The American Practice of Medicine, Vol. II
Wooster Beach
The American Practice of Medicine; Being a Treatise on the Character, Causes, Symptoms... and Treatment of the Diseases of Men, Women, and Children, on Vegetable or Botanical Principles, vol. II. New York: 1833.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/64210120RX2.nlm.nih.gov).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

AMERICAN PRACTICE OF MEDICINE;

BEINC

A TREATISE

ON THE

CHARACTER, CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, MORBID APPEARANCES,

AND

TREATMENT

•OF THE

DISEASES OF MEN, WOMEN, AND CHILDREN,

OF ALL CLIMATES,

ON

VEGETABLE OR BOTANICAL PRINCIPLES:

AS TAUGHT AT

JTfje l&eCormeU i&eofcal Ctollejjes fntjje JHnfteD States :

CONTAINING ALSO A

TREATISE ON MATERIA MEDICA AND PHARMACY,

OR THE

WITH AN APPENDIX, ON THE CHOLERA, ETC.


ILLUSTRATED BY NUMEROUS PLATES AND CASES.


THE WHOLE PRECEDED BY

PRACTICAL RULES

FOR THE

PREVENTION OF DISEASE AND THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH.


BY W BFACH, M.D.
* • «

President of the Reformed Medical Society, ami Founder of the Reformed Medical Colleges of
the United States; Licentiate of the Medical Society of the State of New York ; Member of
the Medical Society of the City and County of New York ; Professor of Materia Medica,
Pharmacy, Theory and Practice of Physic and Surgery in the New-York Reformed Medical
College, and Principal Physician and Surgeon of the United states Infirmary.


IN THREE VOLUMES VOL. II.


NEW YORK:


B E T T S & A N S T I fJ'E,

OPPOSITE ST. PAUL'S CHURCH.
H DCCC XZX1H.


v\/BJ

h?3-3

V. 2


Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1832, by
W. BEACH, M.D.

in the Clerk's office of the District Court of the United States, for the Southern
District of New York.


PART IV.


SURGICAL DISEASES.


CHAPTER L
CONNEXION BETWEEN PHYSIO AND SURGERY.

It has been, and still is, customary to make a distinction between
physic and surgery, committing the two branches to different sets of
men. But this distinction is not well founded, or expedient, since it
is impossible to decide where either branch begins or ends. A
lecturer in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, in London, has the following
judicious remarks upon this subject.

Surgery, says he, is one division of that science and art which have
disease for their object. This science, considered generally, embraces
the physical history of man. It investigates the construction of the
human body, and its living actions; it inquires into the purposes
executed by each part, and into the general results of their combined
exertions. It observes the human organization under all the various
modifications impressed on it by surrounding influences of all kinds ;
and it draws from these sources the rules for preserving health and
removing disease.

The practical application of these rules constitutes the art of
healing, or rather of treating disease (for in many cases we are
unable to heal, and do not even attempt it) ; while the assemblage of
facts and reasonings on which these practical proceedings are
grounded, makes up the science of medicine.

The boundaries of surgery have not hitherto been, and perhaps
cannot be, very clearly defined ; and the line of demarcation between
it and physic is by no means easily traced. Considering the distinc-
tion between them to be a mere matter of arbitrary usage, I employ the
word surgery in its common acceptation : understanding it to include,
1st. injuries of all kinds; 2nd, the greater part of external and local


6 Connexion between

complaints ; 3dly, such internal affections as produce changes recog-
nisable externally: for example, alterations of figure, colour, or
consistence ; 4thly, all cases requiring external topical treatment,
operations, or manual proceedings of any kind. Such is the catalogue
of subjects embraced in the surgical books of Mr. S. Cooper, in his
Dictionary and First Lines ; also in the treatise of Boyer and Delpech.
The title adopted by the latter, Traite des maladies reputees chirur-
gicales, (treatise on the diseases, reputed or considered surgical,)
shows that the distinction is not better understood in France than in
England.

It must be confessed that the boundary just indicated, is obscure
and uncertain. Hence, as in the case of contiguous governments with
undefined possessions, disputes have arisen respecting the right to
certain portions of territory. Injuries, operations, external local com-
plaints, and manual proceedings, are undisputed possessions of surgery.
But external and internal diseases cannot be clearly divided. Here
physic and surgery join. This is the border-territory between the
two provinces, and has accordingly been the scene of some bitter
feuds, which even now are hardly completely tranquillized.

As it is thus difficult to establish the distinction, we are not surprised
in finding, that in the great majority of instances, physic and surgery
are both practised by one set of persons ; probably nineteen-twentieths
of disease are under their care, and hence they are properly called
general practitioners. On the other hand, in cities, and some large
towns, they are exercised by two distinct classes of persons, whose
education differs widely in important points — they are taught by
distinct teachers, in separate courses of instruction ; and their regula-
tion is entrusted by law to two distinct bodies, the College of Physicians
and Surgeons. Viewing these apparent contradictions, we are
naturally led to inquire more narrowly in what the distinction between
physic and surgery consists ; whether in the nature of the disease
allotted to each, or in the mode of treatment ; whether there is any
essential difference in the mode of learning them ? whether it is well-
founded ? whether it tends to the advantage of the public, or merely
to the benefit of the physicians and surgeons'?

Nothing like the modern distinction was made by the ancients ;
there is no trace of it in the Greek, Boman, or Arabian writers.
Certain branches of practice were followed separately in Egypt, where
the diseases of the eyes, of the teeth, and even of some internal parts,
were attended to exclusively by particular classes of practitioners; and
some such distinctions existed in Rome : but Hippocrates, Galen,
Celsus, and the other medical writers of antiquity, treat indifferently
of the nature and management of fevers, injuries, external and internal
disorders, and operations. In speaking of treatment, Celsus considers
it under three divisions, the same which we still adopt ; viz. diet, &c,
remedies, chirurgical or manual proceedings. But the idea of split-
ting medicine into two parts, and of teaching them differently, seems
never to have been entertained by this elegant and philosophic writer,
nor by those other great founders and promoters of medical science
and practice, whose names and works are still regarded with deference
and respect.


Physic and Surgery. 7

In the long night of barbarism and ignorance, which intervened
between the downfall of the Roman Empire and the revival of letters
in the West of Europe, learning and science were confined to the
members of the ecclesiastical profession, to whom we are indebted for
preserving those imperfect remains of ancient literature and arts which
we still possess. The exercise of medicine harmonized very well with
the immediate objects of their holy calling. After the council of Tours,
held in 1163, had declared that the church abhors the shedding of
blood, (ecclesia abhorret a sanguine), priests and monks were obliged
to desist from all curative proceedings that involved loss of blood.
These were taken up by barbers, attendants on baths,- itinerants, and
mountebanks. In course of time surgery, which then consisted merely
of bleeding, tooth-drawing, and a few other simple processes, became,
with the art of the barber, the occupation of a class of men, who were
legally incorporated in this and other countries, under the title of
barber-surgeons. The separation of surgery, or one branch of treat-
ment, from that medical knowledge which is the indispensable guide
to the time and mode of its application, and its association with the
heart of the barber, long outlived the circumstances which produced
them. In England it lasted till the middle of the last century, when
the Company of Barber- Surgeons was legally extinguished, in the
reign of George II. The union of the two callings still exists in many
parts of Europe.

In order to judge whether there is any well-grounded difference
between physic and surgery, it is necessary to advert shortly to the
nature of medical science and practice generally.

The numerous individual organs, which make up the human body,
although various in structure and office, are all intimately connected
and mutually dependent. They ere merely subordinate parts of one
great machine, and they all concur, each in its own way, in produc-
ing one general result, the life of the individual. All the leading
arrangements are calculated to give a character of unity to the
organization and the living actions of our frame. There is a common
source of nutrition for the whole body; a single centre of circulation ;
a common place of union for all sensations and volitions — for nervous
energy of whatever kind. The various organs are not only intimately
connected by the share which they severally take in executing
associated and mutually dependent functions, they act and re-act on
each other, often very powerfully, by those mysterious, or at least
hitherto imperfectly known influences, which we call sympathies.
Hence the expression of Hippocrates, in relation to the human body,
is perfectly correct : — Labor unus ; consentienta omnia. (One exertion ;
all parts concurring.) You could form no adequate notion of any
organ, or system of organs, if you insulated it from the rest of the
body, any more than you could estimate the use of action of any single
wheel or lever detached from a watch or a steam-engine.

As the animal machine, although complicated in structure, is single,
and as its living motions, although numerous and intricate, form one
indivisible scries, so a similar connexion runs through those changes of
structure and functions which constitute disease: hence there is one
anatomy and physiology, and there can be only one pathology. If wc


8 Connexion bettbeen

wish to s know any portion of the body, we must not only carefully
examine the part itself, but survey the relations of structure and
function which binds it to the rest ; and if we investigate any class
of diseases, we must consider, not only the local symptoms, but also
the disturbance which the diseased organs may excite in other parts
of the frame, and the influence which other parts may exert over the
seat of disease.

It must be the first business of the medical student to learn the
structure of the body and its living actions; that is, to study man in
the state of health. These are the objects of the two sciences, which
are denominated anatomy and physiology. He then proceeds to the
observation of diseases; he watches the circumstances under which
they arise ; he follows their progress and termination ; he explores the
organic changes which they produce, and learns to connect these
changes with their appropriate external signs or symptoms ; deriving
from these comparisons the means of distinguishing the exact seat of
disease, and predicting its course and event. These matters form the
subjects of morbid or pathological anatomy, and pathology. He is now
prepared to employ the external agencies, the outward or inward
remedies, or the operative proceedings, which may be necessary for
removing disease and restoring health. When disease is studied in
this manner, in reference to the whole body, it constitutes the science
of general pathology ; as a similar investigation, directed to any single
organ, is the pathology of that part. The real question respecting the
distinction of physic and surgery is this : — after surveying the whole
field of disease in the way just mentioned, can you find out any portions
insulated from the rest % Any division not connected with other parts,
and which can be understood with reference to them? Can you
separate this entire subject of disease into two independent halves,
requiring different modes of study and practice ? Certainly not. The
entire structure and functions are universally and intimately con-
nected. No part is independent. The causes of natural functions, and
of those' deviations which constitute disease, are often found, not in tho
part itself, but in the state of other associated parts or functions, as in
gouty inflammation of the toe ; paralysis of the finger ; influence of the
head on the system in idiopathic fever; in sympathetic fever from
injury : and the means of cure are seldom to be applied to the very
part diseased.

Again, although individual organs are numerous, the elements of
organic structure are few. The various proportions in which they are
combined make the difference, as the various combinations of a few
letters produce the infinite variety of words. The basis of nearly all
parts consists of the cellular, vascular, absorbent and nervous structures.
Hence, pathological principles are the same for all parts, and, conse-
quently, treatment must be similar throughout. When diseases are
arranged in any form, you may strike a line through, so as to divide
the mass into two halves, give them different names, and call them dis-
tinct branches of science, but they will resemble each other in all
essential points: the causes, origin, course, and treatment of the diseases
comprehended under each, will be the same. If you must have a
division, separate the two sides of the body, or the upper and lower


PART IV.


SURGICAL DISEASES.


Physic and Surgery. 9

hakes. This will at least be clear and intelligible. To assert that
surgery and physic are essentially distinct, is to say that there are two
kinds of pathology that the external and internal parts are to be treated
on different principles, it would be as rational to say, that there are two
kinds of physiology, one for the outside, another for the inside of the
body. When you know the component tissue, or the organic elements
of our frame, are the same throughout, can you suppose that the posi-
tion of a part in the body can alter the nature and treatment of the
disease ? It may cause differences in the mode of proceeding : thus
you cannot act locally on internal parts ; it may make the pathological
investigation of one organ more difficult or easy than that of .another ;
but it cannot alter essential principles. Inflammation, for instance, is the
same kind of disturbance, whether in an internal or external part, and
we treat it exactly on the same principles, whether it be in the eye,
breast, or testicle, in the heart, lungs, or liver. The principles of pa-
thology, therefore, are general ; they are the same for all parts of the
medical art. They result from our knowledge of health and disease
generally, and must, therefore, be common to the physician and surgeon.
Hence we may truly say, with Mr. Abernethy, that surgery and physic
considered as objects of scientific investigation, are one and indivisible.
We may go further, and assert that no branch of medicine, however
limited, can be thoroughly understood except by him who has care-
fully studied the structure and actions of the whole frame, and then
extended his view over the whole field of medical science.

By those who are inclined to defend the existing distinctions
between physic and surgery, various views have been taken of it ; but
none of them will bear examination. Internal diseases have been
assigned to the former — external to the latter. Unfortunately for this
notion, nature has connected the outside and inside so closely, that wc
can hardly say where one ends and the other begins. She has decreed
that both shall obey the same pathological laws, and has subjected
them to such powerful, mutual influences, that we cannot stir a step
in investigating the diseases of either, without reference to the other.
How deep would the domain of surgery extend, according to this
view? — half an inch or an inch? The entrance of the various
mucous membranes, presents a series of puzzling cases ; and the dis-
tribution of diseases in these situations, between the two branches of
the profession is quite capricious. How far is the surgeon to be
trusted ? He is allowed to take care of the mouth : where is he to
stop ? — at the entrance of the fauces, in the pharynx, or in the oesopha-
gus? Inflammation and ulceration of the throat from syphilis belong
to the surgeon : — catarrhal affection of the same membrane to the
physician. Polypus and ulceration of the nasal membrane are surgi-
cal — coryza is medical. The affections of the bones and joints
have been given to the surgeon ; yet they can hardly be called external
parts. In hernia and aneurism there is external tumour; but it is
produced by displacement or disease of organs that are quite internal.

\\ lieu wc look to the nature and cause of disease, the absurdity of
the distinction now under consideration is still more apparent, and the
inseparable connexion between the interior and exterior of our frame
more obvious, Internal causes produce external diseases, as we sec


10 Connexion between

in erysipelas, carbuncle, nettle rash, gout, oedema; while external
agencies affect internal parts, as in catarrhal rheumatic affections, in
various inflammations of the chest and abdomen. In all these affections,
our great reliance is on the external treatment ; external and local
means are comparatively unimportant.

The eyes have been entrusted to the surgeon as external parts ; yet
the organ is the most complicated in the body ; and many of its com-
ponent tissues are highly organised, so that its affections are very
much diversified, and require a greater insight into pathology and
therapeutics than those of any other single part. The eye, with its
appendages, not only contains mucous, serous, and fibrous membranes,
muscular, glandular, and nervous parts, but also several peculiar
tissues. It not only exhibits the various affections of these produced
by common disease, but it suffers from gout and rheumatism, from
small-pox, measles, scarlatina, and chronic cutaneous eruptions ; from
scrofula, syphilis, and cancer.

If, therefore, an organ so complex in its structure, and liable to such
a number and variety of diseases, can be safely entrusted to the care
of the surgeon, I am at a loss to know why there should be any dis-
tinction, grounded on the nature of the affections, between the surgeon
and physician.

It is in vain, then, to establish separate professorships of external
and internal pathology ; and to teach them as separate sciences, and
to expect that they shall be practised separately. Lecturers and
writers cannot make the distinction ; and thus we find the same dis-
eases, in many instances, considered by the teachers of physic and
surgery, comprehended in the writings of both; illustrated by both
on the same principles, and treated by the same means.

Some have proposed to assign local diseases to the surgeon, and
general ones to the physician. It may be questioned whether there
are any local or general diseases in the strict sense of the terms ; at all
events, there are very few in which the cause has been applied to the
part itself, and the influence of the disease, as well as of the treatment,
does not go beyond it; while, on the other hand, there are hardly any
in which all parts of the frame are affected. When a part of little
consequence in the animal economy is slightly diseased, no sensible
effect may be produced beyond the part itself: if, on the contrary, an
important organ is actively disordered, many other parts feel the
influence ; and hence arise what are called general affections. Even
in fever, we can clearly trace the general disturbance to a local origin,
in ninety-nine cases out a hundred ; so that the very existence of
fever, as a general affection, has been questioned. The difference,
therefore, between what we call local and general diseases, is merely
in degree, not in kind : it is a difference of more or less. If we
were to arrange diseases in one column, beginning with the most
local, and ending with the most general, we should fill up the interval
with others forming an insensible transition between the two extremes.
Where could we draw the line across, to divide surgery and physic,
on a scale thus constructed ?

Reverting to the nature and extent of the duties which originally
constituted the occupation of the surgeon, and looking to the etymo-


Phi/sic and Surgery. 11

logical import of the term, which is manual operation, ft has been
contended that surgery should embrace those cases only in which
operations or other manual aid are required. Thus it has been repre-
sented, that the province of surgeons is to administer to external
ailments; and that among their duties is included the important
negative one of prescribing no internal remedy whatever. Such
notions are worthy of the ignorance to which the unnatural separa-
tion of surgery and physic owes its origin, and of the dark period in
which it occurred. Thus this important professional distinction
would rest, not on any essential difference in the causes or nature of
diseases, or in the principles or treatment, but on the accidental and
often varying circumstances of the means employed for their cure.
What are we to do with the numerous cases, such as serious inflam-
mations, affections of the head, various gouty and rheumatic diseases,
in which change of diet and internal remedies are necessary, in con-
junction with topical applications.

. If it is meant to confine surgeons to operations and manual pro-
ceedings, and thus to reduce surgery to a mere mechanical department
of the healing art, I must enter my strongest protest against the
arrangement. I should feel degraded in exercising this kind of bar-
ber surgery, and I should be a little inclined to attempt touching it.
If our profession were reduced to this, it would no longer be necessary
for us to study its scientific principles. We might spare ourselves
the toil and trouble of learning anatomy, physiology, pathology, and
therapeutics ; and we might well resign into the hands of our old
associates, the barbers, the contemptible remnant to which surgery
would then be reduced.


CHAPTER II


SYMPATHY.


The doctrine of sympathy should be well understood by the
practitioner.

All the body is sympathetically connected together, and dependent,
the one part upon the rest, constituting a general sympathy. But
sometimes we find particular parts more intimately dependent upon
each other than upon the rest of the body, constituting a particular
sympathy. Action cannot be greatly increased in any one organ,
without being diminished in some other ; but certain parts are more
apt to be affected by the derangement of particular organs than others.
It may be thought that this position of action being diminished in
one organ, by its increase, either in the rest or in some other part, is
contradicted by the existence of general diseases or actions affecting
the whole system. But in them we find, in the first place, that there
is always some part more affected than the rest. This local affection
is sometimes the first symptom, and affects the constitution in a
secondary way, either by the irritation which it produces, or by an
extension of the specific action. At other times the local affection is
coeval with the general disease, and is called sympathetic. It is
observed, in the second place, that as there is some part which is
always more affected than the rest, so also is there some organ which
has its action, in consequence of this, diminished lower than that
of the rest of the system, and most commonly lower than its
natural standard. From the extensive sympathy of the stomach with
almost every part of the body, we find that this most frequently
suffers, and has its action diminished in every disease, whether
general or local, provided that the diseased action arises to any
considerable degree. There are also other organs which may, in like
manner, suffer from their association or connection with others which
become diseased. Thus, for instance we see, in the general disease
called puerperal fever, that the action of the breasts is diminished by
the increased inflammatory action of the uterus.

In consequence of this balance of action, or general connection of
the system, a sudden pain, consequent to violent action of any
particular part, will so weaken the rest as to produce fainting, and
occasionally death. But this dependence appears more evidently
in what may be called the smaller systems of the body, or those parts
which seem to be more intimately connected with each other than
'.hey are with the general system. Of this kind is the connection of
'he breasts with the uterus of the female : of the urethra with the
.esticles of the male; of the stomach with the liver; and of the
ntestines with the stomach, and of this again with the brain; of the
)ne extremity of the bone with the other ; and of the body of the
ttuscle with its insertion ; of the skin with the part below it.


Sympathy. 1 3

These smaller systems, or circles, shall be treated regularly ; but
first it may be proper to observe, that these are not only intimately
connected with themselves, but also with the general system, a
universal sympathy being thus established.

That there is a very intimate connection between the breasts and
uterus has been long known ; but it has not been very satisfactorily
explained. Fallopius, and all the other authors, declare plainly that
the sympathy is produced by an anastomosis of vessels ; Bartholin
adding that the child being born, the blood no longer goes to the
uterus, but is directed to the breasts and changed into milk. But
none of all those who talk of this derivation, assign any reasonable
cause which may produce it.

In pregnancy, and at the menstrual periods, the uterus is active ;
but, when the child is delivered, the action of the uterus subsides,
while the bueasts in their turn become active, and secrete milk.

If, at this time, we should again produce action in the uterus, we
diminish that of the breasts, and destroy the secretion of milk, as is
well illustrated by the case of inflammation of the uterus, which is
incident to lying-in women. When the uterus, at the cessation of
the menses, ceases to be active or to secrete, we often find that the
breasts have an action excited in them, becoming slowly inflamed,
and assuming a cancerous disposition. The uterus and breasts seem
to be a set of glands balancing each other in the system, one only
being naturally active, or secreting properly, at a time ; and accord-
ingly we seldom, if ever, find that when the uterus yjelds the
menstrual discharge, the milk is secreted in perfection, during the
continuance of this discharge, nor do we ever find them both inflamed
at the same time.

The uterus has not only this connection with the breasts, but it
has also a very particular sympathy with the stomach, which again
sympathizes with the brain ; and thus we see how a disorder of the
uterus may induce an extensive series of affections, each dependent on
the other.

The organs of generation in the male, form likewise]a little system,
in which all the parts exhibit this sympathy with each other. They
likewise give us a very good instance of the association of action, or
sympathy, in the common acceptation of that word.

Sympathy is divided into, first, the sympathy of equilibrium, in
which one part is weakened by the increased action of another ; and,
secondly, the sympathy of association, in which two parts act
together at the same time.

The sympathy of association is produced suddenly, and for a short
time. The sympathy of equilibrium is produced more slowly, and
continues to operate for a much longer time.

It is curious enough, that most, or at least many, of those organs,
which seem to be connected by the sympathy of equilibrium, exhibit
likewise more or less of the sympathy of association, when under the
circumstances in which this can take place.

The sympathy of equilibrium is seen in the effects of inflammation of
the end of the urethra on the testicle; which often diminishes itsaction,
and produces a very disagreeable sensation of dulness, or, if this inflara-


14 Sympathy

mation be suddenly diminished, the action of the testicle is as suddenly
increased, and swelling takes place. The same in the connection of the
urethra with the bladder and prostrate gland, as is mentioned in all the
dissertations on gonorrhoea. These parts likewise affect the stomach
greatly, increased action in them weakening that organ much. This
is seen in the effects of swelled testicle, or excessive venery, or inflamed
bladder, and in a stone ; all which weaken the stomach, and produce
dyspepsia. The same remark applies to the kidney ; vomiting and
flatulence being produced by inflammation of the kidnies.

There is also an evident sympathy between the stomach and lower
tract of intestines ; which two portions may be said in general to
balance each other in the abdomen. When the action of the
intestines is increased in diarrhoea, the stomach is often weakened,
and the patient tormented with nausea. This will be cured, not so
easily by medicines taken into the stomach, as by anodyne clysters,
which will abate the action of the intestines. When the intestines
are inflamed, as in strangulated hernia, vomiting is a never-failing
attendant.

When again the stomach is inflamed, the intestines are affected,
and obstinate costiveness takes place ; even in hysterical affections of
the stomach, the intestines are often deranged. Injections frequently
rejjeve these affections of the stomach, by their action on the
inlestines.

The liver and stomach are also connected with one another. When
the liver is inflamed, or has its action increased, the stomach is
weakened, and dyspeptic symptoms take place. When the stomach
is weakened, as, for instance,, by intoxication, then the action of the
liver is increased, and a greater quantity than usual of bile is
secreted. The same takes place in warm climates, where the stomach
is much debilitated.

If the liver has its action thus frequently increased, it assumes a
species of inflammation, or becomes, as itis called, schhrhus. This is
exemplified in the habitual dram-drinkers, and in those who stay long
in warm countries, and use freedoms with the stomach. The liver
likewise sympathizes with the brain; for when this organ is injured,
its action much impaired, as in compression, inflammation and sup-
puration have been often known to take place in the liver.

Besides this connection of the stomach with the liver, it is also very
intimately dependent on the brain, being weakened when the action
of the brain is increased ; as we see in an inflammation of that organ.
The brain again is affected with pain when the stomach is weakened
by intoxication or other causes; and this pain will be often relieved
by slowly renewing the action of the stomach by such stimuli as arc
natural to it, such as small quantities of soup 1 A

slight increase of action in the stomach, at least if not of a morbid kind,
affects the brain so as to produce sleep, diminishing its action. This
we see in the effects of a full meal, and even of a draught of warm
water. The stomach likewise sympathizes with the throat, squeam-
ishness and anorexia being often produced by inflammation of the
tonsils. This inflammation is fieq bated bj

increasing the action of the stomach, Hence the throat, in slight


Sympathy. 16

inflammation, is frequently easier after dinner; hence, likewise, the
effects of emetics in cynanche.

The extremities of bones and muscles also sympathize in the same
manner. When one end of a bone is inflamed, the action of the other
is lessened, and pain is produced ; for a painful sensation may result
both from increased and diminished action. When the tendon of a
muscle is inflamed, the body of that muscle often is pained, and
vice versa.

Lastly, the external skin sympathizes with the parts below it. If
it be inflamed, as in erysipelas, the parts immediately beneath are
weakened, or have their natural action diminished. If this inflamma-
tion affect the face, or scalp, then the brain is injured ; and head-ache,
stupor, or delirium supervene. If it attack the skin of the abdomen,
then the abdominal viscera are affected, and we have vomiting and
purging, or obstinate costiveness, according to circumstances. This
is illustrated by the disease of children, which is called by the women
the bowel hive, in which the skin is inflamed from some morbid matter
within.

If the internal parts be inflamed, the action of the surface is dimi-
nished, and, by increasing this action, we can lessen or remove the
disease below ; as we see daily proved by the good effects of external
stimulants. When the stomach, intestines, or kidney have been v.°ry
irritable, a sanapism has been known to act like a charm.

The utility of counter irritants in diseases of the lungs, the liver, and
the joints, is to be explained on the same principle. In these cases
we find that they do little good unless they be somewhat painful.

It is a well established fact, that when any particular action disap-
pears suddenly from a part, it will often speedily affect that organ
which sympathizes most with the part that was originally diseased.
This is best seen in the inflammatory action, which, as practical
writers have well observed, occasionally disappears quickly from the
part first affected, and then shows itself in some other.

From the united testimony of all these facts, Mr. Burns, of Glasgow,
maintains the doctrine just delivered, and proposes to introduce it into
pathological reasonings. In the whole of the animal economy, we
discover marks of the wisdom of the Creator, but perhaps in no part of
it more than in this, of the existence of the sympathy of equilibrum ;
for, if a large part of the system were to have its action much increased,
and all the other parts to continue acting in the same proportionate
degree as formerly, the whole must be soon exhausted ; (for increased
action would require for its suppoit an increased quantity of energy*)
But upon this principle, when action is much increased in one part,
it is io a certain diminished in some other, the general sum or

i i in the body is thus less than it otherwise would be, and
consequently the system suffers less.


CHAPTER I.

INFLAMMATION.


Description.

A disease characterized by heat, pain, redness, attended with more
or less of tumefaction and fever. Inflammation is divided into two
species, viz. phlegmonous and erysipelatous.

Besides this division, inflammation is either acute or chronic, local or
general, simple or complicated with other diseases.

Causes.

The occasional and exciting causes of inflammation are very nu-
merous: they, however, may generally be classed under external
violence, produced either by mechanical or chemical irritation, changes
of temperature, suppressed perspiration, and stimulating foods. Fever
often seems to be a remote cause ; the inflammation thus produced is
generally considered as critical. Spontaneous inflammation sometimes
occurs when no perceptible cause can be assigned for its production.
Scrofula and syphilis may be considered as exciting causes of inflam-
mation.

With regard to the proximate cause, it has been the subject of much
dispute. Galen considered phlegmon to be produced by a superabun-
dance of the humor sanguineus. Boerhaave referred the proximate
cause to an obstruction in the small vessels, occasioned by a lentor of
the blood. Cullen and others attributed it rather to an affection of the
vessels than a change of the fluids.

The proximate cause, at the present period, is generally considered
to be a morbid dilitation, and increased action of such arteries as lead
and are distributed to the inflamed part.

Fevers often seem to become the remote causes of local inflammation.
In other instances, inflammation appears to arise spontaneously, or,
as I should rather say, without any perceptible exciting cause.

The principle, on which the application of cold to a part becomes
the remote cause of inflammation, is not decidedly known. "No
subject (says a distinguished professor) is more deserving of your
study, than the effects which are produced in the human body by the
operation of cold applied to its surface ; but the subject is, at the
same time, exceedingly extensive, complicated, and difficult. These
effects differ according to the degree in which the cold is applied, the
state of the system, the part of the body to which it is applied, and
the mode of its application. So diversified, indeed, are these effects,
that it requires no mean confidence in theoretical reasoning to believe,
that the operation of cold in producing them is explicable upon any
single general principle." — (See Thompson on Inflammation, p. 58.)


Inflammation. 17

And in the preceding page he observes : " The operation of oold upon
the human body affords the best example which I can suggest to you,
of the production of inflammation from the operation of a power
acting upon a part at a distance from that in which the inflammation
takes place. The instances formerly mentioned of inflammation of the
throat, chest, or belly, from the application of cold to the feet, are
daily occurrences in these climates, of which it is impossible for us,
in the present state of our knowledge of the animal economy, to give
any thing like a satisfactory explanation.

"In some instances, cold, or a diminution of temperature, seems to
act more directly upon the parts with which it comes into contact.
We have examples of this in the inflammation of the mucous mem-
branes of the nose, fauces, trachea, and bronchiae, from the inhalation
of cold air ; and in the production of rheumatic inflammation from
the accidental exposure of some part or other of the body to cold.
The application of cold, in the instance I have mentioned, seems to
have somewhat of a directly exciting effect ; and perhaps the same
remark is still more applicable to the local effects of cold in the pro-
duction of the inflammation accompanying the state which is usually
denominated frost-bite. Touching a solid body, as a piece of metal,
the temperature of which has been greatly reduced, produces a sen-
sation like that of burning, and may be followed, like the application
of fire, by a blister." — (Op. cit.)

Numerous opinions have been entertained respecting the proximate
cause of inflammation ; but almost every theory has been built upon
the supposition of some kind of obstruction in the inflamed part.

But the proximate, or immediately exciting cause of inflammation
is, usually, the irritation or action of a stimulus or foreign agent,
which has been retained in the circulation by a suppression of per-
spiration, and this is thrown with an accumulated quantity of blood to
different parts or organs, and produces irritation and inflammation; or,
in other words, it arises from retained perspirable matter, mixed with
the circulating mass, which retreats from the surface to the centre, or
is driven in an undue or unequal quantity to the part, which becomes
inflamed. The balance is lost in the circulation, and there is an
irregular distribution of morbid or vitiated blood, occasioned princi-
pally by cold.

Symptoms.

1. Phlegmonous inflammation is known by its bright red colour,
the part ; tending to suppuration. Phlegmon is generally used to
denote an inflammatory tumour, situated in the skin or cellular mem-
brane. When the same disease affects the viscera, it is usually called
phlegmonous inflammation.

2. Erysipelatous inflammation is considered as an inflammation of
a dull red colour, vanishing upon pressure, spreading unequally, with
a burning pain, the tumour scarcely perceptible, ending in vesicles, or
desquamation. This species of inflammation admits of a division into
erythema, when there is merely an affection of the skin, with very
little of the whole system; and erysipelas, when there is general
affection of the system.


18 Inflammation.

The fever attending erysipelatous inflammation is generally
synochus or typhus, excepting when it affects very vigorous habits,
and then it may be inflammatory. The fever attending phlegmonous
inflammation is almost always such. Persons in the prime of life,
and in full vigour with a plethoric habit of body, are most liable to
the attacks of a phlegmonous inflammation ; whereas those advanced
in years, and those of a weak habit of body, irritable, and lean, are
most apt to be attacked with erysipelatous inflammation.

Phlegmonous inflammation terminates in resolution, suppuration,
gangrene, and schirrhus, or induration. Resolution is known to be
about to take place when the symptoms gradually abate : suppura-
tion docs not readily yield to proper remedies, the throbbing increases,
the tumour points externally, and rigors come on. Gangrene is
about to take place when the pain abates, the pulse sinks, and cold
perspirations come on. Schirrhus, or induration, is known by the
inflammation continuing a longer time than usual ; the tumefaction
continues, and a considerable hardness remains. This kind of
tumour gives little or no pain, and, when it takes place, it is usually
the sequel of inflammation affecting glandular parts. It sometimes,
however, is accompanied with lancinating pains, ulcerates, and
becomes cancerous.

Erythematous inflammation terminates in resolution, suppuration,
or gangrene. The symptoms of inflammation are accounted for in
the following way : —

Redness.

This is manifestly owing to the increased quantity of blood in the
inflamed part. More blood must necessarily be contained there,
because the vessels which previously conveyed this fluid are preterna-
turally distended, and the small vessels, which naturally contained
only lymph, are now so enlarged as to be capable of receiving red
blood. " I froze (says Mr. Hunter) the ear of a rabbit, and thawed
it again : this occasioned a considerable inflammation, an increased
heat, and thickening of the part. This rabbit was killed when the
ear was in the height of inflammation, and the head being injected,
the two ears were removed and dried. The uninflamed ear dried
clear and transparent, the vessels were distinctly seen ramifying
through its substance ; but the inflamed ear dried thicker and more
opaque, and its arteries were considerably larger."

Many have supposed that the redness of common inflamation is
partly occasioned by the generation of new vessels. This doctrine,
however, seems very questionable. When coagulated lymph is
extravasated upon the surface of a wound, or an inflamed membrane,
unquestionably it often becomes vascular, in other words, furnished
with new vessels. But in the extravasated lymph of a phlegmonous
tumour, we have no evidence that there is any formation of new
vessels. Were the lymph to be rendered organized and vascular, the
swelling and redness would probably be more permanent.

Swelling.
This effect arises from several causes ; I. The increased quantity
of blood in the vessels. 2. The effusion of coagulating lymph, and


Inflammation. 19

serum, and deposition of new matter. 3. The interruption of absorp-
tion particularly noticed by Soemmering. — (De. Morb. Vas. Absorb.)

Pain.

This is observed to be the greatest during the diastole of the
arteries. The affection is probably owing to the unnatural state of
the nerves, and not to mere dissension, as many have asserted. Were
the latter cause a real one, the pain would always be proportioned
to it.

" Parts, which in the sound state have little or no sensibility (as
Dr. Thompson remarks,) become exquisitely sensible in the inflamed.
That this is the case with tendon, ligament, cartilage, bone and
membrane, seems to be fully established by Dr. Whytt in the very
instructive controversy carried on between him and Haller, respecting
the sensibility and irritability of the different parts of man and other
animals.

Heat.

The augmented heat of inflammation may be conceived to arise from
the increased velocity of the circulation in the part affected. More
blood is transmitted into the minute arteries ; the capacity of a
greater quantity of this fluid for heat is of course there necessarily
diminished, and more caloric is extracted. i

Buffy coat.

Blood taken from a person labouring under active inflammation,
exhibits a yellowish white crust on the surface ; this is denominated
the buffy coriaceous, or inflammatory coat. This consists of a layer
of coagulable lymph, almost destitute of red particles. Blood, in this
state, is often termed sizy. The colouring part of the blood is its
heaviest constituent ; and, as the blood of a person labouring under
inflammation is longer coagulating than healthy blood, it is supposed
that the red particles have an opportunity to descend to a consider-
able depth from the surface before they become entangled.v The buffy
Coat of blood is generally the best criterion of inflammation ; there
are a Tew anomalous constitutions in which this state of blood is
always found ; but these are rare.

Terminations or Consequences of Inflammation.

The terminations of inflammation are resolution, — adhesion, — effu-
sion, — schirrhus, — suppuration, — gangrene.

Of Resolution. — By resolution is meant a gradual subsidence, or
going off, of all the. inflammatory symptoms ; the state and texture of
the part remaining entire.

Of Adhesion. — Adhesion is wh/jn coagulable lymph has been
thrown out from the orifices of the inflamed vessels ; and by its agglu-
tinating qualities has cemented as it were membranes, or other conti-
guous parts, together.

When adhesion is completed, vessels shoot from the opposite sur-


20 Inflammation.

faces, through the coagulable lymph, and anastomose, so as to com-
pletely organize the lymph, and form it into cellular membrane.

Of Effusion. — This termination is peculiar to cavities lined with
smooth diaphanous membranes; the fluid effused is various, and
depends upon the nature of the inflammation, the strength of the
structure of the part. It may possess all the intermediate degrees or
properties between serum, coagulable lymph, and pus.

Of Schirrhus. — Schirrhus, or induration, is when the inflammation
leaves the part hard and swollen. It is a termination of inflammation
more peculiar to glandular parts.

Of Suppuration and Abscess.

■ Symptoms. — Suppuration is the process of the formation of pus. —
Its accession is marked by rigors, if the inflammation be considerable ;
dull heavy weight of the affected part, by the pain becoming more lan-
cinating, and accompanied with a peculiar throbbing of the neighbor-
ing arteries, fluctuation ; by the swelling becoming gradually more
elevated above the surface of the surrounding cuticle, acquiring a soft-
ness to the feel, and showing a tendency to point in one particular
place. If the process be suffered to go on without interruption, the
integuments become more and more thin, and change to a whitish or
yellowish color ; they at length lose their firmness, give way, and
pus is discharged at the opening.

PROGNOSIS:

The prognosis in inflammation will be drawn from the violence of
the symptoms, and from the seat of the inflammation.

Favourable. — The pain, heat, redness, and other inflammatory
symptoms gradually diminishing, and at length altogether ceasing
(see the Terminations of Inflammation) ; — or the swelling becoming
(see Suppuration) ; the constitution at the same time being a little
affected.

Unfavorable. — Violent fever with delirium ; the inflammatory ap-
pearances suddenly ceasing, followed by the formation of blisters, dis-
charging a thin ichorous matter ; the part becoming of a livid colour,
and losing its sensibility. See Mortification..

COMMON TREATMENT.

Bleeding, Blistering, fyc.

Effects of Bleeding. — B v reference to the lectures of Sir Astley Cooper,
it will be seen that he has some allusion to the effect of the loss of blood
in inflammation. If, says he, you adopt a system of free depiction, nature
will not be equal to the restoration of the injured parts, and the most dis-
astrous consequences follow the indiscriminate employment of blood-
letting. There is not a greater error than this in the practice of surgery.

A stout man was admitted into Guy's Hospital, having a simple
fracture of the tibia, with considerable contusion of the surrounding


Inflammation. 21

parts ; a day or two after his admission, he had severe constitutional
irritation, and acute pain, with spasmodic action of the muscles near
the seat of injury. To relieve these symptoms, the dresser was di-
rected to take some blood from the arm of the patient, which he did ;
but thinking it proper that faintness should be produced, as a proof of
its effect upon the constitution, and forgetting that the patient was in
a recumbent position, he abstracted so large a quantity of blood,?that
all power of restoration was completely annihilated, and the man died.

The first effect noticed is a diminution in the force and rapidity of the
circulation, which is manifested by the pulse becoming slower and
softer. By and by the motion of the heart is so much weakened, that
it no longer propels the blood with sufficient force to support the func-
tions of the brain. The individual becomes pale — he complains of
weakness and nausea, which sometimes proceeds to vomiting, but
more frequently, the. functions of the brain becoming more and more
completely suspended, he loses all power of sensation and voluntary
motion — he is no longer able to stand or sit — there are frequently
slight tremors of the muscles, and in some rare cases violent convulsive
contractions of them — he makes some deep inspirations and expirations
— looks wildly about him, and falls into a state closely resembling
death, which is named Syncope. Syncope occurs most readily when
the patient is in an erect posture, and a very large quantity of blood may
be withdrawn without inducing it if he lies horizontally. The most
effectual method of recovering one from this state is consequently to
lay him on his back. The quantity of blood which must be abstracted
to induce syncope in ordinary circumstances is extremely variable.
Sometimes several pounds may be withdrawn before its symptoms
appear, and at other times a few ounces are sufficient for the purpose ;
the patient's mental alarm has a considerable share in producing the
effect, but in general sixteen or twenty ounces are required.

When the patient is very weak, or very largely depleted, the syn-
cope cither passes directly into death, or is succeeded by an intermediate
state, named Sinking. In this condition the pulse is small, feeble, and
intermittent ; the countenance is deadly pale, and bedewed with
clammy moisture : the extremities are cold, and the patient has a dis-
tressing sensation of weakness. He lies in a dozing state ; and when
roused from it takes some time to recollect his situation, often at first
expressing himself incoherently. His breathing is uneasy, being per-
formed with dilatation of the nostrils, and is frequently attended with
sbght crepitation, or mucous rattle in the chest. This state, after
continuing for hours, or it may be even for days, terminates in death,
which is usually preceded by hiccup and vomiting.

When the quantity of blood abstracted is not too great, in proportion
to the strength of the patient, there is a recovery or reaction of the
system. After an ordinary syncope, the symptoms go off in the
inverse order of their approach ; and when the patient has completely
regained his faculties, it is generally observed that the actions which
wen; suspended arc performed with a slight degree of excitement.
This is most observable with regard to the pulse, which is rather more
sharp and frequent for sometime afterwards than it was before, pro-
vided the patient did not labour under any febrile disturbance


22 Inflammation.

This -excess of reaction is observed to be proportioned in degree to
the strength of the patient and the quantity of blood withdrawn,
provided it is not 60 large as at once to induce sinking or death. Ex-
cessive reaction closely simulates the symptoms of inflammatory fever.
The pulse is extremely frequent, and has a peculiar jarring or jerking
sort of character — the respiration is hurried — the face is flushed — the
eyes are red and suffused — the patient complains of intense head-
ache, and distracting noises in his ears — and when blood is drawn, it
exhibits the buffy coat, though hardly the cupped surface which is
seen during inflammation The local symptoms of inflammation are
not wanting ; and the brain, with its membranes, is the part which,
out of all proportion, most frequently suffers ; but the viscera of the
thorax and abdomen are not exempt from risk.

This curious state, for pointing out which we are much indebted to Dr.
Marshall Hall, may be induced either by one or two very large bleed-
ings, or by a great number of small ones, causing a continued drain on
the system for days, weeks, or months ; and accordingly, as it occurs
in one or other of these ways, the symptoms vary in the degree of
their violence or acuteness. It may terminate in fatal effusion on the
brain, or some other important organ, in sinking, or in a return to
health. Bleeding, as might be expected, though it affords temporary
relief, always increases the evil, either by making the state of excite-
ment more quickly terminate in sinking, or by increasing the violence
of its symptoms. Restoring the secretions, perfect rest both of body
and mind, poultices, cooling appbeations, gentle opiates, and the gra-
dual operation of time, ought to be trusted to as the means of relief.

The discrimination between the symptoms of excessive reaction and
those of inflammation, is of the utmost importance in practice ; and the
following observations as to the circumstances which modify the effects
of hemorrhage are deserving of much attention.

In young subjects, that is to say children and infants, the power of
reaction is feeble, and the risk of sinking consequently great.

In adult subjects who are weak from age or any other cause, there
is also small power of reaction ; but their danger of sinking is not
merely in the first instance, and continues for a much longer time after-
wards, as the restoration to health is slow and imperfect.

In the healthy and robust individual there is always excessive reac-
tion, unless the bleeding be so small as not to 3,ffect the system suffici-
ently, or so profuse as to cause sinking or death in the first instance.

Pain, fear, and the exhaustion produced by protracted fever, or the
discharge of matter, increase the risk of sinking.

REFORMED PRACTICE.

Indications of Cure. — The most desirable object in treating inflam"
mation of every kind, is to cause it to terminate in resolution, or to
subside and disappear without suppuration, or leaving any change of
the structure or actions of the part affected. The most obvious indi-
cation then, in the first instance, is to remove the cause, which has
excited the inflammation, should it still continue. But when this


Inflammation. 23

cannot be done, the process for removing it is generally more tedious
and difficult, requiring the use of both internal and external appli-
cations.

Removal of exciting causes. — In all cases, the first circumstance to be
attended to is the removal of all such exciting causes as may happen to
present themselves. If the irritation of a splinter were to excite phlegmo-
nous inflammation, who would not of his own accord directly take away
the extraneous body % In wounds, foreign substances frequently excite
inflammation, and ought to be taken away as speedily as possible ; splin-
tered pieces of bone often give rise to the affection, and require removal ;
the head of a bone, being out of its place, may press and inflame the
part onwhich it lies ; and who does not immediately see the propriety
of putting it back into its natural situation 1 These and other similar
exciting causes may often be detected and removed at once, and this
is doing a great deal towards the cure and even the prevention of
inflammation. However, many of the exciting causes of this affection
are only of momentary application ; yet, though their action is thus
short, the process of inflammation must follow, as a kind of salutary
operation, without which, the injured organization and tone of the
parts, still remaining, could not be rectified again. Hence, besides
taking away the remote cause, whenever this can be done, it is proper
to moderate, by other means, the increased action of the larger arteries,
and lessen the velocity of the blood's motion towards the inflamed part.
Purgatives. — It must be kept in view that the only correct method,
or mode of reducing inflammation, is to restore the secretions and ex-
cretions of the different organs, and by opening the different outlets of
the system, we diminish arterial or febrile excitement. Purgatives,
for this purpose, are to be administered. They lessen the quantity of
the circulating mass, and thus, by their depletive effect, lessen inflam-
mation. Those of a refrigerant kind are, among others, very service-
able ; such as the following :
Take-
Alexandria Senna leaves, (bruised),
Manna,

Cream of Tartar,— of each half an ounce,
Fennel Seed, bruised, one drachm, or a tea siwon full.

To the senna and manna add a pint of boiling water, simmer it till
there is half a pint of the liquor ; strain, sweeten, and add the cream
of tartar. Of this, let the patient take a wine-glass every hour, till it
purges. It lessens inflammation both by its cathartic and diuretic pro-
perties.

Perspiration. — Another most important means of subduing inflam-
mation is, by restoring or exciting a preternatural action of the skin or
capillary system. When this is deranged, inflammation is always
increased, but is immediately diminished when its functions are re-
stored. A person who has a hot and dry state of the skin, feeling ex-
cessively heated, will be immediately relieved and become cool as soon
as you produce free perspiration. The medicines to be employed for this,
must depend on circumstances. If the patient is able to sit up, the
vapour bath will bring on free perspiration in fifteen or twenty mi-
nutes. It is only necessary to place him over a tub, containing a


34 Inflammation.

decoction of bitte* herbs, with a blanket around him to retain the
steam. He should also drink diuretic infusions or teas made of spear-
mint or catnip, and the feet should also be bathed.

Where there is local irritation- or inflammation, the parts should
be first fomented, or steamed, with a decoction of bitter herbs. They
lessen pain and inflammation by removing the tension of the parts, as
well as by excitng perspiration.

If the heat is very excessive, cooling or refrigerant lotions may
be applied, such as a solution of borax and acetate or sugar of lead. •
The following mixture I have found useful in Erysipelatous In-
.flammation :
Take-
Acetate of Lead, — one drachm,
Of Spring or Rain-water, — a porter bottle.

Let linen cloths be dipped in the solution and applied to the parts,
•and when dry to be renewed.

Poultices and Cataplasms.-- -Of all the applications to remove local
inflammation, there is none which has ever been discovered or used,
which will bear any comparison in point of utility or efficacy, with the
Slippery elm bark, (Ulmus Fulva). It has a specific action, that no
other article possesses with which I am acquainted. I have tried every
other kind, such as bread and milk, linseed, &c, and I find, compared to
this, that they dwindle into insignificance. It is the most soothing,
softening, relaxing and refrigerant, and acts the most speedily of any
other production ; and it is the most universal in its application, being
suitable for every species of inflammation. It usually changes the
appearance of the inflamed part from a high degree of redness to per-
fect whiteness, at the same time that it diminishes the swelling, and
lessens irritation and inflammation ; and it is the only article that will
seldom or never disappoint the practitioner in its effects. Even where
other kinds of poultices are indicated, this, in combination, forms a
most valuable auxiliary, such as a decoction of certain roots, yeast,
ley, Sfc.

If inflammation can be terminated by resolution, this indication is
answered by it, and, on the other hand, if suppuration be necessary to
bring about a healthy action, it is favored by this poultice. It also pre-
vents mortification. I never knew a case occur after its use.

Method of Using it. — The superfine flour of the Elm Bark should
be mixed with water, or milk, and brought to the consistence of a
poultice ; about a large table-spoon full of the powder is sufficient for
a pint of liquid. In some cases, particularly erysipelatous inflam-
mation, I have found milk better than water to mix with it. Some-
times, or in obstinate cases of inflammation, where suppuration pro-
proceeds slowly, the bark may be mixed with weak ley, and applied.
This makes an excellent poultice, especially for white swellings, felons,
inflammation of the breast, &c. I sometimes mix it with beer, or ale,
and occasionally a decoction of catnip, wild indigo root, and such
other agents as the peculiar character or stage of the inflammation
may require.

The poultice made of the powder of linseed, or flaxseed, pulverized,
forms a very good one in many cases. Indeed, in inflammation attend-'


Inflammation. 25

ing carbuncle;* I have found this poulrice, combined with an equal part
of slippery elm, preferablo to uny other. It has the propoity of
very much facilitating suppuration. As much hot water is to bo
put into a basin as the size of the poultice requires, and then the
linseed powder and elm is to be gradually mixed with it till the mass
is of the proper consistence. A small quantity of sweet oil may be
added to keep it longer soft and moist.

Fomentations are only to be considered as temporary applications,
while poultices are permanent ones.

As regards the temperature of poultices, "in their application to
inflamed parts, no definite direction can be laid down. As a general
rule, however, I have always found that they answer best applied
warm or tepid. Applied cold, sometimes a more immediate or tempo-
rary benefit may follow, but the sedative effect of the cold, after a time,
eeema to prove injurious ; but the only sure criterion is the feeling and
comfort of the patient. Poultices should never be suffered to get dry
and hard, but should often be renewed or changed, and they will keep
moist much longer, if the muslin or linen on which they are laid, be
first moistened.

Anodynes combined with sudorifics contribute much to diminish irri-
tability, and thus lessen inflammation.

When the patient is wakeful, restless, and in pain, the disease is
exasperated or increased. An anodyne, particularly when it is com-
bined with a diaphoretic, has the effect to remove these symptoms ;
pain and inflammation are lessened by the narcotic and sudorific pro-
perties of such a combination.

The diaphoretic powders answer this purpose well; they should
be given, particularly at night, and may be given also at other times,
if occasion requires, to be accompanied with the use of diluent drinks.
Rest. — In the treatment of inflammation, it is indispensably neces-
sary that rest be enjoined upon the patient. Exercise, by increasing
the action of the heart and arteries, increases the inflammation.

Diet. — The diet used has a tendency to increase, or lessen the
inflammation. Stimulating kinds of food and liquids should be avoided
and that of a cooling nature substituted.

I have sometimes leeched and cupped for local inflammation ; but
where the parts are very irritated and inflamed, it has a tendency to
exasperate it, and generally no great benefit is derived from either,
though there may be cases in which they may prove serviceable.

Blood-kiting should be carefully avoided; it so far weakens the
action of the heart and arteries, that they are incapable of propelling a
sufficient quantity of blood to the parts inflamed, to effect a restora-
tion. Excessive reaction may be moderated, by the means already
mentioned.


CHAPTER II.
MORTIFICATION.

uescriputrii..

We understand by the term mortification, a loss of vitality in any
part or portion of the body. It has been divided into, first, humid, inflam-
matory, or acute ; and, second, into dry or chronic. It is also divided
into' two other species, the one preceded by inflammation, the other
without it.

In inflammations that are to terminate in mortification, there is a
diminution of power joined to an increased action ; this becomes a
cause of mortification, by destroying the balance of power and action,
which ought to exist in every part. There are, however, cases of
mortification that do not arise wholly from that as a cause ; of this
kind are the carbuncle, and the slough, formed in the small-pox pus-
tule. Healthy phlegmonous inflammation seldom ends in mortification,
though it does so when very vehement and extensive. Erysipelatous
inflammation isobserved most frequently to terminate in gangrene ; and
whenever phlegmon is in any degree conjoined with an erysipelatous
affection, which it not unfrequently is, it seems thereby to acquire the
same tendency, being more difficult to bring to resolution, or suppura-
tion, than the true phlegmon, and more apt to run into a mortified
state. ,

Causes.

The "external causes of mortification which are manifest, and act
mechanically or chemically, are burns, excessive cold, the application
of caustics, the presence of any ichorous, urinary, or fecal matter
effused in the cellular substance, violent contusions, such as are pro-
duced by gun-shot wounds, or bad fractures ; the strangulation of a
part, as in cases of hernia, or when polypi or other tumours are tied,
a high degree of inflammation ; and, lastly, every thing that has the
power of stopping the circulation and nervous energy in parts. —
.(Lassus, Pathologie Chir. t. 1, p. 34, 35.^

Inflammation is one of the most frequent occasional causes of mor-
tification.

Causes which impede the circulation of the part affected, will occa-
sion mortification, as is exemplified in strangulated hernia, tied polypi,
or a limb being deprived of circulation from a dislocated joint.

Preventing the entrance of arterial blood into a limb, is also another
eause. Paralysis, conjoined with pressure, old age, and ossification of
the arteries, may produce mortification ; also cold, particularly if fol-
lowed by the sudden application of warmth ; and likewise excessive
heat applied to a part.


Mortification.


17


The symptoms of mortification that take place after inflammation,
-re various, but generally as follows : the pain and sympathetic fever
suddenly diminish, the part affected becomes soft, and of a livid colour,
losing at the same time more or less of its sensibility.

When any part of the body loses all motion, sensibility, and natural
heat, and becomes of a brown livid or black colour, it is said to be
affected with sphacelus. When the part becomes a cold, black,
fibroug, senseless substance, it is termed a slough. As long as any
iility, motion, and warmth continue, the state of the disorder is said
to be gangrene. When the part has become quite cold, black, fibrous,
incapable of moving, and destitute -of all feeling, circulation, and life ;
this is the second stage of mortification, termed sphacelus.

When gangrene takes place, the patient is usually troubled with
a kind of hiccough: the constitution always suffers an immediate
dejection, the countenance assumes a wild cadaverous look, the pulse
becomes small, rapid, and sometimes irregular ; cold perspirations como
on, and the patient is often affected with diarrhoea and delirium.

Though long continuance in the same posture is one cause of mortifi-
cation,yet incidental circumstances are frequently combined with it, and
have great influence over the disorder. These are, great debility, the same
state of the system as exists in typhus fever, impure air, unclean bed-
ding, &c. Some fevers have a greater tendency than others to pro-
duce gangrene, as is the case with scarlatina. In slight cases of
this disorder, the most horrible effects will sometimes arise from gan-
grene. The tonsils will slough to a great extent ; parts of the Eusta-
chian tube, and even the tympanum will separate, and large portions
of bone exfoliate. There is dangerous sloughing frequently brought
on in measles by the application of large blisters to the chest of chil-
dren, and their disposition to sloughing, occasioned by the use of mer-
cury, or by whatever tends to weaken the constitution.

There are some causes which produce death in a part at once, by
the violence of their operation. A very powerful blow on any portion
of the body may destroy its vitality in this sudden manner. Lightning,
strong concentrated acids, and gun-shot violence, sometimes act in a
similar way. When a ball enters parts with great force and rapidity t
many of the fibres which are in its track are frequently killed at once,
and must be thrown off' in the form of sloughs, before the wound can
granulate and heal.

Cold is often another cause of mortification, and, when parts which
have been frozen or frostbitten arc suddenly warmed, they are parti-
cularly apt to slough.

In Baron Larrey's publication there is some interesting observations
on the gangrene from cold. He acquaints us, that after the battle of
Eylau, one of the most grievous events to which the French soldiers
were exposed, was the freezing of their feet, toes, noses, and ears ; few
of the vanguard escaped the affliction. In some, the mortification was
confined to the surface of the integuments of the toes or heels ; in some,
the skin mortified more deeply, and to a greater or less extent ; while
in others, the whole of the toes or foot was destroyed. — (See Program-
ma quofrigoris acrioris in corpore humano effectus expendit. Haller. Ditp.
adMorb. Lips. 1775.)


25 Mortif.cc'.iov..

Dr. James enumerates the following circumstanoes, as capable of in-
fluencing in a very great degree, the disposition of inflammation to ter-
minate in mortification. 1. The powers of the part in which the
inflammation occurs, being naturally weak, as in fibrous membranes,
the scrotum, &c. 2. The remote supply of blood or nervous energy,
as in the lower extremities. 3. Obstruction to the return of blocd.
4. To the supply of blood. 6. Disease in the heart or vessels. 6.
Debility from age, habits of life, disorder of the digestive organs, or
fever. 7. Poor living, foul air, improper food, scurvy, &c. 8. Im-
pairment of organization from external injury. 9. Of the nervous power
by poisons. 10. Undue excitement of weakened parts. 11. Depress-
ing remedies. 12. Pressure and tension. 13. Excessive violence of
inflammatory action. 14. Peculiar disposition in the constitution. —
{James on Inflammation, p. 102.)

Healthy phlegmonous inflammation seldom ends in mortification,
fcxcept when it is unusually violent and extensive.

Of all the inflammatory complaints to which the system is liable,
phlegmonous erysipelas is observed most frequently to terminate in

gangrene.

Symptoms.

Gangrene, or mortification, then is a partial death, or the death of one
part of the body, while the other parts are alive : it is produced either
by excess of inflammatory action, where the powers are natural, or by
a less degree of inflammatory action, where the powers of the part are
feeble.

In mortification, or gangrene, the arteries, enfeebled by excessive
action, or incapable, from any cause, of carrying on circulation, are
deprived of their vitality, the blood coagulates in them, and the death
of the part is produced.

The symptoms of gangrene differ according to the manner in which
it is produced.

Authors have generally distinguished mortification into two stages ;
the first or incipient one they name gangrene ; the second or latter
stage, that is, when the part has become quite cold, black, fibrous, inca-
pable of moving, and destitute of all feeling, circulation, and life, is
termed sphacelus.

When gangrene is the result of high and active inflammation, the
pain attending its production is exeedingly severe ; the inflammation
is very extensive ; there is usually a blush to a considerable extent ;
and there is generally, though not always, a considerable degree of
swelling.

Under these circumstances, the secretion from any sore which may
exist, ceases ; for the skin no longer perspires. The surface of the
skin becomes of a dark colour ; it is said to become purple, but it is
rather of a brownish tinge. The cuticle is raised ; a vesication is pro-
duced, and when this breaks, it is found to contain a bloody serum.
When the serum is discharged, the skin assumes the gangrenous
appearance, and becomes perfectly insensible. The vesications ex-
tend to parts beyond the ulceration.

The constitution suffers considerable derangement from gangrene ;


Mortification. £3

there is a high degree of irritative fever— quick, very small, and
thready pulse ; generally irregular — usually delirium, and it is also
attended with vomiting and hiccough.

Hiccough is the characteristic sign of gangrene, situated in what-
ever part of the body it may be. The fact is, that when gangrene
arises from a diseased state of the constitution, the stomach is extremely
deranged, and this derangement of the stomach is followed by a spas-
modic contraction of the diaphragm, producing hiccough. Hiccough
may be arrested for a time, either by cold water, or a slight stimulant.

We have just related the symptoms when gangrene is the result of
excessive action ; we will therefore proceed to speak of it when it ia
the effect of a low degree of inflammation ; as from cold, or any other
analogous cause.

When a great degree of cold has been applied to any part for a con-
siderable time, the part will become benumbed j that is, its nervous
powers will be diminished ; and when it is thus enfeebled, it will be
unable to bear a very slight degree of supervening inflammation, so
that gangrene will be produced.

When you receive cases of this kind, be cautious that heat is not too
suddenly applied ; for even the common heat of the bed, frequently
occasions inflammation, which is extremely liable to proceed to gan-
grene, in consequence of the diminished nervous influence of the part.

When gangrene is the result of either circumstance we have men-
tioned, the process of separation soon takes place, and it is one of tho
most curious operations of nature, in the human body.

Under its influence, even large members are destroyed, without any
danger from hemorrhage, or the smallest jeopardy to life.

When the process of separation takes place, the first appearance wo
observe is a white line ; at this white line, the cuticle is raised, and in
a day or two separates, leaving a chasm between it, produced by tho
absorption of the living skin in contact with the dead : — the next part
that begins to separate, is the cellular tissue immediately under tho
skin ; afterwards the muscles nearly opposite the edge of the skin,
Tendons, like the cellular tissue, do not separate opposite the skin, but
at a considerable distance from the part at which the sloughing takes
place ; for tendons are incapable of resisting the inflammation. The
nerves separate in the same manner as the muscles ; the arteries and
veins become as it were hermetically sealed with coagulum, and also
suffer in the general destruction ; and lastly, the bones themselves ex-
foliate, and the limb is completely removed.

Since the white line alluded to, is the barrier which nature sets up
between the dead and the living parts, it is anxiously looked for
by the surgeon, as it becomes a criterion of the cessation of mor-
tification. The elevation of the cuticle at the white lino, is a vesi-
cation which forms a line of circumvallation around the gangrene.
Tlie living skin taken up by the absorbents is carried into the constitu-
tion ; the absorbent vessels act on the living parts, but not on the
the dead skin absorbed after the time when granulations
but it becomes loo^e, and ceases to be attached to the
i formed by the absorbent vessels afford-
"ortuftity for separation. Gangrene proceeds to much greater


30 Mortification.

extent in the oellulav tissue, than in the surrounding skin, because the
cellular membrane is a part of weaker living powers ; it is for this
reason that a sloughing disposition in sores extending to the cellular
membrane is so dangerous. Wherever skin separates, the muscles
give way ; a line of separation is formed, and the living portion of
muscle is taken from the dead. Bones are very slow in the process of
exfoliation ; hence they are often taken away, when the process of
separation is in other respects complete.

During the progress of mortification, nature has provided against
hemorrhage, on the destruction of the blood-vessels, so that even the
larger arteries are cut through without any bleeding, or danger of the
patient's life.

This happens in the following manner : — The blood in the vessels of
the dead part becomes coagulated ; the coagulum, however, does not
confine itself to the dead part, but extends to the living vessels which
join it, and is, in this manner, glued to the inner side of the arteiy, so
that the vessels are, as it were, hermetically sealed. The same thing
takes place in veins, the coagulum adhering to the inner side of the
living vein, so that no blood can escape. The arteries are not only
sealed at the part through which nature cuts it, but at a consider
able distance above it, in order to provide against the danger which
would otherwise arise from a separation of the coagulum.

Gangrene, is frequently the effect of a debilitated state of constitution ;
whatever, in short, weakens the general health much, disposes it to
the production of gangrene ; for the body, when thus debilitated, cannot
bear any excess of action. It is also sometimes depending on an
impeded circulation, whether arising from cold, from pressure, or from
a want of natural strength in the circulation, so that the parts are not
nourished in their accustomed manner.

It may be stated as a general principle, that gangrene generally
arises from inflammation, and is occasionally the consequence of disease
unaccompanied with inflammation, by which the circulation is consi-
derably impeded. — {Cooper.)

PROGNOSIS.

Mortification is- always to be esteemed the worst termination of
inflammation. The circumstances which lead to a prognosis of a
favorable event, are — youth and strength of constitution, — the ge-
neral system little affected by the local disease, — the pulse continuing
full, — there being little irritation ; a disposition to a separation of
the sound from the diseased parts ; marked by a white line, somewhat
elevated, distinctly bounding the latter, about which an oozing of a
serous fluid is observed.

Indications.— -To prevent the extension of the mortification, and to
promote a separation of the dead parts from the living.

When mortification is acute, and seems to depend on the violence
of inflammation, the first indication is to moderate the inordinate
action of the sanguiferous system, by the prudent employment of
such means as are proper for counteracting inflammation. In short,
relief is to be sought in the antiphlogistic regimen, which consists in
the employment of purgatives, diaphoretics, and diluents, and in


Mortification. 31

nbstinonoe from all vegetable or animal substances, which hare a tei>
dency to excite, or to augment the febrile action. This regimen must
be pursued as long as inflammatory fever continues. It is only in
cases in which the fever from the first assumes a typhoid character,
or where the mortification takes place without the previous occurence
of fever, that any deviation from the antiphlogistic regimen can be
allowed. While genuine inflammatory fever and local inflammation
are co-existent with mortification, antiphlogistic means are undoubt-
edly useful ; but great caution is requisite since, in cases of humid
gangrene, as it is termed, the inflammatory state very soon changes
into one in which the great feature is prostration of strength^ A
very essential and important indication to be fulfilled as soon as the
symptoms announcing the existence of the inflammatory state, appear
to abate, and the patient begins to be debilitated. This indication is
to prevent excessive xoeakness by the suitable employment of cordials, and
particularly of tonics. These same means also contribute to place the
system in a proper state for freeing itself from the mortified parts, or in
other words for detaching them. For inflammation is the prepara-
tory step which nature takes to accomplish the separation of mortified
parts from the living ones, and this salutary inflammation cannot take
place if the energies of life be too much depressed.

Treatment.
When inflammation has been properly treated, it will seldom, or
never, terminate in mortification. But when called to treat it, our
object should be to arrest and prevent any further extension of it
by means both local and constitutional. If it be connected with, or
dependent on inflammation, means must be taken to subdue that
inflammation. If debility of the system has been a predisposing
cause, it must be remedied by u more wholesome regimen, and the
rth of the patient must be supported by stimulants, such as wine
and a nutritious diet. Tonics also should be administered, and the
wine bitters may be taken, and occasionally a glass of yeast.

Local Applications. — When blisters, or visicles, appear upon the part
showing a disposition to gangrene, or when sloughing, actually takes
place, the following poultice will separate the living from the dead
I, and put a speedy cheek to it. Take yeasi, a sufficient quantity ;
stir in slippery dm bark, to form a poultice of the proper consistence.
Apply tepid, and often renew.

This will correct the faetor of the parts, and assist the powers of

nature to separate the mortified from the living flesh. I have not

11 this application to fail in a single instance.

It is now customary to amputate a limb in cases of mortification ;

but with what propriety, I am unable to decide, as it is very easily

as; and where it cannot be, I have no

< \ ideuce that the knifej would save the life of the patient. If a proper

3e of treatment will not cure, there will be such a faulty state of

itution, or in the ulcer or wound itself, that should amputa-

he stump will slough, or the patient will sink from

irritation, or the din |ueno« of the operation.

It di i, that surgeons should direct

us to wait till mortification has stopped, before we amputate. We


32 Mortification.

are directed to remove a limb fo* mortification, and at the eame time,
we are directed not to do it, until this very mortification is arrested, or
until a line of demarcation is formed, or a separation takes place be-
tween the dead and living parts ! !

Now, I ask, how can this doctrine be reconciled with reason, com-
mon sense, philosophy, or correct principles of surgery. It does appear
most absurd to me, however it may appear to others, and this absurd-
ity and inconsistency, is more strikingly exemplified in practice, or at
the bed-side of the patient.

I shall here subjoin the remarks of Cooper, on gangrene, who,
though a great advocate for the knife, is not quite so partial for ampu-
tation as some of his cotemporaries. Ho remarks as follows, on the
propriety of amputation in gangrene :

Propriety of Amputating. — As to the propriety of amputation in
these cases, says he, there is sometimes no occasion for ampu-
tation in gangrene when the sloughing process is proceeding
favorably, as you have an opportunity of seeing, in a man in the
other Hospital, in whom nature has performed the operation her-
self, without any assistance; if the surgeon will be content to wait a
short time, and the patient be so disposed, you will find that the parts
will separate without an operation. Nature adopts the very plan in
her amputations which the surgeon pursues ; the skin separates the
longest, the muscles next, and then the tendons, together with the
bones, which are left considerably shorter than the other parts, as you
may observe from the specimen on the table ; the bones become co-
vered by the skin, and the muscles surround the extremity of the
bone. The cases in which }'ou are required to perform the operation
of amputation are those in which the patient is unable to sustain the
constitutional derangement produced by the process of separation; but
when the constitution is strong, the patient will bear the process
required to separate the limb. You have an opportunity of seeing in
the other Hospital at present, in the case to which I have so often
alluded, separation taking place above the centre of the leg ; there is
no absolute necessity to amputate under such circumstances, and you
can give the patient a chance of his life without resorting to it. In
constitutional gangrene, as a general principle, do not amputate till
the sloughing process has commenced, and healthy granulations aro
to be seen on the sore ; for if an operation be performed, the stump
will assume the same appearance and become gangrenous. It is
curious to see how the loss of a slight quantity of blood will destroy
life in these cases. When I was a dresser at these Hospitals, during
my apprenticeship, there was a case of sloughing opposite to the calf
of the leg ; Mr. Cline, my old master, on going round the wards, said
to the dresser, that the projecting ends of the bone had better be re-
moved ; there were some granulations between the bones, which, in
sawing, the dresser did not observe, and he cut through tin tn ; a, slight
hemorrhage ensued, and in the same night the patient died. There
was a case, in the other Hospital, in which the operation of amputa-
tion was performed ; gangrene existed on one foot, a slight gangrene
on the nose, and on the other foot- the | • uu *t tho

gangrene spread on the nose and foot, which before the operation, were
only slightly affected. Amputation,!: formed


Mortification. CI

till tho constitution be in an improved state, and healthy granulations
have appeared.

With, regard to its treatment, continues Cooper, a poultice composed
of port wine and oatmeal, or stale beer grounds, will be found the
best local application ; and the internal remedies should consist of
opium, combined with ammonia. You must not expect that these
cases will generally recover. I have known, however, a single toe,
all of them, and even a portion of the foot, slough, and yet the patient
do well. In these cases you must not amputate ; whether there be
healthy granulations or not, do not amputate ; for as surely as you
do, mortification of the stump will supervene, and death quickly
ensue. During the sloughing process, says he, the nitric acid may
be employed, in the proportion of fifty drops to a pint of water.

Amputation, says a distinguished professor, was long regarded as
one of the most effectual means which could be employed to prevent
the extension of gangrene. This practice, however, has not received
the sanction of experience : on the contrary, it has been generally
found, wherever it has been practised, in either acute or chronic gan-
grene, tc accelerate much the progress of the disease ; and in this way
to Lassen the death of the patient. The parts which were divided in
amputation, though at a distance from a spreading gangrene and
from sphacelus, were found speedily to assume the appearance of th©
affection for which the operation had been performed.

According to Richter, there is never any certainty that we are
amputating in living parts. Mortification rapidly ascends along the
cellular substance surrounding the large blood-vessels, and is fre-
quently much more extensive internally than external appearances
would lead one to suppose. The adjacent surface, still apparently
alive, is often so affected that it must inevitably slough, though at
present it may not actually have sphacelated. The surgeon imagines
that amputation is performed on living parts, but soon afterward dis-
covers that he has been dividing those which are dead. The opera-
tion, he observes, can do no good, while the mortification is in a
spreading state, and it may do considerable mischief. The disorder
continues to extend, because its cause still operates, and this is not
removable by amputation. If the operation be now injudiciously
undertaken, the sphacelus invades the wound, and is the more cer-
tainly mortal, as the stance has been farther weakened by amputation
and its consequences.

Many mortifications, especially those which arise from external
causes, very often spontaneously stop and separate. But the place
whore this will happen can never be foreseen. By amputating in
this circumstance we run the risk of disturbing nature in her salutary
work, and rendering the disorder fatal.

When the toes are to all appearance, perfectly mortified, and seem
so loose as to be capable of being easily taken away, it is in general
thought right to remove them. But however loose they may seem,
if they be violently twisted off, or the parts by which they hang be
divided, a very considerable degree of pain will most commonly attend
such operation, which therefore had much better be avoided j for Mr.
Pott has seen thi3 very pain thus produced bring on fresh mischief,


D4 Mortification.

and that of the gangrenous kind. If tho patient does well, these parts
will certainly drop off; if he does not, no good can arise from remov-
ing them.

The application of a ley poultice has proved a sovereign remedy in
mortification. It is not only well calculated to prevent, but cure it
when it has taken place. After having been applied a short time, it
has often separated and detached large portions of mortified flesh, and
brought about a healthy action. The elm bark should be mixed in
leeched weak ley, and applied tepid.

A case now occurs to me, where this poultice arrested the disease,
seated on or near the breast of a female, and detached such a portion
of dead flesh, that the opening left was as large as a common sized
teacup.

Another case occurs to me, where a young man was to have had
his leg amputated, but before his surgeon or the physician came, the
above poultice was applied, which arrested it, and he recovered.

Dr. Ferris, who was noted for a successful method of treating mor-
tification, made use of the following poultice :

Scraped Carrots,
Spikenard Root, bruised.

Boil till soft ; stir in a small quantity of Indian or oat-meal, and
apply warm. I have used this poultice but little, and therefore can-
not speak with much certainty of its effects ; but in one very difficult
and critical case of inflammation, bordering on gangrene, it changed
the character of it, and was attended with a good effect.

In all cases of mortification, every thing which heats, irritates, or
adds to the patient's sufferings, appears, in general, to augment the
disorder and increase the rapidity of its progress On the other hand,
every thing which tends to calm, assuage, and relax, frequently re-
tards the progress of mortification, if it produce no greater good.
The pain also, which is a constant mark of too much irritation, con-
tributes of itself to increase such irritation, and in this double point of
view, we cannot do better in the majority of cases, than endeavour to
appease it by the judicious and liberal use of anodynes. When the
inflammatory stage evidently prevails, this medicine may be conjoined
with antiphlogistic or cooling remedies.

The feet and surface should be often bathed, as this operation
contributes much to the cure, by its positive good effects upon the
system.

The observations of Pott on the local treatment of these cases,
are of great practical importance :

" I have found (says he) more advantage from frequently soaking
the foot and ankle in warm milk, than from any spirituous or aromatic
fomentations whatever ; that is, I have found the one mora capable
of alleviating the pain which such patients almost always feel, than
the other; which circumstance I regard as a very material one.
Pain is always an evil, but in this particular case, I look upon it as
being singularly so. Whatever heats, irritates, stimulates, or gives
uneasiness, appears to mc always to increase the disorder, and to add
to the rapidity of its progress ; and, on the contrary, I have always
found that whatever tended merely to calm, to appease, and to relax,
at least retarded the mischief, if it did no more."


Mortification. 15

It is customary to facilitate with a cutting instrument, the morti-
fied parts before the process is completed by the efforts of nature.
This practice is very injurious, and ought to be strongly reprobated,
causing unnecessary pain and creating considerable risk. When
assistance is given, no iiritation should be excited.

I shall conclude this chapter on Mortification, by quoting the
remarks of Dr. Cuming, on the use of nitre, and abuse of bark, in
mortification.

" After our attempts at resolution have proved unsuccessful, our
next endeavours are, 1st. To produce a separation of the dead from
the living parts. 2nd. To prevent absorption of putrid virus during the
putrefactive process. 3rd. To cicatrize the wound and support the
strength of the patient. In order to produce a separation of the dead
from the living parts suppuration is requisite, which we effect by
fomentations and poultices. Large quantities of bark in substance
have hitherto been administered, from an erroneous notion that this
drug had a peculiar and specific effect in arresting the progress of,
and curing the sphacelus, which I shall soon prove to be an opinion
founded upon error, and supported merely from arbitrary custom
and prejudice. The part should be well washed at each dressing,
which must be renewed at least four times in the twenty-four hours;
for, notwithstanding the utmost cleanliness, in a warm season of the
year, or in a tropical clime, the fretor and stench issuing from it is
intolerable. A portion of the mortified part is cut away at every
dressing, as much as can be removed, after which Bark and spirit-
uous medicaments have been spread upon the surface of the poul-
tice or sprinkled over the part, and yet strange to tell all these
means have not been sufficient to prevent the effects of absorption, or
to destroy the faetor, which Kali Nitratum or Nitre most undubitably
does, and which I have styled a sovereign remedy. Though there
is no possibility of causing a spontaneous separation to take place
without the aid of warmth, there is reason to suppose that it has
always adder! to the malignity of the disorder, by the well known
property which it possesses of exciting fermentation, and which neces-
sarily keeps up and augments the putrefactive process ; indeed much
philosophical sapience is not requisite to convince any one of the
truth of this : therefore as Nitre counteracts the effects of heat as far
as it is conducive to putrefaction, by rendering the dead mass unsus-
ceptible of its baneful influence, and by correcting it and entirely
subduing it when it has has already taken place, the fomentations
and poultices can now be most advantageously employed. The
separation will be accelerated by a generous stimulating diet,
consisting of strong beef soups and jellies, a moderate allowance of
generousport wine, good mild ale or porter should be drank, and the
patient's spirits kept up by the mostf, positive assurances of a happy
termination to his sufferings ; for which purpose the company and
cheerful conversation of his friends and acquaintances, will now be
very conducive. Bark given in substance and in the quantities
recommended by men whose practice and experience in such cases,
one would suppose were not greater than their penetration, I know
from the most correct and sure observation, to be productive of th«

■


86 Mortification.

most calamitous consequences, which I shall soon particularize.
When the appetite is good, a nutritious and easily digested diet, will,
■without the aid of medicine, answer every purpose. The decoction
of Bark, agreeably acidulated with the Elixir of Vitriol, may be
advantageously employed. How often do medical men, through a
blind and slavish acquiescence to imperious custom, rlefeat the
salutary, though slow and sure operations of nature? The second
indication for the prevention of the absorption of virus, during the
putrefactive process, is fulfilled by cleanliness from frequent ablution,
and sprinkling finely pulverized Nitre over the part which should be
scarified either] superficially or deeply, according to the judgment of
the surgeon, or depth of the disease. And here I must remark, that
the evil so much dreaded formerly, of wounding the parts underneath
possessed of vitality, and thereby exciting absorption with all its
train of calamitous consequences, need now no longer be feared, as
Nitre neutralizes and renders innoxious the deadly poison."

The third indication, for cicatrizing or healing the wound, and
supporting the strength of the patient, is answered by a full diet
and such modes of dressing as are found to be most effectual.

The first time I had recourse to Nitre, as a remedy for Sphacelus,
(which may justly be termed a sovereign one) was whilst I was sur-
geon of his majesty's ship St. George; it was applied to a man's foot,
which was wounded with a cannon-shot in an -action off Cadiz; a
mortification took place soon after the accident, owing to the irritation
of splinters or spicula imparted in the tendinous and nervous parts
(so small as not to be discovered at first) and the destruction of the
soft parts. The usual remedies were had recourse to, such as washing
the mortified parts with Spt. Terebinthinae, Vini, &c, vinegar and
fomentations of bark, but without perceiving the smallest benefit
resulting from their application. The faetor emanating from the
wound which was black and cadaverous, was not at all corrected,
nor was any separation of the sphacelated parts perceptible ; on the
contrary the disease was spreading all over the foot. In this dilemma
revolving in my mind the various antiseptics which the materia
medica afforded, I luckily thought of Nitre, and began to use it very
finely pulverized in large quantities, sprinkling it all over the wound,
covering it so perfectly as to make some degree of pressure without
soiling my fingers, for the purpose of promoting its union with the mor-
tified parts ; the wound was dressed three times a day, as the climate
was warm, and the danger from absorption consequently great. In
the course of twelve hours the disagreeable stench issuing from the
wound, which before was so extremely offensive as to make the nurses
sick, was now quite gone, the extent of the mortification was soon
discovered by a line of separation surrounding the wound. Here the
beneficial effects of Nitre were very evident, both as far as related to
its antiseptic, as well as stimulant power ; the former in subduing
putrefaction, the latter by restoring energy and activity to the living
sub-latent parts, sufficient to enable them to throw off the cause.

It may seem unnecessary to mention that as much of the parts as
could be removed by the assistance of the scissors and forceps were
taken away at each dressing, and the wound well washed sometimes
jvith vinegar, and at other times with decoction of the bark.


Mortifitaiion. VI

By perseverance and strict attention to the above remedies, particu-
larly the Nitre (though the patient was reduced to the lowest ebb of
human misery which was sufficiently evinced by symptoms the most
distressing and alarming, such as yellowness of the skin, a black
furred tongue, tetanus, and some degree of locked jaw, extreme debili-
ty, quick and fluttering pulse,) he was restored to health contrary to
the expectations of all who saw him.

I found in this case, as I have done in many others, the exhibition of
bark in substance do great mischief, though not given to near the
extent recommended by medical writers. One would imagine these
authors were afraid of deviating from the paths of their predecessors,
when they are found slavishly subscribing to their rules, whilst the
conviction of their own experience should convince them of the folly
and even criminality of recommending medicines, which cannot boast
of that consequence or efficacy, which they have laboured to bestow
upon them.

It generally happens, as it did in this instance, that though the
patient previously to its administration, may have some appetite, it
soon fails, and the space of a few hours entirely deprives him of all
inclination to eat, his fever increases, and he loaths every thing offered
to him in the shape of food.

This is not the worst consequence, the medicine at length proves so
nauseating and disgusting, that the stomach, as if conscious of the
violence done to it, arms itself with the resolution of rejecting this
inhospitable and noxious tenant. Such is the method employed by
the vis medicatrix naturae (if there be such a power) to rid herself of
matter so heterogeneous and offensive to this delicate organ, the pri-
mum mobile of the system.

Nor can it be wondered at, that this should happen, when you reflect
on the indigestible nature of bark, however finely it may be pulverized.
The human stomach is not like that of the Ostrich, it will not digest
iron ; and it does not require much penetration to discover, that the
digestives faculties of this noble organ, are greatly impaired by disease.
Then how can it be supposed that a substance which with the great-
est propriety may be termed foreign, should not prove injurious, when
other things, mild and congenial to it in a healthy state, are now
offensive % It is not my wish to have wrong inferences deduced from
these observations, I have said enough to convince that I am inimical
to the exhibition of bark in substance, yet I would not have it imagin-
ed that it cannot' be employed with advantage in any form ; indeed I
think far otherwise, for I am persuaded that it is of great service when
given in decoction, for then you can augment or diminish its strength
without clogging up the stomach with a heterogeneous mass of indi-
gestible matter ; an advantage which will appear to every unpreju-
diced mind, of the greatest importance, as far as relates to the welfare
of the patient and success of the surgeon, whose anxiety must ever
be commensurate with the danger and difficulty of the case.

During the peace subsequent to the treaty of Amiens, whilst I was
in practice, I had the care of two very bad cases of Sphacelus, which I
treated in the manner already mentioned, with the same success, and
the same corroborating proofs of the amazing efficacy of Nitre. Th«


38 Mortification.

first cause was that of a female who had an ulcer on one of her legs,
which, from want of medical aid and other comforts, degenerated into
a state of sphacelus. The other was the worst, and occupied a space
of nine inches on the external part of the forearm and hand, the integu-
ments, fascia, and part of the muscles were completely destroyed, as
well as the extensor medii digniti tendon, and though the mortification
was so very extensive, the repeated application of powdered Nitre pre-
vented the mass of humours from being corrupted by the absorption of
putrid viris.

It appeared very evident at every dressing, that it had perfect com-
mand over this disease, by entirely subduing the cadaverous factor
which always exhales from mortified parts. It is worthy of remark
that the patient's stomach was very little affected, he was enabled to
take in a sufficient quantity of nutriment, which would not have been
the case, if absorption had taken place, or his stomach had been loaded
with huge doses of bark. He took Decoct. Cinchona? and was allowed
strong beef soup, with a liberal quantity of port wine and mild ale.

I the other day in a conversation with a physician in London of
great eminence, respecting the administration of bark in cases of spha-
celus, was happy to find his sentiments exactly in unison with my
own ; and he was, through fatal experience, thoroughly convinced of
the folly of the fashionable practice of throwing in large quantities of
bark in substance. For he was visiting a patient affected with morti-
fication in conjunction with a surgeon, who was of opinion that too
much of this drug could not be given, though the patient's appetite
was already destroyed by its effects and those of the disease ; yet my
friend though he represented to his coadjutors, his opinion of the impro-
priety of continuing the bark in substance, remained passive, not wish-
ing to stem the torrent of popular prejudice, or take the power out of
the surgeon's hands, when he conceived the case to be more closely
affianced to surgery, than physic. I need hardly remark that the case
terminated fatally. My patient's complaint arose from a small pimple
on his hand, which became so troublesome that he was induced to
apply to a famous empiric, whose skill was so perfectly baffled in this
case, that he was constrained to acknowledge from the black, blistered,
swelled, and frightful appearance which the patient's hand and arm
exhibited, that the case required more of the acumen chirurgicum than
he could boast of, and recommended his poor suffering deluded patient
to apply for further advice, as mortification had already taken place.
Nor was it surprising considering the treatment which had been
adopted, white lily root, and a variety of acrid substances were applied
to assuage a most active inflammation.

It has lately been ascertained that the nitrous acid gas possesses
the power of destroying contagion, on which account government
supplies the navy with materials and utensils necessary for the pur-
pose of fumigation.

It has often happened that malignant ulcers exposed to the action of
the fumes have been converted into a mild state, and easily cured, yet
having a knowledge of these circumstances, I must confess that I was
not induced to use this remedy from any analogical inference striking
my mind ; but from the simple idea after a fruitless struggle to subdua


Mortifitation. 39

the fetor issuing from a sphacelous foot, that as Nitre was found to
preserve animal substances from putrefaction, it might also arrest its
progress when commenced ; and such has been invariably the result,
in cases which have come under my care. Some of my medical
brethren in the navy have lately informed me, that they experienced
the same salutary effects from its use in cases that occurred at naval
hospitals, which I shall forbear to particularize, and shall content myself
by noticing a part of Mr. Simpson's letter of Skipton, in the fourth num-
ber of the 13th vol., page 324 of the Medical Journal."

" Gentlemen, — I am induced to request you will allow me, through
the medium of your widely extended and truly valuable publication,
to return my sincere~thanks to Mr. Cuming, for his recommendation of
nitre, Medical and Physical Journal for April and December 1804, in
cases of sphacelus. I have recently had a case of that description,
where every effort to relieve the patient proved fruitless ; until I
resolved upon the application of nitre, in which I was seconded by my
very respectable and ingenious naval friend Mr. Birtwhistle of this
place.

Having frequently experienced very good effects from the external
application of crude sal ammoniac finely powdered in similar cases,

and having previously formed of Mr. Cuming from his

style of* writing which I have repeatedly seen in your Journal, I was
led to resolve upon giving a fair trial to nitre. I am happy in having
it in my power to say the effect was favourable beyond my most san-
guine expectation.

It would be superfluous to trouble you with the minutiae of the case,
suffice it to say the whole class of stimulants and antiseptics were
tried internally and externally ; notwithstanding, the putrid diathesis
increased dady until arrested by this " sovereign remedy." I shall
conclude with joining Mr. Cuming in most strenuously recommending
this invaluable medicine to the public, as one which I flatter myself
will ultimately prove deserving their confidence and attention."

C. Simpson.


CHAPTER II t


OF WOUNDS.


Species,


Description.

By a wound is meant a recent solution of the continuity of th«
animal solid, from external violence.

1. Incised. *

2. Laceratell.

3. Contused.

4. Punctured.
5 Poisoned.
6. Gun-shot.

Wounds in general are subject to a great deal of variety, both in
their nature and external appearance. The differences depend, in a
great measure, on the nature of the injured parts, the manner in which
the wound has happened, and its extent.

Wounds of fleshy parts are exceedingly different from those of ten-
dinous ones, both in regard to their appearance, and nature, and the
degree of danger. There is also an essential difference, between such
as are made with a sharp cutting instrument, and others, in which the
fibres, besides being divided, have suffered considerable contusion and
laceration. A wound, made with a narrow-pointed instrument, is also
of a very different nature from one that has an ample orifice.

The degree of danger attending every wound, depends very much
on some of the following circumstances. The extent of the injury ; the
additional violence, which the fibres of the part have suffered, besides
their division ; the nature of the blood-vessels, or nerves, which happen
to be cut ; the nature of the wounded part, in respect to its general
power of healing favourably, or not ; whether the operations of the
system at large, and life itself, can be well supported, or not, while the
functions of the wounded part are disturbed, interrupted, or suspended,
by the accident ; the age of the patient ; the constitution ; and the
opportunities, which there may be of receiving proper aid, and assist-
ance of every kind.

Progress of Spontaneous Union.

By the first intention. — When the edges have separated only to a
certain distance, or still remain in opposition, a portion of blood is
thrown out from the incised orifices of the arteries, by which the chasm
is filled. The lips of the wound become tumid and painful, a slight
inflammation ensues, under which vessels shoot into the inorganized
coagulum ; this soon becomes endued with life, and thus a complete
union is effected.


Of Wounds. 41

' By Suppuration.— When, however, from the nature of the part, or
from other causes, the edges have retracted to a considerable extent,
this species of union is prevented from taking place, suppuration super-
venes, pus is formed ; granulations arise, and, increasing, fill up the
cavity ; and, having attained the surface, healing commences, pro-
cesses of skin shoot from the surrounding edges, and extending, at
length completely enclose the newly-formed parts.

PROGNOSIS.

The prognosis will chiefly depend upon the situation (see wounds of
the different parts of the body), and the extent of the wound.

Unfavourable circumstances are — great irritability of constitution ;
the constitution of the patient impaired by age, or inebriety ; debility,
however induced ; the division of large arteries, or of numerous absorb-
ent vessels ; the firm texture of the part favouring a considerable
retraction of the edges ; the presence of certain extraneous bodies,
which cannot be readily removed ; too great inflammation, when spha-
celus is likely to ensue ; deficient inflammation, when the progress of
union is retarded, or entirely suspended.

Incised Wounds.

A wound inflicted by a cutting instrument; and in which there is a
simple division of the part, without any, or, any considerable loss of
substance. The usual and immediate consequences are, — a greater
or less retraction of the divided parts according to the texture of the
particular portion of the body which is the seat, of the accident ; and a
discharge of blood proportioned in quantities to the size of the injured
vessels.

Contused and Lacerated Wounds.

Lacerated wounds are those, in which the fibres, instead of being
divided by a cutting instrument, have been torn asunder by some vio-
lence, capable of overcoming their force of adhesion. The edges of
such wounds, instead of being straight and regular, are jagged and
unequal.

The term contused is applied to those wounds, which are occasioned
by some blunt instrument, or surface, which has violently struck a part
of the body.

These two species of wounds greatly resemble each other, and as
they require nearly the same kind of treatment, writers usually treat
of them together.

Lacerated and contused wounds differ from simple incised ones in
appearing, at first view, much less alarming than the latter, while, in
reality, they are more dangerous. In simple cut wounds, the retrac-
tion of the parts, and the hemorrhage, are generally much more
considerable, than in lacerated wounds of the same size. However,
notwithstanding these circumstances, they commonly admit of being
healed with by far the greatest ease. It is even proper to remark, that
lacerated and contused wounds are scarcely ever attended with any
serious effusion of blood, even though some large blcod-vessels may be


42 Of Wounds.

injured. This circumstance often leads inexperienced practitioners to
commit great mistakes, by inducing them to promise too much in the
prognosis, which they make. Surgeons, versed in practice, however,
do not allow themselves to be deceived by the absence of hemorrhage,
and, in proportion as there is little bleeding, they apprehend that the
violence done to the fibres and vessels has been considerable. Whole
limbs have frequently been torn from the body, without any hemorr-
hage of consequence taking place.

Punctured Wounds.

A punctured wound signifies one, that is made with a narrow-
pointed instrument, the external orifice of the injury being small and
contracted, instead of being of a size proportionate to its depth. A
wound, produced by the thrust of a sword, or bayonet, affords us an
example of a punctured wound.

Wounds of this description are, in general, more dangerous than
incised ones, notwithstanding the latter have the appearance of being
by far the most extensive. The greatest degree of danger, in cases of
punctured wounds, always depends on the additional injury, and rough
violence, which the fibres have suffered, besides being divided. Some
of the disagreeable consequences apt to follow, are also to be imputed
to the frequent great depth, to which punctured wounds are liable to
extend, in consequence of which circumstance, important parts and
organs are often injured. These cases are likewise less easy of cure,
owing to the difficulty of extracting any extraneous substances, which
may happen to be lodged in the wound. All punctured wounds, and
stabs, are at the same time dangerous, inasmuch as they are particu-
larly liable to be followed by a great deal of inflammation, fever, deep-
seated abscesses, sinuses, &c.

Gun-shot Wounds.

Gun-shot wounds receive their name from the manner in which they
are produced, being generally caused by hard, obtuse, metallic bodies,
projected from cannons, muskets, or some other species of firearm.
With such injuries, it is also usual to comprehend a variety of dread-
ful accidents arising from the explosion of shells, or the violence with
which pieces of stones from ramparts, or splinters of wood on board of
ship, are driven.about. Gun-shot wounds are the most considerable
of the contused kind ; and what is to be said of them will apply, more
or less, to all contused wounds, according to the degree of contusion.
They are particularly characterized by what the French surgeons are
fond of calling a disor g conization of their surface. The excessive con-
tusion and violence observable in gun-shot wounds depend upon the
rapidity with which the bodies occasioning them are propelled. The
parts touched by the ball are frequently converted into a blackish
slough, the colour of which made our ancestors suppose, that bodies
projected by gunpowder became heated, and actually burned the flesh
with which they came into contact. Eut reason and experience have
now proved, that whatever may be the rapidity of a projectile, it never
acquires in its passage any perceptible heat. Indeed, a modern


OJ Wounds. 43

writer asserts, that such a degree of heat as would be requisite to
make a ball burn parts in its passage, would readily melt it. — (Ri*
cherand, Nosographie Chir. t. 1, p. 217, edit. %.) In general, gun-
shot wounds do not bleed much, unless large blood-vessels be injured ;
their circumference is often livid; and the shock that attends their
infliction, or the injury done to the nerves, may occasion in the limb or
part a kind of torpor, sometimes extending itself to the whole system.

Poisoned Wounds.

These are wounds inflicted by poisoned instruments ; by the bites
of rabid animals ; or by the bite or sting of certain reptiles and insects.

The effect of wounds of this kind are various ; some prove immedi-
ately fatal ; some produce purple or livid eruptions on the body, and
a putrid state of the fluids ; some cause lethargy, but almost all cause
pain, swelling, inflammation or ulceration.

TREATMENT.

1. To put a stop to the bleeding.

2. To remove any extraneous bodies that
may be present.

3. To effect an union by the first inten-
tion or, if that be impracticable, to
promote suppuration.


Indications of Cure, <


Incised Wounds,

Generally, a wound which is made with a sharp cutting instrument,
is attended with the least danger of any other, as it heals by what is
termed, the first intention, or, in other words, without suppuration,
except, however, it is in the immediate neighborhood of some great
blood-vessels, or vital organ.

The fibres, or parts, have only been simply divided, having neither
suffered contusion or laceration ; consequently they are less likely to
inflame severely, or to suppurate or slough, and, properly treated, it
unites again in a very expeditious manner.

In a recent simple incised wound, there are three objects which the
physician should endeavour to accomplish without the least delay.
The first, and that which requires his immediate interference, is the
bleeding, which must be checked. The second is the removal of all
extraneous matter from the surface of the wound. The third is the
reunion of the opposite sides of the injury.

The first thing to be done, in the treatment of a simple incised
wound, is carefully to examine it. Some are in the habit of giving
every wound a most superficial attention, and then putting a bandage
around it, when it may be in a most critical and dangerous state ;
when there may be extraneous substances in it, or where there is an
effusion of blood in the cellular substance. Such practice cannot be
too much deprecated. Every wound must be carefully and delibe-
rately examined before any dressings are applied.


44 Of Wounds.

When the divided vessels are not above a certain size, the bleeding
soon spontaneously ceases, and no surgical measures need be taken
on this particular account. When the wounded vessels are even
somewhat larger, and their situation is favourable for compression with
a bandage, it is often advisable to close the wound and apply com-
presses and a roller, rather than have recourse to ligatures, which
always create a certain degree of irritation and suppuration. Tying
the bleeding vessels may be occasionally, perhaps, the only safe mode
of proceeding. When the artery is of considerable size, and its mouth
can be readily seen, the most proper instrument for taking hold of it is
a pair of forceps. In applying the ligature, the surgeon must take
care to pull its ends in such a manner that the noose will not rise above
the mouth of the vessel, and for the purpose of altering the direction of
the force employed in tightening the ligature, the ends of the thumbs
are generally made use of. The tenaculum is commonly employed
for taking up arteries, which are not large and distinct.

Where bleeding is profuse, recourse may be had to a ligature, placed
around the limb, and drawn tight or twisted with a stick, until the
blood ceases to flow and until the wound can be dressed.

I have never yet, in all nry practice, had a single case, in which it
has been necessaiy to tie an artery. The hemorrhage or bleeding, in
most cases, will spontaneously cease, after a short time, by the formation
of a clot or coagulum. But should a case occur where it becomes
necessary to tie an artery, the ligature made use of may be strong
thread or silk. The lips of the wound should be opened, and the blood
washed away or absorbed by a cloth or sponge, to give an opportu-
nity to see the end of the artery from which the blood issues, and,
having ascertained it, the end is to be taken hold of with a pair of
tweezers, forceps, or tenaculum, and drawn a little out, when the liga-
ture must be passed around it, and drawn and tied very tight, and the
ligature should be cut off before the wound is closed.* This method is

* An hemorrhage, says a writer, may be stopped by simple pressure with the finger,
compress, or bandage, if I he wound be slight, or the hemorrhage trilling ; but when a
considerable artery has been divided, and the effusion of blood is copious, by the appli-
cation of the tourniquet, in situations where its use is admissible, and by afterwards
securing the divided vessel with a ligature.

In the application of the tourniquet, a small linen compress or cushion is to be placed
over the course of the bleeding vessel, in the most eligible situation above the wound
(see Amputation, where the proper positions for its application are pointed out), and
secured by means of a roller passed two or three times around the limb. The instru-
ment is now applied with its handle in a position opposite to the compress upon the
vessel, and rendered firm by the strap to which it is affixed ; after which, by turning the
handle, and thereby tightening the compress, the hemorrhage will be restrained.

The next object is to secure the bleeding vessel ; for which purpose two modes are
practised: 1. by means of the tenaculum; 2. by means of the crooked needle. The
iormer is now generally prclerred.

The tenaculum is a curve! hook, the point of which is to be passed through the
coats of the divided vessel which bring , lU lled out beyond the surface of the wound a
igature, composed of threads proportioned in number to the size of the artery, previous-
ly waxed, and loosely slipped over the instrument in the manner of a ring is to be
drawn by an assistant over its point, until it encircle the extremity of the vessel • when
its ends arc to be gradually, yet firmly drawn, so that the sides of the latter may be
effectual y compressed, it is then to be secured by a second knot, and the ends bein«r
cut off at a propei distance, are to be suffered to hang from the wound

When however from the depth of the wound-, or from the artery havin" retracted
beyond the reach of the tenaculum, there h a necessity for using the crooked needle ;


Of Wounds. 45

only to be practised in the most urgent cases, or where other means
fail. I have read an account of a surgeon in Berlin, or some part of
Europe, who, in amputating a leg, never takes up a single arteiy.
This fact shows the wonderful provision of nature in arresting he-
morrhage.

If the bleeding is so great as to prevent an accurate inspection of
the wound, so that the vessel cannot be perceived, pressure must be
made upon the trunk of the main arteiy, which supplies the parts with
blood. It may be made with the finger, ligature, or tourniquet, which,
after the wound has been cleansed, may be loosened in order to disco-
ver the bleeding vessel.

In the worst species of wounds to which I have been called, I have
found the following treatment sufficient to stop the bleeding.

I first ascertain the situation of the vessel from whence the blood
issues. — Then I take a pledget of lint, roll it up into a little ball, and
press it directly upon the mouth of the artery, (I mean where there is
profuse hemorrhage,) afterwards apply lint and small compresses to
secure permanent pressure upon the arteiy, after which the dressings
are to be applied.

In general, a piece of linen folded thick, of a suitable size, and laid
directly over the wound, and a bandage applied, is quite sufficient to
stop the hemorrhage. Occasionally, I have applied styptic powders
to contract the end of the vessel, produce coagulum, and thus arrest
it. For this purpose, the red, or styptic powders, are employed, a pre-
paration which is extremely astringent. Cold, and lead water, by
their astringent and refrigerant effect, are useful ; the lint and com-
presses may be wet with them. We have made use of a styptic
powder here, which a celebrated German physician, in New Jersey,
has been for many years in the habit of successfully using. It is a plant
pulverized, very astringent and styptic in its qualities, but I am unable,
at present, to obtain the correct name of it, as the physician can only
give some vulgar name. I hope soon, however, to obtain the botanical
character of the plant ; it is unquestionably the best vegetable pro-
duction known of the kind.

The bleeding having been suppressed, the next object is to remove
any extraneous matter, such as dirt, bits of glass, clots of blood, &c,
which may remain in the wound. Wore this circumstance neglected,
the plan of uniting the opposite sides of the cut by the adhesive inflam-
mation, or by what is more frequently termed, union by the first inten-
tion, would in general be frustrated.

As soon as attention has been paid to the foregoing indications, the
practitioner must put the lips of the wound in contact, and take mea-
sures for keeping them in this state .until they have grown firmly
together. The sides of incised wounds are kept in a state of apposition,
by means of an adhesive plaster, a proper position, the pressure of a
roller, and, in a few particular instances, by the employment of sutures.

With respect to sutures, as they create pain, irritation, and some

this armed with a proportionate ligature is to be introduced at about a quarter of an
inch from the situation of the vessel, to be carried under it, and brought cut at the same
distance on the opposite side; and this being repeated, a knot is to be made as above
directed.


4ft Of Wounds.

degree of suppuration, they ought never to be employed when the
parts can be kept in contact without them. However, certain cases
may require them, and it is admitted by many, that in wounds of the
ears, eyelids, nose, and lips, it is proper to use them.

To keep the surfaces of divided parts in contact, without sutures,
and at. the same time to admit of dressings, I have used, with great
advantage and success, a very simple invention, or contrivance, which
I have denominated the Improved Adhesive, or Uniting Plaster.

The following plate gives a representation of this admirable contri-
vance, or plaster.


It is made by taking four pieces of linen, of suitable size, and spread-
ing each thinly over with adhesive plaster. They are then, or before
they are spread, doubled, or one lightly placed above the other, to pre-
vent immediate adhesion or close contact, after which the ends are
brought within the distance of about an inch of each other, and stitched
together in the following manner. A stitch is first to be taken in the
upper piece ; the needle must then be carried across, and a stitch passed
through the lower one j then cross again and pass through the upper
piece, and so alternately to the end. It must be applied in the follow-
ing manner. The edges of the wound must be brought together, or
in contact, and a plaster laid over it at right angles. The two under
pieces, or strips, must be made to stick on or adhere to the skin, a short
distance from the lips of the wound, in order to give sufficient room for
the external dressing. After these adhere firmly, let the upper ones
be gradually extended, which, as a matter of course, draws together
the lower ones, and with them, the edges of the wound, and when
drawn closely together, they likewise must be fastened or made to
adhere to those immediately underneath, by which it will be perceived
that the parts are brought closely together, permanently secured,
and leaving room for dressings without any stitchings or sutures
whatever, and to which, certainly, there are great and insuperably


Of Wounds. 47

objections. They prove a source of irritation and inflammation, so
that it often becomes necessary to remove them. Besides, matter and
blood collects underneath, which prove very injurious, rendering it
often requisite to remove them ; but by this improved bandage, these
objections are obviated. There is an interspace left between the strips
of plaster, by which means the matter can be discharged in case of
suppuration, and the wound very conveniently dressed. After the
bandage, or plaster, has been thus applied, a pledget of lint may be
dipped in spirits, and applied over the wound, then a plaster of the
black, or healing salve, is to be applied, over the whole ; then, if the
nature of the wound call for it, a bandage or roller should be used.

In this manner the fresh cut surfaces are brought into contact ; and
to preserve them quietly in this state, is the next great aim which the
surgeon should have in view. The wounded part should be laid in
the posture which was found the most favourable for approximating
the sides of the cut, at the time of applying the dressings, and the
patient should be directed to keep the part in a perfectly quiet state.

When attention is paid to these circumstances, it often happens
that the two opposite surfaces of the wound grow together again in the
course of forty-eight hours, without any degree of suppuration. The
process by which this desirable event is accomplished is known by the
name of union by the first intention. Besides the advantage of the cure
being effected in this way with the greatest expedition possible, there
is still another thing much in favour of constantly promoting this me-
thod of healing wounds, which is, that the scar is much less than after
any other mode of treatment, and the part is covered with original
skin, which is always much stronger than any which can be formed
as a substitute for it.

It is wonderful with what celerity union by the first intention takes
place under favourable circumstances. In the course of three days,
a large wound is frequently healed.

The wound should be dressed occasionally, but in the commence-
ment, the dressings may remain from one to three days, according to
the feelings of the patient, and other circumstances. I have sometimes
given it a superficial examination in one day ; at other times, not till
after the expiration of three days. No definite rule can be laid down
upon this subject ; it must be left to the good sense and judgment of
the practitioner.

It is sometimes the case, that from some cause or other, more or less
suppuration will follow, which will very much retard the healing pro-
cess. When this is the case ; when inflammation takes place, the
salve or external plaster must be removed, and a poultice of the slippery
elm bark applied, and after the inflammation has subsided, the salve or
plaster to be again applied.

Should fungus, or what is termed li proud flesh," arise and prevent
the wound from healing, it may be sprinkled with a little pulverized
blood-root. If this is insufficient to remove it, a few grains of the
vegetable caustic must be daily applied.

Contused or Lacerated Wounds.

In many wounds which are not attended with contusion, when we
either know or suspect that extraneous bodies have been introduced


48 Of Wounds.

into the wound, union by the first intention should not be attempted,
but they should be allowed to suppurate, in order that the extraneous
matter may be expelled. Wounds which are attended with laceration,
although free from contusion, cannot always be united by the first
intention; because it must frequently be impossible to bring the external
parts or skin so much in contact, as to prevent that inflammation which
is naturally produced by exposure. But even in cases of simple lace-
ration, where the external influence is but slight, or can be prevented,
we find that union by the first intention often takes place ; the blood
which fills up the interstices of the lacerated parts, having prevented
the stimulus in them, and also suppuration, may afterwards be absorbed.

Many of the remarks on the treatment of simple and incised, are
applicable to lacerated wounds. There is not, however, much difficulty
about, bleeding or hemorrhage, there very seldom being much present ;
but the same attention must be paid to the removal of extraneous sub-
stances from the wound, after which the parts must be brought in
contact, or as closely together as possible, and if the bandage above
mentioned, cannot be continually applied, the parts may be kept toge-
ther by narrow strips of adhesive plaster ; afterwards a pledget of lint,
wet in spirits, may be applied, and if there is little or no inflammation
present, the black plaster, or healing salve, should be spread thin upon
a piece of linen, and applied, not only over the wound, but to some
distance on the adjacent parts or around it. Should swelling or inflam-
mation take place, this plaster must be immediately removed, and a
poultice of the slippery elm bark is to be applied until they subside, when
the salve or plaster may be again used.

Attention should be paid to the constitution, and such medicine and
kept open, perspiration promoted, and a cooling regimen recommended.

Punctured Wounds.

Wounds of this description are in general infinitely more dangerous
than cuts, notwithstanding the latter have the appearance of being
by far the most extensive. In cases of stabs, the greatest degree of
danger always depends on the injury and rough violence which the
fibres have suffered, in addition to their mere division. Many of the
disagreeable consequences are also to be imputed to the considerable
depth to which these wounds extend, whereby important parts and
organs are frequently injured. Sometimes the treatment is rendered
perplexing by the difficulty of removing extraneous substances, as, for
instance, a piece of the weapon which has been left in the wound.
Lastly, experience proves that punctured wounds and stabs are par-
ticularly liable to be followed by a great deal of inflammation, fever,
deep-seated abscesses, sinuses, &c.

A strange notion seems to pervade the writings of many systema-
tic authors, that all the danger and disagreeable consequences of
punctured wounds depend entirely upon the narrowness of their
orifices, so that suitable applications cannot be introduced to their
bottom. Hence, it is absurdly recommended to dilate the opening
of every stab, with the view, as is generally added, of converting the


Of Wounds. 49

accident into a simple incised wound. Some of these writers are
advocates for making the dilatation with a cutting instrument, while
others, with more propriety, propose to enlarge the opening with
tents.

Certain authors regard a punctured wound as a recent sinus, and,
in order to make the inner surfaces unite, they recommend exciting
a degree of inflammation in them, either by means of selons or in-
jections.

If the notion were true, that an important punctured wound, such
as the stab of a bayonet, could be actually changed into a wound
partaking of the mild nature of an incision, by the mere enlarge-
ment of its orifice, the corresponding practice would certainly be
highly commendable, however painful. But the fact is otherwise :
the rough violence done to the fibres of the body by the generality
of stabs is little likely to be suddenly removed by an enlargement of
the wound. Nor can the distance to which a punctured wound
frequently penetrates, and the number and nature of the parts in-
jured by it, be at all altered by such a proceeding. These, which
are the grand causes of danger, and of the collections of matter that
often take place in the cases under consideration, must exist, whether
the mouth and canal of the wound be enlarged or not. The times
when incisions are proper is, when there are foreign bodies to be re-
moved, abscesses to be opened, or sinuses to be divided. To make
painful incisions sooner than they can answer any end, is both inju-
dicious and hurtful. They are sometimes rendered quite unnecessary,
by the union of the wound throughout its whole extent without any
suppuration at all.

Making a free incision in the early stage of these cases undoubtedly
seems a reasonable method of preventing the formation of sinuses, by
preventing the formation of matter ; and were sinuses an inevitable
consequence of all punctured wounds, for which no incisions had
been practised at the moment of their occurrence, it would undoubted-
ly be unpardonable to omit them. Fair, however, as this reason may
appear, it is only superficially plausible, and a small degree of reflec-
tion soon discovers its want of real solidity. Under what circum-
stances do sinuses form ? Do they not form only where there is some
causes existing to prevent the healing of an abscess? This cause
may either be the indirect way in which the abscess communicates
with the external opening, so that the pus cannot readily escape ; or
it may be the presence of some foreign body or carious bone ; or,
lastly, it may be an indisposition of the inner surface of the abscess
to form granulations, arising from its long duration, but removable by
laying the cyst completely open to the influence of the air. Thus it
becomes manifest, that the occurrence of suppuration in punctured
wounds is followed by sinuses only when the surgeon neglects to
procure a free issue for the matter after its accumulation, or when he
neglects to remove any extraneous bodies. But as dilating the wound
at first can only tend to augment the inflammation and render the
suppuration more extensive, it ought never to be practised in these
cases, except for the direct object of giving free exit to matter already
collected, and of being able to remove extraneous bodies palpably


fiO Of Wounds.

lodged. It is an erroneous idea to suppose the narrowness of punc-
tured wounds so principal a cause of the bad symptoms with which
they are often attended, that the treatment ought invariably to aim
at its removal.

Recent punctured wounds have absurdly had the same plan of
treatment applied to them as old and callous fistulae. Setons and
stimulating injections, which, in the latter cases, sometimes act
beneficially, by exciting such inflammation as is productive of the
effusion of coagulating lymph, and of the granulating process, never
prove serviceable when the indication is to moderate an inflammation
which is too apt to rise to an improper height. The counter-opening
that must be formed in adopting the use of a seton is also an objec-
tion. However, what good can possibly arise from a seton in these
cases ? Will it promote the discharge of foreign bodies, if any are
present ? By occupying the external openings of the wound, will it
not be more likely to prevent it? In fact, will it not itself act with
all the inconveniences and irritation of an extraneous substance in
the world ? Is it a likely means of diminishing the immoderate pain,
swelling, and extensive suppuration so often attending punctured
wounds? It will undoubtedly prevent the external openings from
healing too soon; but cannot this object be effected in a better way?
If the surgeon observe to insinuate a piece of lint into the sinus, and
pass a probe through its tack once a day, the danger of its closing
too soon will be removed.

The practice of enlarging punctured wounds by incisions, and of
introducing setons, is often forbidden by the particular situation of
these injuries.

In the first stage of a punctured wound, the indication is to guard
against the attack of violent inflammation. In short, the antiphlo-
gistic plan is to be followed. As no man can pronounce whether
such a wound will unite or not, and as no harm can result from the
attempt, the orifice ought to be closed, and covered with simple
dressings.

Sometimes, under this treatment, the surgeon is agreeably surprised
to find the consequent inflammation mild, and the wound speedily
united by the first intention. " Numerous are the examples of
wounds, which penetrate the large cavities, being healed by the first
intention, that is, without any suppuration. Even wounds of the
chest itself, with injury of the lungs (continues an experienced mili-
litary surgeon and professor), ought to be united by the first intention."
— (Assilina, in Manuale di Chirurgia, parte seconda, p. 13.) More fre-
quently, however, in cases of deep stabs, the pain is intolerable ; and
the inflammatory symptoms run so high as to leave no hope of
avoiding suppuration. In this condition, an emollient poultice is the
best local application ; and when the matter is formed, the treatment
is like that of abscesses in general. ,

If the situation of the parts will admit of it, let the wound be daily
immersed in hot ley ; after which apply a poultice of it, (ley) by stir-
ring in the elm bark, and applying it warm, and often renewing it. The
sinus, or opening, should be often injected with soap and water, and
other detergent liquids, such as the tincture of Blood-root, Gum,


Of Wou/ids. 51

Myrrh, &c. A tent, with u few grains of the vegetable caustic, may
likewise be introduced to keep the wound open ; when the swell-
ing, pain, and inflammation have subsided, apply the black, or healing
salve.

This treatment is peculiarly applicable to wounds occasioned by
old or rusty nails, which are very dangerous, often giving rise to the
lock-jaw.

Gun-shot Wounds.

Gun-shot wounds, as before stated, are solutions of continuity
effected by substances impelled from fire-arms. They are generally
punctured as to their form, and always contused as to their surface.
They are consequently apt to occasion extensive inflammation, and
sloughing of the parts more immediately concerned. The orifice
by which a ball enters is small, round, depressed, and livid ; that
by which it escapes larger, more elongated, and rather everted at its
edges. These appearances vary with the velocity of the ball, the
entrance being most, and the exit least distinctly characterized when
it is greatest, and vice versa. The wound, when first received, occa-
sions a numb sort of sensation, but before long becomes acutely pain-
ful. It bleeds less than an incised wound in the same situation would
do. When of any considerable extent, it invariably causes, immedi-
ately on its infliction, an extreme degree of mental alarm, despond-
ency and prostration of strength. This constitutional effect is
proportioned to the importance of the injury, the weakness of the
patient, and his apprehension of danger.

to the poisonous agency of the gunpowder ; and upon this belief was
founded the cruel practice of scarifying or excising the wounded
surfaces, and dressing them with scalding oils. Pare introduced a
milder practice, which he was led to, in the first instance, by necessity,
and was afterwards confirmed in by experience and reasoning on the
subject. He used merely unctuous applications, and with such
success, that his example Was soon generally followed. The treat-
ment of gun-shot wounds, though so far improved, still continued
unnecessarily severe, since the scarification, which was formerly
preferred to remove the poison, still remained in use, to prevent
tension and inflammation from the fistulous shape of the wound.
John Hunter exploded this system of dilatation, as it was called, by
showing that it did not prevent the effects in question, and was per-
formed soon enough if delayed until they actually appeared. The
best application at first is a pledget of lint placed on the wound, a
cooling wash, and a poultice. Should inflammation supervene,
fomentations, and poultices, become proper ; when the sloughs are
detached, pressure with the usual cooling lotions, must be carefully
employed, as there are apt to be extensive sinuses; and if these
have not a sufficient opening, it ought to be afforded by tents, &c.
When the ball, or any other foreign matter introduced into the
wound, is not carried through, but remains, it ought to be removed,
if this can be done without any serious cutting or searching ; for such
extraneous substances often acquire a fibrous cyst, and cause no dis-
agreeable symptoms. The finger is the best probe for detecting the


52 Of Wouuds.

ball or other foreign body ; and when farther search is requisite to find
it, the nature of the tissues concerned ought to be carefully considered,
since the direction of its course is much affected by those of dense, and
unyielding structure, as the bones, fascia*, and even the skin. The
velocity of the ball, and the position of the body when it entered, ought
also to be taken into account. The forceps is the best instrument to
extract it when it is practicable.

It is recommended to dilate all gun- shot wounds ; but this practice
is attended with very little benefit, but on the contrary, with much mis-
chief, except the ball is within reach, and can be felt, and it becomes
necessary to remove it.

Poisoned Wounds.

Of the bites of rabid animals. — After the expiration of a shorter or
longer time, sometimes not until many months after the accident, the
part becomes painful ; wandering pains are felt over the body ; great
restlessness ; heaviness ; disturbed sleep, and frightful dreams ; sudden
starlings or spasms ; sighing ; anxiety, and love for solitude. These
symptoms daily increase, pains begin to shoot from the wounded part
up to the throat, occasioning a straightness and sensation of choking ;
an aversion is felt' to the swallowing of water or other liquids, which at
length arises to such a degree, that the moment any thing in a fluid
fjrm is brought in contact with the patient's lip, it occasions him to
start back with dread and horror ; and the attempt at deglutition is
accompanied with a convulsive paroxysm. A vomiting of bilious mat-
ter is an early symptom ; an intense hot fever ensues, with dryness
and roughness of the tongue, hoarseness of the voice, and the discharge
of a viscid saliva from the mouth, which the patient is constantly spit-
ing out ; together with spasms of the genital and urinary organs, in
consequence of which the evacuations are forcibly ejected. There is
extreme anxiety, and irritability sometimes so excessive, that the
smallest impression made upon the body, by the perching of a fly or
other cause, fails not to induce the most terrible convulsions. In some
in< Lances delirium arises, and closes the tragic scene: but generally
the judgment is retained until the pulse becomes tremulous and irregu-
lar, convulsions then arise, and nature is, at length, totally exhausted.

Of the bile of the viper. — Acute pain and considerable swelling of
the part, which soon becomes red, and afterwards livid ; disposition to
fainting ; or an actual syncope ; small rapid, sometimes interrupted,
pulse ; great nausea ; bilious convulsive vomitings ; cold sweats ; the
skin becomes yellow ; convulsions ; death.

Of the bite of the rattle-snake. — Nausea ; a full, strong, agitated
pulse ; swelling of the whole body ; the eyes much diffused with
blood ; sometimes copious bloody sweats ; and often hemorrhage from
the eyes, nose, and ears. The teeth chatter, and the pains and groans
of the sufferer indicate his approaching dissolution.

From some facts recorded by Sir Everard Home, and observations
made on the operation of the poisons of the black-spotted snake of St.
Lucia, the cobra di Capello, and the rattle-snake, it appears, that, " the
effects of the bite of a snake vary according to the intensity of the
poison. When the poison i3 very active, the local irritation ia so sud.


Of Wwnd*. 53

den and so violent, and its effects on the general system are ao great,
that death soon takes place. When the body is afterwards inspected,
the only alteration of structure met with is in the parts close to the.
bite, where the cellular membrane is completely destroyed, and the
neighbouring muscles very considerably inflamed. When the poison
is less intense, the shock to the general system does not prove fatal:
It brings on a slight degree of delirium, and the pain in the part bitten
is very severe ; in about half an hour, swelling takes place from an
effusion of serum in the cellular membrane, which continues to in-
crease, with greater or less rapidity, for about twelve hours, extending
during that period into the neighbourhood of the bite. The blood
ceases to flow in the small vessels of the swollen parts ; the skin over
them becomes quite cold ; the action of the heart is so weak that the
pulse is scarcely perceptible, and the stomach is so irritable that
nothing is retained by it. In about sixty hours, these symptoms go
off; inflammation and suppuration takes place in the injured parts ;
and when the abscess formed is very great, it proves fatal. When the
bite has been in the finger, that part has immediately mortified. When
death has taken place under such circumstances, the absorbent vessels
and their glands have undergone no change similar to the effects of
morbid poisons, nor has any part lost its natural appearance, except
those immediately connected with the abscess. In those patients who
recover with difficulty from the bite, the symptoms produced by it go
off more readily and more completely than those produced by a mor-
bid poison, which has been received into the system. — (Sir E. Home,
Case of a JWan who died in consequence of the bite of a rattlesnake, in
Phil. Trans., IS 10.)

The bile of the adder is attended with symptoms of a similar nature
but they are much less violent ; neither does it often prove fatal.

Of smaller reptiles, and of insects. — These in general produce local
inflammation only ; which, however, is often very severe : in some
instances the bite is productive of the same consequences as punctured
wounds ; inducing inflammation of the absorbents, and convulsions
from their effect upon the nerves.

The effects of the bite of musquittos, are small tumors, attended
with so high a degree of itching and inflammation, that the patient
cannot refrain from scratching ; by a frequent repetition of which he
not uncommonly occasions them to ulcerate.

The Chigre is a kind of small sand-flea, which proves very trouble-
some in the West Indies, by insinuating itself into the soft and tender
parts of the fingers and toes more usually than into other parts of the
body, particularly under the nails, where it continues to increase in
size, causing no farther pain than a disagreeable itching and heat. In
process of time, however, a small bag or bladder is formed, in which
are deposited thousands of nits or ova, that become so many young
chigrea, and if not speedily extracted, create running ulcers. Some
people have lost their limbs by amputation, nay, even their lives, by
having neglected to root out these vermin in proper time.

The moment, therefore, that an itching, redness, and heat, more
than usual, are perceived in any part affected with a chigre, it will
be advisable to extract it. This is usually done with a sharp-pointed


54 Of Womdi.

needle by sonic dexterous negro, who picks out the insect, and if
a cyst is formed, endeavours to take out this whole also ; for by
breaking it, troublesome ulcers are sometimes formed. The cavity is
then usually filled up with tobacco-ashes or snuff.

In very inveterate cases, where from neglect either the hands or feet
are much beset with chigres, it may be necessary, after the extraction
of the several cysts, to wash the parts with a strong decoction of
tobacco, or a solution of the vegetable caustic.


TREATMENT OP POISONED WOUNDS.


I, | 2.


To prevent the absorption of the poison.
Indications, ^ 2. To counteract its destructive effects when already
introduced into the system.

1st. As soon as a person has been bitten by any kind of a snake which
is poisonous, as a rattle snake or adder, a cup should be applied to the
part as soon as possible, and, after it has drawn awhile, use the scarifi-
cators, and apply the cups again, and thus drawing out as much fluid
as can be done.

The efficacy of cupping in poisoned wounds has been well tested,
in experiments made upon animals which had been bitten ; it was
proved that those to which the cups were applied experienced no bad
effects of the poison, while the others soon died. This operation
prevents the absorption of the virus, or poison.

2nd. As soon as the wound has been cupped, apply the vegetable
caustic, and let it be repeated twice a day.

3rd. Make a strong decoction of the common plantain, and wash the
wound with it : after which mix it with the slippery elm bark, add
freely of sweet oil, and apply it constantly, or as long as there is any
swelling or inflammation.

This has proved very effectual in poisoned wounds. The plantain
has been found a certain antidote against the bites of different
animals.

I have read an account of a battle fought between a toad and a
snake, in which the former, whenever he was bitten, repaired immedi-
ately to a little distance and ate the leaves of the plantain, after which
he returned and renewed the conflict. The person who witnessed the
scene, after a short time, plucked up the root, and when the animal
was deprived of it he immediately died, thus demonstrating the power
of the plant. This production forms the basis of a. receipt for the cure
of poisoned wounds, which was long and successfully used by a negro
named Caesar, residing in one of the Southern states ; and his master
gave him his liberty, on conditions of publishing it. It may be drank
internally, and applied externally.

4th. An ounce of Olive oil must be taken by the patient every day,
and the cupping repeated.

Jt i3 now customary to cut out the part wounded ; but this is cruel
and unnecessary

A singular case of poisoned wound, from the bite of a rattle-snake,
occurred some years since, under the observation of Dr. S. T. Barstow,
of Wilkesbarrc, Pennsylvania, and in some respects is perfectly ano-
malous.


OJ Wounds. 59

A lady, in the fourth or fifth month of het pregnancy, ^as bitten by
a rattle-snake, but under the treatment she at length recovered from
the symptoms usually consequent upon such wounds. At the full
period of gestation, she was safely delivered of a fine, healthy- looking
child ; but immediately on its being applied to the breast and allowing
it to suck, the child assumed the peculiar hues of the rattle-snake,
swelled exceedingly, and soon died. She then procured a puppy to
relieve her breast, which died in two days of the same symptoms. A
lamb was then tried ; and in succession, one puppy and three lambs
shared the same fate. Another puppy was then procured, which
escaped with its life, but exhibited some of the symptoms which had
been fatal to its predecessors. The lady remained all this time with-
out any symptom of the disease, and had as rapid a convalescence
from parturition as i3 usually observed.

The poison seems to havebee/i excreted by the process of lactation ;
for the second year afterward she had another child, and though she
applied it to her breasts, not without fearful forebodings, yet no evil
consequences resulted.

The obscurity in which the action of poisons on the human consti-
tution is involved, is in nowise lessened when we consider that testi-
mony of the most satisfactory sort shows that hydrophobia may be
generated by heat, and that the disease may sometimes occur sponta-
neously. According to M. Unaniel, in 1807, in the village of Sea,
forty-two persons died, after having been bitten by mad dogs ; and on
the north coast, hydrophobia occurred in several individuals without
bite. — (See Journal des Progres, quoted in North Am. Med. and Surg.
Journ. vol. 6.) The causes which may induce spontaneous hydropho-
bia are violent emotions of the mind, sorrow, fear, rage, fright, the want
of food, &c. Drs. Hosack and Francis enjoyed a singular opportunity
of witnessing a case of hydrophobia, arising in a young man, aged
thirteen years, independent of the bite of a rabid animal. He had been
severely treated by his guardian or overseer for some imaginary
offence ; the want of food and clothing at an inclement season of the
year could alone be looked upon as the exciting cause of his complaint.
The symptoms of his disorder throughout were similar to those arising
from madness induced by the bite of a rabid animal. — (N. Y. Med. and
Phys. Journal, vol. 2.) A curious paper on the various means em-
ployed for the cure of hydrophobia by Dr. Mease, may be seen in the
Philadelphia Medical Museum.


56 Qf Wounds.

WOUNDS OCCURRING IN PARTICULAR PARTS OF THE BODY.

Wounds of the throat. — Superficial wounds of the throat require the
same treatment as others, but they are often very deep from attempts
to commit suicide. In this case, the first thing that demands atten-
tion is the hemorrhage which is often profuse : the bleeding vessels in
this case, if possible, should be secured by a ligature; although I
have seen a copious hemorrhage spontaneously cease without tying
it, and without compression. When the carotid artery is cut, it is
generally fatal, but not always when the jugulars are divided.
After the bleeding has ceased or has been stopped, the divided parts
must be brought together and secured the same as other wounds. It
is customary with some to use stitches or sutures, but they excite ir-
ritation, or inflammation, and when the patient coughs, or upon any
motion of these parts, the stitches are torn through. Sometimes the
trachea, or wind-pipe, and oesophagus are cut through. When this
accident occurs, the most that is necessary to be done, is the same
treatment as before recommended, or application of the ordinary
dressings.

Wounds penetrating cavities. — The thorax and abdomen are some-
times penetrated, and dangerous consequences result if any of the
viscera contained in thess cavities are injured.

Wounds of the Thorax. — The thorax is sometimes penetrated suffi-
cient to penetrate the cavity of the pleura, and the admission of air,
produces an immediate collapse of the lungs, and respiration is per-
formed with great difficulty. When this accident occurs, the wound
must be closed, a plaster and bandage applied over it, and rest and
a cooling regimen enjoined.

Should inflammation arise, the parts must be poulticed, and it must
be placed between two pieces of muslin to prevent any portion of it
from entering the cavity of the chest.

Wounds penetrating the Abdomen. — Wounds occurring in these parts
are often very dangerous, arising from the danger of peritoneal in-
flammation. If the wound is superficial, let it be dressed the same
as others, and the treatment both external and internal instituted, as
it is calculated to prevent inflammation. If the wound penetrate the
cavity of the abdomen, and let out the intestines, after removing the
extraneous substances, they must be returned, parts brought together,
and secured, and cooling lotions, and poultices applied. Tepid ap-
plications are, in general preferable, as those that are cool are apt to pro-
duce a chill, and subsequently fever. In general, in all cases of wounds
of the abdomen, it is an excellent rule never to be officious about ab-
scesses which may take place, nor to exhibit partiality to such experi-
ments as have been devised for learning precisely what bowel is wound .
ed. It is quite time enough tointerfere when the urgency of the symp-
toms confirms any suspicions which may be entertained. A great
deal of harm is frequently done by handling and disturbing the
wounded parts more than is necessary, and it is well known, that
wounds at first attended with alarming symptoms frequently have a
favourable termination. Swords, balls, and other weapons some-
times pass completely through the body without the patient suffering
afterwards any threatening symptom, or indeed any effect which]


Of Wounds. 57

abstractly considered, would authorize the inference that the
viscera had been at all injured. Severe inflammations may not end
in suppuration, and when pus is formed it is sometimes absorbed
again. Nothing, then, indicates the necessity for the discharge of
purulent matter in the abdomen, unless the fluctuation and situation of
the abscess be very distinct, and the quantity and pressure of the
matter clearly productive of inconveniences. Under these circum-
stances, the surgeon should make a cautious puncture with a lancet.

I lately saw a case in which a very aged female had a considerable
portion of the abdomen torn open, the intestines thrown externally,
by the horn of a cow.

By judicious treatment, although there was inflammation of the
peritoneum and the most extensive suppuration, when I last heard from
her she was nearly, or quite well. In such cases there is much con-
stitutional disturbance, which must be removed by a strict anti-phlo-
gistic, or cooling course of treatment.

Wounds of the Intestines.

Sometimes the intestines are wounded, or partially divided. When
this happens, we must rely more upon the recourses of nature than
art. Adhesive inflammation may arise, and agglutinate, the divided in-
testine together. The vomiting of blood, or discharge of it by stool ; the
escape of fetid air or of intestinal matter from the mouth of the wound ;
an empty, collapsed state of a portion of bowel, protruded at the open-
ing in the skin, are the common symptoms attending a wound of this
kind. When the wound is situated in the protruded portion, it is
obvious to the surgeon's eye ; but when it affects a part of the intes-
tinal canal within the abdomen, the nature of the case can be known
only by a consideration of other symptoms. In addition to such as I
company wounds of the bowels; as, for instance, oppression about
the precordia, acute or griping pain in the belly, cold sweats, syncope,
&c. But unless the wounded intestine protrude, there is no practical
£oo<l in knowing whether the bowel is injured or not ; since if it be
in the abdomen, the treatment ought not to be materially different
from that of a simple penetrating wound of the belly, unattended
with a wound of any of the viscera. Large wounds of the small
intestines, particularly of the duodenum and jejunum, are attended
with acute fever, anxiety,' paleness of the countenance, syncope, cold
perspirations, a small, intermitting, tremulous pulse, and they fre-
quently prove fatal. Injuries of the small intestines are also more
often than those of the large ones followed by extravasation. A
division of the upper part of the intestinal canal, towards the
pylorus, will deprive the body of the nourishment requisite for its sup-
[f the chyle escape from the wound, the patient will die of a
ismus ; and if it become extravasated, it will be likely to
1 1 irritation as will prove fatal. The escape of excrement
or of fetid air from the wound, indicates an injury of one of the
In these eases, the symptoms are generally milder,
and the p.oggage of the intestinal contonts outwards, through the


58 0/ Wounds.

wound, more easy, on account of the bowel being less moveable. For
the same reason, the wounded intestine more readily contracts an
adhesion to the adjacent parts. — ( Callisen, Syst. Chirurgice Hodierncc,
t I, p. 717.)

From repeated experience, we learn that most of the viscera of
the abdomen may be wounded without any very serious or fatal con-
sequences, and this affords wounderful proof of the resources and
powers of nature, in providing against danger and death.

When the wounded bowel lies within the cavity of the abdomen,
no surgeon of the present day would have the rashness to think of
attempting to expose the injured intestine, for the purpose of sewing
up the breach of continuity in it. In fact, the surgeon seldom knows
at first what has happened ; and when the nature of the case is after-
wards manifested, by the discharge of blood per anum, and extrava-
sation of intestinal matter, &c, it would be impossible to get at the
injured part of the bowel, not only because its exact situation is un-
known, but more particularly on account of the adhesions, which are
always formed with surprising rapidity. But even if the surgeon
knew to a certainty, in the first instance, that one of the bowels was
wounded, and the precise situation of the injury, no suture could be
applied without considerably enlarging the external wound, drawing
the wounded intestine out of the cavity of the abdomen, and hand-
ling and disturbing the adjacent viscera. Nothing would be more
likely than such proceedings to ( render the accident, which might
originally be curable, unavoidably fatal. I entirely agree with Mr.
John Bell, who says, "When there is a wounded intestine, which
we are warned of only by the passing out of the feees, we must not
pretend to search for it, nor put in our finger, nor expect to sew it to
the wound ; but we may trust that the universal pressure, which pre-
vents great effusion of blood, and collects the blood into one place,
that very pressure which always causes the wounded bowel and no
other i o protrude, will make the two wounds, the outward wound and
the inward wound, of the intestine, oppose each other, point to point;
and if all be kept there quie*, though but for one day, so lively is the
tendency to inflame, that the adhesion will be begun which is to
save the patient's life." — (Discourses on Wounds, p. 361, edit. 3.)

When the extravasation and other symptoms, a few days after the
accident, show the nature of the case, a suture can be of no use
-whatever, as the adhesive inflammation has already fixed the part
in its situation, and the space in which the extravasation lies is com-
pletely separated from the general cavity of the abdomen, by the
surrounding adhesions.

When the bowel does not protrude, and the opening in it is situated
closely behind the wound in the peritoneum, a suture is not requsite ;
for the contents of the gut, not passing onward, will be discharged
from the outer wound, and not be diffused among the viscera, if care
be taken to keep the external wound open. There is no danger of
the wounded bowel changing its situation, and becoming distant
from the wound in the peritoneum, for the situation which it now oc-
cupies is its natural one. Nothing but violent motion or exertions
could cause so unfavourable an occurrence, and these should always
be avoided. The adhesions which take place in the course of a day


Of Wounds. 69

or two at length render it impossible Tor the bowel to shift its situation.
Things, however, are very far different when the wounded part of the
bowel happens to protrude. No enlargement of the outer wound is
requisite to enable the practitioner to adopt the suture ; there is no dis-
turbance of the adjacent parts ; there is no doubt concerning the
actual existence of the injury ; no difficulty in immediately finding out
its situation.

But though authors are so generally agreed about the propriety of
using a suture in the case of a wounded and protruded bowel, they
differ exceedingly, both as to the right object of the method, and the
most advantageous mode of sewing the injured part of the intestine.
Some have little apprehension of extravasation, advise only one stitch
to be made, and use the ligature chiefly with the view of confining the
injured bowel near the external wound, so that in the event of an extra j
vasation, the effused matter may find its way outwards. Other writers
wish to remove the possibility of extravasation, by applying numerous
stitches, and attach little importance to the plan of using the ligature,
principally for the r purpose of keeping the intestine near the superficial
wound.

When the wound of a bowel is so small that it is closed by the
protrusion of the villous coat, the application of a suture must evi-
dently be altogether needless ; and since the ligature would not fail to
cause irritation, as an extraneous substance, the employment of it ought
unquestionably to be dispensed with.

Notwithstanding I have carefully read all the arguments adduced
by Travers, in favour of stitching a divided bowel at as many points as
possible, I still remain unconvinced of the advantage of such practice,
for reasons already suggested. If a case were to present itself to me,
in which a bowel, partly cut through, protruded, I should apply only a
single suture, made with a small sewing-needle and a piece of fine silk,
If the bowel were completely cut across, I should have no objection to
attach its ends together by means of two or three stitches of the same
kind. I coincide with Mr. Travers, respecting the advantage of cut-
ting off the ends of the ligature, instead of leaving them in the wound,
as I believe he is right in regard to the little chance there is of the
injured intestine receding far from the wound ; and if the ends of the
ligature are then of no use in keeping the bowel in this position, they
must be objectionable as extraneous substances. [Cooper.]

As confirming some of the foregoing observations, I would refer to
the valuable writings of Scarpa and those of Dr. Hennem

" The old practitioners (says Dr. Hennen,) were very much averse
from leaving any thing to nature in cases of abdominal injuries,
although their universal employment of sutures ought to have con-
vinced them how much she could bear with impunity ; for there can
be very little doubt that their uniform performance of the operation of
gastroraphe was at least superfluous, if not positively hurtful. In the
course of a very extensive practice, two cases only have come under
my notice, where it was required to a wounded intestine, though fre-
quently it may be needed for injuries to the parietes." — (On Military
Surgery, ed. 2, p. 411.)


60 Oj Wounds.

As Dr. Hennon observes, in the treatment of wounds of the abdo-
men, the violence of symptoms is to be combated more by general
means than by any of the mechanical aids of surgery. The search
for extraneous bodies, unless superficially situated, or they can be felt
with a probe, is entirely out of the question. " Enlargement or con-
traction of the wound, as the case may require, for returning protruded
intestine, securing the intestine itself, and promoting the adhesion of
the parts, is all that the surgeon must do in the way of operation ; and
even in this the less he interferes the better." — (On Military Surgery,
ed. 2, p. 401.)

The principal indication is to prevent a dangerous degree of inflam-
mation. Hence the antiphlogistic treatment is highly indispensable.

Wounds of the small intestines are attended with more dangerous
symptoms than those of the large ones. All flatulent, stimulating, and
solid food is to be prohibited. The bowels are to be daily emptied with
clystors, by which means no matter will be suffered to accumulate in
the intestinal canal, so as to create irritation and distension.

When excrementitious matter is dischaged from the outer wound, it
is highly necessary to clean and dress the part very frequently. Gen-
tle pressure should also be made with the fingers, at the circumference
of the wound, at each time of applying the dressings, for the purpose
of promoting the escape of any extravasated matter. For the same
reason the patient should always lie, if convenient, in a posture that
will render the external opening depending.

After a day or two, the surgeon need not be afraid of letting the
outer wound heal up ; for the adhesive inflammation all around the
course of the wound will now prevent any extravasated matter from
becoming diffused among the viscera. If the case should end well, the
intestine generally undergoes a diminution in its diameter at the place
where the wound was situated. When this contraction is considera-
ble, the patient occasionally experiences colic pains at the part, especi-
ally after eating such food as tends to produce flatulence. As these
pains usually go entirely off after a certain time, and no inconvenience
whatsoever remains, the intestine may possibly regain its wonted
capacity again. A more considerable constriction of the above sort
has been known to occasion a fatal miserere. Even the intestine itself
has been known to burst in this situation, after its contents had accu-
mulated behind the contracted part. Patients, who have recovered
from wounds in the intestines, should ever afterward be particularly
careful not to swallow any hard substances, or indigestible flatulent
food.

Wounds of the Joints. — In all wounds of the joints, it is proper to
place the limb in such a posture as to favor the approximation of the
sides of the wound, and absolute rest must be enjoined. In every other
respect they must be treated as other wounds. When there is a dis-
charge of synovia, or joint water, it may sometimes be necessary to
sprinkle styptic powders upon the wound, to prevent its escape ; but
as the wound heals, the discharge usually lessens.

I attended one case where the knee was wounded with a* scythe,
and where there was a discharge both of pus and of the synovial
fluid. The application of the elm poultice, and black plaster, reduced


Of Wounds. 61

the swelling and inflammation ; the wound rapidly healed, and he
soon recove

Wounds of the Tendons. — It requires sometimes nice discrimination
to detect wounds of the tendons, as they are usually complicated with
ulcers. There is a discharge from the sore, of matter or pus, and also
of a clear fluid resembling joint water. In such cases, instead of excit-
ing a preternatural discharge, as we do in common ulcers, we must
reverse our treatment, and make use of such applications as will check
this discharge.

I attended a young man, nearly fifteen years ago, who received a
wound of the leg by a cart passing over it, and which was attended by
a physician, or surgeon, of New Brunswick, who stated that it would
be a year or two before he could recover, and that a portion of bone
must first be sawed off. He was brought to me, a distance of thirty
miles, exhibiting, when he arrived, very unfavorable symptoms. He
had become very pale and much reduced. Upon an examination of
his sore, which was upon the leg, it appeared to assume the appear-
applied medicine to make it discharge more freely, with a view to bring
about a healthy action ; but this discharge was attended with a very
serious effect ; it reduced him in twelve hours surprisingly, and I
could not account for it ; but upon a more minute examination, I dis-
covered two kinds of matter or fluids issuing from the ulcer ; one kind
was pus, the other was such as issues from a common ganglion, from
which I perceived that my treatment was diametrically the reverse
from what it ought to have been. I therefore reversed it, and injected
in with a small syringe, an astringent preparation, made by adding a
few grains of the styptic powder to a strong decoction of the Persimon
bark, which immediately checked the discharge and so changed the
character of the ulcer, that the patient was soon able to walk, and he
entirely recovered, to the great disappointment and mortification of his
former physician.

When he first came he was unable to walk, I think, even with
Crutches.

Such is the proper treatment of various kinds of wounds, and no
matter in what part of the body they are received, the practitioner in
treating them is to be governed by the same principles with such va-
riations, as particular and peculiar cases may require.

In wounds of the integuments of the head, the hair must be care-
fully shaved off with a razor, extraneous substances removed, the
divided parts replaced in contact, and secured either by the improved
adhesive or uniting plaster, or narrow strips of the same. No matter
how extensive the wound is, the separate scalp or integuments must
be replaced. In cases where nearly half the scalp has been torn off,
and covered with dirt and splinters of wood, the parts have been
cleansed and replaced, and the wound has healed.


CHAPTER IV.

INJURIES OF THE HEAD.


All injuries of the head are more dangerous than any other kind,
in consequence of the effect they produce upon the brain and ner-
vous system.

From the variety of parts of which the scalp is composed, from
their structure, connexions, and uses, injuries done to it by external
violence become of much more consequence than the same kind of
ills can prove, when inflicted on the common integuments of the rest
of the body. One principal reason of the danger in these cases de-
pends upon the free communication between the vessels of the peri-
cranium and those of the dura mater, through the diploe of the skull ;
for when inflammation is kindled in the former membrane, it may ex-
tend itself to the latter. According to Sir Astley Cooper, there are
three modes in which wounds of the scalp may induce fatal conse-
quences. 1st, by producing what is called an erysipelatous inflam-
mation on the head ; 2dly, by producing extensive suppuration under
the tendon of the occipito-frontalis muscle ; 3dly, by rendering a
simple fracture'compound by means of the trephine, so as to cause
more extensive inflammation of the dura mater.

The nervous system is composed of the cerebrum, cerebellum, and
medulla oblongata, which principally supply the organs of sense and
their appendages with nerves, and of the medulla spinalis, with the
nerves of volition and sensation proceeding from it. But there is a
second system of nerves in the body, called the grand sympathetic,
which is distributed to the heart, and to the viscera of the abdomen :
it communicates with most of the nerves of the brain, and with those
of the spinal marrow: it forms by its branches a large ganglion, or
several ganglia, called the semilunar, situated behind the stomach ;
and a plexus proceeds from this, which distributes branches to the
greater part of the abdominal viscera.

The eighth pair of nerves of the brain forms a large communica-
tion with the ganglion behind the stomach.

If an injury happens to the head, the functions of volition and sen-
sation are diminished ; the stomach is disordered through the medium
of the par vagum ; and from the general communication between the
grand sympathetic nerve, and those of the brain and spinal marrow,
the functions of the heart and of the abdominal viscera become af-
fected. The powers of the mind are also diminished ; the memory
is lost ; the judgment is enfeebled : thus sensation, volition, the in-
voluntary actions, and the powers of the mind, are diminished or sus,
pended.

The time at which inflammation of the brain supervenes, after the
injury has been received, is generally about a week, rarely less than


Of Wounds. 03

that time; and this it was that led me to say, on another occasion,
that inflammation of the brain was more slow in its occurrence than
that of most other organs. It often happens that inflammation of the
brain does not come on till a fortnight or even three weeks after the
injury. Every surgeon who has written on the subject puts his read-
er on his guard about the distance of time that complaint supervenes
after the accident he tells you the patient is not safe till two or three
weeks afterwards. If you read the works of Mr. Pott on the injuries
of the head, you will find the circumstance mentioned ; and in the
work of Mr. Dease, of Dublin, it is distinctly stated, that inflamma-
tion of the brain is occasionally postponed to three or four weeks af-
ter the accident occurs, and even then the patient is not safe. [Cooper.]
" A blow on the scalp," says Dorsey, " occasions an ecchymosis, in
which blood forming the tumour remains fluid, and the surrounding
scalp feels unusually hard and elevated, and conveys to the fingers
this accident particularly, with a view to caution young practitioners
against opening the tumour under an expectation of finding depressed
bone. The proper treatment consists in promoting the absorption of
the extravasated blood by cold applications, and if these are unsuc-
cessful, a small puncture may be made with a sharp lancet and the
fluid pressed out. W suppuration take place, the abscess must be
treated in the usual manner. It is prudent in all injuries of the scalp


section r.
Wounds of the Scalp or Integuments.

Dangerous. — Wounds of the scalp are not devoid of danger ; and
slight injuries of that part have destroyed life. Incised wounds are
certainly less liable to produce deleterious effects than the lacerated
or contused ; although I knew a lady, of high consequence in the
country, die from the removal of an encysted tumour in the scalp.

Cause of danger. — The cause of the danger attending such wounds
is the free communication by blood-vessels between the scalp and
dura matter ; as the vessels of the pericranium freely anastomose
with those of the dura mater through the diploe of the skull, and,
therefore, inflammation lighted up in the one, is readily extending its
influence to the other. There cannot be, therefore, a more absurd
and injudicious practice than that of wantonly making incisions
through the scalp, to ascertain the exact extent of the injury which
the bone may have received, when there are no symptoms to justify
such a procedure ; because such incisions produce new dangers to
the patient, as well as add to that which the injury would itself pro-
duce. If, therefore, I am called to a case of injury of the head, in
which there is apparent depression of the skull, yet there are no
symptoms of injury of the brain, I would not render that fracture
compound by making an incision through the scalp ; and even if


64 Of Wounds.

there were symptoms of injury of the brain, I would try the effect of
free depletion, before I made an incision, as the loss of blood some-
times occasions the entire removal of the symptoms. But if there
were already a wound in the scalp, and my linger passed down to a
depressed portion of bone, I would immediately use an elevator to
raise it, which may be generally done in children without difficulty,
and in the adult would saw off a portion of bone to admit the ele-
vator. [Cooper.]

Wounds in the soft parts of the head must be treated the same as
other kinds of wounds. (See Chapter on this subject.) The hair
should be shaved off with a razor a considerable distance round the
wound, after which the blood may be removed with a sponge or piece
of linen, and all foreign substances ; the divided edges brought in
contact, and secured by means of the improved or uniting plaster, or
narrow slips of the same. Over these dressings a plaster of the
black or healing salve may be applied ; and it is necessary, previously,
to apply a little lint to the wound. The dressings may be secured
by a bandage or night-cap.


SECTION II.

Concussion of the Brain.

Mr. Abernethy has removed a good deal of the perplexity of this
subject, by dividing concussion into three stages. In fact, without
discriminating them, the various descriptions of the symptoms, as
given by different writers, cannot be at all reconciled.

"The first is, that state of insensibility and derangement of bodily
powers which immediately succeeds the accident. While it lasts, the
patient scarcely feels any injury that may be inflicted on him. His
breathing is difficult, but in general without stertor; his pulse inter-
mits, and his extremities are cold. But such a state cannot last long ;
it goes off gradually, and is succeeded by another, which I consider
as the second stage of concussion. In this, the pulse and respiration
become better, and though not regularly performed, are sufficient to
maintain life, and to diffuse warmth over the extreme parts of the body.
The feeling of the patient is now so far restored, that he is sensible if
his skin be pinched ; but he lies stupid and inattentive to slight exter-
nal impressions. As the effects of concussion diminish, he becomes
capable of replyirg to questions put to him in a loud tone of voice,
especially when they refer to his chief suffering at the time, as pain
in the head, &c: otherwise he answers incoherently, and as if his
attention was occupied by something else. As long as the stupor
remains, the inflammation of the brain seems to be moderate ; but as
the former abates, the latter seldom fails to increase ; and this consti-
tutes the third stage, which is the most important of the series of
effects proceeding from concussion.

These several stages vary considerably in their degree and dura-
tion ; but more or less of each will be found to take place in every
instance where the brain has been violently shaken. Whether they
bear any certain proportion to each other or not, I do not know. In-


Of Wounds. 65

deed, this will depend upon such a variety of circumstances in the
constitution, the injury, and the after-treatment, that it must be difficult
to determine.

In most, cases of concussion, the patient vomits after the accident.
According to Mr. Brodie, sickness and vomiting are generally early
symptoms, and seldom continue after the patient has recovered from
the first shock of the accident. — [Med. Chir. Trans, vol. xiv. p. 339.)
In the beginning, a torpor exists in the intestinal canal, and consider-
able difficulty in procuring an evacuation ; but afterward the feces are
sometimes involuntarily discharged, and the bladder becomes dis-
tended, so as to require the catheter ; but after a time, the urine also
comes away involuntarily. There is sometimes bleeding at the nose,
and a part of the blood which drops in the throat is vomited up. The
pupils of the eyes are generally natural ; but if changed, both are a
little dilated, or sometimes only one. The state of the pupils, how-
ever, is differently represented by different writers, and my expe-
rience has taught me that it is subject to much variety. In that stage
in which the sensibility of the patient is impaired, but not annihilated,
" the pupils contract on exposure to light, and are sometimes more
contracted than under ordinary circumstances." — [Brodie, vol. cit.
p. 338.) According to Sir Astley Cooper, the pulse, although natural
when the patient is undisturbed, scarcely ever fails to be quickened
by any exertion made by the patient : and the carotids sometimes
pulsate with great force ; but the latter symptom is generally not
noticed till after a few hours. The state of the pulse is very different,
according to the stage of the disorder. In severe cases, t he pulse is
at first intermitting, irregular, feeble, perhaps scarcely perceptible, and
the patient in a condition approaching that of syncope. Such maybe
his situation for several hours after the accident. When concussion
proves fatal, the cause of death is imputed by Mr. Brodie to this
disturbance of the action of the heart. "In general, when the patient
action of the circulating system takes place, and the pulse beats with
greater strength in proportion as the failure of it "was greater in the
first instance. But where the shock has been unusually severe, there
is no such reaction. The pulse becomes more and more feeble, more
irregular and intermittent; the extremities grow cold, and at last, the
action of the heart being altogether suspended, the patient expires.
In some cases, even alter reaction has begun to take place, it seems
as if the constitution were unequal to the effort: there is another
failure of the circulation, the result of which is the same as if the
patient had never rallied from the beginning." — (Brodie, in Med. Cliir.
Trans, vol. xiv. p. 341.) The mind, as Sir Astley Cooper remarks, is
variously affected, according to the degree of injury which the patient
has sustained. In some cases, there is a total loss of mental power ;
in others, the patient is capable, though with difficulty, of being moused
to make a rational answer, but immediately sinks again into coma.
Sometimes the memory is lost ; while in other instances, it is only
partiallv impaired. A total forgatfulness of any foreign language is
a common effect of concussion. It frequently happens that the pa-
tient, when roused, will be perfectly sensible, and answer questions


66 Of Wounds.

rationally ; but if left undisturbed, tbe mind appears to be occupied
by some particular circumstance, (often an incoherent one,) of which
he is constantly talking. Patients recollect nothing about the mode
in which their accidents took place. If the injury has been occa-
sioned by a fall from a horse, they can only remember mounting and
riding to some distance, but not that the animal ran away or threw
them ; nor, however perfectly they may recover in other respects,
do they ever have any recollection of the kind of accident. The
change produced by injuries of the brain is remarked to be somewhat
similar to the effects of age ; the patient loses impressions of a recent
date, and is sensible of those which he received in his earlier years.
But, as Sir Astley correctly explains, the degree of injury sustained
by the brain varies considerably in different cases. Some patients
are only stunned, or deprived of sense for a moment; others recover
in a few hours ; some remain in a great degree insensible for fifteen
or twenty days. Some recover entirely ; others have afterward an
imperfect memory. A partial loss of sense will be produced in the
function of one eye, or deafness in one ear ; and so of volition, the
squinting caused by an injury of the brain being sometimes permanent.
In some cases a degree of fatuity; in some, great irritability; in
others, vertigo, and tendency to severe headache from the slightest
excitement, will remain. In one example seen by Sir Astley Cooper,
a remarkable irritability of the stomach and disposition to vomit were
the permanent consequences of a concussion of the brain. In parti-
cular instances, the faculty of readily uttering the proper words for
expressing ideas is lost and never regained, and wrong terms are
used. Often the judgment remains enfeebled. — (Lectures, vol. i. p.
254, &c.) Many of the observations in the foregoing statement coin-
cide with the accounts given of the subject in the writings of Bichat
and Desault.

The following passage, extracted from a writer who has already
been of material assistance in this article, cannot be too deeply im-
pressed on the memory of every practitioner.

" To distinguish between an extravasation and commotion by the
symptoms only, is frequently a very difficult matter, sometimes an
impossible one. The similarity of the effects in some cases, and the
very small space of time which may intervene between the going off
of the one, and the accession of the other, render this a very nice
exercise of the judgment. The first stunning or deprivation of sense,
whether total or partial, may be from either, and no man can tell
from which; but when theso first symptoms have been removed, or
have spontaneously disappeared, if such patient is again oppressed
with drowsiness or stupidity, or a total or a partial loss of sense, it
then becomes most probable, that the first complaints were from com-
motion, and that the latter are from extravasation ; and the greater the
distance of time between the two, the greater is the probability, not
only that an extravasation is the cause, but that the extravasation is
of the limpid kind, made gradatim, and within the brain."

The causes of the symptoms of injury to the brain are two : 1st.
Concussion ; 2d. Pressure, which may be the result of extravasa-


Injuries of the Head. 67

tion of blood, of depression of bone, or of matter produced by inflam-
mation on the brain.

Cooper thus remarks on Symptoms of Concussion. — When you ap-
proach the bedside of the patient who has a concussion of the brain,
you rind him in what you would suppose a sweetly tranquil sleep : his
breathing is easy, and not quicker or slower than natural : his pulse is
beating with steadiness, and with its usual velocity, and you would
be disposed to say, do not disturb him, but let him sleep on. But if
you attempt to rouse him, he is with difficulty excited ; if he be
spoken to, he mutters, and returns an incoherent answer, and you
then discover that he is comatose. Upon inquiry it is found, that he
has received a severe blow upon his head, that immediately after he
was senseless, and unable to stand, and that he had since vomited.
At first a torpor exists in the intestinal canal, and considerable diffi*
culty in procuring an evacuation, but afterwards the faeces are invo-
luntarily discharged : in a few hours the bladder is distended, from
the accumulation of urine, which demands the introduction of a ca-
theter for its removal ; but after some time the urine also passes
involuntarily.

There is sometimes, in these cases, bleeding at the nose, and from
the blood trickling into the throat and stomach, blood is vomited ; the
pupils of the eyes are generally natural ; but if changed, both are a
little dilated, or sometimes one only. The state of the pulse is cu-
rious. Although when the patient is undisturbed it is natural, it
scarcely ever fails to be quickened, if the patient is capable of making
any effort to rise, and exerts himself for that purpose. The carotid
arteries sometimes beat, under an exertion, with a force dispropor-
tioned to the other arteries of the body ; but generally this symptom
is not observed until after a few hours.

Mind. — The mind is variously affected, according to the degree of
injury which the patient has sustained. In some cases there is a
total loss of mental power ; in others, the patient is capable, though
with difficulty, of being roused to make a rational answer, but again
sinks immediately into coma. Sometimes the memory is lost, at
others only partially impaired.


SECTION III.

Compression of tJie Brain.

Compression of the brain may be produced by blood extravasated
within the cranium, or by a portion of the skull being beat in below
its natural level.

1st. Compression from Effused Blood. — Blood maybe extravasated
between the skull and dura mater : beneath the pia mater ; into the
ventricles ; or into the substance of the brain. The symptoms in all
these cases are similar. It has always been an object of interest,
among surgeons, to designate the symptoms which attend compres-
sion of the brain, and to discriminate them from those arising from
concussion ; and although no subject has been more carefully in-
vestigated than this, yet amidst the multiplicity of observations which
Vol. II. I


68 Injuries of the Head.

are to be found in surgical writings, no accurately distinctive
symptoms have ever been pointed out ; and this furnishes an argu-
ment in favour of the opinion, that in concussion there is extravasation.
Le ftran, long ago observed, that " in concussion small vessels may
be ruptured, and thereby occasion extravasation in several places."
The loss of sense, speech and voluntary motion, which attend severe
concussion, is alike common after extravasations of blood, and de-
pression of the blood. Mr. Abernethy observes, on this subject, that
" if we judge of the symptoms of compression from what occurs in
cases of apoplexy, or from cases of the rupture of the middle artery
of the dura mater, we must be of opinion that pressure on the brain
occasions insensibility partially, or generally, and in a degree propor-
tionate to its quantity." " In extreme cases, the insensibility is mani-
fested by every circumstance. The pupil of the eye is dilated, and
cannot be made to contract, even by a strong light. The respiration is
slow and stertorious, and the pulse proportionally slow and labouring.
There is no vomiting which would indicate sensibility of stomach. The
limbs are relaxed, as in a person just dead. No struggles take place ;
no signs of sensation appear during the operation ; but on the pressure
being removed, sensation and intelligence are immediately restored. In
concussion, the insensible state is of short duration, and during its con-
tinuance the body is generally cold, and the pulse feeble and inter-
mitting. Afterwards the skin is hotter than usual ; the pulse and
respiration more frequent ; the former often intermits, and the latter
has not the stertor of apoplexy. (But the absence of stertor must not
be relied on as a proof that there is no compression, for Morgagni
relates dissections of apoplectic persons, where the effusion was con-
siderable, yet no stertor had occurred ; and in some cases where it
took place only in a very slight degree.) The pupil of the eye is not
dilated, but rather contracted. The countenance expresses pain and
uneasiness, and vomiting occasionally takes place. The state of the
patient is like that of a heavy and uncomfortable sleep ; yet, being
roused, signs even of intelligence appear."

These remarks of Mr. Abernethy contain the best contrast of the
symptoms resulting from concussion and compression which are to be
found; but in some cases they are insufficient to afford an accurate
diagnosis.

In many instances, however, the symptoms indicating extravasa-
tion are very clearly marked : of a great number of cases which I
have met with in books and in practice, I shall relate the prominent
circumstances of one, to illustrate this observation.

Compression of the Brain from Depressed Bone. — Fractures of the
skull, as they are produced in a variety of ways, must differ very ma-
terially in their nature and extent. The numerous divisions of the
ancients, founded upon these circumstances, are, however, of little im-
portance. The chief differences now regarded, are the degrees of
pressure and irritation.

Fissures or cracks in the skull, unattended by a depression of one
of the fragments, are not dangerous, and very readily heal without un-
pleasant symptoms ; but must occasion all the symptoms which are
produced by pressure from an effused fluid : accordingly, we find that


Injuries of the Head. m 69

patients thus circumstanced arc generally affected with the same apo-
c symptoms, — a complete or partial loss of sense, speech and
voluntary motion — stertorious breathing, followed by vomiting, ver-
tigo, haemorrhage from the ears, nose, mouth, &c. Now these symp-
toms often occur without a fractured skull, as has already been re-
marked ; and, on the other hand, many cases of fractured skull, even
where the bone is considerably depressed, are unaccompanied by
them. " I once saw a woman," says Dorsey, " who had been as-
saulted by a lunatic, and struck forcibly with an iron bar : I found
her skull fractured near the junction of the parietal bones, a depres-
sion existed, which in one part was full half an inch below the na-
tural level, and yet none of the usual symptoms of compressed brain
occurred, and the fracture healed up without any dressings except a
superficial pledget." Similar cases are recorded.

Fractures of the skull, although they occasionally produce no un-
pleasant symptoms, are, notwithstanding, accompanied with many dan-
gers. In addition to the evils to be dreaded from pressure upon the
brain, the irritation occasioned by the mechanical action of the sharp
and irregular edges of the bone upon the dura mater and brain is to
be feared. The constant pulsation of the vessels upon the brain,
which produces motion under the fracture, augment considerably the
irritation in consequence of which the dura mater sometimes ulcer-
ates.

In many cases of fracture of the skull, the dura mater is pierced
and the brain wounded by the body which caused the accident, or by
a fragment of the bone being forced through these parts. In some
instances, portions of the substance of the brain escapes through the
fracture at the time of the accident. In sabre wounds, slices of brain,
together with considerable portions of the skull, are sometimes re-
moved.

Inflammation of the Brain and its Membranes. —Mr. Abernethy very
judiciously remarks, that, "in the generality of cases of injury done
to the head, the symptoms of concussion, compression, and inflamma-
tion, are so combined as to appear inexplicable. It is only by an at-
tention to those rare cases, in which the symptoms of each appear
distinctly, that we are likely to increase our knowledge of their spe-
cific effects." Inflammation of the brain and its contents, is a con-
sequence of different species of violence to which it is subject, and
therefore its symptoms will be more or less blended with those result-
ing directly from the accident, as stupor, &c.

The dura mater, the pia mater, and the whole substance of the
brain, is liable to inflammation.

Mr. Abernethy remarks — "If the inflammation be violent and
general, the patient will be irrational and disturbed, having his mind
strongly affected by wrong ideas, and endeavouring to act in conse-
quence of them. If the inflammation be moderate, and affect the
surface only, he will be irrational, uneasy, restless, and perhaps en-
deavour to get out of bed, but without the violence of mania. Should
a moderate inflammation be blended with the effect of concussion, he
will have less appearance of irrationality, will lie pretty quiet, and
inattentive to slight impressions.


70 Injuries of tlie Head.

Some variety will occur, probably, in the Bymptoms of different pa-
tients ; but in all there will be more or less derangement of the
powers, both mental and corporeal, depending upon the degree of in-
flammation, &c. The symptoms which chiefly characterize the com.
plaint, are those of an increase of sensibility ; the pupils of the eyes
are contracted, the patient often withdraws his arm on being touched,
and his pulse and tongue denote general as well as local inflammation.

Suppuration takes place when the remedies are unsuccessful in ar-
resting the progress of the inflammation ; and when this happens, the
symptoms of compressed brain are repeated, and a deep coma or
lethargy comes on. The pus or matter in this case is very often situ-
ated directly under the skull, but sometimes under the dura mater —
at other times an abscess is found in the brain.

Although inflammation of the brain generally occurs in a few days
after the accident which causes it, yet in some cases, a week, or even
a month will elapse before its commencement.

Common Treatment.

Bleeding, blistering, mercurial purges, trephining or trepanning.

I have little or no confidence in general blood-letting. Tt produ-
ces injury by the debility which it occasions ; and, besides, it prevents
the restorative process. Other means are much better to mitigate
the violence of arterial action, or excessive inflammation.

As regards the trephine, I have still less confidence in it. From all
the information I can obtain respecting its effects, I think it has killed
ten where it has cured one, and I am not at all surprised that Desault,
in the last years of his practice, should abandon the use of this in-
strument altogether, in consequence of the fatal effects which follow-
ed its use. Formerly it was very fashionable to trephine for even
trivial injuries of the head ; but for some years past, surgeons have
become less partial to the operation, from the notorious bad effects
which have followed the operation ; but it is still, I regret to say, too
much practised. We are directed to trephine, to remove depressed
pieces of bone, in order to relieve compression of the brain ; but in
doing this, we make a compound fracture, and which is more mis-
chievous in its effects than the wound for which the operation is per-
formed.

It is very evident to all who are in the least acquainted with injuries
of the head, that patients do well in very bad cases of compression
without elevating the bone ; that they recover and do well, when this
very operation, under similar circumstances, proves fatal ; and it can
readily be accounted for: two severe wounds of the head are much
more likely to kill a person than one. It is hardly possible to bore a
hole in a person's skull down to the dura mater, or its vicinity, and not
produce a dangerous wound. But when this is done in addition to a
previous serious injury, what beside can we expect but lamentable
consequences. It is hardly possible that irritation, inflammation or
suppuration will not supervene.

In compression from a depressed bone, we may apply the old
maxim : " of the two evils, choose the least." If the pressure on the


Injuries of the Head. 71

brain be an evil, and if the operation is still greater, would not com-
mon sense dictate to us the propriety of pursuing that course of
treatment which, wc know by experience, is attended with the least
danger. Another objection to the use of the trephine is, tliat it i> often
extremely difficult to discriminate between concussion and compres-
sion of the brain. Hence, there is no sure criterion for performing the
operation.

Says Sir Astley Cooper, "The old practice used tobe,the moment
an injury of the brain was suspected, and the least depression of the
bone appeared, to make an incision into the scalp. This is putting
the patient to considerable hazard ; for the simple fracture would, by
the incision, be rendered compound. In simple fracture, then, when
it is attended with symptoms of injury of the brain, deplete before you
trephine ; and when it is unattended with such symptoms, deplete
merely, and do not divide the scalp, &c. If the fracture be compound,
the treatment must be very different ; because a compound fracture
is very generally followed by inflammation of the brain ; and it will
be of little use to trephine, when inflammation is once produced. If
the inflammation come on, the patient will generally die, whether you
trephine or not ;" and it is added, that the operation will even be
likely to increase the inflammation, which has been excited by a
depressed portion of the skull. " The rule," says Sir Astley, " which I
always follow, is this : when I am called to a compound fracture with
depression, which is exposed to view, whether symptoms of injured
brain exist or not, I generally use an elevator, and very rarely the
trephine. I put the elevator under the bone, raise it, and if it has
been comminuted, remove the small portions of bone." — {Lectures, Sfc.
vol. i. p. 304. 308.) Of the propriety of using the elevator in such
cases, and also of taking away loose fragments, there cannot be a
doubt.

2d. The operation is recommended for the purpose of giving exit
to extravasated blood, or collections of pus or matter. But I would
ask, how are we to know when either of these fluids are collected,
and in what part of the brain they are located, whether between the
skull and dura mater, or the ventricles, or on the pia mater, or under
this membrane, on the surface, in the substance or cavities of the
brain? How, then, I ask, can the trephine be used with any propriety,
or the least prospect of success? It is impossible to tell in what part
of the cranium or skull to bore the hole, or to make the perforation.
But even should we be so fortunate as to make it in the right place,
and remove the extravasated fluid, it can only, at best, afford partial
relief; and there is ten times more danger to be apprehended from the
additional wound, and subsequent inflammation, than from any collec-
tion of blood or matter, for which the operation is performed.
These, by proper treatment, will be removed by the absorbent vessels.

" The case of extravasation between the cranium and dura mater "
says Samuel Cooper, "is almost the only one which admits of relief
from trephining. Mr. Abernethy informs us, that in the cases which
he has seen of blood extravasated between the dura and pia mater, on a
division of the former membrane being made for its discharge, only
the serous part of it could be evacuated ; for the coagulum was spread


72 Injuries of the Head.

over the hemisphere of the brain, and had descended as low as pos-
sible towards its inferior part, so that very little relief was obtained
by the operation." — (Surgical Works, vol. ii. p. 46.) This statement
is confirmed by that of Richat, and the practice inculcated agrees with
what Sir Astley Cooper also directs. Therefore, it appears evident
that it is improper to use the trephine with a view to remove any
extra vasated fluid.

1, therefore, cannot sec the benefit resulting from this operation,
which is held out by many surgeons ; neither have I any evidence
that it has ever been of any service, although occasionally there may
have been cases in which it has proved useful ; but they are so sel-
dom, and it is so uniformly attended with injurious or fatal effects, that
I think, in almost, if not in every instance, it ought to be dispensed
with.

Should any instrument be used to enable the practitioner to remove
pieces of bone, or to elevate any portion that is depressed, the instru-
ment invented, or recommended by Hey, is preferable to the trephine.
The inventor remarks, that " the purposes for which any portion of
the cranium is removed are, to enable surgeons to extract broken
fragments of bone, to elevate what is depressed, and to afford a pro-
per issue to blood or matter that is or may be confined, &c.

" When a broken fragment of bone is driven beneath the sound
contiguous part of the cranium, it frequently happens that the extrac-
tion cannot be executed without removing some of the unbroken part,
under which the fragment is depressed. This might generally be
effected with very little loss of sound bone, if a narrow portion of that
which lies over the broken fragment could be removed. But such
a portion cannot be removed with the trephine. This instrument can
only saw out a circular piece. And, as in executing this, the central
pin of the saw must be placed upon the uninjured bone, it is evident
that a portion of the sound bone, greater than half the area of the
trephine, must be removed at every operation. When the broken
and depressed fragment is large, a repeated application of the tre-
phine is often necessary, and a great destruction of sound bone must
be the consequence.

" When the injury consists merely of a fissure with depression, a
small enlargement of the fissure would enable the surgeon to introduce
the point of the elevator, so as to raise the depressed bone. But a
small enlargement of the fissure cannot be made with the trephine.
When it is necessary to apply the elevator to different parts of the
depressed bone, a great deal of the sound cranium must be removed,
where a very narrow aperture would have been sufficient.

" The same reasoning will apply to the case of openings made for
the purpose of giving a discharge to extravasated blood or matter.

" If a saw could be contrived which might be worked with safety
in a straight or gently curvilinear direction, it would be a great acqui-
sition to the practical surgeon. Such a saw I can now with confidence
recommend, after a trial of twenty years, during which time I have
rarely used the trephine in fractures of the skull. Its use has been
adopted by my colleagues at the General Infirmary in Leeds ; and
will be adopted, I hope, by every surgeon who has once made trial


Injuries of the Head. 73

of it." Mr. Hey next informs us, that the instrument was first shown
to him by Dr. Cockell, of Pontefract ; but that there is a saw formed
on the same principle in Scultetus's Armamentarium Chirurgicum.

In order further to illustrate my views on this subject, I shall quote
some remarks by Dr. Samuel Cooper, and others.

If, then, it be asked, in what does concussion consist? the answer
is, that if it he slight, it is merely a disturbance of the circulation in
the hrain ; if violent, the brain is lacerated. A knowledge of this
leads to a judicious treatment of the injury, as laceration of the brain
is frequently followed by extravasation : and concussion in the com-
mencement, may be compression in its result.

Reformed Practice.

" Watch your patient," says Sir Astley, " with the greatest possible
anxiety ; visit him at least three times a-day ; and if you find any hard-
nessof the pulse supervening, after the first copious bleeding, take away
a tea-cupful of blood ; but do not go on bleeding him largely, for you
would by this means reduce the strength of the patient too much, and
prevent the reparative process of nature. It is necessary that there
should be a slight degree of inflammation, for without this the repara-
tive process cannot proceed, or the patient ultimately recover ; but it
will he your duty to keep this inflammation within due bounds. I
shall mention a case in which fatal consequences ensued from the
error committed by the surgeon in bleeding his patient to such ex-
cess, that the slight degree of inflammation necessary for adhesion
was removed, and the restorative process of nature consequently
prevented.

you surgery as it is, and not in the glowing colours in which it is
painted to you in books. I am most anxious that you should omit
nothing which may contribute to increase your professional skill, and
onable you to afford the greatest possible degree of relief to the suf-
ferings of humanity ; but those who blazon forth our profession as
one which is attended with undeviating success, are only deceiving
you. You must hear the untoward cases of your profession, as well
as those of which the issue is favourable, in order to form a correct
judgment in your minds of what surgery really is. It is for these rea-
sons, that I shall never hesitate, " coute qui coute," to detail to you,
and perhaps to the public, those cases which have terminated unfa-
vourably. I have a duty to perform, and I shall never shrink from the
discharge of it. It is by detailing to you the unfavourable as well as
the favourable cases, that I can alone perform that duty; for it is by
such a course alone that I can point out to you the rocks which you
are to avoid, as well as the haven in which you are to endeavour to an-
chor. The case to which I last alluded, was one of concussion,
accompanied with slight laceration of the brain, which occurred in
the other hospital. The gentleman, under whose care the patient
was, thought it right to bleed him, and that he could not bleed him too
largely. He accordingly bled not only from day to day, but twice a
day. The consequence of this mode of treatment was, that the pa,
tieut became perfectly pale, was in a state of considerable dejection,,


74 Injuries of the Head.

not of the mind, but of the powers of the body, and died, without any
symptoms of inflammation of the brain, ten days after the injury*
On examination of the head, it was found that there was a slight la-
ceration of the brain, with some degree of extravasation of blood ;•
but that not the slightest attempt had been made by nature to heal
the wound. You are aware that the brain heals, like any other organ,
by the process of adhesion ; but, in this case, the quantity of blood
taken from the patient was so large, that the slight inflammation ne-
cessary to the adhesive process was removed, and the powers of re-
storation consequently prevented.

"You are to use bleeding as a means of preventing inflammation ;
but you are not to resort to it as a matter of course, the moment you
are called to a patient under concussion. A man falls from his horse,
and the instant he is raised from the ground some surgeon thinks it
necessary to use the lancet. This conduct is quite irrational ; for,
suppose the pulse could scarcely be felt at the wrist, and the surgeon
were in such a case asked why he proceeded to bleed, what would his
answer be ? The probability is, that he could make no reply ; or he
would perhaps say, that he bled because the accident had determined
a great quantity of blood to the brain. It is not with this view that
we bleed in concussion, but in order to prevent inflammation. I have
seen patients, who would have died if a large quantity of blood had
been taken away at the time of the accident. Thus, in the case al-
ceptible. I took a little blood from the arm, and the patient was im-
mediately seized with convulsions, like an epileptic fit, which I thought
would have proved fatal. I closed the arm, and I would not upon any
account have taken more blood from him at that moment."

Trephining for after symptoms. — For the symptoms remaining after
concussion, the trephine used to be employed ; but it now becomes a
question, whether it ever ought to be resorted to in these cases ? What
will trephining do? Probably great harm, by disturbing the brain;
and, if not, no good can possibly result from it. Now for the proofs :
first, that it does no good. Gentlemen, I never lecture to you but
from the recollection of some case that has occurred to me, from
which I form my opinion. In a former part of this lecture, I men-
tioned to you a case of great irritability of the stomach, produced by
concussion, the effect of a blow on the forehead, which happened at
Yarmouth, in Norfolk. Mr. W. Cooper, formerly surgeon of Guy's
Hospital, visited this gentleman, and prevailed upon him to suffer the
trephine to be applied upon the part of the forehead on which the
blow was received ; and, when the bone had been removed, the dura
mater was sound, and no relief whatever arose from the operation :
a direct proof that it is useless. Dr. Farre informed me, that he
knew a person who was subject to epileptic fits after concussion of
the brain. The operation of trephining was performed, and he died
soon afterwards.

Forty years ago, trephining used to be the plan generally adopted
with the patients admitted into the London hospitals ; many were
submitted to the operation; inflammation of the membranes of the
brain supervened, and nearly all died ; recovery being very rare.


Injuries of the Head. 75

But do our patients now die from the effects of concussion? No ; by
depletion we rarely lose a patient.

After the expiration of my apprenticeship at these hospitals, I
went over to Paris, to see the practice of Desault, at the Hotel de
Dieu ; and I found that scarcely ever, under any circumstances, did he
trephine ; and he was more successful than the English surgeons.
Trephining in concussion is now completely abandoned.

The Treatment of Fractures of the Skull is as follows : when there is
fracture, unaccompanied with symptoms of injured brain, you will
not trephine ; but you must, by the application of adhesive plaster,
endeavour to heal the wound in the scalp as quickly as possible. Let
your constitutional treatment be that of depletion. This plan re-
moves symptoms of concussion, and even extravasation, which ac-
company these fractures ; and often a few hours will show you that
the application of the trephine, which you at first might have thought
indispensable, is rendered unnecessary. It is wrong, therefore, to de-
cide hastily in these accidents ; for irreparable mischief might arise
from your making an incision, and converting a fracture which was
simple into one that is compound. Wait, then, for a time before you
operate in such cases, for the purpose of seeing what effects may be
produced by bleeding and purgatives. It not unfrequently happens,
in these hospitals, upon persons being brought in who have received
injuries of the head, that the dresser in attendance will bleed them
immediately after their admission, and send for the surgeon ; before
whose arrival the good effects of the loss of blood are apparent, and
the symptoms of concussion, and even of extravasation, have lessen-
ed, so as to lead to a different view of the case. This shows how ne-<
cessary it is that you should not be precipitate. If you act prudently,
therefore, in these accidents, you will try bleeding and purgatives be-
fore you operate; and the depletion will prove of the greatest possi-
ble advantage in preventing inflammation : from which arises a prin'
cipal danger.

Apparent Depression. — After blows have been received upon the
head, it often happens that, upon examining the scalp, there appears to
be depression of bone to a great extent, when, in reality, there is
none. Let me put you on your guard here in this respect. A person
receives a blow on the scalp : the parts immediately surrounding the
spot where the blow was received swell from the extravasation of
blood ; but at the part on which the blow directly fell, the cellular
membrane, having been condensed by the injury, will not receive the
cxtravasated blood ; thus the surrounding parts are considerably high-
er than the middle ; and the character of the contusion is certainly
calculated to deceive those who are unacquainted with the nature
of these accidents. I have several times seen these appearances ;
but the first case which I recollect of it in my own practice was that
of a child brought into Guy's, who had received a severe blow on the
head from a brickbat. All present were prepared for the operation,
fully expecting that I should apply the trephine ; for they felt convin-
ced that there was considerable depression of bone ; and when I sta-
ted that I should not operate, they exclaimed, " Good God ! I wonder
what can be his reason." This child, after having been freelv bled
Vol. II. K


76 Injuries of the Head.

and purged, in two or three days recovered, and the appearance of
depression vanished.

I have been often sent for by my dressers to these cases, and have
been requested to bring my instruments with me ; but upon examina-
tion have found that there was no depression of bone, and that the un-
even appearance of the scalp was produced by the cause before men-
tioned.

It also very often happens in fracture of the cranium, that consi-
derable depression of bone will happen from the external table of the
skull being driven into the diploe, without producing the slightest inju-
ry to the internal table : do not, therefore, be precipitate in your diag-
nosis, nor hastily determine upon performing an operation which you
might afterwards have reason to repent.

Suppose you are called to a patient who has had a severe blow on the
head, and on examining the skull you find a portion of bone considera-
bly depressed. You may still find this man capable of giving a his-
tory of the accident, and his mind is not at all affected. On the other
hand, you may be called to a person who has a fracture of the skull
with depression, and who has lost the powers of his mind. If the frac-
ture be simple, and there is no wound in the scalp, and no symptom of
injury to the brain, it would be wrong to make an incision into the part,
and perform the operation of trephining ; for, by making such an in-
cision, you add greatly to the danger of the patient, as you may make
what was before a simple, a compound fracture, and consequently
greatly increase the danger of inflammation, which rarely follows
fracture with depression, where the fracture is simple, but is a very
frequent consequence of a compound fracture, which is produced by
making an incision in the scalp. Never make an incision, therefore,
when you can avoid it, or merely because there is a fracture with
depression, if there be no symptoms of injury to the brain. Even if
there be symptoms of injury to the brain, and the fracture be simple,
do not immediately trepan. Take away blood, and purge your patient
freely, and see how far the symptoms may be the result of concus-
sion of the brain, and not of depression. If the symptoms do not
yield to depletion, then, and not till then, perform the operation of tre-
phining. I was called to a lady who had fallen against a projection
in a wall, in walking across her parlour. The os frontis was driven in,
but there were no symptoms of compression of the brain. I bled her,
and guarded cautiously against inflammation, but there was no neces-
sity for elevating the portion of the bone. This lady never had any
symptoms of injury to the brain, and she recovered by depletion,
alone.

The old practice used to be, the moment an injury to the brain was
suspected, and the least depression of the bone appeared, to make an
incision into the scalp. This is putting the patient to considerable
hazard ; for the simple fracture would, by the incision, be rendered
compound.

The rule, therefore, which I always follow is this : When I am called
to a compound fracture, with depression which is exposed to view,
whether symptoms of injured brain exist or not, I generally use an ele-
vator, and very rarely the trephine. I put this instrument under the


Injuries of the Head. 77

bone, raise it, and if it has been comminuted, remove the small portions
of bone. The elevation of the bone is not followed by any mischief;
but if you do not raise it, and inflammation follows, it will be too late
to attempt to save the life of the patient.

Mischief of Depression not immediate. — The mischief of depression
is not, however, always immediate ; the patient sometimes recovers
from the first symptoms, but is thrown by any hurried circulation, at a
subsequent period, into a new train of effects, which still require sur-
gical assistance ; and it is upon that account, if there were a wound,
and I felt much depression, that I would immediately elevate the
bone ; but if no wound, I would wait the production of symptoms.

Danger of the Operation. — Some surgeons assert that it is a trifling
operation, and not difficult to perform. But they would deceive you.
It is one of tlie most dangerous operations in surgery. Whilst per-
forming it, there is but a thin web between the instrument and the
brain ; cut through this, and the destruction of life will generally be
the consequence. Mr. Hunter thought that when the dura mater was
wounded, the person scarcely ever recovered. [Cooper.]

" It is a high source of gratification to be able to record," says Dr.
Reed, " that, in this country, the trephine is now much more seldom
used than formerly. But a few years ago, on a man being stunned by
a blow or a fall, to any considerable extent, almost any neighbouring
physician would apply the trephine without hesitation, and the facility
with which this operation can be performed, offers no small tempta-
tion to the mere operator, especially as there is seldom any risk of life,
and always a gain in reputation among the multitude. It is now very
generally viewed, as it ought to be, as adernier resort in suchcases; and
the use of it is not countenanced, unless the symptoms of compression
by depressed bone, or extravasated blood, are altogether unequivocal."

" I have seen scores of persons, who would formerly have been tre-
phined, without even a " trial by jury," recovered from coma, paraly-
sis, and convulsions, justly attributable to compression on the brain,
by very large and copious bleedings, aided by cathartics and stimula-
ting frictions and cataplasms to the extremities.

" In the year 1819,1 assisted Dr. Henry Wm. Ducachet, then a prac-
titioner in the city of Baltimore, in the performance of this operation
on a woman who had received several blows on the head with an axe
from a brutal husband. We could discover no depression of bone, and
yet thecoma, stertor, hemiplegia, and other evidences of compression,
resisted all our depletion, and on the third day after the violence, we de-
termined to apply the trephine, being sustained by judicious counsel
in our opinion, that there must be extensive extravasation of blood
beneath the cranium. On removing the circular piece of bone, with
the largest crown of the instrument, a coagulum was found extending
over the left hemisphere of the brain, exterior to the dura mater.
This being removed, and only a mitigation of the symptoms following,
the olnious distension of the dura mater itself, pointed out the exist-
ence of still more extended mischief. We therefore divided the
dura mater with a probe-pointed bistoury, for the space of half an inch,
when coagulated blood to an immense extent forced itself through
the opening. After washing out the cavity by warm water thrown in


78 Injuries of the Head.

with the syringe, we were delighted to find the entire removal of the
symptoms instantaneously result. Our patient spoke for the first
time, asked for water, seemed as though awoke from an ordinary sleep ;
the stertor ceased, the dilatation of the pupil and hemiplegia were re-
moved, and the most sanguine hopes were entertained of her re-
co very.

" I shall never forget the painful acuteness of our disappointment,
when in a few hours we found all these dangerous symptoms return in
a still more aggravated form, discovering to us the mortifying truth,
that though the operation had succeeded, yet our patient would die ; for
although we had removed the coagula, we could not stop the bleeding
vessel."

Having, I think, very clearly shown the little benefit, as well as the
positive injury, resulting from the use of the trephine, I shall now lay
down such treatment as I have found remarkably successful in every
injury of the head, concussion, compression, extravasation, inflamma.
tion, &c; and I have to observe, that I have never had occasion to
use this or any other instrument.

The indications of cure, in almost every injury of the head, are
nearly alike ; and it may be said that the greatest danger arises from
an untimely interference of art ; from the officiousness of the practi-
tioner, in doing too much ; by intercepting the healthy effort of
nature, instituted to effect a cure. Our principal object should be,
in every injury of the head, whether concussion, compression or
extravasation, to prevent excessive inflammation, and if already estab-
lished, to moderate it.

In the first place, when called to an accident of this nature, we
should endeavour to ascertain, by careful examination, the situation,
nature and extent of the injury. When this cannot be done by su-
perficial examination, it may be necessary to shave the hair from a
portion of the head, or in that part which appears to be the seat of
the injury, by which an opportunity will be afforded to discover it.

An inflammatory spot, or small tumour, often appears over the part,
or by the uneasiness expressed by the patient upon pressure, or by
his frequently lifting his hand, and applying it to a particular portion
of the head. This is of practical importance, as it is necessary to
know whether a wound has been made or not, either in the integu-
ments or bone. Should we discover any laceration, or wound, which
requires dressing, the same treatment must be adopted as has been
recommended in the commencement of this chapter.

In the next place, the irritation or pain demands our attention, and
almost every bystander will cry out, " bleed the person, bleed the
person;" and that too when, perhaps, he is in a state of asphyxia, or
when he is motionless and senseless. In every case, I believe, to which
I have ever been called, this has been the language of the populace,
or bystanders ; and if the practitioner is not possessed of much deci-
sion of character, he will comply with their request, and he may kill
the person by taking even a small quantity of blood before reaction
takes place. If he is bled at all, it should not be under two hours
after the accident ; and even then, I cannot believe that it has any
decisive good effect ; except, perhaps, that it may afford temporary


Injuries of the Head. 79

relief; but, on the contrary, it is often productive of positive injury. I
have tried it, and therefore consider myself a competent judge. And
the reasons have already been assigned in another part of this work.
Local bloodletting, however, particularly by cup*ping, I have occa-
sionally found beneficial ; probably from the counter irritant effect
which it produces.

1st. Opiates. — -If the patient is in great pain or distress, administer
an anodyne; and one combined with a diaphoretic is preferable, such
as the diaphoretic powders.

A pill made of the gum opium is very good. I have never seen
any bad effects follow the use of opiates, as some have intimated, but
they have been attended with the best effects. Anodynes appear to
prevent an undue flow of blood to the injured part, by lessening the
irritability and commotion of the system. They may be repeated as
occasion requires.

2d. Purgatives. — Purgatives are exceedingly valuable in every
injury of the head. And whoever reflects a moment upon the con-
nexion between the stomach and the brain will realize their utility.
They are beneficial by lessening the quantity of the circulating fluid
in the system, or, in other words, by their depletive effects. They
may be given every day or two, according to the urgency of the
symptoms, or according to circumstances. Our common purgatives
may be given, and occasionally changed for senna, manna and cream
of tartar.

3d. Perspiration. — It is always necessary, either to prevent or
reduce inflammation, to keep the skin moist, and therefore diaphore-
tic or sudorific medicines must bo given to fulfil this indication. If
the diaphoretic powders which are given are not sufficient for this
purpose, give the sudorific drops. At the same time let the surface
be frequently bathed with tepid ley. water. This contributes much to
allay constitutional disturbance, or sympathetic fever, as well as to
the comfort of the patient.

Cooling or refrigerant Lotions. — In all Injuries of the Head, there is a
determination of blood to it, causing a preternatural degree of heat
or inflammation. To reduce this, surgeons recommend cold or ice
water; and although some benefit may be derived from their applica-
tion, they, in general, are followed by some injury resulting from the
sedative effects of the cold. I have found the following application
preferable to any other, applied cool, but not cold. Take equal parts
of spirits, rain water and vinegar, to which add a little fine salt. Let
linen or muslin be wet with this liquid and applied to the head, over
which tie a handkerchief, or nightcap.

Fomentations. — After this has been applied awhile, let it be removed,
and the following used, panic ilarly if the patient does not improve as
much as is desirable. Take hops and wormwood, equal parts ; simmer
in vinegar until they are soft, or the strength is extracted ; then
enclose in flannel, and apply to the head ; to be occasionally renewed.
Tins fomentation affords essential benefit, by its anodyne and refrige-
rant effects.

Poultices.— When any particular part of the head has been wound-
ed, after the hair has been removed, apply a slippery elm poultice. I


80 Injuries of the Head.

have seen wounds of the scalp assume a perfectly white and healthy
appearance, only in six hours after applying this poultice. It seems
almost impossible for inflammation to exist on any part where it is
applied. In one or two cases I applied it over the whole head with
decided benefit. But when it is applied, the whole hair must be first
shaved from the head.

Counter Irritation. — Mustard plasters applied to the nape of the
neck, or between the shoulders, will often relieve the head. I have
applied blisters, but I think the mustard is better, as it produces the
same effect as the blister, without any of the subsequent effects which
arise from it. The mustard should be mixed with an equal quantity
of Indian meal, and moistened with vinegar. They should also be
applied to the feet.

Bathing the Feet. — Among all the means used to prevent inflam-
mation, and allay irritation, there are none better, however simple it
may be, than immersing the feet in warm ley-water, two or three times
a day. The patient, when restless and wakeful, will often fall asleep
immediately after this operation. The manner in which it proves
beneficial, is by equalizing the circulation.

After a person has received an injury of the head, the extremities
become cold, while the head becomes unusually hot. The reason is
obvious : the blood retreats from these parts, and flows in an undue
quantity to the brain. Immersing the feet in the warm water recalls
the blood from the upper to the lower extremities, and the balance of
the circulation is thereby restored.

Emetics. — I have seldom given emetics in any stage of injuries of
the head, as they have appeared to me rather calculated to injure
than benefit the patient. But when the acute stage of inflammation
has subsided, and the brain still appears affected, and it assumes
something of a chronic character, as is sometimes the case, gentle
emetics may prove serviceable. But on the first attack of the injury,
they ought to be prohibited.

Cupping. — I have found some advantage from the operation of
cupping. The benefit is derived not from the quantity of blood ab-
stracted, but from its counter irritating effects. I recollect one case
where a person fell from a building, more than twenty feet, and struck
the fore part of the head upon the ground, which rendered him sense-
less, and produced enormous swelling of the eyes, and adjacent parts.
Means were taken to reduce the inflammation, which partially sue
ceeded ; but, in consequence of the concussion and extravasation
which followed, he was senseless and delirious for two or three
weeks. Soon after the accident, it required several men to confine
him in bed; but after having been cupped, these urgent symptoms
were relieved, and the patient recovered.

I have successfully treated severe injuries of the head, without
resorting to the use of cups ; but I have found that the application of
three or four of them, where not more than half a gill of blood was
taken, has been attended with a better effect than when a quart
has been drawn from the arm.

Leeches. — When there has been a severe contusion about the eyes,
I have occasionally applied leeches ; and I think with some little


Injuries of Uie Head. 81

benefit : but from the haemorrhage that follows, and the inflammation
proceeding from the bites, I am not very friendly to the operation.
If it should be deemed requisite to apply them, I would observe, for
the benefit of those unacquainted with the fact, that American leeches
are equal to any that are imported. Neither cupping nor leeching
possesses half the power in removing inflammation, swelling, extrava-
sation, &c, as the slippery elm hark poultice. No matter how black
the part is rendered by the contusion, this poultice soon removes it.

Rest or Quietude. — The patient must he kept from noise as much as
possible, as this aggravates all the symptoms.

The above treatment I have found uniformly efficacious and success,
ful, in all injuries of the head, within the reach of physic or surgery ;
in concussion, compression and extravasation.

What then, says an objector, do you never trephine, to elevate or
remove the bone, in any case whatever? In answer to this, I have to
observe, that in all my practice, and I have had my share in differ-
ent kinds of injuries of the head, I have had no occasion to resort to
it in a single instance. I have had the very worst cases that could
occur, and have succeeded beyond my expectations, by pursuing only
the treatment here laid down. And it consists in a reliance more
fully upon the sanative powers of nature than art.

When the bone has been depressed, and even very serious symp-
toms have appeared from such compression, I have rather chosen to
trust to the restorative powers of nature, than the danger and uncer-
tainty of the trephine ; which, as far as my observation, experience
as well as history proves, has almost uniformly proved fatal. There
is not near the danger to be apprehended from any pressure that a
broken bone may make upon the skull, which arises from the addi-
tional injury of a compound fracture occasioned by the trephine.
The chance of recovery is certainly much greater, in all cases that
I have seen or heard of, without, than by an operation.

If there be splinters of bone, they should of course be removed;
and if the depressed portion of bone can be raised without causing
too much irritation, it would be justifiable to doit; and, possibly,
cases may occur where Hey's saw could be used with impunity and
advantage. But I have never seen any such case ; and I believe
there are very few instances where any instrument ought to be
resorted to.

I might detail numerous cases to illustrate these sentiments, and
there are enough on record, of the same nature, to prove that there
is no necessity for trephining, in even compression of the brain.

A case occurs to me, which I attended some time ago, in
which a large portion of the os front is was driven in upon the brain,
by a stone, causing loss of sense, dilatation of the pupil of the eye,
convulsions, &c, and having all the symptoms for which trephining
is recommended ; and yet the patient recovered by the treatment
hero laid down. The bone still remains depressed, but still without
injury.

Some time ap,o, a woman was struck, by her husband, with an iron
instrument, which produced an extensive fissure in the skull, with


82 Injuries of the Head.

great depression of the bones, notwithstanding which, the patient
did well.

Another case occurs to me, in which a person fell from a con-
siderable height, upon a stone, and which wounded the head in a
most dangerous manner. The wound bled for several hours, and
delirium and inflammation succeeded ; but, by pursuing the treat-
ment which I recommend, he recovered.

A grocer, of this city, a short time since, was thrown from his cart,
and so exceedingly injured, that it seemed impossible for him to live
but a short time. There were several wounds of the scalp, contusion,
concussion, extravasation, if not compression. Yet this man has so
nearly recovered, that he feels only some chronic affection of the
brain.

A man was thrown from a building, which wounded his head in
such a manner that his life, for some time, was despaired of. The
contusion, concussion and inflammation were excessive, and which
resulted, no doubt, from extravasation of blood or pus ; and yet the
man, under the same treatment, recovered.

A vast number of cases might be mentioned, and given in detail,
if the limits of this work would permit. I will relate a few more,
recorded by Mr. Abernethy.


Cases of Fracture of the Cranium with Depression, which terminated
favourably, although no operation was performed.

CASE I.

A woman, about 40 years of age, was admitted into the hospital
for a wound on her head. About a week before she applied for ad-
vice, her husband had knocked her down with a brass candlestick.
She was stunned by the blow, and lay for some time senseless ; but,
on recovering, she felt no other inconvenience than the soreness oc-
casioned by the wounded integuments. She had suffered some slight
indisposition since the accident.

On examining the head, the right parietal bone was found denuded
about two inches in extent ; a fracture of the same length was also
to be felt, and the bone on one side of the fracture was depressed
about the eighth of an inch. She remained in the hospital a fortnight,
without any bad symptom occurring, and was then, at her own de-
sire, discharged, although the wound was not perfectly healed.

CASE II.

A boy, about twelve years old, received a kick from a horse in
Smithfield, which stunned him, and he was immediately brought to
the hospital. The integuments of the forehead were divided by the
injury, and the lower part of the os frontis, and superciliary ridge of
the frontal bone, depressed at least a quarter of an inch below its origi-
nal level, the depressed portion measuring about an inch and a half
in length.


Injuries of the Head. 83

It is obvious that the bone could not be thus depressed without a
fracture of some part of the basis of the skull occurring at the same
time, on which account the case might be considered as more danger-
ous. In less than two hours he had recovered from the immediate
effect of the blow, being at that time perfectly sensible. Fourteen
ounces of blood were taken from his arm, his bowels were emptied
by a purge, and saline medicines, with antimonials, were directed to
be given. He went on tolerably well for two days, at the end of which
time, evident symptoms of considerable irritation of the brain took
place. He now complained of pain in his head, slept little, and,
when dozing, often started, or was convulsed in a slight degree. To
remove these symptoms, he was bled twice, took opening medicines
occasionally, was kept quiet, and without light, and was allowed only
a spare diet. By continuing this plan for about three weeks, he per-i
fectly recovered.


A man, between thirty and forty years of age, received a blow On
the forehead from a brick thrown at him, by which the frontal bone
was fractur5ti about half an inch above the orbit ; the fracture mea-
sured two inches in length, and the upper portion of the bone was
depressed about the eighth of an inch. He was not even stunned by
the blow, and walked to the hospital without assistance, complaining
only of soreness in the wounded integuments. Sixteen ounces of
blood were immediately taken from his arm ; he was confined (much
against his inclination) to a scanty and liquid diet, and was purged
every second day. This patient did not experience any illness, and
the wound soon healed.

CASE IV.

A boy, about thirteen years old, had a fracture, with depression of
part of the temporal and parietal bones. By similar treatment, he
also escaped without any material ill consequences ; but, in this case,
part of the injured bone exfoliated.


A girl, thirteen years old, had a considerable fracture, with de-
pression of the left parietal bone. She was not brought to the hos-
pital until ten days after the accident. When admitted, she was fe-
verish, had pain in her head, and the little sleep she got was very
much disturbed ; but, by the use of bleeding, with antiphlogistic medi-
cines and regimen, she soon got perfectly well.

The cases above related are not offered to notice on account of any
striking peculiarity attending them, but merely to show that such are
not unfrequent, as they all occurred within the course of a year.
From amongst a great number of similar cases, I shall select the two
following, as the symptoms attending them were more violent than
ordinary.

Vol. II. L


84 Injuries of the Head.

CASE VI.

A lad, seventeen years of age, had his head pressed between a cart-
wheel and a post, by which accident the scalp on both sides was turn-
ed downwards, so as to expose the lower half of the parietal bonea,
the squamous part of the temporal, and also part of the frontal and
occipital bones, about a quarter of the cranium being thus completely
denuded. The periosteum was in several places stript off from the
skull, the scalp much bruised, and the posterior and inferior angle of
the left parietal bone was beaten in. The visible part of the de-
pressed portion was an inch in length, and more than an eighth of an
inch below the level of the cranium; but the fracture extended along
the squamous part of the temporal bone towards the basis of the skull:
it could not, however, be traced, as the temporal muscle had not been
removed from that part by the injury. The scalp, heing cleansed, was
replaced, retained in its situation by slips of sticking plaster, and a
slight pressure by bandage was applied. The boy was perfectly sen-
sible, his pulse regular, and not quickened. He had bled consider-
ably from the temporal artery, which had been divided by the acci-
dent : eight ounces of blood were, however, taken from his arm, and
some purging medicine was administered next morning, which pro-
cured three or four stools. The next day, (Friday,) his pulse beat
nearly 120 in a minute ; his skin was hot and dry, and he complained
of pain in his forehead. Twelve ounces of blood were taken away,
and four grains of pulvis antimonialis ordered to be given three times
a-day. On Saturday, the former symptoms still continued, and were
rather increased. The antimonial powder made him sick, or at least
increased his disposition to be so. Fourteen ounces more of blood
were taken from him ; the vibratory feel of his pulse not being alter-
ed until that quantity was taken away : the blood, on standing, ap-
peared very buffy. His skin, notwithstanding all this, still remained
extremely dry : some antimonial wine was given, which produced
vomiting. On Sunday, his pulse was evidently lowered by the evacu-
ations he had undergone, but it was still quick, and sufficiently strong.
The pain of the head remained as before. Having a sufficient num-
ber of stools, and the sickness still continuing, the antimonial powder
was omitted. He was bled, however, in the vena saphena, and his
feet and legs were afterwards immersed in warm water ; during which,
he, for the first time, perspired copiously. A blister was also applied
to his neck. The scalp united, with only a trifling suppuration over
the fractured part of the bone ; and to this ready union, the lowering
plan, by preventing inflammation, seems very materially to have con-
tributed. The matter collected over the fracture was discharged by
a puncture, and the boy got well.

CASE VII.

A lad, eighteen years of age, had the squamous part of the temporal
bone beaten in. The fracture ran horizontally, about a quarter of an
inch above the zygoma, and could be distinctly traced with the finger,
introduced throu oral muscle, for two inches.

ighth of an inch,
^"d n ielow the fracture in order to elevate


Injuries of the Head. 85

the depressed portion. The lad had recovered from the immediate
stunning occasioned by the injury ; nor was there any symptom that
indicated material derangement of the functions of the brain from the
pressure which it sustained. He was bled largely, and took a purging
medicine, and was moderately well on the following day. On the
second morning he was again purged, and when I saw him at noon,
nothing materially wrong appeared; but when I came to the hospital
at eight in the evening, I found he had gradually become delirious,
and that he then could scarcely be kept in bed. His skin was hot,
and his pulse frequent and strong. These symptoms could be attribu-
ted to nothing but inflammation of the brain ; he was therefore im-
mediately and largely bled. He now became quiet and manageable,
but the next morning his replies to all questions were incoherent, his
pulse frequent, his skin hot, and his tongue dry. The bleeding and
purging were repeated, and at night a blister was applied to his neck.
On the following morning he was sleeping and feeble, but his answers
were rational ; as the frequency and fulness of his pulse increased in
the evening, he was again bled. The inflammation of the brain was
now subdued, and the patient gradually recovered. The wound healed
without any exfoliation of bone, and when he was discharged from the
hospital there was not the most trivial circumstance which could in-
duce us to suspect that the brain had sustained any injury from the
accident. Hissleep was sound and undisturbed, and the sudden motion
of his head in any direction occasioned no giddiness or inconvenience.

It appears very clearly, I think, from these cases, as well as
from a great number of others to be found in books, that a slight de-
gree of pressure docs not derange the functions of the brain, for a
limited time after its application. That it does not do so at first is
very obvious ; as persons are often perfectly sensible, and free from ,
headach and giddiness immediately after the injury. Whether it
may not produce such an effect at some remote period, is not so easily
determined, since this cannot be ascertained but by a continued ac-
quaintance with the persons who had received the injuries. All,
however, whom I have had an opportunity of knowing for any length
of time after the accident, continued as well as if nothing of the kind
had over happened to them. In Mr. Hill's Cases in Surgery, two in-
stances of this sort arc related ; and Mr. Hill knew both°the patients
for many years afterwards, yet did not perceive any inconvenience
to arise. It deserves to be mentioned, too, that one of the patients
was a sailor, and, therefore, probably led a life of irregularity as well
as of exertion. The result of cases of this kind, which 1 have met
with in authors, docs not lead to the apprehension of any future mis-
chief; nor is it easy to conceive that the pressure, which caused no
ill effects at a time when the contents of the cranium filled its cavity
completely, should afterwards prove injurious when they have adapt-
ed themselves to its altered size and shape. Severe illness, indeed,
does often intervene between the receipt of the injury and the time of
its recovery ; and many surgeons might he inclined to attribute this
to pressure ; but it equally occurs where the depressed portion is
elevated ; several instances of which I shall have occasion to relate,
and many others are to be met with in authors. This is a circum-


86 Injuries of the Head.

stance which nothing but very extensive experience can show in a
true light. If, for instance, a surgeon who was prepossessed with the
opinion that elevation of the bone is necessary, in every instance of
depressed cranium, should have acted upon this opinion in the first,
third, fourth and fifth cases, and afterwards have employed proper
evacuations, his patients might, perhaps, have had no bad symptoms,
and he would naturally have attributed their well-doing to the mode of
treatment which he had pursued : 3-et these cases did equally well
without an operation. If the same surgeon had been witness to the
disturbance which arose in the second, sixth and seventh cases, he
would, without doubt, have attributed them to the continuance of pres-
sure made by the bone ; yet these cases also did well by medical
treatment only : and when the symptoms which come on thus are of
the inflammatory kind, they may generally be removed by the same
means. Many cases also are to be met with in books, and some are
related in the subsequent part of this Essay, where not only great but
even fatal mischief ensued, notwithstanding the brain had been re-
lieved from pressure at an early period. Another surgeon, preju-
diced against the use of the trephine, might, with equal injustice,
consider the mischief, which ensues in certain cases, as entirely ow-
ing to the operation.

The degree of pressure which the brain can sustain, without great
injury to the system, may probably vary according to the disposition
of that organ to be affected by it, the suddonness of its application,
and the direction in which it is made ; and although it must be very
difficult to obtain any precise knowledge on this subject, yet there is
great reason to believe that the brain can bear more pressure with-
out injury to it, than was formerly supposed. The first of these cir-
cumstances seems evident, for in some persons a slight pressure pro-
duces severe symptoms, whilst, in others, a much greater degree is
borne without inconvenience. We can rarely judge of the effects of
pressure when any part of the cranium is beaten in by a blow ; for,
in that case, the shock generally occasions stupefaction. Internal
haemorrhages, perhaps, afford us the best criterion whereby to deter-
mine the effects cf pressure on the brain. The eighth case will serve
as an illustration of this remark, where it appears that a considerable
haemorrhage must have taken place before it deprived the patient of
his faculties ; for he walked home, undressed himself and went to bed,
after the trunk of the middle artery of the dura mater had been rup-
tured. In cases of apoplexy, also, the haemorrhage is generally very
large before it produces those consequences which destroy life.

The authorities quoted by Morgagni, as well as his own observa-
tions, show that people may recover from apoplexy even after a con-
siderable effusion of blood has taken place.

Volume IX. page 161, of the London Medical Journal, contains
observations on recent depressions of the skull to the same effect.
Several cases are reported which were successfully treated, better
without than by an operation.

One general principle, says a writer, I would inculcate, which is,
" that injuries of the head, apparently trifling, should never be neglected;
and, on the other hand, those which appear most dangerous and alarm-
ing should never be despaired of"


Injuries of the Head. 87


Of the Consequence of Injuries to the Brain.

Of Fungus and Hernia Cerebri. — The fungus is simply an exube-
rant protrusion of granulations beyond the level of the cranium, ari-
sing usually from the surface of the dura mater, or from the cut edges
of the bone granulating luxuriantly.

Hernia cerebri is a tumour formed by the pressure of blood, which
has been extravasated into the substance of the brain, owing to a dis-
eased state of its vessels induced by one of the foregoing causes.
The effused fluid, if the skull were entire, would in all probability, in-
duce apoplexy ; but when a deficiency of bone exists, so as to allow
it to expand, it presses the surface of the brain and its meninges,
through the vacant space, and there forms a tumour, which continues
to increase in size, until the superficial stratum of brain becomes so
distended as to give way ; when blood oozes eut and forms a co-
agulum.

Treatment*

Of the Fungus. — Moderate pressure ; the constant application of
dry lint ; sprinkling the excrescence with pulverized blood root.

Of the Hernia. — All pressure should be carefully avoided, and no-
thing in general need be done but daily to apply simple dressings;
when the coagulum may soon drop oft", and the tumour waste away.

Ligatures and styptics diould be avoided.

Should the haemorrhage be so great as to threaten danger, the co-
agulum should be removed, the bleeding vessel exposed, and some
diluted vegetable astringent may be applied with success to stop the
bleeding.


CHAPTER V.

FRACTURES.


Fracture is a division of bone into two or more fragments; gene-
rally occasioned l>v external violence.

Species.— I. Simple :— where the bone has been divided, and the
integuments remain unimpaired.

2. Compound :— where there is a corresponding wound in the soft
parts, by which the fractured extremity of the bone becomes exposed.

A^'ain, fractures are divided : 1st. Transverse, which are such as take
place directly across the bone ; 2d. Oblique, when they deviate from
a perpendicular direction ; 3d. Longitudinal, when a fracture runs
parallel with the axis of the bone, which seldom or never happens ;
and some add a fourth kind, Comminutive, when a bone is broken into
several pieces, or crushed into fragments.

Fractures complicated with violent contusion of the soft parts, or
with a wound, rendering them compound, are much more dangerous
than others free from such accidents. The bad symptoms which
render compound fractures so dangerous, are of many kinds : haemorr-
hage, violent and extensive inflammation of the limb, with extreme
pam, delirium and fever ; large abscesses, gangrene, &c. Fractures
of the leg are generally more serious than similar injuries of the
uppeT extremity. The wound of a large artery may add considerably
to the danger of a fracture.

Causes.

Predisposing.— Certain diseases of the bone ; as abscess, friability
or white swelling, &c.

Exciting. — External violence.

Symptoms.

Some of the symptoms of fractures are equivocal. The pain and
inability to move the limb, commonly enumerated, may arise from a
mere bruise, a dislocation, or other cause. The crepitus or grating ;
the separation and inequalities of the ends of the fracture, when the
bone is superficial ; the change in the form of the limb ; and the
shortening of it ; are circumstances communicating the most certain
information ; and the crepitus, in particular, is the principal symptom
to be depended upon, though occasionally attendant on dislocations.
The signs of fractures, however, are so exceedingly various, accord-
ing to the bones which are the subject of injury, that it cannot be said,
that there is any one which is invariably present and characteristically
confined to them. The writers of systems of surgery usually notice


Fractures. 89

loss of motion in the injured limb, deformity, swelling, tension, pain,
dec, as forming the general diagnosis of fractures. The crepitus, or
the grating sensation, or noise occasioned by the ends of a fracture,
when they are moved and rubbed against each other, is one of the
most positive symptoms of the existence of such an accident.

Treatment of Fractures in general.
i

In the treatment of fractures in general, there are three indications
to be fulfilled.

First, to replace or reduce the fractured or broken bones into their
original or natural situation.

Second, to secure and keep them in this situation.

Third, to prevent excessive inflammation and pain.

1st. Examination of Fractures. — When called to an accident of this
kind, it will be first necessary carefully to examine, and ascertain whe-
ther the bone or limb is fractured; and bypassing the finger or thumb
along thecourse of the bones, the fracture can generally be felt. There
is an unevenncss or roughness communicated ; a depression; and upon
rotating or turning the fractured limb, a grating noise is heard, or a
jar felt. Besides, there is an inability to raise or move the limb ; and
it is usually shorter than the opposite one. Having ascertained the
nature of the accident ; the next step will be to remove the patient
to his residence, or the place where he is permanently to remain ;
and if he is to be removed to any distance, the bones may be tempo-
rarily secured by splints. Having arrived, or been carried to the
destined place, preparations must next be made for reduction and
dressing. If splints have not already been provided, they should
now be made, of a proper width and length, according to the part
which requires their application ; and they must be properly covered.
Nc\t, bandages must be prepared. Muslin will answer, but those
made of linen are preferable. They should be made three or four
inches wide, and several yards in length, and rolled up for use. Having
made the necessary preparations, the patient must be placed on a
bed or mattress, and gradual extension and counter extension should
be made, provided one bone ride another, or is not alreadv in coapta-
tion. It is quite erroneous to suppose that force, or much extension
is necessary in reducing all fractures. In most that I have attended,
the end of the bones have been in contact with each other, or nearly
so, so that very little force has been necessary to be employed. The
physician, or surgeon, should take hold of the lower limb, if the frac-
ture be upon a limb, while an assistant grasps or holds the upper
portion of it ; and upon slight extension, examination should be made
to ascertain whether the fractured bones are in a straight or direct
line with each other ; and, also, whether the ends of the bones are
even, or in no respect depressed one below the other, as these are
the distinguishing marks, or the criterion which -will enable us to
judge whether they are brought properly together, or in coaptation.

" It is true, that when swelling has come on, it is impossible always
to decide by the touch, in what degree we have accomplished our
object ; we are obliged to judge by the relative position of the joirtfs


90 Fractures.

above and below the fracture, and the general aspect of the limb. I
have often desisted from my unavailing efforts to reduce a fractured
limb to a right position, the spasms that were excited being so violent
as to threaten a protrusion of the bones through the skin, and yet
have afterwards found no difficulty in bringing the bones into a very
satisfactory position. In many cases, also, it has appeared to me that
the coaptation has been affected by the action of the muscles them-
selves ; for when on the subsequent day, I had removed the splint, I
have felt so well satisfied with the general position, that I have done
nothing more, and each succeeding day found less cause for inter-
ference. In these cases, upon the subsidence of the swelling, scarcely
any irregularity could be perceived in the outline of the bone."

The bones being properly adjusted, the bandage will be put round
the limb, commencing below and rising upwards, or from the inferior
extremity, and continuing it to the top, a suitable distance above and
below the place of fracture. After covering the limb, let the bandage
be still held, and splints, as many as are necessary, be placed around
it, to give security, and let these be held by an assistant. The
roller must then be continued over the splints, until they are sufficiently
compressed to keep the bones in their proper places, or in coaptation*
I sometimes fold a piece of linen, a number of times, the width of
the splints, to place them upon, in order to prevent too much, or undue
pressure. When this has been accomplished, tape or narrow strips
of linen may be tied around, in two or three places, to render the
dressings and the fractured bones still more secure.

The bandages must not be put on too tight, as the swelling that
always follows will excite too much pain, by impeding the circulation.
The limb may now be placed upon a pillow, a little flexed or bent,
and kept in an easy and quiet position.

A decoction, made by boiling wormwood and hops in vinegar, may be
applied to prevent and diminish excessive inflammation ; and after
this application has been continued awhile, it may be discontinued,
and equal parts of rain water, spirits and vinegar be substituted.
After the parts have been wet with the liquid, a cloth should be laid
over, to prevent too much evaporation.

All that art can do towards the reunion of a fractured bone, is to
lay it perfectly straight, in its original situation, and to secure it so ;
to keep it easy, and moderate excessive inflammation. All tight
bandages are injurious. It is in this way that excess of art does
mischief. Indeed, fractures may be successfully treated without
either the use of splints or bandages. Instead of the roller mentioned,
the following bandage may be applied, which, in some respects
answers a better purpose. It is made by taking apiece of American
muslin, somewhat wider than is sufficient to extend round the limb,
and cutting it down each side, to the distance of about half the diame-
ter of it, in strips of about an inch in width, and then applying it
similar to the eighteen, or many tailed bandage. This admits of the
part being examined without changing the position of the parts ; and
is more particularly applicable to compound fractures. It is not
necessary often, to remove the dressings to examine the fracture,
provided we have no just grounds to suppose there is any displace-


Fractures. 01

ment. It is sufficient to remove them occasionally, or as often as
the bandages become loose, from a subsidence of the swelling, or
other causes. As a general rule, once a week is sufficient, except
we have some doubt on our minds respecting the bones being in con-
tact, or in their proper places. The patient should lay in a horizon,
tal position as much as possible ; and should twitchings of the tendons
occur, or much pain, an anodyne may be given, and particularly at
bedtime.

I have taken from different writers, some remarks upon the treat-
ment of fractures in general, which may either throw some additional
light upon the subject, or further illustrate the foregoing treatment.
In general, the remarks are judicious, and consonant with my own
views.

Of the Means for keeping Fractures reduced.

After the bones have been put into their natural situation, time
alone would complete their cure, were there not in the muscles a
continual propensity to displace the ends of the fracture again. In
cases of fracture the muscles are often affected with involuntary spas-
modic action, by which the broken part would certainly be displaced,
were no measures taken to maintain the extremities of the broken
bone in contact. Besides, the patient, in easing himself, coughing,
sneezing, &c, must unavoidably subject the limb to a degree of
motion, by which the coaptation would be altogether destroyed.
Hence, the necessity of employing means for fixing the broken limb
so effectually that it may continue perfectly motionless during the
whole time requisite for the union of the fracture. This second indi-
cation is sometimes troublesome and difficult, and, as Boyer observes,
it is in this part of the treatment that the surgeon has an opportunity
of evincing his skill. The means employed for the fulfilment of this
indication are, an advantageous position, quietude, bandages, splints,
and various kinds of apparatus.

In the treatment of all fractures, the position of the part, and indeed
of the whole body, is a thing of material importance. Whenever the
case is a fracture of the lower extremities, the patient should lie
strictly in bed until the callus is completely formed. It is likewise an
advantage not to have the bed much more than a yard wide, because
the surgeon and assistants can then more conveniently get at any
part of the limb. Feather-beds are a great deal too soft and yielding :
a horse-hair mattress is far preferable. Boyer, indeed, is so im-
pressed with the utility of letting the patient lie upon a surface which
will not sink, that he recommends two mattresses to be used, and a
board to be laid under the upper one from the hip to beyond the
patient's foot. — (TraitC des Mai. Chir. vol. iii. p. 39.)

The most favourable position for a fractured limb is that in which
all the muscles passing over the fracture, and extending either to the
lower fragment or to that part of the limb which is articulated with it,
are equally relaxed. The injured limb should also have firm support
at every point, and its position ought to be regulated so that not only
this object be carefully fulfilled, but at the same time the chance of

Voi. II. M


92 Fractures.

displacement from the action of the muscles, or the weight of the
body, or part itself, may he diminished as much as possible.

The natural, or rather the most easy position of the limb, is that
which is usually chosen by a person who reposes himself or who is
sleeping; for then all motion is suspended, and every part assumes
that posture which is most congenial to it. In this condition, the
limbs are not extended, nor yet entirely bent ; but only in a moderate
state of flexion. Hence, Boyer remarks, that a half-bent position of
the limbs is that which is most natural, and that in which all the
muscles enjoy an equal degree of relaxation, and, consequently, that
it is, generally speaking, the best for fractures. This posture, which
was recommended by Hippocrates and Galen, has been highly ex-
tolled by Pott, who appears to have exaggerated its advantages.
Considered in a general way, it is without contradiction preferable to
every other position of the limb ; but its employment should be liable
to exceptions, as will be noticed in treating of particular fractures. —
(See Boyer, Traite des Mai. Chlr. t. viii. p. 40.)

In whatever position a broken limb is placed, (says this writer,) it
should bear throughout its whole length equally and perpendicularly
upon the surface on which it lies, and not be only partially supported.
When, for example, only the extremities of a fractured limb rest upon
the bed, the weight of the limb itself will make it bend in the situation
of the fracture. The limb will also be rendered crooked, if the bro-
ken part be supported, while the extremities of the limb (especially the
inferior) sink lower by their own weight. The displacement of the
fracture is not the only inconvenience arising from the limb being
laid upon a surface where it is not every where equally supported.
The parts which do bear on this surface experience a painful degree
of pressure, which, if long continued, is apt to produce inflammation,
and even sloughing, of the integuments. Thus, in fractures of the
leg, gangrene of the heel has sometimes arisen entirely from this
cause. Such inconveniences may be prevented by laying a fractured
limb on a surface of corresponding form ; that is to say, on a surface
which is depressed where the limb has projections, and rises where it
presents depressions. The surface should not be so hard as to annoy
the patient ; yet it ought to be sufficiently firm not to yield to the
weight of the limb and apparatus. According to Boyer, the best
pillows for the support of broken limbs are stuffed with chaff of oats,
it more readily admits of being pushed from the place where the limb
is prominent to another situation where the member presents a depres-
sion or hollow ; and it has the advantages of being less heating than
feathers and less apt to spoil.

In whatever position fractured limbs are placed, they ought to be
kppt perfectly quiet during the whole time requisite for the union. If
the broken bone be moved while the callus is forming, the surfaces of
the fracture rub against each other, and the process is disturbed ;
and, indeed, sometimes b\ rep< the limb, the consoli-

dation of fractures is entirely prevented, or, at least, rendered very
slow and difficult.

In order to maintain the limb in the right position, and in a state of


Fractures. 93

quietude, and to preserve the fragments in proper contact with respect
to each other, the surgeon is to caution the patient to avoid moving
at all more than can be helped ; and every cause likely to subject the
limb to any kind of shock or concussion is to be removed. But, in
particular," it will be necessary to apply a ret paratus, usually

consisting of some application to the skin itself, bandages, splints,
tapes, straps and buckles, soft pads, &c. — (See Boyer, Trail6 des
Mai. Chir. t. iii. p. 42.)

Upon the subject of the dressings, bandages, &c. which ought to
be applied to fractures, no surgeon has written better than Mr. Pott.

" The intention (says he) in applying any kind of external medi-
cine to a broken limb is, or ought to be, to repress inflammation, to
disperse extravasated blood, to keep the skin lax, moist and perspir-
able, and at the same time to afford some, though a very small degree
of restraint or confinement to the fracture, but not to bind or press;
and it should also be calculated as much as possible to prevent itch-
ing, an herpetic eruption, or an erysipelatous efflorescence.

" This lies very easy, repels inflammation, is not adherent, comes off
clean, and very seldom, if ever, irritates, or causes either herpes or
erysipelas. But let the form and composition of the application made
to the limb be what it may, one thing is clear, viz., that it should be
put on in such manner, as that it may be renewed and shifted as often
as may be necessary, without moving the limb in any manner : it
being certain, that when once a broken thigh or leg has been properly
put to rights, and has been deposited properly on the pillow, it ought
not ever to be lifted up or moved from it again without necessity,
until the fracture is perfectly united ; and it is true that such neces-
sity will not very often occur."

Such application having been made as the surgeon thinks right,
the next thing to be done is to put on a proper bandage. That for-
merly used was what is commonly called a roller. This was of differ-
ent lengths, according to the surgeon's choice, or as it was used in
the form of one, two or more pic<

" By such kind of bandage three intentions are aimed at, and said
to be accomplished, viz. to conline the fracture, to repress or prevent
a flux of humours, and to regulate the callus ; (see Duverney;) but who.
ever will reflect seriously on this matter, will soon be convinced, that
although some sort of bandage is necessary in every simple fracture,
as well for preserving some degree of steadiness to the limb, as for
the retention of the applications, yet none nor either of these three
ends can be answered merely, or even principally, by bandage of
any kind whatever : and, therefore, if this should be found to be
true, that is, if it should appear, that whatever kind ofdeligation be
made use of, it cannot be a principal, but only an accessory kind of
assistance, and that in a small degree, and very little to be depended
upon, it will follow, that such kind of bandage as is most difficult to be
applied with justne s and exactitude, such as is soonest relaxed and
out of order, such as stands most frequently in need of renewal, and
in such renewal is most likely to give pain and trouble, must be more
improper and less eligible than one which is moro easily applied, less


94 Fractures.

liable to be out of order, and which can be adjusted without moving
the limb, &c.

" The best and most useful bandage for a simple fracture of the leg
or thigh is what is commonly known by the name of the eighteen,
tailed bandage, or rather, one made on the same principle, but with
a little difference in the disposition of the pieces. The common me-
thod is to make it so that the parts which are to surround the limb
make a right angle with that which runs lengthwise under it ; instead
of which, if they are tacked on so as to make an acute angle, they will
fold over each other in an oblique direction, and thereby sit more
neatly and more securely, as the parts will thereby have more
connexion with, and more dependence on, each other. In com.
pound fractures, as they are called, every body sees and acknowledges
the utility of this kind of bandage preferably to the roller, and for
very obvious and convincing reasons, but particularly because it
does not become necessary to lift up and disturb the limb every time
it is dressed, or every time the bandage loosens.

" The pain attending motion in a compound fracture, the circumstance
of the wound, and the greater degree of instability of parts thereby
produced, are certainly very good reasons for dressing such wound
with a bandage which does not render motion necessary ; but I
should be glad to know what can make it necessary, or right, or
eligible, to move a limb in the case of simple fracture? what benefit
can be proposed by it ? what utility can be drawn from it ? When a
broken bone has been well set, and the limb well placed, what pos-
sible advantage can arise from moving it ? Surely none ; but, on the
contrary, pain and probable mischief. Is it not the one great inten-
tion to procure unition ? Can moving the limb every two or three
days contribute to such intention ? must it not, on the contrary, ob-
struct and retard it ? Is not perfect quietude as necessary towards
the union of the bone in a simple as in a compound fracture ?
It is true, that in the one there is a wound which requires to be dress-
ed, and the motion of the limb may in general be attended with ra-
ther more pain than in the other ; but does motion in the simple frac-
ture give ease, or procure more expeditious union ?

" Every benefit then which can be supposed to be obtained from the
common bandage or roller, is equally attainable from the use of that
which I have just mentioned, with one additional, and, to the pa-
tient, most invaluable advantage, viz. that of never finding it neces.
sary to have his leg or thigh once, during the cure, removed from the
pillow on which it has been properly deposited."— (Pott's Remarks on
Fractures, fyc.)

In France, a universal preference is given to Scultetus's bandage
in every instance where we employ the eighteen-tailed one, from
which it chiefly differs in being composed of separate pieces admitting
of removal, so that when a part of the bandage is soiled it can be
taken away without disturbing the whole of the dressings. The
clean pieces are first stitched to those which are about to be removed,
and then they are drawn under the part. In cases of compound frac-
ture, where the bandage is soiled with the discharge in a very short
time, and must be often removed, certainly Scultetus's bandage is the


Fractures.


95


best, particularly as it possesses all the recommendations peculiar
to that of the cightecn-tailed kind.— (Boyer, Traitt des Mai. Chir.
t. iii. p. 40.)

With respect to the general objects and uses of bandages, in cases
of fracture, I ought to notice one design of them, which is strongly
inculcated in the modern French schools ; namely v that of " benumbing
the irritability of the muscles," by the compression resulting from their
regular and even application to the whole of the member.

"The parts of the general apparatus for a simple fracture, which
come next in order, (observes Mr. Pott,) are the splints," which are
unquestionably the most efficient of all the applications made to a
broken limb with a view of keeping the ends of the fracture steady
and in a proper state of contact. Without them the surgeon would
in vain endeavour to maintain the reduction.

" Splints," says Pott, " are generally made of pasteboard, wood, or
some resisting kind of stuff, and are ordered to be applied lengthwise
on the broken limb ; in some cases three, in others four ; for the more
steady and quiet detention of the fracture.

" That splints, properly made and judiciously applied, are very ser-
viceable, is beyond all doubt ; but their utility depends much on their
size, and the manner in which they are applied.

"The true and proper use of splints is to preserve steadiness in the
wholo limb, without compressing the fracture at all. By the former
they become very assistant to the curative intention ; by the latter
they are very capable of causing pain and other inconveniences ; at
the same time that they cannot, in the nature of things, contribute to
the steadiness of the limb." — (See Remarks on Fractures and Disloca-
tions, in Pott's Chirurgical Works, vol. i. p. 298, &c. edit. 1808.)

Assalini strongly disapproves of the employment of all tight band-
ages, and of covering the whole of a broken limb with splints. He
was called to a gentleman of rank at Paris, who had broken the
knee-pan transversely. He laid the limb upon a concave splint, the
shape of which was adapted to the under surface of a part of the leg
and thigh. No bandage was used ; merely two leather straps, which
crossed upon the knee, and included the fractured bone. A perfect
bony union was thus easily effected. Assalini afterward extended
the use of a concave splint, applied under the limb, to fractures of the
leg and thigh. In the first of these cases, however, only the thigh is
recewed in the hollow splint, and from this, two branches, or lateral
splints, go along the leg. The apparatus has also a kind of sole for
the support of the foot. As this simple contrivance is fastened with
a very lew straps, and no plasters or bandages arc used, the surgeon
has constantly a view of the whole front of the limb, and of the frac-
tured part of it, which Assalini thinks a great advantage. In com-
pound fractures, he puts no other dressings on the wound, but linen
compresses, which are kept continually wet with cold water. — (Ma-
nuale di Chirurgia, parte prima, 1812.)

In oblique fractures of the thigh, and sometime*evcn in those of
the leg, the difficulty of accomplishing, by the ordinary means, a cure
free from deformity, and especially without a shortening of the limb,
has led to the idea of employing continual extension. This expres-


96 Fractures.

sion implies the operation of a bandage, or machine, which continu-
ally draws the fragments of the broken hone in contrary directions,
at the same time that it restrains them from gliding over each other,
and maintains them in contact during the whole time necessary for
their union. In England, this practice has long been relinquished.
It appears to have been chased away by the dazzling theory of relax-
ing every muscle in such manner as to render it incapable of displacing
an oblique fracture ; a theory with which the surgeons of this coun-
try were but too much blinded, by the persuasive eloquence of the
late Mr. Pott. Desault saw at once, however, every inconsistency
in the doctrine of the possibility of relaxing the muscles so as to in-
capacitate entirely the whole set connected with a broken thigh ; and
he never ceased to inculcate in his school, that in such a case, the as-
sistance of a mechanical apparatus applied to the limb was the main
thing by which the shortening of the limb was to be prevented.
When we consider the treatment of fractured thighs, we shall find
that the principle of continual but moderate extension has had, in
France, advocates of great talent and eminence, though it is a method to
which many surgeons appear to entertain strong objections. — (Cooper.)

Means for preventing and removing the, unfavourable Symptoms liable to
arise from Fractures.

After having reduced the fracture, applied a suitable apparatus for
maintaining the reduction, and nut the part in an advantageous po-
sition, the practitioner is to attend to the indication in the treatment,
viz. the prevention and removal of any unfavourable symptoms.

Costiveness is to be averted by .the use of clysters and mild aperient
medicines. It must 1 • hat in fractures of the lower ex-

tremity, the disturbance by the patient's being

obliged to move himself after having taken a purgative, is seriously
objectionable; but perhaps in all, and certainly in some habits, a
neglect to open the bowels soon after the an uld have still

more pernicious consequences. In order, however, to lessen the dis-
turbance, a bed-pan should be carefully introduced under the patient.
One great convenience of a fracture bed, the cost of which is mode-
rate, is to enable the patient to void his t;r.ces, without the slightest
change of position or disturbance ; an object effected by the simple
contrivance of a little kind of trap, opening under the bed, out of
which a small portion of the m;:! ithdrawn, and

a tin receptacle is placed, for the reception of what is voided from
the bowels and bladder.

When a fracture is well set, the position of the part right, arid the
bandage and splints neither too tight nor too slack, the less the bro-
ken bone is moved, and the less the nppn dressings are dis-
turbed, the better. Sometimes ■, the practitioner is obliged
to take otf the splints, and undo the bandage, in order to ascertain
that the ends of the fracture lie in even contact. Were he to leave
the splints on the part, ten days, or a forlnight, without ever being
sure of this important point, he might find, when too late for altera-
tion, that the fracture was in a state of displacement, and the limb


Fractures. 97

seriously deformed. Hence, a strong reason for employing the
eighteen-tailed bandage, which admits of being opened without dis-
turbing the limb, or even without lifting it from the surface upon
which it lias been deposited.

In fractures of the lower extremities, particularly of the legs, it
sometimes happens, the first two or three nights after the reduction,
that the limb is affected with convulsive spasms and cramps, which
make the patient start in his sleep, and displace the ends of the bone,
which must be again reduced.

When the callus has acquired some firmness, the patient should
still keep the part or limb quiet, until the union is perfectly consolida-
ted. And in fractures of the lower extremity, even after the union
has proceeded so far that the splints admit of heing left oil', the patient
ought not to venture to gel out of bed, or bear upon the limb, till seve-
ral more days have elapsed.

All fractures, however simple and well treated they may be, are
constantly followed by weakness and stiffness of the limb. These un-
pleasant consequences are the greater, the more violently the limb
lias been contused, the nearer the fracture is to a joint, and the long-
er the pari has remained motionless and without exercise. The stiff-
ness always affects the inferior joint of the broken bone much more
than the superior. For the relief of these effects of fractures, it is
customary to employ friction, liniments, emollient relaxing applica-
tions, washes, and bathing; but sometimes, notwithstanding such
remedies, the membrane does not quickly recover its strength, but
continues stiff and weak for a year, or even a longer time. The most
effectual plans for the prevention of this state, should therefore be re-
sorted to early. These consist in making the joints nearest the frac-
ture execute slight motions, as soon as the union is sufficiently ad-
i d not to he in danger of interruption from this practice. A
great deal of caution, however, is necessary in moving the part, and
il is safer for the surgeon to superintend the business himself, than
lease it to the patient or others. One of the best proceedings, also,
lor the hindrance of much weakness and stiffness in the limb, after a
fracture, is to discontinue the splints and tight bandages immediately
the state of the callus will allow. The manner in which their pressure
retards the circulation, and prevents the action of the muscles, is one
of the principal causes of the stiffness of the limb; and, consequently,
the sooner they can he safely left off, the sooner will the patient regain
the free \t^o of the limb.

In Prance, the chief division of fractures is into simple and compli-
' ; which hist includes, among many varieties, the cases which
we name compound. We shall here briefly notice a few of the com-
plications, ; im i t| 10 particular treatment which they require.

Fractures (says Boyer) are always attended with a certain degree
of contusion, which is constantly more severe in eases where the vio-
lence has arte! nation of the fracture. But such
can only he regarded as a complication of the accident,
in so vio' ree as to demand a different treat-
ment from that which is employed in simple fractures.

In this circumstance, the splints and bandage should be applied ra-


98 Fractures.

ther slackly, and the latter ought to be'wet with some resolvent lotion.
The next day, the splints and bandage should be opened; a thing
highly necessary to be observed, for where it has been neglected, the
limb has been known to mortify, in consequence of the swelling ha-
ving rendered the bandage too tight. — (Boyer, Traitf des Mai. Chir.
t. hi. p. 63, 64.)

In cases where the contusion is severe, but unattended with a
wound of the integuments, the tension and swelling may be so intense,
that the cuticle is detached, forming vesicles filled with yellowish se-
rum. These vesicles may deceive an inexperienced surgeon, and
lead him to imagine that the limb is threatened, or actually affected
with gangrene. They ought to be punctured, and covered with
pledgets of simple ointment. Here the practitioner may apply emol-
lient poultices under the apparatus.


SECTION I.

Treatment of Compound Fractures.

In the treatment of compound fractures we are to be governed by
the same general principles as in simple fractures. The wound is to
be cleared of all extraneous substances, such as splinters of bone, dirt,
&c; and they should be removed with all possible gentleness, without
pain, violence or laceration ; for if the parts surrounding the fracture
be further injured, inflammation will be the consequence, and prove
Very injurious. There is no necessity of exciting any additional pain
by probing, or any harsh means whatever.

Reduction of, or setting a compound fracture, is the same as in the
simple ; that is, the intention in both is the same, viz. by means of a
proper degree of extension to obtain as apt a position of the ends of
the fracture with regard to each other, as the nature of the case will
admit, and thereby to produce as perfect and as speedy union as pos-
sible. The wound being cleared from any loose pieces of bone, or
other substances, the next thing to be done is to apply the dressing.
The wound must be treated the same as any other. The edges must
be gently brought in contact as nearly as possible, and then two or
three strips of adhesive plaster applied to secure them, and thus afford
an opportunity to heal without suppuration. Over this lint should be
placed, and then the black or healing salve.

" The dressing necessary in a compound fracture is of two kinds,
that for the wound, and that for the limb. By the former, we mean to
maintain a proper opening for the easy and free discharge of gleet,
sloughs, matter, extraneous bodies, or fragments of bone, and this in
such a manner, and by such means, as shall give the least possible
pain or fatigue, shall neither irritate by its qualities, nor oppress by its
quantity, nor by any means contribute to the detention or lodgment of
what ought to be discharged. By the latter our aim should be the pre-
vention or removal of inflammation, in order, if the habit be good
and all other circumstances fortunate, that the wound may be healed
by what surgeons call the first intention, that is without suppuration or


Fractures. 99

abscess ; or, that not being practicable, that gangrene and mortifica-
tion, or even very large suppuration, may be prevented, and such a
moderate and kindly degree of it established as may best serve the
purpose of a cure. The first, therefore, or the dressing for the wound,
can consist of nothing better, or indeed so good, as soft lint, laid on
so lightly as just to absorb the matter, but neither to distend the wound,
nor be the smallest impediment or obstruction to the discharge. This
lint should be kept clear of the edges, and the whole of it should be
covered with a pledget, spread with a soft, easy ointment. The times
of dressing must be determined by the nature of the case ; if the dis-
charge be small or moderate, once in twenty-four hours will be suf-
ficient ; but if it be large, more frequent dressing will be necessary,
as well to prevent offence as to remedy the inconveniences arising
from a great discharge of an irritating sharp sanies.

" When from neglect, from length of time passed without assistance,
from misconduct or drunkenness in the patient, from awkwardness and
unhandiness in the assistants, or from any other cause, a tension has
taken possession of the limb, and it is become tumid, swollen and
painful, a warm poultice is the most proper application that can be
made ; immediate union is impossible, and every thing which can tend
towards relaxing the tense, swollen and irritable state of the parts
concerned, must necessarily be right. But when the parts are not
in this state, the intention seems to be very different. To relax swol-
len parts, and to appease pain and irritation by such relaxation, is one
thing ; to prevent inflammatory defluxion and tumefaction is certainly
another ; and they ought to be aimed at by very different means. In
the former, a large suppuration is a necessary circumstance of relief,
and the great means of cure ; in the latter it is not, and a very mo-
derate degree of it is all that is required. The poultice, therefore, al-
though it be the best application that can be made use of in the one
case, is not so proper in the other, as applications of a more discutient
kind, such as mixtures of spirit, vinegar and water, with fomentations,
and medicines of this class. By these, inflammation may sometimes
be kept off, and a cure accomplished, without large collections or dis-
charges of matter.

" Compound fractures in general require to be dressed every day ;
and the wounded parts not admitting the smallest degree of motion
without great pain, perfect quietude becomes as necessary as frequent
dressing."

If the common bandage or roller is used, care must be taken, in
covering the limb, to leave a space sufficiently large, over the wound,
conveniently to dress it. In compound fractures, however, it is best
to apply such a bandage as prevents the necessity of changing the
position of the limb when it is dressed or unbandaged.

A piece of linen, sufficient exactly to go round and fit the leg, may
first be applied, and every part covered except the wound. On this the
necessary splints should be placed, underneath being compresses to
prevent too much pressure. The splints may be secured by the same
kind of bandage as is spoken of under the head of simple fractures, or
the whole of the splints or dressings (the wound excepted) may be
entirely covered by narrow strips of linen, placed adjoining, or in

Vol. II. N


100 Fractures.

contact with, or overlap each other, and tied sufficiently tight, hut not
so as to render the patient uncomfortable. The eighteen or many-
tailed bandage also answers a very good purpose.

The points to be aimed at are, the even position of the broken
parts of the bone, and such disposition of the muscles surrounding
them, as is most suitable to their wounded, lacerated state, as shall
be least likely to irritate them, by keeping them on the stretch, or to
produce high inflammation, and at best large suppuration.

These cases, require at first the most rigid observance of the re-
frigerant regimen ; pain is to be appeased, and rest obtained, by
anodynes ; inflammation is to be prevented or removed by fomenta-
tions of tansy and hops, and aperient medicines. And during the
first state or stages, the treatment of the limb must be calculated
either for the prevention of inflammatory tumefaction by discutients ;
or, such tumour and tension having already taken possession of the
limb, warm fomentation, and relaxing and emollient medicines, are
required.

If these, according to the particular exigence of the case, prove
successful, the consequence is, either a quiet easy wound, which
either heals by the first intention or suppurates very moderately, and
gives little or no trouble, or a wound attended at first with consider-
able inflammation, and that producing large suppuration, with great
discharge and troublesome formation and lodgement of matter. If,
on the other hand, our attempts do not succeed, the consequence
may be gangrene and mortification.

These are the three general events or terminations of a compound
fracture, and according to these must our conduct be regulated.

In the first instance, there is nothing to do but to avoid doing mis-
chief, either by dressing or by disturbing the limb. Nature, let
alone, will accomplish her own purpose ; and art has little more
to do than to preserve the due position of the limb, and to take care
that the dressing applied to the wound proves no impediment.

In the second stage, that of formation and lodgement of matter, in
consequence of large suppuration, all a physician's judgment will
sometimes be required in the treatment both of the patient and his
injured limb.

Every body who is acquainted with surgery knows (says Pott)
that, in the case of bad compound fracture, attended with large sup-
puration, it sometimes happens, even under the best &nd most judi-
cious treatment, that the discharge becomes too great for the patient
to sustain ; and that, after all the fatigue, pain and discipline which
he has undergone, it becomes necessary to compound for life by the
loss of the limb.* This, I say, does sometimes happen, under the
best and most rational treatment ; but I am convinced that it also is
now and then the consequence of pursuing the reducing, the antiphlo-
gistic, or cooling, and the relaxing plan too far. I would therefore
take the liberty seriously to advise the young practitioner to attend
diligently to his patient's pulse and general state, as well as to that of
his fractured limb and wound ; and when he finds all febrile com-

• When symptoms of gangrene appear, the yest poultice may be applied.


Fractures. 101

plaint at an end, and all inflammatory tumour and hardness gone, and
his patient rather languid than feverish, that his pulse is rather weak
and low than hard and full, that his appetite begins to fail, and that he
is inclined to sweat or purge without assignable cause, and this in
consequence of a large discharge of matter from a limb which has
suffered great inflammation, but which is now become rather soft and
flabby than hard and tumid ; that he will, in such circumstances, set
about the support of his patient, and the strengthening of the diseased
limb, totis viribus ; in which 1 am from experience satisfied he may
often be successful, where it may not be generally expected that he
would.

The time necessary for the reunion of a bone is somewhat uncer.
tain ; it depends upon many circumstances, such as age, habits of
the patient, treatment, &c. In young, the bone unites much sooner
than in old subjects ; as soon, sometimes, as ten days. It may be said,
however, in general, that from twenty to sixty days are required for
bones to unite. A callus, or hard substance, forms in and around
the fracture, which becomes more difficult to break than other parts
of the bone.

A short time after a bone is broken, osseous matter is deposited by
the vessels, which forms a callus, and unites it. This shows a wonder-
ful provision of nature, to cure such accidents ; and so powerful and
effectual is this principle, that it proves effectual under the most dis-
advantageous circumstances. A bone will unite even without bandages,
splints, or any other application, either internal or external, and that
too when it is subject to a considerable degree of motion.

I lately had an opportunity of seeing this proved, or exemplified, in
a case of a dog, which broke its leg. I daily saw it opposite my office,
and thought of applying splints and bandages, but neglected it from
some cause. The poor animal kept constantly in motion, and the
limb, also, with more or less pressure upon the ground. After a short
time, the bone united, and the dog walked as well as ever ; leaving,
however, the limb a little crooked, or deformed.

A cow also broke its leg ; and, as an experiment, it was set, and
bark taken from a tree and applied to the fractured limb, and firmly
bound on. It united very handsomely, and the cow was as useful as
formerly. A fact of practical importance should be drawn from this:
instead of killing valuable animals when a bone is broken, they may
be in this manner saved, and rendered as valuable as ever.

When the requisite time for a broken bone to become firmly united
has elapsed, it is proper to examine carefully and cautiously the place
of the fracture, in order to learn whether the callus has acquired a
suitable degree of strength. If the bone should be found to bend in
the least at the injured part, the callus is not sufficiently strong, and
the limb should be immediately put up in the apparatus again, with a
view of preventing a new fracture, or, at all events, deformity.

For the same reason, the patient should not be allowed to make use
of his limb as soon as the fracture has united. In fractures of the
lower extremity, he ought to use crutches, and only let the weight of
the trunk by degrees bear upon the injured limb. From neglect of
this precaution the callus has been known to be absorbed, the limb to


102 Fractures.

be shortened, and the patient become a cripple. An accidental slip
may also produce the fracture again ; for the callus, so far from being
firmer than the rest of the bone, is at first considerably weaker.

I have often been astonished to see the treatment practised by dif-
ferent persons in cases of fracture. There is no uniformity among
them, and the majority appear to be governed by no principles what-
ever. One practitioner extends and binds down a limb in the most
absurd manner, and thus tortures his patient ; while another uses
Dcsaidfs long splint, which is another species of torture. Another
confines the limb in a box, with little or no'other treatment. A physi-
cian in New-Jersey practised this method till the wound suppurated,
and became filled with maggots or worms ; and it is proverbial, that
in some hospitals in Europe, patients with fractures are sure to come
out cripples.

A case of this kind of treatment occurred in this city, a few years
ago, the circumstances of which I will briefly relate. A physician,
of this city, was upset in his gig, and his leg became so entangled as
to fracture the tibia and fibula just above the ancle. It was a com-
pound fracture. Two or three physicians were called, who examined
it, one of whom, a noted hospital surgeon, proceeded, after the pa-
tient was taken home, to treat it, I cannot say to reduce or dress it, as
this he did not attempt to do. He left him in the same situation in
which he was placed in the house where he was first taken after the
accident. A wide splint each side of his leg had there been temporarily
applied, and these were continued without any attempt to reduce the
fracture ; nor did this surgeon scarcely attempt to give it a superficial
examination. It appears that he adopted a new fashion, which has
lately been introduced into some parts of this country, for the treat-
ment of fractures, viz. to do nothing, at least, under ten days, and
then to put on an apparatus to make gradual and permanent extension.
This patient not being mine, or not having been called to him in the
capacity of a physician, I had no right to interfere ; besides, the
attending surgeon manifested much jealousy and hostility at my pre-
sence. I, however, took the liberty, in the presence of the bystanders,
and two or three of the physicians, to show the true nature of the
accident, and thus expose the man's ignorance. I placed one finger
upon the upper portion of the fractured or broken bone, and one upon
the lower, and then pointed out the wide separation there was betwixt
them, or the great distance they were apart ; and, strange as it may ap-
pear, this man was left in this condition for a length of time, and it was
by mere accident that he discovered that the fracture had never been
reduced. This, the physician or patient afterwards communicated to
me himself; and stated that he had found it necessary to make an
incision in the wound, to let out the pus or matter which had collected.

Now, is it not passing strange, that some of our most noted sur-
geons are guilty of such mal-practice ? From many accounts that I
have heard, of a similar kind, I am confident, that there is no branch
of surgery so badly managed as fractures.

I witnessed a case in New-Jerscy, many years ago, where a person
received a compound fracture of the femur, or thigh bone, which
proved fatal for the want of proper treatment.


Fractures. 103

The surgeon had received the first medical education in Philadel-
phia, and he seemed to possess sufficient knowledge to reduce the
fracture ; but being unable to subdue the inflammation, the person
died.

There is no branch of surgery that is more simple or more easy to
treat than fractures or dislocations. I have had my share of such
practice in them, and I should really feel mortified and ashamed, if a
single case that I ever treated could be exhibited, in which there was
any deformity or bad management.

1 have never yet attended one, no matter what bone of the system
has been fractured, but that has been properly set, secured, and suc-
cessfully treated. No lameness, deformity, or inequality in the bones
remaining, nor the least mark or symptom, that could ever lead a
person to suspect there had ever been a fracture ; and this has been
accomplished by the simple treatment here laid down, and which,
every person, I was about to say, possessed of common sense, can
easily put in practice. I have omitted to state that, as soon as the
swelling and inflammation have subsided, the tincture of capsicum
should be applied to the parts, and in a short, time after an adhesive
or strengthening plaster. Much benefit is invariably produced by
these applications.

Particular Fractures.

I have thus given the general rules by which we are to be governed
in the treatment of fractures in general ; arfd if they are kept in view,
they are sufficient to enable us scientifically and successfully, to treat
particular fractures, or every species or variety of them. I shall,
however, briefly notice fractures occurring in various parts of the
body, in order, if possible, to throw more light upon the subject, or
still further to illustrate it.


SECTION II.

Fracture of the Nose, or Ossa Nasi.

Those bones, from their situation, are much exposed to fractures.
The fragments are sometimes not deranged ; but most frequently
are depressed. In order to replace them, the surgeon must pass
a female catheter, a ring-handled forceps, or any such instrument, into
the nostrils, and, using it as a lever, push the" fragments outwards;
while, with the index finger of the left hand, he prevents them from
being pushed out too far.


section nr.

Fractures of the Lower Jaw.

This bone is sometimes fractured near the chin ; but seldom so as
to produce a division of the symphisis. In other instances, the frac-
ture occurs near the angles of the jaw, that is to sav, between the


104 Fractures.

insertion of the masseter and the root of the coronoid process. The
bone may also be broken in two places at the same time ; in which
event, the middle portion is extremely difficult to keep right, because
many of the muscles which draw the lower jaw downwards are at-
tached to that part.

The condyles and coronoid processes are also sometimes broken ;
the former the most frequently.

Fractures of the lower jaw may be either perpendicular to its basis,
oblique or longitudinal. Of the latter, examples have been known, in
which a portion of the alveolar process, with the teeth in it, was de-
tached from the rest of the bone.

The soft parts are generally contused and wounded.

Treatment.

The fracture, or broken bone, should be raised, and its end brought
in contact with the other ; after which a compress is to be laid over it,
and on this, a piece of pasteboard, previously wet, the better to adapt
it to the shape of the jaw ; and when this has been applied, the whole is
to be secured by a proper bandage. The patient must be directed to
keep still, and to talk none. The nourishment must be liquids.

I attended, some time ago, a very bad fracture of the jaw, which
occurred in a female, in consequence of a blow from a ruffian, and
which did remarkably well by this treatment.


SECTION IV.

Fracture of the Clavicle, or Collar Bone.

The clavicle is perhaps as often broken as any bone of the body.
Its exposed situation at the upper part of the trunk, its long slender
shape, and its being covered only by the common integuments, expose
it to frequent accidents.

The fracture commonly occurs near the middle of the bone, as it is
here most prominent ; it is also occasionally broken near the sternal
and humeral extremities. When fractured by the falling upon it of
a heavy body, the nerves of the arm become paralyzed by the contu-
sion. In general, the fragments are displaced, unless it is broken
near the shoulder, in which case its firm connexion by ligaments with
the scapula prevent the displacement. The external fragment, or
that nearest the shoulder, is drawn downwards by the weight of the
arm, and the action of those fibres of the deltoid muscle, which are
inserted into it, and also by the pectoralis major, which, when it is
depressed, draws it forwards or inwards towards the sternum, so that
the sternal portion is always found riding over the humeral ; the arm
of the affected side falls upon the breast, and the patient is unable to
rotate the humerus, so that it is impossible for him to raise his hand
upon his head. He leans to the fractured side ; and the altitude is so
remarkable, that the celebrated Desault, it is said, was never deceived
in deciding, from this circumstance alone, the existence of the fracture.


Fractures. 1° 5

Crepitation, or a grating sensation, may easily be produced by mov-
ing the arm ; and the finger passed over the clavicle readily detects the
place of fracture.

This accident in itself is not dangerous, but becomes so when ac-
companied with great contusion or laceration of the neighbouring soft
parts.

The treatment of this fracture has been the source of much diffi-
culty among surgeons ; a vast variety of machinery has been contrived
forkeepinglhe fragments together ; and a surgeon of great celebrity,
Mr. Pelletan, surgeon in chief to the iaotel Dieu, has renounced all
applications, and trusts to rest in a horizontal posture as the only
remedy.

Treatment.

The treatment for this accident, pursued both in Europe and Ameri.
ca, seems to me to be really useless, injurious, absurd, and even
ridiculous. The very appearance of a person who has been bandaged
up, according to the popular practice, is sufficient to convince any
reasonable person that it must be productive of bad consequences.
The poor patient is obliged to submit to be enveloped in so much
bandage, and that of such a tight and oppressive nature, that it is worse
to him than the injury. The objections to it must certainly be apparent
to every one. When applied in the most skilful manner, it is inade-
quate to fulfil the necessary indications. Its complexity, its liability
to be deranged, and the pressure it makes upon the breast and other
parts, impeding respiration, &c, are exceedingly objectionable. In-
deed, it is much better to do nothing at all with this fracture, than to
apply the ordinary dressings.

The treatment of it is exceedingly simple and easy. First, make a
cushion of hair, woollen or cotton, long enough to extend from the axil-
la, or the arm-pit, nearly to the elbow ; about three inches thick, and of
a suitable width. A narrow bandage which may be folded and stuffed
with cotton to prevent irritation, must be attached or fastened to the
corners of the base, which are placed upwards. They must cross the
back and breast, and over the shoulder of the opposite arm ; they are
to be tied on the back, or in front, and it may be further secured, and
kept under the axilla by additional strips of linen passed over the
acromion process and tied, and if necessary others maybe tied around
the arm and fastened to the cushion. In applying this cushion or
compress, or dressing this fracture, there is no necessity for using
much force, extension, or thrusting the shoulder backwards. It is
sufficient gently to elevate the upper arm and shoulder, then place
underneath and as far up into the axilla, or arm-pit, the cushion ;
after which let it be secured as directed above. This being done,
spread a piece of the sticking salve, or plaster, on a stiff piece of
leather, and let it be applied directly over the fracture. This has a
considerable tendency to prevent any displacement of the bones.
After it has been thus dressed, let a silk handkerchief be placed around
the neck, the arm be placed in it, and kept across the abdomen, and
iu this condition worn until the bone is united ; in every other respect
to be treated the same as other fractures. The patient should keep


106 Fractures.

very quiet. This course of treatment will be found invariably suc-
cessful, without that inconvenience and torture which accompanies the
common practice.


section v.
Fractures of the Sternum.

The sternum, or breast bone, is not frequently broken, and the
reason of this fact is imputed to the position of this bone, resting, as
it were, upon the cartilages of the ribs, and also in some measure to
spongy texture. When the accident does occur, it is from the direct
application of external violence to the injured part; and hence the
fracture is always accompanied with great contusion, or even a wound
of the integuments, and more or less injury of the chest. As Boyer
remarks, the sternum, in consequence of the elasticity of the cartila-
ges of the ribs, may be readily propelled backwards by pressure in
this direction ; and the result is an actual change in the form, and a
real diminution of the chest. Now, since this cavity is always accu-
rately filled by its contents, these alterations cannot happen in a con-
siderable and sudden manner, without a risk of the thoracic viscera be-
ing contused, and even ruptured. Thus, when the sternum has been
fractured by violent blows on the chest, the heart and lungs have been
found severely contused, and sometimes lacerated ; and there will
always be greater danger of such mischief, when the fracture is at-
tended with depression of one or more of the fragments. In some
cases, a large quantity of blood is effused in the cellular membrane
of the anterior mediastinum ; and, in others, the accident is followed
by inflammation and suppuration in the same situation, and necrosis
of the broken part of the bone. Since the lungs are also liable to be
ruptured by the same force which causes the fracture, or wounded by
the depressed pieces of bone, emphysema, or collection of matter,
may become another complication, as we see exemplified in a case
related by Flajani. — (Collezione d' Osservaz, fyc. di Chir. t.iii. p. 214,
8vo. Roma, 1802.)

A fracture of the sternum is rendered obvious by the inequalities
perceptible when the surface of the bone is examined with the fin-
gers ; by a depression or elevation of the broken pieces ; a crepitus,
and an unusual moveableness of the injured part in respiration. Jn
many cases, the fracture may be seen, the soft parts being torn or
otherwise wounded. The breathing is difficult, and mostly accom-
panied with cough, spitting of blood, palpitations, and inability to lie
on the back. According to the observations of Petit and Baldinger,
several of these latter symptoms may continue, with less intensity,
along while after the fracture is cured. — (Leveille, Nouvelle Doctrine
Chir. t. ii. p. 243.)

Fractures of the sternum, when mere solutions of continuity, only
require common treatment, viz. a piece of plaster to the situation of


Fractures.


10?


the injury, a roller round the chest, quietude, and alow regimen, with
a view of preventing what may be considered as the most dangerous
consequence, inflammation of the parts within the chest.


SECTION VI.

Fractures of the Ribs.

These generally happen near the greatest convexity of the bones,
several of which are often broken together. The first rib, being pro-
tected by the clavicle, and the lower ribs, being very flexible, are less
liable to be fractured than the middle ones.

When the spicula of a fractured rib is beaten inwards, it may lace-
rate the pleura, wound the lungs, and cause the dangerous train of
symptoms.

A pointed extremity of the rib, projecting inwards, may also cause
an extravasation of blood ; or by its irritation produce inflammation
in the chest. A fracture which is not at all displaced is very difficult
to detect, particularly in fat subjects ; and, no doubt, is very frequent-
ly never discovered. The surgeon should place his hand on the
part where the patient seems to experience a pricking pain in the
motions of respiration, or where the violence has been applied. The
patient should then be requested to cough, in which action the ribs
must necessarily undergo a sudden motion, by which a crepitus will
often be rendered perceptible. All the best practitioners, however,
are in the habit of adopting the same treatment, when there is rea-
son to suspect a rib to be fractured, as if this were actually known to
be the case by the occurrence of a crepitus, or the projection of one
end of the fracture ; which, indeed, in the instances which are dis-
placed, makes the nature of the accident sufficiently plain.

A broken rib cannot be displaced either in the direction of the di*
ameter of the bone, or in that of its length. The ribs, being fixed
posteriorly to the spine, and anteriorly to the sternum, cannot become
shortened. Nor can one of the broken pieces become higher or low-
er than the other, because the same muscles are attached to both
fragments, and keep them at an equal distance from the neighbouring
ribs. The only possible displacement is either outwards or inwards.

Simple fractures of the ribs, free from urgent symptoms, require
very simple treatment. The grand object is to keep the broken bones
as motionless as possible. For this purpose, after a piece of plaster
has been applied to the side, and over it proper compresses, a broad
linen roller is to be firmly put round the chest, so as to impede the
motion of the ribs, and compel the patient to perform respiration chief-
ly by the descent and elevation of the diaphragm. A scapulary will
prevent the bandage from slipping downwards. When the fractured
part is depressed inwards, the compresses should be placed on the
anterior and posterior part of the bone. As u roller is apt to become
slack, many surgeons, with good reason, prefer a piece of strong
linen, large enough to surround the chest, and laced so as to compress
the ribs in the due degree. — (Bayer.)
Vol. II. O


108 Fractures.

SECTION VII.

Fractures of the Thigh.

A fracture of the thigh bone, or os femoris, is liable to take place*
at every point, from its condyles to its very head ; but it is at the
middle third of this extent, that fractures mostly occur. The frac
ture is sometimes transverse, but more frequently oblique. Accord-
ing to the common method, the latter direction of the injury makes a
serious difference in the difficulty of curing the case without future
deformity or lameness. Sometimes the fracture is comminuted, the
bone being broken in more places than one ; and sometimes the case
is attended with a wound, communicating with the fracture, and ma-
king it what is termed compound. As Petit remarks, however, the
thigh-bone is less seldom broken into several pieces than other bones
more superficially situated.

A fractured thigh is attended with the following symptoms : a local
acute pain at the instant of the accident; a sudden inability to move
the limb ; a preternatural mobility of one portion of the bone ; some-
times a very distinct crepitus, when the two ends of the fracture are
pressed against each other ; deformity in regard to the length, thick-
ness, and direction of the limb. The latter change, viz. the deformity,
ought to be accurately understood ; for, having a continual tendency
to recur, especially in oblique fractures, our chief trouble in the treat-
ment is to prevent it.

As now treated, almost all fractures of the thigh are attended with
deformity. When this is considered in relation to length, it appears
that, in oblique fractures, the broken limb is always shorter than the
opposite one ; a circumstance denoting that the ends of the fracture
ride over each other. We may also easily convince ourselves, by
examination, that the deformity is owing to the lower end of the frac-
ture having ascended above the upper one, which remains stationary.

Besides the action of muscles, there is another cause of displace-
ment. However firm the bed may he on which the patient is laid,
the buttocks, more prominent than the rest of the body, soon form a
depression in the bedding, and thence follows an inclination in the
plane on which the trunk lies, which, gliding from above downwards,
pushes before it the upper end of the fracture, and makes it ride over
the lower one. The muscles, irritated b} r the points of bone, increase
their contraction, and draw upwards the lower part of the bone: and
from this double motion of the two ends of the fracture in opposite
directions, their riding over each other results.

Transverse fractures are less liable to be displaced in the longitudi-
nal direction of the bone, because, when once in contact, the ends
of the fracture form a mutual resistance to each other ; the lower
end, drawn upwards by the muscles, meets with resistance from the
upper one, which, being itself inclined downwards by the weight of
the trunk, pushes the former before it, and thus both retain their
position in i elation to each other.

The deformity of a fractured thigh, in the transverse direction,
always accompanies that which is longitudinal ; but sometimes it


No. 10.


Figure 1 represents the double inclined concave plane, or splint.
Figure 2 represents the same, with a stiff joint.
Figure 8 represents the concave angular splint, for a fracture of the
humerus, or upper arm.


Fractures. 109

exists alone. This is the case, when, in a transverse fracture, the
two ends of the bone lose their contact ; one being carried outwards,
the other inwards ; or, one remaining in its place, while the other is
separated' The upper end of the fracture is not now, as in the fore-
going instance, motionless in regard to the muscular action. — [De~
sault. j But when treated according to the principles or directions we
lay down, no such deformity will exist.

Various have been the contrivances, such as very long splints, to
secure, in its original situation, the thigh-bone, in cases of fracture ;
but I have never seen any that has been, in all respects, well adapted
to the nature and state of this accident. Some are useless, others
injurious, and the best, which is probably Amesbury's, is so expen-
sive, that it is in the reach of but few. Besides, it is too complicated.
None will answer for general use, except such as are cheap, simple,
and of easy application ; and such an apparatus, combining all these
length of time to invent something which would answer the purpose,
I finally succeeded in making one, which I have found, by expe-
rience, to be supcriorto any other which I have ever seen, the figure of
which is here annexed ; and when we reflect upon the peculiar or
critical nature of this accident, the acknowledged deformity which
attends the ordinary treatment, I think 1 may pronounce the inven-
tion (simple as it is) very valuable. The representation given of it,
will enable a person to form a pretty correct idea of its mechanism,
and also the mode of applying it. It may be made by hollowing out
two pieces of pine or white wood, of suitable width and length, suffi-
ciently to receive the thigh and the lower extremity, or a suitable
portion of it. The upper part, as a matter of course, should be made
wider, and deeper than the lower, to suit the shape of the limb ; and
it should be made smooth, thin and rounded externally, to correspond
with the shape of the limb. It should be fastened in the middle by a
hinge. A small piece should extend from the upper to the lower
portion, and also be fastened by a hinge above, and so secured to the
lower portion, that it may be properly graduated, or slide higher or
lower at pleasure, (as represented in the plate,) in order to form any
desirable angle or obliquity. In some cases, it may be necessary
to make the upper piece larger, in order to embrace a portion of the
pelvis. It may now cither be lined with buckskin or not, this being
a matter of very little moment, except it were to fasten buckles or
3 to it, and to give it a better appearance. Or, what will answer
the purpose as well, and which I have always used, is one made in
the same manner, except there is a stiff joint, or a joint that admits
of no motion. After the two pieces are excavated, or hollowed out,
and made very light, they may be both nailed and glued together.
Such an angle, however, must be formed, as will keep the limb, when
placed in it, considerably flexed or bent. This may be made, in
of emergency, in half an hour; but it is always best to keep
one or more on hand, or ready made. A crooked limb of a tree is
an excellent article for making this apparatus in the most simple,
cheap and secure manner ; or one may be made of tin, or binder's
pasteboard, and which, on some accounts, may be preferred by many.


110 Fractures.

While the principle of the apparatus is kept in view, it is of little con-
sequence of what material it is made, or what the peculiar construc-
tion maybe, provided the right indication be fulfilled.

JMode of Application.

Having ascertained that the femur, or thigh-bone, is fractured in any
part of it, no matter whether transversely or obliquely, it must be reduced
the same as a simple fracture, by a little extension and counter-exten-
sion ; and sometimes none at all is necessary. Let a bandage or
roller be passed around, beginning just above the knee, and continuing
it upwards to the groin; or, in place of this roller, the other bandage
mentioned must be applied, particularly in a compound fracture ; after
which, let a splint, properly covered with linen or muslin, be placed on
the anterior part of the thigh, the length of the bandage, and let
one also be placed a little below, on each side of it, leaving suffi-
cient room for the apparatus. Then let the roller (if this be used)
be continued over the splints, the same as in other fractures ; after-
wards, let the whole leg be carefully placed in this apparatus. Narrow
strips are next to be tied around the whole, above and below the knee,
in order properly to secure it. An easy bed is now formed for the
limb, and such is the convenience and adaptation of the contrivance
to the leg, that the patient almost forgets that he has met with the
accident. He can change his position, and the position of the leg,
without the least danger of displacing the broken bones. He can be
removed to any place, if necessary, without injury or inconvenience.
He can sit up in the bed, or on a chair, take medicine, or safely sub-
mit to considerable motion. The limb reposes in its concavity with
perfect ease and perfect support ; and I have found this fracture appa-
ratus to be remarkably successful in every instance. The bones
speedily unite, there is no deformity attending the accident, and I am
persuaded that no one who has ever applied it once can fail of recom-
mending it, or entertaining a high opinion of its utility. Refrigerant
or cooling applications can be applied the same as in other fractures.
It may also be successfully applied in compound fractures, due care
being taken to leave an opening over the wound.

After the apparatus has been applied, the knee should be turned a
little outwards, and should rest upon a pillow ; which posture, I find,
is the most easy and natural. I could here relate cases of its suc-
cessful application in this species of fracture, but the limits of this
work will not permit; and I must therefore leave it for those who are
disposed to make trial of it, which is the best method of testing its
merits.


SECTION VIII.

Fracture of tlie Femur, or Thigh-bone, within the Capsular Ligament.

As this is a subject which has of late years excited considerable
discussion, the reader cannot be too particular in noticing, that three
distinct kinds of fracture, very different in their nature, treatment


2 •—


r«


to


Fractures.


Ill


and result, have been generally confounded together, under the name
of "fractures of the n<.ck of the thigh-bone ;" for much of the dispute
that has prevailed, whether these fractures will unite like those of
other bones, seems to have proceeded from the three species of frac-
ture not having been properly discriminated. Two of the cases unite
by means of callus, like other fractures ; but the other, as it usually
occurs, is conceived by some surgeons not to admit of a similar mode
of union ; or, at all events, they declare that the fact has not yet been
demonstrated. Sir Astley Cooper has therefore divided these cases,
first, into fractures which happen through the neck of the bone, entirely
within the capsular ligament ; being the examples in which he thinks
a union by bone has not yet been proved ; secondly, into fractures
through the neck of the bone at its junction with the trochanter major,
which fractures are of course external to the capsular ligament ; thirdly,
into fractures through the trochanter major, beyond its junction with the
neck of the bone. — (On Dislocations, <^c, p. 114 — 116.)

Fractures of the neck of the thigh-bone are infinitely more frequent
than dislocations at the hip, and may arise from a fall, either upon
the great trochanter, the sole of the foot, or the knee. According to
Desault, the first accident produces the injury much more frequently
than the two latter. Of thirty cases which were seen by Desault,
four-and-twenty arose from falls on the side. All those inserted by
Sabatier, in his interesting Memoir, were the result of a similar acci-
dent. These authors, it is to be remarked, are not speaking particu-
larly of the fracture within the capsular ligament ; and hence, perhaps,
the reason of their sentiments differing from those of Sir Astley
Cooper, who observes, that in London the fracture within the capsule
is most commonly produced by a person slipping off" the edge of the
foot-pavement. According to this surgeon, a fracture of the neck
of the thigh-bone, within the capsular ligament, seldom happens but
at an advanced period of life ; and the reason of the facility with
stitial absorption which that part of the femur undergoes in indivi-
duals past a certain age, whereby it becomes shortened, and altered in
its angle with the shaft of the bone. He admits, however, that the
accident is frequently caused by a fall upon the trochanter major. —
(Surgical Essays, part 2. p. 35, 36. Also, Larrey, Journ. Complem.
t. viii. p. 98. 8vo. Paris, 1820.) Fractures of the neck of the thigh-
bone within the capsule arc more common in women than men. —
(J. Wilson, on the Skeleton, Sfc. p. 245. A. Cooper, on Dislocations,
\c. p. 122.)

The division is more frequently trnnsversc than oblique ; the neck
being sometimes, in the former case, wedged in the body of the bone,
as Desault found in several instances ; a model of one of which, in
wax, is preserved in the collection of L'Ecole de Sanfe, and the
natural specimen of which was in the possession of Bichat. A
fracture, of the neck of the thigh-bone is sometimes complicated with
one of the trochanter major.

With respect to the diagnosis of a fracture within the capsular
ligament, an acute pain is felt, a sudden inability to walk occurs, and
the patient cannot raise himself from the ground. The latter circum-


112 Fractures.

stance, however, is not invariable. In the fourth volume of the Mem.
de VAcad. de Chirurgie, a case is related, in which the patient walked
home after the accident, and even got up the next day. Desault
published a similar example. 'J "he locking of one end of the fracture
in the other may offer an explanation of this circumstance. The
dissections made by Dr. Colles have recently led to another discovery,
viz., that sometimes the solution of continuity does not extend com-
pletely through the neck of the femur. — (See Dublin Hospital Reports,
Vol. ii.) Three cases proving this fact are there adduced ; a fact
which at once explains the ability of some patients to walk directly
after the injury, and the absence of all retraction of the limb. Ac-
cording to Mr. Amesbury, incomplete oblique fractures of the neck
of the femur are easily produced in the recently dead subject. — (On
Fractures of the Upper Third of the Thigh-bone, p. 3.)

A shortening of the limb almost always takes place: the " leg
becomes from one to two inches shorter than the other ; for the con-
nexion of the trochanter major with the head of the bone, by means
of the cervix, being destroyed by the fracture, the trochanter is drawn
up by the muscles as high as the ligament will permit, and conse-
quently rests upon the edge of the acetabulum, and upon the ileum
above it." — (Sir A. Cooper, on Dislocations, c^-c. p. 117.) The action
of the muscles drawing upwards the lower end of the fracture, the
weight of the trunk in propelling downwards the pelvis and upper end
of the fracture, are the two causes of the shortening of the limb. In
general, a slight effort suffices for the restoration of the natural length
of the limb ; but the shortness recurs almost as soon as the extension
ceases. " This evidence of the nature of the accident continues,"
as Sir A. Cooper correctly remarks, " until the muscles acquire a fixed
contraction, which enables them to resist any extension which is not
of the most powerful kind." — (Surgical Essays, part 2. p. 31.) Gour-
sault and Sabatier remark, that sometimes the shortening of the mem-
ber does not lake place till a long while after the accident. In oppo-
sition to the common belief that the limb is shortened, Karon Larrey
asserts, that the member is at first actually lengthened. — (Journ.
Complrm. t. viii. p. 99.) This statement I have never seen confirmed,
and it is contradicted by daily experience. And, to prove how widely
Larrey differs from Sir A. Cooper, the following passage will suffice.
" In order to form a still more decided judgment of this accident,
(says the latter writer,) after the patient lias been examined in the
recumbent posture, let him be directed to stand by his bedside, sup-
ported by an assistant, so as to bear his weight upon the sound limb.
Immediately he does this, the surgeon observes most distinctly the
shortened state of the injured leg, the toes resting on the ground, but
the heel not reaching it, the everted foot and knee, and the diminished
prominence of the hip." — (Surgical Essays, part 2. p. 34.) The
lessened projection of the trochanter major arises from its not being
supported by the neck of the bone, as it always is in the natural state
of the parts. A swelling is observable at the upper and front part of
the thigh, always proportioned to the retraction of which it appears
to be an effect.

The projection of the great trochanter is almost entirely effaced.


Fractures. 113

Directed upwards and backwards, this eminence becomes approxi-
mated to the crista of the os ileum ; but, if pushed in the opposite
direction, it readily yields ; and, when it has arrived at its natural
level, the patient becomes capable of moving his thigh.

The knee is a little bent. Abduction of the limb always occasions
acute pain ; and it is noticed by Sir A. Cooper, that the rotation
inwards is particularly painful, because the broken extremity of the
bone then rubs against the capsular ligament. — (Vol. cit. p. 33.) If,
while the hand is placed on the great trochanter, the limb is rotated
on its axis, this bony projection may be felt revolving on itself, as on
a pivot, instead of describing, as in the natural state, the segment of
a circle, of which the neck of the femur is the radius. This symptom,
which was particularly noticed by Desault, is very manifest when the
fracture is situated at the base of the neck ; less so when at its middle ;
and it is not very perceptible when the breach is near the head of the
bone. In the rotatory motions, the lower fragment rubbing against
the upper one produces a distant crepitus, which, however, is not an
invariable symptom, as Larrey would lead one to suppose. In fact,
as Sir A. Cooper has explained, it is not discoverable while the patient
is lying upon his back with the limb shortened ; but if the leg be
drawn down, so as to bring the limbs to the same length, and rotation
be then performed, especially inwards, the crepitus is sometimes
observed, in consequence of the broken ends of the bone being thus
brought into contact. — (On Dislocations, <$'C. p. 121.)

It appears to Mr. Amesbury, that the head of the bone moves so
readily in the acetabulum, "that the least impetus, even through the
periosteum and reilected membrane, (supposing them to be entire,)
will cause it to move simultaneously with the shaft ; and if it should
do so in the same relative proportion, crepitus cannot be felt. If
crepitus be not elicited by bending the limb upon the pelvis, the
surgeon may try to produce it by causing the limb to be gently rotated,
while he endeavours to fix the head of the bone, by pressing it with
his fingers back against the acetabulum." — (On Fractures of the
Upper Third of the Thigh-bone, p. 15.)

The toes are usually turned outwards, a position which Sabatier
considers as the inevitable effect of the fracture ; though Pare and
Petit noticed that it did not constantly occur. Two cases, adduced
by these surgeons, were not credited by M. Louis ; but the experience
of Desault fully confirmed the possibility of the limb not being always
rotated outwards ; and, as Sir A. Cooper has remarked, three or four
hours generally elapse before the turning of the limb outwards is
rendered most obvious.

Treatment.

I have treated this accident successfully, in the most simple manner,
merely by applying fomentations to the hip, to reduce the inflamma-
tion, and then applying a strengthening or adhesive plaster over it, and
directing the patient to lie in a recumbent, and the most easy position;
and which is 1>\ flexing or bending the limb a little, and placing a
pillow underneath.

Some time ago, I was called, in consultation with two surgeons, to


1 14 Fractures.

an aged woman of this city, who met with this accident in a fall down
stairs. We all agreed that it was a fracture of the thigh-bone within
the capsular ligament. They both stated that the woman would never
again be able to walk ; but their opinion proved to be incorrect. The
bone gradually united, after pursuing the above treatment, and in two
or three months she was able to walk. She called upon me not long
since, and I had an opportunity of examining the leg. There was
some difference in the length of it ; and the foot, when she walked,
turned a little outwards, remaining much in the same position us it did
when she received the accident.

I saw another case of the kind treated in a different manner, which
never united ; the person always remained a cripple. I know not,
however, but the difference ought to be imputed, in this case, to some
peculiarity in the nature of the accident, rather than the kind of
treatment.

The instruments recommended ibr this kind of fracture are of very
little, if any, use. I have thought of applying to the limb, in this
accident, the double-inclined, concave plane or splint, used for fractures
of the femur, but I know not that it would be attended with any better
effect than the course advised above.

The treatment, then, for a fracture of the thigh-bone within the
capsular ligament, consists in first applying fomentations to the hip,
if there be pain, swelling and inflammation : second, in placing the
limb as near as possible in its natural or original position, and a little
bent or flexed, and placed upon a pillow : third, a recumbent position
to be continually maintained, on a hair, or any substantial mattress,
or bed : fourth, using that kind of diet that is the least calculated to
excite inflammation : fifth, the application of an adhesive or strength-
ening plaster over the whole hip, when the inflammation shall have
subsided. The patient should lie in this position until he is able to
move or use the limb a little. He may, however, be raised up occa-
sionally, to render his situation less irksome. He should begin to
use his leg very gradually, and very moderately ; and he should not
attempt to walk without crutches. As an experiment, I would recom-
mend the same apparatus that I have recommended for ordinary frac-
tures of the femur. The old lady just mentioned derived very great
benefit from the use of the tincture of capsicum, and the plaster.

I have omitted to mention that the fracture apparatus is equally suc-
cessful in oblique as in transverse fractures. The nature of it is such
that, if the parts are kept properly relaxed, by suitable applications,
there is no danger of one bone riding another. The angle or obliquity of
the apparatus produces moderate but sufficient permanent extension
to prevent this evil. Nor is there any danger of any lateral displace-
ment, as this is prevented by the concavity of the apparatus. Neither
twitching of the tendons or accidental shocks will have any untoward
effect, but the limb is kept natural and quiet, and nature is left free
to bring about the restorative or healing process.

I might also have mentioned, as regards bandages, whether a roller,
the eighteen-tailcd bandage, or the other mentioned, be used, they all
have one common mode of operating ; they press the muscles towards
the ends of the fracture, so as to make them form a kind of natural


No. 9.
Fracture of the Neck of the Thigh Bone.


Diagnosis, or Symptoms.

In a fracture of the Neck of the Thigh Bone, the leg is shorter,
knee and foot turned outwards. The fracture within the capsular
ligament generally occurs in persons considerably advanced in
years. The leg, in this case, is capable of being pulled down to the
length of the other, but is immediately drawn back by the action of
the muscles.


Fractures. 115

case, like the apparatus for the fracture, and thus they make lateral
resistance against the parts.

I know of no proper name for this contrivance, except it be called
the double inclined concave plane or splint.

Before I invented this instrument, (and I studied and reflected
much before I succeeded, as simple as it is,) I treated the fracture of
the thigh the same as any other. After reducing it, or bringing the
separated bones in contact, I applied the bandage and splints, extend-
ing them from the knee as far up as possible ; after which the leg
was flexed, turned a little outwards, and placed upon a pillow. I suc-
ceeded well in this manner. But there is less security against dis-
placement than by the method recommended, besides many other
advantages.


SECTION IX.

Fracture of the Humerus, or Upper Arm*

This bone is frequently fractured near its middle ; occasionally in
other parts. When the fracture is transverse, and about the middle of
the bone, no great derangement takes place ; the limb preserves its
length, and, unless moved, its form. In oblique fracture, the limb is
shortened by the action of the muscles, and considerable alteration
in its shape is perceived. ,

Treatment*

The patient being seated in a convenient place, in a chair, or on a
bed, the arm must be a little separated from the body, and carried
somewhat ferward ; then, by an assistant, let gradual extension and
counter-extension be made until the arm is straight, and until it can be
perceived by the pressure of the finger that the ends of the bones
are in contact, or coaptation ; then let a roller be put around it, and
two narrow and covered splints on the outside, and at a short distance
from each other. These must also be secured by the bandage.
After this has been accomplished, let the apparatus, or the angular
and concave splint, be applied inside of the arm, as represented in the
figure or plate on which is exhibited the apparatus for a fracture of
the thigh. This splint must be made somewhat similar to the one
just mentioned. It may be made of pine, or any other light wood.
It should be convex externally, and concave internally, with a stiff*
joint, forming an angle of ninety degrees or more, or such obliquity
as will enable the patient to place his hand in a sling, and keep it
directly across the abdomen.

After it has been applied, it must be secured by a narrow bandage,
or strips of linen. This simple apparatus (which I have likewise
contrived) as effectually secures the bones in their natural situations,
as the other apparatus secures the femur or thigh bone.

One may be made of binder's pasteboard, by cutting it of a proper
width and length, slitting the edges, in order to bend it or fit it to the

Vol. II. P


116 Fractures.

arm ; then wet and apply it ; when dry, it forms a perfect and secure
bed for a fractured or dislocated limb.

Since writing the above, I have been called to a fracture of the
humerus or upper arm of a child about eighteen montbs old, produced
by a fall from a chair. The bone was broken immediately above the
elbow or the condyles, and the fractured bone was nearly driven
through the integuments, and was attended with a considerable
contusion ; the fore-arm was twisted, and the bones were so widely
separated that the elbow joint had every appearance of a dislocation,
and the swelling soon became very considerable. I took a piece of
pine board, and split it into two small narrow pieces, about an inch
wide and half an inch thick. After shaving or cutting them even and
smooth, I placed the ends of each together, so as to form a right
angle, nearly as represented in the plate, (the angle not being quite so
acute,) and then fastened them together bv two small nails. After
placing it upon the opposite arm, to ascertain the proper length, the
ends were cut off, and it was then covered with muslin. This, and
one or two splints, and a very narrow roller or bandage, being pre-
pared, the child was placed in the lap of a female, when I took hold
of the fore-arm, and directed a student to grasp the upper portion of
the humerus. I now held it a few minutes, and made very slight ex-
tension ; the bones and parts gradually became approximated, which
was known by examination, comparison, &c. With the left hand I
held the limb directly over the fracture, and with the right I applied
sufficient of the bandage to cover a considerable portion of the upper
and lower arm, passing it over the elbow. Ithen applied a common
splint on the posterior part of the upper arm, extending it down to the
elbow, and at the same time I placed on a suitable sized compress,
the angular concave splint on the inner side, each wing or end ex-
tending about two thirds the length of the upper and lower bones, and
then continued to pass the bandage the whole length of it. The arm
was then placed in a sling across the abdomen or belly.

I directed the arm to be kept wet with a decoction of wormwood
and hops boiled in vinegar, and at the same time ordered it to be
covered after the application, to prevent too much evaporation of the
liquid. At the same time, an anodyne was administered.

The fracture being very bad, contrary to my usual practice, the
next day I removed the dressings and examined it, and found the
parts natural, the limb straight, bones in coaptation, swelling much di-
minished, and the dark colour of the flesh measurably gone, and every
symptom favourable.

This morning I have visited the child, and so well is it doing, that
without examination no one would suspect that the child had met with
the accident, and I am confident that not the least deformity will ever
succeed the fracture.

I have been thus particular in detailing this case, that the practi-
tioner may understand the minutiae or particulars of the mode of
treatment.


Fractures. H?


section x.
Fracture of the Fore-arm and of the Leg.

These bones are very liable to be fractured, either one bone or
both ; and they are detected the same as other fractures, by a grating
noise upon rotating the limb, depression or inequalities in the bones,
with difficulty or inability of rotation or movement.

The directions laid down under the treatment of fractures in
general, are sufficient to enable any one to treat these fractures.
Moderate extension and counter-extension must be made, until the
bones are brought in a straight line and in contact. The bandage must
then be placed around the limb, and narrow compresses, upon which
the splints must be placed ; after which, let the whole be secured by a
roller or bandage. If it he a fracture of the fore-arm, let it be placed
in a sling; if it he the leg, let it he placed upon a pillow.

Fractures of the wrist, hand and feet, are to be treated on the same
general principles.


In concluding this chapter on fractures, I shall give the remarks of
the count La Sallee.

The count La Sallee, in one of his papers addressed to the Aca-
demy des Arts, at Paris, thus expresses himself in relation to the
practice of surgery among the Indians. The paper is dated August
10, 1565.

" In my travels through the wilds of America, I visited most of the
Indian tribes which populate the regions of the west. 1 commenced
my pilgrimage at the mouth of the St. Lawrence, and ended it at the
passes of the Mississippi. A nobler race of beings I never witnessed;
and I was surprised when I found that, though unacquainted with any
of the sciences, they were masters of the art of surgery. During
my travels, I found a number of the aborigines who had been
wounded and mangled in the wars, but I never found one who was
in the least deformed by the fracture of bones, and the numerous
accidents to which Indian warfare is liable; not a single amputation.
I had noticed in most of the hospitals of Europe, that but few of the
inmates who had been confined came out without being lame and de-
formed ; and when I recollected this, I expressed my astonishment
to the chiefs of the tribes, that the invalids perfectly recovered the use
of their limbs, and did not bear any of the marks of previous disaster.
To my observations one of the chiefs replied, 'You have men to mend
limbs, who are taught by men to do so ; we obtain our knowledge
from the Great Spirit. We are perfect, for our knowledge comes
from the clouds ; yours comes from man only.' I confess that I was
thunderstruck with the reply ; but I could not but admit the justice,
accuracy and pungency of the remark."

The celebrated missionary, John Zimmerman, as early as the year
1620, made a voyage to Patagonia, under the auspices of the Moravian
church, and in one of his letters to the Synod, took an elaborate view
of that people, and from the which we make the following extract.


118 Fractures.

" I was not more surprised than delighted to find among this people
men who were practically and theoretically acquainted with surgery,
though they were unacquainted with the terms and phrases which are
employed by civilized nations. I inquired of them how they became
acquainted with the art ; their reply was, our God forms not his mortals
without intelligence, and he has wisely ordained that we should all
possess the capacity of supplying our wants. He that formed us,
endowed us with the necessary knowledge to enable us to heal our
wounds, and restore our fractured bones."


CHAPTER VI.

DISLOCATION'S.


Description.

When the bones are thrown from their natural cavities, or articular
surfaces, the accident is termed a dislocation, or luxation.

Some bones, in consequence of the structure of their joints, and
their exposure to violence, are frequently dislocated, as the shoulder ;
others again are very rarely dislocated.

Perhaps there is as much mischief and injury done in this branch
of surgery, as there is in the treatment of fractures. Sir Astley
Cooper, who wrote a learned treatise upon dislocations, has the fol-
lowing remarks. Of the "various accidents," says he, "which
happen to the body, there are few which require more prompt assist-
ance, or which more directly endanger the reputation of a surgeon,
than cases of luxation. If much time shall have elapsed before the
attempt at reduction is made, the difficulty of accomplishing it is pro-
portionably increased, and not unfrequently becomes insuperable : and
if the nature of the injury be unknown, and the luxation consequently
be left unreduced, the patient will remain a living memorial of the
surgeon's ignorance or inattention. ' « What is the matter with me V
said a patient, who came to my house, placing himself before me, and
directing my attention to his shoulder : 'Why, sir, your arm is dis-
located.' 'Do you say so! Mr. — told me it was not out.' 'How
long has it been dislocated?' 'Many weeks,' he replied. '0, then,
you had better not have any attempt at reduction made.' He said'
' Well, I will take care that Mr. — has no more bones to set, for I
will expose his ignorance in that part of the country in which I live.'
He was a man of malevolent disposition, and carried his threat into
execution, to the great injury of the surgeon ; who was also frequently
reminded of his want of skill by meeting his former patients in his
rounds, and, what was worse, by hearing the following observation
frequently repeated, ' Mr. — is a good apothecary, but he knows
nothing of surgery.'"

In a dislocation of the os femoris, or thigh-bone, which still remains
unreduced, a consultation was held upon the nature of the injury ; and,
after a long consultation, a report was made, by one of the sure-cons,
to this etrect : " Well, sir, thank Cod, we are all agreed, thai there is
no dislocation."

During my attendance on the lectures of the late Dr. Wright Post,
1 recollect hearing him relate the following circumstance. He stated,
that he was called to a case, where a number of physicians were in
attendance ; and he found, upon examination, that it was a dislocation
ol the thigh-bone, instead of some other complaint for which they were
treating him. Said he, " gentlemen, this is a dislocation of 'the os
lemons, and if you will go with me to the lecture room, or museum,
and examine the skeleton, I will convince you of it." And this was
tound to be the case, notwithstanding their ignorance of the fact.


120 Dislocations.

Whether or not this dislocation was ever reduced, I do not now
recollect. But it goes to show what little knowledge of this subject
is possessed by the generality of physicians, or surgeons, not only in
the country, but in cities. 1 was conversing, the other day, with a
learned surgeon, in this city, on the dislocation of the joint. Said he,
" it is useless to apply to any one for correct information on this sub-
ject, except a very few experienced practitioners."

A few days ago, a person was relating to me a case of fracture,
or dislocation, in which a noted physician, or surgeon, displayed
great ignorance in treating it. The patient afterwards told him, that
if he should break his leg, he could treat it much better himself.

A Mr. Hawks, editor of a paper, in one of the eastern states, has
been rendered a cripple for life, inconsequence of ignorance, or mal-
practice, on the part of his attending physicians, or surgeons. Now,
if the theoretical and practical part of this branch of suigery is, in
this state, so little understood, is it not time that a treatise be given,
that will enable practitioners to understand it, and successfully to
treat dislocations. And such a treatise, I believe, will be found in
the following pages.

A dislocation may be partial or complete, simple or compound ; in the
same sense of these terms as when they are used in reference to
fractures.

Causes.

The causes of dislocation are, first, external violence ; second,
inordinate muscular action ; third, diseased alteration of the articular
process. The displacements which proceed from the last of these
causes, are named spontaneous dislocations. For instance, the hip
disease, or the white, swelling.

Dislocations are generally occasioned by violence, and the force
is applied whilst the bone dislocated is forming an angle with its
socket. But it is necessary that the muscles should be in a great de-
gree unprepared for resistance, or the greatest force will hardly pro-
duce them ; but when they are unprepared, very slight accidents will
often produce the effect. A fall in walking will sometimes dislocate
the hip joint, when the muscles have been prepared for a different
exertion.

Symptoms.

1st. Articular Surfaces of the Bone not in contact. — In dislocations,
the articular surfaces of the bone are separated, which can be gene-
rally felt or seen, and the point where the dislocated bone is lodged
is elevated or repressed. Hence, there is a change in the length of
the limb. It is sometimes shorter, and sometimes longer.

2d. Immobility of the Limb. — In a dislocation, the patient is unable
to move the limb, little if any ; and this is the most striking characteris-
tic symptom. Sometimes there is a little motion immediately after
the accident.

Elevation or Depression of the Bone. — There is usually a promi-
nence, or depression, felt in every dislocation, which is also another
excellent mark of discrimination.

Difference in the Length of the Limb. — As before intimated, by com-
paring one limb with the other, a difference in length will be perceived.
It is sometimes shorter, sometimes longer.


Dislocations. 121

Rotation. — By rotating the dislocated limb, the head of the bone
may be readily felt in its new situation.

These are the prominent symptoms in a dislocation, and will en-
able every person of common discernment to detect the accident in
most cases.

Fracture and Dislocation. — A dislocation is sometimes accompanied
with fracture.

When a bone is both broken and dislocated, it is proper to endea-
vour to reduce the dislocation without loss of time, taking care that
the fractured part be strongly bandaged, in splints, to prevent any
injury to the muscles ; for, it' this be not done at first, it cannot be
afterwards effected without danger of reproducing the fracture.

If a compound fracture of the leg, and a dislocation of the shoulder,
happen in an individual at the same time, the reduction of the arm
should be immediately undertaken, after the fractured limb has been
secured in splints.

Treatment of Dislocations in general.

The ordinary method of reducing dislocations, is by extension and
counter extension, with different modifications. This is accomplished,
usually, in two ways : first, by manual force ; second, by compound
pulleys. Many surgeons, both in Europe and America, highly extol the
latter method ; and it is practised by many, particularly in our hospi-
tals ; but there are very serious objections to their use. They are apt
to exert too much violence ; and, besides, they hinder another part of
the operation, indispensably requisite, which is that of flexion, abduc-
tion, &c, or making use of the limb as a lever, to return the head of
the bone into its socket, or natural situation.

Dr. Reece, speaking of the effects of violence in reducing disloca-
tions, thus remarks :

" The mischiefs resulting from violence done to the structure of the
neighbouring parts, in attempts to reduce a dislocation, are often much
greater than those to which Cooper alludes in his remarks. The
following extract is taken from the last edition of the ' First Lines,'
and may be found in a note by the Philadelphia editor, vol. ii. p. 4b9.

" In the third volume of the Repertoire d'Anatomie, several cases
of long-continued luxation of the humerus, in which severe mischief
arose from the attempt to reduce the parts, are reported by M. Flau-
bert, M. D. In one case, one of the axillary nerves was torn from
the spinal marrow ; and in others, paralysis of the arm was the result.
After having succeeded completely in several previous instances,
Professor Gibson has, within a few years, met with two instances in
which the axillary artery, having formed unnatural adhesions, was
torn across, and the death of the patients consequently resulted from
the attempts at reduction.

" One of these cases is reported in the third number of the Am. Jour-
nal of the Med. Sciences. The patient, a stout, muscular, athletic
man, about six feet high, applied to Professor Gibson on account of
a luxation of the left os humeri, at the shoulder-joint, of nine weeks'
standing. He was admitted into the Alms house Infirmary, on the


122 Dislocations.

6th of March. The antiphlogistic system was pursued until the 15th,
when attempts at reduction were made, in the presence of the sur-
geons and students of the house, which was not accomplished until
after the lapse of an hour and three quarters from the commencement
of the operation.

" On the 16th there was a general swelling over the deltoid and pec-
toral muscles, with a distinct pulsation of an aneurismal character.
On the morning of the 17th, it had increased considerably, and in
consultation it was decided that the subclavian artery should be tied
without delay. This was accordingly done by Professor G."

This patient died on the tenth day after the ligature of the sub-
clavian.

Doctor Nathan R. Sinith gives the following judicious objections
to the use of pulleys :

" The propriety of employing pulleys," says he, " for the purpose of
multiplying power in the treatment of dislocations of the hip, appears
to be so tacitly and universally admitted, at the present time, that one
who contends against it can scarcely expect to obtain a favourable
hearing. But the facts which I have stated above, and the inferen-
ces which they justify, are certainly hostile to their general employ-
ment. Ifit be important, as I have endeavoured to show, that, during
the attempt, the attitude of the member should be so varied as to fa-
vour the action of those muscles which are so important in aiding
to effect the reduction, then certainly there is to be deduced from
this a strong objection to the use of any mechanism which precludes
the possibility of taking advantage of the action of the muscles.
While powerfully extending the limb with pulleys, it is obvious that
no bending movements, by which we use the bone as a lever to throw
the head into its place and call the muscles into action, can be em-
ployed ; the effort must be made in one undeviating direction. In
the use ef the pulleys, also, we are compelled to extend powerful mus-
cles, the resistance of which can be completely evaded by a little ad-
dress in the movements of the limb.

' Thus, when, in a case of dislocation on the dursum ilii, we endea-
vour to effect the reduction of the bone by extension, made by pulleys
from the knee or ankle, the extending effort which we then make is
directly resisted by the glutei muscles, the most powerful in the body.
Indeed, the reduction cannot be effected by dragging the limb direct-
ly downward in this manner, without putting them violently upon the
stretch ; because, before the head can be returned to its place by this
movement, the trochanter, where the muscles are inserted, must be
carried far outward from the pelvis at the moment that the head
mounts over the margin of the cup, and also downward as low as its
usual attitude ; and thus will the points of origin and insertion of those
muscles be widely removed, and they, of course, rendered very tense.
But, could the thigh be abducted at the moment that extension is
being made, it is apparent that the trochanter would be thrown up-
ward at the moment that the head descended, and thus would the
points of origin and insertion be approximated, and the muscles re-
laxed, while, at the same moment, the adductor muscles, which aid
the reduction, would be called powerfully into exercise. Indeed, it


Dislocations. 123

is obvious that, in effecting the reduction of this dislocation by pul»
leys, nearly all the muscles which are inserted into the thigh-bone
are violently strained, and in such a manner that they resist with
great effect.

" When we have effected, by the force of the hands, a partial ap-
proximation of the head of the bone to the socket, we find that the
business is suddenly taken out of our hands by the contraction of the
muscles, and the bone springs into its place with an audible snap, and
we feel a shock- — an impulse given to our hands by the effort of the
muscles. Now this cannot so readily occur when the pulleys are
employed, because the limb is too rigidly fixed ; — the pulleys furnish
an unyielding, inelastic lbrce, which will not yield the limb to the
action of the muscles, which, if they had command of it, would throw
the dislocated extremity home. They perhaps make spasmodic ef-
forts, during the extension, to effect this, but they are foiled by the
resistance of the pulleys ; and as their effort cannot persist long, it ac-
complishes nothing.

" The pulleys rarely succeed in the reduction of this dislocation, with-
out the employment of venesection, and other means, to effect the re-
laxation of the muscles ; and the violence employed is necessarily
such, that often alarming prostration results. It is impossible to es-
timate correctly the degree of force which we employ with the
pulleys.

" Lastly, the pulleys, exercising great power, are often employed
without effect, in cases in which, subsequently, very gentle force,
or accident, has accomplished the reduction with the greatest faci-
lity." — (Smith's Surgical Memoirs, p. 17G.)

Another great objection to the pulleys, is the liability of the bone
to be again very easily displaced, arising, probably, from the great
force which has been exerted upon the muscles. Asain, according
to the method practised, as recommended by Sir Astley Cooper, the
bandages, being placed above the knee, are very liable to slip off, and
thus frustrate the designs of the operator.

In reducing dislocations, then, the compound pulleys are to be dis-
pensed with on all occasions, as not answering the indications re-
quired, and the necessary extension and counter-extension is to be
made by manual force, or that exerted by assistants ; but it is to be
recollected that there is very little force or extension generally re-
quired in reducing a dislocation ; much less than is supposed, or is
usually practised. Indeed, it has now become questionable whether
any extension or counter-extension is at all necessary or required. A
method has been practised by many, particularly the family of Sweets,
in one of the Now-England States, for half a century or more, to
reduce dislocations without any extension whatever ; and it is done in
such a simple and easy manner, that no assistants are required.
These men have obtained or possessed this art, it appears, without
much anatomical knowledge, or even much education. They have
acquired it by a natural genius, or turn of mind, aided by extensive
practice in the most difficult and complicated cases ; and they have
succeeded when the most celebrated surgeons have abandoned cases
as hopeless, and so often, and under such a variety of circumstances,

Vol. 11. Q


124 Dislocations.

that their superior skill in reducing luxations is placed beyond all
doubt, and generally admitted. One of the Sweets was called to a
case in this city, many years ago, and succeeded in treating it suc-
cessfully, where the other phjsicians or surgeons had failed.

He succeeded, likewise, in another case, of a dislocation of the
hip, and after a professor of surgery and others had exerted great
force in vain, and abandoned it as irreducible.

In the case of a Captain Russel, where his shoulder was dislocated,
and where the man was dreadfully tortured by the violence exerted
by two physicians, who in vain attempted to reduce it, Sweet came,
and without any assistance, by a certain motion, (hereafter to be
explained,) returned the bone to its original situation in a few seconds.
Having heard so much, during my life, of the skill of Sweet, in
dislocations, I was ever anxious to come in possession of it, although
some of the faculty affected to despise the man, merely through envy,
jealousy, prejudice, or for departing from what they call " a scien
tific," or orthodox course of practice. An opportunity presentee!
itself some time ago, to obtain this knowledge. A son-in-law of Dr.
Sweet came to this city, who imparted to the students of our school
his peculiar method of treating luxations; and subsequently to this,
one of the Dr. Sweets came to this city to practise, and I accompanied
him, upon his invitation, to witness his treatment. The method pur-
sued by both of these men, Ifotfhd, accorded with each other. I shall
now disclose, or give the Sweet principle of "bone setting," and
afterwards state how far it may be successfully applied, or practiced.
1st. The operation is performed, according to thisjdan, by the prac
titioner himself, although, in some cases, an assistant is required. In
order to illustrate the principle, I will give the method of reducing a
dislocation of the hip.

Instead of it being performed by extension and counter-extension, it
is done by a compound movement. The patient must be placed upon
a table, upon a floor, or a bed, upon his back ; then the practitioner
seizes the dislocated leg, and flexes or bends it a little, taking hold
principally of the knee with one hand, and the ankle with the other.
After having very much flexed the leg upon the thigh, for the purpose
of converting the leg into a lever, he carries it a little outward ;
in the next place, the thigh is to be gradually abducted ; and, lastly,
the operator freely pushes the leg upwards upon the pelvis, by the
knee, towards the face, inclining the leg a little to the opposite side,
as represented in the annexed plate. I noticed, that Dr. Sweet, after
freely flexing the leg upon the pelvis, rotated it in different directions,
to give an opportunity for the head of the bone to pass over the brim
of the acetabulum.

This is the principle, or method, to be employed in every species of
dislocation ; and in this manner he often attempted to reduce disloca-
tions which had been displaced for eight or ten years, and even where
the joint was in a state of anchylosis, or stiff; but I never could learn
with any degree of success. The elder Sweet, I presume, never at-
tempted any thing of this kind ; some of his followers, being probably
more sanguine than their predecessor.

After learning and witnessing this practice, I began closelv to ex-


3

o


en

O


Dislocations. 125

amine its merits, and defects. I found that the principle was good,
but that it was abused, and often wrongly applied.

It certainly does appear, by numerous cases, that the greatest force
that can be applied, even by the pulleys, is not sufficient to reduce
some kinds of dislocations, unless the limb be rotated in such a man-
ner as favours the action of the muscles, and thus throw the head of
bone towards its socket. "After attempting," says Smith, "the
ordinary methods by extension, in vain, to reduce a dislocation, he,
Sweet, bent the leg upon the knee, seized the leg, and using it as
a lever, rotated the thigh a little outwards ; then he gently abducted
the thigh ; and, lastly, flexed it freely on the pelvis, by carrying the
knee towards the face of the patient."

These movements " instantly succeeded, and with little effort of
strength." But, to return to the merits of the operation, or practice.^
Having availed myself of the benefit arising from a knowledge of
the principle ; I find that, although it possesses great merits, often
of much practical importance, yet it does not, as far as my ex-
perience goes, entirely supersede the ordinary method of extension
and counter-extension. I therefore have, upon the comparative merits
of both methods, adopted neither exclusively ; but have combined, or
united the distinguishing principles of both.

1st. Let very moderate extension and counter-extension be made,
then let the Sweet principle, or the compound movement, before men-
tioned, with abduction, jiexion and rotation, be practised in connexion
with such extension, by which the improvements or advantages are
combined, and put in execution at the same time.

The first thing, then, to be attended to, in reducing dislocations, i9
the position of the patient. He must be placed, as before intimated,
in such'a manner that the body will not be subjected to change or alter-
ation ; in other words, his posture, or position, must be firm and
secure. After the patient has been properly placed, the joint or
socket from whence the bone has been thrown must be firmly and
securely fastened by the use of a towel, sheet, or suitable bandage.
This should be fastened, or firmly held by assistants. The practitioner
will now take hold of the dislocated limb, near the seat of it ; and he,
with other assistants, will make extension, while those who have
hold of the sheet, or bandage, which secures the socket or joint, will
make counter-extension ; and it is very important that this extension
and counter-extension should be made extremely slow and gradual.

Says a writer, " With respect to the means to be employed, for
reducing dislocations, it is now generally agreed amongst the most
eminent surgeons, that force should be only gradually applied. Vio-
lence is as likely to tear sound parts as to reduce those which are
luxated; it calls up all the powers of resistance to oppose the efforts
making by the surgeon. But it is his duty to produce gradually that
state of fatigue and relaxation which is sure to follow continued exten-
sion, and not attempt at once to overpower the action of the muscles."
The extension should always be first made in the same direction in
which the dislocated bone is thrown ; but in proportion as the muscles
yield, the bone is to be gradually brought back into its natural position.
Thus the head of the bone becomes disengaged from the parts among
which it has been placed, and is brought back to the articular cavity


12(5 Dislocations.

again, by being made to follow the same course which it took in esca-
ping from it.

Extension will prove quito unavailing, unless the bone, with which
the dislocated head is naturally articulated, be kept motionless by
counter-extension, or a force at least equal to the other, but made in a
contrary direction.

The mode of fixing the scapula and pelvis, in luxations of the

Much dispute has arisen respecting the part of the limb on which
extension should be made. The English surgeons apply it on a dislo-
cated limb ; the French, on the contrary, apply it to the lower part of
the limb, which is articulated with the dislocated one ; and this, I think,
for some reasons is preferable ; and one is, that the dislocation can be
reduced often without affixing any bandage to the limb. The exten-
sion then must be continued, and in a right line, or the same direction
in which the dislocated limb lies, and as extension is made, it must be
gradually brought to a straight or natural position.

The dislocated limb must often be compared with the sound one, to
ascertain whether the head of the bone has been brought to a level
with the socket; and when this is the case, or nearly so, the assistants
may slightly relax their extension, while the practitioner will freely
flex or bend the limb, in the manner as before directed ; and the
muscles will now replace the bone. The limb may be occasionally
rotated while the assistants are making the necessary extension, as a
very little change in the position of the bone will often return it to its
place Sometimes it is necessary to elevate it, that it may pass over
the brim of the socket.

The reduction of a dislocation is known by the limb recovering its
natural length, shape and direction, and being able to perform certain
motions, not possible while the bone was out of its place. The patient
experiences a great and sudden diminution of pain, and very often the
head of the bone makes a noise or snap at the moment when it turns
into the cavity of the joint.

When the bone has been reduced, the patient should be placed in
bed, if ho has not been before ; and, after a bandage has been applied,
refrigerant and astringent lotions or washes may be applied, such as
equal parts of spirits, rain-water and vinegar, to which a little fine salt
has been added.

In cases where, before the accident or after, there is great pain,
swelling or inflammation, fomentations must be applied : equal parts
of wormwood and hops, simmered in vinegar, and enclosed in a muslin
or linen bag, and placed on the parts. I have applied this with
decided benefit and success. In one case, it so far reduced the
swelling and pain, that the patient could scarcely be persuaded that
his thigh was dislocated.

Much mischief has been done by attempting to reduce old disloca-
tions ; the integuments often become lacerated or torn, and the patient
is rendered much worse. No definite time can be given, as this de-
pends upon the history of the disease, state of the joint, &c. It is
not proper to attempt to reduce some dislocations after a month ;
but some, again, have been reduced even after three months. This


Dislocations. 127

point must be determined by the judgment and experience of the
practitioner.

One of the family of Sweets attempted to reduce three cases of old
dislocations of the hip, which had arisen from the white swelling.
One, a female, about fifteen years of age, I attended, and cured ; but
a new socket had formed for the joint, which enabled her to walk
about as well as ever, although there was some prominence of the
hip, with a little lameness.

The second case was a young woman, who had received an injury
of the hip during the act of moving from a fire. She had been con-
fined to her bed for a length of time, with excessive swelling and
inflammation, which resulted in extensive suppuration. The whole
hip, in every direction from the joint, was covered with sinous ulcers,
which also affected the bones. After some length of time, I sue-
cecded in curing the disease ; but an artificial joint had previously
formed, with partial anchylosis or stiffness.

The third case was that of a boy, who had, for two or three years,
a white swelling of the hip, which had likewise thrown the head of
the femur, or thigh-bone, from its cavity. I succeeded, also, in curing
the disease, but not in reducing the dislocation, as I never entertained
an^idea of this nature. But all these patients, or their parents, having
heard of the great skill of Dr. Sweet, sent for him, and he attempted
to reduce them, but without success, as every person, the least
acquainted with surgery, must know.

I assisted him to go through the operation with one of the worst
of the cases ; and such violence did he use, that I was really afraid
that we should so far injure the female, that an indictment would be
brought against us for mal-praclice, if not for manslaughter.

1 know not, however, that Dr. Sweet held out much encouragement
to any of these patients : but it appeared to me, that the very act of
attempting to reduce a dislocation of this nature, carried the marks
of empiricism upon the very face of it. I must add, at the same
time, as before stated, that the principle in itself, properly applied, is
good ; and I cannot think that the elder Sweet ever attempted to
reduce old dislocations of this kind.


section i.

Compound Dislocations.

Compound Dislocations are those which are attended with a wound
communicating with the cavities of the injured joints. Some joints
nre much more disposed than others to compound dislocations. ' The
accident scarcely ever takes place at the hip. Sir A. Cooper has
known one instance of it at the shoulder, and he has seen one of the
knee; but the case is very frequent in the ankle, elbow and wrist —
(On Dislocations, p. 19.) In most instances, the opening in the skin
is caused by the protrusion of the bone, but sometimes by the part
having struck against a hard or an irregular bodv. Cases of this
description arc frequently attended with great danger.


128 Dislocations.

■ In the treatment of compound dislocations, after the bones and
integuments have been replaced, the slippery-elm bark poultice will
be very valuable. It will reduce the inflammation, favour suppura.
tion, prevent mortification, relieve the pain, and, in short, prevent the
necessity of amputation. In compound dislocations of the ankle,
joint, I have made an apparatus which will be found very useful. A
piece of pine, or any kind of wood, is hollowed or excavated to suit
the shape of the leg, and to this there is fixed a foot-piece. The leg,
when dressed, is placed in it, and secured by a bandage. By this
means, the foot and leg are kept perfectly secure and easy, without
any danger of motion or displacement, even though the position of
the patient be often changed by sitting up, removing, or in any other
manner.

The treatment of a compound dislocation requires the reduction to
be effected without delay, and with as little violence and disturbance
as possible. When the extremity of the bone protrudes, and is
smeared with sand or dirt, as frequently happens, from its having
touched the ground, " it should be washed with warm water, as the
least extraneous matter admitted into the joint will produce and sup.
port a suppurative process ; and the utmost care should be taken to
remove every portion of it adhering to the end of the bone. If the
bone be shattered, the finger is to be passed into -the joint, and the
detached pieces are to be removed ; but this is to be done in the
most gentle manner possible, so as not to occasion unnecessary
irritation : and, if the wound be so small as to admit the finger with
difficulty, and small, loose pieces of bone even be felt, the integu-
ments should be divided, to allow of such portions being removed
without violence." — (Sir A. Cooper, on Dislocation*, p. 254.) If any
difficulty of reduction should arise from the bone being girt by the
integuments, the opening in them should be dilated with a scalpel.
The limb is then to be placed in splints, with the necessary pads,
eighteen-tailed bandage, &c. Sir A. Cooper judiciously recom-
mends the portions of this bandage not to be sewed together, "but
passed under the leg, so that one piece may be removed when it
becomes stiff';" and, by affixing another to its end, before it is with-
drawn, the fresh piece may be applied without any disturbance of the
limb. — (Surg. Essays, part 2. p. 120.) The wound is to be freed
from any dirt, clots of blood, or other extraneous matter, and its
lips are to be accurately brought together with strips of adhesive
plaster.

The following are the instructions delivered by Sir A. Cooper on the
subject of dressings. "If the patient complain of considerable pain
in the part, in four or five days the bandage may be raised to examine
the wound ; and, if there be much inflammation, a corner of the lint
(or other dressing) should be lifted from the wound, to give vent to
any matter which may have formed; but this ought to be done with
great circumspection, as there is danger of disturbing the adhesive
process, if that be proceeding without suppuration. By this local
treatment, it will every now and then happen, that the wound will be
closed by adhesion ; but if, in a few days, it be not, and suppuration
take place, the matter should have an opportunity of escaping ; and,


Dislocations. 129

the lint being removed, simple dressings should be applied. After a
week or ton days, if there be suppuration, with much surrounding
inflammation, poultices should be applied upon the wound, leeches in
.urhood ; and upon the limb, at a distance, the evaporating
lotion should still be employed; but, as soon as the inflammation is
lessened, the poultices should be discontinued."— (Surgical Essays,
part 2. p. 121.)

SECTION II.
PARTICULAR DISLOCATIONS.

Dislocations of the Lower Jaw.
The lower jaw can only be luxated forwards, and either one or
both of its condyles may become displaced in this direction. Every
dislocation except that forwards is rendered impossible by the forma-
tion of the parts. The lower jaw cannot even be dislocated forwards,
unless the mouth, just before the occurrence of the accident, be very
much open. Whenever the chin is considerably depressed, the con-
dyles slide from behind forwards under the transverse root of the
zygomatic processes. The cartilaginous cap which envelopes the
condyles, and follows them in all their motions, still affords them an
articular cavity ; but, the depression of the bone continuing, the liga-
ments give way, the condyles glide and slip under the zygomatic
arches. Hence, a dislocation mostly happens while the patient is
laughing, gaping, &c. A blow on the jaw, when the mouth is wide
open, may easily cause the accident. The case has occasionally
arisen from the exercise of great force in drawing out teeth. Sir
Astley Cooper has known a complete luxation, that is to say, of both
condyles, produced by a boy suddenly putting an apple into his mouth
to keep it from the reach of a playfellow. — [On Dislocations, p. 389.)
Whenever the jaw has once been dislocated, the same causes more
easily reproduce the occurrence. In certain individuals the liga-
ments are so loose, and the muscles so weak, that a dislocation is
produced by any slight attempt to yawn, laugh, or (as Lamotte has
observed) to bite any substance which is rather large. — (LeveilM,
Nouvclle Doctrine Chirurgicale, t. ii. p. 54.) There have been
persons who could scarcely ever laugh heartily without their jaws
being luxated. But of all the causes of this occurrence, yawning
alone, even without the combination of any external force, is by far
the most common.

When the jaw is depressed, and its angles, to the external sides of
which the masseters are attached, are carried upwards and back-
wards, if these muscles contract, the greater part of their force tends
to bring the condyles into the zygomatic depression. — (IJoyer.)

Dislocations of the lower jaw are attended with a great deal of
pain, which Buyer imputes to the pressure produced by the condyles
on the deep seated temporal nerves, and those going to the masseters,
which ni s before the roots of the zygomatic process. The

mouth is wide open, and cannot be shut. It is more open in recent
dislocations, than in those winch have continued for some time. An
empty space i Core the ear, in the natural situation of the con.


130 Dislocations.

dyles. The coronal process forms, under the cheek bone, a promi-
nence, which may be felt through the cheek, or from within the
mouth. The cheeks and temples are flattened by the lengthening of
the temporal, masseter and buccinator muscles. The saliva flows in
large quantities from the mouth, the secretion of which fluid is greatly
increased by the irritation of the accident. The arch, formed by the
teeth of the lower jaw, is situated more forward than that formed by
the teeth of the upper jaw. During the first five days after the acci-
dent, the patient can neither speak nor swallow. — (Boyer.) When
only one condyle is dislocated, the mouth is distorted, and turned to-
wards the opposite side, while the fellow-teeth of the jaws do not cor-
respond. However, Mr. Hey asserts, that frequently the position of
the chin is not perceptibly altered. — (Practical Observations, p. 322.)
The mouth cannot be shut ; but it is not so widely open as in the
complete luxation. — (Sir A. Cooper, on Dislocations, p. 392.)

When a dislocated jaw has remained unreduced for several days
or weeks, the symptoms are not so well marked. In such instances,
the chin becomes gradually approximated to the upper jaw ; the pa-
tient recovers, by degrees, the faculty of speaking and swallowing 5
but he stammers, and the saliva dribbles from his mouth. The suf-
ferings induced by a dislocated jaw, it is said, may even prove fatal,
if the case continue unreclified ; but we are not to believe Hippo-
crates, when he positively declares the accident mortal if not reduced
before the tenth day. Indeed, Sir Astley Cooper, in noticing the se-
verity of the pain, assures us, that he has never seen any dangerous
effect produced ; on the contrary, that, in time, the jaw becomes more
closed, and a considerable degree of its motion is restored. — (On
Dislocations, p. 389.)

Monteggi attended a man, two months after such a luxation, which
had not been understood, and Fabricius ab Aquapendente assures us,
that he had never seen the prognostic of Hippocrates verified, though
he had had many patients of this sort under his care. — (Lewille,Nou-
velle Doctrine, Chirurgicale, t. ii. p. 58.)

Mode of Reduction.

Dislocations of the lower jaw may be reduced in the following
manner : the practitioner is first to wrap some linen around his thumbs,
to keep them from being hurt by the patient's teeth, and then intro-
duce them into the mouth, as far as possible, along the grinding teeth.
At the same time, he is to place his fingers under the chin and base of
the jaw, and while he depresses the molarcs with his thumbs, he raises
the chin with his fingers, b) r which means the condyles become disen-
gaged from their situation ; at which instant the muscles draw those
parts so rapidly back info the articular cavities again, that the sur-
geon's thumbs might sometimes be hurt, did he not immediately move
them outwards between the cheek and the jaw.

The reduction being accomplished, a fresh displacement is to be
prevented by applying a bandage, as recommended for the fractured
jaw. For a few days the patient should avoid such food as requires
much mastication.


Dislocations. 181

The ancients used to place between the grinding teeth two pieces
of stick, and while they used them as levers to depress the back part
of the bone, they raised the chin by means of a bandage. The late
Mr. Fox, the dentist, had a patient whose jaw was dislocated on both
sides in the extraction of a tooth : the reduction was first effected on
one side by placing a piece of wood, a foot long, upon the grinders,
and then raising the part of it which was held in the hand. Mr. Fox
next reduced the other condyle in the same manner. Sir Astley
Cooper, in reducing a complete luxation of the lower jaw, prefers
putting the patient in the recumbent posture, introducing two corks
behind the molar teeth, and then elevating the chin, and which is
probably the easiest and best method. — (0?i Dislocations, p. 391.)
When only one condyle is dislocated, whatever method of reduction
be followed, it need only be applied to the side affected.


SECTION III.

Dislocation of the Shoulder, or Humerus.

The os humeri is liable to be thrown from the glenoid cavity of the
scapula in four directions : three of these luxations are complete ;
the other is only partial. The first is downwards and inwards, the dis-
location into the axilla, as it is usually called ; in which case the head
of the bone rests upon the inner side of the inferior costa of the sca-
pula. The second is forwards under the pectoral muscle, the head of
the bone being placed below the middle of the clavicle, and on the
sternal side of the coracoid process. The third is the dislocation
backwards, in which the head of the bone can be plainly felt and
seen, as a protuberance at the back and outer part of the inferior
costa of the scapula, upon the dorsum of this bone. The fourth,
which is only partial, is when the front of the capsular ligament is
torn, and the head of the bone rests against the outer side of tho
coracoid process. " Of the dislocation in the axilla (says Sir Astley
Cooper) I have seen a multitude of instances ; of that forwards on
the inner side of the coracoid process, several ; although it is much
less frequent than that in the axilla ; of the dislocation backwards, J
have seen only two instances, during the practice of my profession for
thirty-eight years." — (On Dislocations, 6fc. p. 416.)

Symptoms.

In general, the diagnosis of dislocations of the humerus is attended
with no difficulties.

Whatever may be the mode and situation of the dislocation, there
always exists, as Hippocrates has remarked, a manifest depression
under the acromion, which forms a more evident projection than in
the natural state. Almost all the motions of the arm are painful ;
some cannot be performed in any degree ; and they are all very li-
mited. The arm cannot move without the shoulder moving also, be-
cause, the articulation being no longer able to execute its functions,
both it and the shoulder form, as it were, one bod v. When the limb

Vol. II. R


132 Dislocations.

is moved, a slight crepitus may sometimes be felt, probably in conse-
quence of tlie synovia having escaped through the laceration of the
capsule. — (A. Cooper on Dislocations, p. 418.)

To these symptoms, generally characteristic of every sort of dislo-
cation of the humerus, are to be added such as are peculiar to each
particular case. When the luxation is downwards, the arm is a little
longer than in the natural state ; the natural roundness of the shoulder
is lost in consequence of the deltoid muscle being drawn down with
the head of the bone ; and the patient cannot use the arm. The
elbow is more or less removed from the axis of the body by the ac-
tion of the deltoid ; the long head of the biceps and supraspinal
muscle being also stretched, and tending to draw the bone outwards.
The pain which arises from this position compels the patient to lean
towards the dislocated limb, to keep the fore-arm half bent, and the
elbow supported on his hip.

With the general symptoms of dislocations of the humerus, a luxa-
tion inward has the following. The elbow, separated from the axis
of the body, is inclined a little backward. The humerus seems to be
directed towards the middle of the clavicle. Motion backwards is not
very painful, but that forwards is infinitely so. A manifest promi-
nence under the great pectoral muscle. The arm is said, by Desault,
to be a very little longer than in the natural state : by Sir Astley Coop-
435.^ and the posture is the same as in the foregoing case.

Were a dislocation outwards to present itself, it would be particu-
larly characterized by a hard tumour under the spine of the scapula ;
by the direction of the elbow forwards, and by the somewhat in-
creased' length of the arm. The motion of the arm would be im-
paired, but not in so great a degree as in the foregoing cases. In
one example, the arm could be moved considerably either upwards
or downwards ; but motion forwards or backwards was very limited.
And it would seem that this dislocation may be attended with the pe-
culiarity of the arm lying close to the side.

Reduction.

We may refer to two general classes the infinitely various number
of means proposed for the reduction of a dislocated humerus. The
first are designed to push back, by some kind of mechanical force,
the head of the bone into the cavity from which it is displaced, either
with or without making previous extension. The others are merely
intended to disengage the head of the bone from the place which it
accidentally occupies, leaving it to be put into its natural situation by
the action of the muscles.

By the first means> art effects every thing ; by the second, it limits
its interference to the suitable direction of the powers of nature. In
the first method, the force externally applied always operates on the
bone in the diagonal of two powers, which resist each other at a
more or less acute angle ; in the last, the power is only in one di-
rection.

All the means intended to operate in the first way, act nearly in


Dislocations. ^3

the following manner. Something placed under the axilla serves as
a fulcrum, on which the arm is moved as a lever, the resistance being
produced by the dislocated head of the humerus, while the power is
applied either to the lower part of this bone, or the wrist. The con-
dyles of the humerus being pushed downwards and inwards, the head
of the bone is necessarily moved in the opposite direction, towards
the glenoid cavity, into which it slips with more or less facility.

This dislocation is very easily reduced. A towel, doubled or fold-
ed several times, should be placed under the arm-pit, or in the axilla,
on a thick linen or muslin compress ; the two ends of which ascend
obliquely before and behind the chest, and meet each other at the
sound, or opposite shoulder, and are held there by an assistant, in
order to secure the trunk or shoulder, and make the necessary coun-
ter-cxtension. The practitioner will now take hold of the arm, and
gradually extend it in the direction in which it has been dislocated.
With the right hand seize the elbow of the dislocated arm, keep it
bent, and gently move it from the body. With the left hand crowd a
large ball of yarn as far under the arm-pit as possible ; then use the
arm as a lever, the ball acting as a fulcrum over which the head of
the bone is guided into its socket.

There have been various other means recommended, to reduce
this species of dislocation, but few, if any, are worth insertion.

Reduction by means of the surgeon's heel in the patient's axilla is
a well known method, which is commended by Sir Astley Cooper
as the best in three fourths of recent dislocations. The patient (he
observes) should be placed in the recumbent posture, upon a table
or sofa, and near its edge. " The surgeon then binds a wetted roll-
er round the arm, immediately above the elbow, upon which he ties a
handkerchief. Then, with one foot resting upon the floor, he sepa-
rates the patient's elbow from his side, and places the heel of his
other foot in the axilla, or arm-pit." The arm is then steadily drawn
with the handkerchief for three or four minutes, at the end of which
the bone, in common cases, is easily replaced. If more force be re-
quired, a long towel can be used, with which several persons may
pull. Sir Astley Cooper generally bends the fore-arm nearly to a
right angle with the os humeri, because this position relaxes the bi-
ceps, and lessens its resistance : in many cases, however, he makes
the extension at the wrist ; a plan in which he finds more force re-
quisite, but the bandage is less apt to slip.

After the reduction, a strengthening plaster should be applied on
the shoulder, and the arm worn in a sling, and very great care used
to prevent its being again displaced.


SECTION IV.


Dislocation of the Fore-arm from the Humerus.

Notwithstanding the extent and strength of the articulation of the
radius and ulna, or the elbow joint, it sometimes becomes dislo-


134 Dislocations.

cated ; most generally backwards ; sometimes, laterally but very
rarely forwards. This accident always takes place from a fall on the
hand.

The fore-arm is in a state of half flexion, and every attempt to ex-
tend it produces acute pain. The situation of the olecranon, with
respect to the condyles of the humerus, is changed. The olecranon,
which, in the natural state, is placed on a level with the external con-
dyle, which is itself situated lower than the internal, is even higher
than the latter. Posteriorly a considerable projection is formed by
the ulna and radius. On each side of the olecranon, a hollow ap-
pears. A considerable hard swelling is felt on the fore part of the
joint, arising from the projection of the lower end of the humerus.
The hand and fore-arm are supine, and the power of bending the
joint is in a great measure lost. — (Sir Astley Cooper on Dislocations,
p. 468.)

Reduction.

The patient being seated, an assistant is to take hold of the middle
of the humerus, and make counter-extension, while another assistant
makes extension at the wrist. The practitioner, seated on the out-
side, grasps the elbow with his two hands, by applying the fore-fin-
ger of each to the anterior part of the humerus, and the thumbs to
the posterior, with which he presses on the olecranon, in a direction
downwards and forwards. This method will generally be successful.
If the strength of the patient, or the long continuance of the luxation,
render it necessary to employ a greater force, extension is to be made
with a towel applied on the wrist, and a cushion is to to be placed in
the axilla, and the arm and trunk fixed as is done in cases of luxation
of the humerus.

In Sir Astley Cooper's method, the patient sits in a chair. The
surgeon places his knee on the inner side of the elbow joint, in the
bend of the arm, and, taking hold of the patient's wrist, bends the arm.
At the same time he presses on the radius and ulna with his knee, so
as to separate them from the os humeri. Thus, the coronoid process
is pushed out of the posterior fossa of the humerus ; and while the
pressure is kept up with the knee, the arm is to be forcibly but slowly
bent, and the reduction is soon effected. According to the same au-
thority, the bones may also be reduced by bending the arm over a
bedpost, or by bending it while it is engaged in the opening of the
back of the elbow-chair in which the patient sits. — (On Dislocations,
p. 469.)

After this dislocation has been reduced, a handage should be put
round the elbow, and wet with a cooling wash; and then it should be
placed in the angular concave splint, placed in a sling, and worn
across the abdomen.

At the end of seven or eight days, when the inflammation has sub-
sided, the articulation is to be gently moved, and the motion is to be
increased every day, in order to prevent an anchylosis, to which
there is a great tendency.


Dislocations.


135


SECTION V.

Dislocation of the lower end of the Radius.

There are two kinds of dislocations of the radius ; the one forward,
the other backward. The first is very frequent ; the second is much
less so.

by Desault, the symptoms are, constant pronation of the fore-arm; an
inability to perform supination, and great pain on its being attempted ;
an unusual projection at the back of the joint, in consequence of the
protrusion of the little head of the ulna through the capsule ; the po-
sition of the radius is more forward than natural ; constant adduction
of the thumb, which is almost always extended ; a half bent state of
the fore-arm, and very often of the fingers, which posture cannot be
changed without considerable pain. The outer side of the hand is
twisted backwards, and the inner forwards. The protuberance made
on the fore part of the wrist, by the head of the radius, is very evi-
dent ; and, as Sir Astlcy Cooper observes, the styloid process of the
radius is no longer situated opposite to the os trapezium. This case,
he says, usually happens from a fall while the hand is bent back. —
(On Dislocations, p. 503.)

Sometimes the lower head of the radius is driven through the skin,
at the inside of the wrist, between the radial artery and the mass
formed of the flexor tendons of the wrist and fingers. Cases of this
description, when well managed, generally have a favourable termi-
nation, as we sec in the case reported by M. Thomassin. — (Journ. de
Med. t. xxxix.)

A luxation of the radius backwards is characterized by symptoms
the reverse of those above mentioned. They are, a violent supination
of the limb ; inability to put it prone ; pain on making the attempt ;
a tumour in front of the fore-arm, formed by the head of the ulna ; a
projection backwards of the large head of the radius ; and adduction
of the thumb.

Reduction.

When the dislocation is forwards, an assistant is to take hold of the
elbow, and raise the arm a little from the bodv ; while another is to
support the band and fingers.

The surgeon is to take hold of the end of the fore-arm with both
his hands ; one applied to the inside, the other fo the outside, in such
a manner that the two thumbs meet each other in front of the limb
between the ulna and radius, while (he fingers arc applied to the back
ot the wrist. He is then to endeavour to separate the two bones
from each other, pushing the radius backwards and outwards, while

olcn'n" a th 8 n I 61 ' 1 J" !? V?^ Pl u CC - At thG Same time ' the assistan *
holding the hand, should try to bring it into a state of supination, and

consequently the radius, which is its support. Thus pushed, in the

d.rection contrary to that of the dislocation, by two powers, the radius


136 Dislocations.

is moved outwards, and the ulna returns into the opening of the capsule,
and into the sigmoid cavity.

cation of the lower end of the ulna backwards, reduces it by pressing
the bone forwards, and maintains the reduction with splints well
padded, and a compress of leather over the end of the ulna. — (On
Dislocations, p. 505.)

Some time ago, I ceduced a dislocation of this kind, which had ex-
isted a length of time, merely by making a little extension upon the
arm, and then very much flexing or bending it, as has been pre-
viously explained.


SECTION VI.

Dislocation of the Wrist.

The wrist often appears to be dislocated, owing to the swelling and
immobility which it suffers in consequence of external injury ; but
these symptoms, in the great majority of cases, are merely the effects
of sprains ; and real dislocation of the joint is an extremely rare oc-
currence. It may take place in two directions, forwards and back-
wards, the bones of the carpus being driven upwards, under cither
the extensors or the flexors. The causes are falls on the hand.
The reduction is effected by extending the hand, and pressing on the
dislocated bones, then bending or flexing it.


SECTION VII.

Dislocation of the Thumb.

The first, or proximal phalanx of the thumb, is occasionally dislo-
cated from its connexion with the metacarpal bone, in consequence of
falls or blows. It is usually driven upwards and backwards, where
the extremity can be felt distinctly, while that of the metacarpal bone
is not less perceptible on the palmar side.

The reduction of this apparently trivial displacement, has been
generally found very difficult, and sometimes altogether impracticable ;
the reason of which would seem to be, that the lateral ligaments of
the joint' remain more or less entire, and, being separated by the
wedge-shaped extremity of the metacarpal bone, to allow its passing
between them, afford a serious obstacle to its return. The best mode
of proceeding, is to extend the thumb with moderate force, then bend
it, and, at the same time, to exert some pressure, to push it into its
place.

The phalanges of the fingers are occasionally dislocated back-
wards, so that the displaced extremity rests on the dorsal surface of
the corresponding bone. The accident can hardly be overlooked or
mistaken, and the reduction is generally very easy, provided the force
employed be directed chiefly upon the projecting end of the phalanx,


Dislocations. 137

SECTION VIII.

Dislocation of the Thigh-bone, or Hip.

The hip-joint, notwithstanding the great strength of all the" parts
which enter into its formation, is subject to dislocation in four dif-
ferent directions.

1. Upwards and backwards on the dorsum of the ilium.

2. Backwards into tho sacro-ischiatic notch.

3. Downwards into the foramen ovale.

4. Forwards upon the pubis.

1st. Dislocation upwards on the Dorsum Hii.

This dislocation is the most frequent of those which happen to the
hip-joint, and the following are the signs by which its existence is
known.

Symptoms.

The limb on the dislocated side is from one inch and a half to two
inches and a half shorter than the other, as is well seen by comparing
the maleoli interni, arid by bending the foot at right angles with the
leg. On the dislocated side the toe rests against the tarsus of the
other foot. The knee and foot are turned inwards, and the knee is a
little advanced upon the other. When the leg is attempted to be .
separated from the other, it cannot be accomplished, for the limb is
firmly fixed in its new situation, so far as regards its motion outwards;
but the thigh can be slightly bent across the other. If so much blood
has not been effused, as to conceal the bones, the head of the thigh-
bone can be perceived during the rotation of the knee inwards, mov-
ing upon the dorsum of the ilium ; and the trochanter major advances
towards the spinous process of the ilium, so as to be felt much nearer
to it than usual. The trochanter is less prominent than that of the
opposite side, for the neck of the bone and the trochanter are resting
in the line of the surface of the dorsum ilii : upon a comparison of the
two hips, the roundness of the dislocated side has disappeared. A
practitioner, titcn, called to a severe and recent injury of the hip-joint,
looks for a difference in length, change of position inwards, dimi-
nution of motion, and decreased projection of the trochanter. The
accident with which the dislocation upwards is liable to be confounded,
is the fracture of the neck of the thigh-bone, within the capsular liga-
ment. Yet the marks of distinction are generally sufficiently strong
to prevent an error in a person commonly attentive. In a fracture of
the neck of the thigh-bone, the knee and foot are generally turned
outwards : the trochanter is drawn backwards : the limb can be
readily bent towards the abdomen, although with some pain: but, above
all, the limb which is shortened from one to two inches, by the con-
traction of the muscles, can be made of the length of the oilier by a
slight extension, and when the extension is abandoned, the leg is
again shortened. If, when extended, the limb is rotated, a ci coitus can
often be felt, which ceases when rotation is performed under u short-
ened stale of the limb. The fractured within


138 Dislocations.

the capsular ligament, rarely occurs but in advanced age ; and it is the
effect of the most trifling accidents, owing to the absorption which
this part of the bone undergoes at advanced periods of life. Frac-
tures externally to the capsular ligament occur at any age, but gene-
rally in the middle periods of life ; and these are easily distinguished
by the crepitus which attends them if the limb be rotated, and the
trochanter compressed with the hand. The position is the same as
in fractures within the ligament. The proportion of fractures of the
neck of the thigh-bone, is at least four cases to one of dislocation.
(See the plate.)

This accident happens from falls on the side, while the foot is fixed,
so that it cannot be carried outwards ; and the circumstance of having
a load on the back, promotes the dislocation by increasing the strain.
It happens most frequently in males, and is seldom met with either in
very young or in very old subjects, being in a great measure confined
to those in the vigour of life.

Mode of Reduction.

To reduce this dislocation, the patient should be placed on his oppo-
site side, upon a table or bed. A sheet, folded longitudinally, is first to
be placed over the groin, or under the perineum. One end must be
carried behind the patient, the other before ; and they must be either
held by assistants, or fastened to one of the legs, or posts, of the bed.
Thus, the pelvis, or the joint, will be secured, so as to allow the
necessary extension to be made.

Great care must be taken, during the extension, to keep the scro-
tum and testicles in men, or the pudenda in women, from being hurt
by the sheet. To prevent this, a little cotton may be placed under.
A bandage made of American muslin must now be bound firm, imme-
diately above the knee, or ankle, around the limb, from which two or
three bandages must be fastened, in order to make the necessary
extension. The practitioner will now take hold of the dislocated leg,
while his assistants will make slow and gradual extension in the line
made by the limb, when it is brought across the other thigh, a little
above the knee. As soon as the head of the bone has been brought
on a level with the acetabulum, or the socket, by the assistants, who
are making the extension, the practitioner is to carry the leg first a
little outward ; he will then flex or bend it, and carry it upwards on
the abdomen, or towards the face : at the same time, a person must
press hard upon the hip. This will throw the head of the bone into
its natural cavity, or socket, and which is generally accompanied
with a snap or jar.

The extension should always be made in a gradual and unremitting
manner ; at first gently, but afterwards more strongly ; never violent-
ly. The difficulty of reduction arises from the great power and resist-
ance of the muscles, especially the glutei and triceps, which will at
length be fatigued, so as to yield to the extending force, if care be
taken that it be maintained the necessary time, without the least inter,
mission. Sometimes, when there is difficulty in bringing the head of


Dislocations. 188

the bone over the lip of the acetabulum, Sir A. Cooper raises it by
placing his arm under it near the joint.

The disappearance of all the symptoms, and the noise made by the
head of the bone when it slips into the acetabulum, denote that the
reduction is effected. This noise, however, is not always made when
pulleys aro used. The bone is afterwards to be kept from slipping
out again, by tying the patient's thighs together, with a bandage
placed a little above the knees. The patient should be kept in bed at
least three weeks, live low, and rub the joint with the green oil, or
liniment. A strengthening plaster should be also applied over the hip.
Due time must be given for the lacerated ligaments to unite, and the
sprained parts to recover. Premature exercise may bring on irreme-
diable disease in the joint.

In general, sufficient force can be applied without applying any
bandages upon the dislocated limb, cither above the knee or ankle.
One or two persons, by taking hold of the inferior extremity of the
limb, can make force or extension quito sufficient.


On the Dislocation downwards, or in the Foramen Ovale.
Mode of llic Accident.

This accident happens when the thighs arc widely separated from
oach other. The ligamentum teres and the lower part of the capsular
ligament are torn through, and the head of the bone becomes situated
in the posterior and inner part of the thigh upon the obturator externus
muscle. The limb is in this case from two to three inches longer
than the other. The head of the bone can be felt by pressure of the
hand upon the inner and upper part of the thigh towards the perineum.
The trochanter major is less prominent than on the opposite side.
The body is bent forwards, owing to the psoas and iliacus inlernus
muscles being put upon the stretch. The thigh is considerably ad.
vancod if the body be erect ; the knee is widely separated from the
other, and cannot be brought without great difficulty near the axis of
the body to touch the other knee, owing to the extension of the glutei
and pyriformis muscles. The foot, though widely separated from the
other, is neither turned outwards nor inwards generally, although it
varies a little in this respect in different instances ; but the position of
the foot does not in this case mark the accident. It is the bent posi-
tion of the body, the separated knees, and the increased length of the
limb, which are the diagnostic symptoms. (See Plate.)

Reduction.

This species of dislocation is very easily reduced. If the accident

h.as happened recently, all that is required is to place the patient upon

his back, to separate the thighs as widely as possible, and to place a

bandage or girt upon (he pudendum, or upper part ligh, fixing

Vol. II.


140 Dislocations.

it securely to the bedpost. The practitioner then puts his hand upon
the ankle of the dislocated side, drawing it over the sound leg, and
slips it into the socket. But, in general, it may be required to fix the
pelvis, by a girt passed around it, and crossed under that which passed
around the thigh, in order more firmly to secure the joint. (See
Plate.) Care must be taken that there is not too much extension
made.


Of the Dislocation backwards, or in the Ischiatic Notch.

Nature of the Accident.

In this dislocation, the head of the thigh-bone is placed on the
pyriformis muscle, between the edge of the bone which forms the
upper part of the ischiatic notch, and the sacro-sciatic ligaments,
behind the acetabulum, and a little above the level of the middle of
that cavity.

Detection Difficult.

It is the dislocation the most difficult, both to detect and to reduce :
— to detect, because the length of the limb differs but little, and its
position is not so much changed, as regards the knee and foot as in
the dislocation upwards : to reduce, because the head of the bone is
placed deep behind the acetabulum, and it therefore requires to be
lifted over its edge, as well as to be drawn towards its socket.

Signs.

The signs of this dislocation are, that the limb is about half an inch
to one inch shorter than the other, but generally not more than half
an inch ; that the trochanter major is behind its usual place, but is
still remaining nearly at right angles with the ilium, with a slight
inclination towards the acetabulum. The head of the bone is so
buried in the ischiatic notch, that it cannot be distinctly felt, except
in thin persons, and then only by rolling the thigh-bone forwards, as
far as the comparatively fixed state of the limb will allow. The knee
and the foot are turned inwards, but not nearly so much as in the
dislocation upwards, and the toe rests against the ball of the great toe
of the other foot. When the patient is standing, the toe touches the
ground ; but the heel does not quite reach it. The knee is uot so
much advanced as in the dislocation upwards, but is still brought a
little more forward than the other, and is slightly bent. The limb is
fixed, so that both flexion and rotation are in a great degree prevented.

Causes.

This dislocation is produced by force being applied when the body
is bent forward upon the thigh, or when the thigh is bent towards the
abdomen, when, if the knee be pressed inward, the head of the bone
is thrown behind the acetabulum.


No. 1.

First. Dislocation of the Femur, or Thigh Bone, on the Illiurn.


Diagnosis, or Symptoms.

1st. The limb is one, or two, or two and a half inches shorter
than the other.

2d. The toe rests upon the tarsus of the other foot ; the knee and
foot being turned inwards.

3d. The dislocated leg is nearly locked, admitting but of very
little motion, but may be flexed, or bent, and brought across the
other.

4. The head of the Thigh Bone may be felt, when motion of the
limb is made, or when rotated inwards, except the swelling bo too
^rent. Again, it is less prominent than the other.


No. 2.


action of the Thigh Boue, when dislocated, and thrown on
the Illium.


No. 3.

Second. Dislocation downwards into tho Foramen Ovale.


Diagnosis, or Symptoms.

1st. Instead of the limb beiug shorter, as in the last accident, it is
two inches longer.

2d. The head of the hone, can often he felt near the perineum.

3d. Less prominence, or more depression, than on the oj<|
side.

4th. The body is bent forwards.

5th. The knees are widely separated from each other.

6th. The foot continues pretty natural, neither turning outward*
nor inwards.


Reduction of the Thigh Bone, when dislocated, and thrown into
the Foramen Ovale.


No. 5.
Thiiid. Dislocation backwards into tbe Ischlath: Notch.


Diagnosis, or Symptoms.

1st. The limb is from half to one inch shorter.

2d. Foot and knee turned inwards, and the toe rests against the
ball of the great toe.

3d. Little or no motion of the limb.

4th. When the patient is standing, the too touches the ground, but
the heel does not quite reach it.


No. 0.


Method of reducing a dislocation of the Thigh Cone, when thrown
into the Ischiatic Notch.


No. 7.

Fourth. Dislocation of the Thigh Bone, when thrown on the
Pubes.


Diagnosis, or Symptoms.

1st. The limb is an inch shorter.

2d. The knee and foot turned outwards.

Sd. The head of the bone may be felt upon the Pubes, near
Poupart's ligament, which feels like a hard ball, and when the limb
is bent, may be felt to move. • ,;

4th. There is a prominence at the Groin.


No. S.


Reduction of the Femur, or Thigh Bone, when thrown on the
Tubes.


Dislocations. 141


Reduction.


The reduction of the dislocation in the ischiatic notch is generally
m,ore difficult than the other kinds of dislocation. A sheet or bandage
must be placed in the groin, extending forwards, behind and before,
across the hip, as directed in the other accident, and secured in like
manner ; and it may be necessary to pass a napkin or towel around
the upper part of the thigh, in order to lift the head of the bone over
the edge of the socket, or the acetabulum. Extension must be made
across the opposite thigh, in the manner as before directed ; after
which, the reduction must be effected by the compound movement
heretofore mentioned, or by abduction, flexion and rotation.


Of the Dislocation of the Pubis.

Cause.

This dislocation is more easy of detection than any other of the
thigh. It happens from a person, in walking, putting his foot into
some unexpected hollow in the ground, and his body at the moment
is bent backwards ; the head of the bone is thrown forwards upon the
os pubis. A gentleman, who had met with this dislocation in his own
person, told me that it happened whilst he was walking across a paved
yard in the dark, and he did not know that one of the stones had been
taken up ; his foot suddenly sunk into the hollow, and he fell back-
wards ; and when his limb was examined, the head of the thigh-bone
was found upon the os pubis. — (Cooper.)

Symptoms.

The limb is in this case an inch shorter than the other ; the knee
and the foot are turned outwards, and cannot be rotated inwards ; but
there is a slight flexion forwards and outwards ; and, in a dislocation
which had been long unreduced, the motion at the knee backwards
and forwards was full twelve inches. But the striking criterion of this
dislocation is, that the head of the thigh-bone may be distinctly felt
upon the pubis, above the level of Poupart's ligament, to the outer
side of the femoral artery and vein. It feels as a hard ball there,
which is readily perceived to move by bending the thigh-bone.

Reduction.

In reducing this dislocation, extension and counter-extension must
be made, as recommended in other dislocations, but in a different
direction. It must be made in a line behind the axis of the body, so
as to draw the thigh-bone backwards ; and when such extension haa
been continued some time, a napkin or bandage is to be put under the
upper part of the bone, and its head lifted over the pubis and edge of
the socket. Flexion and rotation will likewise be necessary in this
species of dislocation.


142 Dislocations.


SECTION X.

Dislocation of the Knee-pan, or Patella.

The patella may be luxated outwards, or even inwards, when vio-
lently pushed in this direction. It is also liable to a displacement
upwards, in consequence of its ligament being sometimes ruptured by
the action of the extensor muscles. The luxation outwards is the
most frequent, because the bone more easily slips in this direction
ofF the outer condyle of tho femur than inwards. The bone is most
frequently thrown on the external condyle, where it produces a pro-
jection ; and this circumstance, with an incapacity of bending the
knee, is evidence of the nature of the injury. — (Surgical Essays, part
1. p. 6G.) The accident is most common in persons whoso knees
incline inwards; a circumstance that accounts for the tendency of
the patella to be drawn outwards by the action of the extensor mus-
cles. The dislocation inwards, which is much less frequently met
with, is produced either by a fall upon a projecting body, which
strikes the outer edge of the patella, or by the foot being turned in-
wards at the time of the fall.

Reduction.

Let the inferior extremity of the leg on which the knee-pan is dis-
located, rest on the practitioner's lap, in order to flex the extensors
of the leg ; when the patella or knee-pan must be pushed upwards, or
to its original situation. When reduced, let a bandage be placed
around it. I lately reduced a very bad case of this kind, in the above
manner, when other means were found unavailing.

Dislocation of the Knee.

The tibia may be luxated forwards, backwards, or to either side.
As Boyer observes, complete dislocations of the upper head of the
tibia are exceedingly rare, because the articular surface of the con-
dyles of the femur i3 so extensive that the tibia cannot be entirely re-
moved from it without a prodigious laceration of the ligaments, ten-
dons, and all the rest of the soft parts.

Reduction.

Whenever the tibia is dislocated from the femur, the accident has
generally happened either while some force was operating upon that
bone, at a period when the femur was fixed and immovable, or else
while the thigh-bone was propelled, or twisted with great violence,
while the leg itself was firmly fixed.

These accidents are all most easily reduced by making gentle ex-
tension and flexion, and pushing the head of the tibia in the proper
direction. The grand object, after the reduction, is to avert inflam-
mation of the knee, and promote the union of the torn ligaments. The
firsl demands the rigorous observance of the cooling plan— low diet,


Dislocations. 143

opening medicines, and a cooling evaporating lotion ; both require
the limb to remain perfectly motionless. As soon as the ligaments
have grown together, and the danger of inflammation is over, which
will be in about three weeks, the joint should bo gently bent and ex-
tended every day, in order to prevent stiffness.


Dislocation of the Ankle.

Though the ankle is frequently dislocated, as a consequence of frac-
ture through either malleolus, yet dislocation happens so rarely by
itself, that it is hardly necessary to mention the possibility of its oc-
currence. This dislocation can be only backwards or forwards, and
is reduced chiefly by coaptation.


In concluding this Chapter on dislocations, I have to remark, that
the practice recommended, of bleeding, with the use of antimony,
&c, are very objectionable ; there is no necessity for either, in
any case whatever, where the operation is properly conducted. Any
dislocation can be reduced without'resorting to them, or to inconvo-
nient and complex pulleys.

As regards the different luxations of the hip-joint, I have preserved,
according to custom, a discrimination both in theory and practice ;
and some may suppose, at first view, that it is very difficult to reduce
them ; but this is not the case. Without keeping in mind the nice
distinction made in the different species or variety, any person can,
with a little experience and judgment, effect a reduction without the
least difficulty. The practical rules are the same in every accident.
The practitioner has only to keep in mind the general principles of
reducing dislocations, viz., by moderate extension and counter-exten-
sion, with flexion, rotation and abduction, and he will invariably suc-
ceed, where no insuperable obstacles present.


CHAPTER VII.

ULCEUS.


Ulcers on the legs, says a writer, form a very extensive and im.
portant class of diseases. The frequency of these complaints, and
the pain and distress occasioned by them, make them often call for
the surgeon's or physician's attention. The treatment of such cases
is generally looked upon as an inferior branch of practice ; an un.
pleasant and inglorious task, where much labour must be bestowed,
and little honour gained. It is too often neglected in private and in
hospital practice, or left to be negligently performed by unskilful
hands. It ought, however, to be remembered, that more credit is due
to the surgeon who saves one limb, than to him who amputates
twenty ; that dexterity in operating is only secondary in merit to skill
in healing ; and that an extensive cicatrix, or sear, is a more honour,
able trophy, than a well healed stump, or a wooden leg. Different
opinions have been entertained respecting the best mode of managing
these troublesome diseases. Dr. Cummings, an English physician,
makes the following remarks on this subject.

" It is a lamentable fact, and much to be regretted, that the cure of
ulcers is not well understood by practitioners in general ; which is the
more astonishing, as it is extremely simple. In private practice,
there is not one medical person in ten, who knows any thing about it ;
and in the public service, if it were as well known as it ought to be,
our hospitals would not so frequently be crowded with patients of this
description ; for my own part, I have been many years in the navy,
and some in private practice, yet I never had occasion to send one to
a hospital. Cast your eyes around you, and you will discover objects
of misery in every part of the United Kingdoms, both rich and poor,
who have suffered for years ; nay, the greatest part of their lives,
after having even consulted men who have been reputed clever mem-
bers of the profession. A vulgar error has crept abroad, much
indeed to the detriment of society, that healing such sores is attended
with the most dangerous and fatal consequences, producing pains of
the stomach, dyspepsia, &c. There are medical men, who, as a
cover for their ignorance, have availed themselves of this language
of charlatanerie, when they have found their efforts to cure ulcers
unavailing.

" The fact is, that all the unpleasant symptoms so much dreaded,
talked of, and so ill understood, do really affect the patient during the
time that the ulcers are open ; and the cause of this is no mystery.
The irritation of the whole system, accruing from sores, renders the
patient so extremely susceptible, and alive to such impressions, as
would not, in circumstances of an ordinary good state of health, have
produced any visible effect. Besides, absorption must, and very often
does, take place, in ulcers that are not kept clean ; hence arises that


JTlcert. 145

swarthy, pallid, bombycinous countenance, which marks the looks of
such people ; hence, also, those stomachic complaints, and that de-
bility, the never failing result of neglected, old and ill conditioned
sores. My practice has fully and evidently demonstrated the fallacy
of the above foolish notions, and the propriety of losing no time in
healing ulcers, which occasion the evils I have just now mentioned.
I have healed ulcers of twenty years' standing, and instead of suffering
the host of evils which some of their sapient medical, and other ac-
quaintances, had predicted, they were, contrary to their gloomy ex-
pectations, restored to a state of health, which they had long been
strangers to, the comfort of which was greatly enhanced, from its not
having been expected. Such has invariably been the happy conse-
quence of every case which has been treated by me."

Description.

Very different definitions have been given of the term ulcer, by
different writers. But what in general seems to be understood by it
is, a solution of continuity in any of the softer parts of the body, dis-
charging either pus, sanies, or any other vitiated matter ; and this,
whether the complaint may have originally proceded from an internal
or an external cause.

Many writers, indeed, have confined the term to such sores as are
the consequence of some internal disorder of (he system. But in this
they have certainly erred; for even the most simple wound, not in
the least connected with any other disease, if it does not heal by what
is called the first intention, without the formation of matter, mus t,in
its progress towards cure, always end in an ulcer.

Different Species.

1. The simple purulent ulcer.

2. The simple vitiated ulcer.

3. The fungous ulcer.

4. The sinuous ulcer.

5. The callous ulcer.

In the second class of ulcers, all such sores are meant to be in-
cluded, as arc the consequence of, or that are connected with, any
disorder of the system : the different species of which are, the vene-
real, the scorbutic and scrofulous ulcers.

Causes of Ulcers in general.

The causes which, in different circumstances, mavgive occasion to
ulcers, are exceedingly various ; but in general they are found, on
examination, to arise from one or other of the following nature.

1. From such as may be termed, occasional, or exciting causes: of
which kinds are wounds in general, bruises ending in suppuration,
burns, and inflammation, from whatever cause it may have arisen,
when it terminates either in gangrene or suppuration.

2. From such as with propriety may be termed predisposing causes:
of which kind are considered, all disorders of the system in general..


146 Ulcers.

attended with determinations to, or affections of, particular parts ; such
as fevers of all kinds that terminate in what are called critical abscesses ;
also, lues venerea, scrofula and scurvy.

3. Ulcers may proceed from a combination of the two foregoing
causes. Thus, a slight scratch, or excoriation, that in a sound con-
stitution would heal without any trouble, in a habit tainted with any
of the above-mentioned disorders, will frequently produce a very dis-
agreeable and tedious ulcer.

1. Simple Purulent Ulcer.

By the simple purulent ulcer is meant, that species of sore whichis
apparently a local affection, and is attended with a very inconsiderable
degree of pain and inflammation, whilst the discharge afforded by it is
always of a mild, purulent nature, and of a proper consistence.

2. Simple Vitiated Ulcer.

The most common appearances in the matter afforded by ulcers,
when it deviates from the more natural state of purulent matter, are,

1. A thin, limpid, and sometimes greenish discharge, termed sanies.

2. A somewhat red-c©loured, thin, and generally very acrid matter,
termed ichor.

3. A more viscid, glutinous kind of matter, called sordes.

3. Fungous Ulcer.

By the term fungous is understood, such preternatural risings of the
parts, in sores, as are commonly more soft and spongy than sound,
healthy granulations ; which, though they do not in general acquire
any great degree of bulk, yet, by a very long continuance and neglect,
they do, in some instances, arrive at very considerable sizes : and
although, as wo have observed, they are generally at first lax and
soft, yet, when of long duration, they likewise, in some cases, acquire
very great degrees of hardness.

The pain attending them is not commonly considerable ; though, in
some instances, it is otherwise ; and the discharge afforded by them
varies according to the species of ulcer they happen to be connected
with.

4. Sinuous Ulcer.

By the term sinuous ulcer, is meant that species of sore commu-
nicating with one or more openings or cavities of various sizes and
dimensions, which are generally seated in the cellular membrane,
between the common teguments and muscles, or between the inter-
stices of the muscles themselves.

These different sinuses serving as reservoirs both for the matter
formed in the body of the sore, and for that which is afforded by the
sides of their own cavities, make the discharge of all such ulcers,
when the matter of the sinuses is pressed into them, appear to be
much more considerable than their extent of surface would give cause
to expect.


Ulcers. I4T


5. Callous Ulcer.

An ulcer is said to be callous, when its edges, instead of contract-
ing, and diminishing the size of the sore, keep at a stand, turn ragged,
and, at last, by acquiring a preternatural thickness, often rise consi-
derably above the level of the neighbouring parts : and, as it is gene-
rally from neglect or improper treatment that ulcers do turn callous,
the discharge afforded by them is commonly a thin vitiated matter;

It is in this species of ulcer chiefly, toO, that varicose veins occur
as a symptom, especially when the complaint is seated in the lower
extremities. This seems to be owing, not only to the difficulty the
blood, in such situations, meets with in its return to the heart ; but,
in a great measure, to the stricture occasioned by the callosities on
the course of the different veins; a circumstance which, in extensive
sores of this kind, must, no doubt, have a considerable influence.

Treatment of Ulcers in general.

The first jrreat indication in the treatment of ulcers in general, is to
subdue the inflammation (when it exists) with which they are attend-
ed. This is best accomplished by the application of our common poul-
tice. The slippery elm bark is the principal article on which we de-
pend to fulfil this indication, although much depends upon the agents
or the liquids with which it is combined. In obstinate cases, where
the simple poultice is insufficient to remove it, let the powdered bark
be stirred into a strong decoction, of the external or cortical part of
the wild indigo root, sassafras, beer, &c. (podolyria tinctoria.) The
sassafras, weak ley, or beer, to be used in succession, or alternate-
ly, as occasion may require. Another very excellent poultice to
reduce inflammation, is made by mixing the pulverized bark of rose
willow, (by some called pussy willow,) with cream, milk or butter-
milk. This is the article so universally employed by a Doctor Bone,
of New-Jersey, who has become so celebrated for the cure of ulcers.
These applications, particularly the first, must be kept upon the
ulcer until the inflammation is reduced, or nearly so. If it fail, apply
the others. When the ulcer is characterized by fetor or sloughing,
the elm bark should be mixed with yest and milk, which will soon
change the appearance of it. The next object is to excite in the
ulcer, what are termed healthy granulations, or the healing process ;
to effect which, such applications must be made as will prevent the
rising of fungus, or proud flesh, as it is termed, and, if it has already
appeared, to remove it. For this purpose, every time when the sore
is dressed, let it be washed or properly cleansed by Castile soap and
sott water, which is well incorporated or mixed together, to which a
small quantity of spirits has been added. After a little time has been
given for evaporation, let the surface of the ulcer besprinkled with
finely pulverized, or levigated powder of blood root, (sanguinaria Cet-
nadensis.) This powder is mildly stimulating, and is calculated to
keep down unhealthy granulations, and will often remove them after
they have become very troublesome. After this powder has been
applied, let the ulcer be covered with linen lint. This not only acts

Vol. II. T


148 Ulcers.

as a stimulant to the parts, but is very serviceable in absorbing the
discharge from it. In the next place, spread the black salve or plas-
ter thin on a piece of linen, and let it be placed, not only over the
sore, but a little distance mound the margin of it. Lastly, a roller,
or bandage, may be applied around the dressings, particularly in
such cases where it is admissible. Quietness and rest should now be
enjoined, as much exercise retards the cure.

This treatment, in general, will heal all ordinary ulcers, and often
those that are very inveterate ; but some of them, from various
causes, from long standing, from bad management, from a taint of
the system, assume a very indolent, obstinate, and intractable cha-
racter, and are abandoned by the faculty as incurable.

Such ulders require some variation in the treatment. In addition
to the course recommended, it will be proper to use more active
means, to excite in them a new or healthy action. Fortius purpose,
it will be necessary (if the above means do not prove effectual, after
a reasonable time) to sprinkle the ulcer every day with the vegetable
caustic. This is a peculiar preparation, different from any other
with which I am acquainted. Although it acts as a powerful stimulant
for a few minutes, changing both the appearance and discharge,
and acting as an escharotic or caustic upon fundus or unhealthy gra-
nulations ; yet, striking and unaccountable as the fact is, so far from
exciting any additional inflammation, it absolutely removes it. It
should be recollected, that the article must be kept from the air, as ex-
posure to it destroys its active properties. This will be found a power-
ful auxiliary in the cure of ulcers ; but there are some which require
even different applications to remove them ; and after using this, or
dressing them in this manner, for a number of days or weeks, should
the ulcer become stationary, apply the following plaster:

Take white-oak bark, a proper quantity, bruise or grind it; add
urine, a sufficient quantity to cover it ; let it stand two or three days,
and then boil it till it becomes of the consistence of thin molasses;
add to every five pounds of this, one pound of honey, and one pound
of gum turpentine, which has been melted and strained ; let the whole
be simmered a short time over the lire, to incorporate or mix it. Let
this be placed upon a piece of linen, and applied once a dav, in place
of the black or healing salve ; and should fungus or proud flesh ap-
pear in the ulcer, after using it a few days, add oae drachm of white
vitriol, pulverized, to every ounce of the extract. This preparation
alone has cured many very obstinate ulcers, even where they assumed
a cancerous character. Should it excite any pain, or top much in-
flammation, if may be applied during the day, and a poultice at night;
and this is applicable to the other dressings.

In certain cases, the wild indigo salve, or plaster, answers a better
purpose than any other application.

Take wild indigo, the bark from the roots, 1 bushel; boil till the
strength is out; then strain, boil and skim ; add fresh butter 10 lbs,,
beeswax 3 lbs., irmtton tallow 1 1-2 lbs. ; simmer till the water has
evaporated, or is out ; then strain and skim again. The blue flag
roots, is sometimes added. To be applied once or twice a day, th«
same as the preceding platter.


Ulcers. 14»

In treating ulcere in general, the practitioner will find it advanta-
geous to be acquainted with the effects of a great many external ap-
plications ; for very few cases will continue to heal beyond a certain
time, without some alteration in the treatment. The necessity of
changing the applications, after they have been continued for a certain
time, is strikingly illustrated by the fact, that leaving off a powerful
application, and emploj ing one which at first would have had no effect,
often does a great deal of service. When the change is made to a
medicine of powers equal to those of the previous one, the benefit
will be more lasting than in the preceding circumstance.

The following combination forms an excellent plaster in invete-
rate cases of ulcers, where other means fail :

Take extract .of blood root, inspissated juice of poke-berry, extract
of yellow dock, equal parts, mix, spread upon a piece of linen, and
apply the same as the other plasters.

There is one application which I have been in the habit of using
for many years, as the dernier resort, or as the last alternative, and
which has proved a remedy, in conjunction with the treatment first
recommended for ulcers, when all other means have failed. It is
seldom, however, necessary to resort to it ; and, being a mineral pre-
paration, although used externally, is not so desirable as vegetable
agents. I allude to the mineral caustic, one of the most powerful and
active preparations that we make use of. A few grains sprinkled
upon an ulcer, corrodes either the healthy or unhealthy parts. It is
best to commence by using a very small quantity first, about once or
twice a week, only sufficient to produce a preternatural or greater
discharge of matter from the ulcer, for this is the only rational indi-
cation in curing it. Nature makes a great effort to remove the mor-
bid, or diseased action, by establishing a drain, or issue, upon the very
part diseased, and all the physician can do, or ought to do, is to aid
her salutary efforts, by making an issue directly upon the ulcer, in
order to remove the offending cause. The healing process is exclu-
sively the business of nature ; and therefore this and other applications
should be occasionally applied, to keep up this preternatural discharge,
until the exciting cause of the disease is removed, or a healthy action
brought about.

After such discharge has been kept up a reasonable time, the ap-
plications may be discontinued, and the simple dressing used alone,
such as the black, or healing salve, and lint. This is necessary, to
give an opportunity for the healing process to take place, as an ulcer
cannot always heal, or fill up, while under the influence of corrosive
or irritating agents. The greatest caution and circumspection must
be used in applying the mineral caustic. There is no danger arising
from absorption of it into the system ; but if too great a quantity of it
is applied, it causes much pain and inflammation. It usually acts
with considerable violence for six or twelve hours, after which it sub-
sides ; and if much is used, an eschar is formed, which requires the
elm bark and yest to separate it ; but in general it is best to apply
only a few grains, or such a quantity as will not form an eschar, but
merely keep up a little greater discharge than has ordinarily been,
before any thing was applied to the sore.


150 Ulcers.

The late Dr. Ferris, a root, or botanical doctor, states, that the
shrub maple, or cavern wood, applied to ulcers, in the form of decoction,
is an infallible remedy ; but I have never used it, not having been able
to ascertain its true botanical character.

I lately saw a most inveterate ulcer cured, by a botanic physician,
of the name of Galloway, by applying a strong decoction, made of the
chestnut leaves, several times a day.

In what are termed fever sores, and which are exceedingly obsti-
nate, and are usually attended with considerable swelling, I have
fomented, or steamed the part, once or twice a week, over bitter
herbs, such as tansy, wormwood, horehound and catnip, and have occa-
sionally applied cups around the sore, and on the lcjj.

In some ulcers, which have baffled the skill of all physicians, I
have found the application of ,an ointment made to them, of the fob
lowing plant, prove a sovereign remedy :

Take sweet, or Seneca clover, bruise and simmer it, with fresh lard,
until the strength is extracted ; then strain, spread upon linen,
and apply it. One of the worst cases that I ever beheld was cured
by this simple application alone ; it seemed to exert a specific effect,
different from any other article.

As regards the frequency of dressing ulcers, this must depend on
circumstances : such as the fetor arising from them, the discharge,
&c. As a general rule, they should be dressed morning and night.
This treatment is applicable to all kinds of ulcers, except such as are
termed sinous, or where there is one or more openings, or orifices,
communicating with the ulcer to the adjacent parts.

It is necessary, in ulcers of this kind, daily to inject into the orifices
some stimulating liquid. A solution of the vegetable caustic is excel-
lent, as it destroys unhealthy granulations, without producing inflam-
mation. A drachm, or teaspoonful, of the powders may be dissolved
in a teacupful, or eight ounces, of a strong decoction of the wild
indigo, or, as a substitute, water. If this should prove insufficient
properly to cleanse and heal them, inject in a decoction made by
boiling blood root, sumac bark and the bark of bitter sweet. Soap suds
(soap and water) is also very good for this purpose, and also tincture
of gum myrrh. I have been in the habit, occasionally, of dissolving
ten grains of the mineral caustic in eight ounces of water, and inject-
ing this once a day, in order to keep thor;e sinous ulcers open. It is
sometimes necessary to introduce teuts into them, made of the ravel-
lings of linen, twisted hard, or short pieces of twine drawn through the
black salve, or beeswax ; and where they prove insufficient to keep
the orifice of the ulcer open, they may be rolled in the vegetable
caustic, and, should this prove insufficient, a few grains of the mineral
caustic.

, A vast number of applications have been recommended for the cure
of ulcers ; but I have seen very little good result from any of them,
except those which I have recommended.

Tight bandaging has been highly extolled, and is now practised by
many; but I have very little confidence in it, except as an aux-
iliary.


Ulcers. 151


General or Constitutional Treatment.

In slight, or healthy ulcers, it is not necessary to resort to much,
if any, internal medicines ; but where they are protracted, and assume
an obstinate, or inveterate character, without attention to constitutional
treatment, all local applications will seldom be sufficient. The gene-
ral secretions of the system must be attended to.

Pitrgatives, consisting of our common physic or mandrake, should
be given as often as once a week. The skin must be kept moist, and
an alterative course pursued.

Ulcers often depend upon some morbid taint of the system, and
it therefore becomes necessary to remove the cause before the effect
will cease. I have found no preparation so valuable, in correcting
an impure state of the blood, as the alterative syrup. It should be
taken regularly, and should be continued until the ulcer has healed.
The following medicine, or beer, may be taken at the same time,
with advantage : — take sassafras root, black alder, burdock root, wild
cherry tree bark, q. s.; cut or bruise' them ; add sufficient water to
make a strong decoction, sweetened with honey, or molasses ; then add
sufficient yest to ferment it. Drink freely through the day.

Regimen.

No ardent spirits must be drank, and the diet must be light and
nutritious. Too much exercise must be avoided ; the more quiet the
patient keeps, the more favourable will it prove.

This is the course of treatment which I have found to exceed any
other ; and it has proved a sovereign remedy in every species of
ulcer, without reference to the length of time it has existed, a^e or
habit, even where they have been abandoned as incurable by our
most popular surgeons, and where amputation has been proposed.

1 have deemed it unnecessary to treat the different species of ulcers
under distinct heads, as almost every kind requires a similar course.
Where any difference is required, it has been pointed out.

The bone is often affected in some description of sores, which calls
for a different course to be pursued, and which will be given under the
head of necrosis. Scrofulous, venereal and cancerous ulcers will be
treated under their respective heads.


CHAPTER VIII.

Necrosis — Cabies — {Diseased Bones.)


The bones of the body, as well as the soft parts, are liable to be
attended with inflammation, ulceration and exfoliation. They are
composed of arteries, veins, absorbent vessels, nerves, and a cellular
texture ; they are endued with vitality ; they are nourished ; they
grow, waste, are repaired, and undergo various mutations, according
to the age of the individual; and they are subject to diseases analo-
gous to those of the soft parts. To the phosphate of lime, which is
more or less abundantly distributed in their texture, they owe all their
solidity; and perhaps it is to the same earthy substance, that the
difference in their vital properties, and in their diseases, from those
of the rest of the body, is to be referred. In fact, this particular
organization and inferior vitality of the bones are generally supposed
to account for the small number, peculiar character, and generally
slow progress of their diseases.

It is customary for writers to make a distinction between necrosis
and caries ; but I can see no good reason for this distinction, as they
may, with propriety, be said to be one and the same complaint. The
appearances to be observed, depend more upon the stage of the
disease, than upon any other cause. The treatment, also, is very
similar. The following is the distinction made bv writers :

In necrosis, the bone is entirely deprived of life ; in caries, the
vital principle exists, but a morbid action is going on, whereby the
texture of the bone is altered, and rendered softer and lighter than
natural. But, though these disorders are thus far different from each
other, they frequently occur together in the same part ; and the term
seems proper only to express a difference in the stage of the
complaint.

The tibia, femur, lower jaw, clavicle, humerus, fibula, radius, and
ulna, are the bones most frequently affected with necrosis. Except-
ing the lower jaw and scapula, the process of regeneration has only
been noticed in the cylindrical bones. From twelve to eighteen
years of age id the time of life most subject to necrosis. Necrosis
of the lower jaw, however, seldom occurs before the age of thirty.

No climate, age, sex, mode of life nor condition, (says Weidmann,)
is exempt from this disorder. Childhood and puberty, however, are
the periods most liable to it. The same thing may be said of persons
who labour hard, and are much exposed to externa! injuries. Every
bone of the human body is subject to necrosis ; but those which are
superficial, and enter into the formation of the extremities, are more
frequently affected than others whose situation is deeper. Necrosis
less commonly attacks the spongy substance of the bones, because,
this being endued with a higher degree of vascularity and life, sup-


Necrosis — Caries — (Diseased Bones.) 153

pnration is most apt to occur. Necrosis, on the contrary, is oftener
seen in the compact substance, where the vital principle is less ener-
getic, and more readily extinguished. As a modern writer has re-
marked, a very slight injury will frequently occasion an extensive
exfoliation from the surface of the cylinder of a long bone; but a
musket-ball may pass through the cellular structure of an epiphysis,
or lodge in its substance, without giving rise to necrosis — suppurative
inflammation being much more likely to occur than the latter affec-
tion.— (Bell, on Diseases of the Bones, $c. p. 49.) Lastly, necrosis
may affect the long bones or the broad, the large or small, and even
those of the very least size.

Though necrosis mostly attacks the cylindrical bones, the flat ones
are not exempt from the disease. Indeed, almost every bone in the
body is subject to caries or necrosis. I scarcely recollect a bone
which I have not seen diseased, and which, I may add, I have not
successfully treated.

Causes.

The death of bones usually proceeds from inflammation ; and this
may be induced by various causes, such as cold, injuries, and espe-
cially the use of mercury, and the venereal disease.

The causes of necrosis are not essentially different from those
which produce ulcers and gangrene of the soft parts. As, however,
the vitality of the bones is weaker, we may infer, that necrosis may
be occasioned in them by causes which are less numerous and intense,
and such as would only give rise to suppuration in the soft parts.
Every thing, whether in the periosteum or the substance of the bone
itself, that tends to interrupt the nutrition of the bone, must be regard-
ed as conducive to the origin of necrosis. It is observed, however,
that when the mischief in the periosteum, medulla, or substance of the
bone, is of trivial extent, the consequence is merely an abscess. Some
of the causes of necrosis are external, while others are internal, or
constitutional. Sometimes, the life of the bone is instantaneously
destroyed by them ; but, in other instances, the bone is first stimula-
ted and enlarged, so that its death is preceded by true inflammation.

The external causes which injure the periosteum and medullary
structure, and thus produce necrosis, are wounds, contusions, pressure,
fractures, comminutions, acrid substances, caustics, and extreme de-
grees of heat or cold.

When the periosteum, in consequence of an external cause, inflames
and sloughs, or is at once deprived of its vitality, as it may be by the
action of caustic, fire, or intense cold, the vessels which conveyed
nourishment to the bone are destroyed, and the death and exfoliation
of the denuded portion of the bone are inevitable. But if the detach-
ment of the periosteum is of little extent, the patient young and
healthy, and the treatment calculated to prevent inflammation, and
preserve uninjured the vessels distributed to the bone, hopes may be
entertained, that no part of the bone will die, but that granulations
will very soon arise from its surface, being adherent to it as the
periosteum was, and that they will grow to, and heal with, the
surrounding parts.


154 Necrosis — Caries — (Diseased Bones.)


Symptoms.

The inflammation, arising from the causes which excite necrosis,
may be either acute or chronic, it is chronic when it begins and
passes through its different stages slowly, and when the mildness of
the symptoms may lead us to mistake the nature of the case. This
sort of inflammation chiefly happens in debilitated constitutions, in
which the necrosis only affects the external part of a bone, and o:i-
ginates from some chronic cause, such as scrofula, lues venerea, and
the scurvy. But when necrosis attacks the interior, and the disease
occurs in a strong, irritable, plethoric subject, inflammation is imme-
diately kindled, attended with the most acute symptoms, severe pain,
considerable fever, restlessness, delirium, &c. Chronic inflammation
is more supportable ; but its duration is longer : acute inflammation
is more afflicting ; but sooner comes to a crisis.

The part in which a necrosis is situated is affected with swelling.
What has been observed respecting the inflammation, is also apphca-
ble to this tumour, which most frequently forms gradually, but some-
times with great rapidity. In the first case, the accompanying pain
is dull and inconsiderable ; in the second, it is violent. The swelling
has not, like that of abscesses, an elevated apex. On the contrary,
hardly be distinguished.

This diffusion of the swelling is the greater in proportion as the
diseased bone is more deeply buried in soft parts : it may extend over
the whole morbid bone, or even over the whole limb.

The swelling comes on at the very beginning of the disorder, and
continues to increase until the matter which it contains finds its way
out, when the evacuation is'followed by a partial subsidence of the
tumour. The swelling is sometimes watery, especially in persons
whose constitutions have been impaired by the severity of the disease,
the violence of the sufferings, and the long and profuse discharge.

When the inflammation is acute, purulent matter of good quality
soon collects in the vicinity of the necrosis. In the contrary case,
the pus forms slowly, and is thinner and less healthy.

The abscess which accompanies a necrosis, naturally soon bursts,
when it arises from intense inflammation, and is situated near the
skin, which is itself inflamed. But when the bone is surrounded by
a great thickness of soft parts, and the inflammation is chronic, the
quantity of matter daily incieases, the cavity which it occupies be-
comes larger and larger, and considerable pressure is made by the
abscess on every side. The bones and tendons resist for a long
while the progress of the matter ; but the cellular substance yields,
and different sinuses form, which sometimes run to a vast distance
from the main collection of matter.

It was supposed, a few years ago, that in cases of necrosis, the
matter Mas invariably sanious, acrid, and fetid. But the celebrated
Wiedmann exposed the error of this opinion. He had often seen ab-
scesses and ulcers, arising from necrosis, discharge a whitish, inodo-
rous, thick pus, absolutely devoid of any bad quality whatsoever. He


Necrosis — Caries — (Diseased Bones.) 155

bad particularly seen this happen in patients whose necrosis pro-
ceeded from an external cause, or an internal one of a slight nature,
and whose health was generally good. — [De Necrosi Ossium, p. 16.)
If, says the same writer, we sometimes find in practice the suppura-
but to the weakness and bad state of the patient's health. Under the
same circumstances, common sores of the soft parts would also emit
a discharge of bad quality.

After the ulcerated openings have emitted for some time a profuse
discharge, the sinuses, if considerable, receive the appellation of fis-
tulas, on account of their edges putting on a callous appearance,
throwing out fungous granulations, and there being impediments to
healing. These impediments are caused by the dead portions of bone,
which, whether loose or adherent, act as extraneous bodies in hin-
dering the sores from healing. In some instances, also, the ulcers
will not heal, though the dead bone has come away, because they run
to a great depth, and such a quantity of pus is secreted from every
point of their surface as prevents all contact, and the adhesions which
would result from it.

The fistulas vary in number ; but they are fewer in proportion as
the disease is slighter. In an extensive necrosis, several of these
openings are seen, either near together, or separated by considerable
spaces ; and when the necrosis affects every side of the bone, the
fistulas in the integuments occur on every side of the limb.

Besides the inflammatory fever which attends the beginning of
every severe case of necrosis, which is sometimes accompanied with
exceedingly violent symptoms, and which usually abates when matter
is formed, the patient is subject to another fever, of a slow, hectic
type. This takes place in the decline of the disease, is the effect of
the long-continued profuse suppuration, gradually reduces the patient,
and at length brings him to the grave, unless the timely removal of
the bone be effected either by nature or art.

Let us next endeavour to trace the signs by which we may not only
ascertain the presence of the disease, but its modifications.

In the first place, we should make ourselves acquainted with every
thing which may have predisposed to the disorder ; as, for instance,
what accidental circumstances have occurred, and what symptoms
followed them. We should also inquire into any previous treatment
which may have been adopted ; for, as Wiedmann truly remarks, in-
judicious remedies have caused many a necrosis that would not have
occurred at all if the case had been properly treated or confided to
nature.

The kind of inflammat/jn with which the disease commences, may
afford grounds for suspecting that necrosis will happen : it is gene-
rally slow and deeply seated, passing through its stages tardily, and
the attendant symptoms are severe. The skin retains its natural
colour a long while ; but at length exhibits a reddish or livid discolora-
tion. The matter does not reach the skin till a considerable time has
elapsed, and when the abscess bursts, the inflammatory symptoms are
still slow in subsiding. When the inflammation is acute, the patient
suffers intolerable pain a long time.

Vol. II. U


X56 Necrosis — Caries — (Diseased Bones.)

There are also other symptoms of a necrosis ; viz., the swelling
which accompanies the inflammation is situated upon a bone, or rather
the bone is included in the tumour ; the swelling is at the same tune
very diffused, and the suppuration lies deeply, and can only be felt in
an obscure way.

The ulcers, beneath which a necrosis is situated, discharge a large
quantity of matter, and their edges are bent inwards. The granula-
tions are either yellowish and pale, or else of an intense red colour ;
they are also irregular, and generally not very tender, though some-
times extremely painful, and on being slightly touched they bleed.

It has been already noticed, that some years ago the discharge from
fetid, and sanious ; and such qualities of the matter were regarded as
a symptom of the disease of the bone. But, as Wiedmann has ex-
plained, it is a symptom undeserving of confidence. In necrosis, the
pus is often thick, white and inodorous ; while other ulcers, unattended
with diseased bone, sometimes discharge thin fetid matter. Wied-
mann, at the same time, docs not mean to assert, that in necrosis the
sores never emit unhealthy pus ; but he firmly believes, that such dis-
charge is not always the result of a disease of the bone. As far as
he could judge, the suppuration from ulcers situated over diseased
bones, continues white and laudable as long as the patient's general
health is good ; but that it deviates from these properties in proportion
as the health becomes impaired.

Neither is the black colour imparted to the dressings of ulcers a
circumstance which necessarily indicates the existence of necrosis ;
for it may occur when the bone is sound, and may not happen when
the bone is affected.

None of the preceding s5^mptoms convey such information as leaves
no doubt of the positive existence of necrosis. The touch is the only
thing which can give us this knowledge, when the bone is not too
deeply situated, and the sinuses not tortuous, nor obstructed with fun-
gous growths.

When the openings of the ulcers are considerable, the finger may
be introduced. If in this way the bone can be felt to be extensively
uncovered by the periosteum, the surgeon may conclude that all such
portion of the bone has perished. He may be still more certain of
the fact, when he finds the edges of the denuded bone unequal and
rough.

The examinations made directly with the finger, give the most cor-
rect and exact information of the state of the bone ; but the orifices
of the sores are sometimes so small, that the finger cannot be intro-
duced without causing great pain. A probe must then be used, for the
purpose of ascertaining the extent of the denudation of the bone ;
whether its edges are rough ; whether the dead portion is loose, and
likely to separate soon.

Sometimes the dead fragment of bone protrudes from the ulcer, or
is visible on separating its edges. When it is black, there cannot be
a doubt of its being actually dead ; but, on the other hand, when it -
whiteness is increased, the diagnosis is difficult, because, bones being


Necrosis — Caries — {Diseased Bones.) 157

naturally white, much experience is necessary to be able to judge
whether they are so in excess.

It merits attention, also, that the black colour of the bone is not
owing to the necrosis itself, but seems rather to depend upon the
fragment having been exposed to the air. In fact, dead pieces of
bone with which the air comes into contact turn black, while those
which are covered with matter retain their whiteness. The cylin-
drical portion of a humerus, which was almost totally affected with
necrosis, was universally black at the part which protruded through
the flesh ; but the rest, which lay under the integuments, was white.
{Wiedmann, de Necrosi Ossium, p. 19. et tab. 9. fig. 1.)

When the early symptoms of the disease are mild, the surgeon may
infer that it is only a superficial portion of the bone which is about to
be separated. But this judgment wiil be more certain if confirmed
by examination with the finger or probe ; or if the swelling which
occurred in the beginning has not spread beyond the affected point,
and if the pain affects only the outer part of the bone. In this sort of
case there is also great probability that the dead bone will be sepa-
rated within a moderate time.

It is also of importance to ascertain the existence of an internal
necrosis, and to learn whether it is situated in the spongy substance,
or in the internal parietes of the canal of the bone ; whether it affects
only a part, or extends to the whole body of the bone. When there
is an internal necrosis, says Wiedmann, the disease is generally more
aggravated, and of longer duration ; and in the first stage the patient
is affected with severe symptoms, intolerable pain, loss of rest, a great
deal of fever, profuse perspirations, and such disorder of the system
as may prove fatal, unless the patient be young and strong. The
hard swelling which was observable at the commencement of the dis-
ease, increases but slowly, and extends very gradually over the cir-
cumference of the limb, while the skin yet remains free from redness
and tension. If the part be somewhat roughly handled, the pain which
is fixed in the bone is not rendered more acute, as would happen were
the case an external inflammation. In this suffering condition the pa-
tient continues a good while before the formation of matter brings a
degree of relief. When the matter is formed, it spreads through the
adjacent cellular substance, among the muscles and other parts, and
the abscess generally bursts, after a considerable time, by several
openings very distant from the main collection of matter, as also re-
mote from each other, sometimes in diametrically opposite situations.
The evacuation of the matter, however, does not produce any material
subsidence of the swelling. The pus is of good quality, and issues
in large quantities from the ulcerated apertures, the quantity, however,
not being increased when pressure is made. If some of the openings
heal, others are formed ; but, in general, the edges become callous,
and they lose all disposition to heal. When the case presents the
foregoing circumstances, and the weakened limb can neither bear the
action of the muscles nor the weight of the body, and by either of
these causes its shape becomes altered, the surgeon may conclude
that the disease is an internal necrosis. But in order to avoid mis-
take, he should introduce into the sinuses a probe, which, passing


158 Necrosis — Caries — [Diseased Bones.)

through the openings in the subjacent bone, will touch the dead piece
which it contains, and which will sometimes be even distinguished to
be loose and movable. The extent of the sequestrum, or dead bones,
must be judged of by tlie extent of the swelling, and the distances be-
tween the apertures in the bony shell which includes them.

Tho practitioner should also endeavour to ascertain with the probe
whether there is only a single sequestrum, or several. When there
are several, they may be felt with the probe in different places, down
to which this instrument is passed, and the removal of one or two of
the fragments is not followed by a cure. Il ought to be remembered,
however, that the same fragment may be touched by the probe in
several different places when it is very extensive. If there are seve-
ral dead pieces of bone situated at a distance from each other, each
of them is generally accompanied with a distinct swelling and sinuses.
Frequently these fragments are so concealed that they cannot be felt
with a probe ; but their existence may then be suspected, from the

It is also necessary to distinguish, with the greatest attention, tht
different stages of the disease. The first stage may be considered
as existing when the attack is yet recent, and the inflammation and
its concomitant symptoms, the pain, swelling, and symptomatic fever,
prevail in a high degree, and when no suppuration has taken place, or
at least no discharge of matter. The second period, in which the
dead bone is undergoing the process of separation, is indicated by a
diminution of the inflammation, a partial subsidence of the swelling,
and the discharge of purulent matter. When a probe is passed into
the ulcers, the bone is felt bare and dry, and towards the limits of the
swelling it is rough, where, as will be afterward noticed, an excava-
tion is formed. Every part of the bone, however, which is to be de-
tached, still continues adherent to the rest of the living bone. At
length the surgeon knows that the disease has reached its last stage,
or that in which the dead portion of bone is entirely separated, when
sufficient time for the completion of this separation has transpired,
and when the dead bone can be distinguished with the finger, probe,
or even the eye, to be loose anc 1 free from all connexions.

Prognosis.

In general, the most difficult cases of necrosis may be cured by
proper treatment.

Common Practice.

This is very various ; there being little or no uniformity about it.
Some divide the integuments, and take out the decayed bone with
the saw. Some use the trephine ; some use acids, mercury, red hot
iron, rasping or scraping the bone, &c.

Reformed Practice.

Indications of Cure. — In the treatment of necrosis, the first grand
object of the practitioner should be, to aid nature in her endeavours


Necrosis — Caries— (Diseased Bones.) 159

to effect a cure, and not disturb her operations by any superfluous or
unseasonable interference. The second should be to assist her some-
times by the boldest proceedings, when she loses her way, and can-
not, by herself, accomplish what is necessary.

But in order not to attempt any thing wrong, the practitioner must
understand correctly what nature does in this disease ; what it is in
her power to perform ; what she either cannot accomplish at all, or
not with any degree of certainty ; and, lastly, the circumstances in
which she may be insufficient, and endanger the patient's life.

When a portion of bone die9, nature uses all her endeavours to
bring about its separation from the part of the bone which still re-
mains alive. This process is termed exfoliation, which resembles
the separation of parts affected with gangrene or mortification, from
the living flesh. The exfoliation of bone, however, happens much
more slowly than the separation of a slough of the soft parts. Nei-
ther are all exfoliations completed at a regular period; for they pro-
ceed most quickly during youth, when the constitution is usually
more full of energy, the bones more vascular, and less replete with
solid, inorganic, earthy matter. On the other hand, the process is
slower in old, debilitated subjects, whose vitality is less active. A /
thin small scale of bone separates sooner than a large thick portion ;
and the most tedious exfoliation is that of a thick bone, from which a
portion, including its entire diameter, is coming away. The separa-
tion of a necrosis takes place more expeditiously in bones of a light
texture than in those of a solid structure ; and sooner in the less com-
pact parts of bones.

When a necrosis has originated from the scurvy, syphilis, &c,
and appropriate remedies are not administered, nature cannot effec-
tually accomplish the process by which the dead bone is separated ;
the case becomes worse, and life endangered.

The separation happens precisely at the different parts where the
living and dead parts of the bone come into contact ; and it is ob-
vious, that the particles of the dead bone, which are at a distance from
the part that retains its vitality, cannot be acted upon by it.

A variety of opinions have been entertained concerning the means
employed by nature in effecting this separation. Hippocrates believed
that the dead part was pushed away by a fleshy substance which grew
underneath it. — (De Cap. vuln. cap. xxiv.) Ludwig, Aitken, Bonn,
and many others, adopted the same idea. — (See Adversaria Med.
Pract. vol. iii. p. 63. Systematic Elements of Surgery, p. 287. The-
saur. Oss. Morb. p. 1.)

Van Swieten conceived that the dead part was forced away by the
incessant beating of the arteries. — (Comment, in Aphor. Boerrhavii,
expansion of the vessels. — (Mem. de V Acad, de Chir. t. iv. p. 91.)
Others supposed that the exfoliating piece of bone became loosened,
partly by the suppuration, and partly by the rising of the new granu-
lations. — (See B. Bell on Ulcers.)

In the treatment of a diseased or decayed bone, we must condemn
every mode of treatment which is inefficacious, very painful or severe,
and we must make use of all those means which are consistent with


160 Necrosis — Caries — (Diseased Bones.)

the views of nature, which really assist her, and do not tease the
patient to no purpose. In short, the indications are limited to remov-
ing the original cause of the disease ; to alleviating the symptoms ;
to supporting the patient's strength, and improving the state of the
constitution, in whatever respect it may be bad ; and, lastly, remov-
ing the dead portions of bone when they become loose.

Necrosis may often be prevented by making use of judicious means
to reduce the inflammation which is a forerunner of it ; and this ob-
ject should always be kept particularly in view ; and, to accomplish
which, both internal and external remedies are called for, and such
as have been recommended under the head of inflammation. The
part inflamed must be daily fomented with bitter herbs, and the
common poultice must be applied. When suppuration takes place,
or has already taken place, the abscess should be kept freely dis-
charging, and continued as open as possible by proper applications.

When we have ascertained that the bone is actually dead, which,
in general, may be known, either by the appearance of the bone
itself, or the rough sensation communicated to the probe, it will be
necessary to aid the efforts of nature, by exposing as much of the
surface of the diseased bone as can be done without too much dis-
turbing her operations. For this purpose, some recommend very
violent means, such as dissecting the flesh or integuments from the
bone, and sawing it off; but this is not calculated to effect a cure, for
obvious reasons. Nature requires just such a process to separate
the dead from the living bone, and all that art can do is to imitate
her.

Some, also, recommend the application of a trephine, to bore down
through the carious bone to the medullary portion of it. The late Dr.
Smith, of New-Haven, very highly extols this method. But, after
giving it a fair trial, I must state, that I have' not a very favourable
opinion of its efficacy.

A common error of medical and surgical practitioners is always to
impute the cure of every disease to whatever remedies happen to be
employed ; and successes are too often boasted of, the merit of which
belongs entirely to nature. It is, indeed, not very unfrequentto hear
remedies panegyrically spoken of, which counteracts the salutary
efforts of nature, who, in this case, is obliged to overcome both the
disease and the irrational treatment which is applied to it. As Weidmann
observes, this erroneous mode of considering things has happened
particularly often among surgeons who have had cases of necrosis
under their care, all of whom boast of the cures which they have ac-
complished, although some employed absorbent earths ; others, arc
matics; some, spirituous applications; others, balsams; some, acids ;
others, caustics ; and some, armed with a wimble, made numerous
perforations in the dead bone ; while many others rasped the part, or
attacked it with the trepan, cutting forceps, the gouge and mallet, or
even the actual cautery ; and a certain number did nothing more than
apply dry lint. Nature, who was favourable to all, did her own work
in silence, whatever were the remedies employed for her assistance :
whether mild and inert, acrid and corrosive, or hurtful and improper.


Necrosis — Caries — (Diseased Bones.) 161

The course that I pursue, after the fact has been fully established^
that the bone is carious, or diseased, is, after having subdued exces-
sive, or immoderate inflammation, to give a free exit to any collection
of matter, and then, by the application of moderately stimulating
agents, expose as much of the diseased bone as possible. If there be
a number of sinuses communicating with it, from different points or
parts, I make one common opening, either by mild escharotics, the
ligature, or the bistoury, or the three combined.

I usually commence with the syringe, and inject in a solution of the
vegetable caustic, or weak ley, the strength of which is to be gradually
increased as the patient can bear it. This is very penetrating, stimu-
lating and detergent, without exciting the least additional inflamma-
tion ; but, on the contrary, it reduces it.

Having, in this way, expelled from the sinuses any collection of
pus or matter, as well as excited a more healthy action in them, I next
introduce as large tents as possible into every opening, applying a
little of the vegetable and mineral caustic to them alternately. I have
sometimes found it better to use one kind separately, for three or four
days, and then the other. This will make the openings larger, and
in every respect improve the condition of the ulcers, as well as the
general health of the patient, which are very important circumstances
in the treatment of the disease.

In the next place, where I wish to excite the least possible pain, or
where the patient objects to any incision, I bend a common probe, in
a suitable direction, and introduce it from one sinus to the other : then
tie a piece of silk, or thread, to the other end of the probe, and draw
it through, and tie it. After which, tie the silk in the centre or
middle, and thus secure it. This should be daily turned a little, until
it divides, or cuts the flesh ; and, as fast as it is thus divided, lint
must be forced into the incision, to prevent a reunion of the parts or
wound.

All the sinuses are thus to be opened until they communicate with
each other ; and when this is the case, if the bone diseased is very
large, and cannot be extracted without much force, I continue to ap-
ply the escharotics on each side of the wound, or bone, still further to
expose it, Mid give it an opportunity for separation. Sometimes I
have made small incisions instead of using the causlic by degrees, or
as the strength of the patient could bear it. Very often, after this has
been done, one or both ends of the bone will be brought to view, and
then the practitioner will take hold of one end of the diseased bone
with a pair of forceps, and gently elevate it. If it remains firm, when
force is employed, let a twisting or rotatory motion be made. Should
this be insufficient to extract it, or any portion of it, I still continue
the dressings, which are the same as for any other ulcers, and with a
strong blunt, but pointed and sharp instrument, something similar to
the small blade of a pair of scissors, I make numerous perforations
through the bone, and either divide it, or gradually remove it, by small
pieces.

1 have thought that it might be more expeditiously done by using a
small drill, similar to some used by watch makers.

These means must be employed from time to time, as the state of the


162 Necrosis — Caries— (Diseased Bones.)

disease and the patient's health will admit, taking care not to excite too
much pain. After the bone, or bones, have been removed, as well as be-
fore, lint may be applied ; and the black salve, or plaster. If the sores
do not readily heal after a piece of bone has been extracted, it may be
taken for granted that there are other bones remaining. In this man.
ner I have succeeded in successfully treating some of the most difficult
cases of necrosis on record. I have removed the bones of the tibia and
fibula, nearly from the knee to the ankle ; also the jaw-bone, and por-
tions of bones from other parts.

By similar means, in one case, the whole tibia was removed in such
a state that it was for some time hung up in the office as a curiosity.
When it began to be separated, a piece of twine was tied around one
end, and a gradual extension was made upon it daily, and as it sepa-
rated, a callus was formed ; the patient recovered, and was enabled to
walk as well as usual.

The restorative powers of nature are very strikingly exemplified in
cases of this nature ; and it must be acknowledged that most of the
process is accomplished by her powers instead of art.

In some cases, nothing but a small sinus extends to the bone, and
so deep, that very little additional opening can be made. When this
happens, we must rely upon stimulating injections, with the use of tents,
to keep the orifice open, and occasionally passing in a probe, and
pressing hard upon the bone, and turning it, in order to detach the
periosteum, or covering of it, which is, in this case, usually the seat
of the complaint.

I lately cured a very difficult case of this kind, of very long stand-
ing, with profuse discharge of matter, and the sinus, or opening, very
deep : it was situated in the hip ; several small pieces of bone were
removed, and the ulcer healed. I saw this patient the other day, and
he still continues well. He called to express his gratitude, by making
me a handsome present ; and at the same time stating, that the cure
was worth a thousand dollars to him.

During the use of the local applications, medicine must be given
internally : principally the alterative syrup. There are usually hectic
symptoms with great debility, but they soon disappear after this treat-
ment.

I lately dismissed a patient, cured of necrosis, who came about 200
miles to be attended, and who was extremely weak when he came; but
as soon as the ill-conditioned state of the ulcers was changed, and he
had taken some internal remedies, (principally the alterative syrup,) he
became strong and healthy as formerly.

The power which thus reproduces bones is only a modification of
that which unites fractures. Indeed, what consolidates broken bones,
and is known by the name of callus, presents all the characters of new
bone, begins and grows in the same way, and may be impeded and
retarded in its formation by the same causes. It is farther highly
probable, as Weidmann remarks, that the power which effects the
reproduction of bones, is the same as that which, in the sound state,
nourishes and supports these parts.

It is a remarkable circumstance in the history of necrosis, that,
in favourable instances of the disease, the inflexibility and firmness of


Necrosis — Caries — (Diseased Bones.) 163

the limb are preserved, during the whole of the process by which the
new bone is formed. Consequently, the new bone must have begun
to grow and have acquired firmness before the old bone separated or
was absorbed. Were this not the case, the limb must become flexible
and useless the moment the dead bone is removed. Another conse-
quence of the new bone being formed before the removal of the old
one, i?^that the former must surround and include the latter. For,
since the lifeless portion of bone completely occupies the space be-
tween the two living ends, these cannot be immediately connected by
the new bony matter. The connexion can alone be completed by
the new bone being deposited on the outside of the old one, from one
end to the other, and attaching itself to the portions which still remain
alive. The new bone must also be necessarily larger than the old
one, because externally situated ; and hence the affected limb, after
the cure is complete, will always continue larger, clumsier and less
shapely than the other. The length of it, however, remains unaltered,
because the old bone retains its attachment, while the rudiments of
the new bone are lying on its outside, and connect the living ends of
the old one, by an inflexible mass, equal in length to the portion which
is destroyed.

Thus we see, that in the process which nature follows in the forma-
tion of the new osseous shell, the old bone serves as a mould for the
new one, and the first step of the process is to surround the old bone
with an effusion of coagulating lymph. -(See Russell on Necrosis, p. 2-7.)
How astonishing is this provision of nature to remove the disease !
There is one almost infallible mark, or ciiterion, which will enable
us to decide whether there is a disease of the bone, or bones, viz :
after a sinus, or opening, has formed, the appearance of fungus, or
proud flesh, rising high around the edges of it, and becoming everted
or turning a little outwards.

I have found that this symptom invariably attends a necrosis, or a
diseased bone.


Vol. II W


CHAPTER IX.

cancer and scirrhus — (Carcinoma.)


A hard tumor, or scirrhus, is considered as the occult or primary-
stage of cancer, and is not an unfrequent consequence of inflamma-
tion, when it has attacked or occupied glands. The part becomes of
increased size, is knotty, hard and irregular to the touch — being,
however, unattended with any discolouration of the skin — and acute,
lancinating pains are every now and then felt darting through the
tumour. At length, a tendency to cancerous ulceration becomes
obvious.

A cancer is an ulcer of the very worst kind, with an uneven
surface, and ragged and painful edges, which spreads in a very rapid
manner, discharges a thin, acrimonious matter, that excoriates the
neighbouring integuments, and usually lias a very fetid smell, and
which is generally preceded by a hard, or scirrhous swelling of the
part, if glandular.

The disease is most commonly confined to glands, and particularly
the breasts, but is, nevertheless, now and then to be met with in the
uterus, as likewise in the face and other parts that are thinly covered
with flesh, and which are at the same time much exposed to external
irritation ; such as the lower lip, the angles of the eyes, the organs
of vision, the tongue, &c. From a lodgment of soot in the rugae of
the scrotum, chimney-sweepers, who have arrived at the age of pu-
berty, are very subject to a peculiar cancerous affection in this part,
and first noticed by Pott.

Cancer, says Dr. Thomas, is most generally met with in persons
advanced in life, and particularly in women, about the period when
the menses cease. The disease being often met with in unmarried
females about this time of life, it has been thought by some that
celibacy predisposes to the complaint. Women who have had no
children, as likewise those who have had them, but not suckled them,
are frequently affected with cancer. From several persons of one
family having been afflicted with cancer, it seems as if there had
been a hereditary predisposition, from some peculiarity or structure,
in these instances, to the disease. Climate appears to have some
degree of influence in predisposing to cancer : in cold, northerly
regions, the disease is not only more frequent than in the southern
parts of Europe, but seems likewise to be more intractable in its
nature.

It has been observed, that cancerous affections are more prevalent
in persons of a scrofulous constitution.

The experiments of Mr. North and others prove the non-existence
of specific cancerous matter. Mons. Alibert inoculated himself and
some of his pupils with cancerous matter ; and although, in some


Cancer and Scirrhus — (Carcinoma.) 165

instances, inflammation of the part, and of the lymphatics proceeding
from it, occurred, yet nothing like scirrhus or cancer succeeded.

A cancer arises most frequently from some external injury, such
as a blow, but is now and then to be met with as the consequence of
previous inflammation excited by other causes.

Irritation during the scirrhous state of a gland, without any wound
or breach of the skin, may be propagated to other glands, and these
may take on a similar action with the gland first diseased ; but
absorption does not take place until the gland becomes ulcerated.
When this is the case, the irritation from one g|and to another goes
on not only more rapidly, but absorption takes place from every part
of the diseased surface.

A late writer has offered it as his opinion, that cancer is produced
by hydatids. That these may be formed on a cancerous gland, can-
not be disputed ; but that they are generally to be met with, or are
essential to the disease, cannot be admitted.

Symptoms.

Cancer usually begins with a small swelling in the gland, unac-
companied by pain, or any discolouration. It gradually increases,
both in size and hardness — in process of time, is attended with lanci-
nating pains, as if a sharp. pointed instrument was entering the tumour,
and with varicose swellings of the subcutaneous veins, together with
an uneasy and painful sensation in the neighbouring parts. Some-
times, it remains in tin's indolent and occult, or scirrhous state, for a
length of time ; but in other instances it proceeds on to suppuration
with great rapidity, and forms an ulcer. Its progress will, however,
depend much on the state of the person's constitution, and other like
causes. It has been supposed, that in proportion to the rapidity of
the progress of any individual case, so is its degree of malignancy.

During the occult state of cancer, the pains recur at very irregular
intervals, and are dependent upon causes, concerning which, nothing
satisfactory is known. If the disease is seated in the breast, and the
female of such an age, that the catamenia have not altogether disap-
peared, she will usually suffer a considerable more pain in the part
about the times of their recurrence. The tumour will likewise under-
go, most likely, a proportionally greater augmentation of bulk, than
during the same space of time at any other period.

When the tumour begins to form adhesions to the surrounding
parts, and the disease is in the breast, it is not uncommon to find one
or more of the axillary glands on the same side of the body somewhat
enlarged.

As the disease approaches near the surface, the integuments, which
had hitherto retained their natural appearance, begin to look pucker-
ed, or as if they were drawn together in folds. From this cause, the
nipple will be sometimes so retracted, and sunk, as it were, in the sur-
rounding parts, that its existence might be overlooked by a superficial
observer.

When the disease has advanced further, the skin becomes insepa-
rably united to the tumour beneath it, and in a little time more it may


186 Cancer and Scirrhus — (Carcinoma.)

be observed to have acquired a slight tinge of redness. The other
characters of inflammation are also present, though some of them
may be in an inconsiderable degree. After a time, the whole surface
of the swelling puts on a purple, shining appearance, and in this state
it continues, with but little change, till ulceration is about to take place.
From the great increase of pain which usually happens at this period,
a degree of febrile irritation will often be excited in the system at
large.

The superincumbent parts at length give way to ulceration, and the
patient probably experiences a temporary relief, from the discharge
of a small quantity of sanious or ichorous matter. In general, it is not
until after some time, that the ulceration becomes deep and excavated ;
for, under mild treatment, it has been known to continue superficial
for some months. Sooner or later, however, the ulcer assumes the
true carcinomatous or cancerous character. It penetrates deep towards
the more central parts, while at its circumference the edges appear
hard and elevated. The surrounding skin puts on a livid aspect, and
from the surface of the sore there is a considerable discharge of an
irritating, corrosive quality. Matter of a true purulent appearance is
hardly ever furnished by these ulcers. The odour of the discharge
impresses the organ of smell with a peculiar, but indescribable sen-
sation.

If the ulceration be extensive, it will be observed, that, while one
part of the sore is undergoing a sloughing process, another will be
active in throwing forth luxuriant granulations, of a loose and spongy
texture. These changes appear sometimes to alternate with each
other upon the ulcerated surface, and, in their further progression,
give rise to considerable haemorrhages from the erosion of the vessels.
From the derangement which is occasioned in the functions of the
lungs, by the morbid condition of the parts, there gradually comes on
difficulty of breathing, attended by cough and some degree of emacia-
tion, which symptoms are usually followed, at no great distance, by
a fatal termination, and this frequently without any remarkable altera-
tion in the external appearance of the diseased part.

Cancer of the breast is chiefly a disease of middle and advanced
life ; from forty to fifty years is perhaps the most frequent period at
which it makes its appearance.

The female organ which is most likely to suffer from cancer, next
to that of the breast, is the uterus ; and, like the former, it is a disease
of comparatively rare occurrence before the period of life at which
the catamenia, or menses, usually disappear. The early symptoms
of this complaint somewhat resemble those of polypus, and prolapsus
uteri, or falling of the womb : among them may be enumerated, a
sense of weakness, with pain or uneasiness in the loins, leucorrhceal
discharge, and a sense of bearing down. To these may be added,
weight and fulness in the region of the pelvis, with acute, shooting
pains across the cavity, and more or less of derangement in the
functions of the liver. There is also a pain in coitu, and, on an
examination with the finger, the os uteri is discovered to be partially
thickened and indurated, with an increase of size in its aperture. It
sometimes happens, however, that the enlargement begins higfter up


Cancer and Scirrhus— (Carcinoma.) 167

in the neck of the womb, the os uteri remaining closed. In both
cases, the uterus appears to be situated lower in the vagina than is
usual in the healthy, unimpregnated state, and, when supported upon
the finger, a sensible addition to its weight is to be perceived.

After ulceration has taken phicc, there will be a constant discharge
of an offensive sanious matter from the vagina. If an examination
be again instituted, the os uteri will be found more open, and with
ragged, irregular edges. Pressure upon these parts will now occa-
sion some degree of pain, and a little blood will commonly be observed
to come away upon the finger. About this time, the vagina undergoes
a considerable deviation from its natural structure; it becomes some-
what hard to the feel, and its rugre cease to be distinguishable. At
the superior part, it will frequently be affected with ulceration, com-
municated from the mouth of the womb, by the continuity of surface.

As the different functions of the body become more and more
disordered, emaciation increases with rapidity. Frequent retching
and vomiting, with torpidity or irregularity of the bowels, arise,
mental dejection and despondency ensue, and a sort of hectic fever is
constantly present. Towards the latter period of the disease, if the
ulceration of the vagina becomes extensive, there will frequently be
an enlargement of the absorbent glands in the groin ; and this some-
times arrives to such a degree, as to occasion oedema, or swelling, of
the whole lower extremity. It seldom happens that the haemorrhage
from the ulcerated parts is in so violent a degree as to prove fatal
of itself.

The progress of scirrhus of the testicle is usually slower than
where the disease occurs in other glandular parts ; yet it is capable
of being more or less accelerated according to the degree in which
the different causes of irritation, whether local or constitutional, are
permitted to have influence. The tumour goes on gradually to in-
crease in size, and is attended with nearly the same symptoms and
ous breast. The acute darting pain is at first confined to the precise
site of the swelling, but afterwards extends in the direction of the
spermatic chord to the abdomen, and even up the spine and in the
loins.

In process of time, the shape of the gland becomes totally" obscured,
and nothing remains to be distinguished but the enlargement, which
is remarkable on account of its weight, excessive degree of hardness,
and its surface being studded more or less with protuberant inequali-
ties.

When the disease begins to extend, it proceeds from the testicle to
the epididymis, and thence b. batic vessels of the chord, till

it arrives at the lumbar glands. In this course there is produced
great thickening and induration of the different parts through which
it passes. An irregular or knotted feeling of the.spersv^e ,chord is
another and very striking effect of the extension of the citscase. Some
time after the lumbar glands have been contaminated, derangement in
the functions of the various neighbouring viscera is perceptible, and
at this time a prominent tumour may be distinguished through the:
parietes of the abdomen, consisting of a cluster of these enlarged


168 Cancer and Scirrhus — (Carcinoma.)

lymphatic glands. In process of time, cancerous ulceration of the
testicle ensues, and in some instances is extended to the scrotum.

Scirrhosity of the prostate gland is a disease with which men far
advanced in life are very apt to be afilicted, but particularly those
who imprudently produce an excitement of the seminal vessels by
long toying with women, or by unnatural means, or onanism. The
frequency of the disease may be attributed to the unusual degree of
irritation which, in the present licentious state of society, is kept up
in the organs of generation by Cytherean excesses, and their attend,
ants, strictures and the use of bougies. After a time, sharp, lancinat-
ing pains are felt darting through the gland now and then, the flow
of urine becomes considerably obstructed, arid dysuria, and occa-
sionally tenesmus, with ischuria, and other distressing symptoms,
arise.

At length ulceration ensues, and the patient sinks gradually under
a state of misery and pain, or he is cut off by a total suppression of
urine.

The cancer with which chimney-sweepers are sometimes attacked,
generally begins in the rugae of the scrotum, in the form of a wart.
This, from the itching and uneasiness it at first occasions, and from
the part being frequently rubbed in the act of climbing and descend,
ing the chimneys, is often scratched and otherwise irritated ; thus, a
constant stimulus is applied in addition to the action of the soot on the
part. If the head of the wart is picked or rubbed off, another is soon
formed; and at length there is not only a horny crust, but a thickened
base beneath, proceeding inwards, until a large fungus or a spreading
ulceration is produced, which at length occasions the testicle also to
become affected.

Cutaneous cancer is most frequently observed to occupy the lower
lip, the angles of the eyes, the nose, and penis. At its commence-
ment it usually appears under the form of a small preternatural en-
largement or elevation of the skin. Sometimes it is so hard to the
touch and in consistence as nearly to approach to the nature of horn,
while on other occasions it will bear a much nearer resemblance to a
common wart. In a few instances it will put on the appearance of a
small discoloured pimple.

Under whatever form the disease may first appear, a degree of sur-
rounding hardness will invariably be found to take place. Some
degree of shooting pain from time to time is likewise experienced in the
part. In many cases ulceration seems to be materially accelerated
by the accidental irritation of the patient's fingers, which are often,
although unconsciously, applied in the vicinity of the disease. Some-
times, however, a sort of scale is generated, so as to form a covering
to the little tumour, and this will be removed and again be renewed
several times in succession, before ulceration is perfectly established.

When the part has once arrived to a state of ulceration, it quickly
puts on those characters of malignity which have occasioned it to be
classed as a species of cancer. The surface of the sore possesses,
indeed, the common appearance of cancerous ulceration, and there
is a discharge from it of sanious or other ulcerated matter. In cuta-
neous ulcer it seldom happens that the lymphatic glands begin to en-


Cancer and Scirrhus — (Carcinoma.) 169

large or grow painful till after the diseased part has been in a state of
ulceration for a considerable time, which forms a striking point of
difference between this disease and that which has its seat in glandu-
lar structures.

In a very great number of cases of cancer of the penis, it has been
remarked, that phymosis had naturally existed ; hence it has been
inferred by some, that phymosis may generate a predisposition to
this affection. A review of the cases published by the authors re-
ferred to,* and in which amputation of the penis was performed,
seems to countenance the opinion that cancer of the penis is an affec-
tion purely local, and hence less frequently produced than cancer of
other parts.

Cancer of the tongue, like cutaneous cancer, seems to admit of
a certain degree of variability in its appearance, which is, however,
most commonly that of a small hard tumour, situated on the upper sur-
face of the tongue, and at no great distance from its anterior ex-
tremity. The tumour usually possesses a firm connexion with the
subjacent parts, and, before arriving at a state of ulceration, it is not
unusual to see it attain a size equal at least to that of a common hazel
nut.

Another form under which this disease sometimes shows itself at
an early period, is that of a little discoloured pimple, having a dispo-
sition to bleed very freely from the slightest cause ; but there is like-
wise a third case, where carcinomatous ulceration suddenly breaks
out upon the tongue without the part having previously suffered any
morbid change of structure, or presented any unnatural appearance
sufficient to attract notice.

The pain attendant on the disease in its different stages, though
varying in degree, is yet always of that peculiar darting kind which
belongs to cancer. When first complained of, it is only slight and
partial ; but, gradually increasing in severity as the disorder advances,
it will in time extend so as to be felt both about the fauces and base
of the skull. The disease may continue a long time even in an ulcer-
ated state without the health appearing to suffer very materially from it.
The entire destruction of a great portion of the tongue will sometimes
be produced by cancerous ulceration before death takes place in con-
sequence of the disease.

Cancer of the tongue is more frequently met with in those who
are pretty far advanced in years, than in subjects under the age of
puberty.

Tumours of the breast are often removed with perfect safety, and
thereby prevented from degenerating into true cancers, when it is
not delayed too long ; but after a tumour of this description has ulcer-
ated, thereby assuming the carcinomatous character, and has afforded
an opportunity for an absorption of the matter into the system, there
is every reason to suppose that a complete cure can seldom be effect-
ed ; for although we remove the diseased part, still the virus will be
likely, sooner or later, to show itself in some other glandular place.

Sir Everard Home has observed, that with respect to the internal

• Seo Practical Observations in Surgery, by Mr. Hey.— Parallel of French and
English Surgery, by Mons. Roux.


170 . Cancer and Scirrhus — (Carcinoma.)

structure and appearance of the breast affected with a scirrhus, if a
section is made of such a tumour in an early stage, where the struc-
ture is seen to advantage, it puts on the following appearances : —
The centre is the most compact, harder to the feel, has a more uni-
form texture than the rest of the tumour, and is usually of the consist-
ence of cartilage. This middle part does not exceed the size of a
silver penny, and from this in every direction, like rays, are seen
ligamentous bands of a white colour, and very narrow, looking in the
section like so many irregular lines passing to the circumference of
the tumour, which is blended with the surrounding gland. In the
interstices between these bands the substance is different, and be-
comes less compact towards the outer edge. On a more minute
examination, transverse ligamentous bands of a fainter appearance
form a kind of net-work, in the masses of which the new-formed sub-
stance is enclosed.

In a further advanced stage of the tumour, the whole of the dis-
eased parts have a more uniform structure : no central point can
be distinguished, the external edge is more defined and distinct from
the surrounding gland, and the ligamentous bands in different direc
tions are very apparent, but do not follow any course that can be
traced.

No regular distinction of structure can be made in parts affected
with carcinomatous ulceration. In the centre, however, is a small
irregular cavity filled with a bloody fluid, the edges of which are ul-
cerated, jagged, and spongy. — (Thomas.)

Causes.

With respect to the causes of cancer, the disease is very frequently
imputed to blows, pressure, and other accidental injuries ; but there
are almost always other circumstances concerned, which have more
influence than the accidental violence. " Although (as Sir Astley
Cooper remarks) the disease operates on some particular part of the
body, it is always preceded by a state of constitution which has ex-
cited it. He who looks at this disease in the light merely of a local
affection, takes but a narx'ow view of it. A blow or a bruise, in-
flicted on a healthy person, would be followed by common inflamma.
tion only, which would lead to the removal of the matter effused. But
if a blow were received on the breast, when the constitution was dis-
posed to the formation of scirrhous tubercle, it would be the cause of
a particlar action being excited in the part injured, and might lay the
foundation of this complaint. Yet the formation of scirrhous tubercle
does not entirely depend on constitutional derangement ; there must
be also a peculiar action excited in the part." In order to prove that
the disease must depend on constitutional derangement, and an alter-
ed action in the part unitedly, Sir Astley Cooper observes, that if a
scirrhus bo cut into, all the horrors of cancer will be the result of the
injury ; but if the cut be made in the healthy parts around the disease,
no cancerous ulceration follows, and the wound heals. In short, he
argues that the disease is the effect of a specific action in the part,
preceded by a disposition in the constitution to its production. — (Sec
Lancet, vol. ii. p. 378.)


Cancer and Scirrhus — (Carcinoma.) 171

In the breast cancer frequently commences without any previous
accidental injury of the part ; a fact tending to establish the correct-
ness of such writers as represent the disease to"be of a constitutional
nature. In these cases there is always an irregularity or disappear-
ance of the menses; and the affection of the breast maybe sup-
posed to depend on sympathy between it and the uterus. Certain it
is, that cancer is very frequent about the time of life when the men-
strual discharge ceases.

It is a commonly received opinion, that cancer is an hereditary
disease, or observed to prevail a good deal in particular families. Sir
Astley Cooper has known it occur in three sisters. — (Lectures, <SfC
vol. ii. p. 18G.) Sir Evcrard Home has endeavoured to reconcile
this to the doctrine of the disease being at first entirely of a local na-
ture ; circumstances which seem incompatible : " It is now universally
admitted (says he) that children take after their parents in the gene-
ral structure of their bodies, and therefore will be more or less liable
to have the different solids of which they are composed disturbed by
the same causes ; and when a violence of any kind is committed upon
them, it may be productive of the same diseases. In some families,
the venereal disease shall always appear in the form of gonorrhoea [?] ;
in others again, rarely or never in that form, but in that of chancre [;].
Strictures in the urethra are common in some families : they have
taken place in a father and all his sons, from very slight causes ; such,
indeed, as would not have produced the disease in others. Yet stric-
ture cannot be called hereditary, because it is a local complaint, aris-
ing from a local inflammation, differing in different people, according
to the natural irritability of the parts which are affected. In this way,
and this only, can cancer run in families, and be an hereditary dis«
ease," &c. — (Obs. on Cancer, p. 150.)

Common Treatment.

Extirpation by the Knife.

Various applications are recommended and used for cancer, but
the knife is employed as the only remedy ; yet I have never seen a
solitary instance cured by it ; the very nature of the disease, its exten-
sive ramifications, the structure of the parts diseased, show conclu-
sively that the act of cutting out a portion of the diseased mass is of
no service, but, on the contrary, in almost every case exasperates it.
I have seen a cancer grow more in a month after an operation, than
it did in three previously ; and it appears to rise partly from the
nature of an incised wound, that soon heals and retains the cancerous
matter, which proves an additional source of irritation, and partly from
irritation, inflammation, or other causes.

I have had a great share of practice in this disease, both before and
after an operation has been performed, and, therefore, have had an
opportunity of knowing the effects of the common practice, particu-
larly of the knife ; and I must give my testimony against the use of it
in any case whatever ; for I am satisfied, that it only aggravates the
disease.

Vol. II, X


172 Cancer and Schirrus — (Carcinoma.)

I am astonished that surgeons will continue to operate for cancers ;
when they must positively know, by their own experience, that in-
stead of removing, it exasperates the disease, and accelerates its
growth.

I have been called, in every direction, to see persons labouring
under cancer, for which excision has been made, and I have invaria-
bly found that every one of the patients has deprecated and given
their testimony against it.

Could the knife penetrate as far as the cancerous poison extends
into the glandular system, and could the subject of it bear the opera-
tion of having the whole extirpated, there might be some probability
of effecting a cure. But how can this be ? Is not the blood, or the
mass of fluids, in a greater, or less degree, contaminated ; and if so,
does it not betray consummate ignorance, to say the best of it, to use
the knife with a view to remove the disease ? We have evidence that
the constitution is, more or less, affected ; and if so, with what pro-
priety or prospect of success can such cruel and unnatural means be
relied upon or resorted to ?

Sir Astley Cooper, and many other experienced men, both of the
past and present time, consider cancer as decidedly a complaint con-
nected with a peculiar state of the constitution. When an operation
is performed, little cancerous bands, resembling ligaments, shoot into
the surrounding adipose substance, and even the fibres of the muscles
beneath the cancerous disease are frequently affected..

I know that many tumours have been extirpated, which have borne
the name of cancer, but I am well satisfied, that they were fleshy or
sarcomatous.

" Until late years," says Cooper, " the accounts given of the results
of operations for cancers were so unpromising, that they deterred
many patients from undergoing a timely operation ; which, for can-
cerous complaints, is the only remedy with which we are as yet ac-
quainted entitled to much confidence. As Mr. B. Bell remarks, the
great authority of Dr. Alexander Monro must have had no inconsider-
able influence even with practitioners, in making them much more
backward in undertaking the extirpation of cancers than they other-
wise would have been. ' Of near sixty cancers,' says he, ' which
I have been present at the extirpation of, only four patients remained
free of the disease at the end of two years : three of these lucky peo-
ple had occult cancers in the breast, and the fourth had an ulcerated
cancer on the lip.' — (Edin. Med. Essays, vol. v.) Dr. Monro also
observes, that in those in whom he saw the disease relapse, it was
always more violent, and made a quicker progress than it commonly
did in others on whom no operation had been performed. Hence, he
questions, ' whether ought cancerous tumours to be extirpated, or
ought the palliative method only to be followed V and, upon the whole,
he concludes against their extirpation, except in such as are of the
occult kind, in young healthy people, and have been occasioned by
bruiees, or other external causes."


Cancer and Scirrhu* — (Carcinoma.) 173

Reformed Practice.

1st. Treatment of Cancer in a slate of Schirrus, or before it ulcer-
ates. — It is a contested point, whether a truly cancerous disease is
susceptible of any process, by which a spontaneous cure can be ef-
fected. It appears certain, however, that a violent inflammation,
ending in sloughing, may sometimes accomplish an entire separation
of a cancerous affection, and that the sore left behind may then heal.
Facts, confirming this observation, are occasionally exemplified in
cases where caustic is used, and accidental inflammations have led to
the same fortunate result, as we may be convinced of by examples
recorded by Sir Everard Home, Richerand, &c. The latter writer,
adverting to the effort which nature sometimes makes to rid herself
of the disease by the inflammation and bursting of the tumour, takes
the opportunity to relate the following case. A woman, aged forty-
eight, of a strong constitution, was admitted into the hospital at St.
Louis, with a cancerous tumour of the right breast. The swelling,
after becoming softer, and affected with lancinating pains, was at-
tacked with an inflammation, which extended to the skin of the part,
and all the adjacent cellular membrane. The whole of the swelling
mortified, and was detached. A large sore, of healthy appearance,
remained after this loss of substance, and healed in two months. —
(Nosographie Chir. t. i. p. 381. 2d edit.)

When any gland has become enlarged, indurated, and shows a ten-
dency to be scirrhous, we should, from the earliest period, use our ut-
most exertions to discuss, or at least to prevent its further increase.
Applications of a disculient and sedative nature should be had re-
course to without delay ; pressure of any kind should be guarded
against, particularly from lacing, if the breast is the part affected ;
the bowels must be kept free and open by purgatives administered
from time to time, and a cooling regimen be enjoined, cautioning the
patient to abstain from all spiritous liquors, and from other stimuli
of every kind.

When the disease is in a state of tumour or scirrhus, let the fol-
lowing discutient ointment be applied :

Take of bark of the root of bitter-sweet, (solanum dulcamara,) 2 oz.

Stramonium leaves, (datura stramonium,) 2 oz.

Cicuta leaves, (conium maculatum,) 2 oz.

Deadly nightshade, (atropa belladonna,) 2 oz.

Yellow dock-root, (rumex crispus,) 2 oz.
Bruise the articles, and cover with spirits ; simmer a few hours ; then
add fresh butler, sufficient, when melted, to cover the whole ; simmer
moderately over embers, until the strength is extracted ; then strain,
and cover in an earthen jar. Let the tumour be well bathed with
this ointment three or four times a day before the fire, or any heated
substance may be held a little distance from the part during the
act of bathing. After the tumour has been anointed, let a plaster
be applied, made as follows :

Take one bushel of the roots of poke or coakum, (phytolacca decan-
dra ;) bruise, and add a sufficient quantity of soft water ; boil a few
hours, and pour off the liquid ; then add more water, and boil again,


174 Cancer and Scirrhus — {Carcinoma.)

and thus continue until all the strength is extracted, after which, re-
move the roots, strain the decoction, and again boil, until most of the
watery portion of the liquid has evaporated ; after which, add ten
pounds of fresh hitter, three pounds of beeswax, one pound and a half
of mutton tallow ; simmer again until the water is extracted. Let,
this plaster be spread upon linen, applied to the tumour, and ie-
newed once a day.

Every other night on going to bed, if there is any pain in the tu.
mour, steam with the following decoction :

Take Boneset,

Wormwood,
Horehound,
Hops ;
Boil two or three hours in equal parts of vinegar and water ; throw
the decoction and the herbs into a suitable vessel, to which add a
small quantity of soft soap; place the vessel underneath the tumour or
parts affected, and let the steam be confined by a blanket. Continue
the application of it fifteen or twenty minutes each time, and if it pro-
duces no perspiration, throw in a heated iron or brick. If the tu.
mour be in the breast, the articles may be put into a large bowl, and
placed directly underneath it. When the axilla and arm are swelled,
let the steam bo also extended to these parts.

When the patient is in the most excruciating pain, this treatment
will mitigate it by eliminating the cancerous humours, removing the
tension, swelling and inflammation connected with it, and rendering
the parts more soft and natural.

During the use of these medicines, the patient may take the follow-
ing syrup :

Take yellow dock-root, (rumex crispus,) two pounds ;

Bark of bitter-sweet root, (solanum dulcamara,) two pounds;

Bruise, and boil till the strength is obtained ; strain and boil till
thfire is twelve porter bottles ; add sufficient loaf sugar to prevent fer-
mentation. A wine glassful may be taken three or four times a day.

I have also given, in connexion with this syrup, a pill, made of the
extract of cicuta, containing a grain or two ; and, if no nausea follows
its use, to be gradually increased. I think it is an auxiliary, but I do
not entertain the highest opinion of its efficacy.

A purgative should be given about twice a week, and the powdered
root of mandrake is preferable.

I have thus given the treatment for cancer in its scirrhous state, and
it has removed some very obstinate cases ; but it will sometimes, in
spite of the best known treatment, put on a very malignant character,
and inflammation will take place. When this occurs, the same reme-
dies may be applied, except the plaster ; and for this, the following
poultice must be substituted, with a view to moderate inflammation,
and favour suppuration.

Take cicuta leaves, and simmer them in rain-water until they are
soft; then stir in slippery -elm bark to form a poultice ; and let it be
applied tepid, morning and night, as long as there is inflammation, or
ulceration. And even after an abscess is formed, or the tumour dis-
charges, the poultice may be continued, at least a part of the time, in
prder to reduce the swelling and promote a discharge.


Cancer and Schirrus — (Carcinoma.) 175

When this has taken place, when the inflammatory symptoms have
been measurably subdued, and the disease assumes a chronic charac-
ter, a course somewhat different must be pursued. It will be neces-
sary to use the poultice occasionally to lessen heat and irritation, as in
almost all cases of cancer there are more or less of these symptoms pre-
sent. But, in general, we must rely more upon stimuk.dng applica-
tions, with a view to aid the powers of nature to throw off the disease.
To effect this, she establishes a discharge, and it is onr business to
promote it, if the strength of the system will admit. To accomplish
which, many are in the habit of applying various kinds of cancer plas-
ters, such as arsenic, &c; and almost always under pretence that they
are vegetable. There is an agent, in this city, of Dr. Davidson, who
has become considerably popular for the cure of cancers, and, as he
says, by simple and vegetable means ; but it is, I believe, a well esta-
blished fact, that the basis of his plaster is arsenic; and if it has cured
some, it has killed others. I, however, have more confidence in almost
any of the preparations used for extracting cancers, than I have in an
operation by the knife. The latter is exceedingly painful, uncertain
and dangerous, while the former, even though it be very severe, will
sometimes, by its corrosive, or cscharotic effects, cure the disease.
But much depends upon the nature of the application or plaster made
use of, as there is a very great difference in the effect of different
agents employed. I have tried and seen tried almost every thing that
has been highly extolled, or that has gained much celebrity for the
cure of cancer, and I feel therefore prepared to make such a discrimi-
nation, and to give such directions as may be relied on, and entitled
to confidence.

Any preparation of arsenic, blue vitriol, or lunar caustic, I consider
to be injurious.

The attention of practitioners has long been directed to the vegetable
kingdom for an antidote to this formidable disease ; but unhappily none
has, as yet, been discovered, the properties of which are sufficiently
active, invariably, or even generally, to cure it; especially when it
has become confirmed, or in the latter stages ; nor have our researches
into the mineral kingdom been successful. It is true, cancers may be
cured in their incipient or forming stages, and oftentimes when they
are considerably advanced or progressed. I have successfully eradi-
cated them, in numerous cases, where the disease had not proceeded
too far.

I shall now state what dependence may be placed upon both vege-
table and mineral preparations, and show how far they may be bene-
ficially employed.

Of the different vegetable productions, I have found the following
the most active and salutary, where cancer is in a elite of ulceration.

Take any quantity of hickory ashes, and leach them ; boil the ley
until it is of the consistence of molasses or honey ; spread a small
quantity upon a piece of leather, and apply to the part affected. Let
it remain until the pain produced by it subsides; after which apply
the poultice mentioned above. It may be applied daily, or as often
as the strength of the patient will admit. The plaster, or extract, must
be kept from the air, or its virtues, or active properties, will be de-


176 Cancer and Scirrhus — (Carcinoma.)

stroyed. The effect of this preparation, is to excite a preternatural
discharge, or cause a sloughing of the ulcer, and thus remove or di-
minish ft. It has a peculiar operation, different from any known sub-
stance ; that while it proves very active, and somewhat corrosive,
instead of creating inflammation, like other kinds of caustic, it abso-
lutely diminishes it. Hence it becomes a valuable agent in this, as
well as many other complaints. In general, a poultice may be ap-
plied at night, and our black salve or plaster during the day, using,
after every dressing, lint, on which is spread a little emollient oint-
ment, such as the marsh mallow or discutient. This treatment has
removed many cancerous ulcers which were supposed to be incurable.

Should the disease, however, resist the applications, and remain
stationary, or continue to progress, let a plaster be applied, made as
follows :

Take white-oak bark, clear of ross or the exterior portion, and
bruise, half a bushel ; cover the same with soft water, or, what is
better, chamber ley, or urine ; let it stand in a warm place two or
three days properly to digest ; then boil, pour off the liquid, add more
of the urine, and boil again, and thus repeat till all the strength is
extracted ; slowly simmer down till it becomes of the consistence of
molasses ; then take white turpentine, the gum, half a pound, melt and
strain it, and add to the extract, and also half a pound of strained
honey; boil a few minutes to incorporate, and remove it from the fire.
To every ounce of this extract, add from half a drachm to a drachm
of pulverized white vitriol ; let it be spread on a soft piece of leather,
and applied to the cancer. It may be renewed every day or two,
according to circumstances.

This forms about the best cancer plaster, taking all circumstances
into consideration, of any article with which I am acquainted. The
tumour almost invariably becomes diminished, and sort under it : the
indurated, or hardened edges, gradually diminish, the size of the sore
lessens, and in very many instances, used with the other means re-
commended, will effect a radical cure ; and, even where it does not,
it never fails to arrest the progress of the disease, to lessen the pain,
swelling and inflammation, and in every respect to improve the con-
dilion of the patient. It changes both the quality and quantity of the
discharge, and renders the patient comfortable.

In the last place, I shall mention the most corrosive and active pre-
paration that I have ever used, or that there probably is, either in the
mineral, animal or vegetable kingdom, and should never be employed
with a view to effect a cure, except as the last alternative, when every
other means fail. I allude to the mineral caustic, the only active in-
gredient of which is the corrosive sublimate. It is exceedingly active,
the most so of any caustic ; yet, when mixed with other ingredients, it
may be used without exciting very great pain. It certainly has the
power, when a proper opportunity offers, of destroying the cancerous
virus or poison ; but it must be applied, if applied at all, in the early
stages of the disease, before it has progressed too far. When all
other means prove abortive, and it is deemed expedient to make use
of it, let it be applied in the form of powder to the parts, and kept on
for twelve or twenty-four hours, when a poultice must be applied.


Cancer and Scirrhus — (Carcinoma.) 177

It may be added to the preceding extract, and in the same propor-
tion, a drachm of the powder pulverized to an ounce of the extract,
spread upon linen or leather very thin, and applied about twice a
week, or as the patient can bear it, for about six or twelve hours. It
creates considerable pain, and, when applied weak, causes a free
discharge ; but when applied very strong, produces an eschar, or de-
stroys the flesh, which usually sloughs off" in a few days.

Although I have spoken of this article, often employed it, and with
it cured many cancerous cases, yet I should much prefer a milder
and more effectual remedy.

In relation to this remedy, however, I have to observe, that it is not
so violent in its operation as arsenic, nor is it so dangerous ; nor is
there any danger, as far as my experience goes, from absorption into
the system. If the patient complains of great pain, under the influ-
ence of this or any other application, an opiate may be administered.
I have used a plaster, made of the cicuta leaves, with advantage ; and
it may be tried when other means fail. Various other articles have
been highly extolled, and some of them as specifics ; such as the
pippsisewa, or pyrola umbellata ; but I am well persuaded, by expe-
rience and observation, that they cannot be depended upon.

Cornelius C. Cuyler, pastor of the reformed Dutch church in
Poughkeepsie, has communicated the following preparation for the
cure of cancer. He details several cases which have been removed
by it.

Take the narrow leaved dock-root, boil it in soft water, wash the
ulcer with the strong decoction, warm as it can be borne; fill the
cavity with the liquor for two minutes ; then scrape the hulk of the
root, bruise it fine, put it on gauze, and lay it over every part of the
ulcer ; dip a linen cloth in the decoction, and put that over the gauze ;
repeat this three times in twenty-four hours, and at each time let the
patient take a wine glassful of the tea made of the root, with one
third of a glass of port wine, sweetened with honey.


CHAPTER X.

soft cancer — bleeding fungus — {Fungus Hamalodes — Medullary

Sarcoma.)


This is one of the most obstinate and terrible diseases which afflicts
the human system, and is very apt to prove fatal under the best treat-
ment. A tumour first appears, which easily yields to pressure, but
soon returns to its original size, as the pressure is removed. It soon
puts on a red appearance, ulcerates, bleeds, and becomes very pain-
ful. The disease most frequently attacks the eyeball, the upper and
lower extremities, testicle and breast, and it sometimes attacks the
uterus, ovaria, liver, spleen, brain, lungs, hip and shoulder-joint.

Fungus Hcematodes of the Limbs.

In the extremities, the disease begins with a small colourless
tumour, which is soft and elastic, if there be no thick covering over
it, such as a fascia ; but otherwise it is tense. At first, it is free
from uneasiness ; but by degrees a severe acute pain darts occasion-
ally through it more and more frequently, and at length becomes in-
cessant. For a considerable time the tumour is smooth and even ;
but afterward it projects irregularly at one or more points ; and the
skin, at these places, becomes of a livid red colour, and feels thinner*
In this situation it easily yields to pressure, but instantly bounds up
again. Small openings now form in these projections, through which
is discharged a thin bloody matter. Almost immediately after these
tumours burst, a small fungus protrudes like a papilla, and this ra-
pidly increases both in breadth and height, and has exactly the appear-
ance of a carcinomatous fungus, and frequently bleeds profusely.
The mattei is thin, and exceedingly fetid, and the pain becomes of
the smarting kind. The integuments, for a little way round these
ulcers, are red and tender. After ulceration takes place, the neigh-
bouring glands swell, and assume exactly the spongy qualities of the
primary tumour. If the patient still survive the disease in its present
advanced progress, similar tumours form in other parts of the body,
and the patient dies hectic.

After death or amputation the tumour is found to consist of a soft
substance, somewhat like the brain, of a grayish colour, and greasy
appearance, with thin membrane-like divisions running through it,
and cells or abscesses in different places, containing a thin bloody
matter, occasionally in very considerable quantity. There does not
seem uniformly to be any entire cyst surrounding the tumour; for it
very frequently dives down between the muscles, or down to the bone,
to which it often appears to adhere. The neighbouring muscles are
of a pale colour, and lose their fibrous appearance, becoming more


Soft Cancer— Bleeding Fungu*. 179

like liver than muscle. The bones are always cariou9 in the vicinity
of the disease.

The distemper is sometimes caused by external violence, though in
general there is no evident cause whatever. — (Dissertations on Inflam-
mations, by J. Burns, vol. ii.)

Fungus Hoemaiodes of the Eye*

This malignant fungus is a disease (says Cooper) which soon proves
fatal, unless an operation be early performed : even the chance of
success is extremely doubtful. No age appears exempt from it ; but
it more frequently attacks the young, and a large portion of the cases
occur before twelve years of age.

On looking into the eye at the commencement of this complaint,
you see opposite to the pupil, and deeply seated, an appearance like
a mirror, resembling an opacity of the lens, from which it is difficult
to distinguish it. If you watch the progress of the disease, you will
see that this appearance enlarges into a prominence, proceeding from
the bottom of the eye towards the cornea, and as it reaches the lens,
you must be the more on your guard, that you do not mistake it for
cataract. There is one appearance, however, at this stage, by which
you may distinguish the one from the other, upon the opaque sub-
stance, or the retina, of which its covering consists. The other
symptoms are loss of vision, and the iris remaining immovable. As
the prominence enlarges, the iris becomes protruded, and the cornea
distended. The conjunctiva becomes inflamed, the eyelids vascular,
and in a diseased state ; and, in progress of time, the cornea sloughs,
an opening is formed, and a discharge of a ropy mucus first takes
place.

The fungus does not always protrude through the cornea, but some-
times through the sclerotic, and then it has a purple livid hue, and is
covered by the conjunctiva. As it increases in size, it assumes a
dark red colour, its surface is unequal and irregular, it bleeds at the
slightest touch, the parts slough, and then there is a fetid sanious dis-
charge.

During the progress of fungus haematodes of the eye 1 , the health
becomes affected, the countenance puts on a sallow hue, and the
patient wastes in flesh.

The disease is accompanied, and generally preceded, by disorder
of the digestive organs ; the appetite is impaired, and there are pre-
sent all the other marks of derangement of the general health. When
the strength and health are broken up, the disease very soon comes
to a termination. The close of the disease is preceded by hectic
fever, as is that of most complaints from which the general health has
suffered much during their progress. In fungus of the eye, the rest
is completely destroyed, there is an affection of the nervous system,
and, in children, convulsions come on, which terminate their exist-
ence. — (Cooper.)

Fungus Hamatodes of the Testicle.

Fungus haematodes of the testicle sometimes begins in its fflan-
Vol. II. Y


180 Soft Cancer — Bleeding Fungus.

dular part, sometimes in the epididymis. Its progress is slow, and the
pain generally not severe ; nor is there at first any inequality or
hardness of the diseased part, nor change in the scrotum. When
the testicle has become exceedingly large, it feels remarkably soft
and elastic, as if it contained a fluid. Hence the case has often been
mistaken for a hydrocele, and punctured with a trocar. — (Wardrop,
Earle, in Med. Chir. Trans., vol. iii. p. 60.) Occasionally, when the
tumour is large, it is in some places hard, in others soft. The hydro-
cele may be known by the water beginning to collect at the bottom of
the scrotum, and then ascending towards the spermatic cord, and by
as, the fungus haematodes begins with a gradual enlargement of the
testicle itself, followed by a fulness which extends up the spermatic
cord. It is not in the slightest degree diaphanous, and is much
heavier than a similar bulk of water. — [Earle, op. cit.) As the dis-
ease advances, abscesses form, and the scrotum ulcerates, but no fun-
gus shoots out. When the inguinal glands become contaminated,
they often acquire an immense size ; and as soon as the skin over
them bursts, large portions of them slough away. Fungus haematodes
of the testicle is said to afflict young more frequently than old sub-
jects. On dissection, the substance of the diseased testicle is found
to present a medullary or pulpy appearance, generally of a pale
brownish colour, though sometimes red.

Treatment.

It is customary to extirpate this disease with the knife ; but we be-
lieve there is no well authenticated case on record of its ever having
cured it.

A celebrated practitioner thus remarks : — Indeed, very little hope
Bhould be placed in the removal of the testicle ; for fungus haematodes
appears to be rather a constitutional than a local disease. Nearly
every case on record has terminated fatally ; and upon dissection,
either the liver, the lungs, the brain, the mesenteric glands, or other
internal parts, have been found affected with the same disease. In
one case, dissected by Mr. Lawrence, tubercles of a similar structure
to the disease in the axilla, were found in the lungs, heart, and, in
short, in nearly all the thoracic and abdominal viscera, though the con-
tents of the skull were free from disease. — (See Cases recorded by
Wardrop, Earle, Lawrence and Langslaff, in Med. Chir. Trans., vol.
iii. and viii.)

My treatment has been limited in this disease, and therefore I am
not prepared to say much from experience.

I was presented with a drawing of a case, which occurred some
years ago, in the person of Mr. Misplee, of this city. It commenced
on the arm, just below the shoulder, and after it had become fairly
seated, Dr. A. H. Stevens, of this city, amputated or dissevered the
arm at the shoulder joint. For a while, there was some prospect of
recovering ; but it soon returned again, and grew very rapidly. In
this situation, he applied to a root doctor, by the name of Bone, in
New-Jersey, who made use of a cancer plaster, which, for a while,


Soft Cancer — Bleeding Fungus. 181

appeared to remove the whole tumour ; but the hopes entertained
were fallacious, for the disease soon returned again, and terminated
his existence. His widow, whose family I have attended for some
years past, informs me that Mr. Misplee, just before his decease, said
that his eyes had been opened as regards the practice of medicine ;
and he further stated, that he regretted that he had the operation per-
formed ; and his last advice to his family was, not to employ the ordi-
medicine.

I propose the following treatment for the complaint :

1st. The mild cancer or Ferris' black plaster ; the basis of which
is the extract of oak bark, combined with a small proportion of white
vitriol.

2d. If this should not remove it, the alkaline extract, or the potash,
as recommended under the head of Cancer, and a strong solution of
the same injected into the orifices of the ulcer.

3d. Should these applications fail, apply the mineral caustic, mixed
with brown soap, in the proportion of half a drachm of the powder to
an ounce of the soap, to be well mixed or incorporated. After its ap-
plication, which may be as often and as long as the patient can bear,
let a poultice be applied.

The general health should be particularly attended to, as it appears
to arise from a taint of the system. A purgative should be given
once or twice a week, and the alterative syrup, and infusions or
decoctions of such roots and plants as are calculated to purify the
blood, such as the Virginia speedwell, yellow dock, black alder, bitter-
sweet, &c.


CHAPTER XI.

FISTULA.


TnE term fistula is generally applied to those kinds of ulcers which
are very obstinate in their character, and which are attended with
hardness, and sinous openings or orifices, with callous edges. There
are three species enumerated by surgical writers :

1. Fistfila in ano, when situated in or near the rectum, or anus.

2. Fistula in perineo, when situated in the perineum, and commu-
nicating with the urethra.

3. Fistula lachrymalis, a sinous ulcer, situated in the inner canthue,
or corner of the eye, obstructing the lachrymal duct.


SECTION I.

Fistula in Ano.

Description.

By fistula in ano we understand, a most serious, loathsome and
troublesome disease, which is located in the vicinity of the anus and
rectum, and appears in the form of abscess and sinous ulcers, emitting
a fetid discharge, with callous edges.

" It is a disease," says Sir A. Cooper, " in which you will be called
upon to operate more frequently, perhaps, than any other. I do not
consider it a disease which is very easy to treat. It very often baffles
the skill of the best surgeons." Dorsey says it is very difficult to bt
healed; and this statement is confirmed by the many cases which
remain uncured, as well as the fatality which attends it. Henry VIII.,
king of England, it is stated, died of this disease.

Causes.

The causes of fistula are numerous ; such as costiveness and
relaxation of the bowels, derangement of the liver and alimentary
canal, sedentary habits, high living, plethora, bruises, piles, &c. It
is often connected with, and probably produces, a pulmonary disease.

Symptoms.

The fistula in ano usually commences with a phlegmonous swelling
or tumour near the anus or rectum, attended with great pain, hardness
and acute inflammation. In this stage, it is often connected with the
piles. The tumour advances slowly to suppuration, and an abscess
or matter is formed.


Fistula. 183

In some cases, however, the disease proceeds till a sinus is formed,
with very little pain — so much so, that the patient is ignorant of the
time when it formed; but, more generally, the pain is very severe,
swelling great, and suppuration very extensive ; and, in consequence
of the pressure upon the neck of the bladder, or urethra, there is a
suppression of urine. Sometimes, there is an erysipelatous affection
of the nates or buttocks, in which the fistula is very extensive ; in
consequence of which, mortification takes place in the surrounding
cellular texture. A gallon of pus has been discharged from one of
these abscesses.

Fistula in ano is more painful than a common abscess. The patient
is in most excruciating pain when the farce's are voided ; great tenes-
mus, or pressing down, and very often retention of urine. There is
considerable variety in the size and complication of fistula. Some-
times, the sinus is confined to one side of the intestine ; in other cases,
it nearly surrounds it. Sometimes, the fistulous sinus is very short,
penetrating the anus a little above the ring or opening ; at other
times, it is several inches deep, and extends near the os coccygis, or
end of the spine ; at other times, it burrows to a great distance behind
the gluteal muscles. I have seen, cases which appeared to extend
underneath and above the spinal bone. I have seen cases, also, where
the whole surrounding integuments and cellular substance were in a
state of sinous suppuration, or fistulous abscess ; and the flaps or
edges of the ulcers projected an inch, and from which issued out the
most fetid and sanious matter. This happens more generally where
there is a faulty state of the constitution.

Sometimes there is a communication between the bladder, vagina,
os sacrum and other contiguous parts ; and, when so, matter issues
through every opening, and the very faeces, or contents of the intes-
tine, (when the bowels are very soluble,) are also discharged ; thus
constituting an artificial anus.

In the commencement of the disease, the adjacent parts are gene-
rally sound ; but, whenever the ulcer has been of long duration, not
only the parts about the anus, but even the perineum and buttocks
frequently become diseased. This may depend on different causes ;
but it appears most frequently to proceed from the matter of the
abscess, or sinus, not finding a free outlet, and thereby spreading
along the contiguous cellular substance, with numerous sinuses run-
ning in different parts ; and the matter from them is usually sharp and
acrid.

The most common form of the fistula in ano, after suppuration has
taken place, is an opening, or orifice, extending from the verge of the
anus, and running obliquely, and penetrating it or the rectum, at a
greater or less distance from its termination. This sinus has very
hard, callous edges throughout its course ; and the longer it has
existed, the greater is the callus, or hardness. It sometimes commu-
nicates with an internal cavity near the intestine ; and, although it
may not penetrate it immediately, which is somewhat doubtful, it
does eventually, as far as my experience goes, in every instance.
If a probe be passed up the orifice, and a finger up the anus, this
communication can be easily detected.


184 Fistula.

The following figure represents an ordinary fistula. Figure 1
represents the anus ; figure 2 represents the sinus ; and figure 3 the
nates, or verge of the anus.* The sinus, however, is usually much
nearer the termination of the intestine.


Sometimes there are two sinuses in the same neighbourhood, or
very near each other, and communicate together ; at other times, one
is directly opposite the other, or a considerable distance from it.
From this opening issues a thin or thick matter, or pus, and it is often
very copious, but occasionally there is very little or none for a cer-
tain period. Sometimes it will heal up for several days, then give
considerable pain, break out again, and freely discharge.

These symptoms depend very much upon the general health and
habits of the patient; but be they ever so good, such is the inveteracy
of a fistula in ano, that a spontaneous cure is seldom or never known.
It generally continues to increase and grow worse, until there is an
absorption of the fistulous virus or matter, which is translated to the
lungs, and ends in a phthisis pulmonalis, or consumption.

I know not but that one exception has occurred in all my practice.
A person of this city, when I first came here, requested me to exanwne
his fistula, which I did by passing up a probe about three inches.
There appeared to be very little discharge from it, and at the external
opening there was a little fleshy excrescence, or fungous flesh. He
was unwilling to have any thing done for it. After some length of
time, he informed me that it was then healed up, and had remained
well for a year or two ; and I have never heard that it has since
appeared, although this is somewhat doubtful. Possibly, the 'act of

* The lower termination of the great intestine, named the rectum, is so called,
and its office is to form an outlet for the faeces.

The anus is furnished with muscles which are peculiar to it, viz. the sphincter,
■which keeps it habitually closed, and the levatores ant, which serve to draw it up
into its natural situation, after the expulsion of the feeces. It is also surrounded, a*
well as the whole of the neighbouring intestine, with muscular fibres, and a very
loose sort of cellular substance.


Fistula. 185

passing up the probe might have excited sufficient adhesive inflamma-
tion to have healed it ; but this, I think, is still more improbable.

Some authors have divided this disease into several varieties : first,
into occult, when the sinus opens into the rectum only ; second, into
incomplete, when the sinus opens externally, but does not entirely
communicate with the rectum ; and, third, complete, when there is one
continuous opening from the nates through the intestine.

This distinction may be kept in view, but it is not very important
for any practical purpose.

Common Treatment.

The common method of treating a fistula in ano is by a surgical
operation, which consists, 1st, in making a common opening of the
fistula with the rectum, or the anus. A knife, or bistoury, is forced
up the opening, or orifice, until it communicates with the bowel, or
intestine ; the finger is passed up the rectum until it meets it, when
both are drawn down together, which makes one common opening.
It is afterwards simply dressed with lint, and attempts made to heal it.
2d. Some recommend this operation alone, while others attempt to cut
out the whole diseased flesh, or fistula.

This course has been pursued by surgeons for a great length of
time, both in Europe and America, but the practice is neither rational,
philosophical nor effectual. It is inconsistent with correct principles
of the healing art ; and although, like many other operations, is sane-
tioned by the highest authority, it ought to be abandoned. My objec-
tions to the operation are, 1st, it is exceedingly painful ; 2d, it is dan-
gerous, sometimes proving fatal by irritation, inflammation and morti-
fication that follows ; 3d, it is very uncertain in its effects, seldom or
never effecting a cure, even after several or successive operations
have been formed ; 4th, because I have a safer, milder, more effect-
ual, and a radical cure for the disease, without the use of the knife.

Ever since I commenced the practice of physic, I have been en-
deavouring to ascertain the merits of the ordinary treatment for this
complaint. I have seen many on whom the operation has been per-
formed, and some repeatedly, and I have found only one person, du-
ring all that time, who was really cured ; and he suspected that he'was
not sound ; besides, he came near losing his life by the extensive
cutting or incisions which were made. He informed me that such
was the fetor occasioned by the wound made by the operation, that
it was almost impossible to stay in his room. Another man informs
me that he had been operated upon five times for the fistula in ano
and still he was not cured. Among the number of patients afflicted
with this complaint, who have applied to me, a considerable proportion
oi them had undergone a formidable operation fbr it, and instead of
having received any benefit, were onlv injured ; and this effect must
be obvious to every rational person who reflects upon the pathology
or the nature of the disease. I would ask how the act of merely di-
viding a diseased or indurated mass of flesh, can remove it ? especially
when we take into consideration the morbid connexion that always
exists between contiguous parts. It is well known that a simple incised


186 Fistula.

wound readily heals ; and if inflammation be the object of performing
the operation, as some assert, it is quite insufficient to accomplish the
purpose. Not only so : as soon as there is a common opening made
between the fistula and the anus, it is very difficult to apply such
dressings to the ulcers as are calculated to remove it. They cannot
be applied directly to the diseased parts, and if they were, when the
faeces pass the bowels, they would probably be removed.

It is true, I have heard of some cures performed by the knife, but
upon strict inquiry, and upon the minutest examination, I know not
that I have ever witnessed a solitary case in which a permanent cure
had been effected, although occasionally, I think, the suppuration that
follows it, has proved effectual.

Again, how is it possible that a cure can be effected, when the sinus
is highly situated, very extensive, and beyond the reach of the finger.
In such a case, there is no chance or opportunity of curing it.

The after dressings, it is stated by every patient who submits to the
operation, are as painful as the operation itself; and this he must
daily submit to, besides the necessity of being confined to his room or
bed for a great length of time. Not only so : the consequence which
follows such treatment, is sometimes deplorable. The sphincter ani
is often cut, and the patient is unable to retain his stools, and they pass
off involuntarily, with other pernicious effects Which might be men-
tioned, such as haemorrhage or bleeding, in consequence of cutting
an artery.

What man, then, in his sober senses, will suffer a knife to be thrust
up his bowels, and the parts ripped open and mutilated, without any
prospect of a cure, when it can be removed by an easy, safe and sci-
entific course of treatment ?

The practice, then, is cruel, unnecessary and wrong. I know, by long
and repeated experience, that the fistula is curable by means which
are more expeditious, more easy, and neither hazardous in the use,
nor productive of evil in the event. It is true, the method which
I pursue will dispense with the knife, such a favourite with many,
almost wholly and entirely ; but it will be attended with success, and
produce that which every patient has a right to expect from his phy-
sician or surgeon — a speedy and permanent cure, without confinement
to his room or house, but, on the other hand, with ability to attend
daily to his ordinary business.

I shall now give an improved method of treating this disease, which
I have found altogether superior to that now pursued, and which has
invariably and infallibly, in my hands, succeeded in every stage of the
complaint ; and that, too, when our most popular surgeons have been
unable to cure it by repeated operations.

Reformed Practice.

The treatment of fistula depends upon the stage in which we are
inflammation, from that of suppuration or abscess. I shall first treat
of the means to be employed in its incipient, forming, or inflammatory
stage. First, moderate excessive inflammation ; second, diminish


Fistula. 187

painful or urgent symptoms ; third, promote suppuration if the swelling
cannot be discussed ; to accomplish which, the discutient ointment may
be first applied to the swelling ; immediately after which, let it be
steamed, or fomented, with the following :
Take Tansy,

Wormwood,
Horehound,
Catnip,

Hops, a handful of each.
Add water, and boil until the strength is extracted. Put the whole
into a small or suitable sized vessel, and add about half a pint of soft,
soap. Place a narrow piece of board over the vessel, or tub, and let
the patient sit over it fifteen or twenty minutes, with a blanket thrown
around him to retain the steam. A chamber, or bed pan, is well cal-
culated for this purpose. The process, or steaming, must be repeated
morning and night, or as often as the pain becomes severe.

This operation, in almost every case, immediately relieves the pa-
tient ; even when the parts are so tender before, that they cannot
bear the weight of the bed clothes, it so much diminishes the irrita-
bility and soreness, that the patient can afterwards bear considerable
pressure upon the swelling. In a word, it usually acts as a charm in
the most painful stage of the disease ; it not only allays the pain, but
promotes either resolution or suppuration.

As soon as the patient has been thus steamed, apply the following
poultice : Take cicula leaves, simmer in either milk or water, until
they are soft ; then add equal parts of powdered linseed and elm bark,
sufficient to form a poultice of proper consistence. Let this be applied
tepid, or blood warm. About a table spoonful of sweet oil may be
added. It is cooling, emollient, and prevents it from adhering to the
skin.
It will be necessary to renew this poultice morning and night.
I have found a ley poultice excellent, in many cases, where the other
did not agree with the patient.

Every time either poultice is applied, let the discutient ointment be
rubbed on the swelling.

It will be necessary, for the sake of convenience, as well as to secure
the dressings, to use a bandage, made by passing a piece of linen, of
a suitable width, just above the hips, and fastened on the right or left
side of the abdomen, with tapes or buttons ; a piece fastened to this
behind, and brought between the legs, and secured to the bandage
around the body ; likewise in front, or before, in the same manner.
This will effectually secure the poultice and the other dressings.


Vol. II.


188


Fislula.


The following figure represents this bandage, and will enable any
person to prepare it in a few minutes.


When the pain prevents sleep, and should not the means recom-
mended sufficiently mitigate it, a portion of the diaphoretic powders
may be given at bedtime, or an opium pill. Perspiration should like-
wise be promoted. The feet should be daily bathed, and warm tea
drank, and the skin thus kept moist.

It will be very necessary also to attend to the bowels : an emollient
purgative, should be given every day or two ; and the best is the
cold pressed castor oil ; the dose of which is an ounce.

Sometimes the parts become so swelled that any kind of physic
causes much pain. Under such circumstances injections must be
relied upon.

With this treatment the inflammation will gradually subside, and
matter or an abscess will form, which is usually very large and exten-
sive. This maybe known by a subsidence of the pain, redness, and
the tumour becoming softer, yielding readily upon pressure. Sometimes
the pus or matter concentrates more especially to a certain part of
the swelling, which projects a little, assuming a white appearance.
When these symptoms appear, it is recommended by surgeons to make
an incision and let out the matter, and this I have occasionally done-.
But I prefer, where the patient is willing to wait, to let the abscess
burst spontaneously, or by the aid of the poultice. There appears
to be less callus or hardness remaining, and the sinus is not so liable
to close. There appears to be a necessary digestive process for the
fluids to pass through before matter is formed, or is in a proper state to
be expelled.

It is surprising to see what avast quantity of matter these abscesses
contain, and how fetid the discharge is. I once opened one in a fe-
male, who had been previouly cut for the complaint, which poured


Fistula. 189

out a stream of the most offensive fluid, and rendered it almost im-
possible to continue in the room. I know not but it soon discharged
a quart.

It is equally astonishing how extensive oftentimes are the ravages
of this disease. I have seen the inner portion of the rectum com-
pletely denuded as far up as could be seen. I have seen it destroy
the parts from the anus to the testicle, as well as for a great distance
around it ; also, to extend into the vagina of women, and destroy the
adjacent integuments to a considerable extent, in which case a portion
of the matter is discharged by the vagina. When the disease be-
comes so seated or extensive, there is apt to be an absorption of the
fistulous virus or matter into the system, causing great constitutional
debility and disturbance. Sometimes it is translated to the lungs,
and terminates in the consumption. Indeed, this is the most usual
method of its proving fatal. Having, then, arrived at a stage of tho
disease in which suppuration has taken place, there must be a varia-
tion in the treatment. I mean, after the matter has been well evacu-
ated from the abscess, and the pain, swelling and inflammatory
symptoms have subsided ; for until this has taken place, the same
treatment must be continued, especially the poultice.

It sometimes happens, that even a real fistulous abscess will heal
up after a short time, but generally there remains an indurated
tumour, in the centre of which there is a small hole, orifice, or sinus,
from which the matter discharges, and which extends a greater or less
distance from the verge of the anus, running obliquely to the intes-
tinum rectum, communicates with it, lower or higher up^ or at a
greater or less distance from the end of the bowel or anus. The pe-
culiarity and difficulty of curing this disease is the hardness or callus
which lines the sinus. It is sometimes almost as hard as ligament,
or as tough as a piece of whitleather, and a person familiar with
the disease can trace the course of it with his finger from one end to
the other, without ever seeing it. -It is owing to this characteristic
symptom, that opening it with the knife or bistoury with the rectum
is so ineffectual.

Our next object, then, will be to remove this hardness, and place
the ulcer in a condition to heal ; to effect which, we have only to act
in the capacity of a servant to nature. We must watch with an eagle's
eye her attempts to remove the complaint, and all we have to do, is
to aid her in her efforts, when she is inadequate to the task ; and in
a fistula,*her attempts to restore health appear, in almost every case
on record, to be too feeble, and it therefore becomes our duty to render
assistance.

We see plainly what she endeavours to accomplish, which is such a
state of inflammation and discharge as will remove the callous edges
of the orifice, and by adhesive inflammation agglutinate, or unite the
separated parts together. Then, in obedience to the dictates of this
great teacher of the healing art, we must first prevent the sinus from
closing ; second, establish a greater, or preternatural discharge
from it. It is not sufficient to create inflammation alone, for this is
insufficient to heal the sore. Tho diseased parts must be first re-


190 Fistula.

moved, before it can be placed in a state for healing ; in other words,
we must remove the offending cause before a cure can be effected.

The first of these objects (the act of keeping open the fistula) may
be accomplished by introducing a suitable sized tent, made of the ravel-
lings of linen, or thread ; or a piece of twine will answer. It should
be made small, or pointed, at one end, similar to a probe, and drawn
through beeswax, or some plaster of a proper consistence, in order to
stiffen it ; and then it is to be introduced as far up the sinus as possi-
ble, and a very small portion left out ; after which, a little lint should
be placed on the end of it, and a plaster of the black salve applied.
On this a compress should be placed, and secured by the bandage,
as before mentioned. The tents should be gradually enlarged, to fill
the opening. Generally, when they are first introduced, they are
required to be exceedingly'small, and can be introduced only a very
short distance ; but the orifice becomes more open, and, in a short
time, larger ones can be used, and they will penetrate to the whole
depth of the ulcer : nor will they excite any pain, as many might
suppose ; for the matter soon renders them soft after their introduc-
tion. It is not sufficient to introduce these tents without any applica-
tion upon them. It is necessary to make use of some stimulating
agents ; and, for this purpose, I employ, with decided benefit, an
alkali, or preparation of potash. Let ley, made from hickory ashes,
be boiled down until it is perfectly dry ; then let it be removed from
the vessel, pulverized, and kept from the air. A few grains of this
must be put upon the tent every time it is introduced, which should
be morning and night. It soon alters the nature of the discharge,
rendering it more healthy, the fistula less irritable, and the inflamma-
tory state of the system is subdued.

It excites sharp pain for a few minutes ; but, instead of operating
like common caustics, causing greater inflammation, it removes it.

The carbonate of potash will answer the purpose, but I think does
not act so kindly as the preparation just mentioned. In the next
place, the syringe must be resorted to, to aid in curing the complaint ;
and we may commence by injecting into the sinus a solution of the
article just named. About one drachm of the alkali may be dissolved
in eight ounces of rain-water, and injected once a day, and the strength
of it gradually increased, as the patient can bear it. Weak ley answers
very well. The strength of it can be gradually increased, as may be
required : but there is no danger of using it very concentrated ; for
the cure is expedited in proportion to its strength. But we must be
governed by the feelings of the patient ; for they will not permit its
being used too strong, as it might cause too much pain. This liquid
yhould be injected once or twice a day.

Soon after a fistulous abscess breaks, the parts are too irritable to
bear the use of the syringe. A little time should be allowed for the
soreness to subside; and I often commence with the use of injections
consisting of Castile soap and water. Once a day, let the following
decoction be injected :
Take Blood-root — (sanguinaria Canadensis,)

Root of wild hellebore — (veralrum piride,)

Root of wild, or Indian turnip — [arum tryphiUum.)


Fistula. I 91

Bruise, and make a strong, concentrated dfccoction, by boiling several
hours. Let this be injected in the same manner. This course must
be pursued as long as the fistula continues to grow better ; although,
such is the insidious nature of the complaint, that, after the painful
symptoms have subsided, the patient is unable to decide whether he
is improving or not, although the callous, or hardened edges of the
fistula are daily diminishing.

The best and only sure criterion to ascertain whether the morbid
or diseased organization has been removed, is the quantity of matter
discharged when no dressings are applied ; and therefore, when the
fistula becomes pitted, or depressed around the edges, and the hardness
in a measure gone, a trial may be made to heal it, by omitting the use
of the tents and the syringe. The plaster, or salve, should only be
applied. This will enable the practitioner to decide whether the
discharge arises from the fistula itself, or whether it arises from the
stimulating properties of the agents or medicine made use of. For
/ may say, in a word, that the principle of cure depends upon the act of
making, and keeping up, a permanent issue, or drain, upon the fistula,
until the morbid nature of it is so destroyed, that the edges of the sinus
agglutinate and heal. In general, however, after these applications
have been used a sufficient length of time, the discharge of matter
will gradually diminish, and the fistula will close, in spite of the stimu-
lus arising from the dressings.

Sometimes there is a fistulous abscess, which does not appear
externally, but opens into the rectum. In operating for this, surgeons
recommend an artificial sinus, or opening, to be made, to enable them
to operate. I attended one case where this operation was performed
twice, with only injury to the patient. I afterwards treated him
according to the principles here laid down, and effected a radical
euro. When a ca^e of this kind presents, the anus or rectum must
be opened or distended with the fingers, and drawn out as far as
possible, and held in tin's situation a short time, which will, in most
cases, bring the orifice in sight ; and, when so, let the same dressings
be applied as before recommended. In general, I roll up a small
piece of lint, and introduce it into the sinus with a probe. When
the opening cannot be seen, its situation may be ascertained by either
the finger or probe, and then inject a solution of the alkali, and apply
it on lint. It will occasion no injury to the sound parts, but will act
with considerable power upon the fungus and spo of such an

ulcer; for in general, v, situated, they are soft, having but

little callus. It often is the case, that such sinuses extend into an
abscess situated superficially. And, when this ccuitc does not effect
a cure, my method is, to bend a silver probe, pass it up the sinus, and
press the end of it outward, or e\ and the end of the probe

may be felt upon the finger, or the integuments may be seen to rise
when it is pressed upon. The probe being thus in the opening, and
felt, or seen externally, a counter opening may be made, either by
a probe itself, or by cutling down upon it with a lancet, and thus
converting it into an ordinary fistula, which must be treated in the
manner as others.
'ii : it is sometimes the case, that an abscess forms near the


192 Fistula.

rectum, and finds its way externally, without penetrating it. ( This,
by surgeons, is termed an incomplete fistula ; but I have to remark,
in relation to it, that this is a veiy wrong name, as it constitutes a
perfect fistula in every respect ; and although it does not communicate
immediately with the rectum, (which I have almost always found
to be the case,) yet, in a very short time, it invariably works its
way through. Indeed, it sometimes has been a matter of doubt to
me, whether a case of this kind ever occurs ; for it is one of the
characteristic symptoms of the disease for the sinus to penetrate
some cavity or canal.

The treatment for a fistula in this state (should it happen) is the
same as any other.

It is always best to wait, before dressing the fistula, till there has
been an evacuation from the bowels, provided this generally takes
place daily, and in the morning, as the applications are sometimes
disturbed by the passages.

The parts should first always be well washed and cleansed with
soap and water, to which a little spirit has been added.

It is better for the practitioner to attend personally to the dressings,
if practicable, as this will facilitate the cure. But, in more than half
the cases which have been attended, I have been unable, from a mul-
tiplicity of business, to do it, and have therefore committed it to the
wife, husband, or a friend ; and, although a cure is invariably made,
yet it is often much more protracted. A person well experienced in
the treatment can cure it in half the time which will be required for
any one who must first be instructed, and then act only under the
supervision of the physician.

In making objections to my practice, some have asked, how can my
application be made to a fistula when it runs very crooked or obliquely,
or perhaps passes off laterally into the flesh ? In answer to which, I
have to observe, that I know not that any such case occurs. At any
rate, I have never yet seen a fistula in which I could not introduce
the medicine to the very extent or bottom of it, either by the use
of the syringe, or by some of the other means recommended. But,
should this not be the case, if the applications do not penetrate to the
bottom, provided a cure is performed, the modus operandi of the agents
employed is of little moment. It is sufficient for us to know that they
have the desired effect.

Should, from any cause, the disease become stationary, or should
it not improve as fast as desirable, a few grains of the mineral caustic
may be applied two or three times a week, and the following plaster
used : take the

Inspissated juice of the poke-berry— (phytolacca decandra,)

Extract of blood-root — (sanguinaria is,)

equal parts; mix or incorporate well together. Spread on linen,
and apply night and morning, instead of the plaster first mentioned.
These last dressings will excite a pretty free or copious discharge
from the fistula ; and, when the powder is applied to the tent, it excites
considerable pain for six or twelve hours, after which, it begins to dis-
charge very freely, and, in a few days, very much alters the character
of the ulcer. In using this, it sometimes becomes necessary to apply


Fistula. 193

the elippery-elm bark poultice, to remove the inflammation which
it creates ; and it should he used at any time, in the course of the
disease, when there are inflammatory symptoms arising from any
cause whatever.

It is necessary to administer internal, as well as external applica-
tions. A purgative should be given once a week, and, in addition, an
alterative course pursued, to remove any morbid taint that may exist
or give rise to the complaint ; for this purpose, nothing is better than
the alterative syrup, which the patient may take three or four times a
day, as directed under that head.

I have occasionally taken another method to expedite the cure.
Where the patient is very anxious to have the ulcer healed in the
shortest space ©f time, I have pursued the following course. After
the dressings already mentioned have been applied a sufficient length
of time to promote a free discharge, and the callous edges have been
thus broken down, or measurably destroyed, and after it has become
enlarged, and the connexion between it and the rectum rendered
small which follows this treatment ; in order sooner to bring the
divided edges of the fistula in contact, or to promote the healing of it
more readily, I take a probe, bend it, and introduce the blunt edge
through the sinus into the rectum ; and after dipping the little finger
in sweet oil, let it be slowly passed into the anus until it comes in
contact with the end. Let it be held a few minutes in this situation,
to relax the muscles, which it does most extensively and almost in-
credibly ; then push gently upon the probe with one hand while pressure
is made upon the end of the probe with the other, which is within the
anus ; bend it at the same time that the end is brought externally, or
out of the rectum ; which, when done, tie or fasten to the end of it
a piece of silk or thread, or put it through the eye. The probe then
should be drawn back, in the same manner in which it was introduced,
taking care as it is returned, that it be a little rebent, in order that it
may easily return.

This operation brings the silk or thread through the sinus and the
rectum as a matter of course. Sometimes it can be passed through
in a very few minutes ; at others, it requires a longer period, and is
somewhat tedious, but can always be effected by a little perseverance.

The ends of the ligature should now be tied and a little tightened,
after which let the black plaster be applied with a compress and band-
age to secure it. I have tried various ways to introduce the ligature
by means of certain instruments, wires, &c, but I have always suc-
ceeded best with a probe. A gold wire may be passed through, in-
stead of silk or thread, but I know not that it has any advantages
over it.

The ligature, of whatever kind it is, should be a little tightened in
order to accomplish the object designed ; which is to make one com-
mon opening of the sinus with the intestinum rectum.

The advantages of this will be readily perceived. First, it creates,
or establishes, a permanent drain on the seat of the disease ; second, it
excites adhesive inflammation, and has a tendency to agglutinate or
heal the fistula ; and, third, laying the fistula entirely open with the
rectum, it heals more readilv than in a state of sinus, by admitting


194 Fistula.

healthy granulations to shoot up from the bottom of the sore, without
any obstruction from pus or any other cause. According, then, to
this method of practice, the ligatures are to be tightened, or twisted,
from time to time, by means of a small piece of metal or wood, to
which it should be tied in the centre ; or it is sufficient to twist the
ligature as much as the patient can bear, and secure it by applying
the black plaster. It produces some inflammation, and the discharge
is considerably increased.

This process compresses the part of the rectum usually divided by
the bistoury, so as to occasion ulceration and an absorption of the
part. In this way the sinus gradually heals above the ligature, and
by the time the parts are divided, or ulcerated through, if the callus
has been previously destroyed by proper treatment, the cure is
nearly, or quite completed. It is very necessary to introduce lint
into the part divided, to prevent them, if possible, from uniting, or
healing, too soon, lest some portion of the disease should remain.

I have, in one or two instances, divided the parts with a bistoury ;
for, after the fistula has been treated as laid down, such is the enlarge-
ment of the opening, with the removal of the diseased parts, that very
little pain is produced by simply dividing it. But I prefer the other
method ; first, because the parts do not unite so readily as they do after
an incised wound ; second, because the patient almost invariably
shudders at the thought of using a knife ; and, lastly, the ligature con-
tributes far more to eradicate the disease by the adhesive inflam-
mation and ulceration which it produces, and which is not effected by
simply dividing it with the bistoury.

Let not the advocates for the knife say, from this statement, that this-
treatment resembles theirs, because it does not scarcely in the least
respect, inasmuch as simply dividing the parts is the least distinguish-
ing feature in the improvement ; nor do we recommend^this, as abso-
lutely necessary. I formerly cured the disease without any such
practice, and now only advise recourse to be had to it, as before inti-
mated, where it becomes necessary to eradicate the disease in the
shortest space of time, or Avhere it assumes an unusually obstinate
character.

A fistula in ano is certainly one of the most obstinate, the most
loathsome, and the most serious diseases that afflicts the human body ;
and, in consequence of its inveterate nature, it requires considerable
time to effect a permanent cure, especially when the disease has be-
come deeply seated. No definite time can be given in which it can
be cured. In some cases it can be effected in a few weeks ; others
will require a number of months. But where the treatment here laid
down is strictly pursued, it will infallibly cure the disease.

I have thus given the description, causes, symptoms, with the com-
mon and reformed treatment of fistula in ano; and I must now submit
it (as I do the treatment of other complaints) to those who have
honesty and candour sufficient to appreciate, or test, the practice which
I have recommended ; and I hope they will ascertain, by experience,
the comparative merits of both the old and reformed, or improved
method : hoping that prejudice will not so far blind the eyes of the.


Fistula. 195

practitioner as to prevent him from giving the treatment of this, or
any other disease, a fair and impartial trial.

We have experience and facts for our superstructure ; and we,
therefore, solicit any one to overthrow it if possible, by fair and
honourable means.

My mode of treating the fistula in ano, in particular, has exeited
much attention, and has induced some physicians, who have had the
most indubitable evidence of its efficacy and superiority, to request me
to publish it to the world.

I have done so, not only as regards this, but other diseases ; and I,
for the merits of the same, must appeal for a decision to an enlight-
ened, a candid and impartial public.

As considerable pains and exertions were taken, some years ago,
by one of our most distinguished merchants, to extend the benefits of
our improved method of treating fistula to other parts, and as he was
defeated in his philanthropic designs by the envy and jealousy mani-
fested by the most egregious misrepresentations, falsehood and ca-
lumny, I shall now give some statement of the facts, by way of illus-
tration.

Fifteen years ago, when I resided about sixty miles from this
place, 1 attended a gentleman from this city, who was afflicted with a
fistula in ano, (for which a surgical operation was proposed as tho
only remedy,) and I succeeded in effecting a cure. On his return to
New- York, he communicated the fact to another citizen, a man of
considerable note and standing in society, by the name of A. L. De-
grove, who had been, for many years, a collector of the fourth ward
of this city, and who stated, that if I would come to New-York, and
cure him, he would pay me very liberally. I accordingly came, com-
menced the treatment of his complaint, and soon removed it. Ac-
cording to his promise, he gave me a check upon the bank for a
handsome sum of money ; and about the same time, in gratitude for
the services rendered, presented me with a liberal donation. Nor
was this all ; so anxious was he for his fellow men afflicted with this
loathsome and distressing disease, to have the same benefits extended
to them, that he went in every direction of the city to solicit those
having the disease to apply to me for medical aid.

Being a man of considerable influence, he induced almost every
one to apply ; and in consequence of having treated these success-
fully, my reputation and practice became established ; and that, too, in
the face of much opposition from the selfish, the illiberal and preju-
diced portion of the faculty. Mr. A. G. Thompson, one of the most
wealthy and respectable merchants or auctioneers of this city, having
ascertained the merits of our practice in this and some other com-
plaints, expressed an anxiety that its benefits should be extended to
others ; and that I should meet with a suitable remuneration for the
discoveries and improvements made in the healing art.

As he had very little hope that our government, or any body of
men, would bestow their patronage for any improvement of the kind ;
and entertaining an exalted opinion of the character of Alexander,
the late Emperor of Russia, in patronizing every thing useful, or
calculated to benefit mankind, he applied to Mr. Bogart, then Vice

Vol. II. 2 A


196 Fistula.

Consul of Russia, and requested him to call personally upon some of
the persons whom I had cured, and obtain their certificates. Accord-
ingly, I introduced him to many of the persons whom I had cured ;
whereupon their certificates were procured, and the Consul attached
the Russian seal to them. These were forwarded, with a letter from
Mr. Thompson, to the Emperor Alexander, giving a brief history of the
treatment. In a few months an answer was received from the Rus-
sian court, directed to Mr. Poletica, the Russian Minister, then at the
city of Washington, stating, that if I would repair to Russia, I should
be rewarded according to deserved merit. This information was com-
municated to Mr. Thompson, from Mr. Poletica, through Mr. Lomo-
nosoflf, the Russian Consul General at Philadelphia.

While calculations were making to undertake this expedition, with
a view to introduce this practice in Europe, intelligence of the fact, or
the transaction, was communicated to Dr. David Hosack, or some in-
quiries made of him respecting the improvement ; and although he
professed great friendship for me at the time, having attended his lec-
tures when Professor of the Theory and Practice in the University of
the state of New-York; yet, in consequence of his prejudices or mis-
representation, the expedition was broken up, and I have been under
the necessity of suffering the consequences of such injustice and
cruel conduct ever since. But it now affords me great pleasure to
have this opportunity to lay these facis before the public, and I hope
eventually before Nicholas, the present Emperor of Russia. Ten
years had elapsed before I ascertained the reason that we were
defeated in our attempts to introduce this practice in Europe. The
circumstances were communicated to me, during my last visit to Phil-
adelphia, through Mr. LomonosofF.

In concluding this chapter on fistula, I shall depart from my usual
method, and briefly report a few cases, to illustrate the principles laid
down. The limits of this work will not permit me to give them in
detail.

CASE I.

Mr. Henry Crocheron, merchant, recently residing at the corner of
Wliitehall and Front streets, was attacked with a. fistula, termed by sur-
geons occult, in which the fistulous abscess burst into the rectum, from
which issued constantly a sanious matter. He applied to a surgeon
of this city, Dr. M***, or F*?*, who made an artificial sinus at the
verge of the anus up to the ulcer ; or his attempts were to effect this.
He then cut down in the usual manner, and afterwards dressed it with
lint. After trying a length of time to heal it, he could not succeed,
and performed another severe operation without any benefit.

In this situation I was called to him, and such was the difficulty
attending the disease, that I was unable precisely to discover its
state, situation, or extent. The orifice extended some distance up
the rectum, so far that I could not discover its course ; but from the
quantity of the discharge, and other symptoms, it was evident that
there was much mischief taking place in the deep seated parts. I
commenced the treatment by applying the alkaline pouder on lint. I


Fistula. 197

pushed it up with the probe, until I was satisfied that it reached the
sore, from the pain which it created. I also injected a solution of
the same article as before mentioned. It gradually mended, and in a
few months he was well, and has remained so a dozen years.

CASE II.

Mr. Anthony Graves, then residing at the corner of Oak and Catlia-
rine streets, was attacked with a fistula which was exceedingly pain-
ful, and which confined him to his bed. Great swelling, inflamma-
tion, and abscess succeeded, which left the part in a very diseased
state. There were two or three sinuses. Two surgeons called, and
told him that there was no other alternative, but to have it extirpated
by the knife. A gentleman whom I had cured, hearing of his situa-
tion, called, and recommended him to have the disease cured without
an operation. But, such was the confidence that he had in his physi-
cian, that he found it almost impossible to induce him to have re-
course to any other mode of treatment. Upon his offering, however,
to pay the bill in case I did not succeed in effecting a cure, he finally
consented that I should attend him.

I commenced the treatment by subduing the inflammatory symp-
toms ; and then, by applying the other medicine recommended, the
ulcer soon healed, and he became sound in three or four months.

The gratitude shown by this family ever since, has, to me, been a
source of great satisfaction. In addition to having been liberally
compensated for my services, I have repeatedly received donations ;
and so grateful has been this family, that they have presented the
person who recommended me with one or more handsome presents.

case in.

Mr. William Gallaudet, now merchant in NewRochelle, had been
for some time labouring under a fistula in ano, for which a surgical
operation had been performed, by Dr. N. Smith, but he was only
rendered worse by it. He applied to me, in a very deplorable condi-
tion. A fistulous ulcer extended far up the rectum, for which an
operation had been performed, and upon examination another was
found, which had been entirely overlooked by his physician. He
was very much reduced and emaciated when I first saw him, and his
general health had suffered exceedingly. There was a constant dis-
charge from the fistula, and no prospect of his recovery without a
change of treatment. I applied the usual dressings, which acted fa-
vourably, and soon produced an amendment.

He daily grew better in every respect, and in a few months he
was able to resume his business, and he has been perfectly sound for
many years.

CASE iv.

Captain Lijon, master and owner of one of the ships which sails
between this, New-Orleans and France, applied to me a few years


198 Fistula.

ago to be treated for the fistula in ano. The parts for some distance
around the anus, were extensively diseased, and he had had it for a
length of time. He had applied to one or more surgeons, who told him
there was no other method of curing him than submitting to an opera,
tion by the knife. I commenced by treating him with the usual appli-
cations, and after the sinuses were opened, the parts were found in a
very diseased state. The medicine, however, soon brought them into
a healthy condition, and in a few months he was perfectly cured.

In one of his voyages to France, he afterwards informed me, that
he went to Paris, and showed the parts, which had been the seat of
the fistula, to one of the oldest and most popular surgeons in the city,
who said to him, " You have no fistula there ;" in other words, you
are perfectly free of it. I think he had three or four different open-
ings, or sinuses, one or two of which extended two inches up the
rectum.

case v.

Mr. Jacob Anthony, cashier or teller in the United States Bank, had
been afflicted some time with a fistula.

Dr. V B , his family physician, recommended him to sub-
mit to our course of treatment. He applied, and upon examination I
found that the fistulous sinus was extensive, and penetrated in a very
crooked direction, which rendered the cure more difficult. There
was much callus attending it, and a constant discharge. Our usual
dressings were applied, and although he was attended for a consider-
able length of time, a permanent cure was effected, and he has been
well for many years.

CASE VI.

Captain Gregory was recommended to submit to our course of treat-
ment, for a very obstinate fistula, for which he had been labouring
for some time, by Dr. Conger, his family physician, who had seen the
effect of our practice on a friend of his, whom I had cured of the same
complaint. When I saw the patient, I found the disease had commit-
ted very great ravages. The integuments had been destroyed from
the verge of the anus to the perineum, and which had left a large,
flabby, fistulous abscess, and which was connected with a great cavity
underneath. The usual course of treatment was pursued, which en-
tirely cured him. After the cure had been performed, I conversed
with the physician who recommended him,Dr.Conger, and he gave the
following opinion of the course of treatment, in comparing it with the
common or old method. " Your mode of treating the fistula," said
he, "is the most scientific."

CASE VII.

Mr. Meyers, who then resided in Water-street, near Catharine, had
applied to Dr. M., of this city, a noted operative surgeon, who per-
formed a most severe operation without any benefit, afterwards ap-


Fistula. 1"

plied to us for the treatment of his complaint. One or two orifices
extended very far up into the rectum, callous edges, great discharge,
<Scc. From its extent and different ramifications, we found it very
difficult to treat ; but we finally eradicated it, and he has been well
for many years.

A few hours ago, a lady, recommended by the same gentleman,
called with her daughter, afflicted with a fistula, and requested
me to treat it, stating that she had applied to several practitioners, but
none had cured it.


CASE VIII.

Captain Knapp, who owns and sails a vessel from this place, was
confined a length of time to his bed with a fistula. I was called to
see him, and found that he was afflicted with an ordinary fistula in ano.
I gave him my view of his disease, and our mode of practice, and
he seemed inclined to submit to it ; but, being attended by his brother-
in-law, Dr. F., and Dr. M., professors of surgery in the medical
school of this city, he concluded first to ask their advice, whether
there was any other method of curing the disease than an operation
by the knife. Upon their next visit, he asked their opinion, and they
told him that it was impossible for the disease to be cured without an
operation, and he therefore submitted to one, which was very formida-
ble, and which, together with the subsequent treatment, reduced him
very low, and confined him to the house for many months.

I heard no more from this man from the time I was first called, till
nearly a year had expired, when he called upon me, and gave a state-
ment, of the course which had been pursued by these physicians. I
examined his fistula, and found that he had been extensively cut ; the
wound being several inches long, and gaping widely, with indurated
edges, a free discharge of pus or matter.

1 applied our mildest dressings to the wound and fistulous ulcer,
which improved their condition, and after a few months it healed ; and
during the whole time he was enabled to attend to his ordinary busi-
ness. He regretted exceedingly that he had not applied at first. He
said that it had cost him, taking into account the bills of his physi-
cian, board and loss of time, about a thousand dollars, and after all,
only made worse.


Mr. Mahlon Day, bookseller, residing in Pearl-street, near Frank-
fort, was attacked with a fistula in ano, attended with all the ordinary
symptoms. He applied to the late Dr. Kissam, a noted operative
surgeon, who immediately performed a surgical operation. He after-
wards dressed it with lint, in the usual manner ; but it did not heal ;
and the reason of which is explained in this chapter, under the head
of " common treatment."

Some time after this, he requested me to attend him. I pursued
with him the usual course of treatment, viz. established a preternatu-
ral discharge upon the disease, which soon brought about a healthy


'200 Fistula.

state, and completely eradicated it, and he has been well for many
years. In company with him the other day, he voluntarily offered to
give me a certificate of the cure, but believing them to be of very
little service, I declined receiving it.


Mr. Mather, ink manufacturer, now residing at the corner of
Greene and Prince streets, was attacked with pain, swelling and in-
flammation near the rectum, which continued to increase until he was
thrown into the most excruciating agony. It was exceedingly irrita-
ble, became enormously large, and, after a length of time, suppuration
took place, but left a very large abscess with two openings, one or
both communicating with the rectum, and which were both very ex-
tensive. He applied to a physician or surgeon, who, as a matter of
course, proposed an operation ; but, understanding that some had been
cured without one, he concluded to make trial of the same process,
and accordingly placed himself under our care. I pursued the usual
course in treating it ; and although I found it. exceedingly obstinate
from the induration, with the crooked direction in which the sinuses
extended, as well as their great depth, after a few months was per-
fectly cured, and has been sound for many years.

After the cure was performed, I requested one of our most noted
operative surgeons to examine it, which he did ; and, under an im-
pression that he had been cured by a surgical operation with the
knife, he exultingly exclaimed, " that is cured, and handsomely done ;
who performed the operation ?" or words to that effect. Had this sur-
geon known that it had been cured by any different method than that
laid down by authors or practitioners, he would not, I presume, so
readily have given his testimony in favour of the method pursued to
effect it.

CASE XI.

Mr. Clarice, a wholesale grocer, store at the corner of Roosevelt and
Front streets, had been a long time afflicted with a fistula in ano. He
had submitted to one or two surgical operations, without having been
cured. I attended him, and treated his disease as usual, which en-
tirely removed it ; and he has remained well for ten years.

CASE XII.

Mr. George Peterson, then leather inspector of this city, had been
for some time labouring under a fistula, for which he was told there
was no other remedy but the knife. The sinus, as usual, communi-
cated with the rectum, with hardness, pain, inflammation, discharge,
&c. My usual course permanently cured him, and he has remained
well for many years. ^

CASE XIII.

Mr. Emmons, grocer, residing at the corner of Hester and Ludlow
streets, was attacked with a fistula, and called upon a surgeon of this


Fistula. 201

city, who told him that he must submit to a surgical operation to have
it removed. He afterwards applied at our institution, and the ordinary
course of treatment entirely cured him.

CASE XIV.

Mr. Allen, a mason by trade, now residing at the corner of the
Bowery and Grand-street, had been, for a length of time, labouring
under a fistula. It was very painful, swelled and inflamed, and there
was a constant discharge from it. He was treated in the ordinary
manner, and cured, and has remained well for a number of years.


CASE xv.

Mr. Lewis, now residing in Fulton-street, opposite the Fulton mar-
ket, had been afflicted with the fistula for some time, and had extended
some distance towards the spine, communicating with the rectum, a
considerable distance above the sphincter ani. Its situation was such,
that it seemed almost impossible to use the medicine in such a manner
as was- necessary to remove it ; but, by applying it very far up the
rectum, where the sinus apparently communicated with it, the fistula
began to improve, and eventually healed.

CASE XVI.

Mr. Murdoch, collector of the 13th ward, was attacked with a
fistulous abscess, which his family physician was unable to cure.
After submitting to our course of treatment, he soon began to mend;
and the fistula, as far as I now know, is sound.


CASE XVII.

Mr. Kline, of this city, an habitual drunkard, applied to me to be
treated for a fistula. In consequence of his intemperate habits, it
seemed that the disease could not be cured. But after a few months
he entirely recovered.

CASE XVIII.

A merchant from Columbia county, near Hudson, placed himself
under my charge, for the treatment of the same disease, and the
course pursued entirely eradicated it. I have seen him frequently
since, and have ascertained that he remains well.


CASE XIX.

An elderly man, name not recollected, applied to our office some
time ago, afflicted with this complaint, who stated that he had been
operated upon five times, and yet was not cured. We treated him as
usual, and in the course of a lew months he recovered.


202 Fistula.


casb xx.


Mrs. Nash, of this city, had a fistula in ano, for which she supposed
there was no remedy without the knife. In six weeks after submitting
to our course of treatment, the fistula was sound.


CASE XXI.

Mr. , name not in our possession, wheelwright by trade, then

living in Crosby-street, had a most inveterate fistula ; the pain, swell-
ing and inflammation were very great. The same course of treat-
ment as laid down in this work restored him to health in a few
months, and he has remained so eight or ten years.

CASE XXII.

Mr. Peter Graham, of this city, applied to us with a fistula in ano,
attended with considerable discharge, callosity or hardness, and the

sinus extended up to the rectum. He applied to Dr. M , a noted

surgeon of this city, and two other physicians, who were unable to
cure it, and who proposed a surgical operation. We treated it in the
usual manner, and in a short time it healed. The patient is now be-
fore me, who states, that it has not broken out or reappeared since,
a term of four years ; and he further states, that he feels confident
that it never will.

CASE XXIII.

Mr. Pray, shoe dealer, of this city, was attacked with a fistula in
ano, which impaired his general health, and affected one side and
leg so extensively, that he was rendered very lame. The discharge
was profuse and fetid, the abscess large, and it burrowed very deep
into the surrounding cellular substance. It had existed for a length of
time, and continually grew worse. His only hope of a cure was by a
surgical operation ; but, from seeing some who had been cured with-
out the knife, he placed himself under our care, and in a few months
all the unfavourable symptoms subsided, the fistula healed, and it has
remained well for many years.


Fistula in the Perineum. 203

Fistula in the Perineum.

Description.

By this disease, we understand an abscess which terminates in a
fistulous sinus into the perineum, and penetrates the urethra, which
carries the water off from the bladder.

Causes.

The disease may be occasioned by false passages made by means
of the catheter, or it may be occasioned by strictures in the urethra,
which retains or greatly obstructs the discharge of urine, and inflam-
mation and ulceration takes place behind the strictured part, which
terminates in an opening or sinus externally, or in the perineum.
The same circumstance also results in some cases from accidental
injuries to the perineum, which terminates in ulceration, causing a
fistulous opening.

Symptoms.

This species of fistula commences with great pain, swelling, and
inflammation in the perineum, often by the urine becoming extrava-
sated into the cellular texture in the vicinity of the urethra. Suppura-
tion and sloughing now follow, and there is left a fistulous opening,
or ulcer, through which the urine discharges. It often happens, says
Bell, that in these diseases of the perineum, the urine obtaining a free
discharge by the fistulous opening, the original stricture is more and
more contracted, and a considerable part of the canal is totally obli-
terated.

The parts around and in the sinus are sometimes as tough and as
hard as ligament ; and the orifice is sometimes very small, and, if not
cured, will remain opening during life. In the integuments of the
perineum and scrotum, there are abscesses and sinuses running in
various directions, and they are knotty, hard and irregular, with one
or more outlets for the urine.

Common Treatment.

An operation by the knife. A longitudinal incision is made down
through the fistula into the urethra. Others recommend that the whole
diseased or fistulous flesh be cut out or extirpated.

Reformed Practice^

The treatment of this species of fistula is nearly the same as the
fistula in ano. A leading indication is to remove the stricture, and
thereby give a free passage for the urine to flow through its natural
channel. This will be effected by daily introducing a bougie \ at the
same time applying the dressings to the ulcef as recommended under
the head of fistula in ano. If there is inflammation, poultices must
be applied to reduce it. After which, the callus or indurated intcgu*
ments must be broken down in order to heal it ; to effect which, apply
the discutient ointment, the black plaster, as before mentioned, with
tents rolled or charged with the stimulating powders, injections, &c.

Vol. II. 2B


204 Fistula Lachrymalis.

A case occurs to me now, which I cured many years ago, for which

an operation had been performed by Dr. M , of this city. Tha

edges of the ulcer were exceedingly hard, extending a considerable
distance around it, and every time the urine was voided, a portion
went naturally through the urethra, and the other portion ran a
stream through the fistulous opening.

He stated that when the operation was performed by the knife, be-
fore I commenced with him, the most horrid sensations were produced
by it. To use his own expressions, he said, it appeared to him that
all his entrails were torn out.


Fistula Lachrymalis.

The tears secreted by the lachrymal gland, after lubricating the
eye, are taken up by the puncta lachrymalia, and conveyed to the
lachrymal sac, whence they pass through the ductus ad nasum into
the nose. This ductus ad nasum, however, is liable, like all other
canals in the body, to stricture. Whenever, in consequence of a stric-
ture in this duct, the course of the tears into the nose is interrupted,
they accumulate in the sac, which becomes tumid,' and upon being
pressed they regurgitate and flow partly over the cheek and partly
through the nasal duct. The tumour is situated on one side of the
root of the nose, below the inner canthus of the eye. The tears are
constantly overflowing the eye ; because, the sac being full, the
puncta can receive no more. To the disease in this state, the term
fistula is improperly applied. The patient experiences but little in-
convenience from it, except a constant watery eye ; no pain and in-
flammation exist. Eventually, however, the stricture becomes com-
plete, the sac inflames and suppurates, and now a fistulous sore is
formed, which discharges tears, mixed with mucus and pus. It is
generally accompanied with inflammation of the eye, and often with
caries of the os unguis. The puncta, in this stage, are often obstruct-
ed, and no tears find their way into the sac, but all which are secreted
pass over the eyelids.

Common Practice.

A variety of instruments and operations have been recommended
for the removal of this troublesome complaint, but none of them
seems yet to have been found effectual.

The general practice among surgeons is now to perforate the os
unguis, and then to introduce a nail headed style or silver tube. When
the perforation is completed, air passes out of the nose through the
wound, and blood flows through it into the nostril. Ware's plan was
to introduce the style or silver tube through the duct, and continue it
for a great length of time. This process is much more rational, less
painful, and more effectual than the other.

"Unfortunately," says Cooper, " for the scheme of making an ar-
tificial passage, nature was generally so busy, that she completely
frustrated the aim of the surgeon, by gradually filling up the new
aperture again. Hence, some practitioners were not content with


Fistula Lachrymalis. 205

drilling a hole through the os unguis, but actually removed a portion
of this bone ; either with the forceps proposed by Lamorier in 1729,
(see Mtm. de VAcad. des Sciences,) or with cutting instruments, among
which the most celebrated is the sharp-edged kind of cannula, devised
by Hunter. While this was being applied, however, it was necessary
to support the os unguis with something passed up the nose, and a
piece of horn was found to answer very well. Instead of these
methods, Scarpa prefers destroying a portion of the os unguis with
the actual cautery passed through a cannula ; a practice long ago
banished from good surgery, and most justly condemned by Richter.
" I do not feel it necessary to enter very particularly into the details
of these methods of forming an artificial passage between the la-
chrymal sac and nostril. I have never seen a case in which I should
have deemed such practice advisable ; and that the necessity for it
must be rare, may be inferred from what Mr. Travers has observed,
viz. that he does not believe the perforation of the os unguis ever
really required. — (Synopsis, &c. p. 379.) Beer's remarks are also de-
cidedly against the practice ; for he states, that in order that the new
opening may not be closed with lymph, it must be made too high up
to serve the purpose of a drain through which the mucus can descend
by its own gravity. He has not met with a single case, either in liis
own practice, or among the patients whom he has had opportunities
of seeing under other practitioners, where the perforation of the os
unguis had a successful result. On the contrary, in one healthy lad,
the operation, which had been done by an experienced surgeon, was
followed by the destruction of the nasal process of the upper maxil-
lary bone, one of the ossa nasi, and all the bones contributing to the
formation of the passage from the orbit into the nose. — (See Lehre
von den Augenkr. b. 2. p. 182.) Hence, Beer thinks that the patient
had better either submit to the inconvenience of being obliged to
empty the distended sac by pressure several times a day, or let the
cavity of the sac be obliterated by means calculated to excite the ad-
hesive inflammation in it. But if the lachrymal puncta and ducts, as
well as the nasal duct, are obliterated, Beer conceives that there is
no alternative ; because, if the cavity of the sac be left, the case
which he terms hydrops sacculi lachrymalis will ensue whenever the
fistula is closed."

Reformed Practice.

I must confess that I have not been as successful in the treatment
of this disease as I could have wished ; and this has been owing, in
part, to the peculiar nature of the complaint, and partly to the want
of perseverance on the part of the patient. But I cannot, however,
see why it may not be successfully treated in every instance, by a
proper or judicious course.

It called to treat a person labouring under this disease in a state of
inflammation, the ordinary means must be taken to reduce it. When
suppuration takes place, or there is a tumour or abscess formed in the
canthus of the eye, it may be suffered to burst, or it may be punctured ;
after which it must be kept open, and a discharge promoted by the
use of tents charged with the vegetable caustic ; and the opening must


206 Fistula Lachrymalis.

be injected two or three times a day with a solution of the same arti-
cle ; and if this proves insufficient to break down the callous edges
of the sinus, and remove the obstruction, a very few grains of the
mineral caustic may be introduced on the tent, and in this manner it
should be kept open and discharging as long as possible. The marsh-
mallow ointment should be applied two or three times a day, and also
the stimulating eye water.

A powder, composed of equal parts of tobacco, white hellebore
and coWs foot, may be frequently snuffed up the nose, in order to
remove the obstruction in the lachrymal duct. If a common tent is
insufficient to keep the orifice open, introduce a piece of catgut, or
a tent made of silver, with a small head to it. A piece of lint may
be applied, with the black salve over it. By perseverance in this
treatment, the disease may often be very successfully treated.

A European practitioner gives an ingenious method of treating this
complaint, which I shall here subjoin.

Obstruction of the Nasal Duct.

That a permanent closure of this canal does not so frequently
attend diseases of the lachrymal organs, as writers have generally
imagined, must be evident from the remarks already delivered ; and
also that its perviousness, when interrupted partly by inflammation
and thickening of its lining, and partly by the viscid, curdy nature of
the matter, may generally be restored without thrusting any probes,
tubes, or other instruments, down the passage, (measures more likely,
under these circumstances, to do harm than good,) is a fact which is
no longer questionable. The treatment necessary in such cases must
be already intelligible, from what has been said in the preceding
sections, the indication being the diminution of the thickened state of
the mucous membrane, by means adapted to the acute or chronic
form of the inflammation, and, in many cases, the correction, also,
of the morbid state of the Meibomian glands and internal membrane
of the eyelids. It is only when the treatment, conducted upon these
mild principles, is found ineffectual, that the surgeon should think of
examining the state of the nasal duct, and learning, by the introduction
of a fine probe into the passage, whether any permanent stricture or
obstruction is present. It does not appear to me that it is a matter
of much importance, whether the probe be made of whalebone, as
Beer recommends, or of silver ; but that it should not be too thick, is
a thing certainly deserving greater attention. Supposing there is no
direct opening through the skin into the lachrymal sac, one should be
made with a lancet. However, a mere puncture will suffice, as a large
incision, beginning just below the tendon of the orbicularis palpebra-
rum muscle, and extending, in a semilunar form, nearly an inch
downwards and outwards, as used to be the old practice, can here
answer no rational object, the surgeon merely having occasion for a
small direct opening, through which he may conveniently pass a small
probe, for the purpose of ascertaining the state of the nasal duct.
" The probe (as Mr. M'Kenzie observes) is to be introduced horizon-
tally, till it touches the nasal side of the sac ; it should then be raised


Fistula Lachrymalis. 207

into a vertical position, and its point directed downwards and a little
backwards. Turning the probe upon its axis, we pass it from the sac
into the duct ; and, as we continue to press it gently downwards, the
instrument, if the sac is pervious, enters the nose. If its point meets
with some obstruction, we must not immediately conclude that there
is an obliteration of the duct. We must press down the probe a little
more strongly, yet without violence, turning it round between the
fingers, and giving it different directions. By these means the
obstacle is frequently overcome, and the probe suddenly descends.
If the obstacle remains as before, and is extremely firm, still this is
not sufficient ground for us to conclude that there is a real oblitera-
tion ;" because, as the author proceeds to point out, the difficulty may
arise from a mere thickening of the mucous membrane, and swelling
and induration of its cryptae.— (M'Kenzie on the Lachrymal Organs,
p. 78.)

When the probe has entered a good way down the nasal duct, and
becomes, as it were, wedged, Beer leaves the instrument in this
position, until the next time of dressing, taking care, however, to fix
it to the forehead, so that it may not slip out again. At the same
time, he introduces into the lachrymal sac a tent, which he keeps in
with a piece of sticking plaster, (Lehre von den Augenkr. b. 2. p. 108.)
a measure which I conceive may be advantageously dispensed with.
When, at length, the probe can be made to pass with some trouble
into the nostril, Beer recommends introducing the instrument regularly
every day, until the increased diameter of the passage allows it to be
put in and withdrawn without the slightest difficulty. The period is
now arrived, when Beer conceives that some measure should be taken
for rendering the perviousness of the nasal duct complete and perma-
nent, and thus entirely re-establishing the efficiency of the excretinrr
parts of the lachrymal organs. But, says this author, whoever merely
aims at restoring the natural diameter of the nasal duct by mechanical
means, fulfils only one, and that not the most essential, indication.
And in order that the duct may retain its natural diameter, and the
tears and mucus descend freely into the nose, it is necessary that the
morbid state of the mucous membrane be first removed, and the action
or the excreting parts of the lachrymal organs rectified again ; objects
which cannot be performed by any mechanical means. Hence, Beer
places cons.derable stress upon the necessity of obviating every un-
favourable state of health likely to affect the mucous membrane of
the lachrymal sac. For the purpose of restoring the natural diameter
ot the nasal duct, the experience of many years has convinced him
that pieces of violin catgut, which are to be gradually increased in
s.ze, are the best The end of the piece which is to be introduced
is to be first softened a little between the teeth, straightened and
dipped ,n sweet oil. Then, at least six inches of it are to be intro-
duced, so that ,ts lower end may be easily drawn out of the nostril •
a business which Beer always lets the patient do himself. The upper
portion of the catgut is coiled up, and kept within a little linen com-
press on the patient's forehead.


CHAPTER XII.

piles — ( Haemorrhoids. )


Description.

The piles appear in two states : — 1st, a varicose, or preternaturally
distended state of the veins, in the vicinity of the anus ; 2d, in a
state of tumour, or excrescence, which apparently consists of a solid,
fleshy mass.

The first is internal, the second external.

•

Causes.
The piles are often occasioned by aloetic purgatives. When I first
commenced the practice of medicine, not knowing this fact, I took a
large dose of aloes, which produced the piles, attended with great
severity and obstinacy. Sedentary habits will occasion them, cor-
pulence, or a plethoric habit, a morbid condition of the 'liver, preg-
nancy, costiveness, drastic purgatives of any kind.

Symptoms.

A patient afflicted with the bleeding piles, is subject to greater or
less discharges of blood, from a rupture or distension of the veins,
whilst evacuating his bowels, and sometimes a fatal haemorrhage suc-
ceeds.

The founder of the Arian system of religion, and the philosopher
Copernicus, are said to have perished in this manner. I was acquaint,
ed with a Methodist minister, who had bled, at different times, several
gallons from the hemorrhoidal vessels, by which he became exceed-
ingly reduced and emaciated. This symptom continues a longer or
shorter time, according to circumstances.

There are sometimes tumours internally, but more generally they
are most numerous extei'nally.

It usually commences with dyspeptic symptoms, nausea, &c. There
appears to be a morbid, or acrid secretion from the liver, which
either causes costiveness, or such a state of the bowels as brings on
the complaint. The patient first experiences an uneasy sensation
about the rectum, especially when he is costive, and any thing passes
the bowels. He first perceives a small tumour at the end of the anus,
or a little distance up, which an evacuation forces down. As the dis-
ease increases, the inconveniences attending the complaint are very
great. There is extreme pain in going to stool, followed by a great
tenesmus, or pressing down, with a heaviness, and itching disagreeable
sensation through the hips, attended with bleeding, and sometimes by
a prolapsus ani, or falling down of the bowel ; oftentimes a descent
of a large mass of tumours ; and these, if the disease is not cured, or
is protracted, remain large, hard and round, and difficult, if not impos-
sible, to reduce. When the bowels are relaxed, or constipated, they
are much worse. Sometimes inflammation supervenes, followed by
suppuration, giving rise to abscess and fistula.


Piles. 209

The following description of this disease I subjoin, from Cooper.

" Two states. — These are found in two states, viz. a varicose en-
largement of a vein ; or an excrescence arising from its adhesion and
organization.

" The first is external or internal.

"Of the external. -The symptoms of the first are, an external swelling,
which feels round and hard, which is painful at the passage of the
stools : is hot and itches at other times. It sometimes bursts, and dis-
charges blood with the stools. In a few days it declines and disap-
pears. Sometimes it becomes inflamed, and very acutely painful ;
and it now and then suppurates, and lays the foundation of fistula.
If cut into before suppuration, a large and very solid clot of blood
passes from it.

" Repeated returns of this complaint engender an excrescence, which
arises from the swelling having undergone adhesion, and becoming or-
ganized, forming a cutaneous tumour, which is very vascular. The
skin over it is thin, — the substance very irritable, and pains shoot from
it into the rectum, to a considerable height from the anus. I have
known a person confined to her bed from the excoriation and suffering
produced by such excrescences originating in external piles.

" Internal. — The internal piles are originally enlarged veins : they
produce pain about the sacrum, bleed frequently, and render the pas-
sage of the motions difficult ; and the stools are often mixed with
blood.

"At length, many of these become obliterated by adhesion, and form
very vascular pendulous tumours in the entrance of the rectum.

" Occasion prolapsus ani. — They often occasion prolapsus ani ; the
patient feels as if there was more motion to discharge, and he forces
the rectum until a part of it becomes everted, and the internal piles
appears externally, thus producing prolapsus ani. The patient, after
each evacuation, is obliged to return these with the finger ; the evacu-
ation is, in consequence, highly painful, tedious, and very often the
return of the part is exceedingly difficult.

" Profuse hemorrhage. — The bleeding from the piles thus everted is
often so profuse, that the weight of the blood exceeds that of the fceces.
They sometimes vent a considerable serous discharge. When the
number and size of the piles, and the degree of prolapsus becomes
great, and there is much difficulty in their return, inflammation some-
times arises in them, and their return is rendered impracticable, with-
out giving an unjustifiable degree of pain. When in this state, in
addition to other sufferings, the urine is retained, the faeces pass with
extreme difficulty, and there is a free sanious discharge from the part.
When thus inflammation is the result of a strangulation of the piles
from the pressure of the anus, it is immediately relieved by the return
of the parts ; but often the inflammation precedes the descent, and then
the parts are too tender to be returned. It now and then happens that
by this process nature effects a spontaneous cure of the disease ; the
parts proceed to gangrene, and a slough of the piles is produced, the
rectum ceases to prolapse, and, at least for a great length of time, the
patient is rid of his complaint.

"Causes, sedentary habits. — The usual cause of piles is a sedentary
habit, which leads to congestion of blood in the vessels of the rectum.


210 Piles.

" Diseased liver. — A diseased state of the liver is also a cause, by
preventing a free return of blood.

" Obesity. — Obesity occasions them, by the pressure of the omentum
and mesentery upon the mesenteric veins.

" Pectoral disease. — They, like fistula in ano, frequently arise from
pectoral complaints, which affect respiration and the freedom of cir-
culation." — (Cooper's Lectures, p. 146.)

Common Treatment.
Nutgalls, opium, white vitriol, extirpations with the knife, &c.

Reformed Practice.

In the treatment of either species of piles, whether bleEding or
blind, (as they are vulgarly called,) or in a state of humour, the
first object will be to obviate costiveness and to regulate the bowels
by laxative medicines, and a due course of regimen ; but aloes, par-
ticularly uncombined with other substances, must never be given.
Medicine which acts moderately upon the bowels, is calculated to
remove that morbid state of the liver and stomach, which not unfre-
quently gives rise to the complaint. When the faeces are so impacted
or hardened that neither laxatives nor purgatives would be proper to
administer, an emollient injection, or clyster may be given. The bow-
els having been properly evacuated and regulated, our next object will
be to employ such local applications as are calculated to relieve or
remove the disease ; and they will depend upon the kind of piles for

1st. Bleeding Piles. — If bleeding is present, or if we are called to
rhage is the most predominant symptom, the following ointment will
be found very effectual in arresting it :

Take the red or styptic powders, pulverized, one part ;
Venice turpentine, two parts ;
Lard, eight parts ;

Add the whole together, and simmer over a gentle fire till the lard
is melted. Remove from it, and continue to stir until it is cold, in
order well to mix, or incorporate the articles. Let a small portion of
this be introduced as far up the bowels as possible, with the finger, or
on a piece of lint, or in any manner that can be most conveniently
done. The first application of this ointment usually stops the bleeding.

2d. Blind Piles, or in a state of tumour. If this variety of piles is
in a state of chronic inflammation, with swelling, &c, astringent and
refrigerant, or cooling washes should be applied. The following is
good :

Take acetate or sugar of lead, one drachm ;
Borax, two drachms ;
Soft, or rain water, one pint.

Dip a piece of linen or muslin in this liquid, and wet the parts occa-
sionally with it ; after which, apply the following ointment :

Take celandine, the leaves, q. s.

Simmer in spirits for a short time. Then add fresh butter sum-


Piles. 211

cient to cover the leaves. Simmer gently over a moderate fire until
the strength of the herbs is extracted, then strain, and to every four
ounces of the ointment add half an ounce of Venice turpentine.

Anoint the piles with this, three or four times a day, and let it be
introduced as far up the bowel or rectum as possible.

This wash and ointment are cooling or refrigerant, softening and
discutient.

During tho time that these local applications are made, administer
internally the following :

Take the flowers of sulphur ;

Cream of tartar, equal parts, mix;

Give a small teaspoonful of this daily, mixed with molasses or
honey, until it acts sufficiently upon the bowels ; and take through
the day an infusion, or tea, made of equal parts of elder flowers and
mullen combined.

This has a very favourable effect upon the parts diseased, by its
laxative, cooling and astringent effects. When the tumours become
very painful, and are attended with considerable inflammation, a poul-
tice made of the slippery.elm bark and milk will be found a valuable
application. It usually soon gives relief. It may be continued with
the marsh-mallow ointment, until the swelling and inflammation subside,
or until there is suppuration, which sometimes supervenes. It is desir'
able always to reduce the tumours after they are forced down, and
this may be done by applying a little ointment to the finger, and press-
ing upon the most prominent tumourjuutil it returns.

I have used with success, in obstinate cases, the while ointment,
which may be applied in the anner as recommended above ;

and when used, a heated substance to be applied near the parts ; as a
wash, applying a weak solution of salt and water. Should not 'these
applications have the desired effect, let the stramonium ointment be used.

The following preparation, in many cases, has proved very effica-
cious : •

Take vegetable caustic, one drachm ;

Acetate or sugar of lead, one drachm ;

Red^or styptic powders, one drachm ;

Castile soap, one drachm ;

Gum aloes, one drachm ;

Pulverize, and boil all in one pint of molasses, until it is of a proper
consistence to roll out into little troches, as large as can be intro-
duced up the rectum without pain or inconvenience. They should
be made small or pointed at one end, that they may be more readily
introduced. One of these may be dipt into a little sweet oil, and in-
troduced. They must be kept from the air, otherwise they will dis-
solve. *

These troches have a tendency to remove or destroy pile tumours,
or fleshy excrescences.

There are few complaints in which diet has a more beneficial effect
than m the piles. They are brought on by high living, and they may
be removed by an opposite course, or by spare diet. Rye bread
should be preferred ; Indian in any form, eat with
fruit. Ar.


212 Piles.

When there is a falling down of the bowel or anus, astringent ap-
plications must be made. Apply the following decoction :

Take while-oak bark ;

Bark of witch-hazel ;

Upland sumach, equal parts ;

Bruise ; add a suitable quantity of water, and boil till there is a
strong decoction. To every pint add a teaspoonful of pulverized alum.
Let the part be frequently washed with this decoction.

From time to time an attempt may be made to return the bowel, by
gently pressing upon it with the finger which has been immersed in a
little ointment. It is sometimes necessary to use a bandage to support
the parts.

Some profess to have experienced great benefit in the piles by
steaming them over oakum or tarred ropes ; but steaming them with
bitter herbs will, probably, do better.

Radical Cure for the Piles.

The above treatment will not only relieve, but often cure the piles ;
but sometimes, when they have been neglected or improperly treated,
they become so seated and enlarged, that it is necessary to remove
the tumours. Should this happen, or should not the above means be
sufficient to remove the complaint, a piece of silk or thread may be
passed around the largest tumour, (after having been drawn down,)
and tied as tight as the patient can bear, and the knots may be
occasionally drawn a little closer. This will stop the circulation in
the tumour or tumours, and in about a week they will be separated,
and a radical cure effected.

If the ligature creates much inflammation, apply a poultice.

When the tumours are seated so high up that they cannot be tied
conveniently, they must be drawn down with a pair of forceps, or the
patient may propel the tumour or tumours, as much as possible, by
straining, as if at stool.

One or more may be tied at a time, according to the size. Care
must be taken to draw the knot so tight as to intercept, completely, all ,
circulation, so that the part may mortify and drep off.

In general, it will be sufficient to remove the largest, as the others
will shrivel or shrink up, and give little or no further trouble.

I have removed a number of very large tumours at a time with the
ligature, and effected a perfect cure ; and only once have I extirpated
a pile tumour with the} knife, and then at the particular request of
the patient.

The ligature, for several reasons, is the most proper. Besides
avoiding all danger, great benefit is derived from the discharge which
it produces. It is very seldom, however, necessary.

Sir Astley Coopqr has the following remarks upon this subject :

All the means which can be employed will not always prevent their
increase ; nor when they are once suffered to acquire considerable
magnitude, and to produce prolapsus ani, can they be subdued by any
medical or local treatment short of operation.

Mode of Examination. — To examine a patient properly under these


Piles. 218

circumstances, and to enable you to form a correct judgment of the
necessity for, and the mode of, operating, it is necessary that the pa-
tient should have an evacuation ; and that, before the return of the
prolapsus, the surgeon should examine the part.

He will then observe a portion of the rectum, forming the outer
circle, and a number of round and dark-coloured projections, occupy,
ing the more central parts of the protruded mass. The operation is
then ascertained to be necessary or not, according to the degree of
prolapsus and the number and size of the piles.

Having determined that an operation is required, it is next to be
considered in what manner it is to be performed.

Two modes of operation. — It may be done by excision, or by liga-
ture, or it may be effected by a combination of the two.

Excision. — For excision, in the early part of my surgical career,
I was a strong advocate ; for I found it a less painful operation than
ligature, and it appeared to me not dangerous ; but as my experience
increased, I was induced to change my opinion, and to consider ex-
cision as not devested of danger.

The three following cases are proofs of this : the first, dying of
inflammation, and the second and third from haemorrhage. I have
also seen, in a fourth case, extensive suppuration produced by ex-
cision.

Case. — Mrs. O , the wife of a respectable medical man, came

to London to have some hemorrhoids removed ; and I advised their
excision. Observing, in cutting, that her constitution was of a feeble
and irritable kind, I removed only one of three which appeared. In
three days after the operation by scissors, I found her complaining
of great pain in her abdomen, from intestinal and peritoneal inflamma-
tion : she frequently vomited, and her abdomen became tense. The
symptoms were not relieved, although motions were procured, and
she died in a week from the operation. The internal surface of the
intestine, and the peritoneum, were inflamed extensively.

Case. — Mr. Esdaile came to London from Guernsey or Jersey, in
order to have a hemorrhoid removed. Mr. Leman and I attended
him, and I removed a single pile by scissors. On the following day
he was exceedingly low, his pulse small, so as to be scarcely percep-
tible. On the next day he voided a great quantity of blood from his
intestines; and on the day after he died, fulling a victim to internal
bleeding, from the return of the divided vessel with the prolapsed
intestine.

Case. — The Earl of S applied to me for piles with prolapsus

ani, and I removed some of the largest with scissors ; the prolapsus
was greatly relieved ; and for more than twelve months after he was
little troubled, either with haemorrhoids or prolapsus. About two
afterwards he again applied to me, for a return of his complaint ;
and, seeing his age, and having examined the piles, I thought before I
operated, I would have a consultation, when the operation of excision
was again recommended. I removed with the scissors one of the
largest, and desired his lordship to keep the recumbent posture. He
laid down upon the bed immediately after the pile was removed. In
about ten minutes he arose from his bed, and discharged blood. In


214 . Piles.

twenty minutes he had the same sensation, and evacuated more blood
than before. In about the same lapse of time, he again arose, and soon
became very faint from the free haemorrhage. I therefore opened
the rectum with a speculum, and saw an artery throwing out its blood
with freedom. I therefore requested him to force down the intestine
as much as he could, and, raising the orifice of the bleeding vessel
with a tenaculum, secured it in a ligature, and also compressed the
artery with a piece of sponge. His lordship bled no more. On the
following day he was low, his pulse very quick, and he had a shivering:
on the next he complained of pain in his abdomen ; he had sickness,
and tenderness upon pressure, and in four days he died.

In the presence of Mr. Wardrop I opened his body, and found in-
flammation of the rectum, and disease of the intestine, they being en-
larged and hardened, so that the intestine internally had a curious
spotted appearance. He was not, therefore, a healthy or soundman
in other respects ; and it is in such cases that unexpected symptoms
arise after operation.

Ligature. — As a ligature prevents the clanger of bleeding, it is best
to use it, although the process is more tedious and painful. The pain
which it produces may be mitigated by not drawing the ligature too
tight. Draw down the pile with forceps, or a tenaculum, and tie a
piece of waxed silk around it ; draw the knot until the patient com- •
plains severely, then tie a second, cut off the ligature a little-way from
the knot, and return the intestine and pile. — (Cooper's Lectures, p.
148.)

Double ligature. — But in cases in which the pile is very large, a
safer and less painful plan may be adopted ; namely, to pass a needle
and ligature through them, and to cut them off beyond it.


CHAPTER XIII.

STRICTURES OF THE RECTUM.


Description.

It is sometimes the case that the rectum, from various causes, be-
comes partially or nearly closed by the formation of tumours or
scirrhus, which almost renders it impossible for the feces to be voided,
except they are in a very liquid state. It is complicated, not unfre-
quently with ulcer, from which there is a discharge of pus or matter.

Sometimes the disease extends over a considerable length of the
become much thicker and harder than natural. The muscular is
subdivided by membranous septa, and the internal coat is sometimes
formed into hard, irregular folds. The surface of the inner mem-
brane is occasionally ulcerated, so as to form a cancerous disease.
Every vestige of the natural structure is sometimes lost, and the gut
is changed into a gristly suhstance. The cavity of the bowel is al-
ways rendered narrow at the scirrhous part, and is sometimes almost
obliterated. When the passage through the gut is very much ob-
structed, the bowel is always a good deal enlarged just above the
stoppage or stricture, from the accumulation of the faeces there. As
the disease advances, adhesions form between the rectum and adja-
cent parts, and ulcerations produce communications between them.

Causes.

It may proceed from costiveness or hardened faeces, piles, drastic
purgatives, and other sources of irritation.

Symptoms.

As the disease at first is not very painful, it is usually not much no-
ticed till somewhat advanced. There is perhaps no disease, as Mr.
Calvert has noticed, in which the symptoms, arising from derangement
of other parts, are so predominant over the local ; and " there can
be no doubt that in many cases of iliac passion and obstinate consti-
pation, arising from this source, death takes place without the slight-
est suspicion of the cause. In other cases, especially when the dis-
ease is of a malignant nature, it is not unfrequently confounded with
scirrhus of the uterus."— (p. 123.) He also adverts to a case, in
which a stricture of the rectum was lately mistaken for an intus-sus-
ception, by some practitioners " at the pinnacle of professional emi-
nence." Mr. C. Bell, in one case where he attempted to puncture
the bladder, and in another where he was about to divide a fistula in
ano, felt his fingers stopped by strictures of the rectum, of which the
patients had no suspicion. The patient is at first habitually costive,


216 Strictures of the Rectum.

or affected with what is called a torpid state of the bowels, and usually
voids his stools with a little difficulty. In time, a good deal of pain is
felt in the part affected, especially at stool, after which some relief is
experienced. " As the gut continues to decrease in diameter, (says
Mr. Copeland,) the efforts to expel the faeces become more violent,
and the consequent progress of the disease more rapid. The stools,
which have been long evacuated with difficulty, become contracted in
size, appearing like earth-worms in their form, or small pellets ;" and,
if the finger be introduced into the rectum, " the gut will be found
either obstructed with small tubercles, or intersected with membra,
nous filaments : or else the introduction of the finger will be opposed
by a hard ring of a cartilaginous feel, composed of the diseased inner
membrane of the intestines." These states, as Mr. Copeland ob-
serves, are very different from the regular tumour on the anterior
part of the rectum, occasioned by an enlargement of the prostate
gland ; a case apt to be suspected. "As the disease advances, (says
the same author,) the faeces become more fluid, and there is a thin sa-
nious discharge from the anus, accompanied with tenesmus." Mr.
Calvert notices, as the most characteristic symptoms, an unusual dis-
tention of the colon ; the extension of pain, felt about the upper part
of the sacrum down to the feet, in the course of the large nervous
trunks ; the decrease of the tenesmus after a sufficient evacuation ;
and the scanty motions of irregular or figured appearances. The
latter effect, however, he says, is not always present throughout the
disease, for if the contraction be at the upper part of the rectum, the
motion may be of the usual size and appearance. — (p. 147.) Ac-
cording to Desault, pus and blood may sometimes be noticed with the
excrement, particularly when the disease has advanced to the ulcer-
ated state. The cancerous stricture is always attended with more or
less of a burning sensation, or acute shooting pains at the seat of the
disease, except at its very beginning. Sometimes, when a great part
of the stricture has been destroyed by ulceration, the motions are
voided without much effort, but not without intense suffering. — [Cal-
vert, p. 148 — 150. ) The patient at length becomes sallow ; frequent
eructations of air from the bowels torment the patient, and render his
life miserable ; the constitution suffers, and dissolution follows. Se-
vere tenesmus attends the whole course of the disease. — (CEuvres
Chir. par Bichat, t. ii.)

Sometimes a small fistulous orifice, at the verge of the anu3, com-
municates with the inferior portion of the diseased part. Such a fis-
tula, in a case recorded by Sir Everard Home, was half an inch in
length. — (Obs. on Cancer, p. 133.)

Desault often saw the disease form a communication between the
rectum and vagina, and the faeces passed through the latter part. In
the latter stage of the affliction, the rectum, bladder, vagina, uterus
and adjacent parts, are all involved in one common ulceration. And,
according to Mr. Calvert, the surface of the os sacrum, or even that
of the lumbar vertebrae, may become involved in the extent of the
disease, the rectum being sometimes so firmly connected with the
former bone as to be very difficultly separable from it even with a
knife.— (p. 137.)


Strictures of the Rectum. 217


Treatment.

We may first commence tho treatment of stricture of the rectum,
by ordering such medicine and such a course of regimen or diet as
are calculated to keep the bowels in a soluble state. In the com-
mencement, a portion of our common purgative may be given ; after-
wards, a laxative pill, sufficient to obviate costiveness, or to act mo-
derately upon the bowels.

One or two of the troches, mentioned under the head of piles, may
be introduced up the rectum daily, to be accompanied with the use of
the discutient ointment.

If there be any discharge of matter attending the stricture, make
use of the vegetable causll: ; a small quantity to be applied, enveloped
in lint, and put on the diseased parts with a bodkin or tent. A little
of the solution of this alkaline preparation may be daily injected ;
the strength of it to be gradually increased as the patient can bear it.
Where the ulcer is in sight, or so situated that application can be
made directly to it, a saturated solution of the vegetable caustic may
be applied, on a little cotton or lint ; and, what I consider still better,
is ley, made as strong as possible. The first running from that pre-
pared from hickory ashes, contains the greatest degree of strength,
or is the most concentrated. It should be put into a vial, and kept
from the air by means of a glass stopper, and when applied, the cotton
to be dipped or immersed in it.

This preparation, as before stated, in treating of fistula, has an ac-
tion sui generis, or peculiar to itself. . It produces a smarting or pain-
ful sensation for a few moments, and then subsides, without leaving
the parts sore or inflamed, like the generality of caustics. Not only
so : it has an effect peculiarly favourable in all indolent and fistulous
ulcers, acting only upon spongy, fungous or diseased flesh, and thus
bringing about healthy granulations. It becomes necessary some-
times to dilate the stricture, which may be done in the following
manner.

Take equal parts of the bayberry and common tallow ; then make
candles of different sizes in the ordinary manner. They should be
about six inches long, and a little smaller at one end than the other.
Immerse in sweet oil the end of one of the smallest of these, which
should be of such a size as can be introduced without much pain, and
let it be introduced up the rectum, and continued half an hour each
time, or as long as the patient can bear. The same should be re-
peated for three or four days, and then one larger used the same
length of time ; and thus the size should be increased as the stricture
becomes dilated.

The patient himself can generally introduce them without any
difficulty.

This will be found a very excellent method of treating strictures
of the rectum.


CHAPTER XIV.

PROLAPSUS ANI, OR FALLING DOWN OF THE BOWEL.


In this disease the rectum protrudes in a greater or less degree at
the anus, either from mere relaxation of the internal membrane of
the bowel, or from a real displacement and inversion of its upper
portion, which presents itself as an external tumour. The first form
of the disease is that which is most common. The inner coat of the
rectum being connected to the muscular by a very loose elastic cellu-
lar substance, naturally forms several folds, the use of which is to let
this bowel dilate sufficiently for the retention of the excrement. The
swelling occasioned by the protrusion of the inner coat of the rectum,
or by the actual displacement of the greater part of this bowel, is sub-
ject to considerable variety in respect to length and thickness ; when
small, resembling a mere ring ; when large, and reaching far down-
wards, having an oblong globular form. The tumour sometimes ad-
mits of reduction with ease ; sometimes it cannot be returned without
difficulty. The disease occurs in persons of all ages ; but it is most
common in infants and elderly subjects. Such examples as are com-
bined with thickening and relaxation of the inner coat of the rectum,
internal haemorrhoids, or other tumours, are sometimes attended with
a copious discharge from the anus, and from the prolapsed bowel, of
a serous and mucous fluid, mixed with blood.

Causes.

The disease may originate from various causes :

1. From circumstances tending to relax and weaken the parts
which retain the rectum or its inner membrane in its situation.

2. From various kinds of irritation and pressure on the bowel itself,
having the effect of increasing the powers by which it is liable to be
forced outwards.

3. From any disease or irritation in the adjacent parts, and affecting
the rectum sympathetically.

Hence, a prolapsus ani may be caused by long habitual crying, and
great exertions of the voice ; violent coughing ; sitting long at stool ;
hard dry fasces, and much straining to void them ; obstinate diarrhoea
in infants, kept up by dentition ; dysentery ; chronic tenesmus ; va-
rious diseases of the rectum itself; the abuse of aloetic medicines
and emollient clysters ; haemorrhoids ; excrescences and thickenings
of the inner membrane of the rectum ; difficulty of making water ;
the efforts of parturition ; the stone in the bladder ; paralysis of the
sphincter and levatores ani ; and prolapsus vaginae.

Considering the degree of the disease, and the occasional close-
ness of the stricture, the symptoms are sometimes mild, the rectum


Prolapsus Ani, or falling down of the Bowel. 219

generally bearing pressure, exposure to the air, and other kinds of
irritation, better than any other bowel. But the urgency and danger
of a prolapsus ani are greater when the swelling is large, recent and
conjoined with violent pain, inflammation and febrile symptoms.
When complicated with strangulation, the consequences may be a
stoppage of the lbeces, severe pain, swelling inflammation, and even
gangrene within the cavity of the abdomen. In short, all the evils
may arise which attend strangulated hernia. The prognosis, there-
fore, varies according to the different degree, species, cause and com-
plication of the disease. The recent, small, movable prolapsus ani,
the cause of which admits of being at once removed, may be effectu-
ally and radically cured. It should always be recollected, however,
that when once the rectum has been affected with prolapsus, a ten-
dency to protrusion from any slight occasional cause generally re-
mains. The habitual prolapsus, which has existed for years, and
comes on whenever the patient goes to stool, is the case which is
most difficult of relief.

Treatment.

The treatment of prolapsus ani embraces three principal indica-
tions :

1. The speedy reduction of the prolapsed part.

2. The retention of the reduced bowel.

3. The removal and avoidance of the causes by which the disease
is induced.

In general, when the case is recent, and the tumour not of immode-
rate size, the reduction may be accomplished with tolerable ease, by
putting the patient in a suitable posture, with the buttocks raised and
the thorax depressed, and by making gentle and skilful pressure either
with the palm of the hand or fingers ; but from the inflammation and
swelling, this cannot always be done, and it will not do to press too
hard, or exert too much force, for fear of irritation. No further
attempts must be made at reduction, until means have been made use
of to reduce the inflammation. Astringent washes may first be tried,
if the pain and swelling be not too great.

Take White. oak bark,
Sumach,
Witch-hazel,
Hemlock bark ;
Bruise, and make a strong decoction of these barks, and to every
pint add a teaspoonful of pulverized borax. Let the parts be fre-
quently washed with it ; soon after, apply the white ointment, as di-
rected under the head of " piles."

After these have been applied, should it still continue irreducible,
apply the slippery-elm bark poultice, to be secured by the T bandage,
as recommended under the head of " fistula." This will soon lessen
the inflammation, so that the intestine can be reduced.

If it proceed from a relaxed state of the bowels, medicines must be
given for that complaint. The diet should be such as to keep the

Vol. II. 2D


220 Prolapsus Ani, or falling down of the Bowel.

bowels in a soluble state, as rye or brown bread, " mush or hasty
pudding and molasses."

After the protruded intestine has been replaced, let the white oint-
ment be continued for some time, until the tone of the parts is re-
stored.

I have attended some deplorable cases of this complaint, particu-
larly in infants, where the anus had been protruded for many weeks,
and which had extended several inches, with great swelling, inflam-
mation and ulceration, and yet recovery followed, by pursuing these
means. In one case, it was necessary to poultice a month before the
swelling was sufficiently reduced to return the intestine-


CHAPTER XV.
whitb swelling — (Hydarthus.)


The white swelling is a peculiarly common and exceedingly terrible
disease. The varieties of white swelling are numerous, and might
usefully receive particular appellations. Systematic writers have
generally been content with a distinction into two kinds, viz., rheu-
malic and scrofulous. The last species of the disease they also
distinguish into such tumours as primarily affect the bones, and then
the ligaments and soft parts, and into other cases, in which the
ligaments and soft parts become diseased before there is any morbid
affection of the bones. The propriety of using the term rheumatic is
very questionable.

The knee, ankle, wrist and elbow, are the joints most subject to
white swellings. As the name of the disease implies, the skin is not
at all altered in colour. In some instances, the swelling yields,
in a certain degree, to pressure ; but it never pits, and is almost
always sufficiently firm to make an uninformed examiner believe that
the bones contribute to the tumour. The pain is sometimes vehement
from the very first ; in other instances, there is hardly the least pain
in the beginning of the disease. In the majority of scrofulous white-
swellings, let the pain be trivial or violent, it is particularly situated
in one part of the joint, viz., either the centre of the articulation, or
the head of the tibia, supposing the knee affected. Sometimes the
pain continues without interruption ; sometimes there are intermis-
sions ; and in other instances the pain recurs at regular times, so as
to have been called, by some writers, periodical. Almost all authors
when he is warm, and particularly when he is in this condition in
bed.

At the commencement of the disease, in the majority of instances,
the swelling is very inconsiderable, or there is even no visible en-
largement whatever. In the little depressions, naturally situated on
each side of the patella, a fulness first shows itself, and gradually
spreads all over the affected joint.

The patient, unable to bear the weight of his body on the disordered
joint, in consequence of the great increase of pain thus created, gets
into the habit of only touching the ground with his toes ; and the knee,
being generally kept a little bent in this manner, soon loses the capa-
city of becoming extended again. When white swellings have lasted
a while, the knee is almost always found in a permanent state of
flexion. In scrofulous cases of this kind, pain constantly precedes
any appearance of swelling ; but the interval between the two symp-
toms differs very much in different subjects.

The morbid joint, in the course of time, acquires a vast magnitude.
Still the integuments retain their natural colour, and remain unaffect-


222 White Swelling — (Hydarthus.)

ed. The enlargement of the articulation, however, always seems
greater than it really is, in consequence of the emaciation of the limb,
both above and below the disease.

An appearance of blue, distended veins, and a shining smoothness,
are the only alterations to be noticed in the skin covering the enlarged
joint. The shining smoothness seems attributable to the distention,
which obliterates the natural furrows and wrinkles of the skin. When
the joint is thus swollen, the integuments cannot be pinched up into
a fold, as they could in the state of health, and even in the beginning
of the disease.

As the disease of the articulation advances, collections of matter
form about the part, and at length burst. The ulcerated openings
sometimes heal up ; but such abscesses are generally followed by
other collections, which pursue the same course. In some cases,
these abscesses form a few months after the first affection of the
joint ; on other occasions, several years elapse ; and no suppuration
of this kind makes its appearance.

Such terrible local mischief must necessarily produce constitutional
disturbance. The patient's health becomes gradually impaired ; he
loses both his appetite and natural rest and sleep ; his pulse is small
and frequent, and obstinate, debilitating diarrhoea and profuse noc
turnal sweats ensue. Such complaints are sooner or later followed
by dissolution, unless the constitution be relieved in time, by the
amendment of the diseased part. In different patients, however, the
course of the disease, and its effects upon the system, vary very much
in relation to the rapidity with which they occur.

Rheumatic white swellings are generally considered distinct diseases
from the scrofulous distemper of large joints. In the first, the pain
is said never to occur without being attended with swelling. Scrofu-
lous white-swellings, on the other hand, are always preceded by a
pain, which is particularly confined to one point of the articulation.
In rheumatic cases, the pain is more general, and diffused over the
whole joint.

With respect to the particular causes of all such white swellings as
come within the class of rheumatic ones, cold is the exciting cause.
External irritation, either by exposure to damp or cold, or by the
application of violence, is often concerned in bringing on the disease;
but very frequently no cause of this kind can be assigned for the
complaint. &s for scrofulous white swellings, there can be no doubt
that they are under the influence of a particular kind of constitution,
termed a scrofulous, or strumous habit. In this sort of temperament,
every cause capable of exciting inflammation, or any morbid and
irritable state of a large joint, may bring such disorder as may end
in the severe disease of which we are now speaking.

In a man of a sound constitution, an irritation of the kind alluded
to might only induce common, healthy inflammation of the affected
joint.

In scrofulous habits, it also seems probable that the irritation ef
a joint is much more easily produced than in other constitutions ;
and no one can doubt that, when once excited in scrofulous habits,


White Swelling— (Hydarthus.) 223

it is much more dangerous and difficult of removal than in other
patients.

The pathology or nature of this complaint is thus given by an
experienced practitioner :

"There are not, probably," says he, "many disorders, to which
the human body is liable, which prove either of worse consequences
to patients, or that are less understood by practitioners, than white
swellings of the joints ; insomuch, that whenever the disease is tho-
roughly formed, it is in general considered as incurable.

" This ought certainly to be a very strong inducement with every
practitioner, for carrying his researches with respect to it as far as
possible.

" The term white swelling has commonly been applied to such en-
largements of the joints as are not attended with external inflamma-
tion or discolouration of the skin and common teguments ; the only
symptoms, which at first commonly take place, being a greater or
less degree of swelling, with a deep-seated pain. In the progress of
the disease, indeed, the whole surrounding parts come to be so much
affected, that inflammation is at last communicated to the skin itself;
and, when this terminates in abscesses and consequent ulcerations, it
is not at all uncommon to find a great many openings surrounding the
whole joints that are so diseased.

" Though there are, by different writers, several detached observa-
tions upon this complaint, yet no regular account has ever been given
of it, farther than what may be met with in general dissertations on
diseases of the bones, which have always been considered as the
principal seat of such disorders."

Different Species of While Swellings.

There seem evidently to be two different species of white swellings,
distinct from one another ; and, as the one is of a much milder nature
than the other, it would seem to be a matter of importance, so to
characterize the different varieties, that the one may be easily and
certainly distinguished from the other.

In this, however, as in many other diseases, the complaint has fre-
quently been of considerable standing before practitioners are called
in : so that although, if seen from the beginning, and through all its
different stages, it might generally be easily enough known of what
particular nature the disorder in reality is ; yet, when it is far advanc-
ed, and when an exact history of the symptoms cannot be obtained
from patients themselves, it is often impossible to make any accurate
or certain distinction ; the symptoms of both species being, in the
latter stages of the disease, commonly very similar.

When this, however, is not the case, and a practitioner is called in
before the symptoms have made any great progress, he may com-
monly, with a little attention, form almost a certain judgment of the
nature of the complaint. And, as I have had many opportunities of
seeing every species of the disorder, in all its stages, I propose, first,
to give as exact an account as possible of the rise and progress of the


224 White Swelling — (Hydarthus.)

different symptoms in each species ; then to mention the several ap-
pearances of the joints, which in each of them are observed on dissec-
tion, with the most common exciting and predisposing causes of the
disorder ; and, lastly, I shall enumerate the different remedies that I
have used for it, with their several effects.

Swellings of this nature, it may be remarked, occur in every joint
of the body; but much more frequently in the large than in the smaller
joints : thus, at least, twice as many are met with in the hip, knee and
ankle joints, as in all the rest of the body besides.

Rheumatic Species of White Swelling.
Symptoms.

The first, and what may be considered as the most simple, species
of the disease, begins with an acute pain, which seems to be diffused
over the whole joint, and frequently even extends along such muscles
as are connected with it. There is, from the begiikrng, a uniform
swelling of the whole surrounding teguments, which in different pa-
tients is in very different degrees ; but it is always so considerable as
to occasion an evident difference in point of size between the diseased
and sound joint of the opposite side. A considerable tension generally
prevails ; but there is seldom, in this period of the disorder, any ex-
ternal d;s:olouration.

The patient, from the commencement of the disease, suffers much
pain from the motion of the joint ; and always finding it easiest in a
relaxed posture, keeps it accordingly constantly bent ; which generally,
in every situation, but more especially in the knee, produces a stiffness
or kind of rigidity in all the flexor tendons of the limb.

This rigidity of the tendons has by many been considered as an
original symptom of the disorder ; but when duly attended to, it will
always be found to be rather a consequence of the disease, and to
have arisen from the above-mentioned cause. In consequence, too,
of the total want of motion, which from this circumstance is always
produced, such joints in a very short time generally become quite
stiff and immovable, and seem frequently to be in a state of complete
and real anchyloses, or stiff.

If the disorder, either by nature or by the effects of proper reme-
dies, is not now carried off, the swelling, which originally was not
perhaps very considerable, begins gradually to augment, and goes on
till it sometimes increases to twice, or even thrice the natural size of
the part.

The cuticular veins become turgid and varicose ; the limb below
the swelling decays considerably in its fleshy muscular substance, at
the same time that it frequently acquires an equality in point of thick-
ness, by becoming oedematous ; the pain turns more intolerable, espe-
cially when the patient is warm in bed, or otherwise heated ; and
abscesses form in different parts of the swelling, and run in all differ-
ent directions, whilst at the same time they frequently do not appear
to communicate with one another.

In all these abscesses, a fluctuation of a fluid, upon pressure, is
generally evident, as is the case in every collection of matter not very


White Swelling— (Hydar thus.) 225

deep seated; but, independently of the fluctuation, all such swellings
afford a very peculiar elastic feel ; yielding to pressure, at the same
time that they do not, like cedematous swellings, retain the mark, but
instantly rise again as soon as the pressure is removed.

These different collections, either upon breaking of themselves, or
on being laid open, discharge considerable quantities of matter, which
at first is generally purulent, and of a pretty good consistence : it soon,
however, degenerates into a thin foetid ill-digested sanies ; and has
never, at least in proportion to the quantity discharged, any remark-
able influence in reducing the size of the swellings, which still retain
nearly their former dimensions.

If the orifices from which such matters flow are not by art kept
open, they very soon heal up; and new collections, forming in different
parts, again break out and heal as before. So that, in long continued
disorders of this kind, the whole surrounding teguments are often
entirely covered with scars that remain after such ulcers.

Long before the disorder has arrived at this state, the patient's
health has generally suffered considerably ; first, from the violence
of the pain, which is often so great as to take away entirely both
sleep and appetite ; and then, from the absorption of matter into the
system, which always takes place in some degree from its first forma-
tion in the different abscesses ; but which, indeed, never appears so
evidently, till the several collections either burst of themselves or are
by incision laid open ; when a quick pulse, night sweats, and a weak-
ening diarrhoea, always certainly occur; and generally, at last, carry
off the patient, if a cure of the disorder be not otherwise effected.

These are the several symptoms of this species of white swelling,
in all its different stages.

Distinction.

The only preternatural affection observed on laying open the swell-
ings, is, ,a considerable morbid thickness of the surrounding liga-
ments, without any disease of the joint whatever ; the bones and car-
tilages always remaining perfectly sound, and the synovial fluid in a
natural condition both as to quantity and consistence.

This thickening of the ligaments, though in general it appears in a
greater or less degree, according as the complaint has been of longer
or shorter duration, yet we do not find that it always does so ; for in
some recent instances, the ligaments have appeared more diseased
than in others, where the disorder had continued longer. In the former,
indeed, the symptoms were always found to have been very violent.

In the more advanced stages of the disorder, when abscesses have
formed in different parts ; when the pain has been long very violent,
with great addition of swelling ; on laying open the parts, the thicken-
ing of the ligaments is then found to be more considerable, and is
generally, if not always, attended with an effusion, into the surround-
ing cellular substance, of a thick glairy matter, which appears to be
the cause of that elastic feel peculiar to such swellings, formerly taken
notice of in the description.

The different abscesses or collections of matter are found to run in


226 White Swelling — (Hydarthus.)

various directions through this glairy albuminous congestion, without,,
however, seeming to mix with it. In some few instances, again, to-
gether with collections of pus, a great many small hydatids are observ-
ed ; and in the farther progress of the disorder, all these together
form such a confused mass of different matters and substances, that it
is almost impossible, by dissection, to procure a more distinct view of
them, than what presents itself on their first being laid open.

Even all these appearances exist, without any affection of the bones
of the joint ; which, together with the surrounding cartilages, upon
cutting through the capsular ligaments, remain perfectly sound.

When, however, by a very long continuance of the complaint, these
ligaments come to be corroded by the different collections of matter,
the cartilages, and, in consequence, the bones, are very soon brought
to suffer ; the latter becoming carious, as soon as the former, by the
acrimony of the matter, have been abraded.

The tendons of the flexor muscles, which are always, in this disease,
as was already mentioned, very stiff and much contracted, do not,
upon dissection, exhibit any evidently morbid appearances, either with
respect to hardness or enlargement.

Of the Symptoms of the more Inveterate or Scrofulous Species of
White Swelling.

In this species of the disease, the pain is generally more acute than
in the other; and, instead of being diffused, it is more confined to a
particular spot, most frequently to the very middle of the joint. In
some instances, the patients say, they could cover the whole pained
part with a small piece.

The swelling is at first commonly very inconsiderable ; insomuch
that, on some occasions, even when the pain has been very violent,
little difference, in point of size, could be observed between the dis-
eased joint and the opposite sound one.

In this, as in the other species of the disease, the least degree of
motion always gives very great pain : so that the joint being here too
constantly kept in a bent position, stiffness and rigidity of the tendons
come likewise soon to be produced.

As the disorder advances, the pain turns more violent, and the
swelling becomes more considerable, with an evident enlargement of
the ends of such bones as compose the joints.

In process of time, the tumour acquires that elastic feel formerly
taken notice of, varicose veins appear over its surface, and collections
of matter occur in different parts of it. These, upon bursting or being
laid open, discharge considerable quantities sometimes of a purulent
like matter, but most frequently of a thin fcEtid sanies ; and if a probe
be introduced, and can be passed to the bottom of the sores, the bones
are found carious, and pieces of them are often discharged at the
openings.

On the farther continuance of the disorder, the constitution comes
here likewise to suffer as in the first species of the disease ; and a
diarrhcBa, with night sweats, commencing, the patient, though naturally


While Swelling— (Hydarthus.) 227

perhaps of the fullest habit, is reduced by loss of llesh to the most
extreme weakness.

Appearances observed on Dissection, in the Scrofulous Species of
White Swelling.

When such joints are dissected, either after death, or after ampu-
tation of the member in the first stages of the disorder, the soft parts
seem to be very little affected : but in all, even the slightest, there
was constantly observed an enlargement, either of the whole ends of
the bones, or of their epiphyses ; frequently of those on one side of the
joint only ; in others, again, the bones on both sides have been af-
fected.

This enlargement sometimes occurs without any other evident dis-
ease ; but in general, and always in a more advanced state of the
complaint, the soft spongy parts of such bones are found to be dissolv-
ed into a thin, fluid, foetid matter ; and that too, in some cases, with-
out the cartilages whicli surround them seeming to be affected. In
process of time, however, the cartilages come likewise to be dissolved ;
and then the different matters, namely, the dissolved bones and softer
parts, mixed all together, exhibit, when such swellings are laid open,
a still more confused collection than is generally observed, even in the
worse stages of the other species of the disorder.

Although it was remarked, that in the early periods of the complaint,
the surrounding soft parts do not always appear to be much affected ;
yet, in its farther progress, they likewise are generally brought to
suffer. The ligaments become thickened, and the contiguous cellular
membrane filled with that viscid glairy kind of matter we mentioned
when speaking of the other species of the disorder.

Causes.

Having thus given a particular account of the different appearances
generally observed in both species of white swelling, we come now,
in course, to the consideration of the different causes which' tend to
produce them ; and, to go on in the same order with the descriptions
that have been given, we shall first enumerate those that are particu-
larly connected with that which we termed the first, or rheumatic
species of the disorder.

All such strains may be mentioned as causes, as particularly affect
the ligaments of the joints, so as to produce inflammation ; likewise
bruises, luxations of the bones, and, in short, every derangement
which can in any degree be attended with that effect.

A rheumatic disposition may here, too, be taken notice of, as a prin-
cipal cause of this species of white swelling ; for, in every rheumatic
affection, the parts most liable to be attacked are the ligaments of the
joints, and other deep-seated membranes. The disorders occurring
most frequently in the large joints, especially in the knee, is a strong
argument, too, for -supposing that the rheumatic disposition has a con-
siderable influence in its production ; for it is well known that rheu-
matism, in its most evident form, does really more frequently attack
the larger joints, than any of the smaller: and, in fact, we find this

Vol. II. 2 E


228 White Swelling — (Hydarthus.)

species of white swelling occurs more frequently in young, pletho-
ric people, in whom the rheumatic diathesis or predisposition mos!
frequently prevails, than it ever does in those of an opposite tem-
perament.

That it is the ligaments of the joints only which are first affected in
this disorder, is, from the history of the dissections, rendered evident ;
these, in the first stages of the complaint, being almost the only parts
that are found diseased. The effusions into the cellular membrane,
of that thick, glairy matter we have taken notice of, are probably
occasioned by an exudation from the vessels of those ligaments that
have been originally inflamed, as it is known that such parts never
furnish a proper fluid for tlie formation of purulent matter. In the
course of the disease, indeed, abscesses containing real pus do always
appear, but never till inflammation has been communicated to the
surrounding parts, which more readily afford a fluid proper for this
purpose.

I would, therefore, upon the whole, conclude, that this species of
white swelling is at first always occasioned by an inflammatory, or
rheumatic affection of the ligaments of such joints as it attacks, from
whatever cause such inflammation may originally have proceeded.

The other species of the disorder, from all the symptoms enumera-
ted, and from the different appearances on dissection, seems to be an
affection of the bones ; the surrounding soft parts coming only to suffer
in the progress of the disease, from their connexion with and vicinity
to these.

This species of white swelling very seldom occurs as the conse-
quence of any external accident. It generally begins without the
patient's being in the least able to account for it. From the effects
usually produced on the bones which it attacks, it would appear to be
a species of the real spina ventosa, and which, again, is very probably
a disease of the same nature in the bones, that scrofula is of the soft
parts. Indeed, the appearances of the two disorders, after making
allowances for their different situations, are exceedingly similar ; they
both begin with considerable enlargements or swellings of the parts
they invade, which afterwards, in both too, generally end in evident
ulcerations ; and they both likewise frequently occur in the same
person, and at the same time.

It is likewise observed, that this species of white swelling is gene-
rally either attended with other evident symptoms of scrofula subsist-
ing at the time, or that the patient, in an earlier period of life, has
been subject to that disease ; or, what is nearly the same, that he is
descended from scrofulous parents, and, consequently, most probably
has the see^s of that disease lurking in his constitution.

From all these circumstances, it may, I think, with probability, be
concluded, that this species of white swelling is commonly, if* not
always, of a scrofulous nature : and as it has already been shown, that
the other species of the disorder is to be considered as an inflamma-
tory, or what we have termed a rheumatic, affection ; and, a thorough
distinction of the two different species being, in the treatment, a matter
of some importance, it will not here be improper to give a short
enumeration of the several diagnostic, or most characteristic symp-
toms of each.


WJiite Swelling — (Hydarthus.) 229


Discrimination.

The pain in the white swelling from a rheumatic disposition is always,
as was formerly remarked, from the beginning, diffused over the whole
joint, and on some occasions extends even a considerable way along
the muscles that are attached to it : whereas, in the other species of
the disorder, the pain is not only always at first, but sometimes, even
when the complaint has been of* considerable standing, confined to a

In the former, the swelling is always confined to the soft parts, and
is, from the beginning, exceedingly evident : but in the latter there is
seldom, for some .time, any perceptible swelling ; and, when it does
more sensibly appear, the bones are found to be the parts chiefly
affected — the surrounding teguments coming only to suffer on the
further progress of the disease.

These are the chief local differences of the two species of this
disorder ; but some assistance in the distinction may likewise be ob-
tained from considering the general habit of the patient, and the
manner in which the complaint may seem to have been produced.

Thus, when such swellings occur in young, strong, plethoric people,
and especially in those who have formerly been subject to rheumatism,
whether they have been the immediate consequences of external
accidents or not, they will most probahly always prove to be of the
mildest, or rheumatic species of the disorder.

Whereas, when swellings of this nature appear in such patients as
are otherwise evidently of scrofulous dispositions — where, together
with a fine skin and delicate complexion, there are either, on exami-
nation, found to be hardened glands in the neck, armpits, or inguina,
or it is discovered that the patient may be liable to such complaints
from inheritance — when either any or all of these circumstances oc-
without any evident external cause, we need be under very little doubt
in concluding it to be of a scrofulous nature. — (Bell on Ulcers, p. 274.)

Treatment of White Swelling.
Common Treatment.

Blisters, setons, issues, mercury, amputation, &c. That the reader
may have an opportunity of knowing the efficacy of the present
practice, I here subjoin the report of B. C. Brodie.

From a work called " Morisonia" page 310.

Of Tumours, White Swellings, and Diseases of the Joints.

" I have now before me the work of B. C. Brodie, F. R. S., Professor
of Anatomy and Surgery to the Royal College of Surgeons, and Sur-
geon to St. George's Hospital, on Diseases of the Joints ; and from
the cases stated, a more unsuccessful practitioner never presented
himself before the public. One would think this learned and dex-
terous surgeon considered it only the patient's wish to have his limbs


230 White Swelling— (Hydarthus.)

torn off, or to die a wretched, lingering death. What have his re-
searches benefited the world, by his cutting up, dissecting joints, or
giving plates of diseased, carious bones ? When once you have im-
bibed a true knowledge of disease and of the human body, don't you
see the futility of this practice ? and has not experience proved to
you the quackery and peruiciousness of such medical practice ? With-
out entering into this author's mode of treatment, I shall merely lay
before the reader the cases stated, and allow him to form his own
opinion from them."

Case 1. A man with a diseased knee died in two months after ad-
mission.

2. A young man, leg amputated after eight months' confinement.

3. A middle-aged man, diseased liver, and swelling of knee : died
in two months.

4. A man, forty-seven years of age, after being four months in the
hospital, dismissed nearly as well as when he entered.

5. A young lad, after a month, was dismissed as cured.

6. A middle-aged man, after five months' residence in a hospital,
was dismissed only better than when he was admitted ; and fifteen
months after, he was still a disabled man, not capable of any exertion.

7. A young gentleman, thirteen years of age, treated from July to
November, when he was seized with a variety of disorders and died.

8. A man, forty years of age, was treated for months ; dismissed,
though not cured : returned again worse than ever. He does not
say how it ended.

9. An aged woman was treated a month, and dismissed as cured.

10. A gentleman, of forty-five years, under treatment from 1817
to 1822. At last, having got vinum colchici, he recovered.

11. A gentleman recovered from vinum colchici.

12. A young lady, felt pain in the thigh and knee ; was put to bed,
and fever coming on, died in a week.

13. A middle-aged man, complained of pain in the shoulder; was
seized with fever, and died.

14. A diseased knee, sent for examination.

15. A young woman, after five months in the hospital, had her leg
amputated.

16. A young man, after two months in the hospital, shared the
same fate.

17. A young man, after ten months in the hospital, lost his leg.

18. A boy, of six years, after twelve months in the hospital, leg
amputated.

19. A lad, after two years going to and from the hospital, leg am-
putated.

20. A young man, leg amputated.

21. An old man, leg amputated.

22. A boy, eleven years, died.

23. A boy, twelve years, died.

24. A middle-aged man, died.

25. A case of examination in a dissecting-room.

26. A boy, ten years, treated from April to October, and died.


White Swelling— (Hydarthus.) 231

27. A girl, of seven years, treated four months, and died.

28. A man, treated three months, and died.

29. A young man, treated five months, and died.

30. A young woman, treated three months, and died.

31. A young man, treated four months, and died.

32. A lad, treated three months, and lost his leg.

33. A young woman, treated three months, and lost her leg.

34. A middle-aged woman, treated four months, and lost her leg.

35. A middle-aged man, treated four months, and died.
30. A middle-aged woman, was admitted, and died.

37. A young woman, treated more than a year, recovered a little
the use of her knee.

" In all, this volume contains sixty-five cases, all terminating in the
same unsatisfactory way ; and it is certain that, even in the most fa-
vourable cases, not one of them approaches to a radical, perfect cure ;
and that if the patients who did not die could be called together and
examined, they would declare that their pain and infirmities are far
from gone. It is perfectly unnecessary to go through the various
treatments, conjectures, and false doctrines set forth in the work —
leeching, bleeding, blisters on the part, incisions, cutting out, embro-
cations, and a variety of fatiguing nostrums without meaning, and at last
amputation ; — such are the means of cure recommended. Deluded
people ! your lives and comfort sacrificed, by this barbarous science,
surgery."

Reformed Practice.

The numerous cripples that are daily seen, and the amputations
that are performed for this complaint, show that the treatment ordi-
narily pursued for it is not only ineffectual and injudicious, but ex-
ceedingly pernicious and dangerous. And it affords me much pleasure
to give a course of treatment which I know by experience to be a
most valuable remedy.

If the practitioner is called to a case of white swelling in the com-
mencement, or in the stage of irritation or inflammation, his first object
will be to remove it by resolution, or by such applications and treat-
ment as will prevent the second or suppurative stage of the disease ;
and this may often be done, provided a very prompt and energetic
course be instituted. To fulfil this indication, make use of the fol-
lowing fomentation or process of steaming :

Take Catnip, (nepeta cataria,)

Hearts of mullen, (verbascum nigrum,)
Wormwood, (absynthium vulgare,)
May-weed, (antliemis cotula,)
Two double handfuls of each ; boil them in six quarts of water, to-
gether with a pint of soft soap, a sufficient time to obtain the strength
of the herbs. Put the part affected over the steam, and cover it
closely with a blanket for fifteen or twenty minutes.

Immediately after steaming, take a liquid and bathe the disease,
made as follows :


232 White Swelling— (Hydarthus.)

Take half a gill of sjnrits,
Half an ounce of camphor,
A large table spoonful of laudanum,

The marrow of three hogs jaws, or, as a substitute, lard or sweet oil.
Simmer together on embers. Rub or bathe the swelling, more par-
ticularly downwards. The same course to be daily repeated ; and
should it not remove the complaint, then apply one of our common
strengtliening plasters.

To aid in reducing the swelling and inflammation, an ointment made
by simmering the cicuta leaves in spirits and lard, may be applied three
or four times a day, and alternated with the use of the stramonium
ointment, made in the same manner.

This treatment, with frictions during the day, has been attended
with an excellent effect, even without the use of any other medicine.
It cured one lady in this city, for which other physicians could not
render the least aid or benefit.

If it cannot be discussed or dispersed, apply the following poultice :
Take of Dandelion roots, (leontodon taraxalum,)
Hearts of mullen, (verbascum nigcum,)
Catnip leaves and jlowers, (tiepet. cataria,)
Of each, a handful. Bruise or pound the same in a mortar ; after
which, boil in sweet milk, until the strength is extracted ; then stir in
sufficient of the slippery-elm hark, (ulmus fulva,) to make a poultice
of the proper consistence ; apply to the parts, tepid or blood warm.

Steam or foment, as above directed, in the evening ; and imme-
diately after, apply the cataplasm or poultice, which must be kept on
during the whole time, or until the swelling suppurates, there is a
free discharge of matter, and the inflammation is measurably subsided.
After the swelling thus breaks or discharges, apply the following
salve :

Take the bark of the root of the wild indigo, (podolyria tinctoria,)
a bushel ; boil till the strength is extracted ; then strain, and again
boil and skim. When most of the watery portion of the liquid has
evaporated, add fresh butler ten pounds, beeswax three pounds, mutton
tallow one pound and a half; simmer till all the water has evaporated ;
then again strain and skim ; pour into a jar and cover ; it is then fit
for use. This forms a beautiful, fragrant and golden coloured salve,
which is detergent and healing in its properties.

Let it be spread upon a piece of linen or muslin, and laid upon the
ulcer ; to be renewed morning and evening.

In white swelling, fungus or proud flesh is more apt to arise thap
in other ulcers. This arises, probably, from the seat of the disease
being probably in the periosteum, and particular attention must be
paid to prevent its growth, and to remove it whe:. it is formed.

For this purpose, applications very mild may first be made, such as
the fine powder of blood-root. If this does not remove it, sprinkle a
few grains of the vegetable caustic upon it. Should it still remain af-
ter these applications, Ferris' plaster must be applied, to which a small
quantity of sulphate of zinc, or white vitriol, has been added, in pro-
portion of half a drachm or a drachm, pulverized, to an ounce of the
plaster, to be well mixed or incorporated together. It should be


White Swelling— (Hydarthus.) 233

spread thin, upon a soft piece of leather or linen, and applied to the
sore ; and it may extend a little around the margin or edges of the
ulcer. It may be kept on constantly, if the patient does not complain
too much ; otherwise let it be occasionally applied, or a sufficient
length of time to fulfil the indication required. It has a peculiar ef-
fect upon the ulcer, destroying the fungous flesh without exciting in-
flammation, by producing a preternatural or greater discharge, which
contributes powerfully to heal it. The strength must be regulated
according to the feelings of the patient ; and it ought to occasion very
little if any pain.

I have ordered this plaster to be used constantly until the sore was
healed, and when it excited any or too much pain or inflammation,
have removed it, and substituted the black salve or plaster, and which
agrees exceedingly well with the complaint. In some cases it answers
a better purpose than the yellow salve above mentioned, and therefore
both may be tried and used alternately ; the one that produces the
best effects may be constantly applied.

Owing to temperament, or idiosyncrasy, what will cure one will
exasperate the complaint of another; in consequence of which, we
find it advantageous to possess numerous medicinal agents.

Sinuses or Openings. — It is often the case that there are little open-
ings or sinuses communicating from the surface of (he ulcer down to
the bone, or into the adjacent parts. When they appear, they should
be kept open as long as possible. If they show a disposition to heal,
let tents be introduced, on which is put some stimulating article. If
they excite too much irritation, let them be removed, and a little lint
occasionally crowded in with a probe. Where the parts are not too
irritable, stimulating liquids may be injected into the ulcer, such as
soapsuds, (Castile soap and soft water,) weak ley, a decoction of wild
indigo, &c. I have, generally, however, found the patient unwilling
or unable to bear the use of the syringe.

Contraction of the Sinews, or Tendons. — In addition to steaming the
parts when the limb is contracted, bathe with the following oil.
Take Oil of sassafras,
" wormwood,
" turpentine,
Neals-foot oil,
Gum camphor, equal parts ;
Mix ; rub or bathe the sinews with this oil, or mixture, thoroughly,
twice a day, near the lire.

Callus. — In almost all cases of white swelling, there is an enlarge-
ment, or callus, about the joints ; and this often remains after The
ulcers have healed, and throws the leg into a state of semiflexion, or
such contraction, that the patient cannot touch it to the floor, or
ground. To obviate this, in addition to what has been recommended,
the above oil should be applied, and friction or rubbing the part three
or four times a day, for half an hour each time ; after which, let a
strengthening planter be applied to the parts.

Internal Treatment. —The general health must be attended to. The
pale and unhealthy appearance of the countenance of children afflict,
ed with white swelling, shows that there is a scrofulous or morbid


234 White Swelling— (Hydarthus.)

taint of the system; and, therefore, it is of primary importance, white
we apply proper local applications, that we improve the condition of
the general health. To this end, let a purgative be given, once or
twice a week ; let the alterative syrup be daily exhibited, according to
the age and strength of the patient.

The following syrup is also excellent, and which may be used part
of the time.

Take Yellow dock-root, (rumex crispus,)

Bittersweet, bark of the root, (solanum dulcamara,)
A pound of each ; cut or bruise; add a sufficient quantity of water;
then boil till the strength is extracted, and simmer till there is two
quarts ; add four pounds of loaf sugar. To a child five or six years
old, a wine glassful may be given, morning, noon and night.

When the pain is very severe, and prevents sleep, let an anodyne be
given.

This treatment I have found invariably successful where the disease
has not proceeded too far, or where the constitution has not been too
much undermined.

I have successfully treated patients labouring under white swelling,
nearly in every stage of the complaint, when all other means have
been tried in vain, and wherever the above treatment has been pur-
sued, it has been attended ""with the same salutary effects ; and I,
therefore, consider it one of the most valuable improvements in medi-
cine or surgery.

When the patient is labouring under the most excruciating pain, one
usually operates as a charm in allaying pain and inflammation.

A part of this treatment, it is stated, came from one of the aborigines
of this country, particularly the application of steam to the disease, in
the manner here laid down. The other part of it I made use of before
I came in possession of the remedy. A brief history of the method
of obtaining the information, I will here give, as communicated to me.
A person in New-Jersey, travelling in the western states, put up at a
tavern in company with an Indian chief, or a number of Indians.
They soon heard the groans of a boy, in an adjoining apartment, when
one of the Indians inquired into the cause of it. He was told that he
was afflicted with a white swelling, which, I think, was stated, had been
given up as incurable. The Indian immediately said, if they would
follow his directions, he could relieve, or cure him. To this they
most cheerfully assented, and the prescriptions soon mitigated the
pain, and subsequently proved a sovereign remedy.

The woman mentioned above, who was present at the time, obtained
the remedy; and such confidence had she in its virtues, after her
return home, that she began to use it with great success among her
neighbours, not only for white swellings, but for felons, inflammation,
&c. Several of my friends spoke in the highest terms of the treat-
ment pursued by this woman, and gave the most unequivocal proof
and evidence of its efficacy. I did not, however, place much confi-
dence in the treatment, from the circumstance that I had so often
been deceived in different kinds of nostrums. Besides, the course
that I had pursued, in the treatment of white swellings, had generally


White Swelling— (Hydar thus.) 235

been successful ; and I, therefore, was less anxious to purchase the
proposed remedy.

After a number of years, the person (Mrs. Moore) concluded to
remove a great distance to the west ; and a gentleman, a neighbour of
hers, who had often witnessed its good effects, being unwilling that it
should be lost, purchased the same almost exclusively for my use, and
from whom I obtained the recipe; and, upon a fair trial of the course
pursued, I find it quite an improvement on my former method. This
improvement consists, principally, if not wholly, in the direct application
of the steam of stimulating and aromatic herbs, or medicinal plants, with
the addition of a part of the ingredients recommended for the poultice.
It is impossible for a practitioner truly to appreciate the immediate
and sovereign effect of the fomentation made use of, or rather, the
effect of the steam or heat, arising from the combination, except they
make a trial of it. I have seen the languishing sufferer, nearly worn
out with excruciating pain, so suddenly relieved, the transition or
change so great, that the patient suspected that a dangerous or fatal
dose of opium had been administered. It not only has an astonishing
effect upon the parts immediately diseased, but a correspondent, or
sympathetic one upon the whole system, and I have found it equally
applicable and beneficial in case of felons, inflammations, and other
painful diseases.

A patient has just called, who has been in great distress with a
whitlow or felon, and who had tried a number of applications without
much benefit, and to whom I recommended the process of steaming,
a day or two ago ; but he neglected to do so, apparently from the sup-
position that it was too simple to afford any relief, but after repeating
to him the necessity of resorting to it, he steamed his hand thoroughly,
by throwing the decoction, with the herbs, into a small vessel, placing
his hand over it, and retaining the steam by a blanket. He states,
that it gave immediate relief, deadening or removing the pain, and pro.
ducing a free discharge of matter, and also lessening the swelling or
inflammation.

I will here give the original formula, or mode of treatment, as I
received it. There, probably, has been some alteration from the first
that was given. By comparing this, with the treatment I have laid
down, the variation made will be seen.

1st. Steaming or Fomentation.

Take for the sweat, two double-handfuls of catnip ;

The same quantity of hearts of mullens ;

The same quantity of double tansy;

The same quantity of wormwood ;

The same quantity of may-weed ;

Boil them in six quarts of water, together with a pint of soft soap, a
sufficient time to get the strength from the herbs.

Put the part affected over the steam, and cover the part closely
with a blanket, for fifteen or twenty minutes.

Immediately after steaming, take a liquid, and bathe the part affect,
ed, made of half a gill of spirits, half an ounce of camphor, a large

Vol. II. 2 F


236 White Swelling — (Hydarthus.)

table spoonful of laudanum, the marrow of three hogs' jaws, simmered
together on embers ; apply the liquid, and rub the swelling down-
wards.

Then apply a poultice, made of one handful of dandelion roots, one
handful of the hearts of mullen, the same quantity of catnip. Boil them
in sweet milk, and thicken with wheat flour.

Steam in the evening, and poultice every morning and evening,
until the swelling breaks.

After the swelling breaks, apply a salve, made of one handful of
English clover, a lump of rosin as large as a walnut, half a pound of
sheep's tallow, one handful of bitter-sweet berries ; stew slow on embers.
Apply the salve twice every day.

Take an equal quantity of red precipitate and loaf sugar, with a
small lump of charcoal, and powder them, to cleanse the sore of proud
flesh.

If the sinews should be contracted, take a pint bottle, fill it half
full of sweet oil, then fill it with camomile flowers. Let it hang in the
sun for three days, taking it in every evening. Rub the sinews with,
it, twice every day, hard, and heat it in with a hot iron*


CHAPTER XVI.

venereal disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)


Description.

This is a most loathsome affection, which extends to every part of
the system, and is occasioned by a specific poison, conveyed by con-
tagion or actual contact. It acts both locally and constitutionally.

History.

About the year 1494, or 1495, the venereal disease is said to have
made its first appearance in Europe. Some writers believe that it
originally broke out at the siege of Naples ; but most of them suppose
that, as Columbus returned from his first expedition to the West Indies,
on March 13th, 1493, his followers brought the disorder with them
from the new to the old world. Other authors, however, among whom
are Mr. Beckett, (Phil. Trans, vols. xxx. and xxxi.) Mr. B. Bell and
Dr. Swediaur, maintain the opinion, that the venereal disease was
well known upon the old continent, and that it prevailed among the
Jews, Greeks and Romans, and their descendants, long before the
discovery of America. Another doctrine, not entirely destitute of
ingenious arguments, and even containing many valuable truths, is,
that the venereal disease, as it is considered in modern times, has no
real existence as a distinct affection, arising from any particular virus,
but is a name given to an assemblage of disorders of different kinds,
to which the human race have always been subjected, from time
immemorial.— (See a tract entitled, "Sur la Non-existence de la Ma-
ladie Ve'ne'rienne" 8vo. Paris, 1811.) One writer of high reputation
believes, that, though syphilis was brought to Europe by the followers
of Columbus, there existed, previously to that event, throughout the
old continent, venereal disorders, both local and constitutional, which
strongly resembled the newly-imported disease, and were for more
than three centuries confounded with it. — (R. Carmichael on Venereal
Diseases, p. 33. 8vo. London, 1825, 2d ed.) Mr. Bacot has bestowed
great pains on an examination of all the passages in old works,
affording any ground for the opinion, that syphilis existed in ancient
times. He finds in them allusions to many local complaints of tha
genitals, warts, discharges, ulcers, pustules, &c, sometimes clearly
tional symptoms. "Surely," says he, "I may be allowed to say,
that, if there is any historical fact that can be said to be proved, it is
that of the origin of syphilis being referable to the latter years of the
fifteenth century ; for I cannot understand otherwise, why, at that
precise period, we all at once hear of ulcers on the parts of generation


238 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

in both sexes, followed speedily by excruciating nocturnal pains, by
corroding ulcers over the whole body, by affections of the throat and
nose, and very frequently by death — when not one word that can be
construed into any similar affection is to be met with distinctly stated
by any writer before that period." — (J. Bacot, in Med. Gazette, vol. ii.
p. 100.) But, while this writer will not admit the truth of the exist-
ence of the venereal disease in times of antiquity, he allows that a
disorder resembling gonorrhoea has been known from the remotest
periods of history.

Although many considerations lead me to coincide with Hunter,
Sprengel, Pearson and Bacot, in rejecting the common history of
syphilis, as fabulous — I mean that account which refers its origin to
America, or the French army in Italy — it does not appear to me that
any utility would be likely to result from agitating this question in
modern times ; because, if jt be true, as the most candid and intelli-
gent surgeons of the present day generally acknowledge, that they
cannot precisely define what the venereal disease is, nor always point
out the exact circumstances in which it differs from some other
anomalous complaints, even when the cases are before their eyes,
how can such discrimination be attempted from a mere review of old
descriptions, not accompanied with the advantage of a view of the
living patients themselves? But, as far as the nature of the venereal
disease has been unravelled, and it is allowable to judge from such
comparisons, I may be permitted to remark, that, in degree of severity,
acutencss of symptoms, rapidity of propagation, and extent and quick-
ness of fatality, no forms of disease, however conjectured to be vene-
real, bear the least resemblance to the destructive malady with which
the army before Naples was afflicted, at the close of the fifteenth
century ; nor will any ignorance of the uses of mercury, as will be
presently noticed, explain differences so strongly marked. With
reference to the contagious disorder which scourged a great part of
Europe, at the close of the fifteenth century, there is a decree of the
parliament of Paris, dated 1490, in which the disease is mentioned to
have been then prevalent in that city two years ; consequently, it was
known there in 1494 : yet the conquest of Naples, by Charles VIII.,
was not effected till 1495. It is clear, therefore, that the disease hero
alluded to could not have been derived from America. It appears to
have been communicated from one person to another by the mere
touch, residence in the same chamber, &c. : and, in fact, unless some
other mode of propagation, besides coition, be supposed, its extension
throughout Europe in two years would imply a depravity of manners
quite extraordinary, and beyond all credibility. Another fact is, that,
whatever the disorder might be, it was not of long continuance ; and
Guieciardini, the historian, who wrote a few years after its breaking
out, assures us, that it had already become much milder, and under-
gone, of itself, a change into kinds different from the first.

Dr. Steward supposes that this disease originated in the camp of
Israel, as may be inferred by reading the fifth chapter of Numbers.
No doubt it was first inflicted upon mankind, as a curse, in conse-
quence of departing from moral rectitude, or the law of God.


Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea— Syphilis.) 239


Causes.

The venereal disease is supposed to arise from a specific morbid
poison, which, when applied to the human body, has the power of
propagating or multiplying itself, and is capable of acting both locally
and constitutionally.

Mr. Hunter was of opinion, that the effects produced by the poison
arise from its peculiar, or specific irritation, joined with the aptness
of the living principle to be irritated by such a cause, and the parts
so irritated acting accordingly. Hence he considered that the vene-
real virus irritated the living parts in a manner peculiar to itself, and
produced an inflammation peculiar to that irritation, from which a
matter is produced, peculiar to the inflammation.

The venereal poison is capable of affecting the human body in two
different ways : locally, that is, in those parts only to which it is first
applied ; and constitutionally, that is, in consequence of its absorption.

In whatever manner the venereal disease was first produced, it
began, says Mr. Hunter, in the human race, as no other animal
seems capable of being affected by it. He conceives, also, that the
parts of generation were those first affected ; for if the disease had
taken place on any other part, it would not have gone farther than
the person in whom it first arose. On the contrary, if the disease,
in the first instance of its formation, be presumed to have attacked
the parts of generation, where the only natural connexion takes place
between one human being and another, except that between the
mother and child, it was in the most favourable situation for being
propagated ; and Mr. Hunter infers, also, that the first effects of the
disease must have been local, in consequence of the fact, now well
established, that none of the constitutional effects are communicable
to other persons ; that is to say, infectious.

Thus, the numberless cases of the venereal disease, afflicting
generation after generation, and observable in all the known parts
of the world, arc supposed to be originally derived from the amours
of some unfortunate individual, in whom the poison was first formed,
from causes beyond the reach of human investigation. Every modern
speculation about the origin of the distemper promises but little in-
struction or success ; because the question relates to a disease, the
diagnosis of which is still very unsettled, and the complete definition of
which has hitherto baffled men of the greatest genius and experience.

According to Mr. Hunter, the venereal poison is commonly in the
form of pus, or some other secretion. In most cases, it excites an in-
flammation, which (to use the same author's language,) is attended with
a specific mode of action, different from all other actions attending
inflammation, and accounting for the specific qualities in the matter.

1st. Gonorrhoea.

Symptoms.

Gonorrhoea is a discharge resembling pus or matter from the urethra,
with heat of urine, &c, after impure coition, to which often succeeds


1240 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

a discharge of mucus from the urethra, with little or no dysury, called
a gleet. This disease is also called Fluor albus maligna*. Blennor-
rhagia, by Swediaur. In English, a clap, from the old French word
clapises, which were public shops, kept and inhabited by single pros-
titutes, and generally confined to a particular quarter of the town, as
is even now the case in several of the great towns in Italy. In Ger-
many, the disease is named tripper, from dripping ; and in French,
chaudpisse, from the heat and scalding in making water.

No certain rule can be laid down with regard to the time that a clap
will take before it makes its appearance, after infection has been con-
veyed. With some persons it will show itself in the course of three or
four days, while with others there will not be the least appearance of it
before the expiration of some weeks. It most usually is perceptible,
however, in the space of from six to fourteen days, and in a male, be-
gins with an uneasiness about the parts of generation, such as an
itching in the glans penis, and a soreness and tingling sensation along
the whole course of the urethra ; soon after which, the person per-
ceives an appearance of whitish matter at its orifice, and also some
degree of pungency upon making water.

In the course of a few days, the discharge of matter will increase
considerably ; will assume, most probably, a greenish or yellowish
hue, and will become thinner, and lose its adhesiveness ; the parts
will also be occupied with some degree of redness and inflammation,
in consequence of which the glans will put on the appearance of a
ripe cherry, the stream of urine will be smaller than usual, owing to
the canal being made narrower by the inflamed state of the internal
membrane, and a considerable degree of pain and scalding heat will
be experienced on every attempt to make water.

Where the inflammation prevails in a very high degree, it prevents
the extension of the urethra, on the taking place of any erection, so
that the penis is, at that time, curved downwards, with great pain,
which is much increased if attempted to be raised towards the belly ;
and the stimulus occasions it often to be erected, particularly when the
patient is warm in bed, and so deprives him of sleep, producing, in
some cases, an involuntary emission of semen.

In consequence of the inflammation, it sometimes happens that, at
the time of making water, owing to the rupture of some small blood
vessel, a slight haemorrhage ensues, and a small quantity of blood is
voided. In consequence of inflammation, the prepuce likewise be-
comes often so swelled at the end, that it cannot, be drawn back,
which symptom is called a phimosis ; or, that being drawn behind the
glans, it cannot be returned, which is known by the name of paraphi-
mosis. Now and then, from the same cause, little hard swellings arise
on the lower surface of the penis, along the course of the urethra,
and these perhaps suppurate and form into fistulous sores.

The adjacent parts sympathizing with those already affected, the
bladder becomes irritable, and incapable of retaining the urine for
any length of time, which gives the patient a frequent inclination to
make water, and he feels an uneasiness about the scrotum, perinaeum
and fundament. Moreover, the glands of the groins grow indurated
and enlarged, or perhaps the testicles become swelled and inflamed,


Venereal Disease — {Lues Venerea — Syphilis.) 241

in consequence of which he experiences excruciating pains, extending
from the seat of the complaint up into the small of the back, he gets
hot and restless, and a small symptomatic fever arises.

Where the parts are not occupied by much inflammation, few or
none of the last mentioned symptoms will arise, and only a discharge
with a slight heat or scalding in making water will prevail.

If a gonorrhoea be neither irritated by any irregularity of the pa-
tient, nor prolonged by the want of timely and proper assistance, then,
in the course of about a fortnight or three weeks, the discharge, from
having been thin and discoloured at first, will become thick, white,
and of a ropy consistence ; and from having gradually begun to di-
minish in quantity, will at last cease entirely, together with every in-
flammatory symptom whatever ; whereas, on the contrary, if the
patient has led a life of intemperance and sensuality, has partaken
freely of the bottle and high-seasoned meats, and has, at the same
time, neglected to pursue the necessary means, it may then continue
for many weeks or months ; and, on going off, may leave a weakness
or gleet behind it, besides being accompanied with the risk of giving
rise to a constitutional affection, especially if there has been a neglect
of proper cleanliness ; for where venereal matter has been suffered
to lodge between the prepuce and glans penis for any time, so as to
have occasioned either excoriation or ulceration, there will always be
danger of its having been absorbed.

Another risk, arising from the long continuance of a gonorrhoea,
especially if it has been attended with inflammatory symptoms, or has
been of frequent recurrence, is the taking place of one or more
strictures in the urethra. These are sure to occasion a considerable
degree of difficulty, as well as pain, in making water, and, instead of
its being discharged in a free and uninterrupted stream, it splits into
two, or perhaps is voided drop by drop. Such affections become, from
neglect, of a most serious and dangerous nature, as they not unfre-
quently block up the urethra, so as to induce a total suppression of
urine.

Where the gonorrhoea has been of long standing, warty excres-
cences arc likewise apt to arise about the parts of generation, owing
to the matter falling and lodging thereoji ; and they not unfrequently
prove both numerous and troublesome.

Having noticed every symptom whicn usually attends on gonorrhoea
in the male sex, it will only be necessary to observe, that the same
heat and soreness in making water, and the same discharge of dis-
coloured mucus, together with a slight pain in walking, and an uneasi-
ness in sitting, take place in females, as in the former ; but as the
parts in women which are most apt to be affected by the venereal
poison, are less complex in their nature, and fewer in number, than in
men, so of course the former arc not liable to many of the symptoms
which the latter arc ; and, from the urinary canal being much shorter,
and of a more simple form, in the in than in men, they are seldom, if
ever, incommoded by the taking place of strictures.

With women, it indeed often happens, that all the symptoms of a
gonorrhoea are so very slight, they experience no other inconvenience
than the discharge, except, perhaps, immediately after menstruation, at


242 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerta — Syphilis.)

which period it is no uncommon occurrence for them to perceive some
degree of aggravation in the symptoms.

Women of a relaxed habit, and such as have had frequent miscar-
riages, are apt to be afflicted with a disease known by the name of
fluor albus, which it is often difficult to distinguish from gonorrhoea
virulenta, as the matter discharged in both is, in many cases, of the
same colour and consistence. The surest way of forming a just con-
clusion, in instances of this nature, will be to draw it from an accurate
investigation, both of the symptoms which are present and those which
have preceded the discharge ; as likewise from the concurring cir-
cumstances, such as the character and mode of life of the person,
and the probability there may be of her having had venereal infection
conveyed to her by any connexion in which she may be engaged.

Not long ago, it was generally supposed that gonorrhoea depended
always upon ulcers in the urethra, producing a discharge of purulent
matter ; and such ulcers do, indeed, occur, in consequence of a high
degree of inflammation and suppuration ; but many dissections of
persons who have died while labouring under a gonorrhoea, have
clearly shown that the disease may, and often does, exist without any
ulceration in the urethra, so that the discharge which appears is usual-
ly of a vitiated mucus, thrown out from the mucous follicles of the
urethra. On opening this canal, in recent cases, it usually appears
red and inflamed ; its mucous glands are somewhat enlarged, and its
cavity is filled with matter to within a small distance from its extremity.
Where the disease has been of long continuance, its surface all along,
even to the bladder, is generally found pale and relaxed, without any
erosion.

2d. Chancre.

From absorption of the venereal poison, little eruptions, scabs and
ulcers arise on different parts of the head of the penis. It begins
usually with an itching in the part. A small pimple, full of matter,
generally arises, without much hardness, or apparent inflammation or
swelling. The itching is gradually changed into pain, and is con-
verted into an ulcer. Its base is hard, and the edges a little promi-
nent. When it begins on th§ fraenum, or near it, that part is very
commonly destroyed, or a hole is made in it by ulceration. When
the disease is more advanced, inflammation is apt to take place.

When the pain is severe, Mr. Hunter remarks, there is a strong
disposition to irritation. Chancres also, sometimes, soon begin to
slough, there being a strong tendency to mortification. Here he
probably adverts to what are now usually called phagedenic sores, and
frequently believed to differ from the truly venereal chancre.

It is also observed by Hunter, that when there is a considerable
loss of substance, either from sloughing or ulceration, a profuse bleed-
ing is no uncommon circumstance, more especially when the ulcer is
on the glands. The adhesive inflammation does not appear to take
place sufficiently to unite the veins of this part of the penis, so as to
prevent their cavity from being exposed, and the blood escapes from
the corpus spongiosum urethrae. The ulcers or sloughs often extend


Venereal Disease— (Lues Venerea— Syphilis.) 243

as deeply as the corpus cavernosum penis, and similar bleedings are
the consequence.

With respect to chancres in women* the labia and nymphae, like
the glans penis in men, are subject to ulceration, and the ulcerations
are generally more numerous in females than males, in consequence
of the surface on which the sores are liable to form being much larger.
As Hunter observes, chancres are occasionally situated on the edge
of the labia ; sometimes on the outside of these parts; and even on
the perinseum. When the sores are formed on the inside of the labia
or nympha), they can never dry or scab ; but when they are externally
situated, the matter may dry on them, and produce a scab, just as
happens with respect to chancres situated on the scrotum or body of
the penis.

The venereal matter from these sores is apt to run down the peri-
na;um to the anus, and excoriate the parts, especially about the anus,
where the skin is thin, and where chancres may be thus occasioned.

Chancres have been noticed in the vagina ; but Mr. Hunter sus-
pected that they were not original ones, but that they had spread to
this situation from the inside of the labia*

Before any of the virus has been taken up by the absorbents and
conveyed into the circulation, a chancre is entirely a local affection.
From the Huntcrian doctrines, however, it would appear, that absorp.
tion must generally soon follow the occurrence of the sore ; and all
the modern opinions concerning the nature of ulceration itself,would lead
to the same inference. Some persons appear much more susceptible
of the effects of the venereal disease than other individuals. It is re-
marked by Hunter, that the interval between the application of tho
poison, and its effects upon the parts, is uncertain ; but that, on the
wholo, a chancre is longer in appearing than a gonorrhoea. However,
the nature of the parts affected make some difference. When a
chancre occurs on the fraenum or at the termination of the prepuce in
the glans, the disease in general comes on earlier ; these parts being
more easily affected than either the glans penis, common skin of this
organ, or the scrotum. He adds, that in some cases in which both
the glans and prepuce were contaminated from the same application of
the poison, the chancre made its appearance earlier on the latter part.
Hunter knew of some instances in which chancres appeared twenty,
four hours after the application of the matter ; and others, in which
an interval of seven weeks, and even two months, elapsed, between
the time of contamination and that when the chancre commenced.
However, here, as in almost all other statements about this perplexing
subject, we never know with certainty that the writer has sufficient
grounds for the assumed fact, that it is only one kind of poison which
is spoken of. — (Thomas.)

3d. Bubo.

When the venereal poison is suffered to take its natural course, the
absorbents take it up, and it becomes located in the glandular system,
and the first part usually attacked, is the inguinal gland, or the groin.
Between a local and constitutional affection, there often arises a kind

Vol. II. ' 2 G


244 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

of intermediate state ; and that, in consequence of an absorption of
venereal matter from some surface to which it has been applied, the
glands situated nearest to the parts thus affected are apt to become
indurated, swelled and inflamed, and so to give rise to a bubo ; and
the parts of generation usually coming first in contact with the matter,
so the glands in the groins are the most general seat of this particular
symptom. In most cases the syphilitic virus is absorbed from a chan-
cre or ulcer in the urethra ; but instances have occurred where a bubo
haa arisen without either gonorrhoea, or any kind of ulceration, and
the matter appears to have been absorbed without any evident erosion
of the skin or of the mucous membrane.

A bubo comes on with a pain in the groin, accompanied with some
degree of hardness and swelling, and is at first about the size of a
kidney-bean, but continuing to increase, it at length becomes as large
as an egg, occasions the person to experience some difficulty in walk-
ing, and is attended with a pulsation and throbbing in the tumour, and
a great redness of the skin. In some cases, the suppuration is quickly
completed ; in others, it goes on very slow ; and in others again, the
inflammatory appearances go off without any formation of pus. In a
few instances the glands have been known to become scirrhous.

As many other swellings in the groin, such as a rupture, aneurism,
lumbar abscess and scirrhous affection of the glands may be mistaken
for a bubo, it will always be advisable, in doubtful cases, to inquire
whether or not the patient has lately been afflicted either with a gonor-
rhcea or chancre ; and whether or not he has lately laboured under any
other complaint that might have given rise to the swelling. It may
likewise be advisable to attend to the progress which the tumour has
made. By a due consideration and investigation of these circum-
stances, we cannot fail to form a just conclusion as to the real nature
of the disease.

The following are the characteristics of a venereal bubo : the
swelling is usually confined to one gland ; the colour of the skin where
inflammation prevails is of a florid red ; the pain is very acute ; the
progress from inflammation to suppuration and ulceration is generally
very rapid ; the suppuration is large in proportion to the size of the
gland ; and there is only one abscess.

A bubo is never attended with danger where the inflamed gland
proceeds on regularly to suppuration ; but in particular cases it ac-
quires an indolencu after coming to a certain length, arising from a
scrofulous taint ; or, by being combined with erysipelas, it termi-
nates in a phagedenic ulceration, and occasions a great loss of sub-
stance. This termination is, however, more frequently met with in
hospitals than in private practice, and may partly be attributed to the
contaminated state of the air of the wards wherein syphilitic patients
are lodged.

The many inconveniences that ensue from allowing a venereal bubo
to suppurate, should induce the practitioner to exert his utmost en-
deavours to prevent it from proceeding to such a state, and to occasion
its speedy resolution or dispersion, if possible.


Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.) 245


4th. Constitutional Disease — (Lues Venerea.)

A constitutional taint is the third form under which it ha9 been
mentioned that the syphilitic poison is apt to show itself, and which
always arises in consequence of the matter being absorbed, and car-
ried into the circulating mass of fluids. The absorption of it may,
however, take place in three ways : —

1st, It may be carried into the circulation without producing any
evident local effect on the part to which it was at first applied :

2dly, It may take place in consequence of some local affection, such
as either gonorrhoea, chancre, or bubo : and,

3dly, It may ensue from an application of the matter to a common
sore or wound, similar to what happens in inoculating for the small-
pox.

The most general way, however, in which a constitutional taint is
produced, is by an absorption of the matter, either from a chancre or
bubo.

When syphilitic matter gets into the system, some symptoms of it
may often be observed in the course of six or eight weeks, or probably
sooner ; but in some cases it will continue in the circulating mass of
fluids for a few months before any visible effects are produced. The
system being completely contaminated, it then occasions many local
effects in different parts of the body, and shows itself under a variety
of shapes, many of which put on the appearance of a distinct disease.
We may presume that this variety depends wholly on the difference
of constitution, the different kinds of parts affected, and the different
state these parts were in at the time the matter or poison was applied.

The first symptoms usually show themselves on the skin, and in the
mouth and throat. When the matter is secreted principally in the
skin, reddish and brownish spots appear here and there on its surface,
and eruptions of a copper colour are dispersed over different parts of
the body, on the top of which there soon forms a thick scurf or scale.
This scurf falls off after a short time, and is succeeded by another ;
and the same happening several times, and at length casting off deep,
an ulcer is formed, which discharges an acrid fetid matter.

When the poison is secreted in the glands of the throat and mouth,
the tongue will often be affected, so as to occasion a thickness of
speech : and the tonsils, palate and uvula will become ulcerated, so as
to produce a soreness and difficulty in swallowing, and likewise a
hoarseness in the voice.

The tonsils are more usually affected with syphilitic ulceration than
the uvula or velum palati, though the affection may spread to these
from the tonsils. The ulcer of the latter is an excavation, as if a
piece was scooped out ; the sore has an uneven, jagged, foul appear-
ance, with an erysipelatous redness on a hard, elevated, defined
border ; the ulcer is commonly covered with a whitish or brown
slough ; it is progressive, and, like the rest of the syphilitic symptoms,
it is not curable by the powers of the constitution. Generally there
is not much pain nor much enlargement attendant on this form of the


246 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

disease ; in other respects the sensations do not materially differ from
those produced by ulceration of the throat proceeding from other
causes.

If tho disease affects the eyes, obstinate inflammation and some-
times ulceration, will also attack these organs.

The matter sometimes falls on deep-seated parts, such as tho ten-
dons, ligaments and periosteum, and occasions hard, painful swellings
to arise, known by the name of nodes.

When the disease is suffered to proceed, and is not counteracted by
proper remedies, the patient will, in the course of time, be afflicted
with severe pains, but more particularly in the night-time ; his coun-
tenance will become sallow ; his hair will fall off; he will lose his
appetite, strength and flesh ; his rest will be much disturbed by night,
and a small fever of a hectic kind will arise. The ulcers in the mouth
and throat being likewise suffered to spread, and to occasion a caries
of the bones of the palate, an opening will be made from the mouth to
the nose ; and, the cartilages and bones of the nose being at length
corroded away, this will sink to a level with the face.

It now and then occurs that primary symptoms followed by second-
ary ones present themselves, all closely imitating syphilis in its pri-
mary and secondary stages, and yet are not venereal. Symptoms
resembling the secondary appearances of syphilis occur also without
any preceding primary symptom, and turn out not to be venereal.
In some of the cases, the symptoms go off, and the patient gets well
without any remedy : in others, common alteratives have subdued the
complaint. These complaints resembling the venereal disease, have
been called by the name of cachexia syphiloidea, or pseudo-syphilis.
venereal one, were numerous ; and Abcrnethyj" has drawn the atten-
tion of medical men by his remarks on diseases resembling syphilis.

Some constitutions will bear up for a considerable time against the
disease, while others again will soon sink under the general weakness
and irritation produced by it. If the disorder is recent, and the con-
stitution not impaired by other diseases, a perfect cure may easily be
effected ; but where it is of long standing, and accompanied with
the symptoms of irritation which have been mentioned, the cure will
prove tedious, and in many cases uncertain, as the constitution and
strength of the patient may not admit, of his going through a course of
medicine sufficient to destroy the poison.

Dissection.

The general appearances to be observed on dissections of those
who die of lues, are caries of the bones, but more particnlnrly those
of the cranium, often communicating ulceration to the brain itself ;
together with enlargements and indurations of the lymphatic glands,
scirrhus of several of the organs, particularly the liver and lungs, and
exostosis of many of the hardest bones.

See his Treatise on the Venereal Disease, t See his Surgical ObcorTationf


Venereal Disease— {Lues Venerea— Syphilis.) 247


Common Treatment.

Mercury is almost exclusively relied on by physicians, in all its
different stages, and it was formerly the practice to salivate most
profusely for this disease ; so much so, that the supposed remedy was
much worse than the complaint itself, with all its horrors ; but modern
not so extensive and mischievous upon the system ; although they
frequently salivate, and cause a shocking state of the system, yet, in
general, they withhold this mineral before these serious symptoms
make their appearance. At any rate, this is the avowed design in
prescribing it by the more judicious part of the faculty; but, so un-
manageable, so uncontrollable and uncertain is the operation of mer-
cury, in different habits, that there is no reliance to be placed upon
its effects. The physician cannot rely with any degree of certainty
upon fulfilling one single indication.

Owing to temperament, and the peculiar state of the system, the
physician is often sadly disappointed, or most egregiously mistaken,
when he gives it. Oftentimes a single dose will cause a free salivation,
and produce a universal derangement of the system, and the pre-
server has the mortification to hear the anathemas of the patient
hurled against him at every visit. And what else can he expect from
such a deadly poison, from such a disease creating agent. The use
of tin's metal, says Dr. Chapman, however cautiously administered,
sometimes acts as a poison.

When I was an articled student at St. Bartholomew's Hospital,
says Dr. Cooper, most of the venereal patients in that establishment
were seen with their ulcerated tongues hanging out of their mouths ;
their faces prodigiously swelled ; and their saliva ilowing out in
streams. The wards were not sufficiently ventilated, and the stench
was so great that the places well deserved the appellation of foul.
Yet, notwithstanding mercury was tbus jntshed, (as the favourite ex-
pression was,) it was then common to see many patients suffer the
most dreadful mutilations, in consequence of sloughing ulcers of the
penis ; many unfortunate individuals, whose noses and palates were
lost ; and others who were afflicted with nodes and dreadful phage-
denic sores.

Setting aside the unpleasant and injurious effects to which mercury
subjects the venereal patient, there are other considerations of para-
mount importance for entirely dispensing with it ; which is principally
the fact that no preparation of mercury whatever, according to the ex-
perience and observation that 1 have had, (and it has not been very
limited,) has any power directly or indirectly, of curing the disease in
any stage of it ; but, on the contrary, often exasperates, protracts the
cure, and brings on the mercurial disease, which is much worse than
any form of syphilis. It is frequently, itself, a source of cutaneous
diseases, sore throats, and symptoms which, without its baneful influ-
ence, would never have occurred.

Is it not a startling fact, that this has never been discovered, with
all the boasted learning and improvement of physicians ? All their


248 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

talents have been engaged to ascertain whether the venereal disease
can be cured without mercury, whereas they have never yet learned,
it appears, that it never was cured with it.

When Doctor Alexander H. Stevens first commenced his surgical
course in the University of the State of New-York, I attended his
lectures ; and I recollect that he remarked, when speaking of the
treatment of venereal disease, as follows : said he, " Gentlemen, I
know not what to say to you on the use of mercury in the venereal
disease ; the whole medical world has been upset within a few years."
He then went on to state the experiments which had been tried in
Europe, in the military hospitals,which went to establish the fact, that in
an equal number of venereal patients treated with and without mercury,
those recovered the most speedily who did not submit to a course of
mercury, and were treated merely by cleanliness, rest and absti-
nence, with the most simple and mild dressings.

Further to illustrate or corroborate what I have here stated, I shall
give some observations and experiments made by British practition-
ers.

Dr. Fergusson assures us that, in Portugal, the disease, in its pri-
mary state among the natives, is curable without mercury, and by
simple topical .reatment ; that the antisyphilitic woods, combined
with sudorifics, are an adequate remedy for constitutional symptoms ;
and that th virulence of the disease has there been so much miti-
gated, that, after running a certain course (commonly a mild one)
through the respective orders of parts, according to the known laws
of its progress, it exhausts itself and ceases spontaneously. — (See Med.
and Chir. Trans, vol. iv. p. 2 — 5.) In the third edition of the First
Lines of the Practice of Surgery, it was sufficiently proved, from se-
veral conclusions drawn from the writing of Mr. Pearson, (Obs. on
the Effects of various Articles in the Cure of Lues Venerea,) that vene-
real sores might be benefited, and even healed, under the use of seve-
ral inert insignificant medicines. And the possibility of curing
chancres and other venereal complaints without mercury, was long
since remarked by Dr. Clutterbuck, who thence very justly inferred,
that the healing of a sore without this remedy, was no test that it was
not venereal. — (See Remarks on the Opinions of the late John Hunter,
1799.)

But although the whole history of the venereal disease, and of the
various articles of the materia medica, if carefully reflected upon,
must have led to the same conclusion, the truth was never placed in
such a view as to command the general belief of all the most expe-
rienced surgeons in this and other countries of Europe. I do not mean
to say that the truth was not seen and remarked by several of the
older writers ; for, that it was so, any man can convince himself by
referring to several works quoted. But it is to be understood, all in-
decision could never be renounced as long as prejudices interfered
with the only rational plan which could be adopted, with a view of
bringing the question to a final settlement; I mean experiments on a
large and impartial scale, open to the observation of numerous judges,
yet under such control as insured the rigorous trial of the practice.
Nor could such investigation be so well made by any class of prac-


Venereal Disease— (Lues Venerea— Syphilis.) 249

tttioners as the army surgeons, whose patients are numerous, obliged
ing from hospital to hospital, or from one surgeon to another, as ca-
price may dictate, or of eluding the observation of the medical attend-
ants after a seeming recovery. And here I must take the opportunity
of stating, that as far as my judgment extends, the most important
and cautious document yet extant, on the two questions of the possi-
bility and expediency of curing the venereal disease without mercury, is
the paper of Mr. Rose. At the time when Mr. Rose published his
observations, he had tried the non-mercurial treatment in the Cold-
stream regiment of Guards, during a year and three quarters, and had
thus succeeded in curing all the ulcers on the parts of generation, which
he met with in that period, together with the constitutional symptoms to
which they gave rise. " I may not be warranted in asserting (says this
gentleman) that many of , these were venereal ; but undoubtedly a
considerable number of them had all the appearances of primary
sores, produced by the venereal virus, and arose under circumstances
Avhere there had been at least a possibility of that virus having been
applied. Admitting that there is nothing so characteristic in a chancre
as to furnish incontrovertible proof of its nature, it will yet be allowed,
that there are many symptoms common to such sor«yt, although not
entirely peculiar to them, and whenever these are met with,
strong grounds to suspect that they are the effects of th£ &> phihtic
virus. In a sore, for instance, appearing shortly aftei suspicious
connexion, where there is loss of substance, a want of disposition to
granulate and an indurated margin and base, there is certainly a pro-
bability of that poison being present. Among a number of cases of
such a description, taken indiscriminately, the probability of some
being venereal is materially increased, and must at last approach
nearly to a certainty. On this principle, some of the sores here re-
ferred to must have been venereal. They were also seen by differ-
ent surgeons, on whose judgment I would rely, who agreed in consi-
dering many of them as well-marked cases of true chancre.— (Rose,
in Med. Chir. Trans, vol. viii. p. 357, &c.) The men thus treated
were examined almost every week for a considerable time after their
apparent cure, " both that the first approach of constitutional symp-
toms might be observed, and that any deception from an underhand
use of mercury might be guarded against." — (p. 359.) Sixty cases
of ulcers on the penis were also cured by Dease in the York Hospi-
tal, by means of simple dressings, the only general remedy being
occasional purgatives. The practice was likewise extensively tried
by Whympcr and Good, surgeons of the Guards, with the same kind
of success. In Mr. Rose's practice, all idea of specific remedies was
entirely laid aside. The patients were usually confined to their beds,
and such local applications were employed as the appearances of the
sores seemed to indicate. Aperient medicines, bark, vitriolic acid,
and occasion illy sarsaparilla, were administered. — (p. 363.) " Upon
an average, (says Mr. Rose,) one out of every three of ilie sores thus
treated, was followed by some form or other of constitutional affection :
this was in most instances mild, and sometimes so slight that it would
have escaped notice, if it had not been carefully sought for. The


250 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea—Syphilis.)

constitutional symptoms were evidently not such as could be regarded
as venereal, if we give credit to the commonly received ideas on tho
subject. Caries of the bones, and some of the least equivocal symp*
toms, did not occur. In no instance was there that uniform progress,
with unrelenting fury, from one order of symptoms and parts affected
to another, which is considered as an essential characteristic of true
syphilis." — (Med. Chir. Trans, vol. viii. p. 422.) The constitutional
symptoms also yielded, without the aid of mercury ; and frequently
primary sores, corresponding to what had been called the true chancre,
with indurated base, were cured in this manner,yet were followed by
no secondary symptoms. We are also informed, that "several cases
occurred of a cluster of ill-conditioned sores over the whole inner
surface of the prepuce : and behind the corona glandis ; and also of
a circle of small irritable sores, situated on the thickened and con.
tracted ring at the extreme margin of the prepuce. These occasion,
ally produced buboes." None of the sores of this description, met with
by Mr. Rose, were followed by any constitutional affection. — (Vol. cit. p.
370.) He bears testimony to the ill effects of mercury and stimulants
in cases of phagedenic ulcers, and confirms a not uncommon opinion,
that they are seldom followed by secondary symptoms, which opinion
should be qualified with the condition mentioned by Mr. Guthrie,
(Med. Chir. Trans, vol. viii. p. 565.) that no mercury be given.
Lastly, as I have already stated, Mr. Rose observed, that most of
the cases of papular eruptions followed ulcers, which were not very
deep, and healed without much difficulty. — (p. 399.)

The fact of the possibility of curing every kind of ulcer on the ge-
nitals without mercury, has been fully confirmed by the statements of
Mr. Guthrie, (Med. Chir. Trans, vol. viii. p. 558. 576.) Dr. J.
Thomson, (Edin. Med. and Surg. Journ. for January, 1818,) Dr.
Hcnnen, (Op. cit. Nos. 54 and 55, and Principles of Military Surgery,
2d ed.,) Mr. Bacot, (On Syphilis, p. 26, &c.,) and many other careful
observers.

Respecting the comparative quickness of the cures of chancres, or
reputed chancres, without the aid of mercury, much disagreement
prevails in the different reports, even those collected by the same in-
dividuals, whose statements must therefore be deemed perfectly im-
partial, though inconclusive. — (See Hennen's Military Surgery, 2d
ed. p. 536, &c.) Some of Mr. Rose's best marked cases of chancre,
that is to say, such as were distinguished by the indurated base and
circumference, healed in a very short time. But even respecting
these, or any other kinds of chancre, no regularity on this point can
be found. Mr. Guthrie observes, if the " ulcers were not without
any marked appearance, and did not amend in the first fortnight or
three weeks, they generally remained for five or seven weeks longer;
and the only difference in this respect between them and the raised
ulcer of the prepuce was, that this often remained for a longer period,
and that ulcers, possessing the true character of chancre, required in
general a still longer period for their cure, that is, from six, eight, to
ten, and in one case, even twenty. six weeks, healing up and ulcera-
ting again on a hardened base. Those that required the greatest
length of time had nothing particular in their appearance that would


Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.) 251

lead us to distinguish them from others of the same kind which were
healed in a shorter time." — (Med. Chir. Trans, vol. viii. p. 558.)

In relation to the question before us, one of the most important do-
cuments which I have met with, is an official circular, signed by Sir
James M'Grigor and Sir Wm. Franklin, from which it appears that
in 1940 cases of primary venereal ulcerations on the penis, cured
without mercury, between December, 1816, and December, 1818,
(including not only the more simple sores, but also a regular propor-
tion of those with the most marked characters of syphilitic chancre,)
the average period taken up by the treatment, when bubo did not exist,
was twenty-one days; with bubo, forty-five days. — (See Henneii's
Military Surgery, 2d. ed. p. 545.) And it farther appears, that, during
the period above specified, 2827 chancres, a more considerable pro-
portion of which were probably Hunterian chancres, were treated with
mercury, and that the average period required for the cure, when
there was no bubo, was thirty-three days ; with bubo, fifty. As far,
therefore, as a judgment can be formed from this official estimate,
and no calculation is ever likely to be furnished on a larger or more
impartial scale, the evidence tends to prove, that primary sores may
generally be cured rather sooner without than with the administration
of mercury, only by cleanliness, diet and rest.

[From tho London Medical Gazette.]

On the Application of Mercury to Venereal Complaints. By S. D.

Broughton.

Usually, a mine of prejudice has been ready to explode when any
anti-mercurial doctrines have been broached; and, in attempting to
disturb theories sanctioned by age, and rendered orthodox from an-
cestorial experience, the curse of modern heresy often attaches itself
to the avower of that which many regard rather in the light of rash
innovation than improvement.

I will not here dwell upon the often-told tale of the origin and
progress of lues venerea, and the blessing conferred upon suffering
humanity by the introduction of a supposed specific check to its rava-
ges, in the form of mercury. Both bane and antidote have gone
hand in hand together, during more than three centuries; nor is it
my purpose to repeat the several well-known efforts made, from time
to time, to lay the offspring of impurity, by the substitution of milder
measures than such as are afforded by extensive and long-continued
mercurial applications. These efforts have, indeed, generally fallen
in time into disrepute, and the old remedy has been fondly and per-
tinaciously adhered to ; the public has been taught to distrust the one,
and to consider caution, safety and security, as the sure recommenda-
tion of the other.

I cannot glance at these successive efforts without offering a remark,
(with which, 1 believe, well-informed, experienced and judicious prac-
titioners will generally coincide,) that Mr. Rose's late introduction of
an anti-mercurial treatment (though some, perhaps, may consider it
as a failure) is one of the greatest improvements in modern surgery,

Vol. II. 2 H


252 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

has made the most general impression, and has imparted the moef
useful direction to practice, of which the pathology of the present
century can boast. I also consider Mr. Rose's doctrines to be further
valuable, upon the ground that they do not inculcate the necessity
of hunting after one specific remedy as a substitute for a discarded
specific ; but that they tend, on the contrary, to lessen the estimation
so long cherished, of a dogmatical practice, introducing in its place
a pathological theory and remedial measures, built on a far more
rational foundation.

These doctrines have guided my practice some years, «and expe-
rience has taught me not to distrust their truth, safety and value. I
have not allowed myself to be scared, by imaginary dangers and
terrors, into the adoption of an ancient dogma, too often followed
upon the ground merely of suspicion and probabilities, when the alter-
native was the use of a powerful mineral — at the best, more or less
a positive evil — the ultimate mischief of which, past and present his-
tory show to have been, and still is daily being, confounded with the
effects of venereal poison, sometimes extending beyond calculation
the chance of recovery, from its destructive ravages upon the con-
stitution.

I aver that mercurial saturation tends to the destruction of mucous
membranes, the removal, by morbid absorption, of soft parts, and the
disorganization of the osseous substance.*. The mind^ itself has suf-
fered, the constitution received a baneful impression, and pulmonary
consumption^ has not unfrequently terminated the patient's earthly
career, when the system has undergone mercurial saturation ; while
the wretched victim of imbecility or imprudent rashness has been
commonly reported (with ill-timed levity) to have died of " the breeches
fever." Is it not better that we should

-rather bear those ills we have,


Than fly to others that we know not of?"

I do not, however, contend for the entire abolition of mercury in
venereal complaints ; like the abolition of slavery, it must be done
with care and caution, from regard both to the moral and physical
constitution.

* A young gentleman went through a full course of mercury; symptoms of
phthisis pulmonalis followed repeated inflammatory attacks of the chest, and
several deep holes were formed in the forehead, in the manner called corona vene-
ris, but more properly should be corona mercurii. This patient did not die ; but
his head is marked, his constitution debilitated, and he is liable to sore throat and
acute catarrhal affections, and has been obliged to pass much time in the south
of Europe, to the detriment of his professional advancement in his own country.

t The brother of a fellow-student of the author, constitutionally strumous, went
through a full course of mercury, and in a few weeks he was placed in a private
mad-house.

t A respectable unmarried tradesman in the city, 30 years of age, went through
a full mercurial course. Impaired digestion, irregular bowels, symptoms of phthi-
sis pulmonalis and diarrhoea followed. He was removed to the seaside, arid there
died of hydrothorax, &c.

A young nobleman used mercury to a very considerable extent. Consumptive
symptoms, &c. ensued. He was sent to the south of Europe, and there died.


Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.) 253

Though " custom be the plague of wise men, and the idol of fools,"
the deep-rooted prejudices which it implants require gradual steps to
eradicate them ; and there may occur certain cases, wherein a judi-
cious application of mercury will be serviceable and inoffensive. But
Mr. Rose's mass of evidence has shown how easily we may wean
ourselves of the practice, and that the suspension of the mercurial
plan is a bugbear, the fear of which has intimidated too much, and
been carried unnecessarily far. At the same time, it appears to me,
that the adoption of mercurial remedies is more frequently the act
of temerity than is its rejection — at least as it is frequently applied.
And I trust it is not extravagant to believe, that Mercury is often
more to blame than Venus, or that the destroying sword of the god
does more execution than the insidious blandishments of the goddess.

These remarks have been elicited, not only from having repeatedly
observed the safety of an anti-mercurial practice, but also the fre-
quent terrible consequences of the contrary method ; consequences
which, I do not hesitate to declare, sometimes far, very far, exceed
what it is possible to conceive from the progressive steps of venereal
taint in the constitution. Then is mercury so mild and safe a remedy
in its action that it may be indiscriminately used in all cases of sus-
picious sexual intercourse ? Independently of otherwise removing the
complaint possibly, even if suspicion be justly formed, is no time to
be allowed to give the disease fair play, and declare its nature and
character ? Is no account to be taken of the many little constitutional
and local circumstances which aggravate an excoriation, ulcer or bubo,
or produce some cutaneous eruption, easily removed by a little pa-
tient care and judicious treatment, without saturating the system with
mercurial ointment and pills ? Yet such is a very common practice,
especially with general practitioners ; so that amongst high and low,
rich and poor, a sufficient course of mercury is generally recommended
to the patient ; and he must get out of the scrape as well as he can —
if matters go wrong, by aid of sarsaparilla, the seaside, mild climate,
&c. &c. Then, sometimes, it is thought, the poison lurks in his
bones, or his throat (perhaps extensively ulcerated) shows that he has
not had a sufficient quantity to destroy the venom, and therefore a little
more mercury will do for him, (and quickly, too, in a scrofulous habit,)
when Nice or Naples will, probably, set him to rights again, and restore
his constitution ; and if it does, he may esteem himself very lucky to
return with a sound skin and whole bones, &c.

Now these are not imaginary cases, and, were it necessary, which
it is not, a multitude of instances might be cited in proof, many of
which have passed under my personal observation. Many cases
might be shown to have done very well without mercury ; -many in
which this remedy was totally unnecessary, though not, perhaps, in-
jurious to the health ; and many in which the abuse of mercury has
produced distressing and protracted mischief, and, in some instances,
ultimate dissolution, from a train of superinduced disorders.

On the other hand, {ew, I believe, if any cases, can be authenti-
cated, in which the venereal disease, (as it is termed,) when left to it.
self, has produced any such consequences as those to which I have
alluded above, without the aid of mercury.


254 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

The common cant is to attribute cases which get well without mer-
cury, to what is called pseudo-syphilis, a term which is perfectly
gratuitous.

Those whose prejudices are invincible, believe that all cases healed
without mercury cannot have been venereal. With the example of
Portugal before us, and some other countries, and the long trial which
Mr. Rose gave the anti-mercurial system, I conceive such inferences
to be wholly unwarranted. I have taken about three hundred and fifty
recorded cases of ulcers of the penis, admitted and treated in the re-
gimental hospital of the 2d Life Guards, one hundred and fifteen of
which appear to have used mercury in different forms and proportions,
and for different periods of time ; so that about two hundred and thirty
five cases of primary symptoms, following sexual intercourse, have
been healed by other means than mercurial remedies, as well as many
not in the list.

The number of secondary cases of symptoms following the prima,
ry venereal disorder during the same period, amounts to about twenty-
two, out of three hundred and fifty. And, upon following up the nar-
ratives of these, it appeats that the majority were generally simple
cases of lichen, which got well without mercury, and in no long time.
The greater part of those cases which were protracted, and attended
with ulcers of the throat, pains of the limbs, nodes, &c, were origin-
ally treated with mercury in the hospital, and the rest showed that
mercury had been clandestinely procured at some period or other
during the progress of the complaints. The simple cases of lichen,
&c, were chiefly found amongst the men not treated with mercury,
while the most protracted and troublesome cases occurred with those who
had been fully subjected to its operation.* Since the use of mercurial
saturation has been suspended, no cases have occurred to throw any
distrust upon the propriety of the practice ; and the few cases of se-
condan symptoms were generally mild and trifling, compared with
those which followed mercurial treatment, and readily yielded without
mercury. ,

I do not pretend to enter upon any nice discriminations of practice, or
to draw a line between cases requiring and cases not requiring mercu-
of no satisfactory rules to guide the practitioner in this respect, but
those which he himself derives from a sound judgment and experience.
I wish merely to assist in establishing the fact, that venereal sores
admit of treatment without mercury and without cause of alarm ; the
secondary evils of mercury being usually far more destructive than
those which arise from venereal taint, and that the one case is often
mistaken for the other. Consequently, it appears to me, that there is
more security in omitting to push a mercurial course, than in adopting
it ; that comparatively few cases occur requiring mercury ; that the
perils of mercury are sometimes manifold and terrible ; that at all
times it entails more or less personal inconvenience and annoyance,
and frequently leads to a train of ultimate symptoms, from which er-

* And such I have always found to be the case elsewhere


Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea— Syphilis.) 255

roneous inferences are made, and a useless, if not mischievous prac-
tice adopted, the effects of which cannot be foreseen, and their limits
no man can calculate upon.

In my dispensary practice I have had frequent occasion to observe
the great danger of pushing a course of mercury, when the patient
is not under the surgeon's control as to diet, temperature, &c. An
error, made in the treatment of sores on the penis with persons going
about, and exposed to sudden changes of temperature, to cold winds,
or wet, is too often irretrievable. The labouring classes in London,
perhaps not living on the best diet, nor possessing sound constitutions,
exhibit frightful examples of the imprudent use of mercury ; the ef-
fects of which, from some cause or other best known to themselves,
there are practitioners, (chiefly in private practice,) who are constant-
ly disposed to attribute to syphilitic action and deficient mercurial
saturation. This propensity,. indeed, I remember once to have heard
very satisfactorily accounted for in a medical debating society, by a
candid avowal, that if the anti-mercurial mania continued to spread,
" it would be ruin to the apothecaries and general practitioners." There-
fore, the inference drawn from this liberal sentiment was, that it is
better to be on the safe side, and not to hazard the adoption of modern
heretical opinions, against the " wisdom and experience of our an-
cestors."*

My attention has been particularly drawn to the subject of this pa-
per lately, from the circumstances of the following cases affording a
tolerable sample of the effects which the blessing handed down to us
by our forefathers is capable of producing. [Here follow several
cases illustrating these views.]

The above six cases are selected from a stock containing many
similar; but it is not so much my object to accumulate examples of
the points to which I have referred, as to illustrate some of my posi-
tions. Instances of the above description have often fallen under
my notice in hospital and dispensary practice, and some could be
produced from among private patients ; and such are, doubtless, to be
found in the records of cases which must occur to the remembrance
of other practitioners. I am induced to believe, both from the fore-
going facts and observations, and those which are put forth by Dr.
Thompson, of Edinburgh, Dr. Ferguson, (late inspector general of
the Portuguese army,) Mr. Guthrie, and others —

1. That all the forms in which venereal complaints present them-
selves are to be removed without the aid of mercury ; and this is
more especially and remarkably the case in regard to the secondary
symptoms of the disease.

2. That mercury has formerly been, and frequently is still, used in
an unnecessary, indiscreet and highly dangerous manner.

3. That mercury, judiciously and alieratively used, is not only an
excellent, but perhaps the best remedy in many venereal complaints ;

* It is, however, to be hopod, that the gentleman who avowed this motive was
as much in joke as the wag who declared that the first standing toast at the College
of Physicians' dinners, was always " a slow fever" with three times three !


256 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

nevertheless, a tithe of the quantity anciently administered is gene
rally sufficient, and more than sufficient, probably, to eradicate the
primary symptoms ; while, again, a tithe of that tithe, or a centime,
has been found competent to eradicate the secondary stage of the
disease.*

4. That mercury is very far from being a certain preventive of the
secondary train of symptoms, in any form or quantity.

5. That mercury, when pushed far, induces ulceration of the mucous
secreting surfaces, more especially of the inner palate, throat and
fauces, as well as affections of the bones, so exactly resembling those
detect any difference. In the hands of the members of the old school,
mercury, in fact, creates its own work, by establishing diseases which
have too often been confounded with venereal poison, and thereby led
to a most dangerous and destructive practice.

6. That the train of symptoms following mercurial treatment has
been found more severe and difficult to remove, than that which follows
primary venereal sores not treated with mercury ; and that repeated
relapses into secondary symptoms are removed with increased facility
every time they occur, (as if the disease wore itself out,) in cases
wherein no mercury has been given.

7. That mercury tends to undermine the healthy state of the con-
stitution, to establish, in some instances, and in others to aggravate,
constitutional diseases, to increase constitutional irritability^ to excite
inflammation and ulceration in, and to destroy the mucous textures
of, the body, to promote morbid absorption and removal of the fatty,
fibrinous and osseous substances of the system, and to induce synovial,
albuminous and serous accumulations in the respective cavities lined
with the membranes producing such secretions.

8. That the extent and injury to the soft and bony parts of the
system, arising from the action of mercury, is far more dreadful than
any primary or secondary effects of venereal poison.

9. That mercury never was a specific against the venereal poison ;
for relapses were constantly occurring during its fullest operation;
nor possessed any virtue in the cure of the disease ; and that, the
creed so long believed in, (to the ruin of the health of multitudes,
through mercurial salivation,) of its indispensibility towards the cure,
and the destruction of the patient if omitted, is utterly false and ground-
less ; facts which can admit of immediate, every-day demonstration,
in the many thousands of the healthiest British soldiers, who have been
easily, effectually and permanently cured of every stage of the venereal
disease, without ever having taken one particle of mercury.

The bigoted adherence to a belief so false, and so universal, in
which the wisest and most philosophic of our profession blindly par-

* Vide Abernethy on his imaginary pseudo-syphilis, who cured so many of the
worst cases of the disease with so little mercury, that he actually distrusted the
work of his own hands, and therefore summoned the trustiest of his brethren of
the old school, to vouch for the impossibility of the diseases so treated being truly
syphilitic.


Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.) 257

ticipatcd, will be quoted by after ages as a national reproach ;* and,
as it has indeed already done, will, it is to be feared, go far in des-
troying our confidence in all medical dogmata, or any doctrines,
whatever.

10. That mercury is wholly inadmissible in cases of sloughing
sores of the penis, wherein there is preceding high inflammation and
tumefaction of the parts affected, attended with fever ; as it aggravates
the local symptoms, and increases continual irritation ; and that mer-
cury is inadequate to the cure in such cases, specific contagion being
superseded by violent inflammatory action, which is too rapid in its
course to be overtaken by the accumulative power of mercury, or by
any remedies but those which act immediately and directly npon the
symptoms of danger. f

[From the Journal deB Progres des Sciences et Institutions Medicales.]

Non-mercurial Treatment of Syphilis. (Communicated by M. Gan-

ther.)

Dr. Fricke, of Hamburg, after a long series of experiments, made
in the general hospital of that place, has at length published the re-
sults of his observations on the non-mercurial treatment of this disease.
The regulations of that hospital particularly adapt it tor observations
of this nature ; the venereal patients are long subjected to the ex-
amination of the physician, and he is consequently enabled to ascertain
with correctness. In support of this method of treatment, it may be
alleged, 1st, that the primary symptoms were more speedily cured,
than by the employment of mercury ; 2d, the unpleasant consequences
sometimes occasioned by that mineral were avoided, and, 3d, the ci-
catrices or scars presented generally a better aspect.

Reformed Practice.
1. Gonorrhoea.

Having shown the inutility, and in some degree the injury of mer-
cury, or the common practice, in the venereal disease, I shall now lay
down such a course of treatment as I have found speedily to remove
the disease ; and, in justice to the efforts of nature, I must add, that
gonorrhoea, as well as other venereal affections, arc sometimes spon-
taneously cured, and very generally by a simple and mild treatment,
such as cleanliness, simple dressings, diet and regulation of the se-
cretions. At the same time, by the use of more active means, the
disorder may be sooner eradicated.

* This time has already arrived, and this bigoted adherence to a belief so false in
the use of mercury I now quote, and pronounce with thousands of others, " a
national reproach."

t Tt h- 1 .? occurred to the author to notice two distinct examples of destruction of
the penis — in one case entirely, and in the other reducing it to a short stump — fol-
lowing the application of mercury, to sloughing sores on the penis, consequent to
inflammation and fever.


258 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

There is swelling, inflammation and pain of the parts, with heat and
scalding, and difficulty of making Avater, from which symptoms the
indications are clearly inferred, which is promptly to subdue the in-
flammatory symptoms ; to effect which, the following mixture will be
found very effectual :

Take Spirits of nitre, (spts. nit. dulc.,) 1 oz.

Spirits of turpentine, (ol terebinth,) \ oz.
Oil of almonds, (ol amygdalis,) 1 oz.
Balsam of copaiva, (bals. copaivae,) | oz.
Mix, and add half a scruple of gum camphor. Dose, a small teaspoonful
three or four times a day, to be given in half a wineglassful of the mu-
cilage of gum Arabic, and to be accompanied with the use of spearmint
tea. These drops generally mitigate the symptoms in a few hours,
and entirely remove them in a few days.

When the heat and scalding of the water have subsided, should
there remain any discharge or gleet from the urethra, a refrigerant
and gently stimulating injection may be introduced. A strong decoc-
tion of the blood-root or sanguinaria Canadensis may be injected three
times a day ; two or three small syringes full each time. Should not
this diminish the discharge, and act favourably, introduce the follow-
ing liquid :

Take eight grains of while vitriol, pulverized,
Sixteen grains of borax, pulverized ;
Add eight ounces of rain or soft water. To be used in the same man-
ner ; and if there is much swelling or inflammation, wet a piece of
linen or muslin in the liquid, and apply to the parts. I have not, how-
ever, found very great benefit from injections ; besides, if given too
strong, they are apt to be followed by suppression of urine or disease
of the testicle.

It will be necessary, also, from the commencement of the complaint,
occasionally to give a purgative ; and I have a particular choice in this
class of medicines, there being a great difference in the action or
properties of them. Every kind of cathartic appears to have some
peculiar effect upon the system, acting more especially upon certain
parts or organs. I formerly employed, in this complaint, our common
purgative, the base of which is jalap, and with it I succeeded very
well ; but, as far as my observation goes, I have found the podophyllum
peltatum much better, although its operation is not quite so pleasant.
I have sometimes thought that it appears to have a specific effect in
the venereal disease ; whether in consequence of acting more gene-
rally upon all the secretions or not, I am unable to decide. I also
find that those who have used it, speak highly of its virtues. It may
be given as follows :

Take mandrake or May-apple, (podophyllum peltatum,) 2 parts,
Cream of tartar, (supertras potassae,) 1 part,
Spearmint, (rnentha sativa,) 1 part ;
Pulverize each article separately, then mix. Of this give thirty or
forty grains, or an ordinary sized teaspoonful. The best method of
taking it, is to put the powder into a teacup, with a small piece of loaf
sugar : add a gill of boiling water, and, when cool, let it be taken.


Venereal Disease— (Lues Venerea— Syphilis.) 259

When it operates, give oatmeal or indianmeal gruel. It proves a
very cleansing or detergent cathartic, evacuating the whole alimentary
canal, and acting in a greater or less degree upon all the secretions
and excretions. This preparation may be repeated every two or
three days, or according to circumstances, the stage, severity of the
disease, dec.

This is sufficient to remove the symptoms of gonorrhoea. Occa-
sionally, as under every kind of treatment, a troublesome gleet is left,
unaccompanied with any other symptoms. Should this be the case,
the same means must be continued until it is removed ; and should it
prove very obstinate and protracted, recourse must be had to the same
treatment as is recommended for a general taint of the system, or a
constitutional affection. The patient must resort to tepid bathing,
country air and a restorative diet. He must make use of a spare
diet, when there is inflammation, and abstain from all spiritous and
fermented liquors.

I have omitted to mention, that in case a chordee attend the
complaint, the pntient should take an anodyne at bedtime, and
bathe the parts with the marshmallow ointment ; and should the
skin of the prepuce retract, and become very much inflamed or swell-
ed, a poultice must be applied. Should a swelling of the testicle
come on, it must be bathed with the stramonium ointment, and if the
inflammation be very considerable, the leaves may be simmered with
vinegar, and applied as before stated.

Chancres.

The second local form under which the syphilitic poison has been
mentioned to show itself, is that of a chancre : this is distinguished
inflammation, with other characteristic marks already noticed.

The parts most apt to be affected with these ulcerations in men,
are the prepuce, the fhenum, at the orifice of the urethra, and in the
angle between the glans and body of the penis ; and in women, about
the labia, nymphse, and clitoris ; but in some instances they have ex-
tended Into the vagina, and even so far up as the os uteri. Syphilitic
matter, by being applied to other parts of the body covered with a
mucous membrane, such as the lips, nostrils, &c. may give rise to
chancres there also ; but, being most usually applied to the organs of
generation, in consequence of an intercourse between the sexes, these
are generally the seat of such ulcers.

A chancre makes its appearance either with a slight inflammation,
which afterwards ulcerates ; or there arises a small pimple or pustule
filled with a transparent fluid, which soon breaks and forms into a
spreading ulcer. The period at which it makes its appearance after
infection is very various, being most commonly in five or six days,
but in some cases not till after the expiration of as many weeks.

As there is always a risk that an absorption of matter may take
place from a chancre, and possibly very speedily, it will not only be
necessary to attend to the ulcer, but likewise to secure the constitu-

Vol. 11. 21


260 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

tion by a use of such remedies as are well known to possess the power
of counteracting the syphilitic poison.

The treatment of chancre must be very similar to that of an ordi-
nary ulcer. The inflammation must first be reduced, by applying the
elm bark poultice, also the marshmallow ointment on a pledget of lint.
When the inflammation has subsided, apply the black salve, and if the
ulcer does not heal under this dressing, let it daily be sprinkled with
the powdered blood-root, and subsequently, if it does not heal, with a
mild mineral caustic. No irritation is excited by this powder, but it
changes the character of the sore usually in twenty-four hours, caus-
ing it rapidly to heal. Every time the sore is dressed, it should be
well cleansed with a mixture of Castile soap, soft water and spirits,
and any collection of matter in the contiguous parts must be removed
with the same.

I formerly was in the habit of using a wash made by adding about
ten grains of the corrosive sublimate to ten ounces of borax water,
and it makes a very cooling and astringent wash for venereal ulcers,
without any danger of its being absorbed ; but more recently, I have
almost entirely dispensed with it, and used the applications mentioned
above, in preference.

Chancres are often attended with that stage of the disease, called
phymosis or paraphymosis, which renders it difficult to make any
applications to the ulcers.

When this occurs, poultices and cooling lotions must be applied, and
other means to remove the inflammation, before any thing t can be
done to the chancres. Sometimes it is necessary to apply them a
number of days before the swelling subsides, but there is no necessity
of dividing the prepuce as surgeons recommend, as it only requires a
little time to accomplish that for which the operation is recommended.
In addition to these local applications, it will be necessary to attend
to the constitution. The mandrake must be given as a purgative ;
and in addition, the following decoction is a good alterative, although
I have repeatedly cured the complaint without using it.
Take blood-root, (sanguinaria Canadensis ;)

Bark of the root of sumach, (rhus glabrum ;)
Root of blue Jlag, (iris versicol ;)
Bruise the roots, and make a strong decoction. Let the patient drink
freely. This makes a very purifying or alterative decoction, and
some botanical physicians rely almost exclusively upon the blue Jlag
for the cure of the venereal disease, while others rely almost exclu-
sively upon the mandrake.

Dr. Elisha Smith, who has written a work entitled the Botanic
Physician, highly extols the use of the flag-root, in the following lan-
guage :

"This root," says he, " possesses great medicinal power, and, from
a long experience of its use, I am convinced that it is equally as effi-
cacious as mercury in all the diseases in which, in the common prac-
tice, it is supposed mercury is indicated. It serves as an alterative
and sialagogue, in small continued doses, as a powerful drastic purge,
a stimulant, a vermifuge, a diuretic, errhine, &c. It is a complete
substitute for that mineral, for any of its purposes ; and, being a vege-
table, I consider it far preferable ; because, after its operation and


Venereal Disease — {Lues Venerea — Syphilis.) 261

effects, it passes off, and leaves the system free ; whereas, mercury
fastens upon the bones and solids, and remains like a corroding and
-eating canker, rendering vast numbers feeble and debilitated for life.
Such is the difference between these two articles of medicine ; and it
would be a happy event for mankind, if physicians would, for once,
devest themselves of their blind prejudices in favour of the mineral,
and consent, at least, to make a trial of this vegetable substitute. Their
humanity should be a sufficient inducement for this. The plea that
the vegetable kingdom contains no equivalent to mercury, is no longer
tenable. Then why should not physicians discard the use of it at
once, when it is universally acknowledged and felt that in the aggre-
gate it has proved a curse, a destroyer to the human race ?"

Under this treatment, should the chancres decrease very slowly,
or in any respect become stationary, in addition to what has been
recommended, the ulcer, or ulcers, may be sprinkled with a few grains
of the mineral caustic, and afterwards poulticed.

This treatment is not only applicable to chancres, or ulcers, which
appear upon the penis, but likewise to every species of venereal ulcer,
in whatever part of the body they^may appear.

Bubo.

When the poison becomes absorbed, and affects the inguinal glands,
particularly as before stated, it is termed a bubo, and our first object
should be to discuss or disperse it ; to effect which, apply the discutient
ointment, three or four times a day, rubbing it well in before the fire ;
after which, a poultice may be made, by simmering the cicuta leaves
in water, and when soft, the slippery-elm bark to be stirred in, to
form a poultice, and it may be used constantly, but the night is the
most convenient time. The patient should be pretty freely purg-
ed. Should this attempt to discuss the venereal tumour or bubo
fail, and should the swelling and inflammation increase, suppuration
will probably succeed, and it must be promoted by applying the fol-
lowing poultice. Take the root of wild carrot, (daucus sylvestris ;)
bruise, and simmer in milk, then stir in the elm bark, and apply to the
part, to be secured by proper bandages.

When symptoms of suppuration appear, which will be known by
the subsidence of pain and inflammation, with softness and fluctuation
of the bubo, a small opening may be made to let out the matter, or it
may be left a short time, to open spontaneously. After it has dis-
charged freely, the poultice may be laid aside, and the black plaster
or salve substituted. It should be washed with a little soap water and
spirits, and if it does not heal kindly, to be treated as any other ulcer.

Constitutional Affection — Lues Venerea.

If, from neglect or improper treatment, or peculiar temperament, or
any other cause, the venereal poison is suffered to be absorbed and
taken into the circulating mass, and thus contaminate and affect the
whole system, our treatment must be varied, and adapted to this melan-
choly stage of the complaint.


262 Venereal Disease — {Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

It is customary, not only in the preceding stages of the disease, but
likewise in this, to administer mercury, but there is no evidence of any
good arising from it, but, as before stated, much mischief. The
following statement of Doctor Hennen, shows still further the propriety
of treating the venereal disease, even in the worst stage of it, without
mercury, and also the ill effects arising from its use.

Carious affections of the bones, which are so common in persons
treated by long mercurial courses, proceed, not from the disease, but
from the remedy rapidly and irregularly thrown in while periostitis
exists : and he has not seen a single case of carious bone in the mili-
tary hospitals since the non-mercurial treatment was adopted, except
where mercury had formerly been used. — (On Military Surgery, 2d. ed.
p. 505, 506.)

Nor will the results of modern experience and inquiries, made on a
very extensive and impartial scale, allow us to consider the venereal
disease as regularly and unavoidably leading to any secondary symp-
toms, even though no medicine at all be employed for their preven-
tion. TWs is fully exemplified in the official reports of the army
hospitals. The particulars of 5000 cases, spoken of by Sir James
M'Grigor and Sir W. Franklin, lead to the opinion, that " the fre-
quency or rarity of secondary symptoms would seem to depend on
circumstances not yet sufficiently understood or explained, although
the following fact would tend to the belief, that either the constitutions
of the men, or the mode of conducting the treatment without mercury,
are the causes that possess the greatest influence in their production.
In one regiment, four secondary cases out of twenty-four, treated
without mercury, supervened." In another regiment, sixty-eight ca-
ses were treated without mercury, all bearing marks of the true vene-
real disease, (and twenty-eight of them especially selected for their
decided characters of chancre,) yet no secondary symptoms of any
kind had taken place fifteen months after the treatment had ceased.

Therefore, the investigations made in the military hospitals of Eu-
rope, without any other evidence, show conclusively that this disease
can be curedVithoufa particle of mercury ; and in Spain, and in the
the south of France, they likewise treat it without this poison.

When called to a patient labouring under this form of the venereal
disease, the object should be to eradicate the syphilitic poison from
the system ; and this must be effected by attending to the secretions
of the system. It must be driven from it, the same as any other mor-
bid affection.

The patient should take the same purgative as before recommend-
ed, viz. the compound powder of mandrake, once or twice a week,
or according to circumstances. He will also commence and continue
the use of the following concentrated vegetable syrup .

Take sarsaparilla, (smilax sarsaparilla,) 6 lbs., cut or split fine ;
Bark from the sassafras root, (laurus sassafras,) 2 lbs. ;
Guaicum shavings, ^guaic. officinal,) 3 lbs. ;
Elder flowers, (sambucus niger,) 2 lbs. ;
Add a sufficient quantity of soft boiling water, or a little more than to
cover the articles ; then let them stand on embers, or near a fire,
twenty-four hours, properly to digest or steep, after which commence


Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.) i268

boiling. In two or three hours pour off the decoction into an earthen
vessel, again cover with water, boil the same length of time, and
thus continue to add water, and boil five or six times, or until all
the strength of the articles are extracted ; after which remove them,
and after straining the different boilings or the decoctions, let them be
put together and again boiled until there are but sixteen porter bottles ;
then add twenty-five pounds of loaf or white sugar ; again boil, to
form a syrup. In order to clarify it, the whites of three or four eggs
may be beat up and mixed with a pint of milk, and added to it, and,
boiled a short time ; the scum should be removed as it rises to the
surface. It should now be passed through flannel, made in the form
of a cone, and it is then fit for use. A wineglassful should be taken
three times a day, before eating. During the use of it, the patient
may take a strong decoction of the best Honduras sarsaparilla.

I have tried every preparation used by modern physicians, with
most of the nostrums now so highly extolled, such as Swaim's Panacea,
and other preparations, and after repeated and comparative trials for
years, I find that the above syrup by far exceeds the whole of them.
If there is any chance of recovery for the patient, or the disease is
within the control of medicines, with proper agents accompanying it,
this syrup will prove effectual. It requires to be given a length of
time, in certain cases, before it has the desired effect. I know not
the modus operandi, or how it acts on the system, nor is this of much
consequence. The effect of it is enough for us to know, but it appears
pretty evident that it must change the secretions, or eliminate the
morbific matter by the skin, kidneys, bowels or intestines, although it
has very little sensible effect upon any of these organs.

In very obstinate cases, fifteen or twenty bottles should be taken.

The surface should be daily bathed in weak ley water, and an in-
fusion may be also alternately given with that of sarsaparilla, made
of the roots or seed of burdock, blood-root, sumach and blue flag com-
bined.

When there are sores in different parts of the body, as there usually
are when there is a general taint of the system, apply the following
wash three times a day :

Take muriate of gold, (murias auri,) eight grains ;
Rain water, four ounces : mix.

If it is practicable, let lint be dipped in this liquor and applied to
the ulcer, after which the black salve. Where there is much inflam-
mation, apply the marsh mallow ointment. When the ulcers are
situated in the throat or nose, the liquid should be applied repeatedly,
by a piece of sponge fastened to a wire or stick.

Should the ulcers be very intractable and unyielding, they must be
occasionally touched with the mineral caustic ; the same" as other
ulcers.

This course, with me, has been invariably successful, even in those
desperate cases where (hey have been abandoned, or given up, as
incurable, by hospital surgeons and others. But much time and 'pa-
tience is often required to effect a cure in the worst variety of the
complaint.


264 Venereal Disease — (Lues Venerea — Syphilis.)

This treatment is also very beneficial in mercurial affections, which
are usually connected with the venereal disease.

In concluding this chapter on the venereal disease, I have to remark,
that there is one diagnostic symptom, which will enable the prac-
titioner always to detect the real character of the venereal ulcer. It
is the peculiar fetid effluvia, or stench, which arises from it. It is
always of a most loathsome and sickening nature, and essentially
different from that arising from any, and every other complaint.


CHAPTER XVII.

SCROFULA, OR KING'S EVIL.


Description.

The scrofula was so called, as is supposed, in consequence of
swine being subject to this disease ; and it is vulgarly called the
" King's Evil," from the custom of submitting patients to the royal
touch.

The disorder consists in hard indolent tumours of the conglobate
glands in various parts of the body ; but particularly in the neck, behind
the ears, and under the chin, which, after a time, suppurate and degen-
erate into ulcers, from which, instead of pus, a white curdled matter,
somewhat resembling the coagulum of milk, is generally discharged.

The first appearance of the disease is most usually between the
third and seventh year of the child's age, but it may arise at any pe-
riod between these and the age of puberty, after which it seldom
makes its first attack. It most commonly affects children of a lax
habit, with a smooth, soft and fine skin, fair hair, rosy cheeks, and a
delicate complexion ; but it is occasionally met with in those of a dark
one. It likewise is apt to attack such children as show a disposition
to the rickets, and marked by a protuberant forehead, enlarged joints
and a tumid abdomen.

The glandular system appears to be almost entirely, if not exclu-
sively, the seat of the disease ; and in almost every instance it is
located in the conglobate glands of the neck.

Writers, from their representation, make out almost every morbid
taint of the system to consist of the scrofula. The hip disease, white
swelling, chronic ophthalmia, and every morbid affection of the system,
by them is pronounced " scrofulous." The term is entirely too ex-
tensive, at any rate, for practical purposes.

A physician of this city was called to a boy, who had a white swell-
ing in the knee, and, upon being asked what it was, he said it was a
scrofulous affection ; on which the mother asked him if he meant the
king's evil, when he replied in the affirmative ! !

It is very probable that the proximate causes of almost all diseases
are alike, but the diversity or variety of character which they present,
depends upon the peculiar tissues or organs dieased. For instance, if
the exciting cause of scrofula were to attack the joints, it would pro-
duce a specific complaint, entirely different from that which arises
from the application of the same to the conglobate glands of the neck
or other parts.

ft has been supposed by many that tho scrofula is hereditary, but
we have no evidence of this, as it often appears in families whose
P r . e . llc ' ' &» as they can be traced, have never had a vestige

of it. Children born of scrofulous parents are not invariably affected


266 Scrofula.

with scrofulous diseases ; and sometimes one child has some
strumous affection, while the parents and all the rest of the family
have no appearance of scrofulous habits.

Scrofula is not communicable from one person to another : neither
can it be conveyed into the system by inoculation. The opinion, also,
that scrofulous nurses may infect children, seems quite destitute of
foundation. — (See White, p. 26, &c.)

Pinel and Alibert have purposely kept scrofulous and healthy chil-
dren together in the same ward, without any of the latter receiving
the complaint. Hebreard could not communicate the disease to dogs
by inoculation. And G. T. Kortum, whose valuable work contains
every thing known about scrofula at the period when it was written,
tried in vain to impart the distemper to a child, by rubbing its neck
every day with the pus discharged from scrofulous ulcers. Lepelle-
tier, desirous of ascertaining the correctness of such experiments,
has of late repeated them : he has made Guinea-pigs swallow scrofu-
lous matter ; and he has injected it into the veins, and applied it to
wounds ; but in no instance was there even a temporary appearance
of the disease being communicated. The same author also mixed
scrofulous with vaccine matter, and inoculated with it ; yet he never
found the vaccine vesicle, thus produced, deviate in the least from its
regular course. Lastly, Lepelletier inoculated himself with pus dis-
charged from scrofulous sores, as well as with the serum collected
under the cuticle of a strumous patient after the application of a blis-
ter ; but he remained free from every scrofulous ailment. — (See Diet.
des Sciences Med. t. 1. p. 294.) Goodlad inoculated himself several
times with the discharge from scrofulous sores and abscesses, and
the result was, that the disease could not be thus transmitted.

According to White, scrofula prevails more extensively in tempe-
rate latitudes, than in very hot or very cold climates. It is also more
frequent in some parts of Europe than others. At all periods it seems
to have been a very common complaint. From history, we learn that
it was denominated the king's evil in the time of Edward the Confes-
sor, who is supposed to have been the first that attempted to cure it
by the royal touch. From a register kept in the royal chapel, we find
that Charles II. touched 92,107 persons in a certain number of years ;
and this equally bigoted and useless practice was not discontinued till
a recent period, when kings were found to be, as well as their poorest
subjects, totally destitute of all supernatural power.

Scrofula prevails most in those climates where the atmosphere is
cold and humid, where the seasons are variable, and the weather un-
steady. From latitude 45° to 60S is the principal climate of this dis-
ease. A long continuance of inclement weather may increase any
predisposition to scrofula ; and in persons already much predisposed
to it, any uncommon, though temporary exposure to wet and cold, is
sometimes an exciting cause of an immediate attack. Besides cli-
mate and exposure to moist air and atmospherical vicissitudes, every
other circumstance which weakens the constitution and impairs the
general strength of the system, predisposes to scrofula ; thus, breathing
impure tainted air, unfit for respiration, and living upon food of an un-
wholesome and indigestible nature, Which does not afford proper


Scrofula. 267

nourishment to the body, favours an attack of scrofula, by reducing
the strength of the system, and making the person weakly. The
neglect of due personal cleanliness, and of salutary exercise, indo-
lence, inactivity, the want of warm clothing, confinement in cold, damp
habitations, dec, may all be regarded as so many exciting causes, and
satisfactorily account for the prevalence of the disease among chil-
dren employed in large manufactories.

The influence of climate, says Gregory, is immense, and may be
estimated by the following facts. In the East and West Indies, scro-
fula is hardly known ; but when the natives of either are brought into
this or any European country, they suffer from it severely. The
prevalence of scrofula is directly proportioned to the coldness, or,
more properly, to the variableness of the climate. Scrofulous affec-
tions are principally met with in all countries during the winter
months. They rapidly improve, or disappear altogether, on the ap-
proach of summer ; and this effect of warm weather upon scrofulous
ulcers, is important in diagnosis as well as in practice. Among the
causes of scrofula, the close, confined air of a town appears to merit
especial mention. The' complaint i3 infinitely more common among
the inhabitants of a town, than among those of a corresponding class
of society breathing the pure air of the country. It is notorious, that
the population of our large manufacturing towns, pent up during the
day, are, of all others, most afflicted with it. Certain modes of life
contribute also in no small degree to the developement of scrofula ;
confined habitations, want of cleanliness, sedentary occupations, ir-
regular habits, but, above all, deficient or unwholesome diet. They
concur in reducing the tone of the system below that healthy standard,
which is the surest preservative, not only against the attacks of scro-
fula, but of every other disorder. The extensive influence of debili-
tating causes, lastly, is demonstrated by the prevalence of scrofulous
affections subsequent to small-pox, measles, hooping cough, and
other diseases which most unequivocally impair the energies of the
constitution. Of late years, attempts have been made to connect the
scrofulous state, in a peculiar manner, with primary derangement of
the digestive functions, but no sufficient reasons have been adduced
in support of this opinion. It appears to me to be founded on very
imperfect views of the mutual influence of the different parts of the
animal economy upon each other. — (Gregory's Practice, p. 512.)

Symptoms.

Among the earliest, tke most frequent, and most characteristic
symptoms of the disease, are swellings of the absorbent glands, parti-
cularly those of the neck. Such tumours sometimes continue for a
long time, neither advancing nor receding, unattended by pain or
any constitutional disturbance. Sometimes they subside sponta-
neously, but more frequently suppuration of an imperfect kind gradually
takes place in them, followed by open ulceration. The ulcers heal
slowly, leaving ragged and unsightly scars, and are succeeded by other
tumours, which run a similar course. In this manner the disease is
often kept up for a series of years, until at length, the constitution

Vol. II. 2K


268 Scrofula.

strengthening, either throws it ofF, or it appears under some of it*
more severe and dangerous forms.

An opinion has been entertained, that 'in scrofula a morbid matter
is generated which has a specific influence on the lymphatic system.
What the circumstances, however, are, which in a scrofulous habit
render the lymphatic system so peculiarly liable to inflammation, we
know not. Scrofula affects other structures, and in all cases the in-
flammation which is excited has the same general character. It is of
a chronic, languid kind. The scrofulous abscess is distinguished by
its jagged and uneven sides. The pus which it contains, instead of
having a bland, uniform, cream-like appearance, is thin, or ichorous,
and mixed with curdy flakes. The ulcer by which it is succeeded
has a smooth, obtuse, and overlapping margin. The surface of the
sore is of a light red colour, and the granulations are flabby and in-
distinct. For a great length of time, in spite of every care, it remains
indolent, neither increasing nor diminishing in size.

The attacks of scrofula, says a writer, seem much affected or in-
fluenced by the periods of the seasons. They begin usually some
time in the winter and spring, and often disappear, or are greatly
amended, in summer and autumn. The first appearance of the dis-
order is commonly in that of small oval or spherical tumours under
the skin, unattended by any pain or discoloration. These appear in
general upon the sides of the neck, below the ear, or under the chin ;
but in some cases other parts are affected.

After some length of time, the tumours become larger and more
fixed, the skin which covers them acquires a purple or livid colour,
and, being much inflamed, they at last suppurate and break into little
holes, from which at first a matter somewhat puriform oozes out ;
but this changes by degrees into a kind of viscid serous discharge,
much intermixed with small pieces of a white substance, resembling
the curd of milk.

The tumours subside gradually, while the ulcers at the same time
open more, and spread unequally in various directions. After a while
some of the ulcers heal ; but other tumours quickly form in different
parts of the body, and proceed on in the same slow manner as the for-
mer ones to suppuration. In this way the disease goes on for some
years, and, appearing at last to have exhausted itself, all the ulcers
heal up, without being succeeded by any fresh swellings ; but leaving
behind them ugly puckerings of the skin, and scars of considerable
extent. This is the most mild form under which scrofula ever ap-
pears. — ( Thomas. )

Scrofulous inflammation (as Burns observes) is marked by a soft
swelling of the affected part, which very frequently is one of the lym-
phatic glands. The covering or coat of the gland becomes slightly
thickened, and its substance more porous and doughy. The swelling
increases, and the doughy feel changes by degrees into that of elas-
can be felt round the base of the tumour. The skin is slightly red.
If, at this time, an incision or puncture be made, either no matter or
very little is evacuated ; the lips of the wound inflame and open, dis-
playing a sloughy. looking substance within ; and between this and


Scrofula. 369

toe skin a probe can often be introduced for some way all round. If,
however, the disease should have advanced farther, then there is
very little elasticity in the tumour ; it is quite soft, rather flaccid, and
fluctuates freely ; the skin becomes of a light purple colour, and small
veins may be seen ramifying on its surface* Some time after these
appearances, the skin becomes thinner at one particular part, and
here it is also generally rendered of a darker colour. It afterward
bursts, and discharges a thin fluid, like Whey, mixed with a curdy-
matter, or thick white flocculi. The redness of the skin still conti-
nues ; but the aperture enlarges as the tumour subsides, and thus a
scrofulous ulcer is produced. The margins of this kind of sore are
generally smooth, obtuse, and overlap the ulcer ; they are of a purple
colour, and rather hard and tumid. The surface of the sore is of a
light-red colour; the granulations are flabby and indistinct; and the
The discharge is thin, slightly ropy, and copious, with curdy flakes.
The pain is inconsiderable. When this ulcer has continued for some
time, it either begins slowly to heal, or* as more frequently happens*
the discharge diminishes and becomes thicker. An elevated scab is
next formed, of a dirty white or yellowish colour. This continues on
the part a good while ; and when it falls off, leaves the place covered
with a small purple cicatrix or scar. Burns adds, that the preceding
description corresponds to the mild scrofula, or the struma mansuela of
the old writers. Sometimes, especially if a bone be diseased below
the ulcer, the sore has a more fiery appearance, the surface is dark-
coloured, the margins soft, elevated, and inflamed, and sometimes
retorted. The discharge is watery, the pain very considerable, and
the surrounding skin inflamed. This has been called the struma ma-
ligna. Such overacting scrofulous sores are most frequently met
with over the smaller joints, particularly those of the toes. Some-
times a scrofulous abscess, after it has burst, forms a sinus ; the
mouth of which ulcerates, and assumes the specific scrofulous ap-
pearance, while the track of the sinus still continues to emit a dis;
charge. Scrofulous swellings are often disposed to subside in winter,
and recur on the approach of summer ; but this is not an invariable
law. Glandular enlargements are very apt to become smaller, in a
short time, in one place, while other glandular swellings originate
with equal suddenness, somewhere in the vicinity of the former ones.
Ulcers also very often heal upon the appearance of the disease in
other parts. — {Burns' Dissertations on Inflammation, vol. ii. 1800.)

The glandular swellings which occur in syphilis, says Dr. Thom-
son, are of a more acute character than those which proceed from
scrofula. They arise from the absorption of a specific poison ; and
they do not, like those of scrofula, admit of a spontaneous cure ; a
belief, however, now known not to be exactly correct. — (See Vene- '
real Disease.) Chronic swellings of the lymphatic absorbent glands
occur also in carcinoma or cancer ; but these manifest little or no dis-
position to suppuration : they succeed most frequently to carcinoma-
tous indurations, or ulcers existing in the neighbourhood of the glands
affected ; and they are accompanied in their progress and growth by
a peculiar lancinating pain. — (On Jnflammvtion, p. 135.)


270 Scrofula.


Common Treatment.

There is nothing very definite in the treatment of this disease,
laid down by physicians. It is considered by them incurable, and
very little is done for it. Mercury by some is given, but with a
decided injurious effect.

" For the cure of scrofula," says Cullen, "we have not yet learned
any practice that is certainly or even generally successful. The
remedy which seems to be the most successful, and which our prac-
titioners especially trust to, or employ, is the use of mineral waters.
But, he adds, in very many instances of the use of these waters, I have
not been well satisfied that they had shortened the duration of the
disease more than had often happened when no such remedy had
been employed. With regard to the choice of the mineral waters
most fit for the purpose, I cannot, with any confidence, give an opin-
ion. Almost all kinds of mineral waters, whether chalybeate, sulphu-
reous or saline, have been employed for the cure of scrofula, and
seemingly with equal success and reputation ; a circumstance which
leads me to think, that if they are ever successful, it is the elementary
water that is the chief part of the remedy. Of late, sea water has
been especially recommended, and employed ; but after numerous
trials, I cannot yet discover its superior efficacy." — (First Lines of
Physic, vol. iv.) On the subject of mineral waters, Dr. Thomson
very properly remarks, that they are now usually employed as pur-
gative and tonic remedies, and not as specifics. In employing them,
it is often difficult to distinguish between the effects which they in
reality produce, and those which are to be attributed to the slow ope-
ration of time, the season of the year, change of situation, alteration in
the mode of life, or exercise in the open air. — (Lectures on Inflamma-
tion, &c. p. 195.)

Reformed Practice.
There are four particular states of this disease, which must be kept
in view in treating it :

1st. A state of inflammation.
2d. A state of abscess or ulcer.
3d. A state of tumour or scirrhus.
4th. A state of constitutional affection.

1st. A State of Inflammation.

When the disease attacks a person with pain, swelling and inflam-
mation, the following poultice must be applied :

Take the wild or Indian turnip, (arum tryphyllum ;) if green or
fresh, let it be bruised, a little rain or soft water added, and sufficient
pulverized slippery-elm bark mixed with it, to form a poultice of a
proper consistence. Let it be applied cold, and continued till it
begins to be dry ; then renew it. It often is necessary to apply three
or four a day, according to the inflammation present.

Let this be continued until the swelling subsides, either by or with-
out suppuration ; but it is very difficult to disperse scrofulous swellings,


Scrofula. 271

attended with much pain and inflammation. I have found the above
poultice preferable to any other ; but where the disease is very ob-
stinate, a change is sometimes beneficial, and, besides, a substitute
may be necessary. I then apply a poultice, made of the yellow or
narrow-Uaved dock, made by bruising or pulverizing the root, simmer-
ing it in milk, and then adding a sufficiency of the elm bark to form
a poultice, to be applied the same as the one preceding.

2d. State of Abscess or Ulcer.

When the swelling or the abscess breaks, or suppuration takes place,
our next object will be to bring the ulcer into a healthy state and heal
it. As before stated, these ulcers assume a very indolent and invete-
rate character, and therefore require altogether a different treatment
from that usually pursued to cure them. And I am happy in being
able to give, what I have found, a sovereign remedy.

We must be governed in our applications, in some degree, by the
state of the ulcer. If it be well opened, and no orifice is connected
with it, let the following dressings be applied :

1st. Thoroughly cleanse the ulcer with soap, water and spirits,
after which, apply to the ulcer a little lint, and over this, the follow-
ing salve or piaster :

Take bayberry tallow, one part ;

White turpentine, two parts ;
Mix and melt over a slow fire ; then strain, spread upon a piece of
linen, and apply to the ulcer. In some seasons and latitudes, a little
sweet oil is necessary to make the plaster of the right consistence.
Let this dressing be continued through the day.

During the night use the following poultice :

Take the bark of the root of bayberry, (myrica cerifera,) a suffi-
cient quantity. Bruise or pulverize ; then add rain or soft water,
and simmer until it is soft ; after which stir in sufficient Indian meal,
to form a poultice, and continue during the night, and it may be used
during the day, provided there is any pain or inflammatory symp-
toms present. The original poultice was directed to be made in this
manner. But I find that it is a considerable improvement to substitute
the elm bark instead of the Indian meal, as it makes a better poultice.

I have found, by experience, the bayberry to be one of the most
extraordinary remedies in^the scrofula, particularly in a state of ulcer,
of any other article, either in the animal, vegetable or mineral king-
dom ; and I have thought, if there was a specific, in any complaint, it
is this very plant or shrub. I have never yet known it to fail in a
single instance, in all my practice, in the most advanced and worst
stages of the complaint, and when they have been treated, without any
benefit, by our most popular physicians and surgeons.

I have hitherto spoken of scrofula in a state of ulcer. I shall now
give directions for the treatment of it, in a state of ulcer connected
with a sinus or orifice.

By a close examination, often a small opening will be seen, pene-
trating deeply into the integuments, or cellular substance, even to the
bone, denuding the periosteum, and from this issues either a thin or


2T2 Scrofuld.

thick matter. When such an opening is found or discovered, it should
be kept open, and freely discharging, by the use of tents drawn through
beeswax or adhesive plaster, and then rolled in the vegetable caustic,
and introduced as far into the sinus as possible.

In addition to this, the sinus must be injected with a proper sized
syringe, morning and night, with a strong concentrated decoction of the
bayberry bark.

The black salve may occasionally be substituted for the plaster first
mentioned.

When the bone is diseased, which may be ascertained by the gra-
ting sensation which is communicated when probed, a few grains of
the vegetable caustic must be introduced to the bottom of the sinus, and
a solution of the same daily injected.

3d. State of Tumour or Scirrhus.

This variety or species of scrofula is very frequent. Hard, indo-
lent, inert and indurated tumours appear in the glands of the neck,
which often continue a long time very stationary ; at other times they
slowly increase. Sometimes they are very painful, at other times they
give none at all ; but sooner or later, if they are not dispersed, they
degenerate into a malignant and scrofulous ulcer.

In the treatment of these tumours, our first attempt should be to
disperse or discuss them, to effect which, apply the following ointment.

Take the poke or skoke root, finely scraped or pulverized, any quan-
tity. Simmer in spirits till the roots are soft ; cover with fresh butter
or lard ; then simmer until the strength is extracted. Strain, and to
every four ounces of the ointment, add half an ounce of Venice turpen-
tine, and let it be well mixed or incorporated.

Rub the tumour with this ointment, three or four times a day, half
an hour each time it is used. Then apply a plaster of the inspissated
juice of the poke-berrry, to be spread on a soft piece of leather, and
occasionally renewed. Continue these dressings a sufficient length of
time to ascertain whether the tumour decreases, and if so continue
them ; but if they are not diminished, but on the contrary grow larger,
then use the discutient ointment in the same manner, and, after having
anointed the parts with it, apply our common strengtliening plaster*
These applications will in general discuss these tumours, even when
very large, if aided by proper internal medicine.

1 recollect, however, having one case, on the neck of a young lady
of this city, of very long standing, so large and so indolent, as not
only to baffle the skill of several physicians, but likewise my own. In
this case, I made a little roll of adhesive plaster, the thickness of a
quill, formed a ring about the size of the tumour, placed it over it, and
then covered the inner part, or the part encircled, with the mineral
caustic, wet with a few drops of water, and over the whole I placed
the black plaster. This was suffered to remain on twenty-four hours,
which enveloped a considerable portion of the tumour in an eschar. I
then applied a poultice made of yest and the elm bark, which separated
the part destroyed, and in this manner removed the scrofulous tumour.
The young woman has been well many years.


Scrofula. 273

I am not, however, very partial to this method, as it excites con-
15'iderable pain, and requires very skilful management. But it is
seldom, if ever required, if the means I have recommended be pro-
perly applied, and persevered in a suitable length of time.

When all means fail to discuss the tumor, mild dressings must be
applied, until there are symptoms of inflammation, or suppuration, and
then it must be poulticed as before directed.

Constitutional Affection.

It appears that there is generally a scrofulous diathesis, or state of
the system, which may be known by a peculiar haggard and pale
countenance, flabby muscles, and small tumours appearing in the
glands, in different parts of the body, attended with a considerable de-
gree of debility, with more or less derangement of the digestive organs.

When such symptoms present, give the following decoction :
Take yellow dock-root ;

Bark of the bitter-sweet ;
Of each a pound ; bruise ; add a sufficient quantity of water, and boil
till all the strength is extracted down to two quarts. Strain ; add
four pounds of sugar. Then boil a few minutes to form a syrup. Of
this, give from half a wineglassful to a wineglassful, three or four
times a day, to a child five or six years old.

As a change, give the alterative syrup part of the time. Both are
exceedingly well calculated to eradicate a scrofulous, or any other
taint of the system. In addition to this, the patient should take a
purgative at least once a week. If any small tumours are perceived,
in any part of the body, let the discutient ointment be applied to them
three or four times a day.

By pursuing this treatment, I have succeeded in curing the most
formidable cases of scrofula on record ; one of which I here repre-
sent by the annexed figure.


274 Scrofula.

The subject of the disease was a coloured man, then residing in
Trenton, N. J. The swelling and inflammation were prodigious, and
several physicians, who were first called, appeared to consider the
case entirely hopeless. One of them observed, that whoever cured
the disease should be pronounced " King of Doctors." It was first
poulticed with the green root of Indian turnip, (arum triphyllum,) until
suppuration followed, with fifteen different apertures, or orifices,
through which the pus or matter discharged. I now injected the alka*
line liquid, and it issued through every one of them. Tents were used
to prevent the ulcers from healing ; a plaster was kept upon the swell-
ing, and it was in other respects treated in the usual manner. It im-
proved daily, till it healed perfectly sound, leaving but very small
scars immediately over the sinuses or apertures.

May not the bayberry (the principal article used in the cure of this
complaint) derive some of its medicinal effects from the muriate of
soda, which it imbibes from the salt water, near where it grows ; or
upon some peculiar organization arising from it ?

It is somewhat remarkable, that the bayberry should only grow near
the seacoast, or salt water ; which it is known often exerts some
beneficial effect on the patient by bathing with it.

Regimen.

The patient should be confined to a nutritious diet, principally milk.
He should bathe once a week in salt water, and, if it is convenient,
should live near it, in the country.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Inflammation of the eye — {Ophthalmia.)


Description.

By the term ophthalmia, we understand inflammation , either pri-
mary, or symptomatic, of the membranes of the eye, its superficial,
or deep-seated parts, muscles, &c. The conjunctiva, the cornea and
the iris are very frequently inflamed.

In the commencement of ophthalmia, the inflammation is usually
very superficial ; but such is the connexion between the different
tunics of the eye, that it soon extends to them and all the adjacent
parts. It is both chronic and acute.

Causes.

The causes producing ophthalmia are, external injuries, such ad
blows, contusions, and wounds on the eyes ; extraneous bodies of an
irritating nature, introduced under the eyelids ; exposure to bleak
winds and cold; little inflammatory tumours, called sties, which rise
on the eyelids ; various acrid fumes acting as a chemical stimuli,
such as the smoke of coal, wood, &c. ; too free a use of vinous
and spiritous liquors ; the suppression of accustomed discharges; the
long application of a strong light, or fixed attention to minute objects,
and an acrimony prevailing in the mass of blood. To these causes
we may, perhaps, add with some propriety the bare inspection of the
eyes of a person when in a highly inflamed state ; for although prac-
tical writers have not enumerated it among the causes of ophthalmia,
yet I have occasionally met with cases which appeared to arise from
this, as previous to inspecting the diseased eyes the person made not
the least complaint, but very soon afterwards complained of uneasi-
ness in his own. Ophthalmia is sometimes symptomatic of other
diseases, such as measles, small-pox, scurvy, scrofula and syphilis.

A very obstinate and dangerous species of ophthalmia of the puru-
lent nature is now and then produced by the accidental application of
gonorrhoea! matter to the eye, or eyes. A distressing case of this
nature, says Thomas, wherein the patient, a very stout man, was
for ever totally deprived of sight by imprudently washing his eyes
with his urine, whilst labouring under gonorrhoea, lately came under
my observation.

Mons. Sonnini, in his Travels through Egypt, mentions, that oph-
thalmia is a complaint which is endemical in that country, and that
eyes perfectly sound, or which are not swelled, are rarely to be seen.
This he attributes to the excessive heat, the air being impregnated
with noxious particles, and the acrid and burning dust which the
winds scatter in the atmosphere. Another cause of it, so general at
Cairo, he says, is the frequent watering of the streets and houses

Vol. II. 2 L


276 Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.)

Water, thrown abundantly and frequently upon a burning soil, con-
taining a great many saline particles, produces, he observes, acrid
vapours, which may be considered as one of the principal causes of
blindness in Egypt.

Sir Robert Wilson mentions that the Egyptian ophthalmia is sup-
posed to originate in the nitrous particles emitted from the ground by
the force of the sun, which are of a quality so pungent and penetra-
ting as to injure the fine vessels of the eye. The acrid and burning
dust flying continually in the atmosphere, irritates still more the al-
ready affected part; while the reflection of the soil, the heat of the
air and vivid light of the sky, tend to weaken the sight, at last occa-
sioning excessive inflammation.

According to the best information which we have received, this
species of ophthalmia arises in the first instance soon after the over-
flowing of the Nile, or rather on its recession, when a vast quantity
of slimy mud is deposited on its banks and other places which were
overflowed, and which, being acted upon by a powerful sun, send
forth miasma, or effluvia, that excite inflammation in the eyes of this
peculiar nature. The custom in Egypt of sleeping in the open air,
possibly may increase the power of the cause.

Ophthalmia has not been considered as a contagious disease, al-
though it has often been known to appear as a prevailing epidemic
at different times ; but it is an undoubted fact, that the Egyptian
species is highly contagious. During the campaign in Egypt, the
troops were dreadfully afflicted with it, and many returned with a
total loss of sight ; whilst others, still labouring under the disease,
propagated it at Malta and Gibraltar, where they first landed ; and
from which places it was at length brought into England.

It seems to be established, I think, on the most indisputable evidence,
that the Egyptian ophthalmia may be propagated by contagion, and
that in this way it has been introduced, and has spread in the same
manner as in its native soil. The influence of climate, and other local
circumstances, on the general character and progress of the disease,
cannot, however, be denied. In most of the instances in which this
species of ophthalmia has prevailed in England, it has appeared with
mitigated symptoms, in comparison with the disorder as it occurs in
Egypt ; but it has nevertheless been observed, that where the pa-
tients were exposed to the influence of a marshy soil, it equalled in
the severity of its symptoms the Egyptian ophthalmia. A modern
writer assures us, that its spreading is not owing to contagion in the
ordinary sense of the word, (that is, to any infectious matter thrown
off from the system of those labouring under the disease, and opera-
ting at a greater or less distance from its source,) but to the actual
conveyance of the purulent matter from the inflamed organ to the eye
of the person in health. Dr. Edmonston has also pointed out, that the
sphere of action of this contagion is very limited, and that most of the
cases which came under his observation arose from the direct applica-
tion of virus from diseased to sound eyes.

It has been indeed ascertained as a fact, that many soldiers, with
the hope and view of obtaining a discharge from their regiments, ab-


Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.) 277

soluUly inoculated their eyes with the contagious matter, thereby in-
ducing a loss of sight in one or both.

The late Mr. Ware was of opinion, that the disease which has ap-
peared as a prevailing epidemic among soldiers, ought to be denomi-
nated the purulent ophthalmia, instead of the Egyptian ; since one of
its chief symptoms, and that which distinguishes it from any other, is
the profuse discharge of a purulent coloured fluid, closely resembling
the pus or matter that issues from an ulcerated surface. He also
thinks that it greatly resembles, in many respects, a disorder, which
Eye, (see vol. i. p. 129. 309.) under the title of the Purulent Eye
of new-born Children, and in which, no less than in that under con-
sideration, the discharge of matter is always profuse. — (Thomas.)

Symptoms.

The common ophthalmia usually comes on with a sensation as if
some gritty particles had insinuated themselves under the eyelids,
accompanied with great heat, redness, and pricking darting pains.
As it increases, the parts swell, and the vessels of the eye become
not only increased in size, and turgid, but appear more numerous
than in the natural state. Great pain is excited upon the least mo-
tion of the ball of the eye ; the patient cannot bear the light ; and an
affusion of tears from the lachrymal gland ensues, which is of so
acrid a nature as to excoriate every part on which it happens to fall.
When the inflammation runs high, a slight febrile disposition often
attends. These appearances, after some days' continuance, gra-
dually abate, and at length entirely cease ; but in some cases, a dis-
charge of thick glutinous matter ensues, which collects in consider-
able quantities about the angles of the eye, particularly during sleep.
Where only one eye has been affected, it is often succeeded by an
inflammation of the other, particularly in a scrofulous habit.

In the Egyptian ophthalmia, the symptoms which present them-
selves are somewhat different from those of common ophthalmia.
In the early stage of the former, the conjunctiva is red, swelled and
turgid ; the secretion of tears is copious ; the patient complains of
excessive pain, and roughness of the ball of his eye, and he cannot
bear even a feeble light. The eyelids are red at their edges, and
swelled, and there is often a sense of weight and scalding of the eye.
Sometimes there is a soreness of the integuments of the forehead and
temples, with rigours, a quick hard pulse, headach, and other febrile
symptoms. In a very short time, cedematous swelling and tension of
the eyelids, and prodigious tumefaction and turgescence of the con-
junctiva, wilh a feeling as if the eye was about to burst out of the
head, succeed to the other symptoms. The least ray of light falling
on the retina, gives acute pain, and excites in the patient the feeling
as if some sharp instrument was thrust into his eye.

In some cases, the under eyelids are turned somewhat outwards ;
in others, both eyelids are closed and swollen, and the skin of these
parts has an efflorescent shining appearance. It is not unusual to see
the eyelids open, and the conjunctiva so swelled and turgid as to pro-


278 Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.)

trade from the eye in the form of two or three folds. When the tu-
mefaction of the conjunctiva is not very great, and the eye can be
brought fully into view, the cornea sometimes appears pellucid, the
pupil is contracted, and the iris discoloured, or, as it were, full of
spots.

As the inflammation proceeds, a secretion of purulent like matter
takes place from the surface of the conjunctiva and glands of the
tarsi. This matter is pent up for some time within the eyelids, in
those cases in which the tarsi come in contact ; but in others, where
they remain separated, it flows from the eye mixed with tears. It is
so acrid as to irritate the eye exceedingly, and to excoriate the pal-
pebral and cheeks in passing over them. In this stage of the disease,
the sufferings of the patient are excessive. He is hot and feverish,
cannot remain long in one posture or situation, gets no sleep either by
into his eyes.

If a sight of the ball of the eye can now be obtained, it is found
bathed with the purulent matter ; the cornea is muddy in a part or the
whole of its extent, or its surface is studded with small white spots.
These appearances denote the commencement of a suppuration of
the cornea. Sometimes the whole of the cornea is included in the
suppuration, and destroyed ; the iris is laid bare, the lens and vitreous
humour are forced on the iris, or entirely evacuated, and even the
form of the eye does not remain. At other times, only a portion of
the cornea suppurates, and the sight is more or less affected after-
wards, according to the point at which the suppuration has taken
place, and the extent to which it has gone. If the abscess be situa-
ted before the pupil, and if it penetrate the whole depth of the cornea,
the aqueous humour, in escaping, will carry with it a portion of the iris
through the aperture in the cornea ; and the pupil will be in general
totally obliterated by the protrusion of the iris, and its subsequent ad-
hesion to the sides of the ruptured cornea.

During some violent paroxysm of pain, from the excessive increas-
ed volume of the whole compages of the eye, locked within the orbit,
the coats of the eye at length give way. By this circumstance, the
tension in the parts is considerably diminished, the inflammation
gradually subsides, and the state of the eye begins to improve, unless
in the melancholy instances in which the iris continues to protrude.

Such is the most violent form of the disease ; but even in slighter
cases, where no rupture of the cornea takes place, on the discharge
of pus ceasing, a number of granulations are sometimes perceived to
arise, on an inspection of the eye, from the interior of the eyelids, and
to present, a shocking spectacle.

With some, the Egyptian opththalmia lasts only nine or ten days :
in others, the patients have suffered for months.

The common opththalmia, when slight and not symptomatic of any
other disease, will readily give way to proper means ; but if it is very
violent, or has continued for any length of time, it is apt to occasion
specks, or to terminate in a dimness of sight or opacity of the crys-
talline lens. In some cases, the inflammation terminates in suppura-


Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophtluilmia.) 279

tion of the cornea and deep seated parts. When it arises in a scro-
fulous habit, or is symptomatic of syphilis, the cure is often tedious.
In the treatment of ophthalmia, its varieties of idiopathic and
symptomatic, and of acute and chronic, ought duly to be considered,
and to form the basis of our practice. Our object, therefore, should
be, to determine with precision, how far each particular case is to be
referred to one or other of these kinds, and to adopt our plan ac-
cordingly. — ( Thomas. )

Common Treatment.

Bleeding, blistering, mercury, salts, blue vitriol, scarifications,
nitrate of silver, &c.

Reformed Practice.

The first indication to be fulfilled in the treatment of ophthalmia, is
to remove all extraneous substances from the eye, or whatever may
prove a source of irritation.

Second. To reduce the inflammation as speedily as possible.

The first indication, viz. that of removing foreign bodies from the
eye, is very important ; for, so long as they continue, the inflammation
will be kept up. Sometimes it continues for months, when something
has been found in the eye which has been the source of all the mis-
chief.

The smallest particle, lodging in the eye, from its irritable and deli-
cate structure, produces great pain, swelling, inflammation, and inabi-
lity to move the lids. There is a preternatural secretion of
tears, which often removes the exciting cause. But should not
this be the case, the lids should be opened with the fingers, and the
patient must rotate the eye in different directions, and the opposite
side to that wherein the extraneous body appears to lie ; and when the
substance is brought in view, it may be readily removed by the end of
a probe or bodkin covered with a silk handkerchief of a close texture,
or a small roll of fine linen will answer the purpose. If one of the lashes
fall into the eye, it may be removed in the same way. If the foreign
bodies be very small, either dust or sand, the mucilage of slippery -elm
bark should be introduced, by directing the person to throw his head
as far back as possible, and then pour a quantity of the clear mucilage
into the inner corner or canthus of the eye, at the same time that he
is directed to wink or move the eye in different directions. The dust
or sand will, in this manner, adhere to the mucilage, will be washed
out, and the mucilage will also diminish the inflammation, by its
soothing and cooling properties.

It is sometimes the case that extraneous particles are insinuated
under the lids and adhere to them. In these cases, the lid should be
everted, or turned inside out, the particle brought in sight and remov-
ed as before directed.

Sometimes particles of metal, or insects, get imbedded into the coat
of the eye. A silver wire, beat thin, and fixed into a handle, will be
convenient to remove them. A hog's bristle bent, is very good.


280 Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.)

Sometimes foreign substances penetrate the conjunctiva, and projee?
a little, causing intolerable pain. They may be removed by a small
pair of tweezers.

It is very common in cities, and in factories where much iron is
used, for scales, or small pieces of it, or steel, to penetrate into the
cornea, and become so imbedded, that they cannot be dislodged with-
out touching them with a sharp instrument.

We very often have persons apply to us in this situation ; and it
requires some skill to take them out. The method which I adopt, and
which is very effectual, is as follows : I seat myself directly before
the patient, and direct an assistant to hold his head as steadily as pos-
sible. I then press the left forefinger on the upper lid of the eye,
and the left thumb upon the lower lid, and extend them sufficiently
open to discover the object ; and, by the by, the scale is often scarcely
perceptible. On one or two occasions, the patient had applied to a
physician, who said there was no substance in the eye. But in every
case, by looking very closely, a minute dark speck will be seen on the
cornea. When, then, the practitioner discovers this, and every thing
has been adjusted as mentioned, he will direct the person to look
steadily at some object, in that direction which brings the substance
fairly into view. At the same time, he will press with his fingers,
sufficiently to keep the ball of the eye from turning in any direction,
while at the same moment he will, with a common thumb, or abscess
lancet, carry the point directly to the particle, or body, and carry it
outwards. In this manner it can be easily taken out. Sometimes it
will adhere to the point of the lancet ; at other times it will fall upon
the eye/and is washed out by the tears ; and occasionally it is removed
without discovering it. After the removal of the body, a minute speck
will be seen where it has been imbedded, which is liable to deceive
the physician. The only sure criterion to ascertain, whether or not,
it has been removed, is the subsidence of the pricking sensation, or
the removal of the source of irritation ; and this will sometimes take
place immediately, at other times not till several hours afterwards.

When it has been in for some length of time, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to remove it ; and if it cannot be removed, we must wait,
and let suppuration follow, when it will be thus separated, and will
drop out. During the process, however, means must be adopted to
lessen or keep down the inflammation.

When pieces of lime get into the eye, as many as possible must be
removed in the same manner as has been directed for the removal of
other foreign agents ; and such as cannot be thus removed, must be
washed out by the mucilage of slippery-elm bark.

In this manner we have succeeded in every case of the kind, and
they have been numerous.

After the first indication has been fulfilled, viz. to remove all extra-
neous bodies from the eye, our next one will be to subdue the inflam-
mation ; and the first application to be made, may be locally.

1st. Fomentations. — If the pain be very severe, let the eye be foment-
ed with a decoction of poppy leaves. The eye or eyes may be washed
with it, and the leaves then be bound on, and often renewed.

2d. Cooling or Refrigerant Lotions. — After this fomentation has heen


Inflammation of the Eye— {Ophthalmia.) 281

used awhile, the cooling or refrigerant wash may be applied ; which
consists of one drachm of pulverized borax, to which has been added
eight ounces of boiling rain or spring water, and afterwards strained
or filtered. After the eyes have been washed with this, if the inflam-
mation is slight, the use of the stimulating eye-water may be sufficient
to remove it ; and when first used, to be a little diluted.

Should it, however, continue, after the use of this a short time,
apply the following wash : make a strong mucilage, by immersing the
pith of sassafras in rose water ; after which, let the eyes be washed
with this frequently.

The above wash is prepared and sold by the physician of the So-
ciety of Shakers, at New-Lebanon, in this state ; and in many cases
is useful.

3d. Poultices. — Of all the applications which can be employed to
reduce inflammation, there is none so powerful, so strikingly effectual
and sovereign, as a poultice made of the slippery-elm hark. The
superfine flour of it should be mixed with equal parts of milk and
water, and applied tepid, and next to the skin. It should not be placed
between linen, if it can be kept on without. In infants and children,
sometimes, however, it is necessary to enclose it, in order to keep it
upon the eyes, and when this is necessary, it should be made very
thin. If the inflammation is very acute, it may be kept on during the
day and night, otherwise the washes may be applied during the day,
and the poultice at night. This does more to remove the pain and
inflammation, than any other means besides. There is not the least
danger arising from its use, as some, entirely ignorant of its effects,
have intimated might be the case ; or rather this has been their charge
against poultices in general ; and, was this, that is here recommended,
no better than those usually employed, such charge would be very
valid, or properly made ; but the bark, applied as here directed, is
exceedingly valuable, surpassing every other application, and no
injurious effects arises from it in any case.

4th. Stimulating Eye-water, or Wash. When the inflammation has
partially subsided, an eye-water or wash may be applied to the eye,
which is a little stimulating to the absorbents. For this purpose, let
the stimulating eye-water be applied, two or three times a day, to be
diluted with a little rain water, and the strength of it gradually in-
creased, as the eyes will bear. If it increases the inflammation, let
it be omitted.

5th. Equalize the Circulation. — When the pathology of this disease
is well understood, (which I am persuaded is not the case in this
day,) the method of treating it will be found simple, easy and very
effectual. People will not then have their eyes so often destroyed,
as at the present time, by improper treatment. When the cause
is well understood, the treatment will be necessarily right ; and
I have found in nine cases out of ten, that ophthalmia of all
kinds, arises from an unequal circulation of blood. It recedes in
consequences of cold from the surface and extremities, and is thrown
in an undue quantity upon the eyes, which, with the morbific agents
contained in the circulation, is the great cause of inflammation of
these organs. Ask the patient if his feet have not been, and are not


282 Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia^)

habitually cold, while his head and eyes are hot. He will answer in
the affirmative. Or place one hand upon the feet, and the other upon
the forehead, and you will discover, that while the former (the feet)
are cold, the forehead is hot, i. e. the temperature, instead of being
regular and uniform, is unequal, and diametrically opposite. Hence,
the indication of cure must be obvious to the meanest capacity, which
consists in recalling, not abstracting, the blood from the eyes and head
back again to its original channels, which is no sooner done, than in-
flammatory symptoms subside ; and this is effected by means so simple,
that except a practitioner possesses a good share of candour and
honesty, combined with discernment, and some physiological know-
ledge, he will reject it, from errors previously imbibed.

One great and principal means to equalize the circulation, is the
application of heat to the surface and extremities. Diaphoretics may
be given to excite perspiration or a determination to the skin, and the
feet should be repeatedly bathed in warm ley-water, to return the
blood, or to promote a natural warmth and circulation ; and it is
usually the case, that in the very act of this process, the patient expe-
riences great relief. The temporal arteries cease to beat so violently,
the pain in the head subsides, and the irritation of the eyes are les-
sened.

After the feet are bathed, mustard plasters may be applied, and
kept on, particularly at night.

The vapour bath may be used to promote general perspiration, in
cases where internal medicines prove insufficient, or in cases where
it is excited by any difficulty ; and perspiration should be aided also
by warm diluent drinks. The skin should be kept moist while any
inflammation remains.

6th. Counter-irritants. — Where pain in the head is very great, and
the above means do not afford that relief which is desirable, cups
may be applied to the temples and nape of the neck. I have found
some benefit from their use, but they are seldom required. I have
formerly been in the habit of applying blisters to the nape of the
neck in cases of severe ophthalmia, but more recently, I have substi-
tuted the mustard plaster, which, thus far, answers a better purpose.

7th. Diet. — Diet has a considerable effect in reducing inflamma-
tion ; and the patient must therefore avoid every thing of a heating
or stimulating nature, both in food and liquids, and take only light,
cooling, vegetable diet.

8th. Rest and Quietude. — The patient should keep in his room
as much as possible, as exercise and exposure to the air or cold
is apt to increase the inflammation. The room should be a little
darkened, and but little, as the act of keeping the eyes entirely from
the light will prove injurious, particularly when they first begin to be
exposed to it ; and they ought gradually to be accustomed to a mode-
rate degree of it.

9. Anodynes — Where the patient is very restless and wakeful, a
portion of the diaphoretic powders may be given at bedtime.

10. Purgatives. — Physic should be given to the patient two or three
times a week. It contributes very much to lessen the inflammation,
by lessening the quantity of the circulating mass, and by equalizing


Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.) 283

the circulation. Our common purgative may be given, and occasion.
ally substituted for senna, manna and cream of tartar. When the
eyes adhere much together, from a secretion of matter, which takes
place most commonly in the morning, they should be washed off with
a little Castile soap and water ; and, when they are very irritable, a
little milk and water is sufficient. But the soap should be used in
this case in preference, if the patient can bear it ; and I have found
the daily use of it, particularly in purulent ophthalmia, exceedingly
beneficial. It not only cleanses the eyes of all viscid secretions,
but it gives tone and energy tothem,'by stimulating the absorbents to
a healthy action. An ointment, made by simmering marshmallow,
spirits and fresh butter, forms a preparation which will be found very
serviceable in ophthalmia, where it assumes a protracted type or cha-
racter, and may be used with advantage in any stage of the complaint.
The patient may take, throughout the stage of the disease, an infusion
or decoction of the elder flowers. They are cooling, laxative and
alterative.


Chronic Ophthalmia.

When acute ophthalmia or inflammation of the eyes has been
properly treated, there is very little danger of its running into a
chronic form. But when a patient has been freely bled, blistered,
mercurialized, and reduced as they now are, chronic inflammation
will supervene, or ulceration will follow, which will destroy all vision,
or disorganize the eyes, as may be daily seen where such practice
has been followed. But when we are called to treat chronic ophthal-
mia, although we cannot prevent the mischief which has been done,
we may remedy it in part, and perhaps wholly. And first, we must
make use of the same means to subdue it, as is recommended for the
acute stage of the disorder. And if this proves ineffectual, which will
seldom be the case, some variation in practice will be called for.
Additional, or somewhat different means must be taken to divert the
blood from the head, to equalize the circulation, and to excite a healthy
action in the eyes.

First, Emetics. — Emetics sometimes have an excellent effect where
the disease has become stationary, or where chronic inflammation
exists. About two a week should be given, and a purgative adminis-
tered as often. The fact that ophthalmia depends upon gastric
irritation, is often overlooked by the practitioner ; but should it not
depend upon a morbid state of the stomach, the shock given by the
emetic to the head and capillary system, exerts a salutary in-
fluence on the eyes, by lessening subacute inflammation, and giving
tone to them.

Says Abernethy, most of even our local diseases originate in a bad
state of the stomach — a truth which cannot be too often impressed
upon those who speak of the treatment of purulent ophthalmia. He
traces nearly all the maladies which affect the eye to this fertile cause
of human suffering, and tells the following amusing story in lllustra-

Vol. H. 9M


284 Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.)

tion of the vulgar errors on the subject : we quote from the report of
his lectures in the Lancet:— " A lady and gentleman brought their
child to me with inflamed eyes ; the pupils could hardly be distin-
guished ; there were ulcers on the cornea, and it was very much
clouded. They said, 'sir, we are going out of town, and we thought
we would ask your opinion of our child's eyes ; he has been under
the care of several of the most eminent surgeons, and he is getting
an eye. water, or an eye-salve, and so on ? I tell you that I am per-
suaded that the cause of irritable eyes is a disordered state of the
stomach and bowels. I desired the lad to put out his tongue, and it
was very furred and dirty indeed. I told them that they must pay
great attention to the child's diet, to the regulation of his bowels, to
take exercise in the open air, and so on. ' Oh !' they said, ' if that
was all the advice I could give, they should wish me good morning ;*
so they paid me a guinea and off they went. They were going into
Devonshire, and when they were about seventy miles from the town,
the child was seized with a diarrhoea, which caused them to stop on
the road, and in a day or two the child's eyes became very much bet-
ter. They now began to think that there was some truth in what had
been told them about a disordered state of the stomach and bowels,
and away they came again towards town, after having travelled above
seventy miles, to hear something more about this matter, which, if
they had had a little patience, they would have heard at first in a
few minutes."

Conjunctivial, catarrhal, purulent, gonorrheal, scrofulous, sclerotic,
ititic, and every species of ophthalmia, must be treated on the same
general principles. These distinctions are unnecessary for all prac-
tical purposes.

I have found that in the chronic, and particularly in the purulent
ophthalmia, that the inflammation depends in some degree upon a
morbid or vitiated state of the blood ; and I have, therefore, admi-
nistered alteratives, particularly in the purulent and scrofulous, and for
this purpose the alterative syrup should be freely given.

There is a medicine sold in this city, by physicians and others, par-
ticularly for the ophthalmia tarsi, called Baker's Eye-Balsam, and prepa-
red by a physician in Pennsylvania. In several cases, I have seen it
applied with an excellent effect. A gentleman from that section of
the country informs me that it is composed of the following ingre-
dients:

Take one ounce of olive oil,

One ounce of lard,

Half an ounce of wMte wax, (cera alba,)

Half a drachm of red precipitate,

Ten grains of gum camphor ;
Melt the three first articles ; then add the precipitate and camphor,
finely pulverized. Continue to stir until it is nearly cold. A piece
of this ointment, as large as a kernel of wheat or rye, is to be insinua-
ted between the lids of the eye night and morning, with a camel's hair
pencil. This may be tried, if the other means recommended should
not entirely remove the complaint. The physician who gave me this


Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.) 285

formula, was unable to give the proportions of the ingredients con-
tained in it. But I have given them according to the best of my
judgment.

If the patient complains of any pain or heat about the eyes and
forehead, and which is not easily removed, let him be directed to im-
merse the crown of his head once or twice successively in spring or
rain water which has just been drawn. This will have a tendency to
abstract the remaining heat from the parts, by the evaporation which
follows, while at the same time it diverts the blood from the head to the
other parts, and gives tone and energy to the absorbents. Should the
patient feel any worse after this operation, or the use of any other
medicine, let it be discontinued ; for it is well known, that a medicine
that will cure nineteen persons, will disagree with the twentieth.

Says Dr. Reese, Professor Sewall, of Columbia College, D. C, a
distinguished practitioner of Washington city, has obtained extensive
reputation by his success in the treatment of ophthalmia, and particu-
larly the purulent form of this disease. By a communication with
which he has recently favoured me, I learn, that after a previous course
of depletion, which he pursues with great energy, in all cases of
ophthalmia, he relies chiefly upon pressure, in almost every form of the
disease, and especially in the purulent kind. So soon as the active
symptoms are subdued by the antiphlogistic regimen, he applies over
the eye a pad of silk or soft linen, th«:n a bat of carded cotton, or scraped
lint, which he confines by a thin light bnndage so tight as to afford gen-
tle and comfortable compression to the eye, so as not to produce pain
or uneasiness, however, by its intensity. This compress he removes
twice in the twenty-four hours, and replaces it immediately by another
of similar material. By this course he thinks he fulfils three indica-
tions, viz :

1st. Effectually to exclude the light from the eye ;

2d. The globe of the eye is prevented from rolling ; and,

3d. The distended vessels are compressed and disgorged.

His observation has detected, in most cases of ophthalmy, that there
is a portion of the globe of the eye in which the vessels are more
turgid than elsewhere, and this is in a line extending from the inner
and outer canthus of the eye, and corresponds to the triangular groove
formed by the lids when closed ; and arises, as he conceives, from a
want of pressure from the lids of the eye.

This practice was, I believe, originally proposed and adopted by
Dr. Francis Moore, of Massachusetts, a gentleman of high reputation,
both as a physician and surgeon. Professor Sewall, however, has for
sixteen years tested its utility, and recommends it to his class with
great confidence. From the few trials I have seen of this method, I
am inclined to judge favourably of its merits.

During the time he is using compression, a minute quantity of a
cerate is introduced into the eye, to which Dr. S. attributes great vir-
tues, in almost dvery violent form of the disease. It is prepared in
the following manner, viz :

Take hydarg. oxyd. rub. grs. xlv. ; lapis calaminaris, grs. xxx. ; cin-
nabar native, grs. xv. ; litharge, grs. xxx. ; axungia pore. oz. j. ;
levigate separately, and mix.


286 Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.)

This cerate may, of course, be diluted with lard, to adapt it to
milder cases of the disease, if it should be thought too active.

Much benefit is derived, in chronic and purulent ophthalmia, from
exercise in the open air, from a change of diet and from travelling.

The purulent ophthalmia, it must be remembered, is contagious ; and
where a member of a family is afflicted with it, great care must be
taken that it is not communicated to others, by washing in the same
basin, wiping on the same towel, or letting the matter from the eyes
be conveyed in any way to any one with whom he associates.

Ophthalmia Tarsi.

This is a troublesome species of ophthalmia, which affects the lids
of the eye, and appears to be occasioned by a scrofulous state of the
system. It is situated in the sebaceous glands. It is often productive
of much inflammation, is very inveterate, and sometimes destroys the
eye-lashes.

Treatment.

When there is much inflammation attending this species of ophthal-
mia, it must be reduced by the means previously recommended. After
which, let the affected parts be washed with camphorated spirits, and
soon after let the ointment, mentioned under the head of chronic oph-
thalmia, be applied two or three times a day. If this fail to cure, ap-
ply the marshmallow, the discutient and celandine ointments, in succes-
sion. Sometimes one will cure, sometimes another.

A person lately applied to me, who came a distance of nearly Iwo
hundred miles, to be attended for this complaint. The lids of the eye
were four times the thickness that they were in their natural state,
and there was a constant corrosive discharge from the eyes, which
extensively excoriated the checks. She had laboured under the com-
plaint for eight years, and was rendered completely miserable by it.
The whole routine of our common treatment only afforded partial
relief. The flowers of sulphur, enclosed in a bag, and placed over the
eyes at night, she thought, rendered her the greatest service.

After trying every medicine which afforded any prospect of a cure,
I was about to abandon the case as incurable. But it occurred to me
on my last visit, that one of the preparations, (tincture of capsicum
annum,) which 1 had before directed her to use, and which she
said had aggravated her eyes, might still be beneficial, if used in a
weak or diluted state. I accordingly took about a drachm of this sti-
mulating liquid, added to it an ounce of rain water, and directed her
to apply it to the eyes two or three times a day. The next time that
I saw her, I found a remarkable change for the better. This diluted
tincture of capsicum, or cayenne pepper, checked the discharge, redu-
ced the swelling, inflammation and pain, and, in a word, operated like
a charm, and the old lady soon returned home nearlv well. Of the
modus operandi, or the manner in which this article acts, affording
relief in such cases, it is not easy to determine. The benefit is pro-
bably derived from the new action excited, or from the stimulus given


Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.) 287

to the absorbents, which cause them to perform their office, and thus
remove the complaint.

In some cases, I have removed all the eye-lashes with a pair of
tweezers, but without much benefit. In other cases, I have applied
strips of blistering plaster along the edges of the tarsi, or lids, and
excited a discharge from them ; but these last means have never been
attended with much success.

The patient must be directed to take purgatives occasionally, and
such medicines as have a tendency to eradicate any taint of the sys-
tem ; and, above all, he should enjoy the benefit of pure air, and
every morning the eyes should be well cleansed and washed with
good Castile soap and water.

We have had, at our institution, a very extensive practice in various
diseases of the eye, and for the success of the treatment here laid
down, we can appeal to the numerous patients we have attended.
We have had cases so severe, that they have been abandoned by other
physicians, after having been exceedingly injured by mercury, bleed-
ing, blistering, scarifications, &c. They have been led to our insti-
tution blind, and we have, after a length of time, (for, under the best
treatment, such cases are very tedious,) succeeded in restoring them
to sight. And, whoever perseveres in this plan of treatment, may
safely hold out a prospect of cure to the patient, if vision has not been
completely lost, or the eye disorganized by inflammation.

I might here give a vast number of cases in illustration of this prac-
tice, but neither time nor space will permit. One case, however,
occurs to me, which I will briefly give, more particularly to demon-
strate the effects of the present practice of medicine.

A captain Allen, from Lockport, N. Y., residing a distance of
400 miles from this city, applied to me to be treated, with the Egyptian
or purulent ophthalmia, which has been endemical in the western
states.

The account and treatment which he gave of his disease, was most
afflicting and appalling ; and illustrates, more strikingly than words or
assertions, the lamentable practice of medicine in this day, and as
clearly illustrates the superiority of the botanical over the mineral
practice. He informed me that when he was first attacked with the
disease, his general health was excellent. He was strong and athletic,
enjoying the best constitution. He was seized with the usual symp-
toms of acute ophthalmia, with severe pain, swelling and inflammation
in the eyes, with a great discharge from them. He immediately placed
himself under the care of a person who was a professed oculist, and
who had taken extraordinary pains to acquire all the medical know-
ledge possible, particularly as relates to the eye.*

* lie had attended lectures, or received instruction from a certain institution in
this city, which claims uncommon skill in treating diseases of the eye, and which
has acquired considerable notoriety, but with what propriety, I shall leave the pub-
lic to decide ButascD.se of duty constrains me to state, that I have seen and
heard numerous cases which have been exceedingly injured, but I know not of any
cures performed, or any bcno.it derived.

A person who has attended at the place, or infirmary, alluded to, informs me,
that scores of tore eyet have remained under their treatment for a year or two,
without receiving any benefit, Charity does, however, induce inc to believe, that
they will hereafter substitute an improvod system of practice.


288 Inflammation of the Eye — (Ophthalmia.)

This physician began in the usual method, to bleed him most co-
piously, and he repeated this operation till he was so far reduced that
he was confined to his bed. Pint after pint, and quart after quart,
was taken from his arm, and from the head, by cupping and leeching.

He was bled twenty or thirty times in the course of two or three
months, and during this time, he was purged as freely, by taking seve-
ral pounds of salts. In addition to this, he was tortured by the re-
peated and continued application of blisters. Not only so, his whole
system, was completely contaminated and poisoned by large portions
of mercury. The water or saliva flowed copiously from his mouth,
teeth'loose, gums swelled, breath horrid, debility excessive, and ra-
pidly sinking. This was not all ; as the course did not have the
desired effect, he must follow the rule of Doctor Sangrado, and stick
to the principles of the book. He now applied the most irritating
applications to the eye — he everted the lids, and made incisions in
them with his lance, and abstracted more blood from a part already
irritated and inflamed.

Again, blue vitriol is next applied, and he is further tormented by
corrosive applications. He was suffered to eat little or nothing during
the whole time, which produced nearly a state of starvation, and his
room was rendered a complete dungeon, by excluding all light. As
he grew worse under this, two or three other physicians were called
in consultation. But, as a matter of course, no change, not a single new
idea on the nature or treatment of his complaint. The principles of the
book must be adhered to, and a similar course of treatment was directed
to be continued. The man now was in a most deplorable state ; pus
or matter streaming from his eyes, totally blind, and an abscess
formed on one eye, so extensive as to let out the humours, and to
completely disorganize it, and in the other, but a little vision left.

While thus distracted with pain, with the most horrid sufferings,
with a constitution broken, ruined, and sinking very rapidly, a thought
struck him, for the first time, that the treatment of his physicians was
murdering him. He therefore discharged them, and from the very
time, he began to grow a little better. He gradually let light into
the room, and he soon rode out in a carriage, from which he found
great benefit. After a while, the acute inflammation ceased, and he
was left with a shattered constitution and with blindness.

It was in this state that he was led to our institution ; and it would
be interesting could I give a representation of this man's eyes. 1 can
only compare them to two bad ulcers, from which matter is constant-
ly issuing, attended with pain, swelling, inflammation and disorgan-
ization. Like other cases of ophthalmia, the extremities were cold,
and had been, during the whole course of the complaint, while the
head was very hot and painful. The digestive functions were exceed-
ingly impaired, great debility, and mind very much depressed. It
was in this state that we commenced treating his complaint. He had
already asked the opinion of a noted surgeon of this city, who gave
him no encouragement, and it appeared to me that little or no bene-
fit could be afforded further than to give temporary relief; but, by
pursuing the course already laid down, an improvement was soon
manifest. The applications checked the discharge of pus from his


Diseases of tlie Eye. 289

eyes in a very short time : the inflammation and pain began to sub-
side ; the constant heat which he had for such a length of time, was
removed ; the warmth returned in the extremities ; the ulcerated
state of his eyes was removed, and they assumed their former globu-
lar and healthy appearance. The eyelids, that were lined with fun-
gous flesh, and which proved a constant source of irritation, was
likewise removed, and in a short time, every symptom grew more
and more favourable ; and in the course of three months, although it
appeared that all vision was destroyed, he was able to walk the
streets alone, and could distinguish the different signs upon the stores ;
a circumstance which was almost incredible to all those acquainted
with his situation. His general health became good ; he recovered
his former plethoric and robust state of the system, and he has ever
since transacted business.

For several years, and ever since, he has almost made it a business
to give a history of his disease, and the treatment ; and to recommend
to us every person labouring under a similar complaint, and for which
we feel under particular obligations.

Mr. Coleman, late editor of the Evening Post, stated, that for three
months he suffered most excruciatingly from the treatment of his
physicians for an inflammation of his eyes. He was bled, blistered,
cupped, reduced, &c.,till he was under the necessity of discontinuing
their applications ; when, by the advice of a friend, he washed his
eyes with the water in which potatoes were boiled, and he immediate-
ly began to recover, and in a short time he was well ! ! A large
library of books could be made of such cases.


Cataract.


The cataract is an opaque state of the crystalline humour, or of its
capsule, by which the rays of light are obstructed in their passage to
the retina.

Symptoms.

Imperfect sight or mistiness in vision ; the sensation of motes, par-
ticles of dust, flies, or other imaginary objects, floating in the air, or
attached to the eye ; the patient seeing better in a weak than in a
strong light ; an opacity becomes sensible, and gradually increases,
until nearly a total loss of vision is produced ; the crystalline lens
gradually changes from a stare of transparency, to a perfectly white
or gray colour ; in some rare instances it has been black, and also-
red ; and in appearance resembles a pearl, or other extraneous body
of a like colour, situated immediately behind the pupil. The cataract
varies in its consistence, being sometimes hard, at others entirely
dissolved.

Dr. Bere enumerates the following distinctive appearances :
The hard cataract is equally opaque, has no specks nor spots, is par-
tially detached from the iris, so as frequently to admit of objects


290 Diseases of the Eye.

being seen laterally ; the opacity begins in the centre, and slowly
spreads ; its colour is gray, or more or less inclining to green.

The black cataract is very liable to be mistaken for amaurosis.

The soft cataract appears streaked or radiated ; the opacity begins
uniformly over the whole surface ; the loss of vision is more complete ;
it is of a shining white colour, approaches nearer to the iris, and even
presses forward into the pupil ; the spots often change their position,
and upon opening the cornea, the pupil does not contract.

The connate cataract is almost universally in a dissolved state.

The cataract produced by the opacity of the capsule of the lens,
is distinguished by its peculiar shining surface, and by the appearance
of silver-like lines, forming radii or stars.

In fluid cataracts, the capsule is also usually opaque.

Treatment.

Electricity, in the form of aura, or weak sparks. Hyoscyamus has
been highly extolled.

When any degree of inflammation is present, the same means must
of Ophthalmia.

Cataract is a disease which is rarely cured. Stimulating applica-
tions may be applied externally, and emetics, cathartics and altera-
tives.

An operation is usually performed for the disease ; but in almost
every case it only affords temporary relief, and scarcely even this.
Not only so : in most cases it is apt to bring on inflammation, suppu-
ration and disorganization, both to the eye operated upon, and the re-
maining sound one.

The act of running an instrument into the eye, and wounding it, to
cure a disease, seems neither reasonable nor philosophical. I will
not, however, take it upon me to say, that the experiment should never
be tried ; but I deem it very questionable whether it is ever justifiable ;
at any rate, the patient should be apprized of the danger and uncer-
tainty of the operation ; he should be told that if the vision of one eye
remains, he will be in danger of losing it by the operation, as well
as in danger of losing the natural appearance of the eye, or the eye-
ball, on which such operation is performed.

He should be told the remarks of a celebrated operator, that he had
spoiled a hatful of eyes before he had operated with the least degree
of success. He ought, I think, rather to have said, that even after he
had ruined a hatful of eyes, he was still unable to cure the disease.

Since writing the above, a lady of this city, Mrs. Avery, informs
me, that she submitted to two operations for the cataract, the first de-
pression, the second couching, without deriving the least benefit ; but,
on the contrary, it nearly destroyed her life. And they were per-
formed, too, by the physicians of the New- York *** ****** *, who
are considered the best acquainted with diseases of the eye. In this
case they had the best opportunity of testing the merit of this opera-
tion. After depressing it, she states that she was confined to a dark
room for the space of thirty-one days ; was fed on mercury (to use her


Diseases of the Eye. 291

own expression) and salts every day ; was bled, cupped and leeched,
until she was exceedingly reduced. This not proving effectual, in one
month after she submitted to the operation of extraction,, and under-
went the same subsequent treatment ; which, with the low diet, nearly
destroyed her. Her eye collapsed, pain horrid, teeth loose and rotten,
strength and flesh gone, general health about ruined, and, finally, such
debility followed that she was thrown into convulsions.

Now I will not comment upon this tragedy or treatment, but merely
ask the reader, if a " botanical physician or medical reformer" should
be guilty of such mal-practicc, whether he would not be indicted and
tried as a criminal ? And yet all this passes current, and as scientific
and learned, because it is popular, and sanctioned by custom and
great names ! !

Mr. T. Williams, of this city, underwent the most dreadful suffer-
ings, in consequence of an operation performed of the same kind.
So excruciating was the pain during the operation, that his shirt was
drenched with sweat or perspiration, and after all he was left still
blind.

Since writing the above, a gentleman informs me, that a physician
in Cincinnati ruined the eyes of his brother by the same operation.

Hundreds of other cases of the same nature might be mentioned.

(See Dr. Lobsteiri's remedy for calaracf, under tlte head of PJiarmacy.)


Amaurosis.

By amaurosis, I mean partial or total loss of vision, arising from
paralysis of the optic nerve or retina ; and this is produced by a con-
gestion of the vessels of the part, or minute alteration of its structure.

The persons, subjected to this complaint are those who have been
in the habit of viewing minute objects, or exposing the eyes to strong
lights ; and those who are affected with amaurosis, are frequently
troubled with false appearances, as flashes of light, or balls of fire
before their eyes.

The symptoms of this complaint are few, and therefore require
to be well known.

The pupil is generally dilated and motionless ; the iris is nearly
immovable, and acts very little, and vision is completely destroyed.
There is also slight squinting. There is frequently the sensation as
if a cloud was before the eye, which is termed caligo, and there is
often a greenish appearance of the humours, which is named glaucoma.
This depends on an alteration of the lens, or an alteration in the struc-
ture of the vitreous humour.

Causes.

The causes of amaurosis may be divided into three parts ; those
which affect the retina or optic nerve ; those affecting the brain, or
that part of it from which the optic nerve arises, the thalami nervorum

Vol. II. 2 N


292 Diseases of the I.

opticorum ; and, lastly, those affecting the body at large, or sol
particular organ, and thus sympathetically affecting the <

First : the structure is sometimes altered by disease or violence
laceration from wounds, blows, the changes from inflammation, pres-
sure from the tumours, accumulation of the humours of the eye, para-
lysis from exhausted sensibility, as by the frequent viewing minute or
brilliant objects, too strong light, the use of magnifying or telescopic
glasses, or suddenly by a strong transition from darkness to light, as
that of the sun, lightning, &c.

Second : the second class of causes consists of affections of the
brain ; such as plethora, an increased action, a fulness of the vessels
of the brain, and from pressure on the brain from tumours, apoplectic
effusion, hydrocephalus, injuries to the head, &c.

Third : the third set are those causes, which, operating through the
nervous system, depend on some condition of the l»ody at large, or
irritation in a distant part. Such arc general debility, palsy from lead,
irritation in the prima? via; from disorder of the biliary secretions, or
digestive organs generally, worms, &c.

Treatment.

Although the prognosis in this disease is unfavourable, yet we are
not to give up all hopes of benefit from treatment. It is, however,
especially necessary to distinguish those cases which admit of cure or
amendment, and to ascertain in these the causes upon which tlte aflec-
tion depends.

In those cases of amaurosis which are accempanied by, or depen-
dent upon inflammation of the organ, the active antiphlogistic or
cooling treatment requisite for that condition may relieve the retina.
In those cases in which it depends upon plethora, congestion or action
of vessels in the brain, the appropriate treatment for such disorder,
will suit the amaurosis. In cases where the disorder is in the prima?
via?, the clearing of the stomach and intestines, and the restoring of
its healthy secretions, will be the indications. Where the amaurosis
depends upon debility, the use of tonics and stimulants will be requi-
site. In cases which depend upon some paralytic or torpid state of
the part, we use stimulants, friction on the eyebrows, stimulating lini-
ments, sternutatious powders, mustard plasters, electricity, and, in
some cases, manifest advantage has been derived by emetics and
purgatives.

Whatever may be your plans of treatment for this complaint, you
will find that there are many cases incapable of cure ; many others
which are but slightly benefited ; and that the cases, most likely to be
successful, are those depending upon some obvious and remediable
cause, and those only when incipient. — {Castle.)

This disease, like cataract, is also extremely difficult to cure.
Electricity may be tried, and moans made use of to excite a healthy
action of the system. Stimulants may be applied to the eyes, and
there is nothing better than the diluted tincture of capsicum; The
head should be dipped every morning in cold water, and benefit may
be derived by bathing the feet, and making an issue behind the ears-,


Diseases of the Eye. 293

■ ig up a constant discharge. In a word, it should be treated on
general principles. Emetics, purgatives and sudorifics, tonics and
iid alteratives, are classes of medicines which should be
tried.


Opacity of live Cornea-

Opacities, or specks of the cornea, may be divided into several
kinds or species.

Those which are caused by the altered or more condensed state of
the inner lamellar secretion, are called nebula ; those depending upon
the formation of a pseudo-membrane, are more appropriately termed
leucoma; and the third variety, or that in which the lamella are
firmly united with each other, or the conjunctiva, is termed albugo or

Nebula. — Nebula, or simple opacity of the cornea, is recognised by
a diffused cloudiness of the whole or part of the cornea ; it has no
transparent part of the tunic.

The opacity appears always greater in its centre, declining steadily
towards its circumference. It seldom attacks the deeper lamellae, but
\a seated commonly directly beneath the conjunctiva. The obscurity
of the cornea is never so great as to conceal the pupil or iris ; and
(he vision, on this account, is never totally destroyed, but only ren-
dered less clear and distinct.

whitish, chalky, or pearl colour.

If it be deeply seated, it will assume a polished or shining lustre ;
if more superficial, or beneath the conjunctiva, the colour is more
dull. In both cases, there is a considerable degree of nebula sur-
rounding the opacity. Where the disease occupies the centre of the
cornea, so as to obstruct the entrance of the rays of light into the
pupil, the patient is rendered completely blind. Sometimes one half
of the pupil only is obscured, and the patient still enjoys very tolerable
sight; the sphere of vision is simply contracted. He will always see
better in the twilight, or in an obscure chamber, than in the broad
glare of day, because the pupil, being expanded, permits a greater
number of rays to enter the retina.

Albugo. — This species differs no less in form and colour from the
two other varieties, than in the cause which produces it ; being always
<iie consequence of a wound or ulcer of the cornea.

Its form is infinitely varied. Not unfrequenfly the iris will be found

united with the cornea at the point of the albugo, so that the pupil is

considerably distorted or drawn from its natural position. The cornea

netimes seen completely studded over with these scars, so that

it baa lost, in a great measure or altogether its transparency and con-

.IV.

Opacities or specks of the cornea may always be traced to previous
inflammation of this tunic.


294 Diseases of the Eye.

Those varieties of ophthalmia, which are connected with some pe-
culiar state of system, are most disposed to terminate in this way.
Any accidental or artificial wound of the cornea will cause a nebu-
lous or leucomatous scar. Opacities of the cornea are also often
caused by the contact of acrid, or strongly corroding substances with
the eye.

Treatment.

The inflammation in these affections is generally of the chronic
kind, and arises from a relaxed state of the vessels, which require
stimulating applications, in order that they may recover their tone and
convey the blood uninterruptedly.

If the vessels be stimulated, the blood will be likely to flow through
the veins ; the absorbents will be excited, and remove the effused
lymph. If there is considerable inflammation, it must be removed by
active means.

Care must be taken that, in the treatment, no undue degree of sti-
mulus be employed ; if there should be inflammation, it will be in-
creased, and the complaint be as bad as ever.

By stimulating applications, the cornea will frequently be restored
to the same transparency as before the attack. A good stimulus,
which may be used, is one with the sulphate of zinc, containing
about a grain to an ounce of water, gradually increased in strength. —
(Castle.)

Pure white ashes, obtained by burning any hard wood, may be ap-
plied to the specks or opacity once or twice a day, and a little mo-
lasses inserted into the eye as often ; both of which are sufficiently
stimulating. If inflammation follows, apply a poultice.


Staphyloma.

Staphyloma is that disease of the eyeball, in which the cornea loses
its natural transparency, rises above the level of the eye, and even
projects beyond the eyelids, in the form of an elongated, whitish,
or pearl-coloured tumour, which is sometimes smooth, sometimes un-
even, and, according to Scarpa, attended with total loss of sight.

This disease is justly considered as one of the most serious to
which the eyeball is subject ; for, to the total and irremediable loss
of sight that it occasions, are added all the evils which necessarily re-
sult from the bulk and protuberance of the staphyloma. In such cir-
cumstances, the continual exposure of the eyeball to the contact of
the air, and particles of matter suspended in it, the friction of the eye-
lashes, the incessant flux of tears down the adjacent cheek, render the
eye painful and inflamed ; the sound one is affected by sympathy, and
the diseased one at length ulcerates, together with the lower eyelid
and cheek, on which it presses.

Staphyloma appears to proceed principally from purulent ophthal-
mia, or the small-pox.


Diseases of the Eye. 295

Scarpa observes, thai infants are often attacked with this disease
soon after their birth, and mostly in consequence of purulent oph-
thalmy. It is also, produced by the small-pox, yet never during its
eruption, nor during the stage of suppuration, but when the pustules
dry, and even after the detachment of the variolous scabs.

Treatment.

In this complaint, nothing can be done for the restoration of sight;
and the only plan of treatment will be to close the eyelid, and make
moderate pressure upon it by linen compresses, dipped in cooling lo-
tions or washes.


Ptergyrium, or Excrescence.

This is a membranous excrescence, often found upon the white part
of the eye, which frequently spreads over the cornea, so as entirely to
destroy vision. It is sometimes attended with great pain, and has
terminated in cancer.

Causes.
External injury ; inflammation ; scrofula ; lues venerea.

Treatment.

The careful application of stimulating agents, as directed against
specks in the eye, and mild caustic.


Abscess.


A collection of matter in the eye in consequence of ophthalmic in-
flammation. This must necessarily take place betwixt one or other of
the coats of the eye, varying in its quantity and extent in different
cases. Often, when deep seated, a purulent matter is apt to be formed
in some of the chambers of the eye, which kind of abscess is called
Hypopion, when the ball becomes enlarged, the humours disturbed,
and neither the iris, pupil, nor lens, can be distinguished. The ex-
ternal appearance of the ball becomes altered, irregular, and full of
protuberances. While the disease is forming, besides the loss of
sight, the patient feels great distress in the eye and head, and the
usual symptoms of fever. The deposition is discharged, either natu-
rally, or by the assistance of art.

An abscess lodged in the substance of the coats of the eye is not an
unfrequent consequence of small-pox : it is also sometimes produced
by external injury.


•296 Diseases of the Eye.


Treatment.

The collected matter should be evacuated by an incision made into
the eye, in the most prominent part of the tumor, or it may be allowed
to break spontaneously. Inflammation is afterwards to be obviated
by the most rigid antiphlogistic regimen, and by the means recom-
mended for the treatment of ophthalmia.


Ulcer.


Ulcers on the eye arise from the same causes which produce ulcers
on other parts of the body, as accidental injury, wounds, burns, &c.
They may also be the consequence of a general affection of the con-
stitution ; as, lues venerea, scrofula, &c. They are more imme-
diately produced by inflammation. /

'Treatment.

If inflammation be present, this should first be removed by appro-
priate means ; after which their management must be nearly the same
as that of similar affections in other parts. See Inflammation.

If healing proceed slowly, astringents and tonics, in the form of
solution or ointment.

If there be great attendant pain, opium, or the poppy fomentation.


Fungus.


Fungous excrescences, sometimes considered as a cancer of the
eye, are apt to form as a consequence of both the preceding diseases.
In some rare instances, also, excrescences of a fungous nature are
found to be connected with the interior parts of the eye, and to be-
come so prominent as even to rest upon the cheek.

Treatment.

When small in size, gentle esoharotics.
When large, the ligature may be tried.


Hordeolum, or^True Slye.

This is a small abscess, seated in the edge of the eyelid, and pro-
duced by an obstruction in one of its sebacious glands. It is attended
with heat, stiffness, pain, and considerable irritability.


Diseases of the Eye. 297


Treatment.

A small emollient poultice ; — an opening made with the point of a
lancet, and afterwards the application of a cooling ointment.


Steatomatosis Tumours and Warts.

Small encysted tumours and warts arc apt to form about the eyelids,
and occasion much inconvenience and deformity.

Treatment.

Warts maybe removed by ligature, or caustic, guarding against
subsequent inflammation by refrigerant lotions, or small emollient
cataplasms.


Trichiasis, or Inversion of the Cilia.

In this disease the eyelashes are so much inverted as to rub upon the
eye, and produce much pain and inflammation.

Causes.

The hairs themselves taking a wrong direction ; inversion of the
tarsus ; cicatrix of this part in consequence of a wound, or ulcer ;
tumours pressing the hairs in upon the eye ; a relaxation of the exter-
nal integuments.

Treatment.

Extraction of the eyelashes. If inflammation be present, the local
applications recommended for ophthalmia. When arising from the
presence of tumours, the removal of these.


Retortion of the Eyelids, or Gaping Eye.

This consists in a large portion of the eyelid being turned outwards ;
by which too much of the eye is exposed.

Causes.

Dropsical swellings of the eye ; cicatrix from sores, produced by
inflammation, variola, syphilis, scrofula, &c. ; laxity of the part in
old age.


298 Diseases of the Eye.


Treatment.


If the disease proceed from the first of the causes above enume-
rated, recourse is to be had to the treatment afterwards to be men*
tioned. If from debility, or laxity, cold and astringent applications.


Concretion of the Eyelids.

This is mostly the consequence of a high degree of ophthalmia. A
cohesion may either take place betwixt the lids themselves, or the lids
may form adhesions to the surface of the eyeball.

Treatment.

When slight, the adhesion may be removed by the end of a blunt
probe, passed between the lids. When more considerable, a cautious
division will be necessary. A few drops of bland oil should after-
wards be applied to the eye, and every precaution taken to prevent the
accession of inflammation and irritation.


Dropsy of the Eye

Consists in a preternatural accumulation of the aqueous humour.
It is attended by a sense of fulness in the eyeball ; — the motions of the
eyelids, by degrees, become impeded ; — vision gradually becomes
more and more imperfect, till at last the patient can only distinguish
light from darkness. The ball of the eye becomes gradually en-
larged ; the cornea begins to protrude, and, if suffered to proceed,
at length bursts, and the fluid is discharged.

Treatment.

Constant fomentations and steaming the eye with bitter herbs, and
giving purgatives and alteratives. If this fail, a puncture or incision
made at the under edge of the cornea, into the anterior chamber of the
eye, or through the sclerotic coat, into the posterior, of sufficient ex-
tent to admit of the evacuation of the fluid.


Protrusion of the Eye.

A protrusion of the eyeball beyond its socket is not an unfrequent
effect of external violence ; — it may also be produced by tumours form-
ing behind it, by a dropsical swelling.


Diseases of the Eye. 299


Treatment.

When the consequence of external injury, if the eyeball be not en-
tirely separated from the neighbouring parts, it should be carefully
freed from extraneous matter, and returned to its situation ; when the
faculty of sight will often be recovered, should the optic nerve remain
uninjured. When it arises from collections within the eye itself, these
are to be evacuated. — See Dropsy and Abscess. Other causes are to
be removed by the means proper for each,


Vol. IT. 2


CHAPTER XIX.

locked-ja w — ( Tetanus. )


Tetanus is defined by all authors to be a more or less violent and
extensive contraction of the muscles of voluntary motion, attended
with tension and rigidity of the parts affected.

The excessive contraction of the muscles is kept up without any
intervals of complete relaxation ; in which respect the disorder differs
from ordinary spasms and convulsions, where the contractions and
relaxations alternate in rapid succession. In tetanus, the powers of
sensation and intellect also remain unimpaired, in which particularity
it forms a contrast to epilepsy. — (Rees* Cyclopaedia, art. Tetanus.)

When its effects are confined to the muscles of the jaw or throat,
it is called trismus or locked-jaw ; when all the body is affected and
becomes rigid, but retains its ordinary straightness, the case is named
tetanus. When the body is bent forwards, the disease is termed
emproslholonos ; and opisthotonos, when the muscles of the back are
principally affected.

To these four forms some writers have added a fifth, which they
denominate pleurosthotonos, and which is characterized by the body
being drawn to one side. It is the tetanus lateralis of Sauvages.

The different terms which are applied to tetanic affections do not
imply so many particular diseases ; but only the seat and various de-
grees of one and the same complaint.

A far more important division of tetanus is into the acute and chronic,
according to its greater or less intensity. The first is exceedingly
dangerous, and usually fatal ; while the latter, on account of the
more gradual progress of the symptoms, affords more opportunity of
being successfully treated, — (Larrey, in Mem. de Chirurgie Mili-
taire, t. i. p. 235, 236.)

Tetanus may also be distinguished into the traumatic, or that aris-
ing from wounds, being the case with which surgeons have principally
to deal ; and into the idiopathic, or that proceeding from a variety of
other causes.

Traumatic tetanus sometimes comes on in a surprisingly sudden
manner, and quickly attains its most violent degree. The most ra-
pidly fatal case that has ever been recorded, is one that we have on the
authority of the late Professor Robison, of Edinburgh. It occurred
in a negro, who scratched his thumb with a broken china plate, and
died of tetanus a quarter of an hour after this slight injury. — (See
Rees , Cyclopedia, art. Tetanus.) But commonly the approaches of
the disorder are more gradual, and it slowly advances to its worst
stage. In this sort of case the commencement of the disorder is an-
nounced by a sensation of stiffness about the neck ; a symptom which,
increasing by degrees, renders the motion of the head difficult and


Locked. Jaw — ( Tetanus. ) 30 1

painful, in proportion as the rigidity of the neck becomes greater,
the patient experiences about the root of the tongue an uneasiness
which soon changes into a difficulty of mastication and swallowing,
which after a time become totally impossible. The attempt at deglu-
tition is attended with convulsive efforts, especially when an endea-
vour is made to swallow liquids ; and so great is the distress which
accompanies these convulsions, that the patient becomes very reluc-
tant to renew tbe trials, and refuses all nourishment. Sometimes it
even inspires him with a dread of the sight of water, and a great re-
semblance to hydrophobia is produced.

One of the next remarkable symptoms is a very severe pain at the
bottom of the sternum, darting from this point backwards to the spine,
in the direction of the diaphragm. As soon as this pain commences,
the spasms of all the muscles about the neck become exceedingly vio-
lent, and the head is drawn backwards or forwards, according as the
contraction of the extensor or flexor muscles happens to be strongest;
but, in the majority of cases, the head and trunk are curved back-
wards, {Boyer, TraiU des Mai. Char. t. i. p. 288.) and the contrac-
tions increasing in force, the body is frequently raised in the form of
a bow, resting upon the head and feet alone ; a state which is more
particularly denominated opisthotonos. — (See Rees' Cyclopaedia, art.
Tetanus.) At the same time the muscles which close the lower jaw,
and which were affected with spasm and rigidity in the very beginning
of the disorder, now contract with great power, so as to maintain the
lower jaw-bone inseparably applied to the upper one. The last state,
which has been considered as a particular affection under the name of
trismus, or the locked-jaw, Boyer conceives, may be regarded as the
pathognomonic symptom of tetanus, which in many instances is limited
to such an affection of the jaw.

The muscles affected in tetanic cases are never altogether relaxed
as long as the disease continues ; but still they become more violently
contracted in the frequent paroxysms of spasm, which always attend
the complaint, and increase as it advances.

The continuance of the disease is marked by the increasing spasm
of the diaphragm, which now returns every ten or fifteen minutes,
and is instantly succeeded by a stronger retraction of the head and
rigidity of the muscles of the back, and even of those of the lower
extremities. The abdominal muscles are also strongly contracted, so
that the belly feels as hard and tense as a board. By the violence of
the contractions, indeed, the recti muscles have been known to be
lacerated. Sometimes the spasm and tension extend only to the
muscles on one particular side of the body.

When the disease reaches its most violent stage, the flexor muscles
of the head and trunk contract so powerfully, that they counterba-
lance the force of the extensors, and hold those parts in a straight,
fixed, immovable position. This is the condition to which the ap-
pellation of tetanus more particularly belongs. The muscles of the
lower extremities become rigid ; and even the arms, which till now
were little affected, also partake of the general spasm and stiffness,
with the exception of the fingers, which often retain their movable,
ness to the last. The tongue likewise continues a long while endued


302 Locked- Jaw-~{ Tetanus. )

with the power of voluntary motion ; but at length the violent spasms
do not leave it unaffected, and it is then liable to be forcibly propelled
between the teeth, where it is sometimes dreadfully lacerated.

In the extreme period of the disorder, all the muscles destined for
voluntary motion are affected ; among others those of the face : the
forehead is drawn up into furrows; the eyes, sometimes distorted, are
generally fixed and motionless in their sockets ; the nose is drawn up ;
and the cheeks are retracted towards the ears ; so that the features
undergo a most extraordinary change. When tetanus arrives at this
stage, and the spasms are universal, a violent convulsion usually puts
an end to the patient's misery.

Wherever the muscular contractions are situated in cases of teta.
nus, they are always accompanied with the most excruciating pain.
They sometimes last, without any manifest remission, to the end of
the disorder; but in almost all cases, their violence, and the sufferings
excited by them, undergo periodical diminutions every minute or two.
The relaxation, however, is never such as to let the muscles which
experience it yield to the action of their antagonists ; and it is in
pearly all cases followed in ten or twelve minutes by a renewal of the
previous contractions and suffering. The recurrence of these aggra-
vated spasms frequently happens without any evident cause ; but it is
often determined by efforts which the patient makes to change his
posture, swallow, speak, &c.

As Dr. Cullen observes, the attacks of this disease are seldom
attended with any fever. When the spasms are general and violent,
the pulse is contracted, hurried, and irregular, and the respiration is
affected in like manner ; but during the remission both the pulse and
the respiration usually return to their natural state. The heat of the
body is commonly not increased ; frequently the face is pale, with a
cold sweat upon it ; and very often the extremities are cold, with a
cold sweat over the whole body. When, however, the spasms are
frequent and violent, the pulse is sometimes more full and frequent
than natural ; the face is flushed, and a warm sweat is forced out
over the whole body.

" Although fever be not a constant attendant of this disease, espe-
cially when arising from a lesion of nerves ; yet, in those cases pro.
ceeding from cold, a fever sometimes has supervened, and is said to
have been attended with inflammatory symptoms. Blood has often
been drawn in this disease ; but it never exhibits any inflammatory
crust ; and all accounts seem to agree, that the blood drawn seems
to be of a looser textiire than ordinary, and that it does not coagulate
in the usual manner.

" In this disease the head is seldom affected with delirium or even
confusion of thought, till the last stage of it ; when, by the repeated
shocks of a violent distemper, every function of the system is greatly
disordered.

" It is no less extraordinary, that in this violent disease, the natural
functions are not either immediately or considerably affected. Vomit-
ings sometimes appear early in the disease, but commonly they are
not continued ; and it is usual enough for the appetite of hunger to
remain through the whole course of the disease ; and what food hap-


Locked. Jaw — ( Tetanus. ) 303

pens to be taken down seems to be regularly enough digested. The
excretions are sometimes affected, but not always. The urine is
sometimes suppressed, or is voided with difficulty and pain. The
belly is costive ; but, as we have hardly any accounts, excepting of
those cases in which opiates have been largely employed, it is uncer-
tain whether the costiveness has been the effect of the opiates or of
the disease. In several instances of this disease, a miliary eruption
has appeared upon the skin ; but whether this be a symptom of the
disease, or the effect of a certain treatment of it, is undetermined.
In the mean while, it has not been observed to denote either safety
or danger, or to have any effect in changing the course of the distem-
per." — (First Lines of Physic, vol. iii.)

According to Baron Larrey, the opisthotonos is not so often ob-
served in Egypt as the emprosthotonos ; and the experience of this
gentleman taught him that the former was the most rapidly fatal. We
must not adopt, however, his curious opinion, that the violent exten-
sion of the vertebra of the neck, and the manner in which the head is
thrown back, cause strong compression of the spinal marrow, and a
permanent contraction of the larynx and pharynx, (Me'm. de Chirur-
gie Militaire, t. i. p. 240.) since this sort of compression, if it did not
at once destroy the patient, would at any rate paralyze most of the
muscles, and instantly stop their extraordinary contraction.

This experienced writer notices how much the nerves of the neck
and throat seem generally to be affected on the invasion of this disease.
The consequent contraction of the muscles of these parts, he says, is
soon attended with difficulty of deglutition and respiration. The pa-
tients then experience, if not a dread of liquids, at least a great aver-
sion to them, which often prevents the administration of internal
remedies ; and if the wound is out of reach of the interference of art,
the patient is doomed to undergo the train of sufferings attendant on
this cruel and terrible disorder. Nothing can surmount the obstacles
which present themselves in the oesophagus. The introduction of an
elastic gum catheter into this canal, through the nostrils, is followed
by convulsions and suffocation. " I have tried this means (says
Larrey) on the persoiyof M. Navailh, a surgeon of the second class,
who died of a lockecf-jaw, brought on by a wound of the face, ac-
companied with a comminuted fracture of the bones of the nose, and
part of the left orbit.

" In the examination of the bodies of persons dead of tetanus, I
have found the pharynx and oesophagus much contracted, and their
internal membrane red, inflamed, and covered with a viscid reddish
mucus.

" Hydrophobia, hysteria, and several other nervous diseases, like-
wise produce their chief effects upon these organs, and the result
appears to be the same. So I have just remarked, when tetanus is
arrived at its worst degree, the patients have a great aversion to
liquids ; and if they are forced to swallow them, immediate convul-
sions are excited. This circumstance was particularly observed in
M. Navailh."— (Mim. de Chirurgie Militaire, t. i. p. 247, 248.)

Sometimes tetanic affections deviate from their ordinary course
and nature. The most singular of these anomalies is recorded by


304 Locked- Jaw — ( Tetanus. )

Sir Gilbert Blane : it is a case in which tetanus prevailed to a veiv
considerable extent, without any degree of pain. The spasms were
accompanied with a tingling sensation, which was even rather agree-
able than distressing. The case, however, terminated fatally ; but, to
the last, no pain was experienced. In two examples mentioned by
the same author, the spasms affected only the side of the body in
which the wound was situated.

The dissection of patients who have died of tetanus, has thrown no
light upon the nature of this fatal disorder. Sometimes slight effu-
sions are found within the cranium ; but in general, no morbid ap-
pearance whatever can be detected in the head. There is always
more or less of an inflammatory appearance in the oesophagus and in
the villous coat of the stomach about the cardia. But those who are
conversant with dissections, must be well aware that these appear-
ances are common to a great number of diseases, and arc uniformly
met with in every case of rapid or violent death. Besides the red-
ness and increased vascularity of these parts, Baron Larrey, as I
have already stated, found the pharynx and oesophagus much con-
tracted, and covered with a viscid reddish mucus. He also found
numerous lumbrici in the bowels of the several patients who died. —
(See Mem. de Chir. Militaire, t. iii. p. 287.) This, however, could
only be an accidental complication, and not a cause. In several
cases, Dr. M'Arthur found the intestines much inflamed ; and in two
of them a yellow waxy fluid, of a peculiar offensive smell, covered
their internal surface ; but whether the inflammation was primary, or
only a consequence of the pressure of the abdominal muscles, which
contract so violently in this disease, he is unable to decide. — (See
Med. Chir. Trans, vol. vii. p. 475. ; and Rees' Cyclopaedia, art. Te-
tanus.)

Dr. Lionel Chalmers, of Charleston, South Carolina, states, that
when the disease forms very quickly, and invades the unfortunate per-
son with the whole train of its mischievous symptoms in a few hours,
the danger is proportioned to the rapidity of the attack, and that the
patients thus seized, generally die in twenty-four, thirty-six, or forty-
eight hours, and very rarely survive the third day. But when the
disease is less acute, few are lost after the ninth or eleventh. — (See
Med. Obs. and Inq. vol. i. p. 92, 93.)

From the valuable report of Sir James M'Gregor, it appears that
several hundred cases of tetanus occurred in our army during the late
campaigns in Spain and Portugal. The disease was observed to come
on at uncertain periods after the receipt of the local injury ; but it
terminated on the second, third and fourth days, and even as late as
the seventeenth and twentieth day ; though it was usually not pro-
tracted beyond the eighth. — (Med. Chir. Trans, vol. vi. p. 353.) A
patient, however, iingered in the military hospital at Oudenbosch five
weeks with chronic tetanus, before he died. This happened in the
year 1914, soon after the assault on Bergen-op-Zoom, where the pa-
tient had been wounded, and suffered amputation of the thigh.

Although tetanus is a disease which has been observed in almost all
parts of the world, experience proves that its frequency is much the
greatest in warm climates, and especially in the hot seasons of those


/ Locked- Jaw — (Tetanus.) 305

climates. It is also more common in marshy situations and coun-
tries bordering upon the sea, than in places which are very dry, eleva-
ted, and at a distance from the seacoast. Every class of" individuals
is exposed to its attack ; but infants, a few days after their birth, and
middle. aged persons, are said to be oftener affected than older sub-
jects or others in the youthful period of life. The male sex more
frequently suffer than the female ; and the robust and vigorous more
frequently than the weak.

According to Dr. Cullen and other medical writers, the causes of
tetanus are cold and moisture, applied to the body while it is very
warm, and especially the sudden vicissitudes of heat and cold. Or
the disease is produced by punctures, lacerations or other injuries.
Cullen admits, however, that there are probably some other causes,
which are not distinctly known.

Baron Larrey observed, that gun-shot wounds in the course of the
s, and injuries of the joints, often produced tetanus in the climate
of Egypt, particularly when the weather or temperature passed from
one extreme to the other, in damp situations, and in those which were
adjacent to the Nile or the sea. What he terms dry and irritable tem-
peraments, were the most subject to the disorder, the event of which
was found to be almost always fatal. — (Larrey, op. et loc. cit.)

Traumatic tetanus is remarked to proceed oftener from wounds of
the extremities, than from similar injuries of the trunk, head and neck.
Sometimes it originates at the moment of the accident, as in the in-
stance mentioned by the late Professor Robison, of Edinburgh ; but
in general it does not come on till several days afterward, sometimes
not till the wound is nearly or perfectly healed, and free from all pain
and uneasiness. Wounds of every description may give rise to teta-
nus, and in warm climates very trivial injuries produce it. Thus, in
Egypt, Larrey had one case which proceeded from the lodgement of
a small piece offish-bone in one of the sinuses of the fauces. — (Mem.
de Chir. Militaire, t. i. p. 254.) In colder regions, traumatic tetanus
seldom happens, except from contused, punctured or lacerated wounds ;
or wounds of the ginglymoid joints, with laceration of the tendons
and ligaments ; compound fractures or dislocations ; deep pricks in
the sole of the foot ; and especially lacerations or ulcerations of the
fingers and toes. A partial division of a nerve has been suspected as
a cause ; but as some nerves must be imperfectly cut through in al-
most every wound, and yet tetanus does not arise, the reality of this
cause is doubtful. Besides, if it were true, the cure would be easily
effected, by making the division of the nerve complete, which expe-
rience contradicts. Baron Larrey, however, has recorded a fact
which favours the opinion, as I shall presently notice ; and a case in
which the branch of the median nerve going to the thumb was found
partly torn through, and its extremity inflamed and thickened, has
been related by Mr. Liston.— (Ed. Med. and Surg. Journ., No. 79.
p. 892.) The inclusion of the nerves in ligatures applied to arteries,
is another alleged cause of tetanus ; but as this fault is very common,
and tetanus rather rare in this country, while it may follow all sorts of
wounds, whether from accidents or operations, the accuracy of this
opinion may also be doubted. In support of it, however, there are


306 Lacked- Jaw — (Tetanus.)

some cases and observations adduced by Larrey, which will be quoted
in the sequel of this article. — (See t. iii. of his Mim.de Chir. Militaire.)
At the same time, I do not mean to hint that the nerves are not some-
times tied in tetanic cases, or that the practice is not on every account
blameable. Amputation and castration are the only great surgical
operations to which I have seen tetanus succeed ; though it may fol-
low the employment of the knife on less severe occasions. In St.
Bartholomew's hospital, it once followed the operation of removing
the breast.

In warm countries, tetanus is an ordinary consequence of all kinds
of wounds.

There cannot be a deubt that difference of climate makes consider,
able difference in the degree and danger of tetanus. Larrey found
that in Egypt the disease was more intense, and bore a greater resem-
blance to hydrophobia, than in the colder climate of Germany. In
both these countries he remarked that, when the wounds causing teta-
nus injured nerves situated on the fore part of the body, emprostho-
tonos was occasioned ; that if the posterior nerves were hurt, opistho-
tonos followed ; and that when the wound extended quite through a
limb, so as to injure equally both descriptions of nerves, complete
tetanus ensued. He noticed, also, that the disease commonly arose
from wounds when the seasons and temperature passed from one ex-
treme to another. Exposure to the cold, damp nocturnal air, he found
particularly conducive to it. — (See Me'm. de Chir. Militaire, U iii.
p. 286.)

In the late campaigns in Spain and Portugal, according to the re-
port of Sir James M'Gregor, tetanus occurred in every description,
and in every stage of wounds, from the slightest to the most formida-
ble : it followed the healthy and the sloughing ; the incised and the
lacerated ; the most simple and the most complicated. It occurred
at uncertain periods ; but it was remarked that if it did not commence
before twenty-two days from the date of the wound, the patient was
safe.— (See Med. Chir. Trans, vol. vi. p. 453.) In Egypt, as we
learn from Larrey, the latest period of the commencement of tetanus
after a wound, was from the fifth to the fifteenth day. — (Me'm. de Chir.
Militaire, t. i. p. 263.)

It is observed by Dr. Dickson, that as the acute form of tetanus is
so uniformly fatal, it is of the greatest consequence to attend to what-
ever may assist in detecting the disease early, or in warding it off.
Richerand states, that in wounds threatening convulsions and tetanus,
a persevering extension of the limbs during sleep often manifests it-
self before any affection of the lower jaw ; and we should naturally
.pay more attention to any admonition of this kind in punctured or ex-
tensive lacerated wounds, particularly of tendinous or ligamentous
parts, and especially in injuries of the feet, hands, knee-joint, back,
&c. Some prelusive indications of danger may often be derived from
the increase of pain, irritation, restlessness, nervous twitching, pain
and difficulty in deglutition, or in turning the head ; spasms or partial
rigidity of some of the voluntary muscles ; pain at the scrobiculis
cordis ; a suppressed or vitiated state of the discharge, &c, which
mark the slower approaches of the disease. Larrey adduces several
instances of tetanus, in which the wound was either dry, or afforded


Locked- Jaw— ( Tetanus. )

only a scanty serous exudation, and where the symptoms were relieved
on suppuration being re-established ; and Dr. Reid (Edin. Med. and
Surg. Journ. for July, 1815.) remarks, that on removing the dressing,
the wound was covered with a darkish unhealthy-looking matter, and
that he had seen this change the forerunner of tetanus in two other
instances. A torpor of the intestines has generally been observed to
precede as well as accompany the disease ; and Boyer, in particular,
enumerates' an obstinate constipation among the predisposing causes.
{Traite des Mai. Chir. t. i. p. 287.) Mr. Abernethy also informs us,
that in four cases where he inquired into the state of the bowels,
the evacuations were not like faeces ; and he proposes as a question,
in investigating the cause, what is the state of the bowels between the
infliction of the injury and the appearance of this dreadful malady !
(Abernethy's Surgical Works, vol. i. p. 104.) Dr. Parry thinks the
velocity of the circulation a useful criterion of the danger of the dis-
ease, and observes, that if the pulse be not above 100 or 110, by the
fourth or fifth day, the patient almost always recovers ; but that if it
be quickened early, the disease mostly proves fatal ; and yet there are
a few instances of recovery where the pulse has risen to 120 on the
first day. Baron Larrey remarks, that when the perspiration which
so often attends the disease is symptomatic, it begins upon the head
and extremities ; but that when it is critical, it occurs over the chest
and the abdomen. — (Me'moires des Chir. Militaire, t. i. p. 256.) It
must be confessed, however, that in many cases perspiration flows
very freely, without bringing relief. — (Rees' Cyclopaedia, art. Tetanus.)
Says Samuel B. Cooper, the treatment of tetanus is a subject of in-
finite difficulty, because the disease frequently baffles every mode of
practice, and, in certain instances, gets well under the employment of
the very same remedies which decidedly fail in other similar cases of
the disorder. Every plan has occasionally succeeded, and every plan
has still more frequently miscarried. The great difficulty, therefore,
is to ascertain, among numerous discordant accounts, what practice is
found on the whole to be attended with the least ill-success ? For, in
the present state of our knowledge, the most credulous practitioner
will not flatter himself with the supposition, that any effectual remedy
for tetanus has yet been discovered.

Treatment.

There is no disease which is treated with such a variety of medi-
cines as the lock-jaw. There are as many different applications as
there are physicians, none of which seem to have much effect.

When the tetanus proceeds from a wound, as is very apt to be the
case, the chief attention should be directed to such wound. It will
be usually found, that an unhealthy or an ill-conditioned state of it, is
the exciting cause of the disease. There is either no discharge, or it
consists in an unhealthy or a sanious matter. Hence the importance
of applying such agents as will bring about a healthy state of it. If
the situation will admit, the parts should be fomented or steamed
over bitter herbs, after which, should be bathed or held in hot ley.
A captain of a vessel, in one of the eastern states, was cured of a

Vol. II. 2 P


906 Locked-Jaic — ( Tetanus.

severe attack of the lock-jaw, by bathing it in ley as hot as could bo
borne.

When it has been thus bathed, let a poultice be applied, made of
slippery -elm bark stirred in the ley, and applied warm ; and let it be
often thus steamed and poulticed. To the wound itself, let the vege-
table caustic be applied whenever it is dressed, and as a substitute the
carbonate of potash may be used. It is not, however, so powerful.

When the muscles become stiff, rigid and contracted, le\ the patient
be thoroughly sweated, by means of the vapour bath, made by putting
a strong decoction of bitter herbs into a small tub, and placing the
patient over, with the blanket around to retain the steam. At the
same time let him drink a tea or infusion of catnip. After this he
should be put to bed, and covered warm, in order to keep up a per-
spiration. If the symptoms of the complaint continue afterwards, if
there be spasms, rigidity, affection of the throat and jaws, give the
patient a tablospoonful of the tincture of lobelia, diluted with any kind
of tea, every twenty minutes, until it operates as an emetic.

When the jaws have been so closed that no medicine could be
introduced, I have known this to cause an immediate relaxation of the
muscles and open them. If symptoms are very severe, a teaspoonful
of the tincture of capsicum may be added, with the tincture of lobelia.
If these medicines do not control the disease, or if the patient does
not receive essential benefit from their exhibition, administer the black
drop. When the case be very urgent, a teaspoonful may be given, but
the physician should be governed by the violence of the symptoms.
If called to a case where there is any difficulty of administering any
kind of medicine, injections, or clysters should be administered, made
With a strong decoction of lobelia, mixed with half its quantity of milk,
and sweetened with molasses, into which a little sweet oil has been
added. To each injection, from half an ounce to an ounce of laudanum
may be added. It will not be requisite to use this, unless the other
means fail.

In concluding this chapter, I will insert the remarks of Dr. Reece
upon tetanus. He says,

f ' Perhaps there is no disease which has been treated by so great a
variety, and even contrariety of remedies, as tetanus. There are in
America very many surgeons who pursue the stimulating plan of Dr.
Rush ; among these is Professor Hosack, who relies upon Madeira
wine : while there are many others who adopt the opposite theory,
and not only bleed unsparingly, but combine the whole antiphlogistic
battery ; and instances of their success are reported, quite as nume-
rous as those of the opposite theory and practice. The liberal use of
mercury, in large and oft-repeated doses, has found many advocates,
and many cures have been reported in which this was the only agent
employed.

'■ Of late, however, the treatment of this disease, in this country, has
very much changed, and extensive vesication, especially on the region
of the spine, seems to be very generally relied on, and with singular
success. One of the most severe cases of tetanus I ever witnessed,
arose from a gun-shot wound, a load of shot having entered the back
and penetrated into the dorsal and lumbar vertebrae. The disease


Locked- Jaw — ( Tetanut. ) 309

speedily assumed the form of opisthotonos, and was treated by the
application of the caustic potash to the spine, from the cervical verte-
brae to the sacrum. About an inch in width of the skin was destroyed
all the way down, and the only internal medicines relied upon were*
prussic acid in large doses, and elaterium as a carthatic. This casej
and its successful issue, was reported in the Medical Recorder for
1825. The prussic acid was given at the suggestion of my friend
Professor Pattison, now of the London University, who informed me
that he had seen it of great value in the treatment of every form of
tetanus. I was inclined to attribute the removal of the disease to the
effect of the caustic application, as the irritation and eschar were con-
siderable, and relief almost immediate. Similar results are reported
as having followed extensive blistering with cantharides along the
Course of the spinal marrow, and this practice is now becoming very
general in America/'


CHAPTER XX.

carbuncle — (Anthrax.)


Description.

tumour, generally appearing in the posterior parts of the body, and
most frequently attacking people above the middle age, and luxurious
livers. About its centre it is of a dusky red, purple or livid colour,
but is much paler, and often variegated towards its circumference.
There is often an extensive areola of a brownish hue. It is accom-
panied with an intensely painful sense of burning ; small purulent
vesications or pustules appear, which, when ruptured, evacuate a dark
coloured sanies, and often discover a sphacelated base.

It usually commences with a small pimple, which runs deeper and
deeper into the cellular membrane, until the base becomes extremely
broad. In the beginning, it is sometimes accompanied with symptoms
of general inflammation, but more commonly with rigours, sickness,
faintings, succeeded by great prostration of strength, languid pulse,
and symptoms of typhus. It not unfrequently degenerates into a
sloughing ulcer. It is sometimes accompanied with a miliary eruption,
or with petechice dispersed in different parts of the body.

Sometimes a little slough, of a black colour, appears in the middle
of the tumour. This was supposed by the ancients to be a part of the
body burned to a cinder or hard crust, by the violence of the disease.
By some authors, the carbuncle is considered as a sort of gangrenous
affection of the cellular substance. — (Latta.) The progress of car-
buncles to the gangrenous state is generally quick. Their size is
various ; they have been known to be as large as a plate. Consider-
able local pain and induration always attend the disease. The skin,
indeed, has a peculiar feel, like that of brawn. As the complaint ad-
vances, several apertures generally form in the tumour. Through
these openings there is discharged a greenish, bloody, fetid, irritating
matter. The internal sloughing is often very extensive, even when
no signs of mortification can be outwardly discovered.

The constitution is often so low and exhausted, that death follows.
The carbuncle, indeed, is most frequent in old persons, whose consti-
tutions have been injured by voluptuous living ; and hence we cannot
be surprised that the local disease, influenced by the general disorder
of the system, should very often assume a dangerous aspect.

The degree of peril may generally be estimated by the magnitude
and situation of the tumour, the number of such swellings at the same
time, the age of the patient, and the state of his constitution.


Carbuncle — (Anthrax.) 311


Treatment.


The treatment of carbuncle may be commenced by fomenting or
steaming the part with bitter herbs, as is directed for some other in-
flammatory complaints. This should be repeated whenever the pain
is severe.

After this, let the following poultice be applied :

Take equal parts of pulverized linseed and slippery-elm bark; add
a sufficient quantity of rain water, and simmer until the linseed be-
comes mucilaginous, and a poultice of a proper consistence is formed.
When it is cool, or about blood warm, to every half pint of the mass,
add a wineglassful of good yest, and let it be well mixed. Apply to
the carbuncle tepid, and before it becomes dry, renew it.

This will be found to haye a very salutary effect upon the disease.
It will lessen the pain, swelling and inflammation, while, at the same
time, it has a tendency to promote suppuration. After some length
of time, little orifices will be seen in different parts of the carbuncle,
through which a peculiar matter, sometimes resembling water mixed
with flour, discharges, and it will often, after a while, be converted
into a pulpy or soft substance, which will slough off, and leave a
deep opening ; the symptoms of it very much resembling mortifi-
cation.

After the inflammatory symptoms have in a considerable degree
subsided, although erysipelatous inflammation is the characteristic
symptom of this complaint, stimulating applications may be used. A
small quantity of the vegetable caustic may be daily sprinkled upon
the ulcer, and the poultice continued. But, if the disease has been
in a considerable degree subdued, the black plaster may be applied
to it, particularly during the day. Every time it is dressed, it
should be cleansed with soap, wafer and brandy ; after which pled-
gets of lint may be laid in the opening. Carbuncle is attended with
much pain, itching and burning, and therefore it will be found bene-
ficial to wash it often with cooling lotions and ointments.

If the poultice mentioned should in any respect disagree with the
patient, which it may possibly in the first stages of the complaint, it
may be omitted, and one made by boiling the bark from the root of
sassafras and mixing the elm bark with the decoction. This makes
an excellent poultice for this, and other kinds of inflammation.

The patient must take, internally, such medicines and diet as are
calculated to impart tone and energy to the system, as carbuncle ap-
pears to be a disease arising from debility.

A purgative may be occasionally administered, and the patient
may take yest ; and, if he be very weak, porter, and Madeira wine,
and through the day he may take an infusion of Virginia snake. root.
If there are any febrile symptoms, perspiration must be promoted.
This course will be found very effectual.

I see in a periodical a case of carbuncle successfully treated by Ho-
sack, by means somewhat similar, and which I will here insert.

Although the disease, says he. which is the subject of the following


812 Carbuncle — (Anthrax.)

by modern writers,f and is of so frequent occurrence as to fall under
the notice of most practitioners ; it is no less true, that there is at this
day, great difference of opinion as to the mode of treating it. It will
be recollected, that, but a few years since, it was the subject of a pub-
lie controversy in this city ; and in Europe, surgeons are no less di-
vided in their treatment of this disease, than they are in this country.

In 1794, I attended a case of carbuncle, in consultation with two
of our eldest and most respectable practitioners. The inflammation
exhibited by the tumour appeared so active, that we unanimously
agreed on the application of lead-water ; poultices of bread and milk ;
an abstemious diet, with the internal use of depleting remedies. Un-
der this treatment, the febrile symptoms increased ; the tumour ex-
tended ; sphacelus ensued ; and, in a few days, terminated in the
death of the patient. The appearances, progress, and termination of
this case, led me to the resolution to employ a very different treatment
in those cases which might afterwards fall under my notice. Since
that period, it has been my practice to support the strength of my pa-
tient by a nutritious and stimulant diet, and the free use of bark and
wine ; at the same time preserving the tone and action of the part
itself, by frequently washing the tumour with spirits or brandy, and
by the constant application of a poultice composed of bark and yest.
Finding these remedies successful in many instances which have fall-
en under my care, I enclose to you the following case, in which this
practice was pursued, under the most unpromising circumstances,
and therefore is better calculated to establish the principles upon
which the cure of this disease is to be conducted ; especially when it
occurs in advanced life, and is preceded by, or accompanied with a
scorbutic or vitiated habit of body, as, I believe, is most usually the
case. I am, with great regard and respect, yours,

New-York, July 31, 1809. David Hosack.

On the 5th March, 1808, I was called to Elizabethtown, in New.
Jersey, to see Mr. John Hartshorne, aged 84, then on a visit to the
family of Mr. Thomas Eddy.

He was extremely debilitated, and suffering much distress, from a
tumour on the small of the back, which had been of several days' con-
tinuance.

Upon inquiring into the history of the case, I was informed that
the tumour, in the first instance, appeared like a common boil ; but
having been preceded by several smaller ones, and an eruption on-
the skin, it excited very little attention on the part of his friends. It,
however, very soon was attended with an acute burning pain, and
began to spread, the adjacent part assuming a deep red or purple
colour. The family physician was called, who, at that time, was not
acquainted with the peculiar character of this disease, having never

* See Galen, Celsus, Fabricius.

t See Wiseman, Broinfield, Kirkland, David, Prix de L'Acadeinie Royale de
Chirurgie, torn. iv.

Pouteau, CEuvres Foathumec. Pearsons Surgery. Cooper's Surgery.


Carbuncle — {Anthm 313

met with it before in his practice, and therefore very naturally treat-
ed it as a common phlegmon ; applying the common cataplasm of
bread and milk, for the purpose of inducing suppuration, together
for the removal of simple inflammatory tumours.

The inflammation continued*to extend, attended with severe pain,
in the part, fever, restlessness, loss of sleep, and occasional delirium.
In this state I found him. The tumour appeared about six inches in
diameter ; of a dark purple, livid colour ; extremely painful and sen-
sible to the touch ; in the centre of the swelling the colour was still
darker, and was attended with a discharge of a thin acrid humour, as
is usual in erysipelatous inflammation, altogether exhibiting the symp-
toms of approaching sphacelus ; his pulses were small and frequent ;
his skin preternaturally heated, and attended with a sense of itching
over the whole surface of the body ; his tongue was moist, but foul ;
his bowels were costive, except when relieved by injections, which
were occasionally administered ; his urine was sparing in quantity,
and high-coloured.

Under these circumstances of a typhoid state of fever, attended
with a gangrenous appearance of the tumour, we advised the part af-
fected to be washed wiih a strong solution of soap and water, render-
ed more stimulant by the addition of a small quantity of rum or bran-
dy, and afterwards a cataplasm of bark and yest to be applied over
the whole surface of the tumour, and the same to be renewed every
four hours, making use of fresh yest at each application : a wine-
glassful of a decoction of bark and Virginia snake-root was also di-
rected to be taken every two hours, together with the free use of
porter, panada made strong with wine, and soup, as his nourishments.

As he suffered a great deal of pain, he was also directed to take
occasionally, throughout the day, about twenty-five drops of lauda-
num, and at night an anodyne draught, if otherwise he was unable to
sleep. These directions were faithfully complied with.

Upon visiting him on the 7th, his symptoms Were much changed
for the better. The appearance of the tumour was more healthy, and
assumed a brighter colour, but was somewhat increased in size, and
in the extent of the inflammation ; his pulses were more full, and less
frequent ; his strength was also improved ; he suffered less pain, and
discovered a greater inclination for nourishment than he had before
done. As he was fond of eggs and oysters, they were also allowed
him. All the other remedies were directed to be continued.

I did not see him again until the 12th ; in the mean time the bark
and yest poultice had been steadily continued, with his decoction of
snake-root, a generous diet, the liberal use of wine, and anodynes
whenever he suffered mueli pain, or was deprived of his rest. At
this time the tumour began to discharge, at different parts of its sur-
face, a very healthy* pus ; the apertures were small, but numerous,

* I am not a little surprised at the observation of John Pearson, (see Principles
of Surgery,) and the Editors of the Edinburgh Practice of Physic and Surgery,
when they remark, that " an Anthrax never evacuates a laudable pus." Wiseman
also observes, " that he never saw a true carbuncle suppurate.*' On the contrary,
I am inclined to believe that the wound never heals without this change in the
quality of the discharge.


314 Carbuncle — (Anthrax.

resembling the cells of a sponge, or honeycomb. It continued thus
to discharge for several days.

We did not think it necessary to enlarge the openings, through
which the matter was evacuated, as directed by Mr. Kirkland, David,*
Mr. Cooper, f and the Editors of the Edinburgh Practice of Physic
and Surgery. In cases where the ulceration may be of greater
extent than in the present instance, and the quantity of matter very
great, this practice may be advisable and necessary. About
the 22d, we directed the poultice to be omitted, and the wound to be
dressed with simple cerate. Within twenty-four hours after this
change in the application, the quality of the discharge was sensibly
altered. Instead of a healthy pus, a thin sanies, as in the beginning
of the disease, was again poured out. The complexion of the tumour
also assumed a darker appearance, and his friends again became
alarmed for his safety.

Finding these changes, we again advised the tumour and neigh-
bouring parts to be bathed with brandy, and the poultice of bark and
yest to be renewed.

From this time the wound recovered its healthy aspect, and con-
tinued to heal, without an unpleasant symptom. When the discharge
totally ceased, and the wound had become cicatrized, a light compress
of linen, wet with rum or brandy, was directed to be applied to the
yet tender surface of the part affected. As he still continued to com-
plain of an itching over the whole surface of the body, we put him on
the use of the decoction of sarsaparilla and guaiac.

On the 7th April he was discharged cured, and returned to his fa-
mily, in Monmouth.

If it were necessary, I could here add the history of another very
formidable instance of this disease, as it occurred in the family of the
British Consul, Col. Barclay ; in which precisely the same treatment
was pursued, and with the same happy result.

* See a very valuable memoir on abscess, by this writer, in the Memoires de
l'Acad. de Chir. torn. iv.

t See First Lines of the Practice of Surgery.


CHAPTER XXI.

INFLAMMATION IN THE BREAST, AGUE IN THE BREAST, MAMMART

abscess, &c. — (Mastodynia.)


The breasts of women are occasionally the seat of very painful
and distressing swellings and abscesses. They are sometimes seated
deeply in the glandular substance of the breast, and at other limes
in the investing cellular membrane.

The inflammation commences in the usual manner, and the pain,
hardness and swelling are, in general, very considerable.

When the glandular structure is affected, the secretion of milk is
much diminished, and is sometimes totally suspended. The disease
in its progress is attended with severe pains shooting Up into the ax-
ilia, and the axillary glands often swell and inflame.

The progress of this complaint varies ; sometimes it is rapid, and
suppuration takes place in three or four days, and in other Cases it is
much slower. Sometimes an oedematous swelling forms, and the
nipple appears buried below the level of the skin. In some cases
several distinct hard tumours are found in the breast ; and when these
suppurate, an equal number of separate abscesses are formed. It now
and then happens that one abscess opens by several small apertures, and
sinuses are thus made, communicating with each other under the skin.

Abscesses of the breasts form at different periods after delivery, and
are always attended with more or less fever, preceded, in general, by
a chilly fit. They result sometimes from exposure to cold, from tight
dresses, accidental injuries, long retention of milk, and from the usual
causes of inflammation ; and, in other instances, no evident cause can
be assigned.

A writer has the following remarks upon this disease : —

quent occurrence, and not confined to pregnant nor suckling women.
Its situation renders all superficial applications ineffectual. The in-
flammatory stage is tedious ; and when the matter has made its way
outwards, the discharge continues, and there is no tendency to healing.
Sometimes the matter lodges behind the breast, as well as in the sub-
stance of the gland, and breaks out in different places, the interme.
diate parts of the breast feeling as if affected with a scirrhous hard-
ness. Numerous sinuses run in different directions, and, when opened,
a soft purple fungus appears within them. The disease goes on in
this state for a long while, keeping up hectic symptoms.

Women who suckle are particularly subject to inflammation and
suppuration of the breast. The part enlarges, becomes tense, heavy
and painful. The integuments of the brtast sometimes assume a
uniform redness ; sometimes they are only red in p-i»ticular places.
The inflammation may affect the mammary gland itself, or be con.
fined to the skin and surrounding cellular substance. Iu the latter

Vol. II. 2Q


316 Inflammation in the Breast, dpc- — ( M astodynia.)

case, the inflamed part is equally tense ; but when the glandular struc-
ture of the breast is also affected, the enlargement is irregular, and
seems to consist of one or more large tumours, situated in the sub-
stance of the part. The pain often extends to the axillary glands.
The secretion of the milk is not always suppressed when the inflam-
mation is confined to the integuments, and suppuration is said to come
on more quickly than in the affections of the mammary gland itself.
When the symptoms of inflammation continue to increase for four or
five days, suppuration may be expected ; unless the progress of the
inflammation be slow, and its degree moderate, in which circum-
stances resolution may often be obtained, even as late as a fortnight
after the first attack. Acute inflammation of the breast is generally
attended with more or less sympathetic inflammatory fever. — (See
Fevers.) According to the description lately given of the case by
Sir Astley Cooper, it is adhesive in the first stage, suppurative in the
second, and ulcerative in the third. Swelling is followed by a blush
of inflammation upon the surface of the breast, and throbbing, very
acute pain. " A particular prominence and smoothness are observed
at one part of the tumour, with a sense of fluctuation from the pre-
sence of matter. The constitution is also highly irritated, which is
evinced by the occurrence of shivering, succeeded by heat and pro-
fuse perspiration. Over the most prominent part of the swelling, the
cuticle separates, ulceration follows in the cutis, and the matter be-
comes discharged through the aperture thus produced." — (Illustra-
tions of Diseases of the Breast, p. 7.)

Women are most liable to mammary abscesses within the first three
months after parturition ; but they are also much exposed to the dis-
order as long as they continue to suckle.

The most common causes of mammary abscess, as enumerated by
writers in general, are, repressing the secretion of milk at an early
period, mental disturbance, fright, &c. ; exposure to cold, moving the
arms too much while the breasts are large and distended, bruises, and
other external injuries. The causes are not always obvious. In Sir
Astley Cooper's opinion, the principal cause of acute inflammation
and suppuration of the breast, is " the rush of blood, which takes
place each time the child is applied to the bosom, and which by nurses
is called the draught, and is the preparatory step to the secretion of
milk." He also adverts to the frequent exposure of the bosom in
suckling, and the active exertions of the child in sucking, as promoting
the origin of the complaint. The nurse, he says, often produces
these abscesses immediately after the lying-in, by not putting the
child soon enough to the breast, and by giving the mother strong
drink. — (See Illustrations of Diseases of the Breast, p. 8.)

The matter is sometimes contained in one cyst or cavity ; some-
times in several ; but the abscess generally breaks near the nipple.

As all inflammations of ihe breast are attended with considerable
induration, these cases should be carefully distinguished from other
swellings of a more incurable kind. It is said that scrofulous tu-
mours of the mamma, which have existed a long while, often disap-
pear after the occurrence of a milk abscess. Women who have
never been pregnant, are sometimes affected with suppuration in the


Inflammation in the Breast, 8fc.—(Mastodynia.) 317

breast, supposed by Mr. James to be connected with uterine or gas-
tric disorder. Even men are liable to abscesses of the breast.
In the early period of the affection, resolution should be attempted.

Treatment.

If called in season to swelled and inflamed breasts, by proper treat,
ment they may be frequently discussed, and it should ever be our ob-
ject to fulfil this indication, or, in other words, to prevent suppuration ;
for when an abscess forms, it is a disease attended with great pain
and suffering, and indeed this is usually the case in every stage
of it.

I have applied the following ointment with decided advantage,
in cases where the breast has been very painful, and very much
swelled : —

Take gum camphor, two drachms ;

Add a few drops of alcohol, and rub in a mortar, until it is pul-
verized ;

Then add an ounce of lard, and continue to rub or triturate until
the articles are well mixed, or incorporated together. Let the breast
be bathed with this three or four times a day, the patient at the same
time exposing the breast to a fire or stove.

After this process, or even before, if it is more convenient, let the
breast be well fomented or steamed. Take hops, tansy, wormwood,
hoarhound and catnip, a handful of each plant or herb. Boil in equal
parts of vinegar and rain water, and keep them all the time covered.
After the strength has been extracted, or after a strong decoction has
been made, add a small quantity of soft soap, and boil a few minutes
longer. Then put the whole into a wooden bowl of a suitable size,
and place it underneath the breast and arm, and retain the steam by
means of a blanket. Let this be continued fifteen or twenty minutes,
or until the parts perspire.

It should be repeated as often as the pain becomes severe. This
fomentation, or steaming, usually acts like a charm in allaying pain,
swelling and inflammation, not only in this, but in other similar dis-
eases.

When this has been done, a discutient plaster should be applied
over the whole breast ; and a small place should be left for the nipple.

What we term our common discutient or strengthening plaster is well
calculated for this purpose.

A moderate dose of physic should be administered, and the bowels
subsequently kept regular.

This course will remove the induration, pain and swelling, if it can
be done by what is termed resolution, or if it can be dispersed without
the formation of pus or matter. But this desirable object cannot al-
ways be accomplished. Although in all cases, the urgent symptoms
can be mitigated ; yet, when they are very severe, suppuration is very
apt to follow. Therefore, when matter cannot be prevented from
forming, it will be necessary to poultice the breast. For this purpose,
one made of the slippery-elm bark should be used, combined with the
cicuta, or other articles.


318 inflammation in the Breast, Sfc. — (Mastodynia.)

The cicuta leaves should be simmered in rain water, until they
are soft; after which, a suitable quantity of the slippery -elm bark
pulverised, should be mixed with it, to form a poultice of a proper
consistence, to be applied tepid or blood-warm. If it acts favourably,
let it be continued, otherwise let it be removed, and the bark mixed
with weak ley, and applied in the same manner.

Sometimes it becomes necessary after a few days to change the
poultice, even though it prove very favourable on its first application.
If this should happen, from the obstinacy or violence of the inflam-
mation, a poultice may be made of catnip leaves, simmered in rain
water until they are soft, and then mixed with equal parts of linseed
and elm bark, and to every poultice let a tablespoonful of sweet oil be
added.

Either of these poultices will be found excellent, and will soon pro-
mote suppuration, while at the same time, they will diminish the severe
pain attendant on the complaint.

Perspiration should be promoted by taking infusions of medicinal
plants, such as catnip, hyssop, sage, &c.

If the patient is in much pain, and cannot sleep, let eight or ten
grains of the diaphoretic powders be given at night. At the same time,
let the feet be bathed, to equalize the circulation.

When an abscess, or pus, has formed in the breast, the physician
usually plunges in a lance to let it out; but I consider this practice
unjustifiable. 1st, the operation is exceedingly painful, from the great
irritability of ihe parts ; 2d, the incision after it has been made is very
liable to close, which brings on a greater degree of inflammation.

It appears that a certain process is necessary for nature to pass
through, in order to remove the disease ; and if there be much inter-
ference of art, this process seems to do violence to her laws, and thus
aggravate all the symptoms.

I have found it best, where the strength of the patient will admit, to
let the abscess burst spontaneously, or rather by the aid of the poul-
tice. But if the sufferings of the patient be very severe, and the sup-
purative process very tedious, some assistance may be rendered; but
it must be well timed, and by attention it is easy to discover when such
aid becomes necessary. When matter has fairly formed, in a state
to be discharged, it is concentrated in a particular part of the breast,
and a sort of tumour or projection takes place, and which assumes a
a whiter appearance than the surrounding parts. Not only so, by
pressing upon this prominence with the finger, it is very soft and
elastic, evincing clearly that it contains matter. When these symp-
toms appear, a very small incision, or puncture, may be made in an
oblique direction.

But such is the aversion of most women to the lancet, that they had
rather suffer longer than to have the abscess punctured. I have very
seldom ever had recourse to it in the worst cases, having either waited
for the swelling to break of itself, or have aided nature by slowly and
moderately making a small opening into the abscess, by means of a
probe. I usually take a sharp diamond or three-cornered probe, and
carefully press it upon the most depending part of the tumour, at the
same time that I give it a spiral motion, backwards and forwards, and


Inflammation in the Breast, <Sfc. — (Mastodynia.) 319

thus continue for about twenty or thirty minutes, or until matter begins to
discharge. Sometimes it requires two or three operations of this kind
before the object is effected, and occasionally I have dipped the point
of the probe in water, then in the mineral caustic, and repeated the
same process, in order that the escharotic may afterwards make an
opening, in case the probe alone should not be sufficient. But one or
two applications of the probe generally answers the purpose. Two
thirds of the patients which I have had, have applied to me in conse-
quence of treating the complaint without using the lancet.

A fter the matter has been evacuated, or discharged from the breast,
the poultice must be continued until the inflammation has entirely
subsided ; after which, the black salve or plaster may be applied.

The breast will, in most instances, heal after a short time, but not
always. From various causes it may assume a very unfavourable
character, even after suppuration has taken place. The glands be-
come indurated, the matter mixed with milk, and discharges from one,
or perhaps half a dozen sinuses or openings ; the pain and inflammation
is considerable, and the general health suffers. But I have found that
this condition of the breast proceeds from bad practice, from neglect,
or from the want of proper treatment. The sinuses are often suffered
to close, which gives rise to much pain and inflammation.

It will be necessary, in this condition of the disease, to apply the
discutient ointment, to remove the hardness of the breast, and also
poultices, particularly at night. But the most important indication to
fulfil, is to give free vent to the matter, not by opening all the apertures,
as somo surgeons recommend, but by keeping them continually open,
by the use of tents ; and if they alone are not sufficient to effect this, be-
fore they are introduced let them be rolled in a mild escharotic. In
addition to this, let soap and water be injected into the orifices morning
and night, and, as a change, equal parts of the tincture of gum myrrh
and \v;iler. This course must be continued until the sinuses heal ; and
after they have healed, should there be much hardness left, let the
breast be often bathed with the discutient ointment, and afterwards, a
sweating or discutient plaster kept constantly applied to it. White's
strengthening or adhesive plaster is excellent.

If the disease is mild, and there are only a few openings in the
breast, the infant may be nursed or draw the breast. But if a great
portion of the breast is involved in the disease, it must suck the other
only, but may be applied when it has healed, as the milk will re-
turn and become as healthy as in the other breast. One greet
cause of the mischief, is a collection of milk in the breast ; hence,
it becomes important that it should be drawn by some person, or by
nipple shells or glasses. Some are in the habit of applying a small
puppy, particularly when the breast is extensively diseased.

Tonics and a nutritious diet must be given, to keep up the strength
of the patient.

By this method I have cured the most desperate and loathsome dis-
eases of this kind which are on record, when the whole breast has
been, as it were, a mass of corruption, numerous sinuses pouring out
matter and milk, the glands so indurated that they have been apparent-
ly in a state of scirrhus or cancer, and when other physicians have


320 Inflammation in the Breast, Sfc. — (Mastodynia.)

treated them without the least benefit. Nor has the practice failed in
a single instance. It is attended uniformly and invariably with the
same success.


I will conclude this chapter by subjoining some remarks upon this
subject, by a physician, whose name I am unable to give.

The pain and inflammation of the nipples often extend to the breast
itself, and suppuration takes place- I proceed, therefore, to make
some observations on this subject, which, though important, has not,
that I know of, been yet publicly treated of.

It would be needless, in this place, to take up the reader's time, by
adverting to the various other occasions which threaten such a com-
plaint, since, perhaps, the only one in the patient's power to prevent,
is that of taking cold; as frequent an occasion, indeed, as any, and
against which every precaution ought to be taken. With a view to
this, it may be observed, that the custom of bathing the breasts of
women, who do not suckle, frequently proves very injurious, though it
has not, perhaps, been generally suspected. The rubbing in a little
oil and spirit, as soon as the patient is delivered, may be harmless
enough ; though, if something must be done, in compliance with cus-
tom, the application of a plaster will answer every ordinary intention,
without any of the disadvantages which attend the frequent repetition
of useless embrocations, which expose the part to taking cold. And
as the above, and any other such lotions as nurses usually recommend,
and place great confidence in, have no such power as is generally
attributed to them, they are certainly much better let alone : and if it
should be thought proper to have recourse to such as actually possess
any considerably repelling property, they will, of course, be directed
by the practitioner himself, who will give every necessary caution ;
as the consequences of cold taken in the application, are generally
much more likely to give rise to suppuration, than leaving the business
to nature.*

The first symptoms of such an unfavourable turn, are usually a
deep lancinating pain, hardness and tumour in some part of the breast,
and a considerable diminution of the customary discharge of milk by
the nipple. This is the moment to prevent the apprehended mischief,
as a very short delay renders the means ineffectual ; the skin soon
becoming discoloured, and the breast greatly enlarged. To remedy
this, immediate recourse should be had to proper medicines, but

* It is perhaps worthy of remark on this occasion, that the mammary-absceM
was for a number of years a very common complaint in the British Lying-in Hos-
pital; and has always been attributed to cold, as the most general cause. The
justness of this suspicion has been confirmed since water-closets have been con-
structed on every floor. Previous to this, several women, from motives of delicacy,
were inclined to go, too early, across a paved yard, though continually cautioned
against it : but for full two years, since that contrivance has been made, there have
been only two instances of the mammary-abscess: and the like exemption has
continued since the last edition. Though this circumstance may, perhaps, be
thought to prove too much, it nevertheless being a fact, ought to have its proper
weight.


Inflammation in the Breast, fyc. — (Mastodynia.) 321

above all to sedative applications, which are usually found to be the
most powerful discutients. Sometimes, however, solutions of crude
sal ammoniac, with the addition of a good quantity of spirit, and, if the
inflammation be very recent, some vinegar, will be more advisable
than saturnine remedies. Compresses of coarse linen cloth, wetted in
such a liquor, made moderately warm, and renewed as often as they
become dry, are abundantly preferable to those to which surgeons
have usually had recourse.

When the above means are made use of in proper time, the inflam-
matory symptoms will soon disappear, the pain be entirely removed,
and if the milk runs freely again from the nipple, there will be no fur-
ther danger of suppuration. On the other hand, if there be not a very
early and considerable abatement of the first symptoms, however
slowly the process may go on, the breast will seldom fail to suppurate.
In this state, therefore, the plan ought very soon to be changed, in
order to forward the work of maturation.

The whole breast should now be covered with a mild suppurative
poultice, which must be continued till the matter can be felt ; the part
should also be fomented twice a day, if the abscess threatens to be
large, and does not incline to ripen fast, after there are evident tokens
of suppuration. The circumstance of early maturation is of the
greatest importance, for in proportion to the length of time taken up
in that process, will be the size of the abscess, and the time afterwards
necessary for its cure ; at least, this is pretty uniformly the case.

Of no less importance is the manner of treating abscesses after the
matter is well formed. And here I am constrained to oppose the
ancient and common method of surgeons, that of making a large open-
ing with the knife ; which can seldom, or never be necessary. This
happy idea originated from the late ingenious Dr. Hunter ; and I be-
lieve, that gentlemen in the department of midwifery, at least in Lon-
don, are well acquainted with the many advantages of sparing women
this painful operation : but as it has not been noticed by surgical
writers, nor, I think, sufficiently approved of by the generality of the
profession, there are probably many practitioners who are not duly
acquainted with it.

The impropriety of making large openings in the breast, arises, I
apprehend, from its glandular structure, and peculiar use, together
with the harmless nature of the complaint. But I shall not enlarge
here, on the many unfavourable circumstances attending such a prac-
tice, and the tediousness of the cure as the inevitable consequence.
I mean only to hint at a method everywise preferable to so painful a
process. But not only are the larger incisions highly improper, which
are made with the knife, but smaller openings with a lancet are gene-
rally better let alone ; not only because commonly needless, and
very distressing to the patient, but the breast will heal sooner when
the abscess is left to burst of itself. Hereby, we are sure the suppu-
ration will become as complete as the case will admit of, and the little
jagged round aperture nature makes for herself, will keep open much
better than the smooth puncture from a lancet. All that is commonly
necessary, is to cover the part with a soft poultice ; to keep it well


322 Inflammation in the Breast, fyc. — (Maslodynia.)

supported by an easy bandage ; and carefully to press out the matter,
and renew the poultice twice or three times a day.

I am aware, that the patient may sometimes undergo some very
considerable pain for twelve or four-and-twenty hours, by the matter
being left to make its own way through the skin, and I have myself
formerly made this circumstance an argument for opening some small
abscesses ; but, from a fair comparison of all the effects of each mode,
am satisfied to which the preference ought to be given. For, besides
that the pain which leaving an abscess to burst itself, may without any
disadvantage be much abated, or entirely removed by a dose or two
of laudanum, I have, on the other hand, after having opened these
abscesses in order to obviate that pain, received no thanks from my
patients ; who, partly from the dread some people have of any cutting
instrument, and partly from the actual pain of the little operation,
and its consequences for some hours afterwards, have on a subse-
quent occasion determined to leave the business to nature, and to en-
dure with patience the effects of her operations, or at most, to stun
the pain by an opiate taken at bed-time. But it has been suggested,
that there are other, and more material advantages, resulting from a
well-timed opening made by the lancet, and that for the want of it,
the little orifice will often be closed up, and a fresh abscess be form-
ed. In answer to this, I must say, that I am constrained to doubt
the justness of this observation. I was myself bred up to be of this
opinion, and was with difficulty led to change it ; but a long and
pretty extensive practice, and much observation, have, as I think, led
me to form a more just opinion of the matter. The fact, indeed, is,
that the little apertures may be very easily and certainly kept open,
as long as there remains any thing to be discharged from parts with
which they communicate, and that fresh imposthumations will not be
formed, but in cases where other parts of the breast are in an ob-
structed and diseased state, and not yet inclined to suppuration ; in
which case, let the first abscess be opened, and treated in whatever
manner it may, new imposthumations will be formed, and, indeed, in
this case, are to be desired. Whereas, when other diseased parts
have communicated with the first abscess, I have without difficulty
kept an orifice (not larger than a pin's head) for many weeks open,
till, the various indurated parts having suppurated, the matter has
found its way to the first and only orifice, which has discharged very
considerably, and for a long time together, without any interruption ;
and when the breast has got well, only the smallest scar imaginable
has remained. And it might be here noticed again, that the little
jagged aperture which nature has made for herself, keeps open much
better than one from the lancet, though made four k or five times as
large : every surgeon knowing how soon incised wounds are disposed
to heal up at the angles, especially if extended into the sound skin,
leaving only a kind of fistulous orifice in the centre. So that upon
the whole, after having bestowed much attention on this subject, it is
still my unprejudiced opinion, that it is in general best to leave the
business to nature ; and that if there be any merit in being the first
publisher of such an opinion, it properly belongs to this work.


Inflammation in the Breast, 6fC. — (Mastodynia.) 323

The above method of discharging the matter, it was said, is usually
the best ; there are, however, instances, where I have thought small
punctures made with the point of a lancet have their use. Such are,
first, abscesses that suppurate very quick, and with excessive cuta-
neous inflammation ; whereby, early and pretty large sloughs will soon
be formed, if the ulcer be left to break, though some parts remain yet
very hard around the protruding surface. So likewise in those cases
where the whole breast is very hard, and the habit not disposed to
form matter so plentifully as the indurated state of the part seems to
require. Here a great number of very small imposthumations are
formed ; come very slowly to a head ; often thicken and harden the
skin ; are but little disposed to break, and cease to discharge as soon
as they have vent. The little tumours will even sometimes subside,
if an opening is not made soon after the matter can be felt ; and the
induration remains a long time nearly the same. Poultices of more
potential heat than those of mere bread and milk, are here particu-
larly serviceable, as well as light frictions with a weak volatile lini-
ment, which should not be forcibly rubbed in, but spread lightly
over the breast.

The worst cases I have met with, have arisen from cold taken after
the end of the month, and are, perhaps, more common in women who
have not suckled their children, nor been properly attentive to the
turn of the milk. Here, one or more very large lumps are often
pretty suddenly formed, or sometimes smaller ones almost insensibly
run together, and occupy a great part of the breast ; are always ex-
ceedingly hard, but are not usually painful at first. The appearance,
in some instances, is very alarming, but they all, nevertheless, end
perfectly well, if prudently managed. I have been called to cases of
several months' standing, where the breast had entirely lost its natural
appearance, had become hard in every part, flattened, and the nipple
been almost obliterated. When the disease extends to such a degree,
suppuration must take place, and, indeed, it is a desirable event, as
otherwise mischief would ensue ; for, I believe, an entire resolution
of the tumour, is not to be effected. Hence, saturnine applications,
which have been much too indiscriminately made use of, are here
highly improper.

By these means, I have succeeded in cases to appearance exceed-
ingly unfavourable, and not at first to be distinguished from incurable
scirrhus ; which have, nevertheless, got well in a very reasonable
time, and the patients have afterwards suckled children without the
least inconvenience. In such cases, more especially, the abscess
when formed should always be left to burst of itself, the use of the
knife having a direct tendency to increase the induration of the parts,
as well as to injure the structure of the breast ; and at the best, it has
been said, is, in most cases, perfectly unnecessary.

Sometimes, where the suppuration has gone on very slowly, an
oozing of ichor or sanies will remain, and often a discharge of milk
from the sore, long after the tumour and hardness are removed. And
I have been applied to, where a small fistulous sore has remained for
some months, which I have safely dried up in as few days. If the

Vol. II. 2 R


324 Inflammation in the Breast, 4fC.—(Mastodynia.)

sinus runs deep, an astringent solution by way of an injection may be

The above hints are thrown together, as the result of long expe-
rience both in the lying-in hospital, and in private practice ; not, in-
deed, as a treatise upon abscesses of the breast, but as the outlines
of a pleasant and safe practice, which every man of experience
will know how to apply, and the young practitioner may possibly pro-
fit from.


CHAPTER XXII.
st. Anthony's fire — (Erysipelas.)


Description.

Erysipelas, or Anthony's Fire, may be defined to be a cutaneous
inflammation, attended with redness, which disappears, and leaves a
white spot for a short time after being touched with the end of the
fined line, is characterized by a remarkable propensity to spread.

The part is generally of a bright red colour, clear and shining.
The disorder is not accompanied by throbbing ; and a burning heat
and tingling are felt, rather than acute pain. If the skin alone be
affected, there is hardly any perceptible swelling, and no tension ;
" yet some difference is perceived between the sound and the inflamed
part, by passing the finger over it." In many instances, vesications
arise.

This disease, says Thomas, is an inflammatory affection, accompa-
nied usually with drowsiness, often, however, with delirium, when the
face is affected, and with a fever of a few days' continuance.

When the inflammation is principally confined to the skin, and is
unattended by any affection of the system, it is called erythema; but
when the system is affected, it is named erysipelas.

It sometimes happens that the inflammation extends to the cellular
membrane beneath the skin, whence a real phlegmon and collection of
matter become joined to the erysipelas, which combination has been
denominated erysipelas phlegmonodes ; but this is mostly the case
where there has been a previous scratch or injury of the skin.

Every part of the body is equally liable to erysipelatous inflamma-
tion, but it more frequently appears on the face, legs and feet, than any
where else, when seated externally ; and it occurs oftener in warm
climates than phlegmonous inflammation.

Erysipelas does not often attack persons before the age of puberty :
it is a disease of advanced life, met with more frequently among
women than men, particularly those of a sanguine, irritable habit.
In many people there seems to exist a predisposition to the disease.
Sometimes it returns periodically, attacking patients once or twice in
the year, and in some instances much oftener, greatly exhausting the
strength thereby.

Causes.

It is brought on by the several causes that are apt to excite inflam-
mation ; such as injuries of all kinds, the external application of sti-
mulant, acrid matters to the skin, exposure to cold, particularly during


326 St. Anthony's Fire — (Erysipelas.)

a course of mercury ; obstructed perspiration, suppressed evacua-
tions, or other causes inducing plethora ; the presence of irritating
matter in the prima? viae or first passages, &c. ; and it may likewise be
occasioned perhaps by a certain matter generated within the body, and
thrown out on its surface. A particular state of the atmosphere seems
sometimes to render it epidemical, as we often find the scarlet fever,
which is a species of internal erysipelas, prevail as such.

It seems connected likewise with that peculiar state of the atmos-
phere which occurs in hospitals and crowded ships of war. occasioning
the slightest wound to produce erysipelas.

A farther proof that erysipelas is mostly dependent on constitutional
causes is, that the affection is particularly frequent in autumn, or in
any season when hot weather is succeeded by cold and wet.

The cases termed exanthematous, and which are mostly sympa-
thetic, particularly from disorder of the prima? via? or liver ; and
hence the epithets bilious and gastric. Phlegmonous erysipelas is
most commonly produced by the wound of bleeding, injuries of the
superficial bursa?, as those of the patella and olecranon, incised and
lacerated wounds, and compound fractures ; inflamed ulcers of the
legs, and a full diet to persons who have large wounds or ulcers ra-
pidly healing ; the wounds received in dissection, &c.

In most cases, erysipelas would seem to be intimately dependent on
the state of the constitution. Thus, persons in the habit of drunken-
ness and other kinds of intemperance, and who in a state of intoxica-
tion meet with local injuries, often have erysipelatous inflammation in
consequence of them. Other subjects, who lead more regular lives,
experience, when they meet with similar injuries, healthy phlegmo-
nous inflammation.

It may proceed from a retention of morbid humours in the blood,
which, not being eliminated, are located in the capillary system, and
become a source of erysipelatous irritation.

Symptoms.

The skin is preternaturally red and shining, having a light or ro3y
tint in the early stage and slighter cases of the affection ; whence, in
some languages, it has received the popular appellation of the rose;
while, in other instances, it is of a bright scarlet, or even a deep and
livid red. The colour disappears on pressure, returning as soon as
the pressure is removed. If the skin alone be affected, there is
hardly any perceptible swelling, and no tension ; yet some difference
is perceived between the sound and the inflamed part, by passing the
finger over it. Erysipelas, however, is found by Lawrence to
be seldom confined to the skin, except in the slightest cases ; effu-
sion soon takes place into the cellular texture, causing a soft
swelling ; and this may be considerable, together with much ten-
sion and a shining surface, when a large part of the body or an entire
limb is involved. The inflamed part is hot and painful ; at first, a
stinging or itching is felt, which soon becomes a sharp, smarting and
burning sensation, with acute pain on pressure. The pain is not
so intense and unremitting as in phlegmon, nor is it attended with


St. Anthony's Fire — {Erysipelas.) 327

throbbing. This kind of inflammation often ends by resolution ; the
redness and other symptoms disappearing, and the skin recovering its
natural state, with or without desquamation of the cuticle. Frequently
serous or watery effusion takes place from the inflamed surface, ele-
vating the skin into smaller or larger vesicles, like those produced by
blisters ; or raising it by a soft, yellow, jelly-like deposite, which re-
mains slightly adherent to both the cutis and cuticle. The contents of
the vesicles are transparent, sometimes nearly colourless, but more
commonly yellowish ; sometimes they consist of a thin pus or mat-
ter, or they may exhibit a bloody or livid discoloration. The fluid
loses its clearness, becoming thicker, opaque, and whitish or yellow-
ish. The cuticle gives way ; the fluid escapes, and incrustations form,
which soon fall off", leaving the skin sound ; or they may lead to super-
ficial ulcerations. Erysipelas sometimes produces gangrene, but
this is of comparatively rare occurrence. So long as this inflamma-
tion is confined to the skin, it does not produce suppuration ; and the
affection of the cellular structure is too slight for that termination in
most cases of simple erysipelas. It may, however, become more
severe at one point ; and thus we occasionally see the formation of
abscess under the skin towards the decline or after the disappearance
of the general erysipelatous redness. This inflammation generally
attacks a considerable surface of the skin, the inflamed part being
neighbouring skin, declining and disappearing in the part first affected.
Thus, we commonly see the various stages of erysipelas existing to-
gether at the same time in different parts of the skin. The portion
last affected is red and swelled ; another part is vesicated ; while
others exhibit incrustation and desquamation. Sometimes it leaves
the part first affected, to appear in a distant situation. Its origin,
dcvelopement and complete termination, seldom take place in one and
the same spot. The neighbouring absorbent glands are frequently
inflamed, and red streaks are sometimes seen leading to them. —
(Lawrence, in Med. Chir. Trans, vol. xiv.)

A little before the appearance of the redness, and sometimes du-
ring several previous days, the patient experiences considerable in-
disposition, loses his appetite, has shiverings and violent pains in his
head, accompanied sometimes with vomiting, and always with
weakness and dejection. Frequently bilious complaints occur, at-
tended with bitter taste in the mouth, and fetid eructations from the
stomach. The tongue is moist, and covered with a yellow mucus.
The patient afterwards has a dry, parched skin, constipation, an ac-
celerated pulse, thirst, and other common symptoms of fever. Blood
drawn from a vein exhibits in a greater or less degree the inflamma-
tory character. " Often, particularly when the head is the seat of
erysipelas, the censorium is principally affected, and symptoms are
of the kind called nervous, such as pain and oppression of the head,
sleepiness, lethargy or delirium. The tongue in such cases is dry
and brown ; but, according to Lawrence, this state of the organ is
often owing principally to the circumstance of the patient breathing
entirely through the mouth ; the pulse is rapid and feeble, and there
i-8 great loss of muscular strength ; in short, the symptoms at length


328 St. Anthony's Fire — (Erysipclo

are those called typhoid. In other cases, the circulation and th.
voua system are not much affected ; hut there is pain in the epigastric
region, foul tongue, with had taste in the mouth, nausea and consti-
pation; that is, so many indications of disordered stomach and intes-
tinal canal, to which, as its cause, the local affection must be re-
ferred." — (Med. Chir. Trans, obs. xiv. p. G.) This last form of
the complaint has been termed by Desault and others bilious erysipe-
las.

When erysipelas attacks the face, it comes on with chilliness, suc-
ceeded by heat, restlessness, thirst and other febrile symptoms, with
drowsiness or tendency to coma or delirium, and the pulse is very
frequent and full. At the end of two or three days, a fiery redness
appears on some part of the face, and this at length extends to the
scalp, and then gradually down the neck, leaving a tumefaction in
every part the redness. has occupied. The whole face at length be-
comes turgid, and the eyelids are so much swelled as to deprive the
patient of sight. When the redness and swelling have continued for
some time, blisters of different sizes, containing a thin, colourless,
acrid liquor, ai'ise on different parts of the face ; the skin puts on a
livid appearance in the blistered places ; but in those not affected
with blisters, the cuticle, towards the close of the disease, falls off in
scales.

This disease has sometimes prevailed as an epidemic. It is stated
that in Toulouse it prevailed as an epidemic in 1716, and proved
almost as fatal as the plague.

Hippocrates mentions an erysipelas which spread among the peo-
ple, and proved very fatal. The whole arm, leg, &c, had their soft
parts in some instances almost entirely destroyed by mortification.

Common Treatment.

Bleeding, leeching, mercury, tartar emetic, blisters, deep incisions
with the lancet, &c.

In cases of bilious erysipelas, says a modern author, many modern
practitioners would be bolder with anlimonials than Desault, first by
imitating Richter, and giving an emetic at the commencement of the
attack, and then by exhibiting more freely either antimonial powder or
tartarized antimony, with a dose or two of calomel.

Reformed Practice.

From the derangement of the digestive organs, it is obvious that
purgatives should be given. Senna, manna and cream of tartar, with
a little frmirhsecd, (o prevent griping, answers a good purpose. A
dose of this should he given every other day, or twice a week, or ac-
cording to circumstances. During the day the patient may take a
strong decoction of elder flowers ; they are laxative, cooling and
alterative. These medicines, by \hc\r >deplf live and refrigerant ope-
ralion, diminish the inflammatory symptoms.

I have found that the vapour hath is attended with a very excellent
effect in this complaint. One single bath will sometimes remove all


St. Anthony's Fire — (Erysipelas.) 329

the heat, swelling, itching, &c. I think it is better when it is so con.
trived that the head, as well as other parts of the body, be exposed to
the heat or steam of the herbs.

The good effects, I think, depend simply upon the discharge of the
skin, or the perspiration produced. The acrid humours, which appear
to be the exciting cause of the complaint, are expelled from the sys-
tem, by restoring this secretion. If it be inconvenient to use that kind
of vapour hath which admits the application of steam to the head, the
common domestic vapour bath may be substituted.

Sudorific medicines, then, are indispensably necessary in the treat-
ment of St. Anthony's fire, or erysipelas.

External or local applications are also very valuable in every spe-
cies or stage of this disease. The inflamed parts may be often
anointed with the following 1 :

Take marshmallow and elder bark, equal parts, and a suitable quan-
tity ; simmer in spirits ; then cover with fresh butter ; simmer until
the leaves are crisp ; strain, and apply with a piece of linen or the
finger. This ointment allays the irritation and itching, and will sel-
dom be applied without decided benefit.

Some have an idea that any preparations of oil are injurious, but
this idea is not correct, as I have proved by ample experience. The
opinion has been formed, no doubt, in consequence of uniting with
greasy or oily substances acrid or stimulating agents.

The parts should be frequently washed with the following liquid or
tincture :

Take of the leaves of Celandine 1 oz.,

Irish whiskey, or, as a substitute, commor ichiskey or spirits, 1 pt.
Add the leaves, and after it has stood a few hours it is fit for
use. Let this be often applied, three or four times in the course of
the day.

When the extremities are the seat of erysipelas, and when the
swelling and inflammation are very great, the following will be found
a good application :

Take Borax, 1 drachm,

Superacetate of lead, A drachm,
Rain, or soft water, 1 porter bottle ;
Pulverize the articles, and add them to the water. Let linen cloths
be dipped in this mixture, and kept upon the parts affected.

But of all the articles or preparations which I have ever used for
erysipelas, in any stage of it, I have found a poultice made of the
slippery elm bark to be the most decidedly beneficial. Indeed, in this,
as well as every other inflammatory affection, it proves a sovereign
remedy. If the patient is in even the greatest distress, he experiences
relief as soon as it is applied. The superfine flour of the bark should
be mixed with pure milk ; and, what is sometimes preferable, butter-
milk or fresh cream, when it can be procured.

If this disease terminates in ulceration, or gangrenous blisters ap-
pear, a little of good brewer's yest must be added to the same poultice.
Where there is an ichorous discharge, apply a little of the elm bark,
powrlei- irb it. Some are in the habit of using burnt rye-


330 Si. Anthony's Fire — (Erysipelas.)

meal in this disease, which, no doubt, is in some degree serviceable.
A continuance in these means, in a short time will arrest the disease,
and soon remove it.

Nothing stimulating or heating should be given to the patient. A
cooling diet should be recommended, consisting principally of milk,
vegetables and ripe fruit.


CHAPTER XXIII.
aneurism — (Aneurisma.)


Description.

By the term aneurism, wc understand a pulsating tumour, situated
over some artery, containing blood, and formed by the dilatation or
rupture of the proper coats of the artery, internal and muscular.

Aneurisms are situated either externally or internally : that is,
they are either so situated on the limbs, as that access may be had to
them, and the nature of the disease clearly ascertained, or they are
bo placed in cavities of the body, such as the abdomen, chest, and
cranium, as to render the nature of the disease very often extremely
doubtful.

They are divided by writers into true and false. One kind is made
out to be that which depends on an extension or dilatation of the coats
of an artery, and is denominated the true aneurism ; and that which
proceeds from an effusion of arterial blood into the surrounding parts,
is called false.

Scarpa appears to entertain a different opinion of aneurisms from
other writers. " I have ascertained," says he, " in the most certain
and unequivocal manner, that there is only one kind or form of this
disease, viz. that formed by a solution of continuity or rupture of the
proper coats of the artery, with effusions of blood into the surround-
ing cellular substance ; which solution of continuity is occasioned
sometimes by a wound, a steatomalous earthy degeneration, a corroding
ulcer, or a rupture of the proper coats (the internal and muscular) of
the artery, without the concurrence of a preternatural dilatation of
these coats being essential to the formation of this disease, and there,
fore that every aneurism, whether it be internal or external, circum-

Scarpa draws the following conclusions : — " 1. That this disease is
invariably formed by the rupture of the proper coats of the artery*
2. That the aneurismal sac is never formed by a dilatation of the pro-
per coats of the artery, but undoubtedly by the cellular sheath, which
the artery receives in common with the parts contiguous to it ; over
which cellular sheath the pleura is placed in the thorax, and the peri-
toneum in the abdomen. 3. That if the aorta, immediately above
the heart, appears sometimes increased beyond its natural diameter,
this is not common to all the rest of the artery, and when the aorta in
the vicinity of the heart yields to a dilatation greater than natural, this
dilatation does not constitute, properly speaking, the essence of aneu-
rism. 4. That there are none of those marks regarded by medical
men as characteristic of aneurism from dilatation, which may not be
figure of the tumour. 5. That the distinction of aneurism into true

is onlv t] on of a false


332 Aneurism — (Aneurisma.)

theory ; since observation shows that there is only one form of the
disease, or that caused by a rupture of the proper coats of the artery,
and an effusion of the arterial blood into the cellular sheath which
surrounds the ruptured artery." — (See Treatise on Aneurism, by A.
Scarpa, transl. by J. H. Wisharl, Edin. 1808.)

Such were the inferences made by Scarpa, in 1804, one of the most
distinguished anatomists and surgeons of the present day upon the con-
tinent. It has been already stated, that, great as this authority is, several
eminent modern surgeons, as Richerand, Boyer, Dubois, Dupuytren,
Sabatier, Breschet, &c, did not yield to it, but still contended that in
some aneurisms the coats of the artery were dilated. These profes-
sors in France coincided with what has been usually taught upon this
subject in the surgical schools of Great Britain. Every lecturer here
true and false, or into some cases which are accompanied with dilata-
tion, and into others which are attended with rupture of the arterial
coats. A few years ago, Mr. Hodgson, of Birmingham, published a
valuable treatise on aneurism, in which work he differs from Scarpa,
and joins those surgical writers who believe in the occasional dilata-
tion of the coats of the arteries. — (S. Cooper.)

Partial as well as general dilatation (says Hodgson) frequently pre-
cedes the formation of aneurism in the arteries of the extremities. A
gentleman had a large aneurism in the thigh, which had undergone a
spontaneous cure. Upon examining the limb after death, the popliteal
artery was found to be thickened and covered with calcareous matter.
A small pouch, which would have contained the seed of an orange,
originated from the side of this artery. This little sac was evidently
formed by a dilatation of the coats of the vessel. A man died from
the sloughing of an aneurism in the ham ; in the femoral artery there
was a small aneurism about as large as a walnut. The external coat
was dissected from the surface of the tumour to a considerable extent.
The internal and middle coats were evidently dilated, and contributed
to the formation of the sac.

In many instances the most fatal accidents have happened, in con-
sequence of incisions having been made in aneurisms, which were
mistaken for abscesses because there was no pulsation. Vesalius was
consulted about a tumour of the back, which he pronounced to be an
aneurism. Soon afterward an imprudent practitioner made an open-
ing in the swelling, and the patient bled to death in a very short time.
Ruysch relates that a friend of his opened a tumour near the heel, not
supposed to be an aneurism, and the greatest difficulty was experienced
in suppressing the haemorrhage. De Haen speaks of a patient, who
died in consequence of an opening which had been made in a similar
swelling at the knee, although Boerhaave had given his advice against
the performance of such an operation. Palfin, Schlitting, Warner,
and others, have recorded mistakes of the same kind. (Sabatier, t. iii.
p. 167.)

Notwithstanding a pulsation is one of the most prominent symptoms
of an aneurism, it is not to be inferred, that every swelling which pul-
sates is unquestionably of this description.

Whenever an aneurismal sac of immoderate size beats violently and


Aneurism — ( Aneurisma. ) 333

for a long while against the bones, as the sternum, ribs, clavicle, and
vertebra), they are in the end invariably destroyed, so that the aneu-
rismal sac elevates the integuments of the thorax, or back, and pulsates
immediately under the skin. Scarpa, with the best modern writers,
attributes the effects to absorption in consequence of the pressure.

Aneurisms are common in the aorta, and they are particularly often
met with in the popliteal artery. The vessels which are next to these
the most usually affected, are the crural, common carotid, subclavian
and brachial arteries. The temporal and occipital arteries, and those
of the leg, foot, fore-arm and hand, are far less frequently the situations
of the present disease. But although it is true, that the larger arteries
are the most subject to the ordinary species of aneurisms, the smaller
arteries seem to be more immediately concerned in the formation of
one peculiar aneurismal disease, now well known by the name of the
aneurism by anastomosis.

Causes.

The causes of aneurisms operate either by weakening the arterial
parieties or by increasing the lateral impulse of the blood against the
sides of these vessels. It is said to be in both these ways that the
disease is occasioned by violent contusions of the arteries, the abuse
of spirituous drinks, frequent mercurial courses, fits of anger, rough
exercise, exertions in lifting heavy burdens, &c. In certain persons
aneurisms appear to depend upon a particular organic disposition.

Richerand affirms, that out of twelve popliteal aneurisms which he
had seen in hospital or private practice, ten were caused by a violent
extension of the leg.

In many instances it is difficult to assign any cause for the commence-
ment of the disease. Among the circumstances which predispose to
aneurisms, however, the large size of the vessels may undoubtedly be
reckoned. Those trunks which are near the heart are said to have
much thinner parietes, in relation to the magnitude of the column of
blood with which they are filled, than the arteries of smaller diameter ;
and since the lateral pressure of this fluid against the sides of the
arteries is in a ratio to the magnitude of these vessels, it follows that
aneurism must be much more frequent in the trunks near the heart
than in such as are remote from the source of the circulation. —
(Richerand, Nosogr. Chir. t. iv. p. 72. 2d. ed.) The whole arterial
system is liable to aneurism ; but, says Pelletan, experience proves
that the internal arteries are much more frequently affected than those
which are external. — (Clinique Chir. t. i. p. 54.)

The curvatures of the arteries are another predisposing cause of
the disease ; and, according to Richerand, such cause has manifest
effect in determining the formation of the great sinus of the aorta,
the dilatation which exists between the cross and the origin of this
large artery, and is the more considerable the older the person is :
Monro even thought that one half of the old persons have an aneurism
at the beginning of the aorta. And with respect to aneurisms in gene-
ral, which are preceded by calcareous depositions, thickening, and
disease of the coats of the vessel, they are most frequently met with


334 Aneurism — {Aneurisma. \

in persons of advanced age. Aneurisms from wounds are of course
often seen in individuals of every age. In old people the coats of tin
arteries are subject to a disease which renders them incapable of
making due resistance to the lateral impulse of the blood.

It was observed by Morgagni, that popliteal aneurisms occur with
particular frequency in postilions and coachmen, whose employments
oblige them to sit a good deal with their knees bent. In France, the
men who clean out the dissecting rooms and procure dead bodies for
anatomists, are said, almost all of them, to die with aneurismal dis-
eases. Richerand remarks, that he never knew any of these persons
who were not addicted to drinking, and he comments on the debility
which their intemperance and disgusting business together must tend
to produce. — (Nosogr. Chir, t. iv. p. 74. 2d. edit.) It may be pro,
duced by wounds, contusions, debility, &c.

Symptoms.

the first sensation which the patient perceives, is an extraordinary
throbbing in some particular situations, and on paying a little more
attention, he discovers there a small pulsating tumour which disap-
pears when compressed, but returns again as soon as the pressure is
removed. The colour of the skin is not changed. The tumour now
continues gradually to increase until it attains a very great size.
There is beating, throbbing and pain. In proportion as it becomes
larger, the pulsations are less distinct, or become weaker, sometimes
they are entirely lost when the disease acquires a great magnitude.

the artery losing their dilatable and elastic quality in proportion as
they are distended and indurated, and, consequently, the aneurismal
sac being no longer capable of an alternate diastole and systole from
the action of the heart. The fact is also imputed to the coagulated
blood deposited on the inner surface of the sac, particularly in large
aneurisms, in which the motion of some of the blood is always inter-
rupted. Immediately such coagulated blood lodges in the sac, pres-
sure can only produce a partial disappearance of the swelling. This
deposition of lamellated coagulum in the aneurismal sac is a circum-
stance of considerable importance ; for it has been well explained by
Hodgson, that it is the mode by which the spontaneous cure of the
disease is in most instances effected. " One of the circumstances
which, in the most early stage, generally attend the formation of
aneurism, (says this author,) is the establishment of that process
which is the basis of its future cure. The blood, which enters the
sac soon after its formation, generally leaves upon its internal surface
a stratum of coagulum, and successive depositions of the fibrous part
of the blood gradually diminish the cavity of the tumour. At length
the sac becomes entirely filled with this substance, and the deposition
of it generally continues in the artery which supplies the disease,
forming a firm plug of coagulum, which extends on both sides of the
«ac to the next important ramifications that are given off from the ar-
tery. The circulation through the vessel is thus prevented, the blo.V


Aneurism — (Aneurima.) 335

is conveyed by collateral channels, and another process is instituted,
whereby the bulk of the tumour is removed, &c.

As the tumour grows larger, the communication of blood into the
artery, beyond the tumour, is lessened ; hence, in this state, the
pulse below the swelling becomes weak and small, and the limb fre-
quently cold and swelled. The pressure of the tumour on the adja-
cent parts may also produce a variety of symptoms, such as inflam-
mation, ulceration, absorption of bone, &c.

In the advanced stage of an aneurism, the skin is found extremely
thin, and confounded, as it were, with the aneurismal sac. The ca-
vities of the cellular substance near the disease, are either filled with
serum or totally obliterated by adhesion. The adjacent muscles,
whether they lie over the aneurism or to one side of it, are stretched,
displaced, dwindled, and sometimes confounded with other parts. It
is the same with the large nervous cords situated at the circumference
of the tumour : they are pushed out of their natural situation, dimi-
nished in size, sometimes adherent to the outside of the sac, and so
changed as scarcely to admit of being known again. Lastly, the
cartilages and the bones themselves are not exempt from the mischief
which the aneurismal swelling produces in all the surrounding parts :
they are gradually destroyed, and at length not the least trace of their
substance remains, just in the same way as the bones of the cranium
are destroyed by fungous tumours of the dura mater. Even the car-
tilages of the larynx and rings of the trachea are sometimes destroyed ;
this tube is pierced, and the blood escapes into it, or the aneurism
bursts into the oesophagus. — (Boyer.)

While an aneurism is small and recent, it does not generally cause
much pain, nor seriously impede the functions of the limb. But when
it has increased, several complications are produced. Thus, the drag-
ging of the saphenal nerve, by femoral aneurisms, frequently occa-
sions acute pain in the course of this nerve as far as the great toe.
The distention of the sciatic nerve, by the popliteal aneurism, some-
times brings on intolerable pain, which extends to all the parts to
which this nerve is distributed, and which can hardly ever be appeased
by the topical use of opiate applications. The compression of the
veins and lymphatics gives rise to swelling, numbness and coldness
of the limb. And, finally, the long continued pressure of the aneu-
rism on the neighbouring bones, causes their destruction. — [Boyer,
t. ii. p. 105.)

In true aneurism, the coats of the artery are not always in the same
state, the kind of changes observed depending upon the progress of
the tumour. In the early stage of the disease, either the whole
cylinder of the vessel, or only a part of its circumference, is dilated ;
but this period is generally of short duration, especially in arteries of
middling size, because their middle coat is Capable of less resistance
than that of the larger arteries, like the aorta, where this coat is yel-
lowish, firm, and very elastic. As Breschet remarks, this difference
of resistance in the middle coat of the aorta and the branches given
ofT from it, accounts for the rarity of true aneurisms either in the
small arteries or those of middling size, and their greater frequency
in the principal trunk of the arterial system.


336 Aneurism — (Aneurisma.)

At length, in consequence of the increasing distention, some of the
coats of the artery possessing the least elasticity give way, and these
are found to be the internal and middle coats, while the external one
still makes resistance and continues to be more and more dilated by
the lateral impulse of the blood.

The second stage of true aneurism is that which is mostly met
with ; that in which the tumour increases more rapidly, and therefore
begins to excite greater attention. The disease, when it has attained
this form, is in point of fact no longer a true aneurism, but a case
which Monro distinguished by the name of the consecutive or external
mixed false aneurism. In this stage the patient's life is endangered,
and death often brought on by the rupture of the tumour. Examina-
tions of the dead subject, under these circumstances, have frequently
led to mistaken notions ; and doubtless if various swellings of this
kind had not been found in different degrees or stages in the same in-
dividual, one might be disposed to join Scarpa in the belief, that no
aneurism consists of a dilatation of all the arterial coats. — (Breschel,
Fr. trans, of Mr. Hodgson's work, p. 128, 129.)

The false aneurism is always attended with at least a rupture, or
giving way of the inner coat of the vessel, and usually with a breach
in both litis and the muscular coat, the outer clastic tumour forming
the pouch in which the blood collects. But after the swelling has
attained a certain size, this coat also bursts, and then the blood either
the condensation of the surrounding cellular membrane. False aneu-
risms, when produced by a wound or puncture, are of course, from the
first, attended with a division of all the coats of the vessel. This form
of the disease is often seen at the bend of the arm, where the artery
is exposed to injury in venesection or bleeding. In this circumstance,
as soon as the puncture is made, the blood gushes out with unusual
force, and in a bright scarlet, irregular, interrupted current ; flowing
out, however, in an even and less rapid stream when pressure is ap-
plied higher up than the wound. These last are the most decisive
marks of the artery being opened ; for blood may issue from a vein
with great rapidity, and in a broken current, when the vessel is turgid
and situated immediately over the artery, which imparts its motion to
it. The surgeon endeavours precipitately to stop the haemorrhage by
pressure, and in general a diffused false aneurism is the result. The
external wound in the skin is closed, so that the blood cannot escape ;
but this does not hinder it from passing into the cellular substance.
The swelling thus produced is uneven, often knotty, and extends up-
wards and downwards along the track of the vessel. The skin is also
usually of a dark purple colour. Its size increases as long as the
internal haemorrhage continues, and if this should proceed beyond
certain bounds, mortification of the limb ensues. Such is the diffused
false aneurism from a wound.

in the following manner. When proper pressure has been made in
the first instance, so as to suppress the haemorrhage, but the bandage
has afterward been removed too soon, or before the artery has healed,
the blood passes through the unclosed wound, or that which it has


Aneurism — (Aneurisma.) 337

burst open again, into the cellular substance. As this has now be-
come agglutinated by the preceding pressure, the blood cannot diffuse
itself into its cells, and consequently a mass of it collects in the vi-
cinity of the aperture of the artery, and distends the cellular substance
into the form of a sac. Sometimes, though not often, the circum-
made in the artery. This chiefly happens when the aperture in the
vessel is exceedingly small, and consequently when the hemorrhage
takes place so slowly that the blood, which is first effused, coagulates,
and prevents the entrance of that which follows into the cavities of the
cellular substance, and of course its diffusion. False aneurisms, pro-
ceeding from the rupture of the inner coats of an artery, are always

external coat of the artery ; or, in case this has given way, it is com.
posed of an artificial pouch, formed among whatever parts happen to
be in the vicinity of the burst artery. This cavity is filled with blood,
and situated close to the artery, with which it has a communication.
Hence, in false aneurisms, a throbbing is always perceptible, and is
more manifest the smaller such tumours are. The larger the sac be-
comes, the less elastic it is, and the greater is the quantity of laminated
coagula in it ; so that in very large aneurisms of this kind, the pulsa-
tion is sometimes wholly lost.

The tumour is at first small, and on compression entirely disap-
pears ; but returns as soon as this is removed. It also diminishes
when the artery above it is compressed ; but resumes its wonted mag-
nitude immediately such pressure is discontinued. When there is
coagulated blood in the sac, pressure is no longer capable of produ-
cing a total disappearance of the tumour, which is now hard. The
swelling is not painful, and the integuments are not changed in colour.
It continually increases in size, and at length attains a prodigious
magnitude.

The following are generally enumerated as the discriminating dif-
aneurism readily yields to pressure, and as readily recurs on its re-
moval ; the false one yields very gradually, and returns in the same
way ; and as it contains coagula, it cannot be reduced in the same
degree by compression as an aneurism formed by a dilatation of the
arterial coats, where such strata of coagulated blood arc usually ab-
sent. Frequently a hissing sound is audible when the blood gushes
into the sac. The pulsation of the false aneurism is always more
feeble, and as the tumour enlarges, is sooner lost than that of the true
one, which throbs after it has acquired a considerable volume. — (See
Richter's Anfangsgr. b. i.

Discrimination.

Aneurismal tumours may be known by the pulsation being per-
ceptible over every part ; whereas, in tumours which derive their pul-
sation from being situated over an artery, it is only to be felt in the
direction of the vessel.


338 Aneurism — (Aneurisma.)

Also, if the aneurism be recent, by pressing your finger on the af
tery which leads to the aneurism, you will empty the aneurismal bag ;
but if the aneurism be of long duration, and the pulsation is but slight,
place yourself by the side of the patient, observe carefully the size
of the swelling, and by pressing your finger on the artery above, you
will see the aneurism sink down as you make the pressure, though the
sac will not entirely empty itself ; and upon raising your hand sud-
denly, you will observe a jet of blood rush into the aneurismal sac,
and raise it to its former height.

The following are the principal or the most formidable aneurisms :

Aneurism of the Heart,

An aneurism of the heart consists of a bag formed out of the parie-
tes of that organ, and in this bag an opening is formed, as in aneurisms
which take place in arteries.

In these unhappy cases, the only course you can adopt, is to enjoin
quietude, with mild and moderate diet. — (Cooper.)

Aneurisms of the Aorta.

Aneurisms of the aorta, are diseases of by no means unfrequent
occurrence ; and are, indeed, most truly to be dreaded, both by the
surgeon and the patient.

No affliction, in fact, can be more deplorable ; for, the sufferings
which they occasion hardly ever admit of palliation, and the instances
of recovery are so very few, that no consolatory expectations can be
indulged of avoiding the fatal end to which the disease naturally
hastens.

Aneurisms of the aorta vary in their situation ; sometimes arising
in one part, in other instances, at another ; more frequently, however,
at the arch of the aorta. — (Cooper.)

Popliteal Aneurism.

Popliteal aneurism, as its name implies, is situated in the popliteal
space of the ham ; it is the most common external one, and is charac-
terized by the symptoms lately drawn in illustration of external
aneurisms.

Femoral Aneurisms.

It is not an uncommon occurrence to meet with an aneurism of the
femoral artery, just below Poupart's ligament.

Axillary Aneurisms.
There may happen cases of aneurism in the axilla.

Carotid Aneurisms.

Aneurisms of the carotid artery may undergo a spontaneous rur<\
without am- sp'-inii? cnnspouenCFS to t^ ' >


Aneurism — (Aneurisma.) 339


t Common Treatment.

The method now adopted in the treatment of aneurism, is to make
an incision down to the artery, passing a ligature round, tying it, and
then closing the lips of the wound. This is done to prevent the en-
trance of blood into the aneurismal sac. But from the effect of this
operation, and from the various reports which have been detailed by
those who have performed it, (I mean honest reports, for many I have
found have been false,) I am led to doubt the propriety, or the utility
of the operation. I find, by strict inquiry, that more cases even on
record have been cured without an operation, or cured spontaneously
by the natural efforts of the system, without the least medicine what-
ever, than have been cured by a surgical operation, or tying the ar-
tery. A large proportion of the cases where an operation has been
performed, have proved fatal. Occasionally one has been reported
which has proved successful. But even such, I find, has often been
followed by the most serious, injurious, or fatal effects, such as morti-
fication of the leg, scirrhous enlargement, stiffness, and permanent
lameness.

Were I to give an account of the number of cases that have proved
fatal by a surgical operation, the catalogue would indeed be frightful.
My objections to the operation are as follow :

1st. The consequences arising from irritation or pain.

In some habits, and in some aneurisms, such a degree of pain or irri-
tation is produced that the patient is carried off at the time, or shortly
afterwards. In this city, some time ago, a woman died in about twen-
ty-four hours after an operation for a femoral aneurism ; and nume-
rous others might be mentioned.

2d. The second objection is the danger arising from haemorrhage.
The impetus of blood is so great after an artery has been tied, that
sometimes haemorrhage or bleeding takes place, and proves fatal.

3d. Mortification of the Limb. — If haemorrhage does not imme-
diately arise from the act of tying the artery, as soon as the ligature
or ligatures cut through it, mortification often takes place, and carries
off the patient.

4th. After the operation has been performed of tying the artery,
even if no such effects follow as above mentioned, in consequence of
the anastomosing branches not being sufficient to supply the limb with
blood below the aneurismal tumour, or in consequence of the want of
a due circulation, the temperature of the limb is diminished or re-
duced, mortification and sloughing takes place, and the limb or life of
the patient is endangered or lost. This happened in this city in the
case of a Mr. Parcells, who was operated upon for femoral aneurism
by Dr. M .

5th. Callus and stiffness of the limb.

Where an aneurism is situated upon any of the extremities, if the
circulation is cut off by tying the artery for an aneurismal tumour,
the whole limb frequently becomes not only cedematous and exceed,
ingly swelled, but it likewise becomes stiff, indurated, and so perma-
nently enlarged, that the use of it is entirely lost, and amputation

Vol. II. 2 T


340 Aneurism — (Aneurisma.)

is proposed as the only remedy. This occurred in the case of Rich-
ard White, of Brooklyn, who was operated upon for a popliteal aneu-
rism ; and such deplorable consequences resulted from it, that ampu-
tation was proposed as the only alternative.

I objected to this operation, (for which I received a liberal share
of abuse,) and aftor about nine months, succeeded so far in reducing
the enlargement, and removing the stiffness of the limb, that he was
enabled to walk without crutches, and he now attends to his ordinary
business.

6th. I object to the operation, because it does not even in all
cases prevent the blood from passing into the aneurismal sac, by
which the pulsations and the tumour still continue in a greater or less
degree.

7th. I object to the operation again, because nature alone effects
more cures than are effected or performed by the operation.

8th. I object to it, because I have succeeded in curing it where an
operation has been proposed as the only alternative to save life,
and where a fatal event was predicted without such operation being
performed, by a most distinguished operator of this city.

9th. I object to it, because the operation is not only uncertain in the
event, but because it is excruciatingly painful, particularly under cer-
tain circumstances.

10th, and lastly. Because the operation may be resorted to, as an ex-
periment, when all other means fail, or as the last alternative.

According to Scarpa, the circumstances chiefly preventive of suc-
cess, especially in the popliteal and femoral aneurisms, are the follow-
ing : Rigidity, atony, or disorganization of the principal anastomoses,
between the superior and inferior arteries of the ham and leg ; some-
times depending on an advanced age, or on it together with the large
size of the aneurism, which by long continued pressure has caused a
great change in the neighbouring parts ; or sometimes on steatoma-
tous, ulcerated, earthy, cartilaginous disorganization of the proper
coats of the artery, not confined to the seat of the rupture, but extend-
ing a great way above and below the aneurism, and also to the princi-
pal popliteal recurrent arteries, tibial arteries, and, occasionally, to
portions of the whole track of the superficial femoral artery. Some-
times the pressure of a large aneurism renders the thigh-bone carious.
In such circumstances, the ligature is apt to fail in closing the trunk of
the artery ; and, if it should succeed, the state of the anastomosing
vessels will not admit of a sufficient quantity of blood being conveyed
into the lower part of the limb. Hence, when the patient is much
advanced in life, languid and sickly ; when the internal coat of the ar-
tery is rigid, and incapable of being united by a ligature ; when the
aneurism is of long standing and considerable size, with caries of the
os femoris or tibia ; when the leg is weak and cold, much swelled,
heavy, and cedematous, Scarpa considers the operation contra-indi-
cated.

I will now give a few cases that, are before me, that have proved
fatal in consequence of the operation.


Aneurism — (Aneurisma.) 341

Cask 1st- Aneurism of the Carotid Artery, related by Sir Astley

Cooper.

The first case is that of Mary Edwards, aged 44. The swelling
occupied two thirds of the right side of the neck, pulsated very strong-
ly, and the integument at the most prominent part of the tumour ap-
peared very thin. It had existed six months previous to the operation,
which was performed as follows : — On November 1, 1805, I made an
incision, two inches long, on the inner edge of the sterno mastoid
muscle, from the inferior part of the tumour to the clavicle, which
laid bare the omo and sterno-hyoideus muscles, which being drawn
aside towards the trachea, exposed the jugular vein. The motion of
this vein produced the only difficulty in the operation ; as, under the
different states of breathing, it sometimes presented itself to the knife
tense and distended, and then as suddenly collapsed. Passing my
finger into the wound, to confine that vein, I made an incision upon
the carotid artery, and having laid it bare, I separated it from the par
vagum, and introduced a curved anuerismal needle under it, taking
care to exclude the recurrent nerve on the one hand, and the par va-
gum on the other. The two threads were then tied about half an
inch asunder, being the greatest distance to which they could be se-
parated : on account of the short space, I did not divide the artery.
As soon as the threads were tied, all pulsation in the tumour ceased,
and the wound was superficially dressed.

Immediately after the operation she was seized with a severe fit of
coughing, which continued half an hour, when she became more
tranquil, and slept six hours during the following night. She con-
tinued in a favourable state until the eighth, when it was observed
that her left arm and leg were paralytic : she was restless, but had
not any pain in the head. 9th. Could not swallow solids, and felt oc-
casional pricking pain in the wound. 11th. Power of motion of the
left arm returned, and she appeared going on favourably. 12th.
The two ligatures came away with the intervening portion of artery.
She went on well until the 17th, the tumour reducing, and the wound
healing; when the wound again opened, the tumour increased and
was painful ; she had a violent cough, great difficulty in swallowing,
and a high degree of constitutional irritation. From this time she
gradually got worse, and died on the 21st.

CASE II.

Mr. Travers, in an operation which he performed for a popliteal aneu-
rism in a sailor, in Nov. 1813. A double ligature was passed under
the femoral artery. The ligatures were tied with loops or slip knots,
about a quarter of an inch of the vessel being left undivided between
them. All that now remained of the pulsation in the tumour was a
slight undulatory motion. Nearly six hours having elapsed from the
application of the ligatures, the wound was carefully opened, and the
ligatures untied and removed without the slightest disturbance of the
vessel. In less than half a minute afterward the artery became dis-
tended with blood, and the pulsations in the tumour were as strong as


342 Aneurism — (Aneurisma.)

they had been before the operation. Mr. Hutchison then applied two
fresh ligatures ; haemorrhage afterwards came on ; amputation waa
performed, and the patient died. — (See Practical Obs. in Surgery,
p. 102.)


The following cases were mentioned by Sir Astley Cooper. A man
underwent the operation for aneurism ; the femoral artery was tied ;
the pulsation ceased ; and the patient in a little while was supposed to
be cured of the aneurism, and discharged. Upon his return to la-
bour, however, a swelling arose in the ham, without pulsation. The
swelling subsided in consequence of rest : but afterward, while the
man was at work, the swelling returned with great pain. At length,
as Sir Astley conceived that there was no prospect of the limb be-
coming useful again, it was amputated. Upon an examination of the
parts, he found that the femoral artery, below the place of the ligature,
had been conveying blood. It does now and then happen (says he)
that a blood-vessel will arise from the artery close above the ligature,
and pass into the artery immediately below it, by which means the
circulation is produced. Sir Astley then referred to a specimen in
the hospital museum, where this fact is illustrated in the brachial ar-
tery. — (See Lancet, vol. i. p. 298.)

CASE IV.

Another example of the operation is reported in vol. xii. of the
Lancet. The carotid was tied above the aneurism by Mr. Lambert,
and Mr. Callaway, March 1st, 1827. On the third day, the tumour
seemed much consolidated, and reduced in size. On the 10th day,
there was some bleeding from the wound ; but it was suppressed by
the application of a compress wet with cold water ; and in a few days,
the swelling had entirely disappeared, and all that could be felt of it
on pressing the finger deeply down, was a small hard tumour, having
a very faint undulatory thrill. Unfortunately, this patient, also a fe-
male, fell a victim to haemorrhage on the 1st of May, in consequence
of ulceration extending.

case v.

Another instance, in which the internal iliac artery was tied, was
some time ago communicated to the public. The operation was per-
formed by Mr. Atkinson, of York, on account of a gluteal aneurism.
The following are a few of the particulars, as related by this gentle-
man : — Thomas Cost, aged 29, presented himself at the York County
Hospital, April 29th, 181T. He was a tall, strong, active bargeman,
not corpulent, but very muscular. He was enduring great pain from
a large, renitent, pulsating tumour, situated under the gluteus of the
right side ; an obvious aneurism. It had existed about nine months,
and was the consequence of a blow from a stone. In a consultation
with Dr. Lanson and Dr. Wake, the necessity of the operation was
determined upon, and it was performed on the 12th of May, without
any material difficulty or interruption. The artery being then tied,
the pulsation of the swelling entirely ceased.


Aneurism — (Aneurisma.) 343

The patient went on tolerably well for some time after the opera-
tion ; the pulse never exceeded 130, and after a time sunk to 85 or
90. He became exhausted, however, partly by the discharge, and
partly by haemorrhage, and died on the 31st of May, about nineteen
days after the operation.

CASE VI.

Dr. Jeffray, of Glasgow, was consulted in a case where the gluteal
artery had been wounded. He urged the propriety of tying the ves-
sel where it had been injured. This sensible advice was at first re-
jected, and when the friends at last consented, the operation was too
late, as, while preparation was making for it, the tumour burst, and
the patient expired in a few moments.

case vir.

Thenden also mentions an instance in which the gluteal artery was
wounded in the dilatation of a gun-shot wound, and the patient lost
his life. — (See Scarpa on Aneurtom, p. 407. 2d. edit.)

CASE VIII.

Professor Gibson had occasion to put a ligature round the iliac, in
an example of gun-shot wound. " The patient lived fifteen days
after the operation, and then died from peritoneal inflammation, and
from ulceration of the artery. The circulation in the limb of the in-
jured side was re-established about the seventh day after the artery
was tied."

Axillary Aneurisms.

Aneurisms occasionally take place in the axilla, and make it neces-
sary to tie the subclavian artery. A question here naturally present-
ing itself is, whether the surgeon should attempt the operation in an
early period of the disease, or wait till circumstances are urgent ; the
aneurism large and far advanced ; the arm cedematous and insupport-
ably painful, from the stretching of the axillary plexus of vessels ; the
patient worn out by suffering and loss of rest ; and the tumour in
danger of bursting? In all cases of aneurisms, unquestionably, there
is a certain chance of the disease getting well spontaneously ; and
one axillary aneurism, in a man in St. Bartholomew's Hospital a few
years ago, had certainly disappeared of itself, as was proved by the
account which the patient, while living, gave of his case, and by the
obliteration of the artery, found on inspection after death.

CASE IX.

Mr. Hunter's second operation for internal aneurism, was on a
trooper. Instead of using several ligatures, which were found hurt-
ful, he tied the artery and vein with a single strong one ; but un-
luckily the experiment was made of dressing the wound from the bot-
tom, instead of attempting to unite it at once ; and the event was, that
the man died of haemorrhage.


344 Aneurism — (Aneurisma.)


The operation of tying the artery below the tumour was repeated
by Sir A. Cooper, not for an aneurism of the femoral artery in
the groin, but for an aneurism of the external iliac, where tying
the artery above the swelling was impracticable. The femoral ar-
tery was therefore tied immediately below Poupart's ligament, be-
tween the origins of the epigastric and the profunda. The pulsations
of the tumour continued ; but the progress of the disease was checked.
After a time, indeed, the swelling decreased, and this in so consi-
derable a manner, that hopes began to be entertained that perhaps the
external iliac artery might soon admit of being tied above the disease.
The ligatures came away without any unfavourable occurrence, and
when the wound was healed, the patient was sent into the country for
the benefit of the change of air. Afterward, however, the tumour
gave way ; an extravasation of blood took place in the abdomen and
cellular membrane of the pelvis, and the patient died.

CASE JI.

December 10, 1826, Mr. Wardrpp attempted a similar operation
for the cure of a carotid aneurism in another woman, aged 57. Some
reduction of the throbbing, and other relief, are stated to have en-
sued ; but the patient died of a complication of complaints on the 23d
of the following March, 1827. " Up to the day of her death, a tu-
mour remained in her neck of about the bulk of an almond, which
pulsated strongly, felt very thin in its coats, and its contents could
be readily squeezed out of it, but returned rapidly, when the pressure
was removed." — (p. 33.) In the dissection, it deserves notice, that
the carotid was found completely pervious, and that no cicatrix nor
other appearance, enabled Mr. Bennet to ascertain the precise point
to which the ligature had been applied. — (p. 35.)

CASE XII.

Mr. C. Bell met with a case in which the femoral artery divided
below the profunda into two equal branches, the most superficial of
which was alone noticed and tied in the operation. The patient died
of constitutional disturbance, arising from inflammation in the whole
course of the sartorious.

CASE XIII.

Mr. Vincent tied the carotid trunk for an aneurism. A single
ligature was applied ; the pulsation in the tumour did not entirely
cease, at first, when the artery was tied, but it did so two days
afterward ; and the swelling was rapidly diminishing. The li-
gature came away about three weeks after the operation, and there
was every hope of a cure ; but, between the fourth and fifth week, a
considerable swelling occurred between the wound and the jaw, im-
peding deglutition, but not the breathing. This state was followed
by febrile symptoms, increased difficulty of swallowing, an attack of
coughing, and impeded respiration. In the hope of affording relief,
an incision was made in the tumour, from which a small quantity of
pus and coagulum issued ; but it was in vain, for the patient was
dying.


Aneurism — (Aneurisma.) 345


CASE XIV.

John Townly, a tailor, aged thirty-two, addicted to excessive in-
toxication, of an unhealthy and peculiarly anxious countenance, was
admitted into St. Bartholomew's hospital on Tuesday, the 2d of No-
vember, 1809, on account of an aneurism in the right axilla. Imme-
diately the artery was tied, the pulsation of the swelling ceased ;
the arm of the same side continued to be freely supplied with blood,
and was even rather warmer than the opposite arm. The opera-
tion, which was severe from the length of time it took up, was, after
a time, followed by considerable indisposition. The patient died
about five days after its performance. After the artery had been
tied, the oedema of the arm and the aneurismal tumour partly subsi-
ded ; and, on examination after death, nothing but the vessel was
found included in the ligature.

CASE XV.

In Dr. Colles's first case, the artery was tied before it reached the
scaleni muscles, as the tumour, which was in the right subclavian ar-
tery, extended from the sternal origin of the sterno mastoid muscle
along the clavicle, a little beyond the arch of that bone, and rose near-
ly two inches ahove it, in a conical form, the apex of the cone being
situated at the outer edge of the foregoing muscle. After a tedious
dissection, it was found that only a quarter of an inch of the artery was
sound, and on this portion the ligature was placed. Great difficulty
was encountered in passing it round the artery, and the pleura was
supposed to have been slightly wounded. Before tightening the liga-
ture the breathing became laborious, and the patient complained of
oppression about the heart. These symptoms, indeed, were so violent,
that it was judged prudent not immediately to tighten the ligature.
On the fourth day, however, the artery was constricted, when the
pulse at the wrist ceased, the patient not seeming to suffer much from
what had been done. The patient then went on pretty well till the
ninth day, when he was seized with a sense of strangling, and pain
about his heart, and, becoming delirious, died nine hours after the be-
ginning of this attack. On dissection, the aorta was found diseased,
and the disease extended into the subclavian artery.

In another instance, Dr. Colles tied this vessel at the point where
it emerges from between the scaleni muscles, without any particular
difficulty. The operation, however, was soon followed by a train of
severe symptoms, delirium and mortification, and the patient died on
the fifth day. — (See Edin. Med. and Surg. Journ. January, 1815.)

With respect to tying the subclavian artery on the tracheal side of
the scalenus, we have seen, that it was performed by Dr. Colles, and
the event was fatal. Descriptions of the operation may be found in
Mr. Hodgson's work, p. 382.

CASE XVI.

Mr. Abernethy was under the necessity of tying the trunk of the
carotid, in a case of extensive lacerated wound of the neck, where the


346 Aneurism— (Aneurisma.)

internal carotid and the chief branches of the external carotid were
wounded. The patient at first went on well : but in the night he be-
came delirious, and convulsed, and died about thirty hours after the
ligature was applied. This case fell under my own notice, and the
inference which I drew was, that the man died more from the great
quantity of blood which he lost, and the severe mischief done to the
parts in the neck, than from any effect of the ligature of the artery on
the brain.

CASE XVII.

In another instance in which the common carotid was tied, on ac.
count of a wound of the external carotid by a musket ball, complica-
ted with fracture of the condyle and coracoid process of the lower
jaw, every thing went on favourably until the 7th day after the opera-
tion. Neither* the intellectual faculties nor the functions of the or-
gans of sense had been at all disturbed. But at that period, stupor,
confusion of ideas, restlesness, a small unsteady pulse, discolouration
of the face, and loss of strength came on, followed in the evening by
a violent paryoxysm of fever. On the eighth day three copious hae-
morrhages took place from the whole surface of the wound, and on
the ninth the man died. — (See Journ. Central de Med. 8fc. par Se~
dillot.)

CASE XVIII.

Scarpa mentions one unfortunate patient who was killed by a
knife being plunged in a carotid aneurism, on the supposition that
the case was an abscess.

CASE XIX.

Deschamps tied the femoral artery below an inguinal aneurism ;
but the progress of the disease, instead of being checked, seemed to
be accelerated by the experiment. The operator was obliged, as a
last resource, to open the tumour, and try to take up the vessel. In
this attempt the patient lost a large quantity of blood, and died eight
hours afterward.

CASE xx.

Dr Mott operated upon a person, on the 11th of June, 1818, in the
New-York hospital, for a subclavian aneurism. On the twenty-third
day, haemorrhage came on from the wound : it was stopped by the
introduction of lint, and the employment of pressure. About twenty-
four ounces of blood were lost, whereby the patient was so depressed
that the pulse was no longer distinguishable. On the twenty-fourth
day, in the evening, he lost four ounces more blood ; on account of
his restlessness and the painful state of his arm, two grains of opium
were administered to him. After one or more returns of bleeding, he
died on the twenty-sixth day.

CASE XXI.

The arteria innominala was tied by Graefe, in the hospital at Ber-
lin, on the 5th of March 1622, on account of a subclavian aneurism.
The carotid was exposed and traced down to the innominata, to which
a ligature was applied by means of a blunt tenaculum constructed for
the purpose, the vessel being tied at most about an inch from the cur-
vature of the aorta, and two inches from the heart. As soon as the


Aneurism — ( Aneurisma . ) 347

ligature was tightened, the pulsation of the arteries of the right arm,
right carotid, and right temporal artery ceased ; at the same instant
the throbbing of the aneurism stopped, and the tumour became flaccid.
The constriction of the cord produced no disturbance of any function.
The patient went on so well for several weeks afterward, that no
doubt was entertained of his recovery. However, when the wound
was nearly healed, haemorrhage came on, and though it was suppress-
ed, and hope began to be again indulged, the bleeding recurred, and
the patient died on the sixty-seventh day. — (See Journ. der Chirurgie,
von C. F. Grdefe, and Ph. v. Walther, b. 3. p. 596, &c, b. 4. p. 587.)

The example in which the carotid was tied by Dr. Fricke, in the
hospital at Hamburgh, for the cure of »u diseased parotid, is reported
in the Lancet, No. 182. Some diminution of the swelling, and in-
creased power of swallowing, followed ; but suppuration took place,
and the case ended fatally.

The limits of this work will not permit me to insert more cases
which have proved fatal. Nearly all these were selected from
Cooper's Surgical Dictionary. I might, were it necessary, give a
sufficient number to constitute a volume. Some might wish us to
insert some cases in which an operation has proved successful, but
these, in the first place, are very scarce, or difficult to find, and in the
next place, when any such do occur, they are so emblazoned abroad,
that others are induced to perform the operation so frequently that
much injury is the consequence of it.

Of the Spontaneous Cure and General Treatment of Aneurisms.

The obliteration of the sac in consequence of a deposition of co-
which the spontaneous cure of aneurism is in most instances effected.
The blood soon deposites upon the inner surface of the sac a stratum
of coagulum ; and successive depositions of the fibrous part of the
blood by degrees lessen the cavity of the tumour. At length, the sac
becomes entirely filled with this substance, and the deposition of it
generally continues in the artery on both sides of the sac as far as the
giving off of the next large branches. The circulation through the
vessel is thus prevented ; the blood is conveyed by collateral chan.
nels ; and another process is instituted, whereby the bulk of the tu-
mour is removed. — (On the Diseases of Arteries, <fec. p. 114.) Such
desirable increase of the coagulated blood in the sac is indicated by
the tumour becoming more solid, and its pulsation weak or ceasing
altogether.

Another mode, in which the disease is spontaneously cured, hap-
pens as follows : an aneurism is sometimes deeply attacked with in-
flammation and gangrene ; a dense, compact, bloody coagulum is
formed within the vessel, shutting up its canal, and completely inter,
rupting the course of the blood into the sac. Hence, the ensuing
sphacelation and the bursting of the integuments and aneurismal sac
are never accompanied by a fatal haemorrhage ; and the patient is
cured of the gangrene and aneurism, if he has strength sufficient to

Vol. II. 2 U


348 Aneurism — (Aneurisma.)

bear the derangement of the health necessarily attendant on so con-
siderable an attack of inflammation and gangrene.

When a patient dies of haemorrhage, after the mortification of an
aneurism, it is because only a portion of the integuments and sac has
sloughed, without the root of the aneurism, and especially the arterial
trunk, being similarly affected. For cases illustrative of this state-
ment, refer to Hodgson on Diseases of Arteries, p. 103, &c.

A third way, in which an aneurism may be spontaneously cured, is
by the tumour compressing ^the artery above, so as to produce adhe-
sion of its sides, and obliteration of its cavity. This mode of cure
must be uncommon : it. has been adverted to by Sir E. Home, Scarpa,
Dr. John Thomson and othavs ; but some facts, tending to prove it,
have been collected by Mr. Hodgson, and are published in his useful
work.— (See p. 107, &c.)

The treatment of aneurism (says Mr. Hodgson) consists in the ob-
literation of the cavity of the artery communicating with the sac, so
that the ingress of the blood into the latter is either entirely prevented,
or the stream which passes through it is supplied only by anastomos-
ing branches, and consequently the force of the circulation is so much
diminished, that the increase of the tumour is prevented, and the de-
position of coagulum is promoted. By the absorption of its contents,
and the gradual contraction of the sac, the cure is ultimately accom-
plished. The blood is conveyed to the parts, which it is destined to
supply, by collateral vessels, some of which, being giadually enlarged,
constitute permanent channels for the circulation. The obliteration
of the artery is effected by the excitement of such a degree of inflam-
mation in its coats as shall produce adhesion of its sides.

I will now mention a few spontaneous cures of aneurism, by way
of contrast.

CASE I.

Patients should know that this disease, says Cooper, sometimes un-
dergoes a spontaneous cure, for it is a great consolation for them to
know this. I have known many examples of this change in aneu-
rism, and will relate one of the most striking : George Bowie was
admitted into Guy's hospital, with an aneurism in the groin. When
the aneurism had acquired considerable magnitude, as he was sitting
by the fire in his ward, he suddenly felt a snap in the swelling ; his
leg and thigh became immediately swollen and useless, and the pa-
tients assisted him into bed. The pulsation in the swelling continued
for four days, and then ceased ; the swelling of the limb gradually
subsided, and four months afterwards he was able to walk, with
scarcely any lameness : I met him one day in the square of the hos-
pital, and, asking him how he was, he said, " Sir, I am pretty well of
my old complaint, but I have got something alive in my inside ;" and
upon applying my hand to his abdomen, I found a pulsating tumour.
He died from the bursting of this aneurism into the abdomen. I ex-
amined him, and we have the parts preserved in the museum of St.
Thomas's hospital. The aneurism of the thigh had burst under the
fascia lata, and the accumulated blood pressed the aneurism on the
femoral artery, so as to interrupt the circulation. Both the iliac and


Aneurism — (Aneurisma.) 349

upper part of the femoral artery were obliterated, and the blood found
its course by the internal iliac vessels.

I have seen spontaneous cures of aneurism produced without any
circumstance which would readily explain the cause : one case with
Sir William Wizard, at Walworth ; a case of popliteal aneurism ;
and another of popliteal aneurism in Guy's hospital. Mr. Ford has
published cases of this description ; and Dr. Baillie has met with
similar instances. I once saw, in Guy's hospital, a man who had
an aneurism in the thigh, which had existed several years ; which
still retained its pulsation, but had ceased to increase, although it had
not diminished : this man died of some other disease ; and, upon ex-
amination, I found it to be aneurism produced by the general dilatation
of the coats of the artery.

case n.

From a foreign periodical, entitled, Medical Facts and Observations. By George
Wilkinson, Surgeon.

A tall, muscular man, about, fifty years of age, was unfortunate
enough to have the artery wounded in the opening of the basilic vein,
in June, 1788. After a very large quantity of blood had escaped
per solium, a considerable degree of pressure was made on the ori-
fice, and the blood was staid. There was an ecchymosis that ex-
tended from the shoulder to the wrist. A tumour, which had a strong
pulsation in it, immediately began to be formed, and continued to in-
crease till it equalled the size of a common cricket ball, and the
limb at the same time grew (to use his own words) painfully lifeless.

It had been told him that nothing but an operation could give a
chance of preserving his arm ; but as he had formerly lived near
Petworth, and had been a patient of mine, he chose to show me the
case before he came to a determination concerning it.

When I saw him, it was about six months after the accident had
happened, and I received from him the above account.

it, somewhat less indeed than a cricket ball, but hard, and with a
strong pulsation in it. The arm was shrunk and cold, and the wrist
entirely pulseless.

The patient having repeatedly assured me that the tumour had been
somewhat larger, and the pulsation still stronger, I did not hesitate to
dissuade him from the operation, at least for the present.

I recommended the constant use of the flesh brush only to the whole
arm, and desired to see him regularly every fortnight.

Within a few weeks the arm grew a little warm ; in about three
months I could perceive a tremulous kind of motion at the wrist ; the
tumour very gradually diminished in size, its pulsation grew weaker,
and the motion at the wrist stronger in the same proportion ; the
bardness of the tumour likewise increased as the tumour itself be-
came less, so that when it was diminished to the size of a small apple,
it was perfectly incompressible: indeed in this situation it was so
long stationary, that I began to doubt whether it would ever vary
from it ; but within the last eight or nine months even this extreme
hardness has gradually abated, and the decrease gone on, till the tu-


350 Aneurism — ( Ane urisma.)

mour is become no larger than a full-sized hazel-nut, and not harder
than a steatoma. The pulse too is now as strong in that arm as in
the other ; the arm itself is as large, and the power of using it, un-
less on very laborious occasions, (which he is cautioned to avoid,)
nearly equal.

It is too evident to admit of any doubt that the circulation is prin-
cipally carried on in its usual course through the artery, and not
through the capillary and anastomosing branches of it.

This case may perhaps be thought to add some little weight to two
of the conclusions drawn by Mr. Ford in his excellent paper on the
same subject, " that nature is capable of effecting the cure of aneu-
risms solely by her own efforts, and that the cure by nature is a per-
manent one :" but although I am unable to form a satisfactory idea of
the manner in which nature has so completely effected the cure in the
present instance, I still hope the case may not be altogether unworthy
of regard ; for I confess myself of Mr. Watson's opinion, that the
history of the disease is not complete, and that every aneurismal
tumour will be found to have its peculiarities, and of course may
afford useful information.

CASE III.

Aneurism cured by Valsalva's method.
[Translated from the Quebec Medical Journal, No. 5, for 1827.]

Miss Antouard, aged 18 years, enjoying good health, on the 18th
of June, 1825, received a stab with a dagger, which wounded the left
carotid artery below the superior extremity of the sternum, the in-
strument having been directed inwards and downwards. A very large
quantity of blood was immediately diffused in the cellular tissue of the
lateral and anterior part of the neck. She swooned away on the spot.
The fourth day afterwards, this mass of blood was almost entirely ab-
sorbed, but an aneurismal tumour made its appearance at the border
of the sternum. Dr. Souchier saw the patient a month after the ac-
cident, and the tumour was then as large as the lady's two fists. The
pulsations were nearly equal throughout every part of the tumour ex-
cepting opposite the orifice of the artery. The tumour caused no
other inconvenience than that which resulted from its weight, which
gave rise to a continual headach.

Dr. Souchier, finding it highly imprudent to have recourse to an
operation, owing to the heat of the season, and especially on a tumour
situated so deep under the sternum, therefore he determined to put in
practice the following principles:

1. To diminish the quantity of the blood, and consequently its
stimulating action on the heart ; thus diminishing its projectile force,
checking the rapidity with which the blood escaped through the orifice
of the artery, and causing a continual vibration of the walls of the
tumour, which was an obstacle to the coagulation of the blood within
the tumour.

2. To second this effect, by general and local bleeding, by the use
of cold, by pressure, and, most of all, by digitalis. The force of the
circulation being thus diminished, a coagulation would take place, and
perhaps a complete cure.


Anewitm — (Aneurisma.) 35 1

Miss Antouard willingly submitted to this treatment, and he pre-
of mallows. This was all the drink and nourishment he allowed. 2d.
Frictions over the abdomen and inside of the thighs morning and
evening, with eight grains of fol. digitalis, previously pulverized, and
macerated twenty-four hours in a sufficient quantity of saliva. 3d. The
application of twelve leeches every day close to the tumour ; and af-
terwards, to procure a greater discharge from their bites, by means
of emollient fomentations. The tumour was also to be covered with
bandages dipped in a cold solution of acetate of lead, renewed fre-
quently, so that their temperature should always be below that of the
skin. 4th. To augment the pressure on the tumour with the bottom
of a tumbler, held by the hand of an assistant. 5th. Lastly, absolute
rest and silence.

Aug. 2, 1825. Fourth day of treatment. The pulsations of the
tumour are more central.

Aug. 12. The volume of the tumour diminished to three fifths of
its original size.

Aug. 18. The tumour is no longer visible ; the pulsations, never-
theless, discernible ; the skin thickened over the tumour ; pulse
fifty.

Dr. Souchier revisited his patient fifteen days after. It required an
expert hand to distinguish in what place the artery was cicatrized,
there being but a very small elevation on the artery. The pulses for-
ty-eight, extreme hunger, and the remedies have become disagreeable,
some of which are suspended, and she is permitted a little fruit and
a piece of chicken, besides her ordinary diet. The digitalis is reduced
to twelve grains per day ; compression, silence and moderate exercise
days after their cessation, and in greater abundance than at the first
time.

A month after, no trace of a tumour could be discovered. The
young lady, by degrees, took a little more exercise and nourishment,
without experiencing any inconvenience, and finally ceased using any
remedies. In last December and January, she felt neither pain nor
inconvenience about the part where the tumour was situated ; and the
union of the sides of the artery was regarded as complete.


Petit mentions that the advocate Vieillard had an aneurism at the
bifurcation of the right carotid, for the cure of which he was or-
dered a very spare diet, and directed to avoid all violent exercise.
Three months afterward the tumour had evidently diminished ; and at
last it was converted into a small, hard, oblong knot, without any pul-
sation. The patient having died of apoplexy seven years afterward,
the right carotid was found closed up and obliterated from its bifurca-
tion, as low down as the right subclavian artery. — (Acad, des Sciences
de Paris, an. 1765.) Haller dissected a woman whose left carotid
was impervious. — (Opuscula Pathol, obs. 19. tab. 1.) An example
. of the total closure of both carotids in consequence of ossification, is
•tated by Koberwein, to be recorded by Jadelot.


.'{52 Aneurism— {Aneurisma. )

case v.

Whenever the ulcerated, lacerated, or wounded artery, says
Cooper, is accurately compressed against a hard body like the bones,
it ceases to pour blood into the surrounding cellular sheath, because
its sides, being kept in firm contact, for a certain extent above and be-
low the breach of continuity, become united by the adhesive inflam-
mation, and converted into a solid ligamentous cylinder. Molinelli,
Guattani and White, have given examples and plates illustrative of this
fact. When aneurisms get well spontaneously, the same fact is ob-
served after death, as Valsalva, Ford, &c. have demonstrated. I
have myself seen, in St. Bartholomew's hospital, an instance in which
a man had had a spontaneous cure of an aneurism in the left axilla,
but afterward died of haemorrhage from another aneurismal swelling
under the right clavicle : the artery on the left side was found com-
pletely impervious. My friend Dr. Albert had under his care, in the
York hospital, Chelsea, a dragoon, who recovered spontaneously of
a very large aneurism of the external iliac artery : the tumour
sloughed, discharged about two quarts of coagulated blood, and then
granulated and finally healed up. Paoli relates a similar termination
of a popliteal aneurism. Moinichen and Guattani relate other exam-
ples. Hunter found the femoral artery quite impervious and oblite-
rated at the place where a ligature had been applied fifteen months
before. Boyer noticed the same fact in a subject eight years after
at the bifurcation of the right carotid : the subject having afterward
died of apoplexy, the vessel, on dissection, was found closed up and
obliterated, from the bifurcation as far as the right subclavian artery.
Desault had an opportunity of opening a patient, in whom a sponta-
neous cure of a popliteal aneurism was just beginning : he found a
very hard bloody thrombus, which extended for three finger-breadth*
within the tube of the artery above the sac, and was so tirm as to re-
sist injection, and make it pass into the collateral branches.

CASE VI.

Popliteal aneurisms, as well as other external tumours of the same
nature, stand (he best chance of a spontaneous cure, when any cause
induces a general, violent and deep inflammation all over the swelling ;
for then the communication between the sac and the artery is likely to
become closed with coagulating lymph, and the pulsation of the tu-
mour to be suddenly and permanently stopped. If in this state the
disease sloughs, and the patient's constitution holds out, the coagulated
blood in the sac and the sloughs are gradually detached, leaving a
deep ulcer, which ultimately heals. An example, in which a popliteal
aneurism was cured by such a process, is related in the Trans, for
the Improvement of Med. and Chirurgical Knowledge, vol. ii. p. 268.

CASE VII.

A celebrated case, says Cooper, completely established the im-
portant fact, that simply taking off the force of the circulation is suf-
ficient to cure an aneurism, as the tumour is afterward diminished
and removed by the action of the absorbent vessels.


Aneurism— (Aneurisma.) 353

In order to confirm the same fact, Sir E. Home related a case of
femoral aneurism which got well without an operation, but on a similar
principle to what occurs when the artery is tied. A trial of pressure
had been made without avail. The tumour became very large, and
such inflammation took place in the sac and integuments that mortifi-
cation was impending : no pulsation could now be felt in the tumour,
or the artery above it. The correct inference of Sir E. Home was,
that a coagulum, which we know always occurs in an artery previously
to mortification, seemingly to prevent bleeding, had formed in this in-
stance, and in conjunction with the effusion of coagulable lymph about
the root of the aneurism, had kept the blood from entering the sac.

CASE VIII.

Pelletan also cured a large axillary aneurism, which was deemed
beyond the reach of operative surgery. On the thirteenth day, the
patient was reduced to a degree of weakness which alarmed many of
the observers. From that time, all pulsation in the tumour ceased.
The contents were gradually absorbed ; and the patient returned to
his former laborious life with his arm as strong as ever. The pulse
at the wrist was lost in consequence of the obliteration of the axillary
artery, and the limb only receiving blood through the branches of the
subclavian artery.

ADDITIONAL CASES.

Pelletan records the cure of one popliteal aneurism by compression
and absolute repose during eleven months, (t. i. p. 115.) Boyer re-
lates two instances. {TraitC des Mai. Chir. t. ii. p. 204.) One is
mentioned by Richerand. (Diet, des Sciences Med. t. ii. p. 96.) The
practice of Dubois is said to have furnished several examples of the
same success ; (vol. cit. p. 97.) and a case, in which Dupuytren ef-
fected a cure by compressing the femoral artery by means of an in-
strument applied just above the place where the vessel perforates the
tendon of the triceps muscle, is detailed by Breschet. — (Fr. trans, of
Mr. Hodgson's work, t. i. p. 249, &c.)

Two cases of aneurism are reported by a surgeon in Baltimore,
which were cured by the efforts of nature alone, the particulars of
which I am unable now to give.

Mr. H , a mcthodist minister, of New Jersey, called upon me

some years ago, with an aneurism of the carotid artery. He was not
disposed at that time to have any thing done for it, and although the
tumour was large, the pulsations great, accompanied with very unfa-
vourable symptoms, which threatened the most imminent danger, still
it gradually grew better, and I believe he is now well.

There are cases of this kind, or spontaneous cures of aneurism,
to fill a volume ; but it is unnecessary to insert any more. I think it
must appear evident, that, even admitting that medical treatment avails
nothing in the disease, that more reliance is to be placed upon the
powers of nature alone, or that more cures are performed by it, than
by a surgical operation, or tying the artery above the tumour.

If, then, the evidence preponderates against the operation for aneu-
rism, and in favour of the efforts of nature alone, how much more doeB


354 Aneurism — (Aneurisma.)

it preponderate against it, when we take into consideration the addi'
tional prospect of a cure by aiding her salutary efforts ? The balance
appears to me to be in favour of dispensing with the knife, when I take
into view, the danger and uncertainty of the operation, and the great
probability of curing the disease by the combined aid of nature and
art.

I shall now give the treatment which I pursue in cases of aneurism.
Although the resources of nature are very great in curing all com-
plaints, I wish it not to be understood that art is incapable of aiding
her salutary efforts. It is our duty carefully to watch her progress,
and, when her struggles are ineffectual, to assist her. And this is
particularly applicable to aneurisms of all kinds. The first attempt
should be to cure the disease by compression. This has succeeded in
some instances, particularly when the tumour is small and compres-
sible ; but when very large, I have found it to aggravate the symp-
toms. Pressure may be applied in any convenient manner. When
an aneurism is upon a limb, a piece of lead, bone, ivory, or wood,
may be covered with linen, and laid directly over the artery above
the tumour, and secured by a bandage, to be compressed as much as
the feelings of the patient will permit. The tourniquet may be used
for this purpose, or any other suitable contrivance, which will operate
without retarding the return of blood through the veins.

This will sometimes effect a cure, by exciting adhesive inflamma-
tion in the walls of the aneurismal sac, by which it will be removed.
Or it may be cured by the coagulum, which is produced in conse-
quence of such pressure.

In order that pressure may succeed, the coats of the vessel at the
place where it is made must be sufficiently free from disease to be
susceptible of the adhesive inflammation. When the arterial coats
around the root of the aneurism are much diseased, Scarpa considers
them as insusceptible of the adhesive inflammation, although com-
pressed together in the most scientific manner, and even when tied
with a ligature, which only acts by making circular pressure on the
vessel.

During this process, a suitable course of regimen must be pursued,
and such medicine taken as is calculated to prevent inflammation.

Another method has been practised in some cases with success,
the credit of which has been given to Valsalva, and one interesting
cure is detailed in this chapter, which proved successful by follow-
ing his directions. It consists in moderating the force of the circula-
tion by low diet, bleeding, laxative medicines and opiates. A num-
ber of successful cases, treated in this way, are also on record. Aneu-
risms within the thorax and abdomen, acknowledged to be without
the reach of operative surgery, have been cured by this treatment, or
rather, perhaps, by the efforts of nature.

When, by these or similar means, the tumour continues to enlarge
and grow worse, it is then that we must rely almost exclusively upon
the resources of nature, and a vigorous antiphlogistic course of treat-
ment. It is upon this principle or treatment that we must depend
for the cure.

1st. The patient must be freely purged, and to be repeated two or


Aneurism — (Aneurisma.) 355

three times a week. The common physic, combined with a little
cream of tartar, is the best preparation to give.

2d. Sudorifics. — As there is much inflammation usually attending
the complaint in its most aggravated form, moderate perspiration will
be necessary, to lessen the heat and pain, or to moderate the violence
of arterial action. An opiate may be combined with a sudorific or
diaphoretic, for which give the diaphoretic powders. But where the
pain becomes excruciating, as is the case in some species of aneu-
risms, it becomes necessary to give powerful anodynes. An opium
pill, containing three or four grains, is scarcely sufficient to mitigate
the pain. The black drop is a good preparation of opium, and it must
be given in doses according to the urgency of the symptoms.

Local applications. — The tumour may be bathed with the discutient
ointment two or three times a day, after which apply the following :

Take wormwood and hops ;

Simmer in vinegar ; apply cool over the swelling, and often renew.

If it be a femoral aneurism, and the limb is very much swelled, let
it be fomented with the same.

The feet should also be bathed in warm ley-water, once or twice a
day. If it be cold, which is often the case for want of circulation, let
it be steamed over bitter herbs, and let frictions be applied with the
hand occasionally.

While these applications prove beneficial, let them be continued.
But, if there is no improvement in the aneurismal tumour, apply a
poultice made of the slippery-elm bark and weak ley. At the same
time, administer from twenty to twenty-five drops of the tincture of
digitalis, four or five times a day, in any kind of tea. Let the patient
take freely of infusions, or teas, of mint, catnip and other diluent
drinks. They aid very much in reducing inflammation by their
diuretic and diaphoretic properties. I have applied cups over the
aneurismal tumour and in its vicinity, where the pain, swelling, and
inflammation has been very great, and I think with some advantage.
As regards general blood-letting, I have no evidence that it possesses
any control over the disease.

Where it is necessary to give opiates to allay the irritation, it may
be tiecessary to give injections or clysters to evacuate the bowels.

Position. — The patient must be kept in a recumbent and quiet po-
sition, and if it is on an extremity, the limb must be a little flexed,
turned outwards, and made to rest upon a pillow.

Diet. — Nothing stimulating must be taken internally, as regards
food or liquids. The diet must be spare, and principally vegetable.
In short, all the ordinary means for subduing inflammation must be
promptly and rigidly adhered to ; for I conceive that art, in this dis-
ease, can do very little besides. Our reliance, in other respects,
must be upon the resources, or powers of the system.

After this course has been continued for some time, there will often
be an audible snap or report, sometimes almost as loud as a pistol,
(to use the expression of a patient,) when instantaneously the beating
and pain will cease, the swelling and inflammation subside, and gra-
dually diminish, until there is nothing left except a cartilaginous tumour
directly over the artery, which becomes, no doubt, obliterated.

Vol. II. 2 W


356 Aneurism — (Ancurisma.)

Now it is a very interesting inquiry, to know in what manner a cure
is thus effected. It appears to me, that after inflammation has existed
a certain length of time, the external coat of the artery, or rather the
cellular sheath of it, which forms a portion of the aneurismal sac,
ulcerates, or is ruptured from the impetus of the blood, which is
then diffused into the cellular substance, and subsequently taken up
by the absorbents, while, at the same time, coagulated blood is formed
in the tumour, and finally obliterates its cavity ; the circulation being
carried on below the tumour, by the anastomosing branches, or the
lateral blood-vessels, as in amputation.

Should this theory be correct, the idea would occur to us that, in
imitation of nature, we might expedite the cure, by rupturing the
artery with a probe, or passing a seton through it, on the same prin-
ciple that a ganglion is destroyed by bursting its sac. I, however,
leave this for the reflection of others.

I have thus given my treatment for different species of aneurism,
and I conceive that there is less danger in pursuing it, and a greater
probability of effecting a cure, than by a surgical operation, or tying
the artery. I will not, however, say that such operation should never
be performed, although 1 am led to doubt the propriety of it, both from
experience and observation ; and should the ordinary treatment be
found preferable lo this, 1 trust that I shall have the magnanimity to
acknowledge and adopt it. I wish to advance nothing that will not
bear me out by facts. I must, therefore, leave the subject to be in-
vestigated and tested by those who have candour and honesty enough
to do it.

In concluding this* chapter, I will relate an interesting case of fe-
moral aneurism, which will serve to illustrate the principle of treat-
ment here laid down.

Mrs. Grant, aged about forty, then residing in Reed-street, in this
city, was attacked with a throbbing and beating sensation in the thigh,
just below the groin, and over the femoral artery. It gradually in-
creased for several weeks, until the tumour became very great, and
the whole leg exceedingly swollen and enlarged. The pulsations
were very great, and the tumour almost lost in the surrounding par^s ;
extremely hard, and excruciatingly painful. The whole thigh, from the
groin to the knee, and particularly the upper portion of it, assumed a
very morbid and diseased state. The circulation was carried on very
feebly below the tumour, which rendered it very cold. She was now
confined to the bed, and such was the pain attending it, that she took
an ounce of laudanum during each night to procure relief. I was
called to attend her soon after its commencement, and so formidable
was it, that there appeared to be very little chance or prospect of
recovery. It appeared, too, that if an operation was performed, and
the artery tied, it must inevitably prove fatal, and I had not much
I was, therefore, at a loss to know what course to pursue. I took a
physician, or surgeon, to examine the limb, who immediately pro-
posed an amputation, to save the patient's life. About this time, one
of the neighbours requested Dr. Mott, of this city, to examine the dis-
ease, who, upon finding it an aneurism, immediately proposed aa


Aneurism — ( Aneurisma . )


357


operation, without which, he said, she could not live. To this, the
woman objected, and said, "the knife should never enter her flesh,"
let the consequences be what they might.

Taking every thing into consideration, the objections of the patient,
and the danger and uncertainty of the operation, I concluded that it
would be more prudent and safe to rely upon nature, aided by suitable
means, than to rely upon such operation. It appeared to me that the
chance of her recovery would be greater, and I therefore concluded
to abandon it, and wait the result. But when Dr. Mott found that both
myself and the patient were not disposed to take his advice, so anx-
ious was he to try the experiment of tying the artery, that he employed
another surgeon, and one or two private citizens, one of whom was
a minister of the gospel, to wait upon the patient, and to inform her
that except she submitted to the operation, it would certainly kill her.
She replied, that she was getting better under the prescriptions of her
present physician, and that she should not discharge him. Accord-
ingly, after this, I was permitted to treat the case without further in-
terference or molestation.

My applications were the same as before mentioned, with the addi-
tion that, a part of the time I applied the leaves of stramonium the
whole length of the leg, to assist in reducing the swelling and inflam-
mation. 1 also applied a tourniquet above the tumour over the femo-
ral artery, with directions that it should be tightened in case the tu-
mour should burst, as I feared it would, from the great swelling and
enlargement, together with the excessive pain and inflammation.

The tumour continued slightly to im-
prove for some time, when one night she
felt and heard a sudden snap or report in
the leg, from which time all the symp-
toms subsided, and she continued to im-
prove, till, two or three weeks after-
wards, there was nothing left of the
aneurismal tumour but a little hardness,
or, apparently, a cartilaginous tumour,
immediately over the femoral artery,
and which appeared to be the centre of
the swelling. Her leg, for some time,
was weak, but the strength gradually
returned, and she was soon able to walk
as well as ever. She has been per-
fectly sound for nearly fifteen years,
and 1 have several times exhibited the
patient to our school, when lecturing
upon this subject.

I herewith annex a plate, or figure,
representing the appearance of the aneu-
rism when I first commenced the treat-
ment of it. About two years after the
patient recovered, two surgeons called
upon her to know whether she conti-
nued well, and what means 1 employed
to effect the cure.


CHAPTER XXIV.

ru pture — ( Hernia. )


Description.

Hernia, or rupture, is the protrusion of any viscus from its proper
cavity. It has obtained various names from its situation, as the ingui-
nal, when it occurs in the groin ; the scrotal, when it occurs in the
scrotum ; the femoral, when it is situated under the crural arch, or
Poupart's ligament ; umbilical, when it occurs in the abdomen, or um-
bilical region ; ventral, when it is situated in some other part of the
parietes of the abdomen — most frequently in the linea alba, but some-
times in the linea semilunaris — a very rare complaint ; hernia conge-
nita, formed by a protrusion through the abdominal ring into the tunica
vaginalis testis, and can only happen in the cases where this cavity
remains continuous with the general cavity of the abdomen. The
protruded viscera are in contact with the testicle, the hernial sac be-
ing the tunica vaginalis. There are some instances of the bladder
and stomach escaping from their cavities, and forming hernial tumours.

If a portion of intestine forms it, it is called enterocele hernia intes-
tinalis, or gut rupture ; if a piece of omentum only, epiplocele hernia
omentalis, or caul rupture ; and if both intestine and omentum contribute
mutually to the formation of the tumour, it is called enter o-epiplocele, or
compound rupture.

If the piece of gut or caul descends no lower than the groin, it is
said to be incomplete, and is called bubonocele ; if the scrotum be oc-
cupied by either of them, the rupture is said to be complete, and
bears the name af oscheocele.

When the protruded bowels lie quietly in the sac, and admit of be-
ing readily put back into the abdomen, the case is termed a reducible
hernia ; and when they suffer no constriction, yet cannot be put back,
owing to adhesions, or their large size, in relation to the aperture
through which they have to pass, the hernia is termed irreducible. An
incarcerated, or strangulated hernia, signifies one which not only
cannot be reduced, or without great difficulty, and the consequence is,
often, that the contents of the intestine cannot be expelled, and in-
flammation takes place, and brings on alarming and fatal conse-
quences, if relief be not speedily obtained. It is a prevalent idea,
that the contents of the abdomen are protruded through some ruptured
viscus or part ; but this is a mistaken notion, as it arises from dilata-
tion, not rupture. Both the scrotal and femoral hernia pass out from
the abdomen by openings which are natural to every human body ; as
well those who have not ruptures, as those who have. The former,
that is, the scrotal, descend by means of an aperture in the tendon of
the external oblique muscle, near the groin, designed for the passage
of the spermatic vessels in men, and the ligamenta uteri in won.;


Rupture — [Hernia.) 359

and the latter made by Pourpart'a, or Fallopius' ligament, at the upper
part of the thigh, along with the great crural vein and artery.

Causes.

The causes of hernia are, debility of any "particular part of the pari-
etes of the abdomen, whether natural or the consequence of morbid
affections, and violent efforts by which the muscles of the abdomen
are made to contract forcibly upon their contents ; lifting heavy
weights, jumping, running, violent coughing, parturition, vomiting,
straining at stool, and many other analogous exertions of the muscles :
these are the occasional causes of hernia.

The causes of hernia are either predisposing or exciting. Among
the former, writers mention a pretematurally large size of the open-
ings, at which the bowels are liable to protrude ; a weakness and re-
laxation of the margins of these apertures ; a preternatural laxity of
the peritoneum ; an unusually long mesentery, or omentum, &c.
With regard to the abdominal ring, the transverse tendinous fibres
which naturally cross and strengthen its upper and outer part, are
much weaker in some subjects than others. No idea seems more
prevalent in books, than that taking a good deal of oil with our food,
is conducive to the formation of hernial diseases. Some of the al-
leged predisposing causes may justly excite skepticism ; but several
circumstances tend to prove, that a natural deficiency of resistance,
in any part of the parieties of the abdomen, promotes the occurrence
of hernia. Hence, persons who have had the peritoneum wounded
are very liable to the present disease ; (Richerand, Nosogr. Chir. t. iii.
p. 317. Schmucker, Vermischte Chir. Schriften, b. i. p. 197.) and
men are much more liable than women to inguinal hernia, evidently
from the larger size of the abdominal ring ; while, in women, as there
is a larger space for the protrusion of the viscera, below Poupart's
ligament, they are more exposed than men to femoral hernia.

With regard to the exciting causes, our knowledge is involved in less
doubt. The grand cause of this kind is the powerful action of the ab-
dominal muscles and diaphragm on the viscera. In feats of agility,
such as jumping, &c. the pressure which the contents of the abdomen
must often encounter, sufficiently accounts for their protruding at any
part, where the abdominal parieties do not make adequate resistance.
The same consideration explains why hernia very often takes place in
lifting and carrying heavy weights, running, vomiting, straining at
stool, parturition, &c. and in people who inhabit mountainous coun-
tries.

The diminution of the capacity of the abdomen, by the action of the
abdominal muscles and diaphragm, in many occasional exertions,
must take place in every body, by reason of the common habits and
necessities of life. But, as only a certain number of persons meet
with the disease, it is fair to infer, that either the exciting causes must
operate with greater force in them, than in the generality of people,
or else that their abdominal parieties have not been capable of the
ordinary degree of resistance. Many patients, who meet with her-
nia in making violent efforts and exertions, mav be in the forme*


360 Rupture — (Hernia.)

circumstance ; while others, whose viscera protrude from such tn
thintrs as coughing, sneezing, crying, &c, must be considered as
being under the influence of some predisposing cause. A gentle-
man, who has gained great honour by a most valuable treatise on her-
nia, remarks, that : ' hernia, which originates in predisposition, gene,
rally comes on gradually, and almost imperceptibly ; while those which
are produced by bodily exertions, are formed suddenly, and by the
immediate action of the exciting cause. The occurrence of the com-
plaint is often indicated, in the first instance, by a fulness, combined
with a sense of weakness, about the abdominal ring. The swelling
is increased by an action of the respiratory muscles, and disappears
on pressure, and in the recumbent position of the body. It gradually
finds its way through the tendon of the external oblique muscle, into
the groin, and afterward into the scrotum. When a hernia takes
place suddenly, it is generally attended with a sensation of something
giving way at the part, and with pain." — (Lav;rence on Ruptures, p.
42. 4th. edit.)

Upon the subject of the immediate cause of hernia, it is observed
by Scarpa, that several distinguished modern surgeons, as, for in-
stance, Warton, (Adenograph, cap. xi.) Benevoli, (Dissertazioni Chirur-
gische, 1.) Rossius, (Acta Nat. Cur. t. ii. obs. 178.) Brendel, (l)e Her-
niarum Natalibus,) and Morgagni, (DeSed. et Caus. Morb. epist. xliii.
art. xiii.) consider a relaxation and elongation of the mesentery as
the principal cause of hernia in general, and of the bubonocele in
particular. Hence, say they, the whole mass of intestines, or only a
portion of an intestine, descends against the inner orifice of the in-
guinal ring, presses against this opening, and gradually makes its
way out of the abdomen. Debility, causing relaxation of the muscu-
lar fibres, is unquestionably the principal and immediate cause of
hernia or rupture.

Symptoms of Hernia in general.

The general symptoms of a hernia, which is reducible, and free from
strangulation, are, an indolent tumouf^lt some point of the abdomen,
most frequently descending out of the abdominal ring, or from just be-
low Poupart's ligament, or elso out of the navel ; but, occasionally,
from various other situations, as will be presently explained. The
swelling often originates suddenly, and is subject to a change of size,
being smaller when the patient lies down on his back, and larger
when he stands up, or holds his breath. It frequently diminishes
when pressed, and grows large when the pressure is removed. Its
size and tension often increase after a meal, or when the patient is
flatulent. In consequence of the unnatural situation of the bowels,
many patients with hernia are occasionally troubled with colic, con-
stipation and vomiting. Sometimes, however, ,the functions of the
viscera seem to suffer little or no interruption.

Sometimes the contained parts may be known by the symptoms.
But, as Mr. Lawrence justly remarks, this discrimination is often dif-
ficult, and even impossible, when the hernia is old, large and very
tense : for, in cases of this description, the viscera experience con-


Rupture — ( Hernia. ) 36 1

siderable changes in their figure and state, while the thickened her-
nial sac prevents an accurate examination hy the hand. — (On Rup-
tures, p. 40. 1th. ed.)

If" the case be an enlerocele, and the portion of intestine be small,
the tumour is small in proportion; but, though small, if the gut be
distended with wind, inflamed, or have any degree of stricture made
on it, it will be tense, resist the impression of the finger, and give
pain upon being handled. On the contrary, if there be no stricture,
and the intestine suffer no degree of inflammation, let the prolapsed
piece be of what length it may, and the tumour of whatever size, the
tension will be little, and no pain will attend the handling of it. Upon
the patient's coughing, it will feel as if it were blown into, and in
general it will be found very easily returnable. — (Pott.) A guggling
noise is often made when the bowel is ascending. An enterocele is
also generally characterized by the uniformity of its surface and its
elasticity.

If the hernia be an epiploccle, or one of the omental kind, the tu-
mour has a more flabby, and a more unequal feel ; it is in general
perfectly indolent, is more compressible, and (if in the scrotum) is
more oblong, and less round, than the swelling occasioned in the
same situation by an intestinal hernia ; and, if the quantity be large,
and the patient adult, it is, in some measure, distinguishable by its
greater weight. In very young subjects, the contents of a hernia are
generally intestine, and but seldom omentum. — (A. Cooper, Lectures,
vol. iii. p. 8.)

If the case be an entero-epiplocele, that is, one consisting of both
intestine and omentum, the characteristic marks will be less clear
than in either of the simple cases; but the disease may easily" be
distinguished from every other one, by any body in the habit of ma-
king the examination. — (Pott, p. 28.)

As the smooth slippery surface of the intestine generally makes its
reduction easier than that of the omentum, we may infer, with Mr.
Lawrence, " that if a portion of the contents slip up quickly and with
noise, leaving behind something which is less easily reduced, the case
is probably an entero-epiplocele." — (Op. cit. 4th. ed. p. 47.)

On the subject of prognosis, Mr. Pott remarks, that the age and
constitution of the subject, the date of the disease, its being free or
not free from stricture or inflammation, the symptoms which attend
it, and the probability or improbability of its being returnable, neces-
sarily produce much variety.

If the subject be an infant, the case is not often attended with much
difficulty or hazard, the reduction being easy as well as the descent;
and though, from neglect or inattention, the bowel may fall down
again, yet it is as easily replaced, and mischief seldom produced : Mr.
Pott says seldom, because he has seen an infant, one year old, die of
a strangulated hernia, which had not been down two days, with all
rtified intestine. For other examples of strangu-
lated hernia in very young infants, refer to Goocifs Chir. IT oris, vol.
ii. p. 33 : 1 on Ruptures, 4th. edit. p. 77 ; Edin. Med. and

Surgical Journal, vol. iii. p. 47U, -

" If the patient he adult, and in the vigour of life, the consequences
of neglect or mal-treatment, are more to be feared than at any other


362 Rupture — (Hernia.)

time, for reasons too obvious to need relating. The great and prin-
cipal mischief to be apprehended, in an intestinal hernia, is an in-
flammation of the gut, and an obstruction to the passage of the ali-
ment and faeces through it ; which inflammation and obstruction are
generally produced by a stricture made on the intestine. In very old
people, the symptoms do not usually make such rapid progress, both
on account of the laxity of their frame, and their more languid circu-
lation ; and also because their ruptures are most frequently of ancient
date, and the passage a good deal dilated : but then, on the other
hand, it should also be remembered, that they are by no means ex-
empt from inflammatory symptoms ; and that if such should come on,
the infirmity of old age is no favourable circumstance in the treatment,
which may become necessary." — (Pott.)

If the disease be recent, and the patient young, immediate reduc-
tion, and constant care to prevent another protrusion, are the only
means whereby it is possible to obtain a perfect cure.

Treatment.

1st. In reducible hernia.

The first thing to be done will be to return the protruded parts into
their original cavity, by making gentle pressure upon the hernial tu-
mour, and this is in general most easily effected in a recumbent posi-
tion. There is very little inconvenience attending this complaint,
while the protruded viscera can be easily returned. It may be trou-
blesome both from the bulk of the swelling, and from the intestinal
derangements which are apt to take place ; but, independent of these
circumstances, it may exist throughout life, without causing more
than slight inconvenience. But this state cannot be depended upon,
as, from various causes, such as straining, lifting, coughing, &c, the
parts may be displaced from their natural situation, and become ex-
ceedingly difficult to reduce, and be attended with very serious, if
not fatal consequences. The patient, therefore, should immediately
return the parts, and then take proper means to secure them, to pre-
vent them from being displaced. There have been several contri-
vances to effect this, such as various kinds of bandages and trusses.
A truss, in general, of proper mechanism, is best adapted to the pur-
pose. By its permanent pressure upon the opening, the parts are
prevented from descending, and a permanent cure is often effected.
A Doctor Hull, of this city, has invented a truss which answers as
well, or better than any I have seen, although there is said to be
some as good, or better than this.

Dr. Hull claims for himself the merit of accomplishing the true in-
dications in the surgical treatment of reducible hernia, by the four
following distinctive peculiarities embraced in his truss, viz.

1st. The concave internal surface of the rupture pad, from its pres-
sure being greatest at the circumference, tends constantly to approxi-
mate the hernial parietes, affording them rest and mechanical support.

2d. The combined hinge and pivot mode of connexion between the
spring and pad, by means of a tenon and mortice so constructed as
to preserve a double hinge and limited joint acting in every direction,
thereby securing the uniform pressure of the spring on the pad, and


Rupture — (Hernia.) 363

sustaining the same nice coaptation of the pad and rupture opening,
as well under the varied ordinary muscular actions as when the body
is in a recumbent posture.

3d. The graduating power and fixture of the pad to the spring, ren-
dering, as will be readily perceived, the condition of the pad perfectly
controllable, even to nameless minuteness. Also resulting from this
mechanism is the advantage of accommodating a large truss to a
small person ; hence the facility of supplying, without disappoint-
ment, persons at a distance.

4th. The double inguinal truss being simply the addition of another
pad attached to a short elastic metallic plate : this plate with its pad
move on the main spring by the same power of adjustment and fixture
as the first pad, the pressure of the pads being graduated at pleasure
by an intervening cork wedge.

It is calculated for all classes, even infants, and is worn with a great
deal of ease and comfort by the patient. In some cases, bandages
answer a better purpose than a truss, as some persons are unable to
wear them. They answer often best for children, and may be made
for umbilical hernia, bypassing apiece of leather of a suitable width
around the body, and drawn sufficiently tight by means of straps and
buckles, and made to press moderately upon a pad or cushion, stuffed
with wool, hair, or cotton. The diameter or size of this cushion
should be large enough to prevent danger of its being displaced, or of
its sliding or slipping from the hernial tumour.

Many years ago, in consequence of great fatigue in practice, I ex-
perienced some symptoms of a hernia. Being unable to wear any
kind of a truss, I invented a simple bandage, which I found very
effectual, and which has cured the complaint. It consists simply in a
piece of buckskin, about six inches in width, made to pass around the
body, and to be securely fastened by straps. One or two pieces of
the same, of a suitable width, are fastened to the back part of this
bandage, over or near the spine, and which pass between the legs,
and are secured before, in like manner, directly over the seat of the
hernia. A pad about twice as long as it is broad is to be secured or
fastened to the bandage.

After the protruded parts are replaced, which must be done by
laying in a recumbent position, the bandage is to be applied. The
first that I made, I placed the pad upon the straps, which were fas-
tened before, to secure the bandages which pass between the legs. I
know not how this may answer in general, but, in my own case, it
proved very effectual. In my complaint, it appeared that the omen-
tum had only passed through the internal abdominal ring, which con-
stituted a hernia only in its forming or incipient stage. The bandage
may be taken off* at night, or continued, as the patient may prefer.
When a truss is applied, and the patient is ruptured in both groins,
one that is doubled should be used ; one spring going quite round the
body, and terminating in two pads, one over each aperture. Should
the truss slip upwards, a strap may be passed between the thighs,
which will prevent it.

With respect to the application and use of trusses, the following in-
structions seem to merit attention :

Vol. II. 2X


864 Rupture — (Hernia.)

1st. A truss should never be first applied, or changed, except whew
the patient is in the horizontal posture, and it is known with certainty
that all the contents of the rupture are completely reduced.

2d. The first applications of a truss should always be made under
the superintendence of the physician himself; and care should be
taken to put on the instrument in such a manner that the lower third
of the pad will compress the neck of the hernial sac against the os
pubis, while the upper portion will compress the abdominal ring. The
practitioner should also make the patient acquainted with the right
manner of applying the truss ; the principles on which it keeps up
the bowels, and affords a chance of a radical cure ; the requisite cau-
tions to be observed, &c. When a patient first begins to wear a
truss, he should be particularly careful not to be guilty of any impru-
dent exertions, and it behooves him to observe most attentively that
the instrument does not slip from its proper situation. It will also be
necessary for him to pay attention to the instrument being neither too
tight nor too loose.

3d. The patient ought to be provided with at least two trusses,
which should be changed every morning, in bed. In order to save
the truss, especially in fat persons, who perspire a great deal, it is a
good plan to lay a soft piece of calico under the pad.

4th. An uneasiness about the ring, which always gives rise to a sus-
picion that a portion of intestine or omentum is protruded, makes it
proper to take off the truss, carefully examine the parts, and reduce
them if they have descended.

5th. When the skin is excoriated by the truss, the part may be
cured by sprinkling upon it the powder of elm-bark, or bathing the
part with an astringent lotion. It will also be right to protect the ex-
coriated place with a piece of linen put under the truss.

6th. When the pressure of the truss excites affections and swellings
of the spermatic cord and testicle, either the thigh-strap must be re-
laxed, or the lower part of the pad made less prominent. And when
strong pressure is absolutely necessary to keep the hernia reduced,
the pad should have an excavation in it over the spermatic cord.
Whoever wears a truss, should be careful to employ it day and night,
without interruption, so that there may be no opportunity for the her-
nia to protrude again. If, under the employment of a truss, the rup-
ture once descends again, either a strangulation happens from the
narrowness of the neck of the sac, or, at all events, the hope of a ra-
dical cure, which may have been entertained for years and months, is
destroyed in a moment ; for experience has put it beyond all doubt,
that by the continual, unremitted use of a truss, and the steady reten-
tion of the contents of the hernia, the neck of the hernial sac and
the ring may be gradually lessened in diameter, until they are en-
tirely closed, and a radical cure of the rupture effected. This is
more frequently observed in young subjects, seldom in adults, and
scarcely ever in persons of advanced years. But trusses must be
worn a long while ; nor should the patient venture to lay aside their
use till after many cautious attempts ; beginning the experiment at
first only in the night-time, and not making it in the day till after a
considerable period from the time when he first thinks himself safe.


Rupture — (Hernia.) 365

The longer and more attentively a truss is worn, the greater is the
hope of a radical cure. — (Callisen, Syst. Chir. Hod. t. ii.)

Sometimes there is great debility and inflammation about the parts,
and when this happens, cooling and tonic applications may be employed.

Various means have been proposed to effect a radical cure of her-
nia in this condition. Some have recommended the patient to lie
placed several weeks in a recumbent position, to give an opportunity
for the opening to be permanently closed. Others have recommended
the application of caustic to the parts, and some cutting down and
applying a ligature.

There was a person in some part of this state, very famous for the
cure of ruptures ; and from the statements made to me of his sue
cess, I obtained his treatment. I found it to consist in applying to
the rupture, two or three times a day, simply the oil of eggs, obtained
by boiling them very hard, and pressing them between two pewter
plates. I have never used it, and therefore cannot speak of its effects.

A preparation has been used in Europe, by a few practitioners,
which, from the account given, and the properties of the article re.
commended, promises more benefit than any other application. I
shall give an account of it, taken from the Edinburgh Medical and
Surgical Journal.

Mr. Lizars on the Decoction or Extract of Oalc Bark in Hernia. — For
these many years past, I have used for reducible hernia, either in the
adult male, female, or in children, a strong decoction of oak bark,
with wonderful success. In men I have succeeded in curing them
from birth to seventy-five years of age, and in women to fifty years
of age. Children are very easily cured by this means, particularly
of the umbilical hernia.

The manner of preparing the decoction is, to macerate a few
pounds of oak bark, in a sufficient quantity of cold water, for twelve
or twenty-four hours, then to put both bark and solution into a large
boiler, and to keep the fluid at the boiling temperature, over a gentle
fire, for two or three days, adding, when required, boiling water from
time to time, so that the bark may be always covered. The intention
is to extract all the virtues of the bark. The bark, after this slow de-
coction, should be removed, washed with more boiling water, which is
to be added to the strong decoction, and reduced to the consistence
of nearly an inspissated juice. When used, it should be warmed, to
suspend the astringent matter ; the hernia must be previously re-
duced ; then the groin bathed or splashed, and the truss applied imme-
diately after. The application should be repeated three or four times
a day. In this way I have succeeded in curing hernia of many
years standing, in the course of a few weeks. In general, it requires
a perseverance of three months. A case of double rupture, one of
which the patient had laboured under for twelve years, was cured in
nine days. He was thirty-six years of age, and had been invalided
out of the public service for the complaint. In umbilical hernia, so
common to children, it succeeds very soon.

The modus operandi appears to be, first, the corrugation of the skin
and contraction of the muscles ; secondly, increased determination to
the part ; thirdly, a deposition of substance, most probably cellular sub.
stance, which eflectually shuts up the aperture. That there is a con-


366 Rupture — (Hernia.)

traction of the muscles, we are entitled to conclude, from the tumoar
not so readily protruding after each application of the decoction.
That there is a local determination, is evident from the stimulus ap-
plied, and the heat produced. Lastly, that a deposition of substance
takes place, we are entitled to infer, by the treatment proving effectual
in the cure of crural hernia, where no muscular contraction can take
place to any extent.

This invaluable remedy was mentioned to me by a merchant in
this neighbourhood, who cured himself after having laboured under
the disease for many years. In 1757, a hospital was constituted,
near Westminster bridge, for ruptured people, and a Mr. Lee, of
Arundel-strcet, was appointed surgeon. This gentleman is"said to
have been successful in curing men belonging to the army and navy,
after they had been invalided and sent to Chelsea and Greenwich
hospitals. These men were returned fit for the service. One was
seventy-four years old, and had been ruptured for ten years. I can
find no trace of the treatment adopted by this gentleman ; but it is
possible that it may have proceeded on the same principles.

Of Irreducible Hernia.

Ruptures are very often irreducible, when they are not in a state
of strangulation. The chief circumstances which prevent their return
are, an increase of bulk, and preternatural adhesions to surrounding
parts. Bands formed of coagulating lymph pass in some cases in
various directions through the hernial sac, and water, in many cases,
collects in considerable quantity, rendering it necessary to tap the
tumour for its evacuation.

Irreducible hernias must, in a great measure, be left to themselves.
The inconveniences arising from the bulk are considerable, and there
is constant danger of strangulation. This risk is diminished in many
cases by the great dilatation of the ring, but it nevertheless exists, and
should render the patient extremely cautious of all violent exertions,
and he should especially guard against costiveness. A suspensory
bag, such as is used in cases of swelled testicles, or hydrocele, will
be found to obviate some of the unpleasant effects of the tumour.
Cases considered as irreducible hernia have in some instances been
gradually returned into the abdomen, in consequence of long confine-
ment to bed and frequent purges, together with an adherence to an
abstemious diet. In addition to these remedies, when the patient con-
sents to employ them, moderate and increasing pressure should be
made upon the tumour, by means of a sac of firm linen, made so as
to lace up to it in front.

Irreducible hernia should be carefully protected from accidental
injuries, as the most serious consequences have sometimes resulted
from blows upon such parts. And, it is to be recollected, that during
the whole time of protrusion there is a risk of strangulation, in conse-
quence of any violent exertion.

Patients afflicted with irreducible hernia are liable to indigestion
and bowel complaint from very slight causes, and, therefore, they
ought to be extremely guarded against errors in diet ; they should also
pay particular attention to prevent costiveness by the use of clysters


Rupture— (Hern f 367

or laxative medicines, when these become necessary. If, however,
it should take place in an irreducible rupture, it will be generally
found to arise from an accumulation in the contents of the bowels ;
and, therefore, cathartic medicines and clysters very frequently relieve
it without much difficulty.

Symptoms and Treatment of a Strangulated or Incarcerated Hernia.

The earliest symptoms have been already related, viz. " tumour in
the groin or scrotum, attended with pain, not only in the part, but all
over the belly, and creating a sickness and inclination to vomit, sup-
pression of stools, and some degree of fever. These are the first
symptoms, and, if they are not appeased by the return of the intestine ;
that is, if the attempts made for this purpose do not succeed, the
sickness becomes more troublesome, the vomiting more frequent, the
pain more intense, the tension of the belly greater, the fever higher,
and a general restlessness comes on, which is very terrible to bear.

According to Sir Astley Cooper, one of the earliest symptoms of a
strangulated hernia is pain about the diaphragm, followed by continual
eructation. The patient is next troubled with vomiting and costive-
ness. He feels a great inclination to have stools, but cannot succeed
in his attempts to expel the faeces. There is some pain in the swelling ;
and a great deal at the part where the stricture is situated. Afterward
the abdomen becomes considerably distended with air, such dis-
tention not arising at first from inflammation, but from the cause here
mentioned, as is proved by pressure on the abdomen not giving at first
any pain. The vomiting becomes more frequent, and feculent matter
is ejected from the stomach ; into which it is brought by what is called
the antiperistaltic action of the bowels. A clyster will sometimes
bring away a portion of feculent matter, but the quantity will be ex-
tremely small. While the abdomen is in this tense state, but unac-
companied with pain, and while there is frequent vomiting of the
faeces, the pulse is hard, frequent and very distinct : but, in the next
stage of the symptoms, when the abdomen is not only tense, but pain-
ful on being touched, the pulse is extremely small and frequent. The
vomiting and eructation continue, and the patient is pale, and covered
with a cold perspiration. The tumour becomes very tense, hard, and
in general a little inflamed on the surface of the skin.

Difficulty of reduction (says Pott) may be owing to several causes.
The size of the piece of omentum, or the inflamed state of it; the
quantity of intestine and mesentery; an inflammation of the gut, or
its distension by faeces or wind ; or the smallaess of the aperture of
the tendon through which the hernia passes. But, to whatever cause
it be owing, if the prolapsed body cannot be immediately replaced,
and the patient suffers pain, or is prevented thereby from going to
stool, it is called an incarcerated hernia, a strangulated hernia, or a
hernia with stricture.

The symptoms are a swelling in the groin or scrotum, resisting the
impression of the fingers : if the hernia be of the intestinal kind, it is
generally painful to the touch, and the pain is increased by coughing,
sneezing, or standing upright. These are the very first symptoms,
and, if they are not relieved, are soon followed by others, viz. a sick-


3G8 Rupture — ( Hernia.)

ness at the stomach, a frequent retching or inclination to vomit, a
stoppage of all discharge per anum, attended with a frequent hard
pulse, and some degree of fever.

A patient thus circumstanced is in some danger, and demands im-
mediate assistance. A stricture made on the prolapsed part of the
gut by the aperture through which it passes, is the immediate cause of
all the bad symptoms, and of course the removal of such stricture is
the only thing which can bring relief. This object can only be accom-
plished by returning the bowel back into the abdomen, or relaxing the
parts which form the stricture.

We next proceed to notice the various measures to be adopted for
the relief of a strangulated hernia, so as to obtain the best chance of
doing away the necessity of an operation.

Taxis. — This is the term applied to the operation of reducing a
hernia with the hand. It is much promoted by the position of the
body; which Winslow thought should be placed on an inclined plane,
and the thighs bent towards the trunk. Sir A. Cooper advises the
same practice, observing that this posture, by relaxing the facia of
the thigh, relaxes also the aperture through which the hernia passes.
Every degree of tension and relaxation of the femoral fascia, must un-
doubtedly be attended with a corresponding change in the abdominal
ring. But flexion of the thigh, besides relaxing this facia, also relaxes
the abdominal internal iliac, and psoas muscles. In cases of inguinal
hernia, the pressure made on the tumour by the hands of the surgeon,
should always be directed upwards and outwards, along the course of
the spermatic cord; and Sir A. Cooper advises it to be continued from
a quarter to half an hour. — (On Inguinal and Congenital Hernia.)

As the femoral hernia passes downwards and then forwards, the
pressure must be directed first backwards and then upwards. In um-
bilical and ventral hernia it is to be made straight backwards. No
violence should ever be used ; for, besides being unavailing, it greatly
aggravates the inflamed state of the contents of the hernial sac, and
has been known even to burst the intestine. — (See Cooper on Inguinal
Hernia, &c.,p. 23.)

Besides bending the thigh, care should also be taken to rotate it
inwards, which will have great effect in relaxing the femoral facia and
tendon of the external oblique muscle. Suspension of the patient
over the shoulders of an assistant has been thought to facilitate re-
duction : " I have tried it often, (says Mr. Hey,) but have not found
it to be of such superior efficacy as some authors have represented."
—(P. 144.)

The manoeuvre of gently pulling the intestine downwards, or a little
way further out of the ring, previously to the attempt to reduce the
hernia, has been suggested. — (See Balfour'''! New Mode of the Taxis,
in Med. and Phrjs. Journ. Nov. 1824.) The plan, I believe, is not
entirely new, and it is noticed by Mr. Lawrence, who says, that it
will sometimes succeed, when the difficulty of reduction is owing to
an accumulation of fsecal matter.

The return of a piece of intestine is generally preceded by a pecu-
liar noise, caused by the passage of air through the stricture. It
recedes at first gradually, and then slips up suddenly. The omentum
goes up slowly to the very last portion, which must be actually pushed


Rupture — (Hernia.) 363

through the opening. If the taxis should not succeed at first, it will
often do so after the warm bath or cold applications. Small herniao,
being attended with the closest stricture, are the most difficult to
reduce, and, for the same reason, crural ruptures do not so often yield
to the taxis as inguinal hernia in the male subject. The taxis be-
comes less likely to succeed, the longer the inflamed viscera have
been down, because adhesions are liable to form. Mr. Lawrence
observes, (p. 63.) "When the rupture becomes painful, we are no
longer justified in persevering in attempts at reduction by the hands.
A sufficient pressure cannot now be endured ; and the force which is
employed only tends to increase the inflammation, and accelerate the
in the inflammatory strangulation, until the previous use of other
means had produced a change in the state of the swelling.

That the taxis is frequently abused, and the cause of serious mis-
chief, is a truth that cannot be doubted. " Strangulated hernia?,"
says Scarpa, " very frequently mortify from the negligence of the
patients, and their repugnance to submit to an operation ; and, per-
haps, still more frequently from the effect of the taxis, unskilfully
exercised by uninformed surgeons, who are determined, at any price
whatever, to accomplish the speedy reduction of the viscera. The
majority of them make no distinction between the acute and the chronic
strangulation. In both cases, no sooner are the symptoms of stran-
gulation evinced, than they begin to handle the swelling roughly,
and to push the viscera with all their force, in order to make them
return into the abdomen ; while, when the strangulation is acute, and
the patient young and strong, the taxis ought never to be practised
before all the means proper for diminishing the strength, calming
spasm, and relaxing the parts which are to be reduced, have been
employed for a certain time."

The distinction here made by Scarpa is one of the greatest prac-
tical importance, and one which no surgeon should lose sight of in his
attempts at the taxis. The terms acute and chronic, applied to each
individual case of incarcerated hernia, will be intelligible to the merest
tyro, although the ambiguity in the application of these terms to other
subjects is too obvious and perplexing to be denied. To recognise
this distinction will result as Scarpa predicts ; and operations for
strangulated hernia will be less frequent, "and the taxis will very
generally be successful." I speak on this subject from a personal
knowledge of its value ; and for several years, although sent for fre-
quently to operate, I have been able to succeed in dispensing with the
use of the knife very generally, by a modification of the practice here
recommended, after the taxis had been ineffectually attempted for
hours, and in one instance these attempts had been continued at inter-
vals for two days. — (Reese.)

Things are different with regard to the chronic strangulation of old
large hernia?, in feeble or aged persons ; for, in these cases, it is of
great importance to support the patient's strength. Bleeding, the
warm bath, and other weakening means, should also be avoided, which,
in producing a general atony, might bring on gangrene of the intes-
tine, either during the strangulation, or after the reduction of the


370 Rupture — {Hernia.)

viscera. It is ascertained, that these kinds of strangulation are
almost always occasioned by an accumulation of fiscal matter, or an
extraordinary quantity of air in the hernia. Nothing is more effica.
cious than cold applications, for promoting the action of the bowel on
the matter which distends it, or for lessening the volume of the air.
They produce a corrugation of all the scrotum, and contractions of the
cremaster, which alone sometimes suffice for reducing the viscera, in
a much better manner than could be done by the hands of the most
experienced surgeon. — (Scarpa, Traits des Hemes, p. 244 — 247.)

Bleeding. — The inflammation which attacks the protruded viscera,
and spreads thence over the whole abdomen, and the temporary
weakness and often fainting which the sudden loss of blood induces,
and which is a peculiarly favourable opportunity for reducing the
herniae by the hand, are the reasons in favour of bleeding. Sharp,
Pott, B. Bell, Sabatier, Richter, Callisen and Scarpa, are all in favour
of bleeding. Wilmer, Alanson and Sir Astley Cooper have published
against the practice. — (S. B. Cooper.)

The method of reduction practised by M. Gimbernat, of Madrid, is
so ingenious, and at the same time so successful, that I shall give it in
detail. He places the patient on his side opposite the hernia, with
his body a little bent and lower than the pelvis, in order to relax the
muscles of the abdomen. With the same intention the head is brought
forward towards the chest, and in the hernia femoralis he elevates the
thigh on which the hernia is, yet so as not in the least to obstruct the
operation. Sitting then by the bedside, with his hand which is near-
est to the patient he grasps the tumour at its base, which is the upper
part, and with his three first fingers he compresses it all round to di-
minish its diameter ; at the same time with the fingers of the other
hand he pushes the apex, which is the lower end of the tumour, up-
wards and inwards, to direct it towards the crural arch, because it
cannot be reduced in any other direction. He has sometimes found
that more than one hour was required for this operation. When the
patient is fatigued, he ceases both to press and push, but yet never
quits his hold ; and when he renews these efforts, he increases gradually
their force.

Of numerous herniae treated by him in this way, and many of them
desperate, those which have not been reduced have been very few.

It may be needless to add, that this method is improper if the tumour
is inflamed and very painful, of the part which causes the strangulation.
This operation is safe, easy, and generally successful.

It is now the practice, with most surgeons, to wait but a very few
hours before an operation is performed, in strangulated hernia. Af-
ter following the means which I have found are not calculated to re-
duce it, recourse is had to the knife. Some surgeons commence an
operation almost immediately, alleging that it is extremely dangerous
to delay even a few hours. Others again wait a greater length of
time.

The operation consists in dividing the integuments, dissecting down
to the hernial sac and opening it, removing the stricture, and re-
placing the protruded viscera.


Rupture — ( Hernia .) 371

I will not take it upon me to assert that this operation is never ne-
cessary, but I am confident that it is seldom or very rarely so.
I have the best authority for stating that most of the cases of strangu-
lated hernia for which an operation is performed, would be sponta-
neously cured, or might be by proper treatment. In very many cases
where an operation has been proposed, the patient has recovered by
very simple means, or none at all. I have been called to some
where, at first view, it has seemed impossible to return the protruded
viscera without cutting down and dividing the stricture ; and yet, by
prompt and energetic means, I have succeeded in reducing it, and by
the following means :

1st. Purgatives. — The treatment may be commenced by adminis-
tering a dose of castor oil ; no other physic (olive oil excepted) but
this, will answer in the complaint. Those of a very stimulating nature
are apt to aggravate the symptoms. But oleaginous purgatives are
beneficial, by the relaxation which follows their exhibition.

2d. Injections. — It sometimes happens that this medicine, or any
kind of physic, will not be retained upon the stomach. When this
takes place, our dependence must be placed upon injections or clys-
ters. The following may be given :

Take of lobelia inflata, q. s.
Make a strong infusion ; to half a pint of which, add as much milk,
as much molasses, and a gill of olive or sweet oil. Mix, and admi-
nister with a suitable sized syringe, to be repeated every hour. Not
only the fiiecal contents of the intestine are evacuated by this injection,
but it has a great tendency to remove the stricture by its emollient
and relaxing properties.

3d. Opiates. — Opium, in strangulated hernia, is often exceedingly
valuable. It checks the vomiting attendant on the stricture ; allays
pain and irritability of the system ; removes the tension of the parts,
and will often effect a speedy reduction. About three grains should be
given every two hours, until the desired effect is produced.

External Applications.

1st. Steaming or Fomentations.— A strong decoction of bitter herbs,
tansy, wormwood, hoarhound, catnip and hops, may be thrown into a
suitable sized tub or vessel ; a narrow piece of board placed over it,
on which the patient must be p'aced, and a blanket thrown round to
retain the steam. This will p jduce perspiration, and contribute very
much to lessen the inflammation.

2d. Discutients. — Let the hernial tumour, including the neck of it,
be bathed with the discutient ointment for half an hour at a time, and
when applied, let some heated article be held a little distance from
the parts. The green oil may also be used. Let them be alternately
applied every hour or two. They also prove serviceable by their
emollient and relaxing properties.

3d. The Hot or Warm Bath. — Should the hernia still remain unre-
duced or strangulated after these means, let the patient be immersed
in a warm bath, and continued in until he begins to feel faint.

4th. Poultices. — After any of the foregoing applications have been
used, let an alkaline poultice be applied over the parts and over the

Vol. II. 2 V


372 Rupture — {Hernia.)

seat of the stricture. Let the slippery-elm bark be mixed with weak
ley until a poultice of a proper consistence is formed, to be applied
tepid, and often renewed. I have found the best effects from this
application in strangulated hernia. In one case, I applied it when I
left the patient at night, and in the morning the viscera returned with-
out the taxis or any manual operation. It removed the pain, swelling
and inflammation, and the parts in the morning appeared very
wrinkled or shrivelled.

5th. Cupping. — In very critical cases, where reduction is found
difficult, four or five cups may be applied around the neck of the tu-
mour. It has a much better effect than general blood letting, although
I have seldom found this operation necessary in the worst cases.

6th. Coldor Refrigerant Applications. — Some physicians or surgeons
highly extol cold applications, such as cold water, ice, &c. ; but in most
cases, as far as I have ascertained, they are attended with a decided
injurious effect. They appear to make the stricture worse instead of
better ; and this, no doubt, arises from the sedative effects of the cold.
There is one application, however, that appears to have been attended
with some success, which is the sulphuric ether. Dr. Reese, of
this city, the editor of the last edition of Cooper's Surgical Dictionary,
informs me that he has used with great benefit sulphuric ether.

He wets the hernial tumour with the liquid, and then, in order to
produce speedy evaporation, blows upon it with a pair of bellows.
He states, that he has reduced a number of strangulated hernias, by
this method alone, when they had been doomed to undergo an opera-
tion.

8th. Manual Aid, or Assistance. — It becomes necessary during the
time the patient is making use of these various means, from time to
time, to make attempts to return the protruded viscera by manual
assistance, or what is usually termed, the taxis. In accomplishing
this, considerable judgment is necessary. The position of the pa-
tient should be particularly attended to. His legs and buttocks should
be elevated as high as possible, forming an angle, if possible, of 45
degrees. This can be very easily accomplished, by placing the back
parts of a chair underneath him. His thighs and the body should be a
little flexed, in order to relax the muscles. The tumour should then
be seized, and moderate pressure made, in order to return the viscera,
as has been previously directed.

But I have usually found that the patient himself Could succeed
best, in performing this part of the business. In most instances, it is
the case, that the viscera have been often down, and he has been in
the habit of returning them himself, by which means, he acquires a
tact in doing it, with which the most skilful surgeon is not conversant.

The above method; in case of strangulated hernia, I have practised
invariably, with success ; nor have I found that danger arising from
delay of which writers speak. In difficult cases, it sometimes has re-
quired several days to reduce the hernia ; in other cases, a few hours
only. It is stated by many, that even a few hours' delay, are fatal ;
and this is probably the case, under bad treatment, or bad manage-
ment. But I have never witnessed any such result. An opponent to
this treatment, or to any longer delay than usual, before an operation


Rupture — (Hernia.) 373

was performed, might say that mortification would take place, and in
this way prove fatal, and had such operation been performed, the life
of the patient might have been preserved. But this is by no means a
conclusive or valid argument, because it is impossible to say what
might be the case under different management, or the common course
of treatment. It is more probable, that the life of the patient would be
lost or endangered by the use of the knife, or dividing the stricture ;
an inference which is very fairly drawn from the many fatal cases
resulting from such practice. And suppose that a patient should be
lost under the treatment that I lay down, would it prove that it was
any the less efficacious than a surgical operation. I conceive not. I
think it would be much more reasonable, judging of the comparative
effects of the two modes of practice, to infer that this treatment would
save the lives of those patients which are lost in consequence of an
operation ; and therefore, from the uniforrff success which I have had
by pursuing this method, I can confidently recommend it in prefer-
ence to the one adopted, viz., of operating for a strangulated hernia al-
most immediately. I am persuaded that more cases would be lost
by the knife than by the treatment I adopt. And even should it fail,
(which I have never known,) it does not preclude the act of dividing
the stricture. More time only is allowed to 'try the resources of
nature and the powers of art, in whose favour, if we err at all, I have
found it the most safe to err.

It would be very pleasing to me, had I room, to detail a number of
cases which I have successfully treated, by pursuing this treatment.
In one, which occurred some time ago in a very aged man, th*e prac-
titioner who attended with me, decided that the hernia could not be
reduced without an operation ; and from its great magnitude, pain,
&c, it appeared so ; but, by persevering a few hours, I effected a
reduction.

In concluding this chapter, I will relate a case recorded in the
Boston Medical Journal, which shows what course nature alone,
sooner or later, takes to cure hernia or rupture. Some practical
inferences may, perhaps, be drawn from it.

Remarkable case. — A married woman, of middle age, on one of the
islands below the harbour of this city, a short time since, had a stran-
gulated hernia. An opening formed from the tumour, and a consider-
able portion of the intestine sloughed off. From the peculiar loca-
tion of the woman, it became exceedingly difficult to obtain a physi-
cian, and her husband, therefore, as the only alternative, as he sup-
posed, gave her enormous quantities of physic, before the sloughing
took place.

There was a complete relief from pain, after the faeces began to
discharge at the artificial opening, where they continued to pass off
about ten days, when the orifice again closed, the discharges readily
took a natural course, and the patient now remains in perfect health.
We have understood she was not visited by any physician or surgeon,
till after the cure was perfectly completed. — (Boston Med. Jour.)


CHAPTER XXV.

STRICTURES IN THE URETHRA.


There are three kinds of stricture of the urethra ; the perma*
nent, the spasmodic, and the inflammatory.

Permanent Stricture. — The permanent stricture is the result of a
thickening of the urethra from chronic inflammation.

An individual having permanent stricture, first observes a few drops
of water remain after the^whole seems to have been discharged ; then
notices a fine spiral or divided stream ; and, lastly, discharges his
water by drops only. In this last state, for the purpose of facilitating
the escape of the urine and preventing its being retained by the
lacuna? of the urethra, he draws out the penis with considerable force.

In cases of stricture, you will find, in all stages, that the ap-
pearances and nature of the urine will be according to the degree of
inflammatory excitement.

When the inflammation has extended to the mucous membrane of
the bladder, there will be a considerable quantity of mucus with the
urine ; the urine, when discharged, is as transparent as usual ; but
wfcen *t has cooled, the mucus sinks to the bottom, where it appears
ropy, and adheres to the vessel. As the inflammation of the mem-
brane increases, the urine becomes yellow on cooling. When the
disease is of a very aggravated nature, the urine will become quite
white. If the urine is bloody, it is a proof that the ulcerative process
has commenced, and, if not bloody, on the contrary.

In that state of stricture when the urine is loaded with pus, the
patient has frequent and severe rigours or chills, or even below that
state of inflammation.

The person will have frequent shivering fits, so that you would sup-
pose he had an intermittent fever. In these cases, opium is the best
remedy.

Persons labouring under stricture, are sometimes severely af-
flicted with piles, and, not unfrequently, direct inguinal hernia, or
rupture.

The last complaint is in consequence of the extreme force that is
employed to evacuate the urine.

Seat of Stricture. — There is no part of the urethra which is not
liable to stricture, but most frequently it is found in three situations :
first, just at the beginning of the bulb ; secondly, at the membranous
part ; and, thirdly, in the prostate gland itself.

A stricture does not always arise from an equal contraction of the
urethra all round ; for, in some instances, the contraction is only on
one side.

Cause of Permanent Stricture. — The cause of permanent stricture
of the urethra, is inflammation of the chronic kind, and in ninety-nine
cases out of every hundred, it is the result of neglected gonorrhoea.


Strictures in the Urethra. 376

Chronic inflammation occasions a greater determination of blood to
the part, and produces a deposition of adhesive matter on the outer
side of the urethra ; the urethra itself becomes thickened, which, to-
gether with being pressed upon by the adhesive matter collected in the
interstitial spaces surrounding the urethra, produces the stricture in
question.

Treatment of Permanent Stricture. — There are three principal ob-
jects to be attended to : the first of which is, to cure the complaint
by dilatation ; the second, by absorption ; and the third, to destroy it
altogether.

The first is effected by mechanical means ; the second, by the in-
fluence of medicines ; and the third, by caustic.

The first, or cure by dilatation, is accomplished by means of bougies;
from the regular use of which, strictures may be readily cured, and
the strictured part of the urethra made to regain its natural size.

Bougies are made of either wax, catgut or silver ; and they are
usually numbered from one to sixteen, according to their dimension,
so that the practitioner may, on each occasion, know the size he is
using, and the size last used. Catheters are sometimes employed as
a substitute for bougies, and answer the purpose tolerably well. Catgut
bougies are only employed when the stricture is particularly small.
With respect to wax bougies, before introducing them into the urethra,
you should always warm them by the fire, for the purpose of render-
ing them soft ; when, if they are introduced into the urethra, and pass
through the stricture, you will ascertain the distance at which it is
situated from the orifice, and the form and size of the stricture will
be modelled on the bougie. On the following day, you again intro-
duce two bougies, that is, if there be no existing inflammation to pre-
vent it. The first bougie you then use, is to be of the same size as
the one with which you concluded on the previous day ; after this has
been withdrawn, you again pass another, a size larger ; thus using,
on every occasion, two bougies, always beginning with one of the
same size as that with which you had concluded on each preceding
occasion.

In endeavouring to pass a bougie, it now and then happens that the
urethra is torn through ; and unless attention is paid to the circum-
stance, may give rise to a troublesome extravasation of urine.

When you suspect a tear of the urethra, immediately withdraw the
instrument, and desire the patient, if possible, to retain his urine, that
it may not irritate the wound, and also to prevent its escaping through
the opening, and becoming extravasated in the surrounding cellular
substance. In this way, you give time for a clot to form over the sur-
face of the wound, a slight degree of inflammation is excited, and it
becomes healed by the adhesive process, without any further mischief.

With respect to burning away strictures with escharolics, you must
be particularly careful to prevent them getting in contact with any
other part than where their presence is absolutely necessary.

Spasmodic Stricture arises either from a contraction of the muscles
•surrounding the urethra, or from the urethra itself.

The spasmodic stricture is usually more or less connected with per-
manent stricture, and the spasms commonly attack the muscular part
of the urethra.


376 Strictures in the Urethra.

Spasmodic stricture may arise from various causes, and attacks in-
dividuals of all ages. Common accidents will sometimes give rise to
it an operation for an aneurism, &c.

The complaint usually comes on of a sudden, is unattended with
pain, and the first notice that a patient has of it is, that he experiences
a difficulty in voiding his urine.

Treatment of Spasmodic Stricture. — This must consist in the intro-
duction of a bougie, and, if necessary, other surgical and medical
means.

You should introduce a bougie, letting it steal gently along the uri-
nary passage, and when it arrives at the strictured part, there let it
rest for a short time ; after this, you should gradually push it forward,
using only a very slight force, but continuing that force until you have
succeeded in passing the stricture. Let the bougie rest for a minute
or two in the strictured part, and then withdraw it ; directly after you
do so, the person will be enabled freely to pass his urine.

Inflammatory Stricture. — This kind of stricture is generally pro-
duced by the inflammation of gonorrhoea ; but there is another mode
by which it is caused, and that is, the introduction of a bougie.

The passing of bougies, although done with care, will sometimes give
rise to a violent inflammation of the urethra.

Treatment of Inflammatory Stricture. — Under this complaint, you
must not think of introducing either a bougie or a catheter ; but, by a
regular and judicious antiphlogistic treatment, you will be able to af-
ford relief.

The consequences of stricture of the urethra are very numerous.
First, in very bad cases, a great dilatation of the urethra behind the
stricture ; secondly, a considerable thickening of the coats of the
bladder ; thirdly, enlargement of the ureters, an effect of their being
distended with urine, during the retention common in the advanced
stages of stricture ; fourthly, the kidneys are often diseased, their
glandular structure being sometimes entirely destroyed ; lastly, the
prostate gland is frequently enlarged, and abscesses are occasionally
formed in it, with fistula leading from them to the perinseum or parts
around, and its natural ducts are often considerably dilated — (Castle.)

The different varieties of stricture have been mentioned, and the
treatment briefly stated. But some additional remarks are deemed
necessary.

I have found that a repeated introduction of different sized bougies,
will remove the worst stages of stricture. Small ones should be first
introduced, and successively larger ones, as before mentioned. After
they have been introduced, they should remain for twenty or thirty
minutes. If the urethra is very irritable in consequence of inflam-
mation, fomentations must be applied to the perinaeum, and cooling
diuretics administered, such as diuretic drops, a decoction of elm bark,
marshmallows, linseed, and the mucilage of gum arabic. Physic should
also be given, and if these do not allay the irritability of the urethra,
give anodynes. The diaphoretic powders are the best that can be given,
in consequence of the antispasmodic and diuretic properties of the
opium and camphor they contain. This treatment is applicable to
other kinds of stricture, such as the spasmodic and inflammatory.


Strictures in the Urethra. 377

Some attempt has been made to cure strictures by caustic, and by
cutting down to the seat of the stricture. But I have no confidence
in either mode of treatment. The only sure method to remove any-
kind of stricture, is the repeated introduction of different sized cathe-
ters, aided by the exhibition of proper internal remedies. Although
it may be somewhat difficult to introduce one at first, it can always be
effected by perseverance, commencing with the use of the smallest
size. Each introduction will become gradually less difficult.

For very small or close strictures, catgut bougies, or the smallest
elastic gum catheters, are generally the best to commence with.

A little of the discutient, and if the parts be very irritable, the marsh-
mallow ointment should be rubbed upon it when it is introduced.

These ointments contain cooling and discutient properties. If
such resistance is met with, on the first introduction of the bougie,
gradual pressure must be continued upon the stricture for some time,
and in this way, the difficulty will shortly be overcome.

When the striciure is once passed, we have it, as it were, within
our control.

Very little pain should be produced in the operation, and as soon as
the patient complains much, it should be withdrawn. The size may
be very gradually increased as the stricture dilates. A silver bougie
passes, perhaps, as easily as any. Some recommend the bougie to
be pushed with much force against the stricture, with a view to cure
it by causing ulceration, but this is a cruel, unnecessary, and dan-
gerous practice. A false passage is sometimes caused by it. When
the instrument has been introduced a few times, and it passes readily,
the patient himself may use it, under the superintendence of the prac-
titioner.

I have applied the vegetable caustic, made in the form of small tro-
ches, and pushed them down upon the stricture by a catheter ; but I
am not yet prepared to speak of the effect, not having sufficiently
tested it. But this kind of caustic causes no inflammation, and, if pro-
perly applied, it may be very efficacious. It certainly must be much
better than lunar caustic, which is recommended by many surgeons,
and which is conveyed to the stricture by an armed bougie. In the
same manner the vegetable caustic might be applied, perhaps, better
than any other way. Both this, and the mineral caustic, I am per*
suaded, will do better than the nitrate of silver.


CHAPTER XXVI.

SUPPRESSION AND RETENTION OF URINE.


When there is a frequent desire of making water, attended with
much difficulty in voiding it, the complaint is called dysuria or stran-
gury ; and when there is a total suppression of urine, it is known
by the name of ischuria. Both ischuria and dysuria are distinguished
into acute, when arising in consequence of inflammation, and chronic,
when proceeding from any other cause, such as calculus, &c.

The causes which give rise to these diseases, are, an inflammation
of the urethra, occasioned either by venereal sores or by a use of
acrid injections, inflammation of the prostate gland, bladder, or kid-
neys, considerable enlargements of the haemorrhoidal veins, a lodg-
ment of indurated faeces in the rectum, spasm at the neck of the
bladder, exposure to cold, the absorption of cantharides applied ex-
ternally or taken internally, excess in drinking either spiritous or
vinous liquors, or particles of gravel sticking in the neck of the blad-
der, or lodging in the urethra, and thereby producing irritation.
Gout, by being translated to the neck of the bladder, will sometimes
occasion these complaints. In many instances the obstruction to the
flow of urine is in a great measure owing to a diseased action of the
muscles ; in some of them it is entirely to be attributed to this cause.

A very frequent cause, however, of a retention of urine, is, an en-
largement or other diseased state of the prostate gland, a complaint
with which men in advanced life are very apt to be afflicted. It is
usually excited by full living of every kind, inebriety, indulging to ex-
cess with women, or producing frequent excitement in the seminal
vessels by masturbation, severe attacks of gonorrhoea, a confined
state of the bowels, and exposure to cold. Indeed, whatever in-
creases the circulation of the blood in these parts beyond the healthy
standard, may become a cause of inflammation in this gland, the blood
vessels of which lose their tone in an advanced period of life.

In dysuria there is a frequent inclination to make water, attended
with a smarting pain, heat and difficulty in voiding it, together with a
sense of fulness in the region of the bladder. The symptoms often
vary, however, according to the cause which has given rise to it. If
it proceeds from a calculus in the kidney or ureter, besides the affec-
tions mentioned, it will be accompanied with nausea, vomiting, and
acute pains in the loins and region of the ureter and kidney of the
side affected. When a stone in the bladder or gravel in the urethra
is the cause, an acute pain will be felt at the end of the penis, parti-
cularly on voiding the last drops of urine, and the stream of water
will either be divided into two, or be discharged in a twisted manner,
not unlike a cork-screw. If an enlargement or scirrhus, or the prostate
gland has occasioned the suppression or difficulty of urine, a hard


Suppression and Retention of Urine. 379

indolent tumour, unattended with any acute pain, may readily be felt
in the perinaeura, or by introducing the finger in ano.

" Dysuria" says a writer, " is seldom attended with much danger,
unless by neglect it should terminate in a total obstruction. Ischuria
may always be regarded as a dangerous complaint when it continues
for any length of time, from the great distension of the bladder, and
often consequent inflammation which ensues. In those cases where
neither a bougie nor a catheter can be introduced, the event in all
probability will be fatal, as few patients will submit to the only remain-
ing means of drawing off the urine, before a considerable degree of
inflammation and tendency to gangrene have taken place." But no
such case have I ever had in all my practice.

Treatment.

When dysuria has arisen in consequence of the application of a
blister, as sometimes happens, nothing more will be necessary than
to direct the patient to drink plentifully of warm diluent liquors, such
as a thin solution of gum Arabic, linseed tea, marshmallow decoction,
or barley' water. When it proceeds from any other cause, and the
symptoms are violent, besides the means just mentioned, flannel
cloths wrung out in a warm decoction of emollient herbs, or a bladder
filled with warm water, should be kept constantly applied over the
region of the pubes ; and emollient clysters should be injected fre-
quently, both with the view of acting as an internal fomentation, and
of dislodging any indurated faeces that may be collected, and which,
by their pressure and stimulus, will of themselves often produce a
strangury, or difficulty of making urine.

I have found it exceedingly useful to steam the patient over a strong
decoction of bitter herbs, as recommended in several other complaints.
Both the decoction and the herbs should be thrown into a suitable
sized vessel, and a blanket put around the waist of the patient, that
the steam may be applied more immediately to the seat of the dis-
ease. At the same time let his feet be immersed in warm ley water,
and let him drink freely of parsley tea. After he has been steamed
fifteen or twenty minutes, let the herbs be enclosed in flannel, and
applied over the region of the bladder, to be often renewed, and ap-
plied as hot as can be borne. This will usually produce such a relax-
ation of the parts as to cause a free discharge of urine. The patient
may also take the following : take a wine-glassful of the best Hol-
land gin ; add to it a tumbler of spearmint tea, and two teaspoons-
ful of spirits of nitre ; sweeten with honey, and drink the whole.
The same portion should be taken every hour until relief is afforded.
Where the pain is very exquisite, 40 drops of laudanum may be added
to each dose. In half an hour, or an hour, this treatment, in almost
every case of retention of urine, will afford relief.

If the suppression of urine does not give way to the means advised,
the patient should be put into a warm bath ; and, having kept him in
for about ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, he is then to be taken
out, and the introduction of a silver catheter, or one of flexible gum,
to be attempted.

In all cases it will be necessary to introduce the catheter with gen-

Vol. II. 2 Z


380 Suppression and Retention of Urine.

tleness ; even a moderate force, improperly directed, is capable «Hf
injuring the urethra in such a manner as to render the operation al-
most impracticable ; and it must be obvious to every surgeon, that
long-continued and violent attempts have a tendency to increase the
inflamed state of the urethra; but besides this, a laceration of its
membranous parts is apt to arise, so as to endanger the making of an
artificial passage by the catheter.

In a suppression of urine proceeding from an enlarged or diseased
state of the prostate gland, and where there is a fulness in the region
of the bladder, with a turgidness of the parts, no time should be lost
in introducing the catheter and drawing off the water. In doing this,
three things are, however, to be attended to : — 1st. To avoid bringing
on spasms of the urethra; 2dly. To conduct the point of the instru-
ment over the prominence at the neck of the bladder; and, 3dly. To
employ an instrument that is fitted to be retained in the bladder,
should much difficulty have occurred in the introduction, as less dis-
turbance is likely to arise from an instrument remaining therein, than
will be produced by repeating the operation of introducing it, where
any degree of violence is committed upon the parts.

The instrument should be soft and smooth, round at the point, and
as large as the canal will easily admit, that it may more readily dis-
engage itself at the turn into the bladder : the apertures in its side
should be wide, to render them less liable to be clogged with mucus
or blood, and it should be pliant, that it may adapt itself to the form
of the parts, and give little disturbance while retained : another desir-
able property for it to possess, is a permanent curvature at the point,
even to a greater degree than is usually given to the common silver
catheter. The only instrument which possesses these requisites is
the elastic gum catheter.

In some cases of an enlargement of the lobes of the prostate gland,
even a flexible gum catheter with a stilet cannot pass along the ure-
thra on account of spasms ; but by having given it a considerable
curvature by its being kept a sufficient time upon.a stilet, and then in-
troducing it in a flexible state without the stilet, we shall succeed,
and be able to draw oft' the water. Hard metallic instruments should
never be employed in cases of diseased prostate, when others will
answer the purpose.

The catheter, in cases of diseased prostate, should be introduced
either towards the left or right side, with the handle nearly in a hori-
zontal line ; and when it reaches the membranous part of the urethra,
the handle should be gently and gradually brought towards the per-
pendicular line, the point all the time being kept in motion ; and when
it is nearly upright, the handle should be depressed. When the flexi-
ble catheter has no stilet, a good deal of dexterity is often required.
If the catheter without the stilet cannot be made to pass, it ought to
be tried with one, and if it is still prevented from going on, by intro-
ducing a finger into the rectum, and pressing upon the cuived point
r, we nvi- into

-


Vnppremon and Retention of Urine. 381

Where there is inflammation, accompanied by inordinate irritation
at the neck of the bhidder, all straining to'expel the urine should be
avoided, and the organ he emptied every six hours, by introducing
the elastic gum catheter, and afterwards washing it out with a little
tepid water, injected through the catheter by means of a gum-bottle
properly fitted thereto. By so doing we shall soothe the irritability of
the parts, by substituting tepid water for the acrid urine. In the
healthy state of the parts connected with the bladder, the surface is
not susceptible of the stimulus from the urine, or in only due degree ;
but when inflammation occupies these parts, the acrid urine becomes
a continual source of excitement. Besides, by thus injecting the
bladder, the ropy mucus and purulent secretion, when there is any,
are washed away, and that sort of tenesmus vesicae caused by their
presence, is much relieved.

In every instance of suppressed urine, whether arising from stric-
ture, gravel, inflammation, an enlarged state of the prostate gland, or
spasm, opiates will prove highly serviceable, and ought therefore to
be administered not only by the mouth along with diuretics of a mild
or bland nature every four hours, but likewise in clysters repeated
frequently. The liquor potassae, in doses of from twenty to thirty
drops, joined with tincture of opium, the patient drinking freely of mu-
cilaginous liquors, such as linseed tea, parsley, elm bark, or barley
water, in which a little gum Arabic has been dissolved, is a very
useful remedy in all cases of irritation at the neck of the bladder.

Injecting sweet oil, or even warm milk and water, frequently up
the urethra, will often afford relief, especially if the suppression has
been occasioned by a small piece of gravel which has stuck in the
canal. Injecting tepid water into the bladder itself in similar cases
by the apparatus before mentioned, will also afford great relief in such
cases.

In both ischuria and dysuria, arising from gravel or a stone in the
bladder, besides adopting this step, we should have recourse to the
means advised expressly under these heads.

Where the patient is frequently troubled with strangury, he should
take the urinary decoction, diuretic drops, infusions of spearmint,
slippery-elm, flaxseed, &c.

I have been called to patients when they have nearly lost their sen-
ses from the excruciating pain arising from a retention of urine, and
after putting this practice in execution, they have experienced almost
instantaneous relief. The transition from acute suffering to relief,
has been truly surprising to all who have witnessed it ; and the feel-

On one occasion, a person with spasmodic stricture, had retained
his urine so long, that the flesh above the pubis had turned black.
Several attempts had been made to introduce the catheter, but all
were unsuccessful. Medicine was given, warm bath and injections
used, when the catheter most easily entered the bladder and evacuated
its contents.

I have been called when the patient has been groaning and scream-
ing from distress by severe agony, and in a short time the suffer-
ings have been removed, and that, too, without the introduction


382 Suppression and Retention of Vrine.

of the catheter. And, as for puncturing the bladder above the pubis,
or by the rectum, I consider it cruel and unnecessary.

The following case is translated from a late work published in
Canada, and which may be of practical importance.

A case of Retention of Urine from Stricture of the Urethra, related by
M. Amussat.— (Quebec Med. Jour. 1827. No. V. p. 60.)

A man, aged seventy years, of a plethoric constitution, thirty years
previous, had had three attacks of gonorrhoea, and ever since hashad
considerable difficulty in discharging his urine, not being able to eject
more than one or two ounces at a time. At 8 o'clock, P. M., he made
an effort to void his urine, without success, which caused him most
excruciating pain. His pulses were agitated, face flushed, his abdo-
men distended, the lower part much tumefied ; the subcutaneous ab-
dominal veins distended, and a partial priapism. His efforts to void
his urine were extremely painful and fruitless. The following day,
at JO o'clock, A. M,, M. Amussat introduced a bougie, which was ar-
rested by the bulb of the urethra, and brought a trifling quantity of
blood. The urine had now been retained for fourteen hours, though
he was accustomed to pass it as much as twelve or sixteen times
every night. The obstruction was such, that there seemed to remain
no other alternative than either to forcibly introduce the catheter, or
to puncture the bladder. M. Amussat finally had recourse to a me-
thod which completely succeeded without putting his patient to the
pain of either of the other operations. He injected gradually, but
with force, warm water into the urethra, which, in dilating the orifice
of the stricture, freed the urethra from the thickened mucus which
was an additional obstruction. As soon as the injected liquid had
reached the urine, the patient cried out he was cured, and the flow of
urine returned, as heretofore. At two efforts he voided about two
pints of muddy urine. Since, he has had no retention, and continues
in good health.

If this method is confirmed by experience, of which I have no
doubt, U will be of great value in the treatment of strictures.


CHAPTER XXVII.

GRAVEL AND STONE.


SECTION I.
GRAVEL.

Description.

By the term gravel, we understand a collection of sand, or small
particles of stone, collected in some part of the body, in the kidneys,
ureters, or the bladder.

Causes.

There is, no doubt, contained in our food and our drink, the agents
which form the gravel and stone. There is a sufficient quantity of
sand, either in a native state, or combined with other substances, to
produce or to form calculous affections. /When the system is healthy,
these ingredients are carried of by the proper secretions of the sys-
tem. But, when there is debility of any organ, especially the kid-
neys, they become incapable of expelling such sandy concretions, and
consequently they lodge in the kidneys, ureters, or bladder.

In general, these minute portions of gravel pass off, without oc-
casioning much disturbance or disease. But, if there be an excess
of uric or any other acid, a chemical union takes place, and these
particles of stone are united, or combined together, and there is a
constant apposition, until they become considerably large, or a stone
is formed. This stone, or stones, may be deposited in^the kidneys or
ureters, and give rise to inflammation of these organs ; or, it may
pass down into the bladder, and, if not discharged, constitute all the
symptoms of stone.

"The causes," says Gibson, "of the formation of urinary calculi,
although frequent attempts have been made to investigate them, have
never yet been unravelled. We know, indeed, little beyond this, that
the disease prevails in certain countries and districts, more than in
others ; and that, in some climates, especially very warm ones, it
does not exist. Throughout the United States, which embrace a
very extensive tract 'of country, fugitive cases may be every where
seen ; but, upon the whole, the complaint must be considered by no
means common, if we except some portions of the western country,
especially Kentucky, Alabama and Tennessee, where it is exceedingly
frequent, and usually attributed to the use of lime-stone water.

All substances, containing azote, furnish matter for the formation of
uric acid,* into which it is readily transformed, and tends to the pro-

* Sea Dr. Magendie's Physiological and Medical Researches into the Causes of
GraveL


384 Gravel.

duction of gravel. The use of animal food and other analogous ali-
ments, tends to diminish the quantity of urine, at the same time that it
increases the proportion of uric acid ; whereas, a vegetable diet has
the contrary effect.

Those who are in the decline of life, and who have been much en-
gaged in sedentary employments, as likewise those who are much
afflicted with the gout, are in general very subject to nephritic com-
plaints ; but, it is a matter of notoriety, that the period of life from
infancy to about fifteen years, is most subject to the formation of cal-
culi in the bladder, and that the children of the poor are afflicted in a
greater proportion than those of the opulent. From the difference in
the structure of the urinary passages in the sexes, men are much more
liable to them than women. In warm climates, we seldom meet with
instances of calculous concretions forming of any size, either in the
kidneys or bladder, as the particles of sand deposited from the urine,
usually pass off before they can adhere together, owing to the re-
laxed state of the parts ; but in cold ones, they are found frequently
of considerable magnitude.

Excess of urea is not unfrequently met with, especially in children
and persons depositing the phosphates. In these cases, the urine is
generally pale, but sometimes high-coloured, like porter and water
mixed. When recently voided, it reddens litmus paper, and is for the
most part free from sediment.

It is stated that a long use of fermented liquors, and of wines
abounding with tartar, may possibly, in some constitutions, prove oc-
casional causes of the gravel and stone. Intemperance, by producing
debility, may occasion gravel.

Symptoms.

Where urea is in excess, there is usually a frequent and almost
irresistible desire of voiding the urine; but this does not arise from a
fulness of the bladder ; for, in general, only a small quantity is voided
at one time, but, from the frequency, the total quantity voided in a given
time not being greater than natural. In cold weather the quantity is
augmented, and it is also increased by all causes producing mental
agitation. There is often a sense of weight, or dull pain in the back,
and an occasional irritation about the neck of the bladder, which now
and then extends along the urethra. The pulse, however, is not
affected, and the tongue is clean : there is no remarkable thirst, nor
are the functions of the stomach and bowels much deranged.

A fit of the gravel is attended with a fixed pain in the loins, numb-
ness of the thigh on the side affected, nausea and vomiting, and not
unfrequently with a slight suppression of urine. As the irritating
matter removes from the kidney down into the ureter, it sometimes
produces such acute pain as to occasion faintings and convulsive fits.
The symptoms often resemble those of nephritis, or inflammation of
the kidneys ; but the deposition of reddish-brown sand, or very fine
powder of the same colour, in the urine on becoming cold, will de-
monstrate the difference. »

When gravel has once formed in the pelvis of the kidney, or


Gravel. 385

elsewhere, it continues to increase, by receiving on its surface new
layers of uric acid successively precipitated ; of which we may be
convinced by cutting the concretions transversely, which enables us
to perceive that they are almost entirely composed of concentric layers.

One of the principal diagnostic symptoms of calculus in the kidney
is the dark appearance of the urine, as if it were mixed with coffee
grounds, evidently depending on broken down particles of blood,
proceeding from the obscure but continued irritation of the kidney.
When this occurs in conjunction with a dull, heavy pain in the loins,
there can be very little doubt of the presence of calculus in the kid-
ney. In mere inflammation of this organ, when no calculus is pre-
sent, the urine does not put on the above appearance.

The symptoms which attend on a stone in the bladder are, a fre-
quent inclination to make water, which flows in a small quantity, is
often suddenly interrupted, and is voided towards the end with pain
in the glans penis. The patient, moreover, cannot bear any kind of
rough motion ; neither can he make use of any severe exercise, with-
out enduring great torture, and perhaps bringing on either a discharge
of bloody urine, or some degree of temporary suppression. With
these symptoms he experiences pain in the neck of the bladder, tenes-
mus, itching and uneasiness in the anus, frequent nausea, and some-
times a numbness of one or both thighs, with a retraction of one of
the testes.

The long-continued irritation of the coats of the bladder by the
stone, produces a considerable thickening in their substance, but
principally in the muscular coat, the packets of its fibres becoming
large, and incapable of that dilatation which they formerly possessed :
their irritability, however, increases, so that they are excited to con-
tract upon a few drops of urine, and thus, by pressing the stone against
the part, already too sensible to pain, an almost constant state of suf-
fering is kept up. The bladder in time becomes more diseased, the
inner coat constantly inflamed, and sometimes ulcerated : all the un-
favourable constitutional symptoms increase, and unless the stone is
removed, the patient's sufferings are only ended by death.

Disordered affections of the prostate gland are those which, with-
out proper attention, are most likely to be confounded with stone in
the bladder. One mark of distinction which the practitioner will do
well to attend to is, that in the prostate affection, the pain expe-
rienced in making water will be always in the commencement of mic-
turition, while, on the contrary, it is most usually during the passage
of the urine, or when the bladder is nearly emptied, that pains and
obstructions are perceived in cases of calculus. Another important
diagnostic of stone is, that the irritation which it induces does not so
much all'ect the general health as the same degree of local disturb-
ance from other causes. — (Thomas.)

Treatment.


386 Gravel.

which are the seat of the affection, and, second, by administering
stimulating diuretics. If we are called to treat a fit of the gravely
the most speedy way of giving relief will be to administer an opiate,
the black drop, or an opium pill ; the doses to be in proportion to the
urgency of the symptoms. This medicine will so far diminish the
sensibility of the parts, and at the same time take off the tension or
relax them, that the spasms or fit will be allayed. There is usually
very severe pain across the kidneys, proceeding from the irritation of
the calculus. When this symptom occurs, fomentations will be found
very useful. Hops and wormwood, simmered in vinegar, must be re-
peatedly applied, and it will be found of great service to throw the pa-
tient into a free perspiration ; to effect which, let the feet be bathed,
and a strong infusion of spearmint tea be given ; this plant has a ten-
dency to allay the vomiting, to produce perspiration, and at the same
time promotes a discharge of urine ; and, should it be necessary, the
Vapour bath may be used. If there is a strangury, or difficulty of
passing the water, the spirits of mint may be freely given, combined
with the spirits of nitre.

The spirits of mint is made by pounding or bruising the green
plant (spearmint) to a pulp or soft mass, then adding sufficient of
the first runnings from the still of Holland gin, to make a satu-
rated tincture. The watery portion will so far dilute the gin, that it
may be taken without the addition of any menstruum. This is to be
given as often, and as much as the patient can bear. No fear need be
apprehended of inflammation arising from the stimulating properties
of this medicine. There is no other preparation with which I am ac-
qainted, so exceedingly efficacious in producing the discharge of urine,
as the above, in retention from any cause. I was lately called to a
case where two physicians exerted their skill in vain, in case of a re-
tention of urine from gravel and calculi, and after giving this prepara-
tion, or a similar one, all the symptoms of the complaint subsided in a
very short space of time.

Having none of the medicine then prepared, I went into the garden,-
and broke off a quantity of the tops of the plant, bruised it, and put
it into a quart bottle, and then filled it up with best Holland gin. Of
this I directed the woman to take about a wineglassful, (whether with
the addition of the spirits of nitre, or otherwise, I cannot now say,)
as often as the stomach would bear. The effect of the medicine was
almost immediate. Although she was exceedingly reduced from
pain, arising from a long retention of urine, but a very short time
elapsed before she was better.

Nor was she, like too many in this day, ungrateful for the benefit
received. In addition to the commendation bestowed, when I pre-
sented my bill, she most promptly produced a bag of silver, and
evinced, by her manner and feelings, a disposition to pay double the
amount. But, alas, where we find one patient of this description,
we find five, even after we have cured them of some desperate dis-
ease, who, instead of manifesting gratitude for the favour conferred,
refuse to pay, and probably will even censure.

Where the case is desperate, it may be necessary to use the warm
bath, to produce sufficient relaxation to afford relief. The patient


Gravel and Stone. 387

should take mucilaginous and diluent drinks : Buch as slippery -elm,
parsley, &c. Physic should also be given, and, in some cases, emol-
lient injections will be required.

After the urgent symptoms have been removed, and the ordinary
symptoms of gravel exist, a teaspoonful of the diuretic drops should
be given, two or three times a day, in a tumbler of wild carrot tea ;
and, at the same time, let the person drink the following decoction.

Take marshmallows, three ounces ;

Queen of the meadow, (spiraea ulmaria,) three ounces ;
Add four quarts of water ; boil to one ; then add two ounces of gum
Arabic, and half an ounce of nitre, (nitras potassae.)

The dose is a teacupful, four or five times a day. It may be
sweetened with honey. If nausea and vomiting attend the complaint,
give the solution of the bicarbonate of potash or salairatus. This also
has a tendency not only to allay the vomiting, but also to remove the
calculous affection.

Many persons have found great benefit from the use of Harlem oil,
but most that is now sold is counterfeit or spurious. I am acquainted
with but one place, in New York, where it can be obtained pure, (Van
Antwerp & Co.) I know not exactly the component parts of this
medicine, but believe it to be principally the product of the pine, tar
and balsam of sulphur.


SECTION II.

Stone.
Symptoms.

The symptoms of a stone in the bladder are, a sort of itching along
the penis, particularly at the extremity of the glans ; and hence the
patient often acquires the habit of pulling the prepuce, which becomes
very much elongated ; frequent propensities to make water, and go
to stool; great pain in voiding the urine, and difficulty of retaining it,
and often of keeping the fasces from being discharged at the same
time : the stream of urine is liable to stop suddenly, while flowing in
a full current, although the bladder is not empty, so that the fluid is
expelled by fits as it were ; the pain is greatest towards the end of,
and just after the evacuation ; there is a dull pain about the neck of
the bladder, together with a sense of weight or pressure at the lower
part of the pelvis : and a large quantity of mucus is mixed with the
urine ; and sometimes the latter is tinged with blood, especially after
exercise. — (Sharp, Earle, Sabatier.)

Frequently (says Deschamps) a patient will have a stone in his
bladder a long while without the occurrence being indicated by the
symptoms. (See Case in Howship on Complaints affecting the Secretion
and Excretion of the Urine, p. 125.) Most commonly, however, the
presence of the stone is announced by pain in the kidneys, more
especially in adults and old persons ; children scarcely ever suffering
in this way, because in them the stone is hardly detained in the kid-
neys and ureters at all, but descends immediately into the bladder.

It seldom happens that calculous patients void blood with their urine
before the symptoms usually caused by the stone have taken place.

Vol. II. 3 A


388 Stone -

It is not till after the foreign body has descended into the bladder,
acquired some size, and presented itself at the orifice of that viscus>
that pain is occasioned, particularly when the surface of the stone i*
unequal. The patient then experiences frequent inclination to make
water, attended with pain. The jolting of a carriage, riding on
horseback, and much walking, render the pain more acute. The
urine appears bloody, and its course is frequently interrupted, and
sabulous matter, and particles of stone, are sometimes discharged
with it. The want to make water becomes more frequent and more
insupportable. The bladder is irritated and inflames, its parieles
become thickened and indurated, and its diameter is lessened. A
viscid, more or less tenacious matter is observed in greater or less
quantity in the urine, and is precipitated to the bottom of the vessel.
The urine becomes black and putrid, and exhales an intolerable alka-
lescent smell, which is perceived at the very moment of the evacua-
tion, and is much stronger a little while afterward. The patient can
no longer use any exercise without all his complaints being redoubled.
Whenever he takes much exercise the urine becomes bloody ; the
pain about the hypochondria, which was dull in the beginning, growi
more and more acute ; the ureters and kidneys participate in the
irritation with the bladder ; they inflame and suppurate, and very
soon the urine brings away with it purulent matter. The fever in-
creases, and changes into one of a slow type ; the patient loses his
sleep and appetite, becomes emaciated and exhausted ; and death at
length puts a period to his misery. (See Trade Historique el Dogma-
tique de VOperaiion de la Taille, par J. F. L. Deschamps, t. i. p. 163.
Paris, 1796.)

It is acknowledged by the most experienced surgeons, that the
symptoms of a stone in the bladder are exceedingly equivocal, and
may be produced by several other disorders. " Pain in making water,
and not being able to discharge the urine without the faeces, are
common consequences of irritation of parts about the neck of the
bladder, from a diseased prostate gland, and other causes. The urine
stopping in a full stream is frequently caused by a stone altering it*
situation so as to obstruct the passage ; but the same thing may hap-
pen from a tumour or fungus in the bladder. I have seen an instance
of this, where a tumour, hanging by a small pedicle, would sometimes
cause obstruction, and by altering the posture would retire and give
a free passage. The dull pain at the neck of the bladder, and the
sensation of pressure on the rectum, are frequently owing to the
weight of the stone, &c; but these may proceed from a diseased en-
largement of the prostate gland. Children generally, and grown
persons frequently, are subject to a prolapsus ani, from the irritatidn
of a stone in the bladder ; but it will likewise be produced by any
irritation in those parts." — (Earle.) The rest of the symptoms are
equally fallacious ; a schirrous enlargement of the os tincae and disease
of the kidneys may occasion a copious quantity of mucus in the urine,
with pain, irritation, dec. " The least fallible sign," says Sir James
Earle, " which I have remarked, is the patient making the first por-
tion of urine with ease, and complaining of great pain coming on when
the last drops are expelled. This may readily be accounted for, from


Stone. 389

the bladder being at first defended from contaet with the stone by the
urine, and at last being pressed naked against it. But to put the
matter out of all doubt, and actually to prove the existence of a stone
in the bladder, we must have recourse to the operation of sounding."

A stone in the ureter or kidneys, or an inflammation in the bladder
from any other cause, will sometimes produce the same effects : but
if the patient cannot urinate, except in a certain posture, it is almost
a sure sign that the orifice of the bladder is obstructed by a stone.
If he finds ease by pressing against the perineum with his fingers, or
sitting with that part upon a hard body, there is little doubt the ease
is procured by taking off the weight of the stone ; or, lastly, if, with
the other symptoms, he thinks he can feel it roll in his bladder, it is
hardly possible to be mistaken ; however, the only sure judgment is
to be formed from searching.

An enlarged prostate gland is attended with symptoms resembling
those of a stone in the bladder ; but with this difference, that the mo-
tion of a coach, or horse, does not increase the grievances when the
prostate is affected, while it does so in an intolerable degree in cases
of stone. It also generally happens, that the fits of the stone come
on at intervals : whereas the pain from a diseased prostate is neither
so unequal nor so acute. — (Sharp, in Critical Inquiry, p. 165. 4th.
edit.)

Though, from a consideration of all the circumstances abovo related,
the surgeon may form a probable opinion of there being a stone in the
bladder, yet he must never presume to deliver a positive one, nor ever
be so rash as to undertake lithotomy, without having greater reasons
for being certain that there is a stone to be extracted. Indeed, all
prudent surgeons, for centuries past, have laid it down as an invariable
maxim, never to deliver a decisive judgment, nor undertake lithotomy,
without having previously introduced a metallic instrument, called a
sound, into the bladder, and plainly felt the stone. — (Cooper.)

I know of at least seven cases, and at two of them I was present,
where the patients were subjected to all the torture and perils of this
operation, without there being any calculi in their bladders. The
maxim, therefore, cannot be too strictly enforced, that the operation
ought never to be attempted, unless the stone can be distinctly felt
with the sound or staff. In one of the examples, of which I was a
spectator, not only the symptoms, but the feel which the sound itself
communicated when in the bladder, made the surgeons imagine that
there was a calculus, or some extraneous body in this organ. Most
of the above cases, I understand, recovered, which may be considered
fortunate ; because, when the stone cannot be found, the disappointed
operator is apt to persist in roughly introducing his fingers and a
variety of instruments, so long, in the hope of catching what cannot
be got hold of, that inflammation of the bladder and peritoneum is
more likely to follow, than when a stone is actually present, soon
taken out, and the patient kept only a short time upon the operating
table. — (Cooper.)

In a valuable practical work, is recorded an instance, in which what
is called a horny cartilaginous state of the bladder made the sound
communicate a sensation like that arising from the instrument actually


S90 Stone.

touching a stone, and the surgeon attempted lithotomy. This patient
unfortunately died in twenty-four hours. — (See Desault's Parisian
Chir. Journal, vol ii. p. 125.)

However, were the symptoms most unequivocal, there is one cir-
cumstance which would always render it satisfactory to touch the
stone with an instrument, just before the operation, I mean the pos-
sibility of a stone being actually in the bladder to-day, and not lo-mor.
row. Stones are occasionally forced, by the violent contractions of
the bladder, during fits of the complaint, between the fasciculi of the
muscular coat of this viscus, together with a portion of the mem-
branous lining of the part, so as to become what is termed encysted.
Or, as there is reason to believe, the cyst is sometimes produced first,
and the calculus is formed in it, as a kind of effect of the existence
of the separate pouch. The opening into the cyst is frequently very
narrow, so that the stone is much bigger than such orifice, in conse-
quence of which, it is impossible to lay hold of the extraneous body
with the forceps, and the operation would necessarily become fruitless.
- — (Sharp's Critical Inquiry, p. 228. 4th. edit.)

Treatment.

A great variety of means have been recommended for the removal
of this most formidable disease. The ingenuity of physicians has
been much puzzled to find out some agents that would have the power
to dissolve the stone ; and although some may possess considerable
virtue, it is pretty evident, that as yet there has been discovered no
specific. Lime-water, alkalies and various diuretic articles have
been extolled, but all have proved unavailing. Various liquids have
been injected into the bladder, in order to dissolve the stone, but none,
I believe, has been attended with much benefit.

It would appear that all internal medicines prove ineffectual, in
consequence of their acting only by sympathy, and therefore not
proving sufficiently powerful, or if they enter the circulation, they
still prove insufficient.

The most reasonable theory given of the formation and cure of the
gravel and stone, where it is effected, is given by Dr. Perry. He
states, that all that internal medicine can do, is to prevent any future
apposition of the stony concretions, by exciting a healthy action of
the urinary organs, and then depending entirely upon the power of the
urine alone to dissolve the stone ; and, in all probability, it is in this
way that medicine, when taken internally, proves efficacious in the
disease. In this manner, unquestionably, many persons have been
cured of stone in a very aggravated form, and the medicine given has
acquired the character of a solvent.

Some years ago, I was called forty or fifty miles from this city, to
see a lady labouring under a fistula. On my passage there, a gentle-
man stated to me that he had been for a length of time afflicted with
a stone in the bladder, and that he had been entirely cured of it by
taking a tea of a simple plant, which was the wild carrot (dancus syl-
vestris.) He voided forty-seven large pieces of stone, part of which
he exhibited to me, and the other pieces, he said, were in the hands of


Stone. 391

a physician in the city of New-York. He made a strong decoction of
the top or seeds of the plant, and drank it freely and very warm, and
continued the use of it a length of time. He stated also, that he had
found that when the stone produced a retention of the urine, he
avoided the difficulty by laying upon his back or in a recumbent po-
sition, by which the stone was thrown to the posterior part of the body,
and he was enabled to make water by turning on one, or the other
side.

The course which has been recommended in the preceding com-
plaint, the gravel, should be first thoroughly tried in this disease, and
if this should not prove effectual, I should recommend the patient to
submit to the use of the instrument called the lithontriptor, em-
ployed for crushing the stone in the bladder, by which the horrible
and dangerous operation of lithotomy, or cutting open the bladder, is
rendered unnecessary.

According to some accounts, it was invented by M. Le Roy d'Etioles,
but first brought into much notice by the exertions of Dr. Civiale,
of Paris. It is not for me to enter into the dispute concerning the
degree of merit which may belong in this subject to each of these
gentlemen, or to Baron Hourteloup, who has warmly defended the
priority of M. Le Roy's claim, at the same time that he has himself
contributed very much to the perfection of the instruments and the
success of the practice. The lithontriptor consists of a straight silver
catheter of considerable diameter, and enclosing another of steel, the
lower extremity of which consists of three branches, calculated to
grasp the stone, on withdrawing the steel catheter a short way within
the outer one, when they become approximated. The cavity of the
inner catheter is capable of admitting a steel rod, to which may be af-
fixed, at the surgeon's option, a simple quadrangular drill, or a straw-
berry-shaped file, or a trephine. By means of a spring the latter
part of the apparatus is pressed evenly inwards, and it is made to re-
volve with velocity through the medium of a bow, after the manner of
a common hand-drill. Chausier and Percy were requested by the
Royal Academy of Medicine at Paris, to examine the merits of this
new invention, and to draw up a report on the subject. " This re-
port (as a respectable journal states) speaks in very strong terms of
the success which the reporters witnessed in repeated trials by the
inventor ; and there can be no doubt, from the distinct and precise
evidence adduced by them, that none of the means previously sug-
gested for the same purpose can compete with the instrument now
proposed. The first case in which the reporters witnessed its appli-
cation, was that of a man thirty-two years old, who had a mulberry
calculus of considerable size. The experiment was made in presence
of Chaussier, Percy, Larrey, and several other surgeons of eminence.
The instrument having been introduced, and the stone caught at the
first attempt, ' at every stroke of the bow those present heard a
crackling sound, which announced both the hardness of the stone
and the rapidity of its demolition.' The operation was continued, at
occasional intervals, for forty minutes, during which the patient com-
plained rather of uneasiness than of decided pain. The instrument
was then withdrawn, and the patient immediately discharged with his


392 Stone.

urine a quantity of powdery detritus, which was supposed to form a
third part of the stone. The operation was renewed eleven days af-
terward, in presence of the same persons, and of Magendie and
Serres ; and again, a third time, ten days afterward. The quantity
of powdery matter then discharged, appeared to be equivalent to the
size of the stone, and no calculus could be afterward discovered in
the bladder by the most careful sounding. The second case was that
of a man affected with a calculus, of which the nucleus was a kidney-
bean. The urethra had been previously dilated by the successive
introduction of sounds of larger and larger diameters. The sound
caused in this instance was dull and obscure. The bladder being
irritable and disposed to contract, the operation was continued for a
shorter period than in the former case, and was resumed every third
day. Four operations removed the whole of the stone, the patient
being sounded after the fourth by one of the most dexterous lithoto-
mists in Paris. The stone in this case came off in sundry particles,
and little fragments loosely agglutinated by a viscous animal matter.
At the third operation, the forceps caught and brought away the bean,
deprived of its epidermis ; and at the next, the crust came away with
the remaining fragments of the stone. In the third case, the stone
was of the size of a pigeon's egg, and moderately hard. After three
operations, the cure, at the period of the delivery of the report, was
considered as nearly completed. Nothing unusual occurred in this
case, except that, on one occasion, the operator failed in catching hold
of the stone. The plan is evidently inadmissible when the stone is
too large to be seized with the forceps, when it is adherent, encysted,
or formed on a nucleus of a metallic or bony nature." — (See Arch.
G<?n. de Med., May, 1824, and Edinb. Med. and Surg. Journ., Jan.
1825.)

This invention, certainly, is a great desideratum, and a very im-
portant one ; for the idea of undergoing a surgical operation by the
knife for a stone, is most appalling, and by most persons is dreaded
more than the disease itself. The objections to the operation are
certainly very serious. About one fourth, it may be computed, die of
it, and often the bladder is opened and no stone found ; and even if one
or more is taken out, the same causes still remaining in the system,
are very liable to reproduce the complaint.

From the success which has attended this ingenious invention, by
those who well understand it, I confidently hope that this dreadful
operation will hereafter be dispensed with.

I speak with confidence on this subject, because I have had an op-
portunity of witnessing and learning the treatment and operation, aa
practised by an ingenious French surgeon.

Of thirty patients operated upon by M. Civiale, since the month of
April of the year just mentioned, twenty-five have been cured, and
the remainder were still under treatment when the memoir was pub-
lished. Among the former, was a lad seven years of age, in whom
the operation was attended with great difficulty, by reason of the im-
perfect developement of the parts, and the irritability of the patient ;
every obstacle, however, was surmounted ; the stone, of the size of
an almond, and composed of oxalate of lime, was perforated, and ex-
tracted in three sittings often minutes each. — (Cooper.)


Stone. 393

The author asserts that the reproduction of the calculi, is not more
frequent after lithotrity, than the common operation of lithotomy ; and
if the reverse should appear to be the case, it arises, according to him,
from the fatality attending the latter, which must of course diminish
the number of relapses. A priori, we might suppose they would oc
cur more frequently after lithotrity, in consequence of some small
fragments being left in the bladder, which would thus serve as nuclei
to fresh formations ; but this is in a great measure obviated by the
construction of the instruments, which affords great facility of ex-
tracting small bodies. In proof of which, M. Civiale states, that he
has removed pieces of straw, and other substances equally minute,
which had served as nuclei. — (Nouv. Biblioth. Med.)

Should this instrument, and the means recommended, fail of per-
forming a cure, I cannot conscientiously recommend the operation of
lithotomy as practised in this day. There is one, however, that might,
under some circumstances, be justifiable, and which I consider to be
altogether preferable to that now adopted. It is the ancient method
practised by Celsus, being safe, more simple, altogether less painful,
and more certain, and may even be performed on children without
causing great irritation or much hazard ; and we have the best au-
thority for stating, that nothing but the simplicity and the success at-
tending it, in the hands of every one who thought proper to make use
of the method, induced surgeons to abandon it, and to substitute in its
place the common operation of lithotomy. Interest, and new and
complicated inventions, then, were the cause of its falling into disuse.


Apparatus Minor Cutting on (lie Gripe, or Celsus' Method.

The most ancient kind of lithotomy was that practised upwards of
two thousand years ago by Ammonius, at Alexandria, in the time of
Herophilus and Erasistratus, and by Meges at Rome, during the reign
Celsiani. As the stone, fixed by the pressure of the fingers in the
anus, was cut directly upon, it has been called cutting on the gripe, a
knife and a hook being the only instrument used. The appellation
of the less apparatus was given to it by Marianus, in order to dis-
major, from the many instruments employed.

The operation was done in the following way. The rectum was
emptied by a clyster, a few hours previously ; and, immediately before
cutting, the patient was desired to walk about his chamber, to bring
the stone down to the neck of the bladder ; he was then placed in the
lap of an assistant, or secured in the manner now practised in the
lateral operation. The surgeon then introduced the fore and middle
fingers of his left hand, well oiled, into the anus ; while he pressed
with the palm of his right hand on the lower part of the abdomen,
above the pubes, in order to promote the descent of the stone. With
the fingers the calculus was next griped, pushed forwards towards the
neck of the bladder, and made to protrude and form a tumour on the
left side of the pcrinocum. The operator then took a scalpel and made


394 Stone.

a lunated incision through the skin and cellular Bubstance, directly on
the stone near the anus, down to the neck of the bladder, with the
horns towards the hip. Then, in the deeper and narrower part of the
wound, a second transverse incision was made on the stone into the
neck of the bladder itself, till the flowing out of the urine showed
that the incision exceeded in some degree the size of the stone. The
calculus, being strongly pressed upon with the fingers, next started
out of itself) or was extracted with a hook for the purpose. — (Celsus,
lib. 7. cap. 26. J. BelVs Principles, vol. ii. p. 42. Allan on Litho-
tomy, p. 10.)

The objections to cutting on the gripe are, the impossibility of
always dividing the same parts ; for those which are cut will vary
according to the degree of force employed in making the stone project
in the perinaeum. When little exertion is made, if the incision be
begun just behind the scrotum, the urethra may be altogether detached
from the prostate ; if the stone be much pushed out, the bladder may
be entered beyond the prostate, and both the vesicular seminales and
vasa deferentia inevitably suffer. Lastly, if the parts are just suffi-
ciently protruded, the neck of the bladder will be cut, through the
substance of the prostate gland. — (Allan on Lithotomy. Burns, in
Edinb. Surg. Journal, No. XIII. J. Bell, vol. ii. p. 59.)

The preceding dangers were known to Fabricius Hildanus, who
attempted to obviate them by cutting on a staff introduced through the
urethra into the bladder. He began his incision in the perineum,
about half an inch on the side of the raphe : and he continued the
cut, inclining the knife, as he proceeded, towards the hip. He con-
tinued to divide the parts till he reached the staff, after which he
enlarged the wound to such an extent as permitted him easily with a
, hook to extract the stone, whieh he had previously brought into the
neck of the bladder by pressure with the fingers in the rectum. —
(Burns.) In this way Mr. C. Bel) has operated with success. — (J.
Bell.)

The apparatus minor, as practised by Fabricius, with the aid of a
staff, is certainly a very simple operation on children, and some judi-
cious surgeons doubt the propriety of its present neglected state.
You cut, says an eminent writer, upon the stone, and make of course
with perfect security an incision exactly proportioned to its size.
There is no difficult nor dangerous dissection : no gorget nor other
dangerous instrument thrust into the bladder, with the risk of its pass-
ing between that and the rectum ; you are performing expressly the
lateral incision of Raw and Cheselden, in the most simple and favour-
able way. The prisca simplicitas instrumeniorum seems to have been
deserted for the sake of inventing more ingenious and complicated
operations. — (J. Bell.)

Celsus has delivered one memorable precept in his description of
lithotomy, ut plaga paulo major quam calculus sit ; and he seems to
have known very well that there was more danger in lacerating than
cutting the parts.

The simplicity of the apparatus minor, however, formerly embold-
ened every quack to undertake it ; and as this was followed by the
evils and blunders unavoidably originating from ignorance, at the same


Gravel and Stone. 395

time that it diminished the emolument of regular practitioners, the
operation fell into disrepute. — (See Heistcr.) It was longer practised,
however, than all the other methods, having been continued to the
commencement of the 16th century; and it was performed at Bor.
deaijx, Paris, and other places in France, on patients of all ages, by
Raoux, even as late as 150 years ago. Frere Jaques occasionally
had recourse to it ; and it was successfully executed by Heister. —
(Part 2. chap. 140.) A modern author recommends it always to be
preferred, on boys under fourteen. — (Allan, p. 12.)


Enlargement of the Prostate Gland.
Symptoms.

Sense of weight and bearing down in the perineum ; frequent in-
clination to make water, with difficulty and pain in voiding it ; great
costiveness ; the evacuation of faeces is attended with much pain, and
is in general accompanied with a discharge of urine ; micturition and
dysuria increase, and at length a total suppression takes place.

Diagnosis.

The urine and faeces discharged at the same time ; the patient, in
making water, is observed to kneel and separate his legs from each
other, in order to effect a relaxation of the muscles ; an examination
per rectum, when a large irregular tumour will be discovered in the
situation of the prostate gland.

• Treatment.

Recourse should be had to all those means which allay irritation in
the urinary organs. The internal use of opium, cicuta ; the occa-
eional or constant use of a catheter. — (See Gravel and Stone.)


Voi. 11. ^B


CHAPTER XXVIII.

AMPUTATION.


"It is an excellent observation, founded on the purest humanity, and justified by the
soundest professional principles, that to save one limb is infinitely more honourable to the
surgeon, than to have performed numerous amputations, however successful,"


I introduce the subject of amputation here, not to give the method
of performing it, but to make some remarks upon the propriety or
impropriety of it in many diseases.

" From the earliest periods," says Gibson, " the question of the
propriety or impropriety of amputation, in certain diseases and inju-
ries, has been agitated with warmth and even acrimony ; some con-
tending that the operation was scarcely ever necessary under any
circumstances ; others, that patients were often suffered to die for the
want of it. Unfortunately, these points are almost as unsettled at the
present day, as at any former period." — (Gibson's Surgery.)

It certainly must be admitted, that the act of performing amputa-
tion is proof of the surgeon's ignorance ; for, if he possesses skill
or knowledge of the healing art, he would be enabled to cure the
disease for which he amputates.

" The amputation of a limb," says Pott, " is an operation terrible
to bear, horrid to see, and must leave the person on whom it has
been performed, in a mutilated and imperfect state."

When we reflect how often this operation is performed, either
through the desire of obtaining notoriety, ignorance or other causes,)
it is enough to produce a strong feeling of indignation in the mind of
every feeling person.

In every direction, there are cases in which amputation has been
proposed, which have been cured by very simple means, or perhaps
the efforts of nature alone ; thus showing conclusively, that practi-
tioners in this day labour under a most lamentable error.

A case occurred in New-Jersey, where a man injured his leg, and
where a physician decided that it must be amputated ; and after it was
cured by another physician, he felt so indignant at the first, who
wished to deprive him of it unnecessarily, that he could scarcely re-
-frain, when he saw him, from "kicking" him with it.

Let us briefly examine into the reasons given for amputation,
and refer to the diseases for which it is performed.

And, first — Compound Fractures, particularly of the ankle joint. It
has been thought necessary to amputate almost in every case for this
accident. A noted surgeon of this city was always in the habit of it.
But, to show that it is unnecessary to amputate in such cases, even
without tho benefit of any reformed system of medicine, I shall quote
some remarks and cases, as recorded by Sir Astley Cooper, in a work
of his, on dislocations and fractures of the joints.


Amputation. 397

Speaking of compound dislocations of the ankle, he says, " is ampu-
tation required ?" The first question which arises upon this subject, is
the following :

is Amputation generally necessary in Compound Dislocations of the

Ankle ?

My answer is, certainly not. Thirty years ago, it was the practice
to amputate limbs for this accident, and the operation was then
thought absolutely necessary for the preservation of life, by some of
our best surgeons ; but so many limbs have been saved of late years,
indeed I may so say, so great a majority of these cases exist, that
such advice would now be considered not only injudicious, but cruel.
I shall now proceed to state the cases which have induced me to say
that amputation, as a general rule, is improper.

CASE I.

I was, many years since, going into the country with a friend of
mine, and we met with a surgeon on our journey, who put this ques-
tion : " How do you act in compound dislocations of the ankle joint ?"
I do not recollect the reply, but he proceeded to say, " I have had a
case of compound dislocation of the ankle joint under my care, in
which I told the patient he must lose his limb. Not approving this
advice, his friends sent for another surgeon, who said he thought he
could save it ; the patient placed himself under his care, and the man
is recovering."

About thirty years ago I received from Mr. Lynn, of Woodbridge,
now Dr. Lynn, of Bury, St. Edmunds, the astragalus of a man broken
into two pieces, which he had taken from a dislocated ankle joint.
His letter is as follows :


Dear Sir : — J. York, aged thirty-two years, being pursued by some
bailiffs, jumped from the height of several feet to avoid them. The
tibia, and a part of the astragalus protruded at the inner ankle. I
immediately returned the parts into their natural situation. Suppura-
tion ensued ; and in five weeks a portion of the astragalus separated,
and another piece a week afterwards, which, when joined, formed the
ball of that bone. In three months the joint was filled with granula-
tions. It soon afterwards healed, and the man recovered with a good
use of the limb.

cask iti.

(Communicated by Dr. Battley.)

A person threw himself from a window and produced a compound
dislocation of the ankle joint. The tibia was thrown on the inner
side of the foot, and when the finger was passed into the wound, the
astragalus was discovered to be shattered in a number of pieces. A
neighbouring surgeon was sent for, who, on viewing the case, pro-
posed an immediate amputation, which was not acceded to. Mr.


398 Amputation,

Cooper and myself were requested to take charge of the case. The
loose and unconnected portions of the bone were removed, and the
tibia was replaced. The parts were ordered to be kept cool by fre-
quent applications of evaporating lotions. Suppuration continued, but
after four or five months, filled up, and the joint healed at the end of
nine months, but the ankle was stiff. In two years he could walk with
out the aid of a stick, and at the end of three or four years was near-
ly as well as at any former period of his life.


Compound Dislocation of the Tibia, inward.

Mr. Knowles, a farmer, was thrown from his chaise, against the
hinder wheel of a wagon, and dislocated the tibia inward, and fractur-
ed both the tibia and fibula. Mr. Richards, who was called, reduced
the dislocation, and endeavoured to heal the wound by adhesion.
When I saw Mr. Knowles, which was ten days after the accident, the
wound wore a favourable aspect. The discharge was abundant, but
not in a degree to excite alarm, and all I had to do was to praise the
judgment which led to the preservation of the limb. The wound per-
fectly healed, and the patient walks without the use of a stick.

CASE V.

Compound Dislocation of the Tibia outwards.

Elizabeth Chisnel, received a compound dislocation of the ankle
joint outwards. The wound communicated with the joint, which was
situated upon the outer part of the leg, and was about four inches in
extent, through which the fibula projected two inches. The liga-
ments connecting the malleolus externus and the astragalus were
lacerated. From the inclination of the sole of the foot inwards, the
whole surface of the joint was so displaced as to allow two fingers to
pass readily across. The tibia was fractured. The parts were re-
turned to their original situation, straps of adhesive plaster applied,
and the leg splintered. The parts discharged freely, and in two
months the wounds were almost healed. During the progress of the
cure, there was not much constitutional disturbance.

CASE VI.

Compound Dislocation of the Tibia inward.

Mr. George Caruthers received a compound dislocation of the
ankle joint inwards, with fracture of the tibia, the end of which pro-
jected through the integuments of the inner ankle, two or three inches,
and the bone was tightly embraced by the skin. A considerable por-
tion of the bone' afterwards came away, when the sore immediately
healed, and he is now in better health than he was before the ac-
cident.

Mr. Somerville relates the following cases. Two patients were re-
ceived in the Stafford Infirmary, with compound dislocation of the
ankle-joint. They were both dislocated inwards, and were both dis-


Amputation. 399

charged cured ; the one at the end of the fifth, the other not till the
end of the seventh week.

CASE VII.
(Communicated by Dr. Scarr.)
Compound Dislocation of the Tibia outwards.
John Plumb, in descending upon a ladder, with a sack of oats upon
his shoulders, received a compound dislocation of the tibia outwards.
The tibia and fibula had penetrated through the integuments at the
outer ankle, and were lying on the outside of the foot. The articula-
tory surface of the astragalus had penetrated through the integuments
of the inner ankle, the foot nearly reversed, the bottom of the foot
being placed where the side of the foot was naturally situated. The
bones and integuments were replaced, and cooling lotions applied.
Abscesses took place, and after five-and-twenty weeks, the man was
convalescent, union of the articulatory surfaces took place, the wounds
healed, and the patient became able to walk. He could not bear to
work much on his foot till about twelve months after the accident,
from which time he has been constantly labouring.

CASE VIII.
(Communicated by Dr. Abbott.)
Compound Dislocation of the Tibia inwards.
Mr. Robert Cutting, near seventy years of age, corpulent, intem-
perate and subject to gout from his youth, in a dispute m a state of in-
toxication, was thrown violently to the ground, and suffered a com-
pound dislocation of the tibia at the ankle-joint. The end of it was
forced through the integuments nearly four inches, and the wound was
large. In the struggle to stand erect, he rested his weight upon the
end of the bone, which was covered with sand and dirt. The cavity
of the articulating surface of the joint was filled with blood and sand,
the fibula fractured, and the foot completely turned outwards. He
was now carried several miles in a cart, and it was five hours before
surgical assistance was rendered, in the middle of a cold night. A.
case so formidable, a large wound, the connecting ligaments lacerated,
the surface of the articulating parts long exposed and much injured,
led me to conclude that it would be impossible to save the limb, in a
constitution so disordered. However, no persuasion could prevail with
a mind obstinate and inflexible ; he would not submit to amputation.
The surfaces were as carefully and expeditiously as possible made
clean with warm water; the reduction wos easily accomplished; the
lacerated parts properly placed, and the edges of the wound brought
nearly in apposition, without stitches or adhesive plaster. 1 he limb
was laid upon a propcr-sized thin board, so as to take the form ot the
leer, with an opening to receive the outer ankle. Refrigerant lotions
were applied, and the svstem properly attended to. After ten weeks
he was taken from his bed, and the wound was healed. At the end
of five months, he %vas allowed to go upon crutches, and, to please
himself, the patient plunged his foot and ankle into the paunch ot an
ox. In twelve months, he could walk without a stick.


400 Amputation.


CASE IX.

(Communicated by Dr. Ransom.)
A female, of a scrofulous habit, fell from a high stool, and caused
a compound dislocation of the ankle-joint. The foot was dislocated,
the external malleolus was fractured, a lacerated wound extended half
round the joint, and laying the cavity of the joint so open as freely to
admit the finger, and through it the synovial fluid escaped. The pa.
tient recovered.

case x.
(Communicated by Dr. Chandler.)
Compound Dislocation of the Tibia inwards, and Fracture of the Thigh.
A bricklayer fell from a height of from between thirty and forty
feet, and received a fracture of the thigh, a considerable contusion
and laceration of the left ankle-joint, accompanied with a dislocation
of the bones inward, the tibia resting upon the inner side of the astra-
galus. The fibula was broken, and the ligaments lacerated. The
question arose on the propriety of amputation, but I ventured to give
him a chance of saving the limb. Evaporating lotions were applied,
and a cooling course enjoined. Considerable inflammation followed,
with the symptoms of gangrene, but they soon disappeared, and the
patient gradually improved until the tenth week. In fourteen weeks
he was discharged well.

I treated another case of the compound dislocation of the ankle,
which was also cured.

Remarks.
(Communicated by Dr. Stephen S. Hammick.)
The result of my observations has been, that in cases of compound
dislocations of the ankle-joint, there is not only a chance of saving
the limb, but that limb being useful.

The following case shows that, under the most unfavourable circum-
stances, these injuries are not destructive to life in sound constitutions.
I was called, five weeks after the accident, to reduce a dislocation
of the ankle, as he had reduced the fracture of the fibula. I saw the
patient, but the fractured fibula was so firmly united, that a reduction
could not be attempted. The compound dislocation gradually got
well, and no bad symptoms arose.

28 Park Street, Bristol,
October 20th, 1818.
My Dear Sir : — During the twenty -two years I have been surgeon
to the Bristol Infirmary, and I believe during my apprenticeship there,
making in all nearly thirty years, it has been our invariable practice to
endeavour to save the limb in cases of compound dislocation of the
ankle, unless where the chance was annihilated by some concomitant
injuries or circumstances : but as a general rule, it was always adhered
to, which it would not have been, unless the great majority of cases
had done well. We save the limb in private practice almost inva-
riably, unless in very bad cases indeed.

R. SMITH.


Amputation. 401

Dr. Fisk communicates the following case. A man fell from a lad-
der, and dislocated the tibia inwards, the bone protruding through the
integuments. The man recovered, and has a very useful limb.


(Communicated by Dr. Maddox.)

A man was thrown from a horse, and dislocated his ankle. The end
of the bone protruded through a large, lacerated and contused wound,
and which was broken four inches above the joint ; ligaments torn.
The patient, in three months, recovered the use of the joint, and from
this time experienced no inconvenience from the accident.

Two other cases communicated by the same.

Two cases of dislocation occurred in boys, by falls from horses.
In both cases the ankle was broke, and the bones protruded through
the flesh. Both recovered.

CASE XII.
(Communicated by Dr. Ormond.)
A lad, thirteen years old, got his foot entangled in machinery, and
caused a bad compound dislocation of the tibia and fibula. The bones
protruded four or five inches through the integuments, which were
dreadfully lacerated. The wound extended from the ankle nearly to
the knee ; the bones of the foot were very loose, being torn from their
connecting ligaments. It seemed impossible to save the limb, and I
was about to amputate, but deferred it. In fifteen weeks after he re-
ceived the injury, he was able to walk to the factory without crutches.


I was about to proceed to detail thirty or forty cases more of the
game nature, many of which were much worse than any of the pre-
ceding, but the limits of this work will not permit. Those who wish
further information on this subject, may refer to Sir Astley Cooper's
work on Dislocations and Fractures of the Joints.

A volume might be filled with cases of accidents occurring in
other parts of the system, where amputation is commonly practised,
and which have been cured without it by very mild means. I trust,
however, that I have already exhibited proof enough to satisfy every
judicious person, that amputation is very rarely or seldom necessary,
in the worst cases of compound fracture.

2d. Mortification. — I know of no disease in which amputation is ren-
dered more unnecessary, than for mortification ; and that according
to the very principles now laid down in surgery. It is admitted, that
if a limb, in a state of gangrene, be cut off, that the stump will par-
take of the same character, and thus prove fatal : and therefore it is
now recommended never to amputate, until a line of demarcation is
formed between the living and the dead part, or, in other words, until
the disease is arrested. Then, according to this theory and practice,
there is no propriety in removing a limb until the disease gets well or
begins to grow better, for which the limb is removed. Any attempt
to refute a doctrine so palpably absurd, is rather imposing upon the
good sense of the reader. It carries its own refutation on the very
face of it.


403 Amputation.

I know of no complaint that can be more successfully treated, than
mortification ; and amputating for it, was it in reality a remedy, would
be useless and cruel. I shall, therefore, not dwell upon this subject,
but leave it for all sober minded persons to decide how far my state-
ment or views coincide with correct principles of the healing art.

3d. While Swellings. — Limbs are now removed for white swellings,
but with what propriety, I cannot see. Although it is an obstinate
complaint, yet it is a curable one, as I have demonstrated in numerous
instances, ever since I commenced the practice of medicine. I have
found a sovereign remedy for this most afflicting complaint, for which
little else but blisters are recommended, (and which may truly be said
to be the oppropria medicorum.)

An interesting child, afflicted with this complaint, the other day was
led from one of the wards of the hospital into the amputating theatre,
writhing in agony in anticipation of the dreadful calamity about to
come upon him, while a set (shall I not say) of human butchers were
eagerly waiting to display their adroitness in using the amputating
knife. His leg was removed for a common white swelling, which I
should only have required the period of three months effectually to
have removed.

Let this case be contrasted with one that recently occurred in a
lady of this city, labouring under the same disease. She was told
that her leg must be amputated for it ; but by the application of ve-
getable agents alone, the inflammation, pain and swelling subsided,
and she has now the use of it, and can walk as well as ever. And,
did the limits of this work permit, a vast number of similar cases
might be adduced, to corroborate these principles.

4th. Necrosis, or Diseased Bone. — Amputation is recommended and
practised for necrosis, or diseases of the bone ; but this arises, as in
other cases, in consequence of the ignorance of the surgeon. If he
Understood his business, or was a skilful physician, he would be able to
treat this disease successfully, without ever resorting to amputation.
I have never yet seen a case in which I deemed it necessary ; and I
do not believe that it is justifiable in any case whatever ; and of this,
every practitioner who has had much experience in surgery, must be
fully aware. The efforts of nature in expelling dead or diseased
bones, is truly astonishing ; and whoever is acquainted with her salu-
tary and powerful efforts, if he possesses only a moderate share of medi-
cal skill, would never think of using the knife in affections of this kind.

5th. Cancer. — Amputation is now performed for cancerous diseases,
particularly for the fungus haematodes. But it is well known, and
generally acknowledged, that after the patient undergoes an operation
for any of these complaints, it returns with greater violence than
ever. The cancerous humour, or virus, is so extensive and so inter-
woven with the adjacent parts, or the vessels concerned in the produc-
tion of the disease, that only a portion can be removed. So far from
even affording relief, it usually aggravates the disease.

A writer remarks, that " when this disease shows itself only exter-
nally, internal organs are mostly at the same time similarly affected."

The very nature of this complaint is sufficient to prove that the
knife is no remedv for it.


Amputation. 403

6th. Ulcers. — Surgeons perform amputation for inveterate ulcers,
which certainly evinces great ignorance and cruelty, for it requires
but a small share of medical knowledge to cure the worst species of
ulcers. But some surgeons, even if they had skill to cure them,
would much rather have the name of cutting off a limb, than saving
it by any treatment whatever. Again and again we have been called
to obstinate ulcers, where amputation has been proposed as the only
remedy, and we have succeeded in effecting a cure. I have never
yet seen one which has required amputation, nor do I believe
that any ever occur which require it.

I have thus briefly treated of the various diseases for which ampu-
tation is usually performed, and I think I have shown that few, if any,
call for it. I grant, that if the practitioner have no other resources
than such as are laid down in surgical works for the removal of the
various diseases for which amputation is performed, that it might be
often necessary. But inasmuch as the treatment pointed out in this
work is sufficient to cure these diseases, it should be dispensed with,
at any rate, with very few exceptions.

Poor must be the resources of that surgeon who has not sufficient
skill to prevent the necessity of amputation. How much more credit-
able would it be to him to save a limb, than ever so handsomely to
amputate it.

In concluding this chapter, I shall again quote the remarks inserted
in Gibson's Surgery, on bony tumours.

In Dr. Gibson, on bony tumours, page 136-7, is the following, to
the same import :

" Whoever attends a European Infirmary, will be struck with the
diversity and multiplicity of operations performed upon the most
trivial occasions. Will it be credited, when I say that the illustrious
founder of American surgery, during a practice both hospital and pri-
vate, of thirty years, and more extended than that of any other indi-
vidual of our country, has hardly ever had occasion to resort to ampu-
tation ? It may be asked what became of his patients ? I answer,
they have been cured by general and local means. Doctor, said a
surgeon of Pennsylvania hospital, to a distinguished practitioner of a
neighbouring city, what would be done in your town with such a leg ?
We should cut it off, was his reply. We can cure it here without, re-
joined the other. ' In a certain London hospital,' says Dr. Gregory,
' a patient was under the care of the pbysicians, on account of a very
bad leg, which baffled their skill, and appeared to them almost hope-
less ; they therefore requested a consultation of the surgeons, to ex-
amine the leg and to decide what should be done with it. The surgeons
accordingly met, examined it, consulted about it, and resolved nemine
contradicente, that the leg could not be saved, and ought to be cut off.
They cut it off without delay. But, strange to tell, the physicians, at
their next visit, on examining the patient, found, to their great astonish-
ment, the supposed hopeless leg as fast to his body as ever it had been.

fi l The puzzle was soon explained. It happened that the man had two
legs, both of them very bad ; o;<ie the physicians thought they could
aave, the other they despaired of. There being but right and wrong,
it was not very marvellous that the consultation took the wrong. Both

Vol. II. 8 C


404 Amputation.

physicians and surgeons, I believe, were a little disconcerted at that
quid pro quo ; and as it was thought rather a strong measure to cut off
both of the man's legs, they exerted themselves to the utmost and
saved the leg which should have been cut off; so that, after all, the
poor man was but one leg out of pocket.

"'As I was not an eye-witness of this edifying transaction, it is proper
to give some notion of the genealogy of the story, which is very short
and simple. I have it from a reverend clergyman, who had it from
one of the physicians concerned, and who is now one of the most
eminent of his profession in London. I know both the clergyman
and the physician intimately ; I know them both to be men of veracity
and men of sense ; and I have no doubt the facts were just as I have
stated them.'

"These remarks may appear, perhaps, irrelative, but I am satisfied
of their importance, and shall be gratified if they tend to check the
disposition, so prevalent among surgeons, to use the knife; or con-
tribute, in a single instance, to alleviate pain or remove diseases by
milder or more appropriate means."

Even supposing that amputation ever was required, the practice of
doing it immediately should be deprecated. The act of performing
the very painful operation of cutting off a limb immediately after a
severe injury, is sufficient of itself to produce the most serious conse-
quences, besides depriving the patient of any chance of saving his
limb. All the pretexts for immediate amputation, can never convince
me of the propriety of such a course.

It has often been the case that an operation has been immediately
proposed, and when for some reasons it has been deferred a few
hours, such a change has taken place as has induced the surgeon to
abandon it and the patient has recovered.

Two conclusions, then, are to be drawn from the preceding remarks.
1st. That the diseases for which amputation is performed may be
cured without resorting to it. 2d. Should it become necessary ever
to amputate, a dangerous, if not fatal error, is practised, by performing
such operation prematurely.

In concluding this chapter, I would now ask — for what disease is
amputation necessary ?


CHAPTER XXIX.

Dropsy of the Scrotum and Spermatic Cord — (Hydrocele.)


Hydrocele is an accumulation of water within the cavity of the
tunica vaginalis of the testis, of the spermatic cord, or in the cellular
membrane of the scrotum.


SECTION I.

Dropsy of the Scrotum — (Hydrocele.)

Symptoms.

An accumulation of a fluid is first perceived to commence at the bot-
tom of the scrotum, which gradually increasing, the latter becomes
enlarged and distended ; a distinct fluctuation is generally to be dis-
tinguished ; the tumour acquires a pyramidal shape ; there is no pain
nor discolouration of the integuments ; and, upon viewing the parts
near to a strong light, a transparency is observable.

Diagnosis.

It is distinguished from other diseases by its shape, which is con-
stantly pyramidal, except where the patient has had a hernia, or
where the disease has been taken for hernia, and a truss has been
worn, when it acquires an oblong shape ; — by its transparency ; yet
this criterion is rendered fallacious when the investing membranes
have previously undergone inflammation, in which case they become
thickened and impermeable to light ; — by the fluctuation of the con-
tained fluid ; by the tumour having first commenced at the bottom of
the scrotum.

From Hernia. — By the tumour not dilating when the patient coughs ;
by the tumour in the one disease commencing at the top of the scro.
turn, in the other at the bottom ; by the facility of returning the pro-
truded intestine, in reducible hernia, into the abdomen.

From Disease of the Testicle. — By the want of discolouration and
hardness, and the absence of that irregularity to the touch possessed
by scirrhus.

From Hatmatocele. — By the colour and shape of the tumour, and by
that disease suddenly coming on, and being usually the consequence
of accident.

From Anasarca of the Scrotum. — By the one being elastic to the feel,
the other cedematous ; the one pyramidal, the other irregularly shaped.

Treatment.
At the commencement of the disease, and when a small quantity
of fluid only is collected, attempts may be made to disperse it by in-
ternal and external applications. When it occurs in children, which
is often the case, it may readily be cured by proper treatment, without
ever evacuating the water by the trocar or lancet. It is usually con-


406 Dropsy of the Scrotum — (Hydrocele.)

nected with anasarca, or a general dropsical affection ; and we must
begin the treatment in the same manner as we do for general dropsy,
by administering hydragogues and diuretics.

Let the parts be fomented or steamed, by placing the patient over a
suitable-sized vessel, in which is put a strong decoction of bitter herbs ;
the heat or steam to be retained in the usual manner, by means of a
blanket. Immediately after, let the herbs be enclosed in mushn or
linen, and applied warm to the scrotum, to be repeated two or three
times a day. This treatment should be applied not only to children,
but to adults, as in some cases it may remove the disease without fur-
ther applications. But, when it has become large, it usually requires
a different course to effect a radical cure.

The water may first be drawn off in the following manner : Let
the patient be seated in a chair, when the practitioner will grasp a
portion of the tumour at its anterior and inferior part, between his
thumb and finger ; then with a lancet make a small puncture or inci-
sion, by which the contents of the scrotum will be discharged. Some
use a trocar, but there is no necessity for it ; a simple puncture is suffi.
cient. As soon as the water has been discharged, a tent must be in.
troduced into the orifice, sufficiently stiff; (and to the largest end there
should be a piece of silk thread tied, to keep it from entirely entering
the sac,) and another should be introduced in the course of twelve
hours, in order to keep the wound from healing, as a radical cure de-
pends in a considerable degree upon this circumstance.

Should there be any difficulty attending it, in consequence of the
wound healing too fast, a mild cscharotic must be applied to each tent,
before it is introduced, to enlarge it, or keep it open. As soon as the
water has been evacuated, every day afterwards Castile soap and wa-
ter, to which a small quantity of the tincture of gum myrrh has been
added, must be injected into the scrotum by a syringe, with a long pipe.
Jt should be strong enough to excite a little pain. After this, a plaster
of the black salve is to be applied, and the dressing secured by a suspen-
sory bandage ; and, should any inflammation follow, let a poultice be
applied.

The hydrocele may also be cured by introducing a seton into the
scrotum, and turning or drawing it a little every day, and using injec
lions as above mentioned.

This complaint, in all stages, is the most easily managed of any in
surgery ; at least I have found it so, having always cured it without
any difficulty. But, at the same time, it is, like other diseases, easily
controlled only when it is known how properly to treat it. It may be
said of every department of the healing art, that, it is simple when un-
derstood. But it is often extremely difficult to obtain this simple know-
ledge. It can only be acquired by honesty, perseverance, experience and
great research, especially when there is so much rubbish to clear away.
Sometimes the hydrocele is connected with an indurated state of
the testicle, and which Pott called the hydro-sarcocele. After the wa-
ter has been evacuated, by examining the testicle with a probe, it will
be found hard and insensible. The cure consists in keeping the ori-
fice open, and injecting occasionally stimulating liquids, sufficiently
$trong to excite a slight degree of inflammation.


Dropsy of the Scrotum — (Hydrocele.) 407

Some time ago I attended a gentleman in this city, who was
first attacked with a collection of water in the scrotum, which
continued to increase until the swelling or tumour hecame enor-
mous. I think it had continued for one or two years. It was
not transparent, but still its appearance indicated the existence
of more or less water. He had applied to several practitioners,
but so formidable had it become, that all except one were afraid
to undertake it. This surgeon proposed such a severe operation,
that the patient was deterred from having it performed. When
I commenced the treatment, I was doubtful what the event might
be, but I concluded to undertake it, and hazard the result. I first
punctured the tumour in the lower portion of it, about half an
inch from the septum, or middle portion. After making a puncture
with a lancet, I attempted to introduce a trocar, but the water flowed
so freely, that I found it quite unnecessary. After having evacuated
thirty or forty ounces of serous fluid, I injected, with a small syringe,
a weak solution of corrosive sublimate, which caused some inflamma-
tion, but it subsided in a few days. I -then introduced a long tent,
over which I placed a piece of lint, then a plaster of the black salve.
The whole dressings were then secured by a suspensory bandage.
In this manner it was dressed once or twice a day, (the injection ex-
cepted.) The patient was now very feeble, and confined to his bed;
and although there was a great diminution of the tumour, yet, from
the solution made use of, or injected into the scrotum, there was con-
siderable pain and inflammation. I next applied a poultice, which
soon reduced the inflammation, but still the patient did not recover ;
and, as the disease had become stationary, and assumed a very obsti-
nate and dangerous character, I requested a surgeon to examine the
disease with me. He did so, and, after introducing his probe, and
finding a scirrhous state of the testicle, he gave it as his opinion, that
castration was necessary to effect a cure. I could not, however,
agree with the gentleman, but communicated his opinion to the pa-
tient, who was totally unwilling to submit to the operation. I there-
fore continued my treatment, with very little variation. J applied
poultices and discuticnt ointments, until pus or matter collected, when,
after being discharged, the hardness, swelling and inflammation soon
subsided, and the man grew better very fast, and in a few weeks en-
tirely recovered.

Pott, speaking of this disease, thus remarks :

" An indurated or scirrhous testicle has, indeed, very frequently, a
quantity of fluid lodged in its vaginal coat, which is a circumstance
not to be wondered at ; the diseased state of the gland being sufficient
to account for the non-execution of the ahsorbent faculty, and, con-
sequently, for the collection of the water. But, although part of this
mixed tumour is undoubtedly owing to a fluid, and such fluid as is
lodged within the vaginal coat, yet it is a very different disease from
the true, simple hydrocele, and ought not to be confounded with it ;
one of these marks of the latter being the natural, soft, healthy state
of the testicle, and the characteristic of the former being its diseased
and indurated enlargement."


408 Dropsy of the Scrotum, <Sj-c. — (Hydrocele.)

" We are, by most of the writers on this subject, advised, in operating
for the radical cure of an hydrocele, to regard carefully the state and
condition of the testicle ; and, if we find it enlarged, hardened, pu-
trid, fungous, or any other way really diseased, to remove it imme-
diately."

"The testicle is first diseased, and the faculty of equal regular ab-
sorption thereby interrupted ; by which means a quantity of fluid is
accumulated, and that mixed appearance produced, which is not im-
properly called hydro-sarcocele. But in this case, the extravasation of
water is really the consequence of the morbid state of the gland ;
and (being still mere lymph) neither is, nor can be, the cause of it."

" Those who choose it, may call this a species of hydrocele ; and
the literal sense of the word will certainly vindicate them, but they
will by that means run the risk of confounding together two things
extremely unlike to each other, and which require very different treat-
ment : I mean the true, simple hydrocele, in which the testicle is
soft and sound, (only perhaps a little more lax, and larger than ordi-
nary,) and the hydro-sarcocele, in which the testicle is not only en-
larged, but hardened, and not in a sound or healthy state ; the former
of these will permit such treatment with perfect safety, but in the
other may bring the patient both into a state of pain and hazard."


SECTION II.

Hydrocele of the Spermatic Cord

extending to more or less of the cellular substance round the sperma-
tic vessels, and sometimes named the diffused hydrocele of the cord ;
the second form of the disease is that in which the fluid is collected
in a particular cavity or cyst, which has no communication with the
cavities of the common cellular substance of the cord. This case is
denominated, accordingly, the encysted hydrocele of the cord. The
cellular substance, situated behind the bag of the peritoneum, sur-
rounds the spermatic vessels, passes with them through the inguinal
ring, and accompanies them to their insertion in the testicle.

Hydrocele of the spermatic cord, says Cooper, may be defined as
a collection of water, which takes place in the tunica vaginalis, be-
tween the testicle and abdominal ring.

" Sometimes the fluid extends above the ring, giving rise to the idea
of its being inguinal hernia ; but you may judge of the nature of the
tumour by its blue and semi-transparent appearance, by its being
entirely unattended with pain, and by its not running into the abdo-
men, like inguinal hernia."

It is distinguished from hydrocele of the tunica vaginalis testis, by be-
ing situated above the testicle ; which, when the tumour is not large,
may be distinctly felt below.

From Anasarca of the Spermatic Cord. — By the smoothness, elaa-


Scirrhus of the Testicle. 409

hoity and fluctuation of the one tumour, and the oedematous feel of
the other.

It is often with great difficulty distinguished from hernia. — (See
Hernia.)

Treatment.

The treatment for this variety of the complaint must be very similar
to that recommended for a collection of water in the scrotum. The
water must first be evacuated, after which a little soap and water in-
jected, a tent introduced, and a plaster applied.

The common method is, simply to let out the water, and let the
wound heal immediately ; the consequence of which is, that the
water soon collects again, and the disease is worse than ever, and all
for the want of using the precaution which is obviously indicated from
the very nature of the complaint.

A German physician in this city requested me to aid him, or ac-
company him to perform an operation for a hydrocele of the spermatic
cord, which had previously been done by another surgeon ; but, as he
had let the puncture heal, it became necessary again to evacuate the
water. The tumour was punctured, and the water drawn off in the
usual manner ; but, no tent being introduced to keep the orifice open,
as a matter of course, it soon closed ; and, although I have not heard
from the patient since, I have no doubt that it was necessary soon to
renew the operation.

I intimated to the surgeon the propriety of keeping it open, but he
did not choose to depart from established principles, whether right or
wrong. Like Dr. Sangrado, when told by Gil Bias that almost all his
patients died under his prescriptions, he replied, " Never mind, Gil
Bias, we have written a book, and therefore perish the clergy, perish
the nobility, perish the people, but let us stick to its principles."


SECTION HI.

Scirrhus of the Testicle.

Symptoms.

An enlargement is first observed in the body of the testicle, which
becomes preternaturally hard, and gradually increases in size. An
acute, intermitting, lancinating pain ensues ; the colour of the inte-
guments becomes livid ; the surface assumes an irregular knotty ap.
pearance ; and often adhesions take place of the skin, forming inden-
tations which much resemble cicatrices. Ulceration supervenes ; the
edges of the ulcer become livid, sore, hard and retorted ; fungous
excrescences sp%ut forth ; and if timely means are not employed to
prevent the extension of the disease, the spermatic cord partakes of
the affection, becoming hard and knotty. Emaciation and hectic fe-
ver ensue.


410 Scirrhus of the Testicle — Varicocele and Cirsocele.

Diagnosis.

From Hernia Humoralis. — The one is an acute, the other a chronic
disease ; the one enlarging gradually, the other suddenly. In the
one the pain is intermittent, pungent, lancinating ; in the other con.
stant. In hernia humoralis the surface of the testicle is smooth, and
of the usual colour of inflammation ; in scirrhus it is livid, irregular,
or knotty.

From Hydrocele. — By the transparency of the tumour in that dis-
ease ; and other marks already mentioned. — (See Hydrocele.)}

Treatment.

It is recommended to remove the testicle, but this operation, I be-
lieve, is never attended with any success. Sir Astley Cooper, when
speaking of this disease, thus remarks : " The operation of castration
for this disease is, however, extremely unsuccessful, for it rarely
happens that the complaint does not return after the removal of the
scirrhous testicle.

The same course must be pursued for scirrhus of the testicle, as for
scirrhus of any other part.


SECTION IV.

Varicocele and Cirsocele.

Cirsocele is a varicose distention and enlargement of the spermatic
vein ; and whether considered on account of the pain which it some-
times occasions, or on account of a wasting of the testicle, which now
and then follows, it may truly be called a disease. It is frequently
mistaken for a descent of a small portion of omentum. The uneasi-
ness which it occasions is a dull kind of pain in the back, generally
relieved by suspension of the scrotum. It has been fancied to resem-
ble a collection of earth-worms ; but whoever has an idea of a varicose
vessel, will not stand in need of an illustration by comparison. It is
most frequently confined to that part of the spermatic process, which
is below the opening in the abdominal tendon ; and the vessels gene-
rally become rather larger as they approach the testis.

In general the testicle is perfectly unconcerned in, and unaffected
by, this disease 5 but it sometimes happens, that it makes its appear-
ance very suddenly, and with acute pain, requiring rest and ease ;
and sometimes, after such symptoms have been removed, Mr. Pott
has seen the testicle so wasted as hardly to be discernible. He has
also observed the same effect from the injudicious application of a
truss to a true cirsocele ; the vessels, by means of the pressure, be-
came enlarged to a prodigious size, but the testicle shrunk to almost
nothing. — (Pott's Works, vol. ii.)

Morgagni has remarked, that the disease is monr frequent in the
left than in the right spermatic cord ; a circumstance which he refers
to the left spermatic vein terminating in the renal. — (De Sedibus et
Cans. Morb. epist. xliii. art. 34.)


Varicocele and Cirsoctle — Hematocele. 411

Cirsocele is, more frequently than any other disorder, mistaken for
an omental hernia. As Sir Astley Cooper remarks, when large, it
dilates upon coughing ; and it swells in an erect, and retires in a re-
cumbent posture of the body. There is only one sure method of dis-
tinguishing the two complaints : place the patient in a horizontal pos-
ture, and empty the swelling by pressure upon the scrotum ; then
put the fingers firmly upon the upper part of the abdominal ring, and
desire the patient, to rise : if it is a hernia, the tumour cannot re-ap-
pear, as long as the pressure is continued at the ring; but if a cirso-
cele, the swelling returns with increased size, on account of the re-
turn of blood into the abdomen being prevented by the pressure. — (A*
Cooper on Inguinal Hernia.)

Treatment.

In general the disease occasions very little inconvenience, and the
patient seldom applies for medical aid ; but, sometimes the distention
becomes very great, and the patient suffers inconvenience from it ; a
severe pain in the back and loins. The treatment consists in applying
fomentations, refrigerant or cooling washes, occasional purgatives,
and a suspensory bandage.


°ection v k

Hematocele

Is a tumour formed by an extravasation of blood in the tunica vagi-
nalis of the testicle, or of the spermatic cord ; in the body of the tes-
ticle itself, or in the cellular membrane of the scrotum.

Cause.

Mechanical injury ; puncture ; a rupture of vessels after the sud-
den removal of the water in the operation for hydrocele ; a relaxed
state of the vessels themselves.

Diagnosis.

The sudden appearance of the tumour ; when arising from external
injury, the effect immediately following the cause ; the livid disco-
louration of the scrotum ; the swelling increasing from the bottom.

Treatment.

Upon the first appearance of the tumour, astringents may be em-
ployed to effect an absorption of the fluid; should these be unsuccess-
ful, recourse must be had to the same treatment as for hydrocele ;
after which, should an oozing of blood continue, tonics and astringents
may be employed both internally and topically.


Vol. II. 3 D


412 Inflammation of the Testicle.

SECTION VI.

Inflammation of the Testicle.
Symptoms.

Pain and enlargement of the epididymis of the affected testicle ;
shooting pains along the course of the spermatic cord. The body of
the testicle next becomes affected ; it swells, becomes hard and pain-
ful ; the scrotum becomes much enlarged and inflamed ; there is a
distressing pain in the loins ; the system at length becomes affected
with fever, quick, hard pulse, nausea and vomiting.

Causes.

Inflammation of the testicle maybe induced by any of the common
causes of inflammation, but is most frequently produced by irritation
of the urethra, by the matter of gonorrhoea ; the improper use of in-
jections, or incautious introduction of a bougie. It often follows a
suppression of the gonorrhceal discharge from cold : sitting on wet
grass is a frequent cause.

Inflammation of the testicle and epididymis do not occur from go-
norrhoea alone ; but are a frequent result of the introduction of a
bougie.

This complaint, from an error of pathology, used to be called her-
nia humoralis, in consequence of a belief that it arose from a fluxion
of humours to the testicle.

Inflammation of the testicle generally shows itself from within ten
to fourteen days after the gonorrhceal discharge.

The first symptom is a sensation of a drop of urine in the perinaeum ;
at this time, the inflammation is proceeding down the urethra, and,
before it reaches the testicle, affects the prostate, veru montanum,
vasa deferentia, proceeds up the cord to the abdominal ring, then at-
tacks the epididymis, and finally the testicle itself.

While the inflammation is confined to the epididymis, the patient
feels little or no pain ; but when it has passed to the body of the tes-
ticle, then there will be felt excessive pain, in consequence of the un-
yielding nature of the tunica albuginea. The scrotum is sometimes
reddened, arising from the degree of violence which characterizes
the inflammation. The pain does not, generally speaking, corres-

Treatment.

The patient should be put upon a spare regimen, should remain in
a recumbent posture, with the part suspended by means of the bag-
truss, employed for irreducible hernia.

If the inflammatory symptoms run high, subdue it by the ordinary
means-; by fomentations, refrigerant washes, poultices, &c.

The treatment laid, down for inflammation in general, must be ap-
plied in this disease/" Suppuration must be prevented, if possible, by
the use of discutient applications.


Felon, or Whitlow — {Paronychia.) 415

The testicle must be bathed two or three times a day, with the
stramonium ointment, and after a short time, let it be changed for the
discutient ointment. It should also be fomented or steamed over
bitter herbs once a day, and continued as long as there is any pain,
swelling, or inflammation. A plaster may also be applied.

Should the disease still progress, and threaten to suppurate, ap-
ply the cicuta poultice. Simmer the plant in water till it is soft, then
stir in a little of the slippery. elm bark, sufficient to make it of a proper
consistence. This should be applied to the testicle, and kept on by a
proper bandage.

After suppuration has taken place, or an abscess formed, and the
matter evacuated, the orifice, or orifices, must be kept open by means
of tents.

Injections must also be used, the same as for any sinous ulcer.

I, in general, use the alkaline liquid, made strong enough to ex-
cite considerable pain for a few minutes, and alternate it with the use
of the mild solution of the sublimate, in proportion of four grains to
eight ounces of water; the black plaster, or salve, to be applied as usual.

A purgative should be given once or twice a week, and the general
health renovated by the exhibition of alterative medicines.

In this manner I have cured some of the worst diseases of inflamed
and diseased testicles, where other surgeons have been unable to sue-
ceed, and where castration has been proposed as the only alternative.


CHAPTER XXX.

felon, or whitlow — (Paronychia.)


A whitlow is an inflammation at the end of one of the fingers or
thumb, exceedingly painful, and very much disposed to suppurate.
The toes are also sometimes the seat of the disease.

Writers usually divide whitlows into four kinds. In the first or
mildest, a vesicle filled with matter commonly arises near the root or
side of the nail, after a superficial inflammation of trivial extent. The
matter is situated immediately under the cuticle. Sometimes the
abscess takes place under the nail, in which case the pain is severe,
and not unfrequently shoots upwards as far the external condyle.

The second kind of whitlow is chiefly situated in the cellular sub-
stance under the cutis, and for the most part occurs at the very end of
the finger. In this case the inflammatory symptoms, especially the
pain, are far more violent than in other common inflammations of not
greater extent. However, although the pain is thus severe, it does
not in general extend far from the part affected. Writers usually im.


414 Felon, or Whitlow — (Paronychia.)

pute the violence of the pain, and the considerable degree of inflam-
mation attending the complaint, to the hard and unyielding nature of
ficulty of perceiving any fluctuation, after matter is formed ; and the
slowness with which the pus makes its way outwards.

The third kind of whitlow is distinguishable from the others by the
following circumstances. With the most excruciating pain,, there is
little swelling in the affected finger, but a vast deal in the hand, parti-
cularly about the wrist, and over the whole fore-arm. The pain ex-
tends to the hand, wrist, elbow, and even the shoulder. When suppu.
ration takes place, a fluctuation can never be felt in the finger, though
it may often be distinctly perceived in the hand, at the wrist, or even
somewhere in the fore-arm. The case is frequently accompanied
with considerable fever. The disease is seated in the tendons and
their sheaths, and the power of moving the fingers, and even the whole
hand, is lost.

from an inflammation of the periosteum. The case is attended with
one peculiarity, which is, that however violent the pain may be, it
never extends to the hand and fore-arm, nor is there any external swell-
ing of the affected finger. Suppuration generally follows very soon,
the usual consequence of which is a caries, or rather a necrosis of the
subjacent finger-bones.

Whitlows commonly begin on the inside of the fingers; but they do
occasionally commence on the back of these parts, and even on that
of the hand. Though pain about the wrist is usually the effect of in-
flau. nation in the finger, Acrel mentions a case in which the disorder
was altogether confined to the hand itself. — (Vorfdlle, b. ii. p. 191.)

Treatment.

It is customary, in treating felons, to make a deep incision even
down to the periosteum, but I have found this practice in most cases,
to make the complaint worse, as much pain and inflammation follows.
Some apply blisters, which also prove injurious, while others recom-
mend a bread and milk poultice, all of which treatment I have found
to be useless or injurious.

In treating this complaint successfully, in whatever variety it may
present itself, our object should be, if possible, to remove it, by reso-
lution, or without the formation of pus or matter; and if we are not
able to accomplish this, to make' use of such applications as will fa-
vour suppuration.

The patient should be directed to immerse the finger in strong ley,
as hot and as long as he cart bear it ; after which mix the elm-
bark with the liquid, and apply it. If this fails to afford relief, the
whole hand must be effectually steamed over a decoction of herbs,
consisting of catnip, wormwood, horehound, tansy and hops. A handful
of each should be boiled down until the strength is extracted, then a
small quantity of soft soap must be added, and then the whole thrown
into a small vessel, the hand placed over it, and the steam retained
by means of a blanket, or piece of flannel, as directed for several


Felon, or Window — {Paronychia.) 415

other diseases. The steaming should be continued fifteen or twenty
minutes, or as long as the patient can bear, and if there is not suffi-
cient heat to produce perspiration, let a hot brick or stone be thrown
into the decoction. This process should be repeated every time it
becomes painful. The same herbs and decoction may be preserved,
as they answer the purpose as well as those that are fresh. In almost
every case, no matter how severe the sufferings of the patient are
from the complaint, this operation alone will mitigate them, and af-
ford the most sudden relief.

I have ordered it when the patient has been in acute distress, but
he has delayed putting it into practice, under a supposition that it
would afford no benefit, when a continuance of the sufferings has
forced him to employ it, and the process has been followed by the
happiest effects.

After this has been attended to, the poultice should be still conti-
nued, and if it does not afford relief, or if it does not appear to agree
with the complaint, then substitute the following :

Take the Indian turnip, (arum triphyllum;)
Bluejlag, (iris versicolor ;)
let them be well pounded or bruised ; simmer in water until they are
soft ; then add a sufficient quantity of the pulverized slippery-elm
bark, to form a poultice of the proper consistence.

Where the disease is deep-seated, and protracted, I have some-
times found it necessary to apply two or three different kinds of poul-
tices.

I have occasionally used equal parts of linseed and slippery-elm,
simmered awhile in milk and applied ; but the first kind is, in most
cases, sufficient.

After it has been treated in this manner awhile, a small white spot
will appear in the eentre of the swelling, indicating the formation of
matter. When this symptom appears, the exit of the matter may be fa-
voured by slowly and cautiously introducing a large needle or probe,
directly through this point or place, from which the matter appears
about to issue. By rolling the probe backwards and forwards, or by
giving it a drill-like motion, and making a little pressure, and conti-
nuing it for some time, it can be introduced even down to the perios-
teum without exciting much pain ; but if matter or pus has sufficiently
formed, it is unnecessary to introduce it so far. If it cannot be ac-
complished at one operation, it must be repeated. Where there has
been any difficulty in making the opening, I have occasionally touch-
ed the end of the needle or probe with the mineral caustic, but this is
very seldom necessary. Even after there is a considerable discharge
of matter, it may be proper to introduce the probe, to prevent the
orifice from closing. Fungous flesh will often shoot from the open-
ing. This must be removed and kept down by a little of the vegetable
caustic or potash.

Some species of felons are exceedingly painful, and protracted, pro-
ducing a necrosis or destruction of the bone. I have been called to
cases where the whole thumb or finger has been in a state of ulcera-
tion, and the bone partially or wholly destroyed, and where the flesh
of the patient has wasted away 100 pounds, in a short space of time


416 Hare-Lip — {Labia Leporina.)

from excessive irritation. When such a form of the complaint pre-
tic must be applied, and the ulcer enlarged as much as possible, to
obtain access to the diseased bone ; and when the bone is sufficiently
loose, it must be removed by a pair of forceps.

When this has been removed, or when inflammatory symptoms sub.
side, simple dressings are sufficient to complete the cure. The ulcer
may be dressed with a little lint, and the black or healing salve applied.

When there is any constitutional disturbance, suitable medicine
should be given. If the patient is unable to sleep at night, let him
take an anodyne.

After the felon has healed up, sometimes the sinews are contracted,
impeding the motion of the joint. For this let the part be daily rub-
bed with a relaxing ointment or oil.

In this manner, I have invariably succeeded in curing the worst
and every species of felons, and in all stages of them, and often, when
the complaint has been exceedingly aggravated by the common prac-
tice, particularly in laying it open.

Perhaps, in certain cases, it might be deemed justifiable to make a
small puncture with the lancet to let out the matter, but it ought never
to be done until there is certain evidence that matter has formed. I,
however, prefer the method which I have laid down, having found it
more successful.


CHAPTER XXXI.

hare-lip — (Labia Leporina. >


This is a deformity which consists in a fissure, or perpendicular
division of one or both lips. The term has arisen from the fancied
resemblance of the part to the upper lip of a hare. Occasionally
the fissure is more or less oblique. In general, it is directly below
the septum of the nose ; but sometimes it corresponds to one of the
nostrils. The two portions of the lip are generally movable, and
not adherent to the alveolary process ; in less common cases they are
closely attached to the fore part of th» jaw.

Children are frequently born with this kind of mal-formation, which
is called a natural hare-lip, while that which is produced by a wound,
is named accidental. Sometimes the portion of the lip which ought
to be united have a considerable interspace between them ; while in
other instances they are not much apart. The cleft is occasionally
double, a little lobe or small portion of the lip being situated between
the two fissures.

The fissure commonly affects only the lip itself, and usually the
upper one. In many cases, however, it extends along the bones and


Hare-Lip — (Labia Leporina.) 417

soft parts forming the palate, even as far as the uvula ; and sometimes
those bones are entirely wanting. In a few instances, the jaw not only
is imperfectly ossified in front, so that a cleft presents itself there,
but one side of it projects forwards, and is at the same time inclined
too much outwards, drawing with it the corresponding part of the
palate, and the septum nasi, so that a very unsightly distortion of the
nostril and nose is produced.

A hare-lip, in its least degree, occasions considerable deformity ;
and when more marked, it frequently hinders infants from sucking,
and makes it indispensable to nourish them by other means. When
the lower lip alone is affected, which is rare as a mal- formation, the
child can neither retain its saliva, nor learn to speak, except with the
greatest impediment. The constant escape of the saliva, besides
being an annoyance, is found to be detrimental to the health ; for its
loss impairs the digestive functions, the patient becomes emaciated,
and even death would sometimes ensue, if the incessant discharge of
so necessary a fluid in the animal economy were not prevented.
Thus, a lady, who was in this state, consulted Tronchin, who imme-
diately saw the cause of her indisposition, and recommended the fis-
sure in the lip to be united ; the operation was done, and the dyspeptic
symptoms then ceased. And when the fissure pervades the palate,
the patient not only articulates very imperfectly, but cannot masticate
nor swallow, except with great difficulty, on account of the food
readily getting up into the nose.

An early removal of the deformity must obviously be very de-
sirable.

A rational objection to early operations, is the liability of infants to
convulsions after operations, and this has induced many to postpone the
cure of the hare-lip till the child is about two years old. This custom
is also sanctioned by Sir Astley Cooper, who mentions, in his lectures,
several instances, which have either been communicated to him by
others, or have occurred in his own practice, where operations for the
cure of hare-lips, in very young infants, have had a fatal termination,
in consequence of an attack of convulsions or diarrhoea. The period
when dentition is completed, or the age of two years, he therefore
sets down as the most advantageous for the operation, and if parents
urge its being done earlier, he very properly advises the surgeon to
let them be duly apprized of the risk, so that in the event of the child
being cut off, he may not incur blame for having operated at a disad-
vantageous period^of life. — (See Lancet, vol. iii. p. 108.)

Common Treatment.

The common treatment consists in cutting each side of the cleft,
then bringing the edges together and keeping them united by passing
pins through the lip, or by stitches. The objections to the pins are,
1st. the irritation and inflammation they occasion ; 2d. the failures
which occur from the pins being torn out by the child, or catching in
the nurse's clothes. The objections to stitches or sutures, are equally
great. 1st. the pain and irritation ; 2d. the extensive scar which is
left where they have been inserted, as they soon cut through the
lip, and leave an unsightly scar through the whole track.


418 Hare-Lip — (Labia Leporina.)

I saw a case, a few days ago, the child of Mr. Valentine, in Mul-
berry -street, on which the interrupted suture was used by Dr. M— ;
and although the fissure united, an extensive cicatrix was left as far
as the stitches extended.

Reformed Practice.

In the operation, the grand object is to make as smooth and even
a cut as possible, in order that it may more certainly unite by the first
intention, and of such a shape that the scar may form only one narrow
line. The edges of the fissure should, therefore, be cut off with scis-
sors or a sharp knife. If the knife is used, the best plan is, either to
place any flat instrument, such as a piece of horn, wood or pasteboard,
underneath one portion of the lip, and then, holding the part stretched
and supported on it, to cut away the whole of the callous edge ; or else
to hold the part with a pair of forceps, the under blade of which is
much broader than the upper one : the first serves to support the lip,
the other contributes also to this effect, and, at the same time, serves
as a sort of ruler for guiding the knife in an accurately straight line.
When the forceps are preferred, the surgeon must of course leave
on the side of the upper blade just as much of the edge of the fissure
as is to be removed, so that it can be cut off with one sweep of the
knife. This is to be done on each side of the cleft, observing the
rule, to make the new wound in straight lines, because the sides of it
can never be made to correspond without this caution. For instance,
if the hare-lip had an uneven shape, the incision of the edges must
be continued in straight lines till they meet, in the manner here repre-
sented : A

In short, the two incisions are to be perfectly straight, and are to
meet at angle above, in order that the whole track of the wound may
be brought together, and united by the first intention.

After the edges of the fissure have been thus cut smooth, they are
to be brought evenly together, each part perfectly corresponding, after
which the improved uniting plaster i3 to be applied, as directed under
the head of incised wounds. The lower plasters must be placed close
to the edges of the incised fissure, and the upper ones drawn suffi-
ciently to bring them closely together. Two or three narrow strips of
adhesive plaster may be also placed over it. This will keep the
edges of the fissure in contact, and they will speedily unite by the
first intention, and without ever causing convulsions or any untoward
or unpleasant effects. Besides, in pursuing this improved method,
the operation may be performed at almost any age, or, at any rate,
much earlier than is recommended in the ordinary operation. But
the most suitable time to do it is when the child is a year old.

A person who has never seen the application of this improved plas-
ter, cannot form a correct idea of the excellent indications which it
fulfils, besides obviating the danger, pain, inconvenience, the inflam-
mation, ulceration and failure consequent on the use of pins or the
interrupted suture.

It is necessary to administer an anodyne to the child one hour be-
fore the operation ; and if the lip adheres to the jaw, to separate it
with a lancet. If there is a double hare-lip, it must be treated in the
same manner.


CHAPTER XXXIL

POLYPUS.


A polypus is a fleshy excrescence, of various density and to\buf t
Originating from the lining membrane of a canal, or cavity, as the»
nose, vagina, rec\um, &c.

The nostrils are the most frequent situation of this complaint. It
commences as a small pendulous tumour, void of pain, accompanied
with watering of the eyes, sneezing, and the usual symptoms of ca-
tarrh. The colour of these tumours is generally of a pale red. They
commonly commence from the ossa spongiosa ; but occasionally from
all the parts concerned in forming the cavity of the nostril. They
produce, at first, no other effects than have been noticed, but as they
enlarge, the defluxion from the eyes increases, sneezing is frequent,
and the tone of the voice is much altered.

The weather has a great influence on the patient : in dry weather
the tumour appears to diminish, and it increases in damp and cold
weather. Augmenting gradually in size, it at length obstructs the
passage of air through the nostril, and in this stage produces a
very unpleasant nasal tone of the voice. The polypus assumes gra-
dually the shape of the nose, being formed in it as in a mould. It
becomes visible at the anterior nostril, and at the fauces behind, where
it may be seen situated over the soft palate, and sometimes hanging
down behind the uvula. In this state great inconvenience is expe-
rienced, the eyes are constantly suffused with tears, from the obstruc-
tion to the ductus ad nasum.

In some instances ulceration takes place, and a fetid matter is
discharged, attended with great inflammation and severe pain. Iri
some cases, however, it is remarkable that the tumour acquires &
great size, and the patient suffers no pain. From the nose being
stopped, patients generally sleep with the mouth open, and inconve-
nience is sustained from the dryness of the mouth and throat. Hear-
ing is often injured, probably from pressure against the eustachian tube.
In swallowing, some difficulty is experienced from the weight of the
tumour, which presses against the velum pendulum palati. The ap-
pearance of the face becomes changed, from one nostril being wider
than the other, the root of the nose appears swelled, and violent head-
aches come on ; the bones eventually become carious and ulcerated :
a foul fetid sanies, mixed with blood, is discharged ; haemorrhage
sometimes ensues, the teeth fall out, and a fungus shoots through the
sockets. The symptoms, in some cases, increase, and exhaust the
patient's strength ; frequent bleedings, and an incessant discharge of
matter takes place, and during the last stage of the disease, stupor
and coma come on, and eventually death. Such are sometimes the
dreadful effects of a disease, at first trifling, and to all appearance of
very little consequence.

The causes of this complaint are not well understood. Some hav«

Vol. II. 3E


420 Ranula.

supposed picking, or violently blowing the nose, to have produced it,
but for this there is no foundation.

which is said to be of a malignant nature, disposed to end in cancer.
This, however, I believe, is extremely rare ; the most common are a
fleshy, ted, vascular polypus, and a pale, tough, firm polypus, neither
of which is of a cancerous nature.

Treatment.
I have succeeded in curing this disease, when it has not become too
large, by directing the patient to use the following, as a sternutatory
or snufF :

Take Bayberry bark,

Blood-root,

Calomel ; equal parts.
Pulverize and mix. This must be snuffed up the nose frequently
through the day. If the polypus is too large to admit it, it may be
introduced by tying a strip of linen to a probe, wetting it, then dipping
in the powder, and touching the tumour with it : to be often repeat,
ed. Where the tumour is quite large, and this method does not
prove effectual, it may be necessary to introduce a pair of forceps, and
seize the tumour as far up as possible, and compress so hard as to
disorganize it, or by turning the forceps to twist it off, and afterwards
apply the powder to prevent a regrowth. I have never had occasion
to do this except in one instance, and this was in the last stage of the
complaint. Many practitioners are in the habit of introducing a liga-
ture round the polypus, by means of a double canula. But, whether
taken out in this manner or by the forceps, it is very apt to appear
again, except some escharotic be applied to the source or origin of it.
The above powder generally turns the polypus black, when it will
either disappear by a discharge, or drop off. The powder must be
continued for some time after it is apparently well.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

Ranula


Is a little inflammatory or indolent tumour, situated under the
tongue, by the side of the ranular artery, on either side of the frae-
num. It is of greater or less size ; sometimes acquiring such magni-
tude as to impede the motions of the tongue, obstruct the speech, and.
m children, who are equally subject to the affection as adults, prevent
the action of sucking. Its contents are various : generallv a fluid


Salt Rheum, Tetter — (Herpes Psoriasis.) 421

resembling saliva ; sometimes a glairy matter like that found in ths
cells of swelled joints ; and then a fatty or carious substance. Ita
cause is supposed to be an obstruction of the salivary ducts, arising
from either cold, inflammation, calculary concreiaons, &c. It is at-
tended with little or no pain. In some cases, it long remains in an
indolent state ; in others, it soon acquires a considerable size, spon-
taneously bursts, and leaves an ulcer extremely difficult to heal.

Treatment.

The usual applications to this disease are powerful astringents and
escharotic applications. If this should fail, pass a seton through the
tumour, which will radically cure it.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

SALT RHEUM, TETTER — (HerpCS. Psoriasis.)


This is a troublesome, inveterate eruption, appearing on different
parts of the body, usually the hands. Very small eruptions or vesicles
appear, which break and discharge a thin, ichorous or corrosive fluid,
that causes a very great degree of irritation or itching. Afterwards
scabs often form upon the part affected, which, though they be rubbed
off, or dry away, will after awhile re-appear.

It is attended with more or less inflammation and swelling, and such
is the degree of itching sometimes attending it, that the patient is
obliged to scratch continually to obtain the least relief. The whole
hands, or parts, sometimes become excoriated, stiff and almost im-
movable. It appears to be located principally underneath the skin,
although, from its disappearing in one part, and then appearing in
another, it is evident that the disease is located in the vascular system,
or the blood. It appears to be occasioned by a retention of morbid
humours, which are thrown to the surface, and which the system
seems unable entirely to expel.

The disease appears to be very similar to the different species of
as follows :

1. Herpes Farinosus, or what may be termed the dry tetter, is the
most simple of all the species. It appears indiscriminately in differ-
ent parts of the body, but most commonly on the face, neck, arms and
wrists, in pretty broad spots and small pimples. These are generally
very itchy, though not otherwise troublesome ; and, after continuing
a certain time, they at last fall off in the form of a white powder,
similar to fine bran, leaving the skin below perfectly sound ; and


422 Salt Rheum, Tetter— (Herpes Psoriasis.)

again returning in the form of a red efflorescence, they fall off, and
are renewed as before.

2. /ferpg* Puslulosus. This species appears in the form of pustules,
which originally are separate and distinct, but which afterwards run
together in clusters. At first, they seemed to contain nothing but a
thin watery serum, which afterward turns yellow, and, exuding over
the whole surface of the part affected, it at last dries into a thick
crust, or scab ; when this falls off, the skin below frequently appears
entire, with only a slight degree of redness on its surface ; but on
some occasions, when the matter has probably been more acrid, upon
the scab falling off, the skin is found slightly excoriated. Eruptions
of this kind appear most frequently on the face, behind the ears, and
on other parts of the head ; and they occur most commonly in chiK
dren.

3. Herpes Miliaris — the miliary tetter. This breaks out indis.
criminately over the whole body ; but more frequently about the loins,
breast, perinaBum, scrotum and inguina, than in other parts. It gene-
rally appears in clusters, though sometimes in distinct rings, or circles,
of very minute pimples, the resemblance of which to the millet seed
has given rise to the denomination of the species. The pimples are
at first, though small, perfectly separate, and contain nothing but a
clear lymph, which, in the course of this disease, is excreted upon
the surface, and there forms into small distinct scales ; these, at last,
fall off, and leave a considerable degree of inflammation below, and
still continues to exude fresh matter, which likewise forms into cakes,
and so falls off as before. The itching, in this species of complaint,
is always very troublesome ; and the matter discharged from the
pimples is so tough and viscid, that every thing applied to the part
adheres, so as to occasion much trouble and uneasiness on its being
removed.

4. Herpes Exedens, the eating and corroding tetter, (so called from
its destroying or corroding the parts which it attacks,) appears com-
monly, at first, in the form of several small painful ulcerations, all
collected into larger spots, of different sizes and of various figures,
with always more or less of an erysipelatous inflammation. These
ulcers discharge large quantities of a thin, sharp, serous matter, which
sometimes forms into small crusts, that in a short time fall off; but
most frequently the discharge is so thin and acrid as to spread along
the neighbouring parts, where it soon produces the same kind of
sores. Though these ulcers do not, in general proceed farther than
the cutis vera, yet sometimes the discharge is so very penetrating and
corrosive as to destroy the skin, cellular substance, and, on some
occasions, even the muscles themselves. It is this species that should
be termed the depascent or phagedenic ulcer, from the great destruc-
tion of parts which it frequently occasions.

Treatment.

A thousand different remedies are recommended for this complaint,

but none can be relied upon as capable of removing it. Hence,

il may be considered very difficult entirely to cure ; although in many

oases which have been exceedingly obstinate, we have successfully


Salt Rheum, Tetter— ( Herpes Psoriasis.) 423

treated. The treatment may be commenced by applying the follow-
ing wash :

Take Litharge, one drachm ;
Vinegar, eight ounces ;
Mix, and wash the parts whenever the itching is troublesome. After
this has been applied a short time, anoint with the following :
Take White turpentine, half a pound ;

Indian turnip, (arum triphyllum,) one ounce ;
Common plantain leaves, (plantago major,) two ounces ;
Leaves of white lily, (lilium candidum,) two ounces ;
Olive oil, one ounce ;
Fresh butter, half a pound ;

Beeswax, two ounces ; i

Bruise the leaves and roots, and simmer them in an earthen vessel,
in equal parts of spirits and rain water, and closely covered, and,
when nearly cold, add two drachms of yellow ochre pulverized. This
forms a very handsome and efficacious ointment, and which I do not
recollect ever to have applied without benefit.

After using this wash and ointment for a reasonable length of time,
if it shouldjnot cure, with the aid of such internal medicines as I shall
hereafter mention, let them be omitted, and let the following wash or
tincture be applied :

Take of Celandine, (chelidonium major,) one drachm ;
Irish whiskey, or good spirits, eight ounces ;
Add the celandine to the spirits, and digest a few days to extract the
strength. Wash often with this tincture. After which, apply the
following ointment or salve :

Take sweet oil, and add gradually sufficient red lead, pulverized, to
convert or change it into a salve, or ointment, of a proper consistence
to spread, which is effected by placing the mixture over a fire, and
simmering it until a decomposition takes place, or until it becomes
dark, and acquires a proper consistence for use. Let it be spread
thin upon a piece of linen, and applied over the parts affected.

If the complaint is attended with any inflammation, it must be first
subdued by a poultice made of the slippery-elm bark and fresh milk,
which will soon allay it, as well as the itching.

An excellent ointment for the tetter, or salt rheum, is made by
mixing half an ounce of the sulphur vivum, (native sulphur) with two
ounces of fresh butter, and applying it two or three times a day.

Internally, the patient should take such medicines as are calculated
to purify the blood : as the alterative syrup, and an infusion of black
alder bark, Virginia speedwell, and yellow-dock.

An excellent beer or diet drink, possessing alterative properties, is
made by boiling in a suitable quantity of water, the following articles :
Take the root of sassafras, (laurus sassafras ;)
Burdock, (arctium lappa;)
Black alder, (prinos verticillatus ;)
Wild, cherry-tree, (prunus Virginiana ;)
Of this, let a strong decoction be made, then sweeten with molasses
or honey, and when about blood-warm, add a sufficient quantity of
yest to ferment it. The patient should take freely of this beer. The


424 Salt Rheum, Tetter — (Herpes Psoriasis.)

perspiration should be promoted, and the bowels kept open. The
hands should never be immersed in water, as this is sure to exasperate
the complaint, and prevent a cure, nor should the patient eat any
greasy or sour victuals. This treatment will either cure, or essen-
tially benefit the patient.

Before I commenced the practice of medicine, when I resided in
the state of New- Jersey, I became acquainted with an elderly lady
who had suffered exceedingly by this complaint ; and she had inci-
dentally found a medicine that had entirely eradicated it. Her hands
were so swelled, inflamed and excoriated, that she was unable to
close them or the fingers, and the medicine cured the complaint. I
solicited the family to communicate it to me, for five or six months,
before tJiey consented. And it was finally disclosed on conditions of
secrecy ; but, as I consider the welfare of my fellow men paramount
to any promise of this nature, I shall communicate the remedy or
preparation used, and leave the reader to judge what merit it possesses.
It is a poisonous article, as is elsewhere stated, and I have never used
it, except as the last alternative, or when every other means failed :
Take corrosive sublimate, one scruple ;
Venice turpentine, two drachms ;
Fresh butter, two ounces ;
Rub the whole in a mortar until it is well mixed ; then apply a small
quantity morning and night, after which, let the patient be directed to
wear a soft pair of gloves.

While this ointment is used, the following wash is to be applied :
Take corrosive sublimate, half a scruple ;
Best French brandy, eight ounces ;
Mix. Wash the hands with this liquid before the ointment is applied.

These are not the original receipts or formulas, as I have found it
necessary to vary or alter them. This has cured some very obstinate
cases of this disease, although it will sometimes fail.

A case occurs to me now, where a lady applied to me from a great
distance to be attended with an herpetic affection, which covered the
whole body. Every night large quantities of scales came off, and the
complaint was attended with a great deal of pain, itching and distress.
I tried various medicines without much benefit ; and, at last, I con-
cluded to make use of the sublimate, in the following form :
Corrosive sublimate, two drachms ;
Best French brandy, two quarts ;
Mix. I directed the patient to wash the whole body with this, two or
three times a day, or as often as the disease became troublesome.
Fearing, however, some ill consequences from the application of such
a large quantity of this preparation, I directed the patient to commence
by first using a little, and gradually increasing it. She found that it
benefited her, and, therefore, washed the body as fearlessly as though
it had been water. It constantly grew better, until it eradicated every
vestige of the complaint ; and, notwithstanding exposures, no bad
consequences followed the use of it.

In some eruptions, assuming an anomalous character, and particu-
larly those appearing on the face, body, and extremities of infants and


Chilblain— (Pernio.) 425

children, as well as adults, I have found the application of the stramo-
nium ointment a very valuable remedy.

In some species of this disorder, where other means fail, the yellow
dock, the stramonium and the discutient ointments, may be used alter-
nately ; for such a protean type does the salt rheum, or herpes, some-
times assume, that a variety of medicines become necessary to eradi-
cate every species of it.

The sulphur bath is highly recommended, and I have used it, but I
am not prepared to speak decisively of its merits. It is said, however,
to have performed cures.


CHAPTER XXXV.

chilblain. — (Pernio.)


Chilblains are painful, inflammatory swellings, of a deep purple or
leaden colour, to which the fingers, toes, heels, and other extreme
parts of the body are,subject, on being exposed to a severe degree of
cold. The pain is not constant, but rather pungent and shooting at
particular times, and an insupportable itching attends. In some in-
stances the skin remains entire, but in others it breaks and discharges
a thin fluid. When the degree of cold has been very great, or the
application long continued, the parts affected are apt to mortify or
slough off, leaving a foul, ill-conditioned ulcer behind.

Children and old people are more liable to be troubled with chil-
blains than those of a middle age ; and such as are of a scrofulous
habit are remarked to suffer severely from them.

The best mode of preventing these affections is to avoid, with much
care, any exposure to wet or cold ; wherefore, those who are subject
to them should be cautious, on the approach of winter, to keep warmly
clothed.

Treatment.

If the parts have recently been frozen, or frost-bitten, the fire must
not be approached ; but the cold gradually abstracted. The affected
parts may first be immersed in snow, or cold water, which will remove
the frost ; after wjiich, let brisk friction be used, and a little cam-
phorated spirits be applied. If there be much pain or inflammation,
apply an elm-bark poultice ; after which, a cooling and soothing oint-
ment, and, lastly, the black or healing salve.


CHAPTER XXXVI

TIC DOULOUREUX.


This term is used to signify a disorder, the most prominent charac-
ter of which consists in severe attacks of pain, affecting the nerves of*
the face ; most frequently the filaments of that branch of the fifth pair
which comes out of the infra-orbitary foramen : but sometimes the
other branches of the fifth pair, and occasionally the numerous fila-
ments of the portio dura of the auditory nerve, which are distributed
upon the face. The complaint is not continual, but occurs in violent
paroxysms, which vary in duration in different instances.

In the frontal neuralgia, the pain usually begins in the situation of
the supra-orbitary foramen, extending at first along the branches and
ramifications of the frontal nerve, distributed to the soft parts upon the
cranium, and afterward shooting in the direction of the trunk of the
nerve towards the bottom of the orbit. In a more advanced stage,
the conjunctiva and all the surface of the eye participate in the effects
of the disorder, and become affected with chronic inflammation, which
passes beyond the distribution of the branches of the frontal nerve,
and affects all the corresponding side of the face and head. It seems
as if it extended itself to the facial, sub-orbitary, maxillary, and even
to the temporal and occipital nerves, through the communications
naturally existing between the filaments of all those organs of sensa-
tion. Each paroxysm produces a spasmodic contraction of the eye-
lids, and a copious effusion of tears.

The sub-orbitary neuralgia is first felt about the sub-orbitary fora-
men. The seat is probably in the nerve of this name, and the pain
extends to the lower eyelid, the inner canthus of the eye, the muscles
about the zygoma, the buccinator, cheek in general, ala of the nose,
and the upper lip. At a later period, the pain appears to extend
backwards to the trunk of the nerve, and those branches which are
given off in its passage through the sub-orbitary canal. Hence, pains
are then experienced in the upper teeth, the zygomatic fossa, the
palate, tongue, and within the cavity of the nose. As the disorder
advances, it may extend, like other neuralgia; of the face, to all the
same side of the head. During the paroxysms, when the disease is
fully formed, an abundant salivation usually takes place. In general,
the attendant toothach deceives the practitioner, who, in the belief
that the pain arises from another cause, uselessly extract several of
the teeth.

The tic douloureux of the lower jaw, or maxillary neuralgia, is usu-
ally first felt about the situation of the anterior orifice of the canalis
mentalis, and it extends to the lower lip, chin, neck, teeth and temple.
This form of the complaint is more uncommon than the preceding ;


Tic Douloureux. 437

but after it has prevailed some time, is equally remarkable for its in-
tensity.

With respect to the neuralgia of the facial nerve or portio dura of
the auditory nerve, it is a case which very soon cannot easily be dis-
tinguished from the other species of tic douloureux. The pains at an
early period are no longer continued to the passage of the principal
branches of this nerve between the parotid gland and ramus of the
jaw. The numerous communications of the portio dura with the rest
of the nerves of the face seem to facilitate the extension of the dis-
ease, so that the agony is soon felt over the whole side of the head.
The original source of the disorder can only be detected by attentively
considering the progress of the complaint in all its stages. — (See Del-
pech, Traitd des Maladies repuUes Chirurgicales, t. iii. sect. 7. p.
214, &c.)

Tic douloureux may be known from rheumatism by the paroxysm
being excited by the slightest touch, by the shortness of its duration,
and the extreme violence of the pain. In acute rheumatism, also,
there is fever, with redness, heat, and generally some degree of swell-
ing; and in chronic rheumatism the pain is obtuse, long continued,
and often increased at night ; none of which symptoms characterize
tic douloureux.

It may easily be distinguished from hemicrania by the pain exactly
following the course of the brandies of the affected nerve.

It is known from the tooth-ach by the comparative shortness of the
paroxysm ; the quickness of their succession ; the intervals of entire
ease ; the darting of the pain in the track of the particular nerve
affected ; the more superficial and lancinating kind of pain ; and the
convulsive twitchings which sometimes accompany the complaint.

The causes of tic douloureux may be said to be in general unknown ;
but there are a few instances recorded, which appear to be the con-
sequence of external violence, wounds, contusions, &c. It is men-
tioned in one of the journals, that distant irritations, especially of the
splanchnic nerves, often produce this disease, and that Sir H. Halford
has met with cases where the discharge of portions of diseased bone,
even from a distant part, has cured the complaint. — (Med. Chir. Re-
view, No. 9. vol. iii.) The difficulty of placing implicit reliance on
such observations depends on the fact, that disorders frequently exist
together in different parts, without having any kind of connexion with
each other, and terminate quite as independently.

A modern writer has related a very curious instance of a resem-
bling disease in the arm, where the affection proceeded from the
lodgment of a small bit of bullet in the radial nerve. — (Denmark, in
Med. Chir. Trans, vol. iv. p. 48.) Dr. Parry attributed the pain to
increased vascularity or determination of blood (perhaps amounting to
inflammation) to the neurilema or vascular membranous envelope of
the nerves affected. — (Elements of Pathology and Therapeutics.)

Hosack has published among his medical essays some observations
on tic douloureux, in which he contends that neuralgia is not a local
affection or disease of a particular nerve, and to be removed by the
division of such nerve ; but a disease dependent upon the whole sy6-

Vol. II. 3 F


42$ Tic Douloureux. — Tumours.

tem and only to be counteracted by remedies addressed to the pecu-
liar state or condition of the constitution.— (Reese.)

Treatment.

This is a difficult disease to cure, but can generally be mitigated,
and, after occurring occasionally, will disappear altogether. The
treatment consists, 1st, in cleansing the stomach and bowels ; 2d, m
giving tone to the system, by the exhibition of strengthening medi-
cines; 3d, in administering anodynes, such as opium, stramonium,
the restorative bitters, alsoscullcap tea, extract or tiucture of henbane,
&c, may be given.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

TUMOURS.


Of Sarcomatous Tumours.

These are vascular tumours, arising from a morbid growth of skin.
They generally begin with a small warty projection, which soon be-
comes pendulous, and sometimes, though not often, enlarges to a con-
siderable size. As the tumour increases; and becomes weighty, it
draws the skin from the neighbouring parts, and a pedicle is thus
formed. In advanced life, it becomes smooth, livid, and in some in-
stances has degenerated into cancer.

Of this species are ncevi mate/ ni, or original marks, which are small
excrescences, sometimes hardly arising above the cuticle, at others
considerably protuberant ; they are firm, fleshy and very vascular,
consisting solely of a congeries of vessels.

Smaller tumours of the sarcomatous kind are denominated warts :
these are usually confined to the hands and fingers, and pudenda,
where they are often situated in great number, and follow as a con-
sequence of the venereal disease, though not themselves partaking of
the venereal taint.

Corns are small tumours of a horny nature, situated on the feet
and toes : they consist in a diseased state of the cuticle, produced by
pressure.

Diagnosis.
Sarcomatous tumours are distinguished from all others by the hard-
ness of their texture ; by their great vascularity ; by the absence of
pain and inflammation.


Of Steatomalous Tumours.
TheBe consist in a morbid growth of the adipose membrane : their


Encysted Tumours. 429

first appearance is usnally a small excrescence, soft and cedematous ;
this gradually increasing, often attains an enormous size. They are
free from pain and inflammation, and discolouration of the cuticle,
and occasion inconvenience to the patient only by their bulk ; some-
times, however, after they have become extremely large, inflamma-
tion and ulceration take place. They are soft to the touch, feeling
not unlike the omentum contained within a hernial sac.

Diagnosis.

The characteristic marks are, the softness of their texture ; their
great bulk ; the absence of pain and inflammation.


Of Encysted Tumours.

The true encysted tumour is a collection of matter contained within
a cyst, formed by adhesions in the cellular membrane. From the
nature of its contents, it has obtained different appellations, as athe-
romatous, meliceratous, &c. Its seat is the cellular membrane of
any part of the body, its size usually that of an egg, and it seldom or
never increases to a great bulk. It begins with a distinctly circum-
dually gets larger and larger, until some slight inflammation comes on,
when it becomes in a small degree painful, and a fluctuation is soon
afterwards distinctly perceived. As it slowly enlarges, the vessels of
the integuments become varicose, and in some instances, though not
often, slightly livid.

Diagnosis.

It is distinguished from common abscess by the extreme slowness
of its progress to maturation, and by the absence of pain and inflam-
mation.

Treatment.

Tumours may be removed, particularly when they are pendulous,
by passing a silk or linen thread around the base, and then fastening
it to a short piece of metal or wood, and drawing it daily tight enough
to stop the circulation. Tumours of great magnitude may be taken off
in this manner, and there is an advantage in removing them in this
way, in consequence of no haemorrhage attending the operation.
Besides, the patient has less dread of it than excision by the knife.

I removed a very large sarcomatous or fleshy tumour, of fourteen
years' standing, in this manner, from the shoulder of a lady in this
city, which was preserved in a jar of turpentine, and exhibited a
length of time in Scudder's museum, as a curiosity ; and I have found
very little difficulty in removing every kind of tumour, without re-
sorting to the knife.

Another method 1 have successfully practised, which consists in
applying the caustic potash over a small portion of the most promi-
nent part of the tumour, until a deep eschar is formed, and afterwards


430 Encysted Tumours.

applying slippery-elm bark and yesl, to promote suppuration. After a
few days, sloughing will commence, and the contents of the tumour
will be discharged. I once removed a tumour so large from the face
of a person, that the boys were in the habit of running after him, to
examine it, as a matter of curiosity.

The following is the method of applying the caustic : Take a stick
or roll of the caustic potash, and enclose it in a piece of paper, all
except the end, to prevent injury to the fingers ; then, after having
wet the most prominent part of the tumour, gently touch or rub it in
a circular form, about the size of a twenty-five cent piece, or accord,
ing to the size of the tumour, to be continued until the skin turns brown
or dark, which is usually in about five or ten minutes. As the caus-
tic dissolves, it runs down and excoriates the parts. This should be
absorbed by cotton or linen. The pain is severe for a short time only,
and no more is experienced until the eschar separates. A poultice of
the elm bark and yest must now be kept on, to favour the process of
sloughing, or a detachment of the disorganized parts ; which, when
done, gives vent to the internal portion or substance of the tumour.

I have taken out a very large tumour, by applying only a few
grains of the mineral caustic on the most dependent part of it. The
method of applying it is as follows : Make a small roll of any hard
plaster, about half the size of a goose-quill ; form it into a little ring,
of the size you intend to make your opening, and place this upon the
tumour ; wet the mineral caustic with a few drops of water, and apply
it within the ring, and a sufficient quantity to cover it ; over this, place
a suitable plaster, to retain it ; after it has remained on for twelve or
twenty-four hours, it will penetrate the tumour to a considerable
depth, which will form an eschar, and will penetrate to a considerable
depth, and which must be removed by a poultice, made as before di-
rected, when the contents of the tumour will be discharged. In this
manner it is removed, without destroying but a very little portion of
the skin.

I think it is better to remove tumours in this manner, than it is by the
knife ; because, 1st. In using the knife, it is necessary to dissect the
whole tumour, which is very painful. 2d. There is sometimes dan-
ger of haemorrhage. 3d. The tumour is more apt to recur after ex-
cision, than when it is taken out by this method, particularly where
the contiguous parts are diseased.

Some kinds of sarcomatous tumours adhere so slightly to the swelling,
or the connexion is so slight, that it is only necessary to separate it
from the skin, to remove it. All that is required to detach the disease,
or the tumour, is to remove the skin, and the little vascular connex-
ions. Hence, this process very easily removes them.

It has occurred to me, that some tumours might be removed with
greater facility, by drawing a roll of the caustic potash around the
bottom or base of the tumour, until an eschar was formed, or until the
skin was cut through or destroyed ; which, if the tumour was not one
solid mass of organized matter, would be separated. Having suc-
ceeded so well in removing all kinds of tumours by the method pro.
posed above, I have never attempted this experiment.


Encysted Tumours. 431

I see an account in the Baltimore paper, of one or two large tumours
removed merely by puncturing them in one or two places, and then
exciting a discharge by injecting a stimulating liquid.

In passing the street some time ago, my curiosity was attracted by a
tumour of considerable magnitude, which was situated on the cheek of
a negro. I examined it, and made some inquiries respecting it. I
found that about one half of the tumour had been removed, which, he
informed me, had been effected by rubbing upon it, two or three times
a day, the juice of milk-weed, or the milky fluid which issues from
the plant ; and, from the change that had been produced, I have a
favourable opinion of this juice in some kinds of tumours.

There is a species of tumour which, it appears, the knife, caustic,
ligature, or any thing else, has not been sufficient always to remove :
I mean the bony, callous, or esteo-sarcomatous tumour. Amputation
has been performed for this, and various other means tried, but with-
out effect, although I cured one which appeared upon the side of a
gentleman, who, in consequence of its inveterate character, came to
me a distance of sixty miles, to have it treated. I applied the sas-
safras oil, and camphor, and cupped it often, then a discutient or
sweating plaster, which, after about six months, entirely dispersed it.
I have repeatedly seen the patient since, who is perfectly well.

A gentleman from the eastward informs me, that a bony tumour ap-
peared upon some part of an ox belonging to his father, and which he
entirely removed, by applying the phytolacca decandria, or the com-
mon poke or scoke root. From analogy, we may infer, that this plant,
which possesses great discutient properties, would cure tumours of a
similar nature, appearing on the human body.

A gentleman called at the office the other day, who had had a wen
upon his cheek for eighteen or twenty years, which one of my students
removed by the preceding treatment ; and another student has removed
one since, which had been upon the face for many years, by one ap-
plication of the caustic potash, which enveloped the whole in an
eschar, and removed it in a solid mass.

From the success wc have invariably had, in removing different
kinds of tumours, in the manner here laid down, I am induced to be-
lieve that the knife is very seldom required.

Method of treating an Abdominal Tumour, supposed to contain Hydatids.

A man, about thirty. four years of age, was recently admitted at
the Hotel Dieu, who, for the last eighteen months, had complained of
tumour in the situation of the liver, which increased very gradually,
but at present occupies the whole of the right hypochondrium. At-
tentive examination showed, that it is connected with the liver. It is
perfectly free from pain, even when pressed upon ; has not produced
any derangement of the healthy functions of the part, and gives rise
to no other inconvenience than that of preventing the man from
pursuing his usual avocations. He has had advice from many differ-
ent medical men, and has tried a great variety of internal and external
remedies, to no purpose. It so happens, that M. Recarnier, about a
year ago, treated a tumour somewhat similar to this, which proved to


432 Bronchocele.

contain hydatids ; and, as the means he then employed were perfectly
successful, he determined to adopt them on the present occasion.
The tumour in the present instance is, however, much larger than
the former one ; and, although some thought they could perceive that
sort of crepitation which hydatids cause when pressed against each
other, yet the diagnosis is by no means very clear. However, M.
Recarnier proceeded, as in the former case, to puncture the tumour
with a very fine trocar, in order to ascertain the nature of its con.
tents. The fluid which flowed out, as had been anticipated, was lim-
pid and colourless, and did not coagulate by heat. After having ex-
tracted a small quantity of this fluid, the puncture was carefully closed
and healed ; and a week after, when the tumour was again distended
to its former size, the caustic potash was applied, so as to form an open,
ing into the cavity of the cyst. In the former case, this method an-
swered admirably, as great numbers of hydatids were extracted. A
sufficient quantity of water was then injectedi to fill the space they
had occupied, in order to avoid the introduction of the air ; the exter-
nal wound was dressed in the usual manner, and the patient recovered
rapidly. The object in applying caustic, rather than making an open,
ing by incision, is to produce adhesions between the cyst and parietei
of the abdomen, so as to form an uninterrupted canal from the tumour
to the external parts. — (Lon. Med. Gaz.)


CHAPTER XXXIX.

BRONCHOCELE.


A tumour on the fore part of the neck, formed by an enlargement
of the thyroid gland. The progress of the swelling is extremely gra-
dual, and m general the skin long retains its natural appearance. It
is at first soft, but as it advances in size, it acquires a great degree of
hardness ; the skin becomes of a brownish or copper colour, and the
veins of the integuments are varicose. The face is subject to fre-
quent flushing ; the patient complains of frequent head-achs, and
likewise of pains shooting through the body of the tumour. It is
often accompanied with hysteric affections.

Causes.
The inhabitants of Derbyshire, and other mountainous parts of
Europe, and those of the Alps and adjacent mountains on the conti-
nent, are peculiarly subject to this disorder. Among the latter, it is
snow-water. It is considered a scrofulous affection of the gland.


Common Boil — (Furunculus.) 433


Treatment.

An ointment made of the roots of poke may first be applied, and if
this does not discuss it, apply the discutient ointment. If this fails,
make an issue upon the tumour with the caustic potash, and then
poultice it with yest and elm-bark, to promote a discharge.

The juice of milk-weed, from its specific effects in removing wens,
might also remove this kind of tumour.

In other respects, let it be treated the same as scrofulous tumours,
both internal and external.

Dr. S. Bell, a graduate of our school, has recently cured a diffi-
cult case of bronchocele by pursuing this kind of treatment. The
discutient ointment, united with an ointment made of the poke root,
contributed much towards the cure.


CHAPTER XL.

common boil — (Furunculus.)


This disease is so well known that it needs not much description,
and although very common, is extremely tedious and painful. A hard,
appearing under the figure of a cone, the base of which is consider-
ably below the surface of the surrounding skin. — Upon the most pro-
minent part of the boil, there is commonly a whitish or livid pustule,
exquisitely sensible to the touch, and immediately beneath this is the
seat of the abscess. The matter is generally slow in forming, and is
seldom found to exist in considerable quantity.

Treatment.

When in a state of inflammation let it be poulticed, with a mixture
of equal parts of linseed and slippery-elm bark, boiled for a short time
in rain water or milk. If the pain be very great, steam it over bitter
herbs. After it suppurates and breaks, and when the inflammation'
has subsided, apply the black or healing salve.


CHAPTER XLI.

ENLARGEMENTS OF THE TONSILS.


Enlargements of the tonsils may be of two kinds :

1. The common abscess occurring in cynanche tonsillaris, or in.
flammatory sore throat.

2. A chronic swelling, generally the consequence of previous in-
flammation of the gland in a scrofulous habit.

They often become so large as to impede both respiration and de-
glutition.

Treatment.

Occasionally give a purgative and also an emetic ; after which, ex-
cite perspiration by the ordinary means recommended. If the child
is of a suitable age, let it frequently inhale the steam of bitter herbs.
When the swelling is very great, bathe it with equal parts of sassa-
fras and olive oils, to which add a little gum camphor. After-
wards apply over the tonsils equal parts of hops and wormwood, sim-
mered in vinegar. When the inflammation has in a measure subsided,
apply the discutient ointment on a batt of cotton, to be kept constantly
bound on the throat, over the seat of the swelling. The tonsils, if
practicable, should be frequently touched with common ley, by means
of a piece of sponge or muslin, fastened to a probe or a piece of
stick. The feet should frequently be bathed, and exposure to wet and
cold should be avoided.

It is customary to remove the tonsils when they become enlarged
with the knife or ligature, but this is very painful, and not devoid of
danger, and if possible should never be resorted to. If these means
be persevered in, they will effect a cure without either of these ope-
rations.


CHAPTER XLII.

GANGLION.


A hard tumour, movable on the tendons, called li weeping sinew."

Ganglions, upon the tendons, are enclosed in the same cellular

membrane which forms their vagina, to facilitate their motion. They


Deafness. 435

occupy their station also on the annular ligaments and capsular mu-
cosee, through which they pass. These tumours, although indolent,
being yet very troublesome by pressing on the tendons, it becomes
needful to remove them. This may in common be effected by excit-
ing the absorbents, the best way of doing which is by pressure ; for
this, when applied to a degree just beyond the point of ease, calls
forth their activity to remove, when it is removable, the pressing sub-
stance, and that substance is the ganglion. I need scarcely add, that
the pressure must be uniform and long continued.

Another method of cure is, to give repeated and hard blows with a
hammer ; for this, by bruising, disturbs the organic structure of the
part, and thereby, according to a beautiful law of the animal economy,
excites the absorbents into action for the purpose of conveying it
away.

When the ganglion, by neglect, has been suffered to enlarge itself,
it may be vain to attempt its resolution in these ways. Nothing then
remains but to remove it.

Treatment.

I have removed this complaint in the following manner : make a
small puncture into the tumour with a lancet, which will evacuate a
fluid of a transparent appearance ; then, with a suitable syringe, inject
a stimulating liquid ; after which introduce a tent and apply a plaster.
Let it be kept open as long as possible.

It may also be removed in the same manner which is recommended
for the removal of other tumours. Let it be touched with the caustic
potass until an eschar is formed, and then employ the yest and elm
poultice to separate it.


CHAPTER XLIIL

DEAFNESS


Is most commonly owing to a relaxation of the tympanum ; accu-
mulation of wax ; or paralysis of the auditory nerves.

Treatment.

Hot stimulating oils applied by means of wool ; drop in the ear the
balsam of copaiva, then inject soapsuds daily. If this fail, try elec-
tricity, and keep up a discharge behind the ear by means of an issue

Extraneous Bodies in the Ear.

These may often be extracted by means of a small forceps-, or by
Voi. II 3G


436 Ague, or Pain in the Face and Jaw.

syringing the ear with tepid water. Should these means be unsuc-
cessful they may be suffered to remain with impunity if they do not
produce pain, as in a short time they will be forced out with the accu-
mulating wax.

Insects may be killed by filling the ear with spirits, or any other
fluid, and afterwards be removed by injections of warm water.


CHAPTER XLIV.

AGUE, OR PAIN IN THE FACE AND JAW.


The jaws, teeth and face frequently become swollen and painful,
proceeding from cold, which is termed by some, ague in the face. It
is a very distressing complaint.


Treatment.

1st. Steam the jaws or face over bitter herbs.

2d. If the swelling be very great, apply a ley poultice.

3d. Bathe the parts with sassafras oil.

4th. Dip a piece of cotton or lint in the tincture of red pepper, (cap*
sicum,) made warm, and place it between the lip and the jaw. A free
discharge of saliva follows, which usually affords immediate relief.


Toothache.

Pursue the same course. If it fail to cure, dip a piece oflintinthe
oil of cloves, and press it into the tooth affected. If this fail, apply'the
oil of capsicum in the same manner. And if all these means fail, the
nerve may be destroyed, by putting into the decayed tooth, a few
drops of nitric acid. Great care must be observed to keep it from
touching or getting into the mouth.

If the patient is unwilling to hare the tooth drawn, and the pain is
very great, an anodyne may be taken.

By cleaning the teeth, two or three times a week, or even once a
week, with a powder composed of equal parts of levigated charcoal and
prepared chalk, it will both preserve and prevent them fnom aching.


CHAPTER XLV.

INVERTED TOE NAIL.


A disease frequently occurs in the great toe, productive of much
inconvenience and distress ; an inversion of the nail, generally of the
great toe, which grows in upon the flesh, usually in consequence of
wearing a tight shoe.

This complaint is attended with severe pain and inflammation ;
sometimes with ulceration. A fungus arises in many cases, which is
extremely sensible, and gives great pain when touched, so that the
patient is completely incapacitated from walking. The nail, in many
cases, becomes completely imbedded in the flesh, and in others, a
thick skin forms over the greater part of it. Distressing spasms oc-
casionally result.

Treatment.

The foot must be well bathed in very warm ley water at least once
a day, and immediately after, the slippery-elm bark poultice must be
applied. This will diminish excessive inflammation, and render the
patient more comfortable. But, in order to effect a radical cure, it
will be. necessary, immediately after the foot has been immersed in
the ley water for twenty or thirty minutes, to press down as far as pos-
sible, without exciting too much pain, pledgets of lint between the nail
and the flesh, until they are brought upon a level with the contiguous
parts ; and after this has been done, if the inflammation has measura-
bly subsided, let a plaster of the black salve be applied immediately
over, and a narrow bandage again bound over this, in order to secure
the dressings.

I find it best to apply sufficient lint to elevate it above the nail and
flesh, that the plaster and bandage may continually produce such
a degree of pressure, as to separate the flesh from the nail.
Where there is great soreness, the lint may be dipped in a little
marshmallow ointment, and if there is much fungus or proud flesh
shooting up from the ulcer, apply a few grains of the vegetable caustic.

After continuing this treatment a few days, an opening will be made
down to the bottom of the projecting nail, except it be unusually deep;
and the act of bathing the part will so soften the nail, that the portion
which is the source of irritation, can easily be removed, which
may be done in different ways.

I have been in the habit of raising the nail with a small pair of
tweezers, and then cutting it off with a penknife. Previous to this,
however, it is desirable not only to open the parts well, but actually to
introduce the lint underneath the point of the nail which penetrates
the flesh ; and the hour that this is done, the patient feels compara-
tively well, as the pain and inflammation suddenly subsides. This


438 Inverted Toe Nail.

not only affords great relief, but enables the practitioner to cut off the
nail without creating much pain. Sometimes I cut off a little at
every dressing ; at other times, nearly the whole.

The nail must be removed upon a line level with the nail of the op-
posite foot on the same side, and afterwards the lint and plaster must
be kept on until the ulcer has healed. In following this method, I
have never yet failed, in a single instance, of effecting a cure ; nor
have I ever known a case, after it has been thus cured, again to
return.

One lady, I now recollect who applied to me, a distance of forty
or fifty miles from this city, who was suffering under a very severe
case of inverted toe nail. It was very painful, and she was unable to
walk ; but, after pursuing the foregoing treatment a few weeks, she
was cured, and has remained well for many years.

Another case occurs to me, which strikingly exemplifies the differ-
ence between this practice and that usually pursued. A woman, of
this city, had been for many years labouring under this disease, in a
most aggravated form. She was in the hospital some length of time,
but the surgeons there were unable to cure it. She suffered so much,
that she requested them, and subsequently myself and another sur.
geon, to amputate the leg or the offending members.

this woman was thrown by the complaint. The seat of the disease
was in the great toe of each foot, and so deep had the nails penetrated
into the flesh, that the pain, swelling, inflammation and ulceration,
were excessive, extending to the feet and legs, and which affected
the constitution, and rendered her not only a cripple, but completely
miserable.

I was called to attend her in connexion with a noted surgeon of this
city. He commenced the treatment of one toe, and I commenced
the treatment of the other ; and while I pursued the plan already
laid down, he passed a pair of forceps underneath one corner of the
nail, and suddenly tore the whole of it off, in the act of which the
woman fainted, and was thrown into convulsions.

Although the nail was thus entirely removed, so far from curing
her, it only aggravated the complaint : whereas, the toe which I treat-
ed, and on which no such operation was performed, became perfectly
well, and has remained so for years; and it is now my impression
that it was, in the commencement, much worse than the other; thus
clearly evincing the difference between the two modes of treatment.


CHAPTER XLVI.

CORNS AND WARTS.


Corns are too well known to need any description, and although
attended with no danger, they are exceedingly troublesome and pain-
ful. They are usually occasioned by wearing shoes that are too
tight or small.

Treatment.

As prevention is better than cure, persons should be careful to wear
such shoes as sit easy, and produce no pressure or irritation. But
when this precaution has not been attended to, and he becomes af-
flicted with them, the following treatment will be found very effectual.
Bathe the feet, or foot, in warm ley water every day ; after which ap-
ply the black salve or plaster. I know not that I have ever recom-
mended this without its having the desired effect.

Dr. Seely informs me that he has always cured corns by bathing the
part in warm water and paring or shaving the corn with a razor, and
then covering it with an alkaline powder called kali prteparatum.
This, he says, entirely destroys them. I presume that the vegetable
caustic would be still better, as it is more active.

Warts.
A very popular remedy for warts, in the country, is the juice of
milk-weed and the juice of celandine. If neither of these should
remove them, they may be touched with some kind of caustic.


CHAPTER XLVIT.

FOREIGN SUBSTANCES IN THE OESOPHAGUS AND TRACHEA, OR WINDPIPE,


Substances sometimes become lodged in some portion of tiie oeso-
phagus or throat, and, by pressing upon the trachea or windpipe, im-
pede respiration, such as fish bones, copper coins, &c.

When I attended the lectures of Dr. Stevens on surgery, T recollect
he exhibited a preparation, in which a pair of clasps liad destroyed
the child by one entering the trachea, and the other the oesophagus,
and which might easily have been removed, said the professor, had
the litlMttion of it been known at the time. From thin circumstance,


440 Foreign Substances in tlte CEsophagiis, Sfc.

we may infer what ought to be done when first called to an accident
of this nature. The tongue should be pressed down, and the finger
introduced as far as possible, which will often enable a person to ex.
tract it, even though it may not be seen. I removed a fish bone from
the throat of a person the other day, in this manner, in a few moments.

If a fish bone, or pin, or needle, can be seen in the posterior part
of the throat, it may be seized by a pair of tweezers and extracted.
An emetic, by the spasmodic affection which it produces, often dis-
lodges any substances of this kind.

If these means fail, a small piece of sponge may be fastened to a
piece of whalebone or wire, and, after having immersed it in water,
it is to be slowly and cautiously introduced into the throat, in a spiral
like manner. Dr. Perkins, one of the graduates of our school, in-
formed me, a few months since, that, by this simple instrument, he
removed a fish bone from the oesophagus of a patient.

Some use a probang, and force down the substance ; but there is
danger of driving some agents, such as needles, into the integuments,
and thus causing serious if not fatal consequences. A lady, in this
city, lost her life by this means, a few years ago.

A physician in Canada obtained great celebrity, a few years ago,
by a simple but ingenious contrivance, with which he extracted a sub-
stance in the oesophagus of a person. It consisted simply in tying a
small piece of sponge to a piece of silk, and' causing the person to
swallow it ; after which, to drink warm tea, and after waiting a short
time for the sponge to expand by the absorption of the liquid, the end of
the strings was seized and cautiously drawn until the sponge came up,
and with it the substance. This may be practised in some cases.

The late Dr. Nathan Smith, of New-Haven, professor of surgery
in the medical institution of Yale College, invented a very excellent
instrument to extract coins from the oesophagus.

" I have twice been called upon," says he, " to remove coins from
the throats of children. In both instances they had descended to
near the inferior extremity of the oesophagus, where the passage is a
little narrowed, just before entering the stomach. Of course, they
were entirely beyond the reach of forceps, or any instrument which
might be employed to grasp and thus withdraw them.

" The instrument which the exigencies of the case suggested, and
Avith which I succeeded, was unlike any thing which I have known to
be employed for a similar purpose. A very few words will be suffi-
cient to give an idea of it.

" The shaft of the instrument is a rod of whalebone, twenty inches
in length, and of the size of a small quill. Half an inch from one
extremity there are attached, at acute angles, like the barbs of an ar-
row, two wings of silver, an inch and a quarter in length, a quarter of
an inch wide, and so thin as to be very elastic and flexible. The ex-
tremity, which stands off from the instrument, is convoluted so as to
render it blunt, and is a little curved inward toward the shaft of the
instrument. The two wings are pinned to the shaft of the instrument,
and may be continued over its extremity, which should terminate with
a bead or obtuse point.

"From the position of the oesophagus between the trachea and


Rickets — (Rachitis.) 441

spine, the faces of the coin present forward and back. When the in-
strument is thrust down the oesophagus, avoiding the glottis, as maybe
done without difficulty, and presenting the barbs one forward and the
other back, it will pass either behind or before the coin, and the barb
will spring beyond it, and catch it between itself and the shaft, when
it may be very easily withdrawn. The manner in which the shaft is
embraced by the oesophagus above, prevents its slipping off laterally.
In both the cases alluded to, I accomplished the extraction of the coin
without any difficulty, and at the first trial. In the second case, after
I had once raised the coin into the mouth, the child instantly swal-
lowed it again, though I had almost seized it with my fingers. It
returned to the same place, and I again withdrew it at the first trial.

"The barbs are made so thin, that should they catch in any of the
follicles of the oesophagus, they would be everted sooner than rupture
the membrane."

Sometimes substances get into the trachea, or windpipe, and prove
serious or fatal. When this happens, an emetic may first be given,
and if this fails, and the substance still continues, it may be ne-
cessary to make an opening into the trachea. This has sometimes
succeeded when other means have failed. A longitudinal or horizon-
tal incision is made just below the thyroid cartilage, which constitutes
the prominence in the throat.


CHAPTER XLVIII.

rickets — (Rachitis.)


This is a peculiar disease, produced by debility of the vascular sys-
tem, and is commonly called rickets.

Rachitis first manifests itself in disease of the mesenteric glands ;
the abdomen is increased in size, the head is considerably enlarged,
and out of proportion to the rest of the body, so that the disease is
often mistaken for hydrocephalus.

The chin is expanded, the sides of the jaws are brought together, and
the whole of the features are altered, so that, in general, by merely
looking at the face of a patient, you infer from it the nature of the
complaint.

In rachitis, an alteration takes place in the form of the spine, which
has a double curvature above and below, like the italic S ; and the other
parts of the body are consequently affected by the distortion.

Under these circumstances, nature endeavours still to preserve the


442 Rickets — (Rachitis.)

perpendicular line of the body, by producing a second curve as soort
as one begins, and the equilibrium is maintained, though there is a con-
siderable variation in the form of the spine. The scapula is also
considerably projected : but pressure on the shoulder, with a view of
remedying this defect, is a most absurd and unscientific practice ; it
may give pain, but can do no possible good. The spine, in these ca-
ses, has given way in two directions, and the ribs on one side are more
curved than on the other. This incurvation of the ribs occasions the
alteration in the form on the scapula. The anterior part of the chest
is extremely projected ; the sternum is sometimes sunk between the
cartilages of the ribs, and sometimes advances so as to form what is
called a chicken breast.

In addition to the parts already mentioned as influenced by rachitis,
the bones of the extremities all undergo a curvature.

When this disease has continued for any length of time, absorption
of some of the bones takes place, and nothing but the cartilage re-
mains ; such are the miserable changes to Which rickety children are
subject.

The cause of all these changes is a great deficiency in the powers
of the circulation, in consequence of which the bones lose their phos-
phate of lime, and become spongy at the extremities, and the joints,
therefore, are exceedingly enlarged. The ossific matter binds down
the cartilages, so as to prevent their expansion, hence arises a dimi-
nution of the ossific deposit, which leads the alteration in the form of
the bones.

Treatment.

With respect to the treatment of these cases, you will observe the
same general principles which I laid down for scrofula.

The joints or parts affected, may be bathed with equal parts of the
sassafras and olive oil, to which a little gum camphor has been added.
Afterwards a strengthening plaster may be applied.

The alterative syrup should be freely given, and oontinued a length
of time. The bowels must be kept regular, and bathing in a tepid
salt water bath, will also aid in the cute. I have found that a syrup,
made of comfrey, shoke-weed and Solomon's sice, very serviceable in
this complaint.

Some time ago, I cured two very bad cases of rickets by pursuing
this method. Friction on the parts is also useful.


CHAPTER XLIX.

dow worm, or scald head — (Tinea Capitis.)


This disease consists in a chronic inflammation of the skin of the
head, productive of a secretion of matter, peculiar in its nature, and
capable of propagating the complaint, if applied to the scalp of a
healthy subject. At rirst the eruption is confined, probably, to only
a small portion of the head ; but by degrees its acrimony is extended
to the neighbouring parts, and at length the whole of the scalp is
eroded, and beset with a scabby eruption. Dr. Willan has substituted
the term porrigo for that of tinea, as being less objectionable, and
considers this genus as consisting of several varieties.

Children are principally affected with it, particularly those of the
poor ; hence it may arise from uncleanliness, from the want of
a due proportion of wholesome nutritive food, and possibly from bad
nursing. At any rate, these will very much aggravate the disease.
In many instances it is propagated by contagion, either by using a
comb imbued with the matter from the head of a person labouring
under it, or by putting on his hat or cap.

Treatment.

It is recommended to cut off the hair, and apply a tar plaster over
the head, and in some cases it may be beneficial, but I prefer a mode
of treatment somewhat different. The head, or the part affected,
should be first well washed with soap and water, and then the follow,
ing ointment applied :

Take Venice turpentine, one ounc a ,
Sulphur vivum, two drachms \
Fresh butter or lard, one ounce ;
Stir the whole in a mortar until it is well mixed. Let this be rubbed
upon the affected parts three or four times a day.

Give the child cream of tartar and sulphur, mixed in molasses, suf-
ficient to act lightly upon the bowels.

" From some recent experience," says Thatcher, " I am confi-
dent that we have a domestic plant, easily procured, which will sel-
dom fail to cure this troublesome and loathsome disease, if properly
applied. The plant I refer to is the kalmia, or laurel, of which we
have two species in our woods and swamps ; the broad-leafed laurel,
or winter-green, and the narrow-leafed laurel, well known by the
name of lamb-kill, from its fatal effects among sheep. The last spe-
cies is said to be the most active. Take the leaves of laurel or lamb-
kill, at any season of the year, boil them till the water is strongly im-
pregnated with their virtues, and then wash the scabby parts about
the head twice in a day, until a perfect cure is effected. It will excite
considerable smarting, but if it cannot be borne it may be made
weaker. Another method of using this remedy is to reduce the dried
leaves to a fine powder, and make an ointment by mixing it with hog's

Vol. II. 3 II


444 Ringworm, or Impetigo.

lard to which some of the powdered root of our swamp hellebore
may be added, if desired. This remedy ought, in my opinion, to be
preferred, as it is far more neat and cleanly than either the sulphur
or tar ointment, and unquestionably of equal efficacy."


CHAPTER L.

RINGWORM, OR IMPETIGO.


This is a cutaneous disease, chiefly occupying the scalp, but some-
times other parts of the body, and arises most frequently from coming
much in contact, or using the same comb, cap or hat, with those al-
ready affected by it ; but in some habits there seems a predisposition
to it. It is a disorder more frequently met with in warm climates than
in cold ones, is of a very contagious nature, and in inveterate cases is
sometimes very difficult to eradicate.

It shows itself in small red pimples, which break out in a circular
form, and contain a thin acrid fluid. When the body is heated by
exercise these itch intolerably, and upon being scratched, discharge
their contents, which, by falling on the neighbouring parts, spread the
disease to a considerable degree. The original size of the circle
formed by the pimples is usually about that of a sixpenny piece ; but
in process of time it will become, by neglect, as large as the palm of
the hand.

In some cases the disease is so universal that the habit becomes
tainted ; the skin puts on a leprous appearance, is much disfigured
with blotches, and the unhappy patient enjoys not a moment's ease,
from the intolerable itching and painful excoriations.

Where the disease is not of an inveterate nature, it may easily be
removed, by washing the parts affected with some kind of restringent
lotion.

Treatment.

Wash the ringworm with the following lotion :

Take litharge, two drachms ;
Vinegar, eight ounces ;
Mix ; apply it three or four times a day. After which anoint it with
the yellow dock ointment.

Should this fail to remove the complaint, treat it the same as tetter,
or salt rheum.


CHAPTER LI.

PSORA, OR THE ITCH.


The itch is evidently confined to the skin, and rarely affects the
general system, however great its irritation.

It arises most usually from infection, communicated by coming
into immediate contact with the body of a person already affected, or
by wearing the same clothes, or lying in the same bed-linen that he
has done ; but it is sometimes produced by unwholesome food, bad
air, and a neglect of cleanliness.

The itch shows itself in small pimples about the fingers, wrists,
hams and waist, which, after a short time, become so many pustules,
and are attended with such an itching as to occasion a constant desire
to scratch. When they break, the acrid fluid which they contained
falls on the neighbouring parts, and thereby spreads the disease over
almost the whole body, if proper remedies are not used to check its
progress. Where the pustules are very large, and attended with
much inflammation, they are apt to run into boils. The animalcule
which are seen in the pustules are the effect, not the cause of them :
as all other stagnating fluids abound with microscopic animals.

Treatment.

Give internally, the following :

Take Jlour of sulphur, two parts ;
Cream of tartar, one part ;
Mix. Of this powder, to an adult, give a teaspoonful, in molasses,
morning and night.

The following ointment to be used externally :

Take sulphur vivum, (native sulphur,) half an ounce, pulverized ;
Lard, two ounces ;
Melt the lard, and stir in this powder until it is cold.

Let the parts be bathed two or three times a day with this ointment.

This treatment will cure this loathsome disease in a few days, with-
out the necessity of even changing the clothes, or producing any of-
fensive effluvia.


CHAPTER LII.

COLLECTIONS OF MATTER IN THE ANTRIM, OF HIGHMORE,


Symptoms.

Pain extending upwards to the eyes, nose, and ears ; swelling and
redness of the integuments over the part ; frequently on a sudden, and
especially upon rising from bed, a discharge of matter issues from the
nose, which affords a relief to the symptoms, until the cavity becomes
again distended.

Treatment.

Evacuating the matter by means of a puncture made through the
alveolus, with a probe, or sharp-pointed instrument ; and after the
contents of the cavity have thus been emptied, preventing the sides
of the opening from "closing, by means of a tent ; and occasionally
injecting tincture of myrrh, or some astringent fluid.

Generally after matter has formed, it will find an exit, or it may be
evacuated by a probe, without extracting the molar tooth, as some re,
commend.


CHAPTER LIII.

PSOAS AND LUMBER ABSCESSES.


By these terms are understood chronic collections of matter,
which form in the cellular substance of the loins, behind the perito-
noeum, and descend in the course of the psoas muscle.

If the disease forms on the side of the vertebrae, instead of the
fore part, it is termed a lumber abscess, instead of psoas.

The origin of psoas abscess is not, in general, attended with any
symptoms of acute pain and inflammation, nor with any febrile dis-
turbance of the constitution.

Previous to the appearance of any other symptom, the patient long
feels an unaccountable sense of weakness across the loins, accompa-
nied by an obtuse, yet distressing pain ; but this, so far from leading
to a suspicion of the nature of the disease, is usually regarded as
rheumatic.

The matter is formed slowly, and imperceptibly, and occasions, at
first, no manifest swelling, nor fluctuation.

When the matter has collected, it spreads until it reaches the ori-


Psoas and Lumber Abscesses. 447

gin of the psoas muscle, which passes into ulceration, and forme a bag,
surrounded by a complete ring. The abscess proceeds as far as the
tendon of the muscle, by Poupart's ligament, and its further progress
is restrained by the tendon ; when it passes under Poupart's ligament,
between the femoral vein and the symphysis pubis, it has generally
attained considerable magnitude.

While the abscess is attended with no external tumour, the discri-
mination is always difficult.

Upon the first appearance of the tumour beneath Poupart's liga-
ment, it possesses so many of the characteristics of hernia : but the
marks, which distinguish it, are the pain in the loins, and the great
constitutional derangement which the patient suffers in the progress
of the complaint.

The outward swelling, at length occurring, may take place in va-
rious situations, and assume different appearances.

The swelling, when in the groin, sometimes insinuates itself be-
neath the femoral fascia. In other instances, it descends as far as
the knee, where it forms a prominent swelling. Sometimes it makes
its way downwards into the pelvis, and occasions a swelling in the
neighbourhood of the anus. Sometimes it tends towards the loins
and sacrum, giving rise to a swelling exactly in the place where ab-
scesses often make their appearance, in the disease of the hip-joint.
In a few instances, the matter causes a swelling in the vicinity of the
vertebrae : and, less frequently still, it makes its way through the ab-
dominal muscles, and produces a tumour at some part of the abdomen.

Causes.

-The causes of a psoas abscess are frequently involved in great ob-
scurity.

It is supposed, sometimes, to arise from injury done to the back
and loins, by severe twists, blows, &c. : at other times, to proceed
from sudden exposure to cold after severe exercise, particularly in
scrofulous habits.

Treatment.

If there be inflammation and pain, steam the part, and afterwards
apply the slippery-elm poultice. Continue this treatment until the
abscess breaks ; and after the matter is evacuated, let it be kept open
and the discharge of matter facilitated. After a few days, inject in
Castile soap and water, and subsequently liquids more stimulating,
such as weak ley, tincture of gum myrrh, &c. They promote the
adhesive process in the interior of the abscess, glue its sides together,
promote a healthy secretion and the healing process. The black
salve may be applied to the ulcer.

There being usually much constitutional disturbance, particularly
after it suppurates, such as debility, loss of appetite, &c. it will be
necessary to give such medicines as will counteract these symptoms.


CHAPTER LIV.

SPRAINS.


A sprain is an injury occurring to the ligaments or tendons sur-
rounding a joint, which are either forcibly stretched or lacerated. It
usually happens from the sudden extension of the joint in a direction
which the muscles are unprepared for ; in the same manner as when
a dislocation is produced, only that the violence is not sufficient to oc-
casion a displacement of the bones.

The most common situations of these accidents are, either at the
wrist or ankle, arising from sudden falls, by which the joints are un-
expectedly and forcibly bent.

These injuries are attended with considerable pain at the time of
the accident, and the part soon becomes swollen and tender ; the for-
mer symptom arises from the effusion of blood in the first instance,
out of the lacerated blood-vessels, and becomes subsequently much
increased from inflammation ; the tenderness and pain are generally
in proportion to the tumefaction.

At first the surface of the skin presents its natural appearance, but
after a short time, as the effused blood coagulates, it becomes much
discoloured.

When inflammation has been set up, and given rise to the effusion
of fibrin, a sensation of crepitus is felt on examining the injured part.

This might, by an ignorant surgeon, be mistaken for the crepitus of
fractured bone ; but it never gives that distinct feel which occurs from
the rubbing of one portion of broken bone upon another.

Immediately after the receipt of the injury, the ordinary motions of
the joints can be readily performed.

However, as the swelling takes place, these motions become much
impeded, and ultimately cannot be performed without producing acute
pain, and increasing the mischief.

Treatment.
The best application to a recent sprain, is wormwood and hops sim-
mered in vinegar, to be often renewed. If the inflammation is very
great, let a poultice be applied. After the irritation, swelling, &c,
has subsided, apply a strengthening plaster sufficiently large to cover
the sprain. Camphorated spirits is sometimes serviceable, and opo-
deldoc, which consists of alcohol, soap and camphor. Where sprains
are obstinate and protracted, I have applied our green or rheumatic
oil, with excellent effect. It is made as follows :
Take oil of wormwood,
Oil of sassafras,
Oil of hemlock,
Oil of red cedar,


Burns and Scalds. 449

Oil or spirits of turpentine,

Olive oil,

Gum camphor,
Equal parts. Mix, and bathe the sprain two or three times a day.

Some have recommended cold water, to be poured from a height
upon a sprain, and in some cases this may have proved serviceable ;
but injury sometimes follows the practice, from the sedative effect of
the cold. After the above has been used, apply a strengthening plaster.


CHAPTER LV.

BURNS AND SCALDS.


Burns are usually divided into three kinds : 1st. Into such as pro-
duce an inflammation of the cutaneous texture, but an inflammation
which, if it be not improperly treated, almost always manifests a ten-
dency to resolution. 2d. Into those which occasion the separation of
the cuticle, and produce suppuration on the surface of the skin. 3d.
Into others in which the vitality and organization of a greater or less
portion of the skin are either immediately or subsequently destroyed,
and a soft slough or hard eschar produced. — (See Thomson on In~
fiammation, p. 585, 586.)

Suppuration is not always an unavoidable consequence of the vesi-
cations in burns ; but it is a common and a troublesome one. " In
severe cases, it may take place by the second or third day ; often not
till a later period. It often occurs without any appearance of ulcer-
ation ; continues for a longer or shorter time, and is at last stopped
by the formation of new skin. In other instances, small ulcerations
appear on the surface or edges of the burn. These, spreading, form
extensive sores, which are, in general, long in healing, even where the
granulations which form upon them have a healthy appearance. —
{Op. cit. p. 595.)

Burns present different appearances, according to the degree of
violence with which the causes producing them have operated, and
according to the kind of cause of which they are the effect. Burns
which only irritate the surface of the skin, are essentially different
from those which destroy it ; and these latter have a very different
aspect from what others present which have attacked parts more
deeply situated, such as the muscles, tendons, ligaments, &c.
Scalds, which are the effect of heated fluids, do not exactly re-
semble burns, occasioned by the direct contact of very hot metal-
lic bodies, or some combustible substance on fire. As fluids are
not capable of acquiring 6o high a temperature as many solids, scalds
are generally less violent than hums in the injury which they pro-


450 Burns and Scalds.

duce ; but, in consequence of liquids often flowing about with gread
rapidity. and being suddenly thrown in large quantities over the pa-
tient, scalds are frequently dangerous on account of their extent. It
is worthy of remark, that the danger of the effects of fire is not less
proportioned to the size, than the degree and depth of the injury. A
burn that is so violent as to kill parts at once, may not be in the least
dangerous, if not extensive ; while a scald, which perhaps only raises
the cuticle, may prove fatal, if very large. The degree of danger,
however, is to be rated from a consideration both of the size and vio-
lence of the injury. The worst burns which occur in practice, arise
from explosions of gunpowder or inflammable gases, from persons'
dresses catching fire, and from the boiling over of hot fluids in labo-
ratories, manufactories, &c.

Burns which only destroy and irritate the skin, are very similar to
the effects produced by cantharides and .rubefacients. The irritation
which such injuries excite, increases the action of the arteries of the
part affected, and they effuse a fluid under the cuticle, which becomes
elevated and detached. Hence, the skin becomes covered with vesi-
cles or bladders, which are more or less numerous and large, accord-
ing to the manner in which the cause has operated. But, when the
skin or subjacent parts are destroyed, no vesicles make their appear-
ance. In this circumstance, a black eschar is seen ; and, when the'
dead parts are detached, there remains a sore more or less deep, ac-
cording to the depth to which the destructive effects of the fire have
extended.

The parts may either be killed at the moment of the injury, by the
immediate effect of the fire, or they may first inflame, and then
mortify.

In all cases of burns, the quantity of injury depends on the degree
of heat in the burning substance ; on the duration and extent of its
application, and on the sensibility of the burnt part.

When a large surface is burnt, mortification sometimes makes its
appearance with great violence, and very quickly after the accident ;
but in general, the symptom most to be dreaded in such cases is in-
flammation. The pain and irritation often run to such a pitch
that, notwithstanding every means, there is sometimes trouble in
keeping down the inflammation. When the burnt surface is very
large, the effects of the inflammation are not confined to the part
which was first injured, but even cause a great deal of fever; and,
in certain cases, a comatose state, which may end in death.

It has been observed, that persons who die of severe burns, seem to
experience a remarkable difficulty of breathing, and oppression of
the lungs. These organs and the skin are both concerned in sepa-
rating a large quantity of water from the circulation ; and their par-
ticipating in this function may perhaps afford a reason for respiration
being often much affected, when a large surface of skin is burnt.
However, the kidneys perform the same office, and they are not par-
ticularly affected in burnt patients ; so that the asthmatic symptoms
frequently noticed in cases of burns, are probably owing to a sympa-
thy between the lungs and skin, or else to causes not at present un-
derstood,


Burns and Scalds. 451

According to Dupuytren, extensive and deep burns always bring on
inflammation of the mucous membrane of the alimentary canal : a
circumstance said to explain those curious instances of death which
so often occur when the ulcers are on the point of healing. — (See
Medecine Opiratoire, par Sabatier, edit, de MM. Sanson et Beguin.)

Common Treatment.

Perhaps there is no complaint for which so many applications are
made use of, as for burns. Some physicians use heating or stimu-
lating, while others use cooling or refrigerant agents. Some apply
spirits of turpentine ; some cotton ; some spirits, &c. ; some bleed,
ice. Each kind of practice has its advocates, and there appears to
be no established rules or uniformity among practitioners. Burns
often get well under any and all applications; and whatever is applied
at the time, obtains the credit of the cure ; notwithstanding which,
the greatest benefit is derived from proper applications.

Reformed Practice.

I am in the habit of applying to burns and scalds, when first called
to treat them, an ointment made of the stramonium, which, 1 find, is
very soothing and cooling. When the skin is entirely denuded, the
marshmallow ointment is preferable ; both of which kinds, however,
are very beneficial. After this has been applied, make use of a poul-
tice of the elm-bark and milk. When it has been spread upon linen
or muslin, let it be covered with olive or sweet oil. The poultice should
not be suffered to get dry, but should be often changed. After the
pain and inflammation have been removed, apply the black plaster or
salve ; sometimes it is necessary previously to apply a little lint.
When the burn degenerates into an ulcer, and becomes difficult to
heal, in consequence of fungous flesh, it must be touched with mild
escharotics, the same as any common sore.

Ferris' black plaster, combined with a very small portion of white
vitriol, is very effectual. When sympathetic fever succeeds, physic
should be administered.

Sometimes hot water or liquids are taken into the mouth, or swal-
lowed. When this happens, let it be gargled with borax water, and
let a mucilage of slippery-elm bark be freely drank, and give the pa.
tient occasionally a portion of olive oil.

For very slight burns, the black salve alone is sufficient to remove
the pain and inflammation.

This simple treatment I have found strikingly successful in all kinds
of burns and scalds, and in the worst stages of them. The elm poul-
tice, in the course of a few hours, completely changes the appearance
of the burn. It removes the inflammation, and from a state of extreme
redness, or high colour, changes the parts to perfect whiteness. At
the same time, the pain and swelling speedily subside.

All other applications will bear no comparison with this mode of
treatment. On one occasion, a child fell backwards into a large kettle
of boiling water, and not only burnt itself severely, but actually roasted
or disorganized the parts from the back nearly to the feet. A poul.

Vol. II. 3 I


462 Suspended Animation.

tice of slippery-elm bark and olive oil alone, in a short space of time,
removed the inflammation and acute sufferings of the patient, and the
child recovered, which, to all acquainted with the accident, seemed
almost incredible. The deep and extensive scars left are' frightful.
The practice is equally successful in all cases of the kind.


CHAPTER LVI.

lUftPENDED ANIMATION, BY HANGING, DROWNING, SUFFOCATION, OR
EXPOSURE TO INTENSE COLD.


Where the vital principle is supposed to be only suspended, not
wholly destroyed, by strangulation resorted to under a fit of despon-
dency, it will be proper to adopt the same means for re-animating the
person as are pointed out for the recovery of those who are drowned.

The vital principle is not unfrequently suspended by the deleterious
fumes arising from fermenting liquors; from charcoal, coke, &c, in
a state of combustion ; from metals in a state of fusion, particularly
arsenic and mercury ; as also very often from respiring the foul air
of wells, privies, caverns and mines.

In such cases the following appearances present themselves : the
head, face and neck are swollen, the eyes protuberate, the tongue
hangs out at one side of the mouth, the jaws are firmly closed, the face
is of a livid colour and the lips of a deep blue ; the belly is distended
and prominent, the person is insensible to any pain, and appears in a
profound sleep.

The first sensations he experiences on inhaling air vitiated with
noxious fumes are, giddiness, headach, stupor, faintings, inactivity,
numbness, and occasionally convulsions.

As soon as possible after a person has been discovered to have
been suffocated by any kind of noxious fumes, he should be freely
exposed to pure, fresh and cool air, being supported at the same time
in a leaning posture. Volatile salts, or other stimulating substances,
are then to be applied to the nose, the face be sprinkled with vinegar,
and the pit of the stomach with cold water. The legs may likewise
be put into a warm bath. Possibly a sudden immersion of the whole
body in cold water might be of service, as it is well known that the
recovery of the dogs, which are made the subjects of experiment in-
the grotto del Cam, is effected by plunging them immediately into a
neighbouring lake. - -* B

After each application of the vinegar and cold water, every part of
the body should be well rubbed with flannels, the temples and insides
ot the nostrils be stimulated by volatile spirits, and heated bricks, or


Suspended Animation. 458

bottles filled with warm water, be applied to the soles of the feet, then
leaving the person fot a few minutes in an undisturbed state. In ad-
dition to these means, it may be advisable to administer an active
clyster, and if this does not produce a good effect, one consisting of
water, mixed with a fourth part of vinegar, may be tried.

To restore the circulation of the blood, due warmth to the body,
and respiration, the same means may be used as have been recom-
mended in the case of suspended animation by drowning.

On a return of life, (usually marked by a foaming at the mouth and
shivering of the whole body, especially after affusions of cold water,)
a little lemonade, or water acidulated with vinegar, should be given
to the patient as soon as he is capable of swallowing. If there is an
inclination to vomit, it may be encouraged by stimulating the throat
with a feather dipped in oil, continuing gentle friction to different parts
of the body at intervals.

Should all these means, however, fail in restoring animation, it then
will be advisable to employ electricity or galvanism, repeated shocks
being passed through the chest. The body should not be abandoned or
deserted until after a considerable lapse of time, and a due perseve-
rance in all the means which have been specified as the best calcu-
lated to re-animate it ; for persons have been known to recover after
lying in a state of insensibility a day or two.

In places where a lighted candle will not burn, but becomes ex-
tinguished, animal life cannot be supported ; and, therefore, in all cases
where wells, cist-pools, or deep vaults, are to be opened, a large candle,
lighted, ought to be let down very slowly to the bottom before any per-
son attempts to descend. If the candle is extinguished, or even if the
flame is materially affected, the well is unsafe to venture in ; but if it
burns clear and brilliant, there is no danger. If the candle is extinguish-
ed, means must be adopted to remove the noxious air before any one de.
scends. To effect this, the following modes will answer : 1st. Let the
leather pipe of an engine be introduced to the bottom of the well, if empty,
or the surface of the water, and affix a blacksmith's bellows to the other
end, when, by well working this, the foul air may be expelled. 2dly.
Carbonic acid gas may be bailed out with a bucket made of coarse
cloth, like a bag, with a round piece of board, nearly the diameter of
the well, at the bottom ; let the bucket, thus made, down upon the
water, so that the bottom may rest upon it, and let the bag fall upon
the bottom ; then draw it up, when it will be filled with foul air, which
may be brought to the surface, and emptied by turning out and shaking
the bag. 3dly. Let down about a bushel of quick lime, dipping it into
the water occasionally to slake it ; or if there be no water in the well,
throw down some for the purpose.

Either of these methods ought to be persevered in till a candle will
burn with ease ; and even then, in no case ought any person to de-
scend without a strong rope securely fastened round his waist ; and he
should be attentively watched, so as to be drawn up immediately, if
ecessary.

The fire-damp, or carburreted hydrogen gas, which is formed in con-
siderable quantities at the bottom of coal-pits, is frequently the canse
of the death of many of the miners, by an unexpected explosion in


4 5 4 Suspended Animation.

consequence of the flame of a candle or lantern being brought near.
A very effectual apparatus, for preventing such accidents, by consum-
L the gas, has been invented by Sir Humphry Davy, which promises
!o be of the highest utility, and insure the safety of all persons who
descend into collieries, and that will avail themselves thereof.

Life is sometimes suspended, and now and then wholly destroyed,
by an exposure to a severe degree of cold for any length of time
The person thus situated finds himself become very drowsy and much
disposed to sleep, in which if he indulges he will be exposed to immi-
nent danger. It therefore will be highly incumbent on him to rouse
himself as much as possible, and keep in action. When he fails m
this, his companions, if he has any, should well shake him, or even
drag him about by force, until the drowsiness ceases.

It is, however, to be suspected that most of the travellers who perish
among' snow fall martyrs to their drinking intemperately of spirituous
liquors : fool-hardv, under the false courage excited by dram drinking,
they sally out in the dark to explore their way, and soon lose the
road from the change of objects which falling snow occasions. Ihe
effects of the dram, in this situation of distress, accelerate death by
assisting to bring on drowsiness or sleep, which is almost irresistible ;
he lays 3 himself down, and in all probability never rises again, or
should he be so fortunate to escape with his life, his extremities will be

frost-bitten. .

The treatment to be adopted in cases of universal torpor and^ in-
sensibility from an exposure to severe cold, must be as follows : The
person to whom such an occurrence has taken place, should be con-
veyed with all possible speed to a convenient place or house, where
the necessary assistance can be given. If the body is found naked,
it should be quickly covered with a blanket, leaving the head and face
bare. If there is snow on the ground, the body may at first be rubbed
gently from the stomach to the extremities with it. Very shortly
afterwards, frictions are to be made with cloths steeped in cold water,
the temperature of which is to be gradually increased, so as to heat
the body by slow degrees. Some of the water may at the same time
be sprinkled in the face, and the nostrils and temples be irritated with
volatile spirits, such as the solution of ammonia or liquor of hartshorn.
As soon as any degree of heat is restored to the body, and the
limbs become somewhat flexible, the person should be placed in a dry
but not warm bed, and then be well rubbed with flannels or a soft
brush ; his lungs should also be inflated in the manner advised in
cases of drowning, and an irritating clyster, consisting of near a pint
of water, with the addition of a middle sized spoonful of volatile liquor
of hartshorn, or of a little mustard, rum, brandy or gin, be administer-
ed from time to time.

If the power of swallowing is restored, we should give the person
some gently stimulating and warm drink, such as a little thin broth
with some brandy in it, or water with some wine and spice, administer,
ing these by a spoonful at a time, repeating the dose frequently.
When the power of swallowing does not soon return, it would seem
advisable to introduce the liquor into the stomach by means of an
elastic gum catheter inserted into the gullet through the mouth. The


Hydrophobia. 455

liquor may be injected through this into the stomach, either by means
of a common syringe, or that of an elastic gum bottle, having a small
pipe affixed to it. The other means recommended in case of sus-
pended animation by drowning, are also to be adopted and persevered
in for a proper length of time. — (Thomas.)

Drovming. — When animation has been suspended, by drowning or
immersion under water, many of the same means recommended are
here proper. The body must be taken to a suitable place, the wet
clothes taken off, and immediately dried by rubbing with warm flan-
nels. The face is to be turned somewhat downwards, to give exit to
any water which may have been introduced into the lungs ; but it
should not be rolled over a barrel, or roughly handled, as is sometimes
practised. An injection may be given, the feet bathed in warm water,
and constant friction kept up for a long time. Bricks and stones may
be heated and covered with cloths, wet with vinegar, and applied to
the feet, legs and sides ; and the windows should be open to admit
fresh air. The lungs may also be inflated by blowing into them by
the mouth, or by means of a pair of bellows, while an assistant gently
presses the breast, up and down, in imitation of natural breathing or
respiration. When signs of life appear, and the person can swallow,
a little lavender compound and spirits of hartshorn may be given.

The means to be used for the recovery of persons suddenly depriv-
ed of life, are nearly the same in all cases : from lightning, poisonous
gases, &c.


CHAPTER LVII.

HYDROPHOBIA, OR CANINE MADNESS,


Cause.


In the human species, it is always the result of a specific virus or con-
tagion, derived from the bite of an animal labouring under the disease.
The poison appears to bo exclusively attached to the saliva, by the
fact of the disease being produced by wounds inflicted with the teeth
of a rabid animal. It may be communicated by bringing the contagious
virus in contact with a wounded surface. The bite of a rabid animal
is not always followed by hydrophobia. When the person is bitten
through clothes, particularly woollens, the virus is sometimes wiped
from the teeth before they enter the skin : from this cause, we some-
times find only one or two, out of a number bitten by the same ani-
mal, become rabid.

Symptoms.
At some uncertain period after the bite, a painful tension, redness
and heat attack the part bitten, and at the same time darting pains
and spasms arise in it ; the patient is seized with languor, lassitude,


456 Poisons.

anxiety, frequent sighing and love of solitude, twitching of the ten-
dons and horrible dreams torment him. These symptoms continue for
some time, and then become worse ; a great aversion to, and dread of
any kind of liquid, supervenes, inasmuch as the sight of it causes
spasms in the throat ; a frothy saliva is frequently ejected, and during
the paroxysms a desire of biting attends ; respiration hurried, and
gasping convulsions, and death.

Treatment.

The wound or bite should be cupped as soon as possible ; after
which, apply the caustic potash, until an eschar is formed ; then ap-
ply yest poultice, and keep up a discharge as long as possible. The
patient should now take a strong infusion or decoction of scullcap
through the day ; mandrake physic once a week. If this does not
prevent the disease, and should symptoms of hydrophobia appear,
lobelia emetics must be given every other day. Perspiration must be
promoted by the steam or vapour bath.


CHAPTER LVIII.

POISONS.


There are various kinds of poisons, which it becomes the province
of the practitioner to treat ; such as animal, vegetable, mineral and
aerial, as well as certain salts, which do not belong to either class.

Since accidents occur so frequently from the agency of some of
these articles, it is very important that the subject should be well un-
derstood ; that we learn how to discriminate between the different
kinds of poisons, in order expeditiously and successfully to afford pro-
per antidotes.

1st. Mineral Poisons.

Mineral poisons are chiefly arsenic, mercury, nitrate of silver, an-
timony, lead, &c.

Lead.
When lead has been introduced into the stomach, tremors, colic,
palsy, convulsions, &c. take place. An over-dose of antimony also
proves fatal, producing violent vomiting, languor and almost imper-
ceptible pulse, coldness of the extremities, insensibility, and not un-
frequently convulsions. Arsenic produces a pricking and burning
sensation in the stomach, sudden and excruciating pains in the bow-
els, severe vomiting, the mouth and tongue will become rough and
parched, great thirst, restlessness and anxiety. If a great dose has


Poisons. 457

been taken, and it has not been evacuated, it will cause an inflam-
mation of the stomach and intestines. Corrosive sublimate (the
strongest preparation of mercury) produces about the same effect as
arsenic, sickness, severe griping pain in the stomach and bowels, ex-
cessive vomiting and purging of frothy mucus, sometimes mixed with
blood, distention of the belly, suppression of urine, coppery taste and
heat in the mouth and throat, great thirst, cold sweats, anxiety and
death.

From all mineral poisons, more or less danger is to be apprehended,
and that in proportion to the quantity taken, and the treatment. On
dissection of those who died from mineral poisons, about the same ap-
pearances are presented as in case of those who die of cholera ;
showing, most conclusively, that this disease is produced by a spe-
cific poison.

Trealmeni.

In all cases of mineral poison, it will be necessary as speedily as
possible to evacuate the poison, as medical aid is seldom at hand. In
such accidents, the person should be directed to drink the largest
quantity possible of milk, and immediately after give a large tea-
spoonful of the flour of mustard ; and what is still better, if it be at
hand, will be a teaspoonful of the pulverized lobelia, to be repeated
every ten or fifteen minutes, until vomiting is produced, to be accom-
panied with the free use of the mucilage of slippery-elm bark ; after
vomiting has been excited, a wineglassful of sweet oil may be adminis-
tered ; it will be necessary, also, at the same time to administer injec-
tions or clysters, composed of equal parts of the mucilage of elm
bark and milk, sweetened with molasses, and a gill of olive oil added ;
a quart of this must be introduced every half hour. Where these
means fail, let a stomach pump be procured and used.

Where vomiting and other symptoms continue, an ounce of the bi-
carbonate of potash may be dissolved in two quarts of water, and a
teacupful drank frequently ; fomentations to the stomach and bowels
will also prove beneficial. Lime-water is highly recommended by
Orfila as an antidote to arsenic.

The same writer states, that of all antidotes to the poison of the
corrosive sublimate, he has found the white of an egg dissolved in
water to be the most powerful and efficacious ; it must be diluted with
water before it is given, in cases where persons have been poisoned
by taking verdigris. Emetics must first be given, and afterwards a
solution of salaeratus (bicarbonate of potash) should be freely taken,
as directed above.

Sugar is said to be an excellent antidote to verdigris.

The effects of lead must be remedied by the use of castor oil and
injections.

Muriate of soda counteracts the corrosive effects of the nitrate of
silver, and it is the best antidote. A person suffering under the dele-
terious effects of this, should drink several glasses of a solution of the
muriate of soda, in the proportion of a tablespoonful of the salt to two
pints of water. Vomiting will ensue, and the symptoms will diminish.


458 Poisons.

Should they continue, recourse should be had to emollient drinks and
fomentations. , . , . . , ,

Milk is the best antidote of muriate of tin, by which it is completely
coagulated. The coagulum contains muriatic acid and oxyde of tin,
which is not deleterious.

It has been observed, that an over-dose of tartarized antimony
sometimes produces severe consequences. In such cases, our chief
dependence is to be placed upon mucilaginous and diluent drinks,
speedily to remove the medicine from the stomach ; and, when this
is done, opium, and perhaps mustard plasters may be of some ser-
vice. M. Orfila conjectures, that a decoction of the cinchona bark
and strong tea may aid in counteracting the injurious effects of an
over-dose of tartarized antimony.

When acids have been swallowed, and prove serious, large quanti-
ties of lime-water, milk, &c. must be given ; afterwards, a dose of
castor oil.

When an over-dose of any alkali has been taken, vinegar, diluted
with water, is the best antidote.

Tests.

Corrosive Sublimate, or Oxymuriate of Mercury. — For testing the
presence of eorrosive sublimate, the method is, its precipitation by
means of an alkali, such as the bicarbonate of ■potash, or by lime wa.
ter, which detach it under the form of an orange colour or orange yel-
low sediment. Nitrate of tin is very delicate, as one drop only pro-
duces an immediate and copious dark brown precipitation ; the matter
vomited and contents of the stomach should be collected, for the pur-
pose of being examined by these tests. A solution of corrosive sub-
limate, although very weak, instantly tarnishes polished silver im-
mersed in it, and gives it a dull, putrid colour, not easily removed.

The following are the tests by which arsenic may be discovered in
the contents of the stomach, where it has been administered as a poi-
son : 1st. If a few grains of it are thrown on a red-hot iron, a smell
like garlic will be perceived. 2dly. If a few grains are placed be-
tween two plates of copper, and subjected to a red heat, the copper
becomes whitened. 3dly. Where the quantity is sufficient, some
wheat may be steeped in a solution of it, and which, if given to chick-
ens or small birds, will destroy them.

A simple and efficacious means for detecting the presence of arse-
nic, is that of Bergman. It consists in infusing a portion of the sus-
pected matter in a solution of vegetable alkali : after standing an
hour or two, pour upon it a portion of the sulphate of copper. If
any arsenic is present, the copper will be immediately converted into
a beautiful green, and will soon be precipitated. In this way, water,
or the contents of a stomach supposed to contain arsenic, may be ex-
amined.

Lead. — The presence of lead may be detected by adding a little
sulphuric acid, which will precipitate the mineral in the form of a
white powder.

Copper. — When copper has been taken, the beautiful blue colour


Poiaon*. 459

produced in its solutions by pure ammonia, is the mo9t decisive and sa-
tisfactory evidence that .can be required. These tests will enable a
person to ascertain pretty correctly the existence of any mineral sub-
stance which has been supposed to have been swallowed.

Salts. — When saltpetre (nitrate of potash) has been taken, a simi-
lar course must be pursued.

Vegetable Poisons. — Vegetable poisons are very numerous, such
as sicuta, henbane, stramonium, digitalis, opium, laurel, helle-
bore, &c.

The symptoms occasioned by all poisonous substances of the vege-
table class are, giddiness, confusion of sight, wildness of the eyes,
palpitations, loss of memory and voice, stupor, nausea, vomiting,
great distension of the stomach, universal twitchings and convulsions.

The bodies of those who have been destroyed by vegetable poisons,
generally swell prodigiously, soon become offensive, and covered with
livid gangrenous spots. On opening the body, the viscera are usually
found in a sound state, but the veins are full and distended, the blood
remarkably fluid, and the arteries empty. When nightshade has oc-
casioned death, the intestines are generally inflated and inflamed, or
corroded and gangrenous.

Treatment.

In accidents from vegetable poisons, we must attempt the immediate
evacuation of the offending matter from the stomach ; and, where
opium, in a state of solution, (as in the tinctura opii,) has been swal-
lowed in any quantity, either through mistake, or with the view of
destroying life, its removal will be best effected by employing the
stomach pump, taking care well to wash out the stomach after the
poison has been evacuated, by injecting two or three syringefuls of
tepid water, so as to clear it thoroughly of the laudanum. Where
this machine is not at hand, or promptly to be procured, the stomach
must be evacuated of its deleterious contents by an active emetic, and
the most proper one will be the lobelia or mustard, as advised under
the head of Mineral Poisons. Where the patient is in a state of
complete insensibility, and incapable of swallowing, the emetic solu-
tion may be injected into the stomach by means of an elastic gum
catheter, introduced into the oesophagus from the right nostril. It is,
however, only quickly after opium or any other powerful narcotic has
been swallowed, that an emetic can be given with advantage, as the
patient's efforts in vomiting might increase the dangerous determina-
tion of blood to the head.

In some cases of poison by opium, or such other powerful seda-
tives, occasioning great torpor in the stomach, so as to resist the effects
of even strong emetics introduced into that organ, a scruple or half a
drachm of lobelia, dissolved in a little water,-and thrown up the in-
testines in the form of a clyster, has excited vomiting, and at the same
time freely evacuated the entire alimentary tube. In very obstinate
constipations, eight or ten grains of the medicine, administered in this
way, will commonly be found sufficient to effect the desired purpose.

Vol. II. 3 K


460 Poisons.

I consider lobelia, in the form of tincture or powder, to be the best
one woman who had taken three large opium pills, (by mistake,) and
when this article was administered, it soon removed all unfavourable
symptoms. Vinegar has been much recommended for laudanum, but
I know not that it is of much use.

Large quantities of diluted and mucilaginous drinks must be poured
down the patient, such as peppermint tea, and the mucilage of slip,
pery-elm bark ; injections or clysters should also be freely given the
patient ; at the same time he must be aroused, and kept awake, and in
motion as much as possible, by shaking and moving him about.

But the greatest reliance must be placed upon the speedy evacua-
tion of the stomach by emetics and the stomach pump. It is stated,
that the application of cowhage will so arouse the patient, that proper
medicines can be given to counteract the effects of the poison. It is
stated, also, that when other means have failed, a strong solution of
ammonia has awakened the patient, and he has gradually recovered.

A late writer states, that severe whipping has had the desired effect
by the irritation produced. In cases of poison, by fungi and other
narcotic plants, a similar course of treatment is required.

Poison Vine.

Both men and animals are severely poisoned by a vegetable called
the poison vine, or mercury, which runs upon trees, fences, &c. It
causes great heat, itching pain, swelling pain and inflammation, and
gives rise to unpleasant and serious symptoms.

I have found the following an excellent remedy for this kind of
poison, both for man and beast :

1st. Apply a wash tp the parts, made by simmering the bark of elder
in buttermilk, every two hours ; after which apply a little sweet oil,
and then, if practicable, a poultice made of the slippery-elm bark; give
occasionally a dose of sweet oil. A horse of mine, a short time since,
became so poisoned by this vine, that his eyes were entirely closed ;
this remedy removed the complaint in about twenty-four hours.

Poisonous Gases.

The fumes arising from many of the metals in a stale of fusion, or
aerial solution, are extremely pernicious. Those from arsenic cause
dryness of the tongue, a sense of suffocation, headach, vomiting, &c.
and, by long exposure, pulmonary consumption is a frequent conse-
quence. The fumes from mercury are highly deleterious : they
occasion salivation, tremors, paralysis and extreme weakness. Those
arising from lead occasion asthma, pains in the chest and body, para-
lysis, &c. ' V

The external appearances of persons suffocated by the deleterious
fumes arising from charcoal, coke, or fermenting liquors, (carbonic
acid gas,) as well as in consequence of sleeping in unv< ntilated apart-
ments, or respiring the foul air of wells, privies, caverns and mines,
are as follow : — the head, face and neck are swollen ; the eyes are


Poisoni. 461

propelled from their sockets ; the tongue is protruded at one side of
the mouth ; the jaws are firmly closed ; the face is of a livid, and the
lips are of a deep blue colour; the abdomen is inflated ; the body is
insensible to pain, and the person appears to be in a profound sleep.

The first symptoms which the patient experiences on inhaling air
vitiated with these deleterious fumes are, giddiness, headach, lethargy,
fainting, convulsions and general torpor.

Immediately on discovering a person who has been suffocated by
any kind of deleterious fume, the windows and doors ought to be
thrown open, and the body undressed and exposed freely to cool air,
being supported at the same time in a leaning posture on a chair :
after a little time it must be covered with flannel or blankets, the face
be sprinkled with vinegar, and the pit of the stomach with cold water.
Vinegar properly diluted with cold water may be introduced into it
through a flexible catheter. The legs may also be put into a warm
bath ; and as it is a well known fact, that the recovery of the dogs
which are made the subjects of experiment in the Grotto del Cani, is
much favoured by their being plunged into a neighbouring lake, pos-
sibly a sudden immersion of the whole body in cold water might be of
service. After each application of vinegar and water, the skin ought
to be rubbed with flannel or a soft brush, the temples and inside of
the nostrils be stimulated by applying volatile spirits, and bottles filled
with warm water be laid to the soles of the feet, then leaving the
person for a few minutes in an undisturbed state. Farther, clysters
consisting of milk and water will be useful ; and on the return of
life an inclination to vomit should be promoted by a feather dipped in
oil, while gentle friction is to be continued at intervals. The first
symptoms indicating this happy change will be foaming at the mouth
and shivering of the whole body, especially after affusions of cold
water. Hope should not be abandoned speedily, as persons have
recovered after lying in an insensible state for some days.?

Pits, wells, deep vaults, &c. should never be entered immediately
after they are opened. It will be a good precaution first to let down
a lighted torch or candle, for where these will not burn, animal life
cannot long be sustained.

In Russia, the common people are frequently deprived of sensation
by vapours arising from the following cause : — Persons of rank in that
country have double windows to their houses in winter, but those of
the poorer classes are only single. During frosty weather, an in-
crustation is formed on the inside of those windows, from a conden-
sation of the breath, perspiration, &c. of a number of persons living
together in the same room. This mephitic crust is mixed with the
noxious fumes of candles, and of the stove with which the chamber is
heated. When a thaw succeeds, and this plate of ice is converted
into water, a deleterious principle is disengaged, which produces
effects similar to those arising from the fumes of charcoal.

The method of recovering persons affected by this effluvium is as
follows : They are immediately to be carried out of doors and placed
on the snow, with no other covering but a shirt and linen drawers.
Their temples and the region of the stomach are then to be well rub
bed with snow, and cold water is to be poured down their throats.


463 Poisons.

The friction is to be continued till the livid hue of the skin disappears,
and the surface acquires its natural colour.

The carburetted hydrogen gas, or fire-damp, which is formed in
large quantity at the bottom of coal-pits, though not properly consider,
ed as a poison, is frequently the cause of the death of many of the
miners by unexpected explosion. An apparatus has been contrived
by Sir Humphrey Davy, and also by Dr. Murray, (Eng.) for prevent-
ing these dreadful effects, by consuming the gas.

Pnissic Acid.

Prussic acid, being artificially obtained by the decomposition of
animal substances, is generally deemed an animal acid ; but it exists
in a natural state in bitter almonds, the kernels of apricots, the leaves
of laurel and peach blossoms, from whence it may be extracted by
distillation. It has a sweet taste, smells like bitter almonds, is very
poisonous ; it produces the same effects on the system as laurel water,
such as convulsions, paralysis and death. When an over dose of
prussic acid has been taken, a portion of lobelia should be immediately
administered, to be accompanied with the free use of diluent infusions
or teas, and subsequently a portion of sweet, or castor oil.

Poisonous Fish.

Many kinds of fish, and such as are supposed to feed on copper
banks, when eaten, prove very poisonous ; to obviate the effects of
which, together with muscles, lobsters, oysters, eels, &c, a smart
emetic should be administered as quickly as possible, and then the
patient may take the acetous acid, and likewise milk.

The patient should be kept quiet, and use a light and nourishing
diet.


PART V.


OPERATIVE SURGERY


PART V.

OPERATIVE SURGERY.


gery, for two reasons : — 1st. That the uninformed reader may under-
stand the usual method pursued by surgeons, in the treatment of many
diseases. 2d. That the practitioner may know how to perform any
operation, in case any of the means recommended prove ineffectual.
At the same time I have to remark, that it will seldom or never be
necessary to use the knife, provided the principles and treatment laid
down in this work be adhered to.

1st. Amputation.

Of the Tarsus. — The tournequet being applied, as in all amputa-
tions, in the lower extremity, (see the following,) a circular incision
is to be made opposite the junction of the tarsal and metatarsal bones ;
and the divided integuments are to be drawn up by an assistant. The
second incision should be through the tendons and muscles. The
tarsal bones are now to be carefully cleared from any adhering mus-
cular substance, and to be divided with the saw ; saving as much of
the foot, as the disease for which the operation is performed will ad-
mit of. After the arteries have been secured, the integuments are to
be brought over the extremity of the bones, and united by the first in-
tention.

Of the Thigh. — The most proper part for the application of the
tournequet in this, and in all other amputations of the lower extremity,
is about the middle of the thigh, where the artery in its course passes
near to the bone. The pad should be placed immediately above the
vessel, and firmly secured in its situation by tightening the screw on
the other side of the limb.

After this has been adjusted, the limb being supported by an assist-
ant, a circular incision should be made through the integuments, im-
mediately above the knee-joint ; and, any adhesions that may intpedo
their retraction having been separated, they are to be drawn up as
high as possible, when a second incision should sever either the whole
of the muscles of the thigh, or the loose muscles only ; leaving those
attached to the bone to be divided by a third.

The bone, now exposed, is to be cleared of its periosteum, and any
portions of muscle that may still adhere ; and then to be divided with
the saw, at that part where it is connected with the retracted integu-
ments : should any spicula or projecting points remain, these are to
be removed.

The next step is to secure the arteries ; and this should be care-
fully done by means of the tenaculum and ligature. A flannel or linen


466 Amputation.

roller is then to be passed around the thigh, to prevent the retraction
of the muscles; after which the integuments are to be brought toge-
ther, and preserved in contact by means of adhesive straps ; suffering
the ligatures to hang from one corner of the wound.

The stump is to be covered with a pledget of soft lint, which
should be preserved in its situation by a broad piece of linen or a laced
stocking.

The patient may now be conveyed to bed ; where the stump should
be laid upon a soft pillow, and protected from the bed-clothes by a
hooped frame. It will also be proper to administer an opiate, and to
suffer the tournequet to remain loosely attached to the limb, as a
means of speedily restraining any haemorrhage that may accidentally
occur.

At the expiration of a week the dressings may be removed, and the
ligatures withdrawn.

Of the Leg. — The tournequet being properly applied, and the leg
supported as before directed, an incision is to be made through the
integuments, about six inches below the knee ; and when the adhe-
sions which connect them to the forepart of the tibia and fibula have
been separated, they are to be drawn up by an assistant.

The muscles of the leg are next to be completely divided by a cir-
cular incision, close to the retracted integuments.

The object is now to divide all that connecting substance between
the two bones : this is to be done by means of a sharp-pointed double-
edged knife, made for this purpose. After which both the bones are
to be sawn through, by the same action of the saw, at a distance from
the knee, equal to the breadth of the hand. The remaining part of

Of the Humerus. — In amputations of the superior extremity, the
most convenient part for the application of the tournequet, is about
midway between the shoulder and the elbow-joint ; where it is to be

The first incision is to be begun about an inch above the joint, and
the operation concluded precisely as in the thigh.

Of the Fore- Arm.. — As in the leg before the knee.

Another Method.

Place a garter, or narrow strip of linen, around the limb, fasten it to
a sttek, and twist it till the circulation stops. Let the limb be grasped
above and below by two assistants; then cut the integuments down to
the bone, separate as far as possible the integuments by strips of
muslin, and then saw the bone directly through, without any further
dissection, to cover the stump. The stump is now to be covered with
lint, and an emollient ointment or salve to be placed over the dressing ;
a narrow bandage is to be placed immediately above the stump,
around the limb, and drawn considerably tight, to prevent the neces-
sity of tying the arteries, which, together with the usual operation of
dissecting the integuments, constitutes two thirds of the pain of ampu-
tation ; and the stump, by this method, will be equally as good.


Amputation 4 407


Femoral Hernia.

The Operation. — The patient being commodiously laid, the hair
removed from the parts, and other necessary preparations made, the
tumour is to be firmly grasped with the left hand, while an incision is
made (if it be not extremely large) through the integuments, along
its whole extent. By this the skin and cellular substance will be di-
vided, and a thin facia exposed, which is given off by the external
oblique muscle. Through the middle of this a small opening is then
to be made, for the introduction of a director, by the assistance of
which it is to be dilated upward to within one inch of the abdominal
ring, and in a similar mariner downwards to the bottom of the tumour.
The second covering of the sac, or the cremaster muscle, next comes
in sight, and this being divided precisely as the preceding fascia, the
sac itself is exposed to view. The anterior and inferior portion of the
sac is now to be pinched up between the fingers, and being thereby
separated from its contents, a small hole is to be made into it, in a
horizontal direction ; afier which it is to be carefully dilated in the
same manner as the preceding tunics.

The next step is to remove the stricture ; in order to ascertain the
seat of which, the finger is to be insinuated between the intestine and
the sac, and carried up to the mouth of the tumour. It will be found
in one of these situations ; either at the opening into the abdomen, an
inch and a half to the outer and upper side of the abdominal ring, at
the external or abdominal ring, or in the sac itself, rendered preter-
naturally thick by the previous pressure of a truss, or constricting the
contained parts by means of a septum which has been formed across
it in consequence of inflammation. In order to dilate the strictured
part, the finger must now be made the guide to a blunt-pointed bis-
toury, which is to be carefully passed up on the outside of the sac, if
the stricture be in either of the two first-mentioned situations, but on
the inside if in the last ; and having reached the desired part, an inci-
sion is to be made through the tendon, or other resisting substance, in
a line directly upwards, of sufficient extent to admit of the return of the
protruded parts.

Having thus removed the stricture, the state of the lacerated parts
is to be carefully examined. When the intestine remains sound, it is
sound to the touch ; the brown colour, invariably acquired under
strangulation, soon lessens, or entirely disappears ; and the blood,
when pressed from a vein, speedily returns. If thus free from injury,
it should be immediately returned into the abdomen, carefully dissect,
ing any adhesions that may have formed between it and the sac. If,
on the contrary, the injury it has sustained by strangulation has been
so great as to have induced mortification, it will be found of a deep
brown, or chocolate colour, covered wilh a layer of brown coagulabla
lymph, fetid, and interspersed with purple or leaden-coloured spots,
which readily break down under the impression of the finger. In
such cases the following treatment is recommended : if a small portion
only of the cylinder be diseased, a ligature is to be passed through the
attached mesentery, at right angles with the intestine, and then

Voi. II. 3 L


463 Amputation. — Cataract.

through the mouth of the hernial sac, when by this means the intestine
becomes confined to the aperture, adhesions form, and an artificial
anus is produced. The opening has, however, in some instances,
after a time, closed ; and the faeces have resumed their natural course :
but when the whole cylinder is mortified, the diseased part should be
cut away ; the divided ends brought together, and united by means
of four ligatures, inserted around the intestine. — (See Wounds of the
Intestines.)

The omentum is now to be inspected. This, even in a diseased
state, retains its natural appearance ; the presence of mortification is
ascertained by its fetid smell, and upon cutting into it, by the blood,
instead of flowing from the vessels, being found coagulated. If in a
healthy state it may, if not very large, be returned into the abdomen ;
if it be diseased, or if its bulk be very considerable, it is directed to
be removed with a knife, and the vessels secured by very fine liga-
tures, which should be suffered to hang from the edges of the wound.

The external wound should be closed by suture, the patient laid in
bed, and re^t procured by opiates.


Operations in the Cataract*

There are two methods in general use : the first is called couching,
the second extraction.

Of the Operation of Couching. — To guard as much as possible
against the effects of inflammation, the patient should be confined for
several days previous to the operation to a low regimen ; if plethoric,
he should be purged, and two or three doses of some cooling laxative
should be administered after proper intervals. These, and other ne-
cessary preparations being made, the patient should be so placed that
light may fall upon the eye in one direction only ; he should be seated
in a low chair ; the operator should also be in a sitting position, but
more elevated, his elbow resting upon his knee, properly raised ; his
ring and little finger supported upon the cheek or temple of the pa-
tient. The upper eyelid is to be elevated by an assistant, and the
lower depressed by the right hand of the surgeon ; or the eye is to be
fixed by means of a speculum, invented for the purpose. The couch-
ing needle (the best construction of this instrument, is that recom-
mended by Mr. Hey. — See his Observations in Surgery,) is now to be
entered in a horizontal direction, through the sclerotic coat, a little
below the axis of the eye, and about a quarter of a line beyond the
transparent cornea, so as to get entirely behind the iris ; taking care
not to wound this, by opposing to it the flat side of the instrument, if
a needle of this form has been made choice of. Its point is then to
be pushed towards the centre of the eye, (Mr. Hey,) and when dis-
cernible through the pupil, it is to be fixed in the body of the lens, if
solid, is to be pushed down by one, if fluid, by several movements, to
the bottom of the vitreous humour. The needle is then to be with-
drawn, the eyelids closed, and covered with a soft compress moistened
with a saturnine solution, or (as recommended by Mr. Pellier) co-


Cataract. — Aneurism. 469

vered with a linen bag, half filled with fine wool, applied dry, and
fixed to a circular bandage passed around the forehead. This should
not be removed before the eighth day, during which time the antiphlo-
gistic regimen should be strictly enforced.

Should the lens, before the absorption takes place, regain its for-
mer situation, a repetition of the operation may become necessary.
— (See Hey's Observations in Surgery.)

The Operation of Extraction. — The patient and operator being
placed, and the eye fixed as for couching, the point of the cornea
knife, (the blade of this is formed like a spear-pointed lancet ; on one
edge it is sharp throughout its whole extent, on the other only a short
space from its point,) with the cutting edge downwards, is to be passed
into the transparent cornea, at about one twelfth of an inch from the
opaque, and as high as the centre of the pupil ; it is then to be carried
forwards to the point opposite to that at which it entered ; this being
pierced, it should be again pushed on, until, by its increasing breadth,
the outer angle of the transparent cornea has been completely divided,
and a semilunar flap has been consequently formed. A .'mall needle,
invented for the purpose, with a hook at its extremity, is now to be
introduced beneath the flap, to be passed cautiously through the pupil,
and with it an opening is to be formed in the capsule of the lens, by
gentle and repeated scratches, with its curved point. This being done,
the eye is to be shaded, to allow the pupil to dilate as much as pos-
sible ; after which, upon gentle pressure being made upon the eye-
ball, at either the upper or under edge of the orbit, the crystalline
lens will pass out through the opening made in the cornea.

When the cataract does not come out entire, or where it is found to
adhere to contiguous parts, the small scoop should be introduced, to
remove any detached pieces or adhesions^that may be present.

When the opacity is solely in the capsule, some practitioners at-
tempt to extract first the lens, and then the capsule, by the forceps or
tenaculum ; others, (Bere,) the lens and capsule entire ; detaching
them from their connexions by lateral motion with the needle. In
many instances it has become partly absorbed after the extraction of
its lens. The subsequent treatment will be precisely as above de-


The Operations for Aneurism.
For Aneurism in general. — The necessary preparations being made,
and the patient placed in a commodious position, the first step ought
to be to obtain a perfect command over the circulation of the inferior
part of the member, by means of the tourniquet. After this has been
adjusted, the operator is, with a common scalpel, to make an incision
through the skin and cellular substance, along the whole course of the
tumour. On the latter being thus exposed to view, a small opening is
to be made into it with a lancet, of sufficient size for the admission of
the finger ; when the whole cavity is to be fairly laid open, from one
extremity to the other, by running a blunt-pointed bistoury from below
upwards, and afterwards from above downwards. The next step is


470 Aneurism.

to clear the cavity of its contents, by means of the finger, assisted by
a sponge. This being done, the tourniquet is to be slackened, in order
to discover the opening into the artery ; when this is perceived, after
renewing the compression, a probe is to be introduced, so as to raise
the vessel, or it may be taken hold of by a pair of small forceps, and
being thus exposed, it is to be secured by a strong ligature passed
around it, by means of a blunt curved needle, about half an inch above
the opening into the tumour. The inferior portion of the artery is
next to be tied in like manner, and the ends of the ligatures being
brought over the edges of the wound, the latter is to be covered with
soft lint, and a pledget of emollient ointment. A compress of linen is
then to be applied over the whole, and secured by a roller lightly
passed around the limb ; after which the patient is to be conveyed to
bed, the limb supported by a soft pillow, laid in a relaxed posture, and
covered with warm flannel. As in all other operations of a similar
nature, it will be prudent to allow 'the tourniquet to remain upon the
limb, without any degree of pressure, till the danger of haemorrhage
is over.

It is recommended by surgeons of the present day, in every case
where such a mode of practice can be admissible, to expose the artery
in a convenient situation above the tumour, und to secure it by liga-
ture, in the manner for aneurism of the popliteal artery.

For Popliteal Aneurism. — Mr. Home gives the following directions
for the improved mode of operating for popliteal aneurism, in Trans,
actions of the Society for the Improvement of Medicine and Surgery.

An incision is to be made, about three inches in length, on the an.
terior and inner part of the thigh, at or below its middle, in a direction
obliquely across the inner edge of the sartorius muscle. This, after
being exposed, is to be drawn to the outside of the thigh, when the
fascia covering the femoral vessels will immediately be seen. A
slight incision is then to be made with extreme caution through this
fascia, and the artery, thus laid open to view, is to be separated from
its lateral connexions with the knife, or by the help of a thin spatula.
A double ligature is now to be passed behind it, by means of an eyed
probe properly curved, taking care not to include the contiguous fe.
moral vein, which is situated on the inside, and the nerve which is
situated to the outside of the artery. The doubling of the ligature is
then to be divided, and the two thus formed are to be separated, and
securely tied at about the distance of half an inch from each
other. After which, the intermediate portion of the artery is to be
cautiously divided, and the ends of the ligatures brought out of the
wound, the sides of which are to be kept in apposition by straps of
adhesive plaster, in order to effect a union by the first' intention.
The subsequent treatment will be, in every respect, similar to that
twelve days.


Fistula in Ano. 471


Fistula in Ano.


Operation for Fistula. — An operation is performed in the following
manner : The patient being placed with his back towards a window,
while his body leans upon a table or bed, the finger, covered with a
bland oil, is first to be introduced at the rectum; after which, if the
fistula be complete, a probe is to be passed along its course, until its
extremity reach the internal opening, and touch the finger in the rec-
tum ; a probe pointed bistoury is then to be passed along the probe,
and having reached the opening in the intestine, its handle is to be
elevated, and its point depressed as much as possible by the finger
previously introduced, and in this manner gradually drawn out at the
anus ; by which means a complete incision will be made of the inter-
mediate space between the sinus and the gut.

If the fistula be incomplete, having no internal opening, an artificial
communication with the intestine must be made ; this is most easily
effected by means of a curved bistoury with a concealed point, which
may be pushed forwards through the coats of the gut, when the in-
itrument has reached the extremity of the sinus. — (Mr. Hey.)

Should the matter have so insinuated itself along the cellular mem-
brane, as to cause several external openings ; they are to be succes-
sively dilated, until all are laid into one.

The edges of the wound are to be prevented from uniting, and
dressed with some stimulating application. If any callous parts are
observable, they are to be touched, by means of a camel's-hair pencil,
with ammonia muriata, or with hydrargyrus nitratus ruber. — (Hey.)

When an abscess is discovered in the neighbourhood of the anus,
and is suspected to communicate with the rectum, by a discharge of
matter by stool, suppuration is to be accelerated by the application of
fomentations and poultices, and an early opening should be made ; by
which means the sinus will be reduced to the first of the above
species. ,


Tapping, or Paracentesis of the Abdomen.

The operation is supposed to be necessary when the pressure of the
water contained within the cavity of the peritoneum is so great as to
impede the function of respiration.

During the operation, the patient should be in a sitting posture, with
a vessel tor the reception of the fluid placed between his legs, and his
body encircled with a long bandage or towel, the ends of which are to
be held by two assistants. These preparations being adjusted, and
the patient having been directed to void his urine, or a catheter having
been introduced for the purpose of drawing it off, a small incision is
to be made, with a common lancet, about an inch below the umbilicus ;
after which a lancet-pointed trochar is to be pushed forwards, till,
from no longer meeting with resistance to its passage, it is ascertained


472


Castration.


to be within the cavity of the abdomen ; the stilet is then to be
withdrawn, and as the fluid is evacuated, the bandage, previously fixed
round the abdomen, is to be drawn tighter and tighter, to prevent the
effects of a sudden removal of the accustomed pressure.
. After the whole of the water has thus escaped, the wound is to be
closed by adhesive plaster, and the body to be encircled with a roller
of flannel, which should be suffered to remain for some days after the

° P It ra is°recommended by Dr. Sims, in the Memoirs of the London
Medical Society, to introduce the trochar at the umbilicus. In this
case the first incision will be unnecessary.

Castration.
This is one of the most simple operations in surgery ; but, before
it is undertaken, be cautious that the disease does actually require to
be removed, and particularly bear in mind the circumstances which
should regulate its removal.— (Cooper.) #

The manner of operating is as follows :— The patient being laid on
a table of convenient height, you grasp the testicle in your left hand ;
begin your incision at the upper part of the abdominal ring, and extend
it to the lower extremity of the testicle. Lay bare the spermatic cord
completely at the abdominal ring. The spermatic cord having been
detached from its rounding connexions, with your finger and thumb,
separate the blood-vessels from the vas deferens, pass a ligature be-
tween them, and having tied the former only, cut through the whole
cord at a quarter or half an inch distance from the said ligature,
according as the state of the process and testicles will admit. This
done you must then, with the same knife, with which you have per-
formed the former part of the operation, dissect the testicles out from
its connexion with the scrotum ; the loose texture of the connecting
cellular substance, the previous separation of the testicle frorn the
spermatic cord, and the help of an assistant to hold up the lips o the
wound, will enable you to accomplish the operation with very little
pain to' the patient, and great facility to yourself.

The arteries which require securing are, the spermatic artery,
the artery of the vas deferens, and several in the scrotum. These
should be tied with fine silk ligatures.

The vessels which we have here named, are not, says J. L. Petit,
the only ones which may be the source of haemorrhage ; for trouble-
some bleeding will sometimes arise from the artery of the septum.
If this should be the case, he recommends it to be suppressed by a

ligature. . ,

After the operation, Pott used to fill the cavity of the wound with
lint ; but Desault, and all the modern surgeons of that country, bring
the edges of the wound together, and endeavour to heal as much of it
as possible bv the first intention.

With this view, some use sutures and sticking plaster ; others, only
the latter, aided with compresses and a T bandage. Sir Astley
Cooper employs two sutures ; one opposite the end of the cord ; the
other at the mid-point between the first suture and the determination


Tapping, or Para, <Sfc. 473

of the incision. Mr. Lawrence's plan of dressing consists in retaining
the edges of the skin in apposition with two or three sutures, and then
applying a narrow strip of simple dressing. A folded cloth, kept con-
stantly damp, is also laid over the wound.

Sometimes one or more vessels begin to bleed soon after the
patient is in bed, although they effused no blood just after the removal
of the testicle.

Keeping the dressings and scrotum continually wet with the cold
saturnine lotion, very often suffices for the prevention and suppression of
haemorrhage : if not, the wound must be opened again, and the ves-
sels tied.

Trepanning, or Trephining.

The Operation. — The first step to be taken (the incision being pre-
viously made) is to remove as much of the pericranium as will be
sufficient to admit the application of the trephine. This is performed
by means of an instrument called the engine. The trephine, with its
annexed perforator, is then to be applied, including within its circle a
larger portion of the depressed than of the sound bone ; and, after
having made a few turns to secure it in its situation, the central pin or
perforator should be removed, as no longer useful, and the operator is
to proceed, with great caution, to saw through the bone, using a semi-
rotary motion with the instrument backwards and forwards, occasion-
ally brushing the accumulated particles of bone from its teeth, and
often, with a probe, examining the sulcus which has been made, to
ascertain if any part be already perforated. As soon as this is the
case, redoubled caution must be used, and the instrument should be
made to bear upon the unperforated parts, until the bone becomes
sufficiently loose to be removed with the forceps or elevator.

The parts beneath the cranium being now exposed to view, if the
replacement of a depressed piece of bone be the object of the opera-
tion, it is to be effected by means of an instrument called the elevator.
This acts as a lever, the fulcrum to Avhich should be either the sound
portion of bone, or the finger laid over it. Should an accumulation
of blood have given rise to the symptoms, the fluid will now, if situated
between the dura mater and the bone, have a free exit; if it' be col-
lected beneath the dura mater, that membrane will be found tense,
dark-coloured, or even livid. In this case, an opening is made.

If, after the operation, any points of bone remain attached to the
sides of the orifice, these should be carefully separated by the forceps
or the elevator.

For the treatment of the wound, the following rules are necessary :
If the operation has been performed for fracture or depression, unless
pieces of bone are expected still to come away, union should be ef-
fected by the first intention ; if for the evacuation of blood or matter,
(see Inflammation of the Brain,) the sore is to be dressed in the light-
est and easiest manner, and a speedy suppuration invited by emollient
cataplasms.

A saw has been invented by Mr. Hey, (see his Observations in Sur-
gery,) with which protruding points may be removed, so as to admit the


474 Bronchotomy, or Opening the Windpipe, Sfc.

elevator, with the loss of a very small portion of the injured bone*
This should be substituted for the trephine.

Bronchotomy, or Opening the Windpipe.

The patient should be in the sitting posture, the body bent a little
forward, the head turned back.

The first incision should be through the integuments, midway be-
tween the sternum and the cricoid cartilage : the arteries of the thy.
roid gland will by this means be avoided. The trachea being thus
exposed, an opening must be made with the point of a lancet, of suffi.
cient extent to admit of the introduction of the canula. This is now
to be passed into the artificial opening, and to be secured in its situa.
tion by means of a bandage, previously connected with it, passed
around the neck. Its mouth should be covered with a piece of thin
gauze, to prevent the admission of extraneous matter; and, when the
causes which endangered suffocation have been removed, it is to be
withdrawn, and the wound healed as an accidental wound of the part.

Enlarged Tonsils.

When the tonsils are too large to admit of cure, by the plans al-
removed by a ligature.

Ii is easily applied, and may be done by first passing it through the
eye of a probe, (previously curved for the purpose,) then carrying it
over the tonsil, bringing it out below, and tie in front of the diseased
gland. If your finger should not be sufficiently long to make the
knot, you should then use the tonsil iron, an instrument well adapted
to the purpose, and would do much better for performing the operation
altogether, than either the probe or finger.

If the tumour is not of that form which will admit of a ligature be.
ing put on in the way just mentioned, you must then pass the ligature
through the centre of the swelling, by means of a needle, and tie it
above and below : your ligature must, of necessity, be double. In
this way, you will succeed, as effectually as with the other mode, in
producing a separation of the enlarged part. — (Cooper.)

Tongue. Tied.

It very frequently happens, that the tongue of infants is tied, that
is, that the franum lingua? is so short as to prevent the tongue from
being protruded to or beyond the gums ; in which case, an operation
becomes necessary, for dividing the fraenum by which it is confined.

Cutting the Tongue. — In performing this, some little care and stea.
diness are required, or the sublingual veins and arteries may be
wounded, and the infant die of haemorrhage. To avoid the danger,
a small curved bistoury may be used instead of scissors, usually em-
ployed. The handle and blade, when open, need not exceed two
inches in length ; and the point should be a little curved, and the back
made broad, whereby the point may be easily forced through the
fraenum, in the most troublesome case, while the back of the instru-
ment will sufficiently press down the vessels, so that they will be en-
tirely out of the way of being injured— (Cooper.)


Application of Leeches, 8{c. ^75


Of the Application of Leeches.

The manner in which leeches are usually applied, is so well known
as not to require description. Success is rendered more certain by
previously drying them, or allowing them to creep over a dry cloth ;
the part, also, to attract them, may be moistened with cream, sugar, or
blood ; and, if still not fastening, it may be cooled with a cloth dipped
in cold water. Their escape should be prevented by covering them
with a small glnss.

Of Scarification and Cupping.

This is performed, where the part will admit, by means of an in-
strument called the scarificator, in which a number of lancets are
placed in such i manner, that when it is applied upon the affected
part, the whole are, by means of a spring, pushed suddenly into it, to
a depth at whit.i the instrument has been previously regulated.

After scarification has been performed in the above manner, bleed-
ing is promoted by means of glasses, from which the air has been ex-
hausted by heal, or by an exhausting syringe. The usual mode of
applying heat is by holding the glass over the flame of a lamp. An
equally or more effectual method is, to moisten a small piece of tow
with spirit of wine, to set it on fire in the bottom of the glass, and on
the flame bein^ nearly extinguished, instantly to apply it over the
scarified part. The glasses are to be occasionally removed, and
again applied, until a sufficient quantity of blood has been drawn.

The operations which are performed for some other diseases, are
inserted under their respective heads.


Vol. II. * M


PART VI.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


PART VI.

ILLUSTRATIONS.


For want of room, I can insert, comparatively, but a few cases of illustrations
which have been successfully treated at the Infirmary connected with the Reformed
Medical College, and that very briefly. Besides, for want of time, I am under the
necessity of inserting some cases promiscuously. We treated over one thousand
cases of Cholera during the epidemic, none of which are here given. But, perhaps,
more (though a vast many would be very interesting) might be considered super-
fluous. I wish the reader to understand, that the diseases were all treated accord-
ing to the directions laid down in this work, although there may have been some
variation in the formulas or prescriptions used. We also wish it understood, that
we are not so tenacious about the precise agents or medicine employed, as we are
of a strict adherence to the theory or principles advocated.


Case 1. J. K., Goerck-street, aged 12 or 14 years, was seized with
the typhus fever ; he was so far reduced that no hopes were entertain-
ed of his recovery. Matter discharged from his eyes, ears and nose ;
he was exceedingly emaciated. The treatment pursued at the infirm-
ary restored him to health, contrary to the expectations of every
one. Neither bleeding, calomel, or any other mineral was used.


Case 2. The daughter of the late M. Nash, school teacher, aged
about 15, had the same complaint, (typhus fever,) and was brought
extremely low with it. Soon after she commenced the use of our
medicine, she grew better, and soon entirely recovered. Her case
was considered extremely dangerous.


Case 3. Mr. Boardman, of the firm of Boardman & Co., Water-
street, was taken with a bilious remittent fever so severely, that he
was scarcely able to articulate a single sentence. Excessive debility,
violent fever, more or less delirium, and all his symptoms highly ag-
gravated. Instead of bleeding and administering mercury, medicine
was given to produce perspiration, which was continued until the fever
was subdued. His sudden recovery was a subject of remark by all
who saw him.


Case 4. Mr. Vankirk, Forsyth-street, was so far reduced by bilious
remittent fever, that little hopes were entertained of his recovery ; but
in six hours after he commenced the use of our medicine, he grew
better, continued to mend, and in a short time was well.

Case 5. Mr. R., Delancey-street, was reduced extremely low of the
same fever. The same treatment soon arrested the disease, and
restored him to health.


480 Illustrations.

Case 6. Mrs. Low, Suffolk-street, two iloors below Stanton-street,
was seized with a fever so violent, that she was relinquished by the
physicians, who stated that it was impossible for her to recover. Her
pain was violent, skin exceedingly dry, tongue excessively furred,
great thirst and great prostration of strength, respiration very labo-
rious, with every dangerous symptom. In this unfavourable condition
we commenced the use of our medicine, which in two hours produced
copious perspiration, which, with other means, arrested the progress
of the fever, and in a few weeks she entirely recovered. The treat-
ment, she states, snatched her from an untimely grave.

Case 7. Mr. D., arrived from the West Indies, was taken with
symptoms of the yellow fever. The medicine given him produced
such a copious perspiration, that in twelve hours the fever was re-
moved.


Case 8. Mr. B.,just arrived at Quarantine, from New-Orleans, with
symptoms of yellow fever. He was attended by a physician, whose
treatment proved altogether useless. 'I then administered medicine
which removed large quantities of bilious matter, after which, a copious
perspiration was produced, which soon relieved and cured him.

Case 9. Esquire M. had been afflicted for months with intermittent
fever, attended with cough, which gave an alarming character to the
disease. He applied at the infirmary, and was, in a few weeks, en-
tirely restored to health. We might here enumerate hundreds of
cases of scarlet, intermittent, inflammatory and other types of fever,
which we have speedily cured by a course of vegetable medicine
alone. Time will not permit us to particularize, neither do we deem
it necessary.

We might here also mention various cases of eruptive and other
diseases, small-pox, measles, &c, which have been treated with the
same uniform success.


Inflammatory Diseases.

Case 10. Mrs. T. had been long afflicted with inflammation of the
liver, characterized by pain in the right side and shoulder, secretion
of bilious matter, vomiting and purging, great debility, dec. She had
been attended for years by a physician, with injury instead of benefit.
She applied at the infirmary, and soon experienced a remission of her
symptoms ; scarcely a vestige of the disease now remains.


Pleurisy.

Case 11. Mr. Moore, Christie-street, a few doors from Broome, was
attacked very severely with the pleurisy. He had been subject to


Illustrations. 481

this disease, and his physician had always bled him profusely. This,
he found, had injured his constitution, and he now wished to submit to
a different course of treatment. He accordingly applied at the infir-
mary, and was soon cured, without bleeding or mineral medicine. At
every previous attack, he had been confined to his bed for three
months by excessive depletion ; by our treatment he retained his
strength, and in a few days he was enabled to resume his business.

Case 12. Mrs. N., Orchard-street, was taken so severely with the
pleurisy, that she could scarcely articulate a syllable. She appeared
almost in a dying state, and yet, without bleeding, in fifteen minutes
her pain was mitigated ; and in a few days she was well. Had she
pursued the ordinary depletive course, in all probability she must have
been confined to her room for several months.


Inflammation of the Lungs — {Pneumonia.)
Case 13. Mr. R. had been for a length of time severely afflicted
with inflammation of the lungs. The pain, cough and fever were
incessant and excessive. Our treatment .soon relieved all the symp-
toms, and he was restored to health, without bleeding even once.
When we commenced, the case was considered entirely hopeless.


Case 14. Mr. S. was attacked with the same, or similar symptoms.
The same treatment soon restored him to health.


Case 15. A man in Walker-street, name not recollected, was taken
so violently with inflammation of the lungs, that there was little or no
prospect of his recovery ; fever high, cough almost constant, expec-
toration of purulent matter, with great debility, and every symptom of
approaching dissolution. The treatment pursued soon arrested the
disease, and he now enjoys good health.


Inflammation of the Kidneys — (Nephritis.)
Case 16. Mrs. Matthews, then residing in Nassau-street, below
Beekman, was seized so violently with inflammation of the kidneys,
that she was thrown into spasms, became delirious, &c. Contrary to
the expectation of every one, she recovered by our treatment.


Case 17. Mrs. Trembly, then residing in Vandam-street, was seized
with the same complaint ; and the same treatment produced the same
effect.


Inflammation of the Eyes. — (Ophthalmia.)
Case 18. Captain Allen, from Rochester, N. Y.. was seized with


482 Illustrations.

an inflammation of the eyes, peculiar to that section of the country.
He was attended by various physicians, who cupped, bled, blistered,
salivated and nearly starved him to death. Their treatment almost
ruined his eyes and constitution. In this situation he came to New.
York, and applied at the eye infirmary, where he received no en-
couragement ; he then applied at our institution. He was here led
blind, and in a most pitiable and deplorable condition. His eyes
appeared like ulcers which discharged a great quantity of pus or
matter. We then commenced our treatment, which removed the
inflammation, and excited a healthy actipn of his eyes and whole
system, and after a few months, entirely recovered ; although his
vision will ever remain impaired.


Case 19. Mr. Wright, Forsyth-strect, near Delancey, was afflicted
with the same disease, and in about the same condition of the case
last mentioned. He had been attended for one or two years by
various physicians in the country and in this city. He had been blind
for about one year. He had likewise been cupped, blistered, salivated,
and a seton put through his neck. After being in this state, and
given up as incurable, we commenced with him ; and under our treat-
ment he began rapidly to mend. He can now see, and is able to
attend to his business.


Case 20. Mr. West, John-street, opposite the Arcade, was severely
afflicted with ophthalmia, or inflammation of the eyes. One* or two
physicians from the eye infirmary cupped, bled and leeched him,
which only aggravated the disease. Our treatment soon removed his
symptoms, and cured him.

Case 21. John Morris, in Forsyth-street, a boy aged about ten years,
had been afflicted with ophthalmia tarsi, a disease of the eyelids, for
two years. He was unable to find any relief until he applied at our
institution, where he was soon cured.

Case 22. Mrs. R. had become nearly blind from the small-pox. Our
applications and treatment cured her in a few weeks. The treatment
received by a former physician was of no use.

We have successfully treated hundreds of cases of inflammation of
the eyes, which might be enumerated.


Quinsy.

Case 23. A short time since, a child of Mr. , living at No. 45£,

Hester-street, aged about seven years, was violently attacked with
Cynanche Tonsilaris, or inflammatory sore throat, in which the swell-
ing was so great, as almost entirely to prevent swallowing, and caused
great fear of suffocation :— The system was also universally affected.
A physician belonging to the U. S. infirmary, was called, who,
without using either the lancet or calomel, or, in fact, anv of the lon<?


Illustrations. 483

list of prisonous drugs, soon gave relief, and the child was restored
to its usual health in three or four days. A few days after, two other
of his children were taken in a similar manner ; and he, being poor,
and thinking himself unable to pay a physician, sent to the dispensary
for advice. A physician from that place was accordingly sent, who,
commencing with his calomel, &c, soon prostrated them. The poor
children were brought extremely low, but the disease remained un-
subdued ; however, their good constitutions seemed to resist both the
disease and the deadly remedy for the space of four or five weeks,
when the youngest one died, and the other one, although in a miserable
state, may have recovered.

Case 24. Mr. B., Attorney-street, was attacked so severely with the
quinsy, that he was nearly suffocated. Our treatment soon removed
the complaint.

Case 25. Mrs. L., in Orange-street, near Broome, was seized with in
flammation of the throat, which was very severe. In one hour our
medicine relieved her, and in a few days she was cured.


Case 26. A lady, name not recollected, in the same neighbourhood,
was seized with the same complaint ; and the same treatment soon
cured her.


Rheumatism.

Case 27. Mrs. L., Lombardy. street, was taken very ill with inflam-
matory rheumatism, and was scarcely able to move a limb. She had
been subject to it, for which she had been previously bled ; but our
treatment in a short time removed her complaint.

Case 28. One of Mr. Horton's workmen, in Stanton-street, had been
for six months afflicted with the rheumatism and confined to his bed. A
physician had treated him, and bleeding, blistering and mercury were
used without effect. His pains were so excruciating that his cries
could be heard a whole block. We attended him for about six weeks,
at the end of which time he was cured, and again commenced his
business.


Case 29. Mr. L., from South-street, was brought to our infirmary in
a carriage, helpless. He took our medicine a few weeks, and was
entirely restored to health.

Numerous cases might be mentioned, where persons have been
cured of this disease by our treatment, when the ordinary method was
useless or injurious.

Case 30. Mr. Ely, from New-Haven, Conn., was brought to this city
in a helpless state, from inflammatory rheumatism ; great swelling of
Vol. II. 3 N


484 Illustrations.

the joints, excessive pain, &c. The physicians who attended him,
were unable to render him any benefit. After submitting to our treat-
ment tor a few weeks, he was enabled to return to his business, and
was restored to health.


Dyspepsia, or Indigestion.

Case 31. Mr. De Forest had been seven years afflicted with dyspep-
sia, or liver complaint. He was unable to perform any manual labour,
and had despaired of ever being restored to health. He tried various
physicians in the city and country, without receiving any benefit.
He submitted to a course of our medicine, which soon produced the
most signal good effects, and after some time effected a cure.

Case 32. Mrs. P., Attorney-street, was so far reduced with dyspep.
sia, that she had but little flesh remaining, and could scarcely take any
food. Her health and spirits were gone, and no prospect remained
of ever enjoying them again. After taking our medicine a few weeks,
her appetite was restored, "she became fleshy, and now enjoys good
health.


Case 33. Mr. Welsh, of Kingston, N. Y., had been for a long time
afflicted with the liver complaint, or dyspepsia. He had been confined to
his house and bed for a length of time, and his case seemed hopeless,
his physicians not being able to relieve or cure him. By the use of
our remedies he entirely recovered, and now enjoys excellent health.

Case 34. Mrs. L., Elm-street, near Spring, had been afflicted with
dyspepsia for some time. She could get no relief until she applied at
the infirmary, and was soon cured.
% A score of similar cases might here be mentioned.


Incipient Apoplexy.

Case 35. Mr. M., corner of Prince and Green, was seized with all the
symptoms of apoplexy in its first stages. The treatment we adopted
restored him to health, and he has remained free of the complaint
ever since.


Case 36. Mr. L. applied at the infirmary with the same symptoms :
the same treatment effected a cure.


Dysentery.

Case 37. A young lady, name not taken down, residing in Eldridge-
street, near Broome, was seized with the dyenterv, with the most


Illustrations. 48 &

Violent symptoms ; pain very great. The medicine given bj her
physicians, Dr. V. Z. and Dr. D., only injured her. We were called
upon, and we commenced our treatment ; in one hour the pain sub-
sided, and in a lew weeks she was enabled to return to her home in
the country.

Case 38. Mr. L., now residing in Elm-street, above Broome, was
reduced nearly to a skeleton, by the chronic dysentery. Our treat-
ment soon restored him to perfect health.


Case 39. The wife of Mr. Higgins, in Division-street, had been
afflicted for a long time with the same disease. She had been attend-
ed a long time by a physician, without any benefit. She was so far
reduced, that she began to despair of ever getting better. In this
situation we found her, when called to administer relief; and, as in
other cases, she was soon restored to health.


Cholera Morbus.

Case 40. The daughter of Mr. Robinson was taken with the cho-
lera morbus. A physician was sent for, but could administer no re-
lief. We were called to visit her when she was nearly dead. Her
eyes were sunken, senseless, constant vomiting and purging. An
energetic course of treatment was immediately adopted, which in a
few hours changed the character of the complaint, and effected a
cure.

Case 41. Mrs. Johnson, Christie, near Delancey-street, was attacked
so severely with the cholera morbus, that she was thrown into spasms.
The prescriptions of her physician only aggravated her disease.
When we were called to her, she appeared nearly gone. The medi-
cine which we gave her afforded immediate relief, and in a short
time she fecovered. She states, that she could not have survived but
a short time without the relief afforded her.


Case 42. Mrs. P., residing in Chestnut-street, between Madison and
Oak, was seized so violently with the cholera morbus, that her cries
could be heard over the house. The second dose of medicine re-
moved the pain ; the next day she was nearly well.


Summer Complaint — (Diarrhcea.)

Case 43. The child of Mrs. Johnson, the lady mentioned above,
was so far reduced with the summer complaint, that he was given up
by two or three physicians. His fiesh was nearly consumed, was ex-
ceedingly bloated, with every symptom of the consumption. When
requested to attend the child, we at first declined, considering it be-


486 Illustrations.

yond the reach of medicine ; but, supposing we might at least afford
some relief, we commenced, and the child gradually grew better, and
finally became entirely well.

Case 44. A child in Governeur-street, near Cherry, from Long
Island, had become very much reduced by the diarrhoea, or summer
complaint. All means employed had been unavailing. They then
applied at the infirmary, and the child was soon cured.


Case 45. Miss Steward, of Greenwich village, had been afflicted
with the diarrhoea and dysentery for more than a year. During part of
this time, she had been attended by physicians who tried various ex-
periments, but could not cure her. She had become very much ema-
ciated, strength and appetite gone, attended with dropsy, fever, &c.
It was in this condition we first saw her, and commenced the use of
our medicine ; and after a few months, she was restored to health.

Case 46. The child of Mrs. Trembly was severely afflicted with
the summer complaint, or diarrhoea, and was given up as incurable.
Our usual course of treatment removed the disease, and the child now
enjoys good health.


Bilious Colic.

Case 47. A young man in Chrystie-street was so violently seized
with the bilious colic, that he became delirious, and was thrown into
spasms. A physician had bled and blistered him, to no purpose.
We were called to visit him, and administered medicine, which af-
forded almost immediate relief. As hopeless as this case was con-
sidered by all who saw him, he survived.

Case 48. One of the workmen of Mr. Bundy, in Division-street,
head of Market, was taken so severely with the painter's colic, that he
became senseless, and was conveyed to his boarding-house in a car-
nage. It was supposed by all who saw him, that he was in a dying
state. We commenced the most active treatment, which was kept up
for several hours, until signs of life returned. Notwithstanding the
hopeless condition in which we found this man, the means made use
of restored him to health.

Case 49. Another of the above-named workmen was taken with
the same complaint ; great constipation of the bowels, severe pain,
vomiting, &c. The usual treatment soon cured him.

Case 50. Mr. B. 5 in Elizabeth-street, was seized violently with the
bilious colic. When we were called to attend him, we found him in
the greatest agony ; his pain was so great, that he was occasionally
insane. Our prescriptions cured him in a few days.


Illustrations. 487

Scrofula, or King's Evil.
To the Editor of the New-York Enquirer.

Case 51. As you are always disposed to make known every thing
calculated to benefit society, I have concluded to send you a brief
statement of a cure recently performed on myself.

On the 2d of September, 1827, I was attacked with a severe pain
and swelling on the side of my head and neck. It increased until sup-
puration took place, and was attended with the most excruciating tor-
ture. I was examined and attended by a number of physicians, in all
not less than seven ; among whom was Dr. Mott. I was bled, cupped
and salivated, likewise lanced fourteen times, and had several hundred
poultices applied. Under this treatment, I was constantly becoming
more and more reduced, and my complaint growing worse every day.
The opening or cavity of the disease extended from the crown of the
head down to the temple, and from thence back of the ear down to the
windpipe. So reduced had I become, that I was unable to take food
for several days together. My throat and neck were exceedingly
swollen. One of the physicians who was subsequently called, laid
aside the poultices, kept the part wet with rum, and gave me in a short
time a pound of salts, and introduced a ligature from one opening of
the abscess to the other. Under this treatment, I was rapidly declin-
ing. My head became immovable, my appetite was gone, and very
little prospect entertained of my recovery. At this critical period, I
was advised by a friend to apply to an institution recently established
at No. 95 Eldridge-street, called United States infirmary, where I was
informed that a successful course of practice was pursued, and the
remedies chiefly derived from the productions of our own country.
I therefore sent for the superintendent, who came to visit me, and pro-
nounced my disease the scrofula, or king's evil, and commenced alto-
gether a different course of treatment, under which I began rapidly to
improve. The pain soon subsided, the ulcers assumed a healthy ap-
pearance, my general health gradually recovered, and in less than
two months a perfect cure was effected. Since I have been cured, I
have done the duty of a fireman, and been completely drenched with
water, without the least injury or return of my former symptoms.
From the evidence I have of the practice and principles of this insti-
tution, I entertain the most favourable opinion of its merits, and I be-
lieve it to be the best of the kind in this country. Foundefl as it prin-
cipally is upon the botanical system, the remedial course pursued
must, in my humble opinion, be far more congenial to our inhabitants
than that usually adopted by physicians and surgeons of the present
day. Mercury, the lancet and the knife, are now chiefly relied on
for the removal of most diseases incident to the human body. To
discuss upon the merits or demerits of such treatment, would be
unnecessary. Every candid and discerning mind will at once admit
that the most dangerous consequences have often resulted from the
above course, and a substitute for such practice must constitute a
glorious era in the annals of medical science. It is high time that the


488 Illustrations.

eyes of the public should be awakened, and a more careful examina-
tion made into the medical productions of our own climate. I there-
fore cheerfully recommend this institution, and sincerely hope and
trust that it may receive that patronage and support which it so richly
deserves. Yours, respectfully,

JOHN J. MURDOCK.

Case 52. The child of Mr. Barnes, Pearl-street, was afflicted for a
length of time with the king's evil, or scrofula, and had been attended
by several physicians, ..without any benefit. After a few months, we
effected a cure, and the child has remained well ever since.

Case 53. The child of Mrs. R., residence not known, was afflicted
with a scrofulous swelling under the chin, which was cured in about
two months after we commenced.


Case 54. The child of Mr. Reed, Harman-street, below Clinton,
was attacked with an enormous scrofulous swelling under the chin.
It was exceedingly swollen, and very hard. One physician who at-
tended, being unable to afford relief, abandoned the case. We were
for several years, having seen the child a few days since.

Case 55. The daughter of Mr. Richard Hunt, now Mrs. Underbill,
was afflicted with the scrofula for a number of years. She had ap-
plied to a number of physicians, without receiving any benefit. We
were called to the case, treated it, and effected a perfect cure.

Case 56. The daughter of Mr. J. W. Robinson was taken with a
scrofulous swelling in the glands of the neck. Our treatment cured
her, and she has been well for two years.

Case 57. Mr. , the foreman of Mr. St. John, merchant

tailor, Greenwich-street, was for a long time afflicted with the king's
evil, or scrofula. He had employed two physician? for a length of
time, without receiving any benefit. Our usual course of treatment
restored him to perfect health.


Case 58 The child of Mr. William P. Morris, formerly auctioneer,
was afflicted with several large scrofulous tumours in the neck. Our
treatment and prescriptions cured him. It has remained well ever
since.


Case 59. The child of Mr. A. T. Morris, then residing in Church-
street, below Canal, was afflicted with a scrofulous ulcer in the neck,
which we also cured after a few months.


Case 60 Mr. R., a cartman, applied at the infirmary,— was af-
flicted with an enormous swelling or tumour upon the neck and jaw,


Illustrations. 489

which seemed impossible ever to remove. In the course of some
time, however, we succeeded in curing it.

Case 61. George, a coloured man, from Trenton, was attacked
with an enormous swelling or tumour on his neck, as large as a child's
head. Four physicians were called, who pronounced it incurable.
After poulticing it, it suppurated, and discharged through fifteen dif-
ferent openings. After persevering for a length of time, this disease
was also perfectly cured.


St. Vitus' Dance— {Chorea Sancti Viti.)

Case 62. About six months ago, a woman applied at the infirmary,
with a remarkable case of St. Vitus' dance. Her limbs were thrown
in various directions, having no control over them ; loss of appetite,
debility and excessive pain attending it. She consulted five physi-
cians, who were unable to tell what the complaint was, much less to
cure it. The treatment which we pursued had a salutary effect ; and,
after a short period, restored her to perfect health.


Case 63. About this time, George, a boy about fifteen years old,
came to the infirmary, afflicted with the same disease ; his left leg and
arm he was unable to control. They were kept in constant motion.
The same treatment which was pursued for the woman above men-
tioned, cured this lad.


Asthma.


Case 64. We were sent for to see a young woman in Allen-street,
two doors from the church, who was said to be dying with the asthma.
When we arrived, we found her almost gone, being nearly suffocated.
We administered a decoction of lobelia, which relieved her in fifteen
or twenty minutes, and she soon recovered.


Case 65. Mr. Walden was severely attacked with the asthma.
The medicines given soon afforded relief.


Croup.

Case 66. A child in Elizabeth-street, above Grand, was thought to
be dying of the croup. We administered medicines, which afforded
immediate relief, and soon effected a cure.


Case 67. A child of Mrs. Welsh, in Norfolk-street, was suddenly


400 Illustrations.

attacked with the croup. When we were called upon, the child's life
was despaired of; but by prompt treatment it was immediately re-
lieved, and soon restored to perfect health.

Case 68. The child of Mrs. N., Mulberry-street, near Houston,
was seized so suddenly with the croup, that his life was despaired of.
Our prescriptions soon relieved it, and eventually cured it.


Dropsy.

Case 69. Mr. B., near the Battery, had been afflicted with dropsy
in the chest for many years. He could find none that understood his
complaint, or could cure it. He applied at the infirmary, received
our prescriptions, and entirely recovered his health.

Case 70. Mrs. Caswell had been confined to her bed for several
months, with an enormous dropsical swelling of the abdomen. She
was reduced so low by the disease, that her life was despaired of.
Under our treatment she grew better, until she finally recovered.

Case 71. Mrs. R., Rivington-street, had been afflicted for several
months with dropsy in the chest, which confined her to her bed.
Our treatment restored her to health.

Case 72. Mr. L. had a dropsy of the chest for a length of time ; he
could find no relief. Our medicine cured him in a few weeks.

Case 73. Mrs. Cook, then residing in Essex-street, was taken with
the inflammatory rheumatism. Her physicians bled, blistered and
salivated her, until her constitution was almost ruined. She then ap-
plied to the infirmary, when she exhibited the following symptoms :
extreme debility, which confined her to her bed ; cough, which ap-
peared to be seated on her lungs ; dropsy in the chest ; loss of appe-
tite ; wasting of the system, &c. It was thought by her friends that
she could not survive but a short time. The treatment pursued ef-
fected a change in her system, removed the symptoms, and, as far as
we know, she is now enjoying good health.


Fluor Albus.

Case 74. Mrs. C, Stanton-street, had been afflicted with the fluor
albus, periodically, for six years ; had tried various physicians, with-
out any benefit. One of the physicians of the infirmary cured this
woman in a few weeks ; she now enjoys good health.

Case 75. Mrs. T., of Rivington-street, had been afflicted with
menorrhagia, or profuse flow of the catamenia, for a number of months,


Illustrations. 491

and had tried various prescriptions, without material benefit. She
was attended by a physician from the infirmary, and in six weeks she
was so far recovered as to be able to attend to her work.

Case 76. Mrs. L., of Elizabeth-street, had been afflicted and con
fined to her bed for many years with (menorrhagia) copious dis-
charges of blood, excessive debility, emaciation, &c. She could find
no relief from ordinary treatment. Our treatment arrested the dis-*
ease, and she is now perfectly well.


Cough.
Case 77. Mrs. Fry, Eldridge-street, was afflicted with a cough so
severe, that doubts were entertained of her recovery. Our treatment
restored her to health.

Case 78. Mr. W. Letson introduced a man to us from South Ame-
rica, apparently near his end, from consumption, hectic fever, inces-
sant cough, copious expectoration of matter, continual wasting away
of the whole body. From the symptoms, it appeared that he
could not survive many months. We commenced our treatment with
great reluctance, but, contrary to the expectation of every one, the
medicine arrested the disease, and restored him to health.

Case 79. Miss Montross, from Peekskill, N. Y., had been afflicted
with cough for a long time. Her physicians pronounced her disease
the consumption, and said she could not survive but a few months.
She applied at the infirmary, and in a few months she was cured.


Case 80. Mrs. Miller, Norfolk-street, near Delancey, had been af-
flicted with a cough for some time, and was evidently in a decline.
Her flesh was fast wasting away, countenance pallid, night sweats
and hectic fever. She was scarcely able to walk across the room.
Our treatment and prescriptions performed a perfect cure, and she now
enjoys remarkably good health.

Case 81. Mr. Jennings, from Hartford, Conn., was afflicted with
cough, spitting of blood, and all the symptoms of consumption. He
could find no relief until he applied at our infirmary, and soon after
was enabled by the treatment he received to return to his business.


Case 82. Captain L., from Sag Harbour, L. I., had an affection of
the lungs for some years, spitting of blood, great weakness, &c.
Since using our medicine, the symptoms have subsided, and he now
enjoys tolerably good health.

Case 83. Mrs. L. was so severely afflicted with a cough, that no
hopes were entertained of her recovery. Our treatment entirely
cured her.

Vol. II. 3 O


492 Illustrations.


Syphilis, <fyc.

Case 84. Mrs. Bloomfield, then residing in Robinson-street, was
afflicted with a syphilitic disease for years ; had large ulcers in the
mouth and cheeks. She applied to a Dr. L., who professed to be a
cancer doctor. He applied a plaster, said to be composed of arse-
nic, which produced the most exquisite pain, and separated several
pieces of the bones, but only aggravated the disease. Our treatment
soon healed up the ulcers, and she has remained well for three years.

Case 85. A person from Long Island had the same complaint for
many years. A large hole was eaten through the roof of the mouth.
Our treatment cured it in a few months.

Case 86. A young man, name not taken, had his whole system con-
taminated with the syphilitic poison ; from the hip to the knee, he was
covered with ulcers. Our treatment soon arrested the progress of
the disease, and in six months healed up every ulcer; and he now
enjoys good health. The scars cover a considerable portion of his
body.


Case 87. C, a young man, was brought from the country, a cripple,
and nearly ruined by the same disease. Part of his body was nearly
a mass of corruption, and his physicians had pronounced him incurable.
After using our medicinca while, he was enabled to walk, his ulcers
healed up, and he has now returned home well.


Case 88. A lawyer of this city had been for years afflicted with the
same disease ; had applied to various physicians in vain. After using
our medicine for a few months, he regained his health.

Case 89. A Mr. Summers was nearly gone with the same disease ;
had been under the treatment of Drs. C. and W. for a length of time ;
but was constantly growing worse. In six weeks after we com-
menced with him, he was enabled to return to his business, cured.


Ulcers.


Case 90. Mr. Cox, near New-Brunswick, was run over by a wagon ;
had his leg so injured that a Dr. T. decided that he could'never reco-
ver until a portion of the bone was removed. He was unable to walk
for a length of time, and was extremely reduced. After submitting
to our treatment for a few months he was cured.


From the Evening Journal.

Case 91. Messrs. Editors— I feel it my duty to make known to you,

what I deem to be one of the most remarkable cures performed either

in Lurope or America. In 1825, I was injured in one of my legs

with an anchor. I was attended bv a physician of this city for eight


niuslrations. 4- ; 3

months, without any benefit. I then went to England, and was there
attended by a surgeon, without receiving any benefit. From thence
1 went to Ireland, and there was treated by several physicians, with
no better effect. From thence I returned to America, and placed
myself under the care of a physician, who, in consultation with
another, pronounced my leg incurable, and decided that it must be
amputated.

At this time, the leg, from the knee downward to the ankle, was
in a complete state of ulceration, with callous and swelling, which
confined me one year and a half to the house ; and so low was I re-
duced, that it was expected that I never should recover. In this de-
plorable condition, almost in despair, I was recommended to apply to
an institution in Eldridge-street, called the United States infirmary,
when one of the physicians came to see me, and commenced altogether
a different course of treatment, under which I soon began to grow
better. The ulcers assumed a healthy appearance, my health im-
proved, and I can now use my leg and attend to my business as well
as ever.

The whole thirty-eight ulcers, which rendered my leg almost a
mass of corruption, are perfectly healed. In justice to the physician
of this institution, as well as the good of the public, I deem it my
duty to make this remarkable and unprecedented cure as extensively
known as possible. RICHARD B. MILLWOOD.

Case 92. Mr. , an Italian singer in the Park Theatre, had

been reduced very low by an ulcer upon the shoulder and throat, at-
tended with cough, emaciation, &c. He had applied to Dr. S ,

and others of this city, but could get no relief. In about two months
we succeeded in effecting a perfect cure.

Case 93. A son of Mrs. Fraser, Batavia-street, a few doors from
Roosevelt-street, had an ulcer upon the leg of long standing ; tried va-
rious means without any benefit. His physicians, we believe, decided
that it must be amputated. We attended him for a period, and effect-
ed a cure.

Case 94. Mr. Van Name, from Staten Island, had been afflicted many
years with ulcers upon his leg from the knee to the ankle. The bone
was extensively diseased : he had applied to four or five physicians ;
among the number was Dr. M . He was told that it must be am-
putated. He applied at the infirmary, and submitted to our treatment.
Our applications removed the inflammation, and so much loosened the
diseased bones, that a considerable portion of them we extracted. He
now walks as well as ever, and, as far as we know, the ulcers have
healed.


Inflammation.

Case 95. Mr. Cameyer, morocco dresser, Ferry-street, was injured
above the knee by a nail. The inflammation and pain were very <*reat;


494 Illustrations.

the swelling of the whole leg was three times as large as the other,
and threatened soon to put an end to life. Under the treatment of

Dr. H , who applied blisters, he rapidly grew worse. After being

called to him, we commenced with the most prompt and energetic
treatment ; the pain, inflammation, swelling, &c, subsided, and he
finally recovered.

Case 96. The daughter of Mr. Joseph Smith, Peck-slip, a few
doors from Pearl-street, had an inflammation and ulcer on one of her
legs, which rendered her a cripple, and unable to walk for months
and years. She had tried various physicians to no purpose ; among

the number was Drs. M and S . She was also taken to the

celebrated Dr. Sweet, of R. I., but none could benefit her. She was
placed under our hands, and her disease soon began to grow better.
Her ulcers are now healed, her crutches are thrown aside, and she
walks even without limping. It had been decided that his leg must
be amputated.

Case 97. The daughter of Mr. Ross, Dominick-street, was attacked
with inflammation and ulcers on the knee and leg, the whole of which
was a mass of corruption. The joints of the knee were displaced,
and the fingers could be introduced under the sinews. She had been
attended by the late Dr. Wright Post and others, without any benefit.
Although this case was so hopeless, we succeeded in effecting a cure.

Case 98. Mrs. B., Spring-street, had her thigh fractured, but her
physician not knowing how to treat it, suffered the bones to remain
separated for two or three inches. Great pain and swelling was the
consequence, which confined her to her bed for several months. We
were enabled to reduce the swelling and inflammation ; and after a
period she was able to walk, and is now well.


Case 99. John Gamble, a boy aged about twelve years, then resid-
ing in Spruce-street, was run over by an engine, which exceedingly
bruised and injured his leg. Under the treatment of the physician
who attended him, he was constantly growing worse. His leg was
exceedingly inflamed and swollen, and very much lacerated. Our
applications soon separated large portions of dead or mortified flesh,
when the wounds healed, and he recovered.

I


Wounds and Contusions.

Case 100. Mr. Hosier, Fifth-street, near Lewis, received a wound
upon the hand, by an instrument of several tons weight, which crushed
the fingers, hand, &c. He was advised to have it amputated imme-
diately ; but our treatment healed the wound, and he has now the use
of his hand, no part lost except the thumb. The physician who had
previously advised that the hand must be cut off, expressed his asto.
nishment at the cure.


Illustrations. 495

Case 101. The foreman of Mr. Nicholls, Mulberry. street, near Hous-
toun, received the weight of a large stone upon his hand, which crush-
ed it, and broke several of the fingers ; at first sight it seemed almost
impossible to cure without amputation, but by reducing the inflamma-
tion, separating the dead flesh, and keeping the fractured bones in con-
tact, the hand was cured, and he has now the use of it as well as ever.


The following cases were treated by one of the students connected
with the infirmary.

Inflammation of the Lungs. — (Pneumonia.)

Case 102. A person was attacked with pneumonia; a severe inflam-
mation of the lungs, excessive cough, violent fever, and great pros,
tration of strength. By the treatment pursued, he recovered without
bleeding, or any of the ordinary medicines.


Bilious Colic.
Case 103. Application was made at the infirmary to see a person
very low with the bilious colic and inflammation of the bowels, who was
previously attended by one or more physicians without any effect, but
constantly growing worse. The treatment succeeded in arresting
the disease and effecting a cure.


Case 104. Another person was attacked with severe inflammation
of the stomach and bowels, which reduced him very low, and his case
was considered extremely dangerous. The treatment removed the
symptoms and effected a cure.


Case 105. Mr. N. had a severe attack of the chronic dysentery,
which lasted two or three years, attended with severe cough and other
dangerous symptoms. The remedies made use of restored him to
health.


Case 106. Several hundred females applied at the infirmary, at dif-
ferent periods, who had been in a delicate state of health for years.
The treatment pursued restored them to health.


From the Evening Journal.

Case 107. Mr. Editor, — I wish to communicate, through the medium
of your columns, the following case, for the benefit of the afflicted :

About two years and a half since, I cut my knee with a broadaxe.
The wound was only seven eighths t of an inch in length, and not very


496 Illustrations.

deep. I applied for surgical aid, and was visited by Dr. Peter Ren-
ton, of Concord, New-Hampshire. He closed the wound by sewing it
up, and then commenced blistering and poulticing. In two weeka
time my knee was considered dangerous, and the third week he am-
putated it from my thigh, leaving a stump six inches long ; four days
afterwards he sawed off four inches more of the thigh bone. It did not
heal, but pained me very much. Six months after, 1 called on Dr.
W. Beach, 95 Eldridge-street, New-York, who gave me medicine
which afforded immediate relief; but, living at a great distance from
him, I could not obtain any more, and my stump continued to bleed
and discharge for two years, during which period I was compelled to
lie entirely upon my back, or sit upon a cushion. I consulted, during
this period, some of the most able surgeons in the United States, (so
considered,) but no one could afford me any relief, or discover the
cause of the ulcer. Some said the bone was exfoliating ; others de-
cided that my thigh must be amputated again for the third time ; but
eventually, I called on Dr. W. Beach the second time, in April, 1831,
three weeks my leg healed. His applications removed a piece of the
bone which had been the great source of irritation for two years.
My opinion is, that if Dr. B. had been my surgeon when I first receiv-
ed my wound, my thigh would not have been amputated. This com-
munication is not published at the request or instigation of any one,
but of my own free will, for the benefit of suffering humanity ; and
the undersigned hereby solicits other editors to publish the same, as
testimony in favour of the practice and skill of Dr. W. Beach.
New- York, July 12, 1831. SAMUEL PARKER.

Case 108. We were called to see a man, on Long-Island, who had
received a wound in the knee, by a sithe, which let out the joint-water.
His physician was unable to cure it. The medicine which we applied
healed the wound, and he is now well.


Case 109. Mr. Rhinehart, Suffolk-street, a few doors below Stanton,
received a wound from a stone, on the frontal bone, that depressed a
large portion of the skull, to the distance of half an inch, which render-
ed him senseless, produced fits, &c. Contrary to the expectations of
every one, we succeeded in curing him ; and that, too, without tre-
panning ; which, no doubt, would have been done by any other sur-
geon in the city.

Case 110. A man, in Cherry-street fell thirteen feet backwards,
and struck his head upon a stone, in the area ; the bleeding was pro-
fuse ; delirium followed. He recovered without trepanning.


Aneurism.
Case 111. A coloured woman, by the name of Grant, in Reed-street,
opposite Manhattan water-works, was seized with an enormous swell-


Illustrations. 497

ing in the leg, which was nearly as large as a person's head, attended
with pulsation and the most excruciating pain. Dr. Mott decided
that she must die, except the operation be performed of tying the
artery. Dr. Marshall stated, that nothing would save her life but
amputating the thigh. Our opinion was directly the reverse. We
believed, that the course proposed would prove fatal : and we adopted
means to subdue the inflammation, lessen the irritation, &c, and the
consequence was, that all her symptoms subsided, she recovered, and
has been well for several years. Dr. M. was so disappointed at her
unexpected recovery, that one year after he deputized persons to
wait upon the woman to know what means were made use of to effect
a cure.


Felon.


Case 112. William Harris, Eldridge-street, opposite the U. S. in-
firmary, was taken with so severe a felon upon the finger, that in a
short time he lost fifty pounds weight of flesh. His physician could
render him no service. We extracted large pieces of dead flesh, and
a large portion of bone ; when it healed.

Case 113. Mrs. Morrison, Frankfort-street, near Chatham, had a
felon, which commenced upon the thumb, was exceedingly inflamed,
swelled and painful. Our applications removed the symptoms ; a
large portion of bone was extracted, and it soon became well.


Case 114. Miss L., a young lady, was also afflicted with a felon on
the finger, which produced great pain, swelling, &c. After subduing
the inflammation, extracting a portion of bone, &c, it healed up.

St. Anthony's Fire — (Erysipelas.)
Case 115. A young lady, in Stan ton-street, near Lewis, was attacked
with an itching, burning and swelling of the face, which increased
The medicine, as in similar cases, soon relieved all her symptoms,
restored her to her sight, and she is now well.

Case 116. Last winter, we were called near Somerville, N. J.,
to visit Mrs. Davis, who had been afflicted nearly all her life with
erysipelas, or St. Anthony's Fire. Vesicles arose upon the skin, which
assumed the appearance of mortification. The remedies made use of
arrested the progress of the disease ; and she now, as far as we know,
enjoys good health.

Case 117. Mrs. L., then residing in Water-street, near Roosevelt,
was seized with a very severe attack of St. Anthony's Fire, on the
lower extremities : itching, burning and swelling, were very great,
and it finally terminated in gangrene. The applications separated the
dead portions of flesh, removed the irritation, and she finally recover-
ed of that disease.


498 Illustrations.


Ague in the Breast.

Case 118. The wife of the late Seymour Hawley, formerly keeper
of the penitentiary, had her whole breast converted into hard indolent
tumours and ulcers, from the ague. She had been attended a long
time, without receiving any benefit. We were called, commenced
our treatment, and after about one year she was cured.


Case 119. The wife of Mr. J.C. Faulkner, in Gold-street, a fewdoors
from Spruce, had been reduced extremely low with the ague in her
breast. It became very much swelled, exceedingly hard, and very
much inflamed. Dr. S. formerly attended her for a length of time,
and under his treatment she constantly grew worse. We were called
upon to attend her, and by following our prescriptions, in a few months,
she was restored to perfect health.

Case 120. Mrs. L., in Division-street, had been also reduced ex-
ceedingly low with the ague in the breast. Under the treatment of
her physician she was daily becoming worse, until we commenced
with her, when she soon recovered.


Case 121. Mrs. R., in Rivington-street, had her breast ulcerated
for a long time, proceeding from the ague. By our treatment she
soon recovered.


Tumours.
Case 122. Mrs. T. Q. Underhill, then keeping a store in Grand-
street arcade, had a tumour on the chin or neck, which a surgeon
said, could not be cured without extraction with the knife. We cured
it by the application of medicine alone.


Case 123. The wife of A. G. Boggs had been afflicted several
years with a large tumour in the breast. Our treatment removed it.


Case 124. Miss Tilton, a young'lady from Shrewsbury, was afflicted
with a large tumour in one of her breasts. She was told that it could
never be cured without a surgical operation. We, however, have
succeeded in entirely removing it without the knife, and she has
returned home well.

Case 125. Mr. R. had a large wen on the side of his face, which
excited the curiosity of persons in passing the streets. We made use
of an application which produced a discharge, and entirely removed
it, with little or no pain.


Case 126. A person called at the infirmary, the other day, (name not
taken,) with a tumour under the chin, which he had for twenty years.
He applied to a surgeon, who stated, that it must be extracted with
the knife. Our treatment entirely removed it, in about two weeks.


Illustration*. 499


White Swelling.

Case 127. The foreman of Mr. Munson, combmaker, then re-
siding at the corner of Pearl and Beekman-streets, was taken with
a swelling and inflammation of the knee, which rendered him a
cripple, and entirely confined him to his room ; being unable to make
the least use of his leg. It suppurated, and the whole knee seemed
almost a mass of corruption. The physician who attended him could
render him no service. We were called to attend him, and succeeded
in curing his disease. He now works, we believe, with Mr. Curtis,
combmaker, in the Bowery, opposite Spring-street.

Case 128. The daughter of Mrs. Williamson, then residing in
Mulberry-street, near Bayard, was afflicted with the white swelling, or
hip disease, which rendered her a cripple. The physician, or phy-
sicians, who attended her, abandoned the case as hopeless ; after
which we were called to attend it : and after one year or more
effected a cure. She is now a young woman, walks the streets with-
out crutches, and enjoys excellent health.

Case 129. A little girl, aged about ten, then residing No. 20 Or-
chard-street, was taken with the hip disease, or white swelling, which
suppurated and discharged in two places. All previous treatment
availed nothing. Our treatment healed up the ulcers and effocted a
cure, although she will ever walk lame, as the hip was drawn out of
joint before wc saw it : had we been called in the commencement,
this probably would not have happened.


Case 130. The son of Mr. Trembly, then residing No. 80 Vandam-
street, was taken with the most excruciating pain of the white swell-
ing, or hip disease. The physicians who were first called to it, were
of no service. Our applications soon removed the pain, swelling, &c.
and although ulceration took place, the boy can now walk without
crutches, and is well.


Salt Rheum, Tetter, Herpes, Sfc.

Case 131. S. A. the daughter of Mr. Lattirett, Gold-street, was
afflicted for a length of time with the salt rheum, itching, burning and
scaly eruptions of the hands. The means we used to cure the dis-
ease, proved effectual.

Case 132. The^daughter of Mrs. G. had also been afflicted with
salt rheum on her hands for a length of time. We gave her such
medicine as entirely removed the complaint.

Case 133. The daughter of Mr. Smith, of Smith-town, L. I., was
so severely afflicted with this disease, that her whole body was cover-
ed with scaly eruptions ; had tried many physicians and many pre-
scriptions without any benefit. She came to this city and placed herself

Vo. . U. 3 P


Illustrations.


under our care ; although it required one year, we cured the disease,
and she is now entirely free from every vestige of the complaint.

Case 1 34. A woman, in Forsyth-street, near Broome, was so severely
afflicted with salt rheum, that her hands and body were nearly cover-
ed with it, and had it for many years ; tried fifty or a hundred reme-
dies, but nothing afforded relief until she tried our medicine, which
mitigated her symptoms in a short time, and, as far as we know, she is
now well.


Case 135. Mr. Stephen G. was severely afflicted with an eruption,
itching, burning, &c. of the feet. Nothing afforded him any relief
until he used our medicines, which soon cured him.


Case 136. Mrs. Lober, in Pearl-street, near Frankfort, was so
severely afflicted with salt rheum, that her whole body was almost in
running ulcers, attended with the most painful sensations. She was
cured in about two weeks.


Rupture — ( Hernia . )
Case 137. Mr. F., corner of Eldridge and Broome, had his life en-
dangered by an irreducible or incarcerated rupture. We were enabled
to return the contents of the hernial sac without an operation, which
is almost invariably resorted to by surgeons of the present day, and
which often destroys the patient in a short time.


Case 138. Mr. L., in Forsyth-street, was reduced to the same
dangerous state, and the same means cured him.


Case 139. Another person, name not recollected, had been afflicted
for many years with a hernial rupture. By great exertion it had
become irreducible, and placed his life in the greatest jeopardy. The
same means soon returned the contents of the hernial sac.


Hydro-Sarcocele.
Case 140. Mr. Heyde, living in Centre-street, near the gas-house,
had been afflicted for years, with an enormous dropsical and callous
swelling. He applied to Dr. M., who intimated that the whole disease
must be laid open, and the most formidable operation be submitted to.
He applied to other physicians, who considered his case so desperate
that they were afraid to treat it. Another surgeon decided that the
operation of castration must be performed to effect a cure. He ap-
plied at our institution, and submitted to our treatment. We first drew
off thirty-six ounces of fluid ; afterwards took measures to reduce the
swelling, and he is now perfectly well, and attends to his ordinary
business, being a cooper by trade.


Case 141. Mr. L., a painter by trade, then residing in Elizabeth-
street, between Spring and Broome, was afflicted for a length of time
with the same disease ; the parts were exceedingly hard, and had


lihislra!' 501

ulcerated in leveral places. A physician attended him for (wo or
three months without any benefit, and thpn decided that lie must be
castrated. In this hopeless condition he applied at our infirmary, and
is now a sound man.

Case 142. A. person, name not recollected, in a similar condition,
made application at the infirmary, was treated in a similar manner,
and cured.


Cancer.
Case 143. Mr. M'Bride, cartman, had a cancer upon his breast for
many years ; could find no remedy. Applications were applied to it
which extracted it in a few weeks, and has been well for many years.


Case 144. Mrs. R. P., residing in Bayard-street, near the Bowery,
had a cancer on the temple. The same treatment removed it, and
she has also been well for many years.


Case 145. John Tucker, of Brookhaven, Long Island, had a disease
upon his tongue, which increased until a hole was eaten nearly through
it, producing a large ulcer, and rapidly extending. He applied to Dr.
Mott of this city, Dr. Stevens, and in all thirteen physicians, who all
decided that it was a cancer, and must be extirpated with the knife,
or the tongue cut off. Under these discouraging circumstances, he
applied at the infirmary, and so hopeless was the case, that we had
little prospect of his recovery ; but our applications had a much more
favourable effect than we anticipated, and after a few weeks removed
every vestige of the disease.


Case 146. Captain Conklin, corner of Pearl-street and Front*
lumber merchant, Brooklyn, had an ulcer upon the face, which was
pronounced a cancer by a physician of this city. Our applications
removed it, and he has now been well for several years.


Venereal Disease.
Case 147. William Graham, Forsyth-street, applied at the infirm-
ar) r , affected with the venereal disease, of seven years' standing. The
symptoms were general emaciation and debility ; part of the time
hectic fever. The disease had contaminated the whole system, and
had nearly ruined the constitution. Ulcers of a very virulent and ir-
ritable character existed in various parts of the body ; copious dis-
charges of fetid matter, and all the ordinary symptoms of the worst
species of lues venerea. He had applied to numerous physicians
without benefit. Most of the medicine he received from all, was
mercury in some form or another, which caused the mercurial rheu-
matism. The treatment pursued under the head of venereal disease,
after some length of time, effected a cure.


Necrosis.
Case 148. George Hewlet applied at the infirmary, afflicted with
an ulcer below the hip-joint. It extended to the bone, which also be-


502 Illustrations.

came affected. It commenced with ordinary inflammation, being at-
tended with very excruciating pains for a length of time ; and it finally
suppurated, and continued to discharge a large quantity of matter for
the space of three years. The physicians to whom he applied could
afford him no relief. The course pursued at the infirmary separated
the diseased bone, and he has now been well about two years.


Case 149. Mr. Henry Lewis, from Columbia county, state of New-
York, was attacked with an inflammation of the leg, which, after con-
tinuing for some length of time, suppurated, and discharged large
quantities of sanious matter, or pus. There were numerous sinous
openings in the leg, extending to the bone, causing a decay of it.
Most of the tibia, or front-bone, was rotten, or in a state of decay. We
applied medicines to open the sinuses, and to make one common com-
munication, one with the other ; after which the applications were
used to separate the diseased portion of the bone, when, after about
six months from the time we commenced, it healed up. A number of

pieces of bone were extracted. A surgeon of this city, Dr. M ,

proposed an operation, by the knife.


Necrosis — Venereal Disease.
Case 150. A woman, aged about thirty years, applied for assistance,
at the infirmary, with the whole fluids completely contaminated with
the venereal poison. One or more openings had been made through
the skull, by the effect of the complaint. The lower jaw-bone was
carious from one angle to the other. Numerous sinuses or openings
to the bone. It had been many years standing, and could not be
cured by the various medicines which she had used. Medicines
were given internally, to eradicate the taint of the system, and such
applied externally, as separated the diseased bone, which, together
with a little manual effort, after a period of about six months, removed
the whole maxillary, or jaw-bone. Osseous matter had previously
been deposited about the alveolar processes, by which the teeth still
were retained. It began rapidly to heal, and when we last saw her,
it. was nearly closed up ; and, as far as we know, she is now well.
The jaw-bone, after extraction, appeared very much diseased, but
still retained considerable firmness and strength.


Bilious Remittent Fever.

Case 151. Mr. R , Delancey-street, was attacked with a bilious

remittent fever; great prostration of strength ; tongue coated ; nau-
sea ; severe headach ; great degree of heat through the whole sys-
tem : little or no remission of symptoms, together with the ordinary
characters of bilious remittent. The treatment pursued soon arrested
the fever, and he daily grew better, till his health was completely es-
tablished. The rapidity with which he amended, was the subject of
remark by all his friends-


Illustrations, 503

Consumption — Phthisis Pulmonalis. )
Case 152. Mrs. Miller, aged about thirty years, residing in Suffolk-
8treet,was taken with a severe cold, which lasted for six or nine months.
After the inflammation subsided, suppuration followed. She expec-
torated, or raised large quantities of thick matter or pus, which con-
tinued during most of the time of the complaint ; more or less pain in
the chest; night sweats; continued to waste away, until most of her
flesh was gone ; countenance pale ; cough excessive ; great debility,
and every symptom of approaching dissolution.

Soon after she commenced taking the medicines, a mitigation of all
the symptoms followed, and in the course of three or four months, she
was perfectly well, and has remained so ever since. We have named
the disease the consumption. Some may prefer to give it another
name ; but names, being arbitrary, will not alter the complexion of the
disease.


Case 153. Mrs. Griffin, a relative of the lady above-mentioned, was
afflicted in a similar manner, though the symptoms were not so vio-
lent. Cough, wasting of the system, hectic fever, expectoration of
matter, great debility.

A similar course of treatment restored her to health in two or three
months.


Venereal Disease.
Case 154. Mr. Farmer, grocer, of this city, residing in Broome,
street, in company with some others, employed some of the Oneida
Indians, to sail to Europe, for the purpose of exhibiting the war dance
and some other Indian customs or practices. One of the company,
named Samuel, on his arrival here, was found to be in a deplorable
condition, with secondary symptoms of the syphilis, or venereal dis-
ease. It had extended throughout the whole system, with deep seated
and most extensive ulcers, which emitted such a fetid smell, that it
rendered it almost impossible to dress them. It was with great diffi-
culty that he could walk. This man began to recover from the day the
medicine was administered to him, and in the course of three weeks
he was perfectly cured.


Chronic Inflammation of the Kidneys.
Case 155. Mrs. Slurges, from Lansingburgh, in this state, applied
at the infirmary, with the chronic inflammation of the kidneys. Symp-
toms — constant pain in the small of the back, which had been for
years ; urine very turbid, and unequal in quantity, in connexion with
rheumatic pains ; great debility ; indigestion ; fever ; irritability of
the nervous system. She had been treated by steam doctors, and phy-
sicians of the old school, with little or no benefit. She continued for
some months in the city, during which time she daily grew better ;
and, as far as we know, is now well.


504 Illustrations.

Scrofula.
Case 156. Joseph Denton, then residing in the city of New-York,
now in Brookhaven, Long Island, was attacked with a scrofulous
tumour upon the neck. It increased, and finally suppurated, leaving
an obstinate scrofulous ulcer. He could find no relief till he sub-
mitted to our treatment ; when the tumour began to subside, the dis-
charge to lessen and become healthy ; and the ulcer healed in about
three months from the commencement. He has been well for a num.
ber of years.


Case 157. The child of Mr. W. Morris, then auctioneer, in this
city, had the scrofula for a length of time. The neck was inflamed;
great heat, pain, and finally ulceration took place. It assumed a very
formidable character. The treatment pursued at the infirmary ef-
fected a radical cure.


White Swelling.

Case 158. A child, about six years of age, was attacked with a
white swelling, which caused the most intolerable pain. The knee
and hip were excessively swelled, and the child confined to his bed ;
and he was rapidly wasting away. The physician who attended him
was unable to afford the least relief. He was placed under the care
of one of our students, who soon succeeded in mitigating the pain,
reducing the swelling, and thus preventing suppuration. His health
was so impaired, that he was unable to sleep for nights in succession.
The course pursued removed the complaint. He was subsequently
attacked in the other leg, in the same manner, and the same course of
treatment removed it.


Case 159. Joseph Denton, the person before mentioned, was seized
with a severe pain in the knee, followed by great swelling and inflam-
mation, which prevented him from labour for a great length of time.
The disease assumed such a character, that it was feared that it would
be necessary to resort to amputation. The usual remedies were ap-
plied ; the symptoms abated, and in the course of two months he re-
covered.


Dyspepsia.
Case 160. Mr. Conklin Davis, of Brookhaven, Long Island, was
afflicted with the dyspepsia, for a number of years. Stomach and
liver diseased ; great debility ; food not digested. The whole sys-
tem became much impaired, and continually getting worse. He could
find no relief from physicians, or any other source, until he applied
at the infirmary. The remedies removed the complaint, after some
length of time. I have since seen the person, who states, that he en-
joys tolerable health.


Illustrations. 505

Case 161. Mr. T. Atwater, of Williamsburg, Long Island, was af-
flicted with indigestion, for a great length of time ; pain and swelling
of the stomach, particularly after eating ; general debility, <Scc. ; dis-
ordered state of the bowels. Soon after he applied for relief, he grew
better ; and, in a short time, the symptoms subsided.


Chronic Dysentery.

Case 162. Mr. S , of this city, had been labouring under the

chronic dysentery, for more than a year. His bowels were constant-
effected a cure.


Fistula.
Case 163. Mr. Washington Lewis, Chatham-square, had been
afflicted with a fistula for a great length of time. It commenced with
great pain, inflammation and swelling, and finally suppurated, and
continued to discharge matter freely for more than a year. It extended
up the bowel, or rectum, about two inches ; hard callous edges, &c.
A surgeon of this city attempted to extirpate it with the knife, by
making extensive incisions. After submitting to the treatment usually
pursued in this complaint, it healed up, and he was restored to health.
[For twenty-two other cases of this complaint, see Fistula.]


Obstinate case of Intermittent Fever.
Case 164. Mr. James Conklin, of this city, was taken with the in-
termittent fever, in Bushwick, Long Island, where it extensively pre-
vailed. The physicians there gave him large quantities of mercury,
salts, bark, <kc, without effecting a cure; the disease had nearly
destroyed his health. Dropsy of the whole system succeeded. In
medicines which brought about a healthy state of the system, and he
is now well.


Dropsy.
Case 165. The same person, Mr. James Conklin, was taken with a
dropsy of the whole system : his face became very much bloated, and
abdomen enormously swelled, so much so that his clothes could not
be buttoned. He was unable to perform any manual labour, and his
system was fast sinking, attended also with a troublesome cough.
This was brought on by the use of mercury, for the fever and ague,
&c. So obstinate was the disease that it was feared he never would
recover. After attending, however, to our prescriptions, the water
in enormous quantities was discharged, the swelling of the body sub-
sided ; and in a few weeks not a vestige of the disease remained. He
has been perfectly well for a length of time.


506 Illustrations.

Cancer.
From the New -York Evening Post.

Case 166. Mr. Coleman — As you have ever manifested a disposition
to publish any fact that might be useful to the afflicted, I take the
liberty of requesting you, through the medium of your paper, to make
known the following case. About one year ago, I discovered a tumour
in my left breast, which gradually increased till it ulcerated. The
pain attending it was darting and lancinating, producing sensations
similar to needles, or some sharp pointed instruments piercing the
flesh. Feeling alarmed at these symptoms, I applied to Dr. Richard
Kissam, who pronounced it a cancer, and advised me to submit to an
operation. In consequence, however, of hearing, a few days after-
wards, that Dr. Beach had been successful in curing this disease with-
out the knife, I relinquished the idea of such an operation, and plaeed
myself under his care. His first application mitigated the pain, and
in the space of two months I had the satisfaction of finding myself
perfectly well. The gratitude I feel on the occasion, prompts me to
make the circumstance thus publicly known, not only in justice to the
physician, who was the instrument, in the hands of Providence, of
rescuing me from the jaws of death ; but also for the benefit of all
those who are labouring under this most distressing malady. In con-
trasting my case with that of a lady from the country, who, a few
weeks since, died under an operation for a similar disease, (performed
by two surgeons of this city,) I feel emotions of gratitude more easily
afflicted with cancers, I do most earnestly recommend Dr. Beach's
mode of treatment, and request, that in the cause of humanity, other
editors will have the goodness to give the above statement a few in-
sertions. ELIZABETH MICHAELS.

New- York, March 11, 1822.


Necrosis.
Case 167. Mr. Douglas had been afflicted with a diseased leg, in
which the bone had become carious, or diseased, for eighteen months.
He could find no benefit from any other source, until he applied at
was entirely cured.


Dropsy of the Chest.
Case 168. Mrs. Washburn, residing then in First-street, was seiz-
ed with pain at the lower portion of the hreast-bone ; difficulty of
breathing ; fulness and tightness of the chest ; diminution of urine ;
which was very high-coloured, and all other symptoms of dropsy in
the chest. It afflicted her so much, that, for a portion of the time, she
few weeks, effected a perfect cure.


Illustrations, 607


Apoplexy.
Case 170. Mr. Paul aged about 70, residing in Forsyth street, had
been subject to cttacks of apoplexy, for considerable time, they increas-
ed upon him, ui til he was seized with one so severely, that the imme-
diate extinction of life was threatened. The physician who was call-
ed to him prop' sed bleeding. We did not bleed him, but used means
to equalize the irculation, which gave immediate relief. His senses re-
turned, and strength, he gradually grew better, until he recovered, and
has remained s< for a great length of time. I have this day seen him
and he is as we I as ever. Had the usual depletive course been follow-
ed, he would in all human probability been now in his grave.

Fever sore or Ulcer.
Case 171. Mrs. Paul, Forsyth-street, had been afflicted for many
years with a fever sore, with a constant discharge, great swelling and
inflammation, &c, the humours from the ulcer often receding, and
settling upon some inward organ, and causing great distress. A
great number of physicians were applied to in vain, after which we
were called to attend her. Our prescriptions were attended with a
happy effect, swelling and inflammation subsided ; the discharge ceas-
ing, and the ulcer (very extensive) nearly healed.


Fistula.
Case 172. Mv Tomes, wood inspector, residing in Crosby-street, was
attacked with a fistula, great pain, inflammation, &c, and all the
symptoms -of that formidable disease. He was attended by two phy-
sicians, who were unable to cure him. After this we were called;
our treatment affected a cure without any surgical operation by the
knife.


Debility, Fluor Albus, fyc.
Case 173. Mrs. Miller, Laurens-street, had been a long time afflict-
ed with fluor albus, general debility, &c. She was unable to find re-
lief from any of the prescriptions of her physicians. In the course of
a few weeks, by adhering to our prescriptions, she was enabled to re-
sume her ordinary business.

Chronic Dysentery.
Case 174. Mr. Rehorn, in Allen-street, had been afflicted with the
chronic dysentery for a year, our treatment cured him.

* Chronic inflammation of the Liver.

Case 175. Mrs. Pessenger, Norfolk-street, had been a long time af-
flicted with a chronic inflammation of the liver; pain in the side and
shoulder, disordered state of the stomach, general debility, &c. She
was unable to find relief from physicians, or from any source. After
submitting to our treatment for a short time, the symptoms subsided,
and as far as we know, the patient is now well.

Vol- II. 3 Q


508 Illustrations.


Inflammation of the Bowels.
Case 176. Mr. Taber, 158 Stanton-street, was seized violently with
the bilious colic. His physician bled, blistered, and salivated
him; all of which only exasperated the complaint. Nothing passed
the bowels for days; constant retching and vomiting, excruciating
pain, the bowels finally became enormously swelled; he had been in
this condition for about ten days, when his life was almost despaired
of. Under these discouraging circumstances we were called to treat
him. We gave him such physic as soon produced a free evacuation
from the bowels, which lessened the swelling, pain, &.c, and arrested
the disease. From this time he grew better, and recovered in about
a week.


Intermittent Fever.
Case 177. Mr. Brewster, residing at the corner of Moore and Water
streets, had become very low, and much reduced by intermiitent fever.
He was at times delirious, and his disease had become so seated, that
it was feared he would not survive. In a few weeks our prescriptions
cured him.


Remittant Fever.
Case 178. The son of Mrs. Burkhill, then residing in Hester-street,
was seized with the remittent fever ; great nausea, pain of the head
and other parts, pulse quick, skin dry, delirium and great prostration
of strength. A vegetable course of treatment soon restored him to
health. His life was once before threatened with bleeding from the
nose. In an hour our applications suppressed it.

Dyspepsia.
Case 179. The daughter of Mrs. Burkhill, then residing in Park
Place, became so low and emaciated with dyspepsia, that her recovery
seemed doubtful. Our usual course of treatment gave immediate re
hef. Her mother now states that she is indebted for her life to our
medicines. The ordinary means were used.

Piles.
Case 180. Mrs. Delamater of this city was severely afflicted with
the piles. A few prescriptions removed the complaint.

Inflammatory Rheumatism.
Case 181. Mr. Caleb Fordham, Madison-street, was confined to his
.bed for several months with inflammatory rheumatism, attended with
great pain and inflammation of the joints, which prevented him almost
from moving the limb. The treatment gradually eradicated the dis*
ease from the system, and he now walks and attends to his ordinary
business. J


Illustrations. 509


Various Diseases.
Case 182. Five or six different cases occurred in the family of Mr.
Gibbs, plane maker, in the Bowery, all of which were speedily curedby
a vegetable course of treatment.


Remittent Fever.

Case 182. A young man boarding at the house of Mr. Hunt, in
Broome-street, was violently seized with remittent fever, pain, &c. He
was restored to health in a few days.

Another member of the family was violently afflicted with colic, fe-
ver, &c. He also was soon cured.


Case 183. Five or six different diseases were cured in a family of P.
Hickock, in Ludlow-street.


Case 184. A number of diseases were cured in the family of Mr.
Noah Hanford, Suffolk-street, as usual, without bleeding or mercury.


Bilious Colic.
Case 185. Mr. Hadley, 104 Allen-street, was so suddenly and pow-
erfully seized with bilious colic, that his life seemed in imminent dan-
ger. Our medicines afforded immediate relief, and in a few days he
was well.


Scurvy, Swelling, Tetter, fyc.
Case 186. The daughter of Mr. Henry, Williamsburgh, Long Island,
had been for along time afflicted with a swelling of the lower lip, which
became very much enlarged, the colour changed, and it was attended
with very obstinate symptoms. The family physicians and others to
whom he applied were unable to cure it. Our medicines effected a
cure.

Case 187. A number of desperate diseases were cured in the fami-
ly of Mr. Newcomb, in Broome-street.

Inflammation of the Eye.
Case 188. Mrs. Parcells, Elizabeth-street, was suddenly seized with
severe inflammation of the eyes. Our applications soon reduced it.

Case 189. Several inveterate cases occurred in the family of Mr.
Charles Sweezey, corner of Grand and Mangin streets, which were
cured by the usual course of treatment.

Ischuria or suppression of Urine.
Case 190. Mr. Jqhn Fleming, 397 Bowery, was seized with an in-


510 Illustrations.

flammation of the bladder, kidney, &c. Total suppression of urine,
swelKng over the region of the abdomen, fever and pain so great that
delirium succeeded. His life seemed in imminent danger; his attend-
ing physician being unable to afford him any relief. After submitting
to our treatment, he was relieved in an hour. He continued to mend
until he entirely recovered.


Pleurisy and Fever.
Case 191. The daughter of Mr. John Fleming, 397 Bowery, was
attacked with inflammation of the pleura, great fever, &c. Great pain,
and confined to the bed for a great length of time. The usual course
was taken to reduce the inflammation, which effected a cure.


Pleurisy.
Case 192. The wife of Mr. John Fleming, 397 Bowery, was severe-
Sly attacked with pleurisy ; acute pain in the side, cough, fever, &c.
Instead of following the course pursued by ordinary physicians, medi-
cines were given to promote perspiration, fomentations were applied
to the side, purgatives were administered which afforded immediate re-
lief and she was soon cured.


Nervous Debility.
Case 193. Mrs. Ludlum, 223 Thompson-street, was reduced very
low by nervous debility. The family physician was unable to render
her any benefit ; our prescriptions cured her.

Case 194. Mr. Porter, 218 Essex-street, had been afflicted with an
■obstinate disease of the face for a long time, and could find no relief
until he used our medicines, which cured him.


Dyspepsia, Palpitation, $-c.
Case 195. Mrs. Neal, 232 Stanton-street, was taken with a severe
palpitation of the heart, which proved very painful and obstinate, the
stomach was very much disordered ; great emaciation., fever, debility,
&c. Two physicians pronounced her case hopeless. Our treatment
cured her of this complaint.


Case 196. Several cases occurred in the family of Mr. A. W. Youle,
Water-street. All were cured by our treatment.

Inflammation of the Eye.
The wife of Mr. Townsend, Water-street, was taken with inflam-
mation of the eyes, which were cured in a few days.

Contusion.
Case 198. Mr. Babbit, corner of Essex and Stanton street, received
a severe and dangerous contusion on the side. Without bleeding he
recovered.


Illustrations. 511

1 Case 199. Mrs. Babbit, corner of Essex and Stanton streets, had
some anomalous disease. Our prescriptions soon relieved or cured her.

Contusion.
Case 200. Mr. S. Rust, Eldridge-street, fell through the scuttle
door from an upper story, and received a severe and dangerous con-
tusion and wound. Our treatment afforded immediate relief, and ef-
fected a cure.


Liver Disease.
Case 201. M. Shade, then residing at 631 Water-street, had been
for a long time afflicted with a chronic disease of the liver. Our pre-
scriptions soon cured her. Since that time we have also cured her of
the bilious colic.

Stricture and inflammation of the Bladder, Src.
Case 202. Mr. Tice, Avenue D, was seized with an inflammation of
the bladder, which produced great pain, and total suppression of urine.
Our prescriptions soon relieved him.

Inflammation of the Bladder, suppression of the Urine, fyc.
Case 203. The wife of Mr. Rayner, 62 Avenue D, was taken with
an inflammation of the bladder, which produced a total suppression of
urine. Her agony was so great that her cries could be heard in an
adjoining apartment. In twenty minutes our treatment afforded re-
lief, returned the water, and in a short time cured her.

Fever.
Case 204. A child of Mr. Raymond, 8 Mangin-street, was seized so
bad with a fever, that his life was despaired of. The course we pur-
sued cured it in a short time.

Contusion.
Case 205. Mr. John Newcomb, 343 Third-street, fell from a scaffold
in a ship yard, fractured the clavicle, and received a severe contusion
of the hip, which prevented him from using it for many weeks; great
swelling pain and inflammation, which confined him to his bed. His
family physician was unable to afford him any relief. Our treatment
soon cured him.

Fracture and Contusion.
Case 206. Mr. Rider of Fourth-street, fell from a scaffold in a ship
yard, fractured the clavicle, and severely bruised his side. One phy-
sician attempted to reduce the fracture, and stated that it was properly
done. Another was called who stated that it was not reduced : the
consequence was that both were dismissed. We were then called and
commenced treating it, and he speedily recovered.


512 Illustrations.

Hip Disease, Ulcer, fyc.

Case 207. The son of Mr. Williamson of Williamsburg, Long Island,
was attacked with a tumour between the hip and the knee, which was
cut out by a surgeon of this city. Ulcerations followed, which appear-
ed to extend to the joint. A large opening or orifice formed about
twelve inches long, which penetrated deep into the flesh, and from it
was a copious discharge of pus and matter. The joint appeared dis-
eased, which rendered him a cripple for many months. Under the
treatment of a number of physicians he constantly grew worse. In this
condition we were callled to attend him, and he began rapidly to re-
cover ; he threw aside his crutches, can now walk, and is perfectly well.

Schirrhous tumour of the Breast.

Case 208. Mrs. Yates, 23 Division-street, was taken with an inflam-
mation and tumour of the breast. The applications removed the tu-
mour, and she is now well.

Epilepsy.

Case 209. Mr. Snyder of Kingston, (N. Y.) was subject to the epi-
lepsy for a great length of time. Fits frequently occurred, and no re-
lief could be obtained. He applied to us, and our prescription cured
him.


Fits.


Case 210. The son of Mr. T. Benjamin, 352 Fifth-street, was seized
with convulsions or fits. Our treatment cured him.


Case 211. Two or three cases were cured at Mrs. Campbell's, 101
Nassau-street. Several cases of disease in the same family were cured.

Cancer.

Case 212. The daughter of Mr. Van Nostrand, Brooklyn, Long Is-
land, was taken with an ulcer upon the nose, which continued to cor-
rode the parts, and destroyed a considerable portion of one nostril. It
had progressed until it appeared to be incurable ; a number of physi-
ing unable to afford any relief. Our treatment eradicated it.

Measles.

Case 213. A child of Mr. Dick, Grand-street, was given up as hope-
less with the measles. Our treatment effected a cure.


Pulmonary Disease.

Case 214. Mr. Hoyt, of Danbury, Connecticut, was reduced exceed-
ing low with a cough, flesh and strength wasted away, fever, great
quantities of matter daily expectorated, and so deep seated was the
disease, that he was pronounced by all who knew him in a decline.
None of the physicians to whom he applied could afford him any re-
rlief. Under these circumstances he applied to us. The medicines


Illustrations. 513

which we gave him, he states, soon produced a crisis in the disorder.
When we last saw him he was nearly well.

White Sicelling.
Case 215. The child of Mrs. Williamson, 200 North-street, was ta-
ken with a pain, inflammation, and swelling of the hip. Ulceration
finally succeeded, which proved to be the white swelling or hip
disease. There was an orifice or opening, which extended to the bone.
She was unable to find relief from any source, until she submitted to
our treatment, which cured her. She was a long time a cripple, but
now walks, and has been well for a dozen years.

Syphilis, Ulcer, $rc.
Case 216. Mrs. Smith, Rivington-street, had been afflicted for two
or three years with an ulcer in the throat, which a number of physi-
cians were unable to cure. Our prescription effected a cure.

Dysentery.
Case 217. The child of Mrs. Holmes, 42 Forsyth-street, was taken
so severe that its life was despaired of. The worst and most unfavour-
able and the last stage of dysentery. Two physicians attended
her, under whose treatment she grew worse. In this condition, in the
advanced stage of the disease, we were called, and our medicine al-
most immediately arrested the disease and cured her. One of the at-
tending physicians witnessed the effect of our medicine, and expressed
his admiration of it.


Spasms or Cramps.
Case 218. We were called to see a woman affected with cramp, and
gastric spasm6, vomiting, pain, contraction of the tendons, &c. The
physician who was called could not relieve her. He was unable to
dose we gave her mitigated all the symptoms, and in a few days she
was well.


Hydrothorax.
Case 219. Mrs. Kimball, of this city, was afflicted with a dropsy of
the chest. Our prescriptions cured her in a short time. We also cu-
red her of another inveterate disease.


Fever.
Case 220. Mrs. Christie, residing in Christie-street, called us to see
her daughter, who was in the last stage of remittent fever, and al-
though the case seemed almost hopeless, our treatment broke the fe-
ver, and she speedily recovered.

St. Anthony's Fire.
Case 221. Mrs. L., Stanton-street, received a check of perspiration,
which caused the St. Anthony's Fire. It caused such a swelling in
the face, as made her totally or partially blind for some time;


614 Illustrations.

great pain, heat, &c, succeeded by ulceration. Our medicine redu-
ced the inflammation, removed the swelling, and soon cured her.

St Anthony's Fire.
Case 222. A young woman applied to us with the St. Anthony's
Fire in both legs, great pain, heat, itching, inflammation, &c. She
had been confined to her room, without being able to walk for many
months. A noted surgeon of this city, Dr. C, had attended her along
time, without rendering her any service. Our prescriptions cured her.

Dropsy in the Chest.
Case 223. Mr. Richardson, grocer, then residing in Eldridge-street,
was afflicted with a dropsy in the chest, pain, fulness, and stricture of
the chest, shortness of breath, diminution of urine, &c. The medi-

Cancer.
Case 224. Mr. Adams, of this city, had an ulcer upon the lip, which
continued to corrode and destroy the flesh for a length of time. Ap-
plications were applied which cur^d him.

Case 225. Mr. M' Bride, cartman, of this city, had been afflicted many
years with a tumour of the breast, which was pronounced a cancer.
Cured.


Curvature of the Spine, Tumour, fyc.
Case 226. A child of Mr. R., Greenwich Village, was attacked with
a disease of the spine. A hard tumour formed by the side of it,
which prevented the child from rising or walking. Our treatment
cured it.

Ulcer.
Case 227. Mrs. Smith, 261 Rivington-street, had an ulcer in the
throat, of seven months standing ; had applied to twelve physicians in
vain ; was given up as incurable. Our prescriptions effected a perfect
cure.

Dropsy in the Chest.
Case 228. Mrs. Walker, in Orchard-street, was afflicted with dropsy
in the chest, cured.


Callous Tumour.
Case 229. Mary Bleeker, had been troubled for a considerable time
with a hard callous tumour on the side. Discutient applications re-
moved it without cutting.

Scrofula.
Case J. Q. Underbill, had been for some time afflicted with a scro-
fulous tumour on the neck or under the chin, applied to different phy-
sicians without any benefit. After submitting to our treatment he was
cured.


Illustrations. 515


White Swelling, Ulcer, fyc.
Case 231. The child of Mr. Ross was taken with inflammation in
the leg, which terminated in suppuration, and extensively diseased
the whole knee, covering it with ulcers, hardness, swelling, &c. Un-
der the treatment of a noted surgeon of this city, it constantly grew
worse. Under our treatment it healed up.

•

Dropsy of the Chest.

Case 232. Mrs. L., Centre-street, near Grand, was seriously affected
with a dropsy of the chest, pain, difficulty of breathing, diminution of
urine, &c. Cured.


Pulmonary Disease.
Case 233. The son of Mrs. Burling, had all the symptoms of con-
sumption, cough, pain in the breast, &c. Cured.

Pleurisy.
Case 234. Miss Dunlavy, Attorney-street, was so severely attacked
with pleurisy, that it appeared that she could not survive but a short
time. The physician who was first called could afford her no relief-
Immediate relief was given, and she was soon cured.

Croup.
Case 235. The child of Mrs. Griffith, in Essex-street, was in the last
stage of croup. The physicians who attended him, pronounced him
to be incurable and dying. They frequently called in and asked if he
was not yet dead. At this time we were called to see him, and al-
though the case seemed entirely hopeless, the child being nearly gone,
from the accumulation of mucus in the bronchial vessels and lungs, a
few drops of medicine was administered, which caused him to raise the
mucus, and relievefl the oppression, from which moment he gradu-
ally grew better, until he recovered.

Rickets:

Case 236. The child of Mr. Washington Lewis, Auctioneer, Chat-
ham-square, was attacked with a scrofulous affection, which termina-
ted in the rickets. He was unable to walk, and very feeble, his joints
were enlarged, and the disease seemed almost incurable from its obsti-
nate character. Internal and external means were used to produce a
healthy state of the system, by which the child was restored to health,
and has for a length of time continued well.

Pulmonary Disease.

Case 237. Mr. William Cook, of this city, was attacked with in-
flammation of the lungs, which continued for a length of time, and
then suppuration took place. He continued to raise for many months,
large quantities of pus or matter, not less than half a pint each day;
pain in the breast, fever and night sweats, continual wasting of the
whole body, excessive debility, and almost constant cough. Every

Vol. II. 3 R


gig Illustrations.

symptom of confirmed phthisis or consumption. The remedies pre-
cribed cured him.

Pulmonary Complaint.
Case 238. Mrs. Wicks, of this city, was attacked with an inflamma-
tion of the pleura and lungs, which continued for about a year ; fever
during most of the time, continual pain in the chest, cough during
most of the night, expectoration of large quantities of purulent matter ;
part of the time she was confined to her bed. Cured.

Scrofula.
Case 239. Caroline Benedict, of Flushing, Long Island, was attack-
ed with a scrofulous disease in the neck, breast, and right arm, attend-
ed with great inflammation and pain. After some length of time it
suppurated and discharged freely, but for some reason was afterward
twice lanced. The ulcers assumed a very unhealthy appearance, and
they extended over a large portion of the neck, breast and side, caus-
ing a general taint and disease of the whole system. All the physi-
cians to whom she applied were unable to cure her. After she had
been in this condition for about four years, she applied for relief to our
institution ; a change was speedily effected in the ulcers, and general
system. She was restored to health, and has continued so for many
years.

Ulcer and Cutaneous Eruption.
Case 240. Mr. Samuel Walker, then residing 507 Washington-
street, had been afflicted for six months with salt rheum, and an
herpetic ulcer on the face. The parts became very much enlarged,
very irritable and inflamed, so much so, that he had not shaved him-
self for four months. It was attended with itching, burning, and the
most unpleasant symptoms. A noted physician, Dr. H., of Boston, had
attended him, without affording him any benefit.* -In this situation he
was placed under our care, and in twelve days he was cured. I saw
him the other day, and he informed me that he had no return of the
complaint since, it having been more than a year.

Syphilis.
Case 241. Levi M'Alister, then residing at 132 Elizabeth-street, had
been labouring under the lues venerea, for eighteen months. Most
extensive and formidable ulcers covered a portion of the body, from
which issued great quantities of matter, so offensive that it was ex-
tremely unpleasant to dress them. During the continuance of the
disease, he was unable to attend his business. He had been attended by
three physicians without deriving any benefit. He was in the New-
York Hospital for eighteen months, but the surgeons were unable to
cure him. When he was nearly ruined by the disease, we began to
he was cured.


Illustrations. 517


Scrofula.
Case 242. A child, a few days since, was brought to the office, aged
about twelve months. The symptoms were excessive, inflammation
of the parotid glands of the neck, fever, hardness of the parts, swelling
so great that the neck was thrown upon one side, much inflammaiion,
the neck enormously enlarged. So aggravated was the complaint,
that it appeared incurable. Medicines were applied to promote suppu-
ration, which was finally effected. The contents of the abscess were
discharged, and the ulcer healed.

Scrofulous Tumour.
Case 243. A hard indolen tumour, about the size of an egg, attack-
ed a child of Mr. Carpenter, of this city. It had remained in this con-
dition for some months. Discutient applications were applied, which
shortly cured it.

Inflammation of the Lungs, (Pneumonia.)
Case 244. A child of Mr. Bloomer, of this city, was so severely af-
flicted with inflammation of the lungs, that little or no hopes were en-
tertained of its recovery. The usual course of treatment restored it
to health.


St Anthony's Fire, (Erysipelas,) Mortification, fyc.
Case 245. Mr. R. L., Orchard-street, was taken with erysipelatous
inflammation of the arm, which became enormously swelled and in-
flamed. Suppuration followed, and mortification commenced, and de-
stroyed the greater part of the arm. It was attended with excruciating
pain, itching, &c. The case was so desperate that it seemed almost
hopeless, but immediately after the application of our medicines, the
disease assumed a more healthy aspect. The dead flesh separated,
the swelling and inflammation subsided, and in six weeks the arm was
well.


Bilious Remittent Fever.
Case 246. We were called to visit a young man residing with Mr.
Eustice in Orchard-street, attacked with bilious remittent fever, tongue
furred, nausea, headache, great prostration of strength, skin dry,
thirst and fever great, &c. Means were taken to restore all the se-
cretions and excretions of the body, which effected a cure in a few
days. A number of others were cured in the same house, affected
with various diseases, by pursuing a vegetable course of treatment.

GENERAL DEBILITY.

Case 247. Mrs. Lee, Greenwich street, had been declining in
health for a great length of time, flesh wasted, strength gone, restless-
ness, fever, digestion impaired, with general debility of the whole sys-
tem. She could find no relief from the ordinary prescriptions. A ve-
getable course of treatment restored her to health in a few weeks.


61S Illustrations.


Pulmonary Disease.
Case 248. Mrs. Provost, 11 Clinton-street, was seized with pneu-
monia, or inflammation of the lungs, which lasted for several months,
and terminated in suppuration. It was attended with a very deep seat-
ed cough, with a copious discharge of matter, hectic fever, night sweats,
great emaciation, with all the symptoms of consumption. The course
pursued at the infirmary cured the disease. A number of others in
the same family were cured without mercury or bleeding.

Ague and Tumours of the Breast.
Case 249. Mrs. Hadley, Stanton-street, was taken with an inflam-
mation of the breast, which became very hard and swollen, and attend-
ed with very excruciating pain, fever, and great debility. Cured.

Schirrhous Tumour of the Breast.
Case 250. Miss Tilton, of Shrewsbury, New-Jersey, had a large
schirrhous tumour of the breast, which continued to increase for near-
ly a year- It was attended with darting and shooting pains, great
soreness and distress. Was cured in about six months, without a sur-
gical operation. A neighbour of hers, had her breast extirpated by the
knife for a similar disease, which proved fatal during the time.

Cancer.
Case 251. Mrs. Holdridge had a schurhous tumour, which was pro-
nounced a cancer, and which her physician was unable to cure. She
applied to us, and the disease was removed. She was afterward af-
flicted vvith inflammation of the lungs, pleura, cramp, &c, and other
complaints, which were all cured.

Ulcer.
Case 252. Mr. Stewart, corner of Seventh and Lewis-street, was
taken with an inflammation of the leg, which was swelled twice as
large as the other. From the knee to the ancle it became hard and
ulcerated. Several pounds of flesh separated from the calf of the leg.
He was either confined to the room, or went upon crutches for near a
year. The discharge from it was very copious and fetid, and several phy-
sicians treated it without benefit. Among the rest was a professor of
the medical school, New- York, who decided that the leg must be am-
putated. In this situation we were called to treat it, and although we
found it very obstinate, after a length of time, succeeded in effecting a
cure. The man walks well without crutches.

Aneurism, Ulcer, Svjelling, fyc.
Case 253. Richard White, of Brooklyn, L. I., had an aneurismal
tumour in the ham of the leg, (popliteal aneurism.) A surgeon of this
city tied the artery above the tumour. This operation, however, was
attended with the most serious consequences. The principal sinew of
the leg became contracted, ulceration followed, and the leg swelled to
at least four times the size of the other. He had been a perfect cripple


Illustrations 519

for a year ; could not even raise his leg from the floor without assist-
ance. Dr. M., in consultation with a number of other physicians de-
cided that it must be amputated, and a day was appointed to perform
it. Under these discourageing circumstances we were called to treat
him, and although his case seemed almost hopeless, the treatment soon
produced an alteration, and lessened the diameter of it about two inch-
es in a very short time, as we found by measurement. It mended
slowly for about a year, when he dispensed with his crutches, and be-
gan to walk as usual. He is now attending to his ordinary business.
Every persuasion was used by the surgeons to induce him to have it
amputated.


InJlammatio7i and Ulcer.
Case 25-1. A little girl, corner of Anthony and Elm streets, was at-
tacked with inflammation and ulcer upon the ancle. One of the pro-
fessors of the medical school in this city ordered it to be amputated
immediately. A few simple dressings cured it.

Inflammation of the Lungs, (Pneumonia.)
Case 255. A child of Mr. William Marks, printer of this city, aged
about one year, was attacked with inflammation of the lungs and croup,
so severely, that its life was despaired of. Cured.

Case 256. A child of Mr. N. Cort was attacked with an inflamma-
tion of the lungs so severely, that it was given up as incurable.
Symptoms, swelling of the throat and neck, great fever, &c. Cured.
Also, eight or ten other cases of inveterate diseases, all cured by a
vegetable mode of treatment.

Fever Pneumonia, fyc.
Case 257. The child of Mr. S. Rust, (inventor of patent printing
presses) in Eldridge-street, was attacked with fever and inflammation
of the lungs so severely that his life was despaired of. This case was
likewise cured. Different members of the family were attacked with
ten or fifteen other diseases, all of which were cured without mercury
or bleeding. The recoveries were rapid, and no effects of the poison
left in the system.

Ulcer and general taint of the System.
Case 258. Mrs. Lewis, 246 Fulton-street, had been labouring for
many years under morbid or scrofulous taint of the system, which
finally appeared in the form of an ulcer in the arm. She was soon
relieved or cured by the treatment.

Sioelli?ig and Inflammation.
Case 259. A young lady at Mrs. Bogardus's 23 Division-street, was
attacked with a swelling and inflammation of the face, which became
so great that she was scarcely able to open her mouth or articulate, and
it appeared dangerous. By proper applications, suppuration took
place, and she was cured.


520 Illustrations.

Case 260. Mrs. P. Gallagher, 105 Chapel-street, was at different
times affected with serious complaints. She could find no relief ex-
cept by our prescriptions. She is now well.

Chronic affection of the Chest, Debility, fyc.
Case 261. Mr. Miller, 142 Norfolk-street, was afflicted with pain in
the breast and side, with general debility, which prevented him from
attending to his business for about a year. Our medicines afforded re-
lief, and as far as we know is now well.

Nervous Disease.
Case 262. Miss Demarest, Brooklyn, was subject for many years to
a nervous affection, which for many years seemed to threaten her life.
She could find no relief from any treatment or any prescription, until
she applied to our institution. Our treatment arrested the disease and
soon afforded relief.


Fracture of the Thigh.
Case 263. A child of Mrs. Hutchinson, 161 Stanton-street, fractured
the thigh about midway. A physician was called, who only placed a
roller or bandage around it, after which we were called to treat it.
Upon examination we found that it had not been reduced. We brought
the bones in coaptation, secured them by our improved double inclined
plane or splint, the bones knit in the usual time, and the boy walks so
well that no one could even suspect the accident.

Fracture of the Tibia and Fibula, {lower-leg.)
An elderly woman in the lower part of the same house, fractured
the tibia and fibula. It was treated in the usual manner. Means used
to reduce the inflammation ; and to keep the bones in contact, &c, by
which she speedily recovered.


Fracture of the Femur or Thigh Bone.
Case 264. Mrs. M., 21 Pell-street, fractured the femur, which
had been previously diseased by a scrofulous affection. The ends of
the bone were brought together and secured by the improved inclined
plane, usual means to subdue inflammation made use of. She speedi-
ly recovered, and was enabled to walk as well as ever.


Case 265. I was called to treat Mr. Eice, Eldridge-street, who fell
and fractured the femur. The improved inclined plain was applied,
rest, enjoined; inflammation was reduced, and the patient rapidly re-
covered.


Case 266. A child at the foot of Rivington-street, was run over by a
cart, which fractured the femur. The physician who was called appli-
ed splints and a bandage, and when we were called, we changed the
treatment. We applied our bandage, splints, and improved inclined


Illustrations. 521

plane as recommended; reduced the inflammation, and the boy rapidly
recovered.


Fracture of the Leg.
Case 267. A journeyman of Mr. Samuel Rust, Eldridge-street,
broke both bones of the leg, (tibia and fibula.) The usual treatment
was pursued, the bones knit, and the patient recovered.

Fracture of the Femur with the Capsular Ligament.
Case 268. Mrs. Mott, residing in Mott-street, near Hester, in going
down stairs slipped and fractured the thigh bone, near or within the
joint. Two experienced surgeons saw the case, and stated that the
fracture was within the capsular ligament, and that she would be a
cripple for life. We used means to subdue the swelling and inflam-
mation, &c. She can now walk, though not as well as formerly, and
the foot of the fractured leg turns considerably outward.

Case 269. Mrs. Chase 18 Stanton-street, was confined to her bed a
length of time, with great inflammation, and swelling of the whole
leg. It was excessively painful, and so much impaired her general
health, that her recovery seemed very doubtful. Her former physician
she stated, had only injured her. By submitting to our treatment, she
recovered.


Small Pox.
Case 270. The son of Mrs. Holmes, Forsyth-street, was seized so
bad with the small pox, that he became delirious, fever and pain vio-
lent. Medicines were given to throw the eruptions to the surface, and
when they appeared, he was relieved. In a very short time he was
well and enabled to return to his business.


Incipient Apoplexy.

Case 271. Mr. Campbell, 24 Stone-street, was taken suddenly
with a determination of blood to the head, senses gone, coldness of the
extremities, &c. We used warm and stimulating applications, which
recalled the blood to the surface of the body ; these means afforded re-
lief, and soon effected a cure. He has been well for several years,
whereas, under the treatment of his former physicjan he had a frequent
return of the complaint, and was often bled for it.

Case 272. I was requested by Mr. Lane, to visit one of his children,
aged sixteen months. He informed me that it had been unwell nearly

three months, during which time Dr. , had regularly attended it,

without affording any relief. He said he was fully convinced that the
child had the consumption, that medicine would be of no benefit to it,
and that in calling me, he was actuated more by a sense of duty, than
a hope of saving the life of his child.

From what I could learn, from the present symptoms, and a history
of the case, the child was evidently labouring under a severe attack of
morasmus, (or infantile remittent fever,) and that much aggravated by


522 Illustrations.

improper treatment. Digestion appeared perfectly at a stand, the food
passed off without undergoing any change, but what would naturally
result from its exposure to heat and moisture. The foeces altogether
void of their natural smell and appearance, the appetite entirely gone.
Emaciation had gone on so rapidly that there was not sufficient
strength left, for the child to turn itself in bed ; the cheeks had fallen
in, the eyes were glassy and sunk in their sockets, the skin was re-
markably pale, except when reddened by the flush of hectic fever.

Under these discouraging symptoms I deemed it an almost hopeless
ease, but feeling anxious to test the efficacy of the reformed practice, I
commenced a course of treatment, and in four weeks it produced an as-
tonishing change in the patient. His flesh became clear and natural, the
cheeks were more full and less pale, the appetite was improved, and in
fact every bad symptom was subdued. Three months from the time I
commenced treating it, I found the child in the enjoyment of better
health than it had ever before experienced.

Case 273. This was a female aged nine years, labouring under acute
dysentery, in its most aggravated form. The patient had been confined
between three and four days, and consequently very much exhausted.
Prompt and energetic treatment restored her to health in a few days.

Case 274. This was a case of enteritis, in its most severe form. The
patient was aged three years, and had been generally healthy, (except
at nine months old it had the small pox.) The symptoms were too
plainly marked to mistake the disease. The pulse w r as quick, hard,
and resisting, the tongue white, a streak of black down the middle, se-
vere pain in the umbilical region, sickness of the stomach, and vomit-
ing, the bowels costive, great restlessness and tossing of the arms.
Two physicians were requested to visit it, and both pronounced the
case a hopeless one, yet the reformed treatment proved victorious,
and the child was completely cured without the use of the lancet.

Case 275. This was a child aged eighteen months, exhibiting all
the symptoms of pneumonia, or inflammation of the lungs. Respira-
tion was extremely difficult, and an almost incessant cough, mucus
accumulated so rapidly in the trachea, as to greatly endanger the life
of the patient, expectcyation was suspended, and the patient was thrown
into epileptic fits. Tine abdomen was much distended and tense ; the
tonsils were enormously swollen, and great determination of blood to
the head. This case was also cured without bleeding.

Chronic Diarrhoea.
Case 276. The patient was a married lady, about thirty-six years of
age, she had been confined about two weeks, and was so much redu-
ced, as not to be able to sit up in bed. The fourth day after she com-
menced taking medicine, she was able to leave her bed without assist-
ance, and in one week more was perfectly cured.

Case 277. Were children of Mr. . These children were se~


Illustrations. 523

verely afflicted with apthcs or thrush. Their mouths and tongues
were completely covered with the eruptions, and the breath so fceted
that it was extremely disagreeable to remain near them. They were
all cured in a few days.

During the month of October, I attended about twenty-five other
cases, and with universal success. SAMUEL M. OLDEN.

Student of Medicine.

Another student, S. B. Merrill, attended during his residence at the
institution, several hundred patients, many of which were afflicted with
diseases of the most virulent character, and the same success attended
his practice.

The other students of the " Medical School," connected with the
infirmary, have atteuded several thousand cases with the same inva-
riable and universal success.


„ " Hydrocephalus.

Case 278. A child of Mrs. , No. 170 Rivington-street, between

four and five years old. Symptoms, fever, restlessness, nausea and
vomiting, bowels relaxed, stools of a dark colour, and very offensive,
pulse quick, pupil of the eye very much dilated, intolerance of light,
tongue furred, appetite impaired, skin dry, pain in the head, and ex-
tremely hot, she would throw her head back and shriek or cry out
without, any perceptible cause, lethargy, «&c. She had been ill and
rapidly growing worse, for about four days, when I was called. She
was when I first saw her in almost a hopeless condition, so bad indeed
that her life was despaired of, and her mother and friends imagined
her dying ; but the following treatment cured her, and she is to the
best of my knowledge now perfectly well. I commenced with purga-
tives, the neutralizing physic to regulate the bowels, afterwards the
bilious physic, cooling washes to the head, put the feet in warm ley
water, and bathed the surface, gave the sudorific tincture, but it did
not agree with her, I then gave, to keep up a gentle diaphoresis, the
amaranthus. This treatment was repeated for about five or six days,
when I gave the digitalis and spearmint, and finished with restorative
cordial, which performed a perfect cure. Ibid.

Stricture of the TJretha.
Case 279. Thomas Parker, 147 Christie-street, affected with a bad
stricture of the uretha, the bladder very much distended, no urine
voided for several days, the operation of puncturing the bladder was
proposed to the patient by several physicians, in consultation, but they
were refused, and immediate application made at the Infirmary ; a phy-
sician attended, who commenced treating it on the reformed system, and
in a short time he obtained relief, and was discharged cured.

Inflammation of the Eye.
Case 280. Margaret Wade, was seized with a severe pain in the
eves, great swelling and inflammation, after a while she became blind,
3 Vol II. 3 S


.524 Iltustrations.

she then applied to the eye infirmary. The attending physician prescri-
bed seven weeks without any good effect, the pain was so great at this
time as to cause delirium ; she was then placed under our charge ; the
first application produced relief, and all the symptoms gradually subsi-
ded; in ten days her sight was restored, and in two weeks she was en-
nabled to walk the streets, and attend. to her usual business.


Case 2S1. Thomas and Elizabeth Taylor, aged seven and five years,
were placed in the New- York AlmsHouse, and were shortly seized with
sore eyes, so swelled and inflamed, constantly discharging matter, that
they became blind, and continued so for two months, suffering with
extreme pain ; they were obliged to lay on their faces continually, to
avoid the light; even in this position, if the windows were opened it
would cause the most excruciating agony. All the treatment of the
physicians afforded no relief; so deplorable was their condition, that
the superintendant advised the mother to remove them ; accordingly
they were placed in our infirmary. Under our treatment the swelling
gradually subsided, the discharge soon ceased, and in a short time they
could see as well as ever.


Opthalmia.

Case 282. Henry Ogden Seavy, aged five years, was brought to the
infirmary from the Alms House, by Alderman Whiting. The com-
plaint was opthalmia. It was pronounced by one of the physicians,
(a member of the board of Aldermen,) to be a " deep seated case."
The tunica conjunctivia, or external coat of the eye was much infla-
med, purulent matter was constantly discharging from the eyes, the
lids of the eyes were also inflamed and swollen, as well as the sur-
rounding integuments. The head also was affected with a preterna-
tural degree of heat. He was received at evening, and before an op-
portunity offered of giving relief, all the symptoms were much in-
creased ; the upper lids projecting so far over the lower, that they
could not be opened. Cooling lotions, and other means were now ap-
plied to his eyes, and about 12 o'clock the next day his eyes were open-
ed, and the applications through the day checked in a considerable de-
gree the purulent discharge. In the morning, after having applied
emohent applications through the night, the swelling was rather less,
and the eyes were opened several hours earlier than the preceding
morning, though they had been much aggravated by crying, still no
very visible change for the better had taken place. The whofe system
seemed to participate in the virulence of the disease, proving beyond
a doubt that the fluids were contaminated. An alterative course of
treatment was now rigidly adhered to, with a view to excite a healthy
action ; soon as the constitution was fairly brought under the influence
of medicine,^ very visible and striking change took place. The boy
recovered from that apathy and depression of spirits and became cheer-
ful and sprightly, the swelling, inflammation, and discharge gradually
subsided, and in a short time he became as well as ever.


Illustrations. 525


Gastric Spasms and Convulsions.
Case 283. John Smith, aged twenty-six, residing in Ludlow-street,
■No. 11, was seized suddenly with violent gastric spasms and convul-
sions of the whole body, caused by drinking cold water to excess. The
convulsions were so great that it took six men to hold him. A com-
mon practitioner was called, who immediately bled the patient, and
dently failing fast. His friends being very much alarmed, sent to the
United States Infirmary for a physician, who found the man to all ap-
pearance dying, his pulse was hardly perceptible at the wrist, the ex-
tremities cold, and life almost extinct. The treatment was immedi-
ately changed, which produced the most immediate salutary effect. He
soon began to show signs of returning life, and in three hours the
symptoms were all allayed, so that in a few days he was enabled to
return to his usual avocation.

Scrofula.

Case 284. Mrs. Sniffin of Ludlow-street, requested attendance from
the Infirmary, for her son, aged four years and a half. Found the
boy with symptoms as follows : a variety of glandular swellings,
tumours on the neck, a large tumour on the front of the right shoulder,
near the arm pit, also one on the back part of the left shoulder, near
the same place, the size of a hen's egg, painful and much inflamed.
A large abscess formed, broke and discharged a large quantity of icho-
rous matter, mixed with curdy flaks. The right leg he was unable to
straighten, the knee largely swelled, much inflamed, and very painful.
Tumour on the back part, in which suppuration took place. The left
leg was also much enlarged about the knee, painful, with symptoms of
white swelling. A part of the abdomen above the left groin, the big-
ness of a saucer, was indurated or hardened, and projected in form of
a tumour. Violent pain in the right side, and shoulder. Constipation
of the bowels, loss of appetite, suppression of urine, cough, hectic fe-
ver, and night sweats. He was perfectly cured in seven weeks.

Case 285. Mr. Cline, residing in Catherine-street, had a long time
been afflicted with a deep seated cough, pronounced consumption, had
been attended by two physicians, and abandoned the case as incurable,
the treatment pursued completely restored his health.

Case 286. Mr. Outwater of New-Jersey, reduced to a low and dan-
gerous state by an attack of bilious remittent fever, which had degene-
rated into the typhus ; his physicians were administering to him Dover's
powder, combined with mercury. Stomach, liver, and whole system
in a morbid and diseased state, reduced so low, that his recovery was
considered doubtful ; after the first portion of medicine was given, he
grew better, and from that time he recovered rapidly, and in two or
three weeks he b«.cam$ wwil.


526 Illustrations.

Case 287. Mr. Coles Tompkins, was seized last summer with the
bilious remittent fever, under the attendance of two or three physicians,
and our treatment soon cured him.


Case 288. A child of Mr. Avery, broke its arm immediately above
the condyle of its elbow, the upper bone nearly protruded through the
integuments, the usual dressings were applied, with the angular splint,
and in two weeks the child could use its arm.


Case 289. Mr. , had a fleshy tumour on the leg, which grew

until it became very large, the usual applications removed it.

Case 290. Mrs. Hozier, of Williamsburg, L. I. had been a long time
afflicted with fever cough, debility, hectic fever, and night sweats, and
considered incurable by her attending physician, who pronounced her
disease the consumption. She had been bled, blistered, and taken
mercury without any beneficial effect. After changing the treatment,
and prescribing vegetable agents, she began to improve ; and at the
present time she is free of all the former symptoms, and has resumed
her usual business.

Treatment : The treatment in one particular differed from that laid
down under the head of pulmonary consumption. 1st. The pulmo-
nary balsam was given. 2d. Tincture of foxglove, to lessen arterial
excitement. 3d. Elixir of vitriol to aid in checking night sweats. 4th.
A syrup made of liverwort, and the rock polypod, and given alter-
nately with the other. 5th. A pill was given composed of the yellow
pine turpentine, as it exudes from the tree, containing about three
grains each. 6th. For drink, equal parts of milk, warm from the cow,
and hot water drank freely.

Fistula.
Case 291. Mr. Washington Lewis, Chatham-square, was attacked
with a fistula, excruciating pain, great swelling and inflammation.
An abscess formed near the rectum, which was extensive, and through

Z u 1 a SSUed great q uamities of P us or matter. He was confined to
his bed or room for months, during which time he was attended by two
other physicians, or surgeons of this city. A very formidable opera-
tion was performed, two or three times in succession without effecting
a cure. Under these circumstances he applied to the infirmary, and
submitted to our treatment, when he began to grow better, and after
a tew months the fistula was healed, and he now enjoys excellent


Illustrations- 627

AFFIDAVITS OF MEDICAL CASES.*

John Wright, being duly sworn, deposeth and saith, that, in the
year 1826, while residing in Sandy Hill, Washington county, state of
New-York, I was seized with a very excruciating pain, and great in-
flammation in my eyes. I was attended by a great number of physi-
cians, in all, not less than twenty or thirty, during a period of four
years. Some pursued one course of treatment, and some another. I
was bled several times, had my eyes scarrified, took large quantities of
salts, was salivated until my teeth were loose, and my tongue very
much swollen, and my general health very much impaired. I was re-
peatedly blistered, cupped, leeched, and had a seaton introduced in my
neck. Part of the four years, while submitting to this course of treat-
ment, I was partially or totally blind. My pain and sufferings were
very exquisite throughout my whole head, temples, and eyes ; the heat,
swelling, and pain were so excessive, that I was obliged to keep the
parts continually wet with cold water; to obtain the least mitigation of
the symptoms ; such, indeed was my distress, that my life became a
burden to me. During a part of this period, I was attended by some
of the most noted physicians in the city of New-York. They continu-
ed to attend me, until they appeared to abandon my case as hopeless.
The last physician, seeing that his treatment was of no use, recom-
mended me to apply to Dr. Beach, remarking at the same time, that
he would help me if any physician could. At this time, when all
hopes had nearly failed, I placed myself under his care, and found, be-
fore much time elapsed, a change for the better. My pain, and all the
unfavourable symptoms, in less than a week began to subside. In
three weeks I could, distinguish objects, in two months I was enabled
to leave my house and walk the streets without any one to lead me.
The discharge from the eyes, and the opacity or film, gradually ceased
and disappeared ; and they continued to grow more healthy, until in a
few months from the time I placed myself under his treatment, I was
enabled to commence business, which I have continued ever since ;
four or five years having passed without my being able to perform any
kind whatever, or even to walk without being led.

JOHN WRIGHT.

Ebenezer Whiting, Commissioner of Deeds.

Henry Weed, being duly sworn, deposeth and saith, that about ihe
beginning of March last, my wife Margaret, was seized with a severe
pain in both her eyes, , great swelling and inflammation succeeded, till
in a short time, total blindness was the consequence. I then placed
her under the care of Dr. Delafield, of the Eye Infirmary, who made
various applications and prescriptions for some weeks, without any
benefit ; but on the contrary was continually growing worse. The
pain was so severe that she became delirious. I then applied to Dr.
Beach, who commenced a different course of treatment. His first ap-
plications produced relief, and all the symptoms gradually subsided,

• Tb:s*s aflliavttB were tafctn Mtht rsfluwt of Ald«raian Vrhiting, for a partlcuJer ot-


528 Illustrations.

until she was free from pain. In the course of one week or ten days
she could discern objects. In three weeks she was enabled to leave
her bed and walk the streets, and soon after resumed her usual busi-
ness. HENRY WEED.
Sworn before me, this 3d day of June, 1831.

Ebenezer Whiting, Commissioner of Deeds.


Denis Hanan, being duly sworn, deposeth and saith.that about five
or six months ago, my child, aged seventeen or eighteen months, was
severely afflicted with pain, swelling, and inflammation of its eyes.
Shortly after, I applied at the Eye Infirmary, corner of Broadway and
Grand-street, and placed it under the treatment of the physicians of
that institution, for about six weeks. The child's eyes however did
not mend, but the symptoms still continued, until I feared that irreco-
verable blindness would follow. I then applied to Dr. Beach, and pla-
ced the child under his treatment. I soon perceived a great improve-
ment, which continued till the child recovered its sight.

DENIS HANAN.

Sworn before me this, this 3d day of June, 1831.

Ebenezer Whiting, Commissioner of Deeds.


Elizabeth Taylor, deposeth and saith, that in the year 1829, two of
my children, Elizabeth, aged seven, and Thomas, aged five, were
placed in the New-York Alms House. The boy had not remained
there more than two weeks, before he became infected with sore eyes.
His eyes were so swollen and inflamed, that he became blind, and
continued so for the space of two months, during which term he suf-
fered the most excruciating pain ; his agony and distress were very
great; he constantly lay upon his face, and even in this position, if the
window was opened, he screamed violently. He remained in this situ-
ation for two months ; all the treatment of the attending physicians af-
fording no relief.

After my daughter Elizabeth had been in the Alms House for two
months, she was seized with the same complaint in her eyes. Her situ-
ation had become so deplorable in consequence of the disease, that her
nose was lanced to discharge the matter. She remained blind or dis-
eased for the space of six months, and so bad had these children be-
come that Mr. Burtis, the superintendant, advised me to remove them,
stating that he was fearful that they never would get well. I took
them home, and then sent for Dr. Beach. At this time they were
both blind. Their eyes were exceedingly swollen, greatly inflamed 1 ,
and matter continually running from them; the least light produced
the greatest distress. They were obliged to lay upon their faces the
greatest part of the time. In about one week after this, my third child
took the complaint, and also became blind.

The prescriptions and treatment of Dr. Beach, was now adhered to.
In a short time I observed some change, the swelling and inflammation
decreased, the discharge lessened, and before long ihev could all see.
ibey continued to improve under the treatment, till in about two


Illustrations. ^""

months, or a less time, they were cured as well as ever, with the ex-
ception of weakness. They now appear as well as ever.

Another child, boarding with me, also caught the disease at the same
time. The mother removed it, and placed it under the care of another
physician, and the disease still remains, it having been afflicted for the
space of one year.

ELIZABETH TAYLOR.
Sworn before me, this 6th day of July, 1831.

Ebenezer. Whiting, Commissioner of Deeds.

William G. Boggs, deposeth and saith, that about the first of Octo-
ber last I was seized with an inflammation of the eyes, great pain, swel-
ling, loss of sight, and discharge of matter. I applied to two physicians
who decided that the case was a very obstinate one, and would require
a course of mercury, to relieve it, which would take several months.
I then applied to Dr. Beach from recommendation, which I received
from others, one of whom especially stated, that he had suffered from
inflammation of the eyes for two years ; had been treated at the Eye
Infirmary for some time, had his eyes scraped or cut without benefit;
and after having submitted to the treatment of Dr. Beach, had received
the use of his sight ; having been prevented from attending to any
business for two years.

Dr. Beach, when I first applied to him, stated that my case was ob-
stinate, but that he could relieve them. I submitted to his treatment,
and in seven weeks I again commenced my usual occupation.

WM. G. BOGGS, Printer, Office of the Com. Advertiser.

Jacob Cooper is a brother-in-law to Win. G. Boggs, and was seized
with the same complaint, which operated in the same manner, or was
attended with the same symptoms. I applied to Dr. Beach, and by at-
tending to his prescriptions, I received my sight in four weeks.

JACOB COOPER, Office of the Com. Advertiser.

Mrs. Lucinda Whaley, No. 55 Suffolk-street, deposeth and saith,
that Martha Ann Smith, aged nine years, was received into my house,
from the Alms House, about four weeks ago, where she had been se-
verely afflicted with the prevailing complaint in that institution. When
I first took her in charge, the following were her symptoms ; her eyes
were red, extremely painful, and attended with much swelling during
the night, so much matter discharged from the eyes that they became
glued together, and could not be opened in the morning, until after two
hours washing. Great pain in the head, with an entire inability to
bear the light of day. Soon after I received her, fearing that she
would lose her sight altogether, I took her to Dr. Beach, who had
previously given me great relief when my own eyes were inflamed, he
gave me some medicine both to be applied internally and externally,
I immediately commenced administering according to his directions,
and the next day her eyes were better, the treatment was continued,
and in a few days her eyes had undergone a great change. It is now


530 Illustrations.

about three weeks since Dr. Beach commenced his treatment, the child
is not necessitated to wear any shade over her eyes. No speck is left
on either eye, and in short, she may be considered as well as ever, save
her eyes are a little weak.

LUCINDA WHALEY.
Sworn before me, this 2d day of July, 1831.

Ebenezer Whiting, Commissioner of Deeds.


Cholera.
Case 298. During my appointment by the Board of Health of this
city, there were treatments to over one thousand cases of Cholera, eith-
er in the premonitory or confirmed state of the disease. In the first
stage of the disease every case was successful, in the second stage the
great proportion was cured, and nearly all, except the most malignant
cases, and those to which we were called too late.


LEONTODON TAltAXACUM.


COMMON DANDELION.


FRONTISPIECE


APPENDIX,

CONTAINING A TREATISE

ON THE

INDIAN OR SPASMODIC CHOLERA,

AS IT OCCURRED AND WAS TREATED IN THE CITY OF NEW-YORK,

IN THE SUMMER OF 1832,
AT THE

TENTH WARD MEDICAL STATION,

UNDER THE APPOINTMENT AND SANCTION OF THE

BOARD OF HEALTH AND CORPORATION.


ALSO:
A TREATISE ON THE DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.


MALIGNANT,


SPASMODIC CHOLERA.


" This pestilence (says the London Quarterly Revietc) has, in the short space of fourteen
years, desolated the fairest portions of the globe, and swept off at least Fifty Millions of
our race. It has mastered every variety of climate, surmounted every natural barrier,
and conquered every people. It has not, like the simoom, blasted life, and then passed
away : the Cholera, like the small pox or plague, takes root in the soil which it has once


DESCRIPTION.

This disease, which has committed such terrible ravages in the old
world, has found its way across the Atlantic, and has prevailed to a
most alarming extent throughout the continent of America ; it has proved
one of the most mortal of any other that has visited the human family ;*
and although it is in the mouth of every person, the pathology, or
nature of it, seems to be "ery little better understood than it was
when it first made its appearance; among the numerous physicians
who have been called to treat it, no two of them entertain similar
views, or treat it in the same manner.

For fifteen years past it has been traversing the globe, spreading
over vast districts of country, and cutting down great numbers of its
inhabitants; crossing seas and oceans, and travelling by land at all
seasons of the year, prevailing alike in the heal of summer, and cold
of winter, being subject to no known laws, although usually cold
weather destroys it. Sometimes its victim is struck as it were with
a thunderbolt, and almost immediately expires. In most cases, how-
ever, it manifests itself in its mode of attack more like other diseases.
Wherever it comes, it is terrible indeed ; it fills the inhabitants with
terror and dismay; " the very sight of the external expression of the
unutterable agonies of its victims, appals the strongest nerves ;" even
physicians, whose feelings, by their profession, are steeled against
undue emotions, confess themselves unmanned, and their whole frame
to be chilled with horror, when they stand over their suffering pa-
tients, feeling as if their own sympathy would inevitably draw them

* I have consulted the following authors: Winslow on Ch"!cra. Dr. VVm. Ste-
phens, Do. Dr. Ashhel Green, Do. Browsais, Do. Yates. Do. Bell, & Condee,
Do. Leary, Do. O. N. Binaghi, Do. yew-York, Cholera Hospital Report.


4 APPENDIX.

into the same convulsions, and to the same fate. They say, " We
never saw disease on this wise. It is new — it is strange — it makes
us wish we were not physicians." Here man finds^himself inclined
to fly from the distress of his fellow when he stands most in need of
his assistance, stricken with horror at the frightful phenomenon before
him. Such are some of the features and effects of this disease which
has at length fixed itself on our continent, appearing equally as de-
structive here as it has been in the old world.

The generic appellative Cholera, is radically derived from a Greek
word, which signifies bile. The title was appropriated in conse-
quence of one of the most prominent symptoms being either a re-
dundant flow of bile into the intestines, accompanied with evacua-
tions of a bilious fluid characterizing Bilious Cholera, or a total ab-
sence of bile in the intestines, with evacuations of a watery fluid,
characterizing Spasmodic Cholera. These symptoms are so com-
pletely opposed to each other in the quality of the fluid discharged,
that attending to them alone will, in general, preclude the possibility
of confounding the two species.

The characteristic symptoms of this complaint, are, purging, vomit-
ing, cramps of the lower extremities, choleric decomposition of fea-
tures, profound alteration of the voice, absence or extreme feebleness
of the puhe, great thirst, non-secretion of urine, general prostration,
coldness and discoloration to a greater or less extent of the surface,
integrity of the intellectual faculties.


HISTORY. '


Since the Black Plague, says a writer, slaughtered one fourth of
the inhabitants of Europe, in the fourteenth century, no pestilence has
ravaged the world to such a frightful extent, and with such unap-
peasable ferocity, as Spasmodic Cholera. In the short period of
fifteen years, it has ransacked Eastern Asia, the Islands of the Afri-
can Sea, Persia, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Eussia, and Poland.
It has traversed the Grand Duchy of Posen and Gallicia, it has visit-
ed Prussia, and Germany. Wherever it has yet appeared, it has sel-

* !;— ^ie Asiatishe Cholera in Russland in den Jahren 1829, 1830. and 1831.
Von Dr. J. R. Lichtenstadt, &c. Berlin. 1831.

2.— Die Cholera Morbus ; ihre Verbreitung, ihre Zuffalle, &c. Von Dr. Schrn-
urrer, &c. 1831. .

3.— Rapport au Cm ? eil Superieur de Sante Sur le Cholera Morbus Pestilentiel.
Par Alex. Moreau de Jonnes, &c. Paris. 1831.

4.— Atemoire sur un Nouveau Tratement du Cholera Morbus, et des Affections
Typhoides, &c. Par H. F. Ranque, &c. Paris. 1831

i - 5 "~; v? 1S A° r i ° f l r e E P idemic Spasmodic Cholera of Russia, &c ; by Bissit Haw-
kins, M. D. &c. London. 1831.

1831 - ° h0lera ! ltS Kature ' Causes ' and Treatment, &c. By C. Searle. London.

• 7 '~ Fu apers r , elat ,'~ t0 the disease called Cholera Spasmodica in India, now prevail-

ffi™ rw n0 ^ n*™^ ^""^ b ? authorit y of the Lords of His Majesty's Most
Honourable Privy Council. London. 1831.

TuruT T T83 a i t0 ddle Va " e Spede dl Ch ° leK * Morbus: Di Michele Buniva, M. D.


CHOLERA.


dom destroyed fewer than one-third of the diseased ; in general it is
fatal in proportion of one half; and not unfrequently three-fifths, two-
thirds, and even six-sevenths of the infected have perished. Little
respect has been hitherto paid to any country which it has invaded,
whether insular or continental; whether distinguished for its salu-
brious or pestilential character. It has traversed the burning sands
of Arabia as rapidly as the banks of the Euphrates ; Caucasus and
Mount Ararat, in common with the jungly marshes which are periodi-
cally bathed in the waters of the Ganges ; and although the number
of the healthy whom it has infected, and the number of the infected
whom it has destroyed, considerably vary with the density, health,
and habits of the population, the Tartar and the Turk, the Indian Na-
bob and the Persian Prince, have indiscriminately suffered.

It is, therefore, most desirable that something precise and authentic
should be more generally known of the character and causes, rise and
progress, symptoms and treatment, of a scourge so extensive in its range,
and so mortal in its influence, that it may appear how far the means
of checking its further progress lie within the exercise of human skill ;
and the treatment found best adapted for its cure, may be fully under-
stood. Some such information it is our present object to convey, and
no source of intelligence which lay within our reach has been ne-
glected.

Cholera is a disease which has been long known and fully describ-
ed by many authors ; but until about the middle of the seventeenth
century, neither its prevalence nor fatality was such as to invest it
with the character which it now wears. As it usually appeared dur-
ing the heat of summer and the fruit season, it was very generally
but although it was occasionally violent, its ordinary features were by
no means alarming. Sydenham says that it appeared in an epidemic
form in England during the summers of 1669 and 1676, and that its
symptoms were so severe, as to " frighten the bystanders, and kill the
patient in twenty-four hours." According to Le Begue de Presle, it
prevailed in 1762 in Bengal, and caried off 30,000 negroes and S00
Europeans. Dr. Paisley mentions it as being at Madras, in 1774 ;
in 1775 it seems to have invaded the Mauritius ; and in 1781, a di-
vision of Bengal troops were attacked by it so fiercely at Ganjam,
that 5,000 were admitted into the hospital during the first day, and
by the end of the third, the half of the entire corps were ill. Men,
previously in perfect health, instantly dropped dead upon the ground,
and few survived the first hour, who did not ultimately recover. In
1780, during a festival at Hurdwar, it destroyed 20,000 people ; and
in the records of Madras it is stated to have raged at Arcot, in 1787,
as an epidemic.

It is, therefore, erroneous to maintain, that this pestilence made its
first entre'e into notice in 1817 ; for with the exception that the eva-
whereas in the present epidemic they are " always" watery, the
symptoms of both affections are precisely the same. Trallian divides
Cholera into the bilious diarrhcea, the bilious Cholera, and the Chole-


6 APPENDIX.

ra without bile ; and as Dr. Johnson observes that this disease assumes
every degree of violence from the mort de ckien, in which nothing but
phlegm is ejected, to an ordinary Cholera, in which the ejections are
principally composed of bile, it is not unreasonable to infer that the
Cholera of 1817 is only an aggravated form of a disease which had ex-
which they call Vishuchi ; and the Japanese a similar affection which
they call Senki ; both of which have a very striking resemblance to
Spasmodic Cholera ; and certain it is that Sydenham, whose accuracy
of observation is well known, never alludes, in his description of
the severe form of Cholera which he witnessed, to the existence of
bile in the evacuations, merely calling them " pravi humores," or bad
humors.*

* Cholera. [Noticed by Curtis, in 1782.] From this period, up to the year 1787,
and perhaps even to 1790, the Cholera would appear to have existed epidemically, in
various parts of India. Curtis states, that the fleet, in which he served, joined Sir Ed-
ward Huges's squadron at Madras, in the beginning of 1782; in May of that year,
his ship, the Seahorse, arrived at Trincomalee, and he says, " The mort de chien, or
cramp, I was also informed by the attending surgeon, had been very frequent and
fatal among the seamen, both at the hospital and in some of the ships, particularly in
the Hero and Superb." The Seahorse had no case of the disease till the 2lst of June,
when between that day and the 25th they had eight cases.

" In every one of the eight cases the symptoms were so much alike, both in order
and in degree, that a description of any one would answer almost equally well for
every other. Any difference that took place was in the suddenness of the attack, or
the rapidity with which the symptoms succeeded each other. In all of them the dis-
ease began with a watery purging, attended with some tenesmus, but with little or no
griping. This always came on some time in the night, or early toward morning, and
continued some hours before any spasms were felt ; and slight affections of this kind
being very common in the country, the patients seldom mentioned them till they began
to be more severe, and extended to the legs or thighs. This purging soon brought
on great weakness, coldness of the extremities, and a remarkable paleness, sinking
and lividity of the whole countenance. Some at this period had some nausea, and
retching to vomit, but brought up nothing bilious. In a short time the spasms be-
gan to affect the muscles of the thighs, abdomen, and thorax, and lastly they passed
to those of the arms, hands and fingers; l>ut 1 never saw, then or afterward, those
of the neck, face, or back, at all affected. The rapidity with which these spasms suc-
ceed the first attack, and their severity, especially as affecting the muscles of the tho-
rax and abdomen, denoted in general the degree of danger in the case. The affec-
tion is not, as in tetanus, confined to a single muscle, or to a certain class of muscles
only. Neither does it, as in the spasmus clonicus, move and agitate the members. It
is a fixed cramp in the belly of the muscles, which is gathered up into a hard knot,
with excruciating pain. In a minute or two thU relaxes, is again renewed, or the af-
fection passes to others, leaving the miserable sufferer hardly an interval of ease : and,
lastlv, it passes from one set to another ; from those of the inferior extremity to those
on the upper parts, leaving the former free. The patients complain much of the pain
of these cramps ; think they obtain some relief from friction of the parts, and cry to their
companions to rub them hard. As the disease proceeded, the countenance became
more and more pale, wan, and dejected; the eyes became sunk, hollow, and surround-
ed with a livid circle. The pulse became more feeble, and sometimes sank so much
as not to be felt at the wrist in two or three hours after the spasms came on. But so
long as it could be felt, it was but little altered in frequency. If the spasms happened
to intermit, it would sometimes rise a little, and the countenance assume a better look.
The tongue was generally white, and more or less furred toward the root ; the pa-
tients had all great thirst, or rather a strong desire for cold drinks ; but there was
no head-ache or affection of the sensor ium commune throughout.

" The coldness of the extremities, which was perceptible from the very first, conti-
nued to increase, and spread over the whole body, but with nomoisture in the skin till
the severity of the pain and spasms forced out a clammy sweat, which soon became
profuse. The hands now began to put on a striking and peculiar appearance. The


CHOLERA. *

But however this may be ultimately settled, a very malignant form
of this disease suddenly appeared on the 28th of August, 1817, at
Jessore, a town situated about one hundred miles north-east of Cal-
cutta. From twenty to thirty died daily, and although the inhabi-
tants became at length terrified, and deserted their habitations, 6,000
perished in the short space of a few weeks. It rapidly spread through
the neighbouring country to Dacca, Patna, Dinnapore, and ISuddea.
In September, it reached Calcutta, and since that time the metropolis
of British India has been regularly invaded by it during every suc-
ceeding season. In November, when the English army were pre-
paring to go out to battle with the Hindostan chiefs, it attacked its
central division, and in ten days destroyed 764 officers, and 8,500
men. From Calcutta it travelled westward to Bahar, and from Bahar
northward to Benares, Lucknow, Cawnpore, and Delhi. It then di-
rected its course southward to Agra, Hussingabad, and Nagpore.
From Nagpore it again struck off in a south-west direction to Aurun-
gabad, then to Panwell and Poonah ; and by the second week in Sep-
tember, 1818, it took up its residence in Bombay, on the western
coast of the Indian Peninsula.

Notwithstanding this rapid journey from Jessore to Bombay, it was
equally active in its movements along the Coromandel coast, in
reaching Madras ; for, while it was shooting northward from Jessore
to Dacca, it was at the same time penetrating southward to Chita-
gong. By the 20th of March, it had entered Ganjam, it reached

nails of the fingers became livid, and bent inward : the skin of the palms became
white, bleached, and wrinkled up into folds, as if long soaked in cold water ; the
effect, no doubt, of the profuse cold sweat, which is one of the most pernicious and fa-
tal symptoms of the disease, both from the effect it has in such a climate, of exhausting
the strength, and in abstracting heal from the system. In some of the present cases,
and in many others after this, we had recoveries from the severest degrees of spasmo-
dic affection ; even where the pulse had been for hours completely lost at the wrist,
and the body perfectly cold ; but never of any who had these profuse cold clammy
sweats, and where the hands had put on this appearance.

" All this while the purging continued frequent, and exhibited nothing but a thin
watery matter or mucus. In many, the stomach became at last so irritable, that no-
thing could be got to rest upon it ; but every thing that was drank was spouted out im-
mediately ; without straining or retching. The countenance and extremities became
livid, the pulsations of the heart more quick, frequent, and feeble ; the breathing be-
gan to become laborious and panting ; and, in fine, the whole powers of life fell under
such a great and speedy collapse, as to be soon beyond the power of recovery. In this
progression, the patient remained from three to five or six hours from the accession of
the spasms ; seldom longer. These began at last to abate, but with more internal op-
pression, great jactitation, panting and gasping for breath, from the diminished action
of the respiratory organs ; for there were no marks of oppression or effusion on the
lungs ; and the motion of the heart, so long as it could be felt, became more and more
quick and irregular, till death came at last to the relief of the miserable sufferer. Some-
time before that event took place, the spasms gradually abating, left the sufferers en-
tirely, and so much possession of their faculties did they retain, that they would con-
tinue to talk sensibly to their messmates to the last moment of their life, even when
the whole body had become perfectly cold, and all pulsation of the heart had ceased
for a long time to be distinguishable.

"About the middle of July, 1782, I entered on duty at Madras hospital. Here,
again, 1 had occasion to see many more cases of the mort de chien. It was frequent
in the fleet in the month of August, and beginning of September, the season at which
the land wind prevails on this part of the coast. "We had some cases in the hospital
in the end of October, and in November after the monsoon, but few in comparison."


8 APPENDIX.

Aska in April, in May it was at Vizianagram, at Mazulipatam in Ju-
ly, and on the 8th of October, 1818, it had entered Madras, about a
month after its appearance at Bombay. Now, when it is considered
that during the winter months the cold had rendered it inactive, it will
appear that this pestilence traversed the whole Peninsula of India, or
about 66,000 square leagues in less than a year.

tions which Cholera has made from that period to the present time in
British India; suffice it to say, that with the exception of the winter
seasons, it has unceasingly preyed upon their Eastern settlements.
Toward the close of each November, it only hybernates to rest, that
on the approach of spring it may burst forth afresh to repeat its inju-
ries ; and, although it has thus swept, with the besom of destruction,
its towns and its rivers upward of fourteen times, it still finds fresh
victims for the slaughter, and it still betrays a poison as malignant as
ever. Even the inferior animals are said not to be exempt from its
influence. On its first appearance, a great number of cattle died in
the most extraordinary manner, in the grand army of India. During
the October of 1827, many of the dogs in the streets of Calcutta
were attacked with Cholera symptoms and killed. Mr. Chalmer
observes, that in the towns near the hills, where the epidemic was
so fatal, a disease occurred among the cattle, which kept pace
with, and often exceeded in mortality that of the human species. Ac-
cording to Dr. Ranken, goats and camels died of it in Rajputana:
and it would appear that at Vercelli, in Italy, the same phenomena
sometimes occur, when the ordinary Cholera is more than usually se-
vere. Mr. Searle examined some ducks, which he was convinced
died of the Cholera, and he found in their stomach and bowels the
same appearances which are discovered in the human subject after
death.

A few months after its first appearance at Jessore, and while it
was travelling through the northern provinces, it began to ravage
along the eastern shore of the Gulf of Bengal ; and in 1819 it
reached the kingdom of Arracan. From Arracan it extended itself
into Siam, and after destroying 40,000 in Banku, the capital of that
kingdom, it passed into the Peninsula of Malacca. In October, it en-
tered the Islands of Sumatra, and Penang ; Java and Borneo after-
ward suffered ; Canton was attacked in 1820, and at Pekin its mor-
tality was so frightful that the government were obliged to have the
dead interred at their own expense. From China it passed to the
Philippine and Spice Islands. Thus, in little more than two years
did it traverse a space in Eastern Asia, which, from north to south, is
not less than 1,300, and from west to east about 1,000 leagues in dia-
meter.

Two months after Cholera entered Madras, it travelled along the
eastern shore of the Peninsula, through Arcot to Palamcottah, from
whence it traversed the strait, and entering the province of Jaffna,
which is opposite to Palamcottah, it penetrated into the capital of Cey-
lon, which is situated in the very centre of the island. About the
same period, the Mauritius was attacked ; and on the 14th of Janua-


CHOLERA.


ry, 1820, it appeared at the town of St. Denis, in the Isle of Bourbon,
which is only forty leagues south-west of the Mauritius. In July,
1821, it betrayed itsen at Muscat, on the southern extremity^of the
Arabian Peninsula. The neighbouring islands of Onnus and Kishme,
in the mouth of the Persian Gulf, were shortly afterward infected :
by August it had ascended along the eastern coast of Arabia, as far
as the island of Bah-eim ; and not long after, it entered Bassorah, on
the northern extremity of the Persian Gulf. Opposite the little island
of Ormus, is the po.-t of Bender- Abassi, in Persia, the principal sea-
port town in which the Persians conduct commerce with British India.
The Cholera broke out here with so much violence, that the bazaars
were closed, and th ■ dead left unburied. Those who escaped its first
onset, abandoned their houses, and sought for safety in flight. Shiraz,
which is about 100 leagues north-west of Bender-Abassi, manifested
symptoms of the pestilence in September, and during the first nine
days, 4,500 persons perished. Yerd afterward suffered, and by the time
the disease had reached Ispahan, the cold season had so far advanced
that its severity was much lessened, and it soon wholly disappeared.

On the recommencement of spring, however, it developed itself
afresh, and spreadiig from Ispahan, where it had wintered, round the
contiguous Persian provinces, it visited in succession, Kermanshah,
Cashan, Khom, Casbin and Tauris, following, as it invariably did,
whether in Asia or Europe, the great commercial lines of national in-
tercourse. At Tauris, 4,800 perished in the short space of twenty-
five days, when it left the town, and travelled on through Khaz, Eri-
van, and Kars, to Erzeroum on the southern shore of the Black Sea.
The prince royal of Persia had driven the Turkish army into this
town, in the month of July; but immediately after his victory, Cho-
lera broke out with such devastating fury among the Persian forces,
that from thirty to forty died daily, and the soldiers became so dispi-
rited that they precipitately retreated, and left the prince with his mi-
nisters to sign an armistice at Khoe.

Before the disease quitted Bassorah, in 1821, from 15,000 to 18,000
of its inhabitants were destroyed ; and so dreadful was the havoc
which it made in the surrounding country, that Dr. Meunier says the
third of the population fell before it. At Bagdad it was so prevalent
that a Persian army, which was marching against the town, were
compelled to withdraw, but were pursued by the pestilence, and among
the other losses which it sustained, their commander fell. In the
spring of 1822, it appeared between the Tigris and Euphrates; in
July it attacked Mosul, which is about sixty leagues north of Bagdad,
and then travelling more westward, it passed through Merdine, Diar-
bekir, Orfa, Biri, and Antab, on its way to Aleppo, in Syria, which it
reached in November. During the winter, as usual, it lay dormant,
but in the spring of 1823 it revived, and visited Latakia, Antioch,
Tortosa, Tripoli, and other towns on the borders of the Mediterranean
sea. By the end of July it had advanced in the direction of Sarkin,
Arsous, Khankaramout, and the Gulf of Alexandretta ; and passing
over the high mountains of Beylam, it entered the towns of Adena
and Tarsous. In 1824 it appeared at Tiberias in Judea.

2


10 APPENDIX.

Thus have Arabia, Persia, Mesopotamia, and Syria, been overrun
by Cholera in little more than two years; traversing every species of
country, from the arid deserts of Irac-Arabia, to the succulent banks
of the Euphrates, and depopulating almost every village in its path,
with a pertinacious obstinacy which human skill was seldom able to
overcome. It will be seen that the disease, during this journey, took
two distinct routes through these countries, which it prosecuted with
equal energy. By the one it penetrated Arabia, attacked Bassorah,
ascended the Euphrates, ravaged Mesopotamia, and finally appeared
in Syria, where it committed frightful havoc among the towns
skirting the Mediterranean sea. By the other it travelled through
the very centre of Persia, until, in 1823, it reached the shores of the
Caspian.

Early in September, 1823, it entered Astracan, a large and popu-
lous town seated on the northern shore of the Caspian, at the mouth
of the Volga. The Russian fleet were first infected, but 216 persons
were all who fell ill, and of these 144 died. As soon as it became
known to the Russian government that Astracan was invaded, they
despatched a medical commission, composed of six physicians, to in-
vestigate its character ; a physician was sent into Persia with the
same view ; a Board of Health was established at Petersburg, and
every exertion was made to prevent its extension farther north. How
far such preventive measures were connected with the result, it may
be difficult to decide ; but certain it is, that the disease got no farther
in that direction that year than Astracan, and did not again appear in
Russia until toward the close of 1828, when it unexpectedly entered
the town of Orenburg, as is supposed by some through the caravans
which came from Upper Asia, and by others, through the Kirghis-
Cossacks, who neighbour Orenburg, and are said to have been infect-
ed by the disease. As the cold season commenced shortly after its
appearance, the mortality which it occasioned was not great until
the spring of 1829, when it raged with great severity, both in the
town and neighbourhood, and entered the forts of Rassyphaya and
Isetzk. On the 31st of July, 1830, it again appeared in Astracan ; by
the 10th of August, 1,229 were ill, of whom 433 died ; and by the
27th, no fewer than 4,043 within the town, and 21,268 throughout the
province of which it is the capital, perished. After committing this
unprecedented destruction, it pursued a north-west course along the
banks of the Volga, making tributary to its power the populous towns
of Saratoff, Penza, Samara, and Kazan. Kazan it reached on the 5th
of September, and on the 26th of the same month its symptoms were
first detected in Moscow. The town was immediately divided into
forty-seven compartments, which were separated from each other by
a cordon sanitaire ; ten temporary hospitals were erected, and Count
Zakrevvski, the Minister of Interior, was appointed by the Emperor to
superintend these protective arrangements. The Emperor Nicholas
himself visited the town when the disease was at its height, and when
he left to go to Twer, by submitting to a quarantine of eight days,
he gave an example of obedience to the sanatory laws. During the
first ten days of October, 747 died ; from the 10th to the 20th, 958


CHOLERA. 11

perished ; and from the 20th to the 31st, 1,284 sunk under the disease.
At first the mortality was as great as nine-tenths ; it afterward dimi-
nished to seven-eights, five-sixths, three-fourths, one-half, and ulti-
mately to one-third. During even the winter months, which had been
hitherto a complete specific against its progress, when all the rivers
were covered with ice, it carried on its works of death ; but the num-
ber who were infected gradually decreased, and the mortality propor-
tionally diminished.

Having now travelled so far north, it was almost universally expect-
ed that the Cholera would have soon reached Petersburg, and from
thence have extended to the shores of the Baltic ; but the capital, at
this time escaped, and the disease, taking an almost opposite direction,
accompanied the Russians into Poland. During the revolution of
July, in 1830, a body of troops were ordered out of the province of
Koursk, in the country of the Cossacks, which was then infected, to
march agai-nst the Poles. These troops, in their passage through Po-
dolia, and Volhynia, took with them the disease along their entire
line of march. The towns of Astrog, Zaslaf, and Luck were infected ;
and a kw leagues from this latter place the disease passed the Bug,
and entered Poland. Lublin was attacked toward the end of March,
1831 ; by the first of April, the hospitals of Siedlec were filled with
Russians laboring under the malady ; ten days afterward it was disco-
vered among the wounded at Praga, which is separated horn "Warsaw
only by the Vistula; and on the 14th it entered the capital of Poland.
According to the Central Committee of Health, from 100 to 150 died
during the first week, out of every 1,000 sick ; and according to
the Berlin Gazette, during thirteen days, ending on the 5th of May,
there had been between the town and the camp, 2,5S0 sick, of whom
1,110 died, and 1,278 still remained under treatment. On the 8th of
May, Ostrolenka, Lomza, Szczuczzyn, Drohicyzn, Pultusk, Makow,
Nesielskal, and Plousk, were ill ; on the 24th it appeared at Polangen ;
on the 25th at Riga, and by the 28th, it had reached Dantzic, in Prus-
sia, Brody and Lemberg in Austria. On the 26th of June, the dis-
ease entered Petersburg; early in August, it appears to have invaded
Hungary, and by the beginning of September, it had entered Germa-
ny, and Vienna.

In this hurried and imperfect outline of the geographical progress
of Cholera, we have intentionally avoided to interfere with the narra-
tive, by making any observations on its identity in different localities ;
on the peculiarity of its habits in following the great thoroughfares of
human intercourse ; on its strikingly progressive mode of travelling,
and on the probable causes by which it was influenced in its selection
of the course it had taken.

That the Eastern and Russian Cholera are substantially the same
disease, every circumstance with which we are acquainted tends to
prove. Those, who have witnessed them both, as Drs. Russel, Schn-
urrer and Riecke, do not hesitate to assert their identity ; and whether
we consider their symptoms, their mortality, their facility of propaga-
tion, their mode of travelling, their habitudes during life, or their pa-
thology after death, all demonstrate them to depend on the same mor-


12 APPENDIX.

bid causes, and to consist in the same diseased action. Their outset
is equally instantaneous and alarming ; their progress is equally rapid
and masterless ; their termination is equally fatal and appalling.

In November of 1831, it was transported from the continent to
Sunderland, in England, and from thence it spread to London, Ldm-
buro-h, Dublin, and many other places in the United Kingdoms. On
the 30th of March, 1832, 66 cases of Cholera were reported to have
occurred in Paris, the capital of France. From that time the disease
increased with the most appalling rapidity.

April 6th, 370 new cases were reported : 7th 509 ; Sth to the same
hour on the 9th 1020, and from the 10th to the next morning 1300.
From Paris the disease spread rapidly in every direction, and in a
few weeks made its way into 17 departments of that kingdom. In
Paris, not less than 15,000 of the inhabitants were swept off by this
disease, and it has revisited many of those places again and commit-
ted great mortality. .

" Scarcely, says a writer, had the Cholera made its appearance m Pa-
ris, before news arrived from all the towns and villages in the neigh-
bourhood, to the distance of 200 miles, of the same disease among
them ; and when it did break out, it was like a sudden and over-
whelming flood which swept off hundreds of persons in every situa-
tion in life, and in all parts of that extensive city— persons who could
have communicated with each other in no other manner than by
breathing the air common to all. In the short space of one month
more people were cut off by Cholera in Paris, than by the plague
of London."

The Malignant Cholera first made its appearance upon this conti-
nent at Quebec, on the 8th of June, 1832 ; previous to its introduc-
tion, there were some remarkable features in the season. It was no-
ticed in Canada that an easterly wind prevailed with an intermission
of five days only, from the 1st of May to the 10th of June, which in
all probability brought the choleric atmosphere from Europe to this
country ; although the first cases were among emigrants, the situa-
tion and state of whom readily accounted for the appearance of the
disease in the minds of many. They were in a filthy and crowded
condition, and it is stated they were of the lowest description ; besides,
the Board of Health states that the disease broke out in a low, un-
cleanly, and ill ventilated part of the city, crowded with the popula-
tion of those emigrants.

So prevalent and mortal was this complaint, that in two weeks
there were one thousand deaths .' previous to its appearance here, dis-
eases, as well as the season, assumed a peculiar character; the wea-
ther was unusually cold, and the influenza very prevalent, and proved
fatal to many. During the winter the scarlet fever prevailed, and
proved very mortal ; bowel complaints also appeared, such as common
cholera morbus and dysentery in the very depth of winter, many of
which terminated fatally.

The season was throughout very sickly, and the mortality by other
diseases great. In the Montreal Herald, fcr June 9, it is stated that
the interments from January 1st to June 6th, amounted to 554 for one


CHOLERA.


13


parish only. During the whole winter and spring all diseases mani-
fested the greatest irregularity, and in April infantile diarrhoea was
quite common. There was also sickness of an unusual character in
the interior of Canada; for in the Canadian of July 16, there is an
account, by a " voyageur," of a disease which appeared among the
Indians of Schomonchouan, 100 leagues from the sea, which exhibited
all the appearances of Cholera. It was attended with vomiting, diar-
rhoea, and cramps, producing entire prostration in four hours. It was
treated with uniform success, by a decoction of equal parts of bark, of
white birch and the larch fir, given frequently in small doses. At
New London, in Connecticut, a disease prevailed in the early part of
the spring, which was quite analogous to Cholera in all its principal
phenomena, although it was considered at the time to bear a close af-
finity to spotted fever, a disease well known in that state. A mode of
treatment very analogous to that most approved by experience in
cases of Malignant Cholera was also found to be highly successful.

It is also stated by Dr. Elvvood, of Rochester, N. Y.,* that cases of
pneumonia in the winter assumed a typhoid form, so that depletion
was not admissible, and in which the patients sunk with rapidity — a
circumstance which he has rarely observed during a residence of fif-
teen years in that place. Diarrhoea was very prevalent in Rochester
and its vicinity from the first of June, that is, for six weeks previous
to the appearance of the first case of Cholera.

It next appeared at Montreal, and for the following facts we are in-
debted to a report by Dr. Robert Nelson, Health Commissioner of that
city. With the month of June diarrhoea showed itself as a common
or predominant symptom in every form of disease, and about the first
of June there was one case of severe Cholera. But on Saturday the
9th, the malignant Cholera made its appearance as an epidemic. On
the evening of that day a passenger was landed from the Voyageur
steamboat, sick with Cholera, who died the same evening. It is stat-
ed by Dr. Nelson, that during the same night several native inhabi-
tants in various parts of the city, remote from the -port and from each
other, and having no communication with the port or place of landing,
sickened, and most, if not all of them, died during twenty-four hours.
On Sunday, the 10th, another emigrant from the same boat died.
From this time it continued to spread, and soon prevailed universally.
In two weeks eight hundred persons had died of it. It continued its
progress from one place to another, along the river and lakes, " soon
outstripping the emigrants," and early in July had reached Detroit.

Without having shown itself at any intermediate spot between Ca-
nada and New-York, it appeared in this city about, the last of June.
The first known case of Cholera in New-York is that of Mr. Fitzge-
rald, an Irish emigrant, who arrived at Quebec in the autumn of 1831.
He resided at Albany from September to May, and on the 3d of May
took the first floor of a house in Cherry-street near James-street. He
was by trade a tailor, and a steady and temperate man. His wife was
also a neat housekeeper, so that in this case neither of the most com-
mon causes of Cholera, viz. dirt and intemperance, were present.

* In Montreal and Quebec, it is stated that about one tenth of the population was
■Wept away by it.


14 APPENDIX.

On Monday, June 25, after spending the day at Brooklyn, he re-
turned late in the evening, and was taken sick in the night, but was
seen by no physician until Tuesday. In a few days he was convales-
cent. Early on Tuesday morning two of his children were attacked
with the disease, who both died on Wednesday, the 27th. They
were seen by many physicians, who considered their symptoms to be
those of Spasmodic Cholera. On Thursday, after eating some sour
strawberries, the mother was attacked with Cholera, at 12 M. and died
on Friday, the 29th.

On the same day an Irishman named O'Neil, was seized with ma-
lignant Cholera, and died the next day. He lived in Greenwich, at
least two miles from the first cases, and died at the Medical Mansion
in Greenwich. He was very intemperate, had been drunk all the
week, and hail fallen, while intoxicated, into the North Kiver.

On Saturday morning, June 30, a man who lodged with Mr. Han-
nasy, at No. 15 James-slip, was seized with the disease, and died on
Sunday rsorning. He was a temperate man, and was not known to
have had any communication with the family in Cherry-street. Ano-
ther lodger in the same house sickened and died on Sunday. The
keeper of the house and several others were subsequently taken sick
and died, either there, or at places to which they were removed.
They were all intemperate, were drunk at the time, and the house
was most disgustingly filthy. On Monday cases occurred in Water-
street near James-street, and on Wednesday, July 4, it had shown
itself at various places upon the opposite side of the city. From this
time cases continued to multiply daily, and. all efforts to trace these
cases to any foreign source had thus far been wholly unsuccessful.

It subsequently appeared at Albany, and in the New-York state
prison, at Sing-Sing, and in many towns throughout the country. It
has extended to Philadelphia, Baltimore, Cincinnati, Louisville,
New-Orleans, and other places ; in the last mentioned place, two or
three hundred have perished in a day ; many to whom interment could
not be afforded were thrown into the water. The habits of the people,
and the locality of the place, caused unquestionably this great morta-
lity. It took many off in the space of two hours without any premo-
nitory symptoms, and it is very remarkable that the yellow fever pre-
vailed there at the same time.

CAUSES.

1st. Remote Cause. Whatever diminishes the tone of the system,
operates as a remote, or predisposing cause of the Cholera, such as
the depressing passions, great fatigue, change of air, derangement of
the digestive organs, intemperance, drunkenness and excess^n eating,
sudden transitions from heat to cold, exposure to the night air, licen-
tiousness, and in short, every deviation from universal temperance ;
but perhaps nothing sooner produces an attack of Cholera than the
use of crude fruit and vegetables of every description, as well as every
article that readily yields an acid by fermentation.

Low and damp situations, either" as regards the quarter of the city,


CHOLERA.


15


or the part of the house occupied, local filth and dirt, either of premi-
ses or persons. Those who are subject to diarrhoea are very liable to
an attack of Cholera. Licentiousness and debauchery are great pre-
disposing causes of the complaint. Debility occasioned by watching
over persons sick with the disease, often brings on an attack. Breath-
ing stagnated, or un ventilated air, also powerfully predisposes to the
complaint, and residing in low, damp situations, such as cellars.

Alderman Palmer of this city, who visited much among the Cholera
during the late epidemic, states, that three-fourths of those who were
attacked with the disease, resided in cellar kitchens, and houses situ-
ated back from the street, where there was very little circulation of
air, and most of the cases which we treated at the 10th ward Medical
Station inhabited similar places and situations, while those who resi-
ded in large and airy houses were nearly exempt from the disease

Marsh effluvia, or the air arising from low, marshy places, contri-
butes much to the production of this disease. Hence it would some-
times suddenly spread from a city even to country places, and towns
where the intermittent fever is usually prevalent. This has usually
been the case in every part where it has prevailed.

But of all the predisposing causes, intemperance, and drunkenness
are unquestionably the greatest. It seems, as it were, to have been
sent as a special scourge to this unfortunate class of men, and this is
readily accounted for, from the morbid state of the liver and stomach
which ardent spirits produce. It appears to render these organs alto-
gether incapable of resisting the poison of this contagion ; hence the
victim sinks immediately under it.

Testimony, to the like effect, has been borne with wonderful unani-
mity, by all the writers on Cholera, not only in India, but in China,
Persia, Russia, Poland, Germany, and England. The disease was
most widely disseminated, and most deadly in its effects, amon^ the
serfs of Russia, who live in the extremest filth, and in habits of beastly
intemperance. The houses in which the disease occurred in Moscow,
were inhabited by a class of persons extremely poor, habitually filthy,
and addicted to intemperance, and who lived in low and damp houses,
and in cellars. Many of the chambers only nine feet square, were
occupied each by thirty individuals.

Every where in Europe, say the best authorities on the subject, the
poor, the ill fed, and the ill clothed, and the intemperate, have been
the greatest sufferers.

The Russian physicians have also adverted to the agency of bad
and indigestible food, in the production of Cholera in that country.
This is distinctly admitted in the precautionary instructions issued by
the Russian and Austrian governments, and by the medical boards in
Berlin and Hamburgh, respecting the articles to be shunned as food —
they are unripe and watery fruits, beer, hydromel, sour soup, mush-
rooms, cucumbers, and melons, sallad, and spoiled fish, and greasy
food generally. The sale of cucumbers and watermellons, which
were peculiarly abundant in the fall of 1829, was prohibited by the
magistrates at Orenberg.

In every place in the United States where the Cholera visited, the


18 APPENDIX.

mortality among the intemperate and the drunkards was truly appal-
ling Although they were the first to trifle with the complaint, they
were its first and most sure victims; and it is a remarkable fact i»
the history of this epidemic, that those who disbelieved in its preva-
lence, and even ridiculed its approach, were the first and most strik-
ing examples of its fatality. But while we have to state the dreadful
ravages among this class of men, truth constrains us to state, that it
attacked manv that were strictly temperate in every respect. But
this peculiar feature of the complaint, seemed to be more marked in
some places than in others. _

Similar causes have been assigned for the disease also in Europe.
It has been stated on good authority, that in ninety cases in a hundred,
in St. Petersburg, the common victims to Cholera were the irregular,
the dissipated, those with broken constitutions, and impaired health,
the badly fed, the badly clothed, and those who indulge in intoxicat-
ing liquors.

In London, the places where the Cholera raged were the haunts of
poverty, wretchedness, and vice, and its victims were the half fa-
mished and intemperate inhabitants of these situations. These con'
stituted the fuel which the all pervading flame selected' as the victims
of its rage ; and wherever they were located in numbers, there the
disease prevailed.

In Paris, however, it prevailed among all classes, the rich as well
as the poor.

Among other causes which might be mentioned, are first, certain
agents taken for medicine, such as calomel or mercury, any of the
neutral salts, rancid caster oil, bleeding, and most of the medicines
found to bring on the complaint.

" We may add to these agencies," says a physician of this city,
their crowded, close, and unventilated habitations, which have consti-
tuted a confined and locally infected district, in which the prevailing
epidemic exerted a greater activity, and carried off many victims.
This has been witnessed at 450 Cherry-street, where fifteen who died
of Cholera were taken from one alley ; and in Stagg's Row, in De-
lancy-street, where forty-three others fell victims to the disease.

Intermediate cause. We have now spoken of the remote, or pre-
disposing cause of the complaint. I shall next speak of the interme-
diate cause or causes, and which, to me, appears to consist in the agen-
cy or influence of a deleterious gas or effluvia mixed with the atmos-
phere, and this extends over whole districts of country, showing its
effects just in proportion as it finds materials to feed upon.

In country places where the air is generally pure, and where there
is little or no marsh miasmata, this deleterious state of the atmosphere
manifested itself by generating only the premonitory symptoms of
cholera, such as nausea at the stomach, derangement of the bowels,
&c. ; but in those places where there is a large population, filth, un-
ventilated apartments, and other predisposing causes, the Malignant
Cholera becomes developed in all its features. Hence it appears that
when the epidemic visits the country, the inhabitants as well as in the


CHOLERA. 17

city breathe the pestilential air alike, and nothing is wanting but some
exciting cause to develope its character, and which so fully exists in
all our dense populous cities, for which reason it usually prevails in
M almost exc l usiv ely. " If the state of the atmosphere over the
world, at any one time, is equal'y vitiated by some unknown cause,
its effects will first appear in places where that state of air is most
powerfully aided by local vitiations, as in cities or marshy grounds."

In other places, the exciting causes do not exist, or are not sufficient
to bring on an attack of the complaint. The intermediate cause, then,
of cholera, is a malaria, or a poisonous gas or gasses floating in the
atmosphere, inhaled by the lungs mixing with the blood, and contami-
nating it with a specific poison.

Proximate cause. The proximate cause of this disease consists in
an effusion of this poison which has been secreted from the blood
through tlve* medium of the liver, and is thrown upon the stomach and
intestines .jtfhich by its poisonous quality causes an irritation and in-
flammation of the mucous membrane of the alimentary canal ; and
which is proved by dissection. That the immediate or proximate
cause is a poison admits of no doubt ; but of the nature of it, we are
not prepared to state precisely. It may be a peculiar acid somewhat
similar to that which causes the common cholera morbus, but more
deleterious or powerful. It appears to lodge in the gall bladder, the
structure of which is such that it remains in it for some time with im-
punity, seldom or never causing the complaint, except there be a pre-
ternatural effusion of it by some of the secretions becoming closed, or
by relaxation or debility occasioned by fatigue, drunkenness, or some
other predisposing cause.

Thus, if I mistake not the contents of the stomach and intestines,
will immediately turn the tincture of litmus red, which appears to
show the existence of an acid. Be this as it may, we are confident
that a most deadly poison is thrown into the stomach and intestines
which produces all the symptoms of the disease. This may be proved
conclusively by analogy. Certain kinds offish, when eaten, produce
almost the same symptoms as the spasmodic cholera, one kind of
which, the yellow bill sprat, possesses a poisonous virus almost incre-
dible, and has, in several instances, been known to destroy life by ex-
citing dreadful convulsions.

The Conger eel, and the large white land crabs that feed upon the
leaves of the machineel tree, are poisonous, and produce violent
Cholera.

Certain and rapid death is almost sure to ensue from eating the
yellowbill sprat; but from a use of most other kinds of poisonous
fish, the person is seized, after a few hours, with languor, heaviness,
and faintness, succeeded by great restlessness, flushings in the face,
giddiness in the head, cardialgia, nausea, griping pains in the bowels,
and a severe vomiting and purging.

Under the supposition that the poisonous quality of the fish before
noticed is occasioned by their feeding on the moss which grows on
copperas banks, a late writer on the subject tells us, that in the treat-
ment of such cases during his residence in the West Indies, his object

3


18 APPENDIX.

was to decompose the poison ; to effect which, he almost entirely de-
pended on alkalies in simple solution wiih water.

Here then says a " physician, we have a disease whose symptoms
not only, but whose effects prove to a moral certainty the existence of
a highly deleterious and morbid secretion in the first passages of the
alimentary canal — that this morbid matter is of an acrid and viscous
nature, producing a painful, griping, and spasmodic action in the in-
testines, and, in proportion to its intensity, calls into sympathetic ac-
tion the muscles of the abdomen and of the extremities. This secre-
tion is sometimes so acrid, and of so poisonous a nature, that its effects
on the system bear a strong analogy to the effects of arsenic. Physi-
cians have often mistaken the symptoms of poison by arsenic for cho-
lera morbus; and I distinctly recollect that in the first case of poison
by arsenic to which I was called, unsuspicious of the cause, I thought
it a case of Cholera, and I sat by the bedside of the patient several
minutes before the suspicion of poison entered my mind."^

It was this strong analogy in the respective symptoms of Cholera
and mineral poison that undoubtedly excited the suspicions of the
people of Paris that their waters and liquors had been poisoned with
arsenic.

Some considering the blood as the natural principal, and general
stimulus of the organic fibre, and consequently as the principal cause
and effect of all the vital movements, have attributed the morbid pro-
cess to the want of oxygenation in the blood, which thereby losing its
faculty of natural stimulus, produces, like narcotic poisons, that which
is called asphyxia of the heart; and they therefore propose the use of
oxygen as a remedy.

SYMPTOMS.

FIRST, OR INCIPIENT STAGE.

" The intestinal irritation, which I have distinguished as the first
stage ot Lholera, has been usually regarded in no higher light than a
premonitory symptom ; and to this neglect is to be attributed the little
success which has attended the treatment of the disease. It is true,
the London central board of health laid it down as a certain precursor
l, n °; r ;: and £ ve * he post public announcement of the fact, call-
rn!r3 t T ^v W [ th diarrhcea to have immediate recourse to
™nd I To a? T* , BUI b6ing ° nl y re ^ arded as a Femonitory sign,
effect on ThP J A st ^tom of the true Cholera] it produced little

Prance in W 1 t 1 he 'f e0ple " When the Cholera made itS a P"
SatJ^nr erland > f the ^ses of diarrhcea were separately no-

and subst„3v S6nt ^° m l he l0Cal t0 the central board of health '

^^^JT^^^ 1 struck out - Whether the Y were

toalv dl Z t 1 T Under the S eneral head of "">** dollar or
die aL aoreSedt *"T* "* J but little ' from that tim * u ^il the
Th?s 3« ° nd ° n ' Was said u P° n this object."

sever ? X^oTe I S? l0 H 0SeneSS ° f the h °^ ™" « ]esS

tient aS % and constlt «tional disposition of the na-

^nt. At first the evacuations are deeply tinged with bile, but gX


CHOLERA. 19

ally the faeces undergo a very marked change, become colourless, and
very much resemble thin gruel or rice water.

The diarrhoea is noticed as a common preliminary symptom, though
for a long time presenting no peculiar character distinguishing it from
the complaint denominated simple diarrhoea ; yet the dejections are
in many instances from an early period more fluid, whiter, and less
feculent than they usually are in that disease ; and generally, toward
the advance of the true choleric symptoms, these evacuations assume
the peculiar rice water character.

In some instances, during this stage of the complaint, there are
slight indications of the symptoms which are to follow : nausea, pro-
ceeding even to vomiting, and slight trembling of the muscular fibres
in various parts of the body, attended with loss of appetite, dejection
of spirits, general debility, and giddiness.

There are cases noticed, in which this diarrhoea was not observed
as a precursor of the second and more alarming stage. In others it
has commenced at night, and before morning the disease in its most
aggravated form has prostrated all the vital powers of the unfortunate
sufferer. But these exceptions are not sufficiently numerous to inva-
lidate the rule ; and I lay it down as a settled position, that the gene-
rality of cases are preceded by a relaxed state of the bowels. The im-
portance of this observation will appear, when I notice* the proper
sanative measures to be adopted for the prevention and cure of the
disease.

" The best writers on Cholera Asphyxia, generally agree that it is
invariably preceded by the following symptoms :

" The patient complains of lassitude and a partial uneasiness in the
region of the stomach, accompanied with some slight evacuations
from the bowels, insufficient however to excite his attention or alarm.
As these symtoms increase, and the evacuations become more frequent,
from two to twelve times a day, accompanied with increased griping,
his countenance becomes sharp and dark, of which he seems to be
perfectly unconscious. Occasional nausea sometimes appears at this
period. These symptoms generally continue, varying in severity,
from one to ten days before the second stage supervenes. The eva-
cuations at first are of a dark brown or blackish hue. As the loose-
ness continues, they become of a less natural appearance, until they
assume the consistence and aspect of dirty water. Some headache,
cramp of the fingers, toes, and abdomen, slight giddiness, and singing
in the ears, accompany these symptoms. Sometimes a costiveness of
two or three days' duration supervenes, which is immediately suc-
ceeded by a return of the diarrhoea, and in a few hours after by a col-
lapse of the whole system, with nausea and vomiting."*

* The epidemic had a peculiar effect upon almost every individual, and proved most
conclusively that tli re existed an impure and pestilential state of the atmosphere.
Most of the citizens were affected with diarrhoea, or a derangement of the digestive
organs. It had a peculiar effect also upon my own system. It appeared that the blood
became charged with the poisonous effluvia, but for the want of some exciting or pre-
disposing cause, the disease was not brought fully into action, but was carried off by
the excretions. Notwithstanding which, in consequence of certain kinds of diet once or
twice indulged in, such as beans, peas, &c, very 6trong premonitory symptoms niani-


20 APPENDIX.

This stage, continuing for a longer or shorter duration, is suddenly-
terminated by the accession of symptoms of a more alarming charac-
ter, usually denominated the proper Cholera, but which I consider as
the second stage of the disease.

SECOND, OR CONFIRMED STAGE.

The diarrhoea, which had perhaps scarcely been noticed by the pa-
tient, becomes suddenly more severe, the evacuation thinner, and more
colourless. The stomach, Avhich up to this moment has remained un-
disturbed, or but little affected, now becomes very irritable, and throws
off first its contents, mixed with food, and at length, like the evacua-
tions from the bowels, colourless and of watery consistence. At the
same time, the strength of the patient becomes as suddenly depressed,
which is indicated not so much by his feelings, as by the lowness and
almost imperceptible pulsation of the heart and arteries. The urine
is suppressed, the voice weak and hoarse, the respirations few, the
breath chilled, and the tongue shrunk and of icy coldness, attended
with great thirst, the skin cold and covered with a cold and clammy
moisture ; the countenance is shrunk, the eyes glassy and sunk in
their orbits, and the features pinched, and exhibiting the most painful
and anxious expression. The muscles in various parts of the body are
now affected with cramps, rather than spasms. They are drawn up
in knots, and their fibres are seen trembling under the skin. The
muscles principally affected are those of the extremities, the calves of
the legs, the flexors of the fingers, and the abdominal muscles ; but
there are twitches of the muscular fibres and tendons in every part of
selves, as uncomfortable rather than painful ; and the generality of
the cases I have seen have not appeared to suffer much from this
cause.

In this stage there is little or no livid hue to be noticed. There may
be a darker circle under the eye, and the nails may be a little dis-
coloured.

< I have given the symptoms of this stage of the Cholera in the order
in which they usually occur. Some may occasionally be absent, or
more or less aggravated ; but generally all are to be found occurring
simultaneously.

fested themselves. On one occasion after eating beans for dinner, nausea, retching
and some vomiting supervened, with great debility; and which was removed only by
a copious perspiration. On another occasion, after having eaten certain vegetables,
similar symptoms followed. At several other times from fatigue, or some other cause
I became very much indisposed, and was confined to my bed for some time with a
most distressing nausea, or sickness at the stomach, with great prostration of strength,
£l mS ? CramP ^ tV " tC u hl T in the flesh > w *h g«at contraction of the abdomil
debility ' derangement of the d, S estive Unctions, and a most depressing nervous

.nJfc £n r r!° dS T med t0 TTJ at Ptated interval *. ^°vit once in three or four week.;
rated &h^1 y i5 r0CCCd u- d u rom a P"^ri.atur a l collection of choleric poison, gene^
tta. ™i ad d«; wmch was suddenly effused upon the stomach and tW
Mnes in consequence of fatigue or some error in diet.


CHOLERA. 21


THIRD, OR COLLAPSED STAGE.

The preceding stage of the disorder is seldom of long duration,
either yielding almost immediately to the prompt application of medi-
cine, or terminating in a few hours in the more concentrated and in-
tense stage of the malady, when all the symptoms are fearfully aggra-
vated, with the exception of the purging and vomiting, which entirely
cease, or are greatly suppressed. The countenance now has that pe-
culiar expression, denominated fades hippo cr atica ; the youthful
plumpness yielding in the space of a few hours to the violence of the
shock, is succeeded by the shrivelled physiognomy of old age and dis-
ease ; the complexion assuming at the same time the peculiar blue or
leaden colour, which has been considered the characteristic mark of
true Cholera.

From this stage, which has been denominated the state of collapse,
but comparatively few recover. " Indeed I think," says a writer, "I
should not much err by asserting, that when the patient is brought to the
hopeless; it is in fac# the dying stage of Cholera." Many patients
do recover, however, even in this stage of the Cholera.

These three stages, though perfectly distinct and clearly observable
in most cases, are nevertheless, in other instances, so suddenly over-
powering in their invasion, and terminate with such alarming rapidity,
as to set all efforts of discrimination at defiance. The vital powers ex-
plode like the electricity of the Leyden phial; the strong holds of life
are in one moment laid prostrate ; and the patient who one moment
ago seemed in the flower of youth and vigour of health, is in the next
a cold, shrivelled, and ghastly object, having nothing in common with
a living being, but the slow heavings of respiration and a countenance
expressive of the most unutterable anxiety.

FOURTH, OR STAGE OF REACTION.

If there is any shade of difference between the Asiatic Cholera and
the disease now raging in Europe and America, it is the presence of
this phenomenon in the latter, and absence in the former. A great
handle has been made of this discovery, by some who deny the iden-
tity of the two diseases; and the presence of fever subsequent to the
coid and collapsed stage has disposed others to conclude that this epi-
demic is only a severe form of typhus fever.

Even should it be found that the premises from which the former
conclusion is drawn are correct, there would not be in the mind of an
unprejudiced observer sufficient ground to justify the inference.

The occurrence of an occasional effect, arising from a cause super-
added to, but not a necessary part of, any physical phenomenon, is not
sufficient to destroy the identity between cases in which this conse-
quence may or may not be present. Circumstances totally uncon-
nected with the proper causes of disease may nevertheless so qualify
and alter the symptoms, as to render the diagnosis, if not impossible,


22 APPENDIX.

at least difficult; and in all climates, every physician is aware of the
effect produced upon the character of disease by constitutional idio-
syncrasy, or temperament.

In India, according to the authority of Dr. James Johnson * con-
secutive fever, or reaction, is never observed ; while, from the reports
of the British commissioners appointed to investigate the nature ot
the disease in Russia and Poland, this phenomenon invariably -follows
a recovery from the state of collapse. Some of the reports of the In-
dian presidencies, in the discussions given, -make no mention of con-
secutive fever ; and it is ascertained to be a fact that the natives of
that country, when recovering from Cholera, are not affected in this
manner. But among the British soldiers and European civilians,
there is every reason to believe, from the statements of those connect-
ed with the British army, that this phenomenon is a common occur-
rence.

Whatever may be the case in India, it is certain that since the com-
plaint has made its appearance in Europe and America, consecutive
fever has invariably been noticed. The report of Drs. Russel and
Barry gives the phenomenon in the following words :

" Fever, or hot stage. After the blue cold period has lasted from
twelve to twenty-four hours, seldom to forty-eight hours or upward,
the pulse and external heat begin gradually to return; headache is
complained of, with noise in the ears ; the tongue becomes more load-
ed, redder at the tip and edges, and also drier. High colored urine is
passed with pain in small quantities ; the pupil is often dilated; sore-
ness is felt on pressure over the liver, stomach, and belly. In short,
the patient is labouring under a continued fever, not to be distinguish-
ed from ordinary fever. A profuse critical perspiration may appear
on the second or third day, and leave the sufferer convalescent; but
much more frequently the quickness of pulse and heat of skin con-
tinue ; the tongue becomes brown and parched ; the eyes are suffused
and drowsy; there is a dull flush, with stupor and heaviness, about
the countenance, much resembling typhus ; dark sordes collect about
the lips and teeth. Sometimes the patient is pale, squalid, and low,
with the pulse and heat below natural ; but with the typhus stupor, de-
lirium supervenes, and death takes place from the fourth to the eighth
day, or even later, in the very individual too whom the most assiduous
attention had barely saved in the first, or cold stage. To give a no-
tion of the importance and danger of Cholera fever, a most intelligent
physician, Dr. Reimer, of the Merchants' Hospital, informs us, that of
twenty cases treated under his own eye, who fell victims to the dis-
ease, seven died in the cold stage, and thirteen in the consecutive
fever."

SYMPTOMS OF THE DISEASE, AS THEY OCCURRED IN THE N. Y. HOSPITALS.

A superintendent of one of the New-York Cholera Hospitals, thus

♦ Letter to the "Times." morning journal, paper published by the Privy Cpuncil
of Great Britain, in the appendix.


CHOLERA. 23

lera Reports.

" The Malignant Cholera appears* to be a violent disease of the pri-
ma? viae, or stomach and intestinal canal, into which the fluids of the
body are turned ; and the discharges, therefore, both upward and
downward, though not always attended with pain, if left unheeded,
bring on that stage of the disease which has been denominated the
state of collapse ; in which the countenance changes, the eyes express
a peculiar sensation of anxiety, the pulse sinks, the extremities be-
come cold, the fingers corrugated, a cold clammy sweat supervenes,
cramps attack the extremities, the voice fails, and a cold breath, and
cold tongue, give indications of extreme danger, and of a speedy and
fatal termination to the disease.

" Premonitory Symptoms. — The violent forms of the disease are
most usually preceded by forewarning, or premonitory symptoms of a
milder character, which, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, may
be cured ; but if neglected, may suddenly and unexpectedly advance to
a more dangerous stage of the disease, and terminate fatally. The
most usual of the premonitory symptoms are simple looseness of the
bowels, with or without pain, and which sometimes continues several
days, though at other times only a few hours, without becoming dan-
gerous. Borborygmi, or rumbling in the stomach and bowels, with
pain or sickness at the stomach, sometimes occur as premonitory of
Malignant Cholera ; and they precede vomiting, or looseness of the
bowels, or both.

" Essential Symptoms. — The essential symptoms of the epidemic
purging, or puking, or both. Vomiting sometimes occurs as the first
symptom, but the disease most usually commences with evacuations
from the bowels. These may be, in the commencement, the natural
contents of the intestines, or in vomiting, those of the stomach. But
in the progress of the malady, the discharges, up and down, become
copious and thin, with little or no fetor, and often without pain, look-
ing like dirty water, or the washings of dirty rice, and containing por-
tions of flocculent matter, as though the fibrins of the blood were se-
parated into shreds, and floating in the watery mass. When these
loose evacuations from the bowels become involuntary, the patient sinks
without a hope of recovery.

" The vomiting may be moderate, and yet the patient die from the
copiousness of the other evacuations, and the violence of the cramps
which occur in most of the fatal cases. The irritability of the stomach
is sometimes very great, attended with distress, pain, burning heat
and thirst, when the desire for cold drinks is urgent, and they are re-
jected soon after being swallowed, with additional quantities of fluid.
In such cases other drinks or medicines produce the same effect.

" Cramps attend some of the milder cases, and are not necessarily
fatal. They occur most usually in the extremities, sometimes in the
stomach and external parts of the body. When violent, they keep the
patient in agony until the strength is exhausted, and the sufferer sinks
into a state of torpor and death. Some have passed into the stage of


04 APPENDIX.

collapse and died without cramps, remaining for some time in a state
of cold insensibility denominated the Cholera Asphyxia.

« Premonitory symptoms do not always occur.— Premonitory symp-
toms are sometimes wanting but such cases are not numerous, and
the patients are then attacked with violence, from the operation of
some exciting cause, and the disease runs rapidly its fatal career. A
few such cases have been admitted into the hospital at Corlaer s

Hook."

" When the Cholera is left to itself," says a practitioner, or even
where it is treated in the beginning with improper remedies, it is al-
most incredible, to those who have not seen it, how rapidly it runs its
course to a fatal termination ; but it is equally incredible, when the
disease is properly treated, how very soon it may often be arrested m
its rapid progress. I have seen, in some of the very worst cases,
where, when a few doses of medicine could be retained in the system
for a sufficient time to enter the circulation, the fatal symptoms were
almost immediately arrested ; and even when the collapse has com-
menced, after a short period, the pulse can be felt beginning to creep,
animal heat begins to be evolved, and though the patients continue
weak for a time, yet they gradually recover from the state of col-
lapse.

" In two of the most malignant cases which I have seen, there was
no premonitory diarrhoea; and in one of them the bowels had not
been open for three days previous to the attack : consequently, Chole-
ra is not merely an excessive diarrhoea, for neither the bowel com-
plaint, the rice-water ejections, vomiting, nor cramps, are essential to
this disease ; and where these symptoms do exist, they are merely the
effects of the poison, for they are merely accidental ; but a sudden
coldness of the blood, and of course of the whole body, without any
obvious cause, is, perhaps, the best characteristic symptom of this pesti-
lential disease.

" In the first stage of Cholera, the ejections are, in general, passed
with great force; but as the disease advances, the intestines become
cold, and frequently so torpid, that even hot clysters can be retained
with great ease : consequently, in such cases, there is no necessity for
plugging the rectum, as recommended.

" The rice-water ejections, which are generally passed so copiously
in the first stage of Cholera, are, like every other secretion in the
body, derived entirely from the circulating current : and as the colour-
ing matter of the blood is, perhaps, the only ingredient which is not
drained off in this way, it naturally follows that a given quantity of
black Cholera blood must be more dense, and contain more colouring
matter and less serum, than is met with in the red blood of a healthy
person.* It is also a fact, that the arterial blood contains less air :

* The following are the proportions between healthy blood and that in Cholera, as
given by Dr. Thomson.

In the former, Cholera blood.

Serum, 55 Serum, - - - 32.34

Cra*aaroentum, 45 Crassamentum, - - 67.66

100 100.00


CHOLERA. 25

there is also less carbonic acid in the venous circulation, as was ascer-
tained many years ago by Dr. John Davy.

" We have seen that, in the early stage of Cholera, the contents of
the stomach and intestines are ejected from the system with great
force. This sudden and forcible contraction is probably caused by the
poisoned or acrid quality of the secreted fluids, which are in this way
removed from the body. The urine which is secreted at this period
is also expelled with considerable force, even though it is not secreted
in such quantity as to stimulate the bladder by distension; and this
firm contraction of the bladder, even on the last drops of the acrid fluid
which is expelled, is probably the chief cause why this organ is so firm
and contracted after death.

" We have seen that animal heat is generated and evolved in the
extreme texture all over the body, consequently, every thing that in-
creases the action of the extreme vessels adds to the quantity of ani-
mal heat. It is for this reason that I consider frictions with hot, dry
flannel, but particularly the application of large sinapisms to various
parts of the body, useful." — (A. Smith.)

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN COMMON CHOLERA MORBUS AND MALIGNANT
CHOLERA.

These are both affections of the stomach and intestines, and may
therefore be considered as modifications of the same disease ; but no-
thing like the late epidemic and Malignant Cholera has occurred in
this country. Several cases of cholera morbus of great violence are
related in the medical journals,* as having heretofore occurred in this
country as parallel to those of the late Epidemic Cholera; but as they
are few and solitary, they must be considered as sporadic cases of ex-
traordinary malignity.

The common cholera morbus prevails annually, most usually in
warm seasons, during the months of July, August, and September,
and is attended with puking, purging, and griping pains in the sto-
mach and bowels. The evacuations are bilious, and the vomiting of
green bile is evident to the sight and taste of the patient.

In the Malignant Cholera, bilious discharges are wanting, and the
evacuations up and down are thin and watery, and without fetor, al-
though there may be food and feculent matter in their commencement.
The liver and kidneys appear to be torpid in their ordinary secretions,
while the fluids of the body are determined to the intestine canal, and
ejected up and down in the form of dirty rice-water.

Cramps attend both forms of disease, but they are more violent and
fatal in the malignant form.

The Epidemic Cholera generally commences with mild symptoms,
and suddenly changes its character, running into a state c f collapse,
often attended with cramps, though sometimes not.

The common cholera morbus commences with violence, without

* See Bushe's Med. Chirurg. Bulletin.
4


26 APPENDIX.

premonitory symptoms, and seldom or never terminates with the symp-
toms of the last stage of the malignant form.

DIAGNOSIS OR DISCRIMINATION.

On this point I think it sufficient to refer to the symptoms and ap-
These are so marked that I think it almost impossible to commit a
mistake on this subject.

prognosis.

When the characteristic symptoms of the cold stage are all present
in a considerable degree, the prognosis is more unfavorable. Of the
intensity of the disease, perhaps the cold, as a single symptom, is the
best index. Recoveries are very rare of cases in which the respiration
is perfectly cold. Copious perspirations in the cold stage are fatal.
Complete stupor and total deafness are always fatal. Of the evacua-
tions, the brick coloured, and after them those of a fish odour, were of
the most unfavourable omen, and very generally fatal; the green
stools denoted great danger. Bile appearing in the matters purged or
vomited was a favourable sign. The return of warmth to the surface,
without a copious clammy perspiration, the diminution of its discolo-
ration, and of the decomposition of the features, justify an increase of
the hope for a favourable issue. When the resources of art are at
hand at the moment of explosion, we may generally anticipate a ter-
mination in health. Advanced age, or a dilapidated constitution, ren-
ders the prognosis very unfavourable. Between the age of puberty
and twenty years, the prognosis is generally favourable. Youth and
a good constitution are very favourable to a fortunate prognosis. The
return of the urinary secretion (which occurs only after reaction is
established) is of very favourable omen : also a breathing perspiration,
with a return of the healthful secretions of the mouth. Swelling of
the glands is very rare, so much so, that I am unable to form any
prognosis therefrom. I have seen epistaxis in only three; it was
slight; they all recovered. Pregnancy was unfavourable. Four
pregnant women were received at Neckeir Hospital. They all aborted;
three died, one recovered. Of five who gave suck, three recovered
and two died. But it is useless to dwell on this subject, as our prog-
nosis must be formed from the ensemble of symptoms, and not from
single ones separately viewed. Smith.

remarks against contagion or infection.

Contagion. I had intended, says Smith, to consider this question,
or fact— for I conceive it now put beyond controversy — at great
length, but it would occupy more space than I am willing to allot to
the subject. My opportunities for observation have been great, and I
have had the contagiousness of the disease at all times in view. I
have collected a mass of facts, many of which fell under my own ob-


CHOLERA.


27


servation, others were communicated to me by my friends : not one
of them goes to establish the contagiousness of Cholera.

" As this subject requires for its full elucidation minute and tedious
details of facts and circumstances, and as the few for which I have
room at present would, from their small number, be insufficient to de-
cide so important a point, I reserve the whole, to be presented in a di-
gested form, if it should hereafter appear to me worth while. I will,
however, mention a very few facts of a general nature, bearing on
this subject. Immediately on rising from my bed, to which I had
been confined a few days by some severe choleric symptoms, occa-
sioned by a change of diet, I resumed my duties in the hospital. For
weeks in succession I spent a considerable part of the twenty-four
hours in the choleric wards, examining the patients, performing very
frequently the offices of a common attendant, inhaling the breath of
the sick and dying. I passed some hours every day in the dead room,
making post mortem examinations, breathing the exhalations from the
dead bodies. I wounded myself, by running spicula of bones into two
of my fingers ; and notwithstanding the great liability to relapse, I en-
joyed good health. The Sisters of Charity at Necker Hospital, who
remained for months in succession, nearly all the time not devoted to
sleep, in attendance on the Cholera paiients, I believe all escaped any
severe choleric symptoms. The hospital is situated in one of the
streets ravaged with the greatest fury. Almost all the medical men
of Paris agree in the opinion that Cholera is not contagious : this
unanimity is of more weight, when we consider that this is almost
the only question pertaining to Cholera on which they accord. The
surgeons and physicians of Hotel Dieu, of St. Louis, of la Pitie', and
some other hospitals, have declared this opinion in the public journals.
The disease appeared in Paris first in a part of the city least in com-
munication with strangers, and before the disease existed in any other
part of the kingdom. The French physicians sent to Poland, are of
opinion that it is not contagious. At Greville-street hospital, in Lon-
don, which is exclusively appropriated to choleriques, and situated near
the middle of the city, I was told that not an individual employed in
the hospital, or in any way connected with it, had been attacked.

" In the absence of known causes, I have adopted the belief that
cholera is produced by some general, constitutional state of the atmos-
phere in those districts where it prevails. It is true that eudiometri-
cal experiments throw no light on this point; but this fact militates as
strongly against the existence of miasmata in general. No eudiome-
trical changes are discoverable in the air of wards crowded with cho-
leriques.

" Nothing can be expected from quarantine regulations, for, as if in
mockery of them, the cholera leaps over the sanatory cordons enforced
by an European police.

" It would be curious to trace several striking analogies, with some
dissimilarities, between the Spasmodic Cholera of the old world, and the
spotted fever of our eastern states, or the " cold plague in the bowels"
of our southern states. Some cases of adynamic fever, which Drs.
Latham and Burrows were kind enough to show me in their wards at


28 APPENDIX.

St. Bartholomew's Hospital, presented the same symptoms as I have
seen in some cases of spotted fever in the eastern states of our own
country. So complete is the resemblance, that I feel confident that
the disease I saw in London is identical with that which has prevailed
epidemically on the Connecticut River at different times, as I am in-
formed, since 1805 or 1807. These gentlemen told me, that fevers
of this type have been of common occurrence at London for several
months, i. e. coexisting with epidemic cholera. These facts I think
interesting, as they show a somewhat similar epidemic constitution of
the air in some parts of our country, and in some of those countries
where cholera now prevails.

" I saw a cholerique whose body was covered with small well de-
fined petechia?, extending to his thighs, while these, as well as his arms
and legs, presented large patches of diffuse lividity."

Dr. Zoubkoff, of Moscow, (Russia,) it appears, had been a firm be?
liever in contagion, until the prevalence of the disease in that city.
He tells us, (p. 10,) that in the hospital (Yakimanka) he saw, " to his
great astonishment, that all the attendants, all the soldiers, handled the
sick, supported their heads while they vomited, placed them in the
bath, and buried the dead ; always without precaution, and always
without being attacked by the Cholera." He saw that even the breath
of Cholera patients was inhaled by others with impunity. He saw that
throughout the district of which he had charge, the disease did not
spread through the crowded buildings, or in families where some had
been attacked ; and that exposure to exciting causes determined the
attack in many instances. He saw all this, gives the public the be-
nefit of the copious notes which he made of details as to persons,
places, Sec, and now ridicules the idea of contagion in Cholera.

A very large majority of physicians and surgeons of India are de-
cidedly of the same opinion ; their observations led them to the fol-
lowing inferences :

1st. That medical men, hospital assistants, &c. were not more lia-
ble to take the disease than the rest of the community ; in many in-
stances less so.

2d. That it was not communicated by the clothing and beds of the
sick to healthy subjects, or even to those labouring unltr the disease.

3d. Regiments, marching from one station to another, get it all of a
sudden, on reaching a certain spot, and the disease as suddenly disap-
pears in a day or two, after changing their ground.

4th. It appears suddenly in a place, continues a week or two, and
as suddenly disappears.

5th. Particular parts of a station, or camp, are attacked in prefe-
rence to others, when the communication is unrestricted.

6th. Banks of rivers and water-courses are more obnoxious than
high and dry situations.

7th. On a change of the weather, the disease is sometimes arrested.

8th. The disease passes by intermediate towns and villages, and
seizes on more distant ones ; a fact inexplicable on the principle of
contagion.


CHOLERA. , ' 29

9th. Seclusion from, and non-intercourse with, the infected, seldom
or ever afford security against the disease.

" Instances of entire immunity, after constant intercourse with the
sick, say Condee and Bell, might be greatly multiplied, both in India
and Europe.

" The women who washed the clothes of the patients in the hospi-
tal at Orenberg, were entirely exempt from the disease. A like im-
munity was enjoyed by the attendants who helped the patients in and
out of the bath, rubbed their bodies, dressed blisters, &c. in different
Russian and other hospitals.

" The physician general to the town hospital of Dantzic says, that
there were five waiters always near the patients; eight men were em-
ployed in rubbing and bathing ; nine medical men visited the patients,
of whom one was always in the room in the day time, two watching
every night ; no one of these twenty-two persons fell ill.

" I have visited," says Dr. White, " the Gateshead hospital, during
the time I had the honour of being physician to that institution, under
all circumstances of physical depression. I have breathed the atmosr
phere of its apartments for hours together; yet I, the attendants, the
nurses, all equally exposed, have equally escaped. Not a single in-
dividual in the profession has sustained an attack since the disorder
has prevailed."

REMARKS IN FAVOUR OF CONTAGION OR INFECTION.

Jonnes asserts, that the Cholera was brought to Muscat, in Arabia,
by the English East Indiamen ; and Dr. Salinas reports that it was
a vessel bound from India, which in 1821 carried this plague into the
port of Bassorah, from which it spread from town to town, even to the
coast of Syria. Almost every authority, which we possess upon the
point, declares that the Cholera reached Astracan by a brig which
came from Baku, on the western coast of the Caspian sea. Baku was
unhealthy when the brig sailed ; she lost eight of her crew upon the
voyage, and Cholera first appeared in Astracan a day or two after her
arrival in the Lazaretto, to which the sick of the vessel had been
brought. The following extract from the pen of Dr. Solomov is rather
long, but it bears so strongly on the present subject that we cannot re-
frain from laying it before our readers. Dr. Solomov is a staff phy-
sician, settled in Astracan ; his statements, like all other statements,
must be taken as coloured necessarily by his opinions. " After the
27th July, it attacked the suburbs, then the nearest villages, and then
gradually extended over the whole government. After the 29th, it
proceeded through the Cossac stations, and the town of Enotaevsk on
the high way to Moscow, up the stream of the Volga ; its extension in
this direction evidently accompanied the fugitives from the places suc-
cessively attacked. In the town of Enotaevsk it spread with the ar-
rival of a sick boor ; on the 29th, a barge arrived at Tchernojar, 150
miles up the Volga, with several rowers on board, who were ill of the
Cholera. On the 8th of August the disease began to prevail among
the inhabitants, then passed across the river among the neighbouring


30 APPENDIX.

Kiro-his, as well as upward to the villages of Solodnikovsko and
Vaisoka; in one of which the first attacked was a military prisoner,
who had been exposed to the disease. On the 25th of July, the epi-
demic also began at Krasnojar, situated on the northern mouth of the
Volga, twenty miles from Astracan ; and it first seized a private of
invalids, and a girl thirteen years of age, who had both recently come
from that capital. While the disease prevailed in Astracan, some
fishermen were there from Makovsky and Schitinsky, two places on
the shore of the Caspian, where the Volga opens into it. These men,
terrified at the progress of the epidemic, hastened home to place them-
selves as they imagined, in security. But they had already imbib-
ed the poison ; some fell sick on the way, others after arriving at
their homes ; and the disease soon spread throughout the community
to which they belonged." Thousands of those, who were employed
in navigating the Volga, made their escape from Astracan as soon as
the disease broke forth ; in little more than a month it had ascended
as high as Nijni-Novogorod, and in all the intermediate districts
which it visited, its first victims were either the navigators of the
Volga, or individuals come from places where it had already raged.

When the disease visited Manilla, in 1820, the captains of the ves-
sels which lay in the harbour forbade them all intercourse with the
town ; and in this way, it would appear, did they all escape. When
the Mauritius became affected in 1816, M. Chamaret de Chozal shut
up all his family, cut off all communication with the diseased, and
thus remained exempt from its influence. M. Guys, the French con-
sul, closed up his household in a similar way, within his garden at
Tripoli ; all the Europeans who were in the town followed his exam-
ple, and none of them were attacked. M. Keraudren observes, " that
in 1822, M. de Lesseps, the French consul at Aleppo, took refuge
with all who chose to accompany him, in a garden at a small distance
from the town, which was surrounded by a wall and a wide trench,
and had only two doors by which it could be entered. His little colo-
ny amounted to, at least, two hundred individuals ; every thing which
was admitted to them from without, underwent a strict quarantine,
and not a ,single case of disease occurred ; while in eighteen days
4,000 perished in the town." Dr. Loder states, " that the authorities
at Sarepta interdicted all intercourse with Astracan and Nijni-Novo-
gorod, while they were infected, and Sarepta was preserved." It is
narrated by Dr. Solomov, " that many gardens in the neighbourhood
of Astracan remained unaffected, by discontinuing communication with
the diseased ; and that many villages in the lordships of Smirnov,
Belcetov, and Prince Colgoruki, escaped by the same precaution. A
little set of villages at Darmala-Gubeewa threw a similar cordon sani-
taire around their habitations, and escaped, while the disease was
prowling throughout the neighbourhood. The school of military
cadets at Moscow was saved by cutting them off from all correspon-
dence with the citizens ; several German colonies in the government
of btratof, and a Moravian colony on the banks of the Volga, were
similarly preserved.

Such are the principal facts upon which the contagionists ground


CHOLERA.


31


the doctrine which they advocate ; and the authorities which they
advance to add influence to their evidence, are entitled to much
attention.

Drs. Scott and Stuart, the principal members of the Medical Board
at Bombay, say, that the Cholera appears to them capable of being
" transported from place to place, as in cases of ordinary contagion or
infection ; and also to possess the power of propagating itself by the
same means that other contagions do." The physicians of the two
divisions of the army at Bengal deem it to be contagious : and from
Jamieson's report it will be seen that the Medical Board of Calcutta
declares, that by the accumulation of men into one place it may be-
come contagious. Dr. Kennedy observes, " that, to the best of my
judgment, I know no character belonging to any contagious disease,
which Cholera does not appear to me to possess ; and that, if it be
not contagious, I know no other disease which I would be inclined to
consider so." The Bombay Report states, " that we are enabled to
trace the disease as it is creeping along from village to village on that
island, (Salsette,) precisely in the same way ; that is, by the arrival
of people affected with the disease from places where it was known to
prevail ; and we are assured that there are some small villages on
that island, which from want of this sort of communication, or from
some other cause, have, after a lapse of four months, hitherto escaped
entirely." The Medical Board of Russia say, that it is "a contagion
sui generis, less severe perhaps than the plague, and requiring a pre-
disposition to make it effective. The Central Sanitary Commission
in France advocate the same view; and the Superior Council, which
has been since erected, have confirmed their judgment. The Persian
and Turkish governments have acted under the same conviction ; all
the continental powers have unanimously advocated the necessity of
quarantine. The four Austrian physicians, who were sent out to
Russia, have reported to their government that it spreads by conta-
gion ; Drs. Walker, Barry, and Russel, give the same information ;
the French Commissioners are unanimous in the same view ; Drs.
Makartienne, Martinengo, Meunier, Angelin, and Salinas, who have
witnessed Cholera in different countries, are contagionists ; Sir Wil-
liam Crichton and Dr. Loder, physicians to Nicholas, are strong ad-
vocates to this doctrine ; the Russian General Diebitsch, was so con-
vinced of its contagious nature, that when Shezel, his physician, in-
formed him of the nature of his disease, he ordered all in his presence,
with the exception of the medical men, to leave the room ; the Polish
general, Skrynecki, is of the same opinion. Immediately after the
battle of Iguinie, Cholera was seen for the first time in the Polish
army. The medical officers were immediately set to work, and by
great exertions succeeded in extinguishing it ; but the battle of Ostro-
lenka brought them again in contact with the Russians, the disease
again appeared, and from that fatal victory the English ambassador,
Lord Heytesbury ,at the Russian court, hesitates not to pronounce this
disease contagious; finally, all the French consuls, Lessops, Guys,
Reynaud, and Gamba, are grounded in the same faith.

We have thus given the opinion, facts, and arguments both in fa-


32 APPENDIX.

vour and against contagion ; and the reader is left to form his own
opinion on the subject. '.

It appears to me that the Cholera ordinarily is not infectious ; that is
it is not conveyed by contact like the plague ; but from many facts
and circumstances, it would seem that it may be communicated much
in the same manner as is yellow, or typhus fever ; that is, by constant-
ly inhaling the effluvia, from those labouring under the disease, and par-
ticularly in close, filthy and unventilated apartments, and under, per-
haps, some predisposing cause or causes, such as fatigue, errors in diet,
&c. It is a fact, that while most persons have attended those labouring
under the disease, and escaped, others have taken it, after exposure in
a striking manner, even in places where the disease had not previously
prevailed.


DISSECTION.


Dissections of those who die of the Cholera, show that the mucous
membrane of the intestines is the seat of the disease. It exhibits every
mark of excessive irritation, with more or less inflammation, accord-
ing to the violence and duration of the disease. The liver and gall
bladder is found in a very morbid condition, but no other organs ex-
hibit any symptoms of injury, except those arising from sympathy.
One writer states, that when the disease has been protracted, slight
patches of red are here and there observed, and which assume a very
dark appearance ; and the lining membrane is rendered so soft as to be
readily scraped away by the nail. He says, that the redness of the
intestine corresponded with the external discoloration, and both were
in proportion to the drain of fluids from the body : and to the rapidity
and violence of the disease, from this discolorature extended in many
cases to the uterus, bladder, and even to the bones, all which symp-
toms exhibit unequivocally, that the proximate cause of the disease, is
the action, or irritation of a most deadly poison, or acid on the mucous
membrane of the alimentary canal.


COMMON PRACTICE.


. It is impossible for me to give the practice which has been pursued
in Cholera by physicians generally. There are as many different
medicines, as there are physicians. Some gave large quantities of
ice, some on the contrary, made use of boiling hot water; some rub-
bed a pound of mercurial ointment into the system ; some opened the
veins, and injected salt and water into them ; and the treatment, in
short, principally consisted in a series of experiments, till in some
parts the hospitals were beset with a mob, in consequence of their in-
human treatment. But, generally speaking, bleeding, mercury, &c.
were the principal articles relied upon in the treatment of the com-
plaint ; and although these were pretty sure soon to prove fatal, yet
most physicians persisted in using them.


CHOLERA. 33

REFORMED PRACTICE.

1st. In the premonitory or incipient stage. The following corres-
pondence will show the treatment in this stage of the complaint, and
partly in the. confirmed stage.

CIRCULAR.

To Dr. "W. Beach, 10th Ward Medical Station.

New-York, 10th August, 1832.
Sir — -I beg to ask you what treatment you have found most suc-
cessful in the premonitory stage of Cholera, say diarrhoea, or uneasi-
ness or pain in the bowels ; and whether such treatment has been
uniformly successful, and if not, by what circumstances it ha*s been
rendered ineffectual ? Be pleased also to state what number you have
preceded by diarrhoea.

In behalf of the Special Medical Council,

ALEX. H. STEVENS, M. D. President.

ANSWER.

New-York, August 15tk, 1832.
Tenth Ward Medical Station.

To Alexander H. Stevens, M. D. President of the S. M. C.

Sir — I have received a note from the S. M. C. requesting me to
answer some interrogations respecting the Cholera.

First, " What treatment have you found most successful in the pre-
monitory stage of Cholera, say diarrhoea, pain or uneasiness in the
bowels, and whether such treatment has been uniformly successful?"

In answer to this question I have to state, that the treatment pur-
sued at this station has been attended, invariably, with success.

The following recipe constitutes almost our only remedy for nausea,
tomiting, pain in the bowels, with flatulence, and diarrhoza.

Take of Rhubarb, (Rhei.)

Sal iEratus, (Bi Carlonas Potasscr, pul.)
Peppermint plant, (Mentha Pepperita, pul.)

2 Scruples of each. — Mix.

Add half a pint of boiling water, sweeten with loaf sugar, then add
a table spoonful of best brandy; of this, give to an adult, a table
spoonful every hour until it acts as a laxative, or moderately upon the
bowels. In the intervals, diluent drinks, such as infusions of catnip
and spearmint are directed to be taken.

This preparation is sufficient to remove the diarrhoea. Where there
is considerable pain, we have found the addition of aromatics attended

* See Neutralizing Mixture, under the head of Pharmacy.
5


34 APPENDIX.

with additional benefit; to the same composition is added, of cinna-
mon and cloves, pul, a a. {Equal parts; one scruple.)

We have found the administration of diaphoretic medicine very
much to aid in the removal of the disease ; bathing the feet, with the
use of the drinks above mentioned, are in general sufficient to cause
perspiration. • ,

In neglected and protracted cases of diarrhoea, when the patient has
complained of great pain,- restlessness, want of sleep, &c., 10 gr. of
diaphoretic powders has been directed to be given at bed time.

The following' tincture to be applied over the region of the ab-
domen.

Take of Capsicum, two table spoonfuls.

Brandy, 1 pint : simmer a few moments and apply warm,

with flannel, and repeat often.


In reply to which I have to state that the aggregate number has

been, up to the present time, since the epidemic, (a period of 40 odd

days,) seven hundred and eighty.*

Third interrogation. — " Have you seen any case of Cholera not
preceded by diarrhoea ?"

In reply to which I have to inform, that in a majority of the cases
of Cholera, and very generally, an attack of the disease has been pre-
ceded by diarrhoea, but not invariably so. We have fully and clearly
ascertained that some cases have no such premonitory symptoms ; but
these have been of a very malignant and fatal character, and confined
principally to the aged and intemperate.

In concluding this communication, a sense of duty constrains me to
state, that much of the success attending our practice must be imputed
to the promptness, persevering industry, and indefatigable exertions of
our worthy Alderman, Mr. John Palmer, and Mr. John Minuse, the
deputy Warden, in visiting from house to house, to obtain the earliest
information of every individual labouring under the premonitory
symptoms of Cholera, and immediately reporting the same to this sta-
tion, which has often enabled us to arrest the disease in its incipient
or forming stage ; a measure which cannot be too strongly recommend-
ed to our municipal authorities. A sense of duty also constrains me
to render a tribute of respect to the medical gentlemen, or assistants,
associated with me, for their untiring zeal and laborious exertions, by
day and by night, in discharging their duties to the sick.t In con-
clusion, it may not be irrelevant or unsatisfactory to add, that the
health of the physicians who have attended at our station has not
been impaired, notwithstanding their assiduous attention (and often-
times in the capacity of nurses) to the most distressed and malignant

" This answer was given before the epidemic had subsided.

t A tribute of respect is due to those physicians who were associated with me du-
ring the epidemic, for the hazard they incurred ; their zeal, industry, and untiring ex-
ertions by day and by night, in visiting, attending, and often nursing patients labor-
ing under the disease. While many elderly physicians of the old school fled in dismay
irom the pestilence, abandoning their former patrons or patients, these physicians, most
ot whom were young, remained at their posts, and most faithfully and honourably d»-


CHOLERA.


35


cases, laying in filthy, un ventilated, and loathsome apartments and
situations. All which is respectfully submitted.

W. BEACH, M. D.
Physician of the 10th Ward Medical Station.

2J. In the confirmed stage of the complaint. The indication of cure
in the confirmed stage of Cholera will be first to neutralize the poison,
and second, to expel it from the system by the various secretions, and
principally the skin.

The pathology or nature of the complaint from the commencement,
shows the existence of some specific poison, and hence it is obvious
that our first object should be to neutralize, and then expel it from
the system by the various outlets or secretions. To effect the first, we
give an alkali, the bi-carbonate of potash, combined with a purgative,
as directed under the head of premonitory symptoms, in order, first, to
destroy the poison, and second, to remove as speedily as possible the
offensive matter from the stomach and intestines, in the manner that
nature generally indicates. Not only must the poison be thrown from
the system by the intestines, but by the skin; and therefore the patient
must be thrown into a free perspiration as soon as possible ; to effect
which, let the feet and legs be immediately immersed in hot ley water,
and continued fifteen or twenty minutes. At the same time, the pa-
tient must take a strong tea made of the peppermint plant, and two
large teaspoonfuls of the sudorific drops may be given in a tumbler of
the same. To be repeated every hour till perspiration take place.
One quart should be taken in as short time as possible. Let bricks
be heated, inclosed in muslin dipped in vinegar, and applied to the
feet and sides.

This will assist to remove the pain and spasms of the stomach, to
check the vomiting, promote a discharge of urine, allay the irritation
of the intestines, and what is of inconceivable importance, to dilute
the morbid fluid, and expel it through the medium of the skin by ex-
citing a copious perspiration, while it will return the accumulated and
congested blood from the centre to the surface, or in other words, will
equalize the circulation or produce reaction.

I know of no single article, (an alkali and rhubarb excepted,) so ex-
ceedingly valuable in the Cholera, as the simple peppermint plant.
It appears to have a specific effect in the complaint, different from any
other agent.

I have several times been attacked with nausea, retching, or vomit-
ing, with horrid sensations at the stomach and other parts ; when drink-
charged their duty. A discerning public, it is to be hoped, will render them that praise
and credit to which they are entitled. And 1 have deemed it proper to record the names
of those who attended at the Tenth Ward Medical Station during the epidemic.
Doctors J. B. Day, from New- Jersey.

Chevers, City of New- York.

D. Carpenter, City of New-York.

Martin Lewis, State of Maine.

Oatman, Vermont.

Warren Alford, North Carolina.

H. D. Sheppard, West New-Jersey.

Belcher, City of ISew-York, of the old school.


JJg APPKNIMX.


ing freely of a tea of this herb, all these unpleasant symptoms have


soon vanished


« Drinks taken into the stomach, dilute and weaken the power of
any irritating matters that may be in the alimentary canal, and enter-
in^ the blood through the lacteal vessels, furnish the exhaling vessels
of°he skin, kidneys, lungs, and alimentary canal with a vehicle to
assist them to throw out and carry off, the subtile poisonous effluvia
that has been taken in by the absorbents, is mixt with the whole mass
of blood, and is acting on the whole nervous system, and, m a word,
upon the whole body. Except the system is regularly and abundantly
supplied with water, and simple drinks, the cause of disease, the nox-
ious matters in the blood cannot be removed ; no other remedies m
nature can do it." ,

The first preparation given, viz., the neutralizing mixture, in gene-
ral will soon allay the vomiting and purging; and our next object will
be as before intimated, to expel the poison by the different excretions,
and which must be effected in the most prompt manner, as it may lite-
rally be said in this terrible disease, " that delays are dangerous." If
the symptoms do not readily yield to this treatment, let the patient be
immersed in a vapour or hot bath, and afterward the body well rubbed.
The cramps which are a characteristic symptom of Cholera, must
claim particular attention. If the foregoing means are put into exe-
cution, and perspiration is promoted, the cramps will subside ; but in
very malignant cases, this desirable object cannot always be accom-
plished, when it will become necessary to resort to other means.

We may first rub the patient with a strong tincture of capsicum and
red pepper, as has been before mentioned, applied very warm, and if
these do not control the cramps, apply dry friction, the rubbing to be
continued without intermission.

To alleviate the cramps, says Smith, I know nothing equal to fric-
tions. After a very extensive use of vesicatories and sinapisms, my
opinion of them is not very favourable. They interrupt the employ-
ment of frictions, and are far less efficacious than the latter. In the
severest cases they do not draw ; when they do, they are painful with-
out controlling the cramps. It is true that frictions require frequently
to be repeated, but the relief afforded by them is so great, that the pa-
tient often requests them, when his prostration renders him regardless
of almost every thing else. To them as a powerful means of establish-
ing reaction I have adverted.

Let the following preparation be given, which I have named the
choleric and antispasmodic mixture.

Take of Camphorated mixture, or spirits, four ounces.
Essence of peppermint, four ounces.
Tincture of capsicum, one drachm.
Syrup of ginger, half an ounce — mix.
Of this, let one table spoonful be taken every one fourth or half
hour, or two hours, according to the urgency of the symptoms. To be
accompanied with the use of copious draughts of thin indian meal
gruel, in which has been dissolved a little sal ceratus.

If this mixture does not soon lessen the cramps, and improve the con-


CHOLERA. 37

dition of the patient, an anondyne may be given ; a good form of which
is the black drop, a proper dose in general, will be about twenty of them.
It is best to disperse with opium, as much as possible, as it is apt to
retain the poison in the system ; but under certain circumstances, it is
beneficial. Used in the form of injections, we have often found it
exceedingly valuable. It has allayed the vomiting and cramps, when
other means seemed only to mitigate them. But the other ingredients
of the injection or clyster, contribute much to this effect, no doubt.
Let the following be used. Take a pint of the mucilage or tea of the
slippery elm bark, add half a pint of molasses, and a gill of sweet oil, a
tea spoonful of sal ceratus, and half an ounce of laudanum. Let the
whole be given at once if possible.

While these means are employed, fomentations may be applied to
the stomach and bowels.

Let hops be simmered in vinegar, enclosed in flannel, and applied
from the stomach to the lower part of the abdomen, and extending to
each side, to be applied as hot or warm as the patient can bear, and
to be often renewed.

Salt has been highly recommended. After making trial, says Dr.
Tappen, of all the different emetics which have been recommended, I
confine myself to the solution of muriate of soda ; (common salt ;) one
tablespoonful dissolved in a pint of lukewarm water, administered at
one dose, very effectually relieves the stomach when oppressed with the
kind of matter noticed.

In 1831, says Dr. Barry, two German physicians had charge of the
Custom House Hospital at St. Petersburg, in which there were in all,
during the epidemic, thirty cases of Cholera ; and of this number they
lost three patients, and twenty-seven recovered. I mention this fact
on the authority of Sir William Crichton : who states also, that, at the
request of the Emperor, he had communicated this practice to the
army physicians in Poland. They gave two tablespoonsful of com-
mon salt in six ounces of the water at once, and one spoonful of the
same, cold, every hour subsequently ; by whom it had been found to
be very advantageous.

The muriate of soda, (common salt,) was the remedy chiefly relied
upon ; and by way of having a theory of their own, they used it as an
emetic, and gave it in the beginning in such doses that it produced
vomiting, after which they used it in smaller quantities ; and to this,
in all probability, they were entirely indebted for their great success.

One of the physicians at our station states, that he administered the
tincture of lobelia, in tablespoonful doses, every twenty minutes, till
free vomiting took place, and cured one case in a state of collapse,
when all hopes of recovery appeared gone. It was given merely as an
experiment. I have since been informed that one or two have used this
article with great success, but this is the only case, I believe, in which

The difficult point in the treatment of Cholera is the producing of
a complete and free reaction. When this is fully developed, though
the state of the patient is attended with danger of life, and requires a


39 APPENDIX.^

very careful and timeous administration of remedies, we may in gene-
ral pronounce him recoverable.

TREATMENT OF THE COLD OR COLLAPSED STAGE.

If the precursors have been neglected, or if the disease opens by the
cold stage, a new set of symptoms is ushered in, infinitely more for-
midable, and far more difficult to be successfully combated.

On approaching the bedside of a patient, cold as marble, and pulse-
less, with universal and extreme prostration, agonized with horrid
cramps, the surface of his body shrunk, and deserted as it were by the
fluids, to supply the great and incessant drain of vomiting and purging,
several indications present themselves to be fulfilled. The most im-
portant, indeed the essential indication of this stage, is to restore
warmth and action to the surface, in other words, to establish reaction.
At the same time, we must obviate those symptoms which torture and
exhaust the patient. To accomplish these ends, the patient should be
put in a warm bed.

There must be administered the same medicines, and the same treat-
ment pursued as has been recommended in the confirmed stage, with
very little if any variation. Frictions repeated from time to time, con-
tribute powerfully to restore warmth and action to the surface. If
practicable, let the patient be immediately immersed in a bath, as hot
as possible, in which a pound of pearl ash has been dissolved ; then let
the body be rubbed dry, and inclosed in flannel blankets and put into
bed. Hot bricks as before mentioned may also be applied, and hot or
warm injections or clysters be administered, and if possible, let large
quantities of hot peppermint tea be given.

Sometimes if the external heat has been too great, it causes distress.
When this occurs, the temperature must be somewhat diminished, and
the most heating or stimulating drinks given internally, to raise the
" inward, above the otwardheat." As soon as the patient can swallow,
let the antispasmodic mixture be given as before directed.

Dr. Seavy has the following remarks on this subject :

" When violent symptoms manifest themselves, the one which re-
quires to be first attended to is, the great coldness of the skin and ex-
tremities.

"This drives the blood from the vessels of the skin, distending those
which are internal, and surcharging the brain, and all the vital organs ;
causing oppression in the region of the stomach, and distress and pain
in the bowels. It is of the greatest importance immediately to remove
this symptom and equalize the circulation, i. e. to restore a free circu-
lation of the blood to the surface and extremities. To fulfil this inten-
tion, the most certain and effectual method is to place the patient in
bed, and make it hot with steam, so as to envelope the whole body of
the patient ; let two persons be appointed to attend upon him constant-
ly, ana rub the limbs and body continually with cloths, till the natural
warmth and circulation is restored, and sweating begins. If the natu-
ral warmth of the skin and extremities, and free circulation of the


CHOLERA. 39

blood is not restored, and sweating produced, the disease will have a
fatal termination.

" The power of heat and frictions combined is the greatest that can
be employed to restore the lost balance of the circulation, and remove
the congestive or oppressive state of the internal organs.

" The length of time that will be necessary to keep the body immers-
ed in hot vapour, and to apply frictions, depends on circumstances. It
should be continued till the body will keep warm, and the circulation
continue free without these means.

"In cases of the spotted fever, otherwise called the cold plague, (a
disease more fatal than the Cholera itself, in proportion to the number
attacked with it,) which prevailed in some parts of this country in 1808,
1810, and 1812, it was found essential, in order to save the patient, to
keep the bed hot with steam during 48 or 60 hours. If the heat and
frictions were discontinued short of that time, the patient would be-
come cold, like a piece of iron taken out of the fire, and soon die."

In a word, the leading indication in the cure of Cholera, either in
the confirmed or collapsed stage, is to establish reaction, or in other
words to promote perspiration, which returns the poison with the blood
from the centre to the surface. When this takes place, which elimi-
nates the poison by the natural excretions of the system, the vomiting,
purging, and cramps are gradually diminished, or entirely subside ;
and these ends are effected, not by any single medicine, or exclusive
method of treatment, but by the combination of all the agents and
means detailed.

STAGE OF REACTION.

Sometimes when reaction takes place, it is very feeble and imper-
fect, at other times, it is excessive or too great. In the former instance,
nature must be assisted or aided, while in the latter, her action must
be restrained, which objects must be accomplished by treating the
symptoms on general principles.

Sometimes typhoid symptoms supervene, which also requires appro-
priate treatment. In a word, particular symptoms must be treated by
particular remedies.

Dr. Barry, in a letter from St. Petersburg, July 20th, 1S31, thus de-

" When the first stage safely passes, very rarely indeed, not five
times in a hundred does the patient return to health without passing
through a dangerous fever, which not unfrequently assumes a typhoid
character, with reddish, brown, dry tongue; stupour; suffused eyes;
constipated and tender belly ; dark sordes about the lips and teeth.
The pulse, however, is generally quicker, and the skin hotter than in
primitive typhus. In this state many die from the fourth to the se-
venth day, and even later. In other cases the fever is mild, and goes-
off within the fourth day by copious perspiration." The same symp-
toms occurred in cases in this city.


40 APrENDlI.

CONVALESCENCE.

Sometimes when the patient becomes convalescent, his complete re-
covery is very much protracted, and great care is necessary in order
to prevent a relapse. Fatigue and exposure of every kind must be
avoided.

When the treatment which I have detailed has been vigor-
ously put into execution, before the disease has too far advanced, the
patient will recover, and as soon as the circulation is restored, or re-
action established, we may predict a favourable termination, or pro-
nounce the patient out of danger. We have tried every kind of prac-
as a vast number of boasted remedies, and we have found this the only
judicious, safe, and effectual course of treatment, and while they were
dying in every direction around us, under an opposite practice, we have
had the pleasure of seeing nearly every person recover, except the most
malignant cases, and such it seems as impossible to cure, as though a
cannon ball was shot through the body.

I regret that I cannot give an accurate statement of the precise num-
ber that we cured at our station ; owing to a throng of patients, and
other causes, a proper register was not kept. But one of the gradu-
ates of our school who practised in another part of the city, has been
more accurate in his account, and he has furnished me with a state-
ment which I here subjoin. His treatment was precisely the same as
ours ; and the proportion cured as far as I can ascertain, the same.

I addressed the following note to him :

Doctor Hopkins,

Sir— As you have had considerable experience in the prevailing
epidemic, please inform me what your success has been ; first, in pre-
monitory symptoms ; second, in Spasmodic Cholera j third, the num-
ber of cases you have treated in each stage.

Compliance with this request, will oblige yours,

W. BEACH.

New-York, Sept. 19th, 1832.

New-York, Sept. 2(M, 1832.
W. Beach, M. D.

Dear Sir — In compliance with your request, I subjoin a concise
statement of the success which has attended my practice, up to the
present period, during the prevailing epidemic.

In Spasmodic Cholera I have had thirty-seven cases, of which tea
were malignant, and eight in a state of collapse. In the premonitory
or first stage, I have had about one hundred and twenty, in every case
of which my treatment has proved a sovereign remedy. In the thirty-
seven cases which I treated in the confirmed stage, all recovered ex-
cept six, and to some of these I was called when it was too late to

Yours very respectfully,

GEORGE W. HOPKINS, M. D.

By comparing our practice with other physicians, I find it infinitely
lupenor, y G. W. H.


CHOLERA. 41

PREVENTION.


1st. Quarantine regulations. Attempts have been made to prevent
the spread of Cholera by means of quarantine regulations, but they
have proved entirely useless. We have no evidence that they have
ever prevented the disorder from spreading, and this must appear ob-
vious when we reflect that it is communicated by atmospheric influ-
ence, and not by contact or contagion, except perhaps in some few in-
stances under peculiarly unfavourable circumstances. Like yellow
fever it requires a peculiar state of the air to propagate it.

2d. Filth. It has been shown that filth contributes much to the
production of this disease.

The streets should be daily cleansed of all offal, dirt, and any impu-
rities whatever, and the gutters frequently washed with running
water. In no yard or open lot should any collections of dirt, or animal,
or vegetable matters, be allowed to remain, nor any ditch or pool be
left unfilled with earth. No removable obstruction to a freer ventila-
tion of courts, and alleys, and narrow streets, should be tolerated, and
all persons should be immediately removed from such places as soon
as the Cholera appears. To this precaution Philadelphia probably
owes the preservation of many of its inhabitants.

3d. Those which regard the habitation. The cellars should be kept
dry, and the sinks cleaned out, or occasionally water with a little chlo-
ride of lime, introduced into them. This substance should be sprin-
kled over the floors of those cellars more particularly, through which
there is not a free current of air. Dissolved in water, with the addi-
tion of a little quicklime, it should be applied as a wash to the walls
of cellars, closets, and rooms in which many persons work together.
Free ventilation of the sitting and bed rooms should be enjoined and
practised — the floors dry-scrubbed, and, as well as the bedding and
bed clothes, aired at least once a day. Arrangements should be made
for suitable ventilation and constant renewal of the air in all kinds of
rooms or halls in which a number of persons congregate together, as
in schools, churches, manufactories, &c. The air should be intro-
duced in such a way as not to blow in a current upon the persons in
the room, or to suddenly chill them after being heated, and nothing
perhaps contributes more to purify the air than fire ; hence they should
be kept up occasionally.

Persons. In order to prevent the disease, personal cleanliness should
be observed ; likewise fatigue should be avoided. All crude vegeta-
tables and fruit, particularly such kinds as easily ferment : sudden
transitions from heat to cold should be guarded against. Warm cloth-
ing should be used, and above all universal temperance in eating and
drinking. Ardent spirits of any kind should not be drank ; the feet
must be kept warm, and insensible perspiration be kept up. This
contributes more than any other means to throw off the poison which
is constantly accumulating in the system, and if checked, is very lia-
ble to bring on the complaint. A physician in the West Indies has
the following judicious remarks upon this subject :

6


42 APPENDIX.

'■ " A free perspiration is the surest preservative of health in a hot
climate. In carrying on duty at St. Domingo, I was exposed to a
good deal of riding, being generally six or eight bo-ra ci horse-
back every day ; and consequently I perspired very freely. 1 never
wore flannel, but made use of cotton shirts. It was not unusual for
me to shift five times a day ; sometimes oftener, each shirt being
drenched in perspiration. To this profusion of it I attribute my safe-
ty, amidst so much exhalation of miasmata, for so long a time,
drank freely of lemonade, sangoree, tamarind water, weak wine and
water, and other diluent compositions ; and when night came I was al-
ways prepared to enjoy my repose."


In concluding this part of the subject, I shall insert the following
report.

" The medical commission appointed by the sanitary committee to
visit Canada, for the purpose of making investigations concerning the
epidemic disease prevailing there, which will be laid before the com-
mittee in a few days, present the following general conclusions they
have formed as the result of their observations, which they flatter
themselves will tend to allay the public anxiety.

" 1st. The disease so lately an epidemic in Montreal and Quebec,
and which now prevails in the city of New-York, and is extending
throughout the country, is Malignant Cholera, the same that has ra-
vaged and spread its devastations over Europe, under the name of
Asiatic and Spasmodic Cholera.

" 2d. That they have not been able to ascertain any positive unequi-
vocal fact to justify a belief that it is a disease communicated by those
affected with it, or is one of importation.

" 3d. That during the prevalence of the epidemic constitution or in-
fluence, a general predisposition exists in the whole community, from
which very few individuals are exempt, productive of a liability to the
disease.

" 4th. That this predisposition is manifested by embarrassed and
difficult digestion, sense of heat, fulness, uneasiness or pain in the ab-
domen, irregularity of bowels, a furred and pasty tongue, with fre-
quency of cramps or constrictions in the muscles of the extremities,
especially at night.

"5th. That this state of predisposition will not give rise to an
attack of the disease, without the application of an exciting cause.

" 6th. That the exciting causes of the disease are moral excitants,
especially fear and anger; intemperance in the use of fermented and
spirituous liquors, or in eating, overloading the stomach ; acid drinks,
or large draughts of cold water; the use of crude indigestible food,
whether animal or vegetable, particularly the latter ; excessive exer-
tion or fatigue in the heat of the day ; exposure to the night air, sit-
ting in currents of air, and particularly sleeping with too light cover-
ing, and with the windows raised, except the rooms are very small and
confined. Most of the attacks occur in the night, from 11 or 12
o clock to 3 or 4 in the morning.


CHOLERA. *3

" 7th. That prudence in living during the epidemic period, which
continues from six weeks to three months, the wearing of flannel, par-
ticularly on. the body, keeping the feet warm and dry, the avoidance of
improper food and drinks, tranquillity of mind and body, are almost
certain guarantees against the assaults of the disease, and disarm the
pestilence of its malignity.

"8th. That the disease, when abandoned to its course, passes
through different stages, in all of which it is easily controlled, except
one — the cold stage, or period of collapse, and which is in almost every
instance, preceded by the symptoms of the forming stage, when the
disease, if timely treated, is arrested with facility.

" 9th. That the symptoms of this forming stage should be generally
promulgated, and persons instructed of the necessity of an immediate
attention to them. It is ignorance in this respect, amongst the labour-
ing and lower classes of society, and their habits of life, leading to in-
difference and inattention, that plunges so many, belonging to those
conditions, in the desperate situation so frequently met with, when
medical aid and human skill are utterly unavailing. Those symp-
toms are, a sudden looseness of the bowels, the discharges becoming
thin, watery, and colourless, or whitish, with little odour — vertigo or
dizziness — nausea, oppression, pain and cramps of the stomach, with
retching and vomiting of a fluid, generally resembling dirty river
water, attended or soon followed by cramps of the extremities, particu-
larly of the legs and thighs.

" 10th. When the foregoing symptoms appear, application for re-
medial assistance must be made immediately. The delay of an hour
may usher in the cold stage, or period of exanimated prostration and
collapse, from which it is almost impossible to resuscitate the expir-
ing energies of the economy.

" 11th. That every preparation should be made by the public autho-
rities, in anticipation of the appearance of the disease, providing the
means of treatment for those who cannot command them, so that aid
may be promptly administered to all, the moment of attack. These
means are a number of small hospitals, or houses of receptions, in va-
rious parts of the city; stations where nurses, physicians, and stu-
dents, with suitable medicines and apparatus, can be procured in the
night without delay, the evacuation of certain localities, where the oc-
currence of numerous cases indicates a pestiferous influence, and the fur-
nishing to the poor, as far as practicable, wholesome and nourishing food.

By the adoption and observance of the foregoing means of precau-
tion and prevention, in addition to the sanative measures already adopt-
ed, the commission are convinced that the prevalence of the disease
guarded against panic and alarm, the great sources of danger — and
under the blessing of Divine Providence, the pestilence will be shorn
of its terrors, and mitigated in its destructive fury.

SAMUEL JACKSON,
CHAS. D. MEIGS,
RICHARD HARLAN.


44 APPENDIX.

In concluding this Treatise on Cholera, I will subjoin a few other
modes of treatment, which are stated to have been attended with great
success, the principles of which are generally similar to those laid
down in this work.

FROM A FOREIGN PAPER. CURE FOR THE CHOLERA.

The Paris accounts of the Cholera epidemic are really alarming, and
should admonish us in this country to adopt every possible guard and
protection against its introduction, particularly in ventilating the cloth-
ing of seamen, and prohibiting the importation of old rags. We have
been constantly attentive to such remedies as have been practically suc-
cessful, and we publish the following, pursued with entire success at
Weizniz. Out of 240 persons treated, every one was saved; and we
advise our readers to cut out and preserve the mode of treatment.

" Take a pint of strong spirits of wine, and half a pint of good white
wine vinegar, add to them one ounce of powdered camphor, one ounce
of flour of mustard, or bruised mustard seed, a quarter of an ounce of
ground pepper, and a full tea-spoonful of bruised garlick ; and lastly,
half an ounce of powdered cantharides. Mix them well together in a
bottle, and expose the mixture for twelve hours in the sun, or other-
wise place it in some warm spot ; take care to shake it repeatedly.

" As soon as the person is attacked, let him be instantly put to bed,
under warm coverlids, and let his hands and feet be rubbed powerfully
and uninterruptedly with the lotion, after it has been warmed. Du-
ring this operation, let the patient take a glass of strong drink, com-
posed of two parts of camomile flowers, and one part of balm mint.

" Persevere in this course, and at the end of fifteen minutes at the
utmost, (the patient's head and body being kept well covered beneath
the bed-clothes,) he will break out into a profuse perspiration.

" The patient must be kept in this state between two and three
hours, but care must be taken that he does not fall asleep. After this,
remove the extra covering from off the bed, and he will drop into a
slumber, which will last between six and eight hours, and be accom-
panied by a gentle perspiration.

" When he awakes, he will find himself weak, but the disease will
have entirely left him, and he will require nothing further but rest
and moderate diet to restore him to perfect health.
. " E c s V e ™ 1 att ention must be paid, that the patient, after the opera-
tion of rubbing does not so much as lift a finger above the clothes, for
death the P ers P iration is u P on him > w ou^ be his

"When the cramps in the stomach come on, we apply very hot dry
bandages of bran and ashes to the pit of the stomach, and, when ne-
cessary, a bladder of hot water to the region of the navel.

1 he great point is to produce strong perspiration, and to restore
the circulation of the blood, which, at the beginning of the attack, is
drawn from the surface of the body, and thrown with frightful viru-
lence on its inward parts.

" From my own experience, and the repeated proofs I have had of


CHOLERA. 45


its entire efficacy, I cannot but most conscientiously recommend this
mode of treatment to universal adoption.


(Signed) "RIVER,

" Commissioner of the District of Bothnia."


REMEDY FOR THE CHOLERA, AS PRACTISED AMONG THE INDIANS.

Extracts from a letter from the Rev. R. Lugger, Upper- Canada, to
his friend at New-Lebanon, N. Y.

" Mohawk Mission, Grand River,
" Upper-Canada, Sept. 7th, 1832.
" My dear Friend — The object of this is purely that of charity, or
out of love, and by way of information to those who may be sufferers
from Cholera, in your vicinity.

" Knowing your confidence in the indigenous medicinal plants of
our country, I would inform you, for your encouragement,. that this
most awful malady, the Cholera, has been divested of all its fright-
fulness, since our Indians have had recourse to the vapour bath and
their herbs. To stop the vomiting and purging, they use the choke
cherry root and blackberry root, and the bath for a sweat. When the
cramps come on, the use the wild chamomile [mayweed] and smart-
weed ; [polygonum;] and, when in bed, if the cramps are in the sto-
mach, they place the hot herbs upon the stomach. As a drink, on go-
ing, or being put to bed, they use a strong tea, made of three parts of
fern [asplenium angustiflorium] and one part boneset ; drink freely.
" We had many deaths under the regular medical treatment, (opium,
camphor, and calomel,) but since the herbs have been used, and with-
out any other medical aid, every person has recovered. I send this for
the benefit of mankind. Yours, sincerely,

" R. LUGGER,
" Missionary to the Indians,
" Grand River, Upper-Canada."

Note. — The above gentleman is a Missionary, sent out about six
years ago by a London Foreign Missionary Society. When he
came out to this country, he bought of J. P. Carroll, 25 John-street,
New-York, one of Whitlaw's Medicated Vapour Baths, with the re-
quisite directions, and has, during his residence among the Indians,
done much good in relieving their diseases, and has really performed
many remarkable cures. N. L.

Stephen Ayres, of Canada, became very famous for curing the
Cholera, by the following prescription, and bathing the surface with
ley water. What its virtues may be, I know not, never having used it.

Take of Charcoal, two spoonsful,

Lard, two do.

Maple sugar, two do.
This dose to be often repeated.


46 APPENDIX.

Dr. Thomas Choke, a physician in India, states that the following
preparation is almost a specific in Cholera; that he lost but very few
cases, out of several hundred, after using it.

Take of Nitrous Acid, (not Nitric,) 1 dr.

Peppermint Water, or Camphor mixture, 1 oz.
Tincture of Opium, 40 drops.

Give one-fourth part every three or four hours, in a cup full of thin
gruel.

The body should be covered with a succession of dry hot cloths,
bottles of hot water, or bricks, applied to the feet constantly, and sip-
pings of fine strained gruel.

No spirits, wine, or other fermented liquors.

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

I regret that the want of room compels me to cut short any further
remarks on this interesting disease. It would afford me much satis-
faction did circumstances enable me to write much more upon the sub-
ject. But I believe that I have stated all, in a brief and comprehen-
sive manner, which is necessary for practical purposes; and I can
most confidently recommend the practice laid down, from its having
been tested by much experience.

The question has been often asked, " Will Cholera again appear
among us ?" But it is impossible to say, with any degree of certainty,
whether this will be the case or not. But if we may judge from its
history, we may infer that it will again visit us, and continue a fright-
ful scourge. Hence it becomes important that we obtain the proper
means, both to prevent, and cure it. The fact mentioned by Webster,
that all epidemics occur in cities, or among a dense population, has
been proved, by the appearance of Cholera in all the principal cities
and towns in the world, showing most conclusively, that its existence
depends upon a departure from that state of simplicity in life, designed
by our Creator.

The act of assembling together in congregated masses, with the in-
temperance, filth, and vice, consequent on such deviation, is the true
cause and origin of this terrible malady. Among all the epidemics
which have ever prevailed, very few have ever extended to farm
houses. Hence the only sure preventative for every epidemic is plainly
pointed out, which is, to return to that primeval state of living, both mo-
rally and physically, which was designed by our Creator ; and nothing
will ever effect this, but a strict adherence to morality and religion.


Since writing the above, a woman, who nursed much among the
Cholera, informs me, that one physician, Dr. Robson, of this city,
pursued a similar practice in the disease that I have laid down. He
was called to a child, two years old, labouring under the complaint,
which was so severe as to cause him to screech, with the agony arising
from the cramps. He placed him in a chair, with a blanket thrown
around him, and underneath he put a vessel, containing spirits, which


CHOLERA. 47

he kept burning until free perspiration was produced ; he then remo-
ved him to the bed, the same blankets or covering around him, and
gave drinks of medicine to keep up the perspiration : this treatment
soon removed the symptoms, and the next day he was well.

The same woman who communicates this information, states, that
if the Cholera was contagious, she certainly would have taken it, as
she nursed much among those who were labouring under it. She
washed the clothes and bedding of those who died of the disease, and
constantly inhaled the most offensive effluvia which arose from them.


" As destructive, says a writer as this disease is, it would appear
that epidemics have occurred in different ages of the world, which
have been more mortal.

" The reign of the Emperor Justinian was rendered remarkable
among other circumstances, by a pestilence, or rather succession of
pestilences "which almost destroyed the human race, and for which,"
says Procopius, a contemporary historian, " no cause could be assign-
ed but the will of God. It did not rage in one part of the world only,
nor in one season of the year. It ravaged the whole world, seizing
all descriptions of people, without regard to different constitutions, ha-
bits, or ages ; and without regard to their places of residence, their
modes of subsistence, or their different pursuits. Some were seized
in winter, some in summer; others in other seasons of the year."

" But the most awfully destructive pestilence which the world ever
experienced was in the period which intervened between the years
1345 and 1350. We are told in the histories of the times, that it
commenced in China. It appeared in Egypt, Syria, Greece, and Tur-
key, in 1346 ; in Italy and Sicily, in 1347 ; in France and the south-
ern parts of Spain, and in England, in 1348; in Ireland, Holland,
and Scotland, in 1349 ; and Germany, Hungary, and the north of Eu-
rope, in 1350. In this 'period a comet was visible — also meteors of
various kinds ; the seasons were irregular — myriads of insects were
seen — domestic animals sickened and died — and fish were found dead
in immense numbers. So deadly was the onset of this plague, that
at least half, some say two-thirds, of the human race, were destroyed
by it. It was most fatal in cities, but in no place died less than a third
of the inhabitants. In many cities, nine out of ten of the people pe-
rished, and many places were wholly depopulated. In London, we
are told that 50,000 dead bodies were buried in one grave yard. In
Norwich, about the same number perished. In Venice there died
100,000. In Lubec, 90,000. In Florence the same number. In the
East it has been said, with what degree of accuracy we cannot vouch,
that twenty millions perished in one year. In Spain, the disease
raged three years, and carried off two-thirds of the people.

" In England, and probably in other countries, cattle were neglected,
and ran at large over the land. The grain perished in the fields for
want of reapers ; and after the malady ceased, multitudes of houses
and buildings of all kinds were seen, mouldering to ruin. Although
in the preceding year there had been abundance of provisions, yet the
neglect of agriculture during the general distress produced a famine.


48 APPENDIX.

Such was the loss of labourers, that the few survivors afterward de-
manded exorbitant wages, and the parliament of England was oblig-
ed to interfere, and limit their wages, and even compel them to labour.
See 23d Edward III, A. D. 1350.

" The disease reached the high northern latitudes ; it broke out in
Iceland, and was so fatal that the island is supposed never to have re-
covered its population. It was called the sorte diod, or black death.

" The pestilence was remarkably fatal to the monks and regular
clergy of all descriptions. At Avignon, where the disease first ap-
peared in France, 66 of the Carmelites had died before the citizens
were apprised of the fact ; and when it was discovered, a report cir-
culated that the brethren had killed one another.

" Our motives for introducing here the narrative of the awful plagues
in the reign of Justinian, and in the first part of the fourteenth centu-
ry, are to show our readers, that mankind have suffered more on for-
mer occasions from the visitations of disease, than of late years from
the dreaded scourge of Cholera; and also that they may be made
aware of the ameliorating influence of civilization — implying improv-
ed minds, and knowledge, and a greater amount of means for promot-
ing personal comfort, and protection against morbid causes. Dread-
ful as the mortality from Cholera has been, we can promptly discover
that it is mainly restricted to a particular class, whose situation and
habits reduce them to a level with the large majority of the people of
the middle or barbarous ages, and expose them to the same calamities
in seasons of epidemical disease. When a pestilential malady, call it
what you will, yellow fever, Cholera, &c, now appears in a city, but
a small portion of the inhabitants are victims to the disease. In for-
mer ages, analogous diseases passing under the common appellation
of plague, would nearly depopulate a city. We have already men-
tioned the loss of 90,000 citizens of Florence, nearly a third of the
entire population, by the plague in 1347. In 1359, on a similar visi-
tation, the mortality was estimated at 100,000 ; whereas the deaths
from the Cholera in Moscow, with a population of 350,000, in 1830,
were short of 5000. St. Petersburgh also, with nearly an equal po-
pulation, encountered the like loss. Vienna, containing 300,000 in-
habitants, lost not 4,000. Even in Paris, where the mortality was
excessive, amounting to upward of 15,000, yet when we consider the
population of that city, upward of 800,000 inhabitants, we cannot but
be sensible of the increased advantages which the people of the civi-
lized world at this time enjoy, of warding off pestilence entirely, or of
greatly mitigating the violence of its attacks.

" In the next or latter part of the fifteenth century, viz. in 1483, or
1485, a new species of plague appeared in England, called the Sudor
Anglicus, or sweating sickness of the English, because it was suppos-
ed either to have originated in England, or to have attacked none but
Englishmen. This disease prevailed, however, at different times, in
Ireland, Germany, Sweden and Holland. It was remarked, also, as
illustrative of a general deterioration of the atmosphere, at this time,
that when the sweating sickness prevailed in Europe, this, or some
other pestilential disease was raging in other countries."

{Bell <f Condee.)


CONCEPTION, PREGNANCY, AND DISEASES


OF


WOMEN AND CHILDREN.


SECTION I.

CONCEPTION.


In order to procreate the human species, there is a periodical dis-
charge of blood from the vagina of every female, termed the catamenia
or menses. The secretion of this fluid commences at that period of life
termed puberty, which occurs at different ages, according to the cli-
mate. In some latitudes, it commences as early as eight or ten, and
in others not until fifteen. As soon as conception or pregnancy com-
mences, this discharge ceases and goes to support the foetus or the
child.

The manner in which conception takes place, has ever been a fruitful
subject of inquiry, but we are unable to account for this change pre-
cisely. It is however pretty evident that the semen of the male is in-
troduced into the uterus, while the semen of the female is discharged
from the ovaria by means of the falopian tubes ; the fimbriated ex-
tremity of which closely embraces that organ.

These tubes by a kind of peristaltic motion similar to the intestines
convey the semen of the female into the uterus, where it unites with
the semen of the male, and it is these united fluids which constitutes
the rudiment of the fcetus, and which often gives to the child the ap-
pearance and dispositions of their parents. Sometimes one trait is
inherited, sometimes another ; sometimes a new compound or cha-
racter is formed, (like a chemical union) which does not partake of the
nature of either of the former.

PREGNANCY.

As soon as the female becomes pregnant, many new symptoms fol-
low, such as sickness at the stomach, heartburn, peculiar longings,
indigestion, headache, giddiness, &c.

The breasts become enlarged, shooting pains extend through them,

7


50 APPENDIX.

and the circle round the nipple alters to a dark brown colour. There
often occurs likewise a feverish disposition, with debility, emaciation'
irritability, and peevishness of temper, and a total alteration of the
countenance, every feature of which becomes much sharpened. Som«
women breed so easily as to experience hardly any kind of inconveni-
ence whatever : while others again are perfectly incapable of retaining
the least thing on their stomach, and are thereby reduced to a state of
extreme weakness.

"With some women the vomiting will continue during the whole or
greater part of the second stage of pregnancy, as well as the first ; but
this does not usually happen. Partial suppressions of urine with a
frequent inclination to void it; itching about the external parts of ge-
neration, costiveness, tenesmus, and the piles, are what they are chiefly
incommoded by during this period. Most women quicken about the
sixteenth week after conception; at which time the mother becomes
sensible of the slightest efforts of the child, and besides the complaints
just enumerated, she will then be liable to sudden faintings, and slight
hysteric affections.

According to the common received opinion, quickening, so termed,
has been generally understood to commence at the time when particu-
lar sensations are perceived by the mother, supposed to be occasioned
by the first motion of the child. The most usual time of feeling any
such symptoms is, about the latter end of the fourth or beginning of the
fifth month of pregnancy : at this period the uterus filling up the pelvis,
slips out and rises above the rim ; and from that sudden transition,
women of a delicate constitution, and irritable fibre, are apt to faint,
more particularly so if in an erect position.

During the last three months, or third stage of pregnancy, general
uneasiness, restlessness,' (particularly by night,) costiveness, cedema-
tous swellings of the feet, ankles and private parts, cramps in the legs
and thighs, difficulty of retaining the urine for any length of time, va-
ricose swellings of the veins of the belly and lower extremities, and
the piles, are the affections which usually prove most troublesome. In
weak delicate women, of an irritable habit, convulsive fits sometimes
arise, which are ever to be regarded in a dangerous light.

PARTICULAR SYMPTOMS.

Sickness of the stomach. — Some women are incessantly harassed by
nausea, or sickness of the stomach, and that, during the whole period of
gestation or pregnancy. For this symptom the patient should take the
following preparation.

Take sal geratus, (bi-carbonate of potash,) 1 drachm, distilled pep-
permint water, eight ounces — mix.

Of this let a table spoonful be taken occasionally, to be accompanied
with the use of spear mint tea. Soda powders have also been found
very serviceable to allay the irritability of the stomach in such cases;
but the best preparation that I have ever found, to relieve the sickness
of the stomach attendant on pregnancy, is an infusion or tea made of
the rose wiUow bark, (cornus sericea.) This has proved in my hands


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 51

exceedingly valuable. The bowels must be regulated by gentle laxa-
tives.


HEARTBURN.

For the heartburn which sometimes takes place in pregnancy, let
the mixture be given mentioned under the head of sickness of the sto-
mach ; if this fail, let large teaspoonfuls of carbonate of magnesia be
taken morning and evening in a little milk or syrup.

LETHARGY, HEADACHE, &C

When there is a sense of fulness in the head, with giddiness and
plethora, a dose of our common physic should be given, the feet must
be immersed in warm ley water, and mustard plasters applied to them.
A vegetable and spare diet should be strictly adhered to ; this will pre-
vent the necessity of bleeding.

COSTIVENESS.

If costiveness supervene, laxative medicine must be taken ; but it
is always better to regulate the bowels by stewed fruits, such as ap-
ples, peaches, prunes, <£c.

PILES, SUPPRESSION OF URINE.

For the piles, apply the stremonum ointment, and obviate costive-
ness by the use of cream of tartar and flower of sulphur, &c. For
the suppression of urine, let half a wine glass of best Holland gin be
taken in a tumbler of spear mint tea ; if this fail to afford relief, apply
fomentations over the regions of the bladder, and drink freely of
parsley tea.

TOOTHACHE.

To relieve the toothache, a few drops of the oil of cloves, red pepper,
or any other essential oil, applied to the affected tooth, will often re-
move it for the time.


It is always desirable to gratify the peculiar longings of pregnant
women, otherwise they are apt to miscarry from the anxiety these occa-
sion, when not indulged in them. But that the child in the womb can
be marked by any depraved appetite of the mother, or be mutilated by
any disagreeable sight that may be presented to her, cannot readily be
admitted.

HYSTERICS.

Should sudden fainting, or any other hysterical affection, arise, little


52 APPENDIX.

more will be necessary than to expose the patient to a free open air,
to place her in a horizontal position, and to give her a glass of cold
water, with a few drops of hartshorn ; or a little wine sufficiently dilu-
ted may also be taken in compound spirits of lavender.

SWELLING AND PAIN IN THE BREAST.

Sometimes the breasts become swollen, and very painful ; to obviate
this symptom, great care should be taken that no part of the dress be
tight over the breasts, and they should be rubbed with a little sassafras
oil, morning and night.

PALPITATION OF THE HEART.

When this affection occurs during pregnancy, it is usually from a
disordered state of the stomach, and it must therefore be cleansed by
moderate doses of physic ; fifteen or twenty drops of the tincture of
digitalis, to be taken three or four times per day, in a little tea.

SWELLINGS.

There is often puffy swellings in advanced stages of pregnancy par-
ticularly toward evening ; for this symptom, bathe the feet often, and
apply fomentations of bitter herbs.

CRAMPS.

For cramps of the legs and thighs, which often occur, let the parts
be rubbed with tincture of capsicum. The feet must be often bathed
in warm water, and the legs should be well covered with flannel.

WAKEFULNESS, &C

For wakefulness, want of sleep, &c, give the tincture or extract of
hops, at bed time, and let exercise be taken through the day.

FALSE PAINS.

False pains, resembling those attendant on actual labour, are apt to
come on at a late period of pregnancy, often occasioning unnecessary
alarm. Confinement in a horizontal position ; laxative medicines if
costive, and giving small and frequent doses of some opiate until the
patient finds relief, may in such cases be necessary.

FITS, OR CONVULSIONS.

Sometimes in advanced stages of pregnancy, hysteric or other fits
occur, as well as during labour.

One species is the consequence of great exhaustion from a tedious
labour, excessive fatigue, or profuse hemorrhage. This makes its at-
tack without much warning, and generally alternates with deliquium,


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 53

or great feeling of depression of strength and debility ; the muscles
about the face and chest are chiefly affected, and the pulse is
small, frequent, and compressible ; the face pale, the eyes sunk, the ex-
tremities cold. The fits succeed each other pretty quickly, and very
soon terminate in a fatal syncope. Apparently it was this species of
convulsion, says a writer, that destroyed her Royal Highness the Prin-
cess Charlotte of Wales.

In all cases of this nature, it should be our object to check the fur-
ther operation of the exciting cause, by restraining haemorrhage if pre-
sent, or preventing every kind of exertion, and thus husband the
strength which remains, or recruit it by cordials. Opiates will be of
infinite service in conjunction with sether and camphor. Delivery is
usually necessary.

Hysterical convulsions are more common during gestation than du-
ring labour. Here it may therefore only be necessary to add to what
has already been said under the head of Hysteria, that if they do not
speedily yield to antispasmodics, the warm bath had better be resorted
to ; and if that fails, we should, if possible deliver the woman.

The species of puerperal convulsions most generally met with, bears
some likeness to epileptic fits ; and it is only by being aware of the
different degree of violence attending each, that at first sight we can
distinguish them. A fit of puerperal convulsion is much more severe
than one of epilepsy, and a paroxysm of the former is usually so vio-
lent, that a woman, who when in health was by no means strong, has
been so convulsed as to shake the whole room, and to resist the coer-
cive powers of many attendants. No force indeed can restrain a wo-
man when in these convulsions. The distortion of her countenance is
beyond conception ; in regard to deformity of countenance, nothing
bears any resemblance to the progress of this disease ; the rapidity
with which the eyes open and shut, and the sudden twirlings of the
mouth, are inconceivable and frightful.

Puerperal convulsions seldom happen before the sixth month, but
may occur at any time between this period and the completion of la-
bour. They may arise at the first symptom of labour, or after the la-
bour is finished. This species of convulsion depends on the state of
the uterus, and has been observed to arise oftener during the first preg-
nancy than in any after one, particularly where the woman is un-
married.

For these convulsions, whatever may occasion them, an opium pill
containing about three grains should be given.

The feet should be immediately immersed in water, as warm as can
be born, and a large injection or clyster should be immediately admin-
istered.

And if these means do not soon afford relief, a mustard plaster should
be applied between the shoulders and to the feet, and evaporating lo-
tions, such as spirits, rain water, and vinegar applied to the head.

The warm bath is strongly recommended by Dr. Denman among the
means for preventing convulsions in women previous to, or during their
confinement. He states, that from its occasional use women will often
find much benefit, and that it is one of the principal means which pro-


6 4 APPENDIX.

( cdnnnl assistance is capable of affording for preventing pueperalcon-
vXns and fo nsurin^an undisturbed^labour. He also recommends
Twarm bath in labours rendered complex by convulsions, and this,
up"Tlong and extensive experience. He says, that when convul-
Sons have continued or increased, notwithstanding copious bleeding
and the use of all other rational means, the patient may be P«t into the
warm bath, in which she may remain a considerable time if the con-
ZZn are suspended while she is in it. In instances where a warm
bath could not be procured, or while it was preparing he ha- directed
flannels wrung out of hot water to be applied over the whole of the

ab Dr m Denman mentions, " that he has seen the patient relieved from
that state of irritation immediately preceding the convulsion by dip-
ping feathers in cold water, and dashing it with force over the wo-
man's face ; as this roused her, and interrupted the progress of the fit
Where the further application of cold may be deemed necessary, and
appear advisable, we may throw water over the patient's head, bringing
this over the side of the bed, and holding an empty pail underneath to
receive it. It should be done on the approach of the fit, which may be
ascertained by attending to the vibrations of the intercostal muscles.

« In all cases of puerperal convulsion, after having paid due attention
to the lessening of the cause which has given rise to it, we should
uniformly exert our best endeavours to deliver the woman as expedi-
tiously as possible, where it is practicable, without violence. When we
find that the os uteri begins to relax and open, and which may take
place although there be no labour pains, we must introduce the hand
slowly, dilate it, and deliver the child."

" If convulsions take place after the delivery of the child lor the first
time, then the placenta, if it have not come away, ought immediately
to be extracted ; and afterward the bowels purged."

" Where convulsions continue after the uterus is emptied of its con-
tents, all that we can do is to keep the brain unloaded, the bowels
open, and the irritability of the system counteracted by opium, joined
with other antispasmodics."


ABORTION.


Abortion, frequently takes place during pregnancy; when this occurs,
let it be treated the same as laid down under that head.


LABOUR, DELIVERY, OR PARTURITION.

After seven months of pregnancy, the foetus has all the conditions
for breathing and exercising its digestion ; it may then be separated
from its mother, and change its mode of existence. Childbirth rarely,
however, happens at this period: most frequently the foetus remains
two months longer in the uterus, and it does not pass out of this organ
till after the revolution of nine months.

Examples are related of children being born after ten full months
of gestation, but these cases are very doubtful, for it is very difficult


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 55

to know the exact period of conception. The legislation in France,
however, has fixed the principle, that childbirth may take place the
299th day of pregnancy.

Nothing is more curious than the mechanism by which the foetus
is expelled ; every thing happens with wonderful precision ; all seems
to have been foreseen, and calculated to favour its passage through
the pelvis and the genital parts.

The physical causes that determine the exit of the foetus are the
contraction of the uterus, and that of the abdominal muscles ; by their
force the liquor amnii flows out, the head of the foetus is engaged in
the pelvis, it goes through it, and soon passes out by the valve, the
folds of which disappear ; these different phenomena take place in suc-
cession, and continue a certain time : they are accompanied with pains
more or less severe, with swelling and softening of the soft parts of
the pelvis and external genital parts, and with an abundant mucous
secretion in the cavity of the vagina. All these circumstances, each
in its own way, favour the passage of the foetus.

To facilitate the study of this complicated action, it must be divided
into several periods.

THE FIRST PERIOD OP CHILDBIRTH.

It is constituted by the precursory signs. Two or three days before
childbirth, a flow of mucus takes place from the vagina, the external
genital parts swell, and become softer; it is the same with the liga-
ments that unite the bones of the pelvis ; the cervix uteri flattens, its
opening is enlarged, its edges become thinner; slight pains, known
under the name of flying pains, are felt in the loins and abdomen.

SECOND PERIOD.

Pains of a peculiar kind come on : they begin in the lumbar region,
and seem to be propagated toward the cervix uteri, or the rectum;
are renewed only after considerable intervals, as a quarter, or half an
hour. Each of them is accompanied with an evident contraction of
the body of the uterus, with tension of its neck, and dilatation of the
opening ; the finger directed into the vagina discovers that the enve-
lopes of the foetus are pushed outward, and that there is a considera-
ble tumour, which is called the waters : the pains very soon become
stronger, and the contractions of the uterus more powerful; the mem-
branes break, and a part of the liquid escapes ; the uterus contracts
on itself, and is applied to the surface of the foetus.

THIRD PERIOD.

The pains and contractions of the uterus increase considerably;
they are instinctively accompanied by the contraction of the abdominal
muscles. The woman who is aware of their effect is inclined to fa-
vour them, in making all the muscular efforts of which she is capa-
ble : her pulse then becomes stronger and more frequent; her face is
animated, her eyes shine, her whole body is in extreme agitation, per-


56 APPENDIX.


spiration flows in abundance. The head is engaged in the pelvis ;
the occiput, placed at first above the left acetabulum, is directed inward
and downward, and comes below and behind the arch of the pubis.


FOURTH PERIOD.


After some moments of repose, the pains and expulsive contractions
resume all their activity ; the head presents itself at the vulva, makes
an effort to pass, and succeeds when there happens to be a contraction
sufficiently strong to produce this effect. The head being once disen-
gaged, the remaining parts of the body easily follow, on account of
their smaller volume. The section of the umbilical cord is then made,
and a ligature is put round it at a short distance from the umbilicus.

FIFTH PERIOD.

If the accoucheur has not proceeded immediately to the extraction
of the placenta, after the birth of the child, slight pains are felt in a
short time, the uterus contracts freely, but with force enough to throw
off the placenta, and the membranes of the ovum : this expulsion bears
the name of delivery. During the twelve or fifteen days that follow
childbirth, the uterus contracts by degrees upon itself, the woman suffers
abundant perspirations, her breasts are extended by the milk that they
secrete ; a flow of matter, which takes place from the vagina, called lochia,
first sanguiferous, then whitish, indicates that the organs of the woman
resume, by degrees, the disposition that they had before conception.

MANAGEMENT OF LABOUR.

There is no subject of which women in general are so entirely igno-
rant, as that of parturition, or delivery. Almost all of them are under
the impression that labour is completed more by art than nature ; hence
the most noted accoucheurs are employed to attend during this inte-
resting period : and professional men, in general, have no wish to un-
deceive them on this subject, as their interest is too much concerned.
I have been often astonished to see the credulity and ignorance mani-
fested on these occasions. Thanks and blessings have been poured
upon me, under an idea that I had saved their lives in labour, when
I had done nothing but look on and admire the perfectly adequate
powers of nature, and superintend the efforts of her work ; and it is
nature which accomplishes all, while the accoucheur gets the credit
of it ! There is not one case in a thousand in which you can be but
only a silent spectator, except it be to calm the fears of the ignorant
and timid attendants. The mischief and injury that is done by the
untimely interference of art is incalculable.

In pregnancy, women must be bled till they have not strength enough
to accomplish delivery, and, when it takes place, the forceps or other
instruments must be used, which often proves fatal to the mother, or
child, or both.

Were all women properly instructed in this branch, many lives would
De saved; and it is upon this branch that I wish to see a Reform, as


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 57

well as other branches of medicine ; but the want of room prevents me
from here enlarging upon this subject.

All women should be instructed in midwifery, and those who are
of a proper turn of mind should be well qualified to act in the capa-
city of midwives : no man should ever be permitted to enter the
apartment of a woman in labour, excepting in consultations, or on ex-
traordinary occasions. The practice is unnecessary, unnatural, and
wrong.

There are various particulars to be avoided, and several things to
be done in the management of women during labour. I have only
room here to state a few; and shall begin by pointing out the course
to be pursued in

NATURAL LABOUR.

When called to a woman supposed to be in labour, we must first
ascertain whether her pains are true or false; and which may be
easily known by a little inquiry. If the female complains of flying,
or unsettled pains about the system, occurring mostly toward even-
ing, or during the night, and being slight or irregular, it maybe taken
for granted that they are spurious, or false. If these symptoms prove
troublesome, an infusion or tea of hops may be taken ; or if this is
not sufficient to relieve them, or procure sleep, an anodyne may be
taken, and it may be necessary also to give laxative medicines.

True pains may be known, by the pain being more concentrated in
the lower part of the belly, through the loins and hips.

The pains now increase in regularity and force, returning every ten
or fifteen minutes, and leaving the woman comparatively easy in the
intervals.

When then the pains become regular and severe, there is a dis-
charge of slimy matter, tinged with blood, known by the name of
shows. At this period of labour it will be proper for the accoucheur,
or the person who attends the labour, to examine, in order to ascertain
what part of the child presents, which may be done by requesting the
female to sit in a chair, or on the side of the bed, and to extend the
legs, when the longest finger, dipt in sweet oil, may be passed up the
vagina to the part which presents, and the sense communicated will
determine the nature of the presentation. In nineteen cases out of
twenty, or in almost every case, the head will be felt.

When it has been ascertained that the labour is natural, or that
there are no impediments or obstacles, there will be very little more to
do than superintend the person. It will be necessary to give proper
instructions to the attendants to make suitable preparation or have every
thing necessary in readiness.

The woman may be delivered upon a bed or a cot, as is most con-
venient ; if a bed be used, all but the mattress should be turned back
toward the head, and it should be so prepared that the moisture from
the uterus, and other discharges, may not add to the discomfort of the
woman. A dressed skin, oilcloth, or folded blanket, may be placed on
that nart of the mattress on which the body of the woman is to rest ;
v 8


58 APPENDIX.

a coarse blanket, folded within a sheet, ought to be laid immediately
beneath the patient; this is to absorb the moisture, and is to be remo-
ved after delivery. The rest of the bed clothes are to be put on the
ordinary way ; the woman, when she is no longer able to remain up
may now lie down, with her head elevated in any position which is
most desirable, and in about every case that I have ever attended, the
back has been preferred, although most all writers recommend that
the woman be placed upon her side. This practice is unnatural and
wrong, for obvious reasons ; it retards the labour pains, and prevents
the accoucheur from superintending the progress of the labour. The
pillow that is directed to be placed between the knees, to keep them
widely separated, soon gets displaced, by the motion or change of the
female, and the legs, instead of being kept apart, again come in con-
tact, and thus the passage of the child is obstructed; but when the fe-
male is placed upon her back, this difficulty is obviated; a free pas-
sage is permitted, the pains are more effectual, the spine is better sup-
ported, and better access can be had to the parts during labour, and
after the delivery of the child. In short, there is a decided advantage
in this position in every respect.

The dress of women in labour should be light and simple, both to
keep themselves from being overheated, and to prevent any thing from
being in the way of what assistance is necessary. In addition to the
means recommended, I direct a sheet to be placed around the waist of
the woman, to prevent the blood, excrements, or waters, from coming
in contact with the linen or clothes, and as much as possible the bed:
her linen may be tucked or pushed up so far that there will be no ne-
cessity of removing it after delivery.

Every thing being thus adjusted, very little more will be necessary
but to wait patiently the efforts and operations of nature. There should
be few attendants in the room, and these should not whisper to each
other, or express any fears or doubts. When the pains become very
severe, quickly succeeding each other, the midwife or the person who
officiates, may sit by the side of the woman, and upon every severe
pain may keep her hand upon the parts, even though no manner of
assistance can be afforded ; and occasionally when the head of the
child presses hard, it may be gently touched or pressed with the long-
est finger, in order to ascertain the parts which presents the progress of
labour, as well as to be able to give from time to time suitable encou-
ragement ; not only so in the last stage of labour, the hand may be
kept near the parts to know the moment when the head of the child
presents ; as some little assistance at this time is called for ; not by
supporting the perineum as some advise, but first to remove any ob-
struction which often arises from the clothes.

Second. To support the child in its passage, and in the interval of
pains ; and to keep the head from pitching downward and thus ob-
structing the labour.

Third. To detach the umbilical cord or naval string from the neck,
when it incircles it, as is often the case, and which endangers the life of
the child.

Fourth. To deliver the woman in case of hemorrhage or great flood-


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 59

Mg ; but at the same time there must be no further interference of
art ; little or nothing can be done toward facilitating the delivery of
the child, except when a large bag or collection of water presents and
opposes ; when it maybe ruptured with the longest finger, and this of-
ten affords much aid : although such is the ignorance and credulity of
some women, that they suppose that almost every thing is accomplished
art. A physician or midwife who watches only the process of labour, by
and does little or nothing, is pronounced inhuman and cruel, and per-
haps ignorant, because he is honest in not interfering with the simple
and beautiful process of labour ; or in other words for relying upon the
great resources of nature ; but such is the fashion and credulity of
mankind, or rather womankind, that physicians are obliged to take the
advantage of such ignorance and credulity, and regulate their pro-
ceedings accordingly. I have myself often been obliged to stand hours
over a woman under pretence of aiding delivery, when in reality I
done nothing at all. The labour would have progressed just as well had
I been out of the room ; but this deception I have been obliged to prac-
tice in order to satisfy ignorant, gossiping, or crying attendants. When
the woman is disposed to make much noise, she should be directed to
hold her breath during the pains, and aid or assist them by pressing
downward as much as possible. The feet may press against the bed-
stead and the woman may take hold of a handkerchief and pull when
a pain occurs; or she may grasp the hand of an assistant for that
purpose. Sometimes from various causes, labour is very much re-
tarded ; from rigidity of the parts, the situation of the child, debility &c.
When this occurs, and labour is tedious and protracted, our reliance
must still be upon the powers of nature. We may however aid her
efforts, by warm fomentations of bitter herbs, often applied to the
lower part of the belly, which will prove relaxing, and will facilitate
the labour : when warm diluent drinks may also be given, such as
tanzy, pennyroyal, &c.

If the labour still continues stationary, we have nothing to fear pro-
vided there is a right presentation ; but should the pains become fee-
ble or lessened from flooding, debility, or any cause, or should they
prove unavailing after a reasonable length of time, a dram of spurred
rye or ergot may be put into a tea cup, and a gill of boiling water poured
upon it, and when cool, a tablespoonful given every fifteen minutes.
This will increase the pains and speedily accomplish the delivery; but
it should be very seldom used, and never except when there is a right
presentation, and under the most urgent circumstances.

When the head is delivered, all that is necessary to do is to support
it, and wait for the pains to expel the child ; except it seems livid and
in danger of injury, or when the cord is twisted around the neck,
when assistance must be rendered to accomplish the delivery. The
face of the child must now be turned upward, the cord freed from the
neck or body, and the person who assists, will pass a narrow piece of
tape around the cord, or naval string, about an inch from the body, and
tie as tight as it can be drawn, otherwise hemorrhage or bleeding will
take place; and another must be tied at a little distance from it above,
and be separated betwixt them with a pair of scissors. The child is


60 APPENDIX.

then to be given to the nurse. The woman must now be covered and
directed to lay quiet.

THE AFTER BIRTH.

The after birth or placenta must be detached or removed, if nature
does not accomplish it in a short time. Generally after about twenty
or thirty minutes a pain is felt which may be sufficient to expel it ; if
it should not, and should there be no pain, gentle manual attempts
may be made to remove it.

The head and breast may be elevated, and the cord taken hold by
the left hand, the two first fingers may be carefully introduced into the
vagina ; and the anterior or forepart of the placenta, or after birth, held
in this situation for some minutes, in order to excite a contraction of
the uterus. The Avoman may now be directed to hold her breath and
press down, which forces it forward, and at the same time, a little ex-
tension maybe made upon the cord with the left hand, while extension
is made upon the after birth with the right; this will almost invariably
extract it in a few minutes. If from any cause it should not, no fur-
ther attempts should be made for the present, but it must be left for a
few hours, when if the natural contractions of the uterus do not remove
it, it must be done in the manner recommended, with this difference, that
a little more force be used. In the interval however, every thing wet
must be taken away.

After the labour has been thus completed, if the woman is not too
weak, one or two assistants may raise her up, and seat her upon the
side of the bed or cot, while another will remove all the wet clothing,
as well as the bed, and with a little warm spirits wash off the blood,
water, &c, which remains ; this is particularly necessary, as the omis-
sion of it may give rise to puerperal fever. I know not that any
other has practiced this method, but I have found it conducive to the
comfort as well as the health of the patient. Some practitioners will
not suffer the woman to be removed from the situation in which she
has been delivered under twelve or twenty-four hours, for fear of he-
morrhage or flooding ; but this is a great and dangerous error. It is
impossible to tell what mischief may arise in consequence of suffering
her to remain drenched in water and blood for this length of time.

After these precautions have been observed, and the bed properly
prepared on which has been placed, folded blankets, skin or oilcloth
covered with a warm sheet, she may be laid down, and diaper, or a suit-
able piece of muslin laid to the parts to absorb the lochial discharges. A
bandage may be also placed around the abdomen or belly, and made
moderately tight, but not enough to render her uncomfortable. A
large tub previously well dryed may be placed by the side of the bed,
and the woman directed to place her feet in it, and when she is lifted
up, every thing that is around her wet to be passed into it. It pre-
vents the necessity of afterward washing the floor and carpet, which
might prove injurious by causing a check to perspiration.

rreturnatural labour or cross births are those in which some other
part than the head presents. We cannot in general assign any rea-


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 61

son for such occurrences, nor can the woman by any sensation of her
own be assured that the presentation is unusual. Apprehensions of
this kind should not be indulged in. If the feet or breech present,
the delivery is to be accomplished by properly accommodating the
uturus of the child to the capacity of the pelvis, but no force should be
employed, and though there is always some risk to the life of the in-
fant, there is none to the mother. If the arm, shoulder, or sides of the
child present, the delivery is impossible until the infant be turned,
and the feet brought down into the passage. This is an operation
which may be done with comparative ease and safety, if the wrong
position of the infant be discovered before the waters are discharged ;
but otherwise both mother and child are in considerable danger. The
womb closely contracting around the body of the infant when the
water is drained away, and being soft and spongy in its texture it
is liable to be torn if much force be employed, and then either there
the child may escape into the cavity of the belly, or if it be extracted
by the feet, blood may be effused from the womb into that cavity,
and such injury be done as to prove fatal. Women too frequently
add to the danger of the operation of turning by their restlessness
and impatience, they should remember how much is at stake, and
exert all their fortitude so as not to embarrass the practitioner.

The labour having been thus accomplished, it will be necessary to
guard against any subsequent symptoms which may occur or take
place.


TREATMENT AFTER DELIVERY.


AFTER PAINS.

Soon after delivery these usually come on, and with some women
prove remarkably severe. The quicker the labour has been, the slight-
er will they prove in general. Women with their first child are sel-
dom much troubled with after-pains ; but as the uterus is thought to
contract less readily after each future labour, so they are more liable to
suffer from them in any succeeding delivery than in the first.

When after-pains prove so troublesome as to deprive the patient of
her rest, it will be necessary to have recourse to fomentations or ano-
dynes ; red pepper and spirits simmered together a few minutes, and
flannels dipped in it and applied to the belly, will generally relieve
them ; if it fail, apply a fomentation of bitter herbs, and give two tea-
spoonfuls of the tincture of hops, in milk or tea. If this fail, which I
never knew, give fifty drops of laudanum. These means are to be as-
sisted by keeping up a sufficient pressure on the belly at the same
time, by means of a broad bandage.

COSTIVENESS.

Costivenes* is apt to prevail after delivery, and should always be re-
moved by a laxative clyster, or some gentle purgative, such as senna
and manna, or about an ounce of the oleum ricini, or castor oil.


62 APPENDIX.

FLOODING, FLOW OP THE LOCHIA, &C.

In all women a certain degree of hemorrhage usually takes place
after delivery, produced by the removal of the placenta, which thereby
lays bare the mouth of the blood vessels in the inside of the uterus;
and this commonly continues until the womb contracts to such a size
as to close them up again. The discharge for the first four or five
days consists usually of florid blood, after which time it assumes a mu-
cous appearance, and so ceases gradually.

In weak and relaxed habits it sometimes happens, that instead of
saturating a cloth now and then, as is natural to all women, the blood
gushes out with such rapidity and violence as to run quickly through
all the bed clothes, and even to soak through the bed itself ; in which
case the patient will be reduced to a state of great debility, if the
hemorrhage is not soon restrained. To effect this, the means recom-
mended under the heads of Menorrhagia and Abortions must be adopt-
ed. A little alum whey, or a tea made of beth root, will soon check
it. Pouring cold water on the abdomen, over the region of the uterus,
from a height of four or five feet, will generally arrest the flooding
immediately.

Where a suppression of the lochia ensues before the accustomed pe-
riod, the discharge ought again to be promoted, if possible, by plenti-
ful dilution, and the application of warm fomentations to the parts.
Should these means prove ineffectual, gentle evacuations from the bow-
els must be made, and the feet bathed and perspiration promoted.

THE MILK FEVEH.

About the third or fourth day after delivery, the breasts generally be-
come turgid and painful, from the secretion of milk which then takes
place in them. When this is moderate and free, no inconvenience
will be experienced ; but when copious, and accompanied by any ob-
struction in the lactiferous tubes in consequence of the use of some re-
pellent application, or of an exposure to cold, the breasts will then be-
come hard, swelled, and painful, and a small fever will arise, accompa-
nied by nausea, restlessness, pains in the head and back, and a con-
siderable degree of thirst.

To prevent any consequences of this kind, it will always be advisa-
ble to apply the child to the breasts at a very early period after delive-
ry. By delaying to do so immediately on the secretion of milk com-
mencing, the breasts are not only apt to become much enlarged and
distented, but the nipples are often so much retracted, that the child
cannot lay hold of them without the greatest difficulty.

Where the mother's health will not admit of her suckling the child,
or any other thing happens to prevent it, she should be careful to have
her breasts drawn three or four times a day by some other person ; and
with the view of preventing a copious secretion of milk, she should
use a very spare diet, keep her body perfectly open with laxative me-
dicines, and abstain as much as possible from all liquids. This mode
of proceeding will be far preferable to the use of repellent applications
to dry up, or put a stop to the secretion.


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.


63


If any degree of fever arises, besides confining the patient to a spare
diet, keeping her very quiet, and obviating costiveness by means of
cooling laxatives, bathe the feet and promote perspiration.

INFLAMMATION AND TUMOURS IN THE BREAST.

From exposure to cold, and neglecting to put the child at an early
period to the breast, or to get them drawn by some other person, acci-
dents of this nature happen very frequently to lying-in women.

The same practice should be adopted in this case of inflammation
as in every other, and the discussion of the tumour ought to be at-
tempted on its first appearance ; the distress and pain which always
attend on a suppuration of the breasts being very great. When the
inflammation and swelling have been of such long standing as to show
an evident tendency to suppurate, any attempt to discuss the tumour
will not be advisable.

Where discussion is proper, recourse should be had at a very early
period to a strict pursuance of the antiphlogistic and discu dent plan. The
strength is to be supported by a cool spare diet; the body is to be kept
perfectly open with mild laxatives; febrile heat is to be abated by re-
frigerants ; pain and irritation are to be allayed by sufficient doses of
the diaphoretic powders; and the inflammation, when considerable, is
to be abated by means of fermentations applied to the part, as likewise
by the application of linen cloths dipped in some sedative lotion. To
assist the effect of these means, the breasts are to be evacuated fre-
quently throughout the course of the day, but more particularly the
one diseased, either by the infant or some other person accustomed to
the business. When they are so much swelled as not to allow of lay-
ing hold of the nipple, the proper glasses made for that purpose should
be employed.

If the tumour proceeds to suppuration, notwithstanding we may have
used every endeavour to prevent it, v/e should then assist the opera-
tions of nature by the application of emollient poultices and fomenta-
tions. As soon as the suppuration is completed, the tumour should be
opened, after which it may be dressed with dry lint, and a plaster of
black salve be laid over all. Should any fresh suppuration ensue,
which not unfrequently happens, the same mode of treatment must be
adopted, and that proper pus may be formed, the restorative cordial,
with a moderate quantity of wine, will be necessary.

OF THE SWELLED LEG INCIDENT TO LYING-IN WOMEN.

This disease is not of very frequent occurrence, but it is occasionally
met with in women a few days after delivery, and is evidently of an
inflammatory nature, not only affecting the limb, but also the whole
system in some degree. Some cases do occur in which the complaint
is not confined to only one of the lower extremities, but occupies both
of them ; and it sometimes happens that after it has subsided in one
limb, the other has been attacked in a similar way.


64 APPENDIX.


SYMPTOMS.


The disease is marked by a firm, glossy, elastic, and painful swell-
ing, of a white or pale colour, which pretty suddenly seizes the leg,
foot, and thigh of a woman some days after her delivery of the child, and
from thence extends upward to the external parts of generation, groin
of the side affected, and loins. The attack is generally preceded by a
sense of coldness over the whole body, with shiverings, which are suc-
ceeded by febrile heat, thirst, and an acceleration of the pulse. At
first the patient experiences a stiffness, weight, and pain in the limb,
which are much increased upon her making any attempt to move it or
the lower portion of the body. After a time, the extremity becomes
very tender to the touch, but shows no discoloration ; it is, however,
hotter than what is natural, and feels much fuller than usual. When
pressed upon with the fingers, very little indentation takes place, and
what does occur, is soon effaced. If a puncture is made into the limb,
no fluid in general is discharged, but should any escape, it does not
coagulate.

In the course of some days (say from six to twelve) the febrile
symptoms diminish, and the swelling, heat, tension, and tenderness of
the affected limb begins to abate, first in the upper part of the thigh,
and afterward in the leg and foot. The febrile symptoms having gone
off, the patient experiences considerable debility, and the extremity feels
stiff, benumbed, heavy, and weak. It seldom returns to its original
size, but on the contrary remains enlarged throughout life.


This disease is occasioned by tedious and difficult labours, exposure
to cold, by getting out of bed too soon, the suppression of natural se-
cretions, particularly the lochial discharge and flowing of the milk, or
by improper treatment of the woman after delivery. Some physicians
have assigned an obstruction or rupture of the lymphatic vessels of the
part, as a cause of the complaint.

It seldom terminates fatally, and but very rarely is followed by any
suppuration in the parts affected.

TREATMENT AND REGIMEN.

Due regard must be paid to the stage in which the disease exists.
During its fast or inflammatory stage, if the febrile symptoms run
high, perspiration must be promoted, the bowels must be well opened
by some gentle cathartic, and then the circulation be determined to the
surface of the body, and a gentle moisture of the skin promoted.

ihe limb may at the same time be well fomented with flannel cloths
wrung out in a warm decoction of hops boiled in vinegar.

During the first or inflammatory stage of the disease the patient
must be restricted to a cooling and low diet ; but in the last, more ef-
fective nourishment should be allowed her, together with a use of wine,
proportioning both to the existing degree of debility.


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILBREN. 65

FALLING OR PROJECTION OF THE WOMB.

This v-.omplaint is frequently met with among women who have had
many children or frequent miscarriages, particularly those of a delicate
constitution, and with lax fibres. Sometimes it is occasioned by rising
too soon out of bed after delivery, and before the parts have regained
their usual tone or strength. In single women, it now and then takes
place from lifting some heavy weight, jumping, dancing, or some
violent exertion during or soon after menstruation, and occasionally it
has arisen as a consequence of the whites long continued.

The uisease is usually accompanied by a sense of bearing down, as
also pains in the back, groins, and private parts, which unpleasant
symptoms are relieved by a horizontal position. In some cases the
womb only falls lower than it ought to do, but in others it protrudes
beyond the external parts. Before the tumour appears outwardly, there
is sometimes a considerable discharge of a mucous fluid, but this is
generally lessened when the protrusion takes place.

A falling of the womb, although a local disease, is often productive
of distressing symptoms which injure the woman's general health ; and
these arise from the functions of the stomach and bowels being impair-
ed, and the nervous system somewhat affected.

TREATMENT.

In slight cases of this complaint, confining the woman a good deal
to a recumbent posture upon a sofa or hair mattress, instructing her to
make use of cold water, and by means of a large sponge, well wetting
the back, bottom of the belly, and parts more immediately concerned,
and then injecting a little of the fluid up the vagina by means of a sy-
ringe, will sometimes be sufficient, particularly if assisted by a nutri-
tive diet and medicines of a strengthening nature, such as the restora-
tive cordial. Costiveness must at the same time be guarded against,
by taking, if necessary, some gentle laxative, observing however not
to excite the bowels to over action, as this would be injurious.

In cases of long standing, and which resist the simple ablution and
injecting with cold water, or where there is a considerable discharge
of mucous or other matter, it then will be necessary to substitute some
more powerful injection, such as a decoction of oak bark, in which is
dissolved a little alum.

Where the womb protrudes, it ought to be replaced by laying the
woman on her back, applying the fingers and thumb to the lower part
of the tumour, and then by a gradual and gentle pressure carried up-
ward into its centre, and continued, the parts are to be returned to their
natural place. This being effected, a proper sized sponge is to be in-
troduced, and the woman kept in a recumbent posture for several hours.
The sponge ought to be introduced as high up the vagina as can be
borti easily, and it must occasionally be removed, and well cleansed.
As the parts recover their proper strength and tone, one somewhat of
a smaller size should be substituted. The same bandage must be
worn as recommended under the head oi fistula.

A woman afflicted with this complaint, and who becomes pregnant,

9


66 APPENDIX.

will not require the use of the sponge after the third month, and by"
beino- very cautious after her delivery may, perhaps, be able to prevent
any "return of the disorder. Let her not therefore be in too great a
hurry to quit her bed ; and when sufficiently recovered so to do, she
should avoid as much as possible for some time an erect position, and
all active exercise or much exertion.

INFLAMMATION OF THE WOMB.

An inflammation of the womb is a dangerous and not unfrequent
disease after delivery. It is known by pains in the lower part of the
belly, which are greatly increased upon touching ; by the tension or
tightness of the parts ; great weakness ; change of countenance, a con-
stant fever, with a weak and hard pulse ; a slight delirium, or raving ;
sometimes incessant vomiting; a hiccup; a discharge of reddish, stink-
ing, sharp water from the womb ; an inclination to go frequently to
stool; a heat, and sometimes total suppression of urine.

This must be treated like other inflammatory disorders, by fomenta-
tions, purgatives, and sudorifics. The drink may be thin gruel or bar-
ley water ; in a cup of which, half a drachm of nitre may be dissolved
and taken three or four times a day. Clysters must be frequently ad-
ministered : and the belly should be fomented by hops simmered in
vinegar.

SORE OR EXCORIATED NIPPLES.

From the constant state of moisture in which these parts are kept
with those who give suck, such occurrences are very apt to happen.
When excoriations do arise, these parts should be washed often with
borax water, and then be sprinkled with a little powder of elm bark ;
afterward a plaster of the healing or black salve, applied. This will soon
cure them. The infant may be nursed notwithstanding these applica-
tions.

ATROPHY FROM SUCKLING.

Some women of a delicate constitution cannot suckle long without
an evident appearance of declining health, and if persisted in it might
terminate in a general wasting of the body and loss of strength, or some
morbid affection of the lungs. When, therefore, a woman finds her
health declining, and that she gets weaker every day, with loss of ap-
petite and langor, she ought immediately to leave off suckling; she
should use a very generous diet with a moderate quantity of wine
daily, and, if convenient, change the air, particularly if an inhabitant of
a large and populous city or town. If the change is not found suffici-
ently efficacious of itself, when conjoined with a restorative diet, a
course of tonics should be given. Gentle exercise on horseback, or in
a carnage, will greatly assist the effect of these remedies.

Other diseases of women as well as children, not noticed here, are
treated under their proper heads.


OF THE


DISEASES OF CHILDREN.


OF STILL BORN INFANTS.

Infants are sometimes born without showing any appearances of
ldfe, but where this, at the same time, is only suspended, not totally
annihilated, the apparent cessation of the action of the heart and
lungs may be owing to a variety of causes, such as universal weak-
ness of the vital powers, collections of glairy matter in the wind-^
pipe, or a congestion of blood in the lungs, arising either from a
long protracted labour and consequent detention of the head in the
passage, or the neck of the infant being tightly encircled by the
navel string or the mouth of the womb, so as to stop the circula-
tion of the blood.

When the infant shows little or no signs of life after a tedious la-
bour, it ought to be cleansed and then be wrapt up in flannel, having
first well rubbed its chest with volatile spirits mixed with brandy, and
stimulated its nostrils with volatile salts. Should these means fail
in reanimating it, we may introduce a pipe or flexible catheter into
its mouth, and thereby endeavour to fill the lungs with air, and make
them perform the office of respiration, which plan ought to be per-
severed in for a considerable time. Besides these means, the in-
fant may be immersed in a warm bath, in order that a proper de-
gree of heat may be restored to its body. In all such cases it will
be of the utmost consequence also not to detach the after birth too
soon from its connexion with the womb, and not to be in a hurry
to apply a ligature on the navel string. These are the first steps to
be attended to.

If a portion of the glairy fluid in which the child floats in the womb
gets into the windpipe or the mouth, and renders the breathing diffi-
cult or rattling, its throat ought not only to be well rinsed and washed
out, but it should be placed in an altitude that will facilitate the dis-
charge of the fluid ; that is, by laying its head lower than its body.
This being done, endeavours should be made to reanimate the infant ;
first, by inflating the lungs in the manner before mentioned, and
then pressing on the chest to extricate the air, imitating thereby natu-
ral respiration.

Where there is either stupor present, or congestion in the lunga, it
will be advisable to lessen the determination of the blood to the head
or chest, by suffering a small quantity of blood to be lost from the di-
vided naval string prior to putting a ligature round it. [Thomas.]

OF A RETENTION OF THE MECONIUM.

The bowels of all infants at the time of their birth are filled with a
blackish coloured and viscid matter of the consistence of syrup, known


68 APPENDIX.

by the name of meconium. The efforts of nature are in general suffi-
cient to dislodge and carry it off, if assisted by the mother's milk,
which is always at first of a laxative quality, and therefore infants
should be applied to the breast as soon as they show an inclina-
tion to suck. But should it be retained, or not sufficiently carried
ofT, a small teaspoonful of castor oil or a little senna tea may be
given, particularly if the secretion of milk in the mother's breasts is
rather tardy.

OF ACIDITIES, FLATULENCY, AND GRIPES.

The species of food most commonly employed for the nourishment
of children, being of an acescent nature, is apt to turn sour on the sto-
mach, particularly if the body be any way disordered. Hence most
^>f the complaints of children are accompanied with evident signs of
acidity, such as flatulency, griping pains, and stools of a green colour.
The child so affected becomes restless, cries much, and draws up its
legs forcibly to its body, is troubled with sour belchings, vomiting or
purging, and not unfrequently becomes convulsed.

New born infants until they are about three months old are apt to
be affected with much distress from flatulence, or wind, or some of
the causes mentioned. An infusion or tea made of the flowers or
leaves of catnip will always afford relief; sometimes a few fennel
seeds may be added, and a little gin. If the pain be very great, and
prevents the infant from sleeping, one or two hops may be added,
and the tea sweetened with loaf sugar : a few spoonfuls of it may be
given.

It answers a much better purpose than paregoric, or any other pre-
paration of opium ; affording relief without producing costiveness,
nausea, or any other unpleasant symptom. Sometimes however, it
may become necessary to give some preparation of opium, such as
paregoric, or syrup of poppy.

To remove offending matter, it will be sometimes necessary to give
the infant about two grains of sal aeratus and rhubarb, mixed in a little
peppermint water, or tea and water with loaf sugar. The medicine
at the same time that it occasions a gentle operation of the bowels,
will tend to correct the acidity, by which means it not only removes
the disease, but obviates its cause. If necessary, it should be repeated
the succeeding day, being far preferable to prepared chalk and such
other medicines, which, although they correct the acidity, are apt to
lodge in the bowels, and occasion costiveness.

A costive habit is, indeed of itself, a frequent cause of flatulency
and griping pains in infants, and when it occurs ought to be obviated,
by administering the above medicine. If not found sufficiently active,
ntteen or twenty drops of the compound tincture of senna may be added.
When the griping pains are very acute, warmth may also be applied
herbs" t0 stomach and bowels, by fomenting them with bitter

In infants who are brought up by the hand, it will be necessary to
pay the strictest attention to their food, and carefully to observe what
seems to agree best with them. Such infants are very apt to be trou-


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 69

Wed with acidity and flatulency in their stomach and bowels, and
therefore it ought to be prepared fresh once or twice a day, and to have
a few fennel seeds inclosed in a small bag, boiled up in whatever fa-
rinaceous substances are given to them as food. Where pap, arrow
root, or the like productions do not seem to agree, the crumbs of bread
mashed very fine in a little chicken broth or weak beef tea may be
substituted occasionally.

GALLING AND EXCORIATION.

Young children are very apt to become excoriated in particular
parts of the body, particularly about the groins, and wrinkles of the
neck, behind the ears, and under the arms, such places being kept
much moistened by urine or sweat.

These complaints prove very troublesome to children, and are, in
some measure, owing to a want of due cleanliness in the mother or
nurse. To prevent them, and likewise to remove them when they do
occur, it will be necessary to wash the parts well with cold water
once or twice a day, to change the linen often, and keep the child per-
fectly clean and sweet. After the child is washed and dried, the parts
affected may be sprinkled with a little fine elm bark. Where the ex-
coriation or galling is considerable, the parts, after having been wash-
ed with cold water, may be wetted with a linen rag moistened in equal
parts of rectified spirit and common water, and then be dressed with
fine lint spread with elder ointment.

OF A LOOSENESS OR PURGING.

This complaint, as well as the former, very often arises in children
from the introduction of unwholesome food into the stomach, as well
as the sudden disappearance of some cutaneous eruption of a critical
nature ; and infants who have been recently deprived of the breast are
sometimes greatly disordered in their bowels by frequent watery
stools, attended with gripes, and occasionally by convulsions. When
this happens, restoring the child to the breast of its former nurse, or
that of another, should not be neglected as the first necessary step to
be taken.

A little of the neutralizing physic or mixture will soon remove this
complaint.

TEETHING OR DENTATION.

Arbuthnot states that above a tenth part of infants die in teeth-
ing, by symptoms proceeding from the irritation of the tender nervous
parts of the jaws, occasioning inflammation, fever, convulsions, gan-
grenes, &c. These symptoms are in a great measure owing to the
great delicacy and exquisite sensibility of the nervous system at this
time of life, which is too often increased by an effeminate education.
Hence it comes to pass that children who are delicately brought
up, always suffer most in teething, and often fall by convulsive dis-
orders.


70 APPENDIX.

About the sixth or seventh month the teeth generally begin to
make their appearance ; first, the incisors, or fore-teeth ; next, the
canini, or dog teeth ; and, lastly, the molarcs, or grinders. About the
seventh year there comes a new set ; and about the twentieth, the two
inner grinders, called dentes sapientim, the teeth of wisdom.

Children about the time of cutting their teeth, slaver much, and
have generally a looseness. When the teething is difficult, especially
when the dog teeth begin to make their way through the gums,
the child has slartings in his sleep, tumours of the gums, watch-
ings, gripes, green stools, the thrush, fever, difficult breathing, and
convulsions.

Difficult teething requires nearly the same treatment as an inflam-
matory disease. If the body be bound, it must be opened either by
emollient clysters or gentle purgatives ; as senna and manna, rhubarb,
&c. The food should be light, and in small quantity; the drink plen-
tiful, but weak and diluting, as infusions of balm, catnip flowers, &c. ;
to which about a third or fourth part of milk may be added.

Sydenham says, that in fevers occasioned by teething, he never
found any remedy so effectual as two, three, or four drops of spirits of
hartshorn in a spoonful of simple water, or other convenient vehicle,
given every four hours.

When children are cutting their teeth, a small strengthening plaster
may be placed between their shoulders. This generally eases the
tickling cough which attends teething, and is by no means a useless
application. When the teeth are cut with difficulty, it ought to be
kept on during the whole time of teething. It may be enlarged as
occasion requires, and ought to be renewed at least once a fortnight.

Several things have been recommended for rubbing the gums, as
oils, mucilages, &c. ; but from these not much is to be expected. If
any thing of this kind is to be used, we would recommend a little fine
honey, which may be rubbed on with the finger three or four times
a-day. Children are generally at this lime disposed to chew whatever
they get into their hands. For this reason they ought never to be
without somewhat that will yield a little to the pressure of their
gums.

With regard to cutting the gums, we have seldom known it of any
great benefit. In obstinate cases, however, it ought to be tried. It
may be performed by a penknife or lancet

In order to render the teething less difficult, parents ought to take
care that their children's food be light and wholesome, and that their
nerves be braced by sufficient exercise.

Infants, during dentition, are subject to sudden attacks of spasm
about the windpipe, producing a temporary feeling of suffocation, with
a crowing sound ; but there is no hoarse cough. It is apt to take
place suddenly at night, or when crying. It is cured by giving a
combination of tincture of blood root and lobelia, and by using laxa-
tives. The tepid bath is also useful. The gum may be cut; and if
there be any tendency to a return, particularly if the child be hot, and
the pulse quick, the eye heavy, and the face unusually pale, or flushed,


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 71

purgatives should be given, the feet bathed, and garlic applied to
them.

BOWEL COMPLAINTS GENERALLY.

A great proportion of infants are cut off before they are a year old,
from bowel complaints, particularly in populous cities ; and most of
them arise from an unnatural, and I was about to say wicked practice,
of such vast numbers of persons crowding together in small, filthy, and
confined apartments or houses. In this city there are instances where
a dozen families occupy one tenement, and in Europe it is no doubt
much worse. This alone is sufficient to account for most of the bowel
and other complaints of infant children ; but when we add to this the
great quantities of trash or green fruit they eat, can we wonder that so
many are sent to an untimely grave.

Children are always sickly in the fruit season, which may be thus
accounted for : two-thirds of the fruit which comes to market in this
country is really unripe ; and children, not being in a condition to
judge for themselves, eat whatever they can lay their hands upon,
which often proves little better than a poison to their tender bowels.
Servants, and others who have the care of children, should be strictly
forbidden to give them any fruit without the knowledge of their parents.

In all these complaints it must be recollected that prevention is bet-
ter than cure. Their diet must be attended to, and it should consist
principally of milk, and at a suitable age it must be boiled with a little
flower. No fruit should be given except it is fresh and ripe. Their
apartments, persons, and clothing must be kept perfectly clean, and it
is of the highest importance that they be placed in pure air, and if pos-
sible in the country.

As soon as the bowels become disordered, the neutralizing cordial
or mixture must be given, as directed under the head of that prepara-
tion. This medicine will almost immediately remove the acidity of
the stomach, pain in the bowels, change the appearance of the passa-
ges, and, in a word, cure the complaint.

Sometimes it may be necessary to give an infusion or tea of rasp-
berry leaves, bene plant, fyc. Foment also the bowels with bitter herbs.

APHTHJE, THRUSH, OR CANKER.

Infants and children are often affected with little sore spots or erup-
tions about the mouth, and it usually extends from the stomach to the
end of the bowels, giving rise to many painful and unpleasant symp-
toms.

This complaint arises from a morbid state of the stomach, and it
must be treated by giving a gentle neutralizing physic, such as the
medicine mentioned above. The mouth may be often washed with a
decoction of sage and hyssop, sweetened with honey, and a little fine
borax may be_added.

CONVULSIONS.

When fits or convulsions arise from teething or any other cause, the


72 APPENDIX.

feet must be immediately bathed in warm ley water, and an anodyne
must be administered, such as the syrup of poppy ox paregoric.

Garlic should be bruised and applied to the stomach, and if there be
heat of the head, spirits, rain water, and vinegar may be applied.
These means must be repeated as often as fits occur : in obstinate ca-
ses it may be necessary to use a warm bath.

SORENESS, OR" EXCORIATION OP THE NAVEL STRING OR UMBILICAL CORD.

About the time the umbilical cord separates, there is sometimes sore-
ness and inflammation ; for such symptoms, sprinkle with a powder of
slippery elm bark, and apply the black salve.

RUPTURE, (HERNIA.)

Sometimes from crying or other causes, infants are afflicted with
ruptures ; when this happens the earliest attention is required.

The infant or child should be placed in a recumbent position, or on
its back. Then press the tumour or protruded part back, make a
compress of linen, which has been previously wet in a decoction of
oak bark, apply it over the rupture, and secure it by a bandage. If
this fails to keep it in its proper situation apply a truss.

TONGUE TIED, OR DIVISION OF THE FRENUM LINGU.E.

Sometimes the frenum of the tongue is so contracted, that the child
cannot nurse or suck. When this occurs, and only then, there must
be a very slight incision made with a pair of scissors or lancet.

The cut must be very small and superficial, lest a blood vessel be
wounded. If the child can nurse, this practice must never be resorted
to. In almost every case this is an imaginary complaint ; and when
parents or a parent insists upon its being done, from a mistaken notion,
the back of the lancet may be used, and this will satisfy them.

IMPERFORATED VAGINA.

Sometimes a thin membrane forms across the mouth of the vagina,
which partially or wholly closes it. This is very easily divided by a
lancet or a pair of scissors.

CLUB, CROOKED, OR DEFORMED FEET.

When children are born with this deformity, an intelligent person
informs me, that a certain practitioner is always in the habit of imme-
diately turning them at birth into a right position, and securing them
with proper splints and bandages. This he says, always obviates the
deformity.

CHOAKING.

Infants often become choaked by getting various substances into
their mouth and throat. When this accident occurs, let the child be
placed upon the lap of the mother or nurse, and its head turned down-


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 73

ward, while it is gently struck a few times on the back between the
shoulders ; if this does not immediately remove it, let the fore finger
be introduced and extract it ; should this fail, give a mild emetic.

VENERIAL DISEASE OF INFANTS.

It is now common in this corrupt age for infants to be born with the
venereal disease, received in consequence of the licentious conduct of
the parent or nurse, giving rise to ulcers in some parts of the body. I
have known some children almost a mass of corruption from the vene-
real disease communicated in this manner. The poison instead of af-
fecting the mother during pregnancy, is communicated to the infant.
When such a complaint occurs, the medicine must principally be given
to the mother, instead of the child. The alterative syrup must be ad-
ministered, and such other medicines as recommended under the head
of the venerial disease.

Who can calculate the magnitude of the vices of such men who thus
entail such a loathsome and horrid disease upon their offspring. Why
are crimes which dwindle into insignificance, compared with this,
punished, while this is passed over without any penalty ?

I have sometimes thought from the prevalence of this vice, that half
of the diseases of women and children were produced by it. Besides
the miseries inflicted upon innocent children, what domestic broils and
difficulties are the consequences.

The reader would be astonished if he knew how many young: men
are ruined by visiting houses of ill fame. It either brings thousands
to an untimely grave, or cripples, or diseases them for life ; and the
only method to put down this disgraceful and destructive vice, is for
the municipal authorities of every county wholly to exterminate every
house of the kind, by employing officers who instead of countenancing
or visiting them, as is now the case, will faithfully and rigidly perform
their duty. Not only so, every female who has the least regard to
virtue or morals, should resolve never to associate or show the least
favour to any young man, who is known or suspected of keeping com-
pany with prostitutes. Nor should any person guilty of this vice be
treated with respect until he reforms. Let him be viewed in the same
light as a thief or a robber, and then we may expect to see a refor-
mation. The odium must be stamped with public disgrace and infamy.

The Jews, by their laws, were, in certain cases, forbid to have any
manner of commerce with the diseased ; and, to this all wise legisla-
tors ought to have a special regard. In some countries diseased per-
sons have actually been forbid to marry. This is an evil of a compli-
cated kind, a natural deformity, and a political mischief; and there-
fore requires a public consideration.

ON THE MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN.

It is during infancy that the foundation of a good or bad constitution
is generally laid ; it is therefore of importance that parents should be


74 APPENDIX.

well acquainted with the various causes which may injure the health
of their offspring. .

" It appears from the annual registers of the dead, says a writer,
that almost one half of the children born in Great Britain die under
twelve years of age. To many, indeed, this may appear a natural
evil; but on due examination it will be found one of our own crea-
ting. Were the death of infants a natural evil, other animals would
be as liable to die young as man ; but this we find is by no means the
case."

It may seem strange that man, notwithstanding his superior reason,
should fall so short of other animals in the management of his young ;
but our surprise will soon cease, if we consider that brutes, guided by
instinct, never err in this respect ; while man, trusting solely to art, is
seldom right. Were a catalogue of those infants who perish annually
by art alone, exhibited to public view, it would astonish most people.

If parents are above taking care of their children, others must be
employed for that purpose ; these will always endeavour to recom-
mend themselves by the appearance of extraordinary skill and ad-
dress. By this means such a number of unnecessary and destructive
articles have been introduced into the diet, clothing, &c, of infants,
that it is no wonder so many of them perish.

It must be admitted, that most of the complaints, peculiar to infancy
and childhood, are owing to the mismanagement, or ignorance of the
mother or the nurse. First, as regards diet, or sustenance. Many are
in the habit of pouring down various liquids and mixtures made of rich
substances, and so much sweetened that the tender organs of digestion
are impaired, and acidity and bowel diseases follow. Sugar, molasses,
and every other 'article of this nature, should be avoided. No food,
except the milk of the mother should be given, except absolutely ne-
cessary. Nature has designed this liquid exclusively for the nourish-
ment of the infant, and indeed, we may say for children.

There is another precaution to be observed, which is, " never to put
an infant to a wet nurse if it can possibly be avoided." Such persons
are generally strangers, and they often communicate the most loath-
some and fatal diseases. Besides, their milk is often rendered un-
wholesome by age, or other causes. This is a very unnatural practice.

Nothing can be more preposterous than a mother who thinks it be-
low her to take care of her own child, or who is so ignorant as not to
know what is proper to be done for it. If we search nature through-
out, we cannot find a parallel to this. Every other animal is the nurse
of its own offspring, and they thrive accordingly. Were the brutes to
bring up their young by proxy, they would share the same fate with
those of the human species.

We mean not, however, to impose it as a task upon every mother to
suckle her own child. This, whatever speculative writers may allege,
is in some cases impracticable, and would inevitably prove destructive
both to the mother and child. Women of delicate'constitutions, sub-
ject to hysteric fits, or other nervous affections, make very bad nurses ;
and these complaints are now so common, that it is rare to find a wo-


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 75

man of fashion free from them; such women, therefore, supposing
them willing, are often unable to suckle their own children.

Almost every mother would be in a condition to give suck, did
mankind live agreeably to nature ; but whoever considers how far
many mothers deviate from her dictates, will not be surprised to find
some of them unable to perform that necessary office. Mothers who
do not eat a sufficient quantity of solid food, nor enjoy the benefit of
free air and exercise, can neither have wholesome juices themselves,
nor afford proper nourishment to an infant. Hence children who are
suckled by delicate women, either die young, or continue weak and
sickly all their lives.

When we say that mothers are not always in a condition to suckle
their own children, we would not be understood as discouraging that
practice. Every mother who can, ought certainly to perform so ten-
der and agreeable an office. But suppose it to be out of her power,
she may, nevertheless, be of great service to her child. The business
of nursing is by no means confined to the giving suck. To a woman
who abounds with milk, this is the easiest part of it. Numberless
other offices are necessary for a child, which the.mother ought at least
to see done. [Buchan.]

" A mother who abandons the fruit of her womb, says Buchan, as
soon as it is born, to the sole care of an hireling, hardly deserves that
name. A child, by being brought up under the mother's eye, not only
secures her affection, but may reap all the advantages of a parent's
care, though it be suckled by another. How can a mother be better
employed than in superintending the nursery? This is at once the
most delightful and important office ; yet the most trivial business or
insipid amusements are often preferred to it ! A strong proof both of
the bad taste and wrong education of modern females.

" It is indeed to be regretted that more care is not bestowed in teach-
ing the proper management of children to those whom nature has de-
signed for mothers. This, instead of being made the principal, is sel-
dom considered as any part of female education. Is it any wonder,
when females so educated, come to be mothers, that they should be
quite ignorant of the duties belonging to that character? However
strange it may appear, it is certainly true, that many mothers, and
those of fashion too, are as ignorant, when they have brought a child
into the world, of what is to be done for it, as the infant itself. Indeed
the most ignorant of the sex are generally reckoned most knowing in
the business of nursing. Hence, sensible people become the dupes of
ignorance and superstition; and the nursing of children, instead of
being conducted by reason, is the result of whim and caprice.

" Many advantages, says a writer, would arise to society, as well as
individuals, from mothers suckling their own children. It would pre-
vent the temptation which poor women are laid under of abandoning
their children to suckle those of the rich for the sake of gain ; by which
means society loses many of its most useful members, and mothers
become in some sense the murderers of their own offspring. I am
sure I speak within the truth when I say, that not one in twenty of
those children live who are thus abandoned by their mothers. For this


76 APPENDIX.

reason no mother should be allowed to suckle another's child till her
own is either dead or fit to be weaned. A regulation of this kind
would save many lives among the poorer sort, and could do no hurt
to the rich, as most women who make good nurses are able to suckle
two children in succession upon the same milk."

Tacitu3, the celebrated Roman historian, complains greatly of the
degeneracy of the Roman ladies in his time with regard to the care of
their offspring. He says, that in former times the greatest women in
Rome used to account it their chief glory to keep the house and attend
their children ; but that now the young infant was committed to the
sole care of some Grecian wench, or other menial servant. We are
afraid, wherever luxury and effeminacy prevail, there will be too much
ground for this complaint.

Again, infants and children are often injured by improper clothing.
It is customary for some nurses to wrap them in such a quantity, as to
injure their health; moderation in this respect, should be observed,
due regard being paid to that which is sufficient to render them com-
fortable.

Another very reprehensible custom is to pour down some nauseous
drug, such as paregoric, Godfrey's cordial, or some other articles, every
time the child begins to cry, or is fretful, by which it becomes habitu-
ated to the use of opium, and makes it necessary to increase the dose
in order to produce the same effect.

Another injurious practice is to give frequently worm lozenges, (the
basis of which is calomel or mercury,) upon any attack of illness, un-
der the impression that the disorder is occasioned by worms. By this
imprudent course both the health and life of the child is endangered.
Therefore those who wish to bring up their children in a healthy con-
dition, must avoid these evils, and be content to follow the simple path
of nature, and common sense.

Few things tend more to the destruction of children than drenching
them with drugs. That medicine may be sometimes necessary for
children, I do not deny ; but that it hurts them ten times for once it
does them good, I will venture to assert. A nurse or mother, the mo-
ment her child seems to ail any thing, runs immediately to the apothe-
cary, who throws in his powders, pills, and potions, till the poor infant
is poisoned ; when the child might have been restored to perfect health,
by a change of diet, air, exercise, clothing, or some very easy and
simple regulation.

Care must be taken to keep the bowels regular, which may be effect-
ed in most cases by the milk of the mother alone. Most of the com-
plaints in children arise frorn flatulence or wind ; to remove which,
give common catnip or fennel seed tea, and let them drink it freely.

When children complain of pain in the stomach and bowels, give a
moderate dose of vegetable physic ; senna and manna is very good,
and after the operation of physic, let the diet be attended to. Green
k Ult i?u St be avoided ' and whatever is hard of digestion. The feet
should be often bathed in warm water, the bowels must be fomented
with bitter herbs, and it is also necessary to give the child sufficient
exercise in the open air. Nothing is more injurious to the health of


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. 77

children than the confined and impure air of great cities. The most
rigid attention must be paid to cleanliness. By pursuing this course,
disease will be avoided, and health promoted.

EXERCISE OF CHILDREN.

Of all the causes which conspire to render the life of man short and
miserable, none has greater influence than the want of proper exercise :
healthy parents, wholesome food, and proper clothing, will avail little,
where exercise is neglected. Sufficient exercise will make up for se-
veral defects in nursing : but nothing can supply the want of it. It is
absolutely necessary to the health, the growth, and the strength of
children.

The desire of exercise is coeval with life itself. Were this princi-
ple attended to, many diseases might be prevented. But while indo-
lence and sedentary employments prevent two-thirds of mankind from
either taking sufficient exercise themselves, or giving it to their chil-
dren, what have we to expect but disease and deformity among their
offspring ? The rickets, so destructive to children, and other com-
plaints are cured by it.

Arguments to show the importance of exercise might be drawn from
every part of the animal economy ; without exercise the circulation of
the blood cannot be properly carried on, nor the different secretions duly
performed ; without exercise, the fluids cannot be properly prepared,
nor the solids rendered strong or firm. The action of the heart, the
motion of the lungs, and all the vital functions, are greatly assisted by
exercise. But to point out the manner in which these effects are pro-
duced, would lead us farther into the economy of the human body than
most of those for whom this treatise is intended, would be able to fol-
low. We shall therefore only add, that when exercise is neglected,
none of the animal functions can be duly performed ; and when this is
the case, the whole constitution must go to wreck.

A good constitution ought certainly to be our first object in the ma-
nagement of children. It lays a foundation for their being useful and
happy in life ; and whoever neglects it, not only fails in his duty to his
offspring, but to society.

I have been told that in China, where the police is the best in the
world, all the children are employed in the easier part of gardening
and husbandry ; as weeding, gathering stones off the land, and such
kind of exercise.

ON THE FOOD OF CHILDREN.

Nature, says Buchan, not only points out the food proper for an in-
fant, but actually prepares it. This, however, is not sufficient to pre-
vent some who think themselves wiser than nature from attempting to
bring up their children without her provision. Nothing can show the
disposition which mankind have to depart from nature more than their
endeavouring to bring up children without the breast. The mother's
milk, or that of a healthy nurse, is unquestionably the best food for an
infant. Neither art nor nature can afford a proper substitute for it.


78 APPENDIX.

Children may seem to thrive for a few months without the breast ; but
when teething, the small pox, and other diseases incident to childhood
come on, they generally perish. .,•;'. , t

A child, soon after the birth, shows an inclination to suck ; and
there is no reason why it should not be gratified. It is true, the
mother's milk does not always come immediately after the birth ; but
this is the way to bring it ; besides, the first milk that the child can
squeeze out of the breast answers the purpose of cleansing better than
all the drugs in the apothecary's shop, and at the same time prevent
inflammations of the breast, fevers, and other diseases incident to
mothers.

If the mother or nurse has enough of milk, the child will need little
or no food for the third or fourth month. It will then be proper to
give it once or twice a-day, a little of some food that is easy of diges-
tion. This will ease the mother, will accustom the child by degrees
to take food, and will render the weaning both less difficult and less
dangerous. All great and sudden transitions are to be avoided in
nursing. For this purpose, the food of children ought not only to be
simple, but to resemble, as nearly as possible, the properties of milk.
Indeed, milk itself should make a principal part of their food, not only
before they are weaned but for some time after.

Next to milk, we would recommend good light bread. Bread may
be given to a child as soon as it shows an inclination to chew ; and it
may at all times be allowed as much plain bread as it will eat. The
very chewing of bread will promote the cutting of the teeth, and the
discharge of saliva, while, by mixing with the nurse's milk in the sto-
mach, it will afford an excellent nourishment. Children discover an
early inclination to chew whatever is put into their hands. Parents
observe the inclination, but generally mistake the object. Instead of
giving the child something which may at once exercise its gums and
afford it nourishment, they commonly put into its hands a piece of
hard metal, or impenetrable substance. A crust of bread is the best
gum-stick. It not only answers the purpose better than any thing
else, but has the additional properties of nourishing the child, and car-
rying the saliva down into the stomach, which is too valuable a liquor
to be lost.

Bread, besides being used dry, may be many ways prepared into
food for children. One of the best methods is to boil it in water, af-
terward pouring the water off, and mixing with the bread a proper
quantity of new milk unboiled. Milk is both more wholesome and
nourishing this way than boiled, and is less apt to occasion costive-
ness. For a child farther advanced, bread may be mixed in veal or
chicken broth, made into puddings. Bread is proper food for children
at all times, provided it be plain, made of wholesome grain, and well
fermented ; but when enriched with fruits, sugars, or such things, it
becomes very unwholesome.

It is soon enough to allow children animal food when they have got
teeth to eat it. They should never taste it till after they are weaned,
and even then they ought to use it sparingly. Indeed, when children
live wholly on vegetable food, it is apt to sour on their stomachs ; but,


DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CH1LEREN. 79

on the other hand, too much flesh heats the body, and occasions fevers
and other inflammatory diseases. This plainly points out a due mix-
ture of animal and vegetable food as most proper for children.

THE INJURIOUS EFFECTS OF UNWHOLESOME AIR UPON CHILDREN.

F -\v things says an experienced physician, prove more destructive
to children than confined or unwholesome air. Impure air is render-
ed so extremely pernicious, that it becomes a poison to infants.

Want of wholesome air is likewise destructive to many of the chil-
dren born in great towns. There the poorer sort of inhabitants live
in low, dirty, confined houses, to which the fresh air has scarcely any
access. Though grown people, who are hardy and robust, may live
in such situations, yet they generally prove fatal to their offspring,
few of whom arrive at maturity, and those who do are weak and de-
formed. As such people are not in a condition to carry their children
abroad into the open air, we must lay our account with losing the
greater part of them. But the rich have not this excuse. It is their
business to see that their children be daily carried abroad, and that
they be kept in the open air for a sufficient time. This will always
succeed better if the mother goes along with them. Servants are
often negligent in these matters, and allow a child to sit or lie on the
damp ground, instead of leading or carrying it about. The mother
surely needs air as well as her children ; and how can she be better
employed them in attending them ?

A very bad custom prevails, of making children sleep in small
apartments, or crowding two or three beds into one chamber. In-
stead of this, the nursery ought always to be the largest and best
aired room in the house. When children are confined in small apart-
ments, the air not only becomes unwholesome, but the heat relaxes
their solids, renders them delicate, and disposes them to colds and ma-
ny other disorders. Nor is the custom of wrapping them too close in
cradles less pernicious. One would think that nurses were afraid lest
children should suffer by breathing free air, as many of them actually
cover the child's face while asleep, and others wrap a covering over
the whole cradle, by which means the child is forced to breathe the
same air over and over all the time it sleeps. [Buckan.]

CLOTHING OF CHILDREN, AND CLEANLINESS.

It is too common a practice with nurses and mothers to swathe very
young children with flannel bandages and stays, the consequences
of which are, that they either become very susceptible to the im-
pressions made by the external air when they are left off, or deformity
takes place.

The best rule that can be observed with respect to the dressing of a
child, is that it be encumbered with no more clothes than are necessa-
ry to keep it warm, in every instance proportioning these to the tem-
perature of the atmosphere, the season of the year and climate ; that
they sit easy and sufficiently loose on its body, so as not to compress
and confine any part of it ; that they are composed of articles that are


QO APPENDIX.

light soft and warm, being at the same time simple and without com-
plication and that they be changed frequently, or as often as they hap-
pen to be wetted by the urine of the child. Wet clothes not only fret
and gall the tender skin of infants, but also give them a strong un-
pleasant smell, and not unfrequently occasion eruptive disorders;
whereas cleanliness in the clothing of an infant, together with proper
ablutions with tepid or cold water, and frictions with the hand over
every part of the body after it has been thus purified, each day previ-
ous to dressing it, will greatly tend to preserve it in good health. In
every part of the dress of an infant, as well as in the application of its
napkins, tape should be substituted instead of pins.

NURSES.

Parents who are obliged to employ nurses should be very particular
in employing such as are free from any complaint, unquestionable re-
ferences as to character should be given. Her milk should not be old,
and she should be clean, her person and dress prudent and careful, and
her nursing should be under the immediate control or superintendance
of the mother or parents.


All diseases of women and children not noticed in the preceding
chapters will be found under the appropriate heads ; such as rickets,
worms, dropsy in the head, croup, &c.


NOTES


CHOLERA


Note 1.

Annual bill of mortality. — We have obtained a sight of the annu-
al bill of mortality for New-York, during the year 1832, which was
presented to the Common Council on Monday evening, January 21st,
1833, and is now in the process of publication, from which we derive
the following particulars :

The whole number of deaths during the year, as will be seen be-
low, was ten thousand three hundred and fifty-nine ; being three
thousand nine hundred and ninety-six more than ever occurred in the
city before, in any one year. This extraordinary increase of mortali-
ty is mainly attributable to the ravages of Malignant Cholera, which
carried off no less than three thousand five hundred and fifteen indi-
viduals, all in the months of July, August, September, and October.
Of the whole number, (10,359) there died of

5

81

10

8

6

29

15

3

72

5

55

3

3515

93

7

1

1415

501

2

16

1

104

3


Abscess,

Apoplexy,

Asphyxia,

Asthma,

Bilious dysentery, .

Burned or scalded,

Cancer,

Caries,

Casualty,

Catarrh,

Childbed,

Chlorosis,

Cholera,

Cholera morbus,

Cholic,

Compression of the brain,

Consumption,

Convulsions,

Contusion,

Cramp in the stomach,

Diabetes,

Diarrhoea,

Drinking cold water,


11


g2 APPENDIX.


Dropsy,

Dropsy in the chest,

Dropsy in the head,

Drowned,

Dysentery, .

Dyspepsia, .

Epilepsy,

Erysipelas, .

Fever, .

Bilious fever,

Bilious remittent,

Hectic,

Inflammatory,

Intermittent,

Puerpal,

Remittent,

Scarlet,

Typhus,

Flux infantile,

Fracture,

Frozen,

Gout,

Gravel,

Hemorrhage, .

Hemoptysis, .

Hives or croup,

Hysteria,

Jaundice,

Inflammation of the bowels,

Inflammation in the brain,

Inflammation in the chest,

Inflammation in the liver,

Inflammation in the stomach,

Influenza, : :

Insanity, : :

Intemperance, :

Killed or murdered,

Lock jaw, : :

Lumber abscess, :

Marasmus, : :

Measles, : :

Mortification, :

Nervous disease, :

Old age, : :

Palsy, : :

Peripneumony, :

Pleurisy, : :

Pneumonia typhodes,

Quinsy, : :

Rheumatism, :


130

43

344

65

130

8

11

13

80

31

8

3

3

7

5

27

221

84

334

2

5

2

2

10

5

179

2

14

196

99

77

44

30

33

4

119

3

3

2

177

290

23

2

154

36

234

22

57

2

7


NOTES.


Rupture, :

Schirrus of the liver,

Scrofula or king's evil,

Small pox, :

Sore throat, :

Spasm, :

Spina bifida,

Sprue, :

Still-born, :

Stranguary, :

Sudden death,

Suicide, :

Syphilis, :

Tabes mesenterica,

Teething, :

Tumour, :

Vomiting blood,

Ulcer, :

Unknown, :

Whooping cough,

Worms, :

Inflammation of the bladder,


83

7

37

17

89

22

13

5

32

384

1

2

29

4

24

110

5

1

1

132

63

41

4


Total, 10,359.

The number of deaths in January was 564 ; February, 735 ; March,
545 ; April, 478 ; May, 515 ; June, 410 ; July, 2,467,— of which by
Cholera, 1,797; August, 2,206— of which by Cholera, 1,202; Septem-
ber, 1,064 — of which by Cholera, 451 ; October, 586 — of which by
Cholera, 63 ; November, 400 ; December, 389. Total, 10,359.

Of the age of one year or under, there died 1,922 ; between one and
two years, 830 ; between two and five years, 965 ; five and ten years,
450; ten and twenty, 433; twenty and thirty, 1,397; thirty and forty,
1,617; forty and fifty, 1,142; fifty and sixty, 705; sixty and seventy,
489; seventy and eighty, 273; eighty and ninety, 109; ninety and a
hundred, 25 ; over a hundred, 2. Total, 10,359.

It will be observed that the proportion of deaths in middle age is
unusually large: the Cholera having selected the greater part of its
victims from that description of persons.

.» Of the whole . number deceased, 3,200 were men, 2,694 women,
2,463 boys, and 2,092 girls. Total males, 5,663; females, 4,696.
Excess of males, 967.

Proportion of deaths to the whole population, rating it at 220,000,
1 in 21 1-4. In 1831, rating the population at 210,000, 1 in 34 1-2.

The number of deaths in 1831 was 6,353 : in 1830, 5,537 : in 1829,
4,094; in 1828, 5,181 : in 1827, the same ; in 1826, 4,973.

Note 2.
Sm— I request permission through your extensively circulated pa-
per, to convey to the public my opinion as to the nature, and my sus-


84 APPENDIX.

cessful practice in the cure of cholera morbus, for more than thirty
years, with uniform success.

The disease is introduced by causes too well known, and shows it-
self at first by violent pains from the stricture of the gall duct, and is
afterward kept up by the irritability of the bowels, brought on by the
excoriation of the internal coat, from the acrid or scalding nature of the
bile when first expelled the gall bag. This irritation keeps up the dis-
ease till nature recovers or sinks.

1 never use calomel, because I have a more certain, safe, and speedy-
remedy, that produces an almost instantaneous relief; calomel relieves
by inducing a more copious secretion of means to defend the membrane
from excessive irritation, where it succeeds : whilst the remedy I re-
commend, affords a tone of firmness to the membrane, a smoothness of
surface that defends it from the action of the bile, and removes exces-
sive irritation ; by vdtich means the disease goes off as soon as the
gall bladder is emptred of its excessive irritative contents, which is
very soon accomplished, as from three to five or six doses complete the
cure. The following is one of the proofs of my assertion.

I was surgeon of the Dolphin in the year 1825, between the 17th
and 26th of July in that year ; I had two hundred and sixty-four cases
of cholera morbus, from which, with the exception of sixteen being
kept under treatment for three days, four patients demanding attention
for four days, and three for five days, every patient was restored with-
in the space of fifty hours : one who had been previously ill, demand-
ed longer attention.

I persuaded the chief mate to take a dose of the remedy before the
healthy remaining part of the ship's company to induce them to fol-
low his example ; they all complied, and to the best of my recollection
not one of them had occasion to trouble me from illness.

The remedy I gave was — one drachm of nitrous acid, (not nitric,
that has foiled me,) one ounce of peppermint water or camphor mix-
ture, and forty drops of tincture of opium. A fourth part every three
or four hours in a cupful of thin gruel. The body should be covered
with a succession of hot clothes dry; bottles of hot water to the feet,
if they can be obtained ; constant and small sippings of finely strained
gruel, or sago, or tapioca ; no spirit, no wine, no fermented liquors till
quite restored. I am your obedient humble servant,

THOMAS HOPE, Surgeon.


Note 3.


It is remarkable, that even now, January 21st, 1833, bowel com-
plaints are very prevalent, particularly the cholera morbus; and which
very much resembles the Spasmodic Cholera, showing evidently, that
the atmosphere is charged with the poison, and that nothing is want-
ing but some exciting cause to bring it into action.

I have just this moment been to visit a patient who has had a very
severe attack of the complaint, vomiting and purging, the discharges
consisting of a fluid resembling " dirty rice water."


INDEX TO VOLUME IT.


Abscess,

Amaurosis,

Abscess of the eye,

Anthrax,

Ague in the breast,

face,
Animation, suspended,


20
291
295
310
315
436
452
by hanging, 452
by drown-
ing, . 452
Amputation, . . . . 396, 465
Antrum, collections of matter in, . 446
Abscess, lumbar,
Aneurism,

of the heart,
aorta,
popliteal,
femoral,
axillary,
carotid,

B
Bites of rabid animals,
viper,

rattlesnake,
adder,
Brain, concussion of, .
compression of,
Bonos, diseases of,
Bronchotomy,
Bronchocele,
Boil,

Burns and scalds,
Bubo,

C
Connexion between physic and

surgery, .

Concussion of the brain,
Compression of the brain, .

from effused

blood,
depressed
bone,
Cancer, ....

and scirrhus, .
Carcinoma,

Compound dislocations,
Carbuncle,
Caries,

Cold, exposure to intense,
Canine madness,
Castration,
Cupping,
Cataract, .


Chilblain,
Corns,
Circocele,
Chancre,


446
331
338
338
338
338
338
338

52

52

52

52

64

67

152

474

432

433

449

243


6

G4

G7

67

. 68
164, 178
. 164
164, 178
. 127
. 310
. 152
. 452
. 455
. 472
. 475
. 289


D


Dropsy of the eye,

scrotum,
spermatic cord

Dislocations,
of


Deafness, .
Dow-worm,


the humerus, or
shoulder, .
lower jaw,
fore-arm,
radius,
wrist, .
thumb, .
thigh-bone, or

hip, .
knee-pan,
ankle, .


Page
425
439
410
242

298

, 405

, 408

. 119
r

. 131

. 129

. 133

. 135

. 136

. 136

137
142
143
435
443


Eye, inflammation of, . . . 275

dropsy of, . . . . 298

fungus of, . 296

abscess of, . . . . 295

tumours of, . . . 297

protrusion of, . . . 298

Erysipelas, .... 325

Extraneous substances in the ear, 435

Enlargementof the prostate gland, 395

F
Fungus hcematodes, . . . 178
of the eye, . . .179
testicle, . . .179
Fistula, : . .182

perineum, ■ . . 203
lacrymalis, . . . 204
in ano, .... 182
plate of, ... 184

bandage for, . . I 188
illustrations of, . . 196
Fractures in general, ... 89
particular, . 103

of the nose, . . . 103
lower jaw, . . 103
clavicle, or collar-
bone, . 104
sternum, . . 106
humeruf, or upp«r

arm, .115

ribs, . . .107


INDEX.


Fractures of the femur, or thigh-
bone,
•within the capsular liga-
ment,
fore-arm and leg,
remarks on, by Count
Lasallec,
Femoral hernia, .
Felon,
Furunculus,
Face, pain in,

Foreign bodies in the throat,
Falling down of the bowel,

G
Gases, poisonous,
Ganglion, .
Gonorrhoea,
Gravel,
Gun-shot wounds,

H
Head, injuries of,
Hordeolum,
Hydrophobia,
Hernia,

femoral, .
Haematoctle,

varicocele,
Hare-lip,
Herpes,
Hydrocele, .
Hydarthus,
Haemorrhoids,


Pago
108

110

117

117
467
413
433
436
439
218


Necrosis,
Neuralgia,


Inflammation,

of the testicle
breast,
eye,
Injuries of the head, .
Illustrations,
Inverted toe nail,
Impetigo, .
Itch, ....

K
King's evil,

L
Locked-jaw,
Leeches, . . .
Lues venerea,

M


. 460

. 434

. 239

. 383

. 42

. 62

. 296

. 455

. 358

. 467

. 411

. 410

. 416

. 421

. 405

. 221

. 208

. 16

. 412

. 315

. 275

. 62

. 479

. 437

. 444

. 445

. 265

. 300

475

237, 245


Mortification,

Mammary abscess,

Mastodynia,

Madness, canine,

Mineral poisons, .

Means for keeping fractures re

duccd, ....

to prevent bad conse

quences of fractures,

Method of treating a hydatid tu

mour, ....
Mercury, in venereal complaints,


26
315
315
455
456

91

96

131
251


Opacity of the cornea,
Ophthalmia,

chronic, .
tarsi,
Operative surgery,
Operation in cataract,
of couching,
for aneurism,
fistula in ano,
femoral hernia,
of castration,
trepanning,
for enlarged tonsils,
Opening the wind-pipe,

Plaster, uniting, .
Plate of, .
Pulleys, remarks on
Pterygium,
Poisons,

tests for,
Poison vine,
Poisonous gases,
Paracentesis,
Paronychia,
Polypus,
Psoriasis,
Pernio,

Pain in the face,
Psora,

Prostate gland, diseases of,
Piles, .
Prolapsis ani,

R
Ranula,
Rickets,
Ring-worm,
Rupture,
Retention of urine,

S
Sympathy,
Suppuration,
Scirrlius,
Scrofula,

figure of a case,
Staphyloma,
Stye, .

St. Anthony's fire,
Suffocation,
Scarification,
Sall-rhcum,
Scald head,
Sprains,

Scalds and burns,
Strictures, .
Suppression of urine,
Stone,

Scirrlius of the testicle,
Syphilis.


T Page

Tumours and warts of the eye, . 297

sarcomatous, . . 428

steatomatous, . 428

encysted, . . . 429

Tetanus, 301

Tests for poisons, . . . 458

Tapping, 471

Trepanning, .... 473
Tonsils, enlarged, . . 434, 474

Tongue-tied, .... 474

Treatment of compound fractures, 98

Testicle, inflammation of, . . 412

Tic-doloureux, .... 426

Toe-nail, inverted, . . . 437

Toothache, 436

Tinea capitas, .... 443

Testicle, scirrhus of, . . . 409

U

Ulcer of the eye, . . . 295

Ulcers, ..... 144

Urethra, strictures in, . . . 374

Urine, suppression and retention of, 378


Varicocele, .
Venereal disease,

W
Wounds,

incised,

lacerated,

contused,

punctured,

gun-shot,

poisoned,

of the intestines,

in particular parts,

penetrating cavities,

of the thorax,
joints,

of tendons, .

of the scalp, .
White-swelling, .
Whitlow, .
Weeping sinew, (sec ganglion,)
Warts, ....

Wind-pipe, foreign bodies in,


APPENDIX.


Page


Falling of the womb,


. 65


Inflammation of the womb,


. 66


Diseases of children, .


. 67


Still-born infants,


. 67


Retention of the meconium,


. 67


Acidities, ....


. 68


Flatulency,


. 68


Gripes, ....


. 68


Galling and excoriation,


. 69


Looseness, or purging,


. 69


Teething, ....


69


Bowel complaints, generally,


. 71


AphtluE, thrush, or canker,


71


Convulsions,


71


Rupture, ....


72


Tongue-tied,


72


Imperforate vagina, .


72


Club, or deformed feet,


72


Choking, ....


72


Sore nipples,


66


Atrophy, from suckling,


66


Soreness, or excoriation of tr


e


navel string, . . . .


72


Conception,


49


Pregnancy,


49


Sickness of the stomach,


50


Heartburn,


51


Lethargy,

Headach,

Costiveness,

Piles,

Suppression of urine,

Toothache,

Longings, .

Hysterics, .

Swelling and pain in the breast,

Palpitation of the heart,

Cramps,

Wakefulness,

Fits, .

False pain,

Abortion, .

Labour,

Delivery, . ' .

Parturition,

Management of labour,

Venereal disease of infants,

Management of children,

Exercise of ditto,

Food of ditto,

Clothing of ditto,

Cleanliness,

Nurses,


CHOLERA.


Description,
History,
Notes on, .
Causes,

remote,

intermediate,

proximate,
Symptoms,

First, or the incipient stage
Second, confirmed stage,
Third, collapsed stage,
Fourth, stage of re-action,
Symptoms of the disease, as they
occurred in the New- York hos
pitals,
Premonitory symptoms,
Essential symptoms, .
Premonitory, do not always occur
Discrimination, .
Prognosis, ....
Contagion,
Remarks against contagion,

in favour of contagion,
Dissection,


Page
3
4
6

14
14
16
17
18
18
20
21
21


22
23
23
24
25
26
26
26
29
32


Page

Common practice, ... 32

Reformed practice, ... 33
Treatment in the premonitory

" stage, 33

Circular, 33

Treatment in the confirmed stage, 35
collapsed stage, 38
stage of re-ac-
tion, . . 39
Convalescence, .... 40
Prevention, .... 41
Quarantine regulations, . . 41
as regards filth, . 41
habitations, . . 41
persons, . . 41
Reports of a medical commission, 42
Cure of the cholera, ... 44
as practised among the In-
dians, .... 45
Stephen Ayres' remedy, . 45
Dr. Cokes*, ... 46
Dr. Robcon's, ... 46
Epidemics, an account of, . . 47
Notes on the cholera, . ' . 81
