Buddhist Records of the Western World, Vol. 1 (Samuel Beal, 1884)
==========================================================
Beal's 1884 translation of Xuanzang's Si-yu-ki — the great Chinese pilgrim's record of 7th-century Buddhist India, volume 1. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

COC 
. \\ \ 


SS 
SS \ 
WX Qa 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2007 with funding from 
Microsoft Corporation 


http://www. archive.org/details/siyukibuddhistreO2hsuoft 


-TRUBNER’S ORIENTAL ‘SERIES. 


** A knowledge of the commonplace, at least, of Oriental literature, philo- 
sophy, and religion is as necessary to the general reader of the preseut day 
as an acquaintance with the Latin and Greek classics was a generation or so 
ago. Immense strides have been made within the present century in these 
branches of learning; Sanskrit has been brought within the range of accurate 
philology, and its invaluable ancient literature thoroughly investigated ; the 
language and sacred books of the Zoroastrians have been laid bare; Egyptian, 
Assyrian, and other records of the remote past have been deciphered, and a 
group of scholars speak of still more recondite Accadian and Hittite monu- 
ments; but the resnlts of all the scholarship that has been devoted to these 
subjects have been almost inaccessible to the public because they were con- 
tained for the most part in learned or expensive works, or scattered through- 
out the numbers of scientific periodicals. Messrs, TrUBNER & Co., ina spirit 
of enterprise which does them infinite credit, have determined to supply the 
constantly-increasing want, and to give in a popular, or, at least, a compre- 
hensive form, all this mass of knowledge to the world.”— Times. 


NOW READY, 
Post 8vo, pp. 568, with Map, cloth, price 16s. 


THE INDIAN EMPIRE: ITS HISTORY, PEOPLE, 
AND PRODUCTS. 


Being a revised form of the article ‘‘ India,” in the ‘‘ Imperial Gazetteer,” 
remodelled into chapters, brought up to date, and incorporating 
the general results of the Censns of 1881, 


By W. W. HUNTER, C.LE., LL.D., 
Director-General of Statistics to the Government of India, 


“The article ‘India,’ in Volume IV., is the touchstone of the work, and proves 
clearly enough the sterling metal of which it is wrought. It represents the essence 
of the 100 volumes which contain the results of the statistical survey conducted by 
Dr. Hunter throughout each of the 240 districts of India. It is, moreover, the only 
attempt that has ever been made to show how the Indian people have been built up, 
and the evidence from the original materials has been for the first time sifted and 
examined by the light of the lecal research in which the author was for so long 
engaged.” —Times. 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


THE FOLLOWING WORKS HAVE ALREADY APPEARED :— 
Third Edition, post 8vo, cleth, pp. xvi.—428, price 16s. 
ESSAYS ON THE SACRED LANGUAGE, WRITINGS, 
AND RELIGION OF THE PARSIS. 

By MARTIN HAUG, Pua.D., 


Late of the Universities of Tiibingen, Gottingen, and Bonn ; Superintendent 
of Sanskrit Studies, and Professor of Sanskrit in the Poona College’ 


EpITED AND ENLARGED BY Dr, BE. W. WEST. 
To which is added a Biographical Memoir of the late Dr. Have 
by Prof. E, P. Evans. 


I, History of the Researches into the Sacred Writings and Religion of the 
Parsis, from the Marliest Times down to the Present. 

If. Languages of the Parsi Scriptures. 
HL. The Zend-Avesta, or the Scripture of the Parsis, 
1V. The Zoroastrian Religion, as to its Origin and Development. 

s¢Pssays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion of the Parsis,’ by the 
late Dr. Martin Haug, edited by Dr. KE. W. West. The author intended, on his return 
from India, to expand the materials contained in this work into a comprehensive 
aceount of the Zoroastrian religion, but the design was frustrated by his untimely 
death. We have, however, in a concise and readable form, a history of the researches 
into the sacred writings and religion of the Parsis from the earliest times down to 
the present—a dissertation on the languages of the Parsi Scriptures, a translation 
of the Zend-Avesta, or the Scripture of the Parsis, and a dissertation on the Zorous- 
trian religion, with especial reference to its origin and development.”— Zines. 


Post 8vo, cloth, pp. viii—176, price 7s. 6d. 
TEXTS FROM THE BUDDHIST CANON 


COMMONLY KNOWN AS “ DHAMMAPADA.” 
With Accompanying Narratives. 


Translated from the Chinese by S. BEAL, B.A., Professor of Chinese, 
University College, London. 


The Dhammapada, as_hitberto known by the Pali Text Edition, as edited 
by Fausbéll, by Max Miiller’s English, and Albrecht Weber’s German 
translations, consists ouly of twenty-six chapters or sections, whilst the 
Chinese version, or rather recension, as now translated by Mr. Beal, con- 
sists of thirty-nine sections, The students of Pali who possess Fausbéll’s 
text, or either of the above-named translations, will therefore needs want 
Mr. Beal's English rendering of the Chinese version; the thirteen above- 
named additional sections not being accessible to them in any other form ; 
for, even if they understand Chinese, the Chinese original would be un- 
obtainable by them. 

“Mr, Beal's rendering of the Chinese translation is a most valuable aid to the 
critical study of the work. It contains authentic texts gathered from ancient 
canonical books, and generally connected with some incident in the history of 
Luddha. Their great interest, however, consists in the light which they throw upon 
everyday life in India at the remote period at which they were written, and upon 
the method of teaching adopted by the founder of the religion. The method 
employed was principally parable, and the simplicity of the tales and the excellence 
of the morals inculcated, as well as the strange hold which they have retained upon 
the minds of millions of people, make them a very remarkable study."— Times. 

‘Mr. Beal, by making it accessible in an English dress, has added to the great ser- 
vices he has already rendcred to the comparative study of religious history.”—Acodemy. 

‘Valuable as exhibiting the doctrine of the Buddhists in its purest, least adul- 
terated form, it brings themedern reader face to face with that simple creed and rule 
ef conduct which won its way overthe minds of myriads, and which is now nominally 
professed by 145 millions, who have overlaid its austere simplicity with innumerable 
earemonies, forgotten its maxims, perverted its teaching, and so inverted its leading 
principle that a religion whose founder denicd a Ged, now worships that founder as 
a god himself.” —Scoteman, 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES, 


Second Edition, post 8vo, cloth, pp. xxiv,—360, price ros. 6d. 


THE HISTORY OF INDIAN LITERATURE. 
By ALBRECHT WEBER. 


Translated from the Second German Edition by Joun Many, M.A., and 
THEODOR ZACHARIAE, Ph.D., with the sanction of the Author. 


Dr. BUHLER, Inspector of Schools in India, writes:—‘‘ When I was Pro- 
fessor of Oriental Languages in Elphinstone College, I frequently felt the 
want of such a work to which I could refer the stndeuts.” 

Professor COWELL, of Cambridge, writes :—‘‘It will be especially useful 
to the students in our Indian colleges and universities. I used to long for 
such a book when I was teaching in Caleutta. Hindu students are intensely 
interested in the history of Sanskrit literature, and this volume will supply 
them with all they want on the subject.” 

Professor WHITNEY, Yale College, Newhaven, Conn., U.S.A., writes :— 
“*T was one of the class to whom the work was originally given in the form 
of academic lectures. At their first appearance they were by far the most 
learned and able treatment of their subject; and with their recent additions 
they still maintain decidedly the same rank.” 

““¥Js perhaps the most comprehensive and lucid survey of Sanskrit literature 
extant. The essays contained in the volume were originally delivered as academic 
lectures, and at the time of their first publication were acknowledged to be by far 
the most learned and able treatment of the subject. They have now been brought 
He to date by the addition of all the most important results of recent research.”— 

ames. 


Post 8vo, cloth, pp. xii.—1rg98, accompanied by Two Language 
Maps, price 12s. 


A SKETCH OF 
THE MODERN LANGUAGES OF THE EAST INDIES. 
By ROBERT N. CUST. 


The Author has attempted to fill up a vacuum, the inconvenience of 
which pressed itself on his notice. Much had been written about the 
languages of the East Indies, but the extent of our present knowledge had 
not even been brought to a focus. It occurred to him that it might be of 
use to others to publish in an arranged form the notes which he had collected 
for his own edification. 


“Supplies a deficiency which has long been felt."— Times. 

““The book before us is then a valuable contribution to philological science. It 
passes under review a vast number of languages, and it gives, or professes to give, in 
every case the sum and substance of the opinions and judgments of the best-informed 
writers.”—Saturday Review. 


Second Corrected Edition, post 8vo, pp. xii.—116, cloth, price 5s. 


THE BIRTH OF THE WAR-GOD. 
A Poem. By KALIDASA. 


Translated from the Sanskrit intd English Verse by 
Rawpu T. UH. Grirriru, M.A. 


“A very spirited rendcring of the Kumérasambhava, which was first published 
twenty-six years ago, and which we are glad to see made once more accessible.” — 
Times. 

“Myr, Griffith’s very spirited rendering is well known to most who are at all 
interestcd in Indian literature, or enjoy the tenderness of feeling and rich creative 
imagination of its author.”"—Indian Antiquary. 

‘(We are very glad to welcome a second edition of Professor Griffith's admiraLle 
translation. Few translations deserve a sccond edition better."—Athenaum, 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp. 432, cloth, price 16s. 
A CLASSICAL DICTIONARY OF HINDU MYTHOLOGY 
AND RELIGION, GEOGRAPHY, HISTORY, AND . 
LITERATURE. 


By JOHN DOWSON, M.R.A.S., 
Late Professor of Hindustani, Staff College. 
“This not only forms an indispensable book of reference to students of Indian 
literature, but is also of great general interest, as it gives in a concise and easily 


accessible form all that need be known about the personages of Hindu mythology 
whose names are so familiar, but of whom so little is known outside the limited 


eircle of savants.”—-Times. 

‘It is no slight gain when such subjects are treated fairly and fully in a moderate 
space; and we need only add that the few wants which we may hope to see supplied 
in new editions detract but little from the general excellence of Mr. Dowson’s work.” 


—Saturday Review. 


Post 8vo, with View of Mecca, pp. cxii.—172, cloth, price 9s. 


SELECTIONS FROM THE KORAN. 


By EDWARD WILLIAM LANE, 
Translator of ‘‘ The Thousand and One Nights;” &c., &c. 


A New Edition, Revised and Enlarged, with an Introduction hy 
SranLey Lane Poo. 


“+, .. Has been lony esteemed in this country as the compilation of one of the 
greatest Arabie scholars of the time, the late Mr. Lane, the well-known translator of 
the ‘Arabian Nights.’ . .. The present editor has enhanced the value of his 
relative’s work by divesting the text of a great deal of extraneous matter introduced 
by way of comment, and prefixing an introduction.”"— Times. 

“Mr, Poole is both a generous and a learned biographer. . . . Mr. Poole tells us 
the facts . . . so far as it is possible for industry and criticism to ascertain them, 
and for liter try skill to present them in a condensed and readable form.”— #nglish- 
man, Calcutta, 


Post 8v0, pp. vi.—368, cloth, price r4s. 


MODERN INDIA AND THE INDIANS, 
BEING A SERIES OF IMPRESSIONS, NOTES, AND ESSAYS. 


By MONIER WILLIAMS, D.C.L., 
Hon. LL.D, of the University of Caleutta, Hon. Member of the Bombay Asiatic 
Society, Boden Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Oxford. 
Third Edition, revised and augmented by considerable Additions, 
with Hlustrations and a Map. 

“Tn this volume we haye the thoughtful impressions of a thoughtful man on some 
of the most important questions connected with our Indian Empire, ... An en- 
lightened ohservant man, travelling among an enlightened observant people, Professor 
Monier Williams has brought before the public in a pleasant form more of the manners 
and cnstoms of the Queen's Indian subjects than we ever remember to have seen in 
any one work. He not only deserves the thanks of every Englishman for this able 
contribution to the study of Modern India—a subject with which we should be 
specially familiar—but he deserves the thanks of every Indian, Parsee or Hindu, 
Buddhist and Moslem, for his clear exposition of their manners, their creeds, and 
their necessities.”— Times. 


Post 8vo, pp. xliv.—376, cloth, price 14s. 
METRICAL TRANSLATIONS FROM SANSKRIT 
WRITERS. 


With an Introduction, many Prose Versions, and Parallel Passages from 
Classical Authors. 


Br J. MUIR, C.LE., D.C.L., LL.D., Ph.D. 
“.. . An agreeable introduction to Hindu poetry.”— Times. 
«... A volume which may be taken as a fair illustration alike of the religious 
and moral sentiments and of the legendary lore of the best Sanskrit writers.”— 
dinburgh Daily Review, 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Second Edition, post 8vo, pp. xxvi.—244, cloth, price ros, 6d? 


THE GULISTAN; 
Or, ROSE GARDEN OF SHEKH MUSHLIU’D-DIN SADI OF SHIRAZ, 


Translated for the First Time into Prose and Verse, with an Introductory 
Preface, and a Life of the Author, from the Atish Kadah, 


By EDWARD B. EASTWICK, C.B., M.A., I.R.S., M.R.A.S. 


‘It is a very fair rendering of the original.”—Times. 

«The new edition has long been desired, and will be welcomed by all who t ike 
any interest in Oriental poetry. The Gulistan is a typical Persian verse-book of th: 
highest order. Mr. Eastwick’s rhymed translation . .. has long established itself in 
a secure position as the best version of Sadi’s finest work.”—Academy. 


“It is both faithfully and gracefully executed.”— Tablet. 


In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. viii.—408 and viii.—348, cloth, price 28s. 


MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS RELATING TO INDIAN 
: SUBJECTS. 
Br BRIAN HOUGHTON HODGSON, Esq, F.1.S., 


Late of the Bengal Civil Service ; Corresponding Member of the Institute; Chevalier 
of the Legion of Honour; late British Minister at tue Court of Nepal, &., &e. 


CONTENTS OF VOL, I. 

Section I.—On the Koech, Bédé, and Dhimal Tribes.—Part I. Vocabulary.— 
Part Il. Granrmar.—Part HI. Their Origin, Location, Numbers, Creed, Customs, 
Character, and Condition, with a General Description of the Climate they dwell in. 
—Appendix. 

Section II.—On Himalayan Ethnology.—I. Comparative Vocabulary of the Lan- 
guages of the Broken Tribes of Népal.—IL. Vocabulary of the Dialects of the Kirant 
Language,—III. Grammatical Analysis of the Vayu Language. The Vayu Grammar, 
—lV. Aualysis of the Babing Dialect of the Kiranti Language, The B&hing Gram- 
mar.—V. On the Vayu or Hayu Tribe of the Central Himaldya.—VI. On te Kiranti 
Tribe of the Central Himaldya. 


CONTENTS OF VOL. Il. 

Section T1I.—On the Aborigines of North-Eastern India. Comparative Vocabulary 
of the Tibetan, Bddd, aud Garé Tongues, 

Section 1V,—Aborigines of the North-Eastern Frontier, 

Sgction V.—Aborigines of the Eastern Frontier. 

Section VI.—The Indo-Chinese Borderers, and their connection with the Hima- 
layans and Tibetans. Comparative Vocabnlary of Indo-Chinese Borderers in Arakan. 
Comparative Vocabulary of Indo-Chinese Borderers in Tenasserim. 

Section VII.—The Mongolian Affinities of the Caucasiaus.—Comparison and Ana- 
lysis of Caucasian and Mongolian Words. 

Section VIIL—Physical Type of Tibetans. 

Secrion IX.—The Aborigines of Central India.—Comparative Vocabulary of the 
Aboriginal Languages of Central India.—Aboriyvines of the Eastern Ghats.—Vocabu- 
lary of some of the Dialects ot the Hill and Wandering Tribes in the Northern Sircars. 
—Ahorigines of the Nilgiris, with Remarks on their Affinities.—Supplement to the 
Nilgirian Vocabularies,—The Aborigines of Southern India and Ceylon. 

Section X.—Route of Nepalese Mission to Pekin, with Remarks on the Water- 
Shed and Plateau of Tibet, 

SEcrion XI.—Route from Kathmandu, the Capital of Nepal, to Darjeeling in 
Sikim.—Memorandum relative to the Seven Cosis of Nepal. 

Secrion XII.—Some Accounts of the Systems of Law and Police as recognised in 
the State of Nepal. 

Section XII1,—The Native Method of making the Paper denominated Hindustan, 
Népalese. 

Section XIV.—Pre-eminence of the Vernacniars; or, the Anglicists Answered ; 
Being Letters on the Education of the Peaple of India. : 

«For the study of the less-known races of India Mr. Brian Hodgson’s ‘ Miscellane- 
ous Essays’ will be found very valuable both to the philologist and the ethnologist.” 
—Times. 


TR UBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Third Edition, Two Vols., post 8vo, pp. viiii—268 and viii.—326, cloth, 
: price 21s. 


THE LIFE OR LEGEND OF GAUDAMA, 


THE BUDDHA OF THE BURMESE. With Annotations. 
The Ways to Neibban, and Notice on the Phongyies or Burmese Monks. 


By rue Ricut Rev. P. BIGANDET, 
Bishop of Ramatha, Vicar-Apostolic of Ava and Pegu. 
“The work is furnished with copious notes, which net only iNustrate the subject- 
matter, but form a perfect encyclopedia ef Buddhist lere.”— Times. 


‘¢4 work which will furnish European students of Buddhism with a most valuable 
help in the prosccutien of their investigations.”"—Edinburgh Daily Review. 


“‘Bishep Bigandet’s invaluable werk.”—Indian Antiquary. 


“Viewed in this light, its importance is sufficient to place students ef the subject 
under a deep obligation to its auther.”—Culeutta Review. 


“This work is one of the greatest authorities upon Buddhism.”—-Dublin Review. 


Post 8vo, pp. xxiv. —420, cloth, price 18s. 


CHINESE BUDDHISM. 
A VOLUME OF SKETCHES, HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL. 


By J. EDKINS, D.D. 
Author of ‘‘ China’s Place in Philology,” ‘ Religion in China,” &c., &c. 


“1t contains a vast deal of important information on the subject, such as is only 
te be gained by long-continued study en the spot.”—Atheneum. 

‘Upon the whele, we know ef ne work comparable to it for the extent of its 
original research, and the simplicity with which this complicated system of philo- 
sophy, religion, literature, and ritual is set forth.”—British Quarterly Review. 

The whole volume is replete with learning. .. . It deserves mest careful study 
from all interested in the history of the religions of the world, and expressly of these 
who are concerned in the propagatien of Christianity. Dr. Edkins notices in terms 


of just condemnation the exaggerated praise bestowed upon Buddhism by recent 
English writers.”—Jtecord. 


Post 8vo, pp. 496, cloth, price 18s. 
LINGUISTIC AND ORIENTAL ESSAYS, 


WRITTEN FROM THE YEAR 1846 To 1878, 


By ROBERT NEEDHAM CUST, 


Late Member of Her Majesty’s Indian Civil Service; Hon. Secretary to 
the Royal Asiatic Society ; 
and Author of “ The Modern Languages of the East Indies.” 


** We know none who has described Indian life, especially the life of the natives, 
with se much learning, sympathy, and literary talent,”—Acadeny. 
“They secm to us to be full of suggestive and original remarks.”—St. James's Gazette. 


“' His boek contains a vast amount of information. The result of thirty-five years 


of inquiry, reflection, and speculation, and that on subjects as full of fascination as 
of food for thought.”—- Tablet, 


‘Exhibit such a therough acquaintance with the history and antiquities of India 
as to entitle him to speak as one having authority.”—Edinburgh Daily Review, 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp. civ. —348, cloth, price 18s. 


BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES; or, Jataka Tales. 
The Oldest Collection of Folk-lore Extant ; 
BEING THE JATAKATTHAVANNANA, 
For the first time Edited in the original Pali. 
By V. FAUSBOLL; 
And Translated by T. W. Ruys Davins, 
Translation. Volume I, 


“These are tales supposed to have heen told by the Buddha of what he had seen 
and heard in his previous births. They are probably the nearest representatives 
of the original Aryan stories from which sprang the folk-lore of Europe as well as 
India. The introduction contains a most interesting disquisition on the migrations 
of these fables, tracing their reappearance in the various groups of folk-lore legends. 
Among other old friends, we meet with a version of the Judgment of Solomon,” — Zimes. 

‘It is now some years since Mr. Rhys Davids asserted his right to be heard on 
this subject by his able article on Buddhism in the new edition of the ‘ Encyclopaedia 
Britannica.’”—Leeds Mercury. 

“ All who are interested in Buddhist literature ought to fecl deeply indebted to 
Mr. Rhys Davids. His well-established reputation «xs a Pali scholar is a sufficient 
guarantee for the fidelity of his version, and the style of his translations is deserving 
of high praise,”—Academy. 

“ No more competent expositor of Buddhism could be found than Mr. Rhys Davids 
In the Jitaka book we have, then, a priceless record of the earliest imaginative 
literature of our race; and... it presents to us a nearly complete picture of the 
social life and customs and popular beliefs of the common people of Aryan tribes, 
closely related to ourselves, just as they were passing through the first stages of 
civilisation.”—St. James's Gazette. 


Post 8vo, pp. xxviii.—362, cloth, price r4s. 


A TALMUDIC MISCELLANY; 
Or, A THOUSAND AND ONE EXTRACTS FROM THE TALMUD, 
THE MIDRASHIM, AND THE KABBALAH. 


Compiled and Translated by PAUL ISAAC HERSHON, 
Author of ‘‘ Genesis According to the Talmud,” &c, 


With Notes and Copious Indexes. 


“To obtain in so concise and handy a form as this volume a general idea of the 
Talmud is a boon to Christians at least."”— Times. 

“Tts peculiar and popular character will make it attractive to general readers, 
Mr. Hershou is a very competent scholar, . . . Contains samples of the good, bad, 
and indifferent, and especially extracts that throw light upon the Scriptures.”-- 
British Quarterly Review, 

““Will convey to English readers a more complete and truthful notion of the 
Talmud than any other work that has yet appeared."—Daily Nes. 

‘Without overlooking in the slightest the several attractions of the previons 
volumes of the ‘ Oriental Series,’ we have no hesitation in saying that this surpasses 
them all in interest."—Edinburgh Daily Review. 

“‘Mr, Hershon has . . . thus given English readers what is, we believe, a fair set 
of specimens which they can test for themselves.”— The Record. 

“‘This book is by far the best fitted in the present state of knowledge to enable the 
general reader to gain a fair and unbiassed_ conception of the multifarious contents 
of the wonderful miscellany which can only be truly understood—-so Jewish pride 
asserts—by the life-long devotion of scholars of the Chosen People.”—Jnquirer, 

“The value and importance of this volume consist in the fact that scarcely a single 
extract is given in its pages but throws some light, direct or refracted, upon those 
Scriptures which are the common heritage of Jew and Christian alike.”—-John Bull. 

“Tt is a capital specimen of Hebrew scholarship; a monument of learned, loving, 
light-giving labour.” —Jewish Herald. 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp. xii.—228, cloth, price 7s. 6d. 


THE CLASSICAL POETRY OF THE JAPANESE. 


By BASIL HALL CHAMBERLAIN, 
Author of ‘‘ Yeigo Heikaku Shirafi,” 


A very curious volume. The author has manifestly devoted much labour to the 
task of studying the poetical literature of the Japanese, and rendering characteristic 
specimens into Enzlish verse.”"—Duily News. 

“ Mr. Chamberlain’s volume js, so far as we are aware, the first attempt which has 
been made to interpret the literature of the Japanese to the Western world. It is to 
the classical poetry of Old Japan that we must turn for indigenous Japanese thought, 
and in the volume before us we have a selection from that poetry rendcred into 
graceful English verse.”—TZablet. 

“It is undoubtedly one of the best translations of lyric literature which has 
appeared during the close of the last | nee oe Empire, 

““Mr, Chamberlain set himself a difficult task when he undertook to reproduce 
Japanese poetry in an English form, But he has evidently laboured con amore, and 
his efforts are successful to a degree.” —London and China Express. 


Post 8vo, pp. xii.—164, cloth, price ros. 6d. 


THE HISTORY OF ESARHADDON (Son of Sennacherib), 
KING OF ASSYRIA, 38.c. 681-668, 


Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions upon Cylinders and Tablets in 
the British Museum Collection; together with a Grammatical Analysis 
of each Word, Explanations of. the Ideographs by Extracts from the 
Ki-Lingual Syllabaries, and List of Eponyms, &e. 


By ERNEST A. BUDGE, B.A., M.R.A.S., 
Assyrian Exhibitioner, Christ’s College, Cambridge. 


“Students of scriptural archeology will also appreciate the ‘History of Esar- 
hhaaddon.’ ’— Times. 

“There is muel to attract the scholar in this volume. It does not pretend to 
popuiarise studies whieh are yet in their infancy. Its primary object is to translate, 
buc it does not assume to be more than tentative, and it offers both to the professed 
Assyriologist and to the ordinary non-Assyriological Semitic scholar the means of 
controlling its results.”—Academy. 

‘Mr. Budge’s book is, of course, mainly addressed to Assyrian scholars and 
students. They are not, it is to ve feared, a very numerous class. But the more 
thanks are due to him on that account for the way in which he has acquitted himself 
in his laborious task.”— Tablet. 


Post 8vo, pp. 448, cloth, price 218. 
THE MESNEVI 


(Usually known as THe MEsNevivy1 SHeniF, or HoLY MEesNeEv1) 
or 
MEVLANA (OUR LORD) JELALU ’D-DIN MUHAMMED ER-RUMI. 
Book the First, 
Together with some Account of the Life and Acts of the Author, 
of his Ancestors, and of his Descendants. 
Illustrated by a Selection of Characteristic Anecdotes, as Collected 
by their Historian, 
MEVLANA SHEMSU-’D-DIN AHMED, EL EFLAKI, EL ‘ARIFI, 
Translated, and the Poetry Versified, in English, 
By JAMES W. REDHOUSE, M.R.A.S., &. 
‘‘A complete treasury of occult Oriental lore.”—Saturday Review. 


“This book will be a very valuable help to the reader ignorant of Persia, who is 


Gesirors of obtaining an insight into a very important department of the literature 
extant in that language.”—Tadlet. 


TRUBNER’S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp. xvi.— 280, cloth, price 6s. 


EASTERN PROVERBS AND EMBLEMS 
ILLUSTRATING OLD TRUTHS, 


By Rev..J. LONG, 
Member of the Bengal Asiatic Society, F.R.G.S, 
“ We regard the book as valuable, and wish for it a wide circulation and attentive 
reading.”—Record. 


“ altogether, it is quite a feast of good things.”—Globe. 
**It is full of interesting matter.”—Antiquary, 


Post 8vo, pp. viii.—270, cloth, price 7s. 6d. 
INDIAN POETRY; 


’ Containing a New Edition of the ‘‘ Indian Song of Songs,” from the Sanscrit 
of the ‘‘Gita Govinda” of Jayadeva; Two Books fram ‘‘The Iliad of 
India ” (Mahabharata), ‘‘ Proverbial Wisdom " from the Shlokas of the 
Hitopadesa, and other Oriental Poems. 


By EDWIN ARNOLD, C.S.L, Author of ‘* The Light of Asia.” 


In this new volume of Messrs. Triibner’s Oriental Series, Mr. Edwin Arnold does 
good service by illustrating, through the medium of his musical English melodies, 
the power of Indian poetry to stir European emotions, The ‘Indian Song of Songs ' 
is not unknown to scholars. Mr. Arnold will have introduced it among popular 
English poems. Nothing could be more graceful and delicate than the shades Ly 
which Krishna is portrayed in the gradual process of being weaned Ly the love of 


* Beautiful Radha, jasmine-bosomed Radha,’ 


from the allurements of the forcst nymphs, in whom the five senses are typified.”— 
Times, 

‘* No other English poet has ever thrown his genius aud his art so thoroughly into 
the work of translating Eastern ideas as Mr, Arnold has done in his splendid para- 
phrases of language contained in these mighty epics.” —Daily Telegraph. 

“The poem abounds with imagery of Eastern luxuriousness and sensuonsness; the 
air seems laden with the spicy odours of the tropics, and the verse has a richness and 
a melody sufficient to captivate the senses of the dullest.”—Standard. 

“The translator, while producing a very enjoyable poem, has adhered with toler- 
able fidelity to the original text.”— Overland Mail. 

“We certainly wish Mr. Arnold success in his attempt ‘to popularise Indian 
classics,’ that being, as his preface tells us, the goal towards which he bends his 
efforts.”—Allen’s Indian Mail. 


Post 8va, pp. xvi.—296, cloth, price ros. 6d. 


THE MIND OF MENCIUS; 
Or, POLITICAL ECONOMY FOUNDED UPON MORAL 


, PHILOSOPHY. 
A SystemMATic DIGEST OF THE DOCTRINES OF THE CHINESE PHILOSOPHER 
MeENcIvs. 


Translated from the Original Text and Classified, with 
Comments and Explanations, 


By the Rev. ERNST FABER, Rhenish Mission Society. 
Translated from the German, with Additional Notes, 
By the Rev. A. B. HUTCHINSON, C.M.S., Church Mission, Hong Kong. 


“Mr. Faber is already well known in the field of Chinese studies by his digest of 
the doctrines of Confucius. The value of this work will be perceived when it is 
remembered that at no time since relations commenced between China and the 
West has the former been so powerful—we had almost said aggressive—as now. 
For those who will give it careful study, Mr. Faber’s work is one of the most 
valuable of the excellent series to which it belongs,"—Nature, 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp. 336, cloth, price 16s. 
THE RELIGIONS OF INDIA. 
By A. BARTIL. 
Translated from the French with the authority and assistance of the Author. 


The author has, at the request of the publishers, considerably enlarged 
the work for the translator, and has added the literature of the subject to 
date ; the translation may, therefore, be looked upon as an equivalent of a 
new and improved edition of the original. 


“Ig not only a valuable manual of the religions of India, which marks a distinct 
step in the treatment of the subject, but also a useful work of veferen te! eee 

“‘Thigs volume is a reproduction, with corrections and additions, of an article 
contributed by the Icarned author two years azo to the ‘ Encyclopédie des Sciences 
Religieuses.’ It attracted much notice when it first appeared, and is generally 
admitted to present the best summary extant of the vast subject with which it 
deals.”— Tablet. 

“‘This is not only on the whole the best but the only manual of the religions of 
India, apart from Buddhism, which we have in English. The present work... 
shows not only great knowledge of the facts and power of clear exposition, but also 
great insight into the inner history and the deeper meaning of the great religion, 
for it is in reality only one, which it proposes to describe.”’— Modern Review. 

«The merit of the work has been emphatically recognised by the most authoritative 
Orientalists, both in this country and on the continent of HAD Oper But probably 
there are few Indianists (if we may use the word) who would not derive a good deal 
of information from it, and especially from the extensive bibliography provided in 
the notes,”—Dublin Review. 

“ Such a sketch M. Barth has drawn with a master-hand.”—Critic (New York). 


Post 8vo, pp. viii.—152, cloth, price 6s. 


HINDU PHILOSOPHY. 
Tue SANKHYA KARIKA or IS’°VARA KRISHNA. 


An Exposition of the System of Kapila, with an Appendix on the 
Nydya aud Vais’eshika Systems, 


By JOHN DAVIES, MLA. (Cantab.), M.B.A.S. 


The system of Kapila contains nearly all that India has produced in the 
department of pure philosophy. 


‘“‘The non-Orientalist . . . finds in Mr. Davics a patient and learned guide who 
leads himinto the intricactes of the philosophy of India, and supplies him with a clue, 
that he may not be lost in them. In the preface he states that the system of 
Kapila is the ‘earliest attempt on record to give an answer, from reason alone, 
to the mystcrious questions which arise in every thoughtful mind about the origin of 
the world, the nature and relations of man and his future destiny,’ and in his learned 
and able notes he exhibits ‘the connection of the Sankhya system with the philo- 
sophy of Spinoza,” and ‘ the connection of the system of Kapila with that of Schopen- 
haner and Von Hartmann,’ "—Foreign Church Chroniete. 

‘Mr, Davies’s volume on Hindu Philosophy is an undoubted gain to all students 
of the development of thought. The system of Kapila, which is here given in a trans- 
lation from the Sankhya Karika, is the only contribution of India to pure philosophy. 
. .. Presents many points of deep interest to the student of comparative philo- 
sophy, and without Mr. Davies's lucid interpretation it would be diflicult to appre- 
ciate these points in any adequate manner.”’—Saturday Reviev, 

““We welcome Mr. Davies's book as a valuable addition to our philosophical 
library.”—Notes and Queries. 


TRUBNER’S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp, x.—130, cloth, price 6s, 


A MANUAL OF HINDU PANTHEISM. VEDANTASARA. 


Translated, with copious Annotations, by Magor G, A. JACOB, 
Bombay Staff Corps; Inspector of Army Schools. 


The design of this little work is to provide for missionaries, and for 
others who, like them; have little leisure for origiual research, an accnrate 
summary of the doctrines of the Vedanta, 


‘There can be no question that the religious doctrines most widely held by the 
people of India are mainly Pantheistic. And of Hindu Pantheism, at all events in 
its most modern phases, its Veddntasdra presents the best summary. But then this 
work is a mere summary: a skeleton, the dry bones of which require to be clothed 
with skin and bones, and to be animated by vital breath before the ordinary reader 
will discern in it a living reality. Majer Jaceb, therefore, has wisely added te his 
translation of the Vedantasd4ra copious notes from the writings of well-known Oriental 
scholars, in which he has, we think, elucidated all that required elucidation. So 
that the work, as here presented to us, presents no difficulties which a very moderate 
amount of application will not overcome,”—Tablet. 

“The modest title of Major Jacob’s work conveys but an inadequate idea of the 
vast amount of research embodied in his notes to the text of the Vedantasara. So 
eopious, indeed, are these, and so much collateral matter do they bring to bear on 
the subject, that the diligent student will rise from their perusal with a fairly 
adequate view of Hindi philosophy generally. His work ... is one of the best of 
its kind that we have seen.”—Calceutta Review, 


Post 8vo, pp. xiii—154, cloth, price 7s. 6d. 
TSUNI—IIGOAM : 


THE SUPREME BEING OF THE Kuor-Kuol, 
By THEOPHILUS HAHN, Ph.D., 


Custodian of the Grey Collection, Cape Town ; Corresponding Member 
of the Geegr. Society, Dresden ; Corresponding Member of the 
Anthropological Society, Vienna, &c., &c. 


“The first instalment of Dr. Hahn’s labours will be of interest, not at the Cape 
only, but in every University of Europe. It is, in fact, a most valuable contribution 
to the comparative study of religion and mythology. Accounts of their religion and 
mythology were scattered about in various books; these have been carefully col- 
lected by Dr. Hahn and printed in his second chapter, enriched and improved by 
what he has been able to collect himself."—Prof. Max Miiller in the Nineteenth 
Century. 

ss Dr Hahn’s book is that of a man who is beth a philologist and believer in 
philological methods, and a close student of savage manners and customs.”—Satur- 
day Review. 

It is full of good things.”—St. James's Gazette. 


In Four Volumes. Post 8vo, Vol. I., pp. xii.—392, cloth, price 12s, 6d., 
and Vol. IL, pp. vi.—4o8, cloth, price 12s. 6d. 


A COMPREHENSIVE COMMENTARY TO THE QURAN. 


To WHICH IS PREFIXED SALzE'S PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE, WITH 
ADDITIONAL NOTES AND EMENDATIONS, 


Together with a Complete Index to the Text, Preliminary 
Discourse, and Notes. 


By Rev. E, M. WHERRY, M.A., Lodiana, 


“ As Mr. Wherry’s book is intended for missionaries in India, it is no doubt well 
that they should be prepared to meet, if they can, the ordinary arguments and inter- 
pretations, and for this purpose Mr. Wherry’s additions will prove useful.”—Saturday 
heview. 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp. vi.—208, cloth, price 8s. 6d. 


THE BHAGAVAD-GITA. 
Translated, with Introduction and Notes 
By JOHN DAVIES, M.A. (Cantab.) 
‘Let us add that his translation of the Bhagavad Gité is, as we judge, the best 


that lias as yet appeared in English, and that his Philological Notes ure of quite 
peculiar value,”"—Dublin Review. 


Post 8vo, pp. 96, cloth, price 5s. 


THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM. 


Translated by E. H. WHINFIELD, M.A., 
Barrister-at-Law, late H.M. Bengal Civil Service. 


Omar Khayyam (the tent-maker) was born about the middle of the fifth 
century of the Hejirah, corresponding to the eleventh of the Christian era, 
in the neighbourhood of Naishapur, the capital of Khorasan, and died in 
517 AH. (=1122 A.D.) 


“Mr. Whinfield has executed a difficult task with considerable success, and his 
version contains much that will be new to those who only know Mr. Fitzgerald’s 
delightful selection.”—Academy. 

‘There are several editions of the Quatrains, varying greatly in their readings. 
Mr, Whinfield has used three of these for his excellent translation, The most pro- 
ininent features in the Quatrains are their profound agnosticism, combined with a 
fatalism based more on philosophic than religious grounds, their Epicureanism and 
the spirit of universal tolerance and charity which animates them.”—Calcutta Review. 


Post 8vo, pp. xxiv.—268, cloth, price 93. 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UPANISHADS AND 
ANCIENT INDIAN METAPHYSICS. 


As exhibited in a series of Articles contributed to the Calcutta Review. 
By ARCHIBALD EDWARD GOUGH, M.A., Lincoln College, Oxford ; 
Principal of the Calcutta Madrasa, 


“For practical purposes this is perhaps the most important of the works that have 
thus far appeared in ‘Triibner’s Oriental Series.’ . . , We cannot doubt that for all 
who may take it up the work must be one of profound interest.”—Saturday Review, 


In Two Volumes. Vol. 1., post 8vo, pp. xxiv.—23o, cloth, price 7s. 6d. 
A COMPARATIVE HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIAN AND 
MESOPOTAMIAN RELIGIONS. 

By Dr. C. P, TIELE, 

Vol, I.—H story oF THE EGYPTIAN RELIGION. 

Translated from the Dutch with the Assistance of the Author. 


By JAMES BALLINGAL. 


“Tt places in the hands of the English readers a history of Egyptlan Religion 
which is very complete, which is based on the best materials, and which has been 
illustrated by the latest results of research. In this volume there is a great deal of 
information, as well as independent investigation, for the trustworthiness of which 
Dr. Ticle's name is in itself a guarantee; and the description of the successive 
religion under the Old Kingdom, the Middle Kingdom, and the New Kingdom, is 
given in a manner which is scholarly and minute.”—Scotsman. 


TR UBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp. xiii—3o2, cloth, price 8s. 6d. 
YUSUF AND ZULAIKHA. 
A Porm By JAMI, 
Translated from the Persian into English Verse. 
By RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH. 

“Mr. Griffith, who has done already good service as translator into verse from the 
Sanskrit, has done further good work in this translation from the Persian, and he 
has evidently shown not a little skill in his rendering the quaint and very oriental 
style of his author into our more prosaic, less figurative, language. .. . The work, 
besides its intrinsic merits, is of importance as being one of the most popular and 
famous poems of Persia, aud that which is read in all the independent native schools 
of India where Persian {s taught. It is interesting, also, as a striking instance of 
the manner in which the stories of the Jews have been transformed and added to by 
tradition among the Mahometans, who look upon Joseph as ‘ the ideal of manly beauty 
and more than manly virtue ;’ and, indeed, in this poem he seems to be endowed with 
almost divine, or at any rate angclic, gifts and excellence."—Scotsman, 


Post 8vo, pp. viiii—266, cloth, price 9s. 
LINGUISTIC ESSAYS. 
By CARL ABEL. 


CONTENTS. 
Language as the Expression of National | The Connection between Dictionary and 
Modes of Thought. Grammar, 
The Conception of Love in some Ancient } The Possibility of a Common Literary 
and Modern Languages. Language for all Slavs. 
The English Verbs of Command. The Order and Position of Words in the 
Semarivlogy. Latin Sentence. 
Philological Methods, The Coptic Language. 


The Origin of Language. 

‘All these essays of Dr. Abel’s are so thoughtful, so full of happy illustrations, 
and so admirably put together, that we hardly know to which we should specially 
turn to select for our readers a sample of his workmanship.”— Tablet. 

“An entirely novel method of dealing with philosophical questions and impart a 
real human interest to the otherwise dry teclinicalities of the science.”—Standard. 

“Dr, Abel is an oppoveut from whom it is pleasant to differ, for he writes with 
enthusiasm and temper, and his mastery over the English language fits him to be a 
champion of unpopular doctrines.”— Atheneum, 

‘«Dr. Abel writes very good English, and much of his book will prove entertaining 
to the general reader, It may give some useful hints, and sugg+st some subjects for 
profitable investigation, even to philologists.”—Nation (New York). 


Post 8vo, pp. ix.—28r, cloth, price ros. 6d. 
THE SARVA-DARSANA -SAMGRAHA ; 


Or, REVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT SYSTEMS OF HINDU 
PHILOSOPHY. 
By MADHAVA ACHARYA. 
Translated by E. B. COWELL, M.A., Professor of Sanskrit in the University 
of Cambridge, and A. E. GOUGH, M.A., Professor of Philosophy 
in the Presidency College, Calcutta. 

This work is an interesting specimen of Hindu critical ability. The 
author successively passes in review the sixteen philosophical systems 
current in the fourteenth century in the South of India; and he gives what 
appears to him to be their most important tenets. 


“The translation is trustworthy throughout. A protracted sojourn in India, 
where there is a living traJlition, has familiarised tie translaters with Indian 
thought.’’—A thenceum. 


Post 8vo, pp. xxxii.—336, cloth, price ros. 6d. 
THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM. 


The Persian Text, with an English Verse Translation. 
By E. H. WHINFIELD, late of the Bengal Civil Service. 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp. 1xv.—363, cloth, price 14s. 
TIBETAN TALES DERIVED FROM INDIAN SOURCES. 
Translated from the Tibetan of the Kau-Grur. 
By F. ANTON VON SCHIEFNER. 
Done into English from the German, with an Introduction, 
By W. BR. 8. RALSTON, M.A. 


“Mr, Ralston adds an introduction, which even the most persevering ehildren of 
Mother Goose will probably find infinitely the most interesting portion of the work.” 
—Saturday Review. 

‘¢Mr. Ralston, whose name is so familiar to all lovers of Russian folk-lore, has 
supplied some interesting Western analogies and parallels, drawn, for the most part, 
from Slavonte sources, to the Eastern fulk-tales, culled from the Kalgyur, one of the 
divisions of the Tibetan sacred books.”"— Academy, 

“The translation . . . could searcely have fallen into better hands, An Introduc- 
tion . . . gives the leading faets in the lives of those scholars who havo given their 
attention to gaining a knowledge of the Tibetan literature and language.”—Caleutta 
Review. 

“Ought to interest all who eare for the East, for amusing stories, or for comparative 
folk-lore. Mr. Ralston... isan expert in story-telling, and in knowledge of tie eom- 
parative history of popular tales he has few rivals in England."—Pall Mall Gazette. 


Post 8vo, pp. xvi.—224, cloth, price 9s. 


UDANAVARGA. 


A COLLECTION OF VERSES FROM THE BUDDHIST CANON. 
Compiled by DHARMATRATA. 
Bring THE NORTHERN BUDDHIST VERSION or DHAMMAPADA. 


Translated from the Trbetan of Bkah-hgyur, with Notes, and 
Extracts from the Commentary of Pradjuavarman, 


By W. WOODVILLE ROCKHILL, 


«Mr. Rockhill’s present work is the first from which assistance will be gained 
for & more accurate understanding of the Pali text; it is, in faet, as yet the only 
term of comparison available to us. The ‘Udanavarga,’ the Thibetan version, was 
originally diseovere 1 by the late M. Schiefner, who published the Tibetan text, and 
lhad intended adding a translation, an intention frustrated by his death, but which 
has been earried out by Mr. Rockhill... . Mr. Roekhill may be congratulated for 
having well accomplished a difficult task,” —Saturday Review, 

“There is no need to look far intu this book to be assnred of tts value.”"—Atheneum, 

“The Tibetan verses in Mr, Woodville Rockhill’s translation have all the simple 
directness and foree which belong to the sayings of Gautama, when they have not 
been adorned and spoiled by enthusiastic disciples and commentators,”"—St. James's 
Gazette. 


In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. xxiv.—566, cloth, accompanied by a 
Language Map, price 25s. 


A SKETCH OF THE MODERN LANGUAGES OF AFRICA. 


By ROBERT NEEDHAM CUST, 


Barristcr-at-Law, and late of Her Majesty's Indian Civil Service, 


** Any one at ali interested in Afriean languages cannot do better than get Mr, 
Cust's book. It is encyclopedic in its scope, and the reader gets a start clear away 
in any particular language, and is left free to add to the initial sum of kuowledge 
there collected,"—Natal Mereury. 

““Mr. Cust has contrived to produce a work of value to linguistie students.’— 
Nature. 

“Mr, Cust’s experience in the preparation of his previous work on the indigenous 
tongues of the East Indies was, of course, of great help to him in the attempt w map 
out the still more thorny and tangled brake of the African languages. His great 
support, however, in what must have bien a task of immense labour and care has 
been the wnflagging enthusiasm and guste with which he has duog himself into his 
subject.”— Scotsman, 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


Post 8vo, pp. xii.—312, with Maps and Plan, cloth, price 4s. 
A HISTORY OF BURMA. 


Including Burma Proper, Pegu, Taungu, Tenasserim, and Arakan. From 
the Earliest Time to the End of the First War with British India. 
By Lrevt.-Gen. Sin ARTHUR P. PHAYRE, G.C.M.G., K.C.8.1, and C.3B., 
Membre Correspondant de la Société Académique Indo-Chinoise 
de France. 

“Sir Arthur Phayre’s contribution te Triibner’s Oriental Series supplies a recog- 
nised want, and its appearance has been looked forward to for many years. .... 
General Phayre deserves great credit for the patience and industry which has resulted, 
in this History of Burma.”—Saturday Review. 

“4 laborious work, carefully performed, which supplies a blank in the long list of 
histories of countries, and records the annals, unkuown to literature, of a nation 
which is likely to be more prominent in the commerce of the future.”—Scotsman. 


Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. 276, cloth, price 7s. 6d, 


RELIGION IN CHINA. 
By JOSEPH EDKINS, D.D., Pexine. 

Containing a Brief Account of the Three Religions of the Chinese, with, 
Observations on the Prospects of Christian Conversion amongst that 
People. 

«Dr, Edkins has been most careful in noting the varied and often complex phases 
of opinion, so as to give an aeeount of considerable value of the subject."—Scotsman. 

“As a missionary, it has been part of Dr. Edkins’ duty to study the existing 
religions in China, and his long residence in the country has enabled him to acquire 
an intimate knowledge of them as they at present exist,”—Suturduy Review. 

“ Dr. Edkins’ valuable work, of which this is a second and revised edition, has, 
from the time that it was published, been the standard authority upon the subject 
of which it treats.”— Noxconsormist. 

** Dr. Edkins . . . nay now be fairly regarded as among the first authorities on 
Chinese religion aud langnage.”— British Quarterly Review, 


Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. xv.-250, cloth, price 7s. 6d. 


OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF RELIGION TO THE 


SPREAD OF THE UNIVERSAL RELIGIONS. 
By C. P. TIELE, 
Doctor of Theology, Professor of the History of Religions in the 
University of Leyden. 
Translated from the Dutch by J. Esttims CARPENTER, M.A, 

* Few books of its size contain the result of so much wide thinking, able and labo- 
rious study, or enable the reader to gain a better bird’s-eye view of the latest results 
of investigations into the religious history of nations. As Professor Tiele modestly 
says, ‘In this little book are outlines—pencil sketches, 1 might say—nothing more.’ 
But there are some men whose sketches from a thumb-nail are of far more worth 
than an enormous canvas covered with the crude painting of others, and it is easy to 
see that these pages, full of information, these sentences, cut and perhaps also dry, 
short and clear, condense the fruits of long and thorough research.”—Scotsman. 


Post 8vo, pp. x.~274, cloth, price gs. 
THE LIFE OF THE BUDDHA AND THE EARLY 


HISTORY OF HIS ORDER. 

Derived from Tibetan Works in the Bkah-hgyur and Pstan-hgyur. 
Followed by notices on the Early History of Tibet and Khoten. 
Translated by W. W. ROCKHILL, Second Secretary U.S. Legation in China, 

“‘The volume bears testimony to the diligence and fulness with which the author 
has consulted and tested the ancient documents bearing upon his remarkable sub- 
ject.”— Times. 

“ Will be appreciated by those who devote themselves to those Buddhist studies 
which have of late years taken in these Western regions so remarkable a develop- 
ment. Its matter possesses a special interest as being derived from ancient Tibetan 
works, some portions of which, here analysed and translated, have not yet attracted 
the attention of scholars, The volume is rich in ancient stories bearing upon the 


world’s renovation and the origin of castes, as recorded in these venerable autho- 
rities."—Daily News. 


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 


In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. eviii.-242, and viii.-370, cloth, price 248. 
Dedicated by permission to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales. 


BUDDHIST RECORDS OF THE WESTERN WORLD, 
Translated from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (A.D. 629), 


By SAMUEL BEAL, B.A., 


Trin. Coll., Camb.) ; R.N. (Retired Chaplain and N.L) ; Professor of Chinese, 
University College, London ; Rector of Wark, Northumberland, &c. 


An eminent Indian authority writes respecting this work :—‘ Nothing 
more can be done in elucidating the History of India until Mr. Beal’s trans- 
lation of the ‘Si-yu-ki’ appears.” 

‘It is a strange freak of historical preservation that the best account of the con- 
dition of India at that ancient period has come down to us in the books of travel 
written by the Chinese pilgrims, of whom Hwen Thsang is the best known.”— Times, 

“«We are compelled at this stage to close our brief and inadequate notice of a book 
for easy access to which Orientalists will be deeply grateful to the able translator."— 
Literary World. 

“Full of interesting revelations of the religious feelings, fables, and supersti- 
tions, manners and habits of peoples inhabiting a vast region, comprising North 


and North-Western India and contiguous countries in that remote and obscure 
period.”—Daily News. 


Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. viii.-464, cloth, price 16s. 
THE SANKHYA APHORISMS OF KAPILA, 
With Illustrative Extracts from the Commentaries, 
Translated by J. R,. BALLANTYNE, LL.D., late Principal of the Benares 
College. 
Edited by FITZEDWARD HALL, 


Post 8vo, pp. xlviii.-398, cloth, price 12s. 
THE ORDINANCES OF MANU. 


Translated from the Sanskrit, with an Introduction, 
By the late A. C. BURNELL, Ph.D., C.LE. 


Completed and Edited by E. W. HOPKINS, Ph.D., 
; of Columbia College, N.Y. 


“This work is full of interest ; while for the student of sociology and the science 
of religion it is full of importance. It isa great boon to get so notable a work in so 
accessible a form, admirably edited, and competently translated."—Scotsman. 


‘*Few men were more competent than Burnell to give us a really good translation 
of this well-known law book, first rendered into English by Sir William Jones, 
Burnell was not only an indepen tent Sanskrit scholar, but an experienced lawyer, 
and he joined to these two important qualifications the rare faculty of being able to 
express his thoughts in clear and trenchant English. ... We ought to feel very 
grateful to Dr. Hopkins for having given us all that could be published of the traus- 
Jation left by Burnell.’—F, Max MULLER in the Academy. 


LONDON: TRUBNER & CO., 57 anD 59 LUDGATE HILL. 
500—16/2/85—K, 


TRUBNER’S 


ORIENTAL SERIES. 


1BlT>AGs5 
‘Bb 


SI-YU-KL. 


BUDDHIST RECORDS 


OF 


THE WESTERN WORLD. 


TRANSLATED FROM THE CdINESE OF 


(HIUEN TSIANG| EP D. eee) 
c Hisdan Ton ot > 


BY 


SAMUEL BEAL, 


B.A. (TRIN. COL. CAMB.), R.N. (RETIRED CHAPLAIN AND N.1.), PROFESSOR OF CHINESE, 
UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON; RECTOR OF WARK, NORTHUMBERLAND, ETU. 


IN TWO VOLUMES. 


VOL. II. 


LONDON: 
TRUBNER & CO, LUDGATE HILL 
1884. 
[Al rights reserved] 


Ballantyne Press 
BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO. 
EDINBURGH AND LONDON 


CONTENTS. 


Boox VI.—Four Countrins 

(1) Shi-lo-fu-shi-ti (Srivasti) 

(2) Kie-pi-lo-fa-su-tu (Kapilavastu) 

(3) Lan-mo (Ramagrima) 

(4) Kiu-shi-na-kie-lo (Kusinagara) 
Boox VIIL—Frve Countrigs 

(1) P’o-lo-ni-sse (Varanasi) 

(2) Chen-chu (Ghazipur) 

(3) Feit-she-li (Vaisali) 

(4) Fo-li-shi (Vrijji) 

(5) Ni-po-lo (Népal) 
Boox VITI.—Mo-kie-t’o (MagapHA) 
Boox IX.—MacapHa (continued) 


Book X.—SEVENTEEN CouUNTRIES 

(1) I-lan-na-po-fa-to (Hiranyaparvata) 

(2) Chen-po (Champa) . 

(3) Kie-chu-hoh-khi-lo (Kajughira or Kajiagarha) 
(4) Pun-na-fa-t’an-na (Pfindravarddhana) 5 
(5) Kia-mo-lu-po (Kamarfipa) . . 

(6) San-mo-ta-ch’a (Samotata) . 

(7) Tan-mo-li-ti (Tamralipti) . 

(8) Kie-lo-na-su-fa-la-na (Karnasuvarna) 

(9) U-ch’a (Udra). 
(10) Kong-u-t’o (Kényédha ?) 


vi CONTENTS. 


Boox X.—continued 
(11) Kie-ling-kia (Kalinga) 
(12) Kiao-sa-lo (Késala) . 
(13) ’An-ta-lo (Andhra) . 
(14) T’o-na-kie-tse-kia (Dhanakataka) 
(15) Chu-li-ye (Chulya or Chéla) 
(16) Ta-lo-pi-ch’a (Dravida) 
(17) Mo-lo-kiu-ch’a (Malakfita) . 
Book XI.—TwEnty-THREE COUNTRIES 
(1) Saing-kia-lo (Sirhhala) 


(2) Kong-kin-na-pu-lo (Kéakanapura) . 


(3) Mo-ho-la-ch’a (Maharashtra) 


(4) Po-lu-kie-ch’e-p’o (Bharukachha) . 


(5) Mo-la-p’o (Malava) . 

(6) ?O-ch’a-li (Atali) 

(7) Kie-ch’a (Kachha) . 

(8) Fa-li-pi (Valabhi) . 

(9) ’O-nan-t’o-pu-lo (Anandapura) 
(10) Su-la-ch’a (Surashtra) 
(11) Kiu-che-lo (Gurjjara) 
(12) U-she-yen-na (Ujjayint) 

(13) Chi-ki-t’o (2). 


(14) Mo-hi-shi-fa-lo-pu-lo (tanesvarane 


(15) Sin-tu (Sindh) 


(16) Mu-lo-san-p’u-lo (Mdlasthanapura) 


(17) Po-fa-to (Parvata) 

(18) ’O-tin-p’o-chi-lo (Atyanabakéla) 

(19) Lang-kie-lo (Langala) 

(20) Po-la-sse (Persia) 

(21) Pi-to-shi-lo (Pitésila) 

(22) ’O-fan-ch’a (Avanda ?) 

(23) Fa-la-na (Varana or Varnu) 
Boox XII.—Twenry-rwo CountTRIES 

(1) Tsu-ku-ch’a (Tsaultita) 


(2) Fo-li-shi-sa-t’ang-na (Pargusthana) . 


(3) ’An-ta-lo-po (Andarab) 


283-326 


PAGE 
207 
209 
217 
221 
227 
228 
230 
“aseate 
235 
253 
255 
259 
260 
265 
266 
266 
268 
268 
269 
270 
271 
271 
272 
274 
275 
276 
277 
277 
279 
280 
281 


283 
285 
286 


CONTENTS. 


Book XII.—continued. 


(4) K’woh-si-to (Khost) 
(5) Hwoh (Kunduz) . 
(6) Mung-kin (Munjan). 
(7) ’O-li-ni (Ahreng) 
(8) Ho-lo-hu (Ragh) 
(9) Ki-li-seh-mo (Khrishma, or Kishm) 
(10) Po-li-ho (Bolor) 
(11) Hi-mo-ta-lo (Himatala) 
(12) Po-to-chang-na (Badaksh4n) 
(13) In-po-kin (Yamgan) 
(14) Kiu-lang-na (Kurdna) 
(15) Ta-mo-sih-teh-ti (Termistat) 
(16) Shi-k’i-ni (Shikhnan) 
(17) Shang-mi (Sambi) . 
(18) K’ie-p’an-t’o (Khabandha) . 
(19) U-sha (Och). 
(20) Kie-sha (Kashgar) . : 
(21) Cho-kin-kia (Chakuka? Yarkiang) 
(22) Kiu-sa-ta-na (Khétan) 


INDEX. 


CORRECTIONS . 


BUDDHIST RECORDS 


OF THE 


WESTERN WORLD. 


BOOK VI. 


Contains an account of four countries, viz., (1) Shi-lo-fu-shi-ti ; 
(2) Kie-pi-lofu-sse-to ; (3) Lan-mo; (4) Ku-shi-na-Wie-lo. 


SHI-LO-FU-SHI-TI [SRAVASTI]. 


THE kingdom of Sravasti (Shi-lo-fu-shi-ti)! is about 


6000 li in circuit. 


The chief town is desert and ruined. 


There is no record as to its exact limits (area), The ruins 
of the walls encompassing the royal precincts? give a circuit 


1 The town of Srivastt, also called 
Dharmapattana ( Trikdndasésha, ii. 1, 
13), in Uttara (Northern) Kééala, has 
been identified by Cunningham with 
a great ruined city on the south 
bank of the Rapti called Sahet 
Mahet, about 58 miles north of 
Ayédhy&. As Hiuen Tsiang gives 
the bearing north-east, and the 
distance about 500 li, he evidently 
did not travel by the shortest route. 
Fa-hian (chap. xx.), on the contrary, 
gives the distance eight ydjanas, and 
the bearing (corrected) due north, 
both of which are correct. For a 
full account of Sihet Ma&het see 
Cunningham, Arch. Survey of Ind., 
vol. i. p. 331 ff.; seealso J. 2. As. S, 
vol, v. pp. 122 ff. It figures also in 
Brahmanical literature, in which it 
is said to have been founded by 
Sravasta, the son of Srava and 


VOL. II. 


grandson of Yuvanagva. Harivamsa, 
670; Vishn. Pur., vol. iii. p. 263; 
Hall’s Vasavadattd, Int. p. 53; 
Mahdbhér., iii. 12518; Panini, iv. 
2, 97; Bhigar. Pur, ix. 6, 21. 
With respect, however, to the date 
of Vikramaditya of Sravasti, Cun- 
ningham seems to be misled by the 
statement of Hiuen Tsiang (ante, p. 
106) that he lived in the middle of 
the thousand years after Buddha, 
as though this meant 500 a.B., 
whereas it means, as stated before, 
in the middle of the thousand years 
which succeeded the 500 years after 
Buddha, in the middle of the “ period 
of images,” in fact. See also Bur- 
nonf, /ntrod., pp. 20 f.,150, 209, 280; 
Lassen, Jad. Alt., vol. iti, pp. 200 f.; 
Vassilief, pp. 38, 75, 188, 218. 

2 Julien translates here and else- 
where kung shing by palace, but it 

A 


2 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book vi. 


of about 20 li. Though mostly in ruins, still there are a 
few inhabitants. Cereals grow in great abundance; the 
climate is soft and agreeable, the manners of the people 
are honest and pure. They apply themselves to learning, 
and love religion (merit). There are several hundreds of 
sanghdrdmas, mostly in ruin, with very few religious 
followers, who study the books of the Sarnmatiya (Ching- 
liang-pu) school, There are 100 Déva temples with very 
many hereties. When Tathagata was in the world, this 
was the capital of the country governed by Prasénajita- 
raja (Po-lo-si-na-chi-to-wang).3 

Within the old precincts of the royal city are some 
ancient foundations ; these are the remains of the palace of 
King Shing-kwan (Prasénajita). 

From this not far to the east is a ruinous foundauems 
above which is built a small stdpa ; these ruins represent 
the Great Hall of the Law,* which King Prasénajita built 
for Buddha. 

By the side of this hall, not far from it, above the ruins 
a stépa is built. This is where stood the vihdra which 
King Prasénajita built for Prajapati® Bhikshuni, the 
maternal auut of Buddha. 


should be“ theroyal precincts,” or the 
portion of the city in which the royal 
palace stood, and which was defended 
by a surrounding wall. Cunning- 
ham is right therefore in his remarks 
on this point, p. 332, loc. cit. 

3 Prasénajit :—In the 4séka Ava- 
déna the following genealogy is 
given :— 

. Bimbisfra (cir. B.c. 540-512). 
Ajatagatru, his son, 512. 

. Udayibhadra, his son, 480. 

. Munda, his son, 46. 
Kakavarnin, his son, 456. 
Sahflin, his son, 

. Tulakuchi, his son. 

. Mahdmandala, his son, cir. 375. 
. Prasénajit, his son, 

. Nanda, his son, 

. Bindusara, his son, 295, 

2. Susima, his son. 


Peers al 


ee 
>= O 


Little dependence, however, can be 
placed on this genealogy, but it may 
be compared with the Singhalese 
and Brahmanical lists, J. As. S. Ben., 
vol. vi. p. 7143 Asiat. Ies., vol. v. 
p. 286; Lassen, Jnd. Alt., vol. i. pp. 
859, xxxvili., vol. ii, pp. 71, 222, 
1207 ; Burnouf, Jnér., pp. 128, 320; 
Burgess, Arehwol. Surv. W. India, 
Rep., vol. v. p. 43, and Cave Temples, 
pp. 24f. On Prasénajit, see Kép- 
pen, Die Rel. d. Bud., vol. i. pp. 98, 
113, 495, 507; Vishn. Pur., vol. iv. 
p.371$ Mahdbhdar., ii, 332, iii, 11072, 
xii. 5924; L/ariv., "09 f, 2054. 

4 The Saddharma Mahasala. 

5 Prajapati, formerly written, as 
a note tells us, Pajapati, with the 
meaning “lord of creatures ;” it may 
be observed here that Hiuen Tine 
is the first to introiuce the Sans- 


BOOK VI.] SRAVASTI, 3 


Still east of this is a stupa to record the site of the 
house of Sudatta® (Shen-shi). 

By the side of the house of Sudatta is a great stiépa. 
This is the place where the Angulimalya (Yang-kiu-li- 
mo-lo) gave up his heresy. The Angulimalyas’ are the 
unlucky caste (the criminals) of Sravastt. They kill 
everything that lives, and maddening themselves, they 
murder men in the towns and country,and make chaplets 
for the head of their fingers. The man in question wished 
to kill his mother to complete the number of fingers, when 
the Lord of the World (Buddha), moved by pity, went to 
him to convert him, Beholding the Lord from far, the 
Angulimalya rejoicing said, “Now I shall be born in 
heaven; our former teacher declared that whoever in- 
jures a Buddha or kills his mother, ought to be born in 
the Bralina heaven.” 

Addressing his mother, he said, “Old woman! I will 
leave you for a time till I have killed that great Sha- 
man.” Then taking a knife, he went to attack the Lord. 
On this Tathagata stepped slowly as he went, whilst 
the Angulimalya rushed at him without slacking his 
pace. 

The Lord of the World addressing him said, “ Why do 
vou persevere in your evil purpose and give up the better 
feelings of your nature and foster the source of evil?” 
The Angulimalya, hearing these words, understood the 
wickedness of his conduct, and on that paid reverence to 
Buddha, and sought permission to enter the law (i. the 
religious profession of Buddha), and having persevered with 


krit forms of proper names into the 


§ Sudatta, formerly written Su-ta, 
Chinese translations, Before him 


the same as Anathapindada, “the 


the Prakrit, or provincial, forms 
are used ; for example, in Fa-hian, 
instead of Po-lo-si-na-chi-to for Pra- 
sénajita, we have Po-sz-nih, corre- 
sponding with Pasénat or Pasén- 
adi; instead of Sravasti, we have 
She-wei for Sewet, &c. For further 
instances see Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, 
p. 243, notes 1, 2. 


friend of the orphan and destitute.” 
For an account of his conversion and 
subsequent career, see Fo-sho-hing- 
tsan-king, p. 201, f. 

7 The Angulimélyas were a sect 
founded by a converted brigaud, who 
wore round his neck a string of 
fingers. 


4 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book v1. 


diligence in his religious progress, he obtained the fruit of 
an Arhat. 

To the south of the city 5 or 6 li is the Jétavana?® 
This is where Andthapindada (Ki-ku-to) (otherwise 
called) Sudatta, the chief minister of Prasénajita-raja, 
built for Buddha a vihdra. There was a saryhdrdma 
here formerly, but now all is in ruins (deseré), 

On the left and right of the eastern gate has been built 
a pillar about 7o feet high; on the left-hand pillar is 
engraved on the base a wheel;® on the right-hand pillar 
the figure of an ox is on the top. Both columns were 
erected by Agdka-rija. The residences (of the priests) are 
wholly destroyed; the foundations only remain, with the 
exception of one solitary brick building, which stands 
alone in the midst of the ruins, and contains an image 
of Buddha. 

Formerly, when Tathdgata ascended into the Trayas- 
triingas heaven to preach for the benefit of his mother, 
Prasénajita-rija, having heard that the king Uddyana had 
caused a sandal-wood figure of Buddha to be carved, also 
caused this image to be made. 

The nobleinan Sudatta was a man of “ humanity ” and 
talent. He had amassed great wealth, and was liberal in 
its distribution. He succoured the needy and destitute, 
and had compassion on the orphan and helped the aged. 
During is lifetime they called him Andthapindada 
(KNi-ku-to—/freend of the orphan) on account of his virtue. 
Ife, liearing of the religious merit of Buddha, conceived a 


the body of an elephant.” But, in 


8 Shi-to-lin, the garden of Jéta, 
fact, the text says, “On the face 


the prince royal. Yor the sale of 


this garden to Sudatta (Shen-shi) 
and the circumstances attending 
it, see fo-sho-hing tsan-king, p. 217. 
For a representation of the scene of 
the history, see Bharhut Stdpa, pl. 
lvii, 

® Julien’s translation of this pas- 
sage is very confusing. He says, “On 
the top of the left-hand pillar is a 
dome (coupole);on the pinnacle (faite) 
of the right-hand pillar is sculptured 


(pedestal, twan) of the left-hand 
pilar is the mark (figure) of a wheel 
(the symbol of dharma); on the top 
of the right-hand pillar is the form 
of an ox. ‘This is in agreement with 
Fa-hian’s account. ‘lhe only doubt 
is whether twan nay not mean “the 
top ;” in that case the wheel would 
be on the top of the left-hand pillar, 
as Fa-hian says (chap. xx.) 


BOOK VI.] THE FJETAVANA. 5 


deep reverence for him, and vowed to build a vikdra for 
him. He therefore asked Buddha to condescend to come 
to receive it. The Lord of the World commanded Saripu- 
tra (She-li-tseu) to accompany him and aid by his counsel. 
Considering the garden of Jéta (Shi-to-yuen), the prince, 
to be a proper site on account of its pleasant and upland 
position, they agreed to go to the prince to make known 
the circumstances of the case. The prince in a jeering 
way said, “If you can cover the ground with gold (pieces) 
I will sell it (you can buy it).” 

Sudatta, hearing it, was rejoiced. He immediately 
opened his treasuries, with a view to comply with the 
agreement, and cover the ground. There was yet a little 
space not filled? The prince asked him to desist, but he 
said, “The field of Buddha is true; I must plant good 
seed in it.” Then on the vacant spot of ground! he 
raised a vihdra. 

The Lord of the World forthwith addressed Ananda 
and said, “ The ground of the garden is what Sudatta has 
bought; the trees are given by Jéta. Both of them, 
similarly minded, have acquired the utmost merit. From 
this time forth let the place be called the grove of Jéta 
(Shi-to) and the garden of Andthapindada (Ki-ku-to), 

To the north-east of the garden of Anithapindada 
(Ki-ku-to) is a sttipa. This is the place where Tathagata 
washed with water the sick Bhikshu. Formerly, when 
Buddha was in the world, there was a sick Bhikshu (Pi-tsu), 
who, cherishing his sorrow, lived apart by himself in a 


2% This incident of the broken pro- 
mise is referred to by ASvaghdésha, 
Fo-sho-hing-tsan-kiny, p. 217, and 
seems to be the subject of the Bhar- 
hut sculpture, pl. xlv. fig. 9, where 
“the little space not filled” is re- 
presented, and the broken promise 
denoted by the broken surface of the 
ground. It would perhaps be too 
bold to suggest chitu pdddsi-la for 
the inscription, where pdddsi would 
be the aorist forin of pradd, and 


the meaning would be “taken or 
caught (/¢) in breaking what he 
gave.” The tree certainly favours 
this identification ; and the august 
figure by the side of Jéta would de- 
note the “ Lord of the World,” or per- 
haps “the magistrate ” or Sariputra. 

nN fe, the system of Buddha is 
founded on truth; alluding to the 
wish of Jéta to annul the agree- 
ment. 

Jie, where there were no trees. 


6 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [pook v1. 


solitary place. The Lord of the World seeing him, inquired, 
“What is your aftliction, living thus by yourself?” He 
answered, “My natural disposition being a careless one 
and an idle one, I had no patience to look on a man sick 
(to attend on the siek),® and now when I am entangled in 
sickness there is nobody to look on me (attend to me).” 
Tathigata, moved with pity thereat, addressed him and 
said, “My son! I will look on you!” and then touching 
him, as he bent down, with his hand, lo! the sickness was 
immediately healed; then leading him forth to the outside 
of the door, he spread a fresh mat for him and himself, 
washed his body and changed his clothes for new ones. 

Then Buddha addressed the Bhikshu, “ From this time 
be diligent and exert yourself.” Hearing this, he re- 
pented of his idleness, was moved by gratitude, and, filled 
with joy, he followed him. 

To the north-west of the garden of Andthapindada is 
a little stépa. This is the place where Mudgalaputra 
(Mo-te-kia-lo-tseu) vainly exerted his spiritual power in 
order to lift the girdle (sash) of SAriputra (She-li-tseu). 
Formerly, when Buddha was residing near the lake Wu- 
jeh-no.* in the midst of an assembly of men and 
Dévas, only Siriputra (She-li-tseu) was absent (iad not 
time to join the assemdly). Then Buddha summoned 
Mudgalaputra, and bade him go and command him to 
attend. Mudgalaputra accordingly went. 

Sariputra was at the time engaged in repairing his 
religious vestments. Mudgalaputra addressing him said, 
“The Lord, who is now dwelling beside the Anavatapta 
lake, has ordered me to summon you.” 

Sariputra said, “ Wait a minute, till I have finished 
repairing my garment, and then I will go with you.” 


3 This differs from Julien’s ver- 
sion; he makes the fault of the Bhik- 
shu to consist in neglecting his own 
sickness; but it seems rather to 
have been his former indifference to 
the sickness of others. For an inci- 


dent somewhat like that in the text, 
see Sacred Books of the East, vol. 
xvii. p. 241. 

14 No feverish affliction, 7.e., cool ; 
antaratapta. See ante, vol. i. p. 11, 
note 28. 


. 


BOOK VI.] PLOT TO SLANDER BUDDHA. 7 


Mudgalaputra said, “If you do not come quickly, I will 
exert my spiritual power, and carry both you and your 
house to the great assembly.” 

Then Sariputra, loosing his sash, threw it on the 
ground and said, “If you can lift this sash, then perhaps 
my body will move (or, then I will start)” Mudgala- 
putra exerted all his spiritual power to raise the sash, 
yet it moved not. Then the earth trembled in conse- 
quence. On returning by his spiritual power of loco- 
motion to the place where Buddha was, he found Sari- 
putra already arrived and sitting in the assembly. 
Mudgalaputra sighing said, “Now then I have learned 
that the power of working miracles is. not equal to the 
power of wisdom.” 

Not far from the sédéipa just named is a well. Tatha- 
gata, when in the world, drew from this well for his 
personal use. By the side of it is a sttdpa which was 
built by Asdka-raja; in it are some Sartras' of Tatha- 
gata; here also are spots where there are traces of 
walking to and fro and preaching the law. To com- 
memorate both these circumstances, (the king) erected a 
pillar and built the stépa. A mysterious sense of awe 
surrounds the precincts of the place; many miracles are 
manifested also. Sometimes heavenly music is heard, 
at other times divine odours are perceived. The lucky 
(happy) presages (or, the omens that indicate religious 
merit) would be difficult to recount in full. 

Not far behind the savighdrdma (of Andthapindada) is 
the place where the Bralimacharins killed a courtesan, in 
order to Jay the charge of murdering her on Buddha (in 
order to slander him). Now Tathagata was possessed of 
the tenfold powers,!’ without fear,!8 perfectly wise, honoured 


1 Mudgalaputra excelled all the 
other disciples in miracnlous power, 

Ariputra excelled in wisdom. Fo- 
sho-hiny-tsan king, ver. 1406. , 

16 There is no mention of Sari- 
putra in the text, as Julien trans- 
lates; the two symbols, she di, for 
sarira, misled hiin. 


17 Buddha was called Dasabala 
(sht-i) on account of the ten powers 
he possessed, for which see Burnouf, 
Lotus, p. 781, and Hardy, Manual 
of Budhism, p. 394. 

18 Abhaya, an epithet given to 
every Buddha (Eitel, Landbook, 
8. v.) 


8 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook vr. 


by men and Dévas,! reverenced by saints and sages; then 
the heretics consulting together said, “We must devise 
some evil about him, that we may slander him before the 
congregation.” Accordingly they allured and bribed this 
courtesan to come, as it were, to hear Buddha preach, and 
then, the congregation having knowledge of the fact of her 
presence, they (the heretics) took her and secretly killed 
her and buried her body beside a tree, and then, pretend- 
ing to be affected with resentment, they acquainted the 
king (with the fact of the woman's death). The king ordered 
search to be made, and the body was found in the Jéta- 
vana. Then the heretics with a loud voice said, “This 
great Sramana Gautama” is ever preaching about moral 
duty and about patience (forbearance), but now laving 
had secret correspondence with this woman, he has killed 
her so as to stop her mouth; but now, in the presence of 
adultery and murder, what room is there for morality and 
continence?” The Dévas then in the sky joined together 
their voices and chanted, “ This is a slander of the infamous 
heretics.” 

To the east of the savghdrdma 100 paces or so is a 
large and deep ditch; this is where Dévadatta,! having 
plotted to kill Buddha with some poisonous medicine, fell 
down into hell, Dévadatta was the son of Drénédana-raja 
(Ho-wang). Having applied himself for twelve years with 
earnestness, he was able to recite 80,000 (verses) from the 
treasury of the law. Afterwards, prompted by covetous- 
ness, he wished to acquire the divine (supernatural) faculties. 
Associating himself with evil companions, they consulted 
together, and he spake thus: “I possess thirty marks 
(of @ Buddha), not much less than Buddha himself; a great 


29) Devamanussapujitam. also said to be his brother-in-law, 

° This is Buddha's gétra name, being brother to Yasédhara, Bua. 
taken from the name probably of dha’s wife. He was tempted to aim 
the Puréhita of the Sakyas. It is at the first place in the Buddhist 
used in Northern books asaterm of community, and when he failed in 
disrespect. this he plotted to take the life of 

4“ Dévadatta (Ti-po-ta-to) the Buddha, (See Oldenberg, Buddha, 
cousin of Buddha, being the son of p. 160.) 
Drénédana, Buddha’s uncle, He is 


BOOK VI.] THE SLANDER OF CHANSCHA, .) 


company of followers surround me; in what respect do I 
differ from Tathagata?” Having thought thus, he forth- 
with tried to put a stumbling-block im the way of the 
disciples, but Sariputra and Mudgalaputra, obedient to 
Buddha’s behest, and endowed with the spiritual power of 
Buddha himself, preached the law exhorting the disciples 
to re-union. Then Dévadatta, not giving up his evil 
designs, wickedly placed some poison under his nails, 
designing to kill Buddha when he was paying him homage. 
For the purpose of executing this design he came from a 
long distance to this spot, but the earth opening, he went 
down alive into hell. 

To the south of this again there is a great ditch, where 
Kukali” the Bhikshuni slandered Tathagata, and went 
down alive into hell. 

To the south of the Kukali ditch about 800 paces is 
a large and deep ditch. Chanégcha,® the daughter of 
a Brahman, calumniated Tathdigata, and here went down 
alive into hell. Buddha was preaching, for the sake of 
Dévas and men, the excellent doctrines of the law, when 
a female follower of the heretics, seeing from afar the 
Lord of the World surrounded by a great congregation 
who venerated and reverenced him, thought thus with 
herself, “I will this very day destroy the good name of 
this Gautama, in order that my teacher may alone enjoy 
a wide reputation.” Then tying a piece of wood next 
her person, she went to the garden of Andthapindada, 
and in the midst of the great congregation she cried with 
a loud voice and said, “This preacher of yours has had 
private intercourse with me, and I bear his child in my 
womb, the offspring of the Sikya tribe.” The heretics 
all believed it, but the prudent knew it was a slander. 
At this time, Sakra, the king of Dévas, wishing to dis- 
sipate all doubt about the matter, took the form of a 

2 Kukalf (Kiu-kia-li-pi-tsu) also *3 For the history of this woman, 
called Kdékali, interpreted “bad called Chinchi,(Chan-che) or Chin- 


time.” She is also called Gépali; chimand, see Hardy, Wanual of Bud- 
she was a follower of Dévadatta. his, p. 275 ; also Va-hian, chap, xx. 


10 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Boox VI. 


white rat, and nibbled through the bandage that fastened 
the (wooden) pillow to her person. Having done so, it 
fell down to the ground with a great noise, which startled 
the assembly. Then the people, witnessing this event, 
were filled with increased joy; and one in the crowd 
picking up the wooden bolster, held it up and showed 
it to the woman, saying, “Is this your child, thou bad 
one?” Then the earth opened of itself, and she went 
down whole into the lowest hell of Avichi, and received 
her due punishment. 

These three ditches * are unfathomable in their depth ; 
when the floods of summer and autumn fill all the lakes 
and ponds with water, these deep caverns show no signs 
of the water standing in them. 

East of the savghdrdma 60 or 70 paces is a vihdra 
about 60 feet high. There is in it a figure of Buddha 
looking to the east in a sitting posture. When Tatha- 
gata was in the world in old days, he discussed here with 
the heretics. Farther east is a Déva temple of equal size 
with the vikdra. When the sun is rising, the Déva 
temple does not cast its shade on the wihdra, but when 
it is setting, the vihkéra obscures the Déva temple. 

Three or four li to the east of the vihdra “which 
covers with its shadow” is a sttpa. This is where 
Sariputra discussed with the heretics. When Sndatta 
first bought the garden of the Prince Jéta for the pur- 
pose of building a vihdra for Buddha, then Sariputra 
accompanied the nobleman to inspect and assist the plan. 
On this occasion six masters of the heretics sought to 
deprive him of his spiritual power. Sdriputra, as occasion 
offered, brought them to reason and subdued them. There 
is a vihdra by the side, in front of which is built a stdpa ; 
this is where Tathagata defeated the heretics and acceded 
to the request of Visikha. 

*4 These gulfs or ditehes have build a vihdra. For the history 
all been identified by Cunningham. of Visakh4, see Hardy, Man. of 


See Arch. Survey, vol. i. p. 342. Budh., p. 220 seq. 
* That is, accepted her offer to 


BOOK VI.] THE SAKYA MAIDENS. tr 


On the south of the st%pa erected on the spot where 
Buddha acceded to Visikha’s request is the place where 
Viridhaka-raja, having raised an army to destroy 
the family of the SAakyas, on seeing Buddha dispersed 
his soldiers. After King Virfidhaka had succeeded to 
the throne, stirred up to hatred by his former disgrace, 
he equipped an army and moved forward with a great 
force. The summer heat being ended and everything 
arranged, he commanded an advance. At this time a 
Bhikshu, having heard of it, told Buddha; on this the 
Lord of the World was sitting beneath a withered tree ; 
Virtidhaka-rija, seeing him thus seated, some way off 
alighted from his chariot aud paid him reverence, then ~ 
as he stood up he said, “There are plenty of green and 
umbrageous trees; why do you not sit beneath one of 
these, instead of under this withered one with dried 
leaves, where you walk and sit?” The Lord said, “ My 
honourable tribe is like branches and leaves; these being 
about to perish, what shade can there be for one be- 
longing to it?” The king said, “The Lord of the World 
by his honourable regard for his family is able to turn my 
chariot.” Then looking at hin with emotion, he disbanded 
his army and returned to his country. 

By the side of this place is a stépa; this is the spot 
where the Sikya maidens were slaughtered. Virfidhaka- 
rija having destroyed the Sakyas, in celebration of his 
victory, took 500 of the Sikya maidens for his harem. 
The girls, filled with hatred and rage, said they would 
never obey the king, and reviled the king and his house- 
hold. The king, hearing of it, was filled with rage, and 
ordered them all to be slaughtered. Then the officers, 
obedient to the king’s orders, eut off their hands and 
feet, and cast them into a ditch. ‘Then all the Sdkya 
maidens, nursing their grief, invoked Buddha, The Lord 


°6 Virfidhaka was the son of of them, and they deceived him. See 
Prasénajit by a servant-woman of infra. 
the Sakyas. He had asked a wife 


1z RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vr: 


by his sacred power of insight having beheld their pain 
and agony, bade a Bhikshu ‘take his garment and go to 
preach the most profound doctrine to the Sikya girls, 
viz., on the bonds of the five desires, the misery of trans- 
migration in the evil ways, the pain of separation be- 
tween loved ones, and the long period (distance) of birth 
and death. Then the Sakya maidens, having heard the 
instructions of Buddha, put away the defilement of sense, 
removed all pollutions, and obtained the purity of the 
eyes of the law; then they died and were all born in 
heaven. Then Galera, king of Dévas, taking the form of a 
3rahman, collected their bones and burnt them. Men of 
succeeding years have kept this record. 

By the ‘side of the stépa commemorating the slaughter 
of the Sikyas, and not far from it, is a great lake wine 
has dried up. This is where Virfdhaka- -raja went down 
bodily into hell. The world-honoured one having seen 
the Sikya maidens, went back to the Jétavana, and there 
told the Bhikshus, “ Now is King Viridhaka’s end come; 
after seven days’ interval a fire will come forth to burn up 
the king.” The king hearing the prediction, was very 
frightened and alarmed. On the seventh day he was 
rejuiced that no harm had come, and in order to gratify 
himself he ordered the women of his palace to go to the 
lake, and there he sported with them on its shores, stroll- 
ing here and there with musie and drinking. Still, how- 
ever, he feared lest fire should burst out. Suddenly, 
whilst he was on the pure waters of the lake, the waves 
divided, and flames burst forth and consumed the little 
boat in which he was, and the king himself went down 
bodily into the lowest hell, there to suffer torments, 

To the north-west of the saighérdma 3 or 4 li, we come 
to the forest of Obtaining-Sight (Aptanétravana ?) where 
are vestiges of Tathfigata, who walked here for exercise, 
and the place where various holy persons have engaged . 
in profound meditation. Jn all these places they have 
erected posts with inscriptions or else stdpas, ’ 


BOOK VI.] KAPILAVASTU. 13 


Formerly there was in this country a band of 500 
robbers, who roamed about through the towns and villages 
and pillaged the border of the country. Prasénajita-raja 
having seized them all, caused their eyes to be put out 
and abandoned them in the midst of a dark forest. The 
robbers, racked with pain, sought compassion as they 
invoked Buddha. At this time Tathagata was in the 
vihdra of the Jétavana, and hearing their piteous cries 
(i.e, by his spiritual power), he was moved to compassion, 
and caused a soft wind to blow gently from the Snowy 
Mountains, and bring with it some medicinal (leaves ?) 
which filled up the cavity of their eye-sockets. They 
immediately recovered their sight, and lo! the Lord of the 
World was standing before them. Arriving at the heart 
of wisdom, they rejoiced and worshipped. Fixing their 
walking-staves in the ground, they departed. This was 
how they took root and grew. 

To the north-west of the capital 16 li or so, there is an 
old town. In the Bhadra-kalpa when men lived to 
20,000 years, this was the town in which Kasgyapa 
Buddha was born, To the south of the town there is a 
sttipa. This is the place where he first met his father 
after arriving at enlightenment. 

To the north of the town is a stdpa, which contains 
relics of the entire body” of Kasyapa Buddha. Both 
these were built by Asgéka-rija. From this point going 
south-east 500 li or so, we come to the country of Kie-pi- 
lo-fa-sse-ti (Kapilavastu). 


KIE-PI-LO-FA-SSE-TI [I APILAVASTU]. 


This country % is about 4ooo li in cireuit, There are 


27 The expression used-here is 
thesame as that employed by Fa- 
hian when speaking of the great 
Kagyapa (chap. xxxiii.), whose 
“entire body” is preserved in the 
Cock’s-foot Mountain near Buddha 
Gaya. 


°8 This is the country of Buddha’s 
birth. The story of his ancestors’ 
occupation of this district will be 
found in Sp. Hardy, Man, of Budh., 
chap. vi, and elsewhere. Speaking 
geuerally, the country of Kapila- 
yastu is the tract of land lying be- 


Iq RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook VI. 


some ten desert” cities in this country, wholly desolate 
and ruined. The capital is overthrown and in ruins. Its 
circuit cannot be accurately measured. The royal precincts® 
within the city measure some 14 or 15 li round. They 
were all built of brick. The foundation walls are still 
strong and high, It has been long deserted. The peopled 
villages *! are few and waste. 

There is uo supreme ruler; each of the towns appoints 
its own ruler. The ground is rich and fertile, and is 
cultivated according to the regular season. The elimate 
is uniform, the manners of the people soft and oblig- 
ing. There are 1000 or more ruined saighdrdmas re- 
maining; by the side of the royal precincts there is 
still a sangdhrdma with about 3000 (read 30) followers 
in it, who study the Little Vehicle of the Saramatiya 
school. 

There are a couple of Déva temples, in which various 
sectaries worship (dive). ‘Within the royal precincts are 
some ruined foundation walls; these are the remains of 
the proper®? palace of Suddhéddana-raja; above is built 
a vthdra in which is a statue of the king. Not far from 
this is a ruined foundation, which represents the sleeping 


tween the Ghfgri river and the 
Gandaka, from Faizibad to the con- 
fluence of these rivers, The direct 
measurement gives a circuit of 550 
miles, which would represent up- 
wards of 600 miles by road. Hiuen 
Tsiang estimates the circuit at 4000 
li. The capital of the country, called 
by the same name, has been identified 
by Mr, Carlleyle, with a site called 
Bhuila, in the north-western part of 
the Basti district, about 25 miles 
north-east from Faizibad. It is 
plain that if this is so, the distance 
fromSravasti given by Hiuen Tsiang 
is much in excess of the actual dis- 
tance. See Arch, Survey of India, 
vol. xii. p. 83. 

*9 The expressions used in the 
text are very marked; the pilgrim 
says “desert cities ten in number 


are waste and desolate to the highest 
degree.” 

#0 Here we have again the expres- 
sion kung shing to denote the forti- 
fied part of the town, within which 
was the palace and its surroundings, 
This is in agreement with Mr. Carl- 
leyle’s remark in Archaolog. Survey 
of India, vol. xii. p. 144. 

31 Or, the inhabited suburbs or 
streets, 

32 It may be either “the proper,” 
i.e., private, or “the principal” palace 
(ching). From Mr.Carlleyle’s remarks 
we may perhaps conclude that this 
palace was situated in the southern 
portion of the enclosed precinct. The 
vihdra had evidently been built after 
the palace was in ruins. The statue 
of the king seems to have been there 
in Hiuen Tsiang’s time. 


BOOK VI.] HOROSCOPE CAST BY ASITA. 


15 


palace of Mahamayd4,® the queen. Above this they 
have erected a vihdra in which is a figure of the queen. 

By the side of this is a vihdra ;*4 this is where Bodhisattva 
descended spiritually into the womb of his mother. There 
is a representation of this scene ® drawn in the vihdra. 
The Mahisthavira school say that Bodhisattva was con- 
ceived on the 30th night of the month U-ta-lo-an-sha-cha 
(Uttarfshidha). This is the 15th day of the 5th month 
(with us). The other schools fix the event on the 23d day 
of the same month. This would be the 8th day of the 
5th month (with us). 

To the north-east of the palace of the spiritual concep- 
tion is a stéipa; this is the place where Asita the Rishi 
prognosticated the fortune (took the horoscope or signs of ) 
the royal prince. On the day when the Bodhisattva was 
born there was a gathering (a suceession) of lucky indica- 
tions. Then Suddhédana-r4ja summoned all the sooth- 
sayers, and addressing them said, “ With respect to this 
child, what are the fortunate and what the evil (signs) ? 
As it is right, so do you clearly answer me.” In reply 
they said, “ According to the record of the former saints 
the signs are especially fortunate. If he remains in 
secular life he will be a Chakravartin monarch ; if he leaves 
his home he will become a Buddha,” 7 


33 Mr. Carlleyle excavated a site 
which he thinks represents this “bed- 
chamber.” If we may judge from 
the size of the building (71 feet 
square), it would represent the palace 
of the king and the chamber of the 
queen. The fact of its being built 
of “very large ancient bricks ” cer- 
tainly favours the identification of 
the place with the inner city de- 
scribed by Hiuen Tsiang. 

34 Mr. Carlleyle places this vihdra 
about 50 feet W.N.W. from the bed- 
chamber ruins, the stipe of Asita 
being situated to the north-east of 
it. 
35 This representative scene is one 
of the best known of the Buddhist 
sculptures. See Tree and Serpent 


Worship, pl. xxxiii. ; Stdpa of Bhar- 
hut, pl. xxviii. ; Lalita Vistara (Fou- 
caux), pl. v. 

*6 The horoscope cast by Asita the 
soothsayer is another well-known 
incident in the Buddhist legend 
Fo-sho-hing-tsan-kiny, vv. 70 ff. For 
an interesting representation of it 
sce Mrs. Speirs’ Life in Ancient [ndia, 
p. 248, also Burgess, Cave Temples 
(Ajanta), p. 308. The stdpa of Asita 
is supposed by Mr. Carlleyle to be 
the solid brick structure he found 
about 400 feet N.N.E.4N. from 
the bed-chamber of Maya. This 
may be so; but the horoscope 
was actually cast within the pa- 
lace. 

37 Arriveatcomplete, equal, perfect, 


16 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book VL 


At this time the Rishi Asita, coming from afar, stood 
before the door3% and requested to see the king. The 
king, overjoyed, went forth to meet and reverence him, 
and requested him to be seated on a precious chair; then 
addressing him he said, “It is not without an object that 
the Great Rishi has condescended to visit me this day.” 
The Rishi sail, “I was quietly resting (or, observing the 
summer rest) in the palace of the Dévas, when I sud- 
denly saw the multitude of the Dévas dancing together 
for joy® I forthwith asked why they rejoiced in this 
extravagant way, on which they said, ‘GreMt Rishi, you 
should know that to-day is born in Jambudvina, of Maya, 
the first queen of Suddhédana-rija of the Sikya line, a 
royal son, who shall attain the complete enlightenment 
of samlédhi, and become all-wise’ * Hearing this, I 
have come accordingly to behold the child; alas! that my 
age should prevent me awaiting the holy fruit.” # 

At the south gate of the city is a stipa. This is 
where the royal prince, when contending with the Sdkya 
princes, cast the elephant away. The royal prince 
having contended in the public competition (ef arts and 
athletic exercises), was left entirely alone (without compeer) 
among them all, (or, in every exercise). And now the 


wisdom. ‘To leave his home” rthasiddha, but this signifies ‘ pos- 


means, if he becomes a hermit or 
ascetic. The signs on the child's 
body are alluded to in ver. 45 of the 
Buddha-charita (Fo-sho-hing-tsan- 
king), and the exact words of the 
prediction in the following verse, 


46. 

% From this it is plain that the 
site on which the stéipa was after- 
wards bnilt was originally a part of 
the palace. - 

8 Shau mo tsuh to, moving their 
hands and feet. Such a scene 
among the Dévas will be found in 
Tree and Serpent Worship, pl. lxxiii. 
fig. 2. 

# Julien remarks in a note that 
this phrase yeh tsut chi (Sambud- 
dhasa) corresponds to the name 
given to the prince, viz, Sarva- 


sessed of every excellency ” (yih taat 
yau i. 

* That is, either seeing him 
arrived at the holy fruit of a 
Buddhha, or myself arriving at 
the holy fruit of an Arhat by his 
teaching. 

© The spot should be just inside 
the southern gate of the city, not 
necessarily the royal city or the 
palace precincts, but the entire 
city. The story as it is generally 
received is that the elephant when 
it fell blocked the gate entrance, 
and that Nanda pulled it off the 
road and left it on one side. The 
prince then flung the elephant across 
the moat. It must, therefore, have 
Leen within the moat. 


BOOK VI.] THE ELEPHANT-DITCH. 


17 


Maharaja Suddhédana, after receiving congratulations 
(or, congratulating him), was about to go back to the 
city.8 

At this time the coachman was leading out the elephant 
and just about to leave the city. Dévadatta, confident as 
ever in his brute strength, was just entering the gate from 
without; forthwith he asked the coachman, “ Who is going 
to ride on this gaily caparisoned elephant?” He said, 
“The royal prince is just about to return, therefore I am 
going to meet him.” Dévadatta, in an excited manner, 
pulled the elephant down, and struck his forehead and 
kicked his belly, and left him lying senseless, blocking 
the way so that no one could pass. As they could not 
move him out of the way, the passers-by were stopped 
on their route.: Nanda coming afterwards, asked, “ Who 
has killed the elephant?” They said, “It was Déva- 
datta.” Forthwith he (Vanda) drew it on one side of the 
road, The prince-royal then coming, again asked, “Who 
had done the foul deed of killing the elephant?” They 
replied, “Dévadatta killed it and blocked up the gate 
with it, and Nanda drew it on one side to clear the road.” 
The royal prince then lifted the elephant on high and 
threw it across the city moat; the elephant falling on 
the ground caused a deep and wide ditch; the people 
since then have commonly called it “the fallen-elephant 
ditch.” # 

By the side of this is a vihdra in which is a figure of 
the royal prince. By the side of this again is a vihdra ; 
this was the sleeping apartment of the queen and the 
prince; in it isa likeness of Yagédhara and (the chald). 


#8 Julien makes this return refer 
to the prince. But there is no 
mention made of him, but of the 
king. 

“4 That is, the ‘‘ Hastigarta.” 
There is a circular tank about 340 
feet to thesouth of the ditch of Bhuila 
which is still called the “ Hathi 
Kund” or “Hathi Gadhe.” General 
Cunningham is perfectly convinced 


VOL. IL. 


that this is the spot indicated in the 
text (Arch. Surv., vol. xii. Introd.) 
But, of course, the whole matter is 
legendary. The vihdras by the side 
of this ditch, and said to be built on 
the site of the palace of the prince 
and his wife, would indicate that his 
palace was outside the walls; how, 
then, are we to explain the story of 
his flight from the palace? 

B 


18 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox v1. 


Raihula. By the side of the queen’s chamber is a vihdra 
with a figure of a pupil receiving his lessons; this indi- 
cates the old foundation of the school-house of the royal 
prince. : 

At the south-east angle of the city is a e¢hdra in which 
is the figure of the royal prince riding a white and high- 
prancing horse;* this was the place where he left the city. 
Outside each of the four gates of the city there is a 
vthdra in which there are respectively figures of an old 
man, a diseased man, a dead man, and a Sraman* It was 
in these places the royal, prince, on going his rounds, 
beheld the various indications, on which he received an 
increase of (religious) feeling, and deeper disgust at the 
world and its pleasures; and, filled with this conviction, 
he ordered his coachman to return and go-home again. 

To the south of the city going 50 li or so, we come 
to an old town where there is a stipa. This is the place 
where Krakuchchhanda Buddha was born, during the 
Bhadra-kalpa when men lived to 6c,000 years.47 

To the south of the city, not far, there is a stdpa; 
this is the place where, having arrived at complete en- 
lightenment, he met his father. 

T'o the south-east of the city is a st@pa where are that 
Tathdgata’s relics (of his bequeathed body); before it is 
erected a stone pillar about 30 feet high, on the top of 


which is carved a lion.*8 


4 Julien gives “a white elephant.” 

4 That is, the sights which met 
the prince’s gaze when he left the 
city on his excursion. These pre- 
dictive signs are well known. They 
are found also in the History of 
Barlaam and Joasaph (Bodhisat), to 
which I called attention in the year 
1869, Buddhist Pilgrims, p. 86, n. 
Mr. Carlleyle notices four mounds 
outside the citadel of Bhuila corre- 
sponding with the sites of these 
rthdras. 

7 Krakuchchhanda was the first 
of the five Buddhas of the Bhadra- 
kalpa. The fabled birthplace of 


By its side (07, on its side) is a 


this Buddha must be sought about a 
ydjana (8 miles) to the south-west of 
Kapilavastu, and not, as Mr. Car- 
leyle indicates, at Nagra, 74 miles 
to the north-west of that place. 
Fa-hian visited this place after 
leaving Srfvasti, then went north 
about 8 miles, then east 8 miles to 
Kapilavastu. Jnd, Ant., vol. xi, 
D. 293. 

4° Mr. Carlleyle, when at Nagra, 
thought he had discovered the 
pedestal on which this pillar stood ; 
the pillar was gone, and the natives 
denied all knowledge of it or its 
history. Their ignorance is not to 


BOOK VL] THE PLOUGHING FESTIVAL. 


19 


record relating the circumstances of his Nirvdya. It was 
erected by Aséka-raja. 

To the north-east of the town of Krakuchchhanda 
Buddha, going about 30 li, we come to an old capital 
(or, great city) in which there is a stipa. This is to 
commemorate the spot where, in the Bhadra-kalpa when 
men lived to the age of 40,000 years, Kanakamuni 
Buddha was born.” 

To the north-east of the city, not far, is a stipa; 
it was here, having arrived at complete enlightenment, 
he met his father. 

Farther north there is a stipa containing the relies of 
his bequeathed body; in front of it is a stone pillar with 
a lion on the top, and about 20 feet high; on this is 
inscribed a record of the events connected with his Niz- 
edna; this was built by Asoka-raja. 

To the north-east of the city about 4o li is a stipa, 
This is the spot where the prince sat in the shade of a 
tree to watch the ploughing festival. Here he engaged 
in profound meditation and reached the condition of 
“absence of desire.” °° The king seeing the prince in the 
shade of the tree and engrossed in quiet contemplation, 
and observing that whilst the sun’s rays shed their bright 
light around him, yet the shadow of the tree did not move, 


be wondered at, considering they 
lived 16 or 18 miles from the site 
named by Hiuen Tsiang. 

# Kanakamuni, a mythological 
person, the second of the five 
Buddhas of the Bhadra-kalpa. His 
birthplace is identified by Mr. 
Carlleyle with a village called 
Kanakpur, about a yéjana to the 
west of Kapilavastu. As this dis- 
tance and bearing agree with Fa- 
hian’s account, and nearly so with 
that of Hiuen Tsiang, it may be 
correct. 

5) This incident is recorded in 
all the Lives of Buddha. See Fo- 
sho-hing-tsan-king, vv. 330 ff. The 


figure of the prince lost in medi- 
tation under the Jambu tree will 
be found in Tree and Serpent Wor- 
ship, pl. xxv. fig. 1, where the 
leaves or flowers of the tree are 
bent down to cover the young 
prince, from the top of whose head 
the light of profound meditation 
proceeds, whilst the figures search- 
ing throughout the garden, and 
looking in at the three palaces of 
the prince, denote the perplexity 
of his attendants and father, as to 
his whereabouts. See the particu- 
lars in the omantic Legend of - 
Buddha. 


20 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vi. 


his heart, recognising the spiritual character of the prince, 
was deeply reverent. 

To the north-west of the capital there are several 
hundreds and thousands of sétdéipas, indicating the spot 
where the members of the Sak ya tribe were slaughtered. 
Virfidhaka-r4ja having subdued the Sakyas, and cap- 
tured the members of their tribe to the number of 9990 
myriads of people, then ordered them to be slaughtered. 
They piled their bodies like straw, and their blood was 
collected in lakes, The Dévas moved the hearts of men to 
collect their bones and bury them. 

To the south-west of the place of massacre are four 
little stupas, This is the place where the four Sakyas 
withstood an army. When first Prasénajita became 
king, he sought an alliance by marriage with the Sakya 
race, The Sikyas despised him as not of their family, 
and so deceived him by giving him as a wife a child 
of a servant, whom they largely endowed. Prasénajita- 
raja established her as his principal queen, and she 
brought forth in due time a son, who was called Virfid- 
haka-raja. And now Viridnaka was desirous to go to 
the family of his maternal uncles to pursue his studies 
under their direction. Having come to the south part of 
the city, he there saw a new preaching-hall, and there 
he stopped his chariot. The Sdkyas hearing of it, 
forthwith drove him away, saying, “How dare you, base- 
born fellow! occupy this abode, an abode built by the 
Sakyas, in appearance (or, intended for) an abode of 
Buddha?” 

After Virfidhaka had succeeded to the throne he longed 
to revenge his former insult; he therefore raised an army 


51 The enmity of Viridhaka (Pi- Carlleyle states, p. 


173), but an 
alien. 


lu-tse-kia) was owing to the insult 
the Sakyas had paid his father in 
wedding him to a slave, and also to 
the epithet “base born ” they ap- 
plied to him (see ante, vol. i. p. 128). 
His father, Prasénajita, was not a 
kinsman of the Sakyas (as Mr. 


The position the S&kyas 
held as “a holy family” is a pecu- 
liarity not yet thoroughly under- 
stood. The site of the slaughter has 
been identified with a place called 
Bhaté or Badha, about 8 miles to 
the north-west of Bhuila, 


BOOK VI.] BUDDHA VISITS HIS FATHER. 21 


and occupied this place with his troops, who took posses- 
sion of the fields. Four men of the Sakyas who were 
engaged in ploughing between the watercourses  im- 
mediately opposed the progress of the soldiers, and having 
scattered them, entered the town. Their clansmen, con- 
sidering that their tribe was one in which there had been 
a long succession of universal monarclis, and that the 
honourable children of such righteous kings* had dared 
to act cruelly and impetuously, and without patience to 
kill and slay, and so had brought disgrace on their 
family, drove them away from their home. 

The four men, having been banished, went to the north 
among the Snowy Mountains; one became king of the 
country of Bamyd4n, one of Udyana, one of Himatala, 
one of Sambi (Kausimbi?), They have transmitted their 
kingly authority from generation to generation without 
any interruption.>+ 

To the south of the city 3 or 4 liis a grove of Nyagroédha 
trees in which is a stiépa built by Asdka-raja. This is 
the place where Sikya Tath4gata, having returned to his 
country after his enlightenment, met his father and 
preached the law. Suddhédana- raja, knowing that 
Tathagata had defeated Mara and was engaged in travelling 
about, leading people to the truth and converting them, 
was moved by a strong desire to see him, and considered 
how he could pay him the reverence due to him. He 
therefore sent a messenger to invite Tathagata, saying, 
“Formerly you promised, when you had completed your 
purpose to become a Buddha, to return to your native 
place. These are your words still unperformed; now then 


52 Tin man, the rills dividing 
fields. 

53 This is a difficult passage, and 
the translation doubtful, but it is 
less obscure than that in the French. 
The idea is that SAkya children, de- 
scended from holy kings, ought not to 
have resisted even an invader, 

‘4 This story of the banishment 


of the Sakya youths is met with in 
the Southern records (Mahdvaisa). 
See Max Miiller, Hist. Anc. Sansk. 
Lit. p. 285. The story of the king 
of Udyana and the Naga girl occurs 
above, Book iii., vol. i. p. 129. 

*% For this part of Buddha’s 
history see Fo-sho-hing-tsan-hing, 
varga 19. 


22 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook v1. 


is the time for you to condescend to visit me.” The 
messenger having come to the place where Buddha was, 
expressed to him the king’s desire (mind). Tathadgata in 
reply said, “ After seven days I will return to my native 
place.” The messenger returning, acquainted the king 
with the news, on which Suddhédana-rija ordered his 
subjects to prepare the way by watering and sweeping it, 
and to adorn the road with incense and flowers; and then, 
accompanied by his officers of state, he proceeded 4o li 
beyond the city, and there drew up his chariot to await 
his arrival. Then Tathagata with a great multitude 
advanced; the eight Vajrapinis surrounded him as an 
escort, the four heavenly kings went before him; divine 
Sakra, with a multitude of Dévas belonging to the world 
of desires (Kima-loka), took their place on the left hand ; 
Brahmé-raja with Dévas of Ripa-léka accompanied him on 
the right. The Bhikshu priests walked in order behind, 
Buddha by himself, as the full moon among the stars, 
stood in the midst; his supreme spiritual presence shook 
the three worlds, the brightness of his person exceeded 
that of the seven lights; °° and thus traversing the air he 
approached his native country.” The king and ministers 
having reverenced him, again returned to the kingdom, 
and they located themselves in this Nyagrédha grove. 

By the side of the senghdrdma, and not far from it, is a 
stipa ; this is the spot where Tathagata sat beneath a great 
tree with his face to the east and received from his aunt a 
golden-tissued kashdya garment. A little farther on is 
another stipe ; this is the place where Tathagata converted 
eight king’s sons and 500 Siakyas. 

Within the eastern gate of the city, on the left of the 
road, is a stvipa; this is where the Prince Siddartha prac- 
tised (athletic sports and competitive) arts. 


55 Sun, moon, and five planets. be kept by the great Kasyapa in the 
57 The exaggeration found in the Cock’s-foot Mountain for Maitréya. 
visit of Buddha to his native country Buddha’s aunt was Mahdprajapati, 
is common to all the records. who was at the head of the female 
53 This is the garment supposed to disciples, 


BOOK VI.] THE ARROW-WELL. 


23 


Outside the gate is the temple of févara-déva. In the 
temple is a figure of the Déva made of stone, which has 
the appearance of rising in a bent position.» This is 
the temple which the royal prince when an infant (in 
swaddling clothes) entered. King Suddhédana was re- 
turning from the Lumbini (Lavani—La-fa-ni) garden,” 
after having gone to meet the prince. Passing by this 
temple the king said, “This temple is noted for its many 
spiritual exhibitions (miracles). The Sikya children® who 
here seek divine protection always obtain what they ask ; 
we must take the royal prince to this place and offer up 
our worship.” At this time the nurse (foster-mother), carry- 
ing the child in her arms, entered the temple; then the 
stone image raised itself aud saluted the prince. When 
the prince left, the image again seated itself. 

Outside the south gate of the city, on the left of the 
road, is a stdpa; it was here the royal prince contended 
with the Sikyas in athletic sports (arts) and pierced with 


his arrows the iron targets. 


From this 30 li south-east is a small stépa. Here 
there is a fountain, the waters of which are as clear as a 


mirror, 


59 This is, as it seems, the meaning 
of the passage, literally, “the appear- 
ance of rising, bendingly,” i.e. rising 
and bending. This rendering, which 
differs so widely from Julien’s, is 
confirmed by the scene found in 77ee 
and Serpent Worship, pl. 1xix. (upper 
disc), where the large figure “ rising 
bendingly” is that of Igvara, and 
the cloth with the feet marked on it 
represents the infant Buddha. Sud- 
dhédana and Maya (or Prajipati) 
are also represented. 

6 This garden was Buddha’s 
birthplace. The name Lumbini is 
said to have been derived from that 
of the wife of Suprabuddha; his 
daughter was Miya, the mother of 
Buddha. The Chinese equivalent 
in the text, La-fa-ni, may possibly 
be connected with the Sanskrit /d- 
vana, saline; but Lavani is a femi- 
nine personal name. 


Here it was, during the athletic contest, that the 


61 In the plate referred to above, 
there are none but women present 
(except Suddhédana), as if they were 
praying for their children. 

6 ‘The account of the contest with 
the Sakya princes will be found in the 
Romuntic Legend of Buddha. See 
also Fa-hian, p. 86, n. 3. The spot 
is identified by Mr. Carlleyle ; Ae- 
port, p. 187. 

6 Fa-hian places this st@pa at the 
same distance and in the same direc- 
tion. It has been identified with a 
spot called Sur-kuia, a corruption 
of Sara-kfipa (arrow well), about 4% 
miles due south of the former stdpa 
(Arch. Survey, vol. xii. p. 188). The 
bearing does not, however, corre- 
spond with that given by the Chinese 
pilgrims. The story of the arrow 
is given in the Lalita Vistara, p. 
149. 


24 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vt. 


arrow of the prince, after penetrating the targets, fell and 
buried itself up to the feather in the ground, causing a 
clear spring of water to flow forth. Common tradition 
has called this the arrow fountain (Saraktpa); persons 
who are sick by drinking the water of this spring are 
mostly restored to health; and so people coming from a 
distance taking back with them some of the mud (moist 
carth) of this place, and applying it to the part where they 
. suffer pain, mostly recover from their ailments. 

To the north-east of the arrow well about 80 or go li, 
we come to the Lumbint (Lavani) garden. Here is the 
bathing tank of the Sikyas, the water of which is bright 
and clear as a uurror, and the surface covered with a 
mixture of flowers. 

To the north of this 24 or 25 paces there is an Aséka- 
flower tree,°* which is now decayed; this is the place 
where Bodhisattva was born on the eighth day of the second 
half of the month called Vaig&kha, which corresopnds with 
us to the eighth day of the third month. The school of 
the Sthiviras (Shang-tso-pu) say it was on the fifteenth 
day of the second half of the sane month, corresponding 
to the fifteenth day of the third month with us. East from 
this is a stupa built by Aédka-raja, on the spot where the 
two dragons bathed the body of the prince. When 
Bodhisattva was born, he walked without assistance in the 
direction of the four quarters, seven paces in each direc- 
tion, and said, “1 am the only lord in heaven and earth; 
from this time forth my births are finished.” Where his 
feet had trod there sprang up great lotus flowers. More- 
over, two dragons sprang forth, and, fixed in the air, poured 
down the one a cold and the other a warm water stream 
from his mouth, to wash the prince. 

To the east of this stipa are two fountains of pure 

6 Wu-yu-shu. It is curious that 85 For all these events the ordi- 
it should be so frequently stated nary Lives of Buddha may be con- 
that the child was born under a sal sulted. I have been unable to follow 
tree (Carlleyle, op. cit., p. 200, and Mr. Carlleyle in his various identi- 


elsewhere) ; 8. Hardy, Man, Bud., fications of the spots named in the 
p. 167. text, 


BOOK Vi] THE OIL RIVER. 25 


water, by the side of which have been built two stdpas. 
This is the place where two dragons appeared from the 
earth, When Bédhisattva was born, the attendants and 
household relations hastened in every direction to find 
water for the use of the child. At this time two springs 
gurgled forth from the earth just before the queen, the 
one cold, the other warm, using which they bathed him. 

To the south of this is a stdpa. This is the spot where 
Sakra, the lord of Dévas, received Bodhisattva in his arms. 
When Bodhisattva was born, then Sakra, the king of 
Dévas, took him and wrapped him in an exquisite and 
divine robe. 

Close to this there are four stipas to denote the place 
where the four heavenly kings received Bodhisattva in 
their arms. When Bodhisattva was born from the right 
side of his mother, the four kings wrapped him in a golden- 
coloured cotton vestment, and placing him on a golden 
slab (bench) and bringing him to his mother, they said, 
“The queen may rejoice indeed at having given birth to 
such a fortunate child!” If the Dévas rejoiced at the 
event, how much more should men! 

By the side of these stdpas and not far from them is a 
great stone pillar, on the top of which is the figure of a 
horse, which was built by Agdka-raja. Afterwards, by the 
contrivauce of a wicked dragon, it was broken off in the 
middle and fell to the ground. By the side of it is a little 
river which flows to the south-east. The people of the 
place call it the river of oil. This is the stream which 
the Dévas caused to appear as a pure and glistening pool 
for the queen, when she had brought forth her child, to 
wash and purify herself in. Now it is changed and be- 
come a river, the stream of which is still unctuous. 

From this going east 300 li or so, across a wild and 
deserted jungle, we arrive at the kingdom of Lan-mo 
(Ramagrama),. 

It is plain from this that “the where the child was born, and flowed 
river of oil” was close to the spot through the garden. 


26 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book VI. 


Lan-mo [RAMAGRAMA]. 


The kingdom of Lan-mo™ has been waste and desolate 
for many years. There is no account of its extent. The 
towns are decayed and the inhabitants few. 

To the south-east of the old capital (own) there is a 
brick séipa, in height less than 100 feet. Formerly, 
after the Nircdna of Tathagata, a previous king of this 
country having got a share of the gartras of his body, 
returned home with them, and to honour these relics 
he built (this stupa). Miraculous signs are here dis- 
played, and a divine light from time to time shines 
around. f 

By the side of the sfipa is a clear lake (tank). A 
dragon at certain periods ® comes forth and walks here, 
and changing his form and snake-like exterior, marches 
round the stdpa, turning to the right to pay it honour. 
The wild elephants come in herds, gather flowers, and 
scatter them here. Impelled by a mysterious power, 
they have continued to offer this service from the first 
till now. In former days, when Agdka-rija, dividing the 
relics, built sévipas, having opened the stdpas built by the 
kings of the seven countries, he proceeded to travel to this 
country, and put his hand to the work (viz, of opening 
this stipa);® the dragon, apprehending the desecration of 
the place, changed himself into the form of a Brahman, 
and going in front, he bowed down before the elephant ” 


6? The Chinese equivalents give tirely from Julien’s; the story, 


us simply Rama, but that is the 
name of the country. Rimagrima 
would be the old capital. There 
can be no doubt as to the restora- 
tion ; the Jfahdwarigo refers to the 
relic tower of Rimagimo (Tur- 
nour’s Mahdw., pp. 184, 185), which 
is described by Hiuen Tsiang and 
Fa-hian. The site has not been 
satisfactorily determined. See Cun- 
ningham, Ane. Geog., pp. 420 f. 

65 Or it may be translated “every 
day.” 

® This translation differs en- 


however, of Aséka’s dividing the 
relics which the seven kings had 
acquired after the cremation is well’ 
known. (See Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, 
vers. 2297, 2298). 

7” It is possible that siang (ele- 
phant) in this passage is a misprint 
for how (head): it would then be, 
“knocking his head (how (how) 
before the king, he said,” &c. ; 
but as there is allusion to a carriage 
or conveyance in the next sentence, 
the reading may be correct. 


BOOK VI] ; RAMAGRAMA. 27 


and said, “Mahardja! your feelings are well affected to the 
law of Buddha, and you have largely planted (good seed) 
in the field of religious merit. I venture to ask you to 
detain your carriage awhile and condescend to visit my 
dwelling.” The king replied, “And where is your dwell- 
ing? is it near at hand?” The Brahman said, “I am 
the Naga king of this lake. As I have heard that the 
great king desires to build a superior field of merit," 
I have ventured to ask you to visit my abode.” The 
king, receiving this invitation, immediately entered the 
dragon precinct, and sitting there for some time, the 
Niga advanced towards him and said, “ Because of my 
evil karma I have received this Niga body; by religious 
service to these gariras of Buddha I desire to atone for 
and efface my guilt. Oh, that the king would himself 
go and inspect (the stdpa, or, the relics) with a view to 
worship. Aégdka-rija having seen (the character of the 
place), was filled with fear, and said, “ All these appliances 
for worship are unlike anything seen amongst men.” 
The Niga said, “If it be so, would that the king would 
not attempt to destroy the stipa!” The king, seeing that 
he could not measure his power with that of the Naga, 
did not attempt to open the stéipa (to take out the relics). 
At the spot where the dragon came out of the lake is an 
inscription to the above effect.” 

Not far from the neighbourhood of this stépa is a 
satighdrdma, with a very few priests attached to it. 
Their conduct is respectful and scrupulously correct ; 
and one Srimanera manages the whole business of the 
society. When any priests come from distant regions, 
they entertain them with the greatest courtesy and 
liberality ; during three days they keep them in their 
society, and offer them the four necessary things.’ 

The old tradition is this: Formerly there were some 
‘Bhikshus who agreed“ to come together from a distance, 


7 Ze., to obtain a superior merit 73 Food, drink, clothing, medi- 
by building stapas, cine. 
” For a similar account, see Fa- 74 So I translate tung chi, “ were 


hian, chap. xxiii. of the same mind.” Julien renders 


28 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book VI. 


and to travel to worship this stdpa. They saw when 
they had arrived a herd of elephants, coming and de- 
parting together. Some of them brought on their tusks 
shrubs (leaves and branches), others with their trunks 
sprinkled water, some of them brought different flowers, 
and all offered worship (as they stood) to the stipe. 
When the Bhikshus saw this, they were moved with joy 
and deeply affected. Then one of them giving up his 
full orders® (ordination), vowed to remain here and offer 
his services continually (¢o the stdpa), and expressing his 
thoughts to the others, le said, “I indeed, considering 
these remarkable signs of abounding merit, count as 
nothing my own excessive labours during many years 
amongst the priests.“ This stzpa having some relics of 
Buddha, by the mysterious power of its sacred character 
draws together the herd of elephants, who water the 
earth around the bequeathed body (of the saint). It 
would be pleasant to finish the rest of my years in this 
place, and to obtain with the elephants the end (at which 
they aim).” They all replied, “This is an excellent 
design; as for ourselves, we are stained by our heavy 
(sins) ; our wisdom is not equal to the formation of such 
a design; but according to your opportunity look well to 
your own welfare, and cease not your efforts in this ex- 
cellent purpose.” 

Having departed from the rest, he again repeated his 
earnest vow, and with joy devoted himself to a solitary 
life during the rest of his days. 


it, ‘‘their brethren,” as the 
equivalent of “those of the same 
mind,” and he makes these invite 
(siang chaou) the other. It may be 
so, but there were evidently no 
brethren at the st@pa, as the nar- 
rative shows. This old tradition 
is also related by T'a-hian (chap. 
xxiii.) 

7 This is undoubtedly the mean- 
ing of the passage. He was a 
Bhikshu, ie, fully ordained ; but 
now he gives up the privilege of 


that position, and undertakes the 
duties of a Sramanéra, to water and 
sweep the courts of the stupa. 

%6 This appears to me to be the 
meaning of the passage: The Bhik- 
shu was led by witnessing the de- 
votion of the elephants to count his 
own conduct as trifling compared 
with theirs. He therefore casts in 
his lot with them. M. Julien takes 
a different view of the meaning of 
the original. 


BOOK Vi.] BECOMING A HERMIT. 


29 


On this he constructed for himself a leafy pannasdld,” 
led the rivulets so as to form a pool, and at their proper 
seasons gathered flowers, and watered and swept and 
garnished the stvlpa. Thus during a succession of years 
he persevered without change of purpose or plan. 

The kings of the neighbouring countries, hearing the 
history, greatly honoured him; gave up their wealth and 
treasure, and together founded the savghdrdma. Then 
they requested (the Srdmanéra) to take charge of the 
affairs of the congregation; and from that time till now 
there has been no interruption in the original appointment, 
and a Srimanéra has ever held the chief office in the con- 
vent. 

Eastward from this convent, in the midst of a great 
forest, after going about 100 li, we come to a great stipa 
built by Aééka-rija. This is the place where the prince- 
royal, after having passed from the city, put off his precious 
robes, loosed his necklace, and ordered his coachman’® to 
return home. The prince-royal in the middle of the night 
traversing the city, at early dawn arrived at this place,’ 
and then, heart and body bent on accomplishing his destiny, 
he said, “ Here have I come out of the prison stocks, Here 
have I shaken off my chains.” This is the place where 
he left for the last time his harnessed horse,® and taking 
the mani gem * from his crown, he commanded his coach- 
man, saying, “Take this gem, and, returning, say to my 
father the king, now Iam going away, not in inconsiderate 
disobedience, but to banish lust, and to destroy the power 
of impermanence, and to stop all the leaks of existence.” 


77 Pansala is a Sinhalese word for 
“leafy hut,” ze, a residence made 
out of boughs of trees. 

78 His coachman, or equerry, was 
called Chandaka. For an account 
of his dismissal see Fo-sho-hing-tsan- 
king, varga 6. 

7 The place appears to be “ Man- 
éya,” about 34 miles E.S.E. of 
Bhuila. 

8 It is true that kedé means ‘“‘a 


chariot ;’? but it also means “a horse 
saddled for service; ”’ and as all the 
evidence, both of the books and 
sculptures, is in favour of the prince 
sending back his “horse,” I have 
used this translation. But it may 
also be translated “chariot,” as the 
answer of Chandaka seems to re- 
quire, 

81 Mo-ni, generally called the 
chaddmant. 


30 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book VI. 


Then Chandaka (Chen-to-kia) replied, “ What heart 
can I have to go back thus, with a horse without a rider?” 
The prince having persuaded him with gentle words, his 
mind was opened ‘and he returned. 

To the east of the stzpa where Chandaka returned i isa 
Jambu tree with leaves and branches fallen off but the 
trunk still upright. By the side of this is a little stupa. 
This is the place where the prince exchanged his precious™ 
robe for one made of deerskin. The prince had cut off 
his hair and exchanged his lower garments, and although 
he had got rid of his collar of precious stones, yet there 
was one divine garment (still on his person). ‘This robe,” 
he said, “is greatly in excess (of my wants); how shall [ 
change it away?” At this time a Suddhdvasa-déva® 
transformed himself into a hunter with robes of deerskin, 
and holding his bow and carrying his quiver. The prince, 
raising his garment, addressed him thus: “I am desirous 
to exchange garments with you. Oh, that you would 
assent.” The hunter said “Good!” The prince, loosing 
his upper garment, gave it to the hunter. The hunter 
having received it, resumed his Deva body, and holding 
the garment he had obtained, rose into the air and de- 
parted. 

By the side of the stpa commemorating this event, and 
not far from it, is a stupa built by Agdka-raja. This is 
the spot where the prince had his head shaved. The 
prince taking a knife (sword) from the hands of Chandaka, 
himself cut off his locks. Sakra, king of Dévas, took the 
hair to his heavenly palace. to offer it worship. At this 
time a Suddhivisa-déva, transforming himself into a bar- 
ber, and holding his razor in his hand, advanced towards 
the prince. The latter hereupon addressed him, “Can you 
shave off the hair? ‘Will you favour me by so doing to 


® His robe ornamented with 83 A Déva of the “pure abodes;” 
various gems. I find nothing about a Déva of the five highest Rapa- 
“a hunter” in the text, although it brahma heavens. See Childers’ Pali 
Mo with a hunter the exchange was Dict. sub voc. Sattaléka. 

made. 


BOOK vi.] KUSINAGARA. 31 


me?” The transformed Déva being so directed, accord- 
ingly shaved his head. 

The time when the prince left the city and became a 
recluse is not quite fixed. Some say that Bédhisattva was 
then nineteen years of age; others say he was twenty-nine, 
and that it was on the eighth day of the second half of 
the month Vaisdkha, which corresponds to our fifteenth 
day of the third month. 

To the south-east of the head-shaving stipa, in the 
middle of a desert, going 180 or 190 li, we come to a 
Nyagrédha grove in which there is a stupa about 30 feet 
high. Formerly, when Tathagata had died and his remains 
had been divided, the Brahmans who had obtained none, 
came to the place of cremation, and taking the remnant 
of coals and cinders to their native country, built this 
stipa over them,** and offered their religious services 
to it. Since then wonderful signs have occurred in this 
place; sick persons who pray and worship here are mostly 
cured, 

By the side of the ashes stipa is an old saighdrdma, 
where there are traces of the four former Buddhas, who 
walked and sat there. 

On the right hand and left of this convent there are 
several hundred séiéipas, among which is one large one 
built by Aséka-raja ; although it is mostly in ruins, yet 
its height is still about 100 feet. 

From this going north-east through a great forest, along 
a dangerous and difficult road, where wild oxen and herds 
of elephants and robbers and hunters cause incessant 
trouble to travellers, after leaving the forest we come to 
the kindom of Kiu-shi-na-k’ie-lo (Kusinagara). 


Ki1u-SuI-NA-K’IE-LO [KUSINAGARA]. 


The capital ® of this country is in ruins, and its towns 


4 This is the “Ashes DAgoba,” 8 Kusinagara, Kusinagari, Ku- 
referred to Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, v. fanagara, Kusigramaka, or Kuéi- 
2284. naira, the scene of Buddha’s death 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BOOK VI. 


32 


and villages waste and desolate. The brick foundation 
walls § of the old capital are about 10 li in cirenit. There 
are few inhabitants, and the avenues of the town are 
deserted and waste. At the north-east angle of the city 
gate 87 is a stipa which was built by Asdka-raja. This is 
the old house of Chunda (Chun-t’o) ; 8 in the middle of it 
is a well which was dug at the time when he was about 
to make his offering (to Buddha). Although it has over- 
flown for years and months, the water is still pure and 
sweet. 

To the north-west of the city 3 or 4 li, crossing the 
Ajitavati (O-shi-to-fa-ti) ® river, on the western bank, 
not far, we come to a grove of sla trees. The Séla tree 
is like the HuA tree, with a greenish white bark and leaves 


very glistening and smooth. 


In this wood are four trees 


of an unusual height, which indicate the place where 


Tathagata died.™ 


There is (here) a great brick vihdra, in which is a figure 


of the Nirvdna of Tathagata. 


He is lying with his head 


to the north as if asleep. By the side of this vihdra is a 
stipa built by Agdka-rija; although in a ruinous state, 


yet it is some 200 feet in height. 


and burial, has been identified by 
Wilson and Cunningham with the 
present village of Kasia, 35 miles to 
the east of Gérakhpir. It stood 
close to the Hiranyavati river (Fo- 
sho-hing -tsan-king, v. 2200); this 
must be the same as the Little 
Gandaki river, or one of its feeders. 
The channel of this river, however, 
has undergone frequent changes. 
See J. &. As. &, vol. v. pp. 123 f.5 
Burnouf, Jntrod. (ad ed.), pp. 75; 3473 
at "Ind, Alt, (2d ed.), vol. i, 
171, 662; Lalita Vistera, pp. 
ve f., 419 ff. 
86 Cunningham speaks of the 
bricks of which the stdpas were 
built (Arch. Survey, vol. ip. 


7): 
87 ASvaghdsha speaks of the Lung- 
siang gate, which must have led to- 


Before it is a stone 


wards the river (Fo-sho-hing-tsan- 
king, v. 2200). 

8 Chunda was a householder who 
invited Buddha to his house and 
there gave him his last repast (Fo- 
sho-hing-tsan-king, v. 1947). For an 
account of Chunda’s offering, ac- 
cording to the later school of Bud- 
dhism, see as above, Note iii, pp. 
365 fi. 

89 In Chinsse Wu-shing, “invin- 
cible.” This is the same as the Shi- 
lai-na-fa-ti or Hiranyavati river, in 
Chinese Yeu-kin-ho, “the river that 
has gold.” 

9° The record generally speaks 
of two sila trees (Shorea robusta) 
(Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, v. 1950), and 
they are represented in the sculpture 
of the Nirvdna in Cave xxvi. at 
Ajanta (Burgess, Cave Zemples, pl.1.). 


- BOOK Vi] SAKRA AND THE PHEASANT. 33 


pillar to record the Mirvdna of Tathagata; although there 
is an inscription on it, yet there is no date as to year or 
month, 

According to the general tradition, Tathigata was eighty 
years old when, on the 15th day of the second half of the 
month Vaisikha, he entered Nirvéna. This corresponds 
to the 15th day of the 3d month with us. But the Sar- 
vastivadins say that he died on the 8th day of the second 
half of the month Kartika, which is the same as the 8th 
day of the gth month with us. The different schools 
calculate variously from the death.of Buddha. Some say 
it is 1200 years and more since then. Others say, 1300 
and more. Others say, 1500 and more. Others say that 
goo years have passed, but not 1000 since the Mirvina.™ 

By the side of the vihdra, and not far from it, is a 
stdpa. This denotes the place where Bodhisattva, when 
practising a religious life, was born as the king of a flock 
of pheasants (chi—S. kapifjala), and caused a fire to be 
put out. Formerly there was in this place a great and 
shady forest, where beasts and birds congregated and built 
their nests or dwelt in caves. Suddenly a fierce wind 
burst from every quarter, and a violent conflagration 
spread on every side. At this time there was a pheasant 
who, moved by pity and tenderness, hastened to plunge 
itself in a stream of pure water, and then flying up in the 
air, shook.the drops from its feathers (on the lames). 
Whereupon Sakra, king of Dévas, coming down, said (to 
the bird), “ Why are you so foolish as to tire yourself, thus 
fluttering your wings? A great fire is raging, it is burning 
down the forest trees and the desert grass; what can such 
a tiny creature as you do to put it out?” The bird said, 
“ And who are you?” He replied, “I am Sakra, king of 


$l The various dates here recorded 
would correspond with 552 B.0., 652 
Bc. 852 BC. and a date between 
252 BO. and 352 Bc. By this last 
Hiuen Tsiang probably means to 
place the Nirvana, a hundred years 


VOL. I. 


before Agdka, i.e, about 325 B.0., 
which is the date he employs else- 
where. The Southern date is 543 
B.c., but the most recent researches 
place it between 477 and 482 B.c. 
This is generally accepted. 


C 


34 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book v1. 


Dévas.” The bird answered, “ Now Sakra, king of Dévas, 
has great power of religious merit, and every wish he has 
he can gratify ; to deliver from this calamity and avert the 
evil would be as easy as opening and shutting his hand. 
There can be no propriety in permitting this calamity to 
last.®2 But the fire is burning fiercely on every side, there 
is no time for words.” And so saying he flew away again, 
and ascending up, sprinkled the water from his wings. 
Then the king of the Dévas took the water in the hollow 
of his hand ®? and poured it out on the forest and extin- 
cuished the fire; the smoke was cleared away and the living 
creatures saved. Therefore this stupa is still called “the 
extinguishing-fire stipa.” 

By the side of this, not far off, is a sta. On this spot 
Bodhisattva, when practising a religious life, being at that 
time a deer, saved (or, rescued) ™ living creatures. In 
very remote times this was a great forest; a fire burst out 
in the wild grass that grew in it. The birds ® and beasts - 
were sorely distressed. Before them was the barrier of a 
swiftly flowing river. Behind them the calamity of the 
raging fire which barred their escape. There was no help 
for it but to plunge into the water, and there drowned, 
they perished. This deer, moved by pity, placed his body 
across the stream, which lashed his sides and broke his 
bones, whilst he strove with all his strength to rescue the 
drowning creatures. A worn-out hare coming to the bank, 
the deer with patience bearing his pain and fatigue, got 
him safely across, but his strength being now worn out, 
he was engulfed in the water and died. The Dévas col- 
lecting his bones raised this stdlpa. 


® This may be otherwise trans- 
lated: “if my request is without 
effect, with whom lies the fault ?” 

93 Taking a handful of water. 

%4 There is an error in the text, 
sha (killed) for kew (delivered). 
Julien translates the passage “took 
the form of a deer, and sacrificed his 
life.” The former part, “took the 
form of a deer,” cannot be correct, 


the original is wei luh, being a deer ; 
with regard to the second part, 
“sacrificed his life,” the original is 
sha sing, which is literally “to kill 
living animals for food.” I have 
preferred to consider skid a mistake 
for kew, to deliver. 

% It is difficult to understand 
why the birds should be afraid of 
the river. , 


BOOK VI.] SUBHADRA. 


35 


To the west of this place, not far off, is a stipa. This 
is where Subhadra® (Shen-hien) died (entered Nir- 
vdna). Subhadra was originally a Brahman teacher. He 
was 120 years of age; being so old, he had acquired in 
consequence much wisdom. Hearing that Buddha was 
about to die, he came to the two%” (sd/a) trees, and 
asked Ananda, saying, “The Lord is about to die; pray 
let me ask him respecting some doubts I have, which 
still hamper me.” Ananda replied, “The Lord is about 
to die; pray do not trouble him.” He said, “I hear 
that Buddha is difficult to meet in the world, and that 
the true law is difficult to hear. I have some grave 
doubts; there is no ground for fear.” On being invited, 
Subhadra at once entered, and first asked Buddha, “ There 
are many different persons who call themselves masters, 
each having a different system of doctrine, and pretend- 
ing therewith to guide the people. Is Gautama (Kiu- 
ta-mo) ® able to fathom their doctrine?” Buddha said, 
“TI know their doctrine thoroughly ;” and then for Sub- 
hadra’s sake he preached the law. 

Subhadra having heard (the sermon), his mind, pure 
and faithful, found deliverance, and he asked to be 
received into the church as a fully ordained disciple. 
Then Tathagata addressed him saying, “Are you able to 
do so? Unbelievers and other sectaries who prepare 
themselves for a pure mode of life ® ought to pass a four 
years’ novitiate, to exhibit their conduct and test their 
disposition; if their characters and words be unexcep- 


% For the circumstances attend- 
ing the conversion of Subhadra 
(Su-po-t’o-lo), see Fo-sho-hing-tsan- 
king, varga 26, p. 290. In Chinese 
his name is Shen-hien, ‘‘the very 
virtuous.” 

97 Here the two trees are re- 
ferred to. The four which existed 
in Hiuen Tsiang’s time were pro- 
bably of a later date, and had been 
planted two at the head and two at 
the feet where Buddha died. 


88 The expression “ Gautama ” is 
used by Subhadra because he was 
a Brahman unbeliever, 

% This does not, as it appears, 
refer to the life of a Sramana, but 
to the preparation of a Brahma- 
chara ; the previous discipline of 
the Brahman (Fan-hing...). The 
“unbelievers,” in Chinese Wai-tao, 
translated Tirthikas, in the LMahd- 
vyutpatti. 


36 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book VI. 


tionable, then such persons may enter my profession ; 
but in your case, whilst living amongst men, you have 
observed their discipline. There should be no difficulty, 
then, to prevent your full ordination ?” 

Subhadra said, “The Lord is very pitiful and very 
gracious, without any partiality. Is he then willing to 
forego in my case the four years of the threefold prepara- 
tory discipline ?” 1% 

Buddha said, “As I before stated, this has been done 
whilst living among men.” 

Then Subhadra, leaving his home immediately, took 
full orders as a priest. Then applying himself with all 
diligence, he vigorously disciplined both body and mind, 
and so being freed from all doubt, in the middle of the 
night (of Buddha's Nirvdna), not long after (the interview), 
he obtained the fruit, and became an Arhat without any 
imperfection. Being thus perfected in purity, he could 
not bear to await Buddha’s death (great Nirvdna), but in 
the midst of the congregation, entering the samddhi of 
“fire-limit” (Agni-dhdtu), and after displaying his spiritual 
capabilities, he first entered Nirvdna. He was thus the 
very last convert of Tathagata, and the first to enter 
Nirvana. This is the same as the hare who was last 
saved in the story that has just been told. 

Beside (the stdpa of) Subhadra’s Nirvana is a stupa ; 
this is the place where the Vajrap4ni (Chi-kin-kang) 14 


Nirvana, are called lih sse, and 


100 The whole of this passage is 
obscure ; the reference seems to be 
to a four years’ preparatory course 
of discipline practised by the S%- 
kshyamdna (pupil) ; for the three- 
fold character of their discipline, 
see Fo-koue-ki, p. 182. This pre- 
vious course of discipline Buddha 
is willing to remit in the case of 
Subhadra, because he had already 
practised it “in the world,” that is, 
in his own religious training. 

1 This incident is also referred 
to by Fa-hian (Beal, Buddhist Pil- 
grims, p. 95). There is some diffi- 
culty in the matter, because the 
Mallas, who were present at the 


they did “sink prostrate on the 
earth” (Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, ver. 
2195). But the text seems to refer 
to some superhuman being, for the 
Vajrapini is called “holding- 
diamond - mace - spiritual - secret - 
vestige - mighty - lord ;” this phrase 
is explained by EKitel (Landbook, 
sub voc. Vadjrapdini) to refer to 
Indra, a sort of demon king, with 
500 Yaksha followers. In the great 
picture of the Nirvdna brought 
from Japan by Mr. Borlase, and 
exhibited for a time at Bethnal 
Green, there is such a figure lying 
on the ground. 


BOOK VI.] BUDDHA'S NIRVANA. : 


37 


fell fainting on the earth. The great merciful Lord of 
the World, having, according to the condition of the per- 
sons concerned, finished his work of converting the 
world, entered on the joy of the Nirvdéna between the 
two Sdla trees; with his head to the north, he there lay 
asleep. The Mallas, with their diamond maces and 
divine though secret characteristics? seeing Buddha 
about to die, were deeply affected with pity, and cried, 
“Tathagata is leaving us and entering the great Nirvéna ; 
thus are we without any refuge or protection to defend 
us; the poisonous arrow has deeply penetrated our vitals, 
and the fire of sorrow burns us up withont remedy!” 
Then letting go their diamond clubs, they fell prostrate 
on the earth, and so remained for a long time. Then 
rising again, and deeply affected with compassion and 
love, they thus spake together, “Who shall now provide 
us a boat to cross over the great sea of birth and death? 
Who shall light a lamp to guide us through the long night 
of ignorance ?” 

By the side where the diamond (mace-holders) fell to 
the earth is a sttpa. This is the place where for seven 
days after Buddha had died they offered religious offer- 
ings. When Tathagata was about to die, a brilliant 
light shone everywhere ; men and Dévas were assembled, 
and together showed their sorrow as they spake thus 
one to the other, “Now the great Buddha, Lord of the 
World, is about to die, the happiness of men is gone, the 
world has no reliance.” Then Tathagata, reposing on 
his right side upon the lion-bed, addressed the great 
congregation thus, “Say not Tathagata has gone for ever 
(perished), because he dies; the body of the law 1% 
endures for ever! unchangeable is this! Put away all 


12 J have retained this transla- 
tion, notwithstanding Dr. Eitel’s 
explanation, as it is literally cor- 
rect, and in agreement with Agva- 
ghésha. Moreover, from the sub- 
sequent exclamations, it is plain 
that the persons who spoke were 


mortals, and disciples of Buddha, 
and they offered their services after 
his death for seven days. 

13 The Dharmakdya, the spiri- 
tual presence of Buddha in his 
words. : 


38 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book VI. 


idleness, and without delay seek for emancipation (from 
the world).” 

Then the Bhikshus sobbing and sighing with piteous 
grief, Aniruddha’* bade the Bhikshus cease. “Grieve 
not thus,” he said, “lest the Dévas should deride.” 
Then all the Mallas (Mo-la) having offered their offerings, 
desired to raise the -golden coffin, and bring it to the 
place of cremation. Then Aniruddha addressed them all, 
and bade them stop, for the Dévas desired to offer their 
worship during seven days. 

Then the Dévas (the heavenly host), holding exquisite 
divine flowers, discoursed through space the praises of 
his sacred qualities, each in full sincerity of heart offering 
his sacrifice of worship. 

By the side of the place where the coffin was detained 
is a sttipa ; this is where the queen Mahimaya!® wept 
for Buddha. 

Tathagata having departed, and his body being laid in 
the coffin, then Aniruddha, ascending to the heavenly 
mansions, addressed the queen Maya and said, “ The 
supremely holy Lord of Religion has now died !” 

May4 having heard of it, suppressed her sobs, and 
with the body of Dévas came to the two sdla trees. 
Seeing the savghdit robe, and the pdira, and the religious 
staff, she embraced them as she recognised each, and 
then ceased awhile to act, till once again with loud 
accents she cried, “The happiness of men and gods is 
done! The world’s eyes put out! All things are desert, 
without a guide!” 


104 Aniruddha (’O-ni-liu-t’o). a + niruddha not-stopped, in agree- 


There is some difficulty in knowing 
whether Aniruddha (cousin of 
Buddha, being a son of Amrité- 
dana\, or Anuruddha is referred 
to in the text; in the one case, 
Burnouf (Zotus, p. 294) states that 
Anuruddha was the personal at- 
tendant on Buddha at the time of 
his death ; but, on the other hand, 
Aévaghisha (Fo-sho, ver. 2123) de- 
rives the name of this person from 


ment with the Tibetan ma hgags- 
pa, celui qui n’a pas été arrété 
(Lotus, p. 293); As. Res. vol. xx. 
Pp. 440). Conf. Hitel, Handbook, sub 
voc. ; 

1% In the picture alluded to 
above (n. 97) there is a represen- 
tation of Anuruddha or Aniruddha 
conducting Mahamay4 from heaven 
to the scene of the Nirvdna. 

16 That is, she fainted. 


BOOK VI.] DIVISION OF RELICS. 39 


Then by the holy power of Tathagata the golden coffin 
of itself opened; spreading abroad a glorious light, with 
hands conjoined, and sitting upright, he saluted his loving 
mother (and said), “You have come down from far; you 
who live so religiously need not be sad!” 

Ananda, suppressing his grief, inquired and said, “What 
shall I say hereafter when they question me?” In answer 
he rejoined, “(Say this), when Buddha had already died, 
his loving mother Maya, from the heavenly courts de- 
scending, came to the twin sdla trees. Then Buddha, 
bent on teaching the irreverent among?’ men, from out 
his golden coffin, with hands conjoined, for her sake, 
preached the law.” 

To the north of the city, after crossing the river, and 
going 300 paces or so, there is a stiipa. This is the place 
where they burnt the body of Tathagata, The earth is 
now of a blackish yellow, from a mixture of earth and 
charcoal. Whoever with true faith seeks here, and prays, 
is sure to find some relics of Tathagata. 

When Tathagata died, men and Dévas, moved with 
love, prepared a coffin made of the seven precious sub- 
stances, and in a thousand napkins swathed his body ; 
they spread both flowers and scents, they placed both 
canopies and coverings over it; then the host of Mallas 
raised the bier and forward marched, with others follow- 
ing and leading on. Passing the golden river (Kin-ho) to 
the north, they filled the coffin up with scented oil, and 
piled high up the odorous wood and kindled it. Then, 
after all was burnt, there were two napkins left—one that 
lay next the body, the other from the outside covering. 
Then they divided the Sartras for the world’s sake, the 
hair and nails alone remained untouched by fire. By the 
side of the place of cremation is a stwpa ; here Tathagata, 


107 That is, those who have no customs of his country, where the 
reverence for parents. This inci- highest reverence of parents is in- 
dent, which is a late invention, culcated. 
would recommend itself to Hiuen 18 The Ajitavati or Hiranyavatt. 
Tsiang as in agreement with the 


40 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book V1. 


for Kigyapa’s sake, revealed his feet. When Tathagata 
was in his golden coffin, and the oil poured on it and the 
wood piled up, the fire would not enkindle. When all 
the beholders were filled with fear and doubt, Aniruddha 
spoke, “ We must await Késyapa.” 

At this time Kasyapa, with 500 followers from out the 
forest, came to KuSinagara, and asked Ananda saying, 
“Can I behold Tathigata’s body?” Ananda said, “Swathed 
in a thousand napkins, enclosed within a heavy coffin, 
with scented wood piled up, we are about to burn it.” 

At this time Buddha caused his feet to come from out 
the coffin. Above (or, on) the wheel sign! lo! there were . 
different coloured marks, Addressing Ananda then, he 
said, “ And what are these?” Answering he said, “ When 
first he died the tears of men and gods, moved by pity, 
falling upon his feet, left these marks,! 

Then K&syapa worshipped and walked round the coffin 
uttering his praises. Then the scented wood caught fire 
of its own accord, and burnt the whole with a great con- 
flagration. 

When Tathfgata died he appeared three times from his 
coffin: first, when he put out his arm and asked Ananada, 
“(Have you) prepared the way?” ! secondly, when he 
sat up and preached the law for his mother’s sake; and 
thirdly, when he showed his feet to the great Kagyapa. 

By the side of the place where he showed his feet is a 
stipa built by Asdka-rija. This is the place where the 
eight kings shared the relics. In front is built a stone 
pillar on which is written an account of this event. 

When Buddha died, and after his cremation, the kings 
of the eight countries with their troops (four kinds of 


109 Tun siang; see ante, vol. i. p. 11 This is the literal translation ; 
4. but it probably refers to Kagyapa, 
11° Tn the Vinaya it is stated that as Julien explains (n. 1, p. 346); or 
these marks were made by the tears the word che may be equal to “the 
of a woman who wept at his feet. chief,” alluding to Kéasyapa; the 
See Abstract of Four Lectures, pp. sentence would then be, “has the 
69, 82. , chief arrived?” 


BOOK VI.] DIVISION OF RELICS. 


4I 


troops) sent a right-minded Brahman (Dréna) "? to address 
the Mallas of Kusinagara, saying, “The guide of men 
and gods has died in this country; we have come from 
far to request. a share of his relics.” The Mallas said, 
“Tathagata has condescended to come to this land; the 
guide of the world is dead! the loving father of all that 
lives has gone! We ought to adore the relics of Buddha; 
your journey here has been in vain, you will not gain your 
end.” Then the great kings having sought humbly for 
them and failed, sent a second message saying, “As you 
will not accede to our request, our troops are near.” Then 
the Brahman addressing them said, “ Reflect how the Lord, 
the great merciful, prepared religious merit by practising 
patience; through successive ages his renown will last. 
Your desire now to try force is not right. Divide then 
the relics into eight portions, so that all may worship 
them. Why resort to arms?”43 The Mallas, obedient 
to these words, divided the relics into eight parts. 

Then Sakra’ the king of gods said, “The Dévas also 
should have a share; dispute not their right.” 

Anavatapta* the Naga also, and Muchilinda 
(Wen-lin), and Elapatra (I-lo-po-ta-lo) also, deliberated 
and said, “We ought not to be left without a bequest; if 
we seek it by force it will not be well for you!” The 
Brahman said, “Dispute not so!” Then he divided the 
relics into three portions, one for the Dévas, one for the 
Nagas, and one remnant for the eight kingdoms among 
men, This addition of Dévas and Nagas in sharing 
the relics was a source of great sorrow to the kings of 
men. 


12 This name is given in the Fo- 
sho-hing-tsan-king, v. 2231. The 
phrase chi sing means ‘right 
minded,” or “impartial;” it may 
possibly be a proper name (Riju- 
bhava), as Julien supposes. 

U3 The argument of the Brahman 
is given in full by ASvaghdésha, Fo- 
sho-hing-tsan-king, pp. 328, 329. 

4 In Tibetan Ma-dros-pa, the 


king of the Nagas (snakes) of the 
lake of the same name. See Asiat. 
fes., vol. xx. p. 448. 

US Julien’s translation can hardly 
be correct ; “the eight kings having 
obtained a double portion, the gods, 
the Nagas, and the kings of men 
grieved much on that account.” The 
eight kings did not, in fact, obtain 
a double portion. Tho translation 


42 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book v1. 


To the south-west of the relic-dividing stdpa, going 
200 li or so, we come to a great village; here lived a 
Brahman of eminent wealth and celebrity, deeply learned 
in all pure literature, versed in the five Vidyds® ac- 
quainted with the three treasures (pifakas). By the side 
of his home he had built a priest’s house, and had used all 
his wealth to adorn it with magnificence. If by chance 
any priests in their travels stopped on their way, he asked 
them to halt, and used all his means to entertain them. 
They might stop one night, or even throughout seven days. 

After this, Sag4nka-raja having destroyed the religion 
of Buddha, the members of the priesthood were dispersed, 
and for many years driven away. The Brahman never- 
theless retained for them, through all, an undying regard. 
As he was walking he chanced to see a Sramana, with 
thick eyebrows and shaven head, holding his staff, coming 
along. The Brahman hurried up to him, and meeting 
him asked, “Whence come you?” and besought him to 
enter the priest’s abode and receive his charity. In the 
morning he gave him some rice-milk (rice balls with milk). 
The Sramana having taken a mouthful, thereupon returned 
it (te. the rest) to his alms-bowl with a great sigh. The 
Brahman who supplied the food prostrating himself said, 
“Eminent sir! (bhadanta), is there any reason why you 
should not remain with me one night? is not the food 
agreeable?” The Sramana graciously answering said, “I 
pity the feeble merit possessed by the world, but let me 
finish my meal and I will speak to you further.” After 
finishing his food he gathered up his robes as if to go. 
The Brahman said, “ Your reverence agreed to speak with 
me, why then are you silent?” The Sramana said, “I have 
not forgotten ; but to talk with you is irksome; and the cir- 
cumstance is likely to create doubt, but yet I will tell you in 


is evidently chung fen, “the addi- grieved.” That is, the relics were 
tional division,” tin lung, “among carried away from the world, and 
Dévas and Nagas,” jin wang mo puh this caused the sorrow. 

pi, ‘‘the kings of men were much U6 See ante, vol. i. p. 78. 


BOOK VI. ] RAHULA. 43 


brief. When I sighed, it was not on account of your offering 
of rice; for during many hundreds of years I have not 
tasted such food. When Tathagdta was living in the 
world I was a follower of his when he dwelt in the Vénu- 
vana-vihdra, near Rajagriha (Ho-lo-she-ki-li-hi) ; 17 
there it was, stooping down, I washed his pdtra in the 
pure stream of the river—there I filled his pitcher—there 
I gave him water for cleansing his mouth ; but alas! the 
milk you now offer is not like the sweet water of old! It 
is because the religious merit of Dévas and men has 
diminished that this is the case!” The Brahman then 
said, “Is it possible that you yourself have ever seen 
Buddha?” The Sramana replied, “ Have you never heard 
of RAahula, Buddha’s own son? J am he! Because 
I desire to protect the true law I have not yet entered 
Nirvéna.” 

Having spoken thus he suddenly disappeared. Then 
the Bréhman swept and watered the chamber he had 
used, and placed there a figure of him, which he reverenced 
as though he were present. 

Going 500 li through the great forest we come to the 
kingdom of P’o-lo-ni-sse (Banaras). 


17 In Chinese, Wang-she-ch’ing. 


END OF BOOK VI. 


( 44 ) 


BOOK VII. 


Includes the following countries, (1) P’o-lo-ni-sse ; (2) Chen-chu ; 
(3) F-she-lat ; (4) Fo-li-she ; (5) Né-po-lo. 


P’0-Lo-NI-SSE (VARANASi+ OR BANARAS). 


TuIs country is about 4000 li in circuit. The capital 
borders (on tts western side) the Ganges river. It is 
about 18 or 19 li in length and § or 6 li in breadth; its 
inner gates are like a small-toothed comb ;? it is densely 
populated. The families are very rich, and in the dwell- 
ings are objects of rare value. The disposition of the 
people is soft and humane, and they are earnestly given 
to study. They are mostly unbelievers, a few reverence 
the law of Buddha. The climate is soft, the crops abun- 
dant, the trees (rut trees) flourishing, and the underwood 
thick in every place. There are about thirty satghdrdmas 
and 3000 priests, They study the Little Vehicle according 
to the Sarhmatiya school (Ching-liang-pu). There are a 
hundred or so Déva temples with about 10,000 sectaries. 
They honour principally MahéSvara (Ta-tseu-tsai). Some 
cut their hair off, others tie their hair in a knot, and go 


1 This is the restoration of the 


Chinese equivalents. A note in the 
original gives the sound of ni as 
=n(iu) + (he)d, 1.€, né; the restora- 
tion, therefore, is V4rdndsi, the 
Sanskrit form of the name of Ban- 
ards. It was so called because it 
lies between the two streams Varand 
and Asi or Ast, affluents of the 
Ganges. See Sherring, Sacred City 
of the Hindus. 


2 Julien gives here, “the villages 
are very close together ;” but, as 
noticed before (p. 73, n. 13), the 
Chinese symbols leu yen mean “the 
inner gates” of a city, and the ex- 
pression tsch pi means “like a tooth 
comb.” I conclude it means that 
the inner gates of the city consisted 
of closely joined, and perhaps sharp- 
ened, iron or other bars. 


BOOK VIl.] THE DEER FOREST. 


45 


naked, without clothes (Nirgranthas); they cover their 
bodies with ashes (Pasupatas), and by the practice of all 
sorts of austerities they seek to escape from birth? and 
_ death. 

In the capital there are twenty Déva temples, the towers 
and halls of which are of sculptured stone and carved 
wood. The foliage of trees combine to shade (the sites), 
whilst pure streams of water encircle them. The statue 
of the Déva Mahéévara, made of teou-shih (native copper), 
is somewhat less than 100 feet high. Its appearance is 
grave and majestic, and appears as though really living, 

To the north-east of the capital, on the western side of 
the river Varan4, is a stépa* built by Agdka-raja (Wu-yau). 
It is about 100 feet high; in front of itis a stone pillar; 
it is bright and shining as a mirror; its surface is glisten- 
ing and smooth as ice, and on it can be constantly seen 
the figure of Buddha as a shadow. 

To the north-east of the river Varana about 10 li or s0, 
we come to the satghdrdma of Lu-ye (stag desert)5 Its 
precincts are divided into eight portions (sections),° con- 
nected by a surrounding wall. The storeyed towers with 
projecting eaves and the balconies are of very superior 
work. There are fifteen hundred priests in this convent 
who study the Little Vehicle according to the Sarnmatiya 
school. In the great enclosure is a vihdra about 200 feet 
high ; above the roof i is a golden-covered figure of the Amra 
(An-mo-lo—mango) fruit. The foundations of the building 
are of stone, and the stairs also, but the towers and niches 


3 Not “life and death,” but “birth 
» and death ;” z.e., to arrive at a con- 
dition of uninterrupted life. 

4 Julien here gives Pé-lo-ni-sse by 
mistake, it should be Pé-lo-ni (read 
na), referring to the Varana or Ba- 
ran& (see Dr. Fitzedward Hall's 
remarks in the Introduction to 
Sherring’s Sacred City of the Hin- 
dus; also Cunningham, nc. Geog., 
P. 436 n.) 

5 The same as Mrigadava, gene- 


rally called Lu-yuen, “the deer 
garden.” This is the spot where 
Buddha preached his first sermon 
to the five mendicants. For an 
account of his march to Banaras 
and the sermon he preached see 
Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, varga 15, p 
168. 

6 Probably meaning that the en- 
closure was an octagon, as the great 
tower of Dhamek was (Arch. Sur- 
vey, vol. i. p. FIT). 


46 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vil. 


are of brick. The niches are arranged on the four sides 
in a hundred successive lines, and in each niche is a golden 
figure of Buddha. In the middle of the vihdra is a figure 
of Buddha made of teou-shth (native copper). It is the 
size of life, and he is represented as turning the wheel of 
the law (preaching).’ =) 

To the south-west of the vihd7a 1s a stone stdpa built 
by Ag6ka-raja. Although the foundations have given 
way, there are still 100 feet or more of the wall remaining. 
In front of the building is a stone pillar about 70 feet 
high. The stone is altogether as bright as jade. It is 
glistening, and sparkles like light; and all those who 
pray fervently before it see from time to time, accord- 
ing to their petitions, figures with good or bad signs, 
It was here that Tathagata (ju-ac), having arrived at 
enlightenment, began to turn the wheel of the law (to 
preach). 

By the side of this building and not far from it is a 
stipa, This is the spot where Ajiata Kaundinya 
(‘O-jo-kio-ch’in-ju) and the rest, seeing Bodhisattva giving 
up his austerities, no longer kept his company, but coming 
to this place, gave themselves up to meditation.® 

By the side of this is a sttipa where five hundred Pratyéka 
Buddhas entered at the same time into Nirvdna. There 
are, moreover, three stvpas where there are traces of the 
sitting and walking of the three former Buddhas. 

By the side of this last place is a stipa, This is the 
spot where Maitréya Bodhisattva received assurance of 
his becoming a Buddha. In old days, when Tathagata 
was living in Rajagriha (Wang-she), on the Gridhrakfta 


7 The wheel is the symbol of 
“preaching,” or of dharma. The 
scene of Buddha's teaching near 
Baniras is the district called SAr- 
nath, which, according to Cunning- 
ham, isa contraction of Saranganitha, 
lord of deer. Buddha himself was 
once the “king of deer,” and this 
may be the origin of the name. 
For an account of the excavations 


made on this spot see Arch. Survey, 
vol. i. p. 107 ff. 

8 The five ascetics who had accom- 
panied the Bédhisattva to Uravilva, 
and fasted with him for six years, 
when they saw him receive the rice 
milk of Nanda, supposing he had 
given up the object of his religious 
life, left him, and came to the deer 
park at Banaras. 


BOOK VII] MAITREYA. 


47 


mountain’ he spoke thus to the Bhikshus: “In future 
years, when this country of Jambudvipa shall be at peace 
and rest, and the age of men shall amount to 80,000 
years, there shall be a Brahman called Maitréya (Sse-che). 
His body shall be of the colour of pure gold, bright and 
glistening and pure. Leaving his home, he will become a 
perfect Buddha, and preach the threefold law for the 
benefit of all creatures. Those who shall be saved are 
those who live, in whom the roots of merit have been 
planted through my bequeathed law. These all con- 
ceiving in their minds a profound respect for the three 
precious objects of worship, whether they be already pro- 
fessed disciples or not, whether they be obedient to the 
precepts or not, will all be led by the converting power 
(of his preaching) to acquire the fruit (of Bédht) and final 
deliverance. Whilst declaring the threefold law for the 
conversion of those who have been influenced by my 
bequeathed law, by this means also hereafter others will 
be converted.” # 

At this time Maitréya Bodhisattva (Mei-ta-li-ye-pu-sa) 
hearing this declaration of Buddha, rose from his seat and 
addressed Buddha thus: “ May I indeed become that lord 
called Maitréya.” Then Tathigata spoke thus: “ Be it so! 
you shall obtain this fruit (condition), and as I have just 


® The “Peak of the Vulture,” 
near Rajagriha. 

0 Julien translates this by “ three 
great assemblies.” It is true hwuy 
means “an assembly,” but in this 
passage san hwuy refers to the 
law “thrice repeated.” Hence it is 
said to be “a triple twelve-part 
trustworthy knowledge of the four 
truths ” (Oldenberg, Buddha, p. 129 
and note. Compare also the phrase 
tikutiko chakamo in the Bharhut 
sculptures, pl. xxviii, the meaning 
of which has escaped General Cun- 
ningham. Mr. B. Nanjio, also, in his 
Catalogue of the Buddhist Tripitaka, 
pp. 9, 10, has not noticed that the 
Chinese symbol Awut corresponds 
with the Sanskrit kata, and so has 
translated the phrase as though it 


referred to ‘‘an assembly.” 

11 That is, those who shall be saved 
by the preaching of Maitréya are 
those in whose hearts my bequeathed 
Jaw shall have worked the necessary 
preparation. 

2 The same influence, i¢., of 
Maitréya’s teaching, will act as a 
‘* good friend ” for their subsequent 
conversion. The expression ‘‘ shen 
yau,” ‘illustrious friend,” refers to 
the guidance of Bédhi, or wisdom. 
There is some difficulty in under- 
standing how this assurance could 
have been given to Maitréya whilst 
Buddha was on the Gridhrakita 
mountain, and yet that the spot 
should be at Bandras, unless, indeed, 
it was repeated there. 


48 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [ook vu. 


explained, such shall be the power (influence) of your 
teaching.” 

To the west of this place there is a sédipa. This is the 
spot where Sikya Bédhisattva (Shih-kia-pu-sa) received 
an assurance (of becoming a Buddha). In the midst of the 
Bhadra-kalpa when men’s years amounted to 20,000, 
Kaéyapa Buddha (Kia-she-po-fo) appeared in the world and 
moved the wheel of the excellent law (i¢., preached the law), 
opened out and changed the unclosed mind (of men), and 
declared this prediction to Prabhapala Bédhisattva (Hu- 
ming-pu-sa). “This Bédhisattva in future ages, when 
the years of men shall have dwindled to 100 years, shall 
obtain the condition of a Buddha and be called Sakya 
Muni.” 

Not far to the south of this spot are traces where the 
four Buddhas of a bygone age walked for exercise. The 
length (of the promenade) is about fifty paces and the 
height of the steps (stepping spots) about seven feet. It is 
composed of blue stones piled together. Above it is a 
figure of Tathagata in the attitude of walking. It is of a 
singular dignity and beauty. From the flesh-knot on the 
top of the head there flows wonderfully a braid of hair. 
Spiritual signs are plainly manifested and divine prodigies 
wrought with power (fineness, éclat). 

Within the precincts of the enclosure (of the sanghd- 
rama) there are many sacred vestiges, with vikdras and 
stdpas several hundred in number. We have only named 
two or three of these, as it would be difficult to enter 
into details. 

To the west of the saighdrdma enclosure is a clear lake 
of water about 200 paces in circuit; here Tathagata occa- 
sionally bathed himself. To the west of this is a great 

13 Julien translates “and received bhipdla) shall become a Buddha. 
from Prabhdpila Bédhisattva the See Wong i (J. BR. As. S, vol. xx. 
prediction following.” But this p. 139), §§ 4, 
would destroy the connection of the 4 Or oe the “deer park,” the 


sentence; itis Kasyapa Buddha who modern Sarnath. 
declares to Prabhapala that he (Pra- 


BOOK VII.] THE ELEPHANT-BIRTH. 


49 
tank about 180 paces round; here Tathagata used to wash 
his begging-dish. 

To the north of this is a lake about 150 paces round. 
Here Tathégata used to wash his robes. In each of these 
pools is a dragon who dwells within it. The water is 
deep and its taste sweet; it is pure and resplendent in 
appearance, and neither increases nor decreases, When 
men of a bad character bathe here, the crocodiles (kin-pi- 
lo—kumbhiras) come forth and kill many of them; but 
in case of the reverential who wash here, they need fear 
nothing. 

By the side of the pool where Tathagata washed his 
garments is a great square stone, on which are yet to be 
seen the trace-marks of his kashdya (kia-sha) robe. The 
bright lines of the tissue are of a minute and distinct 
character, as if carved on the stone. The faithful and 
pure frequently come to make their offerings here; but 
when the heretics and men of evil mind speak lightly of 
or insult the stone, the dragon-king inhabiting the pool 
causes the winds to rise and rain to fall. 

By the side of the lake, and not far off, is a stipa. This 
is where Bodhisattva, during his preparatory life, was born 
as a king of elephants, provided with six tusks (chha- 
danta). A hunter, desirous to obtain the tusks, put on 
a robe in colour like that of a religious ascetic, and tak- 
ing his bow, awaited the arrival of his prey. The elephant 
king, from respect to the dashdya robe, immediately broke 
off his tusks and gave them to the hunter. 

By the side of this spot, and not far from it, is a stdpa. 
It was here Bédhisattva, in his preparatory career, grieved 
to see that there was little politeness (reverence) amongst 
men, took the form of a bird, and joining himself to the 


15 Chhadanta, which seems to 
mean six-tusked, according to Sia- 
mese legend, is the name of an ele- 
phant living in a golden palace on 
the shores of the Himalayan lake 
Chatthan, attended by eighty thou- 
sand ordinary elephants.— Alabaster, 
Wheel of the Law, p. 3053 conf. Sp. 


VOL. II. 


Hardy, Eastern Monachism, p. 178 ; 
Manual of Budhism, p. 17; Maha- 
wanso (Turnour’s trans.), pp. 22, 134; 
Upham, Sac. and Hist. Books, vol. iii. 
p. 269; Burgess, Reports,"Arch. Sur. 
W. Ind., vol. iv. pp. 45, 46; Cunning- 
ham, Bharhut Stadpa, pp. 62, 63 ; 
Beal, Rom. Leg. Bud., p. 367. 
D 


50 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [00K vit. 


company of a monkey and a white elephant, he asked 
them in this place, “Which of you saw first this Nya- 
grodha (Ni-ku-lin) tree?” Each having answered accord- 
ing to circumstances, he placed them according to their 
age.6 The good effects of this conduct spread itself little 
by little on every side; men were able to distinguish the 
high from the low, and the religious and lay people fol- 
lowed their example. 

Not far from this, in a great forest, is a stdpa. It was 
here that Dévadatta and Bodhisattva, in years gone by, 

“sawere kings of deer and settled a certain matter. Formerly 
“in this place, in the midst of a great forest, there were 
two herds of deer, each 500 in number. At this time the 
king of the country wandered about hunting through the 
plains and morasses. Bédhisattva, king of deer, approach- 
ing him, said, “Maharaja! you set fire to the spaces en- 
closed as your hunting-ground, and shoot your arrows and 
kill all my followers. Before the sun rises they lie about 
corrupting and unfit for food. Pray let us each day offer 
you one deer for food, which the king will then have fresh 
and good, and we shall prolong our life a little day by 
day.” The king was pleased at the proposition, and 
turned his chariot and went back home. So on each day 
a deer from the respective flocks was killed. 

Now among the herd of Dévadatta there was a doe big 
with young, and when her turn came to die she said to 
her lord, “ Although I am ready to die, yet it is not my 
child’s turn.” 

The king of the deer (ie, Dévadatta) was angry, and 
said, “ Who is there but values life ?” 

The deer answered with a sigh, “ But, O king, it is not 
humane to kill that which is unborn.” ” 

She then told her extremity to Bédhisattva, the king of 
deer. He replied, “Sad indeed; the heart of the loving 

16 Here I follow Julien’s trans- wise: “Our king is not humane in 
lation, but there is probably an error putting to death without reprieve ; 


in the text. or, “Our King i is not humane ; I die 
_ ” This may be translated other- without reprieve.” 


BOOK VIL] BIRTH AS A DEER-KING. 5t 


mother grieves (is moved) for that which is not yet alive 
(has no body). I to-day will take your place and die.” 

Going to the royal gate (i.2., the palace), the people who 
travelled along the road passed the news along and said 
in a loud voice, “That great king of the deer is going now 
towards the town.” The people of the capital, the magi- 
strates, and others, hastened to see. 

The king hearing of it, was unwilling to believe the 
news; but when the gate-keeper assured him of the 
truth, then the king believed it. Then, addressing the 
deer-king he said, “ Why have you come here ?” 

The deer-(king) replied, “There is a female in the herd 
big with young, whose turn it was to die; but my heart 
could not bear to think that the young, not yet born, should 
perish so. I have therefore come in her place.” 

The king, hearing it, sighed and said, “I have indeed 
the body of a man, but am as a deer. You have the body 
of a deer, but are asa man.” Then for pity’s sake he re- 
leased the deer, and no longer required a daily sacrifice. 
Then he gave up that forest for the use of the deer, and 
so it was called “the forest given to the deer,”?® and 
hence its name, the “ deer-plain ” (or, wild). 

Leaving this place, and going 2 or 3 li to the south- 
west of the satghdrdma, there is a stipa about 300 feet 
high. The foundations are broad and the building high, 
and adorned with all sorts of carved work and with pre- 
cious substances. There are no successive stages (to this 
building) with niches; and although there is a standing 
pole erected above the cupola (/fau poh), yet it has no 
encircling bells.2° By the side of it is a little stépa. This 


1 Commonly called the Mrig- 
dava. This is the site referred to 
before,—the present Sarnith or Sa- 
ranganatha, 

19 Julien translates this “a sort 
of vase belonging to a religious per- 
son, inverted ;” but I take fau poh 
to mean the cupola of a stipa, in 
agreement with the account given 
above, p. 47 and n. 163. 


£0 Zun-to, circular bells, or encir- 
cling bells, referring to the circular 
plates with bells generally attached 
to the surmounting pole of a stipa. 
Julien translates, “it is not crowned 
with a cupola in form like a bell.” 
This seems to be impossible, as it is 
before stated that the stdpa was 
surmounted by a pole, _ 


$2 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [ook vit. 


the spot where Ajfiata Kaundinya and the other men, 
five in number, declined to rise to salute Buddha.2! When 
first Sarvarthasiddha (Sa-p’o-ho-la-t’a-si-to*) left the 
city to sojourn in the mountains and to hide in thevalleys, 
forgetful‘ of self and mindful of religion, then Suddhé- 
dana-raja (Tsing-fan) commanded three persons of his own 
tribe and household, and two of his maternal uncles, say- 
ing, “ My son Sarvarthasiddha has left his home to practise, 
wisdom ; alone he wanders through mountains and plains 
and lives apart in the forests, I order you, therefore, to 
follow him and find out where he dwells. You within 
(the family), his uncles, and you without (the family), mini- 
sters and people, exert yourselves diligently to find out 
where he has gone to live.” The five men, after receiving 
the order, went together, casting along the outposts of 
the country. And now, during their earnest search, the 
thought of leaving their homes occurred to them also, and 
so they thus spake one to the other: “Is it by painful dis- 
cipline or by joyful means we attain to supreme wisdom?” 
Two of them said, “By rest and by pleasant discipline 
wisdom is obtained.” Three of them said, “It is by pain- 
ful discipline.” Whilst they yet contended without 
agreeing, two to three, the prince had already entered on 
the painful discipline of the unbelievers, considering this 
to be the true way to overcome sorrow; and so, like them, 
he took only a few grains of rice and millet to support his 
body. 

The two men seeing him thus, said, “This discipline 
of the prince is opposed to the true way (of escape) ; intel- 


?1 For an account of this incident 
see the Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, p. 172, 
vv. 1222, 1223. For the origin of 
ajiéta Kaundinya’s (’O-jo-kiao- 
ch’in-ju) name see op. cit. v. 1268. 

* This was the name given to 
Bodhisattva by his parents. It is 
explained to mean “one by whom 
all objects are effected” (Monier 
Williams, Sans. Dict., sub voc. 
Sarva). In Chinese it is translated 


into “ Yih-tsai-i-shing,” which seems 
to signify ‘‘one who is perfected in 
all ways,” or “the completely per- 
fect.” 

*3 Such appears to be the force of 
the passage, as though the five men 
by their long search for the prince 
had become accustomed toa solitary 
life, and so were unwilling to return 
home. | 


BOOK VIL] THE SIX YEARS’ PENANCE. 


53 


ligence is obtained by agreeable methods, but now he is 
practising severe discipline, he cannot be our companion.” 
So they departed far off and lived in seclusion under the 
idea that they would (in their own way) attain the fruit 
(of enlightenment). The prince having practised austerities 
for six years ** without obtaining Bédhi, desired to give up 
his rigorous discipline, as being contrary to the truth; he 
then prepared himself to receive the rice-milk (offered by 
the girl), with a view, by this method, to obtain enlighten- 
ment.” Then the three men (who advocated penance) hear- 
ing thereof, sighed and said, “ His merit was just ripen- 
ing, and now it is all dissipated! or six years enduring 
penance, and now in a day to lose all his merit!” On 
this they went together to seek for and consult with the 
two men. Having met them, they sat down and entered 
on an excited conversation. Then they spake together 
thus: “In old days we saw the Prince Sarvarthasiddha 
leave the royal palace for the desert valleys: he put off 
his jewels and robes, and assumed the skin doublet (of the 
hunter), aud then, with all his might and determined will, 
gave himself to austerities to seek after the deep mys- 
terious law and its perfect fruit. And now, having given 
all up, he has received the rice-milk of the young shep- 
herd-girl, and ruined his purpose. We know now he can 
do nothing.” : 

The two men replied, “ How is it, my masters, ye have 
seen this so late, that this man acts as a madman? 
When he lived in his palace he was reverenced and 


*4 The period of mortification is *5 Julien has translated this pas- 


lengthened to seven years in the 
Southern accounts, or rather that 
Mara pursued the Bodhisattva for 
seven years up to the last vain at- 
tack he made upon him. See Olden- 
berg, Buddha, p. 420, Eng. trans. 
It is probable that the seven years’ 
torture said to have been undergone 
by St. George, and the legend gene- 
rally, is borrowed from the story of 
Bédhisattva. 


sage as if it were spoken by “the 
two men” who were opposed to 
severe mortification as a method of 
religious discipline. But this neces- 
sitates the prediction that he would 
receive enlightenment after receiv- 
ing the rice-milk, ‘Mais quand il 
aura recu une bouillie de riz au lait, 
il obtiendra lintelligence”’ (p. 365). 
This is highly improbable, and .I 
have therefore translated it as in 
the text. 


34 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vit. 


powerful; but he was not able to rest in quiet, and so 
went wandering far off through mountains and woods, 
giving up the estate of a Chakravartin monarch to lead 
the life of an abject and outcast. What need we think 
about him more; the mention of his name but adds sor- 
row to sorrow.” 

And now Bodhisattva, having bathed in the Nairafijana 
river, seated himself under the Bédhi tree and perfected 
himself in supreme wisdom, and was named “ The lord of 
dévas and men.” Then reflecting in silence, he thought 
who was worthy ( Jit) to be instructed i in the way of deli- 
verance—“ The son of Rama, Udra by name (Yo-t’eu- 
lan), he is fit to receive the excellent law, as he has reached 
the Samddhi, which admits of no active thought.” 

Then the Dévas in space raised their voices and said, 
“Udra-Ramaputra has been dead for seven days.” Then 
Tathagata sighing (said) with regret, “Why did we not 
meet? ready as he was to hear the excellent law and 
thereby to obtain quick conversion !” 

Again he gave himself to consideration, and cast about 
through the world to seek (for some one to whom he might 
jirst preach). There is (he thought) Arfida KAlama (’0-lan- 
kia-lan), who has reached the ecstatic point “of having 
nothing to obtain ;”2" he is fit to receive the highest reason. 
Then again the Dévas said, “He has been dead for five” 
days.” 

Again Tathagata sighed, in knowledge of his incom- 
pleted merit. Once more considering who was worthy to 
receive his instruction, he remembered that in the “deer 
park” there were the five men,” who might first receive 
the converting doctrine. Then Tathagata, rising from the 
Bédhi tree, went forward with measured step* and digni- 


% Naivasanjhd samadhi (Jul.) 2? Akiticharydyatana—(Julien). 


The theory of Udra-Ramaputra 
(Yvu-tau-lan-tseu) with respect to 
final deliverance is explained in the 
twelfth varga of the Fo-sho-hing- 
tsan-king. His system appears to 
have been a refinement on that of 
Kapila. 


3 In the Lalita Vistara the num- 
ber of days is three. In the Buddha- 
charita there is no period named. 

* That is, the Mrigadava (Sar- 


“‘nath), at Ban4ras. 


30 “Step by step, like the king of 
beasts (the lion), did he advance 


BOOK V1I.] TRADITION OF THE CHAMPION. 55 


fied mien to the “ deer-park garden,” shining with glory; 
his (circle of ) hair*! reflecting its brilliant colours, and his 
body like gold. Gracefully he advanced to teach those 
five men. They, on ‘their parts, seeing him afar off, said 
one to another, “Here comes that Sarvarthasiddha; for 
years and months he has sought for the sacred fruit, and 
has not obtained it, and now his mind is relaxed, and so 
he comes to seek us as disciples (or, to seek our con- 
pany); let us remain silent, and not rise to meet him or 
pay him respect.” 

Tathagata cradually approaching, his sacred appearance 
affecting all creatures, the five men, forgetting their vow, 
rose and saluted him, and then attached themselves to 
him with respect. Tathagata gradually instructed them 
in the excellent principles (of his religion), and when the 
double® season of rest was finished, they had obtained the 
fruit (of Bédht). 

To the east of the “deer forest” 2 or 3 li, we come toa 
stdpa by the side of which is a dry pool about 80 paces in 
circuit, one name of which is “ saving life,”** another name 
is “ardent master.” The old traditions explain it thus: 
Many hundred years ago there was a solitary sage (a sor- 
rowful or obscure master) who built by the side of this pool 
a hut to live in, away from the world. He practised the 
arts of magic, and by the extremest exercise of his spiritual 
power he could change broken fragments of bricks into 


watchfully through the grove of wis- fixed homes. But this ordinance 


dom.” — Fo-sho- hing-tsan-king, v. 
1199. 
31 That is, the circle of hair be- 
tween his eyes (the urna). 

® According to the Buddha-cha- 
rita, VV. 1220, 1221, the five men 
were named Kaundinya, Dagabila- 
Kasyapa, Vaspa, Aévajit, Bhad- 
rika. The Lalita Vistara gives Ma- 
handma instead of Dagabala. For 
the incident named in the text see 
Buddha-charita, loc. cit. 

33 That is, the season of rain, dur- 
ing which the disciples retired into 


was not yet introduced into the 
Buddhist system ; it seems to have 
been a custom, however, among reli- 
gious communities before Buddha’s 
time, for in the Vinaya complaint 
is made to Buddha that his disciples 
continued to wander throngh the 
country when the seeds were first 
growing, contrary to the ordinary 
rule. 

34 There is no expression for 
“pool,” as in the French transla- 
tion. 


56 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vit. 


precious stones, and could also metamorphose both- men 
and animals into other shapes, but he was not yet able to 
ride upon the winds and the clouds, and to follow the 
Rishis in mounting upwards. By inspecting figures and 
names that had come down from of old, he further sought 
into the secret arts of the Rishis. From these he learned 
the following: “ The spirit-Rishis are they who possess the — 
art of lengthening life*® If you wish to acquire this 
knowledge, first of all you must fix your mind on this— 
viz., to build up an altar enclosure 10 feet round; then 
command an ‘ardent master’ (a hero), faithful and brave, 
and with clear intent, to hold in his hand a long sword 
and take his seat at the corner of the altar, to cover his 
breath, and remain silent from evening till dawn. He 
who seeks to be a Rishi must sit in the middle of the altar, 
and, grasping a long knife, must repeat the magic formule 
and keep watch (seeing and hearing). At morning light, 
attaining the condition of a Rishi, the sharp knife he holds 
will change into a sword of diamond (a gem-sword), and 
he will mount into the air and march through space, and 
rule over the band of Rishis. Waving the sword he holds, 
everything he wishes will be accomplished, and he will 
know neither decay nor old age, nor disease nor death.” 
The man having thus obtained the method (of becoming a 
Rishi), went in search of such an “ardent master.” Dili- 
gently he searched for many years, but as yet he found 


not the object of his desires. 


3% The magic art of lengthening 
life, or of a long life. The “elixir 
of life” and the art of transmuting 
metals had been sought after in the 
East long before the Arabs intro- 
duced the study of alchemy into 
Europe. The philosopher’s stone is 
the tan sha of the Chinese, 2.e., the 
red bisulphuret of mercury, or cin- 
nabar. See an article on Tauism in 
the Zrans. of the China Branch of 
the RAS, part v. 1855, by Dr. 
Edkins, p. 86. 

"3% We may compare with this the 


At length, in a certain town 


ceremonies observed anciently on 
conferring the dignity of knight- 
hood, especially the vigil before the 
altar. (Ingulphus, quoted by Mr. 
Thoms in his Book of the Court, p.138.) 
37 The account of this magic gem- 
sword may be compared with the 
“great brand, Excalibur,” of King 
Arthur— 
“ But ’ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, won- 
derful, 
And caught him by the hilt, and bran- 
dished him 


Three times. . . .”—Tennyson. 


BooK vi.] THE VIGIL OF THE CHAMPION. 


57 
he encountered a man piteously wailing as he went along 
the way. The solitary master seeing his marks (the marks 
on his person), was rejoiced at heart, and forthwith ap- 
proaching him, he inquired, “Why do you go thus lathent- 
ing, and why are you so distressed?” He said, “I was a 
poor and needy man, and had to labour hard to support 
myself. A certain master seeing this, and knowing me to 
be entirely trustworthy, used me (engaged me for his work) 
during five years, promising to pay me well for my pains. 
On this I patiently wrought in spite of weariness and 
difficulties. Just as the five years were done, one morn- 
ing for some little fault I was cruelly whipped and driven 
away without a farthing. For this cause I am sad at 
heart and afflicted. Oh, who will pity me?” 

The solitary master ordered him to accompany him, and 
coming to his cabin (wood hut), by his magic power he 
caused to appear some choice food, and ordered him to 
enter the pool and wash, Then he clothed him in new 
garments, and giving him 500 gold pieces, he dismissed 
him, saying, “ When this is done, come and ask for.more 
without fear.”®® After this he frequently bestowed on 
him more gifts, and in secret did him other good, so 
that his heart was filled with gratitude. Then the “ardent 
master” was ready to lay down his life in return for all 
the kindness he had received, Knowing this, the other 
said to him, “I am in need of an enthusiastic person.” 
During a succession of years I sought for one, till I was 
fortunate enough to meet with you, possessed of rare 
beauty and a becoming presence, different from others,*# 
Now, therefore, I pray you, during one night (to watch) 
without speaking a word.” 

The champion said, “I am ready to die for you, much 


33 Siang, the marks indicating his 
noble character. 

39 Wu-wat may also mean “seek 
it not elsewhere.” Julien translates 
it “do not despise me.” 

# “A brave champion ”—Julien. 
_ So I translate the passage, but 


it may be “your beauty (or figure) 
corresponds to the ideal portrait I 
had formed of it.”” So Julien trans- 
lates ; but f yaw ta would more 
naturally be rendered “unlike that 
of any other.” 


58 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Boox vit. 


more to sit with my breath covered.” 4? Whereupon he 
constructed an altar and undertook the rules for becoming 
a Rishi, according to the prescribed form. Sitting down, 
he asvaited the night. At the approach of night each 
attended to his particular duties. The “solitary master” 
recited his magic prayers; the champion held his sharp 
sword in his hand. About dawn suddenly he uttered a 
short cry, and at the same time fire descended from 
heaven, and flames and smoke arose on every side like 
clouds. The “solitary master” at once drew the champion 
into the lake,“? and having saved him from his danger, he 
said, “I bound you to silence ; why then did you cry 
out?” 

The champion said, “After receiving your orders, to- 
wards the middle of the night, darkly, as in a dream, the 
scene changed, and I saw rise before me all my past his- 
tory. My master*# in his own person came to me, and 
in consolatory words addressed me; overcome with grati- 
tude, I yet restrained myself and spoke not. Then that 
other man came before me; towering with rage, he slew 
me, and I received my ghostly body (J wandered as a 
shade or shadowy body). I beheld myself dead, and I 
sighed with pain, but yet I vowed through endless ages 
not to speak, in gratitude to you. Next I saw myself 
destined to be born in a great Brihman’s house in 
Southern India, and I felt my time come to be conceived 
and to be brought forth. Though all along enduring 
anguish, yet from gratitude to you no sound escaped me. 


“ From this it seems that the are not to be taken with chu, as 


portion relating to “holding the 
breath” is omitted in the previous 
sentence. 

43 That is, to escape the fire. 

44 That is, “my lord or master, 
whoni I now serve”—the solitary 
master or Rishi, Jt cannot be my 
old master, the one who treated him 
so cruelly (as Julien construes it), 
for he comes on the scene in the 


next sentence. The symbols sih sse 


though it were “my old master ;” 
but with kin, as I have translated 
it, “there arose before me the for- 
mer events of my life.” 

* This ghostly body or shade 
(chung yin shan) corresponds with 
the &dwdov of the Greeks— 


Wryh cal &dwror, drap 
Hpéves otk éu wdurav. 


—Iliad, xxiii, 104 


BOOK VII.] THE HARE FATAKA. 59 


After a while I entered on my studies, took the cap (of 
manhood), and I married; my parents dead, I had a 
child. Each day I thought of all your kindness, and en- 
dured in silence, uttering no word. My household con- 
nections and clan relatives all seeing this, were filled with 
shame. For more than sixty years and five I lived. At 
length my wife addressed me, ‘You must speak; if not, 
Islay your son!’ And then I thought, ‘I can beget no 
other child, for I am old and feeble; this is my only ten- 
der son,’ It was to stop my wife from killing him I 
raised the cry.” 

The “solitary master” said, “All was my fault; ‘twas 
the fascination of the devil.”*® The champion, moved 
with gratitude, and sad because the thing had failed, fretted 
himself and died. Because he escaped the calamity of 
fire, the lake is called “Saving the Life,” and because he 
died overpowered by gratitude, it has its other name, “The 
Champion’s Lake.” 

To the west of this lake there is a stiipa of “the three ani- 
mals.” In this place, when Bodhisattva was practising his 
preparatory life, he burnt his own body. At the beginning 
of the kalpa in this forest wild, there lived’ a fox, a hare, 
and a monkey, three creatures of different kinds but 
mutually affectionate. At this time Sakra, king of Dévas, 
wishing to examine into the case of those practising the 
life of a Bédhisattva, descended spiritually in shape as 
an old man. He addressed the three animals thus: “ My 
children, two or three,’ are you at ease and without 
fear?” They said, “ We lie upon (read on) the rich her- 
bage, wander through the bosky brakes, and though of 
different kinds we are agreed together, and are at rest and 
joyful.” The old man said, “ Hearing that you, my chil- 

4 Of Mara: it is plainthat this | 4” There appears to be an error 
weird story, taken in connection in the text, as though san (three) 
with the dream, the inability to had been repeated, but the middle 
move or speak, and the actual refe- stroke of the first symbol erased. 
rence of it all to Mara, is but an Butasthe same symbols are used in 


account of “ the enthusiastic hero’s” the next sentence, the meaning may 
suffering from “ nightmare.” be simply, “ My children.” 


60 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vu. 


dren, two or three, were peaceful at heart and living in 
sweet accord, though I am old, yet have I come from far 
alone, forgetting my infirmities, to visit you; but now I 
am pressed with hunger, what have you to offer me to eat ?” 
They said, ‘‘ Wait here awhile, and we will go ourselves in 
search of food.” On this, with one mind and with single 
purpose, they searched through the different ways for food. 
The fox having skirted a river, drew out from thence a 
fresh carp fish. The monkey in the forest gathered fruits 
and flowers of different kinds. Then they came together to 
the appointed place and approached the old man. Only the 
hare came empty, after running to and fro both right and 
left. The old man spake to him and said, “As it seems 
to me, you are not of one mind with the fox and monkey; 
each of those can minister to me heartily, but the hare 
alone comes empty, and gives me nought to eat; the 
truth of what I say can easily be known.” The hare, 
hearing these words and moved by their power, addressed 
the fox and monkey thus, “ Heap up a great pile of wood 
for burning, then I will give (do) something.” The fox 
and monkey did accordingly; running here and there, they 
gathered grass and wood; they piled it up, and when it 
was thoroughly alight the hare spake thus: “ Good sir! I 
am a small and feeble thing; it is difficult for me to obtain 
you food, but my poor body may perhaps provide a meal.” 
On this he cast himself upon the fire, and forthwith died. 
Then the old man reassumed his body as King Sakra, col- 
lected all the bones, and after dolorous sighs addressed the 
fox and monkey thus: “ He only could have done it (or, 
unprecedented event). I am deeply touched; and lest his 
memory should perish, I will place him in the moon’s dise 
to dwell.” Therefore through after ages all have said, 
“The hare is in the moon.” After this event men built a 
sttipa on the spot.*$ 


4 The preceding story is known found also in the Chinese JAtaka- 
as The Hare Jdtaka. It is given book; see also Fausbdll, Five Jdta- 
in Rhys Davids’ Buddhism; it is kas, p. 58. 


BOOK VII.] CHEN-CHU—GHAZIPUR. 61 


Leaving this country and going down the Ganges east- 
ward 300 li or so, we come to the country of Chen-chu. 


THe Kixapom or CuEen-cnu® [GHAZIPUR]. 


This kingdom is about 2000 li in circuit; its capital, 
which borders on the Ganges river, is about 10 li in cir- 
cuit. The people are wealthy and prosperous ; the towns 
and villages are close together. The soil is rich and fer- 
tile, and the land is regularly cultivated. The climate is 
soft and temperate, and the manners of the people are 
pure and honest. The disposition of the men is naturally 
fierce and excitable; they are believers both in heretical 
and true doctrine. There are some ten satighdrdmas with 
less than 1000 followers, who all study the doctrines of 
the Little Vehicle. There are twenty Déva temples, occu- 
pied by sectaries of different persuasions. 

In a sanghdrdma to the north-west of the capital is a 
stdpa built by Agdka-rija. The Indian tradition says 
this stdpa contains a peck of the relics of Tathagata, For- 
merly, when the Lord of the World dwelt in this place,5! 
during seven days he preached the excellent law for the 
sake of an assembly of the Dévas, 

Beside this place are traces where the three Buddhas of 
the past age walked and where they sat. 

Close by is an image of Maitréya Bodhisattva: although 
of small dimensions, its spiritual presence is great, and its 
divine power is exhibited from time to time in a myste- 
rious manner. 

Going east from the chief city about 200 li, we come to 
a sanghiréma called ’O-pi-t’o-kie-la-na (“Ears not 


4° Chen-chu, meaning “lord of 
conflict or battle,” is the transla- 
tion of Garjanapati, and has been 
identified by Cunninghain with Gha- 
zipur, a town on the Ganges just 50 
miles east of Binéras, The original 
Hindu name of the place was Gar- 
japur. 


50 Or the work called Jn-tu-ki, ie., 
the Records of India. 

2 Julien translates “in this con- 
vent,” but the original names only 
“the place.’ It would be natural 
to suppose that Aséka built the 
stdpa, and the saighdréma was 
erected subsequently. 


62 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [pook vit. 


pierced ”—Aviddhakarna®™). The circuit (encircling wall) 
is not great, but the ornamental work of the building is 
very artistic. The lakes reflect the surrounding flowers, and 
the eaves of the towers and pavilions (or, the tower-pavi- 
lions) touch one another in a continuous line. The priests 
are grave and decorous, and all their duties are properly 
attended to. The tradition states: Formerly there were 
two or three Sramanas, passionately fond of learning, who 
lived in the country of Tu-ho-lo® (Tukhara), to the 
north of the Snowy Mountains, and were of one mind, 
Each day during the intervals of worship and reciting the 
scriptures, they talked together in this way: “The excel- 
lent principles of religion are dark and mysterious, not to 
be fathomed in careless talk. The sacred relies (traces) 
shine with their own peculiar splendour ; let us go toge- 
ther from place to place, and tell our faithful (believing*) 
friends what sacred relics we ourselves have seen.” 

On this the two or three associates, taking their reli- 
gious staves, went forth to travel together. Arrived in 
India, at whatever convent gates they called, they were 
treated with disdain as belonging to a frontier country, 
and no one would take them in. They were exposed to 


52 The distance and bearing from 
Ghazipur given in the text would 
indicate Baliya as the site of this 
convent. There is a village called 
Bikapur, about one mile east of Ba- 
liya, which Cunningham thinks may 
be a corruption of Aviddhakarna- 
pura. It may be the same vikdra 
as that called “Desert” by Fa-hian 
(cap. xxxiv.) But we can hardly 
accept Cunningham’s restoration of 
Kwang ye (which simply means “ wil- 
derness”” or “ desert”) to Vrihad- 
aranya or Brihadéranya, which he 
thinks may have been corrupted into 
Biddhkarn. 

53 See vol. i. p. 37. For further 
remarks on the country Tu-ho-lo and 
the Tokhari people see a pamphlet 
by G. de Vasconcellos-Abreu on the 
probable origin of the Toukhari (De 
Origine probable des Toukhares), 


Louvain, 1883. This writer combats 
the opinion of Baron Richtofen and 
others that the Yue-chi and the 
Tokhari are identical. This is in 
agreement with vol. i. p. 57, n. 121, 
of the present work. 

54 “Our non-heretical friends or 
relatives,” or it may be simply “ our 
attached friends.” 

*5 There are two such foreign pil- 
grims with their staves sculptured 
at Ainaravati. Tree and Serpent Wor- 
ship, pl, Ixxxii. fig. 1. Mr. Fergusson 
suggests they may be Scythians ; 
probably they are these Tokhari 
people. If this be so, their position 
beneath the palm-tree indicates the 
misery they endured, as described 
in the text ; and the grouping may 
be compared with the “Judea 
capta” medal. 


BOOK VII] MAHASALA. 63 


the winds and the rains without, and within they suffered 
from hunger; their withered bodies and pallid faces 
showed their misery. At this time the king of the country 
in his wandering through the suburbs of the city saw 
these strange priests. Surprised, he asked them, “ What 
region, mendicant masters, come you from? and why are 
you here with your unpierced ears’ and your soiled gar- 
ments?” The Sramanas replied, “We are men of the 
Tu-ho-lo country. Having received with respect the 
bequeathed doctrine,” with high resolve we have spurned 
the common pursuits of life, and following the same plan, 
we have come to see and adore the sacred relics. But 
alas! for our little merit, all alike have cast us out; the 
Sramans of India deign not to give us shelter, and we 
would return to our own land, but we have not yet com- 
pleted the round of our pilgrimage. Therefore, with much 
fatigue and troubled in heart, we follow on our way till 
we have finished our aim.” 

The king hearing these words, was much affected with 
pity, and forthwith erected on this fortunate (excellent) site 
a sanghdrdma, and wrote on a linen scroll the following 
decree: “It is by the divine favour of the three precious 
ones (Buddha, Dharma, Sangha) that I am sole ruler of 
the world and: the most honoured among men. Having 
acquired sovereignty over men, this charge has been laid 
on me by Buddha, to protect and cherish all who wear the 
garments of religion (soiled or dyed garments). I have 
built this savghdrdma for the special entertainment of 
strangers. Let no priest with pierced ears ever dwell in 
this convent of mine.” Because of this circumstance the 
place received its name, 

Going south-east from the convent of ’O-pi-t’o-kie- 
la-na about 100 li, and passing to the south of the Ganges, 
we come to the town Mo-ho-sa-lo (Mahdséra),8 the in- 


56 Hence the name, Aviddhakarna. 53 The town of Mahdsfra, has 

57 That is, the bequest or testa- been identified by M. V. de St. 
mentary doctrine of Buddha’s reli- Martin with Masar, a village six 
gion. . miles to the west of Ara (Arrah). 


64 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook vit. 


habitants of which are all Brihmans, and do not respect 

ethe law of Buddha. Seeing the Sraman, they first in- 
quired as to his studies, and ascertaining his profound 
knowledge, they then treated him with respect. 

On the north side of the Ganges ® there is a temple of 
(Na-lo-yen) Narayana-déva.© Its balconies and storied 
towers are wonderfully sculptured and ornamented. The 
images of the Dévas are wrought of stone with the highest 
art of man. Miraculous signs, difficult to explain, are 
manifested here. 

Going east from this temple 30 li or so, there is a A 
built by Asédka-raja. The greater part (a great half) is 
buried in the earth. Before it is a stone pillar about 20 
feet high, on the top of which is the figure of a lion. There 
is an inscription cut in it (te, the pillar) respecting the 
defeat of the evil spirits. Formerly in this place there 
was some desert ® demons, who, relying on their great 
strenoth and (spiritual) capabilities, fed on the flesh and 
blood of men. They made havoc of men and did the 
utmost mischief. Tathigata, in pity to living creatures, 
who were deprived of their natural term of days, by his 
spiritual power converted the demons, and led them, from 
reverence to him (kwai 1°), to accept the command against 
murder. The demons, receiving his instruction respect- 
fully, saluted him (by the pradakshina). Moreover, they 
brought a stone, requesting Buddha to sit down, desiring 
to hear the excellent law (from his mouth), that they 
might learn how to conquer their thoughts and hold them- 
selves in check. From that time the disciples of the 
unbelievers have all endeavoured to remove the stone 
which the demons placed for a seat; but though 10,000 


59 According to Cunningham, the 
pilgrim must have crossed the Gan- 
ges above Revelganj, which is nearly 
due north of Masar exactly 16 miles. 
This point, near the confluence of the 
Ganges and Ghagra, is deemed espe- 
cially holy. 

60 That is, of Vishnu. 

61 The expression used for “de- 


sert” (Kwang ye) is the same as that 
found in Fa-hian, referred to above, 
n. 49. 

62 The Chinese phrase kwat i cor- 
responds with the Sanskrit garana, 
“totake refuge in.” Hence General 
Cunningham traces the name of this 
district Saran to the incident re- 
corded in the text. 


BOOK VII] THE DRONA STUPA. 65 


of them strove to do so, they would be unable to turn it. 
Leafy woods‘and clear lakes surround the foundation on 
the right and left, and men who approach the neighbour- 
hood are unable to restrain a feeling of awe. 

Not far from the spot where the demons were subdued 
there are many savighdrdmas, mostly in ruins, but there 
are still some priests, who all reverence the doctrine of the 
Great Vehicle. 

Going south-east from this 100 li or so, we come to a 
ruined stipa, but still several tens of feet high. Formerly, 
after the Nirvdna of Tathagata, the great kings of the 
eight countries ® divided his relics) The Brahman who 
meted out their several portions, smearing the inside 
of his pitcher with honey,™ after allotting them their 
shares, took the pitcher and returned to his country. He 
then scraped the remaining relics from the vessel, and 
raised over them a stdpa, and in honour to the vessel 
(pitcher) he placed it also within tl pa, and hence the 


name (of Dréna stipa) was given it, 


Afterwards Agéka- 


raja, opening (the stilpa), took the relics and the pitcher, 


and in place of the old © one built a great stiépa. 


63 See above, pp. 40, 41. 

64 This translation is somewhat 
forced. Literally the passage runs 
thus — “honey - smearing - pitcher - 
within.” 

® The Dréna stdpa (called the 
Kumbhan stiéipa by Turnour, J. A. 
S. B., vol. vii. p. 1013) is said to have 
been built by Ajatagatru (A séhdva- 
déna, translated by Burnouf, Jntrod., 
p- 372). It may have stood near a 
village called Degwara. It is named 
the “golden pitcher st@pa” by As- 
vaghdsha, Fo-sho, v. 2283 (compare 
Spence Hardy, Manual of Bud- 
hism, p. 351). The Brahman himself 
is sometimes called Dréna, or Dréha, 
or Dauna. Dréna corresponds with 
the Chinese p’ing, a pitcher or vase. 
Julien, ina note (p. 383, n. 1), seems 
to imply that Dréna is simply a 
measure of capacity, and so he re- 

VOL. II. 


To this 


stores p’ing to karka. But it also 
means a vessel or vase ; probably in 

this case the Brahman’s pitcher. 
Compare Fo-sho, v. 1408 ; see also 
Cunningham, Anc. Geog. of India, 
. 442. 

6 Julien translates, ‘then he re- 
constructed the monuments and en- 
larged it ;” but in the original, as in 
all cases when speaking of ASéka’s 
building, it is implied that he de- 
stroyed the old erection, and in its 
place he built “a great st@pa.” It 
would be gratifying if we could as- 
certain the character of the pre- 
As6éka monuments. They are said by 
Cunningham to have been “mere 
mounds of earth,” the sepulchral 
monuments of the early kings of the 
country even before the rise of Bud- 
dhism.—Anc. Geog. of India, p. 449. 


E 


66 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [pooxk vu. 


day, on festival occasions (fast-days), it emits a great 
light. 

Going north-east from this, and crossing the Ganges, 
after travelling 140 or 150 li, we come to the country of 
Fei-she-1li (Vaisall). 


FEI-SHE-LI (VAISALI), 


This kingdom ® is about 5000 li in circuit. The soil is 
rich and fertile; fiowers and fruits are produced in abun- 
dance. The dmra fruit (mango) and the mécha (banana) 
are very plentiful and much prized, The climate is agree- 
able and temperate, The manners of the people are pure 
and honest. They love religion and highly esteem learn- 
ing, Both heretics and believers are found living together. 
There are several hundred savghdrdmas, which are mostly 
dilapidated. The three or five ® which still remain have 


but few priests in them. 


temples, occupied by sectaries of different kinds, 


There are several tens of Déva 


The 


followers of the Nirgranthas are very numerous. 
The capital city of Vaisali (or, called Vaisali) is to a 


great extent in ruins, 
70 li in circuit. 


round: there are a few people living in it, 


& The pilgrim must have crossed 
the Gandak river, not the Ganges. 
This river flows within 12 miles of 
Degwara, the probable site of the 
Dréna st@pa. Vaisali, therefore, is 
to the east of the Gandak, and is 
placed by Cunningham on the site 
of the present village of Besarh, 
where there is an old ruined fort 
still called Raja-Bisal-ka-garh, or 
the fort of the Raja Visala. It is 
exactly 23 miles north-north-east 
from Degwara. Vaisalt was pro- 
bably the chicf town, or the first in 
importance, of the people called 
Vrijjis or Vajjis. These people were 
a northern race who had taken pos- 
session of this part of India (viz., 
from the foot of the mountains to 
the Ganges on the south, and from 


Its old foundations are from 60 to 
The royal precincts are about 4 or 5 li 


North-west 


the Gandak on the west to the Ma- 
hanadi on the east) from an early 
period ; how early we cannot say, 
but as early as the redaction of the 
Buddhist books at least. They may 
have been allied to the Viddhals, 
the Yue-chi of Chinese authors, 
(See J. #, A.S.,{N.S., vol. xiv. part ii.) 

68 This is much in excess of the 
actual measurement, even if the 
country of Vy¥jji be included. But 
for these calculations of area or cir- 
cuit the pilgrim had no data except 
the ordinary statements of the 
people, which would be certainly 
exaggerated. 

69 Julien proposcs to substitute 
four for jive. I have kept to the 
original, which is in accordance with 
Oriental idiom. 


BOOK VII.] LION-PILLAR OF VAISALI. 67 ° 


of the royal city (precincts) 5 or 6 li, is a savighdrdma with 
a few disciples. They study the teaching of the Little 
Vehicle, according to the Sarnmatiya school. 

By. the side of it is a sttpa. It was here Tathagata de- 
livered the Vimalakirttt Sitra (Pi-mo-lo-kie-king), and 
the son of a householder, Ratndkara,” and others offered 
precious parasols (to Buddha). To the east of this is a 
stipa. It was here Siriputra and others obtained perfect 
exemption (became Arhats). 

To the south-east of this last spot is a stipa; this was 
built by a king of Vaisali. After the Nirvdna of Buddha, 
a former king of this country obtained a portion of the 
relics of his body, and to honour them as highly as pos- 
sible raised (this building), 

The records of India state: In this stipa there was 
at first a quantity of relics equal to a “oh” (ten pecks). 
Agoka-raja opening it, took away nine-tenths of the whole, 
leaving only one-tenth behind. Afterwards there was a 
king of the country who wished again to open the stipe, 
but at the moment when he began to do so, the earth 
trembled, and he dared not proceed to open (the stiépa). 

To the north-west is a stdpa built by Asdka-raja; by 
the side of it is a stone pillar about 50 or 60 feet hich, 
with the figure of a lion” on the top. To the south of 


at Saiichi (pl. xxviii. fig. 1, Tree 


7 So Julien restores p’ao-tsi, trea- 
and Serpent Worship) probably re- 


sure heap. It is sometimes restored 


to Ratnakita (B. Nanjio, Catalogue, 
p. 10 ss.); but, as before stated, the 
Chinese symbol for kta is hwu?, not 
tsi, Ratnakara is perhaps the same 
as Yasada. 

71 Yaéada is generally represented 
with a parasol over his head. Much 
of the later Buddhist legend appears 
to have been borrowed or adopted 
from the history of Yagada. Pl. 
Ixiii. fig. 3, Tree and Serpent Wor- 
ship, probably relates to him. 

™ The Lichhavis of Vaisali ob- 
tained a share of the relics of Bud- 
dha, and raised over them a stipa. 
(See Varga 28 of the Fo - sho- 
hing-tsan-king). The scene found 


fers to this stdpa and its consecra- 
tion. The appearance of the men 
shows they were a Northern race ; 
their hair and flowing hair-bands 
and musical instruments agree with 
the account given of the people of 
Kuché (vol. i. p. 19, ante). It is 
stated both in the Paliand Northern 
Buddhist books that the Lichhavis 
were distinguished for their bright 
coloured and variegated dresses and 
equipages. All the evidence seems 
to point to these people being a 
branch of the Yue-chi. 

73 The Lichhavis were called 
“lions.” See Fo-sho, v. 1906. It 
would seem that the four animals 


68 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BOOK Vit. 


the stone pillar is a tank. This was dug by a band of 
monkeys (Markatahrada) for Buddha’s use. When he 
was in the world of old, Tathigata once and again dwelt 
here. Not far to the south of this tank is a stdpa,; it 
was here the monkeys, taking the alms-bowl of Tatha- 
gata, climbed a tree and gathered him some honey. 
- Not far to the south is a stdpa; this is the place where 
the monkeys offered the honey * to Buddha, At the north- 
west angle of the lake there is still a figure of a monkey. 
To the north-east of the satighdrdma 3 or 4 li is a stdpa; 
this is the old site of the house of Vimalakirtti (Pi-mo-lo- 
ki) ;% various spiritual signs (manifestations) are exhibited 


here. 


Not far from this is a spirit-dwelling ” (a chapel 2), its 


shape like a pile of bricks. 


Tradition says” this stone- 


pile is where the householder Vimalakirtti preached the 


law when he was sick. 


Not far from this is a stipe; this is the site of the old 
residence of Ratnakara (P’ao;tsi).”2 

Not far from this is a stdpa; this is the old house of 
the lady Amra.® It was here the aunt of Buddha and 
other Bhikshunis obtained Mirvdna:z 


named in vol. i. pp. II, 12, are” 


typical of the four regions respec- 
tively ; the “lion” would therefore 
typify Northern nations. 

“4 This scene is also found at 
Sanchi (pl. xxvi. fig. 2, Tree and 
Serpent Worship). It is on the same 
pillar as the consecration scene 
alluded to above. The pillar was 
evidently the work or gift of the 
Vaisali people. 

7% Vimalakirtti is explained by 
the Chinese equivalents wu kau 
ching, i.c., undefiled reputation. He 
was a householder (chang-ché) of 
Vaisali and a convert to Buddhism. 
There is little said about him in 
the books; but he is supposed to 
have visited China (Eitel, Handbook, 
sub voc.) 

76 ‘This was probably one of the 
Vajjian shrines, Chetiyani or Yak- 


kha-chetiyani, of which we read in 
the Book of the Great Decease, and 
elsewhere. (Compare Sac. Bks, of 
the East, vol. xi. p. 4.) 

7 Julien translates—“ Tradition 
has preserved for it the name of 
‘piled-up stone’ (Agmakata?).”” But 
there is no symbol for “name ;” it 
is simply “tradition says.” Julien 
has omitted the title of “house- 
holder” (chang-ché). 

78 There is some difficulty in re- 
storing P’ao tsi. Julien, in the pas- 
sage before us, restores it to Rat- 
nikara, but in note 1 (same page) 
he restores the same symbols to 
Ratnakata. 

. 7% For an account of the lady 
Amra, see Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, 
varga 22. Julien restores the ex- 
pression to “daughter of the Amra ” 
(Amradarika). It may be so; but 


BOOK VIL. ] MARA’S TEMPTATION. 


69 


To the north of the satighdrdma 3 or 4 liisa stipa; 
this indicates the place where Tathagata stopped when 
about to advance to Kufginagara to die, whilst men and 
Kinnaras followed him.®° From this not far to the north-- 
west is a stipa; here Buddha for the very last time 
gazed upon the city of Vaisali®! Not far to the south of 
this is a vikdra, before which is built a stépa; this is 
the site of the garden of the Amra-girl, which she gave 
in charity to Buddha. 

By the side of this garden is a stépa; this is the place 
where Tathagata announced his death.’ When Buddha 
formerly dwelt in this place, he told Ananda as follows :— 
“Those who obtain the four spiritual faculties are able to 
extend their lives toa kalpa. What is the term of years 
of Tathagata then?” Thrice he asked this question, and 
Ananda answered not, through the fascination of Mara. 
Then Ananda rising from his seat, gave himself up to 
silent thought in a wood. At this time Mara coming to 
Buddha,™ asked him, saying, “Tathagata has for a lone 


time dwelt in the world teaching and converting. 


whom he has saved from the 


“the lady Amra” appears more 
natural. She is called the ‘Mango 
girl” in the Southern records (Sac. 
Books of the East, vol. xi. p. 33), and 
the Chinese would bear this trans- 
lation. She was a courtesan, and 
otherwise called Ambapali. For an 
account of her birth and history, see 
Manual of Budhism, p. 327 8s. 

8 The Kinnaras are said to he the 
horse-faced musicians of Kuvéra 
(Hitel, sud voc.); but the Chinese sym- 
bols describe them as “something dif- 
ferent from men.” They may ke seen 
figured in the sculpture at Sanchi, 
pl xxvi. fig. 1, where they are com- 
ing to the place where Buddha stop- 
ped (figured by the oblong stone) ; 
this is another sculpture of the Vais- 
ali pillar, and illustrates the notice 
in the text. 

8 The incident connected with 
Buddha’s last look at Vaiéali is nar- 
rated, Fa-hian, cap, xxv.; Sac. Books 


Those 
circling streams (of transmi- 


of the East, vol. xi. p. 64, and vol. 
xix. p. 283. . 

® Or, the lady Amra; for an ac- 
count of the gift of the garden, see 
Fo-sho as above. 

83 For an account of this incident 
compare Fa-hian, cap, xxv.; Sac. 
Books of the East, vol. xi. p. 41, and 
vol. xix. p. 267. 

84 This interview of Mara (called 
Piguna, the wicked one, in the 
Chinese version, S. B. £., vol. xix. 
p. 267) is again found among the 
Sdiichi sculptures on the Vaidali 
pillar, pl. xxvi. fig. 1, lower scene. 
Mara is known by the escort of 
women, his daughters; he is here 
standing in front of the tree which 
symbolises Buddha’s presence. His 
appearance and escort here are the 
same as in pl. xxx. fig. 1, upper part ; 
he is there represented above the 
scene of rejoicing among the Dévas 
of the Trayastrimgas heaven around 


70 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book vit. 


gration) are as numerous as the dust or the sands. This 
surely is the time to partake of the joy of Mirvdna.” 
Tathdgata taking some grains of dust on his nail, asked 
- Mara, saying, “Are the grains of dust on my nail equal 
to the dust of the whole earth or not?” He answered, 
“The dust of the earth is much greater.” Buddha said, 
“Those who are saved are as the grains of earth on my 
nail; those not saved like the grains of the whole earth ; 
but after three months I shall die.” Mara hearing it, was 
rejoiced and departed. 

Meantime Ananda in the wood suddenly had a strange 
dream, and coming to Buddha he told it to him, saying, 
“T was in the wood, when 1 beheld in my dream a large 
tree, whose branches and leaves in their luxuriance cast a 
grateful shade beneath, when suddenly a mighty wind 
arose which destroyed and scattered the tree and its 
branches without leaving a mark behind. Oh, forbid it 


that the lord is going to die! 


My heart is sad and worn, 


therefore I have come to ask you if it be so or not?” 
Buddha answered Ananda, “I asked you before, and 


the head-turban of Buddha after the 
great renunciation ; he is fitly placed 
above that heaven as being the “lord 
of the world of desire,” and therefore 
always described as occupying the 
upper mansion of this tier of heavens. 
His distress and rage are indicative 
of his condition of mind in know- 
ledge of Bédhisattva’s renunciation. 
If the four identifications on this 
pillar are correct, we may conclude 
that the people of Vaisdli were a 
Northern people allied to the Yue- 
chi, which illustrates the observa- 
tion of Csoma Kordési, “that Tibe- 
‘tan writers derive their first king 
about 250 B.C. from the Litsabyis 
or Lichhavis” (Manual of Budhism, 
p. 236, note). The Sakya family of 
Buddha is also said to belong to this 
tribe. Mémoire by V. de St. Martin, 
p. 367, note. The symbols used by 
the Chinese for the Yue-chi and 
for the Vrijjis are the same. Unless 
we are to suppose a much earlier 


incursion of these people into India 
than is generally allowed, the date 
of the Southern books of Buddh- 
ism (the book of the Great Decease 
and others), which contain accounts 
respecting the character, habits, and 
dress of the Lichhavis (which corre- 
spond with the Northern accounts), 
must be brought down considerably 
later than the assumed date of the re- 
daction of the Pali canon. But, on 
the other hand, if it be true that the 
incursion of these people took place 
when Pataliputra was strengthened 
as a fortified outpost to repel their 
advance, 4.¢., about the time of Bud- 
dha, then we must allow an early 
advance on their part into India. 
We know they were regarded as 
intruders, for Ajatasatru, king of 
Magadha, was desirous to attack 
and root out “these Vajjians,” and 
it was he also who strengthened the 
city of Pataliputra. The question 
deserves consideration. 


BOOK VII.] VAISALI—THE THOUSAND SONS. 71 


Mara so fascinated you that you did not then ask me to 
remain in the world. Méara-réja has urged me to die 
soon, and I have covenanted to do so, and fixed the time. 
This is the meaning of your dream,” © 

Not far from this spot is a stdpa. This is the spot 
where the thousand sons beheld their father and their 
mother.8° Formerly there was a Rishi who lived a secret 
life amid the crags and valleys. In the second month of 
spring he had been bathing himself in a pure stream of 
water. A roe-deer which came to drink there just after, 
conceived and brought forth a female child, very beautiful 
beyond human measure, but she had the feet of a deer. 
The Rishi having seen it, adopted and cherished it (as his 
child). As time went on, on one occasion he ordered her 
to go and seek some fire. In so doing she came to the 
hut of another Rishi; but wherever her feet trod there 
she left the impression of a lotus-flower on the ground. 
The other Rishi having seen this, was very much sur- 
prised, and. bade her walk round his hut and he would 
give her some fire. Having done so and got the fire, she 
returned, At this time Fan-yu-wang (Brahmadatta-raja*®") 
going out on a short excursion, saw the lotus-flower traces, 
and followed them to seek (the cause). Admiring her 
strange and wonderful appearance, he took her back in 
his carriage. The soothsayers casting her fortune said, 
“ She will bear a thousand sons.” Hearing this, the other 
women did nothing but scheme against her. Her time 
having been accomplished, she brought forth a lotus-flower 
of a thousand leaves, and on each leaf was seated a boy. 
The other women slandered her on its account, and say- 
ing it was “an unlucky omen,” threw (¢he lotus) into the 
Ganges, and it was carried away by the current. 

§5 For a full account of this inci- haps it is an error in my text. 
dent, see, as before, The Sacred & If yu be taken in the sense of 
Books of the East, vols. xi. and xix. “given,” Brahmadatta may be the 

88 Compare Fa-hian, p. 97 (Beal’s right restoration. Julien proposes 


edition). Julien has no notice of Brahmdénadita doubtfully. 
“the father” of the children : per- 


72 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book vil. 


The king of Ujiyana (U-shi-yen), down the stream 
going out for an excursion, observed a yellow-cloud-covered 
box floating on the water and coming towards him. He 
took it and opened it, and there saw a thousand boys; 
being well nourished, when they came to perfect stature, 
they were of great strength. Relying on these, he ex- 
tended his kingdom in every direction, and encouraged 
by the victories of his troops, he was on the point of 
extending his conquests to this country (ce, Vaisali). 
Brahmadatta-raja hearing of it, was much alarmed; fear- 
ing his army was not able to contend successfully with 
the invaders, he was at a loss what to do. At this time 
the deer-footed girl, knowing in her heart that these were 
her sons, addressed the king thus: “Now that these 
youthful warriors are approaching the frontier, from the 
highest to the lowest there is an absence of courage 
(heart). Your feeble wife by her thought is able to con- 
quer those redoubtable champions.” The king not yet 
believing her, remained overwhelmed with fear. Then 
the deer-girl, mounting the city wall, waited the arrival 
of the warriors. The thousand youths having surrounded 
the city with their soldiers, the deer-girl said to them, 
“Do not be rebellious! I am’ your mother; you are my 
sons.” The thousand youths replied, “ What extravagant 
words are these!” The deer-girl then pressing both her 
breasts, a thousand jets of milk flowed out therefrom, and 
by divine direction fell into their mouths. Then they 
laid aside their armour, broke their ranks, and returned 
to their tribe and family. The two countries mutually 
rejoiced, and the people rested in peace. 

Not far from this spot is a stépa. This is where Tatha- 
gata walked for exercise, and left the traces thereof. In 
teaching (07, pointing to the traces) he addressed the con- 
gregation thus: “In ancient days, in this place, I returned 
to my family ® on seeing my mother. If you would 


88 Fa-hian calls this place the spot where Buddha “laid aside his bow 
and his club,” 


BOOK VII.] VAISALI TO KUSINAGARA. 73 


know then, those thousand youths are the same as the 
thousand Buddhas of this Bhadra-kalpa.” 

To the east of the spot where Buddha explained this 
birth (jdtaka) is a ruined foundation above which is built 
a stipa. A bright light is from time to time reflected 
here. Those who ask (pray) in worship obtain their re- 
quests. The ruins of the turretted preaching-hall, where 
Buddha uttered the Samantamukha® dhdrani and other 
stiras, are still visible. 

By the side of the preaching-hall, and not far from it, 
is a stipa which contains the relics of the half body of 
Ananda. 

No far from this are several std@pas—the exact number 
has not yet been determined. Here a thousand Pratyéka 
Buddhas (To-kio) attained Mirvdna. Both within and 
without the city of Vaiésali, and all round it, the sacred ves- 
tiges are so numerous that it would be difficult to recount 
them all. At every step commanding sites and old foun- 
dations are seen, which the succession of seasons and lapse 
of years have entirely destroyed. The forests are uprooted; 
the shallow lakes are dried up and stinking; nought but 
offensive remnants of decay can be recorded. 

Going north-west of the chief city 50 or 60 li, we come 
to a great stipa. This is where the Lichhavas (Li-ch’e- 
po) took leave of Buddha.” Tathagata having left the 
city of Vaisdli on his way to Kuginagara, all the Lichh- 
avas, hearing that Buddha was about to die, accompanied 
him wailing and lamenting. The Lord of the World having 
observed their fond affection, and as words were useless to 
calm them, immediately by his spiritual power caused to 
appear a great river with steep sides and deep, the waves 
of which flowed on impetuously. Then the Lichhavas 
were abruptly stopped on their way, moved with grief 

*9 Pu-men-t’o-lo-ni-king; this isa | % For an account of the division 
section of the Saddharma pundarika of Ananda’s body consult Fa-hian, 
Sttra, but we cannot suppose that cap. xxvi. 


any portion of this work is as old as + For this event see Fa-hian, cap. 
the time of Buddha, xxiv. 


74 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vu. 


as they were. Then TathAgata left them his pdtra as a 
token of remembrance. 
Two hundred li to the north-west of the city of Vaisali, or 
a little less, is an old and long-deserted city, with but few 
inhabitants. In itis astépa. This is the place where Bud- 
dha dwelt when, in old days, for the sake of an assembly 
of Bédhisattvas, men, and Dévas, he recited an explanatory 
jdtaka of himself when as a Bodhisattva he was a Chakra- 
cartin monarch of this city and called Mahadéva (Ta-tien). 
He was possessed of the seven treasures,” and his rule 
extended over the world (the four empires). Observing 
the marks of decay in himself,®* and concluding in his 
mind about the impermanency of his body, he took a high — 
resolve (being secretly affected by his reflections), left his 
throne, gave up his country, and, becoming a hermit, 
assumed the dark robes and gave himself to study. 

Going south-east from the city 14 or 15 li, we come to a 
great stupa. It was here the convocation of the seven hun- 
dred sages and saints. was held. One hundred and ten 
years after the Nirvdna of Buddha there were in Vaisali 
some Bhikshus who broke the laws of Buddha and perverted 
the rules of discipline. At this time Yasada (Ye-she-t’o) 
Ayushmat ® was stopping in the country of Késala (Kiao- 
so-lo); Sambégha (San-pu-kia) Ayushmat was dwelling in 
the country of "Mathura ; Révata (Li-po-to) Ayushmat was 
stopping in the country of Han-jo (Kanyakubja?) ; Sala® 
(Sha-lo) Ayushmat was stopping i in the country of Vaisali; 
Pujasumira (Fu-she-su-mi-lo=Kujjasébhita ?) Ayushmat 


9 That is, the seven treasures of a 
holy-wheel king, or Chakravartin. 
For an account of these treasures 
see Sénart, La Legende du Buddha, 
pp. 20 ff. 

$3 These marks of decay were the 
first white hairs that appeared on 
his head. On seeing these he re- 
signed the throne to his son and 
lecame an ascetic. He is called 
Makhidéwa by Spence Hardy, Maz- 
ual of Budhism, pp. 129, 130. 


4 This is generally called “the 
second Buddhist convocation.” For 
an account of it see Oldenberg, Vina- 
yapitakam, vol. i.; Abstract of Four 
Lectures, p. 83, 33. &e. 

% So the Chinese Chang-lo may 
be rendered. 

% Julien restores this doubtfully 
as Hahjna. 

% Julien has omitted all mention 
of Sala. 


BOOK VII.] SVETAPURA SANGHARAMA. 75 


was stopping in the country of Sha-lo-li-fo (Salaitbhu 2) : 
all these were great Arhats, possessed of independent 
power, faithful to the three pitakas, possessed of the three 
enlightenments (vidyds), of great renown, knowing all that 
should be known, all of them disciples of Ananda. 

At this time Yagada sent a message to summon the 
sages and saints to a convocation at the city of Vaiéali. 
There was only wanting one to make up the 700, when 
Fu-she-su-mi-lo by the use of his divine sight saw the 
saints and sages assembled and deliberating about reli- 
gious matters. By his miraculous power he appeared in 
the assembly. Then Sambégha in the midst of the assem- 
bly, baring his right breast and prostrating himself, (arose) 
and exclaimed with a loud voice, “Let the congregation 
be silent, respectfully thoughtful! In former days the 
great and holy King of the Law, after an illustrious career, 
entered Mirvdna. Although years and months have elapsed 
since then, his words and teaching still survive. But now 
the Bhikshus of Vaisali have become negligent and per- 
vert the commandments. There are ten points in which 
they disobey the words of the Buddha (the ten-power-das- 
abdla). Now then, learned sirs, you know well the points 
of error; you are well acquainted with the teaching of the 
highly virtuous (bhadanta) Ananda: in deep affection to 
Buddha Jet us again declare his holy will.” 

Then the whole congregation were deeply affected ; they 
summoned to the assembly the Bhikshus, and, according 
to the Vinaya, they charged them with transgression, 
bound afresh the rules that had been broken, and vindi- 
cated.the holy law. 

Going south 80 or go li from this place, we come to the 
sarghdréma called Svétapura (Shi-fei-to-pu-lo); its mas- 
sive towers, with their rounded shapes and double storeys, 
rise in the air. The priests are calm and respectful, and 
all study the Great Vehicle. By the side of this building 
are traces where the four past Buddhas sat and walked. | 

By the side of these is a stépa built by Asdka-raja. It 


76 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BOOK VII. 


was here, when Buddha was alive, that, on going south- 
wards to the Magadha country, he turned northwards to 
look at Vaigali, and left there, on the road where he stopped 
to breathe, traces of his visit. 

Going south-east from the Svétapura sanghdrdma 30 Ji 
or so, on either (south and north) side of the Ganges river 
there is a stipa; this is the spot where the venerable 
Ananda divided his body between the two kingdoms. 
Ananda was on his father’s side cousin of Tathagata. He 
was a disciple (Saiksha®) well acquainted with the doc- 
trine (collectanea), thoroughly instructed in ordinary mat- 
ters (men and things), and of masculine understanding. 
After Buddha’s departure from the world he succeeded 
the great Kasyapa in the guardianship of the true law, and 
became the guide and teacher of men devoted to religion 
(men not yet Arhats). He was dwelling in the Magadha 
country in a wood; as he was walking to and fro he saw 
a Sramanéra (novice) repeating in a bungling way a sétra 
of Buddha, perverting and mistaking the sentences and 
words. Ananda having heard him, his feelings were 
moved towards him, and, full of pity, he approached the 
place where he was; he desired to point out his mistakes 
and direct him in the right way. The SrAmanéra, smiling, 
said, “ Your reverence is of great age; your interpretation 
of the words is a mistaken one. My teacher is a man of 
much enlightenment; his years (springs and autumns) are 
in.their full maturity. I have received from him person- 
ally the true method of interpreting (the work in question) ; 
there-can be no mistake.” Ananda remained silent, and 
then went away, and with a sigh he said, “ Although my: 
years are many, yet for men’s sake I was wishful to re- 
main longer. in the world, to hand down and defend the 
true law. But now men (all creatures) are stained with 
sin, and it is exceedingly difficult to instruct them. To 
stay longer would be useless: I will die soon.” On this, 
going from Magadha, he went towards the city of Vaisalt, 


98 In Chinese, Yo-wan. He was the son of Suklédana-raja. 


BOOK VII.] FO-LI-SHI—VRIFFI. 77 


and was now in the middle of the Ganges in a boat, cross- 
ing the river. At this time the king of Magadha, hearing 
of * Anands’s departure, his feelings. were deeply affected 
towards him, and so, preparing his chariot, he hastened 
after him with his followers (soldiers) to ask him to return. 
And now his host of warriors, myriads in number, were 
on the southern bank of the river, when the king of 
Vaisali, hearing of Ananda’s approach, was moved by a 
sorrowful affection, and, equipping his host, he also went 
with all speed to meet him. His myriads of soldiers were 
assembled on the opposite bank of the river (the north 
side), and the two armies faced each other, with their 
banners and accoutrements shining in the sun. Ananda, 
fearing lest there should be a conflict and a mutual 
slaughter, raised himself from the boat into mid-air, and 
there displayed his spiritual capabilities, and, forthwith 
attained Nirvdna. He seemed as though encompassed 
by fire, and his bones fell in two parts, one on the south 
side, the other on the north side of the river. Thus the 
two kings each took a part, and whilst the soldiers raised 
their piteous cry, they all returned home and built stipas 
over the relics and paid them religious worship. 

Going north-east from this 500 li or so, we arrive at 
the country of Fo-li-shi (Vrijji). 


Fo-.i-sut (VRiss1).20 


This kingdom is about 4000 li in circuit. From east to 
west it is broad, and narrow from north to south. The 
soil is rich and fertile; fruits and flowers are abundant. 


% Northern people call this San- 
fa-shi-Samvaji. It is in Northern 
India.—Ch. Ed. 

1 The country of the Vrijjis or 
Samvrijjis, e., united Vrijjis, was 
that of the confederated eight tribes 
of the people called the Vrijjis or 
Vajjis, one of which, viz., that of 
the Lichhavis, dwelt at Vaisalt. 
They were republicans, and, if we 


may rely on the inferences found in 
note 80 antec, they were a confedera- 
tion of Northern tribes who had at 
an early date taken possession of 
this part of India. They were driven 
back by Ajatasatru, king of Mag- 
adha. Compare Cunningham, Anc. 
Geog., p» 449. Sacred Books of the 
East, xi.2ss. 


73 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook vit. 


The climate is rather cold; the men are quick and hasty 
in disposition. Most of the people are heretics; a few 
believe in the law of Buddha. There are about ten sav- 
ghardmas ; the disciples (priests) are less than 1000, 
They study assiduously both the Great and Little 
Vehicles, There are several tens of Déva temples, with 
a great number of unbelievers. The capital of the country 
- is called Chen-shu-na.™ Itis mostly in ruins. In the 
old royal precinct (citadel or inner city) there are yet 
some 3000 houses; it may be called either a village or a 
town. 

To the north-east of the great river is a sanghdrdma. 
The priests are few, but they are studious and of a pure 
and dignified character. 

From this going west along the side of the river, we 
find a stdpa about 30 feet high. To the south of itis a 
stretch of deep water. The great merciful Lord of the 
World converted here some fishermen, In days long past, 
when Buddha was living, there were 500 fishermen who 
joined in partnership to fish for and catch the finny tribes, 
whereupon they entangled in the river stream a great fish 
with eighteen heads; each head had two eyes. The fisher- 
men desired to kill it, but Tathagata being then in the 
country of Vaisali, with his divine sight saw what was 
going on, and raising within him a compassionate heart, 
he used this opportunity as a means for converting and 
directing (men). Accordingly, in order’ to open their 
minds, he said to the great congregation, “In the Vrijji 
country there is a great fish; I wish to guide it (into the 
right way), i order to enlighten the fishermen; you 
therefore should embrace this opportunity.” 


101 Julien restores this to Chafi- 
guna, V. de St. Martin con- 
nects the name with Janaka and 
Janakapura, the capital of Mithila 
(Mémoire, p. 368). Compare Cun- 
ningham, Anc. Geog., p. 445. The 
interesting account the last writer 
gives of the old mounds or stdpas 


(arranged as a cross) at theold town ~ 
of Navandgarh in this territory (p. 
449 op. cit.), and the respect which 
the Vajjians observed towards them, 
reminds us of the record ‘of Hero- 
dotos respecting the veneration of 
the Skythiansfor the tombs (mounds) 
of their ancestors (Melpomene, 133). 


BOOK VII.] THE VAFFIAN FISH-MONSTER. 79 


On this the great congregation surrounding him, by 
their spiritual power passed through the air and came to 
the river-side. He sat down as usual, and forthwith 
addressed the fishermen : “ Kill not that fish. By my spiri- 
tual power I will open the way for the exercise of expe- 
dients, and cause this great fish to know its former kind. 
of life; and in order to this I will cause it to speak in 
human language and truly to exhibit human affections 
(feelings).” Then Tathagata, knowing it beforehand, asked . 
(the fish), “In your former existence, what crime did you 
commit that in the circle of migration you have been born 
in this evil way and with this hideous body?” The fish 
said, “ Formerly, by the merit I had gained, I was born in a 
noble family as the Brihman Kapitha (Kie-pi-tha). Rely-: 
ing on this family origin, I insulted other persons; relying 
on my extensive knowledge, I despised all books and rules, 
and with a supercilious heart I reviled the Buddhas with 
opprobrious words, and ridiculed the priests by comparing 
them to every kind of brute beast, as the ass, or the mule, 
or the elephant, or the horse, and every unsightly form. 
In return for all this I received this monstrous body of 
mine, Thanks, however, to some virtuous remnants dur- 
ing former lives, I am born during the time of a Buddha’s 
appearance in the world, and permitted to see his sacred 
form, and myself to receive his sacred instruction and to 
confess and repent of my former misdeeds.” 

' On this Tathagata, according to the circumstance, in- 
structed and converted him by wisely opening his under- 
standing. The fish having received the law, expired, and 
by the power of this merit was born in heaven. On this 
he considered his body, and reflected by what circum- 
stances he was thus born. So, knowing his former life 
and recollecting the circumstances of his conversion, he 
was moved with gratitude to Buddha, and, with all the 
Dévas, with bended form he bowed before him and wor- 
shipped, and then having circumambulated him, he with- 
drew, and, standing apart, offered precious flowers and 


80 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vite 


unguents in religious service. The Lord of the World 
having directed the fishermen to consider this, and on 
their account preached the law, they were all forthwith 
enlightened and offered him profound respect. Repenting 
of their faults, they destroyed their nets, burnt their boats, 
and having taken refuge in the law, they assumed the 
religious habit, and by means of the excellent doctrine 
they heard came out of the reach of worldly influences 
and obtained the holy fruit (of Arhats). 

Going north-east from this spot about 100 li, we come 
to an old city, on the west of which is a stépa built by 
Aééka-rfja, in height about 100 feet. Here Buddha, when 
living in the world, preached the law for six months and 
converted the Dévas. Going north 140 or 150 paces is a 
little stupa; here Buddha, for the sake of the Bhikshus, 
established some rules of discipline. West of this not far 
is a stdpa containing hair and nail relics. Tathdgata for- 
merly residing in this place, men from all the neighbour- 
ing towns and villages flocked together and burnt incense, 
and scattered flowers, and lighted lamps and torches in his 
honour. 

Going north-west from this 1400 or 1500 li, crossing 
some mountains and entering a valley, we come to the 
country of Ni-po-lo (Népala). » 


N1-po-Lo (NEPAL). 


This country is’ about 4000 li in circuit, and is situated 
among the Snowy Mountains. The capital city is about 
20 liround. Mountains and valleys are joined together 
in an unbroken succession. It is adapted for the growth of 
cereals, and abounds with flowers and fruits. It produees 
red copper, the Yak and the Iingming bird (jivaijiva). 
In commerce they use coins made of red copper. The 
climate is icy cold; the manners of the people are false 
and perfidious. Their temperament is hard and fierce, 
with little regard to truth or honour, They are unlearned 
but skilful in the arts; their appearance is ungainly and 


BOOK VII.} MAGADHA. 81 


revolting. There are believers and heretics mixed to- 
gether. The savghdrdmas and Déva temples are closely 
joined. There are about 2000 priests, who study both the 
Great and Little Vehicle. The number of heretics and 
sectaries of different sorts is uncertain, The king is a 
Kshattriya, and belongs to the family of the Licchavas. 
His mind is well-informed, and he is pureand dignified in 
character. He has a sincere faith in the law of Buddha. 
Lately there was a king called Athéuvarman™ (An- 
chu-fa-mo), who was distinguished for his learning and 
ingenuity. He himself had composed a work on “sounds” 
(Sabdavidyd) ; he esteemed learning and respected virtue, 


and his reputation was spread everywhere. 
To the south-east of the capital is a little stream and a 


‘Jake. 


If we fling fire into it, flames immediately arise ; 


other things take fire if thrown in it, and change their 


character. - 


From this going back to Vaisalf, and crossing the 
Ganges to the south, we arrive at the country of Mo-kie- 


t’o (Magadha). 


END OF BOOK VIL 


102 In Chinese, Kwang-cheu : the 
only Améuvarman in the lists 
of Nepal dynasties is placed by 
Prinsep immediately after Sivadéva, 
whose date he adjusted tentatively 
to A.D. 470. In Wright's lists Siva- 
déva is omitted, and Amsguvarman 
stands at the head of the Thakuri 
dynasty. In an inscription of Siva- 
déva, Amguvarman is. spoken of as 
a very powerful feudal chieftain, who 
probably ruled at first in the name 
of Sivadéva, but afterwards assumed 
the supreme power; and in other in- 
scriptions dated Sath. 39 and 45, he 
is styled king, and the traditional 
account says he married the daugh- 
ter of his predecessor and began a 
new dynasty; but it makes him 
contemporary with Vikramaditya of 
Ujjani (? cir. 540 to 580 ap. Max 
Miller, Jndia, p. 289). From 
Hiuen Tsiang’s allusion we should 


VOL. II. 


be inclined to place Arhguvarman’s 
reign about a.p. 580-600. His sis- 
ter Bhégadévi was married to a 
Prince Sfiraséna, and by him was the 
mother of Bhégavarman and Bhag- 
yadévi. Armguvarman was probably 
succeeded by Jishnugupta, of whom 
we have an inscription dated Sarh. 
48. If these dates refer to the Srt 
Harsha era, then Amsuvarman ruled 
about A.D. 644-652—at the close of 
the lifetime of Hiuen Tsiang—which 
is rather late. See Wright’s History 
of Nepal, p. 130 f.; Prinsep’s Ind. 
Ant., vol. ii, U. 2, p. 269; Ind. 
Ant., vol. ix. pp. 169-172. 

103 But the pilgrim does not ap- 
pear himself to have gone into Nepéil. 
He went to the capital of the Vrij- 
jis, and there speaks from report. 
His return therefore must be calcu- 
lated froin this place. 


BOOK VIII. 


Contains the First Part of the Account of the Country of 
Magadha (Mo-kie-t’o). 


THE country of Magadha (Mo-kie-t’o)! is about 5000 li 
in circuit. The walled cities have but few inhabitants, 
but the towns? are thickly populated. The soil is rich 
and fertile and the grain cultivation abundant. There is 
an unusual sort of ricé grown here, the grains of which 
are large and scented and of an exquisite taste. It is 
specially remarkable for its shining colour. Itiscommonly. 
called “the rice for the use of the great.”> As the ground 
is low and damp, the inhabited towns are built on the 
high uplands. After the first month of summer and 
before the second month of autumn, the level country is 
flooded, and communication can be kept up by boats. 
The manners of the people are simple and honest. The 
temperature is pleasantly hot; they esteem very much 
the pursuit of learning and profoundly respect the religion 
of Buddha. There are some fifty savghdrdmas, with about 
10,000 priests, of whom the greater number study the 
teaching of the Great Vehicle. There are ten Déva 
temples, occupied by sectaries of different persuasions, who 


are very numerous. 

To the south of the river Ganges there is an old a= 
about 70 li round, Although it has been long deserted, 
its foundation walls still survive. Formerly, when men’s 


1 Or, it may mean the chief city 3 This appears to be the rice 
or capital. called Mahdsdlt and Sugandhikéd 
2 Yih, the towns; Julien gives ‘(Julien), 
villages. 


BOOK VIII.] PATALIPUTRA. 83 


lives were incalculably long, it was called Kusumapura 
(Ku-su-mo-pu-lo), so called because the palace of the 
king had many flowers. Afterwards, when men’s age 
reached several thousands of years, then its name was 
changed to Pataliputra® (Po-ch’a-li-tsu-ch’ing). 

At the beginning there was a Brahman of high talent 
and singular learning. Many thousands flocked to him 
to receive instruction. “One day all the students went 
out on a tour of observation; one of them betrayed a 
feeling of unquiet and distress. His fellow-students 
addressed him and said, “ What troubles you, friend?” 
He said, “I am in my full maturity (Geauty) with perfect 
strength, and yet I go on wandering about here like a 
lonely shadow till years and months have passed, and my 
duties (manly duties)® not performed. Thinking of this, 
my words are sad and my heart is afilicted.” 

On this his companions in sport replied, “We must 
seek then for your good a bride and her friends.” Then 
they supposed two persons to represent the father and 
mother of, the bridegroom, and two persons the father and 
mother of the bride,’ and as they were sitting under a 
Patali (Po-ch’a-li) tree, they called it the tree of the son- 
in-law.8 Then they gathered seasonable fruits and pure 


4 Explained in a note to mean 
Hiang-hu-kong-sh’ing, —the city, or 
royal precinct, of the scented flower 
(kusuma). 

5 The text seems to refer the 
foundation of this city to a remote 
period, and in this respect is in 
agreement with Diodoros, who says 
(lib. ii. cap. 39) that this city ém- 
pavesrarn Kal peylorn was founded 
by Herakles, The Buddhist ac- 
counts speak of it as a village, 
P&taligima, which was being streng- 
thened and enlarged by Ajatasatru, 
contemporary of Buddha, for the 
purpose of repelling the advance of 
the Vrijjis. See Sac. Books of the 
East, vol. xi. pp. 16,17; Bigandet, Life 
of Gaudama, p. 257°; £o-sho-hing- 
tsan-king, p. 249, n. 3; Cunningham, 
Ane. Geog. of India, p. 453. 


5 So it seems, from the story 
following, the passage must be 
understood. Julien confines the 
meaning to his “studies” not yet 
completed. But there would be 
no point in the pretended marriage, 
if that were his regret. 

7 This is the natural translation 
of the passage, and makes good 
sense without the alteration pro- 
posed by Julien. 

8 That is, they made the tree the 
father-in-law of the student; in 
other words, he was to marry the 
daughter of the tree, a Pétali Hower 
(Biynonia suaveolens). Ican find no 
authority for Julien’s statement that 
the word son-in-law corresponds to 
Pdtali; this statement is also re- 
peated by Eitel, Handbook, sub voc. 
Pétala, 


84 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book Vil. 


water, and followed all the nuptial customs, and requested 
a time to be fixed. Then the father® of the supposed 
bride, gathering a twig with flowers on it, gave it to the 
student and said, “This is your excellent partner; be 
graciously pleased to accept her.” The student’s heart 
was rejoiced as he took her to himself. And now, as the 
sun was setting, they proposed to return home; but the 
young student, affected by love, preferred to remain. 

Then the other said, “ All this was fun; pray come back 
with us; there are wild beasts in this forest; we are afraid 
they will kill you.” But the student preferred to remain 
walking up and down by the side of the tree. 

After sunset a strange light lit up thé plain, the sound 
of pipes and Jutes with their soft music (was heard), and 
the ground was covered with a sumptuous carpet. Sud- 
denly an old man of gentle mien was seen coming, sup- 
porting himself by his staff, and there was also an old 
mother leading a young maiden. They were accompanied - 
by a procession along the way, dressed in holiday attire 
and attended with music. The old man then pointed to 
the maiden and said, “ This is your worship’s wife (/ady).” 
Seven days then passed in carousing and music, when the 
companions of the student, in doubt whether he had been 
destroyed by wild beasts, went forth and came to the place. 
They found him alone in the shade of the tree, sitting as if 
facing a superior guest. They asked him to return with 
them, but he respectfully declined. 

After this he entered of his own accord the city, to pay 
respect to his relatives, and told them of this adventure 
from beginning to end. Having heard it with wonder, he 
returned with all his relatives and friends to the middle of 
the forest, and there they saw the flowering tree become a 
great mansion ; servants of all kinds were hurrying to and 
fro on every side, and the old man came forward and re- 
ceived them with politeness, and entertained them with 
all kinds of dainties served up amidst the sound of music. 


9 We must suppose him to represent the tree, the real father. 


BOOK VIII.] ASOKA-RAFA, 85 


2 


After the usual compliments, the guests returned to the 
city and told to all, far and near, what had happened. 

After the year was accomplished the wife gave birth to 
a son, when the husband said to his spouse, “1 wish now 
to return, but yet I cannot bear to be separated from you 
(your bridal residence); but if I rest here-I fear the expo- 
sure to wind and weather.” 

The wife having heard this, told her father. The old man 
then addressed the student and said, “ Whilst living con- 
tented and happy why must you go back? I will build 
you a house; let there be no thought of desertion.” On 
this his servants applied themselves to the work, and in 
less than a day it was finished. 

When the old capital of Kusumapura” was changed, 
this town was chosen, and from the circumstance of the 
genii building the mansion of the youth the name hence- 
forth of the country was Pataliputra pura (the city of 
the son of the Patali tree). 

To the north of the old palace of the king is a stone 
pillar several tens of feet high; this is the place where 
Asdka (Wu-yau) raja made “a hell.” In the hundredth 
year after the Nirvdna of Tathigata, there was a king 
called Ag6ka (’O-shu-kia), who was the great-grandson of 
Bimbisdra-raj&™ He changed his capital from Raja- 
griha to Patali (pura), and built an outside rampart to 
surround the old city. Since then many generations have 


10 From this it would appear that 
Kusumapura was not on the same 
site as Pataliputra. Raéjagriha was 
the capital in the time of Ajatagatru, 
and it was he who strengthened Pa- 
taliputra. In the next clause it is 
said that Aséka changed his capital 
from Rajagriha to Pataliputra. He 
is described asthe great-grandson of 
Bimbasara, and therefore the grand- 
sonfof Ajatasatru. The Vdyu Purdna 
states that Kusumapura or Patali- 
putra was founded by Raja Uda- 
yasva, the grandson of Ajatasatru ; 
but the Makdwanso makes Udaya 


the son of the king. See Cunning- 
ham, Ane. Geog., p. 453- 

 Hiuen Tsiang uses in this pas- 
sage the phonetic equivalents for 
Aééka, ’O-shu-kia ; on this Dr. Old- 
enberg founds an argument that 
the king referred to is not Dharma- 
Sdka, but Kalaséka( Vinaya Pitakam, 
vol.i., Introd., p.xxxiii.n.) But anote 
in thetext states that’ O-shu-kiais the 
Sanskrit form of Wu-yau; the latter 
in the Chinese form, signifying “sor- 
rowless.” For Bimbisara, see p, 102, 
n. 41. 


86 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book-vitt. 


passed, and now there only remain the old foundation 
walls (of the city). The savrghérdmas, Déva temples, and 
sttipas which lie in ruins may be counted by hundreds. 
There are only two or three remaining (entire). To the 
north of the old palace, and bordering on the Ganges 
river, there is a little town which contains about 1000 
houses. 

At first when A&éka (Wu-yau) raja ascended the throne, 
he exercised a most cruel tyranny; he constituted a hell 
for the purpose of torturing living creatures. He sur- 
rounded it with high walls with lofty towers. He placed 
there specially vast furnaces of molten metal, sharp 
scythes, and every kind of instrument of torture like those 
in the infernal regions. He selected an impious man?* 
whom he appointed lord of the hell. At first every 
criminal in the empire, whatever his fault, was consigned 
to this place of calamity and outrage; afterwards all 
those who passed by the place were seized and destroyed. 
All who came to the place were killed without any chance 
of self-defence. 

At this time a Sramana, just entered the religious order, 
was passing through the suburbs begging food, when he 
came to hell-gate. The impious keeper of the place laid 
hold upon him to destroy him. The Sramana, filled with 
fear, asked for a respite to perform an act of worship and 
confession. Just then he saw a man bound with cords 
enter the prison. In a momentthey cut off his hands and 
feet, and pounded his body in a mortar, till all the mem- 
bers of his body were mashed up together in confusion. 

The Sramana having witnessed this, deeply moved with 
pity, arrived at the conviction of the impermanence 
(anitya) of all earthly things, and reached the fruit of 
“exemption from learning” (Arhatship). Then the infernal 


? This may refer to Kusumapura, man; Julien has ‘un troupe de 
the “ flowery palace” city, or to the scélérats.” The story of this place 
palace in the old town of PA&tali- of torment is found also in Fa-hian, 
putra, ; cap. xxxii, 

48 There seems to be only one 


BOOK Vill.] THE EARTH-PRISON OF ASOKA. 87 


lictor said, “Now you must die.” The Sramana having 
become an Arhat, was freed in heart from the power of 
birth and death, and so, though cast into a boiling caldron, 
it was to him as a cool lake, and on its surface there 
appeared a lotus flower, whereon he took his seat. The 
infernal lictor, terrified thereat, hastened to send a 
messenger to the king to tell him of the circumstance. 
The king having himself come and beheld the sight, 
raised his voice in loud praise of the miracle. 

The keeper, addressing the king, said, “ Maharaja, you 
too must die.” “And why so?” said the king. “ Because 
of your former decree with respect to the infliction of 
death, that all who came to the walls of the hell should 
be killed; it was not said that the king might enter and 
escape death.” 

The king said, “ The decree was indeed established, and 
cannot be altered. But when the law was ‘made, were 
you excepted? You have long destroyed life. I will put 
an end to it.” Then ordering the attendants, they seized 
the lictor and cast him into a boiling caldron. After his 
death the king departed, and levelled the walls, filled up 
the ditches, and put an end to the infliction of such 
horrible punishments. 

To the south of the earth-prison (the hell), and not far 
off, is a stipa. Its foundation walls are sunk, and it is in 
a leaning, ruinous condition. There remains, however, the 
crowning jewel of the cupola.* This is madg of carved 
stone, and has a surrounding balustrade This was the 


M4 Shai pao, the distinctive or 
strong ornament. It seems to refer 
to “the tee’ (Att),” as it is called; 
the ornamental enclosure above the 
cupola woyld represent the region 
of the heaven of the thirty-three 
Dévas. 

15 So the dome of Safichi is sur- 
mounted as restored by Mr. Fer- 
gusson, Tree and Serpent Worship, 
pl. ii. (see also the remarks of the 
same writer, op. cit. p. 100, Ist ed.) 
The enclosed space or box onthe sum- 
mit of the stipa is not, however, a 


simulated relic-box, but represents 
the first heaven, or the Trayastrim- 
gas heaven of Sakra and the thirty- 
two Dévas, The Dévas, therefore, are 
constantly represented in the sculp- 
tures as surrounding this enclosure 
and offering their gifts, in token of 
the relics of Buddha (his hair, golden 
bowl, &c.), taken there for worship. 
The Tee or Hti is the cone of metal 
circles, raised above this enclosed 
space, representing the lands (khé- 
tas, or kshétras) above the Trayas- 
trimhsas heaven. 


88 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vu. 


first (or, one) of the 84,000 (stdpas). Asdka-rdja erected it 
by the power (merit) of man 1° in the middle of his royal 
precinct (or palace). It contains a ching (measure) of 
relics of Tathigata. Spiritual indications constantly 
manifest themselves, and a divine light is shed round it 
from time to time. 

After King Aédka had destroyed the hell, he met Upa- 
gupta,” a great Arhat, who, by the use of (proper) 
means,’8 allured him in a right way according as the 
opportunity (or, springs of action, 2.2, his: power or ca- 
pacity to believe) led, and converted him. The king 
addressed the Arhat and said, “Thanks to my acquired 
merit in former births, I have got (by promise) my kingly 
authority, but in consequence of my faults I did not, by 
meeting Buddha, obtain conversion. Now, then, I desire 
in all the greater degree to honour the bequeathed re- 
mains of his body by building stépas.” 

The Arhat said, “ My earnest desire is that the great _ 
king by his merits may be able to employ the invisible 
powers (the spirits) as agents in fulfilling his vow to pro- 
tect the three precious ones.” And then, because of the 
opportune occasion, he entered largely on the narrative 
of his offering the ball of earth, and on that account of 
Buddha’s prediction, as the origin of his desire to build.® 

The king having heard this, was overpowered, and he 
summoned the spirits to assemble, and commanded them, 
saying, “ By the gracious disposal and spiritual efficacy of 
the guiding power of the King of the Law I have become, 
as the result of my good actions in former states of life, 
the highest amongst them. (I wish now) with especial care 


16 Or it may probably be “ by his 
religious merit as a man.” 

7 ¥or some remarks on Upagupta 
(Kin-hu), see vol. i. p. 182, n. 48. 

18 Updya, expedients or skilful use 
of means. 

19 The offering of the ball of earth 
refers to the circumstance related 
by Fa-hian at the opening of chap. 
xxxii, Julien has overlooked this, 


and refers the offering to the charity 
of Agéka in giving Jambudvipa to 
the priests. But it is plain that no 
prediction of Buddha hinged on this. 
Kanishka is said also to have been 
converted by the relation of a predic- 
tion referring to him made by Bud- 
dha, and explained by a shepherd 
boy. : 


BOOK VIII. ] BUILDING STUPAS. 89 © 
to prepare a means of paying religious worship to the 
bequeathed body of Tathagata. Do you, then, spirits and 
genii, by your combined strength and agreement of pur- 
pose, raise stépas for the relics of Buddha throughout the 
whole of Jambudvipa, to the very last house of all? (ae., 
to the extremity of the land). The mind (or purpose) is 
mine, the merit of completing it shall be yours. The ad- 
vantage to be derived from this excellent act of religion 
I wish not to be confined to one person only; let each of 
you, then, raise a building in readiness (for eompletion., 
and then come and receive my further commands,” 

Having received these instructions, the genii com- 
menced their meritorious work in the several quarters 
where they were; and having finished the task (so far), 
they came together to ask for further directions. Asdka- 
raja (Wu-yau-wang) having opened the stipas of the 
eight countries where they were built, divided the relics, 
and having delivered them to the genii, he addressed the 
Arhat#! and said, “My desire is that the relics should be 
dsposited in every place at the same moment exactly: 
although ardently desirous of this, my mind has not yet 
been able to perfect a plan for accomplishing it.” # 

The Arhat addressed the king and said, “ Command the 
genii to go each to his appointed place and regard the 
sun.3 When the sun becomes obscured and its shape as 
if a hand covered it, then is the time: drop the relics into 
the stipas.” The king having received these intructions, 
gave orders accordingly to the genii to expect the ap- 
pointed day. 

Meantime the king, Agéka, watching the sun’s disc, ” 


20 The text is difficult. Julien ing of the passage. Julien trans- 


translates it “dans chaque ville 
possédant un keou-tchi (un kdti de 
souvarnas).” This may be correct, 
but the phrase man keou chi seems 
to me to refer to the full tale of in- 
habited places—every where. 

21 That is, Upagupta. 

22 Such appears to be the mean- 


lates it, “my desire is not yet 
accomplished.” His’ desire was to 
find out a plan or method for de- 
positing the relics at the same in- 
stant. 

*3 Or it may be, “await an ap- 
pointed day.” 


go RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [pook vit. 


waited for the sign; then at noon (or the day) the Arhat, 
by his spiritual power, stretched forth his hand and con- 
cealed the sun. At the places where the stdpas had been 
built for completion, all (the genti™) observing this event, 
at the same moment concluded the meritorious under- 
taking. 

By the side of the sé#pa, and not far from it, in a 
vthdra, is a great stone on which Tathdgata walked. 
There is still the impression of both his feet on it, about 
eighteen inches long and six inches broad; both the 
right and left impress have the circle-sign,® and the ten 
toes are all fringed with figures of flowers (or flower 
scrolls) and forms of fishes, which glisten brightly in the - 
light (morning light). In old time, Tathagata, being about 
to attain Nirvdna, was going northward to KuSsinagara, 
when turning round to the south and looking back at 
Magadha, he stood upon this stone and said to Ananda, 
“ Now for the very last time I leave this foot-impression, 
being about to attain Mirvdna, and looking at Magadha. 
A hundred years hence there shall be a King Agdka ;76 he 
shall build here his capital and establish his court; he 
shall protect the three religious treasures and command 
the genii,” 

When Agdka (Wu-yau) had ascended the throne, he 
changed his capital and built this town; he enclosed the 
stone with the impression; and as it was near the royal 
precinct, he paid it constant personal worship. Afterwards 
the kings of the neighbourhood wished to carry it off to 


*4 So it must signify, not the in- 
habitants of the several places, but 
the genii who were awaiting the 
signal. . 

* The circle-sign is the chakra; 
this is the principal mark on the 
sole of Buddha's feet ; see Alabas- 
ter’s Wheel of the Law, p. 286 
and plate. Julien translates the 
passage as if the chakra were visible 
on the right and left of the feet, 
instead of on the right and left 
imprint of the feet. 


°6 It is plain that this prediction 
concerning Wu-yau-wang, supposed 
by Oldenberg always to refer to 
Dharmésdéka (see above, note 11), re- 
lates to O-chu-kia or Kalaééka, for 
it was he, the grandson of Ajatadga- 
tru, who established his capital at 
Pataliputra; so also in the next 
sentence. Hiuen Tsiang probably 
translated all the records relating 
to Aséka as though referring to the 
same person, using either ’O-shu-kia 
or ’O-yu, or Wu-yau, indifferently. 


BOOK VIII.] PILLAR INSCRIPTION. ron 


their own country; but although the stone is not large, 
they could not move it at all. . 

Lately Sag4nka-raja, when he was overthrowing and 
destroying the law of Buddha, forthwith came to the 
place where that stone is, for the purpose of destroying the 
sacred marks. Having broken it into pieces, it came whole 
again, and the ornamental figures as before ; then he flung 
it into the river Ganges, but it came back to its old place. 

By the side of the stone is a stipa, which marks the 
place where the four past Buddhas walked and sat down, 
the traces of which still remain. 

By the side of the wthdra which contains the traces of 
Buddha, and not far from it, is a great stone pillar about 
thirty feet high, with a mutilated inscription on it. This, 
however, is the principal part of it, viz, “Asdka-raja 
with a firm principle of faith has thrice bestowed Jam- 
budvipa as a religious offering on Buddha, the Dharma, 
and the assembly, and thrice he has redeemed it with 
his jewels and treasure; and this is the record thereof.” 
Such is the purport of the record, 

To the north of the old palace is a stone house. 
It looks outside like a great mnowntaieh within it is 
many tens of feet wide. This is the house which Asdka- 
raja commanded the genii to build for his brother who 
had become a recluse. Early in his life Asdka had a 
half-brother (mother’s brother) called Mahéndra® (Mo- 
hi-in-to-lo), who was born of a noble tribe. In dress he 
arrogated the style of the king; he was extravagant, 
wasteful, and cruel. The people were indignant, and the 
ministers and aged officers of the king came to him (¢he 
king), and remonstrated thus, “Your proud brother as- 
sumes a dignity as though he were some great one in 
comparison with others. If the government is impartial, 

*7 Mahéndra (translated Ta-t?, ary sent to Ceylon. See Maha- 
great ruler) is generally spoken of wanso, Turnours transl, p. 76. 
as the son of Aééka. The Sim- Dr. Oldenberg doubts the truth 


halese historical works speak of of this tradition. Vinayapitaka, i., 
him as the first Buddhist mission. Introduction, lii. 


92 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vu. 


then the country is contented; if men are agreed, then 
the ruler is in peace: these are the principles which have 
been handed down to us from our fathers. We desire 
that you will preserve the rules of our country, and de- 
liver to justice those who would change them.” Then 
Agdka-raja addressed his brother as he wept, and said, 
“I have inherited (as my rule of) government the duty 
of protecting and cherishing the people; how then have 
you, my brother, forgotten my affection and my kind- 
ness? It is impossible at the very beginning of my reign 
to neglect the laws. If I punish you, I fear the anger 
of-my ancestors; on the other hand, if I excuse you, I 
fear the opinion of the people.” 

Mahéndra, bowing his head, replied, “I have not 
guarded my conduct, and have transgressed. the laws of the 
country; I ask only an extension of my life for seven days.” 

On this the king placed him in a dark dungeon, and 
placed over him a strict guard. He provided him with 
every kind of exquisite meat and every necessary article. 
At the end of the first day.the guard cried out to him, 
“One day has gone; there are six days left.” The sixth 
day having expired, as he had greatly sorrowed for his 
faults and had afflicted (disciplined) his body and his 
heart, he obtained the fruit of sanctity (became an Arhat) ; 
he mounted into the air and exhibited his miraculous 
powers (spirttual traces). Then separating himself from 
the pollution of the world, he went afar, and occupied the 
mountains and valleys (as a recluse). 

Agéka-raja, going in his own person, addressed him as 
follows, “ At first, in order to put in force the laws of the 
country, I desired to have you punished, but little did I 
think you would have attained to this highest rank of 
holiness." Having, however, reached this condition of 
detachment from the world, you can now return to your _ 
country.” 


*8 That you would have mounted up in pure conduct to attain to and 
possess this holy fruit. 


BOOK VUI.] HOUSE BUILT BY GENII. , 93 


The brother replied, “ Formerly I was ensnared in the 
net of (worldly) affections, and my mind was occupied 
with love of sounds (music) and beauty; but now I have 
escaped all this (the dangerous city), and my mind delights 
in (the seclusion of) mountains and valleys. . I would fain 
give up the’ world for ever (men’s soetety) and dwell here in 
solitude.” 

The king said, “If you wish to subdue your heart in 
quiet, you have no need to live in the mountain fastnesses. 
To meet your wishes I shall construct you a dwelling.” 

Accordingly he summoned the genii-to his presence and 
said to them, “On the morrow I am about to give a 
magnificent feast. I invite you to come together to the 
assembly, but you must each bring for your own seat a 
great stone.” The genii having received the summons, 
came at the appointed time to the assembly. The king 
then addressed them and said, “The stones which are 
now arranged in order on the ground you may pile up, 
and, without any labour to yourselves, construct of them 
for me an empty house.” The genii having received the 
order, before the day was over finished the task, Asdka- 
raja then himself went to invite his brother to fix his 
abode in this mountain cell. 

To the north of the old palace, and to the south of “the 
hell,” is a great stone with a hollow trough init. Asdéka- 
raja commissioned the genii as workmen to make this 
hollow (vase) to use for the food which he gave to the 
priests when he invited them to eat. 

To the south-west of the old palace there is a little 
mountain. In the crags and surrounding valleys there are 
several tens of stone dwellings which Asdka-rija made for 
Upagupta and other Arhats, by the intervention of the 
genii. 

By the side of it is an old tower, the ruins of which are 
a mass of heaped-up stones. There is also a pond, the 
gentle ripples of which play over its surface as pure as a 


°° Compare Fa-hian, chap. xxvii. 


94 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vuir. 


mirror, The people far and near call it the sacred water. 
Tf any one drinks thereof or washes in it, the defilement 
of their sins is washed away and destroyed. 

To the south-west of the mountain is a collection of — 
five stépas. The foundations are lofty but ruinous; what 
remains, however, is ‘a good height. At a distance they 
look like little hills. Each of them is several tens of 
paces in front. Men in after-days tried to build on the 
top of these little stépas. The records of India state, “In 
old time, when Asgdka-raja built the 84,000 stipas, there 
was still remaining five measures of relics. Therefore he 
erected with exceptional grandeur five other stépas, re- 
markable for their spiritual portents' (miraculous exhibi- 
tions), with a view to indicate the fivefold spiritual body 
of Tathagata.®° Some disciples of little faith talking 
together argued thus, ‘In old time Nanda-raja*! built 
these five (sttipas) as treasure-places for his wealth (seven 
precious substances). In consequence of this gossip, in 
after-time a king of insincere faith, and excited by lis 
covetousness, put his troops in movement, and came with 
his followers to dig (the stépas). The earth shook, the 
mountains bent (fell), and the clouds darkened the sun, 
whilst from the stipas there came a great sound like 
thunder. The soldiers with their leaders fell backward, 
and the elephants and horses took to flight. The king thus 
defeated, dared no longer to covet (the treasures), It is 
said, moreover (2.¢., in the Indian records), ‘ With respect to 
the gossip of the priests there has been some doubt 
expressed, but we believe it to be true according to the 
old tradition,’ ” 


30 Literally, the body of the law 
of Tathagata (Ju-lai) divided into 
five parts. It may refer to the five 
skandhas; these are répa (sih), 
védand (sheu), samnjidna (siang), 
sdiskdra (hing), vijiidna (chi). 

31 This refers to Nanda, the son 
of Mahdnanda, called Mahfpadmia, 
who was exceedingly avaricious. 
He was the son of a woman of the 
Stdra class. He brought the whole 


earth under one umbrella (Vishnu- 
Purdna, p. 466, Wilson's translation). 
In the 
Dhana-nando, because he personally 
devoted himself to the hoarding of 
treasure (Max Miiller, Hist. Anc. 
Sansc, Lit,, p. 281). The state- 
ment in the text, derived from “the 
old records of India,” appears to 
identify Nanda with As6ka, te. 
Kalasoka, 


Mahdévanso he is called ~ 


THE OFFERING OF ASOKA., 95 


To the south-east of the old city there is the sanghd- 
rdma called K’iu-cha-’o-lan-mo® (Kukkutéréma), which , 
was built by ASéka-raja when he first became a believer 
in the religion of Buddha, It was a sort of first-fruit 
(preparation in planting the root of virtue), and a pattern 
of majestic construction (lofty building). He gathered 
there a thousand priests; a double congregation of lay 
people and saints made their offerings of the four neces- 
sary things, and provided gratuitously all the articles for 
use. This building has long been in ruins, but the founda- 
tion walls are still preserved. 

By the side of the savghdrdma is a great stipa called 
’O-mo-lo-kia (Amalaka), which is the name of a fruit used 
as a medicine in India. King Agodka having fallen sick 
and lingering for a long time, felt that he would not 

‘recover, and so desired to offer all his possessions (gems 

and valuables) so as to crown his religious merit (¢o plant 
high the field of merit), The minister * who was carrying 
ou the government was unwilling to comply with his 
wish, Some time after this, as he was eating part of an 
Amalaka fruit, he playfully * put the half ‘of it (in the 
hand of the king) for an offering. Holding the fruit in 
his hand he said with a sigh to his minister, “Who now 
is lord of Jambudvipa ?” 

‘The minister replied, “Only your majesty.” 

The king answered, “ Not so!’ I am no longer lord; for 
I have. only this half fruit to call my own! Alas! the 
wealth and honour of the world are as difficult to keep as 


BOOK VIII.] 


2 This convent or sajighdrdma 
must not be confounded with the 
Kukkutapidagiri, near Gaya. See 
Fa-hian, cap. xxxiii. p. 132 n., also 
Arch. Survey of India, vol. xv. p. 43 
Ind. Ant., vol. xii. p. 327; compare 
also Julien’s remark (p. 428, n. 1). 

3 It may be “ministers ;” the 
story of the text is found aniong 
ASvaghésha’s sermons. It is No. 26 
as given in the Abstract of Four 


Lectures, p. 103. 
+ In a trifling way. This transla- 


tion is difficult. Julien translates it 
as though the king were amused as 
he played with the fruit, until he 
had reduced ittoa half. This transla- 
tion is more agreeable to the text. 
But, on the other hand, in Agvagh6- 
sha’s rendering of the story, he says 


‘that the minister offered the king 


a half Amala fruit, to bestow in 
chatity. The translation I have 
given requires the substitution of 
tan (to give in charity) for lan 
(cooked or thoroughly dressed), 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BOoK VIIL 


it is to preserve the light of a lamp in the wind! My 
wide-spread possessions, my name and high renown, at 
close of life are snatched from me, and I am in the hands 
of a minister violent and powerful. The empire is no 
longer mine ; this half fruit alone is left!” 

Then he commanded an attendant officer to come, and 
he addressed him thus: “Take this half fruit and offer it 
in the garden (drdma) of the cock (monastery) to the priests, 
and speak thus to the venerable ones, ‘He who was 
formerly lord of Jambudvipa, but now is master of only 
this half Amala fruit, bows down before the priests 
(chief priest). I pray you (on behalf of the king) receive 
this very last offering. All that I have is gone and lost, 

only this half fruit remains as my little possession. Pity 
the poverty of the offering, and grant that it may increase 
the seeds of his religious merit’ : 

The Sthavira,in the midst of the priests, spake thus 
in reply: “ Aédka-raja by his former deeds may hope to 
recover. Whilst the fever has held his person, his avari- 
cious ministers have usurped his power and amassed 
wealth not their own. But this offering of half a fruit 
will secure the king an extension of life.” The king 
having recovered from his sickness, gave large offerings to 
the priests. Moreover he ordered the manager of the 
affairs of the convent (Tin-see—Karmmadana) to preserve 
the seeds® of the fruit in a vessel of liquid fit for the 
purpose, and he erected this stéipa as a mark of gratitude 
for his prolonged life.% 

To the north-west of Amalaka stipa, in the middle of 
an old sanghdrdma, is a stipa; it is called “ establishing 
the sound of the ghantd (Kin-t’t).” At first there were 
about 100 sanghdrdmas in this city; the priests were grave 


96 


3 Or, the stone or kernel. The be addressed to the other priests, 


Karmmadana is the steward of the 
convent. 

36 ‘This passage is obscure, and 
the translation I give is nut in 
agreement with M. Julien’s, He 
makes the words of the Sthavira to 


and not to the messenger from the 
king. It appears to me that they 
were made in reply to the king’s 
message, and include in them a 
promised anticipation of the king’s 
recovery. 


BOOK VIII.] NAGARJUNA. 97 


and learned, and of high moral character. The scholars 
among the heretics were silent anddumb. But afterwards, 
when that generation of priests had died out, their suc- 
cessors were not equal to those gone before. Then the 
teachers of the heretics, during the interval, cave themselves 
to earnest study with a view to the mastery. Whereupon 
they summoned their partisans, numbering 1000 to 10,000, 
to assemble together within the priest’s precincts, and 
then they addressed them saying, with a loud voice, 
“Strike loudly the ghanté and summon all the learned 
men; let the foolish ones also stop and dispute; if we are 
wrong, let them overthrow us” (or, to overthrow their 
errors). 

They then addressed the king and asked him to decide 
between the weak and the strong. And now the heretical 
masters were men of high talent and marked learning; the 
priests, although numerous, were weak in their points of 
verbal discussion. 

The heretics said, “ We have got the victory; from this 
time forth let no savghdrdma dare to sound the ghantd to 
call together a congregation.” The king confirmed this 
result of the discussion, and, in agreement with it, bound 
the priests to the penalty. They on their part retired 
with shame and chagrin, For twelve years the ghantd was 
not sounded. 

At this time lived (Na-kia-’o-la-chu-na) Nagdrjuna 
Bédhisattva in Southern India, as a youth of high renown 
for scholarship. When grown up he assumed a lofty title. 
Giving up his home and its pleasures, he practised himself 
in the acquisition of the deepest and most excellent 
principle of learning, and arrived at the first earth (the 
Jirst degree). He had a great disciple called (Ti-po) Déva, 
a man illustrious for wisdom and spiritual energy. This 
man, arousing himself to action, said, “At Vaisali the 
followers of learning (Buddhist learners) have been 
defeated.in argument by the heretics, and now for twelve 
years, days, and months together, they have not.sounded 

VOL, I. G 


98 | RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook vm. 


the ghantd. I am bold enough to wish to overturn 
the mountain of heresy and to light the torch of-true 
religion.” 

Nagarjuna replied, “The heretics of Vaisali are singu- 
larly learned; you are no match for them. I will go 
myself.” 

Déva said, “In order to trample down some rotten 
stems why should we overthrow a mountain? Iam bold 
enough to think that by the instructions I have received 
I can silence all the heretics. But let my master assume 
the side of the heretics, and I will refute you according to 
the points of the thesis; and according as the question is 
decided, let my purpose to go or not be settled.” 

Then Nagarjuna took the side of the heretics, and Déva 
set himself to overthrow his arguments, After seven days 
Nagarjuna lost his superiority (was defeated), and said 
with a sigh, “False positions are easily lost; erroneous 
doctrines are defended with difficulty. You yourself can 
go; you will overthrow those men.” 

Déva Bodhisattva’s early reputation being known fo 
the heretics of Vaiéali, they forthwith called an assembly, 
and went at once to the king, saying, “ Maharaja! you 
formerly condescended to attend to us and bind the 
Sramanas, not to sound the ghanfd. We pray you issue 
an order that no foreign Sramana be allowed to enter the 
city, lest they should combine together to bring about an 
alteration in the former law.” The king consented to 
their request, and gave strict orders to his officers to carry 
it out (to spy narrowly). 

Déva having come to the city, was not able to enter it ; 
having understood the order, he made arrangements to 
change his garments, and wrapped up his kashdya robe 
in a bundle of grass (shrubs); then tucking up his gar- 
ments, he went straight on with his bundle on his back, 
and entered the city, Having come to the middle of the 
city, he threw away his grass bundle, put on his robes, 
and came to this savghdrdma, intending to stop there, 


BOOK vill.] DEVA SOUNDS THE GHANTA. 99 


Knowing few people there, he had no place to lodge, and 
so he took up his night’s rest in the Ghanté Tower, and 
at early dawn he struck it (the Gad) with all his 
might. 

The people hearing it, on investigating the matter, 
found that the stranger of yesternight was a travelling 
Bhikshu. Forthwith all the sanghdrdmas repeated the 
sounds (of the ghantda). 

The king hearing the noise, and inquiring about it 
closely, could not ascertain the origin of it all; coming to 
this saighdrdma, they at length charged Déva with the 
deed. Déva answering said, “The ghantd is struck to 
assemble the congregation; if it is not used for that pur- 
pose, what use is it?” 

The king’s people answered, “In former days the con- 
gregation of priests having been defeated in argument, it 
was decided the ghantd should not be sounded any more, 
and this is twelve years since.” 

Déva said, “Is it so? Nevertheless, I venture to sound 
afresh the drum of the law.” . 

The messenger told the king saying, “There is a strange 
Sramana who wishes to wipe out the former disgrace (of 
the priests.” i 

Then the king assembled fie men of learning (the 
Buddhists), and ‘said, by way of decree, “Whoever is 
-defeated shall die, as a proof of his inferiority.” 

Then the heretics came together with their flags and 
drums, and began to discuss together with respect to 
their opinions ; each displayed the point of his argument 
to his best ability. Then Déva Bodhisattva, having 
mounted the preaching-throne, attending to their former 
arguments, and following each point, refuted them one 
by one. In less than one hour he refuted the sectaries, 
and the king and his ministers being satisfied, raised this 
venerable monument in honour of his extreme virtue 
(reverence). 

To the north of the stdépa built where the ghantd was 


100 =©©RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vin. 


sounded is an old foundation. This was the dwelling- 
place of a Brahman that was inspired by demons. At 
the beginning there was in this city a Brahman who 
had constructed for himself a hut in a wild and desert 
spot far from the haunts of men; he sacrificed to demons, 
seeking religious merit. By the assistance of such 
spiritual connection he discoursed in a high tone and 
disputed with eagerness. The report (echo) of his elo- 
quent discourses resounded through the world. If any 
one came to propose a difficult question, he answered 
him after letting down a curtain. Old men of learning 
and of high talent could not wrest from him his pre- 
cedence. Officers and people were silenced in his pre- 
sence, and looked on him as a saint. At this time lived 
Agvaghésha Bodhisattva ('O-sht-po-kiu-sha-pu-sa).*7 
His wisdom embraced all subjects, and in his career he 
had traversed the arguments of the three Vehicles (Zitéle, 
Great, and Middle Vehiele?). He constantly spoke (about 
the Bréhman) thus: “This Brahman is learned without 
a master; he is skilful without examining the ancients ; 
he lives apart in the gloomy desert, and arrogates a great 
name. It is all done by the connivance of the evil - 
spirits and the assistance of occult powers; this is the 
way he does it! Men, therefore, on account of his elo- 
quence derived from the devil, are unable to reply, and 
exalt his renown and say he is invincible. I will go 
to his place, and see what all this means, and expose 
it.” 

Forthwith he went to his cabin and addressed him 
thus: “Ihave long felt respect for your illustrious quali- 
ties; pray keep up your curtain whilst I venture to 


3? Translated into Chinese by 


posed hymns for Buddhist worship 
Ma-ming, “the voice of the horse.” 


{op. cit., p. 141), Nagarjuna also 


For some remarks respecting him, 
see Abstract of Four Lectures, p. 95 
ss. He is spoken of as the twelfth 
Buddhist patriarch. According to 
Tibetan accounts, he is the same as 
MAtrijeta (mother-child), who com- 


was a poet, and composed a work 
called Suhrid lékha (or likh), which 
he dedicated to his patron, Sadvaha, 
king of Southern Kosala (J-ésing, k. 
iv. fol. 5 b.) 


BOOK VIII.] ASVAGHOSHA. IoI 


express my mind to you.” But the Brahman, maintaining 
an air of proud indifference, let down his curtain in 
order to reply, and to the end would not face his 
adversary. 

Aégvaghésha feeling in his heart the presence of the 
evil spirits, his feelings revolted, and he finished the 
discussion ; but as he retired he said, “J have found 
him out, and he shall be overthrown.’ Going straight- 
way to the king, he said, “Pray condescend to permit 
me to propose a subject and discuss it with that lay- 
doctor!” 

The king, hearing the request, said with feeling, “Do 
you know your man? Unless well learned in the three 
vidyds and in the six supernatural faculties, who can 
discuss with him?” Giving permission, he himself or- 
dered his chariot in order to be present during the discus- 
sion, and to decide as to the victory. 

Then Agvaghésha discoursed on the minute words of 
the three Pitakas, and alluded to the great principles of 
the five Vidyds, and nicely divided the length and breadth 
of his argument with a high and various discourse. Then 
the Brahman following in the argument, Agvaghésha 
said, “You have lost the thread of the subject. You 
must follow my points consecutively.” ; 

The Brahman then was silent and closed his mouth. 

Aévaghdésha finding fault, said, “ Why do you not solve 
the difficulty? Call the spirits to your help to give you 
words as quickly as you can;” and then he lifted up his 
curtain to see how he looked. 

The Brahman, terrified, cried out, “ Stop! stop!” 

Aévaghésha, retiring, said, “This doctor has forfeited 
his high renown. ‘A hollow fame lasts not long, as the 
saying is.” 

The king answered and said, “ Without the eminent 
ability of a master, who can detect the errors of the 
ignorant! The acumen of the person who knows men 
casts honour on his ancestors, and shuts out possibility of 


102 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vit. 


superiority among his successors. The country has a 
standing rule that such a person should ever be honoured 
and remembered.” 

Leaving the south-west angle of the city and going 
about 200 1i,8 there is an old ruined sanghdrdma, by the 
side of which is a stépa which from time to time reflects 
a divine light and displays many miracles. This place is 
frequented by crowds from a distance and near by, who 
offer up their prayers®® in worship. There are traces 
where the four past Buddhas sat and walked to and fro. 

To the south-west of the old sanghdrdmea about 100 li 
is the sarghdérdma of Tiladaka (Ti-lo-shi-kia).° This 
building has four halls, belvideres of three stages, high 
towers, ‘connected at intervals with double gates that open 
inwards (deeply). It was built by the last descendant 


of Bimbis&ra-raja (Pin-pi-sha-lo). 
high talent and exalted the virtuous. 


different cities and scholars 


38 In the French translation the 
distance given is 200 paces. The 
text does not require the distance 
of 200 li to be reckoned in a south- 
westerly direction from the city; 
the construction, indeed, is unusual, 
and it is possible that the symbol yu 
(corner) is an error for hing (going); 
but as it stands, the text reads, 
“about two hundred li (from) the 
south-west angle of the city there 
is,” &c. If the text be correct, some 
of the difficulties noticed by Cun- 
ningham (Ane. Geog. of Ind., p. 456) 
will be explained. 

39 Make their requests i in worship. 
Whatever the theory is as to the 
possibility of prayer in the Buddhist 
religion, the fact remains that prayer 
was offered up. 

# So Cunningham restores it. 
And the symbol shz may represent 
da asin Chandaka. It might also 
be made to represent Darsika, and 
as the last descendant of Bimbisara- 
raja was Naga-dasaka, I thought at 
one time that this might be the right 
restoration. But IJ-tsing gives Zi- 
to-ch’a as an alternative reading 


He made much of 
Learned men from 
from distant countries flock 


¢ 

(Nan hae, k. iv. fol. 12 b.), which 
can only represent Tilada (as in 
Man ch’a for Mandaka, &c.) This 
monastery of ,Tiladaka was three 
yéjanas west of Nalanda, or about 
twenty-one miles (Vie de H. 7, p. 
211). In this last passage Hiuen 
Tsiang notices that there was an 
eminent priest called Prajhabhadra 
residing in this monastery when he 
visited it. When I-tsing was there 
a few years later, there was a priest 
called Prajiiachandra there. Prof. 
Max Miiller by some mistake has 
placed this temple of Tiladaka in 
Surat (India, p. 312), and he speaks 
of it as Si-ra-chu, but it is not so in 
I-tsing. 

| Or Vimbasiira, juice of the 
Bimba’ (Bryonia grandis), (see ante, 
p. 85) his descendant Nagadagaka, 
who appears to have preceded the 
nine Nandas; he seems to be the same 
as Mahé-Nandin. Conf. R. David’s 
Numis. Orient., pp. 50 and 45. Is 
he the same as Kalaséka? Lassen, 
Ind. Alt,, vol. i. p. 859, and Ank,, p. 
xxxviii, 


BOOK VIII] CLOUD-STONE MOUNTAIN. 103 
4 


together in crowds, and reaching so far, abide in this 
sanghirdma. There are 1000 priests in it who study the 
Great Vehicle. In the road facing the middle gate there 
are three vihdras, above which are placed the connected 
succession of metal rings (circles) with bells suspended in 
the air; below they are constructed storey above storey, 
from the bottom to the top. They are surrounded by 
railings, and the doors, windows, the pillars, beams, and 
staircases are all carved with gilt copper in relief, and 
in the intervals highly decorated. The middle vihdra 
contains an erect image of Buddha about thirty feet high. 
On the left is an image of Tara (7o-/o) Bodhisattva ; * on 
the right, one of Avalékitésvara (Kwan-tsz’-tsai) Béd- 
hisattva. Each of these images is made of metallic 
stone; their spiritually composed appearance inspires a 
mysterious awe, and their influence is felt from far (or, 
spreads far). In each vihdra there is a measure of relics 
which emit a supernatural brilliancy, and from time to 
time shed forth miraculous indications. 

To the south-west of the Tiladaka savghdrdma about 90 
li we come to a great mountain of blue-clouded (variegated) 
marble,“ dark and tangled with wood. Here the divine 
Rishis dwell; poisonous snakes and savage dragons in- 
habit their dens, whilst numerous beasts and birds of prey 
‘dwell in the forests. On the top is a large and remark- 
able rock, on which is built a stépa about ten feet or so 
high. This is the place where Buddha entered on ecstatic 
meditation. Of old, when Tathigata descended as a spirit 
(to be born), he rested on this rock, and entered here 
the samddhi called “ perfectly destroyed,” and passed the 


night so. Then the Dévas 


# Tra, said to be a female deity 
of Tibetan origin, worshipped by the 
followers of the Yégachara school 
(Eitel). TarAvatt is also a form of 
Durga. Ind. Ant., vol. x. p. 273. 

43 Yun shih is “variegated marble” 
(cloud-stone). Whether this be the 
meaning in the text it is difficult to 
say. Julien gives “enveloped with 


and spiritual saints offered 


dark clouds.’’ This may be so; the 
original is literally, ‘“ cloud-rock- 
dark-tangled.” 

4 The phrase Kiang shin, de- 
scend spiritually, is generally ap- 
plied to the incarnation of Buddha ; 
in this passage, however, it may 
simply mean “descended as a 
spirit,” 


104 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [ook vill. 


their offerings to Tathigata, and sounded the drums and 
heavenly music, and rained down great flowers, Tatha- 
gata leaving his ecstasy, the Dévas all reverenced him, 
and raised a stdpa composed of gold, silver, and precious 
stones. Now so long time has elapsed since then, that 
the precious substances are changed into stone. No one 
has visited the spot for ages; but looking at the mountain 
from a distance, one can see different kinds of beasts and 
snakes turning round it to the right. The Dévas and 
Rishis and spiritual saints accompany them in a body, 
praising and worshipping. 

On the eastern summit of the mountain there is a 
stipa. Here Tathagata formerly stood for a time behold- 
ing the country of Magadha. 

To the north-west of the mountain 30 li or so, on a de- 
clivity of the mountain, is a sanghdrdma, itis flanked by a 
high precipice, and the lofty walls and towers stand up in in- 
tervals of the rocks. The priests are about fifty in number, 
who all study the great Vehicle. This is the place where 
Gunamati (Kiu-na-mo-ti) Bodhisattva overcame the here- 
tic. In the early time there was in this mountain a heretic 
called MAadhava(Mo-ta-po), who at first followed the law of 
the Sankhyé (Seng-kie) system, and practised the acquire- 
ment of wisdom. He had studied to the bottom the doctrine 
of “the extreme void,” as found in the orthodox and errone- 
ous (books). His fame was great, and surpassed that of 
former teachers, and outweighed all then living. The king 
honoured him exceedingly, and named him “the treasure 
of the country.” The ministers and people regarded him 
with admiration, and spoke of him as “the teacher of the 
household.” The learned men of the neighbouring coun- 
tries acknowledged his merits and honoured his virtue, 
and compared him to the most eminent of his prede- 
cessors; a man, verily! highly accomplished. He had as 
his means of subsistence two towns of the district, and 
the surrounding houses paid him for the privilege of build- 
ing (tenant dues ?). 


BOOK VII. ] GUNAMATI. 105 


At this time in Southern India there lived Gunamati*® 
Bédhisattva, who in his youth had displayed great talents 
and acquired in early life a brilliant reputation. By close 
study he had penetrated the meaning of the three Pitakas, 
and investigated the four truths.° Hearing that Madhava 
discussed on the most mysterious and subtle questions, he 
desired to humble him by overcoming him (in argument). 
He ordered one of his followers to carry a letter thus 
written (to his adversary): “I have heard with all respect 
of Madhava’s virtuous ease. You must now, without 
thought of fatigue, take up again your ancient studies, for 
in three years’ time I intend to overthrow your brilliant 
reputation.” 

And so in the second and third years he sent a messen- 
ger with the same tidings; and now when he was about 
to go to meet him, he again wrote a letter, saying: “The 
appointed period has expired ; your studies, such as they 
are, I am now coming (¢o investigate); you ought to know 
the fact.” 

Madhava now was alarmed, and gave orders to his dis- 
ciples and to the inhabitants of the towns:*7 “From this 
time forth give no hospitality to the Sramana heretics; let 
this order be generally known and obeyed.” 

At this time Gunamati Bédhisattva, with his staff in 
hand, arrived at the town of Madhava. The people who 
guarded the town, in agreement to the order, would give 
him no hospitality.“6 The Brihmans, moreover, deriding 
him, said, “ What mean you by your shaven head and 
your singular dress? Begone from this! there is no place 
here for you to stop.” 


© Translated by the Chinese “ vir- 
tue and wisdom” (Tih hirut). 

46 The four truths, the founda- 
tion of the Buddhist dogma, are— 
(1) the truth of “suffering” (duh- 
kha) ; (2) the increase or accumula- 
tion of misery from the passions 
(samudaya) ; (3) the extinction or 
destruction of suffering is possible 


(nirédha) ; (4) the way or means 
(mdrga). See Childers, Pali Dict., 
sub voc. Ariyasaccam ; Burnouf, 
Lotus, p. 5173 Manual of Budhism, 
p- 496 ; also Julien én loco, n. 1. 

47 That is, the two towns he held 
in feoffment. 

# Would have no intercourse with 
him. 


106 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book Vit. 


Gunamati Bodhisattva desiring to overthrow the here- 
tic, sought to remain the night in the town, and so he 
said with gentle words, “ You, in pursuing your worldly 
studies, observe a pure conduct. I also, in studying higher 
truth, observe a pure line of conduct. Our life being 
alike,° why do you exclude me?” 

But the Brahmans would have no words with him, and 
only drove him from the place. Leaving the town, he 
went into a great forest in which savage beasts prowled 
about to destroy all passers-by. At this time there was a 
faithful brother *! who, fearing (the risk he ran from) the 
beasts and the prickly thorns, hastened to him, staff in 
hand. Having met him, he said to the Bédhisattva, ‘In 
Southern India there is a Bédhisattva called Gunamati, of 
far-spread renown ; because this man wants to come here to 
discuss principles of belief, the master of the town, being 
afraid of him and his fame, has strictly enjoined to give 
no shelter to the Sramanas, and because I am afraid lest 
some accident should happen to him, I have come to 
accompany him in his journey, and to assure him of 
safety (that he may rest free from fear of the other).” 

Gunamati replied, “ Most kind believer, I am Guna- 
mati.” The disciple having heard this, with the greatest 
reverence replied to Gunamati thus: “If what you say 
be true, you must go quickly (onwards).” Leaving the 
deep forest, they stopped awhile on the open plain; the 
faithful believer, following with his torch (?) and holding 
his bow, kept guard on the right and left. The (first) 
division of the night being past, he addressed Gunamati 
and said, “Jt is better for us to go, lest men, knowing that 
you have come, should plot together to kill you.” 

Gunamati, expressing his gratitude, said, “I dare not 
disobey you!” On this, following him, they came to the 
king’s palace and said to the door-keeper, there is a 

49 They were both men of “pure is explained by “a pure-lived man.” 
conduct.” The expression “ pure "0 As we both aim at pure con- 


brother” is applied to the Buddhist duct. 
convert. The word Brahman also ‘1 A pure believer 


BOOK VIII.] DEATH OF MADHAVA. 107 


Sramana here who has come from a distance; he prays the 
king to agree in condescension to permit him to discuss 
with Madhava, 

The king hearing the news, moved by his feelings, said, 
“This man is bereft of reason,” and then he ordered an 
officer to go to the place where Madhava was, with this 
royal order: “There is a foreign Sramana come here who 
seeks to discuss with you. I have now ordered the hall 
for the discussion to be prepared and watered; I have told 
those in the neighbourhood and far off to await the usual 
arrangements after your coming. Pray condescend to come 
forthwith.” 

Madhava asked the messenger of the king, “ This surely 
is the doctor Gunamati of South India.” “Yes,” he said, 
“it is he.” 

Madhava hearing this, his heart was very sad, but as he 
could not well avoid the difficulty, he set out for the hall 
of discussion, where the king, the ministers, and the people 
were all assembled desiring to hear this great controversy. 
Gunamati first laid down the principles of his school, and 
continued his speech till the setting of the sun. Then 
Madhava excusing himself on account of his age and 
infirmities, to defer his answer, asked permission to retire 
and meditate. He would then return and answer every 
objection (difficulty) in order®? At the early morn he 
returned and ascended the throne, and so they went on to 
the sixth day, but on that day he vomited blood-and died. 
When on the point of death he gave this command to his 
wife, “You have high talent; do not forget the affront 
paid to me.” When Madhava was dead, she concealed 
the fact and had no funeral ceremonies; and clothing 
herself in shining apparel, she entered forthwith the 
assembly where the discussion was held, and a general 
clamour was raised as the people said one to another, 
“Madhava, who boasted of his talents, is unable to reply 


52 This sentence appears to be explain the language used by Guna- 
parenthetical, and is introduced to mati. 


108 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [nook vill. 


to Gunamati, and so he sends his wife to make up for his 
' deficiency.” 

Gunamati, addressing the wife, said, “He who could 
bind you, has been bound by me.” 

MAdhava’s wife, seeing the difficulty, retired. The king - 
then said, “ What secret words are these at which she 
remains silent ?” 

Gunamati said, “Alas! Madhava is dead! and his 
wife desires to come and discuss with me!” 

The king said, “How know you this? Pray explain it 
to me.” 

Then Gunamati said, “ When the wife came her face 
was pale as death, and her words were toned in bitter 
enmity. I knew therefore that Madhava is dead! ‘Able 
to bind you,’ is a phrase applicable to her husband.” 

The king having sent a messenger to verify the state- 
ment, he found it even so; then the king in gratitude said, 
“The law of Buddha is a mysterious one! Eminent sages 
succeed one ancther without interruption ; with no pdtsonal 
object they guard themselves in wisdom and use their 
secret knowledge for the purpose of converting (¢ransform- 
ing the world). According to the old rules of the country 
the praises of such a sage (07, of your virtue) should be 
ever celebrated.” 

Gunamati replied, “Whatever poor talents I have, I 
"reserve them for the benefit of all that lives; and when 
I would draw them to the truth first of all I subdue 
their pride, then use the influences of converting power. 
Now then, in this case, O king, let the descendants of 
Madhava’s territory for a thousand generations employ 
themselves in the service of a satghdréma. Your in- 
structions will extend, then, from age to age, and your 
reputation will be immortal. Persons of a pure faith, 
conscious of protection, their religious merit will benefit 
the country for ages. They will be nonrished as the priests 
are, and go the faithful will be encouraged to honour their 
virtue.” 


BOOK VII1.] GUNAMATI'S SERVANT. 109 


On this he founded the savghdrdma to celebrate the 
victory. 

At first, after the defeat of Madhava, six Brihmans 
(pure-lived men), fleeing to the frontiers, told the heretics 
of the reverse they had suffered, and they selected men 
of eminent talent with a view hereafter to wipe out their 
disgrace. 

The king having a sincere respect for Gunamati, went 
in person, and addressed the following invitation to him: 
“Now the heretics, not measuring their strength aright, 
have plotted together, and dare to sound the drum of 
discussion. Pray, sir, condescend to crush these 
heretics.” 

Gunamati replied, “ Let those who wish to discuss 
come together!” 

Then the learned men among the heretics were re- 
joiced,-and said, “We shall be sure of the victory to- 
day!” The heretics then laid down their principles with 

energy for the purpose of opening the discussion. 

Gunamati Bédhisattva replied, “Now those heretics 
who fled from the difficulty they were in of obeying the 
king’s command, these are mean men. What have I to 
do to discuss with and answer such persons?” Then he 
added, “ There is a young servant here by the pulpit who 
has been accustomed.to listen to these discussions. He 
is well acquainted with abstract questions from attending 
by my side and listening to the high language of the 
disputants.” 

Then Gunamati, leaving the pulpit, said to the ser- 
vant, “Take my place, and carry on the discussion.” 
Then all the assembly was moved with astonishment at 
this extraordinary proceeding: But the servant, sitting 
by the pulpit, immediately proceeded to examine the 
difficulties proposed. Huis arguments were clear like the 
water that wells from the fountain, and his points were 
true as the sound of the echo. After three replies the 
heretics were defeated, and once more they were obliged 


110 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [ook vu. 


to hide their disgrace and clip their wings, From this 
time forth the savghdrdma enjowed the endowment of 
the town and dwellings, 

South-west of the convent of Gunamati about 20 li we 
come to a solitary hill on which is a convent called (the 
swnghdrdma of) Silabhadra (Shi-lo-po-t’o-lo)2® This is 
the convent which the master of Sdstras after his victory 
caused to be built out of the funds of a village which 
were given up. It stands by the side of a single sharp 
crag like a stipa. It contains some sacred relics of 
Buddha. This master of sdstras belonged to the family of 
the king of Samatata (San-mo-ta-ch’a), and was of the 
Brahman caste. He loved learning and had gained a 
wide reputation. Travelling through the Indies to exa- 
mine into and seek after religious truth, he came to this 
kingdom, and in the sasighdrdma of N&landa (Na-lan-t’o) 
he encountered Dharmapala Bédhisattva (Hu-fa-pu-sa), 
Hearing him explain the law, his understanding was 
opened, and he requested to become a disciple He 
inquired into the most subtle questions,» and investi- 
gated the way of deliverance to its conclusion; and thus 
having reached the highest point of intelligence, he estab- 


53 In Chinese, Kiai hien, “ the sage 
of moral conduct.” 
54 To assume the soiled or coloured 


name translated by Kumarajiva, and 
recited by Fa-hian at the Vulture 
Peak near MRaéjagriha); it was 


robes of a mendicant. 

55 He inquired as to “the ex- 
treme point of the end of all.” This 
idea of “a terminal fixed point of 
all things” (yih-tsai-sse kau-keng 
kin-ku) corresponds to the Sanskrit 
dhruva, and may be rendered “ final 
truth.” It is the name of a Sama- 
dhi; it is also used as a definition 
of Nirvdna ; it is the formal definie 
tion of the title of a well-known 
Buddhist stra, the S‘urangama. In 
this connection it denotes the inves- 
tigation of the highest (mystical) 
truth. This sdtra was written at 
Nalanda ; it was probably the work 
of Dharmapala (it must not be con- 
fused with another work of the same 


brought to China and _ translated 
AD. 705. In the commentary 
(k. viii. fol. 30 b) it is said, “ This 
sdtra was brought from India and 
belongs to the Mdrdhabhishikta 
school (Aun tengy pu). According 
to Colebrooke (Essays, p. 272), the 
Mardhibhishiktas were a mixed 
class sprung from a Bréhmana and a 
Kshatriya girl. The school named, 
therefore, was probably founded on 
a mixture of Brahman and Buddhist. 
doctrine. Now Nalanda was espe- 
cially a place of study both for the 
Brahmanical and Buddhist books 
(Edkins, Chinese Buddhism, p. 289). 
This school, therefore, probably origi- 
nated there. 


BOOK VIII. ] SILABHADRA. 5 II 


lished his fame over men of his time, even to distant 
countries. 

There was a heretic of South India who delighted in 
examining profound questions and searching out hidden 
matters, in penetrating obscure and abstruse points of 
doctrine. Hearing of Dharmapila’s fame, the pride of 
self rose up within him, and, moved by profound envy, he 
passed over mountains and rivers in order to sound the 
drum and seek discussion, He said, “I am a man of 
Southern India. It is reported that in the king’s country 
there is a great master of sdstras;*’ I aim but ignorant, 
yet I would wish to discuss with him.” 

“Tt is true, as you affirm,” the king said; and forthwith 
he sent a messenger to ask Dharmapala thus: “ There is a 
heretic of Southern India who has come from a long dis- 
tance here, and desires to discuss with you. Will you 
condescend to come to the hall of assembly and discuss 
with him ?” 

Dharmapala having heard the tidings, gathered up his 
garments and went, “whilst Silabhadra and the inferior 
disciples surrounded him as he advanced. Then Sila- 
bhadra (the chief disciple) addressed him thus: “ Whither 
goest thou so quickly?” Dharmapala answered, “Since 
the sun of wisdom went down,** and only the lamp of the 
inherited doctrine burns quietly, the heretics like clouds 
of ants and bees have risen ; therefore I am now going to 
crush that one in discussion.” 

Silabhadra said, “As I have myself attended at various 
discussions, let me destroy this heretic.” Dharmapala, 
knowing his history, allowed him to have his way. 

At this time Silabhadra was just thirty years old. The 
assembly, despising his youth, feared that it would be 
difficult for him alone to undertake the discussion. Dhar- 
mapala knowing that the mind of his followers was 


56 To sound the drum is an ex- (note I, p. 453) to ue equivalent to 
pression for a challenge to discuss Mahdvadi. 
the law. 53 That is, dines the death of 
57 Ta lun sse, explained by Julien Buddha. 


112 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox vit. 


disturbed, hastened to relieve them and said, “In honouring 
the conspicuous talent of a person we do not say, ‘He has 
cut his teeth’ (count his years according to his teeth). As 1 
see the case before us now, I feel sure that he will defeat 
the heretic; he is strong enough.” : 

On the day of discussion (assembly for discussion) the 
people came together from far and near; both old and 
young in numbers assembled. Then the heretical teacher 
on his part laid open his case with great emphasis, and 
penetrated to the utmost the abstruse points (of his argu- 
ment). Silabhadra followed his arguments (principles), 
and refuted them by profound and subtle allegations. 
The heretic, his words being exhausted, was covered with 
shame and retired. : 

The king, in order to reward the virtue (of Sétlabhadra), 
gave him the revenues of this town as a bequest. The 
master of Sdstras, declining the offer, said, “A master who 
wears the garments of religion (dyed garments) knows 
how to be contented with little and to keep himself pure. 
What would he do with a town?” 

The king in reply said, “The King of the Law has 
passed into the obscure (abode), and the vessel of wisdom 
has been engulfed in the stream. If there are no distinc- 
tions now made (between the learned and ignorant), then 
no eneouragement is given to the scholar to press forward 
in the attainment of religion. Pray, of your pity, accept 
my offering.” 

The doctor, not persisting in his refusal, accepted the 
town and built this sarghdrdma, vast and magnificent, and 
endowed it with the revenues of the town,®® as a means of 
providing it with the offerings necessary for religious service. 

Going to the south-west of the savghdrdma of Sila- 
bhadra about 40 or 50 li, and crossing the Nairaiijana® 

59 Of the houses of thetown. I ® This river is now called Phalgu; 
understand it to mean the revenues the name Lilajan or Nilafijana is con- 
of the sazighdrdma were derivedfrom fined to the western branch, which 
the rentals of the place; not that joins the Mohani five miles above 


the people or the inhabitants were Gay& (Cunningham, Ane. Geog., 
bound to the service of the priests. p. 457). 


BOOK VIII] MOUNT GAYA. 113 


river we come to the town of Gayé.! This town is 
naturally strong (situated amid crags or precipices). It 
has but few inhabitants; there are about 1000 families of 
Brahmans only; they are the offspring (successors) of a 
Rishi. The king does not regard them as vassals and the 
people everywhere highly respect them. 

To the north of the town 30 li or so there is a pure 
fountain of water. The tradition handed down in India is 
that it is called “holy water;” all who bathe or drink 
thereof are cleansed from whatever defilement of sin they 
have. 

To the south-west of the town 5 or 6 li we come to 
Mount Gaya (Kia-ye), with its sombre valley, streams, and 
steep and dangerous crags. In India the name commonly 
given to this is the divine (spiritual) mountain. From 
old days it has been the custom for the ruling sovereign 
when he comes to the throne, with a view to conciliate his 
subjects at a distance and to cause his renown to exceed 
previous generations, to ascend (this mountain) and declare 
his succession with accompanying ceremonies (religious 
ceremonies). On the top of the mountain is a stéipa about 
100 feet high, which was built by Asédka-raja. Divine 
prodigies are exhibited by it, and a sacred effulgency often 
shines from it. In old days Tathagata here delivered the 
P’ao-yun ™ and other sutras. 


To the south-east of Mount Gaya is a stdya. This is 
the spot where KAsyapa (Kia-she-po) was born. To the 


south of this stvpa are two others. These are the spots 
where Gayakasyapa (Kia-ye-kia-she-po) and Nadik4s- 
yapa (Nai-ti-kia-she-po) sacrificed as fire-worshippers.® 


81 Now called Brahma-Gay4 to 
distinguish it from Bauddha-Gaya, 
the place where Buddha reached 
enlightenment. The distance from 
Patna to Gaya is 60 miles by the 
highroad, about 70 by the route 
of Hiuen Tsiang. We do not know 
the direction of the “old convent,” 
200 li from Patna, and therefore 
cannot test the correctness of Hiuen 


VOL. II. 


Tsiang’s figures, 

®& Restored to Ratnamégha Sttra 
by Julien. 

6&3 For an account of the three 
Kagyapas and their conversion see 
Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, varga 16, 
vv. 1304 ss. For the scene of the 
“fire grot” see Zree and Serpent 
Worship, pl. xxiv. fig. 1. 


H 


114 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vill. 


To the east of the place where Gaydkisyapa sacrificed 
to fire, crossing a great river, we come to a mountain called 
Pragbédhi (Po-lo-ki-po-ti). Tathigata, after diligently 
seeking for six years and not yet obtaining supreme wis- 
dom, after this gave up his penance and accepted the rice- 
milk (of Sujatd). As he went to the north-east he saw 
this mountain that it was secluded and dark, whereupon 
he desired to seek enlightenment thereon. Ascending the 
north-east slope and coming to the top, the earth shook 
and the mountain: quaked, whilst the mountain Déva in 
terror spake thus to Bédhisattva: “This mountain is not 
the fortunate spot for attaining supreme wisdom. If here 
you stop and engage in the ‘Samadhi of diamond, © the 
earth will quake and gape and the mountain be over- 
thrown upon you.” 

Then Bédhisattva descended, and half-way down the 
south-west slope he halted. There, backed by the. crag 
and facing a torrent, is a great stone chamber. Here he 
sat down cross-legged. Again the earth quaked and the 
mountain shook. Then a Déva of the pure abode (Sud- 
dhavdsas) cried out in space, “This is not the place fora 
Tathagata to perfect supreme wisdom. From this south- 
west 14 or 15 li, not far from the place of penance, there 
is a Pippala (Pi-po-lo) tree under which is ‘a diamond 
throne.’ ® All the past Buddhas seated on this throne 
have obtained true enlightenment, and so will those yet 
to come. Pray, then, proceed to that spot.” % 

Then Bodhisattva, rising up, the dragon dwelling in the 
cave said, “ This cave is pure and excellent. Here you 


64 In Chinese Tsin-ching-kio- 


86 Vajrisana, an imperishable 
shan, i.e, “the mountain leading to 


throne. It was supposed to be the 


(before) perfect intelligence.” When 
Tathagata was about to attain to 
enlightenment he first ascended this 
mountain ; hence the name. 

Se Vajra samddhi, because it 
penetrates all conditions of being 


(fa). 


centre of the earth, and the spot 
where all the Buddhas arrived at 
complete wisdom. 

87 The whole of this passage is 
spoken by the Déva, Julien trans- 
lates it differently, 


BOOK VII1.] THE BODHI TREE. 115 


may accomplish the holy (atm). Would that of your ex- 
ceeding love you would not leave me.” 

Then Bodhisattva having discovered that this was not 
the place for accomplishing his aim, to appease the dra- 
gon, he left him his shadow and departed. The Dévas going 
before, led the way, and accompanied him to the Bédhi 
tree. When Agdka-rija came into power, he signalised 
each spot up and down this mountain which Bédhisattva 
had passed, by erecting distinguishing posts and stdpas. 
These, though of different sizes, yet:are alike in spiri- 
tual manifestations. Sometimes flowers fall on them from 
heaven; sometimes a bright light illumines the dark val- 
leys. Every year, on the day of breaking up the season of 
Wass (Varshds), religious laymen from different countries 
ascend this mountain for the purpose of making religious 
offerings to the faithful. They stop one night and return. 

Going south-west from Mount Prigbddhi about 14 or 
15 li, we come to the Bodhi tree. It is surrounded by a 
brick wall (@ wall of piled bricks) of considerable height, 
steep and strong. It is long from east to west, and short 
from north to south. It is about 500 paces round. Rare 
trees with their renowned flowers connect their shade and 
cast their shadows; the delicate sha ® herb and different 
shrubs carpet the soil. The principal gate opens to the 
east, opposite the Nairaiijani river. The southern gate 
adjoins a great flowery bank. The western side is blocked 

up and difficult of access (steep and strong), The northern 
' gate opens into the great saighdrdma. Within the sur- 
rounding wall the sacred traces touch one another in all 
directions. Here there are stipas, in another place vikdras, 
The kings, princes, and great personages throughout all 
Jambudvipa, who have accepted the bequeathed teaching 
as handed down to them, have erected these monuments 
as memorials. 

In the middle of the enclosure surrounding the Bédhi 


6 The Sha Uso is the Cyperus ivia of Linneus (Doolittle’s Landbock, 
li, 432). 


116 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox vut. 


tree is the diamond throne (Vajrdsana). In former days, 
when the Bhadra-kalpa was arriving at the period of per- 
fection (vivartta), when the great earth arose, this (throne) 
also appeared. It is in the middle of the great cheliocosm ; 
it goes down to the limits of the golden wheel (the gold 
circle), and upwards it is flush with the ground. It is 
composed of diamond. In circuit it is 100 paces or so. 
On this the thousand Buddhas of the Bhadra-kalpa have 
sat and entered the diamond Samddhi ; hence the name of 
the diamond throne. It is the place where the Budddas 
attain the holy path (the sacred way of Buddhahood). It 
“is also called the Bédkimanda. When the great earth 
is shaken, this place alone is unmoved. Therefore when 
Tathagata was about to reach the condition of enlighten- 
ment, and he went successively to the four angles of this 
enclosure, the earth shook and quaked; but afterwards 
coming to this spot, all was still and’at rest. From the 
time of entering on the concluding portion of the kalpa, 
when the true law dies out and disappears, the earth and 
dust begin to cover over this spot, and it will be no 
longer visible. 

After the Nirvdna of Buddha, the rulers of the different 
countries having learned by tradition the measurement of 
the diamond throne, decided the limits from north to south 
by two figures of Kwan-tsz’-tsai (Avalékitésvara) Bédhi- 
sattva, there seated and looking eastward. 

The old people say that “as soon as the figures of this 
Bodhisattva sink in the ground and disappear, the law of 
Buddha will come to an end.” The figure at the south 
angle is now buried up to its breast. The Bédhi tree 
above the diamond throne is the same as the Pippala tree. 
In old days, when Buddha was alive, it was several hundred 
feet high. Although it has often been injured by cutting, it 
still is 40 or §0 feet in height. Buddha sitting under this 
tree reached perfect wisdom, and therefore it is called the 
(Samyak sambédhi) tree of knowledge (Pu-ti-Bédhi). The 
bark is of a yellowish-white colour, the leaves and twigs 


BOOK VIII] THE BODHI TREE. 117 


of a dark green, The leaves wither not either in winter 
or summer, but they remain shining and glistening all the 
year round without change. But at every successive Mir- 
vdna-day (of the Buddhas) the leaves wither and fall, and 
then in a moment revive as before, On this day (of the 
Nirvana?) the princes of different countries and the reli- 
gious multitude from different quarters assemble by thou- 
sands and ten thousands unbidden, and bathe (the roots) 
with scented water and perfumed milk; whilst they raise 
the sounds of music and scatter flowers and perfumes, and 
whilst the light of day is continued by the burning torches, 
they offer their religious gifts. 

After the Mirvdna of Tathagata, when Agéka-raja began 
to reign, he was an unbeliever (a believer in heresy), and 
he desired to destroy the bequeathed traces of Buddha; so 
he raised an army, and himself taking the lead, he came 
here for the purpose of destroying (the tree). He cut 
through the roots; the trunk, branches, and leaves were 
all divided into small bits and heaped up in a pile a few 
tens of paces to the west of the place. Then he ordered 
a Brahman who sacrificed to fire to burn them in the dis- 
charge of his religious worship. Scarcely had the smoke 
cleared away, when lo! a double tree burst forth from the 
flaming fire, and because the leaves and branches were 
shining like feathers, it was called the “ashes bédhi tree.” 
As6ka-raja, seeing the miracle, repented of his crime. He 
bathed the roots (of the old tree) with perfumed milk to 
fertilise them, when lo! on the morning of the next day, 
the tree sprang up as before. The king, seeing the mira- 
culous portent, was overpowered with deep emotion, and 
himself offered religious gifts, and was so overjoyed that 
he forgot to return (fo the palace). The queen, who was 
an adherent of the heretics, sent secretly a messenger, 
who, after the first division of night, once more cut it down. 
Asoka-rija in the morning coming again to worship at 
the tree, seeing only the mutilated trunk, was filled with 
exceeding grief. With the utmost sincerity he prayed as 


118 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [book vit. 


he worshipped ; he bathed the roots with perfumed milk, 
and in less than a day again the tree was restored. 
The king, moved by deep reverence at the prodigy, sur- 
rounded the tree with a stone (brick) wall above 10 feet, 
which still remains visible. In late times SagAnka-raja 
(She-shang-kia), being a believer in heresy, slandered the 
religion of Buddha, and through envy destroyed the con- 
vents and cut down the Bédhi tree, digging it up to the 
very springs of the earth; but yet he did not get to the 
bottom of the roots. Then he burnt it with fire and 
sprinkled it with the juice of the sugar-cane, desiring to 
destroy it entirely, and not leave a trace of it behind. 
Some months afterwards, the king of Magadha, called 
Pfirnavarmaé (Pu-la-na-fa-mo), the last of the race of 
Asbdka-raja, hearing of it, sighed and said, “The sun of 
wisdom having set, nothing is left but the tree of Bud- 
dha, and this they now have destroyed, what source of 
spiritual life is there now?” He then cast his body on the 
ground overcome with pity; then with the milk of a 
thousand cows he again bathed the roots of the tree, and 
in a night it once more revived and grew to the height of 
some 10 feet. Fearing lest it should be again cut down, 
he surrounded it with a wall of stone 24 feet high. So the 
tree is now encircled with a wall about 20 feet high. 
To the east of the Bédhi tree there is a vihdra about 
160 or 170 feet high. Its lower foundation-wall is 20 or 
more paces in its face. The building (pile) is of blue tiles 
' (bricks) covered with chunam (burnt stone, lime); all the 
niches in the different storeys hold golden figures. The 
four sides of the building are covered with wonderful 
ornamental work ; in one place figures of stringed pearls 
(garlands), in another figures of heavenly Rishis. The 
whole is surrounded by a gilded copper Amalaka fruit. 
The eastern face adjoins a storeyed pavilion, the project- 
ing eaves of which rise one over the other to the height 
6 There is no mention made of called “a precious pitcher or “a pre- 


‘figures of Buddha.” cious gourd.”” But see note at end of 
7 Myrobolan-embile; it is also this Book. 


BOOK VIIL.] BUDDHA-GAYA., 11g 


of three distinct chambers; its projecting eaves, its pil- 
lars, beams, doors, and windows are decorated with gold 
and silver ornamental work, with pearls and gems let in 
to fill up interstices, Its sombre chambers and mys- 
terious halls have doors in each of the three storeys. 
To the right and left of the outside gate are niches like 
chambers; in the left is a figure of Avalékitésvara Bédhi- 
sattva, and in the right a figure of Maitréya (T’se-shi) 
Bédhisattva. They are made of white silver, and are about 
10 feet high. On the site of the present vikdra Asdka-rija 
at first built a small vikdra. Afterwards there wasa Brah- 
man who reconstructed it on a larger scale. At first this 
Brahman was not a believer in the law of Buddha, and 
sacrificed to Mahégvara, Having heard that this heavenly 
spirit (god) dwelt in the Snowy Mountains, he forthwith 
went there with his younger brother to seek by prayer 
(his wishes). The Déva said, “Those who pray should 
aim to acquire some extensive religious merit. If you 
who pray have not this ground (of merit), then neither can 
T grant what you pray for.” 

The Brahman said, “ What meritorious work can I set 
about, to enable me to obtain my desire ?” 

The god said, “If you wish to plant a superior root 
(growth) of merit, then seek a superior field (tn which to 
acquire it). The Bédha tree is the place for attaining the 
fruit of a Buddha. You should straightway return there, 
and by the Bédhi tree erect a large vihdra, and exca- 
vate a large tank, and devote all kinds of religious offer- 
ings (to the service). You will then surely obtain your 
wishes,” 

The Brahmans having received the divine communica- 
tion, conceived a believing heart, and they both returned 
to the place. The elder brother built the viddra, the 
younger excavated the tank, and then they prepared large 
religious offerings, and sought with diligence their heart’s 
desire (vow). The result followed at once. The Brahman 
became the great minister of the king. He devoted all 
his emoluments to the work of charity. Having finished 


120 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox vill. 


the vihdra, he invited the most skilful artists to make a 
figure (/tkeness) of Tathagata when he first reached the 
condition of Buddha. Years and months passed without 
result; no one answered the appeal. At length there was 
a Brahman who came and addressed the congregation 
thus: “I will thoroughly execute (paint and mark) the 
excellent figure (or distinguishing points) of Tathagata.” 

They replied, “ For the purpose of doing this, what do 
you require ?” 

“Place in the wihdra a pile of scented earth and a 
lighted lamp ; then when I have gone in, fasten the doors. 
After six months you may open them again.” 

- Then the priests did as he directed. After four months, 
the six not being passed, the priests being astonished at 
the strange circumstance, opened the door to see what had 
happened. In the vikdra they found a beautiful figure of 
Buddha in a sitting position, the right foot uppermost, the 
left hand resting, the right hand hanging down. He was 
sitting facing the east, and as dignified in appearance as 
when alive. The throne was 4 feet 2 inches high, and 
12 feet 5 inches broad. The figure was 11 feet 5 inches 
high; the two knees were 8 feet 8 inches apart, and the 
two shoulders 6 feet 2 inches. The signs and marks (of 
a Buddha) were perfectly drawn. The loving expression 
of his face was like life, only above his right breast the 
material was not yet completely rounded off. Having 
seen no man, they were satisfied that this was a miracle, 
and all of them were filled with strong emotion ( piteously 
sighed) as they diligently sought to find out the secret 
(earnestly inquired in order to know). Now there was a 
Sramana who was passing the night there. He was of an 
honest and truthful heart, and being affected by the cir- 
cumstance (just related), he had a dream, in which he saw 
the forementioned Brahman, who addressed him thus: 
“I am Maitréya Bédhisattva. Fearing that the mind 
of no artist could conceive the beauty of the sacred 
features, therefore I myself have come to paint and 


BOOK VIIL J CONCEALING THE FIGURE. 121 


delineate the figure of Buddha. His right hand hangs 
down? in token that when he was about to reach the 
fruit of a Buddha, and the enticing Mara came to fascinate 
him, then the earth-spirits came to tell him thereof. The 
_ first who came forth advanced to help Buddha to resist 
Mara, to whom Tathagata said, ‘Fear not! By the power 
of patience he must be subdued!’ Mara-raja said, ‘ Who 
will bear witness for you?’ Tathagata dropped his hand 
and pointed to the ground, saying, ‘Here is my witness.’ 
On this a second earth-spirit leapt forth to bear witness 
(to testify). Therefore the present figure is so drawn, in 
‘imitation of the old posture of Buddha.” 

The brethren having understood this sacred miracle 
(spiritual reflection), were all moved with a tender emotion, 
and they placed above the breast, where the work was as 
yet unfinished, a necklace of precious stones and jewels, 
whilst on the head they placed a diadem of encircling 
gems, exceedingly rich. 

Saéinka-raja having cut down the Bédhi tree, wished 
to destroy this image; but having seen its loving features, 
his mind had no rest or determination, and he returned 
with his retinue homewards. On his way he said to one 
of his officers, “We must remove that statue of Buddha 
and place there a figure of Mahésvara.” 

The officer having received the order, was moved with 
fear, and, sighing, said, “If I destroy the figure of Buddha, 
then during successive kalpas I shall reap misfortune; if 
I disobey the king, he will put me to a cruel death and 
destroy my family; in either case, whether I obey or dis- 
obey, such will be the consequences; what, then, shall 
Ido?” 

On this he called to his presence a man with a believing 
heart (zc. a believer in Buddha) to help him, and sent him 
to build up across the chamber and before the figure of 
Buddha a wall of brick. The man, from a feeling of 
shame at the darkness, placed a burning lamp (with the 

7 This is the Bhtimisparsa mudrd, 


122 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [pook Vit. 


concealed figure); then on the interposing wall he drew a 
figure of (or, he made a figure of)”* Mahésvara-déva. 

The work being finished, he reported the matter. The 
king hearing it, was seized with terror; his body produced 
sores and his flesh rotted off, and after a short while he 
died. Then the officer quickly ordered the intervening 
wall to be pulled down again, when, although several 
days had elapsed, the lamp was still found to be burning 
(unextinguished). ; 

The figure still exists in its perfect state as it was made 
by the sacred art of the god. It stands in a dark chamber; 
lamps and torches are kept burning therein; but those 
who wish to see the sacred features cannot do so by 
coming into the chamber; they should in the morning 
reflect the sunlight by means of a great mirror on the 
interior of the room; the sacred marks may then be 
seen. Those who behold them find their religious emo- 
tions much increased. Tathdgata obtained complete en- 
lightenment (Samyak sambodht) on the eighth day of the 
latter half of the Indian month Vaisgakha (Fei-she-kie), 
which is with us the eighth day of the third month. But 
the Sthavira school (Shang-tso-pu) say on the fifteenth 
day of the second half of Vaigakha, which corresponds with 
us to the fifteenth day of the third month. Tathagata 
was then thirty years old, or, according to others, thirty- 
five years. 

To the north of the Bédhi tree is a spot where Buddha 
walked up and dawn. When Tathagata had obtained 
enlightenment, he did not rise from the throne, but re- 
mained perfectly quiet for seven days, lost in contempla- 
tion. Then rising, he walked up and down during seven 
days to the north of the tree; he walked there east and 
west for a distance of ten paces or so. Miraculous flowers 
sprang up under his foot-traces to the number of eighteen. 
Afterwards this space was covered in by a brick wall 
about three feet high. According to the old belief, these 


72 Julien thinks a. translation should be adopted that would apply 
equally to a statue or a picture. 


BOOK VIII. ] GIFT OF THE GRASS. 123 


holy traces thus covered in, indicate the length or short- 
ness of a man’s life, First of all, having offered up a 
sincere prayer, then count the measurement (or, pace the 
distance and measure); according as the person’s life is to 
be long or short, so will the measurement be greater or 
less. 

On the left side of the road, to the north of the place 
where Buddha walked, is a large stone, on the top of 
which, as it stands in a great vihdra, is a figure of Buddha 
with his eyes raised and looking up Here in former times 
Buddha sat for seven days contemplating the Bédhi tree ; 
he did not remove his gaze from it during this period, 
desiring thereby to indicate his grateful feelings towards 
the tree by so looking at it with fixed eyes. 

Not far to the west of the Bédhi tree is a large vikdra 
in which is a figure of Buddha made of teow-shih (brass), 
ornamented with rare jewels; he stands with his face to 
the east. Before it is a blue stone with wonderful marks 
upon it and strangely figured. This is (the place where) 
Buddha sat on a seven-gemmed throne made by Sakra 
Déva-rija when Brahma-raja built a hall for him of seven 
precious substances, after he had arrived at complete 
enlightenment. Whilst he thus sat for seven days in 
reflection, the mysterious glory which shone from his 
person lit up the Bédhi tree. From the time of the holy 
one till the present is so long that the gems have changed 
into stone. 

Not far to the south of the Bédhi tree is a stépa about 
100 feet high, which was built by Asdka-rija. DBédhis- 
attva having bathed in the Nairafijand river, proceeded 
towards the Bédhi tree. Then he thought, “ What shall 
I do for a seat? I will seek for some pure rushes when 
the day breaks.” Then Sakra-rija (Shi) transformed him- 
self into a grass-cutter, who, with his burden on his back, 
went aloug the road. Bédhisattva addressing him said, 
“Can you give me the bundle of grass you are carrying 
on your back ?” 


124 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [noox vin. 


The assumed grass-cutter, hearing the request, offered 
the grass with respect. Bdédhisattva having received it, 
went onwards to the tree, 

Not far to the north of this spot is a stépa. Bodhisattva, 
when about to obtain enlightenment (the fruit of Buddha), 
saw a flock of blue birds rising up (rohin ?)® according 
to the lucky way. Of all the good omens recognised in 
India this is- the most so. Therefore the Dévas of the 
pure abodes (Suddhavdsas accommodated their proceed- 
ings to the customary modes of the world, and caused the 
birds thus to encircle him as spiritually (miraculously) in- 
dicating his holiness, 

To the east of the Bédhi tree, on the left and right of 
the great road, there are two stdpas (one on each side), 
This is the place where Mara-raja tempted Bédhisattva. 
Bédhisattva, when on the point of enlightenment, was 
tempted by Mara to become a Chakravarttin (Lun-wang) 
monarch. On his refusing, he went away heavy and 
sorrowful. On this his daughters, asking him, went to try 
to entice the Bodhisattva, but by his spiritual power he 
changed their youthful appearance into that of decrepit 
old women. Then ee together on their sticks they 
went away.’ 

To the north-west ne the Bédht tree in a vikdra is the 
image of Kasyapa Buddha. It is‘noted for its miraculous 
and sacred qualities. From time to time it emits a glo- 
rious light. The old records say, that if a man actuated 
by sincere faith walks round it seven times, he obtains the 
power of knowing the place and condition of his (former?) 
births, 


73 The expression in the text 
seems tobe phonetic. Julien trans- 
lates “luk” literally by “deer.” 
But the reference is to the blue 
birds rising up and cireling round 
Bodhisattva in a fortunate way, vid. 
Tree and Serpent Worship, pl. lviii. 
fig. 2, Jirst section. The account of 
these signs is to be found in Wong 
Pih, and in other legendary lives of 
Buddha. 

74 To accept the letter inviting 


him to be a Chakravarttin, or the 
lot cast by the soothsayers with 
respect to his being a Chakra- 
varttin (Ch'uen-lun-wang), 

% The temptation scene is repre- 
sented in all the sculptures. See, 
e.g. Cave Temples, by Dr. Burgess, 
pl. xx. For an account of the dif- 
ferent events named in the text and 
a description of the great temple of 
Gaya built by aking of Ceylon, see 
Buddha Gayd, by Dr. Raj. Mitra, 


BOOK.-VIIL. ] THE MAKRARA FISH, 125 


To the north-west of the vikdra of Kasyapa Buddha 
there are two brick chambers, each containing a figure of 
an earth-spirit. Formerly, when Buddha was on the point 
of obtaining enlightenment, Mara came to him, and each 
one (or one) became witness for Buddha. Men afterwards, 
on account of his merit, painted or carved this figure of 
him with all its points of excellence. 

To the north-west of the wall of the Bddhi tree is a 
stdpa called Yuh-kin-hiang (the saffron scent, Kuikuma); 
it is about 4o feet high; it was built by a merchant chief 
(sréshtht) of the country of Tsao-kiu-ch’u (Tsaukuta). 
In old days there was a merchant-prince of this country 
who worshipped the heavenly spirits and sacrificed to them 
with a view to seek religious merit. He despised the 
religion of Buddha, and did not believe in the doctrine of 
“deeds and fruits.” After a while, he took with him some 
merchants to engage in commercial transactions (to take 
goods for having or not having, v.e., for exchange). Embark- 
ing in a ship on the southern sea, a tempest arising, they 
lost their way, whilst the tumultuous waves encircled 
them. Then after three years, their provisions being 
gone and their mouths parched with thirst, when there 
was not enough to last the voyagers from morning till 
evening, they employed all their energies with one mind 
in calling on the gods to whom they sacrificed. After all 
their efforts no result followed (their secret desire not 
accomplished), when unexpectedly they saw a great moun- 
tain with steep crags and precipices, and a double sun 
gleaming from far. Then the merchants, congratulating 
themselves, said, “ We are fortunate indeed in encounter- 
ing this great mountain; we shall here get some rest and 
refreshment.” The merchant-master said, “It is no 
mountain; it is the Makara fish; the high crags and 
scarped precipices are but its fins and mane; the double 
suns are its eyes as they shine.” Scarce had he finished 
when the sails of the ship began to draw; on which the 
merchant-master said to his companions, “I have heard 


126 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book vitt. 


say that Kwan-tsz’-tsai Bédhisattva is able to come to 
the help of those in difficulties and give them rest; we 
ought then with all faith to call upon that name.” So 
with one accord and voice they paid their adorations 
and called on the name. The high mountains disappeared, 
the two suns were swallowed up, and suddenly they saw a 
Sramana with dignified mien and calm demeanour holding 
his staff, walking through the sky, and coming towards 
them to rescue them from shipwreck, and in consequence 
they were at their own country immediately.” Then 
because their faith was confirmed, and with a view not to 
lose the merit of their condition, they built a stdpa and 
prepared their religious offerings, and they covered the 
stipa from top tp bottom with saffron paste. After thus, 
conceiving a heart of faith, those who were like-minded 
resolved to pay their adoration to the sacred traces; be- 
holding the Bédhi tree, they had no leisure for words about 
returning; but now, a month having elapsed, as they were 
walking together, they said in conversation, “ Mountains 
and rivers separate us from our native country, and now 
as to the stéipa which we built formerly, whilst we have 
been here, who has watered and swept it?” On finishing 
these words and coming to the spot (where this stupa stands), 
they turned round in token of respect; when suddenly 
they saw a stdpa rise before them, and on advancing to 
look at it, they saw it was exactly like the one they had 
built in their own country. Therefore now in India they 
call it the Kunkuma stiipa. 

At the south-east angle of the wall of the Bédhi tree 
is a stdpa by the side of a Nyagrédha (ni-ken-liu) tree. 
Beside it there is a eihdra in which is a sitting figure of 
Buddha. This is the spot where the great Brahmadéva 
exhorted Buddha, when he had first acquired enlighten- 
ment, to turn the wheel of the excellent law.78 

% Kwai-ming, pay their adora- 7 Can this be the scene repre- 
tions; the same as kwat-t. Julien sented in the Ajanta frescoes? See 


translates it “placed their lot in Burgess, Cave Zemples, pl. xvi. 
his hands.” 78 Buddha was in doubt whether 


BOOK VIII.] THE BODHI TREE. 127 


Within the walls of the Bdédhi tree at each of the four 
angles is a great stdpa. Formerly, when Tathagata re- 
ceived the grass of good omen (Santi), he walked on the 
four sides of the Bédhi tree from point to point; then 
the great earth trembled. When he came to the diamond 
throne, then all was quiet and peaceable again. Within 
the walls of the tree the sacred traces are so thick to- 
gether that it would be difficult to recite each one par- 
ticularly. : 

At the south-west of the Bédhi tree, outside the walls, 
there is a sédpa ; this is where the old house of the two 
shepherd-girls stood who offered the rice-milk to Buddha. 
By the side of it is another stdpa where the girls boiled 
the rice; by the side of this stdpa Tathagata received 
the rice. Outside the south gate of the Bédhi tree is a 
great tank about 700 paces round, the water of which is 
clear and pure as a mirror. Nagas and fishes dwell 
there. This was the pond which was dug by the Brah- 
mans, who were uterine brothers, at the command of 
Mahéévara (Ta-thseu-thsai). 

Still to the south there is a tank; formerly, when 
Tathagata had just acquired perfect enlightenment, he 
wished to bathe; then Sakra (Shi), king of Dévas, for 
Buddha’s sake, caused a pond to appear as a phantom. 

On the west is a great stone where Buddha washed his 
robes, and then wished to dry them; on this, Sakra, king 
of Dévas, brought this rock from the great Snowy Moun- 
tains. By the side of this is a stipa; this is where 
Tathigata put on(?) the old garments offered him. Still 
to the south in a wood is a stdpa; this is where the poor old 
woman gave the old garments which Tathagata accepted. 


any were fit to hear him preach. 


On this, Brahma (Fan), the lord of 
the “Saha world” (Mahabrahma Sa- 
hdmpati), came and exhorted him to 
“turn the wheel,” for, he said, ‘‘as 
on the surface of a pond there are 
white and blue lotus flowers, some 
only in bud, some opening, others 


fully opened ; thus it is with men ; 
some are not yet fit to be taught, 
others are being made fit, whilst 
some are ready to receive the saving 
doctrine.” See the account in the 
Chung-hu-mo-ho-ti. Satra. 
Fo-sho, varga 14, v. 1183. 


See also 


128 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox vu. 


To the east of the pond which Sakra caused to appear, 
in the midst of a wood, is the lake of the Naga king 
Muchilinda (Mu-chi-lin-t’o). The water of this lake is 
of a dark blue colour, its taste is sweet and pleasant; on 
the west bank is a small vikdra in which is a figure of 
Buddha. Formerly, when Tathagata first acquired com- 
plete enlightenment, he sat on this spot in perfect compo- 
sure, and for seven days dwelt in ecstatic contemplation. 
Then this Muchilinda Naga-raja kept guard over Tatha- : 
gata; with his folds seven times round the body of 
Buddha, he caused many heads to appear, which over- 
shadowed him as a parasol; therefore to the east of this 
lake is the dwelling of the Naga. 

To the east of the tank of Muchilinda in a vihéra 
standing in a wood is a figure of Buddha, which represents 
him as thin and withered away. 

At the side of this is the place where Buddha walked 
up and down, about 70 paces or so long, and on each side 
of it is a Pippala tree. 

Both in old times and now, among the better classes 
and the poor, those who suffer from disease are accus- 
tomed to anoint the figure with scented earth, on which 
they get cured in many cases. This is the place where 
Bédhisattva endured his penance. Here it was Tatha- 
gata subdued the heretics and received the request of 
Mara, and then entered on his six years’ fast, eating a 
grain of millet and of wheat each day; his body then 
became thin and withered and his face marred. The 
place where he walked up and down is where he took 
the branch of the tree (as he left the river) after his 
fast. 

By the side of the Pippala tree which denoted the 
place of Buddha’s fast is a stdpa,; this is where Ajfidta- 
Kaundinya and the rest, to the number of five, resided. 
When first the prince left his home, he wandered through 
the mountains and plains; he rested in forests and by 
wells of water. Then Suddhédana-raja ordered five men to 


BOOK VIII.] OFFERING THE ALMS-DISH. 129 


follow him and wait on his person. The prince having 
entered on his penance, then Ajfiata Kaundinya and the 
rest gave themselves also to a diligent practice of the 
same, 

To the south-west of this spot there is a stdpa. This 
is where Bédhisattva entered the Nairafijana river to 
bathe. By the side of the river, not far off, is the place 
where Bédhisattva received the rice-milk. 

By the side of this is a sttipa where the merchant-prince 
(householder) offered him the wheat and honey. Buddha 
was seated with his legs crossed beneath a tree, lost in 
contemplation, experiencing in silence the joys of eman- 
cipation. After seven days he aroused himself from his 
ecstasy. Then two merchant-princes travelling by the 
side of the wood were addressed by the Déva of the place 
thus: “The prince-royal of the Sikya family dwells in this 
wood, having just reached the fruit of a Buddha. His 
mind fixed in contemplation, he has for forty-nine days 
eaten nothing. By offering him whatsoever you have (as 
food) you will reap great and excellent profit.” 

Then the two merchants offered some wheat-flour and 
honey from their travelling store. The World-honoured 
accepted and received it. 

By the side of the merchant-offering place is a stupa. This 
is the spot where the four Déva-rajas presented (Buddha) 
with a pdtra. The merchant-princes having made their 
offering of wheat-flour and honey, the Lord thought 
with himself in what vessel he should receive it. Then 
the four Déva-rajas coming from the four quarters, each 
brought a golden dish and offered it. The Lord sat silently 
and accepted not the offerings, on the ground that such a 
costly dish became not the character of a hermit. The 
four kings casting away the golden dishes, offered silver 
ones ; afterwards they offered vessels of crystal (po-ch’?), 
lapis-lazuli (iu-iz), cornelian (ma-nao), amber (ku-ch’2), 
ruby (chin chu), and so on. The Lord of the World would 
accept neither of them, The four kings then returned to 

VOL, IL I 


130 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [xoox VIIL 


their palaces and brought as an offering stone pdtras, of 
a deep blue colour and translucent. Again presenting 
these, the Lord, to avoid accepting one and rejecting the 
others, forthwith joined them all in one and accepted them 
thus. Putting them one within the other, he made one 
vessel of the four. Therefore may be seen the four 
borders on the outside of the rim (of the dish). 

Not far from this spot is a stipa. This is the place 
where Tathagata preached the law for the sake of his 
mother. When Tathagata had acquired complete en- 
lightenment, he was termed “the teacher of gods and 
of men.” His mother, May4, then came down from 
heaven to this place. The Lord of the World preached 
to her according to the occasion, for her profit and 
pleasure. 

Beside this spot is a dry pool, on the border of which 
is a stipa. This is where in former days Tathagata dis- 
played various spiritual changes to convert those who 
were capable of it. 

By the side of this spot is a stépa. Here Tathagata 
converted Uravilva-Kagyapa (Yeu-leu-pin-lo-kia-she- 
po) with his two brothers and a thousand of their followers. 
Tathagata, for the purpose of following out his office as 
“illustrious guide,” according to his opportunity (or in a 
suitable way), caused him (.¢., Kagyapa) to submit to his 
teaching. On this occasion, when 500 followers of Uravilva- 
Kasyapa had requested to receive the instruction of 
Buddha, then Kagyapa said, “I too with you will give up 
the way of error.” On this, going together, they came to 
the place where Buddha was. Tathigata, addressing them, 
said, “ Lay aside your leather garments and give up your 
fire-sacrificing vessels.” Then the disciples, in obedience 
to the command, cast into the Nairafijané river their 
articles of worship (service or use). When Nadi-Kasyapa 
(Nai-ti-kia-she-po) saw these vessels following the current 
of the river, he came with his followers to visit his brother. 
Having seen his conduct and changed behaviour, he also 


BOOK VIII.] THE INUNDATION MIRACLE. 131 


took the yellow robes. Gayd-Kasyapa also, with two 
hundred followers, hearing of his brother’s change of 
religion, came to the place where Buddha was, and prayed 
to be allowed to practise a life of purity. 

To the north-west of the spot where the KAsyapa 
brothers were converted is a stiipa. This is the place 
where Tathagata overcame the fiery Niga to which 
Kagyapa sacrificed. Tathdgata, when about to convert 
these men, first subdued the object of their worship, and 
rested in the house of the fiery Naga of the Brahmachfrins, 
After the middle of the night the Naga vomited forth fire 
and smoke. Buddha having entered Samddhi, likewise 
raised the brilliancy of fire, and the house-cell seemed to 
be filled with fiery flames. The Brahmacharins, fearing 
that the fire was destroying Buddha, all ran together to 
the spot with piteous cries, commiserating his fate. On 
this Uravilva-Kasyapa addressed his followers and said, 
“ As I now gather (sce), this is not a fire, but the Sramana 
subduing the fiery Naga.” Tathigata having got the fiery 
dragon firmly fixed in his alms-bowl, on the morrow came 
forth holding it in his hand, and showed it to the disciples 
of the unbelievers. By the side of this monument is a 
stiipa, where 500 Pratyéka Buddhas at the same time 
entered Nircvdéna. 

To the south of the tank of Muchilinda Naga is a stilpa. 
This indicates the spot where Kasyapa went to save 
Buddha during an inundation. The Kasyapa_ brothers 
still opposing the divine method,” all who lived far off or 
near reverenced their virtue, and submitted themselves to 
their teaching. The Lord of the World, in his character as 
guide of those in error, being very intent on their conver- 
sion, raised and spread abroad the thick clouds and caused 
the torrents to fall. The fierce waves surrounded the 
place where Buddha dwelt; but he alone was free from 
the flood. At this time KAsyapa, seeing the clouds and 


79 T.e., the methods Buddha had used for their conversion. 


132. RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox vu. 


rain, calling his disciples, said, “The place where the 
Shaman dwells must be engulfed in the tide!” 

Embarking in a boat to go to his deliverance, he saw 
the Lord of the World walking on the water as on land ; 
and as he advanced down the stream, the waters divided 
and left the ground visible. Kasyapa having seen (the 
miracle), his heart was subdued, and he returned.® 

Outside the eastern gate of the wall of the Bédhi tree, 
2 or 3 li distant, there is the house of the blind Naga. 
This Naga, by the accumulated effect of his deeds during 
former existences, was born blind, as a punishment, in his 
present birth. Tath4gata going on from Mount Pragbédhi, 
desired to reach the Bédhi tree. As he passed this abode, 
the eyes of the Naga were suddenly opened, and he saw 
Bodhisattva going on to the tree of intelligence (Bédht). 
Then addressing Bodhisattva, he said, “O virtuous master ! 
erelong you will become perfectly enlightened! My eyes 
indeed have long remained in darkness; but when a 
Buddha appears in the world, then I have my sight re- 
stored, During the Bhadra-kalpa, when the three past 
Buddhas appeared in the world, then I obtained light 
and saw (for a while); and now when thou, O virtuous 
one! didst approach this spot, my eyes suddenly opened ; 
therefore I know that you shall become a Buddha.” 

By the side of the eastern gate of the wall of the Bédhe 
tree is a stipa. This is where Mara-raja tried to frighten 
Bodhisattva. When first Mara-rija knew that Bédhis- 
attva was about to obtain perfect enlightenment, having 
failed to confuse him by his enticements or to terrify him, 
by his arts, he summoned his host of spirits and arranged 
his demon army, and arrayed his soldiers, armed with their 
weapons, as if to destroy the Bédhisattva. On this the 
winds arose and the rains descended, the thunders rolled 
in space and the lightning gleamed, as it lit up the 
darkness; flames of fire and clouds of smoke burst forth; 


© See Tree and Serpent Worship, pl. xxxi. fig. 2. 


BOOK vuL] THE GREAT TEMPLE OF GAYA. 133 


‘sand and hailstones fell like lances, and were as arrows 
flying from the bow. Whereupon the Bodhisattva entered 
the samddht of “great love,” and changed the weapons of 
the host to lotus flowers. Miara’s army, smitten by fear, 
retreated fast and disappeared. 

Not far from this are two stdpas built by Sakra, king of 
Dévas, and by Brahma-raja. 

Outside the northern gate of the wall of the Bédhi tree 
is the Mahibodhi sanghdrdma. It was built by a former 
king of Sithhala (Ceylon.) This edifice has six halls, with 
towers of observation (temple towers) of three storeys; it 
is surrounded by a wall of defence thirty or forty feet high. 
The utmost skill of the artist has been employed; the 
ornamentation is in the richest colours (red and blue). The 
statue of Buddha is cast of gold and silver, decorated with 
gems and precious stones. The stépas are high and large 
in proportion, and beautifully ornamented; they contain 
relics of Buddha. The bone relics are as great as the 
fingers of the hand, shining and smooth, of a pure white 
colour and translucent. The flesh relics are like the great 
true pearl, of a bluish-red tint. Every year on the day of 
the full moon of (the month when) Tathagata displayed creat 
spiritual changes, they take these relics out for public 
exhibition.4 On these occasions sometimes a bright light 
is diffused, sometimes it rains flowers. The priests of this 
convent are more than 1000 men; they study the Great 
Vehicle and belong to the Sthavira (Shang-tso-pu) school. 
They carefully observe the Dharma Vinaya, and their 
conduct is pure and correct. 

In old days there was a king of Ceylon, which is a 
country of the southern sea, who was truthful and a 
believer in the law of Buddha. It happened that his 
brother, who had become a disciple of Buddha (a houseless 
one), thinking on the holy traces of Buddha, went forth 
to wander through India. At all the convents he visited, 


*1 In India, the thirtieth day of the twelfth month; in China, the 
fifteenth day of the first month. 


134 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book vit. 


he was treated with disdain as a foreigner (a frontier 
countryman). On this he returned to his own country. 
The king in person went out to a distance to meet him, 
but the Sramana was so affected that he could not speak. 
The king said, “ What has so afflicted you as to cause this 
excessive grief?” The Sramana replied, “I, relying on 
the dignity of your Majesty’s kingdom, went forth to 
visit the world, and to find my way through distant 
regions and strange cities. For many years all my 
travels, during heat and cold, have been attended with 
outrage, and my words have been met with insults and 
sarcasm. Having endured these afflictions, how can I be 
light-hearted ?” 

The king said, “If these things are so, what is to be 
done ?” 

He replied, “In truth, I wish your Majesty in the field 
of merit would undertake to build convents throughout 
all India. You would thus signalise the holy traces, 
and gain for yourself a great name; you would show 
your gratitude for the advantage derived from your pre- 
decessors, and hand down the merit thereof to your suc- 
cessors,” 

He replied, “ This is an excellent plan; how have I but 
just heard of it?” 

Then he gave in tribute to the king of India all the 
jewels of his country. The king having received them 
as tribute, from a principle, of duty and affection to his 
distant ally, he sent messengers to say, “ What can I now 
do in return for the decree ?” 

The minister said, “The king of Sishhala salutes the 
king of India (Maha Sri raja). The reputation of the Maha- 
raja has spread far and wide, and your benefits have 
reached to distant regions. The Sramanas of this 
inferior country desire to obey your instructions and 
to accept your transforming influences. Having wan- 
dered through your superior country in visiting the 
sacred traces, J called at various convents and found 


BOOK VIII.] THE KINGS PROCLAMATION. 135 


great difficulty in getting entertainment, and so, fatigued 
and very much worn by affronts, I returned home. I have 
therefore formed a plan for the benefit of future travel- 
lers; I desire to build in all the Indies:a convent for 
the entertainment of such strangers, who may have a 
place of rest between their journey there and back. Thus 
the two countries will be bound together and travellers be 
refreshed.” 

The king said, “I permit your royal master to take (for 
this purpose) one of the places in which Tathagata has left 
the traces of his holy teaching.” 

On this the messenger returned home, having taken 
leave of the king, and gave an account of his interview. 
The ministers received him with distinction and assembled 
the Sramdnas and deliberated as to the foundation of a 
convent. The Sramanas said, “The (Bédhi) tree is the 
place where all the past Buddhas have obtained the holy 
fruit and where the future ones will obtain it. There is 
no better place than this for carrying out the project.” 

Then, sending all the jewels of the country, they built 
this convent to entertain priests of this country (Ceylon), 
and he caused to be engraved this proclamation on copper, 
“To help all without distinction is the highest teaching 
of all the Buddhas; to exercise mercy as occasion offers is 
the illustrious doctrine of former saints. And now I, 
unworthy descendant in the royal line, have undertaken 
to found this saighdrdma, to enclose the sacred traces, 
and to hand down their renown to future ages, and to 
spread their benefits among the people. The priests of 
my country will thus obtain independence, and be treated 
as members of the fraternity of this country. Let this 
privilege be handed down from generation to generation 
without interruption.” 

For this cause this convent entertains many priests of 
Ceylon. To the south of the Bdédhi tree 10 li or so, the 
sacred traces are so numerous that they cannot be each 
named. Every year when the Bhikshus break up their 


136 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book vit. 


yearly rest of the rains, religious persons come here from 
every quarter in thousands and myriads, and during seven 
days and nights they scatter flowers, burn incense, and 
sound music as they wander through the district * and 
pay their worship and present their offerings. The priests 
of India, according to the holy instruction of Buddha, on 
the first day of the first half of the month Sravana enters 
on Wass. With us this is the sixteenth day of the fifth 
month; they give up their retreat on the fifteenth day of 
the second half of the month Asvayuja, which is with us 
the fifteenth day of the eighth month. 

In India the names of the months depend on the stars, 
and from ancient days till now there has been no change 
in this. But as the different schools have translated the 
accounts according to the dialects of the countries without 
distinguishing one from the other, mistakes have arisen, 
and as a consequence contradictions are apparent in the 
division of the seasons, Hence it is in some places they 
enter on Wass on the sixteenth day of the fourth month, 
and break up on the fifteenth day of the seventh month. 


Nove 1, p. 102. 


The pilgrim’s route from Patna to Gaya is difficult to settle. I 
think we must omit the passage on p. 102, 1. 5, “going about 200 
li,” and consider the “ old saighdrdma” as being perhaps 10 li be- 
yond the south-west angle of the city. This ro li, together with the 
two distances of 100 li + 90 li to the “ cloud-stone mountain,” will 
thus make up 200 li (put down by mistake), and correspond with 
the 6 or 7 yojanas in Hwui-lih from Patna to the Ti-lo-chi-kia con- 
vent. This last place I should identify with the Barabar Hills; but 
we must place the Tiladaka convent at Tilira. Hiuen Tsiang did 
not actually visit the spots named between the Barabar Hills and 
Gaya (see Ferguson’s remarks, J. /t. A. S., vol. vi. part 2.. 


Nove 2, p. 118. 


With reference to the translation on p. 118, where the Chinese 
symbols ’O-mwv-lo-kia-ko have been rendered the “Amalaka fruit,” as 
thongh this were the surmounting ornament of the great vihdra at 


82 The district of the penance of Buddha, 


BOOK VIII.] NOTES. 137 


Buddha Gaya, it is to be noticed that in the Chinese text these 
symbols are explained as being equivalent to “precious pitcher or 
vase” (pao ping). This phrase is frequently explained as “the sweet- 
dew dish or vase,” or, “the immortal dish.” M. Julien, in his note 
on the passage in question, restores the phonetic symbols, in defer- 
ence to the Chinese explanation, to Amalakarka, that is, “pure 
dish or vase.” But the right restoration is doubtless Amara Karka, 
“the immortal dish or vase,” for, as before stated, “sweet-dew” is 
always rendered by “immortal” or “immortality.” This ‘sweet- 
dew dish or vessel” is represented in Chinese drawings as an oval 
bottle with a long narrow neck (see the illustration in the Liturgy 
of Avalékitésvara, “ possessed of a thousand hands and a thousand 
eyes”). This explains the statement of Dr. Burgess (Ajanté Caves, 
xvii. § iv.): “ Avalékitésvara holds the palm of his right hand 
forward and has a bottle with oval body and narrow neck in his 
left.” This is the Amara Karka. In the illustration of the pavement 
slab of the great temple of Gayd (ie, the vikdra under present 
notice) given in the first volume of the Archeological Survey of India, 
pl. vi. (following p. 8), there is the figure of a devotee praying in 
front of a st@pa, which is crowned with flags and a bottle or vase, 
doubtless the same as the Amara Karka. This illustrates the inscrip- 
tion found at Buddha Gaya and translated by Sir Charles Wilkins, 
in which the building of the temple is attributed to Amara Kosha ; 
one of the nine gems of the court of King Vikramaditya. General 
Cunningham, then, is probably correct in saying that this great 
temple of Buddha Gaya was built between the time of Fa-hian 
and Hiuen Tsiang. The crowning member or stone of a temple 
epire is called Amalasil@, or “ pure stone.” 


END OF BOOK VIII 


133 ) 


BOOK IX. 
The Second Part of the Country Magadha. 


To the east of the Bédhi tree, crossing the Nairafijana 
(Ni-len-shan-na) river,in the middle of a wood, is a stipa. 
To the north of this is a pool. This is the spot where a 
perfume elephant (Gandhahasti)1 waited on his mother. 
Formerly when Tathagata was practising discipline as a 
Bodhisattva, he was born as the offspring of a perfume- 
elephant, and lived in the mountains of the north. Wan- 
dering forth, he came to the border of this pool. His 
mother being blind, he gathered for her the sweet lotus 
roots, and drew pure water for her use, and cherished her 
with devotion and filial care. At this time there was a 
man who had changed his home,? who wandered here and 
there in the wood without knowing his way, and in his 
distress raised piteous cries. The elephant-cub heard him 
and pitied him; leading him on, he showed him his way 
to the road. The man having got back, forthwith went 
to the king and said, “I know of a wood? in which a 
perfume-elephant lives and roams, It is a very valuable 
animal. You had better go and take it.” 

The king, assenting to his words, went with his soldiers 
to capture it, the man leading the way. Then pointing 


1 See ante, vol. i. p. 5, note 25. 
Consult also Monier Williams, Sansc. 
Dict., sub voc. Gandhadvipa. 

2 Tutt shuk seems to imply that 
he had changed his place of abode, 
and so was at a loss to find his way 
about ; or it may simply mean, “In 
the lapse of time it happened that,” 
&e. So Julien translates it. 


3 The ruins of the stdpa and the 
lower portion of the shaft of the 
pillar raised on the spot where the 
young elephant was taken still exist 
at Bakror, on the eastern bank of 
the Lilajan river, about one mile to 
the south-east of Buddha Gaya 
(Cunningham, Anc. Geog., p. 459). 


BOOK IX.] UDRA-RAMAPUTTRA. 139 


to the elephant to show it to the king, immediately both 
his arms fell off as if cut by a sword. The king, though 
he saw this miracle, yet captured the elephant-cub, and 
bound it with cords, and returned to his palace. The 
young elephant having been bound (in order to tame it), 
. for a long time would neither eat nor drink. The stable- 
keeper stated the matter to the king, who, on his part, 
came to see for himself, and asking the elephant the 
reason.* “Lo!” he answered and said, “my mother is 
blind, and now for days together is without food or 
drink, and here I am bound in a dreary dungeon. How 
can I take my food with relish!” The king, pitying his 
feelings and resolution, therefore ordered him to be set 
free. 

By the side of this (pool) is a stupa, before which is 
built a stone pillar. In this place the Buddha Kagyapa 
(Kia-she-po) long ago sat in meditation. By its side are 
traces where the four past Buddhas sat down and walked. 

To the east of this spot, crossing the Mo-ho® (Mahi) 
river, we come to a great forest in which is a stone pillar. 
This is the place where a heretic entered a condition of 
ecstasy and made a wicked vow. In old days there was 
a heretic called Udra-Ramaputtra (U-teou-lan-tseu). 
In mind he soared above the vapoury clouds, whilst he 
left his body among the wilds and marshes. Here in this 
sacred forest, restraining his spirit, he left his traces.® 
Having acquired the five supernatural faculties,’ he reached 
the highest condition of Dhydna, and the king of Magadha 
greatly respected him. Each day at noon he invited him 
to his palace to eat. Udra-Ramaputtra, mounting through 
space, walking in the air, came and went without hin- 
drance. 


4 In a fond way, as we speak to the text. The expression, “re- 


dumb creatures, 

5 The Mohana Nadi river. 

§ Udra-Ramaputtra was one of the 
teachers to whom Bédhisattva went 
before his penance (Fo-sho-hing-tsan- 
king, varga 12); but itis uncertain 
whether he is the one referred to in 


straining his spirit” means that 
when he confined his spirit within 
his body he left here bodily traces. 

7 Pakchdbhijiids ; see Childers, 
Pali Dict., sub voc. Abhiifid ; Bur- 
nouf, Introd., p., 263 ; Lotus, pp. 820 
ff. 


140 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x. 


The king of Magadha, expecting the moment of his 
arrival, kept watch for him, and, on his coming, respect- 
fully placed for him his seat. The king being about to 
go forth on a tour, wished to put this affair in charge of 
some one during his absence, but he found no one in his 
inner palace whom he could select, capable of under- 
taking his commands? But (amongst his attendants) 
there was a little pet girl of modest appearance and 
well-mannered, so that in the whole palace none of his 
followers (wise folk) was able to excel her? The 
king of Magadha summoned this one, and said to her, 
“I am going some distance on a tour of observation, 
and I desire to put you in charge of an important 
business; you must, on your part, give all your mind 
to do thoroughly as I direct in the matter. It relates 
to that celebrated Rishi Udra-Ramaputtra, whom I have 
for a long time treated with reverence and respect. Now 
when he comes here at the appointed time to dine, do 
you pay him the same attention that I do.” Having left 
these instructions, the king forthwith gave notice of his 
absence (non-attendance). 

The little girl, according to her instructions, waited in 
expectation as usual. The great Rishi having come, she 
received him, and placed a seat for him. Udra-Rama- 
puttra having touched the young female, felt within him 
the impure risings of earthly passion (of the world of 
desire), and so he lost his spiritual capabilities. Having 
finished his meal, he spoke of going, but he was unable 
to rise in the air. Then feeling ashamed, he prevaricated, 
and addressing the maiden said, “I am able, as the result 
of the discipline I practise, to enter Samddhi, and then, 
my mind at rest, I can ascend into the air, and come 
and go without a moment’s delay. I have heard long 
ago, however, that the people of the country desire to see 
me. In agreement with the rule of the olden time, our 


8 That is, none of the females of | * Could take her place of pre- 
the palace. cedence. 


BOOK IX.] UDRA-RAMAPUTTRA. 


141 


utmost aim should be to benefit all that lives. How 
shall I regard only my own benefit and forget to benefit 
others? I desire, therefore, on this occasion, to go 
through the gate and walk on the ground, to bring 
happiness and profit to all those who see me going.” 

The royal maiden hearing this, straightway spread the 
news far and wide. .Then the people began with all 
their hearts to water and sweep the roads, and thousands 
upon thousands awaited to see him come. Udra-Rima- 
puttra, stepping from the royal palace, proceeded on foot 
to that religious forest. Then sitting down in silence, 
he entered Saméddhi. Then his mind, quickly escaping 
outside, was’ yet limited within the boundaries of the 
forest.1° And now (as it wandered through the woods) 
the birds began to scream and flutter about, and as it. 
approached the pond, the fishes began to jump and 
splash, till at last his feelings being wrought up, and 
his mind becoming confused, he lost his spiritual capa- 
bilities. Giving up his attempt at ecstasy, he was 
filled with anger and resentment, and he made this 
wicked vow, “May I hereafter be born as a fierce and 
wicked beast, with the body of a fox and the wings of 
a bird, that I may seize and devour living creatures. 
May my body be 3000 li long, and the outspread of my 
wings each way 1500 li; then rushing into the forest, I 
will devour the birds, and entering the rivers, I will eat 
the fish.” 

When he had made this vow his heart grew gradually 
at rest, and by earnest endeavours he resumed his former 
state of ecstasy. Not long after this he died, and was 
born in the first of the Bhuvdni heavens,” where his years 


10 That is, although his spirit was complete independence of his 


able to leave his body, yet, owing to 
his evil thoughts, it was unable to 
rise as before “above the vapoury 
clouds.” 

This seems to show that al- 
though his spirit quickly passed 
“ outside,” it was unable to obtain 


body. 

12 That is, in the highest of the 
Arupa heavens, This heaven is 
called in Chinese ji-seang-fi-fi-siang- 
tin, i.e, the heaven where there is 
neither thought (consciousness) nor 
an absence of thought; in Pali, 


142 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book 1x. 


would be 80,000 kalpas. Tathigata left this record of 
him: “The years of his life in that heaven being ended, 
then he will reap the fruit of his old vow and possess this 
ignoble body. From the streams of the evil ways of birth 
he may not yet expect to emerge.” ¥ 

To the east of Mahi river we enter a great wild forest, 
and going 100 li or so, we come to the Ki’u-ki’u-cha- 
po-to-shan (Kukkutapidagin, the Cock’s-foot Mountain). 
It is also called Kiu-liu-po-to-shan (Gurupidah giri}), 
The sides of this mountain are high and rugged, the 
valleys and gorges are impenetrable. Tumultuous torrents 
tush down its sides, thick forests envelope the valleys, 
whilst tangled shrubs grow along its cavernous heights. 
Soaring upwards into the air are three sharp peaks ; their 
tops are surrounded by the vapours of heaven, and their 
shapes lost in the clouds. Behind these hills the vener- 
able Maha-Kasyapa dwells wrapped in a condition of 
Nirvana. People do not dare to utter his name, and 
therefore they speak of the “Guru-padah” (the venerable 
teacher.)§ Mahi-K&gyapa was a Sravaka and a disciple (or 


een 


“ Nevasanfidndsanha ” (see Childers, 
Pali Dict. sub voc. From the history 
given in the Fo-sho-king, it would 
seem that this refinement of language 
as to the character of the highest 
heaven is due to Udra-Ramaputira. 

33 That is, although he is now in 
the highest heaven of substance 
(bhuva), where his life will last 
80,000 great kalpas (an incalculable 
period), yet he is not saved from 
future misery. This exhibits the 
character of Buddha’s conception of 
Nirvana, that it is a condition free 
from any possibility of a return to 
mundane or other bodily form of 
existence. 

4 That is, the Mountain of the 
Venerable Master, ie, KAsyapa. 
Pada is here added as a token of 
respect, as in Déva-pidih, Kumé- 
rila-pidah, &c. It seems to have been 
called the Cock’s-foot from its shape, 
the three peaks or spurs reseinbling 
the footof the cock. F'a-hian places it 


3 lito the south of Gaya, probably a 
mistake for 3 yéjanas to the east 
(see Fa-hian, Beal’s ed., cap. xxxiii. 
n. 1). It has been identified by 
Cunningham with the village of Kur- 
kihar (vid. Arch. Survey, vol. i. pp. 
14-16; vol. xv. p. 43 and Ane, Geog. 
Ind., p. 460). This hill of the cock’s 
foot must not be confused with the 
saighdrdma of the cock-garden near 
Patna. There is no evidence that 
there was a hill near this last esta-. 
blishment, and it is nowhere called 
the Kukkuta- pdda vihira. The 
quotation made by Julien (vol. ii. 
428 n.) refers to the hill near Gaya ; 
so also does the note of Burnouf, 
Introd., p. 366. See also Schiefner’s 
Lebensbeschreibung Gdkyamuni’s, p. 
278; Ind. Ant., vol. xii. p. 327. 

15 This is a difficult passage, but 
the senseis evident. Kasyapa dwells 
in the mountain awaiting the arrival 
of Maitréya; he cannot therefore 
have passed into complete Nirvdna. 


BOOK Ix.] COMMISSION GIVEN TO KASYAPA, 143 


a Srivaka disciple) perfectly possessed of the six super- 
natural faculties and the eight enfranchisements ' (ashtaw 
vimokshas).¥  Tathdgata, his work of conversion being 
done, and just on the point of attaining Nirvdna, ad- 
dressed Kasyapa and said, “Through many? kalpas I 
have undergone (diligently borne) painful penances for the 
sake of all that lives, seeking the highest form of religion. 
What I have all along prayed for (destred) I have now 
obtained to the full. Now, as I am desirous to die (enter 
Mahdnirvéna), I lay on you the charge of the Dharma 
Pitaka. Keep and disseminate (this doctrine) without loss 
or diminution. The golden-tissued Kashdya robe given 
me by my foster-mother (mother’s sister) I bid you keep 
and deliver to Maitréya (T’se-chi) when he has com- 
pleted the condition of Buddha.2® All those who engage 
in the profession of my bequeathed law, whether they be 
Bhikshus, Bhikshunis, Updsakas, or Updsikas, must first 
(i.e, before this be accomplished) cross over and escape the 
stream of transmigration.” 

Kasyapa having received this commission to undertake 
to preserve the true law, summoned an assembly”! (council 
or convocation). This done, he continued twenty years (in 
charge of the order), and then, in disgust at the imperma- 


In fact, the subsequent narrative 
shows that he will only reach that 
condition when Maitréya comes. I 
take the expression chung tsie mih 
to denote the indefinite character of 
his present condition, which cannot 
be called Nirvdna, but is a middle 
state of existence. Pdda, as stated 
above, is an honorary affix; the 
expression ki-heou refers to the inner 
recesses of the mountain. Julien 
translates the passage thus: “In 
the sequence of time the great Kas- 
yapa dwelt in this mountain, and 
there entered Nirvdna. Men dare 
not call him by his name, and so they 
say “the foot of the venerable.” 

16 Shadabhijiids. See Childers, 
Péli Dict., s. v. Abhinid, and ante, 
vol. i. p. 104, n. 73. 


7 See Childers, x. s., s.v. Vimokho ; 
Burnouf, Lotus, pp. 347, 824 f. and 
ante, vol. i. p. 149, n. 90. 

18 Mahaprajapati. ~ 
19 The word means “waste” or 
“distant ;” as we might say, through 
“a waste of ages,” or “dreary 

ages.” 

20 This passage is translated by 
Julien thus: ‘Which Maitréya 
after he became Buddha left, that 
it might be transmitted to you.” 
But this cannot be correct. Mai- 
tréya has not become Buddha. I 
translate it, “‘I deliver to you to 
keep, awaiting the time when Mai- 
tréya shall become perfect Buddha.” 

*1 This is the usual phrase used 
for “ calling a convocation,” 


144 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x. 


nence of the world, and desiring to die, he went towards 
Cock’s-foot Mountain, Ascending the north side of the 
mountain, he proceeded along the winding path, and came 
to the south-west ridge. Here the crags and precipices 
prevented him going on. Forcing his way through the 
tangled brushwood, he struck the rock with his staff, and 
thus opened a way, He then passed on, having divided 
the rock, and ascended till he was again stopped by the 
rocks interlacing one another. He again opened a 
passage through, and came out on the mountain peak on 
the north-east side. Then having emerged from the de- 
files, he proceeded to the middle point of the three peaks, 
There he took the Kashdya garment (chévara) of Buddha, 
and as he stood he expressed an ardent vow. On this 
the three peaks covered him over; this is the reason why 
now these three rise up into the air. In future ages, 
when Maitréya shall have come and declared the three- 
fold law,” finding the countless persons opposed to him 
by pride, he will lead them to this mountain, and coming 
to the place where KAsyapa is, in a moment (the snapping 
of the finger) Maitréya will cause it to open of itself, and 
all those people, having seen Kasyapa, will only be more 
proud and obstinate. Then Kaésyapa, delivering the robe, 
and having paid profound reverence, will ascend into the 
air and exhibit all sorts of spiritual changes, emitting fire 
and vapour from his body. Then he will enter Nirvéna. 
At this time the people, witnessing these miracles, will 
dismiss their pride, and opening their minds, will obtain 
the fruit (of holiness). Now, therefore, on the top of the 
mountain is a stépa built. On quiet evenings those look- 
ing from a distance see sometimes a bright light as it 
were of a torch; but if they ascend the mountain there is 
nothing to be observed.4 


2 The thrice-repeated law; see tain, which stands three miles north- 
ante, p. 47, 2. 10. north-east of the town of Kurkihar. 

*3-The three-peaked mountain There is still a square basement 
here referred to has been identified surrounded by quantities of bricks 
by General Cunningham with the on the highest or middle peak of the 
three peaks of the Murali moun- three. Arch. Survey, vol. xv. p. 5. 


BOOK IX.] THE YASHTIVANA. 145 


Going to the north-east of the Cock’s-foot Mountain 
about 100 li, we come to the mountain called Buddha- 
vana (Fo-to-fa-na), with its peaks and cliffs lofty and 
precipitous. Among its steep mountain cliffs is a stone 
chamber where Buddha once descending stayed; by its 
side is a large stone where Sakra (Shih), king of Dévas, 
and Brahma-raija (Fan-wang) pounded some ox-head 
(géSirsha)** sandal-wood, and anointed Tathagata with the 
same. The scent (of this) is still to be perceived on the 
stone. Here also five hundred Arhats secretly dwell 25 in 
a spiritual manner, and here those who are influenced by 
religious desire to meet with them sometimes see them, 
on one occasion under the form of Samanéras just enter- 
ing the village to beg food, at other times as withdrawing 
(to their ceils), on some occasions manifesting traces of 
their spiritual power in ways difficult to describe in 
detail. 

Going about 30 li to the east, amongst wild valleys of 
the Buddhavana (Fo-to-fa-na) mountain, we come to the 
wood called Yashtivana (Ye-sse-chi),26 The bamboos 
that grow here are large; they cover the hill and extend 
through the valley. In former days there was a Brihman, 
who hearing that the body of Sakya Buddha (Shih-kia-fo) 
was sixteen feet in height, was perplexed with doubt and 
would not credit it. Then taking a bamboo sixteen feet 
long, he desired to measure the height of Buddha; the 
body constantly overtopped the bamboo and exceeded the 
sixteen feet. So going on increasing, he could not find 
the right measurement. He then threw the bamboo on 


24 “Tn Pali called gosisam, among 
the Tibetans gorshi-sha, and among 
the Mongols gurshosha. It is ap- 
parently applied to sandal-wood 
having the odour of the cow’s head ” 
(Burnouf, Jntrod., p. §57). But per- 
haps its name is derived from its 
appearance, viz., a centre of silvery 
white wood within a darker outside 
circle. Compare the description of 
the bull that carried off Kuropa— 


VOL. TL. 


KiKros 8 apyudéos weorwpudpuaipe pe- 
trary. Abstract of Four Lectures, p. 
158. For the circle on the forehead, 
see the figures “from the oldest 
painting in Cave X. at Ajanta” 
(Burgess, plates viii. ix. x., Report 
on the Paintings at Ajanta). 

*5 I do not find in the text that 
they entered Nirvdna here, 

% “The forest of the staff.” 


K 


146 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [nook 1x. 


the ground and departed; but because of this it stood 
upright and took root. 

In the midst of this wood is a stépa which was built 
by AS6ka-rija. Here Tathigata displayed for seven 
days great spiritual wonders (miracles) for the sake of 
the Dévas, and preached the mysterious and excellent 
law. 

In the forest of the staff (Yashtivana) not long since 
there was an Upisaka named Jayaséna (She-ye-si-na), 
a Kshattriya of Western India. He was exceedingly 
simple-minded and moderate. He amused himself amid 
the forests and hills, dwelling in a sort of fairyland, 
whilst his mind wandered amid the limits of truth (true 
limits). He had deeply studied the mysteries both of 
orthodox and other treatises (inside and outstde books). 
His language and observations were pure, and his argu- 
ments elevated; his presence was quiet and dignified. 
The Sramanas, Brineaee heretics of different ccueele, 
the king of the country, the great ministers and house- 
holders, and persons of rank came together to visit him 
and personally to ask him questions. His pupils occu- 
pied sixteen apartments;*’ and although nearly seventy 
years of age, he read with them diligently and without 
cessation, and applied their minds only to the study 
of Buddhist sdétras, rejecting all other engagements. 
Thus night and day he gave up body and mind to. this 
pursuit alone. 

It is a custom in India to make little stépas of 
powdered scent made into a paste; their height is about 
six or seven inches, and they place inside them some 
written extract from a stra, this they call a dharma- 
Sarira® (fa-shi-lt). When the number of these has be- 
come large, they then build a great stdpa, and collect all 
the others within it, and continually offer to it religious 


* The text here seems to be aban; Arch. Surv., vol. iii. p. Bch 
faulty. pl. xlvi.; see mor ‘Bom. B. BR. A.'S 
ae See the seals found at Bird- vol. vi. p. 157 f. 


~ BOOK IX.] RAFAGRIHA HOT SPRINGS. 147 
offerings. This then was the occupation of Jaya-séna 


(Ching-kian) ; with his mouth he declared the excellent 
law, and led and encouraged his students, whilst with his 
hand he constructed these st#pas. Thus he acquired 
the highest and most excellent religious merit. In the 
evening, again, he would walk up and down worship- 
ping and repeating his prayers, or silently sit down in 
meditation. For eating or sleeping he had little time, 
and relaxed none of his discipline night or day. Even 
after he was an hundred years old his mind and body 
were in full activity. During thirty years he had made 
seven kétis of these dharma-sarira stipas, and for every 
kéti that he made he built a great stidpa and placed 
them in it. When full, he presented his religious offer- 
ings and invited the priests; whilst they, on their 
part, offered him their congratulations.® On these 
occasions a divine light shone around and spiritual 
wonders (miracles) exhibited themselves; and from 
that time forth the miraculous light has continued to 
be seen. 

South-west of the Yashtivana®® about ro li or so, on 
the south side of a great mountain, are two warm 
springs ;*! the water is very hot. In old days, Tathagata 
caused this water to appear, and washed himself therein. 
The pure flow of these waters still lasts without dimi- 
nution. Men far and near flock here to bathe, after 
which those who have suffered from disease or chronic 
affections are often healed. By the side of the springs 
is a stéipa, to mark the place where Tathagata walked for 
exercise. 

To the south-east of the Yashtivana about six or seven 


"8 Or, invited the congregation of 
priests to a religious assembly to 
consecrate the service. 

30 The Bamboo forest (Chang-lin) 
is still known as the Jakhti-ban ; it 
lies to the east of the Buddhain hill 
(Buddhavana), and is frequented 
by the people for the purpose of 


cutting bamboos (Cunningham, Ane. 
Geoy., p. 461). 

31 These springs are about two 
miles to the south of Jakhti-ban, 
at a place called Tapoban, which 
name is a common contraction of 
Tapta-pini, or the ‘hot water ” 
({bid.) 


148 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x. 


li we come toa great mountain. Before a cross-ridge * of 
this mountain is a stipa. Here in old days Tathagata 
explained the law during the three months of rain for the 
benefit of men and Dévas. Then Bimbisara-raja (Pin- 
pi-so-lo) wished to come to hear the law. He cut away 
the mountain, and piled up the stones to make steps in 
order to ascend. The width is about twenty paces and 
the length 3 or 4 li. 

To the north of the great mountain 3 or 4 li is a 
solitary hill. Formerly the Rishi Vyasa** (Kwang-po) 
lived here in solitude. By excavating the side of the 
mountain he formed a house. Some portions of the 
foundations are still visible. His disciples still hand down 
his teaching, and the celebrity of his bequeathed doctrine 
still remains. 

_To the north-east of the solitary hill 4 or 5 li there 
is a small hill, also standing alone. In the side of this 
hill (Aas been excavated) a stone chamber. In length and 
breadth ® it is enough to seat 1000 persons orso. In 
this place Tathagata, when living in the world, repeated 
the law for three months. Above the stone chamber is a 
great and remarkable rock, on which Sakra, king of Dévas, 
and Brahma-raja pounded some oz-head sandal-wood, and 
with the dust sprinkled the body of Tathigata, The sur- 
face of the stone still emits the scent of the perfume. 

At the south-west angle of the stone house there is a 
lofty cavern which the Indians call the palace of the 
Asuras (‘O-su-lo), Formerly there was a good-natured 
fellow who was deeply versed in the use of magic formule. 
He engaged with some companions, fourteen altogether, 
to covenant with one another to enter this lofty cavern. 
After going about 30 or 40 li, suddenly the whole place was 


32 Or it may be “a transverse 4 This restoration rests on M. 
pass.” Julien's authority, as explained in 
33 The great mountain referred his note (iii. 13). 
to in the text corresponds withthe * Kwang mow, see Medhurst, 
lofty hill of Handia, 1463 feet in Chin. Diet., sub Mow, p. 994. 
height (Cunningham). 


BOOK IX.} KUSAGARA-PURA. 149 


lighted up with great brilliancy, and they saw a walled 
city before them, with towers and look-outs all of silver 
and gold and lapis-lazuli (Weu-di). The men having ad- 
vanced to it, there were some young maidens who stationed 
themselves at the gates, and with joyful laughing faces 
greeted them and paid them reverence. Going on a little 
farther they came to the inner city-gates, where there 
were two slave-girls holding each of them a golden vessel 
full of flowers and scents. Advancing with these, they 
waited the approach of the visitors, and then said, “ You 
must first bathe yourselves in yonder tank, and then 
anoint yourselves with the perfumes and crown yourselves 
with the flowers, and then you may enter the city. Do 
not hasten to enter yet; only that master of magic can 
come in at once.” Then the other thirteen men went 
down at’once to bathe. Having entered the tank, they 
all at once became confused, and forgot all that had taken 
.place, and were (found) sitting in the middle of a rice 
field distant from this due north, over a level country, 
about 30 or 40 li. 

By the side of the stone house there is a wooden way 
(a road made with timber) ® about 10 paces wide and about 
4or5li. Formerly Bimbisara-rija, when about to go to 
the place where Buddha was, cut out a passage through 
the rock, opened up the valleys, levelled the precipices, 
and led a way across the river-courses, built up walls of 
stone, and bored through the opposing crags, and made 
ladders up the heights to reach the place where Buddha 
was located. 

From this spot proceeding eastward through the moun- 
tains about 60 li, we arrive at the city Kusag4ra-pura 
(Kiu-she-kie-lo-pu-lo), or “the royal city of best grass 
(lucky grass).” This is the central point of the kingdom 
of MagadhaJ’” Here the former kings of the country 


36 Chan-tau, wooden bridges over Rdéjagriha, or the “royal residence,” 
mountain chasms (Khang-hi, quoted It was also named Girivraja, or the 
by Julien, note in loco). “hill surrounded.” (See Cunning- 

37 Kusagirapura was the original ham, Ane. Gcog., p. 462). 
capital of Magadha, and was called 


150 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES.  [poox Ix. 


fixed their capital. It produces much of the most excel- 
lent, scented, fortunate grass, and therefore it is called 
“the city of the superior grass.” High mountains sur- 
round it on each side, and form as it were its external 
walls®8 On the west it is approached through a narrow 
pass, on the north there is a passage through the moun- 
tains, The town is extended from east to west and narrow 
from north to south. It is about 150 li in circuit. The 
remaining foundations of the wall of the inner city 
are about 30 li in circuit. The trees called Kie-ni-kia 
(Kanakas) border all the roads, their flowers exhale a 
delicious perfume, and their colour is of a bright golden 
hue. In the spring months the forests are all of a golden 
colour. 

Outside the north gate of the palace city is a stdpa. 
Here Dévadatta (Ti-p’o-to-lo) and Ajatasatru-raja 
Wi-sing-yun), having agreed together as friends, liberated 
the drunken elephant for the purpose of killing Tathagata. 
But Tathagata miraculously caused five lions to proceed 
from his finger-ends; on this the drunken elephant was 
subdued and stood still before him. 

To the north-east of this spot is a st#pa. This is where 
SAriputra (She-li-tseu) heard Aévajita (O-shi-p’o-shi) 
the Bhikshu declare the law, and by that means reached 
the fruit (of an Arhat). At first Sdriputra was a layman; 
he was a man.of distinguished ability and refinement, and 
was highly esteemed by those of his own time. At this 
time, with other students, he accepted the traditional teach- 
ing as delivered to him. On one occasion, being about to 
enter the great city of Rajagriha, the Bhikshu Aévajita 
(Ma-shing) was also just going his round of begging. Then 
Sariputra, seeing him at a distance, addressed his disciples, 
saying, “ Yonder man who comes, so full of dignity and 
nobleness, if he has not reached the fruit of sanctity 

38 So also Fa-hian states that the % This is a perversion of the 
five hills which surround the town simple story found in the Lo-sho- 


are like the walls of a city (cap. ding, vv. 1713 ss., and compare p. 
xxviii.) 240, n. 4. 


BOOK 1X.] PLOT OF SRIGUPTA. 151 


(Arhatship), how is he thus composed and quiet? Let us 
stop awhile and observe him as he approaches.” Now as 
A§vajita Bhikshu had reached the condition of an Arhat, 
his mind was self-possessed, his face composed and of an 
agreeable refinement ; thus, holding his religious staff, he 
came along with a dignified air. Then Sariputra said, 
“Venerable sir! are you at ease and happy? Pray, who 
is your master, and what the system you profess, that you 
are so gladsome and contented ?” 

ASvajita answering him said, “ Know you not the royal 
prince, the son of Suddhddana-rAja, who gave up the condi- 
tion of a Chakravarttin monarch, and from pity to the six 
kinds of creatures for six years endured penance and 
reached the condition of Sambddhi, the state of perfect 
omniscience? This is my master! As to his law, it has 
respect to a condition including the absence of existence, 
without nonentity ;* it is difficult to define; only Buddhas 
with Buddhas can fathom it; how much less can foolish 
and blind mortals, such as J, explain its principles, But 
for your sake I will recite a stanza in praise of the law of 
Buddha.”*! Sariputra having heard it, obtained forthwith the 
fruit of Arhatship. 

To the north of this place, not far off, there is a very 
deep ditch, by the side of which is built a stépa; this is 
the spot where Srigupta (She-li-kio- -to) wished to destroy 
Buddha by means of fire concealed in the ditch and 
poisoned rice. Now Srigupta (Shing-mi) greatly honoured 
(believed in) the heretics, and his mind was deeply possessed 
by false views. All the Brahmachirins said, “The men of 
the country greatly honour Gautama (Kiao-ta-mo), and in 
consequence he causes our disciples to be without support. 
Invite him then to your house to eat, and before the door 
make a great ditch and fill it with fire, and cover it over 
slightly with wooden planks to conceal the fire; moreover, 


49 The opposite of existence (yau, "41 The stanza he recited is given 
material or conditioned existence), in the Fo-sho-king, v. 1392. Seo 
and also of not-being. also p. 194, n. 2. 


152 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox 1x. 


poison the food, so that if he escape the fire (fiery ditch), 
he will take the poison.” 

Srigupta, according to his directions, caused the poison 
to be prepared, and then all the people in the town, 
knowing the evil and destructive design of Srigupta 
against the Lord of the World, entreated Buddha not to go 
to the house. The Lord said, “ Be not distressed ; the body 
of Tathagata cannot be hurt by such means as these.” He 
therefore accepted the invitation and went. When his foot 
trod on the threshold of the door the fire in the pit be- 
came a tank of pure water with lotus flowers on its sur- 
face. 

Srigupta having witnessed this, being filled with shame 
and fear lest his project should fail, said to his followers, 
“He has by his magical power escaped the fire; but 
there is yet the poisoned food!” The Lord having eaten 
the rice, began to declare the excellent law, on which 
Srigupta, having attended to it, himself became a dis- 
ciple. 

To the north-east of this fiery ditch of Srigupta (Shing- 
mi), at a bend of the city, is a stdpa ; this is where Jivaka 
(Shi-fo-kia),# the great physician, built a preaching-hall 
tor Buddha. All round the walls he planted flowers and 
fruit trees. The traces of the foundation-walls and the 
decayed roots of the trees are still visible. Tathagata, 
when he was in the world, often stopped here. By the 
side of this place are the remains of the house of Jivaka, 
and the hollow of an old well also exists there still. 

To the north-east of the palace city going 14 or 15 li, 
we come to the mountain Gridhrakfta (Ki-li-tho-kin- 
ch’a). Touching the southern slope of the northern 
mountain, it rises as a solitary peak to a great height, on 
which vultures make their abode. It appears like a high 
tower on which the azure tints of the sky are reflected, 
the colours of the mountain and the heaven being com- 
mingled. 

# For the history of Jivaka see 8S. Hardy’s Manual of Buddhism, p. 238. 


BOOK IXx.] THE GRIDHRAKUTA PEAK. 153 


When Tathagata had guided the world for some fifty 
years, he dwelt much in this mountain, and delivered the 
excellent law in its developed form (kwang). Bimbisara- 
raja, for the purpose of hearing the law, raised a number 
of men to accompany him from the foot of the mountain 
to its summit. They levelled the valleys and spanned the 
precipices, and with the stones made a staircase about 
ten paces wide and 5 or 6 lilong. In the middle of the 
road there are two small stdpas, one called “ Dismounting 
from the chariot” (Hia-shing), because the king, when he 
got here, went forward on foot. The other is called 
“Sending back the crowd” (Z’ut-fan), because the king, 
separating the common folk, would not allow them to 
proceed with him, The summit of this mountain is long 
from the east to the west and narrow from north to south. 
There is a brick vthdra on the borders of a steep precipice 
at the western end of the mountain. It is high and wide 
and beautifully constructed. The door opens to the east. 
Here Tathagata often stopped in old days and preached 
the law. There is now a figure of him preaching the law 
of the same size as life. 

To the east of the vikdra is a long stone, on which 
Tathagata trod as he walked up and down for exercise. 
By the side of it is a great stone about fourteen or fifteen 
feet high and thirty paces round, This is the place where 
Dévadatta** flung a stone from a distance to strike 
Buddha. 

South of this, below the 


precipice, is a stdpa. Here 


utterance here are fabulous. Com- 


3A great number of the later 
developed séiras are said to have 
been delivered here. There is also 
a late form of belief which connects 
the spiritual form of Buddha with 
this mountain. It is barely possible 
that Buddha did in his later years 
declare a developed (mystical) form 
of his doctrine, and perhaps this 
mountain was the scene of his teach- 
ing ; but the greater portion of the 
sitras claiming the authority of his 


pare Fa-hian, cap. xxix. The Vul- 
ture Peak is a part of the lofty hill 
now called Saila-giri, but no caves 
have been discovered there (Cun- 
ningham, Ane. Geog., p. 466). 

# The story of Dévadatta rolling 
down the stone will be found in Fa- 
hian, chap. xxix., also in the Jo-sho- 
king, p. 246, and in the Manual of 
Buddhism, p. 383. The accounts, 
however, slightly differ. 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES.  [sook 1x. 


154 
Tathdgata, when alive in old time, delivered the Sad- 
dharma Pundarika Sttra" 

To the south of the vikdra, by the side of a mountain 
cliff, is a great stone house. In this Tathdgata, when 
dwelling in the world long ago, entered Samddhi. 

To the north-west of the stone house and in front of it 
is a great and extraordinary stone. This is the place 
where Ananda (O-nan) was frightened by Mara. When 
the venerable Ananda had entered Samddhi in this place, 
Mara-raja, assuming the form of a vulture, in the middle 
of the night, during the dark portion of the month, took 
his place on this rock, and flapping his wings and utter- 
ing loud screams, tried to frighten the venerable one.‘¢ 
Ananda, filled with fear, was at a loss to know what to 

do; then Tathagata, by his spiritual power, seeing his 
state, stretched out his hand to compose him. He pierced 
the stone wall and patted the head of Ananda, and with 
his words of great love he spoke to him thus: “ You need 
not fear the assumed form which Mara has taken.” 
Ananda in consequence recovered his composure, and 
remained with his heart and body at rest and in peace. 

Although years and months have elapsed since then, 
yet the bird traces on the stone and the hole in the rock*” 
still remain visible. 

By the side of the vihdra there are several stone 
houses,‘8 where SAriputra and other great Arhats entered 
Samadhi. In front of the stone house of Sariputra is a 


4 Fa-hian relates how he visited 
the cave on this peak, and wept in 
recollection of Buddha’s residence 
therein. Here also, he adds, “he 
delivered the Sheu-ling-yan Stra,” 
This is the Suraigama Sitra, Hiuen 
Tsiang says he also delivered here 
the Saddharma Pundaritka Sétra. 
These sitras, belonging to the last 
stage of Buddhist development, are 
referred to this mountain, as it was 
the scene of Buddha’s latest teach- 
ing. See Cunningham, Ane. Geog, 


p- 4673 see also Fergusson, Care 
Temples of India, p. 50. 

4 Fa-hian, chap. xxix. 

#7 Julien translates “The long 
cavern which traverses the flanks of 
the mountain.” But the “long 
cavern” is the hole referred to, 
piercing the side of the rock. 

4 Probably caves or cells. Cun- 
ningham understands them to be 
small rooms built against the cliff 
(Anc. Geog., p. 467). The Chinese, 
quite bears out this idea. 


155 


The hollow (shaft) still 


BooK 1x.] THE HOT SPRINGS NEAR RAFAGRIHA. 


great well, dry and waterless. 
remains. 

To the north-east of the vthdra, in the middle of a rocky 
stream, is a large and flat stone. Here Tathagata dried 
his Kashdya garment. The traces of the tissue of the robe 
still remain, as though they were cut out on the rock. 

By the side of this, and upon a rock, is a foot-trace of 
Buddha. Although the “ wheel” outline is somewhat ob- 
scure, yet it can be distinctly traced. 

On the top of the northern mountain is a stdpa. From 
this point Tathagata beheld the town of Magadha,® and 
for seven days explained the law. 

To the west of the north gate of the mountain city 
is the mountain called Pi-pu-lo (Vipula-giri). Accord- 
ing to the common report of the country it is said, 
“On the northern side of the south-western crags of 
this mountain there sere formerly five hundred warm 
springs; now there are only some ten or so; but some 
of these are warm and others cold, but none of them 
hot.” These springs have their origin to the south of the 
Snowy Mountains from the Anavatapta (Wu-jeh-no- 
chi) lake! and flowing underground, burst forth here. 
The water is very sweet and pure, and the taste is like 
that of the water of the lake. The streams (from the 
lake) are five hundred in number (branches), and as they 
pass by the lesser underground fire-abodes (hells), the 
power of the flames ascending causes the water to be 


4 That is, as it seems, the capital the south-western slopes of Pi-po- 


of Magadha, viz., Rajagriha. 

* T have restored Pi-pu-lo to 
Vipula in deference to Julien. 
But it might be equally well re- 
stored to Vaibhira or Baibhar, 
and as Cunningham in his map of 
Rajgir (Arch. Survey, vol. i. pl. 
xiv.) places Baibhar to the west of 
the north gate of the town, it 
would be more agreeable to the 
account in the text to restore it so. 
On the other hand, as Hiuen 
Tsiang places the hot springs on 


lo, and as we are told that “the hot 
springs of Rajagriha are found at 
the eastern foot of Mount Baibhar 
and the western foot of Mount 
Vipula ” (Cunningham, Anc. Geog., 
p. 466), it would seem that he must 
be speaking of Vipula. 

51 Ravanahrad ; in Pali, Anava- 
tatta, in Tibetan, Ma-dros, in Chinese, 
Wu-je-nao. See Asiat. Res., vol. xx. 
p. 65, or Ann. Musée Guimet, tom. ii. 
p. 168; Burnouf, Jntrod., pp. 152, 
154; and ante, vol. i. pp. 11-13. 


156 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES.  [poox 1x. 


hot. At the mouths of the various hot springs there are 
placed carved stones, sometimes shaped like lions, and 
at other times as the heads of white elephants; some- 
times stone conduits are constructed, through which the 
water flows on high (agueduets), whilst below there are 
stone basins, in which the water collects like a pond. 
Here people of every region come, and from every city, 
to bathe; those who suffer from any disease are often 
cured. On the right and left of the warm springs * are 
inany sté@pas and the remains of vihdras close together. 
In all these places the four past Buddhas have sat and 
walked, and the traces of their so doing are still left. 
These spots being surrounded by mountains and supplied 
with water, men of conspicuous virtue and wisdom take 
up their abode here, and there are many hermits who 
live here also in peace and solitude, 

To the west of the hot springs is the Pippala (Pi- 
po-lo) stone house. When the Lord of the World was 
alive in olden times, he constantly dwelt here. The deep 
cavern which is behind the walls of this house is the 
palace abode of an Asura (or, the Asuras). Many Bhik- 
shus who practise Samddht dwell here. Often we may 
see strange forms, as of Nagas, serpents, and lions, come 
forth from it. Those who see these things lose their 
reason aud become dazed. Nevertheless, this wonderful 
place (excellent land) is one in which holy saints dwell, 
and occupying the spot consecrated by such sacred 


52 The names of these warm 


but it is usually restored to Pip- 
springs are given by Cunningham 


pala, This stone house is supposed 


(Ane. Geog., p. 466). 

*3 This stone house is mentioned 
also by Fa-hian, chap. xxx. He 
places it to the south of the new 
city, west about three hundred 
paces. It would therefore be in 
Mount Baibhar, and Cunningham 
suggests that Pi-pu-lo may be an 
equivalent for Vaibhara (Arch. 
Survey, i. p. 21 n.). It may be so, 


to be the same as the present Son- 
bhandar, or ‘‘treasury of gold” 
(tbid.) General Cunningham also 
identifies the Sonbh&ndar cave with 
the Sattapanni cave. But this 
seems impossible. Mr. Fergusson’s 
remarks on this perplexing subject 
are intelligible and satisactory. See 
Cave Temples of India, pp. 49, 50 
and note. 


BOOK IX.] THE ASURA CAVE. 157 


traces, they forget the calamities and evils that threaten 
them. 

Not long ago there was a Bhikshu of a pure and up- 
right life, whose mind was enamoured of solitude and 
quiet; he desired to practise Samddhi concealed in this 
house. Some one protested and said, “Go not there! 
Many calamities happen there, and strange things causing 
death are frequent. It is difficult to practise Samddhi 
in,such a spot, and there is constant fear of death, You 
ought to remember what has happened before time, if 
you would not reap the fruits of after-repentance.” The 
Bhikshu said, “Not so! My determination is to seek the 
fruit of Buddha and to conquer the Déva Mara. If these 
are the dangers of which you speak, what need to name 
them?” Then his took his pilgriim’s staff and proceeded 
to the house. There he reared an altar and began to 
recite his magic protective sentences. After the tenth 
day, a maiden came forth from the cave and addressed 
the Bhikshu, saying, “Sir of the coloured robes! you 
observe the precepts, and, with full purpose, you adopt 
the refuge (found in Buddha); you aspire after (prepare) . 
wisdom, and practise Samddhi, and to promote in your- 
self spiritual power, so that you may be an illustrious 
guide of men, you dwell here and alarm me and my 
fellows! But how is this in agreement with the doc- 
trine of Tathagata?” The Bhikshu said, “I practise a 
pure life, following the holy teaching (of Buddha). I 
conceal myself among the mountains and dells to avoid 
the tumult of life. In suddenly bringing a charge 
against me, I ask where is my fault?” She replied, 
“Your reverence! when you recite your prayers, the 
sound causes fire to burst into (my house) from without, 
and burns my abode; it afflicts me and my family! I 
pray you, pity us, and do not say your charmed prayers 
any more!” 

The Bhikshu said, “I repeat my prayers to defend my- 
self, and not to hurt any living thing. In former days, 


158 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book Ix. 


a religious person (a disciple) occupied this place and 
practised Samddhi with a view to obtain the holy fruit 
and to help the miserable; ** then with unearthly sights 
he was frightened to death and gave up his life. This 
was your doing. What have you to say?” 

She replied, ““Oppresed with a weight of guilt, my wis- 
dom is small indeed ; but from this time forth I will bar 
my house and keep the partition (between it and this 
chamber). Do you, venerable one, on your part, I Pray, 
repeat no more spiritual formule.” 

On this the Bhikshu prepared himself in Samddhi, and 
from that time rested in quiet, none hurting him. 

On the top of Mount Vipula (Pi-pu-lo) is a stdpa. This 
is where in old times Tathagata repeated the law. At the 
present time naked heretics (Nirgranthas) frequent this 
place in great numbers; they practise penance night and 
day without intermission, and from morn till night walk 
round (the stipa) and contemplate it with respect. 

To the left of the northern gate of the mountain 
city (Girivjaja, Shan-shing), going east, on the north 
» side of the southern crag (precipice or cliff), going 2 or 
3 li, we come to a great stone house in which Dévadatta 
formerly entered Samddht. 

Not far to the east of this stone house, on the top of a 
flat stone, there are coloured spots like blood. By the 
side of this rock a std@pa has been built. This is the place 
where a Bhikshu practising Samddhi wounded himself 
and obtained the fruit of holiness. 

There was formerly a Bhikshu who diligently exerted 
himself in mind and body, and secluded himself in the 
practice of Samddhi. Years and months elapsed, and he 
had not obtained the holy fruit. Retiring from the spot, 
he upbraided himself, and then he added with a sigh, “I 
despair of obtaining the fruit of Arhatship (freedom from 
learning). What use to keep this body, the source of im- 


54 T.e., to succour the people in the dark ways of birth, ze, demons 
and pretas and “the lost.” 


BOOK 1X.] THE KARANDAVENUVANA. 159 


pediment from its very character.” Having spoken thus, 
he mounted on this stone and gashed his throat. Forth- 
with he reached the fruit of an Arhat, and ascended into 
the air and exhibited spiritual changes; finally, his body 
was consumed by fire, and he reached Mirvdéna. Be- 
cause of his noble resolution they have built (this stiépa) 
asa memorial. To the east of this place, above a rocky 
crag, there is a stone stidpa. This is the place where a 
Bhikshu practising Samddhi threw himself down and 
obtained the fruit. Formerly, when Buddha was alive, 
there was a Bhikshu who sat quietly in a mountain wild, 
practising the mode of Samddhi leading to Arhatship. 
For a long time he had exercised the utmost zeal without 
result, Night and day he restrained his thoughts, nor 
ever gave up his quiet composure, Tathagata, knowing 
that his senses were fit for the acquirement (of emancipa- 
tion), went to the place for the purpose of converting him 
(perfecting him). In a moment °¢ he transported himself 
from the garden of bamboos (Vénuvana) to this mountain- 
side, and there calling him,5’ stood standing awaiting 
him, 

At this time the Bhikshu, seeing from a distance the 
holy congregation, his heart and body ravished with joy, 
he cast himself down from the mountain. But by his 
purity of heart and respectful faith for Buddha’s teaching 
before he reached the ground he gained the fruit of Arhat- 
ship, The Lord of the World then spoke and said, “ You 
ought to know the opportunity.” Immediately he ascended 
into the air and exhibited spiritual transformation. To 
show his pure faith they have raised this memorial. 

Going about one li from the north gate of the mountain 
city we come to the Karandavénuvana (Kia-lan-t’o- 
chuh-yuen),8 where now the stone foundation and the 


85 This incident is also related by or “ calling an assembly.” 
Fa-hian, cap. xxx. 58 The bamboo garden of Karanda, 
56 So I understand tan chi, “in or Kalanda. Foran account of this 
the snapping of a finger.” Julien garden see Fa-hian, (Beal’s edit., p. 
translates it as though Buddhacalled 117, n. 2), and also Julien in loco, 
the Bhikshu by cracking his fingers. n.1; see also Burnouf, /ntrod., rst ed. 
57 It may be either “calling him” p. 456; Lalita Vistara, p. 415. 


160 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book Ix. 


brick walls of a viddra exist. The door faces the east. 
Tathagata, when in the world, frequently dwelt here, and 
preached the law for the guidance and conversion of men 
and to rescue the people. They have now made a figure 
of Tathigata the size of life. In early days there was in 
this town a great householder (grthapatt) called Karanda ; 
at this time he had gained much renown by giving to the 
heretics a large bamboo garden. Then coming to see 
Tathdgata and hearing his law, he was animated by a true 
faith. He then regretted that the multitude of unbelievers 
should dwell in that place. “And now,” he said, “the 
leader of gods and men has no place in which to lodge.” 
Then the spirits and demons, affected by his faithfulness, 
drove away the heretics, and addressing them said, “ Kar- 
anda, the householder, is going to erect a vihdra here for 
the Buddha; you must get away quickly, lest calamity 
befall you!” 

The heretics, with hatred in their heart and mortified 
in spirit, went away; thereupon the householder built this 
vihdra. When it was finished he went himself to invite 
Buddha. Thereon Tathagata received the gift. 

To the east of the Karandavenuvana is a stdpa which was 
built by Ajatagatru-raja. After the Mirvdna of Tathagata 
the kings divided the relics (she-/z) ; the king Ajatagatru 
returned then with his share, and from a feeling of extreme 
reverence built (a stiéipa) and offered his religious offerings 
to it. When Asdka-rija (Wu-yau) became a believer, he 
opened it and took the relics, and in his turn built another 
stipa. This building constantly emits miraculous light. 

By the side of the stépa of Ajatasatru-raja is another 
sttpa which encloses the relics of half of the body of 
Ananda. Formerly, when the saint was about to reach 
Nirvéna, he left the country of Magadha and proceeded to 
the town of Vaigdli (Fei-she-li). As these two countries 
disputed (about him) and began to raise troops, the vener- 
able one, from pity, divided his body into two parts. The 
king of Magadha, receiving his share, returned and offered 


BOOK Ix.] THE SATTAPANNI HALL. 161 


to it his religious homage, and immediately prepared in 
this renowned land, with great honour, to raise a stipa, 
By the side of this building is a place where Buddha 
walked up and down. 

Not far from this is a stépa. This is the place where 
Sariputra and Mudgalaputra dwelt during the rainy 
season. 

To the south-west of the bamboo garden (Vénuvana) 
about 5 or 6 li, on the north side of the southern 
mountain, is a great bamboo forest. In the middle of it 
is a large stone house. Here the venerable K&éyapa with 
999 great Arhats, after Tathigata’s Nirvana, called a con- 
vocation (for the purpose of settling) the three Pitakas. 
Before it is the old foundation-wall. King Ajatagatru 
made this hall for the sake of accommodating the great 
Arhats who assembled to settle the Dharma-pitaka. 

At first, when Maha Kasyapa was seated in silent 
(study) in the desert (mountain forests), suddenly a bright 
light burst forth, and he perceived the earth shaking. Then 
he said, “ What fortunate change of events is there, that 
this miracle should oceur?” Then exerting his divine 
sight, he saw the Lord Buddha between the two trees 
entering Nirvdna., Forthwith he ordered his followers to 
accompany him to the city of KuSinagara (Ku-shi). 
On the way they met a Brahman holding in his hands a 
divine flower. KaSyapa, addressing him, said, “ Whence 
come you? Know you where our great teacher is at 
present?” The Brahman replied and said, “I have but 
just come from yonder city of Kuéginagara, where I saw 
your great master just entered into Mirvéna. A vast 


(4), where we have named “the 


59 This is the famous Sattapanni 
second beginning of the Vassa sea- 


cave, in which the “ first Buddhist 
son.” 


council” was held “At the en- 
trance of the Sattapanna cave in the 
Magadha town (compare ante, n. 
45) Giribbaja (.¢, Girivraja or 
Rajagrtha) the first council was 
finished after seven months ” (Dipa- 
vamsa (Oldenberg) v. 5). In con- 
nection with this extract I would 
refer to the sentence preceding it 


VOL, I. 


This seems to explain the 
constant use of the expression, the 
“double resting season,” by Hiuen 
Tsiang. See below, n. 61, 

6° The hall appears to have been 
structural; the cave at the back was 
natural. See Fergusson, Cave Tem- 
ples of India, p. 49. 


L 


162 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox 1x. 


multitude of heavenly beings were around him offering 
their gifts in worship, and this flower, which I hold, I 
brought thence.” 

Kasgyapa having heard these words said to his followers, 
“The sun of wisdom has quenched his rays. The world 
is now in darkness. The illustrious guide has left us and 
gone, and all flesh must fall into calamity.” 

Then the careless Bhikshus said one to another with 
satisfaction, “Tathagata has gone to rest. This is good 
for us, for now, if we transgress, who is there to reprove 
or restrain us?” 

Then Kagyapa, having heard this, was deeply moved 
and afilicted, and he resolved to assemble (collect) the 
treasure of the law (Dharma-pitaka) and bring to punish- 
_ ment the transgressors. Accordingly he proceeded to the 
two trees, and regarding Buddha, he offered worship. 

And now the King of the Law having gone from the 
world, both men and Dévas were left without a guide, and 
the great Arhats, moreover, were cleaving to (the idea of 
their) Nirvéna. Then the great Kaésyapa reflected thus : 
“To secure obedience to the teaching of Buddha, we ought 
to collect the Dharma-pitaka.” On this he ascended Mount 
Sumeru and sounded the great gong (ghantd), and spake 
thus: “ Now then, in the town of Rajagriha there is going 
to be a religious assembly.“1 Let all those who have 
obtained the fruit (of arhatship) hasten to the spot.” 

In connection with the sounding of the gong the direc- 
tion of Késyapa spread far and wide through the great 
chiliocosm, and all those possessed of spiritual capa- 
bilities, hearing the instructions, assembled in convocation. 
At this time KaSyapa addressed the assembly and said, 
“Tathigati having died (attained to extinction or Nirvdna); 
the world is empty. We ought to collect the Diarma- 
pitaka, in token of our gratitude to Buddha. Now then, 
being about to accomplish this, there should be profound 
composure (quiet). How can this be done in the midst of 


61 A business relating to religion; a religious proceeding. 


BOOK Ix.] THE FIRST COUNCIL. 163 


such a vast multitude? Those who have acquired the 
three species of knowledge (¢rividyd), who have obtained 
the six supernatural faculties (shadabiyiids), who have 
kept the law without failure, whose powers of discrimina- 
tion (dialectic) are clear, such superior persons as these 
may stop and form the assembly. Those who are learners 
with only limited fruit, let such depart to their homes.” 

On this 999 men were left; but he excluded Ananda, 
as being yet a learner. Then the great Kasyapa, calling 
him, addressed him thus: “You are not yet free from 
defects; you must leave the holy assembly.” He replied, 
“During many years I have followed Tathagata as his 
attendant ; every assembly that has been held for consider- 
ing the law, I have joined; but now, as you are going to 
hold an assembly after his death (wat), I find myself 
excluded; the King of the Law having died, I have lost 
my dependence and helper.” 

Kasyapa said,“ Do not cherish your sorrow! You were 
a personal attendant on Buddha indeed, and you therefore 
heard much, and so you loved (much), and therefore you 
are not free from all the ties that bind (the soul or affec- 
‘ions).” 

Ananda, with words of submission, retired and came 
to a desert place, desiring to reach a condition “beyond 
learning ;” he strove for this without intermission, but 
with no result. At lenoth, wearied out, he desired one 
day to lie down. Scarcely had his head reached the pillow? 
when lo! he obtained he condition of an Arhat. 

He then went to the assembly, and knocking-at the 
door, announced his arrival. Kaésyapa then asked him, 
saying, “ Have you got rid of all ties? In that case exer- 
cise your spiritual power and enter without the door being 
opened!” Ananda, in compliance with the order, entered 
through the keyhole,™ and having paid reverence to the 
priesthood, retired and sat down. 

62 For a similar account of An- the whole account. 


anda’s illumination, see Abstract of | © In other accounts it is stated 
Four Lectures, p. 72, and compare he entered through the wall. 


164 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [BOOK Ix. 


At this time fifteen days of the summer rest (Varshdva- 
sina) had elapsed. On this Késyapa rising, said, “Con- 
sider well and listen! Let Ananda, who ever heard the 
words of Tathagata, collect by singing through ®™ the 
Sttra-pitaka. Let Upali (Yeu-po-li), who clearly under- 
stands the rules of discipline (Vinaya), and is well known 
to all who know, collect the Vinaya-pitaka ; and I, Kas- 
yapa, will collect the Abhidharma-pitaka.” The three 
months of rain ® being past, the collection of the 7ripitaka 
was finished. As the great Kasyapa was the president 
(Sthavira) among the priests, it is called the Sthavira 
(Chang-tso-pu) convocation. 

North-west of the place where the great Kigyapa held 
the convocation is a stdpa. This is where Ananda, being 
forbidden by the priests to take part in the assembly, 
came and sat down in silence and reached the fruit (post- 
tion) of an Arhat. After this he joined the assembly. 

Going west from this point 20 li or so, is a stépa built 
by Agéka-1fja. This is the spot where the “great assembly” 
(Mahdsangha) formed their collection of books (or, held 
their assembly). Those who had not been permitted to 
join Kagyapa’s assembly, whether learners or those above 
learning (Arhats), to the number of 100,000 men, came 
together to this spot and said, “Whilst Tathagata was 
alive we all had a common master, but now the King of 
the Law is dead it is different. We too wish to show our 
eratitude to Buddha, and we also will hold an assembly 
for collecting the scriptures.” On this the common folk 
with the holy disciples came to the assembly (add assembled), 
the foolish and wise alike flocked together and collected 
the Stttra-pitaka, the Vinaya-pitaka, the Abhidharma- 
pitaka, the miscellaneous Pitaka (Khuddakanikdya)," and 


64 Chanting or rehearsing, sazigiti, © This is contrary to the usual 
* Or, the second “three months.” explanation, which makes the Stha- 
It‘is to be noted that the season of vira school date from the second 
Wass was twofold, either the first convocation at Vaigali, 
“three months,” or, the second 6’ Or perhaps the FSannipdta- 
“three months,” nikdya. 


BOOK IX.] NEW RAFAGRIAA. 165 


the Dhdrant-pitaka. Thus they distinguished five Pitahas. 
And because in this assembly both common folk and holy 
personages were mixed together, it was called “the assembly 
of the great congregation” (Aahdsangha).® 

To the north of the Vénuvana Vihfra about 200 paces 
we come to the Karanda lake (Karandahrada). When 
Tathigata was in the world he preached often here. The 
water was pure and clear, and possessed of the eight 
qualities. After the Nirvdna of Buddha it dried up and 
disappeared. 

To the north-west of the Karandahrada, at a distance 
of 2 or 3 li,is a sttpa which was built by Aédka-rija 
It is about 60 feet high ; by the side of it is a stone pillar 
on which is a record engraved relating to the founda- 
tion of the stépa. It is about 50 feet high, and on the 
top has the figure of an elephant. 

To the north-east of the stone pillar, not far, we come 
to the town of Rajagriha ” (Ho-lo-shi-ki-li-hi). The 
outer walls of this city have been destroyed, and there 
are no remnants of them left; the inner city (walls),7 
although in a ruined state, still have some elevation from 
the ground, and are about 20 li in circuit. In the 
first case, Bimbisira-raja established his residence in 
Kuéagara; in this place the houses of the people, being 
close together, were frequently burned with fire and 
destroyed. When one house was in flames, it was im- 
possible to prevent the whole neighbourhood sharing in 
the calamity, and consequently the whole was burned 
up. Then the people made loud complaints, and were 
unable to rest quietly in their dwellings, The king 


said, “By my demerit the 


68 This account, too, differs from 
the common tradition, which makes 
this school of the great assembly 
date from the schism at Vaisalt, 
The statement, however, of Hinen 
Tsiang, that the additional pifakas 
were collated at this assembly is a 
useful and suggestive one. 


lower people are afflicted; 


® For the eight qualities of water 
see J. 2. A. S., vol. ii. pp. I, 141. 

70 “The royal abode” (Wang she). 
This is what Fa-hian calls “ the 
new city.” It was to the north of 
the mountains, 

71 That is, the walls of the royal 
preciucts or the citadel. 


166 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book Ix. 


what deed of goodness (meritorious virtue) can I do in 
order to be exempt from such calamities?” His minis- 
ters said, “Mahfraja, your virtuous government spreads 
peace and harmony, your righteous rule causes light and 
progress. It is by want of due attention on the part of 
the people that these calamities of fire occur. It is 
necessary to make a severe law to prevent such occur- 
rences hereafter. Ifa fire breaks out, the origin must be 
diligently sought for, and to punish the principal guilty 
person, let him be driven into the cold forest. Now this 
cold forest (sttavana) is the place of corpses abandoned 
(cast out) there. Every one esteems it an unlucky place, 
and the people of the land avoid going there and passing 
through it. Let him be banished there as a cast-out 
corpse. From dread of this fate, the people will become 
careful and guard (against the outbreak of fire).” The king 
said, “It is well; let this announcement be made, and let 
the people attend to it.” 

And now it happened that the king’s palace was the 
first to be burned with fire. Then he said to his minis- 
ters, “I myself must be banished ;” and he gave up the 
government to his eldest son in his own place. “I wish 
to maintain the laws of the country (he said); I therefore 
myself am going into exile.” 

At this time the king of Vaig4li hearing that Bim- 
bisira-raja was dwelling alone in the “cold forest,” raised 
an army and put it in movement to invade (make a 
foray) when nothing was ready (to resist him). The 
lords of the marches (frontiers), hearing of it, built a 
town,” and as the king was the first to inhabit it, it 
was called “the royal city” (R&jagriha). Then the 
ministers and the people all flocked there with their 
families. 

It is also said that Ajitasatru-rija first founded this 

“ That is, as it seems, in the had been before used as a burial- 
place where the king was living. place for the people of the ‘‘old 


From this it would appear that the town.” 
site of the new town of Rajagrtha, 


BOOK IXx.] NALANDA. 167 


city, and the heir-apparent of Ajatasatru having come to 
the throne, he also appointed it to be the capital, and 
so it continued till the time of Agéka-raja, who changed 
the capital to Pataliputra, and gave the city of Raja- 
eriha to the Brahmans, so that now in the city there are 
no common folk to be seen, but only Brahmans to the 
number of a thousand families. 

At the south-west angle of the royal precincts” are 
two small savghérdmas; the priests who come and go, 
and are strangers in the place, lodge here. Here also 
Buddha, when alive, delivered the law (preached). North- 
west from this is a stdpa; this is the site of an old vil- 
lage where the householder Jyétishka™ (Ch’u-ti-se-kia) 
was born. 

Outside the south gate of the city, on the left of the 
road, is a stéipa. Here Tathagata preached and converted 
R&hula (Lo-hu-lo). 

Going north from this 30 li or so, we come to Nalanda 
satighdrdma.® The old accounts of the country say that 
to the south of this savghdrdma, in the middle of an 
Amra (‘An-mo-lo) grove, there is a tank. The Naga of this 
tank is called Nalanda.” By the side of it is built the 
satghdrdma, which therefore takes the name (of the Naga). 
But the truth is that Tathagata in old days practised the 
life of a Bédhisattva here, and became the king of a great 
country, and established his capital in this land. Moved 
by pity for living things, he delighted in continually 
relieving them. In remembrance of this virtue he was 
called 7° “charity without intermission,” and the sang- 


73 J.e., of the inner city of Raja- 
griha. 

74 In Chinese Sing lih, “constel- 
lation” or “star collection.” 

% Tf this Lo-hu-lo be the son of 
Buddha, his conversion is generally 
stated to have occurred at Kapila- 
vastu (Manual of Budhism, p. 206). 

76 Nalanda has been identified 
with the village of Baragaon, which 
lies seven miles north of Ra&jgir 


(Cunningham, Ane. Geoy., p. 468). 

7 According to I-tsing the name 
Nalanda is derived from Naga Nan- 
da (see J. &. A. S., N.S., vol. xiii. p. 
571). For a description of this 
temple of Nalanda see “Two Chin- 
ese Buddhist Inscriptions found at 
Buddha Gaya,” J. & A. S&S, NS., 
vol. xiii. le. See also Abstract of 
Four Lectures, p. 140. 

73 So I understand the passage, 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x 


hdrdma was called in perpetuation of this name. The 
site was originally an Amra garden. Five hundred 
merchants bought it for ten kdfis of gold pieces and gave 
it to Buddha. Buddha preached the law here during 
three months, and the merchants and others obtained the 
fruit of holiness. Not long after the Nirvdna of Buddha, 
a former king of this country named Sakraditya (Shi- 
kia-lo-’o-t’ie-to) respected and esteemed the (system of the) 
one Vehicle’? and honoured very highly the three 
treasures.®° Having selected by augury a lucky spot, he 
built this savghdrdma. When he began the work he 
wounded, in digging, the body of the Naga. At this time 
there was a distinguished soothsayer belonging to the 
heretical sect of the Nirgranthas. He having seen the 
occurrence, left this record: “ This is a very superior site. 
If you build here a savghdrdma, it must of necessity 
become highly renowned. Throughout the five Indies it 
will be a model. For a period of a thousand years it will 
flourish still, Students of all degrees will here easily 
accomplish their studies. But many will spit blood 
because of this wound given to the Naga.” 

His son, Buddhagupta-rija (Fo-t’o-kio-to), who 
succeeded him, continued to labour at the excellent under- 
taking of his father. To the south of this he built another 
sanghardma. 

Tathagatagupta-rija (Ta-tha-kie-to-kio-lo) vigor- 
ously practised the former rules (gf his ancestors), and he 
built east from this another savghdrdéma. 

Baladitya-raja (P’o-lo-’o-tie-lo) succeeded to the 
empire. On the north-east side he built a savghdrama. 


168 


It has no reference to the Naga. The 
word Nalanda would thus appear to 
be derived from na + alam + da, “not 
giving enough,” or ‘‘not having 
enough to give.” 

79 The ‘‘ one Vehicle,” according 
to the authority quoted by Julien 
(n. 2 im loco) is “the vehicle of 
Buddha, which is compared to a 


car formed of seven precious sub- 
stances, and drawn by a white ox.” 
But the expression, ‘“‘one Vehicle,” is 
a@ common one in later Buddhist 
books to denote the nature of 
Buddha, to which we all belong, 
and to which we all shall return. 

8 Triratndnt—Buddha, dharma, 
sangha, 


BOOK IX.] BALADITYARAFA. 169 


The work being done, he called together an assembly for 
congratulation. He respected. equally the obscure and 
the renowned, and invited common folk and men of 
religion (holiness) without distinction. The priests of all 
India came together for the distance of 10,000 i. After 
all were seated and at rest, two priests arrived, They led 
them up the three-storeyed pavilion. Then they asked 
them, saying, “ The king, when about to call the assembly, 
first asked men of all degrees (common and holy). From 
what quarter do your reverences come so late?” They 
said, “ We are from the country of China. Our teacher ® 
was sick. Having nourished him, we set out to accept the 
king’s far-off invitation.6* This is the reason why we 
have arrived so late.” 4 

The assembly hearing this, were filled with astonish- 
ment, and proceeded at once to inform the king. The 
king knowing that they were holy persons, went himself 
to interrogate them. He mounted the pavilion, but he 
knew not where they had gone. The king then was 
affected by a profound faith ; he gave up his country and 
became a recluse. Having done so, he placed himself as 
the lowest of the priests, but his heart was always uneasy 
and ill at rest. “ Formerly (he said) I was a king, and the 
highest among the honourable ; but now I have become a 
recluse, I am degraded to the bottom of the priesthood.” 
Forthwith he went to the priests, and said words to the 
above effect. On this the savgha resolved that they who 
had not received the full orders should be classed accord- 
ing to their natural years of life. This sanghdrdma is 
the only one in which this law exists. 


81 It is true the symbol shang 
in this phrase is not the same as 
that forming the second member of 
the word hoshang (upddhydya), but 
they are the same in sound, and 
therefore I think ho-shang in the 
text should be translated “teacher.” 

® That is, the invitation coming 
from a long distance. 

83 That is, he ascended the pa- 


vilion with three stages where the 
strangers from China had been re- 
ceived ; but when he arrived he 
found they had departed. 

& The usual order was that they 
should be classed according to the 
number of years they had been 
“professed disciples ;"” but in the 
convent of Baladitya the order was 
that they should be classed accord- 


170 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x. 


This king’s son, called Vajra (Fa-she-lo), came to the 
throne in succession, and was possessed of a heart firm in 
the faith. He again built on the west side of the convent 
a sanghdrdma. : 

After this a king of Central India built to the north of 
this a great savghdrdma. Moreover, he built round these 
edifices a high wall with one gate. A long succession of 
kings continued the work of building, using all the skill 
of the sculptor, till the whole is truly marvellous to be- 
hold. The king *® said, “In the hall of the monarch who 
first began the sarghdrdma I will place a figure of Bud- 
dha, and I will feed forty priests of the congregation every 
day to show my gratitude to the founder.” 

The priests, to the number of several thousands, are 
men of the highest ability and talent. Their distinction 
is very great at the present time, and there are many 
hundreds whose fame has rapidly spread through dis- 
tant regions. Their conduct is pure and unblamable. 
They follow in sincerity the precepts of the moral law. 
The rules of this convent are severe, and all the priests 
are bound to observe them. The countries of India re- 
spect them and follow them. The day is not sufficient 
for asking and answering profound questions. From 
morning till night they engage in discussion; the old and 
the young mutually help one another, Those who cannot 
discuss questions out of the Zripitaka are little esteemed, 
and are obliged to hide themselves for shame. Learned 
men from different cities, on this account, who desire to 
acquire quickly a renown in discussion, come here in 
multitudes to settle their doubts, and then the streams (of 
their wisdom) spread far and wide. For this reason some 
persons usurp the name (ef Ndlanda students), and in 
going to and fro receive honour in consequence. If men 


ing to their natural age, up to the 88 But it is not said what king. 
time of their full ordination, The The symbol, too, is ti, not wang. 
king, although he had become a Is Siladitya referred to? He was 
disciple, was not fully ordained. not to take the name of wang or 

® That is, to enter the whole ta wang (see vol. i. p. 213 n. 
area. 21). 


BOOK IX.]} NALANDA SAGES. 171 


of other quarters desire to enter and take part in the 
discussions, the keeper of the gate proposes some hard 
questions; many. are unable to answer, and retire. One 
must have studied deeply both old and new (d00ks) before 
getting admission. Those students, therefore, who come 
here as strangers, have to show their ability by hard dis- 
cussion; those who fail compared with those who succeed 
are as seven or eight to ten. The other two or three of 
moderate talent, when they come to discuss in turn in the 
assembly, are sure to be humbled, and to forfeit their 
renown. But with respect to those of conspicuous talent 
of solid learning, great ability, illustrious virtue, distin- 
guished men, these connect (their high names) with the 
succession (of celebrities belonging to the college), such as 
Dharmapala (Hu-fa) * and Chandrapala (Hu-yueh),® who 
excited by their bequeathed teaching the thoughtless and 
worldly ; Gunamati (Tih-hwui) ® and Sthiramati (Kin- 
hwui), the streams of whose superior teaching spread 
abroad even now; Prabhamitra (Kwang-yeu),! with his 
clear discourses; Jinamitra (Shing-yeu),? with his ex- 
alted eloquence ; the pattern and fame (sayings and doings) 
of Jiidnachandra (Chi-yueh) ® reflect his brilliant activity ; 
Sigrabuddha (?) (Ming-min), and Silabhadra (Kiai-hien), 
and other eminent men whose names are lost. These illus- 
trious personages, known to all, excelled in their attain- 
ments (virtue) all their distinguished predecessors, and 
passed the bounds of the ancients in their learning. Each 
of these composed some tens of treatises and commentaries 


& A native of Kaitchipura, author India, by caste a Kshattriya. He 


of the Sabdavidya-samyukta Sdstra 
(Max Miiller, pp. 308 n., 309-310 
and n., 346, 348-349, 361). 

8 See Vassilief; Max Miiller, 
India, p. 31. : 

89 Max Miiller, India, p. 305 and 
0, pp. 309-310 n., p. 362. 

% Pupil of Arya Asanga (Max 
Miiller, pp. 305, 310 n., 318n.; Vassi- 
lief, pp. 59 78, 226-227, 305). 

91 Po-lo-pho-mi-to-lo of Central 


reached China in a.p. 627, and died 
in 633 at the age of sixty-nine (Beal, 
Abs, Four. Lect., p. 28; Max Miiller, 
Ind., p. 312). 

9 Kitel, p. 37. 

%3 Max Miiller, Znd., pp. 312-361 ; 
Eitel, Djiidnatchandra. 

* The favourite teacher of Hiuen 
Tsiang. Vie, pp. 144, 212, 215, 225; 
Max Miiller, india, pp. 310, 343; 
Kitel, s. v. 


172 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x. 


which were widely diffused, and which for their perspicuity 
are passed down to the present time. 

The sacred relics on the four sides of the convent are 
hundreds in number. For brevity’s sake we will recount 
two or three. On the western side of the savghdrdma, 
at no great distance, is a vikdra. Here Tathagata in old 
days stopped for three months and largely expounded the 
excellent law for the good of the Dévas. 

To the south 100 paces or so isa small stdpa. This is the 
place where a Bhikshu from a distant region saw Buddha, 
Formerly there was a Bhikshu who came from a. distant . 
region. Arriving at this spot, he met the multitude of 
disciples accompanying Buddha, and was affected inwardly 
with a feeling of reverence, and so prostrated himself on 
the ground, at the same time uttering a strong desire that 
he might obtain the position of a Chakravarttt monarch. 
Tathagata having seen him, spoke to his followers thus: 
“That Bhikshu ought much to be pitied. The power 
(character) of his religious merit is deep and distant ;* 
his faith is strong. If he were to seek the fruit of Buddha, 
not long hence he would obtain it; but now that he has 
earnestly prayed to become a Chakravartti king, he will in 
future ages receive this reward: as many grains of dust 
as there are from the spot where he has thrown himself 
on the earth down to the very middle of the gold wheel,” 
so many Chakravartti kings will there be for reward ;%” 
but having fixed his mind on earthly joys, the fruit of 
holiness is far off.% 

On this southern side is a standing figure of Kwan- 
tsz’-tsai (Avalékitéévara) Bodhisattva. Sometimes he is 
seen holding a vessel of perfume going to the vthdra of 
Buddha and turning round to the right. 


% This is the literal meaning of %6 T.e., to the middle of the earth 
the symbols. Julien translates, “he where the gold wheel is, 
has a profound virtue.” It may 7 T.e., 80 many times will he be 
mean that his religious merit, though a Chakravartti king. 
deep, will have but a distant re- %8 This seems to explain the words 
ward. ; “deep and distant.” See above n. 95. 


BOOK IX.] THE BALADITYA VIHARA. 173 


To the south of this statue is a stiépa, in which are 
remains of Buddha’s hair and nails cut during three 
months. Those persons afflicted with children’s com- 
plaints,% coming here and turning round religiously, are 
mostly healed. 

To the west of this, outside the wall, and by the side of 
a tank, is a stipa. This is where a heretic, holding a 
sparrow in kis hand, asked Buddha questions relating to 
death and birth. 

To the south-east about 50 paces, within the walls, is 
an extraordinary tree, about eight or nine feet in height, 
of which the trunk is twofold. When Tathagata of old 
time was in the world, he flung his tooth-cleaner (danta- 
kdshtha) on the ground here, where it took root. Although 
many months and years have elapsed since then, the tree 
neither decreases nor increases.! 

Next to the east there is a great vihdra about 200 feet 
in height. Here Tathagata, residing for four months, 
explained various excellent laws. 

After this, to the north 100 paces or so, is a vihdra in 
which is a figure of Kwan-tsz’-tsai Bodhisattva. The dis- 
ciples of pure faith, who offer their religious gifts, do not 
all see the place he occupies alike; it is not fixed. 
Sometimes he (<.e., the figure) seems to be standing by the 
side of the door; sometimes he goes out in front of the 
eaves. Religious people, both clerics and laics, from all 
parts come together in numbers to offer their gifts. 

To the north of this vihdra is a great vikdra, in height 
about 300 feet, which was built by Baldditya-raja (Po- 
lo-’o-tie-to-wang), With respect to its magnificence, 


® Orit may betranslated, “those dantakdshtha in the original is 
afflicted with complicated diseases.” ‘‘ chewing-willow-twig.” The wood 
The symbol ying means either “a used in India is the Acacia catechu; 
babe ” or ‘to add or increase.”’ see ante, vol. i. p. 68 n.; and Ju- 
11 After having used the danta- lien’s note, tome I., p. 55. 
kashtha for cleaning the teeth, it was Wl Or, “do not all see what they 
usual to divide it into two parts, see alike. The place he occupies is 
hence the double trunk of the tree not fixed.” 
{compare Julien in loc. n. 1). The 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x. 


174 


its dimensions, and the statue of Buddha placed in it, it 
resembles (is the same as) the great vihkdra built under 
the Bédhi tree” 

To the north-east of this is a stdpa. Here Tathagata in 
days gone by explained the excellent law for seven days. 

To the north-west is a place where the four past Bud- 
dhas sat down. 

To the south of this is a vihkdra of brass 1 built by 
Siladitya-raja. Although it is not yet finished, yet its in- 
tended measurement, when finished (¢o plan), will be 100 
feet14 

Next to the eastward 200 paces or so, outside the 
walls, is a figure of Buddha standing upright and made of 
copper. Its height is about 80 feet. A pavilion of six 
stages is required | to cover it. It was formerly made by 
Parnavarma- raja (Mwan-cheu). 

To the north of this statue 2 or 3 i in a vthdra 
constructed of brick, is a figure of Tara Bédhisattva (To- 
lo-p’u-sa), This figure is of great height, and its spiritual 
appearance very striking. Every fast-day of the year 
large offerings are made to it. The kings and ministers 
and great people of the neighbouring countries offer ex- 
quisite perfumes and flowers, holding gem-covered flags 


102 This is the great vikdra sup- 
posed to liave been built by Aimara- 
déva. With respect to this and the 
whole subject, the controversies and 
theories respecting its date, see Dr. 
Rajéndralal Mitra’s work on the 
stapa at Buddha Gaya. 

3 Yu-shih, “ calamine stone, used 
in the formation of brass” (Med- 
hurst). There is much confusion in 
the use of the symbols teow shi and 
yu shi. The former is explained by 
Medhurst (sub voc. ?how) “as a kind 
of stone resembling metal, which the 
Chinese cal] the finest kind of na- 
tive copper. It is found in the Po- 
sse country and resembles gold. On 
the application of fire it assumes a 
red colour, and does not turn black.” 
But yu shi (which seems to be in- 
tended in the passage in the text, 


although Julien renders it theou chi) 
is explained by Medhurst (sub voc. 
shih) to be “calamine stone, used in 
the formation of brass.” The cala- 
mine stone is the cadmia of Pliny — 
“fit ete lapide ceroso, quem vocant 
cadmiam ” (vol. ii. cap. xxxiv. § 2). 
Cadmus is fabled to have discovered 
its use in the composition of brass, 
and hence the name. It may be 
called calamine from its place of 
exportation, Calamina, at the mouth 
of the Indus; hence the Chinese 
say it comes from Po-sse. Brass 
being capable of being rolled into 
thin sheets (latten or Dutch metal), 
might easily be used in covering the 
walls of a building. It was so used 
probably by Siladitya in the case 
under notice. 
14 Not in height, but in length. 


BOOK 1X.] SARIPUTRA AND ASVAFITA. 175 


and canopies, whilst instruments of metal and stone 
resound in turns, mingled with the harmony of flutes and 
harps. These religious assemblies last for seven days. 

Within the southern gate of the wall is a large well. 
Formerly, when Buddha was alive, a great company of 
merchants parched with thirst came here to the spot 
where Buddha was. The Lord of the World, pointing to 
this place, said, “You will find water there.” The chief 
of the merchants, piercing the earth with the end of the 
axle of his cart, immediately water rushed out from the 
ground. Having drunk and heard the law, they all ob- 
tained the fruit of holiness. 

Going south-west 8 or 9 li from the saighdrdma, we 
come to the village of Kulika (Kiu-li-kia), In itis a 
stipa built by Agdka-rija. “This is where the venerable 
Mudgalaputra (Mo-te-kia-lo-tseu) was born. By the side 
of the village is a stéipa. This is where the Venerable One 
reached complete Nirvdna,® and in it are placed the 
remains of his bequeathed body. The venerable (Maha- 
mudgalaputra) was of a great Brahman family, and was 
an intimate friend of Sariputra when they were young. 
This Sariputra was renowned for the clearness of his dia- 
lectic skill ; the other for his persevering and deep pene- 
tration. Their gifts and wisdom were alike, and moving 
or standing they were always together} Their aims and 
desires from beginning to end were just the same. They 
had together left the world from distaste to its pleasures, 
and as hermits had followed Safijaya (Shen-she-ye) as 
their master!’ SAriputra having met Agvajita (Ma- 
shing) the Arhat, hearing the law, understood its holy 
(meaning) On returning he repeated what he had 


aoe Literally, Niredna “ without 
remains” (anupadisega). For the 
meaning of this phrase consult Chil- 
ders, Pali Dict., sub voc. Nibbd- 
nam, Julien renders it Parinir- 
edna. 

iv6 For an account of these two 
disciples, see Fo-sho-king, varga 17. 
They are called Seriyut and Mu- 


galan in Pali,—Hardy, Manual of 
Budhism, p. 181. 

107 «There was at this time in 
Rajagaha a famous _paribrajika 
called Sanga. To him they (Seriyut 
and Mugalan) went, and they re- 
mained with him some time.” —J/a- 
nual of Budhism, p. 195. 

08 Or, understood the holy one, 
i.e, Agvajita. 


176 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x. 


heard for the sake of the.venerable (Mudgalaputra), On 
this he understood the meaning of the law and reached 
the first fruit. Then with 250 followers he went to the 
place where Buddha was. The Lord of the World, seeing 
him at a distance, pointing him out, said to his disciples, 
“That one coming here will be the first among my fol- 
lowers in the exercise of spiritual faculties (miraculous 
powers).” Having reached the place where Buddha was, 
he requested to enter the law (the society). The Lord 
replying, said, “ Welcome, O Bhikshu; carefully practise 
a pure life, and you shall escape the limits of sorrow.” 
Hearing this his hair fell off, and his common robes were 
changed into others. Observing in their purity the sec- 
tions of the rules of moral discipline, and being in his 
exterior behaviour faultless, after seven days, getting rid 
of all the bonds of sin, he reached the condition of an 
Arhat and the supernatural powers, 

East of the old village of Mudgalaputra, going 3 or 4 
li, we come to a stipa, This is the place where Bimbisira- 
raja went to have an interview with Buddha. When 
TathAgata first obtained the fruit of a Buddha, knowing 
that the hearts of the people of the Magadha were waiting 
for him athirst, he accepted the invitation of Bimbisfra- 
raja, and early in the morning, putting on his robes, he 
took his begging-dish, and with a thousand Bhikshus 
around him, on the right hand and the left (he advaneed). 
In front and behind these there were a number of aged 
Brahmans who went with twisted hair (jddina), and being 
desirous of the law, wore their dyed garments (chivara). 
Followed by such a throng, he entered the city of Raja- 
ertha. ; , 

Then Lord Sakra (Ti-shih), king of Dévas, changing his 
appearance into that of a Manava (Ma-na-p’o) youth,” 
with a crown upon his head and his hair bound up, in 
his left hand holding a golden pitcher and in his right a 
precious staff, he walked above the earth four fingers 


19 Je, became a Srotépanna. 10 That is, a young Brahman. 


BOOK IX.] SARIPUTRA. 177 


high, leading Buddha along the road in front, in the midst 
of the vast assembly. Then the king of the Magadha 
country, Bimbisara (Pin-pi-so-lo) by name, accompanied 
by all the Brahman householders within the land, and the 
merchants (ku-sse), 100,000 myriads in all, going before 
and behind, leading and following, proceeded from the 
city of Rajagriha to meet and escort the holy congrega- 
tion. 

South-east from the spot where Bimbasfra-r4ja met 
Buddha, at a distance of about 20 li, we come to the town 
of Kalapinaka (Kia-lo-pi-na-kia). In this town is a 
stdpa which was built by Agdka-raja. This is the place 
where Sariputra, the venerable one, was born. The 
well? of the place still exists. By the side of the place 1? 
is a stilpa. This is where the venerable one obtained 
Nirvana ; the relics of his body, therefore, are enshrined 
therein. He also was of a high Brahman family. His 
father was a man of great learning and erudition; he 
penetrated thoroughly the most intricate questions. There 
were no books he had not thoroughly investigated. His 
wife had a dream and told it to her husband. “Last 
night,” said she, “during my sleep my dreams were 
troubled by a strange man "3 whose body was covered with 
armour; in his hand he held a diamond mace with which 
he broke the mountains; departing, he stood at the foot 
of one particular mountain.” “ This dream,” the husband 
said, “is extremely good. You will bear a son of deep 
learning; he will be honoured in the world, and will 
attack the treatises of all the masters and break down 
their teaching (schools). Being led to consider, he will 
become the disciple of one who is more than human,” 4 


11 This may also mean “the stone 
foundation.” 

we) Julien says, “by the side of 
the well.” But refer to the account 
of Mudgalaputra’ s birthplace. The 
original is “the well of the village,” 
not ‘of the house.” 

U3 By intercourse with a strange 
man. 


VOL. I. 


14 This is an obscure sentence, 
but it seems to correspond with the 
dream of the man standing at the 
foot of a mountain. Buddha is con- 
stantly spoken of as “a mountain of 
gold ;” and the expression puh ju 
yih jin, “not as one man,” seems 
to allude, to the superhuman char- 
acter of Sdriputra’s future teacher. 

M 


178 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [nook 1x. 


And so in due course she conceived a child. All at 
once she was greatly enlightened. She discoursed in 
high and powerful language, and her words were not to 
be overthrown. When the venerable one began to be 
eight years old, his reputation was spread in every direc- 
tion. His natural disposition was pure and simple, his 
heart loving and compassionate. He broke through all 
impediments in his way, and perfected his wisdom. He 
formed a friendship when young with Mudgalaputra, and 
being deeply disgusted with the world, and having no 
system to adopt as a refuge, he went with Mudgalaputra 
to the heretic Safijaya’s abode, and practised (his mode of 
salvation). Then they said together, “This is not the 
system of final deliverance, nor is it able to rescue us 
from the trammels of sorrow. Let us each seek for an 
illustrious guide. He who first obtains sweet dew," let 
him make the taste common to the other.” 17 

At this time the great Arhat Aévajita, holding in his 
hand his proper measure bow] (pdtra), was entering the 
city begging for food. 

Sariputra seeing his dignified exterior and his quiet and 
becoming manner, forthwith asked him, “ Who is your 
master?” He answered, “The prince of the Sdkya tribe, 
disgusted with the world, becoming a hermit, has reached 
perfect wisdom. This one is my master.” Sdriputra added, 
“ And what doctrine does he teach? May I find a way 
to hear it?” He said, “I have but just received instruc- 
tion, and have not yet penetrated the deep doctrine.” 
Sariputra said, “Pray tell me (repeat) what you have 
heard.” Then Aégvajita, so far as he could, explained it 
and spoke. Sariputra having heard it, immediately 


On the other hand, Julien translates 5 “The highest ” or “absolute 
it, “there will not be a greater truth.” 


honour for a man than to become 6 That is, “the water of im- 
his disciple ;” or, ‘‘nothing will be mortality ;” the doctrine of Buddha. 
considered so great an honourtoa 7 Je., let him communicate the 


man as to become his disciple,” and knowledge of that system of salva- 
this perhaps is the meaning of the tion (sweet dew). 
passage. 


BOOK 1X.] DEATH OF SARIPUTRA. 179 


reached the first fruit, and went forthwith with 250 of his 
followers, to the place where Buddha was dwelling. 

The Lord of the World, seeing him afar off, pointing to 
him and addressing his followers, said, “Yonder comes 
one who will be most distinguished for wisdom among my 
disciples.” Having reached the place, he bent his head 
in worship and asked to be permitted to follow the teach- 
ing of Buddha, The Lord said to him, “Welcome, O 
Bhikshu.” 

Having heard these words, he was forthwith or- 
dained."8 Half a month after, hearing Buddha preach 
the law on account of a Brahman?” called “ Long-nails” 
(Dirghanakha), together with other discourses”? and 
understanding them with a Jively emotion, he obtained 
the fruit of an Arhat. After this, Ananda hearing 
Buddha speak about his Wirvdna, it was noised abroad 
and talked about (dy the disciples). Each one was affected 
with grief. Sariputra was doubly touched with sorrow, 
and could not endure the thought of seeing Buddha 
die. Accordingly, he asked the Lord that he might die 
first. The lord said, “Take advantage of your oppor- 
tunity.” 

He then bade adien to the disciples and came to his 
native village. His followers, the Sramanéras, spread 
the news everywhere through the towns and villages. 
Ajatasatru-rija and his people hastened together as the 
wind, and assembled in clouds to the assembly, whilst 
Sariputra repeated at large the teaching of the law. 
Having heard it, they went away. In the middle of the 
following night, with fixed (correct) thought, and mind 
restrained, he entered the Samddhi called “ final ex- 
tinction.” After awhile, having risen ont of it, he 
died. 


. M8 Admitted to undertake the Dirghanakha parizerdjaka pariprich- 
duties of the moral code of discip- chha (Jul. note in loc.) 
line. 20 Or, the end of the discourse ; 


n° This Brahman or Brahma- but the symbol chu generally means 
charin (ch’ang-chao-fan-chi) is well “the rest.” 
known, as there is a work called 


180 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox 1x. 


Four or five li to the south-east of the town Kala- 
pinaka #! is a stupa, This is the spot where a disciple 
of Sariputra reached Nirvdna. It is otherwise said, 
“When Kaésyapa Buddha was in the world, then three 
kétis of great Arhats entered the condition of complete 
Nirrvdya in this place.” 

Going 30 li or so to the east of this last-named 
stiipa, we come to Indragailaguha mountain (In-t’o-lo- 
shi-lo-kia-ho-shan),” The precipices and valleys of this 
mountain are dark and gloomy. Flowering trees grow 
thickly together like forests, The summit has two peaks, 
which rise up sharply and by themselves. On the south 
side of the western peak? between the crags is a great 
stone house, wide but not high. Here Tathagata in old 
time was stopping when Sakra, king of Dévas, wrote on 
the stone matters relating to forty-two doubts which he 
had, and asked Buddha respecting them.! 

Then Buddha explained the matters. The traces of 
these figures still exist. Persons now try to imitate by 
comparison these ancient holy figures (jigure forms)! 


121 For some remarks .on Kala- 
pindka, see Fa-hian (Beal's edition), 
p. IIT, n. 2. 

12“ The-cavern-of-Indra moun- 
tain.” The “rocky hill standing by 
itself,” named by Fa-hian, chap. 
xxviii, has been identified by 
General Cunningham (Arch. Sur- 
vey, vol. i. p. 18) with the western 
peak of this hill, The northern 
range of hills, that stretch from the 
neighbourhood of Gay4 to the bank 
of the Pafichina river, a distance 
of about thirty-six miles, end ab- 
ruptly in two lofty peaks; the 
higher of the two on the west is 
called Giryek. This is the one re- 
ferred to by Fa-hian. (See Cun- 
ningham, Arch, Survey, vol. i. pp. 
16, 17, and vol. iii, p. 150.) 

#3 Julien has omitted the symbol 
for west. 

124 Now called Gidha-dwar; in 
Sanskrit, Gridhradwara, “the vul- 
ture’s opening.” 


,% That is, at it seems, he drew 
certain figures or letters on the 
stone, and asked Buddha to ex- 
plain some difficulties he had as to 
the subject of these figures. These 
forty-two difficulties have no refer- 
ence to the Book of Forty-two See- 
tions. 

1-6 This translation appears to me 
the only justifiable one. Julien 
has, “ Now there is a statue there 
which resembles the ancient image 
of the saint (ie. of the Buddha).” 
But if the symbol ¢s’z (this) be 
taken for the adverb “here,” the 
natural translation would be: “Now 
there are here figures in imitation 
of these ancient sacred symbols or 
marks.” The only doubt is whether 
ts’z siang, “these marks or fig- 
ures,” or “the figures here,” be not 
an error. for “ Fo-siang,” “the figure 
of Buddha,” which occurs a little 
farther on. 


BOOK IX. ] THE HANSA STUPA. 181 


Those who enter the cave to worship are seized with a 
sort of religious trepidation. 

On the top of the mountain ridge are traces where 
the four former Buddhas sat and walked, still remaining. 
On the top of the eastern peak is a savghdrdma; the 
common account is this: when the priests who dwell 
here look across in the middle of the night at the wes- 
tern peak, where the stone chamber is, ‘they see before 
the image of Buddha lamps and torches constantly 
burning. 

Before the saighdrdma on the eastern peak of the ° 
Indragailaguhé mountain is a stdpa which is called 
Hansa (Keng-sha).% Formerly the priests of this 
sanghdrdma studied the doctrine of the Little Vehicle, 
that is, the Little Vehicle of the “gradual doctrine.” 128 
They allowed therefore the use of the three pure articles 
of food, and they followed this rule without fail. Now 
afterwards, when it was not time to seek for the three 
pure articles of food, there was a Bhikshu who was 
walking up and down; suddenly he saw a flock of wild 
geese flying over him in the air. Then he said in a 
jocose way, “To-day the congregation of priests has not 
food sufficient, Mahdsattvas! now is your opportunity.” 
No sooner had he finished, than a goose, stopping its 
flight, fell down before the priest and died. The 
Bhikshu having seen this, told it to the priests, who, 
hearing it, were affected with pity, and said one to the 
other, “Tathagata framed his law as a guide and en- 


17 Keng-so-kia-lan, in Chinese 
Keng-sha. The lower peak on the 
east is crowned with a solid tower 
of brickwork, well known as JAra- 
sandha-ka-baithak, or “J arasandha’s 
throne.” This tower, the ruins of 
which still exist, is probably the 
stdpa alluded to in the text (comp. 
Cunningham, Arch. Survey, i. 19). 
But I am at a loss how to explain 
General Cunningham’s remark 
(Arch. Survey, iii. ‘T41), that “close 


to the hot springs on the north-east 
slope of the Baibhar hill there is 
a massive foundation of a stone 
house 83 feet square, called Jaré- 
sandha-ka-baithak, or “Jardsandha’s 
throne.” This is explained, how- 
ever, in Fergusson and Burgess’ Cave 
Temples of India, by the statement 
that there are two sites so named. 

128 The advanced doctrine of the 
Little Vehicle (Hinayfna) ; compare 
Julien's note, tome i. p. 3 


182 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x. 


couragement (suitable to) the powers (springs) of each 
person ; 29 now we, following ‘the gradual doctrine,’ 
are using a foolish guide. The Great Vehicle is the true 
doctrine. We ought to change our former practice, and 
follow more closely the sacred directions. This goose 
falling down is, in truth, a true lesson for us, and we 
ought to make known its virtue by handing down the 
story to other ages, the most distant.” On this they 
built a stvpa to hand down to future ages the action 
they had witnessed, and they buried the dead goose 
beneath it. 

Going 150 or 160 li to the north-east of the Indra- 
Sila-guhi mountain, we come to the Kapédtika (pigeon) 
convent, There are about 200 priests, who study 
the principles of the Sarvistavida school of Bud- 
dhism. 

To the east is a stilpa which was built by Agdka-raja. 
Yormerly Buddha residing in this place, declared the 
law for one night to the great congregation, At this 
time there was a bird-catcher who was laying his snares 
for the feathered tribe in this wood. Having caught 
nothing for a whole day, he spoke thus, “My bad luck 
to-day-is owing to a trick somewhere.” Therefore he 
came to the place where Buddha was, and said in a high 
voice, “ Your speaking the law to-day, O Tathigata, has 
caused me to catch nothing in all my nets. My wife 
and my children at home are hungry; what expedient 
shall I try to help them?” Then Tathdgata replied, 
“Tf you will light a fire, I will give you something to 
eat.” 

Then Tathigata made to appear a large dove, which 
fell in the fire and died. Then the bird-catcher taking 
it, carried it to his wife and children, and they ate it 


9 Te, Buddha’s law was in- ningham with the village of Par- 
tended to be adapted to circum- bati, just 10 miles to the north- 
stances. east of Giriyek. This would require 

4 This Kapétika (pigeon) con- us to change the 150 or 160 li of 
vent is identified by General Cun- Hiuen Tsiang into 50 or 60. 


BOOK IX.] THE SOLITARY HILL. 183 


together. Then he went back to the place where Buddha 
was, on which, by the use of expedients, he framed his 
discourse so as to convert the bird-catcher. Having 
heard the discourse, he repented of his fault and was 
renewed in heart. Then he left his home, and practising 
wisdom, reached the holy fruit, and because of this the 
sanghdrdma was called Kapétika. 

To the south of this 2 or 3 li we come to a solitary 
hill! which is of great height, and covered with forests 
and jungle. Celebrated flowers and pure fountains of 
water cover its sides and flow through its hollows. On 
this hill are many viddras and religious shrines, sculptured 
with the highest art. In the exact middle of the vihdra 
is a figure of Kwan-tsz’-tsai-Bédhisattva. Although it is 
of small size, yet its spiritual appearance is of an affect- 
ing character. In its hand it holds a lotus flower; on its 
head is a figure of Buddha. 

There are always a number of persons here who abstain 
from food desiring to obtain a view of the Bédhisattva. For 
seven days, and fourteen days, and even fora whole month 
(do they fast). Those who are properly affected see this 
Kwan-tsz’-tsai Bodhisattva with its beautiful ®?2 marks, 
and thoroughly adorned with all its majesty and glory. 
It comes forth from the middle of the statue, and addresses 
kind words to these men. 

In old days the king of the Simhala country, in the 


131 This solitary hill is supposed to 
be “the hill standing by itself,” 
named by Fa-hian (Cunningham, 
Reports, vol. xv. p. 7). Dr. Fergus- 
son, on the other hand, identifies the 
hill of Behar with that site (J. R. 
A. 8. N.S., vol. vi. p, 229), and this 
hill ane the Shékhpura range (idid., 
Pp. 232). 

182 One form of the worship of 
Kwan-yin will probably be found to 
have been derived from the Persian 
Anaitis or Andhita; the descrip- 
tions given of each are too similar 
to be attributed to accident. Espe- 


cially on this point of “beauty” com- 
pare Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxiii. 
p. 82; also Bunyiu Nanjio, Catalogue 
of Jap. and Chin. Books lately added. 
to the Bodleian, col. 7, to show that 
Kwan-yin is identified with “pure 
water.” Note also Edkin’s Chinese 
Buddhism, p. 262, “ Kwan-yin from 
beyond the sea.” The description 
of Andhita’s dress in the Abdén 
Vasht (8. B. #., vol. xxiii.), $§ 126-131, 
corresponds with the representations 
in the Liturgy of Kwan-yin. The 
subject is too copious for a note. 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book 1x, 


184 


early morning reflecting his face in a mirror, was not able 
to see himself, but he saw in the middle of a Tala wood, 
on the top of a little mountain in the Magadha country 
of Jambudvipa, a figure of this Bédhisattva, The king, 
deeply affected at the benevolent appearance of the figure, 
diligently searched after it. Having come to this moun- 
tain,!3 he found in fact a figure resembling the one he had 
seen. On this he built a vihdra and offered to it religious 
gifts. After this the king still recollecting the fame of 
the circumstance, according to his example, built vihdras 
and spiritual shrines. Flowers and incense with the 
sound of music are constantly offered here. 

Going south-east from this shrine on the solitary moun- 
tain about 40 li, we come to a convent with about fifty 
priests,* who study the teaching of the Little Vehicle. 
Before the sarghdrdma is a great stipa, where many 
miracles are displayed. Here Buddha in former days 
preached for Brahma-déva’s sake and others during seven 
days. By the side of it are traces where the three Buddhas 
of the past age sat and walked. To the north-east of the 
sanghdrdma about 70 li, on the south side of the Ganges 
river, we come to a large village, thickly populated.’ 
There are many Déva temples here, all of them admirably 
adorned. 

Not far to the south-east is a great stivipa. Here Bud- 
dha for a night preached the law. Going east from this 
we enter the desert mountains; and going 100 li or so, we 
come to the convent of the village of Lo-in-ni-lo.¥¢ 

Before this is a great sttpa which was built ‘by Agdka- 


133 The worship of Kwan-yin as a 
mountain deity has been alluded to 
in the J. BR. A. &., N.S., vol. xv. pp. 
333 £. I would remark here that it 
seems the worship of this deity was 
partly connected with Ceylon. The 
argument of the paper in the J. &. 
A. S. is to the same purport. 

134 General Cunningham suggests 
the substitution of four li for forty. 
In that case the place indicated 


would be Aphsar (see Arch. Survey, 
vol. xv. p. 10). 

135 Both distance and direction 
point to the vicinity of Shekhpura 
(op. cit. p. 13). 

186 Tdentified by Cunningham with 
Rajjina. In Gladwin’s Ayin-Ak- 
bart it is found under the form 
“Rowbenny,” which closely re- 
sembles the Chinese. Julien pro- 
poses Réhinila doubtfully. See also 
Fergusson (op. cit.), p. 233. 


BOOK IX. ] HIRANYAPARVATA. 185 


raja, Here Buddha formerly preached the law for three 
months. To the north of this 2 or 3 li is a large tank 
about 30 liround, During the four seasons of the year 
a lotus of each of the four colours opens its petals. 

, Going east we enter a great forest wild, and after 200 
li or so we come to the country of J-lan-na-po-fa-to 
(Hiranyaparvata). 


( 186 ) 


BOOK X. 


Contains an account of seventeen countries, viz,, (1) I-lan-na-po-fa- 
to; (2) Chen-po, (3) Kie-chu-hoh-hat-lo ; (4) Pun-na-fa-tan-na ; 
(5) Kia-mo lu-po; (6) San-mo-ta-cha; (7) Tan-mo-lac-ti ; (8) 
Kie-lo-na-su-fu-la-na; (9) U-cha; (10) Kong-u-to; (11) Kie- 
ling-kia ; (12) Kiu-sa-lo,; (13) ’An-ta-lo ; (14) To-na-kie-tse-kta ; 
(15) Chu-li-ye, (16) Ta-lo-pi-ch’a ; (17) Mo-lo-kin-cha. 


I-LAN-NA-PO-FA-TO (HIRANYA-PARVATA).2 


THIS country is about 3000 li in circuit. The capital of 
the country is 20 li or so round, and is bounded on the 
north by the river Ganges.? It is regularly cultivated, 
and is rich in its produce. Flowers and fruits also are 
abundant. The climate is agreeable in its temperature. 
The manners of the people are simple and honest. ‘There 
are ten saighdrdmas, with about 4000 priests. Most of 
them study the Little Vehicle of the Sammatiya (Ching- 
liang-pu) school, There are some twelve Déva temples, 
occupied by various sectaries. 


1 Hiranya-parvata, or the Golden 
Mountain, is identified by General 
Cunningham with the hill of Mon- 
gir, This hill (and the kingdom to 
which it gave its name) was from 
early date of considerable import- 
ance, as it commanded the land 
route between the hills and the 
river, as well as the water route by 
the Ganges. It is said to have 
been originally called Kashtaharana 
Parvata, as it overlooked the famous 
bathing-place onthe Ganges called 
Kashtaharana Ghat, or “the pain- 
expelling bathing-place,” because all 
people afflicted with either grief or 
bodily pain were at once cured by 


bathing there. Cunningham re- 
marks that “this name of Harana 
Parvata is clearly the original of 
Hwen Thsang’s /-lan-na-Pa-fo-to” 
(see the whole section, Arch. Survey of 
India, vol. xv. pp. 16,17). The hill 
was also called Mudgalagiri. This 
may have originated the story of 
Mudgalaputra and the householder, 
Srutavimsatikott. 

* There seems to be a confusion 
in the text. Literally it is, ‘‘The 
capital (has) as a northern road or 
way the river Ganges,” There is 
a note in the original saying that 
the order is misprinted, 


BOOK X.] HIRANYAPARVATA. 187 


Lately the king of a border country deposed the ruler 
of this country, and holds in his power the capital. He 
is benevolent to the priests, and has built in the city two 
sanghdrdmas, each holding something less than 1000 
priests. Both of them are attached to the Sarvdstividin 
school of the Little Vehicle. 

By the side of the capital and bordering on the Ganges 
river is the Hiranya (I-lan-na) mountain, from which 
is belched forth masses of smoke and vapour which ob- 
scure the light of the sun and moon. From old time till 
now Rishis and saints have come here in succession to 
repose their spirits. Now there is a Déva temple here, in 
which they still follow their rules handed down to them. 
In old days Tathagata also dwelt here, and for the sake of 
the Dévas preached at large the excellent law. 

To the south of the capital is a stipa. Here Tathagata 
preached for three months. By the side of it are traces 
of the three Buddhas of the past age, who sat and walked 
here. 

To the west of this last-named spot, at no great dis- 
tance, is a sttipa. This denotes the spot where the Bhik- 
shu Srutavirhgatik6ti? (Shi-lu-to-p’in-she-ti-ku-chi) was 
born. Formerly there was in this town a rich house- 
holder (grihapatt), honoured and powerful, Late in life he 
had an heir born to his estate. Then he gave as a reward 
to the person who told him the news 200 lakhs of gold 
pieces. Hence the name given to his son was Siitravith- 


3 This translated into Chinese is 
Wen urh pih yih, that is, “hearing- 
two-hundred lakhs.” The note adds 
that formerly it was translated by 
yih-urh, that is, laksha-karna. The 
reference in the story is to Sona 
Kolivisi, who, according to the 
Southern account, lived at Champa 
(see Sacred Books of the East, vol. 
_xvii. p. 1). He is said to have been 
worth eighty cart-loads of gold, 
asiti-sakata-vahe hirafiam (op. cit., 
p. 13). But in the following section 
of the Mahdvaggd (op. cit. 32) there 
is reference to another Sona called 


Kutikanna, which Buddhaghésha 
explains by saying that his ear-orna- 
ments were worth a kéti ; but Rhys 
Davids thinks this may be explamed 
by his having pointed ears (p. 13, n. 
3). It seems evident that the old 
form in Chinese, viz., yih urh, i.e, 
lakshakarna, refers to this Sona. 
The symbol yih is frequently used 
for kéti, in which case the transla- 
lion would be kéti karna. Compare 
Cunningham’s remarks about Raja 
Karna (Arch. Surv., vol. xv. p. 16). 
Compare also Julien, tome ii. errata, 
Pp. 573, col. 1, line 16. 


188 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x. 


Satikoti (Wen-urh-pih-yih), From the time of his birth 
till he grew up his feet never touched the ground. 
For this reason there grew on the bottom of his feet hairs 
a foot long, shining and soft, and of a yellow gold colour. 
He loved this child tenderly, and procured for him ob- 
jects of the rarest beauty. From his house to the Snowy 
Mountains he had established a succession of rest-houses 
from which his servants continually went from one to the 
other. Whatever valuable medicines were wanted, they 
communicated the same to each other in order, and so pro- 
cured them without loss of time, so rich was this family. 
The world-honoured one, knowing the root of piety in this 
man was about to develop, ordered Mudgalaputra to go 
there and to instruct him. Having arrived outside the 
gate, he had no way to introduce himself (to pass through). 
Now the householder’s family (or simply the householder) 
worshipped Sirya-déva. Every morning when the sun 
rose he turned towards it in adoration. At this time 
Mudgalaputra, by his spiritual power, caused himself to 
appear in the disc of the sun and to come down thence 
and stand in the interior. The householder’s son took him 
to be Siirya-déva, and so offered him perfumed food (rice) 
and worshipped him.t The scent of the rice, so exquisite 
was it, reached even to Rajagriha. At this time Bimbi- 
sfra-raja, astonished at the wonderful perfume, sent 
messengers to ask from door to door whence it came. 
At leneth he found that it came from the Vénuvana- 
vihara, where Mudgalaputra had just arrived from the 
abode of the (rich) householder. The king finding out 
that the son of the householder had such miraculous 
(food), sent for him to come to court. The householder, 
receiving the order, considered with himself what was the 
easiest mode of transport; a galley (boat with banks of 
oars) is liable to accidents from wind and waves; a 
chariot is liable to accident from the frightened elephants 


4 The symbol kivet, “to return,” worship.” The translation I have 
is probably a mistake for Awei, “to given differs from the French. 


BOOK x.] HIRANYAPARVATA. 189 


running away. On this he constructed from his own 
house to Rajdgriha a canal basin, and filled it full of 
mustard seed.’ Then placing gently on it a lordly boat 
furnished with ropes with which to draw it along, he 
went thus to Rajagriha. 

First going to pay his respects to the Lord of the World, 

‘he (a.e., Buddha) addressed him and said, “ Bimbasdra-raja 
has sent: for you, no doubt desiring to see the hair beneath 
your feet. When the king desires to see it, you must sit 
cross legced with your feet turned up. If you stretch 
out your feet towards the king, the laws of the country 
exact death.” 6 

The householder’s son, having received the instruction 
of Buddha, went. He was then led into the palace and 
presented (¢o the king). The king desiring to see the hair, 
he sat cross-legged with his feet turned up. The king, 
approving of his politeness, formed a great liking for him. 
Having paid his final respects, he then returned to the 
place where Buddha was. 

Tathagata at that time was preaching the law and 
teaching by parables. Hearing the discourse and being 
moved by it, his mind was opened, and he forthwith be- 
came a disciple. Then he applied himself with all his 
power to severe thought, with a view to obtain the fruit (of 
Arhatship). He walked incessantly up and down,’ until 
his feet were blood-stained. 

The Lord of the World addressed him, saying, “ You, 
dear youth, when, living as a layman, did you know how 
to play the lute?”® He said, “I knew.” “Well, then,” 


7 Walking up and down, thinking, 


5 In the Mfahdvagga it is simply 
said, “and they carried Sona Koli- 
visa in a palanquin to Rajagrtha” 
(S. B. E., xvii. 2). 

§ This advice is given him by his 
parents in the Southern account. 
On the other hand, the visit of the 
eighty thousand overseers to Buddha 
and the miracles of Sagata resulting 
in their conversion, are quite omitted 
here, 


is represented as a constant habit 
of the early Buddhist Sramanas” 
(S. B. £., xvii. 17, n. 3). It is con- 
stantly referred to in Hiuen Tsiang, 
and the spots where the Buddhas 
had walked up and down appear to 
have been accounted sacred. 

8 The vind, as in the Pali. 


190 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES.  [BooK x. 


said Buddha, “I will draw a comparison derived from this. 
The cords being too tight, then the sounds were not in 
cadence; when they were too loose, then the sounds had 
neither harmony nor charm; but when not tight and not 
slack, then the sounds were harmonious, Soin the prepara- 
tion for a religious life, the case is the same; too severe, 
then the body is wearied and the mind listless; too remiss, 
then the feelings are pampered and the will weakened.” ® 

Having received this instruction from Buddha, he moved 
round him in a respectful way,!® and by these means he 
shortly obtained the fruit of Arhatship. 

On the western frontier of the country, to the south of 
the river Ganges, we come to a small solitary mountain, 
with a double peak rising high. Formerly Buddha in 
this place rested during the three months of rain, and 
subdued the Yaksha Vakula (Yo-c’ha Po-khu-lo).” 

Below a corner of the south-east side of the mountain 
is a great stone. On this are marks caused by Buddha 
sitting thereon. The marks are about an inch deep, five 
feet two inches long, and two feet one inch wide. Above 
them is built a stdpa. 

Again to the south is the impression on a stone where 
Buddha set down his kiun-chi-kia (kundikd or water- 
vessel). In depth the lines are about an inch, and are like 
a flower with eight buds (or petals).¥ 

Not far to the south-east of this spot are the foot-traces 
of the Yaksha Vakula. They are about one foot five or 


9 This comparison is foundin the “there isa small solitary hill with 
Sdtra of Forty-two Sections, No. 
xxxiii, 


That is, keeping his right 
shoulder towards hin (pradak- 
shina). 


1 This mountain is identified by 
Cunningham with the hill of Maha- 
déva, which is situated east from 
the great irregular central mass of 
the Mongir hills (Arch. Surv., vol. xv. 
p.19). Hiuen Tsiang does not appear 
himself to have visited this spot, as 
the symbol used is chi, not hing. 

The passage might be translated, 


successive crags heaped up.” For 
an account of the neighbouring hot 
springs see Cunningham (op. cit. 
Appendix). 

 Vakula or Vakkula was also 
the name of a Sthavira, one of 
Buddha's disciples. Burnouf, /ntrod., 
Pp. 349; Lotus, pp. 2, 126. 

13 Many of these marks or figures 
might probably be explained by a 
knowledge of the character of the 
rock formation. Buchanan describes 
the rock of Mahadéva as quartz or 
silicious hornstone. 


BOOK X.] CHAMPA, 


191 


six inches long, seven or eight inches wide, and in depth 
less than two inches. Behind these traces of the Yaksha 
is a stone fioure of Buddha in sitting posture, about six or 
seven feet high, 

Next, to the west, not far off, is a place where Buddha 
walked for exercise. 

Above this mountain top is the old residence of the 
Yaksha. 

Next, to the north is a foot-trace of Buddha, a foot 
and eight inches long, and perhaps six inches wide, and 
half an inch deep. Above it is a stdpa erected. For- 
merly when Buddha subdued the Yaksha, he commanded 
him not to kill men nor eat their flesh. Having re- 
spectfully received the law of Buddha, he was born in 
heaven. 

To the west of this are six or seven hot springs. 
water is exceedingly hot.!* 

To the south the country is bounded by great moun- 
tain forests in which are many wild elephants of great 
size. 

Leaving this kingdom, going down the river Ganges, on 
its south bank eastwards, after 300 li or so, we come to 
the country of Chen-po (Champa). 


The 


CHEN-PO (CHAMPA).!§ 


This country (Champa) is about 4000 li in circuit, 
The capital is backed to the north by the river Ganges, 
itis about 40 li round. The soil is level and fertile (fat 


4 These springs as described by 
a recent visitor in the Péoneer, 
17th August 1882 (see Cunning- 
ham, op. cit. Appendix) ;they are 
still so hot as to fill the valley 
with clouds of steam ‘‘like a 
cauldron.” 

18 Champa and Champdpuri in 
the Purdyas is the name of the 
capital of Anga or the country 
about Bhagalpur (Wilson, Vishnu- 


pur., vol. ii. p. 166; vol. iv. p. 125; 
J. R.A. S., vol. v. p. 1343; Hari- 
vam., 1699 ; Mahdbh., iii. 8141, &e.) 
See Lassen, J. A., vol. i. pp. 175, 
176. Champanagar and Karnagarh 
are close to Bhagalpur. M.: Mar- 
tin, Hast India, vol. ii. pp. 39 £. 
(Hunter’s Statistical Ac. of Bengal, 
vol. xiv. p. 82, only copies the pre- 
ceding). Fa-hian, chap. xxxvii.; 
Burnouf, Introd, (2d ed.), p. 132. 


192 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook x. 


or loamy); it is regularly cultivated and productive; the, 
temperature is mild and warm (moderately hot); the 
manners of the people simple and honest. There are 
several tens of sanghdrdmas, mostly in ruins, with about 
200 priests. They follow the teaching of the Little 
Vehicle. There are some twenty Déva temples, which 
sectaries of every kind frequent. The walls of the 
capital are built of brick, and are several “tens of feet” 
high. The foundations of the wall are raised on a lofty 
embankment, so that by their high escarpment, they can 
defy (stop) the attack of enemies. In old times at the 
beginning of the kalpa, when things (men and things) 
first began, they (2.¢., people) inhabited dens and caves 
of the desert. There was no knowledge of dwelling- 
houses. After this, a Dévi (divine woman) descending 
in consequence of her previous conduct, was located 
amongst them. As she sported in the streams of the 
Ganges, she was affected by a spiritual power, and con- 
ceiving, she brought forth four sons, who divided between 
them the government of Jambudvipa. Each took 
possession of a district, founded a capital, built towns, 
and marked out the limits of the frontiers. This was 
the capital of the country of one of them, and the first of 
all the cities of Jambudvipa. 

To the east of the city 140 or 150 li, on the south of 
the river Ganges, is a solitary detached rock, cragsy 
and steep, and surrounded by water. On the top of the 
peak is a Déva temple; the divine spirits exhibit many 
miracles (spiritual indications) here. By piercing the 
rock, houses have been made; by leading the streams 
(through each), there is a continual flow of water. There 
are wonderful trees (forming) flowering woods ; the large 
rocks and dangerous precipices are the resort of men of 


18 Hither an islet or a detached 
rock. Cunningham identifies it 
with the picturesque rocky island 
opposite Patharghaéta with its tem- 
ple-crowned summit (Ane. Geog. 
of India, p. 477). The same writer 


(Arch. Surv., vol. xv. p. 34) states, 
“ Both bearing and distance point to 
the rocky hill of Kahalgaon (Kolgong 
of the maps), which is just 23 
miles to the east of Bhagalpur 
(Champé).” 


BOOK X.J KAFINGHARA. 


193 


wisdom and virtue; those who go there to see the place 
are reluctant to return. 

In the midst of the desert wilds, that form the southern 
boundary of the country, are wild elephants and savage 
beasts that roam in herds. 

From this country going eastwards 400 li or so, we 
come to the kingdom of Kie-chu-hoh-khi-lo (Ka- 
jaghira). : 


KIE-CHU-HOH-KHI-LO (KAJOGHIRA OR KCAJINGHARA). 


This kingdom ” is about 2000 li or so in circuit. The 
soil is level and loamy; it is regularly cultivated, and 
produces abundant crops; the temperature is warm; the 
people are simple in their habits. They greatly esteem 
men of high talent, and honour learning and the arts. 
There are six or seven sanghirdmas with about 300 
priests; and there are some ten Déva temples frequented 
by seciaries of all sorts. During the last few centuries 
the royal line has died out, and the country has been 
ruled by a neighbouring state, so that the towns are 
desolate, and most of the people are found scattered in 
villages and hamlets. On this account, Siladitya-rAja, 
when roaming through Eastern India, built a palace in 
this place, in which he arranged the affairs of his different 
states, It was built of branches and boughs for a tem- 
porary residence, and burnt on his departure. On the 
southern frontiers of the country are many wild ele- 
phants. 

On the northern frontiers, not far from the Ganges 
river, is a high and large tower made of bricks and stone. 
Its foundation, wide and lofty, is ornamented with rare 


7 In a note we are told that ern India; also in the Sinhalese 


the common pronunciation of this 

country is “ Kie-ching-kie-lo.” M. 

V. de St. Martin (Mémoire, p. 387) 

notices that in the Mahdbhérata 

there is a country Kajingha 

named among the people of East- 
VOL. II. 


Chronicles a town called Kajan- 
ghélé-Niyangamé, in the eastern 
region of Jambudvipa. There is 
also a village called Kajéri marked 
in Rennell’s map, just 92 miles (460 
li) from Champa 


N 


194 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox x. 


sculptures. On the four faces of the tower are sculptured 
figures of the saints, Dévas, and Buddhas in separate com- 
partments. 

Going from this country eastward, and crossing the 
Ganges, after about 600 li we come to the kingdom of 
Pun-na-fa-tan-na (Pundravarddhana). 


PUN-NA-FA-TAN-NA (PUNDRAVARDDHANA).}8 


This country is about 4000 li in circuit. Its capital is 
about 30 li round, It is thickly populated. The tanks 
and public offices and flowering woods are regularly con- 
nected at intervals,” The soil is flat and loamy, and rich 
in all kinds of grain-produce. The Panasa™ (Pan-na-so) 
fruit, though plentiful, is highly esteemed, The fruit is as 
large as a pumpkin.#+ When it is ripe it is of a yellowish- 
red colour. When divided, it has in the middle many 
tens of little fruits of the size of a pigeon’s egg; breaking 
these, there comes forth a juice of a yellowish-red eolour 
and of delicious flavour. The fruit sometimes collects on the 
tree-branches as other clustering fruits, but sometimes at 
the tree-roots, as in the case of the earth-growing fu ling,” 
The climate (of this country) is temperate; the people 


18 Prof. H. H. Wilson includes in 


Ganda. Mr. Fergusson assigned it 
the ancient Pundra the districts of 


a place near Rangpur. See Ind. 


Rajashahi, Dinajpur, Rangpur, Na- 
diyé, Birbhum, Bardwan, Midnapur, 
Jangal Mahils, Ramgadh, Pachit, 
Palaman, and part of Chunar. It is 
the country of “sugar-cane,” pun- 
dra, Bangali punri-akh. The Paun- 
dra people are frequently mentioned 
in Sanskrit literature, and Pundra- 
varddhana was evidently a portion 
of their country. Quart. Orient. 
May., vol. ii, p. 188; Vishnu-pur, 
vol. ii. pp. 134,170. Mr. Westmacott 
proposed to identify Pundra-vard- 
dhana with the adjacent pargands or 
districts of Pétijara and Borddhon- 
kfiti (or Khéttél) in Dindjpur, about 
35 miles N.N.W. from Rangpur ; 
put also suggested, as an alternative, 
Pondua or Ponrowd, afterwards 
Firzupur or Firuzdbad,-6 miles north- 
east of Maldd, and 18 N.N.E,. from 


Ant., vol. iii. p. 62; Hunter, Stat. 
Ace. Bengal, vol. viii. pp. 59£., 4493 
J. RL A.S., NLS., vol. vi. pp. 238 £3 
conf. Rdja-Taraigini, tom. iv. p. 
421; Mahabh., ii. 1872. General 
Cunningham has more recently 
fixed on MahisthAnagadha on the- 
Karatoya, 12 miles south of Bard- 
hankiti and 7 miles north of 
Bagraha, as the site of the capital 
(Report, vol. xv. pp. v., 104, 110 £.) 

8 This passage may also be trans- 
lated thus : “ Maritime offices (offices 
connected with the river naviga- 
tion?) with their (surrounding) 
flowers and groves occur at regular 
intervals.” 

* Jack or bread fruit. 

*1 “A large and coarse squash.” 
Williams’ Zonie Dict., sub Kwa. 

2 The radix China, according to 


BOOK X.] KAMARUPA. 195 


esteem learning. There are about twenty saighdrdmas, 
with some 3000 priests; they study both the Little and 
Great Vehicle. There are some hundred Déva temples, 
where sectaries of different schools congregate. The 
naked Nirgranthas are the most numerous. 

To the west of the capital 20 li or so is the Po-chi-p’o 
sanghdrdma”® Tts courts are light and roomy ; its towers 
and pavilions are very lofty. The priests are about 700 
in number; they study the law according to the Great 
Vehicle. Many renowned priests from Eastern India 
dwell here, 

Not far from this is a stépa built by Asdka-rija. Here 
Tathagata, in old days, preached the law for three months 
for the sake of the Dévas. Occasionally, on fast-days, 
there is a bright light visible around it. 

By the side of this, again, is a place where the four 
past Buddhas walked for exercise and sat down. The be- 
queathed traces are still visible. 

Not far from this there is a vthdra in which is a statue 
of Kwan-tsz’-tsai Bédhisattva. Nothing is hid from its 
divine discernment ; its spiritual perception is most accu- 
rate; men far and near consult (this being) with fasting 
and prayers. 

From this going east 900 li or so, crossing the great river, 
we come to the country of Kia-mo-lu-po (Kamartipa).: 


Kuia-mo-Lu-po (KAMARUPA). 


The country of KAmartpa ™ is about 10,000 li in cir- 


cuit. The capital town is 


Julien ; the pachyma cocos, accord- 
ing to Doolittle’s Vocabulary, vol. 
ii, 423. Medhurst (sub voce. ling) 
names “the China root” which 
grows under old fir trees, 

*3 Julien restores this (with a 
query) to Vasibhasangharama, “the 
convent which has the brightness of 
fire.” 

*4 Kamariipa (its capital is called 
in the Purdnas, Pragjyétisha) ex- 


The land lies 


tended from the Karatéya river in 
Rangpur to the eastward (Stat. Ace. 
Bengal, vol. vii. pp. 168, 310; or 
M. Martin, Last Ind., vol. iii. p. 
403). Thekingdom included Mani- 
pur, Jayntiya, Kachhar, West Asdin, 
and parts of Maymansingh, and Sil- 
het (Srihatta). The modern district 
extends from Goalpira to Gauhatti. 
Lassen, J. A., vol. i. p. 87, vol. ii. p. 
973; Wilson, V. P., vol v. p. 88; 


about 30 li. 


196 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x. 


low, but is rich, and is regularly cultivated. They culti- 
vate the Panasa fruit and the MNa-lo-ki-lo (Narikéla) * 
fruit. These trees, though numerous, are nevertheless 
much valued and esteemed. Water led from the river or 
from banked-up lakes (reservoirs) flows round the towns. 
The climate is soft and temperate. The manners of the 
people simple and honest. The men are of small stature, 
and their complexion a dark yellow. Their language 
differs a little from that of Mid-India. Their nature is 
very impetuous and wild; their memories are retentive, 
and they are earnest in study. They adore and sacrifice 
to the Dévas, and have no faith in Buddha; hence from 
the time when Buddha appeared in the world even down 
to the present time there never as yet has been built one 
satghdrdma as a place for the priests to assemble. Such 
disciples as there are are of a pure faith, say their prayers 
(repeat the name of Buddha) secretly, and that is all. 
There are as many as 100 Déva temples, and different 
sectaries to the number of several myriads. The present 
king belongs to the old line (¢so yan) of Narayana-déva. 
He is of the Brahman caste. His name is Bhaskara- 
varman,” his title Kumara (Keu-mo-lo), From the 
time that this family seized the land and assumed the 
government till the present king, there have elapsed a 
thousand successions (generations). The king is fond of 
learning, and the people are so likewise in imitation of 
him, Men of high talent from distant regions aspiring 
after office (?) visit his dominions as strangers. Though 
he has no faith in Buddha, yet he much respects Sramanas 
of learning. When he first heard that a Sramana from 
China?’ had come to Magadha to the Nalanda savghd- 
rdma from such a distance, to study with diligence the 


As, Res., vol. xiv. p. 422 3 Lalita Vis, Yih-cheu, “helmet of the sun.” See 
6 


416. Hall’s Vdsavadattd, p. 52. 
% 'The bread-fruit and the cocoa- % The French translation is very 
nut. confused. Julien appears to have 


% P’o-se-kic-lo-fa-mo, in Chinese, overlooked the symbols Chi-na-kud 
(the country of China). 


BOOK X.] YOURNEY TO KAMALANKA. 197 


profound law of Buddha, he sent a message of invitation 
by those who reported it as often as three times, but yet 
the Sramana (i., Hiuen a) had not obeyed it. Then 
Sitlabhadra (Shi-lo- -po-t’o-lo), master of Sdstras, said, 
‘You desire to show your gratitude to Buddha; then you 
should propagate the true law; this is your duty. You 
need not fear the long journey. Kumiara-raja’s family 
respect the teaching of the heretics, and now he invites a 
Sramana to visit iin, This is good indeed! We judge 
from this that he is changing his “principles, and desires to 
acquire merit (07, from merit acquired) to benefit others. 
You formerly conceived a great heart, and made a vow 
with yourself to travel alone through different lands 
regardless of life, to seek for the Jaw for the good of the 
world. Forgetful of your own country, you should be 
ready to meet death; indifferent to renown or failure, 
you should labour to open the door for the spread of the 
holy doctrine, to lead onwards the crowds who are de- 
ceived by false teaching, to consider others first, yourself 
afterwards ; forgetful of renown, to think only of religion 
(enlarge the law).” 

On this, with no further excuses, he hastened in com- 
pany with the messengers to present himself to the king. 
Kumira-raja said, “ Although I am without talents my- 
self, I have always been fond of men of conspicuous 
learning. Hearing, then, of your fame and distinction, I 
ventured to ask you here to visit me.” 

He replied, “I have only moderate wisdom, and I am 
confused to think that you should have heard of my poor 
reputation.” 

Kumira-rfja said, “ Well, indeed! from regard for the 
law and love of learning to regard oneself as of no account, 
and to travel abroad regardless of so great dangers, to 
wander through strange countries! This is the result of 
the transforming power of the king’s government, and the 
exceeding learning, as is reported, of the country. Now, 


°8 To save all creatures (Jul.) 


198 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [ook x. 


through the kingdoms of India there are many persons 
who sing about the victories of the Tsin king of the 
Mahiachina country. J have long heard of this, And is it 
true that this is your honourable birthplace ?” 

He said, “It is so. These songs celebrate the virtues 
of my sovereign.” 

He replied, “I could not think that your worthy self 
was of this country. I have ever had an esteem for its 
manners and laws. Long have I looked towards the east, 
but the intervening mountains and rivers have prevented 
me from personally visiting it.” 

In answer I said, “ My great sovereign’s holy qualities 
are far renowned, and the transforming power of his virtue 
reaches to remote districts. People from strange countries 
pay respect at the door of his palace, and call themselves 
his servants.” 

Kumira-raja said, “ If his dominion is so great (covering 
thus his subjects), my heart strongly desires to bear my 
tribute to his court. But now Siladitya-rAja is in the 
country of Kajfighira (Kie-chu-hoh-khi-lo), about to dis- 
tribute large alms and to plant deeply the root of merit 
and wisdom. The Sramans and Brahmans of the five 
Indies, renowned for their learning, must needs come 
together. He has now sent for me. I pray you go with 
me!” 

On this they went together. 

On the east this country is bounded by a line of hills. 
so that there is no great city (capital) to the kingdom. 
Their frontiers, therefore, are contiguous to the barbarians 
of the south-west (of China). These tribes are, in fact, 
akin to those of the Man® people in their customs. On 
inquiry I ascertained that after a two months’ journey 
we reach the south-western frontiers of the province of 
Sz’chuen (Skuh). But the mountains and rivers present 
obstacles, and the pestilential air, the poisonous vapours, 


*3 The ‘Man people’ (man lo) are the south-west barbarians (so named 
by the Chinese). 


BOOK X.] SAMATATA. 199 


the fatal snakes, the destructive vegetation, all these 
causes of death prevail. 

On the south-east of this country herds of wild ele- 
phants roam about in numbers; therefore, in this district 
they use them principally in war. 

Going from this 1200 or 1300 li to the south, we come 
to the country of San-mo-ta-cha (Samatata). 


SAN-MO-TA-CHA (SAMATATA). 


This country is about 3000 li in circuit and borders on 
the great sea. The land lies low and is rich. The capital 
is about 20 li round. It is regularly cultivated, and is 
rich in crops, and the flowers and fruits grow everywhere. 
The climate is soft and the habits of the people agreeable. 
The men are hardy by nature, small of stature, and of 
black complexion; they are fond of learning, and exer- 
cise themselves diligently in the acquirement of it. There 
are professors (believers) both of false and true doctrines, 
There are thirty or so savghdrdmas with about 2000 
priests. They are all of the Sthavira (Shang-tso-pu) 
school. There are some hundred Déva temples, in which 
sectaries of all kinds live. The naked ascetics called 
Nirgranthas (Ni-kien) are most numerous. 

Not far out of the city is a stéipa which was built by 
Asdka-raja. In this place Tathagata in former days 
preached the deep and mysterious law for seven days for 
the good of the Dévas. By the side of it are traces 
where the four Buddhas sat and walked for exercise. 

Not far from this, in a savghdrdma, is a figure of 
Buddha of green jade. It is eight feet high, with the 
marks on its person perfectly shown, and with a spiritual 
power which is exercised from time to time. 

Going north-east from this to the borders of the 


30 Eastern Bengal: Samétata or Jnd. Alt., iii. 681). It is named by 
Samatata means “the shore coun- Vardha Mihira (Br. Samh., xiv. 6) 
try” or “level country” (Lassen along with Mithilé and Orissa. 


’ 


200 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x. 


ocean, we come to the kingdom of Srikshétra (Shi-li- 
ch’a-ta-lo).3! 

Farther on to the south-east, on the borders of the 
ocean, we come to the country of Kimalanké (Kia- 
mo-lang-kia);** still to the east is the kingdom of Dvara- 
pati (To-lo-po-ti) ; *8 still to the east is the country of 
igAnapura (I-shang-na-pu-lo) ; still to the east is the 
country of Mah&champ4 (Mo-ho-chen-po), which is the 
same as Lin-i. Next to the south-west is the country 
called Yam anadv ipa*(Yavanadvipa—Yen-nio-na-cheu). 
These six countries are so hemmed in by mountains and 
rivers that they are inaccessible;* but their limits and 
the character of the people and country could be learned 
by inquiry. 

From Samatata going west goo li or so, we reach the 
country of Tan-mo-li-ti (Tamralipti). 


TAN-MO-LI-T1 (TAMRALIPTI),° 


This country is 1400 or 1500 li in circuit, the capital 
about ro li. It borders on the sea. The ground is low 
and rich; it is regularly cultivated, and produces flowers 
and fruits in abundance. The temperature is hot. The 
manners of the people are quick and hasty. The men 


are hardy and brave. 
levers, 
1000 priests. 


3. Srikshétra or Tharekhettar4 is 
the name of an ancient Burmese 
kingdom, whose capital city of the 
same name near Prome, on the Ira- 
wadi ; but this is south-east, whilst 
north-east, towards Sribatta or Silhet, 
does not lead to “the borders of the 
ocean.” 

3? Kamalanki: Pegu (Hansa- 
wadi) and the delta of the Irawédi, 
called Ramanya, and earlier Aramana 

3 Dwaravati is the classic name 
for the town and district of San- 
dowé, but in Burmese history it is 
also applied to Siam (Phayre, List. 


There are both heretics and be- 
There are about ten sanghdrdmas, with about 
The Déva temples are fifty in number, in 


of Burma, p. 32). 

#4 Yamadvipa is an island men- 
tioned in the Vdyu-purdna, but pro- 
bably fabulous. < 

% Te,, the pilgrim did not enter 
them. 

35 PTauarirns in Ptol., lib. vii. ¢, 
1,73. Tamalitti or Tamralipti, the 
modern Tamluk, on the Selai, just 
above its junction with the Hughli. 
Jour Rk. A. &. vol. v. p. 1353 Wil- 
son, Vishnu-pur., vol. ii p. 1773 
Lassen, /. A., vol. i p. 177; Varaha 
Mih., Br. S., x. 143 Turnour, Ma- 
havanso, pp. 70, 115. 


BOOK Xx. ] KARNASUVARNA. 201 


which various sectaries dwell mixed together. The coast 
of this country is formed by (or in) a recess of the sea; 
the water and the land embracing each other3”’ Won- 
derful articles of value and gems are collected here in 
abundance, and therefore the people of the country are in 
general very rich. 

By the side of the city is a stépa which was built by 
Agoka-raja; by the side of it are traces where the four 
past Buddhas sat and walked. 

Going from this north-west 700 li or so, we come to the 
country Kie-lo-na-su-fa-la-na (Karnasuvarna). 


KIE-LO-NA-SU-FA-LA-NA (KARNASUVARNA).38 


This kingdom is about 1400 or 1500 li in circuit; the 
capital is about 20 li. It is thickly populated. The 
householders are very (rich and in ease). The land lies 
low and is loamy. It is regularly cultivated, and pro- 
duces an abundance of flowers, with valuables numerous 
and various. The climate is agreeable; the manners of 
the people honest and amiable. They love learning 
exceedingly, and apply themselves to it with earnestness. 
There are believers and heretics alike amongst them. 
There are ten savghdrdmas or so, with about 2000 priests. 
They study the Little Vehicle of the Sammatiya (Ching- 
tiang-pu) school, There are fifty Déva temples. The 
heretics are very numerous. LBesides these there are 
three satighdrdmas in which they do not use thickened 
milk (d% lok), following the directions of Dévadatta (Ti- 
p’o-ta-to).® 

By the side of the capital is the sanghdrdéma called 


37 Le., the coast of the country is 
that of a large bay. 

38 Karna was the king of Anga, 
whose capital is placed at Karna- 
garh near Bhagalpur (M. Martin, 
£. Ind., vol. ii. pp. 31, 38 £, 46, 


50. 
39 Dévadatta appears to have had 
a body of disciples ; in consequence 


of his inferiority in point of influ- 
ence to Buddha, he became his 
enemy. One of the rules of his 
sect was not to use butter. A sect 
revering him as a Buddha existed 
up to A.D. 400 (Hitel, s. 7.) For an 
account of his more rigorous ascetic 
praxis, see Oldenberg, Buddha, pp. 
160, 161. 


202 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x. 


Lo-to-wei-chi (Raktaviti),“° the halls of which are light 
and spacious, the storeyed towers very lofty. In this 
establishment congregate all the most distinguished, 
learned, and celebrated men of the kingdom. They 
strive to promote each other’s advancement by exhor- 
tations, and to perfect their character.4! At first the 
people of this country did not believe in Buddha; at 
this time * there was a heretic of Southern India who 
wore over his belly copper-plates and on his head a 
lighted torch. With lofty steps, staff in hand, he came 
to this country. Sounding aloud the drum of discussion, 
he sought an adversary in controversy. Then a man 
said to him, “Why are your head and your body so 
strangely (arrayed)?” He said, “My wisdom is so great, 
I fear my belly will burst, and because I am moved with 
pity for the ignorant multitude who live in darkness, 
therefore I carry this light on my head.” 

After ten days, no one was found to question him. 
Among all the learned and professed scholars there was 
not a single person to discuss with him. The king 
said, “ Alas! what ignorance * prevails in my territories, 
that no one should be able to challenge the difficult 
propositions “* of this stranger. What a disgrace to the 
country! We must scheme and seek through the most 
obscure retreats.” 

Then one said to him, “In the forest there is a strange 
man who names himself a Sramana, he is most diligent 
in study. He is now living apart in silence and obscurity, 
and so he has lived for a long time; who so well able 


# Meaning “red mud.” I adopt 
the Sanskrit restoration from Julien. 

4| Literally, “to promote their 
mutual perfection by shaping and 
smoothing (in the sense of polishing) 
their reason and virtue.” 

# Julien refers this expression to 
the time when Hiuen Tsiang was 
there (p. 85, n. 3); in this case, it 
is possible that the allusion in vol. 


i, p. 4, n. 22, is to this encounter. 
But as the saighdrdma was already 
built when Hiuen Tsiang visited 
the capital, it is difficult to under- 
stand how the event occurred at that 
time. 

43 Wou ming—darkness. 

# It may also mean “the diffi- 
culty” resulting from the stranger’s 
challenge. 


BOOK X.] KARNASUVARNA. 203 


by his united virtue to controvert this irreligious man 
as he 2?” 4 

The king hearing this, went himself to invite him to 
come. The Sramana replying, said, “I am a man of 
South India; I stop here on my travels merely as a 
stranger. My abilities are small and commonplace; I 
fear lest you should not know it, but yet I will come 
according to your wish, though I am by no means certain 
as to the character of the discussion. If, however, ] am 
not defeated, I will ask you to erect a saighdrdma, and 
summon the fraternity to glorify and extol the law of 
Buddha.” The king said, “I accept your terms, nor could 
I dare to forget your virtue.” 

Then the Sramana, having accepted the king’s invita- 
tion, proceeded to the arena of controversy. Then the 
heretic went through (chanted) some 30,000 words of 
his school. His arguments were profound, his illustra- 
tions (figures or writing) ample ; his whole discourse, both 
as to names and qualities, was captivating to sight and 
hearing. 

The Sramana, after listening, at once fathomed his 
meaning; no word or argument deceived him. With a 
few hundred words he discriminated and explained every 
difficulty, and then he asked (the heretic) as to the 
teaching (the principles) of his school. The words of the 
heretic were confused and his arguments devoid of force, 
and so his lips were closed and he could not reply. 
Thus he lost his reputation, and, covered with confusion, 
retired. 

The king, deeply reverencing the priest, founded this 


© Julien translates this passage 
thus: “Could he conduct himself 
thus if he was not attached to the 
law and devoted to virtue?” The 
passage is difficult ; literally it runs 
thus: “ With this no-master, who is 
able so well as this (Sramana) to 
embody the law, to unite virtue?” 
“To embody the law” means “to 


represent, or, vindicate, religion ;” 
and “to unite virtue” means “so 
virtuously or fully.” 

48 The symbol tik (virtue) some- 
times stands for bhadanta, i.e., “ your 
reverence” or “ your excellency.” It 
may also refer to the priesthood 
generally. It is applied In inscrip- 
tions to Sthaviras or priests. 


204 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [BOOK x. 


convent ; and from that time and afterwards the teaching 
of the law widely extended (through the kingdom). 

By the side of the savghdrdma, and not far off, is a 
stipa which was built by Agdka-rija. When Tathagata 
was alive in the world he preached here for seven days, 
explaining (the law) and guiding (men). By the side of 
it is a vihdva ; here there are traces where the four past 
Buddhas sat down and walked. There are several other 
stdpas in places where Buddha explained the excellent 
law.*8 These were built by Asoka-raja. 

Going from this 7oo li or so in a south-westerly direc- 
tion, we come to the country of U-cha. 


U-cna (Upra). 


This country ® is 7000 li or so in circuit; the capital 
city ® is about 20 li round. The soil is rich and fertile, 
and it produces abundance of grain, and every kind of 
fruit is grown more than in other countries. It would be 
difficult to name the strange shrubs and the famed 
flowers that grow here. The “climate is hot; the people 
are uncivilised, tall of stature, and of a yellowish black 
complexion. Their words and language (pronunciation) 
differ from Central India. They love learning and apply 
themselves to it without intermission. Most of them be- 
lieve in the law of Buddha. There are some hundred 
saighdrdmas, with 10,000 priests. They all study the 
Great Vehicle. There are fifty Déva temples in which 
sectaries of all sorts make their abodes. The stiipas, 


47 Or, he widely extended the 
teaching of the law. 

4 The original has king fd, the 
law of the sétras ; perhaps king is a 
mistake for miu, ‘‘ excellent.” 

49 Udra or Odra is Orissa (Afa- 
hdbh., ii, 1174, iii. 1988); also called 
Utkala (Mahdbh., vii. 122; Vishnu- 
pur., vol. ii. p. 160). 

50 This capital is generally identi- 
fied with Jajipura on the Baitani : 
Mr. Fergusson suggests Midndpur 


(J. B.A. S., N.S,, vol. vi. p. 249); his 
remarks (in this paper) on the whole 
of this part of the pilgrim’s route are 
of great interest. He first noticed 
that the journey of Hiuen Tsiang to 
Kamaripa was made from Nalanda 
on his return to that monastery 
from South India; he also points 
out the errors made by his prede- 
cessors in the same inquiry and cor- 
rects them. : 


BOOK x.] ODRA. 205 


to the number of ten or so, point out spots where Buddha 
preached. They were all founded by Asdka-raja. 

In a great mountain on the south-west frontiers *! of 
the country is a sazghdrdma called Pushpagiri (Pu-se- 
po-k’i-li); the stone stipa belonging to it exhibits very 
many spiritual wonders (miracles). On fast-days it emits 
a bright light. For this cause believers from far and near 
flock together here and present as offerings beautifully 
embroidered (flower) canopies (umbrellas); they place 
these underneath the vase™ at the top of the cupola, 
and let them stand there fixed as needles in the stone, 
To the north-west of this, in a convent on the mountain, 
is a steipa where the same wonders occur as in the former 
case. These two stdpas were built by the demons,‘ and 
hence are derived the extraordinary miracles. 

On the south-east frontiers of the country, on the 
borders of the ocean, is the town Charitra (Che-li-ta-lo),© 
about 20 li round. Here it is merchants depart for 
distant countries, and strangers come and go and stop 
here on their way. The walls of the city are strong and 
lofty. Here are found all sorts of rare and precious 
articles. 


51 Remains, probably of a st@pa, cupola. It’ should have been so 


have been found near Aska (J. R. A. 
S., vol. xx. p. 105). 

52 Literally, “underneath the 
dew-vessel or vase.” Here we have 
another instance of the custom of 
crowning the stépa with a dew- 
vase, or “vessel of immortality” 
(amarakarka). The custom would 
appear to have originated in the 
idea that “sweet dew” thus col- 
lected in a vessel had miraculous 
qualities as “the water of life.” 
Dr. Burgess remarks that these flags 
were probably fixed “on the capital 
of the st@pa, on which was placed 
the relic-casket (when not enshrined 
inside the capital over the garbha 
of the st@pa).” 

53 It is satisfactory to find that 
. Julien in this passage translates 
the ‘inverted vase or alms-dish” by 


rendered throughout. 

54 The expression shin kwei does 
not mean demons in a bad sense, 
but spiritual or divine beings. It 
might also be rendered “ spirits 
and demons.” Cunningham sup- 
poses the two hills named in the 
text to be Udayagiri and Khanda- 
giri, in which many Buddhist caves 
and inscriptions have been dis- 
covered. These hills are 20 miles 
to the south of Katak and 5 miles 
to the west of the grand group of 
temples at Bhuvanéswara (Anc. 
Geog. of India, p. 512). 

55 In Chinese, Fa-hing, “city of 
departure.” This is exactly Pto- 
lemy’s 7d doerjpcoy rwy els Thy 
Xpvojy éurdedvroy (lib. vii. c. 1,15). 
Comp. Lassen, Jf. A., vol. i, p. 205, 
and vol. iii, p. 202. It is plain 


206 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x. 


Outside the city there are five convents * one after the 
other; their storeyed towers are very high, and carved 
with figures of saints exquisitely done. 

Going south 20,000 li or so is the country of Simhala 
(Seng-kia-lo). In the still night, looking far off, we see 
the surmounting precious stone of the tooth-stipa of 
Buddha brilliantly shining and scintillating as a bright 
torch burning in the air. 

From this going south-west about 1200 li through 
great forests, we come to the kingdom of Kong-u-t’o 
(Kényédha). 

Kone-v-1’o0 (K6NYODHA 2). 

This kingdom * is about 1000 li in circuit; the capital 
is 20 li round. It borders on a bay (angle of the sea). 
The ranges of mountains are high and precipitous. The 
ground is low and moist. It is regularly cultivated and 
productive. The temperature is hot, the disposition.of the 
people brave and impulsive. The men are tall of stature 
and black complexioned and dirty. They have some 
degree of politeness and are tolerably honest. With 
respect to their written characters, they are the same as 
those of Mid-India, but their language and mode of pro- 
nunciation are quite different. They greatly respect the 
teaching of heretics and do not believe in the law of 
Buddha. There are some hundred Déva temples, and 
there are perhaps 10,000 unbelievers of different sects. 


(from Hiuven Tsiang’s remark, that 
the precious stone could be seen at 
a distance of 20,000 li) that he is 
confusing this Charitrapura with the 
one farther south, two days’ sail from 
Ceylon. 

o6 M. Julien renders 
stipas” by mistake. 

7 See J. R.A. S., N.S, vol. vi. 
p.250. Cunningham supposes this 
place to be Ganjam. The origin of 
the name Ganjam is not known. 
When Hiuen Tsiang returned to 
Magadha he found that Harsha- 
vardhana had just returned from a 


it “five 


successful expedition against the 
king of Ganjam. Cunningham 
thinks that Ganjam was then an- 
nexed to the province of Orissa 
(Robert Sewell, Lists, vol. i. p. 2). 
Mr. Fergusson remarks that “Khord- 
hagar in the neighbourhood of Bhu- 
vanéswar is just 170 miles south- 
west from Midnapur, and it is im- 
possible to mistake the Chilka 
Lake as the great bay and the two 
seas of the text. Perhaps Hiuen 
Tsiang stopped here to visit the 
caves in the Khandagiri and Uday- 
agiri hills” (J. R.A. &., loc, cit.) 


BOOK x.] KALINGA, 207 


Within the limits of this country there are several tens 
of small towns which border on the mountains and are 
built contiguous to the sea.5® The cities themselves are 
strong and high ; the soldiers are brave and daring; they 
rule by force the neighbouring provinces, so that no one 
can resist them. This country, bordering on the sea, 
abounds in many rare and valuable articles. They use 
cowrie shells and pearls in commercial transactions. The 
great. greenish-blue © elephant comes from this country. 
They harness it to their conveyances and make very long 
journeys. ; 

From this going south-west, we enter a vast desert, 
jungle, and forests, the trees of which mount to heaven 
and hide the sun. Going 1400 or 1500 li, we come to the 
country of Kie-ling-kia (Kalinga). 


KQE-LING-KIA (KALINGA). 


This country® is 5000 li or so in circuit; its capital is 
20 li or so round. It is regularly cultivated and is pro- 
ductive. Flowers and fruits are very abundant. The 
forests and jungle are continuous for many hundred li. 
It produces the great tawny © wild elephant, which are 
much prized by neighbouring provinces. The climate is 


53 The phrase hai kiaw does not 
necessarily imply “the confluence of 
two seas.” It seems to mean that 
the towns were built near the moun- 
tains (the Mahéndra Malé?), but 
in communication with the sea-coast. 
So along the west coast of South 
America the towns built at thefoot of 
the hills are in communication with 
the sea by ports of embarcation (em- 
larcadores). : 

59 It may mean simply “ dark 
coloured ;” but ts’ing generally 
means “the colour of nature, as the 
azure of the sky or the green of 
growing plants” (Wells Williams). 
The phrase for black is un ts’ing. 

6 The frontier line of Kalinga 
cannot have extended beyond the 
Gédavari river on the south-west, 
and the Gaoliya branch of the In- 


dravati river on the north-west 
(Cunningham). For an account of 
the Kalinga déga, see Sewell, op. cit., 
p. 19. The chief town was proba- 
bly Réjamahéndri, where the 
Chalukyas perhaps established 
lished their capital. ither this 
place or Koringa, on the sea-coast, 
agrees with the bearing and distance 
given in the text. If, however, we 
accept Mr. Fergusson’s hypothesis 
that the capital of Kényédha was 
near Katak, and calculating the li 
to be one-seventh of a mile, we 
shall have to seek for the capital of 
Kaliiiga near Vijayanagram, For a 
notice respecting RAjamahéndri see 
Sewell, Lists, &c., vol. i. p. 22. 

61 The same word is used in the 
previous section ; see n. 60. 


208 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook x. 


burning; the disposition of the people vehement and 
impetuous. Though the men are mostly rough and un- 
civilised, they still keep their word and are trustworthy. 
The language is light and tripping,” and their pronuncia- 
tion distinct and correct. But in both particulars, that is, as 
to words and sounds, they are very different from Mid-India. 
There are a few who believe in the true law, but most of 
them are attached to heresy. There are ten savghdrdmas, 
with about 500 priests, who study the Great Vehicle accord- 
ing to the teaching of the Sthavira school. There are some 
100 Déva temples with very many unbelievers of different 
sorts, the most numerous being the Nirgranthas ® [Ni-kin 
followers]. 

In old days the kingdom of Kalinga had a very dense 
population. Their shoulders rubbed one with the other, 
and the axles of their chariot wheels grided together, and 
when they raised their arm-sleeves a perfect tent was 
formed. ‘There was a Rishi possessed of the five super- 
natural powers,® who lived (perched) on a high precipice, 
cherishing his pure (thoughts). Being put to. shame (in- 
sulted) because he had gradually lost his magic powers, he 
cursed the people with a wicked imprecation, and caused 
all dwelling in the country, both young and old, to perish; 
wise and ignorant alike died, and the population dis- 
appeared. After many ages the country was gradually re- 
peopled by emigrants, but yet it is not properly inhabited. 
This is why at the present time there are so few who 
dwell here. 

Not far from the south of the capital there is a stupa 
about a hundred feet high; this was built by Aé6ka-raja. 
By the side of it there are traces where the four past 
Buddhas sat down and walked. 


62 This description of their lan- there would be a continuous tent 
guage will appear natural to those formed. 
who have had Kling boys aboutthem. 6 Explained by Julien as refer- 
® Digambara Jainas, ante, vol. i, ring to the panchdbhijitds. 
p. 145, n. 74. 6 Julien translates gan by “ca- 
6 Ze. by stretching out theirarms vern;” but it means “a rocky or 
one to another, so close were they, precipitous mountain.” 


BOOK X.] KOSALA, 209 


Near the northern frontier of this country is a great 
mountain precipice,” on the top of which is a stone stipa 
about a hundred feet high. Here, at the beginning of the 
kalpa, when the years of men’s lives were boundless, a 
Pratyéka ® Buddha reached Nirvdna. 

From this going north-west through forests and moun- 
tains about 1800 li, we come to the country of Kiao-sa-lo 
(Kosala). 


KIA0-8a-Lo (KOs). 

This country ® is about 5000 li in circuit; the frontiers 
consist of encircling mountain crags; forests and jungle 
are found together in succession. The capital” is about 
40 li round; the soil is rich and fertile, and yields abun- 
dant crops. The towns and villages are close together. 
The population is very dense. The men are tall and black 
complexioned, The disposition of the people is hard and 
violent; they are brave and impetuous, There are both 
heretics and believers here. They are earnest in study 
and of a high intelligence. The king is of the Kshattriya 
race; he greatly honours the law of Buddha, and his 
virtue and love are far renowned. ‘There are about one 
hundred sanghdrdmas, and somewhat less than 10,000 


% Perhaps Mahéndragiri 

68 A Pratyéka Buddha is one who 
has reached enlightenment “for him- 
self alone ;” that is, he is not able 
to enlighten others by preaching or 
guiding. In Chinese it is rendered 
tuk hioh, “a solitary Buddha,” forthe 
same reason. 

® To be distinguished from Sra- 
vasti or Ayddhya, which district was 
also called Késala or Késala. See 
Wilson, Visknu-pur., vol. ii. p. 172 3 
Lassen, J. A., vol. i. p. 160, vol. iv. p. 
7o2. It lay to the south-west of 
Orissa and in the district watered 
by the upper feeders of the Maha- 
nadi and Gédavari. 

70 There is some uncertainty as to 
the capital of thiscountry. General 
Cunningham, who identifies the an- 
cient Késala with the modern pro- 


VOL. II. 


vince of Berar or Gondwana, places 
it at Chanda, a walled town 290 
miles to the north-west of Rajama- 
héndri, with Nagpur, Amaravati, or 
Tlichpur as alternatives ; the three 
last-named towns appear to be too 
far from the capital of Kalinga. 
But if we allow five li to the mile, 
the distance either of Nagpur or 
Amaravati from Rajamahéndri would 
agree with the 1800 or 1900 li of 
Hiuen Tsiang. There is much men- 
tion in I-tsing’s memoirs of priests 
visiting and remaining at a place 
called Amaravati ; itmayrefer to K6- 
sala, Mr. Fergusson, calculating thel: 
at one-sixth of a mile, suggests either 
Wairagarh or Bhandak, both of them 
sites of old cities, as the capital. He 
prefers the former for reasons stated 
(J. &. A. S., N.S., vol. vi. p. 260). 


(6) 


210 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x. 


priests: they all alike study the teaching of the Great 
Vehicle. There are about seventy Déva temples, fre- 
quented by heretics of different persuasions. 

Not far to the south of the city is an old sanghdrdma, 
by the side of which is a sttipa that was built by Aséka- 
raja. In this place Tathagata, of old, calling an assembly, 
exhibited his supernatural power and subdued the unbe- 
lievers. Afterwards Nagarjuna Bédhisattva (Long- 
meng-p'u-sa) dwelt in the sanghdrdma. The king of the 
country was then called Sadvaha” He greatly prized 
and esteemed N&garjuna, and provided him with a city- 
gate hut.” 

At this time Ti-p’o (Déva) Bédhisattva coming from 
the country of Chi-sse-tseu (Ceylon), sought to hold a 
discussion with him. Addressing the gate-keeper he 
said, “Be good enough to announce me.” Accordingly 
the gate-keeper entered and told Nagarjuna. He, recog- 
nising his reputation, filled up a pdéra with water and 
commanded his disciple to hold the water before this 
Déva. Déva, seeing the water, was silent, and dropped a 
needle into it. The disciple held the pdéra, and with some 
anxiety and doubt returned to Nagarjuna, “What did he 
say,” he asked. The disciple replied, “He was silent and 
said nothing; he only dropped a needle into the water.” 

Nagarjuna said, “What wisdom! Who like this man! 
To know the springs of action (motives), this is the privilege 
of a god! to penetrate subtle principles is the privilege of 
an inferior saint.” Such full wisdom as this entitles him 
to be allowed to enter forthwith.” He (the disciple) 
replied, “ What a saying is this! is this then the sublime 
eloquence (sizd2) of silence?” 

“This water,’ he (Nagarjuna) went on to say, “is 
shaped according to the form of the vessel that holds it; 

71 Expressed phonetically by So- 7 An inferior saint (ya shing) is 
to-p’o-ho, with the meaning, “he an expression applied to Mencius 
who draws the good.” compared with Confucius (Julien). 


72 Placed guards round his hut In this passage the title is referred 
(Julien). to Déva in comparison with Buddha. 


BOOK X.] NAGARZFUNA. 211 


it is pure or dirty according to the character of things (in it); 
it fills up every interstice; in point of clearness and com- 
prehensiveness he, on beholding the water, compared it 
to the wisdom which I have acquired by study. Dropping 
into it a needle, he pierced it, as it were, to the bottom. 
Show this extraordinary man in here at once, and let him 
be presented,” 

Now the manner and appearance of Nagarjuna were 
imposing, and inspired all with respect. In discussion all 
were awed by it, and submitted (bowed the head). Déva 
being aware of his excellent characteristics, had long 
desired to consult him, and he wished to become his 
disciple. But now as he approached he felt troubled in 
mind, and he was abashed and timid. Mounting the 
hall, he sat down awkwardly and talked darkly; but at 
the end of the day his words were clear and lofty. 
Nagarjuna said, “Your learning exceeds that of the 
world and your fine distinctions shine brighter than the 
former (teachers). I am but an old and infirm man; 
but having met with one so learned and distinguished, 
surely it is for the purpose of spreading the truth and for 
transmitting without interruption the torch of the law, 
and propagating the teaching of religion. Truly this is 
one who may sit on the upper seat to expound dark say- 
ings and discourse with precision.” 

Déva hearing these words, his heart conceived a degree 
of self-confidence, and being about to open the storehouse 
of wisdom, he first began to roam through the garden 
of dialectic and handle fine sentences; then having 
looked up for some indication of approval (confirmation 
of his argument), he encountered the imposing look of the 
master; his words escaped him; his mouth was closed; 
and. leaving his seat, he made some excuse, and asked to 
be instructed. 

Nagarjuna said, “Sit down again; I will communicate 


4 T have translated it thus; liter- of unfathomable fulness, as you 
ally it runs “clear and limpid and showed it to him.” 


212 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [pook x. 


to you the truest and most profound principles which the 
king of the law himself verily handed down (taught for 
transmission).” Déva then prostrated himself on the 
ground, and adored with all his heart, and said, “Both 
now and for ever I will dare to listen to your instructions.” 
Nagirjuna Bodhisattva was well practised in the art 
of compounding medicines ; by taking a preparation (pill 
or cake), he nourished the years of life for many hundreds 
of years,” so that neither the mind nor appearance decayed. 
Sadvaha-rija had partaken of this mysterious medicine, 
and his years were already several hundred in number. 
The king had a young son who one day addressed his 
mother thus, “When shall I succeed to the royal estate 2” 
His mother said, “There seems to me to be no chance 
of that yet; your father the king is now several hundred 
years old, his sons and grandsons are many of them dead 
and gone through old age. This is the result of the 
religious power of Nagarjuna, and the intimate knowledge 
he has of compounding medicines. The day the Bodhis- 
attva dies the king will also succumb. Now the wisdom 
of this Nfigdrjuna is great and extensive, and his love and 
compassion very deep; he would give up for the benefit 
of living creatures his body and life. You ought, there- 
fore, to go, and when you meet him, ask him to give you 
his head. If you do this, then you will get your desire.” 
The king’s son, obedient to his mother’s instructions, 
went to the gate of the convent. The doorkeeper, alarmed, 
ran away,’ and so he entered at once. Then Nagarjuna 
Bédhisattva was chanting as he walked up and down, 
Seeing the king’s son he stopped, and said, “ It is evening 
time now; why do you af such a time come so hastily to 
the priests’ quarters ? has some accident happened, or are 


75 Some attribute 600 years to 
Nagiirjuna as his term of life (Vae- 
silief, Bouddisme, p. 76). This writer 
says, “In my opinion the 400 or 600 
years of life given to Nagarjuna re- 
fer to the development of the system 


of the Great Vehicle ” (op. cit., p. 77, 
n. I). 

7 To announce the arrival of the 
king’s son (Julien), But it would 
seem to mean he ran away through 
fear. 


BOOK X.] NAGAR}UNA AND THE KING’S SON. 213 


you afraid of some calamity that you have hastened here 
at such a time ?” 

He answered, “ I was considering with my dear mother 
the words of different Sdstras, and the examples (therein 
given) of sages who had forsaken (given up) the world, 
and I was led to remark on the great value set on life by 
all creatures, and that the scriptures, in their examples 
given of sacrifice, had not enforced this duty of giving 
up life readily for the sake of those who desired it. Then 
my dear mother said, ‘ Not so; the Sugatas (shen sht) of 
the ten regions, the Tathdgatas of the three ages, whilst 
living in the world and giving their hearts to the object, 
have obtained the fruit. They diligently sought the way 
of Buddha; practising the precepts, exercising patience, 
they gave up their bodies to feed wild beasts, cut their 
flesh to deliver the dove. Thus Raja Chandraprabha 
(Yueh-kwang) gave up his head to the Brahman; Maitri- 
bala (Ts’e li) raja fed the hungry Yaksha with his blood. 
To recite every similar example would be difficult, but in 
searching through the history of previous sages, what age 
is there that affords not examples? And so Nagirjuna 
Bédhisattva is now actuated by similar high principles ; 
as for myself, I have sought a man who for my advantage 
would give me his head, but have never yet found such a 
person for years. If I had wished to act with violence 
and take the life of a man (commit murder), the crime 
would have been great and entailed dreadful conse- 
quences. To have taken the life of an innocent child 
would have been infamous and disgraced my character, 
But the Bédhisattva diligently practises the holy way 
and aspires after a while to the fruit of Buddha. His 
love extends to all beings and his goodness knows no 
bounds. He esteems life as a bubble, his body as decay- 
ing wood. He would not contradict his purpose in refus- 
ing such a gift, if requested.” 


7 For the story of Chandra. dhist Lit. p. 310; for Maitribala, 
prabha see R. Mitra’s Nepalese Bud-  ibid., p. 50. 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BooK x. 


214 


Nagarjuna said, “Your comparisons and your words are 
true. I seek the holy fruit of a Buddha, JI have learnt 
that a Buddha is able to give up all things, regarding the 
body as an echo, a bubble, passing through the four forms 
of life,’8 continually coming and going in the six ways.” 
My constant vow has been not to oppose the desires of 
living things. But there is one difficulty in the way of 
the king’s son, and what is that? IfI were to give up 
my life your father also would die. Think well of this, 
for who could then deliver him?” 

Nagarjuna, irresolute, walked to and fro, seeking for 
something to end his life with; then taking a dry reed 
leaf, he cut his neck as if with a sword, and his head fell 
from his body. 

Having seen this, he (the royal prince) fled precipitately 
and returned. The guardian of the gate informed the 
king of the event from first to last, who whilst listening 
was so affected that he died. 

To the south-west about 300 li we came to the Po-lo- 
mo-lo-ki-li (Brahmaragiri) mountain. The solitary 
peak of this mountain towers above the rest, and stands out 
with its mighty precipices as a solid mass of rock without 
approaches or intervening valleys. The king, Sadvaha, for 
the sake of Nagarjuna Bodhisattva, tunnelled out this 
rock through the middle, and built and fixed therein (in 


78 The four modes of life are de- 
scribed as creatures oviparous, vivi- 
parous, born from spawn or by trans- 


with the footprint of Bhima, «Qe, 
Siva (or, if Bhim4, then Durgé), 
would answer to the hill of Sadvaha. 


formation. See Vajrachhédikd, cap. 2. 

79 ‘The six ways of birth are (1.),as 
Dévas, (2.)as men, (3.) as Asuras, (4.) 
as Prétas, (5.) as beasts, (6.) in 
hell. 

80 It would seem that this is the 
right restoration. The Chinese ex- 
planation is “the black peak,” but 
here fung, “a peak,” is probably a 
mistake for fung, “a bee.” Brah- 
maré is an epithet of Durga or 
Chand&. Assuming Bhindak to 
have been the capital of Késala, 
the Winjhésani and Dewdli Hills, 


It is tolerably certain that the Po- 
lo-yu of Fa-hian is intended for Par- 
vati (his interpretation of “pigeon” 
(Paravata) being derived from hear- 
say at Banaras), and this corresponds 
with “Brahmara.” Altogether it 
seems probable that the worship of 
Durgi, or Chanda, or Bhima, or 
Parvati, was affected in this part of 
India, and probably gave rise to, or 
at any rate fostered, the worship of 
Avalokitesvara or Kwan-yin. (See 
the question discussed, J. R. A. S., 
N.S., vol. xv. p. 344.) 


BOOK X.] THE PO-LO-MO-KI-LI MOUNTAIN. 215 


the middle) a sanghdrdma ; at a distance of some 10 li, by 
tunnelling, he opened a covered way (an approach). Thus 
by standing under the rock (not knowing the way in) we 
see the cliff excavated throughout, and in the midst of 
long galleries (corridors) with eaves for walking under 
and high towers (fwrrets), the storeyed building reaching 
to the height of five stages, each stage with four halls 
with vihdras enclosed (united)®1 In each vihdra was a 
statue of Buddha cast in gold, of the size of life, wrought 
(cast) with consummate art and singularly adorned and 
specially ornamented with gold and precious stones. From 
the high peak of the mountain descending streamlets, like 
small cascades, flow through the different storeys, winding 
round the side galleries, and then discharging themselves 
without. Scattered light-holes illumine the interior (tuner 
chambers) .®2 

When first Sadvaha-raja excavated this satghdrdma, 
the men (engaged in it) were exhausted and the king's 
treasures emptied. His undertaking being only half 
accomplished, his heart was heavily oppressed. Nagar- 
juna addressing him said, “ For what reason is the king so 
sad of countenance?” The king replied, “I had formed 
in the course of reflection a great purpose.®* I ventured 
to undertake a meritorious work of exceeding excellence 
which might endure firm till the coming of Maitréya, but 
now before it is completed my means are exhausted. So 
I sit disconsolate day by day awaiting the dawn, cast 
down at heart.” 

Nagarjuna said, “ Afflict not yourself thus; the returns 
consequent on the high aims of a lofty religious purpose 


81 It seems to mean that in each 
platform there were four halls, and 
each of these halls had a vihdra 
which were connected. 

8 The description of this rock- 
monastery in the text shows that 
it is the same as that described by 
Fa-hian (pp. 139, 140, Beal’s edition). 
Neither Fa-hian nor Hiuen Tsiang 


personally visited the spot. It would 


seem to have been utterly deserted 


and waste even in Fa-hian’s time. 
This favours the record of its early 
construction in the time of Nagdar- 
juna (about the first century B.c.) 

83 Or, “as my great heart was 
revolving in chance thoughts.” 


216 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BooK x. 


are not to be foiled: your great resolve shall without fail 
be accomplished, Return then to your palace; you shall 
have abundance of joy. To-morrow, after you have gone 
forth to roam through and observe the wild country round 
(the mountain wilds), then return to me and quietly dis- 
cuss about the buildings.” The king having received these 
instructions left him after proper salutation (turning to the 
right). 

Then Nagarjuna Bédhisattva, by moistening all the great 
stones with a divine and superior decoction (medicine or 
mixture), changed them into gold. The king going forth 
and seeing the gold, his heart and his mouth mutually 
congratulated each other.** Returning, he went to Nagar- 
juna and said, “To-day as I roamed abroad, by the influ- 
ence of the divine spirits (geniz) in the desert, I beheld 
piles of gold.” Nd&gfrjuna said, “It was not by the infiu- 
ence of the genii, but by the power of your great sincerity; 
as you have this gold, use it therefore for your present 
necessities, and fulfil your excellent work.” So the king 
acted and finished his undertaking, and still he had a 
surplus. On this he placed in each of the five stages four 
great golden figures. The surplus still remaining he de- 
voted to replenish the necessitous (deficient) branches of 
the exchequer. 

Then he summoned 1000 priests to dwell (in the build- 
ing he had constructed), and there to worship and pray. 
Nagarjuna Bodhisattva placed in it all the authoritative 
works of instruction spoken by Sikya Buddha, and all the 
explanatory compilations (commentaries) of the Bddhi- 
sattvas, and the exceptional collection of the miscellaneous 
school. Therefore in the first (uppermost) storey they 


& That is, his words were in 


agreement with the happy thoughts 


entertained in his heart. 

8 If this be the right rendering 
of the passage, then the “ misce]- 
laneous school” will refer to the 
sannipdta class of books. If, how- 
ever, we adopt M. Julien’s render- 


ing, the passage will simply mean, 
“he collected these books (viz., the 
sdtras and sdstras) and divided them 
into sections.” But if we examine 
the entire passage, it seems to imply 
that Nagarjuna collected (1.) The 
books claiming the authority of 
Buddha’s utterance ; (2.) the writ- 


BOOK X.] ANDHRA. 217 


placed only the figure of Buddha, and the stéras and 
Sdstras; in the fifth stage from the top (2e., in the lowest), 
they placed the Brahmans (pure men) to dwell, with all 
necessary things provided for them; in the three middle 
storeys they placed the priests and their disciples. The 
old records state that when Sadvaha-raja had finished, he 
calculated that the salt consumed by the workmen cost 
nine kofis of gold pieces. Afterwards the priests having 
got angry and quarrelled, they went to the king to get the 
question settled. Then the Brahmans said amongst them- 
selves, “The Buddhist priests have raised a quarrel on 
some question of words.” Then these wicked men con- 
sulting together, waiting for the occasion, destroyed the 
sanghdrdma, and afterwards strongly barricaded the place 
in order to keep the priests out. 

From that time no priests of Buddha have lived there. 
Looking at the mountain caves (or heights) from a dis- 
tance, it is impossible to find the way into them (éhe caves). 
In these times, when they (the Brdimans) introduce a 
physician into their abodes to treat any sickness, they 
put a veil over his face on going in and coming out, so that 
he may not know the way. 

From this, going through a great forest south, after 900 
li or so, we come to the country of ’An-ta-lo (Andhra). 


?AN-TA-LO (ANDHRA). 


This country is about 3000 li in circuit; the capital is 
about 20 li round. It is called P’ing-k’i-lo (Vingila 7) * 
The soil is rich and fertile; it is regularly cultivated, and 
produces abundance of cereals. The temperature is hot, 
and the manners of the people fierce and impulsive. The 
language and arrangement of sentences differ from Mid- 
India, but with reference to the shapes of the letters, they 


ings of the Bédhisattvas ; (3.) the rivers, which was certainly in the 

other miscellaneous books. early Andhra dominions. In the 
86 This is probably the old city of neighbourhood are said to be rock 

Vengi, north-west of Elur lake, be- temples and other remains. 

tween the Gédavari and Krishna 


218 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x. 


are nearly the same, 
about 3000 priests. 
with many heretics. 

‘Not far from Vingila(?) is a great satighdrdma with 
storeyed towers and balconies beautifully carved and 
ornamented. There is here a figure of Buddha, the sacred 
features of which have been portrayed with the utmost 
power of the artist. Before this convent is a stone stidpa 
which is several hundred feet high; both the one and the 
other were built by the Arhat ’O-che-lo (Achala).§” 

To the south-west of the satghdrdma of the Arhat 
’O-che-lo not a great way is a stdpa which was built by 
Ag6ka-rija. Here Tathigata in old days preached the 
law, and exhibited his great spiritual powers, and converted 
numberless persons. 

Going 20 li or so to the south-west of the saighdrdma 
built by Achala (So-hing), we reach a solitary mountain 
on the top of which is a stone stdpa. Here Jina ® Béd- 
hisattva, composed the Jn-ming-lun (Nydyadvdra-tdraka 
Sdstra or Hétuvidyd Sdstra?)2® This Bédhisattva, after 
Buddha had left the world, received the doctrine and 
assumed the vestments (ofa disciple). His wisdom and 
his desires (prayers or vows) were vast. The power of his 
great wisdom was deep and solid. Pitying the world, which 
was without any support (reliance), he designed to spread 
the sacred doctrine. Having weighed™ the character of 


There are twenty saiighdrdmas with 
There are also thirty Déva temples 


8? The Chinese translation of the (iv. fol. 5, b.) the translation of 


Arhat’s name is “he who acts,” it 
should therefore be restored to Ach- 
dra. The restoration otherwise 
might be Achala, who is mentioned 
in an inscription at Ajanta. See 
infra. 

83 The phonetic symbols for Jina 
are Ch’in-na; it is translated by 
?ong sheu, “ youth-received,” which 
Julien restores to Kuméaralabdha. 
But thus Jina cannot be translated 
by either of these phrases. (For an 
account of the works of this Bédhis- 
attva, see Bunyiu Nanjio, Catalogue, 
Appendix i. No, 10) In Hwui-li 


Ch’in-na is simply sheu. 

8 There is much confusion here. 
The text gives only n- ming -lun, 
which must be restored to Hétu- 
vidya Sdstra; but Julien, in his list 
of errata, p. 568, corrects the text, 
and supplies the title of the work, 
In-ming-ching-li-men-lun, i.e, Nyd- 
yadvdra-tdraka Sdstra. This may be 
so, but this work is not named in 
Runyiu Nanjio’s Catalogue among 
those written by Jina. 

% I do not see in the text that he 
composed this édstra, but consider- 
ing its character (¢ wet), he, &c. 


BOOK X.] ACHARA BODHISATTVA. 219 


the Hétwvidyd Sdstra, its words so deep, its reasonings 
so wide, and (having considered) that students vainly 
endeavoured to overcome its difficulties in their course 
of study, he retired into the lonely mountains and gave 
himself to meditation to investigate it so as to compose a 
useful compendium, that might overcome the difficulties 
(obscurities) of the work, its abstruse doctrines and com- 
plicated sentences. At this time the mountains and 
valleys shook and reverberated; the vapour and clouds 
changed their appearance, and the spirit of the mountain, 
carrying the Bodhisattva to a height of several hundred 
feet, then repeated (chanted) these words, “In former days 
the Lord of the World virtuously controlled and led the 
people; prompted by his compassionate heart, he delivered 
the Hétuvidya Sdstra2! and arranged in due order its 
exact reasonings and its extremely deep and refined words. 
But after the Nirvdna of Tathagata its great principles 
became obscured ; but now Jina Bédhisattva, whose merit 
and wisdom are so extensive, understanding to the bottom 
the sacred well, will cause the Hétuvidyd Sastra to spread 
abroad its power (to add its weight) during the present 
day.” 

Then the Bédhisattva caused a bright light to shine and 
ilumine the dark places (of the world), on which the king 
of the country conceived a deep reverence as he saw the 
sign of this brilliancy, and being in doubt whether he (zz., 
Bodhisattva) had not entered the Vajrasamddhi (or, dia- 
mond Samddht) ; then he asked the Bodhisattva to obtain 
the fruit of “no further birth.” ” 

Jina said, “I have entered Samddhi from a desire to 
explain a profound siltra; my heart awaits perfect en- 
lightenment (samyak sambédhi), but has no desire for this 
fruit that admits of no rebirth,” 

The king said, “The fruit of ‘no-birth’ is the aim of 

*1 Tt does not necessarily mean ® That is, to acquire the privilege 


that Buddha composed this work, of an Arhat, 
but delivered (shwo) or spake it, 


220 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BOOK x. 


all the saints. To cut yourself off from the three worlds, 
and to plunge into the knowledge of the ‘three vidyis, 
how grand such an aim!®3 May you soon attain it!” 

Then Jina Bédhisattva, pleased at the request of the 
king, conceived the desire to reach the holy fruit which 
“exempts from learning,” * 

At this time Maiijusri Bodhisattva (Miu-ki-ts’‘iang- 
p'u-sa), knowing his purpose, was moved with pity. Wish- 
ing to arouse him to the truth and to awaken him ina 
moment, he came and said, “Alas! how have you given 
up your great purpose, and only fixed your mind on your 
own personal profit, with narrow aims, giving up the pur- 
pose of saving all! If you would really do good, you 
ought to transmit and explain the rules of the Yw-kia-sse- 
ti-lun (Yégachdrya-bhami Sdstra) of Maitreya Bodhisattva. 
By that you may lead and direct students, and cause them 
to receive great advantage.” 

Jina Bédhisattva receiving these directions, respectfully 
assented and saluted the saint. Then having given him- 
self to profound study, he developed the teaching of the 
Heétuvidyd Sdstra; but still fearing that the students 
thereof would dread its subtle reasonings and its precise 
style, he composed the Hétuvidyd Sastra > exemplifying 
the great principles and explaining the subtle’ language, in 
order to guide the learners. After that he explained fully 
the Yéza discipline. 

From this going through the desert forest south * 1000 
li or so, we come to To-na-kie-tse-kia (Dhanakataka).” 


93 «This is the chief, or complete, 
thing.” 

4 This also is a phrase to denote 
the condition of Arhatship. 

% The title is defective. It pro- 
bably refers to the Nydyadvdra- 
tdraka Sdstra; but, on the other 
hand, this work was composed by 
Nagarjuna (see B. Nanjio’s Cata- 
logue, 1223). The whole of the 
passage in the text referring to Jina 
is obscure, and probably corrupt. 


$6 Tn the translation of Hwui-lih, 
Julien gives “vers le sud,” which 
expression is quoted by Fergusson 
(J. RB. A. S,N.S., vol. vi. p. 262); 
but it is simply “ going south” in 
the original. 

% Called also the Great Andhra 
country. Julien has Dhanakachéka ; 
the Pali inscriptions at Amaravati 
and Nasik give Dhathiiakataka, for 
which the Sanskrit would be Dhan- 
yakataka or Dhanyakataka ; and in 


BOOK X.] DHANAKATAKA. 221 


T’O-NA-KIE-TSE-KIA (DHANAKATAKA). 


This country is about 6000 li in circuit, and the 
capital °8 some 40 li round. The soil is rich and fertile, 
and is regularly cultivated, affording abundant harvests. 
There is much desert country, and the towns are thinly 
populated. The climate is hot. The complexion of the 
people is a yellowish black, and they are by nature fierce 
and impulsive. They greatly esteem learning. The con- 
vents (satghdrdmas) are numerous, but are mostly deserted 
and ruined; of those preserved there are about twenty, 
with 1ooo or so priests. They all study the law of the 
Great Vehicle. There are 100 Déva temples, and the 
people who frequent them are numerous and of different 
beliefs. 

To the east of the capital (the city) bordering on (lean- 
ing against) a mountain is a convent called the Pirva- 
sili (Fo-p’o-shi-lo-seng).1° To the west of the city lean- 
ing against (maintained by) a mountain is a convent 


called Avaragila1 
a former king to do honour 


an inscription of 1361 A.D. we have 
Dhanyavatipura, and these would 
identify the city of Dhamnakataka 
with Dharanikéta close to Amara- 
vati (Ind. Ant., vol. xi. pp. 95 f.) 
The symbol tse is equivalent to the 
Sanskrit fa. 

#8 Mr. Fergusson concludes from a 
report addressed to Government by 
the late J. A. C. Boswell, and also 
from some photographs by Captain 
Ross Thompson, that almost beyond 
the shadow of a doubt BejwAda is the 
city described by Hiuen Tsiang (op. 
cit., p. 263). But seeZnd. Ant., ut cit. 

*% The word is keu, to hold, to 
rely on. In the Analects (vii. 6, 2) 
there is the expression keu yu tih, 
which Dr. Legge translates, ‘let 
every attainment in what is good be 
jirmly grasped.” T should suppose, 
therefore, the text means that the 
Pirvasila convent was supported by 


These were (or, this was) built by 


to (for the sake of) Buddha. 


or enclosed by a mountain on the 
east of the city. 

10 The symbol lo appears to be 
omitted. Fo-le-pe would be equal to 
Purva. 

101 °Q.fa-lo-shi-lo, Aparagilé or 
West Mount. Fergusson identifies 
this with the Amarivati tope. The 
tope is 17 miles west of Bejwéda. 
It stands to the south of the town 
of Amardvati, which again is 20 
miles north-north-west of Guntir. 
The old fort called Dharnikéta 
(which appears at one time to have 
been the name of the district) is 
just one mile west of Amardvati. 
“This celebrated Buddhist tope 
was first discovered by Raja Ven- 
katadri Nayudu’s servants in a.p. 
1796: it was visited by Colonel 
Mackenzie and his survey staff in 
17973 it was greatly demolished by 
the Raja, who utilised the sculptured 


222 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BOOK x. 


He hollowed the valley, made a road, opened the moun- 
tain crags, constructed pavilions and long (or, lateral) 
galleries ; wide chambers supported the heights and con- 
nected the caverns!” The divine spirits respectfully 
defended (this place); both saints and sages wandered 
here and reposed. During the thousand years following 
the Nirvdna of Buddha, every year there were a thousand 
laymen} and priests who dwelt here together during 
the rainy season. When the time was expired, all who 
had! reached the condition of Arhats mounted into 
the air and fled away. After the thousand years the lay- 


marbles for building materials up the saighdrdma. In Hwui-lih there 
to the year 1816. It was again is nothing said about the caverns, 
visited by Colonel Mackenzie, who galleries, and tunnels; he simply 
made large excavations, in 1816. states that “the eastern and western 
Further excavations in 1835 (?);exa- sazighdrdmas were built by a former 
mined by Sir Walter Elliot, who kingof the country, and hethoroughly 
unearthed the ruins of the western searched through all the examples 
gateway in 1840. Excavations re- (kw’ai shih, rules and patterns) [of 
commenced (by Mr. R.Sewell)inMay similar buildings] to be found in Ta- 
1877. Further excavations (by Dr. hia.” Hiuen Tsiang says that “the 
James Burgess) in 1882-83. Sewell’s eastern and western convents were 
List of Antiquarian Remains in Ma- built [the symbol ch’a in the text 
dras, vol. i. p. 63. For a full and is lik in Hwui-lih ; I regard it asa 
valuable account of the sculptures misprint] by a former king,” and 
of this tope see Fergusson, Tree and then he goes on to say that “he 
Serpent Worship, also Burgess, Re- moreover bored through the river 
port on the Amardvati Stapa. An valley, hollowed out a road, divided 
inscription discovered by Dr. Burgess the crags, raised pavilions (turreted 
among the stones of the st@pa proves chambers) with lateral galleries, 
* beyond doubt that the Amardvati whilst wide chambers supported 
stipa was either already built or was (pillowed) the heights and con- 
being built in the second century: nected the caves.’’ This is all in- 
A.D., if not earlier” (Burgess, op. dependent of building the sarighd- 
cit., p. 27). rdmas. I must confess, however, 
102 This would appear to refer to that the position of the stdpa, 
his work in constructing a sort of seventeen miles west of the town, 
“sacred way” leading to the tope. and on the other side of the river, 
But the text does not supply any seems to be a difficulty. With 
information beyond the fact of the reference to Ta-hia, it is generally 
excavations in connection with this translated Baktria (Bretschneider, 
western saighardma. But were Notices of Medieval Geography, &c., 
these excavations confined to “the p. 197). The rules and patterns 
high mountain on the west of the of buildings in Baktria would, I 
town, full of caves, abutting on the should suppose, be those of the 
river?” Perhaps an explanatoin Greeks, 
may be found by supposing that the 3 Fan fu, common disciples. 
excavation of the mountain, &c., 104 Or, is may mean all of them 
was independent of the building of attained the condition of Arhats. 


BOOK X.] BHAVAVIVEKA. 


223 


men and saints dwelt together; but for the last hundred 
years there have been no priests (dwelling here) in con- 
sequence of the spirit of the mountain changing his shape, 
and appearing sometimes as a wolf, sometimes as a mon- 
key, and frightening the disciples; for this reason the 
place has become deserted and wild, with no priests to 
dwell there, 

To the south? of the city a litle way is a great 
mountain cavern. It is here the master of Sdstras P’o- 
pi-fei-kia (Bhavavivéka) 1 remains in the palace of 
the Asuras (’O-ssu-lo), awaiting the arrival of Maitréya 
Bédhisattva as perfect Buddha.” This master of sds- 
tras was widely renowned for his elegant scholarship and 
for the depth of his vast attainments (virtue), Externally 
he was a disciple of Kapila! (Saénkhya), but inwardly 
he was fully possessed of the learning of Nagarjuna. Hav- 
ing heard that Dharmapila (Hu-fa-p’u-sa) of Magadha 
was spreading abroad the teaching of the law, and was 
making many thousand disciples, he desired to discuss 
with him. He took his religious staff in hand and went. 
Coming to Pataliputra (Po-ch’a-li) he ascertained that 
Dharmapala Bodhisattva was dwelling at the Bédhi tree. 
Then the master of sdstras ordered his disciples thus: 
“Go you to the place where Dharmapala resides near the 
Bodhi tree, and say to him in my name, ‘ Bodhisattva 
(ie, Dharmap4la) publishes abroad the doctrine (of Bud- 
dha) bequeathed to the world: he leads and directs the 


205 According tothe report quoted 
by Mr. Fergusson (op. cit., p. 263), 
“immediately south of the town 
(i.e, of Bejwidd) is a singular 
isolated rock or hill, along whose 
base and sides there are the remains 
of a considerable number of rock- 
caves, &c.” 

106 In Chinese Tsing-pin, “he 
who discusses with clearness” 
(Jul.); but in Wong-Pth (§ 193) 
he is called Ming-pin, which seems 
more accurate. Forthe story of this 
doctor see Wong-Pah (loc. cit.) 

107 In this passage, as in the one 


relating to Kasyapa in the Kukku- 
tapada-giri, Julien has quite missed 
the sense; he translates as though 
Bhavavivéka had become a Buddha. 
108 In the text it is ‘externally 
he wore the clothes or costume of 
the Sankhya (Sdng-k’te), that is, he 
was a follower of Kapila by out- 
ward profession. Julien has trans- 
lated it as though Sdng-ie were 
equivalent to Sdng-kia-chi, but the 
symbols are quite different, and he 
himself gives Sdikhya as the equi- 
valent of Sdng-k’ie (pp. 470, 527). 


224 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BOOK X. 


ignorant. His followers look up to him with respect and 
humility, and so it has been for many days; nevertheless 
his vow and past determination have borne no fruit! 
Vain is it to worship and visit the Bédhi tree. Swear to 
accomplish your object, and then you will be in the end 
guide of gods and men,” 1” 

Dharmapala Bodhisattva answered the messenger thus: 
“The lives of men (or, generations of men) are like a 
phantom ; the body is as a bubble. The whole day I 
exert myself; J have no time for controversy; you may 
therefore depart—there can be no meeting.” 

The master of sdstras having returned to his own 
country, led a pure (qutet) life and reflected thus: “In the 
absence of 9 Maitréya as a Buddha, who is there that 
can satisfy my doubts?” Then in front of the figure of 
the Bodhisattva Kwan-tsz’-tsai,™ he recited in order 
the Sin-to’-lo-ni (Hridaya-dhdrant)} abstaining from 
food and drink. After three years Kwan-tsz’-tsai Bodhi- 
sativa appeared to him with a very beautiful body, and 


109 This passage is obscure, and I 
offer my translation only as tenta- 
tive. It appears to me that the 
message to the Bédhisattva was 
couched ironically. Bhavavivéka 
challenges Dharmapala on the 
ground that his aim has not yet 
been accomplished, and to go to the 
Bédhi tree to worship is foolish and 
inoperative. ‘Vow to accomplish 
your purpose, and it shall be accom- 
plished irrespective of worship or 
humility.” This would seem to 
have been the tendency of Nagar- 
juna’s teaching, and Bhavavivéka, 
though outwardly a follower of Ka- 
pila, was yet full of Nagdrjuna’s 
spirit, 

1° That is, until Maitréya be- 
comes Buddha, who is there that 
can answer my doubts? It is not 
that Maitréya has become Buddha, 
but until he does so become. 

11 This is indirectly a most im- 
portant passage. It shows that Bha- 
vavivéka, who was imbued “with the 


” 


spirit of Nagarjuna,” although pro- 
fessedly a follower of Kapila, ex- 
hibited his faith by going to Avalé- 
kitégvara. This, joined with the 
story of Sadvaha excavating the 
Brahmara (Durg4) convent for Na- 
garjuna, shows that the worship of 
Durga (the many-armed and the high) 
was the chief feature in the spirit of 
Nagirjuna’s teaching; in other 
words, that the fusion between Bud- 
dhism and the native worship of hill 
gods dates from Nagarjuna’s time, 
and was brought about by his in- 
fluence. 

n2 This is a well-known, sdira or 
mantra, has been translated in the 
Journal of the R. A, S., 1875, p. 273 
see also Bendall, Catalogue of MSS., 
&e, p. 117, add. 1485. The com- 
position of this sétra may, I think 
be attributed to Nagarjuna, as the 
founder of the Mahayana doctrine. 

US This “ beautiful body ” of Ava- 
lékitésvara seems to be derived from 
foreign sources. The character of 


BOOK X.] BHAVAVIVEKA, 225 


addressed the master of Sdst7as thus: “What is your pur- 
pose (will)?” He said, “May I keep my body till Mai- 
tréya comes.” Kwan-tsz’-tsai Bédhisattva said, “ Man’s 
life is subject to many accidents. The world is as a 
bubble or a phantom. You should aim at the highest 
resolve to be born in the Tushita heaven, und there, even 
now," to see him face to face and worship.” 

The master of sdéstras said, “ My purpose is fixed; my 
mind cannot be changed.”?" Bodhisattva said, “If it is 
so, you must go to the country of Dhanakataka, to the 
south of the city, where in a mountain cavern a diamond- 
holding (Vajrapdni) spirit dwells, and there with the 
utmost sincerity reciting the Chi-king-kang-t’o-lo-ni 
(Vajrapdnidhérani), you ought to obtain your wish.” 

On this the master of sdstras went and recited (the 
dhérant). After three years the spirit said to him, “ What 
is your desire, exhibiting such earnest diligence?” The 
master of Sdstras said, “I desire that my body may endure 
till Maitréya comes, and Avalokitésvara Béddhisattva 
directed me to come here to request the fulfilment (of 
my desire). Does this rest with you, divine being?” 

The spirit then revealed to him a formula and said, 
“There is an Asura’s palace in this mountain; if you ask 
according to the rule given you, the walls will open, and 
then you may enter and wait there till you see (Jfai- 
tréya).” “But,” said the master of Sdstras, “dwelling in the 
dark, how shall I be able to see or know when the Buddha 


the beauty may be seen from the 
plates supplied by Mr. B. Hodgson 
in the /. R. A. S&, vol. vi. p. 276. 
There can be little doubt that we 
have here a link connecting this 
worship with that of Ardhvisura- 
anahita, the Persian representative 
of the beautiful goddess of “ pure 
water.” Compare Anaitis as Venus, 
and the Venus-mountains in Europe 
(Fensberg), the survival of the wor- 
ship of hill-gods. (See Karl Blind 
on “ water-gods,” &¢., in the Con- 
temporary Review.) 
VOL. IL. 


114 This is the aim of the true 
Buddhist convert, to be born in the 
heaven of Maitréya after death, and 
there to hear his doctrine, so as to 
be able at his advent to receive his 
instruction and reach Nirvdza. Op- 
posed to this is the foreign theory of 
a Western paradise. 

Us This exhibits the character of 
Bhavavivéka, who had charged 
Dharmapala with want of a strong 
determination (oath). See ante, n. 
109. 


P 


226 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BOOK x, 


appears?” Vajrapini said, “When Maitréya comes into 
the world, I will then advertise you of it.’ The master 
of Sdstras having received his instructions, applied him- 
self with earnestness to repeat the sentences, and for three 
years, Without any change of mind, he repeated the words 
to a nicety (mustard-seed).6 Then knocking at the rock- 
cavern, it opened out its deep and vast recesses. Then an 
innumerable multitude appeared before him looking about 
them, but forgetful of the way to return. The master of 
Sdstras passed through the door, and addressing the multi- 
tude said, “Long have I prayed and worshipped with a 
view to obtain an opportunity to see Maitréya. Now, 
thanks to the aid of a spiritual being, my vow is accom- 
plished. Let us therefore enter here, and together await 
the revelation of this Buddha.” 

Those who heard this were stupified, and dared not 
pass the threshold. They said, “This is a den of ser- 
pents; we shall all be killed” Thrice he addressed 
them, and then only six persons were content to enter 
with him. The master of Sdstras turning himself and 
advancing, then all the multitude followed him with their 
gaze as he entered. After doing so the stone walls closed 


Né Julien translates this “sur un 
graine de sénevé.” Referring to 
iny translation in Wong-Pah, § 193, 
I had the honour to correspond with 
M. Julien on the subject, he only 
allowed that the point was worthy 
of consideration. His words are 
these: “Il me semble au contraire 
que cela signifie que la puissance des 
dhdrani recités sur une graine de 
sénevé fut telle que cette graine, 
malgré sa légérité extréme, put, 
etant projetée sur la pierre, la faire 
s’entrouvrir comme si elle avait été 
frappée avec un instrument d’une 
force, d’un poids extraordinaire.” 
But there is something to be said on 
the other side. To repeat a formula 
“to a mustard-seed,” is to repeat it 
perfectly (ad unguem); hence the 
name of Siddhartha, “the perfect” 


(yth-tsai-t-shing), the son of Suddhé- 
dana, the promised Buddha, was 
just this, “‘the white mustard-seed ” 
(Siddhartha), because he was ‘‘per- 
fectly endowed.” Whether the 


, phrase, “faith as a grain of mustard- 


seed” (&s xéxkoy owdmews) does not 
mean ‘‘ perfect faith” (an Oriental- 
ism introduced into Palestine, ds 
used for éws, or mpés) is a point I 
shall not urge; but probably the 
familiar story of ‘‘Open Sesame” 
is derived from the legend of Bhava- 
vivéka and the “ mustard - seed.” 
Both Ali Baba and the master of 
sdstras succeeded in opening the 
cavern gate by a “mustard-seed” 
formula. Cunningham connects the 
name of the place, Dharani-kéta, 
pie this legend (Anc. Geog., p. 
38). 


BOOK X.] CHU-LI-YE—CHOLA. 227 


behind them, and then those left without chided them- 
selves for neglecting his words addressed to them. 

From this going south-west 1000 li or so, we come to 
the kingdom of Chu-li-ye (Chulya). 


Ciu-LI-YE (CHULYA oR CHOLA). 


The country of Chulya (Chéla) is about 2400 or 2500 li 
in circuit; the capital is about ro li round. It is deserted 
and wild, a succession of marshes and jungle. The popu- 
lation is very small, and troops of brigands go through the 
country openly. The climate is hot; the manners of the 
people dissolute and cruel. The disposition of the men 
is naturally fierce; they are attached to heretical teaching. 
The séaghdrdmas are ruined and dirty as well as the 
priests. There are some tens of Déva temples, and many 
Nirgrantha heretics. 

At a little distance south-east of the city is a stipa 
built by Asdka-raja. Here Tathagata in old time dwelt, 
and exhibited his spiritual power, and preached the sublime 
law, and defeated the heretics, delivering both men and 
Dévas. 

Not far to the west of the city there is an old sanghd- 
vadma, This was the place where Ti-p’o (Déva) Bédhi- 
sattva discussed with an Arhat. In the first instance, 
Déva Bodhisattva heard that in this convent there was an 
Arhat called Uttara (Wu-ta-lo) who possessed the six 
supernatural powers (shadabhijfids), and the eight vimdk- 
shas (means of deliverance); forthwith he came from a 
distance to observe his manner as a model. Having 

farrived at the convent, he asked the Arhat for a night’s 
lodging. Now in the place where the Arhat lived (in his 
cell) there was only one bed. Waving entered, in the 
absence of a mat, he spread some rushes on the ground, 
and showing it to him, begged him to be seated. Having 
taken the seat, the Arhat entered into samddhi, and came 
out of it after midnight. Then Déva proposed to him his 


228 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BooK x. 


doubts, and prayed him to answer them. The Arhat took 
up each difficulty and explained it. Déva, closely exa- 
mining each word, pressed his difficulties in the way of 
cross-examination, till after the seventh round of discussion 
the Arhat closed his mouth and declined (was unable) to 
reply. Then using secretly his divine faculties, he passed 
into the Tushita heaven, and there questioned Maitréya. 
Maitréya gave the required explanations, but because of 
their character he added, “ This is the celebrated Déva 
who for a succession of kalpas has practised religion, and 
in the middle of the Bhadra-kalpa ought to attain the 
condition of Buddha. You do not know this"? You 
should greatly honour him and pay him reverence.” 

In a moment he returned to his seat, and once more 
entered on a clear explanation (of the difficulties), which ° 
he expressed in great precision and language. Déva 
addressing him said, “This is the explanation of the holy 
wisdom of Maitréya Bédhisattva. It is not possible for 
you, reverend sir, to have discovered such profound 
answers.” Then the Arhat said, “It is so, in truth; the 
will of Tathigata.’ On this, rising from his mat, he 
offered him worship and profound reverence and praise. 

Going from this south, we enter a wild forest district, 
and passing 1500 or 1600 li, we come to the country of 
Ta-lo-pi-ch’a (Dravida). 


TA-LO-PI-cH’A (DRAVIDA). 


This country is about 6000 li in circuit; the capital 
of the country is called KAfichipura (Kin-chi-pu-lo),"8 
and is about 30 li round. The soil is fertile and regularly 
cultivated, and produces abundance of grain. There are 


H7 Or, do you not know this? 

48 This must be Conjiveram. 
I do not think the text in Hwui-lih 
can be construed as Julien takes it, 
“the town of Kin-chi is situated on 
a port of the sea.” The original runs 
thus: “The town of Kin-chi is the 


opening (mouth) of the southern 
sea of India, and in the direction 
of Sinhala the water journey is three 
days.” It seems to imply that Con- 
jiveram was the central town from 
which the traffic to Ceylon was con- 
ducted. 


BOOK X.] DRAVIDA. 229 


also many flowers and fruits. It produces precious gems 
and other articles. The climate is hot, the character of 
the people courageous. They are deeply attached to the 
principles of honesty and truth, and highly esteem learning; 
in respect of their language and written characters, they 
differ but little from those of Mid-India. There are some 
hundred of sanghdrdmas and 10,000 priests. They all 
study the teaching of the Sthavira (Chang-tso-pu) school 
belonging to the Great Vehicle. There are some eighty 
Déva temples, and many heretics called Nirgranthas. 
Tathagata in olden days, when living in the world, fre- 
quented this country much; he preached the law here and 
converted men, and therefore Agdka-raja built stdpas over 
all the sacred spots where these traces exist. ‘The city 
of Kajichipura is the native place of Dharmapala Bédhis- 
attva.9 He was the eldest son of a great minister of the 
country. From his childhood he exhibited much cleverness, 
and as he grew up it increased and extended. When he 
became a young man,”° the king and queen condescended 
to entertain him at a (marriage) feast. On the evening 
of the day his heart was oppressed with sorrow, and being 
exceedingly afflicted, he placed himself before a statue of 
Buddha and engaged in earnest prayer (supplication). 
Moved by his extreme sincerity, the spirits removed him 
to a distance, and there he hid himself. After going many 
hundred li from this spot he came to a mountain convent, 
and sat down in the hall of Buddha. A priest happening 
to open the door, and seeing this youth, was in doubt 
whether he was a robber or not. After interrogating 
him on the point, the Bédhisattva completely unbosomed 
himself and told him the cause; moreover he asked per- 
mission to become a disciple. The priests were much 
astonished at the wonderful event, and forthwith granted 
his request. The king ordered search to be made for him 
in every direction, and at length finding out that Bédhi- 


9 Ta-mo-po-lo-p’u-sa, in Chinese Hu-fa, “ defender of the law.” 
“0 Assumed the cap, toga virilis. 


230 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x. 


sattva had removed to a distance from the world, driven! 
by the spirit (or, spirits), then he redoubled his deep 
reverence and admiration for him. From the time that 
Dharmapila assumed the robes of a recluse, he applied 
himself with unflagging earnestness to learning. Con- 
cerning his brilliant reputation we have spoken in the 
previous records.” : 

To the south of the city not a great way is a large 
sanghdrdma, in which men of the same sort, renowned for 
talent and learning, assemble and stop. There is a stépa 
about 100 feet high which was built by Asdka-raja. Here 
Tathagata, dwelling in old days, repeated the law and 
subdued the heretics, and converted both men and Dévas 


in great number. 


Going 3000 li or so south from this, we come to the 
country of Mo-lo-kiu-ch’a (Malakfita). 


Mo-io-K1u-cH’a (Mauaktra). 


This country !% is about 5000 li in circuit; the capital 


is about 40 li. 


121 Both here and in the preced- 
ing portion of the narrative the 
phrase used is shin fu, which may 
either mean “carried by spirits” 
(in the sense of divine spirits) or 
“driven by his own spirit,” Julien 
adopts the former rendering. We 
should in this case have expected 
to find the phrase Awet shin, instead 
of shin. Hwui-lih, however, tells us 
that it was “a great king of the 
spirits” (one of the Mahadéva-rajas) 
that carried him away. 

122 See ante, vol. i. p. 238. For 
some account of his writings, com- 
pare [wui-lih, book iv. p. 191 (Jul.); 
see also note 87, book ix. 

1°3 The distance given (3000 li or 
so) south from Conjiveram seems 
to be excessive. But none of the 
distances given by Hiven Tsiang 
from hearsay are to be depended on. 
Compare, for example, the distance 
given from Charitra, in Orissa, to 


The land and fields are impregnated with 


Ceylon, viz., about 20,000 li. This 
part of the pilgrim’s itinerary is be- 
set with difficulties. In the text 
before us, the use of the symbol 
hing would denote that he went 
personally to the Malakita king- 
dom, but in Hwui-lih we are told 
that he heard only of this country, 
and his intention was evidently to 
embark, probably at the mouth of 
the Conjiveram river, for Ceylon, 
when he heard from the priests who 
came from that country to Kin-chi 
of the death of the king Raja Buna 
Mugalain and the famine. Mr. Fer- 
gusson, assuming Nellore to have 
been the capital of Chéla (I may 
here notice, by the way, that the 
symbols used for this country are 
the same both in Hwwi-lih and the 
Si-yu-ki, so that the “ Djourya” 
adopted by Julien in the Life of 
Hiuen-Tsiang is the same as 
“Tchoulya” in the St-yu-ki), is 


BOOK x.] MALAKUTA. 231 


salt, and the produce of the earth is not abundant. All 
the valuables that are collected in the neighbouring islets 
are brought to this country and analysed. The tempera- 
ture is very hot. The men are dark complexioned. They 
are firm and impetuous in disposition. Some follow the 
true doctrine, others are given to heresy. They do not 
esteem learning much, but are wholly given to commercial 
gain. There are the ruins of many old convents, but only 
the walls are preserved, and there are few religious fol- 
lowers. There are many hundred Déva temples, and a 
multitude of heretics, mostly belonging to the Nirgranthas. 

Not far to the east of this city is an old sarghdrdma 
of which the vestibule and court are covered with wild 
shrubs; the foundation walls only survive. This was 


built by Mahéndra, the younger brother of Agdka-raja. 
To the east of this is a stipa, the lofty walls of which 
are buried in the earth, and only the crowning part of the 


cupola remains. This was 
disposed to refer Kin-chi-pu-lo to 
Nagapattanam, and so get over the 
difficulty which arises from Hwni- 
lih’s remark that “the town of Kin- 
chi is at the sea-mouth on the 
water-road to Ceylon,” and also the 
distance from Nellore of 1500 or 
1600 li. But this would involve us 
in subsequent difficulties; the name 
of Kaichtpura, moreover, is the 
well-known equivalent for Conji- 
veram, and it is impossible to dis- 
regard this. M. V. de St. Martin, 
relying on Hwui-lih, says (Mémoire, 
p. 399) that Hiuen-Tsiang did not 
go farther south than Kaichipura, 
- but, on the other hand, Dr. Burnell 
is of opinion that Hiuen-Tsiang 
returned from Malakita to Kamchi- 
pura (Ind. Ant., vii. p. 39). It is 
certain that on his way to the Kon- 
kan he started from Dravida ; I am 
disposed, therefore, to think that he 
did not go farther sonth than Kin- 
chi. In this case the subsequent 
account he gives us of Malakita, 
Mount Malaya, and Potaraka, is 
derived from hearsay. With regard 


built by Agdka-raja. Here 


to Malakfita, Dr. Burnell has shown 
(loc. cit.) that “this kingdom was 
comprised roughly in the delta of 
the Kavéri.” This would lead us 
to suppose that the capital was 
somewhere near Kumbhaghénam or 
Avar,; but how then shall we ac- 
count for the 3000 li of Hiuen- 
Tsiang ? the actual distance south 
from Conjiveram to this neigh- 
bourhood being only 150 miles, or, 
at most, 1000 li. For an account 
of Kumbhaghénam, see Sewell, Lists 
of Antig. Remains in Madras, 
voL i. p. 274. Dr. Burnell gives 
the name Malaiktrram as_pos- 
sibly that by which Kumbhaghénam 
was known in the seventh century 
(ibid.) In a note the Chinese editor 
remarks that Malakita is also called 
Chi-mo-lo; Julien restores this to 
Tchimor (p. 121, n.), and also to 
Tchimala “the Simour of M. Rein- 
aud” (Jul, iii. 530). I have given 
reasons for thinking that Chi-mo-lo 
is the equivalent for Kiimar (J. 2. 
A. &., vol. xv. p. 337). 


232 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook x. 
Tathagata in old days preached the law and exhibited his 
miraculous powers, and converted endless people. To 
preserve the traces of this event, this memorial tower was 
built. For years past it has exhibited spiritual signs, and 
what is wished for in its presence is sometimes obtained. 

On the south of this country, bordering the sea, are the 
Mo-la-ye (Malaya) mountains,” remarkable for their 
high peaks and precipices, their deep valleys and mountain 
torrents. Here is found the white sandal-wood tree and 
the Chan-t'an-ni-p’o (Chandanéva) 1 tree. These two are 
much alike, and the latter can only be distinguished by 
going in the height of summer to the top of some hill, 
and then looking at a distance great serpents may be seen 
entwining it: thus itis known, Its wood is naturally cold, 
and therefore serpents twine round it. After having noted 
the tree, they shoot an arrow into it to mark it.¥° In the 
winter, after the snakes have gone, the tree is cut down. 
The tree from which Kie-pu-lo (Karpira) scent is pro- 
cured,’ is in trunk like the pine, but different leaves and 
flowers and fruit. When the tree is first cut down and 
sappy, it has no smell; but when the wood gets dry, it 
forms into veins and splits; then in the middle is the 
scent, in appearance like mica, of the colour of frozen 
snow. This is what is called (in Chinese) long-nao-hiang, 
the dragon-brain scent. 


124 These mountains, or this moun- 
tain, bordering on the sea, may either 
represent the Malabar Ghats gene- 
rally, or, more probably, the detached 
inass of the Ghats south of the Koim- 
batur gap, apparently the true Ma- 
laya of the Pauranik lists. See 
Ind. Ant., vol, xiii. p. 38; Sewell, 
op, cit., p. 252, The term Ma-la-yo 
is also applied to a mountainous 
district in Ceylon, of which Adam’s 
Peak is the centre (Childers, Pali 
Dict., sub voc.); compare J. R.A. 8., 
N.S., vol. xv. p. 336. It would seem, 
at any rate, if this district of Malaya, 
“bordering on the sea,” was. a part 
of the kingdom of Malakita, that 


the latter cannot be confined to the 
delta of the K4vért, but must be 
extended to the southern sea-coast. 
This would explain the alternative 
name of Chi-mo-lo (Kumar). Malaya 
means any “ mountainous region.” 

125 'That is, a tree “like the sandal- 
wood” (Jul., n, 1). 

#6 Compare Julien, note 2 (in 
loco), and Burnouf, Jntrod. to Bud- 
dhism, p. 620. The Malaya moun- 
tain is called Chandanagiri, part 
of the southern range of the Ghats, 
because of the sandal-wood found 
there (Monier Williains, Sanse. Dict. 
8. v. Chandana). 

7 That is, camphor, 


BOOK Xx. ] MOUNT POTALAKA. 


233 


To the east of the Malaya mountains is Mount Po-ta- 
lo-kia (Pétalaka)."8 The passes of this mountain are very 
dangerous ; its sides are precipitous, and its valleys rugged. 
On the top of the mountain is a lake; its waters are clear 
asa mirror. From a hollow proceeds a great river which 
encircles the mountain as it flows down twenty times and 
then enters the southern sea. By the side of the lake is a 
rock-palace of the Dévas. Here Avalékitésvara 1° in coming 
and going takes his abode. Those who strongly desire to 
see this Bodhisattva do not regard their lives, but, cross- 
ing the water (fording the streams), climb the mountain 
forgetful of its difficulties and dangers; of those who 
make the attempt there are very few who reach the 
summit. But even of those who dwell below the moun- 
tain, if they earnestly pray and beg to behold the god, 
sometimes he appears as T'sz’-tsai-t’ien ([évdra-déva), some- 
times under the form of a ydgi (a Pdmsupata); he ad- 
dresses them with benevolent words and then they obtain 
their wishes according to their desires. 

Going north-east from this mountain, on the border 1° 
of the sea, is a town ;}!’this is the place from which they 


18 The situation of this mountain p. 40). Julien says, “Going from 


has been discussed (J. R. A. S., N.S., 
vol. xv. p. 339 ff. 

L9 See vol. i. p. 60, n. 210. 

180 The symbol used implies ‘a 
division of the sea,” as though it 
were at a point where the sea 
divided into an eastern and western 
ocean. 

181 There is no name given ; it is 
simply stated there is a town from 
which they go to Ceylon. If it 
were intended to give the name 
Charitrapura to it, there would be 
no symbol between the word for 
“city or town” and the word “ go.” 
M. Julien’s parenthesis has misled 
Dr. Burnell and others. Dr. Bur- 
nell has also argued on a mistaken 
translation as to the position of 
this town, which he identifies with 
Kavéripattanam (Ind. Ant., vol. vii. 


Malakfta in a north-eastern direc- 
tion, on the borders of the sea is 
a town (called Che-li-ta-to, Chari- 
trapura).” Conf. ante, p. 205, n. 
55. But, in fact, the original 
states, “Going from this mountain, 
t.e., Mount Malaya, in a north- 
eastern direction, there is a town at 
the sea-dividing.” So that Dr. Bur- 
nell’s conclusions, so for as this part 
of his argument goes, are not sup- 
ported by the text. On the other 
hand, it is stated by I-tsing that 
“ooing west thirty days from Que- 
dah, merchants used to arrive at 
Naigavadana, whence after two 
days’ voyage they reach Ceylon” 
(VJ. B.A. S, NS., vol. xiii, p. 562). 
This looks as though Nigapattanam 
were the town referred to by Hiuen 
Tsiang. 


234 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [BOOK x. 


start for the southern sea and the country of Saing-kia- 
lo (Ceylon). It is said commonly by the people that 
embarking from this port and going south-east about 
3000 li we come to the country of Simhala, 


END OF BOOK X. 


BOOK XI. 


Contains an account of twenty-three kingdoms, viz., (1) Sdng-kia-lo ; 
(2) Kong-kien-na-po-lo; (3) Mo-ho-la-c’ha ; (4) Po-lu-kie-che-p’o ; 
(5) AMo-la-p’o; (6) O-cha-li; (7) Kie-ch’a; (8) Fa-la-pi; (9) 
’0-nan-to-pu-lo ; (10) Su-la-ch’a,; (11) Kéu-che-lo,; (12) U-she- 
yen-na; (13) Chi-kie-to, (14) Mo-hi-chi-fa-lo-po-lo; (15) Sin-to; 
(16) Mo-lo-san-pu-lo; (17) Po-fa-to, (18) O-tien-p’o-chi-lo; (19) 


Long-kie-lo ; (20) Po-la-sse , 
(23) Fa-la-na, 


(21) Pi-to-chi-to,; (22) O-fan-cha; 


SANG-KIA-LO (SIMHALA). 


Tue kingdom of Simhala 


is about 7000 li in circuit ;? 


the capital is about 40 li round. The soil is rich and 


fertile; the climate is hot; 
vated; flowers and fruits 
The population is numerous 
rich in revenues. 


the ground is regularly culti- 
are produced in abundance. 


; their family possessions are 
The stature of the men is small. They 


are black complexioned ® and fierce by nature. They love 


learning and esteem virtue. 
excellence, and labour in the 


1 Simhala or Ceylon was not 
visited by Hiuen Tsiang, for reasons 
given in the last book. Fa-hian, 
however, resided in the island for 
two years (cap. 40). For the vari- 
ous names by which this island has 
been known, we may refer to Vin- 
cent (Navigation of the Ancients, &c.) 
Colonel] Yule doubts whether we 
owe the name Ceylon or Seilan to 
Simhala (Marco Polo, ii. p. 254, 
note 1), Childers traces the deriva- 
tion of the word Elu to this name 
Sthala (Notes on the Sinhalese Lan- 
guage). See Ind. Ant., vol. xiii. pp. 


33 ff. 


They greatly honour religious 
acquisition of religious merit. 


2 Yor the exaggerated reports 
concerning the size of this island, 
we may refer to Tennent’s Ceylon, 
cap. i., and Yule, Marco Pole (vol. 
ti. p. 254, n. 1). The circuit of the 
island is really under 700 miles. 
We must therefore allow 10 li to 
the mile if Hiuen Tsiang’s state- 
ment is to be received. Fa-hian is 
much more nearly correct in his 
figures, but in his account we must 
substitute length for breadth (cap. 

7). 
2 3 This must refer to the Tamil 
population. The Sinhalese are tall 
and comparatively fair. 


236 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES.  [pook x1. 


This country was originally (called) P&o-chu* (Ratna- 
dvipa), because of the precious gems found there. It was 
occupied by evil spirits. 

After this there was a king of a country of Southern 
India, whose daughter was affianced in a neighbouring 
country. On a fortunate day, having paid a compli- 
mentary visit, she was returning when a lion met her on 
the way. The servants of the guard left her and fied from 
the danger. Resting alone in her car, her heart was 
resigned to death. At this time the lion king, taking the 
woman on his back, went away and entered a lone valley 
in the deep mountains.© He caught the deer and gathered 
the fruits according to their season, with which to nourish 
her. In the course of time she brought into the world a 
boy and a girl. In form and features they resembled 
human beings, but in disposition they were like the beast 


tribes. 


The youth gradually grew up, and was possessed of 
great bodily strength, so that he could subdue the wildest 


4 That is, the “isle or islet of 
gems.” So it was called by the 
Arabs of the ninth century (Yule, 
op. cil, p. 255). The Javanese 
word for precious stone is sela, and 
from this, some think, comes the 
word Saildn or Ceylon (ibid.) In 
any case the name itself, ‘‘ gem- 
island,” was an old one; the regular 
formation would give us Ratna- 
dvipa. 

5 The construction of the text 
and context is a little unusual. It 
seems to imply that because the 
island abundantly possessed gems 
and precious stones, it was a resting- 
place for demons and spirits, or 
demons. Of course it refers to the 
Rakshasis or Yakkhinis. Comp. 
Weber, Rdmdyana, p. 25 (Boyd’s 
translation). 

6 For notices of this legend see 
Prof. Vasconcellos Abreu, Fragmen- 
tos Puma tentativa de Estudo scolias- 
tico da Epopeia Portugueza (Lisboa, 
1880), pp. 40-75 ; or Ind. Ant., vol. 
xiii. pp. 33 ff; Dépavansa, ch. 
ix.; Lassen, Ind. Alt., vol. i. p. 


241 n.; Burnouf, Zntrod., pp. 198 f. 
It owes its origin probably to the 
rape of a woman during a seaboard 
raid. Some of the northern tribes 
(invaders of India) affected the 
name of lion (simha or li). Compare 
Fo-sho, v. 1788. There are three 
events (obscure in themselves, yet 
perhaps connected) which happened 
in India about the time of Buddha: 
(1.) The invasion of north-west of 
India by the Vrijjis; (2.) the in- 
cursion of Yavanas into Orissa ; (3.) 
the invasion and conquest of Ceylon 
by Vijaya. These events may have 
had a mutual relationship; the 
pressure of the Vrijjis from the 
north-west would drive the inter- 
mediate tribes on Orissa, and from 
Orissa some of the adventurers 
would start for fresh conquests by 
sea, Precisely similar events oc- 
curred in the west a few centuries 
afterwards, Compare Fergusson, 
Cave Temples of India, p. 58 ; Beal, 
Abstract of Four Lectures, Introduc- 
tion, ix., x., xi, and also the sculp- 
tures in the Ganésa Gumpha and 


BOOK x1] THE LEGEND OF SIMHA. 237 


beasts. When he came to man’s estate,’ the wisdom of 
his manhood also came, and he asked his mother, saying, 
“What am I to be called? My father is a savage beast, 
and my mother is a human creature. But as you differ 
in kind, how can you have lived together?” Then the 
mother related the old story, and told it to her son. Her 
son, replying, said, “Men and beasts are of different 
kinds. We ought to hasten away from this.” The mother 
replied, “I should have fled long ago, but I cannot help 
myself.” Then the son from that time forth stopped at 
home whenever his father, the lion, roamed forth through 
the mountain passes, with a view to escape the difficult 
(position in which they were placed), And now on a cer- 
tain occasion, his father having gone forth, he proceeded 
to carry away his mother and sister to a village inhabited 
by men. The mother then said, “ You ought, both of you, 
to keep this matter secret, and say nothing about the first 
transaction, for if people were to come to hear of it, they 
would lightly esteem us.” 

On this she returned to her father’s country, but it no 
longer belonged to her family, and the sacrifices of her 
ancestors had all died out. Having taken refuge in the 
town, all the men addressed her, saying, “From what 
kingdom do you come?” She said, “I belong to this 
country. Having wandered through strange places, we 
have come back, mother and son together (fo our 
home).” 

Then the village people were moved with pity, and pro- 
vided them with necessary food. And now the lion king 
returning to his place, saw no one there. Thinking with 
affection of his son and daughter, he was moved with 
tage, and went away through the mountains and valleys, 
and roamed through the towns and villages, roaring 
frightfully and destroying the people, slaughtering and 
mangling every living thing, The town-folk went forth, 


Rani ka Nur caves, Fergusson, op. 7 Reached the age of twenty 
cit., pl. 1. years, —Julien. 


238 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book XI. 


therefore, to pursue and capture him, in order to kill him. 
They beat the drums, sounded the conch, and with their 
bows and spears formed a large company; but yet they 
lagged behind (delayed) in order to escape danger. Then 
the king, fearing that their courage was little,® organised 
a band of hunters to capture the lion. He himself went 
with an army consisting of the four kinds of troops, 
amounting to tens of thousands, and beat through the 
woods and jungle, and traversed the mountains and valleys 
(in search of their prey). The lion raising his terrible roar, 
men and beasts flee in consternation. 

Not being captured in the hunt, the king again made a 
proclamation, and promised that whoever captured the 
lion and freed the country from the affliction should be 
largely rewarded and his reputation widely published. 

The son, hearing the royal decree, spake to his mother 
and said, “ We have suffered much from hunger and cold. 
I certainly will answer to the appeal. Perhaps we may 
thus get enough to support us,” 

The mother said, “ You ought not to think of it; for 
though he is a beast, yet he is still your father. What 
though we be wretched through want? this is no reason 
why you should encourage a wicked and murderous 
thought.” ® : 

The son said, “ Men and beasts are of a different kind. 
What room is there for the question of propriety in such 
a matter as this? Why should such a thought interfere 
with my plan?” So seizing a knife and concealing it in 
his sleeve, he went forth to answer to the appeal. On this 
a thousand people and ten thousand horsemen assembled 
in crowds (like the clouds and vapour). The lion lay hid 
in the forest, and no one dared to approach him. On this 
the son forthwith advanced to him, and the father, tame 
and crouching, forgot in his sense of loving affection all 


8 The virtue (viz., of manliness) ® Wicked, i.e, unnatural, against 
which influenced them did not pre- nature. 
vail (far). 


BOOK XI.] THE LEGEND OF SIMHA. 239 


his previous hate. Then he (the son) plunged the knife 
into the middle of his bowels, but he still exhibited the 
same love and tenderness, and was free from all anger or 
revengeful feeling even when his belly was ripped up, 
and he died in agony. 

The king then said, “ Who is this man who has done 
such a wonderful deed?” Allured by promises of re- 
ward on the one hand, and alarmed by fear of punish- 
ment on the other, if he kept back anything, he at last 
revealed the whole from beginning to end, and told the 
touching story without reserve. The king said, “Thou 
wretch ! if thou wouldest kill thy father, how much more 
those not related to thee! Your deserts indeed are great 
for delivering my people from the savage cruelty of a 
beast whose (passions) it is difficult to assuage, and whose 
hateful tempers are easily aroused; but to kill your own 
father, this is a rebellious (unnatural) disposition. I will 
reward your good deed largely, but you shall be banished 
from the country as the punishment of your crime. 
Thus the laws will not be infringed and the king’s 
words not violated.” On this he prepared two large 
ships (teats) in which he stored much provision (cured 
rice or other grain). The mother he detained in the 
kingdom, and provided her with all necessary things as 
the reward of the service done. The son and daughter 
each were placed in a separate boat, and abandoned to 
the chance of the waves and the wind. The boat in 
which the son was embarked, driven over the sea, came 
to this Ratnadvipa. Seeing it abounded in precious 
gems, he took up his abode here. 

Afterwards merchants seeking for gems frequently 
came to the island. He then killed the merchant chief 
and detained his children. Thus he extended his race. 
His sons and grandsons becoming numerous, they pro- 


0 The cave pictures from Ajanté the history of Vijaya and the “lion” 
given in Mrs. Speir’s Life in Ancient legend; see also Burgess, Cave 
India, pp. 300 ff. seem to refer to Temples, &c., pp. 312 f. 


240 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Boor xt. 


ceeded to elect a king and ministers and to divide the 
people into classes. They then built a city and erected 
towns, and seized on the territory. by force; and because 
their original founder got his name by catching a lion, 
they called the country (after his name) Sitnhala. 

The boat in which the girl was embarked was driven 
over the sea till it reached Persia (Po-la-sse), the abode 
of the western demons, who by intercourse with her 
engendered a clan of women-children, and therefore the 
country is now called the Country of the Western 
Women ;—this is the reason. 

The men of the Sirhha kingdom are small in stature 
and black-complexioned; they have square chins and 
high foreheads; they are naturally fierce and impetuous, 
and cruelly savage without hesitation. This is from their 
inherited disposition as descended from a beast; but 
another version of the story is that they are very brave 
and courageous, 

The records of the Buddhist religion say: In the 
middle of a great iron city of this Ratnadvipa (P’ao-chu) 
was the dwelling of the Rakshast women (Lo-t’sa). On 
the towers of this city they erected two high flagstafis 
with lucky or unlucky signals, which they exhibited 
according to circumstances” (to allure mariners), when 
merchants came to the island (Ratnadvipa). Then they 
changed themselves into beautiful women, holding 
flowers and scents, and with the sound of music™ they 
went forth to meet them, and caressingly invited them 


11 Chih - sse-tseu, lion-catching ; 
this seems also to be the meaning 
of siahala, where la means to catch 
or take. The Diparansa brings 
Vijaya, the son of Simha, from 
Simhapura in Lala (Gujarat). 

12 “Tf circumstances were pro- 
pitious, they agitated the lucky 
flag or drapery; if they were un- 
fortunate or unlucky, they moved 
the unpropitious signal.” It would 
seem to mean that if a ship drew 
near the shore as if to anchor, then 


the favourable flag or signal was 
shown; but if she kept away on her 
voyage, then the unfavourable 
signal was displayed. Or it may 
mean that the signal was to allure 
mariners. 

13 The curious parallel between 
the ways of these Rakshasis and 
the Sirens has attracted frequent 
notice. Compare Pausanias, book 
x. cap. Vi. Leepyywr vijcos dvdrews 
éaredy, viz,, of those who had lis- 
tened to their songs. Homer, Odys., 


BOOK X1.] LEGEND OF SIMHA. 241 


to enter the iron city; then having shared with them all 
sorts of pleasure, they shut them up in an iron prison, 
and devoured them at their leisure. 

At this time there was a great merchant of Jambu- 
dvipa called Sing-kia (Sirnha) whose son was called Sang- 
kia-la (Sitnhala). His father having grown old, he was 
deputed to take charge of the house (family); he em- 
barked, therefore, with 500 merchants to seek for pre- 
cious stones; driven by the winds and waves, they came 
to Ratnadvipa. 

Then the Rakshasis, displaying the lucky signal, began 
to wave it, and went forth with scents and flowers and: 
the sound of music to meet them, and invite them to 
enter the iron city. The prince of the merchants ac- 
cordingly, matched with the queen of the Rakshasis, 
gave himself up to pleasure and indulgence, The other 
merchants also selected each one a companion, and so, 
in the course of time, a son was born to each, After 
this, the Rikshasis, feeling tired of their old partners’ 
love, (were preparing to) shut them up in the iron prison, 
and to seek new companions among other merchants. 

At this time, Sang-kia-la, moved in the night by an 
evil dream, and impressed with a sense of its bad augury, 
sought some mode of escape, and coming to the iron 
stronghold, he heard the sounds of piteous cries within. 
Forthwith he climbed a great tree, and questioned them, 
saying, “ Who are you thus bound, and why these miser- 
able cries?” They replied, “Do you not know then 
that the women who occupy this place are all Rak- 
soasis? In former days, they allured us to enter the 
city with festive sounds of music, but when you arrived, 
they shut us up in this prison, and are gradually devour- 
ing our flesh. Now we are half eaten up; your turn too 
will soon come.” 


xii. 178, &c., with the account in Jnd. Antiq., vol. x. p. 291, and the 
the text and in the Romantic Academy, Aug. 13, 1881, pp. 120, 
Legend of Buddha, p. 339. See also 121, 


VOL. IL. Q 


242 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [sook X1. 


Then Sang-kia-la (Sirhhala) said, “By what device 
then may we escape this danger?” They replied, and 
said, “We hear that on the sea-board there is a divine 
horse} and whoever prays with supreme faith he will 
safely carry him across.” 

Sirhhala having heard this, secretly told the merchants 
his companions to assemble altogether on the sea-shore 
and there to offer up fervent prayers for deliverance. Then 
the divine horse came and addressed the men and said, 
“Each one of you grasp my hairy coat and look not 
behind ; then will I deliver you and transport you across 
the sea out of danger’s way. I will conduct you back to 
Jambudvipa, to your happy homes (cowntyy).” 

Then the merchants, obeying his directions, did each 
one implicitly as commanded. They seized the hairy coat 
(of the divine horse). Then he mounted aloft, traversed 
through the clouds, and passed the sea to the other side. 

Then the Rakshasis, perceiving all at once their hus- 
bands had escaped, spake one to another in surprise, — 
and asked where they had gone. Then, taking each 
her child, they traversed to and fro the air. Perceiving, 
then, that the merchants had just left the shore, they 
issued a general order to unite in their flight to follow 
them. Not an hour had passed but they encountered 
them, and then, with mingled joy and tears, they came, 
and for a time restraining their grief they said, “We 
thought ourselves happy when first we met you, and made 
it our care to provide you homes, and for long have 
loved and‘ cherished you, but now you are departing 
and deserting your wives and children, leaving them 
desolate. Who can bear the terrible grief that afflicts us ! 
We pray you stay your departure and turn again with us 
to the city.” 


M4 The horse is called Kési in the departure of merchants (see 
the <Albhinishkramana Sdtra (fo- note in the Romantic Legend). 
mantic Legend, loc. cit.) The re- Avalékitésvara is often spoken of 
ference appears to be to the change as a white horse, ze. as one who 
of monsoon, which would favour came across the sea. 


BOOK X1.] LEGEND OF SIMHA. 243 


But the minds of the merchants were as yet unwilling 
to consent. The Rakshasis, seeing their words had no 
effect, had recourse to seductive blandishments, and by 
their conduct excited the feelings of the merchants; in 
consequence of which, being unable to suppress their 
tender emotions, their steadfastness forsook them, and, 
hesitating to go on, they paused, and at length returned 
in company with the Rakshasis. The women, saluting 
and congratulating each other, closely holding to the men, 
went back. 

Now the wisdom of Simhala was deep, and his firm 
purpose remained unchanged, and so he succeeded in 
traversing the ocean, and thus escaped the danger. 

Then the queen of the Rakshasis returned alone to the 
iron city ; on which the other women addressing her said, 
“You are without wisdoin or astuteness, and so you are 
abandoned by your husband; since you have so little 
cleverness or capacity you cannot dwell here.” On this 
the Rakshasi queen, taking her child, hastened her flight 
after Sitnhala. She indulged before him in excessive 
blandishments and entreated him tenderly to return. 
But Simnhala repeated with his mouth some spiritual 
charms, and with his hand brandishing a sword, he said, 
“You are a Rakshasi and I am a man, men and demons 
belong to different classes, there can be no union between 
such; if you trouble me further with your entreaties I 
will take your life.” , 

The Rakshasf woman, knowing the uselessness of further 
parley, darted through the air and disappeared. Coming 
to Sirhhala’s house, she addressed his father Sirhha, and 
said, “I am a king’s daughter belonging to such and such 
a country. Sithhala took me as his wife, and I have 
borne him ason. Having collected gems and goods, we 
were returning to my lord’s country when the ship, 
driven by the winds and the sea, was lost, and only I, my 
child, and Sithhala were saved, After crossing rivers and 
mountains with great difficulty, hungry and worn out, I 


244 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [sooxk XI. 


said a word displeasing to my husband, and I found myself 
deserted, and as he left me he let fall bitter words and 
raged on me as if he were a Rakshasa.> If I attempt to 
return, my native country is a very long distance off; if 
I stop, then Iam left alone in a strange place: staying 
or returning I am without support. I have, therefore, 
dared to tell you the true state of things.” 

Simnha said, “If your words be true, you have done 
right.” Then she entered the king’s house to dwell there. 
Not long after Sinhala came, and his father addressing 
him said, “How is it you esteemed riches and gems so 
much and made so little of your wife and child?” Sirh- 
hala said, “This is a Rakshasi.” Then he related the 
whole previous history to his father and mother ; then his 
relatives, angry on account of the whole affair, turned on 
her to drive her away ; on which the Rikshasi went to the 
king and entreated him. The king wished to punish 
Simhala, but Simhala said, “The delusive influence of 
Rakshasis is very great.” 

Moreover, the king, regarding his son’s words as 
untrue, and being moved in his mind (feelings) by her 
fascination, addressed Sitnhala and said, “Since you 
have decided to reject this woman, I will now protect her 
in my after-palace.” Sirnhala said, “ I fear she will cause 
you some misfortune, for the Rakshasas eat only flesh 
and blood.” 

But the king would not listen to Simhala’s words, and 
accordingly took her as his wife. In the middle of the 
night following this, flying away, she returned to Ratna- 
dvipa, and calling together 500 Rakshasa demon women, 
they all came to the king’s palace, and there, by means of 
destructive charms and sorceries, they killed all living 
things within the building and devoured their flesh and 


5 Or, it may be, ‘as ifI were a serve that in the previous sentence 
Rakshasi,” and so Julien translates where Sitnhala draws his sword he 
it. In this case we should supply calls hera Rakshasa, not a Rakshast, 
the symbol ntu (woman); but I ob- so that either translation is correct. 


BOOK XI.] SIMHALA APPOINTED KING. 245 


drank their blood, whilst they carried off the rest of the 
corpses and with them returned to the “island of gems.” 

The next day, early, all the ministers were assembled 
at the king’s gates, which they found fast closed, and not 
able to be opened. After waiting a long time, and not 
hearing any sounds of voices within, they burst open 
the doors and gates, and pressed forward together (into 
' the house). Coming to the palace hall, they found no 
living thing therein but only gnawed bones. The 
officers looking at one another in astonishment, then 
bent down their heads in their confusion, and uttered 
lamentable cries. Being unable to fathom the cause of 
the calamity that had happened, Sirhhala related to 
them from beginning to end the whole story. The 
ministers and people then saw from whence the evil 
came. 

On this, the ministers of the country, the aged men 
and different officers, inquired in order as to the best 
person to appoint to the high dignity (of the throne). 
All looked in the direction of Sinhala, (so conspicuous 
for) religious merit and wisdom. ‘Then speaking to- 
gether, they said, “With respect to a ruler, the selection 
is no trivial matter; he needs to be devout and wise, 
and at the same time of quick natural parts. If he be 
not good and wise, he would not be able to give lustre 
to the succession; if he have no natural parts (skill or 
tact), how could he direct the affairs of state? Now this 
Sishhala appears to be such a man: he discovered in 
fp dream the origin of the calamity;1® by the effect of 
his virtue he encountered the divine horse, and he has 
loyally warned the king of his danger. By his prudence 
he has preserved himself; the succession should be 
his.” 

The result of the deliberation being known, the people 
joyfully raised him to the honourable position of king. 
Sithhala was desirous of declining the honour, but was 


1 Viz., of the Rakshasis. 


246 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [800K Xt. 


not able to do so. Then keeping to the middle course, 
he respectfully saluted the different officers of state, and 
forthwith accepted the kingly estate. On this, he cor- 
rected the former abuses, and promoted to honour the 
good and virtuous; then he made the following decree, 
“My old merchant friends are in the country of the 
RAikshasis, but whether alive or dead I cannot tell. But 
in either case I will set out to rescue them from their 
danger; we must equip an army. To avert calamities 
and to help the unfortunate, this is the merit of a king- 
dom ; to preserve treasures of precious stones and jewels, 
is the advantage of a state.” 

On this he arrayed his troops and embarked. Then 
on the top of the iron city the evil flag was agi- 
tated.” ; 

Then the Rakshasis seeing it, were filled with fear, and 
putting in practice their seducing arts, went forth to lead 
and cajole them. But the king, thoroughly understand- 
ing their false artifices, commanded the soldiers to recite 
some charmed words and to exhibit their martial bearing. 
Then the RAkshasis were driven back, and fled precipi- 
tately to rocky islets of the sea; others were swallowed up 
and drowned in the waves. On this they destroyed the 
iron city and broke down the iron prison; they delivered 
the captive merchants, obtained large stores of jewels and 
precious stones, and then summoning the people to change 
their abodes, he (Stahala) founded his capital in the “island 
of gems,” built towns, and so found himself at the head of 
a kingdom. Because of the king’s name the country was 
called Sirhhala. This name is also connected with the 
_ Jétakas, relating to Sikya Tathigata, 

The kingdom of Sishhala formerly was addicted to im- 
moral religious worship, but after the first hundred years 
following Buddha’s death the younger brother of Asdka- 
rija, Mahéndra by name, giving up worldly desires, 


7 Tt would seem that “the evil flag” was a signal to warn the Raik- 
shasis of danger. 


BOOK XI] DIVISION INTO SCHOOLS. 


247 


sought with ardour the fruit of Arhatship. He gained 
possession of the six supernatural powers and the eight 
means of liberation; and having the power of instant 
locomotion, he came to this country. He spread the 
knowledge of the true law and widely diffused the be- 
queathed doctrine. From his time there has fallen on the 
people a believing heart, and they have constructed 100 
convents, containing some 20,000 priests. They princi- 
pally follow the teaching of Buddha, according to the 
dharma of the Sthavira (Shang-ts’o-pu) school of the 
Mahayana sect.18 When 200 years had elapsed,’ through 
discussion, the one school was divided into two. ‘The 
former, called the Mahavihdravasinas® (Mo-ho-pi-ho- 
lo-chu-pu), was opposed to the Great Vehicle and 
adhered to the teaching of the Little Vehicle; the other 
wag calied Abhayagirivasinas (O-p’o-ye-k’i-li-chu-pu) ;74 
they studied both vehicles, and widely diffused the 77ript- 
takas. The priests attended to the moral rules, and were 
distinguished for their power of abstraction and their 
wisdom.” Their correct conduct was an example for 
subsequent ages; their manners grave and imposing. 


18 The Mahayana, or Great Vehicle, 
is generally supposed to have been 
unknown in the Southern school ; 
but it is an elastic term, and in the 


nainpiyatissa, about 250 B.c. (Fa- 
hian, e. 39.) Compare Dipavamnsa 
(Oldenberg), xix. 10, Oldenberg 
makes some remarks respecting the 


present instance would refer pro- 
bably to the developed doctrine (in 
what direction we hardly know) of 
the old school of the Sthaviras or 
elders. 

19 That is, as it seems, two hun- 
dred years after the introduction of 
Buddhism into Ceylon, If so, the 
period referred to would be about 
the time of the reduction of the three 
pitakas to writing in Ceylon, viz., 
B.C. 75. Does the phrase just fol- 
lowing this, “they widely diffused 
the JTvripitakas,” refer to this 
event ? 

2 This school evidently followed 
the teaching of the Mahavihara 
priests. The Mahivihara was about 
7 li to the south of the capital Anu- 
radhapura. It was built by Déva- 


Atthakathé preserved,in this monas- 
tery, op. cit. Introd., pp. 6, 7. See 
for some notice of the vihara, Beal, 
Fa-hian, p. 159, n. 1. 

21 For some account of the Ab- 
hayagiri vihira see Dipavazsa, xix. 
14, 173 Beal’s Fa-hian, p. 151, n. 1. 
It seems to have been the vihara in 
which the tooth-relic was exhibited, 
Fa-hian, 157. 

2 « Meditative powers” and “wis- 
dom.” This would indicate a de- 
veloped form of belief. It corre- 
sponds to the chi kwan school of 
Tien-tai in China. The same steps 
which led to the formation of the 
school there may have marked the 
development in Ceylon. It repre- 
sents a compromise between quiet- 
ism and practice of rules. 


248 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book XI. 


By the side of the king’s palace is the vihdra of Bud- 
dha’s tooth, several hundred feet high, brilliant with 
jewels and ornamented with rare gems. Above the vihdra 
is placed an upright pole on which is fixed a great Padma 
raja (ruby) jewel? This gem constantly sheds a brilliant 
light, which is visible night and day for a long distance, 
and afar off appears like a bright star. The king three 
times a day washes the tooth of Buddha with perfumed 
water,** sometimes with powdered perfumes. Whether 
washing or burning, the whole ceremony is attended with 
a service of the most precious jewels, 

[The country of Sithhala,® formerly called the Kingdom 
of Lions, is also called the Sorrowless Kingdom;* it is the 
same as South India. This country is celebrated for its 
precious gems; it is also called Ratnadvipa. Formerly, 
when Sakyamuni Buddha took an apparitional body called 
Sithhala, all the people, and priests, in honour of his 
character, made him king,?’ and therefore the country was 
called Sirnhala. By his mighty spiritual power he de- 
stroyed the great iron city and subdued the Rakshasi 
women, and rescued the miserable and distressed, and 
then founded a city, and built towns, and converted this 
district. In order to disseminate the true doctrine, he 
left a tooth to be kept in this land, firm as a diamond, in- 
destructible through ages. It ever scatters its light like 
the stars or the moon in the sky, or, as brilliant as the 
sun, it lights up the night. All those who fast and pray 
inits presence obtain answers, like the echo (answers the 
voice). If the country is visited by calamity, or famine, 
or other plague, by use of earnest religious prayer, some 


°3 For some notice of the rubies 1405). [have translated a portion of 
of Ceylon, see Marco Polo, book iii. the passage, the rest will be found in 
cap, xiv. : a note at the end of this Book xi. 
24 Or, every day thrice washes, &c. 26 Or the Agéka kingdom. Com- 
2 This and the following para- pare the Aséka garden of Ravana, in 
graphs are interpolated in the text; the Rdmdyana. 
they belong to the time of the Ming ~ To do him honour, 
dynasty (third year of Yung-lo, A.D. 


> 


BOOK x1.] THE ROBBER’S SCHEME. 249 


spiritual manifestation ever removes the evil. It is now 
called Si-lan-mount,”* but formerly Sinhala country. 

’ By the side of the king’s palace is the vikdra of Buddha’s 
tooth, which is decorated with every kind of gem, the 
splendour of which dazzles the sight like that of the sun. 
For successive generations worship has been respectfully 
offered to this relic, but the present king of the country, 
called A-li-fun-nai-’rh (Alibunar’?), a man of So-li 
(Chéla),® is strongly attached to the religion of the 
heretics and does not honour the law of Buddha; he is 
cruel and tyrannical, and opposed to all that is good. 
The people of the country, however, still cherish the tooth 
of Buddha,*"] 

By the side of the vikéra of Buddha’s tooth is a little 
vihéra which is also ornamented with every kind of pre- 
cious stone. In itis a golden statue of Buddha; it was 
cast by a former king of the country, and is of the size 
of life. He afterwards ornamented the head-dress (the 
ushnisha) with a precious gem. 

In course of time there was a robber who formed the 
design to carry off the precious stone, but as it was 
guarded by a double door and a surrounding balustrade, 
the thief resolved to tunnel out an entrance underneath 
the obstacles, and so to enter the wihdra and take the 
jewel. Accordingly he did so, but on attempting to seize 
the gem, the figure gradually raised itself higher, and out- 
reached the grasp of the thief. He, then, finding his 
efforts of no avail, in departing sighed out thus, “ Formerly 
when Tathagata was practising the life of a Bodhisattva, 
he cherished in himself a great heart and vowed that for 


°8 Si-lan-shan, Shan corresponds 
to giri, the name therefore would 
be Silangiri, reminding us of the 
Sirenum scopuli of Virgil, din. v. 
864. It is evident that this name 
was given to Ceylon before the Por- 
tuguese arrived in India 

~’ This has been already stated in 
the previous section. For an ac- 


count of Buddha’s tooth and the 
vihdra, see Beal’s Fahian, p. 153, 
n.1.; Eastern Monachism, by Spence 
Hardy, pp. 224, 226. 

30 For Soli see Marco Polo (Yule), 
vol. ii. p, 272, The Chélas had just 
before this conquered the Pallavas. 

31 The rest of this passage will be 
found at the end of this book (xi.) 


250 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x1. 


the sake of the four kinds of living things he would of his 
compassion give up everything, from his own life down to 
his country and its towns. But now the statue which 
stands in his place (bequeathed) grudges to give up the 
precious stone. His words, weighed against this, do not 
seem to illustrate his ancient conduct.” On this the 
statue lowered its head and let him take the gem. The 
thief having got it, went to the merchants to sell it; on 
which they all exclaimed and said, “This is the gem 
which our former: king placed on the head-dress of. the 
golden statue of Buddha. Where have you got it from, 
that you want to sell it surreptitiously to us?” Then 
they took him to the king and stated the case. The king 
then asked him from whom he had procured the gem, on 
which the thief said, “ Buddha himself gave it tome. I 
am no robber.” The king not believing him, ordered a 
messenger to be sent immediately to ascertain the truth. 
On arriving he found the head of the statue still bent 
down. The king seeing the miracle, his heart was affected 
by a sincere and firm faith, He would not punish the 
man, but bought the gem again from him, and ornamented 
with it the head-dress of the statue. Because the head of 
the figure was thus bent on that occasion, it remains so 
until now. 

By the side of the king’s palace there is built a large 
kitchen, in which daily is measured out food for eight 
thousand priests. The meal-time having come, the priests 
arrive with their pdtras to receive their allowance.* 
Having received and eaten it, they return, all of them, to 
their several abodes, Ever since the teaching of Buddha 
reached this country, the king has established this charity, 
and his successors have continued it down to our times. 
But during the last ten years or so the country has been 
in confusion, and there has been no established ruler to 
attend to this business. 


# Fa-hian also alludes to this charitable mode of feeding the priests, 
p- 155, op. eit, 


BOOK XI.] MOUNT LANKA. 


251 


In a bay on the coast of the country the land is rich in 
gems and precious stones. The king himself goes (there) 
to perform religious services, on which the spirits present 
him with rare and valuable objects. The inhabitants of 
the capital come, seeking to share in the gain, and invoke 
the spirits for that purpose. What they obtain is different 
according to their religious merit. They pay a tax on the 
pearls they find, according to their quantity. 

On the south-east corner of the country is Mount 
Lanka.*+ Its high crags and deep valleys are occupied 
by spirits that come and go; it was here that Tathdgata for- 
merly delivered the Ling-hia-king (Latka Sttra or Lankd- 


vatdra).3 


Passing seawards to the south of this country some 


33 Marco Polo (cap. xvi.) alludes 
to the pearl-fisheries off the west 
coast of Ceylon. He mentions 
Bettelar as the place of rendezvous. 
Colonel Yule thinks that this is 
Putlam, the Pattala of Ibu Batuta. 
With reference to the account given 
by Marco Polo of the fishery, it is 
curious how, in all its particulars 
(except that of the charmers) it 
agrees with the arrangements of the 
pearl-fishery at La Paz, on the 
coast of Lower California. I have 
visited that fishery, and inquired 
into its management. The mer- 
chants fit out the boats and pay the 
gangs of divers (armadores); the 
shells are brought up in the same 
way as described by Marco Polo. 

¢The heap each day is divided into 
three parts—one for the State 
(estado), one for the Church (The 
Virgin), one for the chief merchant 
(armador), or sometimes, when the 
divers do not receive pay, they have 
a proportion of the last heap for 
themselves. The sharks which 
abound at La Paz can be seen 
swimming in the neighbourhood (so 
clear is the water under a cloudless 
and rainless sky), but the divers 
fear only one kind, which they call 
the Tintero (the tiger shark). They 
dive just as Marco Polo describes, 


and I may add that I never found 
one of them (experts though they 
were) remain down more than 53 
seconds. 

34 Lanka is sometimes spoken of 
as a city, sometimes as a mountain, 
and at other times applied to the 
whole island, Moreover, it is some- 
times distinguished from Ceylon, 
and described as on the same meri- 
dian as Ujjayini. The mountain 
is spoken of as three-peaked (étri- 
kata) in the Rémdyana. It was the 
abode of Ravana. 

3% The Laitkdvatdre Sitra or the 
Saddharma Laikdvatira Sétra be- 
longs to the later development and 
is of a mystical character. It re- 
fers everything to ‘‘the heart,” 
which is simply the all-pervading 
dtman. There are three trans- 
lations of the sé#éra in China; see 
B. Nanjio, Catalogue, 175, 176, 
177. The title of 176, the “en- 
tering-Lanka-stitra,” would almost 
justify us in considering this sdétra 
as belonging to Vaishnavism. Bod- 
hidharma, who arrived in China, 
A.D. 526, from South India, at- 
tached his faith to the teaching of 
this sétra; it was therefore com- 
posed before his time. The ear- 
Hest translation in China (No. 175) 
dates from A.D. 443, but this is 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Boor xt 


252 
252 


thousands of li, we arrive at the island of Narakira 
(Na-lo-ki-lo). The people of this island®* are small of 
stature, about three feet high; their bodies are those of 
men, but they have the beaks of birds; they grow no 
grain, but live only on cocoa-nuts. 

Crossing the sea westward from this island several 
thousands of li, on the eastern cliff of a solitary island 
is a stone figure of Buddha more than too feet high. 
It is sitting facing the east. In the head-ornament 
(ushnisha) is a stone called Yueh-ngai-chu (Chandra- 
kanta). When the moon begins to wane, water imme- 
diately runs down from this in a stream along the sides 
of the mountain, and along the ravines of the pre- 
cipices.” 

At one time there was a band of merchants who were 
driven by the winds and waves during a storm, till 
they reached this solitary island. The sea-water being 
salt, they were unable to drink it, and were parched 
with thirst for a long time. But now on the fifteenth 
day, when the moon was full, from the head of the 
image water began to trickle forth, and they obtained 
deliverance. They all thought that a miracle had been 
wrought, and were affected with a profound faith; they 


incomplete; the next (Ne. 176) 
dates from A.D. 513; the third 
from A.D. 700. The following 
quotation from Csoma Korési is 
found in Spence Hardy’s Manual 
of Buddhism, p. 356. ‘The second 
treatise or sdtra in the fifth volume 
of the Jfdo is entitled in Sans- 
krit Arya Laikévatéra mahdydna 
Satra, a venerable séira of high 
principles (er speculation) on the 
visiting of Lanka. This was de- 
livered at the request of the lord 
of Lanka by Shdkya, when he was 
in the city of Lanaké on the top of 
the Malaya mountain, on the sea- 
shore, together with many priests 
and Bédhisattvas.” It is stated by 
Hodgson that the Latkdvatéira is 
regarded in Nepal as the fourth 


dharma ; “it consists of 3000 slecas, 
and states that Ravana, lord of 
Lank&, having gone to the Mala- 
yagiri mountain, there heard the 
history of the Buddhas from Sakya 
Sinha, and obtained Boddhynina” 
(ibid.) Lankagiri, then, is probably 
the same as Mount Potaraka 
spoken of at the end of the tenth 
beok. 

36 Perhaps the Maldive Islands ; 
but see Yule, Marco Polo, ii. 249. 
Narikera means cocoa-nut. 

37 Julien translates, “when the 
moon is about to reflect its light 
from this jewel (d’y reflichir sa 
lumiére) ; ” but the literal rendering 
is, ‘when the moon is abont to 
turn back its light,” that is, “ to 
wane.” 


BOOK XI.] KONKANAPURA. 


253 


determined then to delay on the island. Some days 
having elapsed, as soon as the moon began to be hidden 
behind the high steeps, the water did not flow out. 
Then the merchant-chief said, “It cannot have been 
specially on our account that the water ran down, I 
have heard that there is a pearl ‘loved by the moon,’ 
when the moon’s rays shine full on it, then the. water 
begins to flow from it. The gem on the top of the 
statue of Buddha must be one of this sort.” Then 
having climbed the mountain to examine the case, they 
saw that it was a Chandrakinta pearl in the head-orna- 
ment of the figure. This is the origin of the story as it 
was told by those men. 

Crossing the sea many thousand li to the west of 
this country, we come to a large island renowned for 
its precious stones (or Maharatnadvipa); it is not in- 
habited, except by spirits. Seen from a distance on a 
calm night, a light seems to shine from mountains and 
valleys. Merchants going there are much surprised to 
find nothing can be procured. 

‘Leaving the country of Ta-lo-pi-ch’a (Drivida) and 
travelling northwards* we enter a forest wild, in which 
are a succession of deserted towns, or rather little vil- 
lages.° Brigands, in concert together, wound and cap- 
ture (or delay) travellers. After going 2000 li or so we 
come to Kong-kin-na-pu-lo (Konkanapura).” 


‘ KONG-KIN-NA-PU-LO (KONKANAPURA). 


This country is about 5000 li in circuit. The capital is 


38 Both General Cunningham 
and Mr. Fergusson give the direction 
north-west. This is a mistake (Anc. 
Geog., p. 5523; J. R.A. S&S, vi. 266) 5 
but Hwui-lih has north-west. He 
moreover says that the pilgrim 1e- 
turned to the north-west. If we 
adopt the reading north, then the 
route would be a _ return one. 
The origin, as it seems, of the error 
in direction must be traced to M. 


V. de St. Martin (Mémoire, p. 400), 
who seems to adopt Hwui-lih’s text 
as his guide. 

39 The passage may also be trans- 
lated “passing through (or by) a 
deserted town and many little vil- 
lages.” 

“” Hwui-lih gives Kin-na-pu-lo, 
although in Julien we find Kong- 
kin-na-pu-lo. It may be an error in 
the text. In the passage before us 


254 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [nook xt. 


3000 li or so round. The land is rich and fertile; it is 
regularly cultivated, and produces large crops. The cli- 
mate is hot; the disposition of the people ardent and 
quick. Their complexion is black, and their manners 
fierce and uncultivated. They love learning, and esteem 
virtue and talent. There are about 100 saaghdrdmas, 
with some 10,000 priests (followers). They study both 
the Great and the Little. Vehicle. They also highly 
reverence the Dévas, and there are several hundred 
temples in which many sectaries dwell together. 

By the side of the royal palace is a great satrghdrdma 
with some 300 priests, who are all men of distinction. 
This convent has a great vihdra, a hundred feet and more 
in height. In itis a precious tiara belonging to Sarvar- 
thasiddha (Yih-tsai-i-sh’ing) the prince. It is somewhat 
less than two feet in height, and is ornamented with gems 
and ‘precious stones. It is kept in a jewelled casket. On 
fast-days it is brought out and placed on a high throne. 
They offer to it flowers and incense, on which occasions it 
is lit up with radiance. 

By the side of the city is a great sanghdrdma in which 
is a vihdra about 50 feet high. In this is a figure of 
Maitréya Bodhisattva carved out of sandal-wood. It is 
about ten feet high. This also on fast-days reflects a 
bright light. It is the work of the Arhat Wen-rh-pih-i 
(Srutavirngatikéti).2 


Bednore (J. &. A. S., N.S., vol. vi. p. 
267). Assuming, however, that his 
route was north, and that he was 


the country is Kong-kin-na-pu-lo, 
which is restored by Julien to Kon- 
kandpura. It is stated that this 


country is in Southern India. There 
is no agreement as to the site of the 
capital. -V. de St. Martin takes the 
pilgrim north-west to Vanavasi 
(Mémoire, p. 401). General Cun- 
ningham thinks that Anagundi on 
the northern bank of the Ttinga- 
bhadr4 river is the place indicated 
(Ane. Geog. p. 552), whilst Mr. 
Fergusson would take the pilgrim 
from Nagapattan to the centre of the 
Maisir plateau somewhere east of 


returning towards the neighbour- 
hood of Chanda, we should have to 
look for the capital of Kong-kin-na 
near Golkonda, 

For some reference to this 
person see ante, p. 187, n. 3. It 
seems likely that the allusion in the 
text is to Soya Kutikanna, as he 
was a disciple of Katya4yana, who 
dwelt in Southern India (8. B. Z, 
xvii, p. 32). 


BOOK XI.] MAHARASHTRA. 


255 
To the north of the city not far is a forest of Téla 
trees about 30 li round. The leaves (of this tree) are long 
and broad, their colour shining and glistening. In all 
the countries of India these leaves are everywhere used 
for writing on. In the forest is a sti%pa. Here the four 
former Buddhas sat down and walked for exercise, and 
traces of them still remain. Beside this is a stvipa contain- 
ing the bequeathed relics of the Arhat Srutavimnéatikoti. 
Not far to the east of the city is a sttpa which has 
sunk down into the ground from its foundations, but is 
still about thirty feet high. The old tradition says, In 
this stipa is a relic of Tathfigata, and on religious days 
(holy days) it exhibits a miraculous light. In old days, 
when Tathagata was in the world, he preached in this 
place, and exhibited his miraculous powers and converted 
a multitude of men. 
Not far to the south-west of the city is a stépa about 
a hundred feet high, which was built by Aséka-raja. 
Here the Arhat Srutavirngatikéti exhibited great mira- 
culous powers and converted a great many people. By 
the side of it is a sanghdrdma, of which only the founda- 
tions remain. This was built by the fore-named Arhat. 
From this going north-west, we enter a great forest 
wild, where savage beasts and bands of robbers inflict 
injury on travellers. Going thus 2400 or 2500 li, we 
come to the country of Mo-ho-la-ch’a (Maharashtra). 


é 


This country is about 5000 li in cireuit. 
borders on the west on a great river. 


#2 “The great kingdom ;” the 
country of the Marathas. 

# There have been various sur- 
mises as to the name of this capital. 
M. V. de St. Martin names Deva- 
giri or Daulatébid, but this is not 
on a river. General Cunningham 
thinks Kalyan or Kalyani is the 
place intended, to the west of which 
flows the Kailasé river ; but this is 


Mo-H0-La-cu’A (MAHARASHTRA). 


The capital 
It is about 30 li 


due south of Bharoch (the next 
station) instead of east. Mr. Fer- 
gusson names Toka, Phulthamba, or 
Paitan. However, the distance and 
direction from the capital of Kon- 
kandpura is about 400 miles N.W. 
This seems to bring us near the 
river Tapti, or perhaps the Ghirna 
river, 


256 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x1. 


round. The soil is rich and fertile; it is regularly culti- 
vated and very productive. The climate is hot; the dis- 
position of the people is honest and simple; they are tall 
of stature, and of a stern, vindictive character. To their 
benefactors they are grateful; to their enemies relentless. 
If they are insulted, they will risk their life to avenge 
themselves. If they are asked to help one in distress, 
they will forget themselves in their haste to render assist- 
ance. If they are going to seek revenge, they first give 
their enemy warning ; then, each being armed, they attack 
each other with lances (spears). When one turns to flee, 
the other pursues him, but they do not kill a man down (a 
person who submits). If a general loses a battle, they do 
not inflict punishment, but present him with woman’s 
clothes, and so he is driven to seek death for himself. 
The country provides for a band of champions to the 
number of several hundred. Each time they are about to 
engage in conflict they intoxicate themselves with wine, 
and then one man with lance in hand will meet ten 
thousand and challenge them in fight. If one of these 
champions meets a man and kills him, the laws of the 
country do not punish him. Every time they go forth they 
beat drums before them. Moreover, they inebriate many 
hundred heads of elephants, and, taking them out to fight, 
they themselves first drink their wine, and then rushing 
forward in mass, they trample everything down, so that no 
enemy can stand before them. 

The king, in consequence of his possessing these men 
and elephants, treats his neighbours with contempt. He 
is of the Kshattriya caste, and his name is Pulakési (Pu- 
lo-ki-she). His plans and undertakings are wide-spread, 
and his beneficent actions are felt over a great distance. 
His subjects obey him with perfect submission. At the 
present time Siladitya** Maharaja has conquered the 
nations from east to west, and carried his arms to remote 
districts, but the people of this country alone have not 

4 That is, Stladitya of Kanauj (vol. i. p. 210 58.) 


BOOK xI.] THE AFANTA CAVES, 257 
submitted to him. He has gathered troops from the five 
Indies, and summoned the best leaders from all countries, 
and himself gone at the head of his army to punish and 
subdue these people, but he has not yet conquered their 
troops. 

So much for their habits. The men are fond of learning, 
and study both heretical and orthodox (books). There are 
about 100 saighdrdmas, with 5000 or so priests. They 
practise both the Great and Small Vehicle. There are 
about 100 Déva temples, in which very many heretics of 
different persuasions dwell, 

Within and without the capital are five stidpas to mark 
the spots where the four past Buddhas walked and sat. 
They were built by Asdka-raja. There are, besides these, 
other stzipas made of brick or stone, so many that it would 
be difficult to name them all. 

Not far to the south of the city is a saivghdrdma in 
which is a stone image of Kwan-tsz’-tsai Bédhisattva. 
Its spiritual powers extend (far and wide), so that many 
of those who have secretly prayed to it have obtained 
their wishes. 

On the eastern frontier of the country is a great moun- 
tain with towering crags and a continuous stretch of 
piled-up rocks and scarped precipice. In this there is 
a sanghdrdma constructed, in a dark valley. Its lofty 
halls and deep side-aisles stretch through the (or open 
into the) face of the rocks. Storey above storey they are 

y.sked by the crag and face the valley (watercourse). 

This convent was built by the Arhat Achdra (O-che- 
lo).46 This Arhat was a man of Western India. His 


* This must refer to the famous 
Bauddha rock-temples at Ajanta, 
in the IndhyAdri range of hills, cut 
in the lofty and almost perpendicular 
rocks that hem in a wild secluded 
glen. See Fergusson and Burgess, 
Cave Temples, pp. 280-347; Arch. 
Sur. West. Ind. Reports, vol. iv. pp. 
43-59. 

4 In the inscription 

VOL. IL 


on the 


Chaitya cave, No, xxvi., at Ajanta, 
we read that “ The ascetic Sthavira 
Achala, who glorified the faith and 
was grateful, caused to be built a 
mountain dwelling (saidlagrtha) for 
the Teacher, though his desires 
were fulfilled” (Arch. Sur. West. 
Ind. Reports, vol. iv. p. 135). This 
apparently decides the name of the 
Arhat mentioned here. But as the 


n 


258 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [00K XI. 


mother having died, he looked to see in what condition 
she was re-born. He saw that she had received a 
woman’s body in this kingdom. The Arhat accordingly 
came here with a view to convert her, according to her 
capabilities of receiving the truth. Having entered a 
village to beg food, he came to the house where his 
mother had been born. A young girl came forth with 
food to give him. At this moment the milk came from 
her breasts and trickled down. Her friends having seen 
this considered it an unlucky sign, but the Arhat recounted 
the history of her birth, The girl thus attained the holy 
fruit (of Arhatship). The Arhat, moved with gratitude * 
for her who had borne and cherished him, and remember- 
ing the end of such (good) works, from a desire to requite 
her, built this saighdrdma. The great vikdra of the con- 
vent is about 100 feet or so in height; in the middle is a 
stone figure of Buddha about 70 feet or so high. ‘Above 
it is a stone canopy of seven stages, towering upwards 
apparently without support. The space between each 
canopy “* is about three feet. According to the old report, 
this is held in its place by the force of the vow of the 
Arhat. They also say it is by the force of his miraculous 
powers; others say by the virtue of some magical com- 
pound; but no trustworthy account has yet explained 
the reason of the wonder. On the four sides of the vihdra, 
on the stone walls, are painted * different scenes in the 
life of Tathfigata’s preparatory life as a Bddhisattva: the 


Chinese translation of the name is 
So hing (he who does, or, the doer), 
we retain the equivalent Achara. 

47 Compare the words of the in- 
scription given in the preceding 
note, “who glorified the faith and 
was grateful.” 

4 See the drawings of Cave xix. 
and of the dagaba in it, Buddhist 
Cave Temples (Arch. Sur. W. Ind. 
Rep., vol. iv., pl. xxx., xxxi. 3 Cave 
Temples, pl. xxxvi., xxxvii, The 
measurements given “by report” 
are vastly exaggerated, as such 


matters very often are in India. 
But possibly there may have been a 
structural building against the face 
of the rock, with a digaba of larger 
dimensions, though by no means of 
the size indicated in the text. It is 
more probable, however, that the 
report is only an exaggerated ac- 
count of the rock-cnt chaityas. 
Hiuen Tsiang does not appear to 
have visited them personally. 

# In mosaic, “carved and in- 
laid” (teow low). 


BOOK X1.] BHARUKACHHA. : 


259 
wondrous signs of good fortune which attended his 
acquirement of the holy fruit (of a Buddha), and the 
spiritual manifestations accompanying his Mirvdna. These 
scenes have been cut out with the greatest accuracy and 
fineness.5° On the outside of the gate of the savghdrdma, 
on the north and south side, at the right hand and the 
left, there is a stone elephant.>! The common report says 
that sometimes these elephants utter a great cry and the 
earth shakes throughout. In old days Jina (or Channa) 
Bodhisattva >? often stopped in this savghdréma. 

Going from this 1000 li or so to the west,°? and crossing 
the Nai-mo-to (Narmada) river, we arrive at the king- 
dom of Po-lu-kie-che-po (Bharukachheva; Barygaza or 
Bhar6éch).54 


Po-LU-KIE-Cl’E-P’0 (BHARUKACHIHA). 


This kingdom is 2400 or 2500 li in circuit. Its capital 
is 20 liround. The soil is impregnated with salt. Trees 
and shrubs are scarce and scattered. They boil the sea- 
water to get the salt, and their sole profit is from the 
sea. The climate is warm. The air is always agitated 
with gusts of wind. Their ways are cold and indifferent ; 
the disposition of the people crooked and perverse. They 
do not cultivate study, and are wedded to error and true 


50 This must refer to the famous 
Ajanta frescoes. 
_ 1 This seems to refer to two 
“.ephants in alto rilievo that were 
sculptured on the rock in front of 
Cave xv., but which are now scarcely 
recognisable. See Fergusson and 
Burgess, Cave Temples, p. 306. 

82 Jour, 2. As. Soe., vol. xx. p. 208. 

383 Hwui-lih gives north - west. 
M. Julien has translated it north- 
east, by mistake ( Vie, &c., p. 203). 

‘4 Bharéch appears ina Pali in- 
scription at Junnar (Arch, Sur, West. 
Ind. Rep., vol. iv. p. 96) under the 
form Bharukachha; in Sanskrit it 
is Bharukachchha (Brih. Saiih., v. 
40, xiv, II, xvi. 6; Vassilief, p. 


45) and Bhrigukachcha (Bhdg. Pur., 
viii, 18, 21; As. fes., vol. ix. p. 
104; inscrip. in J. Amer. Or. Soe., 
vol. vii. p. 33) or Bhrigukshétra— 
from the locality being the tradi- 
tional residence of the sage Bhrigu- 
rishi. The Bhargava Brahmans of 
Bharéch are the representatives of 
an early colony of the school of 
Bhrigu. Bharukachhaisrepresented 
by the Greek Baptryaga éuméprov of 
Ptolemy (lib. vii. c. 1, 62) and of the 
author of the Periplus Mar. Lryth. 
(s. 42, &e.) 3 Strabo (lib. xv. @ 1, 
73) has Bapyéoy. See Lassen, J. A., 
vol. i. pp. 113, 136. It was from 
Bharéch the Sramana came who 
burnt himself at Athens, 


260 


doctrine alike. 
about 300 believers. 
and the Sthavira school. 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x1. 


There are some ten satighdrdmas, with 
They adhere to the Great Vehicle 
There are also about ten Déva 


temples, in which sectaries of various kinds congregate. 
Going from this ® north-west about 2000 li, we come 
to the country of Mo-la-po (Malava).% 


Mo-.a-P’0 (MALAYA). 


This country is about 6000 li in circuit. 


The capital 


is some 30 liround. It is defended (or supported) by the 


Mahi river on the south and east.*? 
fertile, and produces abundant harvests. 


The soil is rich and 
Shrubs and 


trees are numerous and flourishing. Flowers and fruit are 


met with in great quantities. 
especial manner for winter wheat. 


The soil is suitable in an 
They mostly eat bis- 


cuits and (or, made of) parched corn-fiour. The disposition 
of the men is virtuous and docile, and they are in general 
of remarkable intelligence. Their language is elegant and 
clear, and their learning is wide and profound. 

Two countries in India, on the borders, are remarkable 
for the great learning of the people, viz., Malava on the. 
south-west, and Magadha on the north-east. In this they 
esteem virtue and respect politeness (Awmanity). They are 
of an intelligent mind and exceedingly studious; never- 
theless the men of this country are given to heretical 


55 The geography of this part of 
the pilgrim’s route is involved in 
obscurities. I can only therefore 
offer some remarks on the text. 
In Hwui-lih the symbol used is chi, 
not hing, from which it might have 
been gathered that Hiuen Tsiang 
did not himself visit this country, 
or at least on this occasion. But in 
the text the symbol hing is used, so 
that no weight can be given to this 
supposition, 

°6 Tf this country be Malava, it 
lies north-east from Bharéch. But, 
on the other hand, it does not folow 
that the ronte was a direct one. 


The pilgrim and his companions 
from Ceylon may have travelled 
east towards the head waters of the 
Mahi river, and then north-west. 
It is said in a note to be the same 
as the southern Zo-lo (Lara) country. 

57 The symbol ku implies that 
the capital was “held by” (either 
defended or supported by) the Mahi 
river on the south-east, or on the 
south and east. This would seem 
to take us to the neighbourhood 
of Dongarpar (Elphinstone’s map). 
Cunningham considers Dharanagara 
to be intended, in which V. de St. 
Martin agrees. 


BOOK Xi] SILADITYA OF UFFAIN. 261 


belief as well as the true faith, and so live together. 
There are about 100 sanghdrdmas in which some 2000 
priests dwell.°® They study the Little Vehicle, and be- 
long to the Sammatiya school. There are 100 Déva 
temples of different kinds. The heretics are very 
numerous, but principally the Pasupatas (the cinder- 
covering heretics). 

The records of the country state: Sixty years before 
this flourished Siladitya, a man of eminent wisdom 
and great learning; his skill in literature was profound. 
He cherished and protected the four kinds of creatures,” 
and deeply respected the three treasures.“ From the 
time of his birth to his last hour, his face never crim- 
soned with anger, nor did his hands ever injure a living 
thing. His elephants and horses drank water that had 
been strained, after which he gave it them, lest any 
creature living in the water should be injured. Such 
were his love and humanity. During the fifty years 
and more of his reign, the wild beasts became familiar 
with men, and the people did not injure or slay them. 
By the side of his palace he built a vikdra. He ex- 
hausted the skill of the artists, and used every kind of 
ornament in decorating it. In it he put images of the 
seven Buddhas,** Lords of the World. Every year he 
convoked an assembly called Méksha mahdparishad, and 
summoned the priests of the four quarters. He offered 
them “the four things” in religious charity; he also 
‘Gave them sets of three garments used in their religious 
services, and also bestowed ou them the seven precious 
substances and jewels in wonderful variety. This meri- 


58 This can hardly refer to 59 See ante, book ii. note 91. 


born 


Ujjain, therefore, because we are 
told subsequently that the convents 
there were in ruins, and only about 
300 priests in them. It is curious, 
however, that the circuit of this 
capital, thirty li (Julien has twenty 
li, by mistake), and that of Ujjain 
are the same. 


6 Viviparous, oviparous, 
from spawn, or by transformation 
( fa) [water-insects, and so on]. 

61 Buddha, dharma, sangha. 

® For the seven Buddhas con- 
sult Eitel, Handbook, s. v. Sapta 
Buddha. 


262 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book Xt. 


torious custom has continued in practice without inter- 
ruption till now. 

To the north-west of the capital about 200 li, we come 
to the town of the Brihmans.8 By the side of it isa 
hollow ditch; into this the winter and summer streams 
flow continually, but though through decades of days 
the water runs into the hollow, yet it never seems to 
increase in quantity. By the side of it again is a little 
sttipa. The old traditions of the country say: Formerly a 
Brihman of an exceedingly haughty mind ™ fell alive 
into this pit and went down to hell. In old days there 
was a Bréhman born in this town, who was acquainted 
with all things, and of learning beyond all the eminent 
men of his time. He had penetrated the secrets and 
dark sayings of books sacred and profane. He was 
acquainted with the calculations of astronomy as if they 
were in his hand; his fame was wide-spread and his 
behaviour without blemish, The king very highly es- 
teemed him, and the people of the country made much 
of him. He had some 1000 disciples, who appreciated 
his doctrine and respected his character. He constantly 
said of himself, “I am come into the world for the pur- 
pose of publishing abroad the holy doctrine and to 
guide the people. Among the former sages, or those 
who have arrived at wisdom after them, there is none 
to compare with me. MahéSvaradéva, Vasudéva, Nara- 
yanadéva, Buddha-lékanaétha, men everywhere worship 
these, and publish abroad their doctrine, represent them 
in their effigies, and pay them worship and honour. 
But now I am greater than they in character, and my 
fame exceeds that of all living. Why should they then 
be so notorious, for they have done no wonderful 
thing.” 


6% This may be Brahmanapura; 267, 268. But the town named 
there is a city of the Brahmans in the text cannot be near Harma- 
named by Arrian (Haped. Alex., telia. 

vi. 7) and by Diodorus, called by ®| Or it may be a proper name, 
him Harmatelia (vii. 465). See “the great-proud Brahman.” 
also Cunningham, Ane. Geog., pp. 


BOOK XI] BHADRARUCHI, 263 


Accordingly, he made out of red sandal-wood figures 
of MahéSvaradéva, Vasudéva, Nardyanadéva, Buddha- 
lékandtha, and placed them as feet to his chair, and 
wherever he went as a rule he took this chair with him, 
showing his pride and self-conceit. 

Now at this time there was in Western India a 
Bhikshu, Bhadraruchi (Po-to-lo-liu-chi) by name; he had 
thoroughly exhausted the Hétuvidyd (Sdstra) and deeply 
investigated the sense of different discourses (treatises). 
He was of excellent repute, and the perfume of his ex- 
ceeding goodness (morality) spread in every direction. 
He had few desires and was contented with his lot, seek- 
ing nothing in the world. Hearing (of the Brdhman) he 
sighed and said, “ Alas! how sad. This age (¢ime) has no 
(one worthy to be called a) man; and so it permits that 
foolish master to dare to act as he does in defiance of 
virtue.” 

On this, he took his staff, and travelling afar, he came 
to this country. Whilst dwelling therein his mind was 
made up and he acquainted the king with it. The king, 
seeing his dirty clothes, conceived no reverence for him; 
but, in consideration of his high purpose, he forced himself 
to give him honour (¢o treat him with respect), and’so he 
arranged the chair of discussion and called the Brihman. 
The Brahman hearing it smiled and said, “ What man is 
this who has dared to conceive such an idea (éo cherish 
this determination).” 

His disciples having come together, and many (hundred) 
thousands of listeners being arranged before and behind 
the discussion-arena to attend as hearers, then Bha- 
draruchi, with his ancient robes and tattered clothes, 
arranging some grass on the ground, sat down. Then the 
Brahman, sitting on his chair which he carried with 
him, began to revile the true law and to praise the teach- 
ing of the heretical schools. 

The Bhikshu, with a clear distinction, like the running 

6 Or, it may possibly be, “ different systems.” 


264 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x1. 


of water, encircled his arguments in order. Then the 
Brahman after a while yielded, and confessed himself 
conquered, 

The king replying said, “For a long time you have 
assumed a false reputation; you have deceived the 
sovereign and affected the multitude with delusion. Our 
old rescripts say, ‘He who is defeated in discussion ought 
to suffer death”” Then he prepared to have a heated 
plate of iron to make him sit thereon ; the Brihman there- 
upon, overpowered by fear, fell down to entreat pardon 
(deliverance). 

Then Bhadraruchi, pitying the Brahman, came and 
requested the king, saying, “ Mah4rdja! your virtue ex- 
tends far and wide; the sound of your praises resounds 
through the public ways. Then let your goodness extend 
even to protect this man: give not way to a cruel design. 
Pass over his want of success and let him go his way.” 
Then the king ordered him to be placed on an ass and to 
be proclaimed through all the towns and villages (as an 
impostor). 

The Brahman, nettled by his defeat, was so affected that 
he vomited blood. The Bhikshu having heard of it, went 
to condole with him, and said, “ Your learning embraces 
subjects religious and profane; your renown is spread 
through all parts; in questions of distinction, or the 
contrary, success or defeat must be borne; but after 
all, what is there of reality in fame?” The Brihman, 
filled with rage, roundly abused the Bhikshu, calumniated 
the system of the Great Vehicle, and treated with con- 
tumely the holy ones who had gone before ; but the sound 
of his words had scarcely been lost before the earth 
opened and swallowed him up alive; and this is the 
origin of the traces still left in the ditch. 

Going south-west we come to a bay of the sea,® then 


66 Literally, the passage runs, because it is sometimes used so 3 it 
“From this, south-west, we enter a probably refers to the gulf of Kachh. 
sea-blending, or a confluence of two Hwui-lih does not mention this 
seas.” Ihave translated it “ bay,’ gulf, but takes us away from the 


BOOK X1.] K’IE-CH’A, KACHH. 265 


going 2400 or 2500 li north-west we come to the king- 
dom of ’0-ch’a-li (Atali). 


’O-cH’A-LI_ (ATALI).&% 


This country is about 6000 li in circuit ; the capital of 
the country is about 20 li or so in cirenit. The population 
is dense; the quality of gems and precious substances 
stored up is very great; the produce of the land is suffi- 
cient for all purposes, yet commerce is their principal 
occupation. The soil is salt and sandy, the fruits and 
flowers are not plentiful. The country produces the hu- 
tsian tree. The leaves of this tree are like those of the 
Szchuen pepper (Shuh tsiaz); it also produces the hiwn-lw 
perfume tree, the leaf of which is like the ¢hang-li,8 The 
climate is warm, windy, and dusty. The disposition of 
the people is cold and indifferent. They esteem riches 
and despise virtue. Respecting their letters, language, 
and the manners and figures of the people, these are much 
the same as in the country of Malava. The greater part 
of the people have no faith in the virtue of religious 
merit; as to those who do believe, they worship princi- 
pally the spirits of heaven, and their temples are some 
thousand in number, in which sectaries of different 
characters congregate. 

Going north-west from the country of Malava, after 
passing over 300 li® or so, we come to the country of 

“’ie-ch’a (Kachha). 


“city of the Brihmans” the same 
distance as in the text to’O-ch’a-li. 

87 °Q-ch’a-li appears to be far 
north of Kachh. May it not have 
been Uchh or B&éhwalpur? There is 
a town called Atari in the neigh- 
bourhood of Multaén (Cunningham, 
Ane. Geog., p. 228); but it is diffi- 
cult to know what could have taken 
the pilgrim there. This place is 
identified by Cunningham with the 
city of the Brahmans, taken by 


Alexander the Great (2. ¢.) 


6 Can this be the Sélei from 
which Aimdura, Gujarati Hindru 
or Sdlainodhipa, Indian gum, oliba- 
num, is obtained? ‘This tree (Bos- 
wellia thurifera, serrata and glabra) 
is found in Oudh, Khandés; and Ka- 
thidwad. Guggula (bdellium), the 
gum resin of Balsamodenron rox- 
burghii, pubescens, and mukul, is also 
produced in Kachh and Sindh. 

® In Hwui-lih, the distance is 
‘three days’”’ journey. 


256 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox XI. 


K1e-cu’a (Kacuua).” 


This country is 3000 li or so in circuit, the capital 
about 20 li, The population is dense. The establish- 
ments wealthy. There is no king (great ruler) amongst 
them; the country is an appanage of Malava, and the 
climate, products of the soil, and manners of the people 
are very similar in both countries. There are some ten 
sanghdrdmas, with about 1000 priests, who study alike 
the Great and the Little Vehicle. There are also several 
tens of Déva temples with very many unbelievers (sec- 


taries). 
From this going north” 
Fa-la-pi (Valabhi). 


1000 li or so, we come to 


Fa-La-Pr (VALABHi). 


This country is 6000 li or so in circuit, the capital 


about 30. 


The character of the soil, the climate, and 


manners of the people are like those of the kingdom of 


Malava. 


The population is very dense; the establish- 


ments rich. There are some hundred houses (families) 


or so, who possess a hundred lakhs. 


The rare and valu- 


able products of distant regions are here stored in great 


quantities. There are some 
about 6000 priests. Most 
Vehicle,” according to the 


% The distance is to be reckoned 
from the kingdom or country of 
Malava, but the place is not named. 
General Cunningham proposes to 
read 1300 li from Dhar to Khéda ; 
this last place is a large town of 
Gujarat, situated between Ahma- 
dabad and Khambay, and would be 
in its Sanskrit form the same as 
Kheda, which again is the equiva- 
lent of the Chinese Kie-ch’a. But 
Kie-ch’a, although it might be cor- 
rectly restored to Kheda, is the 
name of a country. The distance, 
also, being “three days,” in Hwui- 
lih, seems to confirm the 300 li in 


hundred sanghdérdmas, with 
of them study the Little 
Sammatiya school. There 


the text. We must therefore retain 
the restoration of Kachha. 

7” Although we should expect 
the direction to be south from 
Kachh, the reading is north, both 
in the text and in Hwui-lih ; 
wherever the Valabhi of Hiuen 
Tsiang was situated, it is said to 
have been “the kingdom of the Nor- 
thern Lara (Lo-lo) people.” (Note 
in the Chinese text). 

72 In a copper-plate deed of 
Guhaséna of Valabhi, he says, “In 
order to obtain for my parents and 
for myself benefits in this life and 
the next, I have granted, by liba- 


N 


BOOK XI.] DHRUVAPATA, 267 


are several hundred Déva temples with very many sec- 
taries of different sorts. 

When Tathagata lived in the world, he often travelled 
through this country. Hence Agdka-rija raised monu- 
ments or built stépas in all those places where Buddha 
rested. Scattered among these are spots where the three 
past Buddhas sat down, or walked, or preached the law. 
The present king is of the Kshattriya caste, as they all 
are. He is the nephew of Sildditya-raja of Malava, and 
son-in-law of the son of Sildditya, the present king of 
Kanyakubja.’ His name is Dhruvapata (T’u-lu-h’o- 
po-tu).% He is of a lively and hasty disposition, his 
wisdom and statecraft are shallow. Quite recently he 
has attached himself sincerely to faith in the three 
“precious ones.” Yearly he summons a great assembly, 
and for seven days gives away most valuable gems, ex- 
quisite meats, and on the priests he bestows in charity 
the three garments and medicaments, or their equivalent 
in value, and precious articles made of rare and costly 
gems of the seven sorts. IJLaving given these in charity, 
he redeemns them at twice their price. He esteems virtue 
(or the virtuous) aud honours the good; he reverences those 
who are noted for their wisdom.” The great priests 


tion of water, to the community of 94. The “eighteen schools” here 


the reverend Sakya Bhikshus be- 
longing to the eighteen schools 
(nikdyé) who have come from vari- 
ous directions to the great convent 
(Mahdvihdra) of Dudda. 7 Ind. 
Ant., vol. iv. p. 175. This Dudda 
was the daughter of Dhravaséna 
I’s_ sister (Ib, p. 106), and so a 
grand-daughter of Bhatirka, the 
founder of the Valabhi dynasty. 
In another copper-plate of Guhu- 
séna, he makes a grant to ‘‘the 
foreign monks belonging to the 
eighteen schools, and living in the 
Abhyantarika vihdra built by the 
venerable Mimma, and situated close 
to the monastery of Bhatirka, pre- 
sented to the Rajasthantya Sura.” 

Ind, Ant., vol. v. p. 2063 conf. 
Vassilief, Ze Bouddh., p. 63. Arch. 
Sur. W. Ind. Reports, vol. iii. p. 


mentioned point to the Hinaydna 
doctrine. 

73 Dr. Buhler argues that this 
king was the same as Siladitya VI., 
surnamed Dhrfibhata, (which he 
supposes to stand for Dhruvabhata, 
“the constant warrior’’), of whom 
we have a grant dated “Sam. 447 ” 
(Ind. Ant., vol. vii. p. 80). General 
Cunningham adopts the same view 
(A. S. Leports, vol. ix. pp. 16, 18); 
but Burgess is disposed to regard 
this king as the Dhruvaséna IT. of 
a Valabhi grant dated “Sam. 310 ” 
(Arch. Sur. W. Ind., vol. ii. pp. 82, 
ff.) ; and Oldenberg, as possibly 
Dhérabhata, the cousin of Dhru- 
vaséna II. (Ind. Ant., vol. x. p. 
219). 

4 Or, he reverences religion and 
makes much of wisdom. 


268 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book Xt. 


who come from distant regions he particularly honours 
and respects. 

Not far from the city is a great sarghdrdma which 
was built by the Arhat Achfra ('0-che-lo) ; "> here the 
Bédhisattvas Gunamati and Sthiramati” (Kien-hwui) 
fixed their residences during their travels and composed 
treatises which have gained a high renown. 

From this going north-west 700 li or so, we come to 
*O-nan-to-pu- te (Anandapura). 


’O-NAN-TO-PU-LO (ANANDAPURA). 


This country is about 2000 li in circuit, the capital 
about 20. The population is dense; the establishments 
rich. There is no chief ruler, but it is an appanage of 
Malava.” The produce, climate, and literature and laws 
are the same as those of Malava, There are some ten 
sangharamas with less than 1000 priests ; they study the 
Little Vehicle of the Sammatiya school. There are 
several tens of Déva temples, and sectaries of different 
kinds frequent them. 

Going west from Valabhi 500 li or so, we come to the 
country of Su-la-ch’a (Surdshtra). 


SU-LA-cH’A (SURASHTRA).” 
This country is 4000 li or so in circuit, the capital 


7 This is confirmed by a grant vol. vi. p.9 3 Vassilief, p. 78; M. 


of Dharaséna II. of Valabhi, in 
which the Sanskrit name of the 
founder is given as Atharya (Ind. 
Aunt., vol, iv. p. 164 n.; vol. vi. p. 9). 
Julien has Achara ; the Chinese 
translation so-king requires this 
restoration, 

78 Sthiramati Sthavira was one 
of the famous disciples of Vasu- 
bandhu, the twenty-first patriarch, 
who wrote commentaries on all 
the works of his master. He is 
named in a grant of Dharaséna I. as 
the Achairyya Bhadanta Sthiramati, 
who founded the vikdra of Sri 
Bappapida at Valabht (Ind, Ant., 


Muller’s /ndia, p. 305 ; B. Nanjio’s 
Cat. Budd, Trip., c. 372). Guna- 
mati was also a disciple of Vasu- 
bandhu. He had a famous disciple, 
Vasumitra (Pho-shu-mi), who wrote 
a commentary on Vasubandhn’s 
Abhidharmakéshai (Bunyiu Nanjio’s 
Cat. Bud, Trip., ce. 375, 3773; M. 
Muller, Jndia, pp. 305, 309, 310, 632; 
Burnouf, Introd., p. 505; Vassilief, 
p. 78). » f ‘ 

7 See Ind, Ant., vol. vii; Ar. 
Sur. W. Ind., vol. ii. p. $3. 

78 Surdshtra, or Suratha, or Sorath. 
As this district is in the Gujarat 
peninsula, it is difficult to under- 


BOOK XI.} GURFFARA. 269 


about 30 li. On the west the chief town borders on the 
Mahi river; the population is dense, and the various 
establishments (families) are rich. The country is de- 
pendent on Valabhi. The soil is impregnated with salt; 
flowers and fruit are rare. Although the climate is equable, 
yet there is no cessation of tempests. The manners of 
the people are careless and indifferent ; their disposition 
light and frivolous. They do not love learning and are 
attached both to the true faith and also to heretical 
doctrine. There are some fifty saghdrdmas in this king- 
dom, with about 3000 priests; they mostly belong to the 
Sthavira school of the Great Vehicle. There are a 
hundred or so Déva temples, occupied by sectaries of 
various sorts. As this country is on the western sea 
route, the men all derive their livelihood from the sea and 
engage in commerce and exchange of commodities. 

Not far from the city is a mountain called Yuh-chen-to 
(Ujjanta),” on the top of which is a savghdrdma. The 
cells and galleries have mostly been excavated from the 
mountain-side. The mountain is covered with thick 
jungle and forest trees, whilst streams flow round its 
limits. Here saints and sages roam and rest, and Rishis 
endued with spiritual faculties congregate here and stay. 


Going north from the country of Valabhi 1800 li or so, 
we come to the kingdom of Kiu-che-lo (Gurjjara). 


K1U-CHE-LO 
This country ® is 5000 li 


stand how its chief town “on the 
west ”’borders on the Mahi river ; 
perhaps it should be “on the east.” 
But this part of the pilgrim’s narra- 
tive seems to be carelessly written. 
Perhaps, as Fergusson supposes, the 
original documents had been lost in 
crossing the Indus at Attok (see 
Book xii.), and the details supplied 
from memory or notes, Yor re- 
marks on localities see V. de St. 
Martin, Mémoire, p. 405 ; Cunning- 
ham, Ane. Geog., p. 325. 


(GURJJARA). 
or so in circuit, the capital, 


7 The old Prakrit name of Gir- 
nara, close to Junagadh in Kathia- 
wad; the Sanskrit form is Ujjay- 
anta (Mahdbh., iii. 8347 ff.) Lassen 
(Ind, Alt., vol. i. p. 686 n.) misplaces 
it at or near Ajanta. It is sacred 
to Néminatha, the twenty-second 
Jina, and Urjayata (Colebrooke, 
Essays, vol, ii. p. 212; Arch. Sur. 
W. Ind. Rep., vol. ii. p. 129), and is 
also called Raivata. 

80 Prof. R. G. Bhandarkar sug- 
gests that Kukura, a district men- 


270 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x1, 


which is called Pi-lo-mo-lo,®! is 30 li or so round. The 
produce of the soil and the manners of the people resemble 
those of Surashtra, The population is dense; the estab- 
lishments are rich and well supplied with materials 
(wealth). They mostly are unbelievers ; a few are attached 
to the law of Buddha. There is one satighdrdma, with about 
a hundred priests; they are attached to the teaching of the 
Little Vehicle and the school of the Sarvastividas. There 
are several tens of Déva temples, in which sectaries of 
various denominations dwell. The king is of the Kshat-. 
triya caste. He is just twenty years old; he is distin- 
guished for wisdom, and he is courageous. He is a deep 
believer in the law of Buddha; and highly honours men 
of distinguished ability. 

From this going south-east 2800 li or so, we come to 
the country of U-she-yen-na (Ujjayani). 


U-SHE-YEN-NA (Ugsayanf). 


This country © is about 6000 li in circuit; the capital 
is some 30 li round. The produce and manners of the 
people are like those of the country of Surishtra. The 
population is dense and the establishments wealthy. 
There are several tens of convents, but they are mostly 
in ruins; some three or five are preserved, There are 
some 300 priests; they study the doctrines both of the 
Great and the Little Vehicle. There are several tens of 


Déva temples, occupied by 


tioned in an inscription of Pulu- 
miayi at Nasik, and in the Rudra- 
daman inscription at Girndra, might 
be Kiu-che-lo, but the Chinese syl- 
lables are against such an identifica- 
tion (Trans. Int. Cong. Orient. 1874, 
p. 312; Arch, Sur. W. Ind. Rep., 
vol, iv. p. 109, and vol. ii. pp. 129, 
131. Gurjara is certainly the proper 
representative, and the district as 
well as the language extended into 
the southern parts of modern Raj- 
putina and Malwa. See Lassen, 
Ind, Alt., vol. i, p. 1363; Colebrooke, 


sectaries of various kinds. 


Essays, vol. ii. p. 31 n.3 Rdja- 
tarang., v. 144 ff 

8 Bilmér in Raéjputana (lat. 
25° 48’N., long. 71° 16’ E.) * From 
this neighbourhood several of the 
clans in Kathiawad say they origi- 
nally came. : 

% Ujjayant or Ujjayini is pro- 
perly the capital of Avanti in 
Malava, the capital of Tiastanes 
(Chashtana), the 'Ofjvy of Ptolemy 
lib. vii. c. i. 63) and the Peripl. Mar. 
ryth. (¢. xviii.) Bohlen, Alte nd., 
vol. i. p. 94. 


BOOK XI.] MAHESVARAPURA, pra 


The king belongs to the Brahman caste. He is well versed 
in heretical books, and believes not in the true law. 

Not far from the city is a stupa; this is the place 
where Agdka-rija made the hell (of punishment). 

Going north-east from this 1000 li or so, we come to 
the kingdom of Chi-ki-to. 


CHI-KI-TO. 


This country is about 4000 li in circuit; the capital is 
some 15 or 16 li round, The soil is celebrated for its 
fertility; it is regularly cultivated and yields abundant 
crops; it is specially adapted for beans and barley; it 
produces abundance of flowers and fruits, The climate is 
temperate; the people are naturally virtuous and docile ; 
most of them believe in heretical doctrine, a few honour 
the law of Buddha. There are several tens of savighdrdmas 
with few priests. There are about ten Déva temples, which 
some thousand followers frequent. The king is of the 
Brihman caste. He firmly believes in the (three) precious 
ones ; he honours and rewards those who are distinguished 
for virtue, Very many learned men from distant coun- 
tries congregate in this place. 

Going from here north 900 li or so, we come to the 
kingdom of Mo-hi-shi-fa-lo-pu-lo (Mahéévarapura). 


M0-HI-SHI-FA-LO-PU-LO (MAHESVARAPURA). 


This kingdom is about 3coo li in circuit; the capital 
city is some 30liround. The produce of the soil and 
the manners of the people are like those of the kingdom 
of Ujjayani. They greatly esteem the heretics and do 
not reverence the law of Buddha. There are several tens 
of Déva temples, and the sectaries principally belong to 
the Pisupatas. The king is of the Brahman caste; he 
places but little faith in the doctrine of Buddha, 

From this, going in a backward direction to the country 
of Kiu-che-lo (Gurjjara) and then proceeding northward 


272 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book xt. 


through wild deserts and dangerous defiles about 1900 li, 
crossing the great river Sin-tu, we come to the kingdom of 
Sin-tu (Sindh). 


SIN-TU (SINDIT). 


This country is about 7ooo li in circuit; the capital 
city, called P’i-shen-p’o-pu-lo,® is about 30 li round. 
The soil is favourable for the growth of cereals and pro- 
duces abundance of wheat and millet. It also abounds 
in gold and silver and native copper. It is suitable for 
the breeding of oxen, sheep, camels, mules, and other 
kinds of beasts. The camels are small in size and have 
only one hump. They find here a great quantity of salt, 
which is red like cinnabar; also white salt, black salt 
and rock salt. In different places, both far and near, this 
salt is used for medicine. The disposition of the men is 
hard and impulsive; but they are honest and upright, 
They quarrel and are much given to contradiction. They 
study without aiming to excel; they have faith in thelaw 
of Buddha. There are several hundred saaghdrdmas, 
occupied by about 10,000 priests. They study the Little 
Vehicle according to the Sammatiya school. As a rule, 
they are indolent and given to indulgence and debauchery. 
Those who are very earnest as followers of the virtue of 
the sages live alone in desert places, dwelling far off in 
the mountains and the forests. There night and day they 
exert themselves in aiming after the acquirement of the | 
holy fruit (of Arhatship). There are about thirty Déva 
temples, in which sectaries of various kinds congregate. 

The king is of the Sfidra (Shu-t’o-lo) caste. He is by 
nature honest and sincere, and he reverences the law of 
Buddha. 

When Tathagata was in the world, he frequently passed 
through this country, therefore Agédka-rdja has founded 
several tens of std@pas in places where the sacred traces of 


*3 Vichavapura—Julien. Rein- pura and Minagara. See Ind. Ant., 
aud suggests Vasmapura or Balma- vol. viii. p. 336 f. 


BOOK XI.] CONVERSION OF HERETICS. 273 


his presence were found. UpaguptaS! the great Arhat, 
sojourned very frequently in this kingdom, explaining the 
law and convincing and guiding men. The places where 
he stopped and the traces he left are all commemorated 
by the building of sanghdrdmas or the erection of stépas. 
These buildings are seen everywhere; we can only speak 
of them briefly. 

By the side of the river Sindh, along the flat marshy 
lowlands for some thousand li, there are several hundreds 
of thousands (a very great many) of families settled. They 
are of an unfeeling and hasty temper, and are given to 
bloodshed only. They give themselves exclusively to 
tending cattle, and from this derive their livelihood. 
They have no masters, and, whether men or women, have 
neither rich nor poor; they shave their heads and wear 
the Kashdya robes of Bhikshus, whom they resemble out- 
wardly, whilst they engage themselves in the ordinary 
affairs of lay life. They hold to their narrow (littie) 
views and attack the Great Vehicle. 
_ The old reports state that formerly these people were 

extremely hasty (¢mpatient), and only practised violence 
and cruelty. At this time there was an Arhat, who, pity- 
ing their perversity, and desiring to convert them, mounted 
in the air and came amongst them. He exhibited his 
miraculous powers and displayed his wonderful capa- 
bilities. Thus he led the people to believe and accept 
the doctrine, and gradually he taught them in words ; 
4.1 of them joyfully accepted his teaching and respectfully 
prayed him to direct them in their religious life. ‘The 
Avhat perceiving that the hearts of the people had become 
submissive, delivered to them the three “ Refuges” and 
restrained their cruel tendencies; they entirely gave up 
“taking life,’ they shaved their heads, aud assumed the 
soiled robes of a Bhikshu, and obediently walked accord- 
ing to the doctrine of religion. Since then, generations 
have passed by and the changed times have weakened 

8 Bk. vili.; Burnouf, Jntrod., pp. 118, 197, 378 £. 
VOL. II 8 


274 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [BOOK XI. 


their virtue, but as for the rest, they retain their old 
customs. But.though they wear the robes of religion, 
they live without any moral rules, and their sons and 
grandsons continue to live as worldly people, without 
any regard to their religious profession. 

Going from this eastward goo li or so, crossing the 
Sindh river and proceeding along the eastern bank, we 
come to the kingdom of Mu-lo-san-p’u-lu. 


MU-LO-SAN-P'U-LU (MUOLASTHANAPURA). 


This country ® is about 4coo li in circuit; the capital 
town is some 30 liround. It is thickly populated. The 
establishments are wealthy. This country is in depen- 
dence on the kingdom of Chéka (Tse-kia). The soil is rich 
and fertile. The climate is soft and agreeable; the manners 
of the people are simple and honest; they love learning 
and honour the virtuous. The greater part sacrifice to 
the spirits; few believe in the law of Buddha. There 
are about ten saighdrdmas, mostly in ruins; there are a 
few priests, who study indeed, but without any wish to 
excel. There are eight Déva temples, in which sectaries 
of various classes dwell. There is a temple dedicated to 
the sun,®* very magnificent and profusely decorated, The 
image of the Sun-déva is cast in yellow gold and orna- 
mented with rare gems. Its divine insight is mysteri- 
ously manifested and its spiritual power made plain to 
all. Women play their music, light their torches, offer 
their flowers and perfumes to honour it. This custom 
has been continued from the very first. The kings and 
high families of the five Indies never fail to make their 
offerings of gems and precious stones (to this Déva). They 
have founded a house of mercy (happiness), in which they 
provide food, and drink, and medicines for the poor and 
sick, affording succour and sustenance. Men from all 


8 Mflasthanapur or Multin (see Reinaud, Jfém. s, 1. Inde, p. 98). 
83 sditya or Strya. 


BOOK XI,] COUNTRY OF PARVATA. 275 


countries come here to offer up their prayers ; there are 
always some thousands doing so. On the four sides of 
the temple are tanks with flowering groves where one can 
wander about without restraint. 

From this going north-east 700 li or so, we come to the 
country of Po-fa-to. 


Po-Fa-To (Parvata).*7 


This country is 5000 li or so in circuit, its capital is 
about 20 li. It is thickly populated, and depends on the 
country of Chéka (Tse-kia). A great deal of dry-cround 
tice is here grown, The soil is also fit for beans and 
wheat. The climate is temperate, the disposition of the 
people honest and upright. They are naturally quick 
and hasty; their language is low and common. They 
are well versed in composition and literature, There 
are heretics and believers in common. There are 
some ten saighdrdmas with about 1000 priests; they 
study both the Great and Little Vehicle. There are 
four stdpas built by As6ka-rija. There are also some 
twenty Déva temples frequented by sectaries of different 
sorts. 

By the side of the chief town is a great saiighdrdma 
with about 100 priests in it; they study the teaching of 
the Great Vehicle. It was here that Jinaputra, a 
master of Sdstras®® composed the Yégichdryabhime 
Sastrakdrika; here also Bhadraruchi and Gunaprabha, 
ihasters of Sdstras, embraced the religious life. This 
great savighdrdma has been destroyed by fire, and is now 
waste and ruined, 

Leaving the Sindh country, and going south-west 1500 
or 1600 li, we come to the kingdom of ’O-tin-p’o-chi- 
lo (Atyanabakéla). 

8 Parvata is given by Panini shing-tszu; his work, the Yi-chie- 
(iv. 2, 143) as the name of a coun- sh’-tt-lun-shih, is a commentary on 
try in the Panjib under the group the Yéyéchdryabhdmi Sdstra (Yi- 
Takshasiladi (iv. 3, 93). Ind. Ant., chie-sh’-ti-lun) of Maitréya. Both 


vol. i. p. 22. works were translated into Chinese 
88 Jinaputra, in Chinese Tsui- by Hiuen Tsiang. 


276 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x1 


*O-TIEN-P’0-CHI-LO. 


This country is about 5000 li in circuit. The chief 
town is called Khie-tsi-shi-fa-lo, and is about 30 li round. 
It lies on the river Sindh, and borders on the ocean. 
The houses are richly ornamented, and mostly possess 
rare and costly substances. Lately there has been no 
ruler; it is under the protection of Sindh. The soil is 
low and damp and the ground is impregnated with salt. 
It is covered with wild shrubs, and is mostly waste 
land: it is little cultivated, yet it produces some sorts of 
grain, but principally beans and wheat, of which there 
is a great quantity. The climate is rather cold and 
subject to violent storms of wind. It is fit for raising 
oxen, sheep, camels, asses, and other kinds of beasts. 
The disposition of the people is violent and hasty. They 
have no love for learning. Their language differs slightly 
from that of Mid-India. The people are generally honest 
and sincere. They deeply reverence the three precious 
objects of worship. There are about eighty sanghdrdmas 
with some 5000 priests. They mostly study the Little 
Vehicle according to the Sammatiya school. There are ten 
Déva temples, mostly occupied by heretics belonging to the 
Pasupatas. 

In the capital town is a temple of Ta-tsz’-tsai-tin 
(Mahé vara Déva). The temple is ornamented with rich 
sculptures, and the image of the Déva is possessed of 
great spiritual powers. The P&supata heretics dwell in 
this temple. In old days Tathdgata often travelled 
through this country to preach the law and convert men, 
leading the multitude and benefiting the people. On 
this account Asgéka-raja built stdpas on the spots conse- 
crated by the sacred traces, six in number. 

Going west from this less than 2000 li, we come to the 
country of Long-kie-lo (Langala). 


BOOK Xi.] PO-LA-SSE (PERSIA). 


277 


LONG-KIE-LO (LANGALA). 

This country ® is several thousand li from east to west 
and from north to south. The capital is about 30 li 
round. It is named Su-nu-li-chi-fa-lo (Sanur- 
igvara?).%° The soil is rich and fertile, and yields abun- 
dant harvests. The climate and the manners of the 
people are like those of ’O-tin-p’o-chi-lo. The population 
is dense. It possesses abundance of precious gems and 
stones. It borders on the ocean. It is on the route to 
the kingdom of the western women.®! It has no chief 
ruler. The people occupy a long valley, and are not de- 
pendent on one another. They are under the government 
of Persia, The letters are much the same as those of 
India: their language is a little different. There are be- 
lievers and heretics living together amongst them. There 
are some hundred sanghdrdmas, and perhaps 6000 priests, 
who study the teaching of both the Little and Great 
Vehicle. There are several hundred Déva temples. The 
heretics called PAsgupatas are exceedingly numerous. In 
the city is a temple to Mahéévara-Déva: it is richly 
adorned and sculptured, The Paéupata heretics here 
offer their religious worship. 

From this going north-west, we come to the kingdom 
of Po-la-sse (Persia). 


PO-LA-SSE (PERSIA). 


« This kingdom™ is several myriad of lis in circuit. Its 
chief town, called Su-la-sa-t’ang-na (Surasthana), is 
about 40 li in circuit. The valleys are extensive, and so 
the climate differs in character, but in general it is warm. 


89 General Cunningham thinks 


® Cunningham suggests Sambhu- 
this country may represent Liko- 


risvara as the restoration of this 


rian or Lakara, the name of a great 
ruined city which Masson found be- 
tween Khozdar and Kilat, about 
2000 li to the north-west of K otesar 
in Kachh (Anc. Geog. of India, p. 
341). The Chinese symbols might 
be restored to Longhir. 


name (ibid., loc. cit.) 

*1 See p. 240, ante. 

® This country does not belong 
to India (Ch. £d.) Hiuen Tsiang 
did not visit it personally ; he writes 
from report. 


278 RECORDS OF WESTERN CCUNTRIES.  [poox x1. 


They draw the water up to irrigate the fields. The 
people are rich and.affluent. The country produces gold, 
silver, copper, rock-crystal (spkdttka), rare pearls, and 
various precious substances. Their artists know how to 
weave fine brocaded silks, woollen stuffs, carpets, and so 
on. They have many shen horses and camels, In com- 
merce they use large silver pieces. They are by nature 
violent and impulsive, and in their behaviour they prac- 
tise neither decorum nor justice. Their writing and their 
language are different from other countries. They care 
not for learning, but give themselves entirely to works of 
art. All that they make the neighbouring countries value 
very much. Their marriage-customs are merely promis- 
cuous intercourse. When dead their corpses are mostly 
abandoned. In stature they are tall: they tie up their 
hair (arrange their head-dress) and go uncovered. Their 
robes are either of skin, or wool, or felt, or figured silk. 
Each family is subject to a tax of four pieces of silver per 
man. The Déva temples are very numerous. Dinava % 
(Ti-na-po) is principally worshipped by the heretics. 
There are two or three swaghdrdmas, with several hundred 
priests, who principally study the teaching of the Little 
Vehicle according to the Sarviéstavadin school. The 
patra of Sikya Buddha is in this (country), in the king’s 
palace.** 

On the eastern frontiers of the country is the town of 
Ho-mo (Ormus?). The city inside is not great, but the 
external walls are in circuit about 60 li or so. The 
people who inhabit it are all very rich. To the north- 
west this country borders on the kingdom of Fo-lin,® 


% Julien restores this name, and a community of priests in Per- 


doubtfully, to Dinabha. Dinava, or 
Dinapa, however, may be a contrac- 
tion for Dinapa(ti), “the lord of the 
day,” or “the san.” 

‘4 For the wanderings of the 
patra of Buddha, sce Fa-hian, chap, 
xxxix. It is interesting to know 
that there were Buddhist temples 


sia at the time of Hiuen Tsiang. 
As they belonged to the school of 
the Little Vehicle, it is probable 
they had been established there from 
an early date. 

% Fo-lin (réA\wv) is generally sup- 
posed to represent the Byzantine 
Empire. 


BOOK X1.] PITASILA. 279 


which resembles the kingdom of Persia in point of soil, 
and manners, and customs; but they differ in point of 
language and appearance of the inhabitants. These 
also possess a quantity of valuable gems, and are very 
rich. 

To the south-west of Fo-lin, in an island of the sea, 
is the kingdom of the western women:® here there 
are only women, with no men; they possess a large 
quantity of gems and precious stones, which they ex- 
change in Fo-lin, Therefore the king of Fo-lin sends 
certain men to live with them fora time. If they should 
have male children, they are not allowed to bring them 
up. 
On leaving the kingdom of O-tin-p’o-chi-lo, and going 
north 700 li or so, we come to the country of Pi-to-shi- 
lo. 

Pi-TO-SHI-LO (PirAétna). 

This kingdom is about 3000 li round; the capital is 
some 20 li in circuit. The population is dense. They 
have no chief ruler, but they depend on the country of 
Sin-tu. The soil is salt and sandy; the country is sub- 
ject to a cold tempestuous wind. A great quantity of 
beans and wheat is grown. Flowers and fruits are 
scarce. The manners of the people are fierce and rough. 
Their language slightly differs from that of Mid-India. 
They do not love learning, but as far as they know they 
dave a sincere faith. There are some fifty savghdrdmas 
with about 3000 priests; they study the Little Vehicle 
according to the Sammatiya school. There are twenty Déva 
temples, frequented mostly by the heretics called Pagu- 
patas. 

To the north of the city 15 or 16 li, in the middle 
of a great forest, is a stupa several hundred feet high, 
built by Agdka-rija. It contains relics which from time 

% For some references to the is- and Coionel Yule's note (vol. ii. p. 


land or kingdom of the western 339). 
women, see Marco Polo, chap. xxxi, 


280 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poor x1, 


to time emit a bright light. It was here that Tathdgata, 
when in old time he was a Rishi, was snbigeeed to the 
eruelty of the king. 

Not far east from this is an old santghdrdma. This 
was built by the great Arhat, the great Katydyana. By 
the side of it are traces where the four Buddhas of the 
past age sat down and walked for exercise. They have 
erected a stizpa to denote the spot. 

Going north-east from this 300 li or so, we come to the 
country of ’O-fan-ch’a, 


’O-FAN-CH’A (AVANDA ?). 


This kingdom is 2400 or 2500 li in circuit; the capital 
is about 20 li, There is no chief ruler, but the country 
is subject to Sin-tu, The soil is fit for the cultivation 
of grain, and abounds in beans and wheat; it produces 
but few flowers or fruits; the woods are thin. ‘The 
climate is windy and cold; the disposition of the men 
is fierce and impulsive. Their language is simple and 
uncultivated. They do not value learning, but they are 
earnest and sincere believers in “the three gems.” There 
are about twenty sanghdrdmas, with some 2000 priests; 
they mostly study the Little Vehicle according to the 
Sammatiya school. There are some five Déva temples, 
frequented by the heretics called Pagupatas. 

To the north-east of the city, not a great distance, in 
the middle of a great bamboo forest is a saighdréma 
mostly in ruins. Here Tathigata gave permission to the 
Bhikshus to wear Kih-fu-to (boots)? By the side of it 
is a sttipa built by Aédka-rfja. Although the founda- 
dations have sunk into the earth, yet the remains are 
some hundred feet high. In a vthdra by the side of the 
stipa is a blue-stone standing figure of Buddha. On 


% There are some remarks made vol. xvii. p. 35). It would seem 
about permission to wear boots or from these records that this coun- 
shoes with thick linings in the try of Avanda corresponded with , 
Mahdvagga, varga 13,§ 6(S. B. £., Avanti. 


BOOK X!.] FA-LA-NA (VARANA\. 281 


sacred days (fast-days) it spreads abroad a divine 
light. 

To the south 800 paces or so, in a forest, is a stupa 
which was built by Aéséka-raja. Tathdgata, in time 
gone by, stopping here, finding it cold in the night, 
covered himself with his three garments: on the morn- 
ing following he permitted the Bhikshus to wear wadded 
garments. In this wood is a place where Buddha walked 
for exercise. There are also a number of stépas placed 
opposite one another, where the four Buddhas of the 
past age sat. In this stépa are relics of Buddha’s hair 
and nails. On holy days they emit a miraculous 
light. 

Going from this north-east 900 li or so, we come to 
the country of Fa-la-na. 


Fa-LA-NA (VARANA).%° 

This kingdom is about 4ooo ]i in circuit, and the 
chief town about 20 li. The population is dense, The 
kingdom is subject to Kapiga. The chief portion of the 
country consists of mountains and forests. It is regu- 
larly cultivated. The climate is rather cold. The man- 
ners of the people are rough and fierce, They are per- 
severing in their habits, but their purposes are low. 
Their language is somewhat like that of Mid-India. 
Some of them believe in Buddha, others not. They do 

“aot care about literature or the arts. There are some 
tens of sanghdrdmas, but they are in ruins. There are 
about 300 priests, who study the Great Vehicle. There 
are about five Déva temples, frequented mostly by Pagu- 
pata heretics. 

Not far to the south of the city is an old saitghdrdma. 
Here Tathagata in old days preached, exhibiting the 
profit and delight of his doctrine, and opening the mind 

% Panini has a country called group Suvistavadi; also in the group 


Varnu (iv. 2, 103; iv. 3, 93), from Kachchhdi, in which Gandhira also 
a river of the same name, in the is included. 


282 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES.  [Boox X1. 


of his hearers. By the side of it are traces where the 
four past Buddhas sat down or walked for exercise. 
The common report says on the western frontier of this 
country is the kingdom of Ki-kiang-na (Kikana 2). 
The people live amid the great mountains and valleys 
in separate clans. They have no chief ruler. They 
breed an immense quantity of sheep and horses. The 
shen horses are of a large size, and the countries 
around breed but few, and therefore they are highly 
valued. 

Leaving this country and going north-west, after tra- 
versing great mountains and crossing wide valleys, and 
passing a succession of smaller towns, and going 2000 li 
or so, we leave the frontiers of India and come to the 
kingdom of Tsau-ku-ta. 


Norre.—The remainder of the section, noticed on pp. 248, 249, 
records a mission sent to the same king of Ceylon, Alibunar, by 
the Emperor of China (Ch’héng Tsu), under the direction of the 
eunuch Ch’hing Ho; his object was to offer incense and flowers. 
Having arrived, he exhorted the king to respect the teaching of 
Buddha and to expel the heretics. The king being enraged, desired 
to slay him, but Ch’hing Ho being aware of the plot, escaped. 
Again the same ambassador was sent to receive the homagé of 
foreign states, and came to Ceylon (Si-lan-shan-kwo, the country 
of the Seilan mountain). The king rebelliously refused to pay any 
respect to the embassage, and collected 50,000 soldiers to block the 
way and to destroy the ships, Ch’hing Ho having learned the 
purpose of the king, sent secretly by a circuitous way to the ships, 
and got 3000 soldiers by night to march on the royal city. Being ° 
surrounded by the enemy’s troops, they defended the city for six 
days, and then having treated the king with contumely, they 
opened the gates in the morning, and fought their way for twenty 
li; when the daylight began to fail, they offered up prayers to the 
sacred tooth, and suddenly an unusual light shone before them and 
lighted them on their way. Having reached their ships, they 
rested in peace, and arrived at the capital in the ninth year of 
Yung-loh (4.p. 1412), the seventh month, and ninth day. 


END OF BOOK XI. 


BOOK XII. 


Contains an account of twenty-two countries, viz, (1) T'su-ku-cha 
(2) Fo-li-shi-sa-Vang-na; (3) ’An-ta-lo-po; (4) K’woh-si-to; 
(5) Hwoh ; (6) Mung-kin; (7) O-li-nt ; (8) Ho-lo-hu ; (9) Ki- 
li-si-mo; (10) Po-li-ho; (11) Hi-mo-ta-lo, (12) Po-to-chang-na ; 
(13) In-po-kin ; (14) Kiu-lang-na ; (15) Ta-mo-si-tie-t¢; (16) 
Shi-k’'i-ni; (17) Chang-mi ; (18) Kte-p’an-to ; (19) U-sha; (20) 
Kie-sha; (21) Cho-kiu-kia ; (22) Ktu-sa-ta-na. 


Tsu-Ku-cHa (TSAUKOTA). 


THIS country+ is about 7000 li in circuit, the capital, 
which is called Ho-si-na (Ghazna), is about 30 li round. 
There is another capital, Ho-sa-la,? which is about 30 li 
round. Both of them are naturally strong and also for- 
tified? Mountains and valleys succeed each other, with 
plains intervening, fit for cultivation, The land is sown 
and reaped in due season. Winter wheat is grown in 
great abundance ; shrubs and trees grow in rich variety, 
and there are flowers and fruits in abundance. The soil 
As favourable for the yo-kin plant (turmeric) and for the 
hing-kiu ;* this last grows in the valley Lo-ma-in-tu5 
In the city Ho-sa-lo is a fountain, of which the water 


1 For some reference to the country 
Tsauktita, see ante, vol. i. p. 62, n. 
218, Cunningham identifies it with 
the Arachosia of classical writers 
(Ane. Geog. of India, p. 40). 

2 The identification of Ho-si-na 
with Ghazni was first made by M. 
V. de St. Martin; he also proposed 
to restore Ho-sa-la to Hazara, but 
Genera] Cunningham remarks that 
this name, as applied to the district 


in question, is not older than the 
time of Chinghiz Khan ; he, there- 
fore, proposes Guzaristan, on the 
Helmand, the Ozola of Ptolemy, as 
the equivalent of the Chinese sym- 
bols (¢bid., loc. cit.) 

3 For the strength of Ghazni see 
Cunningham (op. cit., pp. 41, 42). 

4 Hiigu, assafcetida (Julien), 

5 Raméndu? (Julien). 


284 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [ook xu, 


divides itself into many branches, and which the people 
utilise for the purposes of irrigation. The climate is 
cold; there are frequent hail and snow storms. The 
people are naturally light-hearted and impulsive; they are 
crafty and deceitful. They love learning and the arts, 
and show considerable skill in magical sentences, but 
they have no good aim in view. 

They daily repeat several myriads of words; their 
writing and language differ from those of other countries. 
They are very specious in vain talk, but there is little 
body or truth in what they say. Although they worship 
a hundred (many) spirits, yet they also greatly reverence 
the three precious ones, There are several hundred 
satighdrdmas, with 1000 or so priests. They all study 
the Great Vehicle. The reigning sovereign is sincere 
and honest in his faith, and is the successor of a long 
line of kings. He applies himself assiduously to religious 
work (merit) and is well instructed and fond of learning. 
There are some ten stipas built by AsOka-raja, and several 
tens of Déva temples, in which sectaries of various de- 
nominations dwell together. 

The Tirthaka ° heretics are very numerous; they worship 
principally the Déva Kshuna (T’seu-na). This Déva 
spirit formerly came from Mount Aruna (’O-lu-nao) in 
Kapiga, and took up his abode here in the southern dis- 
tricts of this kingdom, in the Mount Sunagir.’ He is 
severe or good, causing misfortune or exercising violence. 
Those who invoke him with faith obtain their wishes ; 
those who despise him reap misfortune. Therefore people 
both far off and near show for him deep reverence ; high 
and low alike are filled with religious awe of him. The 
princes, nobles, and people of this as well as of foreign 


6 The symbols Wai-tao may denote for which see Eitel, Handbook, sub 
the Tirthakas, as Julien seems to voc. 
suppose ; or they may be simply 7 For this mountain see ante, vol. 
equal to “only the greater part are i. p. 62. It may be restored to 
Wai-tao,” the symbols wai-tao are Kshuna Hilo or Hila. 
generally applied to the Tirthakas, 


BOOK XII] PARSUSTHANA, 285 


countries assemble every year at a season of rejoicing 
which is not fixed, and offer gold and silver and pre- 
cious objects of rare value (choice trifies), with sheep, and 
horses, and domestic animals; all which they present in 
simple and confiding trust, so that though the earth is 
covered with silver and gold, and the sheep and horses 
fill the valleys, yet no one would dare to covet them: 
they consider them as things set apart for sacred pur- 
poses. The heretics (Tirthakas), by subduing their minds 
and mortifying their flesh, get from the spirits of heaven 
sacred formule. By the use of these they are frequently 
able to control diseases and recover the sick. 

Going from this northwards 500 li or so, we come to the 
kingdom of Fo-li-shi-sa-t’ang-na. 


Fo-LI-SHI-SA-T’ANG-NA (PARSUSTHANA, 07 VARDASTHANA ?) 


This kingdom § is about 2000 li from east to west and 
1000 li from north to south. The capital is called 
U-pi-na (Hupian), and is 20 li round, As regards the 
soil and the manners of the people, these are the same as 
in Tsu-ku-cha; the language, however, is different. The 
climate is icy cold; the men are naturally fierce and 
impetuous. The king is a Turk (Tu-kieuh). They have 
(or he has) profound faith for the three precious objects 
of worship ; he esteems learning and honours virtue (07, 
_the virtuous, 7.¢., the priests). 

Going to the north-east of this kingdom, traversing 
mountains and crossing rivers, and passing several tens of 
little towns situated on the frontier of the country of 
Kapiga, we come toa great mountain pass called Po-lo- 


8 Panini mentions Pargusthina, the tribes Parsioi and Parsnétai (id., 


the country of the Parsus, a warlike 
tribe, in this direction (v.3,117; Brih. 
Sarm., xiv, 18). Baber (Mem., p. 140) 
mentions the Pardchis among the 
tribes of Afghanistan. Ptolemy 
has two places, Parsiana (lib, vi.c. 18, 
s. 4) and Parsia (ib., s. 5), and also 


s. 3), somewhere in this vicinity. 

* Hupian or Opian, a little to the 
north of Charikar, in lat. 35° 2’ N., 
long. 69° x’ E., at the entrance of a 
pass over the north-east end of the 
Pamghan range. 


286 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book xu. 


si-na (Varaséna),!° which forms part of the great snowy 
mountains. This mountain pass is very high; the preci- 
pices are wild and dangerous; the path is tortuous, and 
the caverns and hollows wind and intertwine together. 
At one time the traveller enters a deep valley, at another 
he mounts a high peak, which in full summer is blocked 
with frozen ice. By cutting steps up the ice the traveller 
passes on, and after three days he comes to the highest 
point of the pass, There the icy wind, intensely cold, 
blows with fury; the piled snow fills the valleys, ‘ra- 
vellers pushing their way through, dare not pause on their 
route. The very birds that fly in their wheeling flight ™ 
cannot mount alone this point, but go afoot across the 
height and then fly downwards. Looking at the moun- 
tains round, they seem as little hillocks. This is the 
highest peak of all Jambudvipa., No trees are seen upon 
it, but only a mass of rocks, crowded one by the side of 
the other, like a wild forest, 
Going on for three days more, we descend tee pass and 

come to ’An-ta-lo-po (Andar-fb).¥ 


*AN-TA-LO-PO (ANDAR-AB). 


This is the old land of the Tu-ho-lo country. It is 
about 3000 li round; the capital is 14 or 15 li round. 
They have no chief ruler; it is dependent on the Turks 
(Tuh-kiueh).4 Mountains and hills follow in chains, with 
valleys intersecting them, The arable land is very con- 
tracted. The climate is very severe. The wind and the 
snow are intensely cold and violent; yet the country is 
recularly cultivated and productive: it is suitable also for 
flowers and fruits. The men are naturally fierce and 


1 This pass over the Hindu Kush 12 See Book i., n. 146 
(the Paropamisus or Indian Cau- 18 ‘That is, of the Tokhari people. 
casus) is probably the same as the See Booki, n. 121. 
Khawak Pass described by Wood 14 That is, on the Turkish tribe 
(Oxus, p. 274). He found it to’ be from the borders of China that had 
13,000 feet in height. overrun this eae (see note, loc. 
Ngo ts’eung, soaring birds, cit.) 


BOOK XIl.] HWOH (KUNDUZ). 287 


violent. The common people are unrestrained in their 
ways, and know neither wrong nor right. They do not 
care about learning, and give themselves only to the 
worship of spirits. Few of them believe in the religion of 
Buddha. There are three satghdrdmas and some tens of 
priests. They follow the teaching of the Mahasanghika 
(Ta-chong-pu) school. There is one stipa built by Asdka- 
raja. 

Going north-west from this we enter a valley, skirt 
along a mountain pass, traverse several little towns, and 
after going about 400 li we arrive at K’ woh-si-to. 


K’wou-si-To (KHost).¥ 


This also is the old land of the Tu-ho-lo country. It is 
about 3000 li in circuit; the capital is about 10 li round. 
It has no chief ruler, but is dependent on the Turks, It 
is mountainous, with many contracted valleys ; hence it is 
subject -to icy-cold winds. It produces much grain, and 
it abounds with flowers and fruits. The disposition of the 
men is fierce and violent; they live without laws. There 
are three savighdrdmas, with very few priests, 

Going from this north-west, skirting the mountains and 
crossing the valleys, and passing by several towns, after 
about 300 li we come to the country called Hwoh. 


= Hwou (Kunpvz).@ 


This country is also the old land of the Tuh-ho-lo 
country. It is about 3000 li in circuit; the chief town 
is about 10 li, There is no chief ruler, but the country 
depends on the Turks. The land is level and plain. It is 
regularly cultivated, and produces cereals in abundance. 
Trees and shrubs grow plentifully, and flowers and fruits 
(of various kinds) are wonderfully abundant. The climate 
is soft. and agreeable; the manners of the people simple 


1B See Book i, n. 145. 5 See Book i, n. 35. 


288 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x11. 


and honest. The men are naturally quick and impulsive; 
they clothe themselves with woollen garments. Many 
believe in the three precious objects (of worship), and a 
few pay their adoration to the spirits. There are ten 
sanghdrdmas with several hundred followers (priests). 
They study both the Great and the Little Vehicle, and 
practise the discipline of both. The king is of the Turkish 
clan ; he governs all the little kingdoms to the south of 
the Iron Gates.’ He constantly shifts his dwelling, like 
a bird (Ais bird-dwelling), not constantly occupying this 
town. 

Going east from this, we enter the T’sung-ling moun- 
tains. These mountains are situated in the middle of 
Jambuduvipa. On the south they border on the great 
snowy mountains; on the north they reach to the hot sea 
(Lake Temurtu), and to the “Thousand Springs;” on the 
west they extend to the kingdom of Hwoh; on the east 
to the kingdom of U-cha (Och). From east to west and 
from north to south they run equally for several thousand 
li, and abound in many hundreds of steep peaks and dark 
valleys. The mountain heights are rendered dangerous by 
the glaciers and frozen snow. The cold winds blow with 
fury. As the land produces a great quantity of onions 
therefore it is called T’sung-ling; or because the crags of 
these mountains have a greenish-blue tint, hence also the 
hame, 

Going east 100 li or so, we come to the kingdom of 
Mung-kin. 

Monc-Kin (Mungay). 

This country is an old territory of the Tu-ho-li coun- 
try. Itis about 400 li in circuit. The chief city is about 
15 or 16li round. The soil and manners of the people 
resemble to a great extent the Hwoh country. There 
is no chief ruler, but they depend on the Turks. Going 
north we come to the country of ’O-li-ni. 


WV For the “iron gates” see Book see Book i, n. 77. 
j., n. 119. 19 For Mung-kin sce Book i, n. 
18 For the T’sung-ling Mountains 144. 


BOOK XII. ] PO-LI-HO (BOLOR). 289 
O-LI-NI (AHRENG). 

This country is an old territory of Tu-ho-lo. It 
borders both sides of the river Oxus.24 It is about 300 
ii in circuit; the chief city is 14 or 15 li round. In 
character of its soil and manners of the people it greatly 
resembles the Hwoh country. 

Going east, we come to Ho-lo-hu.” 


Ho-.Lo-Hu (RaGH). 


This country * is an old territory of Tu-ho-lo. On the 
north it borders on the Oxus (Fo-ts’u, Vakshu). It is 
about 200 li in circuit. The chief town is about 14 or 15 
li round. The products of the soil and the manners of the 
people greatly resemble the Hwoh country. 

Going eastward from the Mung-kin country, skirting 
along high mountain passes, and penetrating deep valleys, 
and passing in succession various districts and towns, after 
a journey of 300 li or so we arrive at the country of Ki- 
li-si-mo. 


KI-LE-SI-Mo (KHRISHMA or KISHM). 


This country *4 is an old territory of Tu-ho-lo. From 
east to west it is 1000 li or so; from north to south it is 
300 li. The capital is 15 or 16 liround, The soil and 
the manners of the people are just like those of Mung- 
kin, except that these men are naturally hot-tempered 
&ud violent. 

Going uorth-east we come to the kingdom of Po-li-ho 
(Bolor). 

Po-LI-Ho (BOLOR). 


This country % is an old territory of Tu-ho-lo, From 


*0 For this country see Book i,n. Roshan (V. St. Martin, p. 421), 


143- *3 See Book i, n. 142. 
21 The Fo-t’su (Vakshu). 24 See Book i, n. 14. 
2 The Japanese gives Ka-ra-ko. *% See Book i., n. 140. 


After Julien it represents Roh or 
VOL, II. T 


290 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES.  [poox xu. 


east to west it is about roo li, and from north to south 
about 300 li. The chief town is some 20 li or so in 
circuit. The produce of the soil and the manners of the 
people are like those of Ki-li-si-mo. 

Going east from Ki-li-si-mo, after traversing mountains 
and crossing valleys for about 300 li, we come to the 
country of Hi-mo-ta-lo. 


Hi-Mo-TA-Lo (HIMATALA). 


This country *° is an old territory of the country of Tu- 
ho-lo. It is about 300 hi in circuit. It is cut up by 
mountains and valleys. The soil is rich and fertile, and 
fit for cereals. It produces much winter wheat. Every 
kind of plant flourishes, and fruits of all sorts grow in 
abundance. The climate is cold; the disposition of the 
men violent and hasty. They do not distinguish between 
wrong and right. Their appearance is vulgar and ignoble. 
In respect of their modes of behaviour and forms of 
etiquette, their clothes of wool, and skin, and felt, they 
are like the Turks. Their wives wear upon their head- 
dress a wooden horn about three feet or so in length. It 
has two branches («@ double branch) in front, which signify 
father and mother of the husband. The upper horn 
denotes the father, the lower one the mother. Whichever 
of these two dies first, they remove one horn, but when 
both are dead, they give up this style of headdress. 

The first king of this country was a Sakya,” fearless 
and bold. To the west of the T’sung-ling mountains most 
of the people were subdued to his power. The frontiers 
were close to the Turks, and so they adopted their low 
customs, and suffering from their attacks they protected 
their frontier. And thus the people of this kingdom were 
dispersed into different districts, and had many tens of 
fortified cities, over each of which a separate chief was 


*6 See Book i, n. 139. history of the champions who were 
‘7 Referring, as I suppose, to the banished from Kapilavastu. 


BOOK XII.] IN-PO-KIN (YAMGAN),. 291 


placed. The people live in tents made of felt, and lead 
the life of nomads. 

On the west side this kingdom touches the country of 
Ki-li-si-mo. Going from this 200 odd li, we arrive at the 
country of Po-to-chang-na (Badakshan). 


Po-T0-CHANG-NA (BADAKSHAY). 


This kingdom* is an old territory of the Tu-ho-lo 
country ; it is about 2000 li in circuit, and the capital, 
which is placed on the side of a mountain precipice, is. 
some 6 or 7 li in circuit. It is intersected with mountains 
and valleys, a vast expanse of sand and stone stretches 
over it; the soil is fit for the growth of beans and wheat; 
it produces an abundance of grapes, the khamil peach, 
and plums, &c. The climate is very cold. The men are 
naturally fierce and hasty ; their customs are ill-reculated ; 
they have no knowledge of letters or the arts; their ap- 
pearance is low and ignoble; they wear mostly garments 
of wool. There are three or four sanghdrdmas, with very 
few followers. The king is of an honest and sincere dis- 
position. He has a deep faith in the three precious objects 
of worship. 

Going from this south-east, passing across mountains 
and valleys, after 200 li or so we come to the country of 
In-po-kin (Yamgin). 


IN-Po-KIN (YAMGAN). 
A 


This country™® is an old territory of the Tu-ho-lo 
country. Itis about 1000 li or so in circuit. The capital 
is about 10 li round. There is a connected line of hills 
and valleys through the country, with narrow strips of 
arable land. With respect to the produce of the soil, the 
climate, and the character of the people, these differ little 
from the kingdom of Po-to-chang-na, only the character 
of the language differs slightly. The king’s nature is 


28 See Book i, n. 136. 29 See Book i., n. 137. 


292 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x11. 


violent and impulsive, and he does not know clearly the 
difference between right and wrong. 

Going from this south-east, skirting the mountains and 
crossing the valleys, traversing thus by narrow and diffi- 
cult ways a distance of 300 li or so, we arrive at the 
country of Kiu-lang-na. 


KIU-LANG-NA (IXURAN). 


This country ®® is an old territory of Tu-ho-lo; it is 
about 2000 li round. As regards the character of the 
soil, the mountains and the valleys, the climate and the 
seasons, it resembles the kingdom of In-po-kien (In- 
vakan). The customs of the people are without rule, 
their disposition is rough (common) and violent; the 
greater portion do not attend to religion; a few believe in 
the law of Buddha, The appearance of the people is 
displeasing and ungainly. They wear principally woollen 
garments. There is a mountain cavern from which much 
pure gold is procured (dug out). They break the stones 
and afterwards procure the gold. There are few saig- 
hérdmas, and scarcely any priests, The king is honest 
and simple-minded. He deeply reverences the three 
precious objects of worship. 

Going north-east from this, after climbing the moun- 
tains and penetrating valleys, and going along a precipi- 
tous and dangerous road for 500 li or so, we come to the 
kingdom of Ta-mo-si-tie-ti. 


TA-MO-SI-TIE-TI (TAMASTHITI 2). 


This country *! is situated between two mountains, It 
is an old territory of Tu-ho-lo. From east to west it 
extends about 1500 or 1600 li; from north to south its 
width is only 4 or 5 li, and in its narrowest part not more 
than one li. It lies upon the Oxus (Fo-t’su) river, which 
it follows along its winding course. It is broken up with 


30 See Book i., n. 138. 31 See Book i, n. 135. 


BOOK xI.] KINGDOM OF TA-MO-SI-TIE.-TI. 293 


hills of different heights, whilst sand and stones lie scat- 
tered over the surface of the soil. The wind is icy cold 
and blows fiercely. Though they sow the ground, it pro- 
duces but a little wheat and pulse. There are few trees 
(forest trees), but plenty of flowers and fruits. Here the 
shen horse is bred. The horse, though small in size, yet 
easily travels a long distance. The manners of the people 
have no regard to propriety. The men are rough and 
violent; their appearance low and ignoble. They wear 
woollen garments. Their eyes are mostly of a blue 
colour,” and in this respect they differ from people of 
other countries. There are some ten savghdrdmas, with 
very few priests (religious followers). 

The capital of the country is called Hwin-to-to. In 
the middle of it is a satghdrdma built by a former king 
of this country. In its construction he excavated the 
side of the hill and filled up the valley. The early 
kings of this country were not believers in Buddha, 
but sacrificed only to the spirits worshipped by unbe- 
lievers; but for some centuries the converting power of 
the true law has been diffused. At the beginning, the 
son of the king of this country, who was much loved by 
him, fell sick of a serious disease ; he employed the utmost 
skill of the medicine art, but it brought no benefit. Then 
the king went personally to the Déva temple to worship 
and ask for some means of recovering his child. On this 
the chief of the temple, speaking in the name of the 
spirit, said, “ Your son will certainly recover; let your 
mind rest in peace.” The king having heard it, was 
greatly pleased, and returned homewards. On his way 
he met a Shaman, his demeanour staid and remarkable. 
Astonished at his appearance and dress, the king asked 
him whence he came and whither he was going. The 
Shaman having already reached the holy fruit (of an Arhat), 
desired to spread the law of Buddha, and therefore he had 


® Pih, either blue or green, like 33 In constructing and shaping its 
the deep sea. courts and halls. 


294 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. ' [nook x11. 


assumed this deportment and appearance; so replying he 
said, “I am a disciple of Tathagata, and am called a 
Bhikshu.” The king, who was in great anxiety, at once 
asked him, “My son is grievously afflicted; I scarcely 
know whether he is living or dead. (Will he recover ?”) 
The Shaman said, “You might raise (from the dead) the 
spirits of your ancestors, but your loved son it is difficult 
to deliver.” The king replied, “A spirit of heaven has 
assured me he will not die, and the Shaman says he will 
die; it is difficult to know what to believe, coming from 
these masters of religion.”** Coming to his palace, he found 
that his loved son was already dead. Hiding the corpse and 
making no funeral preparations, he again asked the priest 
of the Déva temple respecting him. In reply he said, “He 
will not die; he will certainly recover.” The king in a 
rage seized the priest and held him fast, and then upbraid- 
ing him he said, “ You and your accomplices are mon- 
strous cheats ; you pretend to be religious, but you practise 
lying. My son is dead, and yet you say he will certainly 
recover. Such lying cannot be endured ; the priest (master) 
of the temple shall die and the building be destroyed.” 
On this he killed the priest and took the image and flung 
it into the Oxus. On his return, he once more met the 
Shaman ; on seeing him he was glad, and respectfully pros- 
trated himself before him, as he gratefully said, “ Hitherto 
I have ignorantly followed (my guide), and trod the path 
of false teaching. Although I have for a long time followed 
the windings of error, now the change has come from this.® 
I pray you condescend to come with me to my dwelling.” 
The Shaman accepted the invitation and went to the 
palace. The funeral ceremonies being over, (the king) 
addressed the Shaman and said, “The world of men is in 
confusion, birth and death flow on ceaselessly; my son 
was sick, and I asked whether he would remain with me 
or depart, and the lying spirit said he would surely re- 


34 Kwei tsuh che jin, men who reprove the world. 
Le., from thig interview. 


BOOK X11.] SHI-K’I-NI—SHIKHNAN. 295 


cover; but the first words of indication you gave were 
true and not false. Therefore the system of religion you 
teach is to be reverenced. eign to receive me, deceived 
as I have been, as a disciple.” He, moreover, begged the 
Shaman to plan and measure out a satghdrdma ; then, 
according to the right dimensions, he constructed this 
building, and from that time till now the law of Buddha 
has been in a flourishing condition. 

In the middle of the old sanghdrdma is the vihdra built 
by this Arhat. In the vikdra is a statue of Buddha in 
stone above the statue is a circular cover of gilded 
copper, and ornamented with gems; when men walk 
round the statue in worship, the cover also turns; when 
they stop, the cover stops. The miracle cannot be ex- 
plained. According to the account given by the old people, 
it is said that the force of a prayer of a holy man effects 
the miracle. Others say there is some secret mechanism 
in the matter; but when looking at the solid stone walls 
of the hall, and inquiring from the people as to their 
knowledge (of such mechanism), it is difficult to arrive at 
any satisfaction about the matter. 

Leaving this country, and traversing a great mountain 
northward, we arrive at the country of Shi-ki-ni (Shikh- 
nan). 


SHI-K’I-NI (SHIKIINAN). 


, This country °° is about 2000 li in circuit, the chief city 
is 5 or 6 li. Mountains and valleys follow each other in 
a connected succession ; sand and stones lie scattered over 
the waste lands. Much wheat and beans are grown, but 
little rice. The trees are thin, flowers and fruits not 
abundant. The climate is icy-cold; the men are fierce 
and intrepid. They think nothing of murder and rob- 
bery; they are ignorant of good manners or justice, and 
cannot distinguish between right and wrong. They are 
deceived as to the happiness and misery of the future, 


33 See Book i., n. 133 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox x1. 


296 


and only fear present calamities. Their figure and 
appearance are poor and ignoble; their garments are 
made of wool or skin; their writing is the same as that of 
the Turks, but the spoken language is different. 

Passing along a great mountain to the south of the 
kingdom of Ta-mo-si-tie-ti (Tamasthit1?3”), we come to the 
country of Shang-mi. 


Snanc-m1 (SAmbui ?). 


This country * is about 2500 or 2600 li in circuit. 
It is intersected with mountains and valleys; with hills 
of various heights. Every kind of grain is cultivated ; 
beans and wheat are abundant. Grapes are plentiful. 
The country produces yellow arsenic. They bore into 
the cliffs and break the stones, and so obtain it. The 
mountain spirits are cruel and wicked; they frequently 
cause calamities to befall the kindgom. 

On entering the country, sacrifice is offered up to them, 
after which good success attends the persons in coming 
and going. If no sacrifice is offered them, the wind and 
the hail attack the travellers, The climate is very cold; 
the ways of the people are quick, their disposition is 
honest and simple. They have no rules of propriety or 
justice im their behaviour; their wisdom is small, and in 
the arts they have very little ability. Their writing is 
the same as that of the kingdom of Tu-ho-lo, but the 
spoken language is somewhat different. Their clothes 
are mostly made of woollen stuff. Their king is of the 
race of Sikya®® He greatly esteems the law of Buddha. 


37 Tamasthiti, according to Eitel 
(Jandbook, 8. v.), was “an ancient 
province of Tukhara, noted for 
the ferocious character of its in- 
habitants.” But this is probably 
derived from Julien’s restoration 
in the text, which he gives doubt- 
fully. 

38 This is the country over which 
one of the banished Sakya youths 


reigned (see ante, p. 21), It is re- 
stored by Julien to Sambhi in the 
passage before us, but to Sambi, 
vol. ii. p. 318. Eitel (op. cit., s. v.) 
speaks of this kingdom as founded 
by refugees of the Sikya family, and 
situated near Chitral, lat. 35° 35’ 
N., and long. 72° 27’ E. 
3% See previous note. 


BOOK XII.] THE PAMIR VALLEY. 297 


The people follow his example, and are all animated by 
a sincere faith, There are two saitghdrdmas, with very 
few followers. 

On the north-east of the frontier of the country, 
skirting the mountains and crossing the valleys, advan- 
cing along a dangerous and precipitous road, after going 
7oo li or so, we come to the valley of Po-mi-lo 
(Pamir). It stretches 1coo li or so.east and west, and 
100 li or so from north to south; in the narrowest part 
it is not more than 10 li, It is situated among the 
snowy mountains; on this account the climate is cold, 
and the winds blow constantly. The snow falls both 
in summer and spring-time. Night and day the wind 
rages violently. ‘The soil is impregnated with salt and 
covered with quantities of gravel and sand. The grain 
which is sown does not ripen, shrubs and trees are rare; 
there is but a succession of desert without any inhabitants. 

In the middle of the Pamir valley is a great dragon 
lake (Nagahrada) ; from east to west it is 300 li or go, 
from north to south 50 li. It is situated in the midst 
of the great T’sung ling mountains, and is the central 
point of Jambudvipa The land is very high; the 
water is pure and clear as a mirror; it cannot be 
fathomed; the colour of the lake is a dark blue; the 
taste of the water sweet and soft: in the water hide the 
kau-ki fish (shark-spider), dragons, crocodiles, tortoises; 
feating on its surface * are ducks, wild geese, cranes, 


40 Pamir, according to Sir T. D. 
Forsyth (Report of Mission to Yar- 
kand, p. 231,n.  ) is a Khokandi 
Turki word signifying ‘ desert.” 
For a description of this district 
and its watersheds, see Forsyth 
(op. cit., p. 231), also Wood’s Oxus, 
chap. xxi. 

4 This no doubt refers to the 
Sarik-kul lake, otherwise called 
Kul-i-Pamir-kulan, the lake of the 
Great Pamir; see ante, vol. i. p. 12, 
n. 33. The great Naga lake is 
sometimes called the Raévana- 


hrada; Ravana also dwelt on 
Lanka-giri (Potaraka ?), and pos- 
sibly from him is derived the 
Arabic name for Adam’s Peak, 
Mount Rahwan. The remark in 
the text “that it cannot be fa- 
thomed ” is a mistake. Wood 
found soundings at 9 fathoms (Oxus, 
. 237. 

© Hiuven Tsiang’s visit was 
during the summer months (pro- 
bably of A.D. 642); in the winter, 
the lake is frozen to a thickness 
of two feet and a half (Wood’s 


298 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x11. 


and so on; large eggs are found concealed in the wild 
desert wastes, or among the marshy shrubs, or on the 
sandy islets. 

To the west of the lake there is a large stream, which, 
going west, reaches so far as the eastern borders of the 
kingdom of Ta-mo-si-tie-ti (? Tamasthiti), and there 
joins the river Oxus (Fo-t’su) and flows still to the west. 
So on this side of the lake all the streams flow west- 
ward, 

On the east of the lake is a great stream, which, flow- 
ing north-east, reaches to the western frontiers of the 
country of Kie-sha (? Kashgar), and there joins the Si-to 
(Sita) river ‘4 and flows eastward, and so all streams on 
the left side of the lake flow enctwvantl 

Passing over a mountain to the south of the Pamir 
valley, we find the country of Po-lo-1]o (Bolor) ; * here is 
found much gold and silver; the gold is as red as fire. 

On leaving the midst of this valley and going south- 
east, along the route there is no inhabited place (20 men or 
village). Ascending the mountains, traversing the side of 
precipices, encountering nothing but ice and snow, and 
thus going 500 li we arrive at the kingdom of K’ie- 
p’an-to. 

K’lE-P’AN-TO. 
This country 6 is about 2000 li in circuit; the capital 


Oxus, p. 236). But in the summer 
the ice on the lake is broken up, 
and the hills in its neighbourhood 
clear of snow; this (according to 
the statement of the Khirghiz 
who accompanied Wood) takes 
place as early as the end of June, “at 
which time the water swarms with 
aquatic birds” (op. cit., p. 239); 
this confirms the remark in the 
text. For the other remarks, see 
Marco Polo, book i chap. xxxii., 
and Yule’s notes. 

43“ The story of an eastern out- 
flow from the lake is no doubt a 
legend connected with an ancient 
Hindu belief (see Cathay, p. 347), but 


Burnes in modern times heard much 
the same story” (Yule, Marco Polo, 
vol. i. p. 166). 

4 For some remarks on the Sita 
river see ante, vol. i, n. 34. Julien, 
in a note found on p. 572, vol. iii, 
corrects the name to Sita, meaning 
“cold ;” his authority is the Chinese 
Dictionary, I-tsi-king-in-t, 

4 Perhaps the same as Balti, a 
Tibetan kingdom. See Cunnee 
ham (quoted by Yule, Jf. P., vol. i. 
p. 168). 

4 Julien restores the symbols 
K’ie-p’an-to to Khavandha doubt- 
fully. V. de St. Martin in his 
Mémoire (p. 426) restores it to Kar- 


BOOK X1l.] KIE-TAN-TO (KABANDHA),. 299 


rests on a great rocky crag of the mountain, and is backed 
by the river Sit. It is about 20li in circuit. The moun- 
tain chains run in continuous succession, the valleys and 
plains are very contracted. There is very little rice culti- 
vated, but beans and corn grow in abundance. ‘Trees 
grow thinly, there are only few fruits and flowers. The 
plateaux are soppy, the hills are waste, the towns are 
deserted ; the manners of the people are without any rules 
of propriety. There are very few of the people who give 
themselves to study. They are naturally uncouth and 
impetuous, but yet they are bold and courageous. Their 
appearance is common and revolting; their clothes are 
made of woollen stuffs. Their letters are much like those 
of the Kie-sha (? Kashgar) country. They know how 
to express themselves sincerely, and they greatly rever- 


ence the law of Buddha. 
with about 500 followers. 


There are some ten saatghdrdmas 
They study the Little Vehicle 


according to the school of the Sarvastivadas. 
The reigning king is of an upright and honest charac- 
ter; he greatly honours the three treasures ; his external 


chu, and in Fa-hian (p. 9, n. 6). I 
have adopted this restoration. Col. 
Yule, however (Wood’s Oxus, xlviii. 
n. 1), speaks of Karchu as “a will- 
o’-the wisp, which never had any ex- 
istence.” On the other hand, he 
says, “ We know this state (i.e, Ka- 
bandha, the K’ie-p’an-to of the text) 
tb be identical with the modern 
territory of Sarikol, otherwise called 
Tush Kurghan from its chief town” 
(op. cit., p. xlviii.); and again, “ As 
for Karchu, which in so many maps 
occupies a position on the waters of 
the Yarkand river, it was an erro- 
neous transliteration of the name 
Hatchit or Ketchat, which appeared 
in the (Chinese) tables of the later 
Jesuit surveyors to the south of 
Sarikol and was by them apparently 
intended as a loose approximation to 
the position of the frontier of the 
Dard state of Kanjat or Hunza” (op. 


cit., p. ly.) It would appear from the 
above extracts that K’ie-pa’n-to must 
be identified with Sarikol and Tush 
Kurghan (stone-tower), and not with 
the Kie-cha of Fa-hian. I am un- 
able, however, to trace Fa-hian’s 
route to “Kie-cha or Ladak,” as 
stated by Yule (op. cit., x1.), and 
Cunningham (Ladak, quoted by 
Yule, ibid.); for if Kie-cha be Ladak, 
how can the pilgrim describe it as 
in the middle of the T’sung-ling 
mountains (chap. v.), or say that a 
journey of one month westward 
across the T’sung-ling mountains 
brought him to North India (chap. 
vi.)? Dr. Eitel identifies the K’ie- 
cha of Fa-hian with the Kasioi of 
Ptolemy (Handbook, s. v. Khasa) ; 
M. V. de St. Martin observes (J/é- 
moire, p. 427) that Kashgar and its 
territory correspond with the Casia 
regio Scythia of Ptolemy. 


300 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [ook x11. 


manner is quiet and unassuming; he is of a vigorous 
mind and loves learning. 

Since the establishment of the kingdom many succes- 
sive ages have passed. Sometimes the people speak of 
themselves as deriving their name from the Chi-na-ti- 
po-k’iu-ta-lo (China-déva-gétra). Formerly this country 
was a desert valley in the midst of the T’sung-ling moun- 
tains, At this time a king of the kingdom of Persia 
(Po-la-sse) took a wife from the Han country. She had 
been met by an escort on her progress so far as this, when 
the roads east and west were stopped by military opera- 
tions. On this they placed the king’s daughter on a 
solitary mountain peak, very high and dangerous, which 
could only be approached by ladders, up and down; 
moreover, they surrounded it with guards both night and 
day for protection. After three months the disturbances 
were quelled (they put down the robbers). Quiet being re- 
stored, they were about to resume their homeward journey. 
But now the lady was found to be enceinte. Then the 
minister in charge of the mission was filled with fear and 
he addressed his colleagues thus: “ The king’s commands 
were that I should go to meet his bride. Our company, 
in expectation of a cessation of the troubles that en- 
dangered the roads, at one time encamped in the wilds. 
at another in the deserts; in the morning we knew not 
what would happen before the evening. At length the 
influence of our king having quieted the country, I was 
resuming the progress homeward when I found that the 
bride was enceinte. This has caused me great grief, and 
I know not the place of my death. We must inquire 
about the villain who has done this (secretly), with a 
view to punish him hereafter. If we talk about it and 
noise it abroad, we shall never get at the truth.” Then 
his servant, addressing the envoy, said, “ Let there be no 
inquiry ; it is a spirit that has had knowledge of her; 
every day at noon there was a chief-master who came 
from the sun’s dise, and, mounted on horseback, came to 


BOOK xil.] THE DESCENDANT OF THE SUN-GOD. _ 301 


meet her.” The envoy said,-“If this be so, how can I 
clear myself from fault? If I go back I shall certainly 
be put to death; if I delay here they will send to have 
me punished. What is the best thing to do?” He 
answered, “This is not so complicated a matter; who is 
there to make inquiries about matters or to exact pun- 
ishment outside the frontiers? Put it off a few days (from 
morning to evening).” 

On this he built, on the top of a rocky peak, a palace 
with its surrounding apartments ;*’ then having erected 
an enclosure round the palace of some 300 paces, he 
located the princess there as chief. She established rules 
of government and enacted laws. Her time having come, 
she bore a son of extraordinary beauty and perfect parts. 
The mother directed the affairs of state; the son received 
his honourable title ;* he was able to fly through the air 
and control the winds and snow. He extended his power 
far and wide, and the renown of his laws was everywhere 
known. The neighbouring countries and those at a dis- 
tance subscribed themselves his subjects. 

The king having died from age, they buried him in a 
stone chamber concealed with a great mountain cavern 
about 100 li to the south-east of this city. His body, 
being dried, has escaped corruption down to the present 
time. The form of his body is shrivelled up and thin: he 
looks as if he were asleep. From time to time they 
change his clothes, and regularly place incense and flowers 
by his side. From that time till now his descendants 
have ever recollected their origin, that their mother (or, 
on their mother’s side), they were descended from the 
king of Han, and on their father’s side from the race of 
the Sun-déva, and therefore they style themselves “ de- 
scendants of the Han and Sun-god.” ® 

4” This may be the origin of the resemblance to the tale about Syd- 
term Tash Kurghan, stone tower. wush the Persian and Afrisyab the 

*® That is, the son of the Sun- Turanian. The latter gave to the 


god. royal refugee his daughter Farangis, 
# There is in this story a sort of with the provinces of Khutan and 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x11. 


302 


The members of the royal family in appearance re- 
semble the people of the Middle Country (China), They 
wear on their heads a square cap, and their clothes are 
like those of the Hu people (Uighurs). In after-ages 
these people fell under the power of the barbarians, who 
kept their country in their power. 

When Aég6ka-rija was in the world he built in this 
palace a stdpa. Afterwards, when the king changed his 
residence to the north-east angle of the royal precinct, he 
built in this old palace a sanghdrdma for the sake of 
Kumaralabdha (T'ong-shiu). The towers of this building 
are high (and its halls) wide. There is in it a figure of 
Buddha of majestic appearance. The venerable Kumara- 
labdha was a native of Takshagilé. From his childhood 
he showed a rare intelligence, and in early life gave up 
the world. He allowed his mind to wander through the 
sacred texts, and let his spirit indulge itself in profound 
reveries. Daily he recited 32,000 words and wrote 32,000 
letters. In this way he was able to surpass all his con- 
temporaries, and to establish his renown beyond the age 
in which he lived. He settled the true law, and overcame 
false doctrine, and distinguished himself by the brilliancy 
of his discussion. There was no difficulty which he could 
not overcome. All the men of the five Indies came to see 
him, and assigned him the highest rank. He composed 
many tens of Sdstras, These were much renowned and 
studied by all. He was the founder of the Sautrantika 
(King-pu) school. 

At this time in the east was Agvaghésha, in the south 
Déva, in the west Nagarjuna, in the north Kuméara- 
labdha. These four were called the four sons that illu- 


Chin or Machin (Mahfchin ?), They 
settled at Kung, some distance 
north-east of Khutan. See Bellew, 
History of Kashgdr (chap. iii., For- 
syth’s Report). The fame of Kaik- 
husro (Cyrus) as a hero-child of the 
sun seems to agree with the miracu- 
lous birth and conquests of the child 


whose birth is narrated in the text. 
I may add that a consideration of the 
circumstances connected with the 
history of the Persian (Iranian) and 
Turanian tribes confirms me in the 
opinion that the Tu-ho-lu of Hiuen 
Tsiang refers to the Turanian people, 
and not to the Turks (so-called). 


BOOK X11.] THE STORY OF THE MERCHANTS. 303 


mined the world. The king of this country, therefore, 
having heard of the honourable one (Kumdralabdha) and 
his great qualities, raised an army to attack Takshaéila, 
and carried him off by force. He then built this savghd- 
rdma. 

Going south-east 300 li or so from the city, we come to 
a great rocky scarp in which two chambers are excavated, 
in each of which is an Arhat plunged in complete ecstasy. 
They are sitting upright, and they could be moved but 
with difficulty. Their appearance is shrivelled, but their 
skin and bones still survive. Though 700 years have 
elapsed, their hair still grows, and because of this the 
priests cut their hair every year and change their clothes. 

To the north-east of the great crag after going 200 li 
or so along the mountain-side and the precipices, we come. 
to a Punyasdld (a hospice). 

In the midst of four mountains belonging to the eastern 
chain of the T’sung-ling mountains there is a space com- 
prising some hundred x’ing (thousand acres). In this, both 
during summer and winter, there fall down piles of snow ; 
the cold winds and icy storms rage. The ground, impree- 
nated with salt, produces no crops; there are no trees and 
nothing but scrubby underwood. Even at the time of 
great heat the wind and the snow continue. Scarcely have 
travellers entered this region when they find themselves 
surrounded by vapour from the snow. Merchant bands, 
caravans, in coming and going suffer severely in these 
dirficult and dangerous spots. 

The old story says: “ Formerly there was a troop of 
merchants, who, with their followers, amounted to 10,000 
or so, with many thousand camels. They were occupied 
in transporting their goods and getting profit. They were 
assailed by wind aud snow, ahd both men and beasts 
perished. 

As this time there was a great Arhat who belonged to 
the kingdom of Kie-p’an-to, who, taking a wide look, 
saw them in their danger, and being moved by pity, de- 


304 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book xi. 


sired to exert his spiritual power for their rescue; but 
when he arrived they were already dead. On this he col- 
lected the precious objects that lay scattered about and 
constructed a house, and gathering in this all the wealth 
he could, he bought the neighbouring land and built houses 
in the bordering cities for the accommodation of travellers, 
and now merchantmen and travellers enjoy the benefit of 
his beneficence. 

Going north-east from this, descending the T’sung-ling 
mountains to the eastward, after passing dangerous defiles 
and deep valleys, and traversing steep and dangerous 
roads, assailed at every step by snow and wind, after going 
1oo li or so, we emerge from the T’sung-ling mountains 
and come to the kingdom of U-sha. 


U-sHa (OcH). 


This kingdom is about roooli in circuit; the chief town 
is about 10 li round. On the south it borders on the 
river Sit4. The soil is rich and productive ; it is regularly 
cultivated and yields abundant harvests. The trees and 
forests spread their foliage afar, and flowers and fruits 
abound. This country produces jade of different sorts 
in great quantities; white jade, black, and green, The 
climate is soft and agreeable ; the winds and rain follow 
in their season; the manners of the people are not much 
in keeping with the principles of politeness. The men 
are naturally hard and uncivilised; they are greatly given 
to falsehood, and few of them have any feeling of shame. 
Their language and writing are nearly the same as those 
of Kie-sha. Their personal appearance is low and repul- 
sive. Their clothes are made of skins and woollen stuffs. 
However, they have a firm faith in the law of Buddha 
and greatly honour him. There are some ten sanghd- 
rémas, with somewhat less than 1000 priests, They 
study the Little Vehicle according to the school of the 
Sarvastivadas, For some centuries the royal line has 


BOOK XI1.] THE MYSTERIOUS ARHAT. 305 


been extinct. They have no ruler of their own, but are 
in dependence on the country of K’ie-p’an-to. 

Two hundred li or so to the west of the city we come to 
a great mountain. This mountain is covered with brood- 
ing vapours, which hang like clouds above the rocks. 
The crags rise one above another, and seem as if about 
to fall where they are suspended. On the mountain top 
is erected a stiipa of a wonderful and mysterious cha- 
racter. This is the old story :—Many centuries ago this 
mountain suddenly opened; in the middle was seen a 
Bhikshu, with closed eyes, sitting; his body was of 
gigantic stature and his form was dried up ; his hair de- 
scended low on his shoulders and enshrouded his face. 
A hunter having caught sight of him, told the king. 
The°king in person went to see him and to pay him 
homage. All the men of the town came spontaneously 
to burn incense and offer flowers as religious tribute to 
him. Then the king said, “What man is this of such 
great stature?” Then there was a Bhikshu who said in 
reply, ‘‘This man with his hair descending over his 
shoulders and clad in a kashdya garment is an Arhat 
who has entered the samddhi which produces extinction 
of mind. Those who enter this kind of samddhi have 
to await a certain signal (07 period); some say that if 
they hear the sound of the ghanfd they awake; others, 
if they see the shining of the sun, then this is a signal 
for them to arouse themselves from their ecstasy; in the 
absence of such signal, they rest unmoved and quiet, 
whilst the power of their ecstasy keeps their bodies from 
destruction. When they come from their trance after 
their long fast, the body ought to be well rubbed with 
oil and the limbs made supple with soft applications ; 
after this the ghanftd may be sounded to restore the 
mind plunged in samddhi.” The king said, “Let it be 
done,” and then he sounded the gong. 

Scarcely had the sound died away, but the Arhat, re- 
cognising the signal, looking down on them from on high 

OL. IL a 


306 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [spook x11. 


for a long time, at length said, “ What creatures are you 
with forms so small and mean, clothed with brown 
robes?” They answered, “ We are Bhikshus!” He said, 
“And where now dwells my master, Kasyapa Tatha- 
gata?” They replied, “He has entered the great n7- 
rvdna for a long time past.” Having heard this, he shut 
his eyes, as a man disappointed and ready to die. Then 
suddenly he asked again, “Has Sakya Tathagata come 
into the world?” “He has been born, and having 
guided the world spiritually, he has also entered ni- 
rvdna.” Hearing this, he bowed his head, and so re- 
mained for a long time. Then rising up into the air, 
he exhibited spiritual transformations, and at last he was 
consumed by fire and his bones fell to the ground. 
The king having collected them, raised over them this 
stilpa. 

Going north from this country, and traversing the rocky 
mountains and desert plains for 500 li or so, we come to 
the country of Kie-sha.°° 


Kin-sua (KAsHGAR). 


The country of Kie-sha is about 5000 li in circuit. 
It has much sandy and stony soil, and very little loam. 
It is regularly cultivated and is productive. Flowers 
and fruits are abundant. Its manufactures are a fine 
kind of twilled haircloth, and carpets of a fine texture 
and skilfully woven. The climate is soft and agree- 
able; the winds and rain regularly succeed each other. 
The disposition of the men is fierce and impetuous, and 
they are mostly false and deceitful, They make light 
of decorum and politeness, and esteem learning but 
little. Their custom is when a child is born to com- 
press his head with a board of wood.5! Their appear- 
ance is common and ignoble. They paint (mark) their 

8° Anciently called Su-li: this (Srikritati). The sound Su-li is cor- 


also is the name of its chief city; rupt.—Ch. Ed. 
the full name is Shi-li-ki-li-to-ti 51 See vol. i, p. 19, n. 60. 


BOOK XIl.] CHO-KIN-KIA (YARKIANG.) 307 


bodies and around their eyelids? For their writing 
(written characters) they take their model from India, 
and although they (ie. the forms of the letters) are some- 
what mutilated, yet they are essentially the same in 
form53 Their language and pronunciation are different 
from that of other countries. They have a sincere faith 
in the religion of Buddha, and give themselves earnestly 
to the practice of it, There are several hundreds of sa- 
aghirdmas, with some 10,000 followers ; they study the 
Little Vehicle and belong to the Sarvastivida school. 
Without understanding the principles, they recite many 
religious chants; therefore there are many who can say 
throughout the three Pitakas and the Vibhdshd (Pi-p'o- 
sha). 

Going from this south-east 500 li or so, passing the 
river Sita and crossing a great stony precipice, we come 
to the kingdom of Cho-kiu-kia. 


CHO-KIU-KIA (CHAKUKA ? YARKIANG). 

This kingdom ® is some 1000 li or so round; the 
capital is about 10 li in circuit. It is hemmed in by 
crags and mountain fastnesses. The residences are 
numerous. Mountains and hills succeed each other in 
a continuous line. Stony districts spread in every 
direction. This kingdom borders on two rivers ;>’ the 
cultivation of grain and of fruit-trees is successful, prin- 
cjvally figs, pears, and plums. Cold and winds prevail 


2 This is the only translation I 
can give. Julien renders it, ‘‘ They 
have green eyeballs ;” but his text 
must differ from mine. 

53 This passage, too, is very ob- 
scure ; Julien has omitted it. As 
an alternative translation of the 
whole passage, this may be offered : 
“They paint their bodies and their 
eyelids; for their models in these 
figures (painted letters) they take 
(those of) India; although they 
thus disfigure themselves, yet they 
retain great vigour of form (or 
body).” 


54 Anciently called Tsie-ku, 

55 V. de St. Martin identifies 
Cho-kiu-kia with Yarkiang, but he 
gives no authority. Dr. Eitel 
(Handbook, s. » Tchakuka) states 
that “it is an ancient kingdom in 
Little Bukharia, probably the modern 
Yarkiang.” The distance and bear- 
ing from Kashgar would point to 
Yarkand. 

56 Compare W. H. Bellew’s ac- 
count of this neighbourhood, Kash- 
mir and Kashgir, p. 365. : 

57 Probably the Yarkand and 
Khotan rivers. 


308 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book x11. 


throughout the year. The men are passionate and cruel; 
they are false and treacherous, and in open day practise 
robbery. The letters are the same as those of K’iu-sa- 
ta-na (Khotan), but the spoken language is different. 
Their politeness is very scant, and their knowledge of 
literature and the arts equally so. They have an honest 
faith, however, in the three precious objects of worship, 
and love the practice of religion. There are several tens 
of sanghdrdmas, but mostly in a ruinous condition; there 
are some hundred followers, who study the Great Ve- 
hicle. 

On the southern frontier of the country is a great 
mountain, with lofty defiles and peaks piled up one on 
the other, and covered with matted underwood and 
jungle. In winter and all through the year the moun- 
tain streams and torrents rush down on every side. 
There are niches and stone chambers in the outside; 
they occur in regular order between the rocks and 
woods. The Arhats from India, displaying their spiri- 
tual power, coming from far, abide here at rest. As 
many Arhats have here arrived at nirvdna, so there 
are many stupas here erected. At present there are 
three Arhats dwelling in these mountain passes in deep 
recesses, who have entered the samddhi of “ extinction 
of mind.” Their bodies are withered away; their hair 
continues to grow, so that Shamans from time to time 
go to shave them. In this kingdom, the writings of the 
Great Vehicle are very abundant. There is no place 
where the law of Buddha is more flourishing than this. 
There is a collection here®* of ten myriads of verses, divided 
into ten parts. From the time of its introduction till now 
it has wonderfully spread. 

Going east from this, skirting along the high moun- 
tain passes and traversing valleys, after going about 
Sco li, we come to the kingdom of K’iu-sa-ta-na 
(Kustana—Khotan). 


58 Series of sacred books, 


BOOK X11. ] K'IU-SA-TA-NA (KHOTAN). 309 


K’IU-SA-TA-NA (KHOTAN). 


This country is about 4000 li in circuit; the greater 
part is nothing but sand and gravel (a sandy waste); the 
arable portion of the land is very contracted. What 
land there is, is suitable for regular cultivation, and pro- 
duces abundance of fruits. The manufactures are car- 
pets, haircloth of a fine quality, and fine-woven silken 
fabrics. Moreover, it produces white and green jade. 
The climate is soft and agreeable, but there are tornados 
which bring with them clouds of flying gravel (dust). 
They have a knowledge of politeness and justice. The 
men are naturally quiet and respectful. They love to 
study literature and the arts, in which they make con- 
siderable advance. The people live in easy circumstances, 
and are contented with their lot. 

This country is renowned for its music; °° the men love 
the song and the dance. Few of them wear garments of 
skin (felt) and wool; most wear taffetas and white linen. 
Their external behaviour is fullof urbanity; their customs 
are properly regulated. Their written characters and 
their mode of forming their sentences resemble the Indian 
model; the forms of the letters differ somewhat ; the differ- 
ences, however, are slight. The spoken language also 
differs from that of other countries. They greatly esteem 
the law of Buddha. There are about a hundred sajghd- 
réaas with some 5000 followers, who all study the doctrine 
of the Great Vehicle. 

The king is extremely courageous and warlike; he 
greatly venerates the law of Buddha. He says that he is of 
the race of Pi-shi-men (Vaisravana)Déva. In old times this 
country was waste and desert, and without inhabitants. 
The Déva Pi-shi-men came to fix his dwelling here. The 
eldest son of ASé6ka-raja, when dwelling in Takshaéila 


59 Compare the remark of Fa-hian general abundance of the district 
(chap. iii.), “They love religious round Khotan consult Marco Polo, 
music.” For the products and Yule’s notes, vol. i. pp. 174, 175. 


310 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [eBook xt. 


having had his eyes put out, the King Agdka was very 
angry, and sent deputies to order the chief of the tribes 
dwelling there to be transported to the north of the snowy 
mountains, and to establish themselves in the midst of a 
desert valley. Accordingly, the men so banished, having 
arrived at this western frontier (of the kingdom), put at their 
head a chief of their tribe and made,him king. It was just 
at this time a son of the king of the eastern region (China) 
having been expelled from his country, was ‘dwelling in 
this eastern region. The people who dwelt here urged 
him also to accept the position of king. Years and months 
having elapsed, and their laws not yet being settled,” 
because each party used to meet by chance in the hunt- 
ing-ground, they came to mutual recriminations, and, 
having questioned each other as to their family and so on, 
they resolved to resort to armed force, There was then 
one present who used remonstrances and said, “ Why do 
you urge each other thus to-day? It is no good fighting 
on the hunting-ground; better return and train your 
soldiers and then return and fight.” Then each returned 
to his own kingdom and practised their cavalry and 
encouraged their warriors for the fray. At length, being 
arrayed one against the other, with drums and trumpets, 
at dawn of the day, the western army (lord) was defeated. 
They pursued him to the north and beheaded him. The 
eastern king, profiting by his victory, reunited the broken 
parts of his kingdom (consolidated his power), changed his 
capital to the middle land, and fortified it with walls ; 
but, because he had no (surveyed) territory, he was filled 
with fear lest he should be unable to complete his scheme, 
and so he proclaimed far and near, “ Who knows how to 
survey a dominion?” At this time there was a heretic 
covered with cinders who carried on his shoulder a great 
calabash full of water, and, advancing to the king, nat 

6 J.e., the mutual relations of the 61 That is, according to Julien 
two. The passage, respecting the (note, p. 225), “the land between 


“western frontier” refers to the the eastern and western states.” 
frontier of the “western kingdom.” 


BOOK Xl] THE CHILD KUSTANA. 311 


“T understand a method” (a territory), and so he began to 
walk round with the water of his calabash running out, 
and thus completed an immense circle. After this he fled 
quickly and disappeared. 

Following the traces of the. water, the king laid the 
foundation of his capital city; and having retained its 
distinction, it is here the actual king reigns. The city, 
having no heights near it, cannot be easily taken by 
assault. From ancient times until now no one has been 
able to conquer it. The king having changed his capital 
to this spot, and built towns and settled the country, and 
acquired much religious merit, now had arrived at extreme 
old age and had no successor to the throne. Fearing lest 
his house should become extinct, he repaired to the temple 
of Vaigravana, and prayed him to grant his desire. Forth- 
with the head of the image (dol) opened at the top, and 
there came forth a young child. Taking it, he returned to 
his palace. The whole country addressed congratulations 
to him, but as the child would not drink milk, he feared 
he would not live. He then returned to the temple and 
again asked (the god) for means to nourish him. The 
earth in front of the divinity then suddenly opened and 
offered an appearance like a pap. The divine child drank 
from it eagerly. Having reached supreme power in due 
course, he shed glory on his ancestors by his wisdom and 
courage, and extended far and wide the influence of his 
levs. Forthwith he raised to the god (Vatsravana) a 
temple in honour of his ancestors. From that time till 
now the succession of kings has been in regular order, 
and the power has been lineally transmitted. And for 
this reason also the present temple of the Déva is richly 
adorned with rare gems and worship is punctually offered 
in it, From the first king having been nourished from 
milk coming from the earth the country was called by its 
name (pap of the earth—Kustana). 

About 10 li south of the capital is a large sanghdrdma, 


312 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [noox xi. 


built by a former king of the country in honour of Vaird- 
chana © (Pi-lu-che-na) Arhat. | 

In old days, when the law of Buddha had not yet ex- 
tended to this country, that Arhat came from the country 
of Kagmir to this place. He sat down in the middle of 
a wood and gave himself to meditation. At this time 
certain persons beheld him, and, astonished at his appear- 
ance and dress, they came and told the king. The king 
forthwith went to see him for himself. Beholding his 
appearance, he asked him, saying, “What man are you, 
dwelling alone in this dark forest?” The Arhat replied, 
“Tam a disciple of Tathagata; I am dwelling here to 
practise meditation. Your majesty ought to establish 
religious merit by extolling the doctrine of Buddha, 
building a convent, and providing a body of priests.” 
The king said, “ What virtue has Tathagata, what spiritual 
power, that you should be hiding here as a bird practis- 
ing his doctrine (or rules)?” He replied, “Tathagata is 
full of love and compassion for all that lives; he has 
come to guide living things throughout the three worlds; 
he reveals himself by birth or he hides himself; he comes 
and goes. Those who follow his law avoid the necessity 
of birth and death ; all those ignorant of his doctrine are 
still kept in the net of worldly desire.” The king said, 
“Truly what you say is a matter of high importance.” 
Then, after deliberation, he said with a loud voice, “ Let - 
the great saint appear for my sake and show himself; 
having seen his appearance, then I will build a monas- 
tery, and believe in him, and advance his cause.” The 
Arhat replied, “Let the king build the convent, then, 
on account of his accomplished merit, he may gain his 
desire,” 

The temple having been finished, there was a great 
assembly of priests from far and near; but as yet there 
was no ghantd to call together the congregation; on 


® In Chinese Pin-chiu, ‘he who shines in every place,” or, “the every- 
where glorious.” 


BOOK XIl.] MOUNT GOSHRINGA. 313 


which the king said, “The convent is finished, but where 
is the appearance of Buddha?” The Arhat said, “Let 
the king exercise true faith and the spiritual appearance 
will not be far off!” Suddenly in mid-air appeared a 
ficure of Buddha descending from heaven, and gave to 
the king a ghantd (kien-tt), on which his faith was con- 
firmed, and he spread abroad the doctrine of Buddha. 

‘To the south-west of the royal city about 20 li or so 

is Mount Gdésringa (Kiu-shi-ling-kia); there are two 
peaks to this mountain, and around these peaks there are 
on each side a connected line of hills. In one of the 
valleys there has been built a sanghdrdma; in this is 
placed a figure of Buddha, which from time to time 
emits rays of glory; in this place Tathdgata formerly 
delivered a concise digest of the law for the benefit of 
the Dévas. He prophesied also that in this place there 
would be founded a kingdom, and that in it the principles 
of the bequeathed law would be extended and the Great 
Vehicle be largely practised. 
. In the caverns of Mount Gdgringa is a great rock- 
dwelling where there is an Arhat plunged in the ecstasy 
called “destroying the mind;” he awaits the coming of 
Maitréya Buddha. During several centuries constant 
homage has been paid to him. During the last few 
years the mountain tops have fallen and obstructed the 
way (to the cavern). The king of the country wished to 
e2move the fallen rocks by means of his soldiers, but 
they were attacked by swarms of black bees, who poisoned 
the men, and so to this day the gate of the cavern is 
blocked up. 

To the south-west of the chief city about Io li there 
is a monastery called Ti-kia-p’o-fo-na (Dirghabhavana ?), 
in which is a standing figure of Buddha of Kiu-chi.® 
Originally this figure came from Kiu-chi (Kuché), and 
stayed here. 


8 This is restored by Julien mountains,” and is now called Tu- 
to Kuché (text tn loco); a Chinese sha (? Tush kurghan). 
note tells us it was in the “icy 


314 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [poox x11. 


In old time there was a minister who was banished 
from this country to Kiu-chi; whilst there he paid wor- 
ship only to this image, and afterwards, when he returned 
to his own country, his mind still was moved with re- 
verence towards it. After midnight the figure suddenly 
came of itself to the place, on which the man left his 
home and built this convent. 

Going west from the capital 300 li or so, we come to 
the town of Po-kia-i (Bhagai?); in this town is a 
sitting figure of Buddha about seven feet high, and 
marked with all the distinguishing signs of beauty. Its 
appearance is imposing and dignified. On its head is a 
precious gem-ornament, which ever spreads abroad a 
brilliant light. The general tradition is to this effect :— 
this statue formerly belonged to the country of Kagmir; 
by the influence of prayer (being requested), it removed 
itself here. In old days there was an Arhat who had a 
disciple, a Srimanéra, on the point of death. He desired 
to have a cake of sown rice (és'hu mai); the Arhat by 
his divine sight seeing there was rice of this sort in 
Kustana, transported himself thither by his miraculous 
power to procure some. The Srimanéra having eaten 
it, prayed that he might be re-born in this country, 
and in consequence of his previous destiny he was born 
there as a king’s son. When he had succeeded to the 
throne, he subdued all the neighbouring territory, and 
passing the snowy mountains, he attacked Kasmir. The 
king of KaSmir assembled his troops with a view to 
resist the invaders. On this the Arhat warned the king 
against the use of force, and said, “I am able to restrain 
him.” 

Then going to meet the king of Kustana (K’iu-sa-ta- 
na), began to recite choice selections of scripture (the 
law). 

The king at first, having no faith, determined to go on 
with his military preparations. On this the Arhat, taking 
the robes which were worn by the king in his former con- 


BOOK X11] THE PRAIRIE RATS. 315 


dition as a Srimanéra, showed them to him. Having seen 
them, the king reached to the knowledge of his previous 
lives, and he went to the king of Kasmir and made pro- 
fession of his joy and attachment. He then dispersed his 
troops and returned. The image which he had honoured 
when a Sha-mi he now respectfully took in front of the 
army, and came to this kingdom at his request. But hav- 
ing arrived at this spot, he could not get further, and so 
built this satghdrdma ; and calling the priests together, 
he gave his jewelled headdress for the image, and this is 
the one now belonging to the figure, the gift of the former 
king. 

To the west of the capital city 150 or 160 li, in the 
midst of the straight road across a great sandy desert, 
there are a succession of small hills, formed by the bur- 
rowing of rats. J heard the following as the common 
story :—“ In this desert there are rats as big as hedgehogs, 
their hair of a gold and silver colour. There is a head rat 
to the company. Every day he comes out of his hole and 
walks about; when he has finished the other rats follow 
him. In old days a general of the Hiung-nu came to 
ravage the border of this country with several tens of 
myriads of followers. When he had arrived thus far at 
the rat-mounds, he encamped his soldiers. Then the king 
of Kustana, who commanded only some few myriads of 
men, feared that his force was not sufficient to take the 
<fensive. He knew of the wonderful character of these 
desert rats, and that he had not yet made any religious 
offering to them; but now he was at a loss where to look 
for succour. His ministers, too, were all in alarm, and 
could think of no expedient. At last he determined to 
offer a religious offering to the rats and request their aid, 
if by these means his army might be strengthened a little. 
That night the king of Kustana in a dream ™ saw a great 

54 For these desert rats, which are 216. For “the dream” and the de- 
probably the same as the “golden struction of the Assyrian army in 


ants” of Herodotos and Nearkhos, Egypt by mice, see ee) BE. 
see Mrs. Spiers’ Ancient India, p. ii. chap. 141. 


316 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book xu. 


rat, who said to him, “I wish respectfully to assist you. 
To-morrow morning put your troops in movement; attack 
the enemy, and you will conquer.” 

The king of Kustana, recognising the miraculous char- 
acter of this intervention, forthwith arrayed his cavalry 
and ordered his captains to set out before dawn, and at 
their head, after a rapid march, he fell unexpectedly on 
the enemy. The Hiung-nu, hearing their approach, were 
overcome by fear. They hastened to harness their horses 
and equip their chariots, but they found that the leather 
of their armour, and their horses’ gear, and their bow 
strings, and all the fastenings of their clothes, had been 
gnawed by the rats. And now their enemies had arrived, 
and they were taken in disorder. Thereupon their chief 
was killed and the principal soldiers made prisoners. The 
Hiung-nu were terrified on perceiving a divine interposi- 
tion on behalf of their enemies. The king of Kustana, in 
gratitude to the rats, built a temple and offered sacrifices ; 
and ever since they have continued to receive homage and 
reverence, and they have offered to them rare and precious 
things. Hence, from the highest to the lowest of the 
people, they pay these rats constant reverence and seek to 
propitiate them by sacrifices. On passing the mounds 
they descend from their chariots and pay their respects as 
they pass on, praying for success as they worship. Others 
offer clothes, and bows, and arrows; others scents, and 
flowers, and costly meats. Most of those who practise 
these religious rites obtain their wishes; but if they neglect 
them, then misfortune is sure to occur. 

To the west of the royal city 5 or 6 i® is a convent 
called Sa-mo-joh (Samajfia). In the middle of it is a 
stdpa about 100 feet high, which exhibits many miraculous 
indications (signs). Formerly there was an Arhat, who, 
coming from a distance, took up his abode in this forest, 
and by his spiritual power shed abroad a miraculous 
light. Then the king at night-time, being in a tower of 


6 Julien has “ fifty or sixty li.” 


BOOK XI1.] THE RELIC CASKETS. 317 


his palace, saw at a distance, in the middle of the wood, 
brilliant light shining. Asking a number of persons in 
succession what their opinion was, they all said, “ There 
is a Sramana who has come from far, and is sitting alone 
in this wood. By the exercise of his supernatural power 
he spreads abroad this light,” The king then ordered his 
chariot to be equipped, and went in person to the spot, 
Having seen the illustrious sage, his heart was filled with 
reverence, and after having offered him every respect, he 
invited him to come to the palace. The Sramana said, 
“Living things have their place, and the mind has its 
place. For me the sombre woods and the desert marshes 
have attraction. The storeyed halls of a palace and its 
extensive courts are not suitable for my tastes.” 

The king hearing this felt redoubled reverence for him, 
and paid him increased respect. He constructed for him 
a sarghdrdma and raised a stdpa. The Sramana, having 
been invited to do so, took up his abode there. 

The king having procured some hundred particles of 
relics, was filled with joy and thought with himself, 
“These relics have come late; if they had come before, I 
could have placed them under this stdipa, and then what a 
miracle of merit it would have been.” Going then to the 
sanghdrdma, he asked the Sramana, The Arhat said, 
“Let not the king be distressed. In order to place them 
in their proper place you ought to prepare a gold, silver, 
copper, iron, and stone receptacle, and place them one in 
the other, in order to contain the relics. The king then 
gave orders to workmen to do this, and it was finished in 
aday. Then carrying the relics on an ornamented car 
(or, stand), they brought them to the sazghdrdma. At this 
time the king, at the head of a hundred officers, left the 
palace (to witness the procession of the relics), whilst the 
beholders amounted to several myriads. Then the Arhat 
with his right hand raised the stipa, and holding it in 
his palms, he addressed the king and said, “You can 
now conceal the relics underneath.” Accordingly he dug 

6 Or, a double tower; a belvedere, 


318 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [vook x11. 


a place for the chest, and all being done, the Arhat 
lowered the stitpa without hurt or inconvenience, 

The beholders, exulting at the miracle, placed their 
faith in Buddha, and felt increased reverence for his law. 
Then the king, addressing his ministers, said, “I have 
heard it said that the power of Buddha is difficult to cal- 
culate, and his spiritual abilities difficult to measure. At 
one time he divided his body into ten million parts; at 
other times he appeared among Dévas and men, holding 
the world in the palm of his hand without disturbing 
any one, explaining the law and its character in ordinary 
words, so that men and others, according to their kind, 
understood it, exhibiting the nature of the law in one 
uniform way, drawing all men (¢hings) to a knowledge of 
it according to their minds. Thus his spiritual power was 
peculiarly his own; his wisdom was beyond the power of 
words to describe, His spirit has passed away, but his 
teaching remains. Those who are nourished by the sweet- 
ness of his doctrine and partake of (drink) his instruction; 
who follow his directions and aim at his spiritual enlight- 
enment, how great their happiness, how deep their insight. 
You hundred officers ought to honour and respect Buddha; 
the mysteries of his law will then become clear to you.” 

To the south-east of the royal city 5 or 6 his a con- 
vent called Lu-shi,? which was founded by a queen of a 
former ruler of the country. In old time this country 
knew nothing about mulberry trees or silkworms. Hear- 
ing that’ the eastern country had them, they sent an em- 
bassy to seek for them. At this time the prince of the 
eastern kingdom kept the secret and would not give the 
possession of it to any. He kept guard over his territory 
and would not permit either the seeds of the mulberry 
. or the silkworms’ eggs to be carried off. 

The king of Kustana sent off to seek a marriage union 
67 Lu-shi means “stag-pierced ;” daughter of the prince of the eastern 


but it is probably a phonetic form in kingdom. 
this passage, and is the name of the 


BOOK XII] THE LU-SHI SANGHARAMA, 319 


with a princess of, the eastern kingdom (China), in token 
of his allegiance and submission. The king being well- 
affected to the neighbouring states acceded to his wish. 
Then the king of Kustana dispatched a messenger to escort 
the royal princess and gave the following direction : “Speak 
thus to the eastern princess,—Our country has neither 
silk or silken stuffs. You had better bring with you some 
mulberry seeds and silkworms, then you can make robes 
for yourself.” 

The princess, hearing these words, secretly procured 
the seed of the mulberry and silkworms’ eggs and con- 
cealed them in her. head-dress. Having arrived at the 
barrier, the guard searched everywhere, but he did not 
dare to remove the princess’s head-dress. Arriving then 
in the kingdom of Kustana, they stopped on the site 
afterwards occupied by the Lu-shi saighdrdma; thence 
they conducted her in great pomp to the royal palace. 
Here then they left the silkworms and mulberry seeds. 

In the spring-time they set the seeds, and when the 
time for the silkworms had come they gathered leaves for 
their food; but from their first arrival it was necessary 
to feed them on different kinds of leaves, but afterwards 
the mulberry trees began to flourish, Then the queen 
wrote on a stone the following decree, “It is not per- 
mitted to kill the silkworm! After the butterfly has 
gone, then the silk may be twined off (¢he cocoon). Who- 
ever offends against this rule may he be deprived of divine 
protection.” Then she founded this saighdrdma on the 
spot where the first silkworms were bred; and there are 
about here many old mulberry tree trunks which they say 
are the remains of the old trees first planted. From old 
time till now this kingdom has possessed silkworms, 
which nobody is allowed to kill, with a view to take away 
the silk stealthily. Those who do so are not allowed to 
rear the worms for a succession of years. 

To the south-east of the capital about 200 li or so is a 


320 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book xu. 


great river® flowing north-west. The people take advan- 
tage of it to irrigate theirlands. After a time this stream 
ceased to flow. The king, greatly astonished at the strange 
event, ordered his carriage to be equipped and went to an 
Arhat and asked him, “The waters of the great river, 
which have been so beneficial to man, have suddenly 
ceased. Is not my rule a just one? are not my benefits 
(virtues) widely distributed through the world? If it be 
not so, what is my fault, or why is this calamity per- 
mitted ?” 

The Arhat said, “Your majesty governs his kingdom 
well, and the influence of your rule is for the well-being 
and peace of your people. The arrest in the flow of 
the river is on account of the dragon dwelling therein. 
You should offer sacrifices and address your prayers to 
him; you will then recover your former benefits (from 
the river).” 

Then the king returned and offered sacrifice to the 
river dragon. Suddenly a woman emerged from the 
stream, and advancing said to him, “ My lord is just dead, 
and there is no one to issue orders; and this is the reason 
why the current of the stream is arrested and the husband- 
men have lost their usual profits. If your majesty will 
choose from your kingdom a minister of state of noble 
family and give him to me as a husband, then he may 
order the stream to flow as before.” 

The king said, “I will attend with respect to your 
request and meet your wishes.” The Naga (woman) was 
rejoiced (to have obtained the promise of) a great minister 
of the country (as a husband). 

The king having returned, addressed his dependents 
thus, “A great minister is the stronghold of the state. 
The pursuit of agriculture is the secret of men’s life. 
Without a strong support, then, there is ruin to the state ; 


68 Probably the Karakash river. (High Tartary and Yarkand). Or 
Its sandy and dry bed is still marked it may be the Khotan-daria. 
with a dotted line on Shaw's map 


BOOK XII] THE SELF-SACRIFICE. 321 


without food there is death to the people. In the pre- 
sence of such calamities what is to be done ?” 

A great minister, leaving his seat, prostrated himself 
and said, “ For a lone time I have led a useless life, and 
held an important post without profit to others. Al- 
though I have desired to benefit my country, no occasion 
has offered. Now, then, I pray you choose me, and I will 
do my best to meet your wishes. In view of the good of 

the entire people what is the life of one minister? A 
‘ minister is the support of the country; the people the 
substance. I beg your majesty not to hesitate. I only 
ask that, for the purpose of securing merit, I may found a 
convent.” 

The king having consented, the thing was done forth- 
with, and his request complied with. On this the minister 
asked to be allowed to enter at once the dragon-palace. 
Then all the chief men of the kingdom made a feast, with 
music and rejoicing, whilst the minister, clad in white 
garments and riding a white horse, took leave of the king 
and respectfully parted with the people of the country. 
So, pressing on his horse, he entered the river; advancing 
in the stream, he sank not, till at length, when in the 
middle of it, he whipped the stream with his lash, and 
forthwith the water opened in the midst and he disap- 
peared. A short time afterwards the white horse came 
up and floated on the water, carrying on his back a great 
sandalwood drum, in which was a letter, the contents of 
which were briefly these: “ Your majesty has not made 
the least error in selecting me for this office in con- 
nection with the spirit (Wdga). May you enjoy much 
happiness and your kingdom be prosperous! Your mini- 
ster sends you this drum to suspend at the south-east 
of the city; if an enemy approaches, it will sound first 
of all.” 

. The river began then to flow, and down to the present 
time has caused continued advantage to the people. 

VOL. IL. x 


322 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [soox xu. 


Many years and months have elapsed since then, and 
the place where the dragon-drum was hung has long since 
disappeared, but the ruined convent by the side of the 
drum-lake still remains, but it has no priests and is 
deserted, 

Three hundred li or so to the east of the royal city is a. 
great desert marsh, upwards of several thousands acres in 
extent, without any verdure whatever. Its surface is a 
reddish-black. The old people explain the matter thus: 
This is the place where an army was defeated. In old 
days an army of the eastern country numbering a hundred 
myriads of men invaded the western kingdom, The king 
of Kustana, on his side, equipped a body of cavalry to the 
number of ten myriads, and advanced to the east to offer 
the enemy battle. Coming to this spot, an engagement 
took place. The troops of the west being defeated, they 
were cut to pieces and their king was taken prisoner and 
all their officers killed without leaving one toescape. The 
ground was dyed with blood, and the traces of it still 
remain (27 the colour of the earth). 

After going east 30 hi or so from the field of battle we 
come to the town of Pimaé(Pi-mo). Here thereis a figure 
of Buddha in a standing position made of sandalwood. 
The figure is about twenty feet high. It works many 
miracles and reflects constantly a bright light. Those 
who have any disease, according to the part affected, cover 
the corresponding place on the statue with gold-leaf, and 
forthwith they are healed. People who address prayers 
to it with a sincere heart mostly obtain their wishes. This 
is what the natives say: This image in old days when 
Buddha was alive was made by Udayana (U-to-yen-na), 
king of Kaugimbi (Kiao-shang-mi). When Buddha left 
the world, it mounted of its own accord into the air and 
came to the north of this kingdom, to the town of Ho-lo- 
lo-kia. The men of this city were rich and prosperous, 


69 Ragha or Raghan, or perhaps Ourgha. 


BOOK X11. ] DESTRUCTION BY SAND. 323 


and deeply attached to heretical teaching, with no respect 
for any other form of religion. From the time the image 
came there it showed its divine character, but no one paid 
it respect. 

Afterwards there was an Arhat who bowed down and 
saluted the image; the people of the country were alarmed 
at his strange appearance and dregs, and they hastened to 
tell the king, The king issued a decree that the stranger 
should be covered over with sand and earth. At this 
time the Arhat’s body being covered with sand, he 
sought in vain for food as nourishment.” There was a 
man whose heart was indignant at such treatment; he 
had himself always respected the image and honoured it 
with worship, and now seeing the Arhat in this condi- 
tion, he secretly gave him food. The Arhat being on the 
point of departure, addressed this man and said, “Seven 
days hence there will be a rain of sand and earth which 
will fill this city full, and there will in a brief space be 
none left alive. You ought to take measures for escape 
in knowledge of this. They have covered me with earth, 
and this is the consequence to them.” Having said this 
he departed, disappearing in a moment. 

The man, entering the city, told the tidings to his 
relatives, but they did nothing but mock at him. The 
second day a great wind suddenly arose, which carried 
before it all the dirty soil, whilst there fell various 
precious substanees.1 ‘Then the men continued to re- 
vile the man who had told them (about the sand and 
earth). 

But this man, knowing in his heart what must certainly 
happen, excavated for himself an underground passage 
leading outside the city, and there lay concealed. On the 
seventh day, in the evening, just after the division of the 

70 Tt would seem that his body In that case it would be “sand and 
was buried up to his neck, earth ;” but, if this be so, why did 


74 Stas. Julien prefers substitut- the people still find fault with the 
ing Sha-tu in the text for T'sah-pao. prophet? 
cof Ps 


324 RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES. [Book XIL 


night, it rained sand and earth, and filled the city.2 This 
man escaped through his tunnel and went to the east, 
and, arriving in this country, he took his abode in Pima. 
Searcely had the man arrived when the statue. also ap- 
peared there. He forthwith paid it worship in this place 
and dared not go farther (change his abode). According to 
the old account it is said, “When the law of Sikya is 
extinct then this image will enter the dragon-palace.” 

The town of Ho-lo-lo-kia is now a great sand 
mound. The kings of the neighbouring countries and 
persons in power from distant spots have many times 
wished to excavate the mound and take away the pre- 
cious things buried there; but as soon as they have 
arrived at the borders of the place, a furious wind has 
sprung up, dark clouds have gathered together from the 
four quarters of heaven, and they have become lost to 
find their way. 

To the east of the valley of Pima’ we enter a sandy 
desert, and after going 200 li or so, we come to the 
town of Ni-jang, This city is about 3 or 4 li in cir- 
cuit; it stands in a great marsh; the soil of the marsh 
is warm and soft, so that it is difficult to walk on it. 
It is covered with rushes and tangled herbage, and 
there are no roads or pathways; there is only the path 
that leads to the city, through which one can pass with 
difficulty, so that every one coming and going must pass 
by thistown. The king of Kustana makes this the guard 
of his eastern frontier. 

Going east from this, we enter a great drifting sand 
desert. These sands extend like a drifting flood for a 
great distance, piled up or scattered according to the 
wind. There is no trace left behind by travellers, and 


” For an account of sand-buried vol. ii, Appendix M. ; and also vol. 
cities, and particularly of Katak, see i. chap. xxxvii. and note 1. It is 
Bellew, Kashmir and Kashgar, pp. probably the Han-mo of Sung Yun. 
370, 371. Also for Pima, probably 3 Pima was probably the Pein of 
near Keria, see Yule, Marco Polo, Marco Polo, See Yule, ut supra. 


BOOK X1I.] NA-FO-PO—-NAVAPA. 


325 


oftentimes the way is lost, and so they wander hither 
and thither quite bewildered, without any guide or 
direction. So travellers pile up the bones of animals 
as beacons. There is neither water nor herbage to be 
found, and hot winds frequently blow. When these 
winds rise, then both men and beasts become confused 
and forgetful, and then they remain perfectly disabled 
(sick). At times sad and plaintive notes are heard and 
piteous cries, so that between the sights and sounds of 
this desert men get confused and know not whither 
they go. Hence there are so many who perish in the 
journey. But it is all the work of demons and evil 
spirits. 

Going on 400 li or so, we arrive at the old kingdom 
of Tu-ho-lo (fukhara). This country has long been 
deserted and wild. All the towns are ruined and un- 
inhabited. 

From this going east 600 li or so, we come to the 
ancient kingdom of Che-mo-t’o-na,” which is the same 
as the country called Ni-mo, The city walls still 
stand loftily, but the inhabitants are dispersed and 
scattered. 

From this going north-east a thousand li or so, we 
come to the old country of Navapa (Na-fo-po), which is 
the same as Leu-lan.”® We need not speak of the 
mountains and valleys and soil of this neighbouring 
country. The habits of the people are wild and un- 
polished, their manners not uniform; their preferences 
and dislikes are not always the same. ‘There are some 
things difficult to verify to the utmost, and it is not always 
easy to recollect all that has occurred. 


74 This was probably the extreme 
limit of the old kingdom of Tu-ho-lo 
towards the east. When the Yue- 
chi spread eastwards they dispos- 
sessed the old Turanian population. 

73 This is the Tso-moh of Sung- 
yun. It must have been near Sor- 
ghdk of Prejevalsky’s map. For 


some interesting notes on this place 
see Kingsmill, China Review, vol. 
viii. No. 3, p. 163. 

76 Also called Shen-shen; see 
China Review, loc. cit. Kingsmill 
makes Navapa equal to Navapura, 
i.e, Neapolis. 


326 


RECORDS OF WESTERN COUNTRIES, [Book x11 


But the traveller has written a brief summary of all 


he witnessed or heard. 


All were desirous to be in- 


structed, and wherever he went his virtuous conduct 


drew the admiration of those who beheld it. 


And 


why not? in the case of one who had gone alone and 
afoot from Ku, and had completed such a mission by 


stages of myriads of li!” 


7 M. Julien renders this pas- 
sage: “How could he be compared 
simply to such men as have gone 
on a mission with a single car, and 
who have traversed by post a space 
of a thousand li?” But if the 
symbol Au be for Au-sse, é.e., “the 
ancient land of the Uigurs” (see 


vol. i. p. 17, n, 51), then I think 
the translation I have given is the 
right one. Respecting this land of 
Kau-chang, we are told it was called 
Ming-fo-chan in the Han period, 
and Ku-sse-ti (the land of Ku-sse) 
during the Tang period (vid. the 
map called Yu-ti-tsun-t’si). 


END OF BOOK XII. 


INDEX. 


References to the Introduction are indicated by black figures. 


A. 


Abhaya (?O-po-ye), in Chinese Wu- 
wat, free from fear, ii, 7 n. 

Abhayagirivasina (’O -p’o-ye-k’i-li- 
chu-pu) schismatie school, ii. 247. 

Abhayagiri vihara, i. 73, 75, 76. 

Abhayamdada—the remover of 
donbts—Aval6kitésvara, i, 60 n. 

Abhidharma, i, 38, 39, 71; 180. 

Abhidharmajitdna-prasthdna Sdstra 
(’0-pi-ta-mo-fa-chi-lun) of Ka- 
tya@yana, i. 175. 

Abhidharmakésha Sdstra (’O-pi-ta- 
mo-ku-she-lun) of Vasubandhu, i. 
105, 110 n., 1933 ii, 268 n. 

Abhidharmakésha - mahdvibhdshd 
Sdstra, i. 155 n., 175 n. 

Abhidharmapituka (?O-pi-ta-mo- 
t’sang) section of trauscendental 
doctrine formed under the direc- 
tion of Maha-Kasyapa, i, 117, 155 5 
ii, 164. 

Abhidharmaprakarana-pdda-Sdstra, 
in Chinese Chung-sse-fen-'o-pi-ta- 
mo-lun, of Vasumitra, i. 109. 

Abhidharmaprakdsa-sddhana Sdstra 
(?0-pi-ta-mo-ming-ching-lun), i. 
TI2n. 

Abhidharmavibhashd S'dstra ('O-pi- 
ta-mo-pi-p’o-sha-lun), i. 155. 

Abhyantarika vihara, ii, 267 n. 

abhijitds, six miraculous powers, i, 
104 n., 149. 

Abhyutgataraja—the great august 
king—Avalékitésvara, i. 60 n. 

Ab-i-Pitinj river, i. 41 0, 

Achala or Achira (’O-che-lo) Arhat, 
in Chinese So-hing, ii. 218, 257 n., 
258, 268. 

Adam’s Peak in Ceylon, i, 126 u.; 
ii, 232 n., 297 u. 


, Adbhutasma sttipa (I]o-pu-to-shi- 
su-tu-po), the stQpa of extraor- 
dinary stone (K’i-te-shi), 1.127 n. 

Adiraja, i. 201 n. 

Adishtén, Adhishthana, capital of 
Kaéginir, i. 158 n. 

Adydtmavidyd, in Chinese Nei-ming, 
i. 79, 153 0. 

*Abparoa—see Andardb, 

Afghans, natives of Pakhtu, the 
Ilaxruixy of Herodotos and the 
Agvakas of Sanskrit geographers, 


i. 43.0. 

Afghanistin (Ro-hi or Lo-hi), i. 
36; 43.., 51 n. 

Aifrasyab, ii, 301 n. 

Agni (’O-ki-ni) conntry, i. 17. 

agni-dhatu, in Chinese Lo-hiat-ting, 
“fire-limit,” ii, 36. 

Agrapura monastery at Mathura, i. 
191 n. 

| Ahi, the cloud-snake, i. 126 n, 


; Ahichhatra or Ahikshétra (’O-hi-shi- 


ta-lo), i, 199 n., 200, 201. 
ahérdtra (1-ji-i-e), day-and -night, 
1, 71. 

Ahreng or Hazrat Imam (’0-li-ni), i. 
42 n.3 ii, 289. 

Ajanta rock temples, i. 52 n., ii. 
32 n., 257 f.; Ajanta frescoes, i. 
83 u., li, 239 n. 3 iuscription, ii, 
218 n. 

Ajatasatru (’O-she-to-she-tu-lu), in 
Chinese Wei-sing-yun, king, i. 17, 
54, 55, 59; 238 n.; i. 2n., 65 n., 
70 n., 77 n., 83 n. 85, go n., 150, 
160, 161, 166, 167, 179. 

Ajitakata, Achchhuta in Singhalese 
accounts (O-chu-to-kiu), i. 98, 

Ajitavati (’O-shi-to-fa-ti), in Chinese 
Wu-shing, ii. 32, 39 n. 


328 


Ajiidta Kanndinya ('O-jo-kio-ch'in- 
ju), i. 67; ii. 46, 52, 128, 129. 

Ajina, or Nagarahara, i. 95 n. 

Akifichavydyatana (Wu-so-yeu-ch’u- 
ting), ii. 54 n. 

Akni (’0-ki-ni) country, i. 17. 

Aksai mountains in Turkistan, i. 
29 n. 

akshaya-vad, banyan tree, i, 232 n. 

Aksu (Poh-luh-kia), country of Little 
Bukharia, i. 19; 24. 

Alakhfna, raja of Gurjjara, i. 165 n. 

Alakshanaka Buddha, 1, 182 n. 

Al-chach or Tashkand, i. 30 n. 

Ali-bunar? (’A-li-fun-nai-’rh)j, king 
of Ceylon, ii. 249, 282 n. 

A-li-fun-nai-’rh—Ali-bunar (2). 

alingar river, in Kabul, i. go n. 

Allahabad or Prayaga, i. 232 n. 

Al-Makah, Arab idol, i. 128 n. 

alms-bow] (patra) of Buddha, i. 47. 
See pédira. 

A-lo forest, i. 43. 

alphabet, Indian, i. 77. 

Altyn-tagh mountains, i. 3n. 

Amala (Ngan- mo-lo) frnit, 1. 88. 

Amala (’0-mo- -lo), the Aura, i. 89. 

Amala fruit, ii. 95 n., 96 n. 

Amalaka ('O-mo-lo-kia), Myrobolan 

, emblica, it. 95, 96, 118, 136 n. 

Amalaka stitipa, ii. 96. 

amalakaraka, in Chinese pao-p’ing, 
pure dish or vase, ii, 137 n., 
205 n. 

Amaradéva’s vihdra, ii. 174 n. 

Amara-Simhha, ii, 137 n. 

Amarfavati sculptured stipa, i. 17; 
47 1, 112 n., ii. 209 1., 221 1., 
222 n,; inseriptions, ii, 220 n. 

Amazons, i, 35 n. 

Ambapéli, i, 59; ii, 
Amrapali. 

amber (Ku-ch’2) dish, it. 129. 

dmla (Ngan-mi-lo),the tamarind, i. 88. 

dmra (’An-mo-lo), in Chinese Nai, 
Mangifera indica or mango tree, 
i, 196, 226, 236 5 ii. 45, 66 5 Amra 
grove, i. 53; ii, 167, 168. 

Amra girl or lady, or Amrapalt, i. 
52, 53; ii. 68, 60. 

Amradarika (‘An-lo-mu and An-mo- 
lo-mu), ii. 68 n. 

aes (Kan-lu-fan-wang), ii. 
38 n. 

Aunritsar, i, 165 n. 

ArmSuvarman (An-shu-fa-mo), in 


69 mn. See 


INDEX, 


Chinese Kwang-cheu, a king of 
Nepal, ii. 81. 

Amu-darya (Mu-ho), Oxus river, i. 
12 n., 33, 36n., 38 n., 41 n. 

Anfgfmin, name of third Buddhist 

, order, i, 61. 

Anagundi, ji. 254 n. 

Anaitis or Anahita, Babylonian god- 

, dess, ii. 183 n. 

Ananda (’O-nan and ’O-nan-t’o), i. 
32, 38, 39, 49, 52, 64, 55, 59, 61; 
53, 134 n., 149, 180, 181, I9I n., 
il. §, 35, 39, 40, 69, 70, 73, 75, 76, 
77) 90, 154, 160, 163, 104, 179 ; 

, becomes an Arhat, ii. 163. 

psy Sk (‘O-nan-t’o-pu-lo), ii. 
268, 


An&thapindada or Andthapindika 
(Ki-ku-to), ii. 3m., 4-7, 9. 

Anavatapta (O-neu, ’U-neu-ta, and 
O-na-p’o-ta-to), in Chinese Wn- 
jeh-no-ch’i, a lake, i. 11, 12 n., 
13 n., ii, 6, 155; dragon king, i. 
Win, ii 47. 

andtma, impermanency, i. 223, 

“Avak dvipdy, i. 14 n. 

Andarib or Indar&éb (An-ta-lo-po), 
in Badakshfn, perhaps the ’Aé- 
pamoa of the Greeks, i. 43, ii. 286. 

Andhra (An-ta-lo) country, li. 217 £, 
220 n, 

Anga country, ii. 191 n., 201 n. 

anguli, aiguliparva, in Chinese chi- 
tsie, a finger’s-breadth, i. 70. 

Angulimalyas (Yang-kiu-li-mo-lo), 
in Chinese Chi-man, i, 443 ii. 3. 

Aniruddha (’O-ni-liu-t’o), i, 39 3 ii, 
38, 40. 

anitya, unreality, i. 223. 

’an-mo-lo — Myrobulan emblica, i. 
180 n. 


.’An - shi-fo- yu-che — Afvayuja 


month, 

An-shu-fa-mo—A tmhguvarman, ii. 81. 

’An-ta-lo-po—Andarab. 

’An-ta-lo—Andhra, ii. 217. 

ants of Herodotos and Nearkhos, 
ii. 315 n. 

anu (’O-nu), in Chinese Si-ch’in, an 
atom, i, 71. 

anupadhissha—without remnants, 
i. 149. 

Anurddhapura, ii. 247 n, 

Anuruddha, ii. 38 n. 

Apalaila (O-po-lo-lo), a dragon or 
niga, i, 122, 123, 126 n. 132. 


INDEX. 329 


aperijpiov, K.7.r., ii, 205 D. 

Aphaar, ii, 184 n. 

Apollonius of Tyana, i. 136 n. 

apricot, Chinese hang or mz, i, 88, 

Aptanétravana — sight - obtaining 
forest, i. 46 n. 3 ii, 12. 

Arabs, i. 176 n. 

Arfida Kalama (’O-lan-kia lan), ii, 


4. 
aoe bhikshu, i, 212 n. 
Ardent master’s pool, ii. 55. 
Ardhvisura, Andhita, or Anaitis, 
Babylonian goddess, ii. 225 n. 
Arhan or Arhat (’O-lo-han), Ch. 
Wu-hio, one of high rank in the 
Bauddha hierarchy, i, 61, 65, 66, 
67, 68, 76, 99; 1520.5 the mys- 
terious arhat, ii. 305. 

army in India, i. 82. 

Arrah or Ara, town, ii. 63 n. 

Aruna (O-lu- nau), mountain ,Chehél- 
Dukhtaran (?), i. 61 n.. 623 ii, 284. 

Arupadh&tu world, i, 2 un, 

Arya Asanga, ii, 171 n. 

Aryadéva Bodhisattva, i. 190 n. 

Arya Laikdvatdra-mahdvana-Sttra, 
ii, 252 n. 

Arya- BL ika (Hie-t’sun), i. 98 n., 
105.4 

Be lily Buddhist patriarch, i. 
119 D., 120 n. 

Asadhirana (O-she-li-ni), convent, 
oee2 en 

Asanag ('O-seng-kia), Bédhisattva, 
in Chinese Wu-cho-p’u-sa, i. 98, 
105 n., 226-229, 237. 

Ash4aha (’An-sha-cha) month, i, 72. 

Ashes dagaba, i. 513 ii. 31 n.; 
ashes bédhi tree, ii, 117. 

ashtavimékskas (pa-kiai-t’o), i. 104, 
149 ; ii. 143, 

Asi stream, ii. 44 n. 

Asita-Rishi, i. 49; ii. 15, 16. 

Aska, town in Ganjam, ii. 205 n. 

Agmaktita, i. 13 n.; ii. 68 n. 

Aséka-raja (’O-shu-kia), in Chinese 
Wu-wei, date of, i, 56 n. ; works, 
&c., 1.17, 31, 40, 50, 51, 55, 57, 63, 
97; 67, 92, I10, 112, 113, 125, 127, 
137, 138, 139, 140 nm, 144, 146- 
148, 150, 151, 172, 175, 177, 178, 
180, 186, 187, 200, 203, 221, 223, 
224, 225, 230, 231, 237, 240 5 ii. 4, 
5 0., 7, 13, 19, 21, 24-27, 29-32, 
33 0, 40, 45, 46, 61, 64, 65, 67, 
75, 80, 85, 86, 88-96, 113, 115, 


117-119, 123, 146, 160, 164, 165, 
167, 175, 177, 182, 184, 195, 199, 
201, 204, 205, 208, 210, 218, 227, 
229, 230, 257, 267, 271, 275, 279- 
281, 284, 302, 309, 310. 

Agoka-flower tree, ii, 24. 

Asdka (sorrowless) kingdom—Cey- 
lon, ii, 248. 

Asékdvaddna, ii. 65 n. 

Aspionia, a satrapy of Baktria, i. 
37 2. 

assembly, quinquennial ( paiicha- 
varshdé and paichavarshikd pari- 
shad), i, 21 1. 

Astes — Hasti, king of Gandbara, 
i, 109 n. 

Asthipura—Bone-town, i. 186 n. 

Astronomy, i. 71. 

asuddhis, impurity, i. 223 n. 

Asuras (’O-su-lo), ii. 148, 214, 223, 
225; Asura cave, ii. 156, 157. 

Aévaghésha Bodhisattva a (’O-shi-po- 
kiu-sha-pu-sa), in Chinese Ma- 
ming, i, 57 n., 143 0, 160 n., 
182 n., 236 n.; ii. 32n., 37 m, 
38 n., 95, 100, Tol, 302. 

ASvajita (’O-shi-p’o-shi), in Chinese 
Ma-shing, i. 59; ii, 55 ., 150, 
T51, 175, 179. 

ASvapati (Ma-chu), lord of horses, 
i. 13 n., 14, 16, 

Agvayuja {An-shi-fo-yu- che), month, 
i. 72; ii, 136. 

Atali, Atari (’ 0. ch’a-li), near Multan, 
li, 265. 

Atharvavéda or Atharvdéna (’O-ta- 
po-na), in Chinese Chen-shu, 
Jang-tsai, and Shu-lun, i. 79 n. 

Athens, ii, 259 n. 

dtman, ii, 251 n. 


Atrafijankhéra ruins, i, 201 n., 
202 n. 
Atyanabakéla (’O-tin-p’o-chi-lo), ii. 


275-277. 

Aulié-ata, town on the Talas river, 
i. 29. 

Audh, Aydédhy4, i, 210 n, 

Avadhdna jdtaka, i. 151 n. 

Avalékitésvara Bodhisattva (’O-fo- 
lu-che-to-i-shi-fa-lo-p’u-sa), in 
Chinese Kwan-tsz’-tsai, Kwan- 
yin, &e, i. 39, 81; 60, 114 n., 
127, 128, 160, 212; ii. 103, 116, 
129, 137 0., 172, 173, 214 b., 
224, 225, 2333 asa horse, ii. 242. 

Avanda (’Q-fan-ch’a), ii. 280. 


330 


Avanti in Malava, il, 270 n. 

Avaragail& ('O-fa-lo-shi-lo), in 
Chinese Si-shan-sse, monastery, 
ii, 221, 

avatéra (kiang-shin), i, 122 n. 

Avichi (Wu-kan-ti-yuh), a hell, i, 
172 n., 1973 ii. 10. 

Aviddhakarna (’O-pi-to-kie-la-na), 
in Chinese Pu-chwang-yul, 
monastery, il. 61, 62, 63 n. 

Aviddhakarnapnra (’O-pi-t’o-kie-la- 
na), in Chinese Pu-chwang-’rh, 

, ii, 62 n, 

Avur, town, ii, 231 n, 


Ayamukha, See Hayamukha, 
ayana (hing), assafoetida, See 
hing. 


ayatana (chu), i. 95 n. 
Aydédhyé (’O-yu-t’o) or Késala Audh, 
i. 106 n., 224 f., 239 n., 240 n.; 
ail. In., 209 n. 

Ayurvéda ('O-yu), in Chinese 
Ming-lun and Shan-lun, i. 79 n. 
dyushmat (chang-lo), long-lived, ii. 74. 

Azhdaha, a dragon, i. 51 n. 


B. 
BAsAvaus, fountain of Elapatra, i. 


137 n. 

Badakshin (Po-to-chang-na), the 
BavéoSnve of Strabo, the Ovav- 
édBavia of Ptolemy, i. 42 n. ; ii. 
2901, 

Badha. See Bhata, 

Bagarash Lake, i. 13; 17 0 

Baghlana Baghelén (Po- ikia- lan), 
district north of the Oxus, i: 


43- 

Bahikes, inhabitants of Takkadéga, 
i. 165 n 

bahiro—Pali, unbelievers, i. 91 n. 

Baibhar hill. See Vaibhara, ii, 155 n., 
156 n., 181 n. 

Bairat or Virdta, i. 179 n. 

Baiswarf, the country of the Bais 
Rajputs, i, 210 n. 

Bakrér, ii, 138 n. 

Baktria (Ta-hia, Po-ho), i. 145; 37 »., 
58 n.;3 ii. 222 n. 

Baladitya-raja (P’o-lo-’o-ti-to), in 
Chinese Yen-jih, king of Maga- 
dha, i, 119 n., 168-170; ii. 168, 
169, 173. 

Baliya, ii, 62 n. 

Balkh (Po-ho-lo), town of Baktria, 
1.14; 39 n., 43, 440., 48, 49 nL 


INDEX. 


Balmapura or Vasmapura, Reinaud’s 
restoration of P’i-chen-p’o-pu-lo, 
ii, 272 n. 

Balmér (Pi-lo-mo-lo), capital of Gurj- 
jara, ii. 270, 

Balti or Baltistfén, Bolor (?Po-lu- 
lo), i. 135 n.3 ii 298, 

Baluké (Poh-luh-kia) or Bai, name 
of a town, i. 19; 24. 

bambu forest, ii. 147 n., 161. 

bambu garden (vénuvana), ii. 161. 

Bamiyan (Fan-yen-na), town of Af- 
ghanistén, i. 39 n., 49, ii, 21; 
images at, i. §1, 55 n. 

Bina, poet, i. 210 n. 

Banaras (Po-lo-ni-sse), i. 67, 70; 47 
n., 134 n., 137 0.5 11. 43, 44, 46 n., 
47 n., 61 n. 

Bannu (Po-na) country, i. 36. . 

Bappapada vihfra at Valabhi, i 
268 n, 

Barabar hills, ii. 136 n. 

Baragaon village, ii. 167 n. 

Baran, ii. 45 n. 

Baptyaga, Bharéch, ii. 259 n. 

Barren ridge (Chih-ling) district, i. 
84. 

Basti district, ii, 14 n. 

bdellinm, guggula, ii. 265 n. 

Bégrém—Hidda, several places of 
this name, i. 95 n. 

Behar hill, ii. 183 n. 

Béjwada on the Krishna, ii. 221 n., 
223 n. 

Bela-sagun, capital of the Kara- 
khitai, i, 26 n. 

Berar, ii, 209 n. 

Betik (Fa-ti), i. 35. 

bhadanta, ii, 203 n, 

Bhadra (Po-t’o), in Chinese Hien, a 
dere ise, ii, 55 n. 5 a tree (p’o-ta- 

lo), i. 88. 

Bhadra-kalpa (Hien-kie), the kalpa 
of the sages, i. 54, 78; ii. 13, 18, 
19, 116, 132, &e. 

Bhadrapada (P’o-ta-lo-po-t’o) month, 


1, 72. 

Bhadraruchi (Po-t’o-lo-liu-chi) Bhik- 
shu, ii. 263 f., 275. 

Bhagalpur (Champa), ii, 191 n., 
192 n., 201 n. 

Bhagyadévi, ii. 81 n. 

Bhandak, ii. 209 n., 214 n. 

Bhandin (P’o-ni), i. 210. 

Bhargava Brahmans, ii. 259 n. 

Bharéch, Bbharukachchha, Bharuka- 


INDEX. 


ehhéva or Bapvyaga (Po-lu-kie- 
ch’e-p’o), ii, 255 n., 259 2., 
260 n. 

Bhaskaravarma (P’o-se-kie-lo-fa- 
mo), in Chinese Yih-cheu, king of 
Kamartipa, ii. 196. 

Bhata or Badhé, ii. 20 n. 

Bhatérka monastery at Valabhi, ii, 


2067 n. 

Bhavavivéka(P’o-pi-fei-kia), Chinese 
Tsing-pin, ii. 223, 224 n., 225 nu. 

Bhawalpur, ii. 265 n. 

Bhida (Pi-tu), i. 36. 

bhikshu (Pi-t’su), ii. 5, &e. 

bhikshunis, i. 39. 

Bhima (Pi-mo) Durga, temple of, i. 
113, 1143 ti. 214 n. 

Bhégadévi, ii. $1 n. 

LBhégavarman, ii, 81 n. 

Bhuila, ditch of, ii. 17 n., 20 n., 
29 n. 

Bhuvanésvara in Orissa, ii, 205 n., 
206 n. 

BiBaors or “Ypacrs, the Vipasa river, 
i, 165 n. 

Biddiorns river, i. 147 n. 

Biddhakarn, corruption of Brithada- 
ranya, ii. 62 n. 

Bijuér in Rohitkhand, i. 190 n. 

Bikapur, ii. 62 n. 

bimba, Bryonia grandis, ii. 102 n. 

Bimbisafra raja (P’in-pi-so-lo), i. 51 ; 
ii, 2n., 85, 102, 148, 153, 165, 166, 
177, 188, 189. 

Bindusara raja, i. 2 n., 140 n. 

Bingheul, the Mongol Min-bulak, i. 
27n., 28 n. 

births (suk), i. 100. 

Biyas river— Vipasa, 1. 167 n., 173 n., 
177 n. 

bédhi, i. 138. 

Bédhidharma, patriarch, i. 119 n., 
120 n.; ii, 251 n. 

Bédhidruma (bP’u-ti-shu), Chinese 
Tao-shu, i. 106; 47, 101, 142; ii. 
54, 115-117, 121, 123, 127, 132, 
133, 135, 174, 223, 224. 

Bédhimanda (P’u-ti-tao-ch’ang), in 
Chinese J'ao-ch’ang, ii, 116. 

Bédhisattva (P’u-ti-sa-to), i. 61, 62, 
75, 93; the great earth, It. 

Boédhivihaira (P’u- -ti-sse), i i. 76. 

Bokhara (Pa-ho), i. 34, 35 n 

Bolor (Po-lu-lo) or Balti, Baltistan, 
i. 93; 135; ii. 298. 

Bolor (Po-li-ho), ii. 289. 


331 


Borddhonktti, ii. 194 n. 

Borpus, i, 19. 

Brahma (Fan), i. 63; ii, 35 m., 115, 
127. 

Brahinachdra, ii. 35 n. 

Brahmachérins (Fan-chi), in Chinese 
Tsing-i, i. 57; and courtesan, ii. 


7. 

Brahmadatta (Fan-sheu), king of 
Kusumapura, i. 207. 

Brahmadattaraja (Fan-yu-wang), ii. 

T72s 

Bence or raja, i. 218; ii. 22, 
123, 126, 133, 145, 148, 184. 

Brahma-gayé, il, 113 n. 

Brahmakayikas (Fan-t'ien), Brahma 
heavens, i, 40. 

Brahmanadita, ii. 71 n. 

Brahman caste (P’o-lo-men), i. 39, 
98, 100, 104; 69, 82, 89; unbe- 
lieving, 44. 

Brahman king, fi. 271. 

Brahman inspired by demon, ii. 
100, 

Brahmanas, nothing known of, i. 
68. 

Braéhmanapura, town of Malwa, it. 
262, 265 u. 

Brahmapura (P’o-lo-hih-mo-pu-lo), 
i, 198. 

Brahmara, Durga, ii, 214 n. 

Brahmara convent, ii. 224 n. 

Brahmaragiri (Po-lo-mo-lo-ki-li), ii. 
214. 

Brihadaranya, ii. 62 n. 

broom, Buddha’s, preserved at Balkh, 


i. 45. 

Buddhabhadra (Fo- t’o-po-to-lo), In- 
dian Sramana, i, 12. 

Aa charita, i, 16 n, 54 n, 


55 

Baiihadasa (Fo-t’o-t’o-s8o), in 
Chinese Fo-sse, i. 230. 

Buddbadharma, 28th patriarch, i. 
105 n., 168 n. 

Buddha-gay4, i. 113, 134, 137, 138, 
142 n.; li. 13 n. 

Buddha-gayé inscription, i. 9; 224 n. 

Buddhagupta-raja (Fo-t’o-kio-to), in 
Chinese Kio-mi and Kio-hu, a 
king, i. 168 n.; ii. 168. 

Buddhain, ii. 147 n. 

Buddha’s hair and nails, i. 221, 230, 
236, ii, 173; tooth, i. 159, 160, 
222, ii, 249; in Ceylon, il, 248, 
249; image of, i, 21, 50, 51 n,, 


332 


102, 202, 230, 235, 236, ii. 215, 
217, 252, 322; patra or begging: 
dish, i, 78; 98, 99 n. ; eyeball, i. 
96; painted figure of, i. 102; 
robe, i, 96; shadow, i. 31; 94; 
shoe-mark, i. 96; skull-bone, i, 
96, 97. 

Buddha-lokanatha, ii. 262, 263. 

Buddhasithha (Fo-t’o-sing-ho), dis- 
ciple of Asatiga, i. 227, 228. 

Buddhapalita, Buddhist teacher, i. 
190 n. 

Buddhavana/(Fo-t’o-fa-na) mountain, 
ii, 145, 147 n. 

Buddhism (Northern), i. 9. 

Buddhist books, ii. 216 n.; in China, 
i. 10, 20. 

Buddhist schools, &c., i. 80. 
Buddhist triad, Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha, i. So n. 
buildings, Indian, i. 73. 

Bukhfria, ii. 307 n. 

bulak (Turkish) pu-lo, 
ground, i. 45 n. 

BudArat of Ptolemy, i. 135 n. 

Bulunghir river, i. 12. 

Buna Mnugalan-raja, ii. 230 0. 

Burma, i. 47 1. 


camping- 


Cc. 


cadmia of Pliny, ii. 174 n. 

Calamina, at the mouth of the In- 
dug, ii. 174 0. 

calendar (the royal), i. 6, 9; Hindu, 
i. 71. 

camphor—karpéra, ii. 232. 

cannibalism, i. 14 n. 

Capissa, Capissene, and Caphusa— 
Kapisa, i. 54 n., 56 n. 

Caspian Sea, i. 36 n. 

castes (varna), Indian, i. 69, $2; 
low, 89. 

castration, i, 23. 

ca—étu (wu-tu), i. 146. 

caves of Afghanistan, i. 59 n. 

cereals, growth of, ii. 80. 

Ceylon, Sithhala, i. 
236. 

Chaddanta elephants, ii. 49. 

Chaghaniin (Chi-ngoh-yen-na), i. 
33 0., 39- 

Chaitra (Chi-ta-lo), month, i. 72. 

Chaj (Che-shi), Tashkand, i. 30. 

Chakas (Che-kie) people, i. 33 
See Takka, 


INDEX. 


Chakravartin- raja (Ch’uen - Jun - 
wang or Lun-wang), a universal 
monarch, i. I, 204, 205; ii, 124, 


172. 

Cha-kiu-kia—Yarkiang? ii. 307. 

Chalukyas claim to be of the race of 
Hariti, i. 111 n. 

Champa (Chen-po) or Champ4puri, 
i. 71; 215 n.; ii. 187 n., ror f, 
192 n. 

Champaka (Chen-po-kia), i. 231. 

Champanagar, ii. 191 ne 

Champion lake, ii. 59. 

Chanda, Durga, ii. 214 n. 

Chanda, ii. 209 n. 

Chanda town, ii, 254 n. 

Chandila (Chen-ta-lo), low caste, i. 
38; 140. 

Chandan Kanika—Kanishka, i. 56 n. 

chandanéva (chen-tan-ni-p’o), san- 
dal-wood, ii. 232. 

Chandrabhaga (Chen-tan-lo-p’o-kia), 
district of the, i, 150 n. 

Chandragiri, ii. 232 n. 

Chandragupta Maurya, i. 17; 128 n. 

chandrakdnta (yueh-ngai-chu), a 
gem, ii, 252, 253. 

Chandrakirtti, a Buddhist teacher, 
i. 190 n. 

Chandrapila (Hu-yuebh), a devotee, 
Il, 171. 

Chandraprabha raja (Chen-ta-lo-po- 
la-p’o), in Chinese Yueh-kwang, 
i. 1385 i). 213. 

chang, a measure of 10 feet, i. 47. 

Chang’an, city, i. 12, 18, 23 n., 83. 

Chang-K'ien, Marquis Po-Wan, i. 
In, 50, 80. 

Chang-kwang, prefecture, 1. 82, 83. 

Chang-tsi, brother of Hiuen Tsiang, 


in 3. 

Chang-yeh, fortified town in Kan- 
suh, i. 12, 23, 

Chang-Yueh, author of preface and 
introduction to Hiuen Tsiang’s 
Si-yu-ki, i. In. 


| Channa or Jina Bodhisattva, ii. 
188. 1893 ii. | 


250. 
Changchia (Chen-che), 2 woman, ii 9. 
chan-t’an-ni-p’o — chandanéva, san- 
dal-wood, ii. 232. 
Charikar (Sha-lo-kia?), village near 
Opian, i. 57 n.. 59 n. 
Charitrapura (Che-li-ta-lo), seaport 
of Utkala, in Chinese Fa-hing, ii. 
205, 230 0., 233 ne 


INDEX. 


ares coout-intermlasien,” ii. 

167. 3 

Chatkal or Chirchik river in Tur- 

’ kistdn, i. 29 n., 30 n. 

Chattan— Himalaya lake, ii. 49 n. 

chatur abhijids (sse-shin-so), four 

’ spiritual faculties, ii. 69. 

Chau dynasty (B.c. 1122-256), whose 
family name was Ki, i. 2 n. 

Chaubara mounds at Mathura, i. 
181 n. 

chau-hia—red-coloured, i. 166. 

Chan-hu-li, convents, i. 21. 

chau-tan, wooden bridges, ii. 149 n. 

Chehéi Dukhtaran mountain (’O-lu- 
na?), i. 61 n. 

Cheka or Takka (Tse-kia), kingdom 
of Amritsar, i, 193, ii. 274, 275. 

Che-mo-t’o-na or Ni-mo country, ii, 


325. P 
Che-meh—Aksu, i. 24. - 
Chemkent, town in Turkist uu, i. 


29 n. 

Chenab river, the Chandrabhiiga, i. 
165 n. 

chen-ch’ing-tao, species of rice, i. 


179. 

Chen-chu—Ghiazipur, ii. 44, 61. 

Chen-chu-na, capital of Fo-li-shi, ii. 
78. 

Chenghiz Khan, i. 29 n., 35 n., 36 n. 

Chen-Kwan ‘I’ai-Tsung, emperor, i. 
In. 

Chen-mu-na— Yamuna river, i. 187. 

Chen-po—Champa, i. 71; ii. 191. 

Chen-seh-to, for K’woh-seh-to. See 
Khost. 

Chen-shi, common name of Hiuen 
Tsiang, i, 2. 

Chen-ta- lo- po - la-p’0—Chandrapra- 
bha, i. 138. 

Chen-to-kia—Chhandaka, ii. 30. 

Cherchern of Mareo Polo, same as 
Shen-shan, i. 12. 

Che-shi, i. 29 n., 30, 31. See Tash- 
kand. 

chestnut (22), i. 68. 

Che-ti, stone cave, i. 71. 

Chetiyani, ii. 68 n. 

Chhandaka (Chen-to-kia), Siddhar- 
tha’s charioteer, i, 51; ii. 29 u, 
30, 102 n. 

Chhasuna, ii. 78 n. 

Chhatrapati, lord of the parasol, in 
Chinese P’ao-chu, lord of trea- 
sures, i, 13 n., 14, 16. 


333 


Ch’-héng Tsu, emperor of China, ii. 
282 n. 

Chi—Vijiiana, ii. 94 n. 

chi—kapiijala, ii, 33. 

Chih-kia—Chaka, people, i. 33. 

Chih-ling, Barren Pass, i. 84, 85. 


‘Chi-i, Buddhist pilgrim, i, 224 n. 


Chi’in Lin, i. 18. 

Chi-king-kang-t'0-lo-ni— Vajrapéni- 
dhérant, ii. 36, 225. 

Chi-ki-t’?0,— Julien supposes to be 
Chikdha or Chittur, ii. 271. 

Chikitsdvidyd, Chin, [-fang-ming, i. 
78, 153 n. 

chilivcosm (ta-tsin), i. I n., 10. 

Chilka Lake, ii. 206 n. 

Chi-mo-lo—Malaktita, ii. 231 n., 
232 n, 

China, date of importation of Bud- 
dhist books into, i, 10. 

China (Chi-na-kw3), i, 8, 10, 21, 
102; 57 n., 58, 217; ii, 196, 
302, 319. 

chindni (chi-na-ni), in Chinese 
han-chi-lat—the peach, i, 174. 

Chinapati (Chi-na-po-ti), country in 
the Panjab, i. 167 n., 173 £ 

chinardjaputra (Chi-na-lo-she-fo-ta- 
lo), in Chinese han-wang-tseu— 
the pear, i. 174. 

Ching-im, i, 108. 

Chinchi, a courtesan, ii. 9 n. 

Chifichimnanda, i. 47 ; ii. 9 n. 

chin-chu—ruby dish, ii. 120. 

Chine or Chinigari—Chinapati, i. 
1730. 

Ch-hing Ho, a eunuch, ii, 282 n. 

Ching-kwong, i. 99. 

Ching-liang—Sammiatiya school, i. 
200, 207; ii. 2, 44. 

Ching-ming-lun—the Vyakaranam 
of Panini, i, 114. 

Chi-ngoh-yen-na—Chaghanian. 

Chin-kin-inan—KAafichanamala, wife 
of Kunfla, i. 141 0. 

Ch'in-na—Jina, ti. 218 n. 

Chinnadéva-gétra (Chi-na-ti-p’o-kiu- 
ta-lo), in Chinese Han-zhi-t’ien 
chong, ii. 300. 

chin-tu-kia—tinduka fruit, i. 88. 

Chirchik river. See Chatkal. 

Chi-ta-lo—Chaitra. 

Chitral, i. 119 n., 135 n.; ii, 2660, 

Chi-sse-tseu—Sirhhala, 

chitupdddsila, ii. 5 n. 

Chi-yeu, i. 18, 23, 25. 


334 


Chi-yueh—Jiidnachandra, ii. 171. 

Chéla country or Chulya (Chu-li- 
ye, So-li), ii, 227, 249. 

Chow dynasty, i, 94; 217 n. 

Chu or Chui river (Su-yel), i. 89; 
26 n., 27 0., 29 n. 

Chuh-Yung, one of the 
sovereigns,” i. 7 ny 

Chit-ku-po—Yarkiang kingdom, i. 


"three 


88. 

Chu-li-ye—Chulya or Chdla, ii. 227. 

Chunda (Shun-t’o), ii. 32, 

Chung-sse-fan-p-p’o-sha — Vibhdsha- 
prakaranu-pdda Sdstra, i. 161. 

Chung-sse-fen-'0-pi-ta-mo — Abhi- 
dharmaprakarana-pada Sdstra, i. 
109. 

Chie haeheie=Temehacls i, 32, 

Chu-si-hing, a pilgrim, i. 10. 

Ch’u-ti-se-kia—Jydtishka, ii. 167. 

Chwang, i. 95. 

Chwong - yan -ta - shing - king -lun— 
Mahdyana sttrdlaikdratika, i. 
220. 

circle sign, il. go. 

civil administration, i. 87. 

classes (sse-sing), four, of living 
beings, i. 150 n. 

cleanliness of Hindus, i. 77. 

climate of India, i. 75. 

clothing, i. 180. 

Cloud-stone mountain sanghdraéma, 
ji, 103, 136 n. 

cock (wood of the)—Kukkuta pada, 
i. 6. 

Cock’s-foot-mountain, i. 64; 238 n.; 
ii. 13 n., 22 n., 142, 144, 145. 

Cock-garden sangharama, ii, 142 n. 

commerce of India, i. 89. 

Confucius, i. 943 4 n. 

Constantinovsk, town, i. 26 n, 

copper, native (teou-shih), i. 89, 
177, 194, 198. 

Cophene (Ki-piu), i. 100. 

cornelian (ma-nao) dish, ii. 129, 

courtesan and Brahmacharing, ii, 


creatures, four kinds of, ii. 261. 
cremation of Buddha’s body, ii, 


40. 
criminals, i. 83 f. 
crosier (sek cheung), i. 96 n. 
crystal dish (po-ch’i), i, 1773 ii. 
129, 
curcuma (yu-kin) ginger, i. 54 n. 


INDEX. 


D. 


DadaI montes—Dantal6ka,i, 112n- 

Dahee tribe, i. 37 n. 

Dahalan or Taras, i, 29 n. 

Dai-Gakf, Japanese name of Vaigra- 
vana, i. 59 n. 

Dakshina (Ta-thsin)—Dekhan coun- 
try, i. 68. 


Dakshindyana (Nan-hing), the 
march of the sun to the south, 
i, 71 n. 


Damdama mound, near Mathura, i. 
182 pn, 

Déuapati (Shi-chu), religious patron, 
i. 81, 
Dandarika (Tan-ta-lo-kia?) moun- 
tain, i. 112 n. See Dantaldka. 
dantakdshtha (tan-to-kia-se-ch’a), in 
Chinese ch’i-mo, Buddha’s tooth- 
cleaner, ii. 173. 

Dantaléka (Tau-ta-lo-kia) mountain, 
in Gandhfra, i. 112. 

Darah or Darah-i-aim (Hi-mo-to-lo), 
in Badakshan, i. 42 n. 

Darah-Gaz, i. 39 n. 

Dé&rail or Dari) (Ta-li-lo), old capital 
of Udyana, i. 134; valley, i. 13. 

Daril, river, i. 13. 

Dard country, 1.13; 119 n., 134 n. 

D&rghanakha, a Brahman, ii. 179. 

Darius, inscription of, i. 61 n. 

Darsika, ii. 102 0. 

Darunta in Kabul, i. g1 n. 

Darviké district, i, 150 n. 

Darwaz in Kumidha, i. 41. 

Dasabhimi Satra (Shi-ti-king), i. 
228, 

dasabdla (shi-li), Ten-power, il. 7 n., 
55 Mey 756 

date fruit (tsau), i. 88. 

Daulatabad, ii. 255 n. 

Dauna, ii. 65 n. 

Daundia-khéra, village, i. 229 n, 

Deer-forest (Lu-ye), ii. 45. 

Deer-feet-daughter or girl, ii, 71 


72: 
Deer-king birth, ii. 51. 
“deer park,’ ii, 48 n., 55. 
DegwaAra, village, ii. 65 n., 66 n. 
Dehasg, i. 49 u. 
Demir Kapi, the iron gates, i. 36 n, 
demon-inspired Br&éhman, ii. Ioo, 
“deposited bows and clubs,” tower 
of, and origin of name, i. 53. 


INDEX. 


Dérabhata, king of Valabhi, ii. 267 n. 
Derbend, near the Caspian, i, 36 n. 
Derbent, i. 36 n. 

desert of drifting sand, i, 85; io 


324. 

“Desert ” 
67. 

deserted town in Turkestan, i. 28, 

Dévas, Brahmanical gods, i. 54, 78; 
10. 

Déva Bodhisattva (Ti-p’o), in Chinese 
Tien, i. 188 f., 231; ii. 97-99, 
210, 227, 302 ; sounds the ghantd, 
ii. 99. 

Déva mountain, ii, 114. 

Dévaraja, ii. 123. 

Déva rajas, four, ii. 129. 

Dévadatta (Ti-p’o-ta-to), in Chinese 
Tien-shu, i, 47, 48, 59, 61; ii. 8, 
9, 17, 50, 150, 153, 158, 201. 

Dévamanussapnjitam, i. 8m. 

Déva Mara Piguna, i. 59. f> 

Dévanampujatissa, king of Ceylon, 
about 250 B.C. ii. 247 n. 

Dévapadan, ii. 142 n. 

Dévagarina (Ti-p’o-she-mo), author of 
Vijidkdya Sastra, i. 240. 

Dévaséna (Ti-p’o-si-na), i. ror f. 

Development (Great) series of writ- 
ings, i. 13. 

dew (sweet), Chinese kan-lu, Sans. 
anorita, i. 1. 

dew-dish, i. 67. 

DéwaAla hills, ii, 214 n. 
Dhamasthieti, Julien’s restoration 
of Ta-mo-sih-teh-ti, which see. 
Dhamek, the great tower of, ii. 


(Kwang-ye) vihira, i. 


45 n. 

Dhamftakataka, ii. 221 n. 

Dhana-nandg, ii. 94 0 

Dhanakataka —( ‘l’v-na-kie-tse-kia), 
Dharanikéta on the Krishna, ii, 
220 £., 225. 

dhanu, Chinese kong, a measure of 
4 cubits, i. 70. 
Dhanyakataka, Dhanyavatipura, or 
Dhanyakataka, ii. 220 n., 221 n. 
Dhara, Dhardmagara, ii. 260 n., 
266 n. 

Dhédrani, ii. 226 n. 

Dharanikéta, Dhanyakataka, ii. 221 
n., 226 n. 

Dhérant-pitaka for Vidyddhara-pi- 
taka (Kin-cheu-tsiang), ii. 165. 
Dharaséna, I. of Valabhi, ii, 268 n. 
Dharaséna II, of Valabhi, ii. 268 n. 


335 


dharma, Chinese Fa, the law, i. 66; 
ii. 63, 168 n. 

Dharmaguptas (T’an-wu-te and T’an- 
mno-kio-to), in Chinese Fa-mi-pu 
school, i. 121. 

dharmakdya, body of the law, i. 
204 n., 205 

dharmakdye | (Fa- shin), the spiritual 
essence of Buddha, ii. 37 n. 

Dharmakéti or Dharmagupta (Ta- 
mo-kiu-ti), a Shaman, i. 76. 

ea or Kurukshétra, i, 
184. 

Dharinapala (Ta-mo-po-lo), in Chi- 
nese U-fa, ii, 110, III, 171, 223 
f£., 225 n., 229, 230, 237, 238, 239, 
240. 

Dharmapattana, Sravasti, ii. In. 

Dharina-pitaka collected, ii, 162, 

dharmasarira (fa-she-li), ii. 146. 

Dharméasoka, ii. go n. 

Dharmatara, error for Dharmatrata, 
i, 110 n. 

Dharmatrata (Ta-mo-ta-la-to), in 
Chinese Fa-k’iu, author of the 
Samyuktébhidharma Séstra, i. 98, 
IIo. 

Dharmavarddhana, son of Asoka, i. 
31. 

Dharméttara or Uttaradharma, 
founder of the Sautrautika school, 
i, 139 n. 

dhatus, the eighteen, i. 95 n. 

Dhivaka, poet, perhaps author of 
Ndgananda, i. 211 n. 

Dhrabhata, Siladitya VI. of Vala- 
bhi, ii. 267 n. 

Dhruvapata (T’u-lo-p’o-po-tu), in 
Chinese Ch’ang-jui, king of Vala- 
bhi, ii, 267. 

Dhruvaséna I. of Valabht, ii, 267 n. 

Dhruvaséna IL. of Valabhi, ii. 267 n 

Digambara Jainas, Nirgranthas, i 
55 0., 144 n., 145 0.3 ii. 208 n. 

Dinava (Ti-na-po) ? Dinapati, ii. 278 

Dipankara Buddha, in Chinese Fen- 
sang-po and Zhen-ting-po, i. 35; 
OI nL, 92, 93- 

Dirghabbavana (? Ti-kia-p’o-fo-na), 
monastery, ii. 313. 

dirghdgama, i. 79. 

Dirghanakha, in Chinese Ch’ang- 
chao, author of the Diryhanakha, 
parivrajaka-pariprichchha, ii. 179. 

discussions, Buddhist, i, 81, 

ditch, Kukdli, ii. 9. 


336 


ditch of Bhuila, ii. 17 n. 

ditch of Srigupta, ii. 152. 

division of S‘artras (shi-li), ii. 39, 
41, 160. 

Dongarpur, ii. 260 n. 

dragons (Nagas), i. 94, 144. 

Dragon-lake (Naigahrada), i. 20. 

Dragon-palace, i. 5. 

Dragon-chapel, i. 41. 

Drivida (Ta-lo-pi-ch’a), country, ii. 
228, 231 n., 253. 

dress of the Hinds, i. 75 ; royal, 76. 

Dréna (Ho), i. 210n. ; ii. 41, 65 n. 

Dréna stipa (Ping-su-tu-po), ii, 65. 

Drénddanardja (Ho-fan-wang), ii, 8. 

Dudda’s convent, ii, 267 n. 

duhkha, in Chinese A’u, sorrow, i. 
223; ii, 105 n 

Dukhula, father ‘of Samaka, i, 111 n. 

Durga, ii. 224 n. 

Durgidévi (T’o-kia-t’ien-shin) or 
Bhimadévi, i. 113 ., 114 0. 

Dvarapati (To-lo-po-ti) Sandowe, ii. 
200. 


E. 


Eastern Hia China, i. 58. 

eight dragons, the talented sons of 
Siin, i. 4. 

eight enfranchisements, ii. 143. 

eight VajrapAnis, ii. 22. 

Ekaparvata sangharama, i i, 81 n. 

phates (To-kio-sien-zin) Rishi, i. 


113. 
flapatra (I-lo-po-ta-lo), i. 68; 137; 


ii. 41. 
Elephant birth, ii. 49. 
elephant, the perfumed, i, § ; wild, 
ii, 207. 
nee strength—Pilusira stiipa, 
Blur lake, ii. 217 n. 
Eraka or Munda, rock or gate, i. 
Ephthalites (Ye-tha), i. 15,16, 90, 91. 


145 n. 
Eukratides, Baktrian king, i. 37 n. 
Excalibur, ii, 56 n. 
eyeball of Buddha, i. 96. 


F, 


Fa-chi-lun—Abhidharma jitdna-pra- 
sthdna S‘dstra, i. 175. 

Fa-hien, Chinese traveller, 399-414, 
A.D., Lt ff; 5.- 


INDEX. 


Fairy land (P’eng-lai-shan), i. 95. 

Faizabad, city, ii. 14 n. 

Fa-la-na—Varana or Varnu. 

Fa-la-pi—Valabhi, ii. 266. 

Fal-ing, Chinese pilgrim, i. 10. 

Fa-lung, ‘‘city of departure,” 
the Orissa coast, ii. 205. 

Fan and Su, books: of Chinese 
legendary history, i. 3. 

Fan— Brahma, i. 2033; ii. 127. 

Fan, Sanskrit, i. 71. 

Fan tribes—Tibetans, i, 173 n 

Kan-hing—Braéhman, ii. 35 n. 

Fan-sheu—Brahmadatta, i. 207 ; ii. 


on 


71. 

fa-she-li—dharmagartra, ii, 146. 

Fa-she-lo—Vajra, ii. 170. 

fast days, i. 21. 

fau-poh, cupola, ii. 51. 

Fei-han—Ferghanah. 

Fet-she-li (Vaisalt), fi. 44, 66, 160. 

Feou-thou, a pagoda. i, 103. 

Ferghanah (Fei-han), province and 
town of Turkistén, i. 30, 31 n. 

Fire-extinguishing stapa, ii. 34. 

Firuzpur or Firuzabad, ii. 194 n. 

Fish-monster story, ii. 79. 

five great commandments, i. 70. 

fivefold spiritual body, ti. 94. 

Five Indies, i. 9. 

Five kings (the), Shan-hao, Chuen- 
hio, Kao-sing, Yao, and Shun, 
who followed Hwang-ti, i. 7 n. 

five skandhas, ii. 94 n. 

five vidyds, ii. 42, Lol. 

Fo-hi, emperor, i. 2 n. 

Fo-kwi-ki discovered by Klaproth 
and translated by Réimusat, i. 11; 
new version, i. 23-83. 

Fo- see Byzantine empire, ii. 278, 


Fo- i shi-sa-Vang- na—Vpijjisthana, 
Pargusthina, i. 56 n.; ii, 285. 
Fo-lu-sha — Purushapura (Pesha- 

war), i, 32, 33. 
Fo-shwui, “river of religious 
merit,” the Mahabhadra, i. 188. 
Fo-sha-fu—the Varusha (Po-lu-sha) 
of Hiuen 'siang, i, 102. 

Fo - to - fa - na- shan — Buddhavana 
mountain, ii. 145. 

Fo-t’o-kio- to—Buddhaguptaraja, ii, 
168, 

Fo-t’o-to-so—Buddhasa, i. 230. 

Fo-ts’u—read Po-t’su, ii. 289, &c. 


INDEX. 


four continents, i. 10, 11. 

four Déva-rajas, ii. 129. 

four modes of life, ii, 214 n. 

four kinds of creatures, ii. 261. 

Fragrant mountains, i. 11, 

Fu, the, family, i. 25. 

Fuh-hi or P’au-i, one of the ‘‘ three 
sovereigns,” i. 7 n. 9 n. 

fu-ling— Radix china, ii. 194 n. 

funeral of an Arhat, i. 76 f. 

funerals, i. 86, 

Fu - she - su-mi- lo — Pujasumira 
Ayushmat, ii. 74, 75. 


G. 


GasaPaTt (Siang-chu), lord of 
elephants, i. 13 0., 14, 15, 16, 
Gandaka river, ii. 14 n., 66 n. 
Gandaki, Little, river, ii, 32 n. 
Gandare or Gandarii and Gandari- 
tis, 1. 97 n., 98 n. Ln 
Gandhadvipa, it, 138 n. 
gandhahastt (hiang-siang), perfume 
elephant, i. 5 n.; ii. 138. 
Gandhara (Kien-t’o-lo), Peshawar 
country, country of the Yazuf- 
ziahs, i, 15, 31, 32, 78, 99, 102, 
103, 106; 56, 57, 63, 97, 98 n., 
109 n., 136 ., 151, 153 0., 156 n. 
Gangé (King-kia}, river, i. 86 f. 
See Ganges. 
Gangadwara (King-kia-ho-men) or 


Gangantri Haridwara, i. 188 n., 
| 198 n. 
Ganges (King-kia) river, Maha- 


bhadr&, i. 16, 33,67, 71; 11, 86 f., 
188, 197, 198, 201, 206, 207, 214, 
217, 218, 222, 223, 224, 225, 229, 
230; ii, 44, 64, 71, 77, 81, 82, 
184, 186, 190, 191, 192, 193, 206 n. 

Gangi (King-k’i), a dragon, i. 122. 

Garhwal, i. 198 u. 

Garjanapati, ii. 61 n, 

Garjpur, ii. 61 n. 

Garma (Hwitih-lo-ma), i. 39. 

gétha (kia-t’o), Chinese song, and 
fong-song, a stanza, i. 124 n. 

Ganda, old capital of Bengal, i. 210; 
ii, 194 n. Re 

Gautama (Kiao-ta-mo), Sramana, i. 
67; ii, 8, 35, 151. 

Gaya (Kia-ye), i. 61; ii.95, 112 n., 
113, 124 n., 136 n., 137 U., 142 5 
Chinese inscriptions at, i. 10. 

Gaya-kasyapa (Kia-ye-kia-she-po), 
il, 113, 114, 130. 

VOL. II. 


337 


Gaz, Ghaz, or Darah-gaz (Kie-chi), 
i. 39 n., 48, 49. 

Ghighra river, i. 225 n.; ii, 64 n. 

ghantdé (kin-t’i), i. 66; ii, 96. 

ghantd sounded, ii. 162. 

Ghazipur (Chen-chu), ii. 61, 62. 

Ghazna (Ho-si-na), town of Af- 
ghanistin, ii. 283. 

Ghorband, town, i. 56 n. ; river, i. 
67 1. 

Ghésha (K’iu-sha), Chinese Miau- 
ing, i. 142, 143 n. 

Ghéshira (Kiu-shi-lo), a noble, i, 
236. 

Ghéshiravana vihdra, i. 68. 

Ghosra in Bihar, i. 91 n. 

ginger (yu-kin), i. 54. 

Giribbaja, ii. 161 n. 

Girjok, ii. 182 n. 

Girivraja (Shan-ching) ii, 149 n., 
158, 161 n. 

Girnara, Mount Ujjanta, ii. 269 n. 

Gédhanya (K’iu-t’o-ni), one of the 
four dvipas, i, 11. 

Goaliyé river, ii. 207 n. 

Gédavari river, ii, 207 n., 209 n., 
217 0. 

Gogardasht river, i. 42 n. 

Gékantha ? (Ku-hwiin-ch’a) convent, 
i, 186, 

Goldflower, a king’s name, i, 20. 

Gold river, ii. 39. 

Golkonda, ii, 254 n. 

Gollas, king, i, 16. 

Gémati river, 237 n. 

Gomati, priests of, i. 26. 

Gondwana, ii. 209 n. 

Gépa (Kiu-po), an arhat and author, 
i, 240. 

Gépala, cave, i. 107. 

Gépala (Kiu-po-lo), a dragon, i. 93 3 
also name of Kukali. 

Gépali (Kiu-po-li), ii. 9 n. 

Gorakhpur, i. 32 n. 

gosirshachandana (niu - tew - shan - 
van), cow’s-head sandal-wood, i, 
44; ii. 145, 148. In Tibetan, 
gorshisha ; in P&li, géstsam ; 
among the Mongols, gurshosha ; 
ii, 145 n. 

Gégringa mount (K’iu-shi-lin-kia), 
in Chinese Niu-kio mount, ii. 313. 

Gévisana (Kiu-pi-shwang-na), in 
Northern India, i. 199. 

gradual doctrine (t’sien-kiau), i. 20, 

grape (po-tau), i. 88. 

Y 


338: 


Great Vehicle. See Mahayana, 

GridhradwAra opening, ii. 180 n. 

Gridhrakfita - parvata (Ki-li-tho-lo- 
kiu-ch’a), in Chinese ‘T’seu-fong 
and T’seu-t’ai, i. 55, 58; 603; ii. 
46, 47 nL, 152, 153- 

grihapati, in Chinese Chang-che, 
householder, ii. 160, 187. 

Grishma (tsin-je), hot season, i. 


72 n. 

guggula—bdellium, i, 265 n. 

Guhaséna, king of Valabhi, ii. 266 
u., 267. 

Gunamati (Kiu-na-mo-ti) Bddhi- 
sattva, Chivese Tih-hwui, ii, 104, 
105, 106, 107, 108, 109, TIO, 

Gunaprabha (Kiu-na-po-la-p’o), iu 
Chinese Te-kwang, i. 191, 192; 
ii. 275. 

Gupta era, i, 168 n. 

Gurjjara, kingdom in the North 
Pafijab, i, 165 n. 

Gurjjara (Kiu-che-lo), Gujarat, ii, 
269, 271. 

Gurupadagiri (K’iu-liu-po-t’o-shan), 
in Chinese ‘T’sun-tso-shan, ii. 
142. 

Gushana, same as Kushana and 
Kopavos, i. 56 n. 


H. 


Harsak, town, i. 43 n. 

hair circle—the drnz, one of the 
thirty-two marks of a Buddha, i. 
I, 67 n. 

Hair-and-nail relic stfpa, ii. 80. 

Hajiyak pass, near Bamiydn, i. 


49 n. 
Hakodati, in Japan, i. 59 a. 
Hami, in Little Bukharia, i. 17 n. 
Han country, i. 30, 45, 71, 73, 78, 
79, 82, 89, 90; ii. 300-301. 
Han period, 201 (or 206) B.c. to 9 
A.D., i. 2, 5 0. 
Handia hill, ii, 148 n. 
hang—apricot, i. 88. 
Hang-ho—Ganges river, i. 11 n. 
Han-jo—Kanyakubja?, ii. 74. 
Han-mo, city, probably the Pi-mo 
of Hiuen Tsiang, the Pein of 
Marco Polo, i, 86 n., 87. 
Hansa (Keng-so) stfipa, ii. 181. 
Hanhsawédi, Pegu, ii. 200 n, 
Hansi, in Northern India, i. 183 1. 
“hare in the moon,” ii. 60. 


INDEX, 


Hare Jdtaka, ii. 59, 60 n. 

Haridwara town, i, 197 n., 198 n. 

Hariparvata — Takht - i- Sulaiman 
mountain in Kagmir, i, 158 n, 

Haritt or Hariti (Ko-li-ti), in Chi- 
nese Kwei-tseu-mu, the mother 
of demons, i. 110 n. 

Haritiputra, the Chalukya royal 
family, &., i. 114 1. 

Harmatelia of Diodoros, ii. 262 n. 

Harshavardhana (Ho-li-sha-fa-t’an- 
na), Hi-tsang, i. 210 f.3 ii. 206 n. 

Hasan-Abdal, 8 miles north of 
Shah-dhéri, i, 136 u., 137 n., 
145 n. 

Hastanagara—Pushkalé vatt, i. rogn. 

Hastigasta — Hathi-godde (Siang- 
to-kan), ii. 17 n. 

hasta, a cubit, Chinese chu, 1. 70. 

Hasti—Astes, king of Gandhéra, 
i, 109 n. 

Hastinapura, i. 186 n. 

“ Hathi-kund,” ii, 17 n. 

Hayamukha(’O-ye-mu-khi), country 
in North India, i, 229, 

Hazara (Ho-sa-lo) country, 147 n. 

Hazrat-Imam, See Ahrang ; heads 
of children flattened, 

hell, the lowest, Wu-kan-ti-yuh, 
i. 172, 185 n.; one made by Asdka- 
raja, ii. 85, 86. 

Helmand (Lo-mo-in-tn), ii. 283. 

Hémanta, cold season, i. 72 0. 

Hesidrus or Hesudrus, the Satlaj 
river, 178 n. 

Hétuvidyd Sdstra (In-ming-lun), i. 
78, 153 u.; ii, 218, 219, 220, 263. 

heun-to—kandu plant, i. 88. 

Hia, eastern and western, i. 9 n. 

Hian mountains, i. 89. 

Hiang - hu - kong - ch’ing, ‘city of 
scented flowers,’ ii. 83 u. 

Hia-shing, ‘‘ dismounting from the 
chariot,” stapa, ii. 153. 

Hidda (Hi-lo), city iu Kabul, i. 34; 
gI n., 95. 

Hien-tau—India, i. 69, 

Hien-yuen-shia or Hwang-ti, em- 
peror, 2697 B.c., i. 3.1. 7 n. 

Hie-ts’un—Arya Parévika, i. 98 n., 
105 n. ; 

Hila (Hi-lo), mountain, i. 123. 

Hi-lo—Hidda, i. 34; 91 n., 95. 

Hi-lu-sili-mien-kien — Rdi-Saman- 
gan, 

Himatala (Hi-mio-ta-lo) Chinese 


INDEX. 339 


Siwe - shan - hia, Darah -i- aim in 
Badakhshan, i. 42, 156, 157, ii. 
21, 290. 

Himavanta country, i. 128 n,, ae : 

HinayAna or Lesser Vehicle, i. 24, 
25, 29, 31, 36, 41; 24 n., 
104, I12, 11g n., 139 m., 172, 
174, 176, 179, 180, 184, 187, 190, 
191, 192, 200, 202, 207, 224, 225, 
e2gene 230. 231, 
61, 67, 78, 81, 100, 181, 184, 186, 
189, 191, 195, 201, 247, 254, 257, 
261, 266, 267 u., 268, 270, 272, 
275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 288, 


299 : 
Hindaiktsh or Snowy Monntains (q. 
v.), the Paropamisus of the an- 


cients, i. 39 n., 49, 50, 525 53s 54, | 


56 n. 

hing—ayana, 9. v. 

hitgu or hing-kiu, assefontida, ii, 
283 n. 

Hlin-vang-shing-kiau Séstra, 237. 

hio-jin—those studying to become 
sramanas, i. 152 n. 

Hiranyaparvata (I-lan-na-po-fa-to), 
Mongir, ii. 185, 186, 187. 

Hiranyavati (Hi-lai-na-fa-ti), Chi- 
nese Kin-ho aud Yn-kin-ho, the 
Gandaki river, i. 52; ii. 32 n., 39 v0. 

Hissar proyinee, i. 39 n. 

Hi-sn, tribe of Turks, i. 40. 

Hi-tsang—Harshavardhana, i. 2I0 f. 

Hiuen Tsiang, a.p. 599-664, called 
San-siang-fa-sse — Tripitakachar- 
ya,and called hitnself Méksha-déva 
and Mahdyanadéva (Vie, p. 248, 
J. A. S&. Beng., vol. li. p. 94 f), 
1.13, 14,16; In.,2,9; eulogium 
on, 1, 2-63 at Kamariipa, ii. 196, 
197. 

Hiung-nu, Turks, i. 16; 20 n. 37 n. ; 
ii. 315, 316. 

hiun-lu—periume tree, ii, 265. 

ho—the eighty inferior marks on a 
Buddha, i. 145 n. 

Ho-han—Kuan country, i. 34. 

ho-hwa—water-lily, i. 96 n. 

Ho-lin—Khulm, 

do -li-sha-fa-t’an-na — Harshavar- 
dhana, i. 210. 

Ho-li-sih-mi-kia—Khwarazm, i. 35. 

Ho-lo-hu—Ragh in Badakhshan, i 
42; ii. 249. 

Ho-lo-hu-lo—Rahbnula, 

Ho-lo-she-pu-lo—Rajapuri, i. 163 


236, 239; ii. 


| Hulu river (Bulunghir?), i. 


Ho - lo- she - fa - t’'an-na—Riajyavar- 
dhana, i, 210. 

Ho-lo-she-ki-li-hi—Rajagriha, ii. 43, 
165. 

ee = Opniy, ii. 278. 

Ho-nan, i. 18. 

Hu-pu-to-shi—Adbhutéisma stfipa, 
i, 127, 

Hor - Parvata — Hari-parvata, in 
Kasmir, i. 158 n. 

horses (excellent, shen), i. 20. 

horse (divine), Aési, a form of 
Avalokitésvara, ii. 242. 

Ho-sa-la—capital of Tsaukdta, ii. 
283. 

Ho-si-na—Ghazna, it. 283. 

Ho-nan-fu or Lo-yang, tow n,l, 15, 21. 

Ho-yun, a pilgrim, i. 10. 

Hytdayadharant (Sin-to-lo-ni), ii. 
224. 

Hu—Uighur people, i. 85; 32, 33, 
76; ii. 302, 326. 

Hu-fa-p’u-sa — Dharmapala Bédhi- 
sattva, li. 110, 171, 223 

huh—a tree, ii. 32. 

19; 
I7n 

Humayin, emperor, i. 49 0. 

Hu-ming- Yr u-sa— Pravhapala Bédhi- 
sattva, 1. 48. 

hiin man, the rills dividing fields, 
ii, 21 n. 

Huns (of Byzantine writers}— Yetha, 
Ephthalites, i..16. 

Hupidn (Hu-pi-na). See Upian. 

Hu-sha—Wakhsli or Oxus river. 

Hu-shi-kien—Juzgana, 


_ hu-tsia’u—a tree, ii. 265. 


Hu-yaeh—Chandrapala, ii. #71. 


. Hwa-chau, an island in the kingdom 


of Hwa-siu, i. 2 n. 
Hwa-kong—Kusnmapura, i, 207 1. 
Hwang-ti, first emperor of China, 

i, 2 n., "7 n., 8 n., 276 n. 
Hwin-t’o-to, capital of Ta-mo-sih- 

teh-ti, ii. 293. 

Hwan-yuen, a district in Ho-nan, 


ide 

Hwei Sing, a pilgrim, i. 15, 84, 106, 

108. 

Hwo or Hwoh—Knnduz country, i. 
39 42, 433 ti. 287, 288, 2S9.. 

Hwith-lo-mo—Gurma. 


| Hwui-kin, a pilgrim, i. 23. 


Hwni-king, Buddhist pilgrim, i. 
23, 26, 28, 31. 


340 


Hwui-wu, pilgrim, i. 23. 
Hwui-lih, i. 20. 
Hwui-ta, i 26, 31, 33. 


L 


Icy mountains—Muzart, i. 19. 
I-gu country—Kamul, i. 19. 
I-lo-po-ta-lo — Elapatra (naga), i. 


137. 

image of Buddha, ii. 322; walking, 
i, 43. 

Imaus mountains, 1, 135 n. 

Indarab or Andarab (’An-ta-lo-po), 
iL 43. 

India, names of, i. 69; extent, 
climate, 70; boundaries of, 90. 

Indra, ii. 36 n. 

Indragila-griha, i. 58 n. 

Indus river, i. 39, 103, 107. 

Indhyadri hills, ii. 257 n. 

Ing, river of Ho-nan, i. 4, 

Ing-chuen— Yu-chen in Ho-nan, 
12, 

‘inner palace,’ Zanana(Chong-kong), 
i. 23. 

In-po-kin—Yamgan in Badakhshan, 
i. 423 ii. 291. 

Introduction to the Si-yu-ki, i. 7. 

In-tu—name for India, i. 69. 

Jn-tu-ki—records of India, ii. 61 n. 

inundation miracle, ii. 131. 

Tron-gates—Kohlugha, i. 36, 37, 39 n. 

Tron-wheel king, i. 64. 

Isfijab, town in TurkistAn, i. 29 n. 

Issyk-kul, Turkish name of Lake 
Temurti or Lop-nur, i. 11; 25 n., 
28 n., 29 n. 

Isterfishan, Sutrishna, i. 31 n. 

ISvara (I-shi-fa-lo) Tsii-tsai, author 
of the ’O.pi-ta-mo-ming - ching - 

. lun, i, 112. 

Iégvara (1'sz-tsai), Mahadéva, i, 113, 
115, 127 n.; ii. 23. 

I-tsing, writer of Buddhist records, 
i, 11. 

I6a-youpos, town in Ovdpoa, i. 147 n. 


J. 


JapDE handle (to move the), i. 4n., 
jade stone, i. 21. 

Jaina sects, i, 144 n., 145. 

Jajahuti—Chi-ki-t’o, a district in 
Central India, ii. 271, 


INDEX. 


Jajapura, in Orissa, ii, 204 n. 
Jakhtiban, ii. 147 n. 

Jalalabad, in Kabul, i. 91 n. 
Jalalabad valley stipas, i, 55 n. 
Jalandhar (She-lan-t’o-lo), i, 167 n., 


174 nD. 
jdlinas, twisted hair, ii. 176. 
JamAlgarhi, i. 114 n, 
jambu (chen-pu) tree, ii. 19 n., 


30. : 

Jambudvipa (Chen-pu-cheu), i. 32, 
40, 64, 78; 13; ji. 16, 47, 88 un, 
89, 95, 96, 115, &e. 

Jammu or Jambu, town, perhaps 
Jayapura, i, 165 0. 

Janaka, ii, 78 n. 

Janakapura (Ch’en-shu-na), ii, 78 n. 

Jardsandha-ka-baithak, ii, 181 n. 

Jarsu river, i, 29 n. 

Jétakas (Pen-seng and Pen-seng- 
sse), i. 124, 171 ; of the lion and 
the pig, 196 n. 

jati, modes of birth, i. 64 n. 

Java, probably Yamanadvipa, ii. 
200 n, 

Jayapura (She-ye-pu-lo), perhaps 
Jammu, i. 165 n., 166 n. 

Jayaséna (She-ye-si-na), in Chinese 
Shing-kiun, ii, 146, 147. 

Jerm, town in Badakshan, i. 42 n. 

Jéta (Shi-to-yuen), the garden of, 
ii. 4m, 53 prince, son of King 
Prasénajit, ii. 10. 

Jétavana (Shi-to-lin), in Chinese 
Shing-lin, i, 44, 45, 46, 70; 202; 
ii. 4, 8, 12, 13. 

Jhelam river, i. 163 n. 

Jimfitavahana Bédhisattva (Shing- 
yun), i. 210 n, 

Jina or Channa (Ch’in-na) Bédhi- 
sattva, in Chinese T’ong-sheu, ii. 
218, 219, 220, 259. 

Jinamitra (Shing-yeu), ii, 171. 

Jin-jo-sien—KshAnti-Rishi, i. 121 n. 

Jin-kia-lau sangharéma, i. 56 n., 


n. 

J Cain (Ch’in-na-fo-ta-lo), in Chi- 
nese Tsiii-shing-tszu, author of 
the Ydi-chie-sh-ti-lun-shih, ti. 275. 

Jen-tang-fo—Dipankara Buddha, i. 


92. 
Jishnugupta, ii. 81 n. 
Jivaka (Shi-po-kia), in Chinese Neng- 
hwo, i. 59; ii. 152. 
jivaijtva (Ming-ming), a bird, ii. 80. 
Jhauachandra (Chi-yueh), ii, 171. 


INDEX. 


Ji fdnapr asthdna Sdstra of Katya- 
yaniputra, i, 155 u. 

Ju, river of Ho-nan, i. 4 n. 

Ju-i—Manérhita, i. 98 ne 

Jui-mo-to—Jumadha 2, 

Ju-lai—Tathagata, i, 88. 

Jwmadha (Jui-mo-to), a district near 
Sir-i-pul, i. 48. 

Jumnaé or Yamun4 (Pn-na), i. 37. 

Junagadh in Kathidwad, ii. 269. 

Jtizgiina (Hu-shi-kien), i. 48. 

Jyéshta (Shi-se-ch’a), month, i. 72. 

Jyétishka (Ch’u-ti-se-kia), in Chi- 
nese Sing-li, ii, 167, 


K. 


Kasuanpa or Kavandha (Han-pan- 
to), i. 89. 

Kabul, Képhén or Képhés, river, 
1.100 n.; 56 0.,67 n.,90f7., 9In., 
97 1 , 109 n, 

Kachha’ (K’ie-cli’a), ii, 264 n., 265 £., 
266 n. 

Kachchhadi of Panini, i. 98 n., ii, 
281 n. 

Kafirnahan, river, i. 39 n., 40 n. 

‘ Kaffir-log ’—Buddhists, i. g1 n. 

Kahalginw, ii. 192 n. 

Kaikhusra, ii, 302 n. 

Kajanghélé. See Kajingha ; Kajai- 
ghélé Niyahgamé, 1i. 193 n. 

Kajéri, village, ii. 193 n. 

Kajiighara (Kie-chu-hoh-k’ ilo), Ka- 
jaghira or Kajingarha, country in 
Eastern India, i. 215 n. ; ii. 193, 
198. 

Kakavarnin, ii, 2n. 

Kakiipur, i. 225 n. 

kalé—period of time, i. 71. 

Kala-i-Khum. See Khum. 

Kala-ka-sarai, supposed site of Tak- 
shaéila, i. 136 n. 

Kalapinika (Kia-lo-pi-na-kia), town, 
i, 68; ii. 177, 180. 

Kalasoka (’O-chu-kia), king, 
n., 9On., 102 n. 

Kali (Kie-li) raja, in Chinese—Teu- 
tseng-wang, i. 121 n. 

Kalinga (Kie-ling-kia), ii. 207 f. 

kalpacritksha, wishing tree, i. 


ii. 85, 


105 


n. 

Kalsi, in Jaunsar, i i. 186 n., 187 n, 

Kalyana, in the Dekhan, ii, 2550. 

kdmadhdtu (Yo-kiai), 
desire, i. I u., 208. 


world of | 


341 


Kamalank& (Kia-mo-lang-kia), ii, 
200. 

Kamaléka, ii, 22. 

KAmaripa (Kia-mo-lu-po), i. 2153 ii, 
195, 204 n. 

kambala (kien- -po- -lo), 
cloth, blanket, i. 75. 

Kamul, i. 13, 19; polyandry in, i. 


a woollen 


170 

Kana, father of Yaga, i. 53 n. 

Kanadéva—Déva Bédhisattva, i. 
190 n. 

kanaka (hie-ni-kia) trees, ii. 150. 

Kanakamuni (Kia-no-kia-meu-ni), 
Buddha, i. 49; ii. 19. 

Kanakpur village, ii. 19 nm. 

Kananj, i. 43; 206n. See Kanya- 
kubja. 

Kafichanamala (Chin-kin-man), wife 
of Kunala, i. 141 n. 

Kéaichipura (Kien-chi-pu-lo)—Con- 
jiveram, ii. 171 n., 228, 229, 230 
n., 231 n. 

Kandahar —Gandhara (gq. 
135 2. 

kandu (heun-to), plant, i. 88. 

Kanerki coins, i. 65 n. 

Kang—Samarkand, i. 32 n. 

Kanbapur, i. 225 n. 

Kanisbka-rAja (Kia-ni-se-kia), i, 32, 
103; 56 u., 117, 151 £., 156, 173, 
175 n., 176 n.; ii. 88 n., 99, 100 
n., 103, 109 n,; sanghdrima (see 
Jour. A. S. Beng., vol. xvii, pt. 
i. p. 494), 1. 103, 109. 

Kanjut, a Dard state, 1. 299 n. 

Kanhéri caves, i. 92 n. 

Kavéyiga— Kanauj, i. 206 n. 

Kan-su province, 1. 12,18; 24 n. 

Kanyakubja or Kanyakubja (Kuih- 
niu-ch’ing and Kie-jo-kio-she- 
kw3), Kanauj, i. 205 £., 206 n., 
207, 217, 218; ii. 74. 

Kan-ying, Chinese general, i. 30. 

Kao-chang—Turfan, i. 13, 19, 25; 
39 0. 

Kao-Tsung, emperor, i. 6. 

Kap4ladbirina,, Saiva, sect, i. 55n., 76. 

Kapila, ii. 54 n., 223, 224 n. 

Kapilavastu (Kie-pi-lo-fa-su-tu), i, 
17, 49; ii. 13, 18 n., 19 n., 167 
n., 290 0. 

kapifijala (kia- -pin-she-lo) ch’i— 
pheasant, ii. 33. 

Kapiga—Kia-pi-she,akingdom north 
of the Kabul river, the Kapisi 


), 


342 


of the Muhammadans (Elliot, 

Hist. Ind., vol. i. p. 47), i. 53) 54, 

55 Us 56 0, 573 king of, i. 90, 

91, 97, 98 136, 176 n. ; ii, 281. 
Kapisene, See Capissa, 

Kapitha (Kie-pi-tha), in Northern 
India, i. 89, 202, 206 n. ; ii. 79. 
Kapétika (pigevn)-convent, ii. 182, 

8 


183. 
Kapél or Kavil—Kabiil, i. 54 n. 
Kapurdagarhi, i. 114 n. 

Karakash river, ii. 320 n. 
Kara-khitai, people, i. 26 n. 
Karakorum mountains, i, 12 0. 
hardla (ha-la-li) cloth, i. 75. 
Kara-moto, town, i, 13. 

Karanda or Kalanda (Kia-lan-t’o), 

ii, 159 n., 160. 

Karandahrada (Kia-lan-to-ch’i), ii. 

165. 
icatandandnicalaiteia tan to-chan! 

yien), i. 60; il. 159. 
Kara-nirfis—Tub-kiueh or Turks, 

i. 20 n., 37 n. 

Kara-shahr or Karshar, i. 13; 17 n., 

18 n. 


Karé-sou (of Klaproth) river, i. 90 n. 


Kar&teghin, river, north branch of 
the Oxus, i. 39 n. 

Karatéya, river, ii. 194 n., 195 n. 

Karchu (?) (K’ie-p’an-t’o), ii. 299 n. 

harka (p’ing), ii. 65 n. 

harmaddna (tin-sse), 81; 
li, 96. 

Karna, king of Anga, ii. 187 n., 
201 n. 

Karnagarh, near Bhagalpur, ii. 191 n., 
201 n. 

Karnasuvarna (Kie-la-na-su-fa-la- 
na), iu Chinese Kin-’rh, a district 
in Bengal, i. 210, 212; ii. 201. 

karpara (kie-pu-lo), camphor, ii. 
232. 

Karsdna town, i. 201 n. 

Karsbar or Karasharh, perhaps same 
as Wu-t or Wu-ki and ’0-ki-ni of 
Hiuen Tsiang, i, 13. 

Karttika (Kia-la-ti-kia) month, i. 
72. 

Karunarnava — Avalékitésvara, i. 
60. 

hiia (kia-she), plant, i. 46. 

Kaganna (Ki-shwang-na 2), i. 26 n. 

Kasapura (Kia-she-pu-lo), i, 237. 

Kashania (Kiuh-shwang-ni-kia), i. 
34) 35 1. 


i, 99; 


INDEX. 


kashdya (kia-sha), brick or ochrey- 
coloured upper robe of the Baud- 
dha priests, i. 53, 95 u.3 ii. 49, 273. 

Kashgar (Kie-sha), i, 19, 903 it. 
298, 299, 306. 

Kashtaharana-parvata—Mongir, ii 
186 n. 

Kasia village, ii. 32 n. 

Kasia regio of Ptolemy, ii, 299 n. 

Kagovot of Ptolemy, ii, 209 n, 

KaSi country, i. 67. 

Kasipur, town, i, 199 n. 

Kasmir (Kia-shi-mi-lo), i, 116, 117, 
134 n., 136-137, 143, 147, 148 f., 
150 n., 156 u., 163, 165 n., 171, 
192, 196; ii. 312, 314, 315. 

Kaorepia, Kéorwepa or Kdopetpa 
—Kasmir, i, 148 n. 

Kasiir, town in the Panjab, i. 173 u. 

KaSyapa Buddha (Kia-she-po), i. 
39, 48, 61, 66, 67, 68, 103; 43, 
53 »., 76, 113, 121, 122, 124, 
125, 137, 153, 238 m3 ii 13, 
22 u., 40, 48, 55 n., 76, 113, 124, 
125, 130, 131, 139, 143, 144, 162, 
163, 164, 180, 223 n. 

Kasyapa and Kadrn, i. 137 n. 

Kasyapapura or Kaomdrupos—Kaés- 
mir, i, 148 n. 


| Kas’yapiyas (Yin-kwong-pu) school, 


Tel ZiT 
Kataghéu or Kunduz (q. v.), 
42. 
Katak, ii, 205 n., 207 n., 303 n. 
Katré mound, at Mathura, i. 181 n. 
Katydyana (Kia-t’o-yen-na), author 
of the <Abhidharmajiidnapras- 
thdna Sdstru, i, 175, 176 0. ; ii. 
254, 280. 


| Katyayanaputra’s Jidnaprasthdna 


Sdstra, i, 155 u. 

Kau-chang—couutry of the Uigurs, 
i. 17; it, 326 n. 

kau-hi—a fish, ii, 297 

Kaundinya (Kiau-chin-ju), i. 68; il. 
55., 1211. 

Kausimbi (Kiau-shang-mi), i. 20, 
68 ; 234, 235; i. 21, 322. 

Kiuséya (kiau-she-ye), coarse silk, 
1. 75, 166. 

Kavért river, ii. 231 n., 237 n. 

Kavéripattanam, ii, 233 n. 

Ke, a fabulous horse, a to goa 
thousand Ha day, 1. 4. 

Kébad, Keshbiid, or Kebiid (Kie-pu- 
ta-na)—-Meheket, i. 33. 


INDEX. 


Kesh (Ki-shwang-na), 1. 26 n., 35, 
36. 

Khadatu-bulak or Tsaghan Ashiban- 
tu, i. 13 n. 

khadira (kie-to-lo), twig, i. 68 n. 

khakkharam or hikkala (ki-ka-lam), 
the religious staff, i, 96 n. ; name 
of a temple, i. 107. 

Khan of the Turks, i. 27. 

Khaénabad, in Badakshan, i. 42 n, 

Khandagiri in Orissa, ii. 205 n., 
206 n. 

Khara - Manikpur, 
210 n, 

Khagakas, Khagas. See Kie-sha. 

Khavandha ? (K’ie-p’an-t’o), ii. 298, 


in Audh, i. 


303- 

Khawak pass, ii. 286 n. 

Khéda, in Gujarat, ii. 266 n. 

Khétal or Borddhonkati, in Din4j- 
pur, ii, 194 n 

Khétas or Kétaksh, identi wd by 
Cunningham with Sithhapura, i. 


143 n. 

Khie-tsi-shi-fa-lo —capital of ’O-tin- 
p’o-chi-lo, ii, 276, 

Khi-li-seh-mo—Khrishma, i. 42. 

Khink-but, one of the Bamiydin 
images, i. 51 n. 

Khiu-kai-tsai-in, the nine borders 
or islands, i, 3 n. 

Khojend in Turkistan, i, 31 n. 

Khoaspes—Kunar river, i. 97 n. 

Khékand, a Khanate in Turkistin, 
i. 30n., 31 n. 

Khorasin, i. 35 n., 48 n. 

Khorasmia—K bwarazm, g. v. 

Khost (K’woh-seh-to), 1. 43 0.3 ti. 
287. 

Khotan or Khutan (K’in-sa-tan-na), 
in Chinese Ti-jeu, country, the 
Li-yul of Tibetan writers, i. 10, 
13, 14, 15, 19, 25, 78, 84, 86, 88, 
91, 106 ; 287; letters, i. 89; ii 
308 ; river Suasey ae 194; 
li. 301 n., 307 n., n. 

Khotlan, Kkotl, ee oe Khatlan 
(Kho-to-lo), i, go n., 41 n. 

Khousta or Khost, q. v. (K’woh-seh- 
to), i, 43 n. 

Khozdar, i. 277 n. 

Khrishma or Kishm (Khi-li-seh- 
mo), i. 42 n.3 ii, 289-293. 

Khuddakanikdya, ti. 164. 

Khulm (Ho-lin), i. 40 n., 43. 

Khulm river, i. 43 n. 


343 


Khum or Kala-i-Khum, capital of 
Darwaz, i. 41 n. 

Khutan, see Khotan. 

= (Ho-li-sih-mi-kia), i. 


amily name of the Chau, i. 


Kiai-hien—Silabbadra, ‘sage of moral 
conduct,’ ii, 110, 171. 
Kia-lan-t’o-chuh- yuen — Karanda- 
vénuvana, ti. 159. 
kia-lan—sangharima, i. 92. 
Kia-la-ti-kia—Karttika, 
Kia-lo-pi-na-kia—Kalapinaka. 
Kia-mo-lang-kia — anes ii. 
200. 
Kia-mo-lu- po—KAmartipa, ii, 195. 
kiang—amber, i. 89 n 
Kia-ni-se-kia— Kanishka. 
Kiao-so-lo—Koaala, i. 44; i. 186. 
Kiao-ta-mo—Gantama, ii. 35, I51. 
Kia-pi-she—Kapisa. 
kia-sha—kashdya robe, ii. 49. 
Kia-she-po—Kasyapa, ii. 113. 
Kia-shi-mi-lo—Kaémir, i. 136, 147, 
148. 
Kia-shi-pu-lo—Kugapura, i. 237. 
Kiau-ming—Silpasthdna vidya. 
Kiau-shang-mi—Kausimbi. 
kiau-she-ye—kauséya, silk, i. 166. 
Kia-ye, Mount Gaya, ii. 113. 
ee -ye-kia-she-po — Gaya-kadyapa, 


13. 
eed to Teas, Buddha, ii. 


48. 

FRie-ch’a—Kacelbha, ii. 265. 

Wie-ch’a—Khéda (2), ii. 266 n. 

Kie-chi—Gachi or Gaz (q. v.), i. 49. 

Kie-chu-hoh-k’i-li — Kajughira or 
Khajinghara, ii, 186, 193. 

Kie-jo-kio-she—Kanyakubja, i, 205. 

Kie-la-na-su - fa - la - na — Karnasu- 
varna. 

Kie-li—Kali, i. 121 n. 

Kie-ling-kia—Kalinga. 

kie-ni-kia—kanaka trees, ii. 150. 

Wien-kwei, Prince, i. 23. 

kien- “po- -lo—kambala. 

Kien-t’o-lo or Kien-t’o-wei, Gand- 
hara, i ok: 

K’ie-p’an-t’?o—Khabandha or Kar- 
chu, ii. 298, 303, 305. 

Kie-pi-lo-fa-su-tu—Kapilavastu, ii. 
13. 

Kie-pi-tha—Kanitha, i. 202. 

kie-pi-ta—kapittha fruit, i. 88. 


344 


Kie-pu-ta-na—Kébiid, ¢. 
kie-pu-lo—karpara, camphor, ii, 


232. 

Kie-sha—(?) Kashgar, i. 14, 26, 28 n.; 
ii, 298, 299, 304, 306. 

kih-fu-to—boots, ii. 280. 

Kih-meh—Kucha, i. 24 n, 

Ki-jou-i—Kanauj, i. 43. 

Kikana (Ki-kiang-na), ii, 282, 

Ki-kiang-na—Kikana, ii, 282. 

Ki-ku-to—Andthapindada, ii. 4, 5. 

Kilat, ii. 277 n. 

Ki-li-seh-mo— Krishma or Kishm, 
ii, 283, 289, 290, 291. 

Ki-li-tho-kiu-ch’a—Gpidhrakfita, ii. 


1525 

Ki-li-to—Kritiyas, i. 150, 

Kin-chi-pu-lo—Kaichipura, ii, 228, 

kindru—olibanum, ii, 265 n. 

king—sdtras, i. 80. 

King-ki—Gangi, i. 122. 

King-kia—Ganges river, i. II. 

King-pu — Sautrantika school, ii. 
302, 

Kin-ho—golden river, ii. 39. 

Hig hoe HEAD i, 182 n.3 il. 

n. 

Kin - hwui — Sthiramati, ii, 171, 
268, 

Ki-ni-kia — Kanika, or Kanishka, 
i, 32, 

Kinnaras, ii. 69. 

kin-po-lo—kumbhiras, crocodiles, ii. 


Fein rare ens 

Kin - she- pao-lun—Késha Karaké 
S‘dstra, i. 193. 

Kin-shi—Suvarnagétra, i. 199. 

kin-vi—ghantd, ii. 96. 

Kio-ho-yen-na—Kubadian, gq. v. 

Ki-pin, Cophene, or Kabul, i. 27, 
100; mistake for Kia-shi-mi-lo, 
i. 147 n. 

Kirghizes, i. 27 n. 

Ki-sang—to bow to the ground, i. 


85 n. 
Kishm., See Khrishma, 
Ki-shwang-na— Kesh, g. v. 
Ki-to-lo, conquest of, i. 100 n, 
ki-te—adbhuta, i. 127 n. 
Kiu-che-lo—Gurjjara, ii. 267. 
F’iu-chi—Kuché, ¢. v. 
Kiueh-yu or Kong-yu, city, i 89. 
Kiuh-shwang-ni-kia—Kashania, y. v. 
Kin-kia-li—Kukalt. 
Kiu-kiu-ch’a-’o-lan-mo, ii. 95. 


INDEX. 


Ki’u-ki’u-cha-po-t’o-shan (Kukkuta- 
padagiri), ii, 142. 
Kiu-lang-na—Kurén in Badakshén, 
i. 42; ii, 292. 
Kiu-li-kia—Kulika. 
Kiu-liu-po-t’o-shan —Gurupédagiri, 
ii. 142. 
Kiu-lu-to—Kultta. 
K’iu-lu-sa-pang, i. 56 n. 
Kiu-mi-t’o—Kumidha, ¢. v. 
Kiu-na-mo-ti — Gunamati 
sattva, li, 104. 
Kiu-na-po-la-p’o — Gunaprabha, i. 
190. 
Kiu - pi- shwang - na — Gévigana, i. 


Bédhi- 


199. 

Kiu-po-li—Gdpalt. 

Kiu-ga-tan-na—Khotan, ii. 308. 

K’iu-sha—Ghésha, i. 142. 

Kiu -she-po-lun — Nydydnusdéra 
Sdstra, i. 160 n. 

Kiu-shi-lin-kia—Gésriiga mount, 
ii, 313. 

Kiu-shi-lo—Ghéshira, i. 236. 

Kiu-shi-na-kie-lo— Kufginagara, ii, 
31. 

Kiu-yi, a Chinese work, i. 30 n. 

Kizil-kQm desert, i. 32 n. 

hlésas, five, i. 152 n., 154. 

Kling boys, ii. 208 n. 

Kohliftigha or Kalugah, Iron Gates, 
i, 36 n. 

Kokili, ii. 9 n. 

Kokcha river, i. 42 n, 

Koko-nor, i. 13 n. 

Kolkhi nation, i. 35 n. 

Ko-li-ti—Hariti, mother of demons, 
i, I10 n. 

Kolika—Kulata, i. 177 n. 

Kondinya, disciple of Buddha, i. 
I2I n. 

Kong-kin-na-pu-lo — Konkandpura, 
ii, 235, 253. 

Kong-u-t’o—Kdnydédha. 

Kong-yu town, i. 29. 

Konkanapura— Kong-kin-na-pu-lo, 
ii, 253 f. 

Konyédha (Kong-u-t’o), 
Ganjam, ii. 206. 

Kophén or Képhés, Kabul river, 
i, 109 n. 

Koriiga, ii, 207 n. 

Korla, town, i. 13. 

Korla, i. 18 n. 

Késala country (Kiao-sa-lo), or Ayé- 
dhy4, i. 44; ii, 209 f., 214 n. 


perhaps 


INDEX. 


Késala, Southern, ii. 100 n. 
Ko-sting-chuen, a Chinese work, i. 


12. 

Késhakaraké Sdstra (Kiu-she-pao- 
lun), i. 193. 

Késhasild Sdstra, i. 193 nu. 

KétéSvara in Kachha, ii. 277 n. 

Krakuchchhanda (Kia-lo-keu-ch’un- 
t’o), a Buddha, i, 48; ii, 18, 19. 

Krishma or Kishm (Ki-li-seh-mo), 
ii, 289. 

Krishnapaksha (He-fen), dark fort- 
night, i. 71. 

Kyishna river, ii, 217 n. 

Kritiyas (Ki-li-to), Ch. Mai-te, 
bought people, inhabitants of 
Kagmmir, i. 150, 156 f. 

- krésa (keu-lu-she), a distance, i. 70. 
kshana (t’sa-na), smallest measure 
of time, i. 71. 

Kshinti, Rishi (Jin-jo- sien), Bédhi- 
sattva, i, 121, 

Kahattriy as (T’sa-ti-li), i. 76, 82, 89; 
ii. 256, 270. 

Kshitigarbha Bédhisattva, i. 11 n. 

kshauma (t'so-mo), linen, i. 75. 

Kshunadéva (T’seu-na), ii. 284. 

Kuan (Ho-han), country, i. 34. 

Kuan-nin—Japanese name of Ava- 
I6kitésvara, i. 60 n. 

Kubadiiu—Kio-ho-yen-na, i. 40. 

Kuchaé or Kuché (K’iu-chi), i. 19, 
78; 18 n., 19, 24; ii. 67 n., 313, 


314. 

ku-ch’i—amber dish, ii. 129. 

Ku-hwin-ch’a—Gékantha convent 
i. 186. 

Kuih-niu-shing — Kanydkubja, i. 
209. 

Balog Mi bedi 

Kujjasébhita (2), i : 

Kukali (Kiu- ide) Bhikshuni, ii. 
9; ditch, 9. 

Kukkutap&dagiri (Kiu-kiu-ch’a-po- 
t’o-shan), Chinese, Khi-tso-shan, i. 
6n.31i, 95 1., 142, 223 n. 

Kukkutapdda vihdra, ii, 142 n. 

Kukkutdrima (Kiu-kiu-ch’a-’o-lan- 
mo), ii. 95. 

Kulab, part of Su-man, i. go, 41 n. 

Kulika (Kiu-li-kia) village, ii. 175. 

Kul-i—Pamirkulan lake, ii, 297 n. 

Kulfita (Kiu-lu-to), the district of 
Kulu, i. 177, 178 n. 

Kuméra (? Chi-mo-lo), in Southern 
India, ii. 231 n., 232 n. 


345 


Kumara (Keu-mo-lo), Bhaskaravar- 
ma, king of Kamardpa, ii. 196, 
197, 198. 

Kumiarajiva (Keu-mo-lo-shi), ii. 110 


n. 

Kumiralabdha (Ku-mo-lo-lo-to or 
Tong-sheu), i. 139; ii, 218, 301. 

Kuméfraraja—Sri Harsha of Kéma- 
rapa, i, 213, 215, 216, 218, 

Kumiérila-padah, ii. 142 n. 

Kuméun, i, 198 u. 

Kumbhaghénam, town, ii, 231 n, 

Kumbhau stépa, ii. 65 n. 

kumbhiras (kin-po-lo), ii. 49. 

Kumidha—Kiu-mi-t’o, i. 41. 

Ku-mo-lo-to-to—Kumaralabdha, i. 
139 2. 

Kundla (Ku-na-lang), Prince, i. 
139 f., 140 n., 141 n. 

Kunar river, in Kabul, i. 90 n. 

kundikd (kiun-ch’i-kia), water ves- 
sel, ii, 170. 

Kunduz or Kataghan (Hwoh), i. 39 
D., 423 ii. 287, 288, 289. 

Kunduz, or Southern Surkhab river, 
1. 43 n. 

Kung—original name of Fa-Hian, 
i, 11. 

Kung-siin, i. 13, 25. 

Kung-shing—citadel or royal resi- 
dence, i. 98 n. 

Kunkuma (Yuh-kin-hiang)  stiipa, 
ii, 125, 126. 

Kuram valley, i. 43 n. 

Kurana (Kiu-lang-na), in Badakshan, 
i 42n.3 ii, 292. 

Kurgan-tubé plain, i, 41 n. 

Kurkihar, ii, 142 n. 

Kurudvipa, one of the four conti- 
nents, i. 11. 

Kurukshétra, i. 184 n. 

Kurus6éna-ka-gadh — Karnasuvarna, 
i, 21I0n. 

kuga, grass of good omen, i. 62. 

Kusagdrapura (Kiu-she-kie-la-pu-lo), 
ii. 149, 165. 

KuSanibha, i. 209 n. 

Kuganagara, See Kusinagara. 

Kugapura or Kusgabhavapura, i. 
237 n. 

Kushan town, perhaps the capital 
of Kapisa, i. 56 n. 

Kushana (Kwei-shwang), i. 56 n. 

Ku-shi—Kudéinagara, ii. 161. 

Kuéigrimaka, Kuéginagara (Keu- 
shi), Kuginagari, Kuginara (Kiu- 


346 


shi-na-k’ie-lo), i. 51, 52 n., 132, 
133 it. 31, 40, 41, 69, 73, 90, 16I. 

Ku-sse,—Ku-sse-ti, the ancient land 
of the Uigurs, ii. 326 n. 

Kustana (Kiu-sa-ta-na) or Khétan, 
ii. 308, 309, 311, 314, 315, 316, 
315, 319, 322, 324. 

Kustana, the child, ii, 311. 

Kusumapnra (Keu-su-mo-pu-lo), 
in Chin, Hwa-kong, capital of Kan- 
yakubja, i. 207 £.; ii. 83, 85, 86. 

kuta, ii. 67 n. 

Kutl. See Khotlan, 

Kuvéra—Vaisravana, ii. 69 n. 

Kwa-chan, i. 19; 17 n. 

iwai-i—sarana, ii. 64 ». 

Kwang-cheu—Améuvarman, ii. 83 n. 

Kwang-chou, town, i. 81, 82. 

Kwang-pih—Satasdstra vaipulyam, 
i. 231. 

Kwang-po—Vyasa, ii, 148, 

Kwang-yeu—Prabhamitra, ii, 171, 

Kwan-lo, divination of, i. 95. 

Kwan-shai-tsz’-tsai, Kwan-shai-yin, 
Kwan - tsz' - tsai, or Kwan-yin — 
Avalokitésvara, i. 19; 127 n., 
128; ii. 172, 173, 183, 184 n., 195, 
224, 225, 257. 

Kwang-ye—‘“‘ Desert” vibara, i. 67. 

Kwei-tseu-mu— Haritt, i. 111 n. 

Kwei-shwang—a tribe of the Yuei- 
chi, i. 56 n. 

Kwen-lun mountains, i. 12 n. 

K’woh-seh-to—Khost, ii. 287. 


L. 


labour, forced, i. 87. 

Lae-lih—Lara or Méalavé dynasty, 
i. 16, 91, 100. 

Ladakh, not to be identified with 
Yu-hwui or Kie-sha, i, 14. 

La-fa-ni—LAvani, ii. 23. 

la-fo—lava, salt, ii. 23 n. 

Laghman—-Lan-po, vulg. for Lam- 
ghan, i. gon. 

Lahér, or Lohdwar, near the Ravi, 
i. 167 nL, 173 0. 

Lahul (Lo-u-lo), i. 177. 

Lajward, town in Badakshin, i. 
42 n. 

Lakoriin, or Lakfiva, ruined city 
near Kilt, ii. 277 n. 

lakshana (siang), marks on Buddha, 
i, 102 n., 188 n. 

Lakhnau, in Audh, i, 210 n. 


INDEX. 


Lala or Lara, lord. 
Laras, Vrijjis of Vaisall, i. 108 n. 
Lamghan (Lan-po), Lampaka, in 
Kabul, i. 56 n., 90, 91 n., 164. 
Aaprdrat, AapBdra, “Aaprayac— 
the Lampdkas, or Murandas, i. 
go. 

Lan-chiau, city, i. 18. 

Langala (Lang-kie-lo) country, ii. 
276, 277. 

lang-nao-hiang—camphor, ii. 232. 

Lankdvatéra Satra (Ling-kia-king), 
ii, 251, 252 n. 

Tanno =e i, 50; ii. 25, 
26. 

Lan-po—Lamghan, i. 164. 

La Paz pearl-fishery, ii. 251 n. 

lapis-lazult dish, i, 11, ii, 129; 
(lieu-li), ii. 149; mines, i, 42 n. 

Lara or Lala (Lo-lo), i. 100; ii. 
266 n. 

Laras ( Northern and Southern), i.16. 

Lariké, Mount, ii. 251, 252 n. 

Taou-Tseu, i. 94. 

Lau-Shan, i. 82. 

lava (la-fo), measure of time. 

Lavani (La-fa-ni), ii. 23, 24. 

law, administration of, i. 83 f. 

Leu-lan, same as Na-fo-po, ii, 325. 

Lhéyal, Tibetan name of Lahul, i. 
177 0. 

Liang-chau, in Kan-suh, i. 18; 17 2., 


Sr. 
Lichehhavis (Li-che-p’o), i. 13, 52, 
55; ii. 67 1, 70, 73, 77 n., St. 

Lien-hwa—Padmiévati, 141 n. 

lih—chestuut, i. 88, 

li-ho—a vegetable, i. 82. 

Li-I, prefect, i. 83. 

likshd, a very small measure, i. 70. 

Lilanjan river, ii. 112, n. 138 n. 

Li-mi—Mahfchampa, ii. 200. 

Ling-chi-tse, i. 97. 

Ling-kia-king—Laika, or Lankdva- 
téra Siatra, ii. 251. 

Ling-shan mountains, i. 27; 25. 

li—pear, i. 88. 

Lin-hwa-sih—Utpalavarmé, i. 204. 

Lin-tsze, in Shan-tung, i. 93. 


. Li-po-to—Révata, Ayushmat, ii. 74. 


Li-shan mountain, where Shun was 
tilling the ground when Yao came 
to call him to the empire, i. 2. 

Liu, house of, i. 83. 

Liu-li—Virfiidhaka, i. 48. 

liu-li—lapis-lazuli, ii. 129, 149.] 

e 


INDEX. 


Litsabyis (?), Lichchhavis, ii. 70 n. 

Little Vehicle. See Hiuaydna. 

Li-yul—Khotan, i. 13, 87. 

Lob-nor, i. 90 n., 12 n. 

Lo-hu-lo—Rahula, ii. 67. 

Lo-i or Ro-hi country—Afghanistan, 
i. 36. 

Lo-in-ni-lo—R6hinila (2), 95, ii. i 

lékandétha, lords of the world, 
10 n., 22. 

Lokéttaravadins (Shwo - ch’uh -shi- 
pu) school, i. 50. 

Longhir (Lan-ki-lo?), ii. 277 n. 

Lo-nio-in-tu—tbhe Helmand valley, 
ii, 283. 

Lo-lo—Lara or Lala, ii. 266 n. 

Lop, desert, i, 12, 24 n.; river, i.25 n. 

loquat (p°t), i. 80. 

Lo-tai-sz-pi- -mi—Radha-Svimi, i. 56. 

Lo-to-wei-chi— Raktaviti sanigha- 
rama, ii. 202. 

Lo-u-lo—Lahul, 

lotus (ho-hiwa), i. 96 n. 

Lo-yang, city, i. 15, 18, 84, 86. 

Lu country, i. 4 n., 66 n. 

Ln-hi-ta-kia—Réhitaka, i. 127. 

Lu-kwong subdued the Tartars, i. 

. 85. 

Lumbini garden, i. 50; ii, 23, 24. 

tun—discourses, i. 80, 

Lung district or mountains, i. 22, 
23. 

Lung-siang gate, ii. 32 n., 40 n. 

lun-wang—chakrayartin, ii, 124. 

Lu-shi convent, ii, 318. 

Ia-ye—deer forest, ii. 45. 


M. 
Ma-shing—Afvajita, ii, 150. 
Madawar (Mo-ti-pu-lo) or Mandor, 

in Rohilkhand, i. 190 n. 
Madhava (Mo- lap? 0), ii, 104, 105, 
107, 108. 
maahuka (mo-t'u-kia), fruit, i. 89. 
Madhyadéga (Chong-kwe), i. 37. 
Madhyanta Vibhdga S‘dstra (Chung- 
pin-fen-pi-lun), i. 226. 
Madhyantika (Mo-t’ien-ti-kia), third 
patriarch, i. 53 n., 134, 156 n.; 
arhat, i. 149, 150. 
Madra tribe, i. 166 n. 
Ma-dros-pa (Ch. Wu-je-nao), ii. 41, 


vi 


155 0. 

Magadha (Mo-kie-t’o), i. 54, 55, 144 
n., 168, 215; ii. 76, 77, 81, 87, 
90, 104, 118, 138, 139, 140, 149 


347 


n., 155, 160, 161 n., 176, 
196, 206 n., 260. 

Magha (Mo-W’ie), month, i. 72. 

Mahabhadra river, i. 188 n. 

Mahabédhi sangharama, ii. 133. 

Mah&bédhi tree (Mo-ho-p’u-ti), i. 10. 

Mahé-Brahmardja (Fan), i. 203, 204. 

Mahabrahma sahampati, ii. 127. 

Mahachamp4 (Mo-ho-chen-po), Ch. 
Lin-i, in the easteru peuinsula, ii 
200. 

Mabachina, i, 216; ii. 198. 

Mahadéva (Mo-ho-ti-p’o and Ta- 
tien), ii, 74. 

Mahadéva hill, ii. 190. 

Mahddéva, a priest, i, 150. 

Mahfdéva rajas, ii. 230 n. 

Mahdkala(Chin-wong)—Vaigravana. 

Maha-Kasyapa (Ta-kia-she-po), ii. 
142, 161. See Kasyapa. 

Maha-li, king of the Lichchhavis, i. 13. 

Mahamandala, ii, 2. 

Mahamaya (Mo-ho-mo-ye), ii 15, 35. 

Mahdmudgalaputra, i. 39. 

Mahinadi river, ii. 66 n., 209 n. 

Mahénama (Mo-ho-nan), ii, 55 0. 

Mahananda, ii. 94 p., 102 n, 

Mahdpadma, it. 94 n. 

Mahdparinirvdna Sétra, i. 124 n. 

Mahdprajapati (Mo-ho-po-lo-she-po- 
ti), i. 44, 49; ii, 22 n., 143 n. 

Maharashtra (Mo-hv-la-ch’a), 
255 f. 

Mahifratnadvipa island, ii. 253. 

Mabiéala Saddbarma (Mo-ho- sa-io), 
ii, 2 n., 63. 

Mahafali, ii. 82 n. 

Mahasarhghika (Mo-ho-sing-k’i-pu 
and Ta- -chong-pu) school, i. 70, 
71; 121, 162; 11. 287. 

Mahdsaigha, ii. 165. 

MahAsara (Mo-ho-sa-lo), ii, 63 n. 

Mabdsthanagadh, in Bengal, 
194.0. 

Mahasthavira school, ii. 15. 

Mahavana (Mo-ho-fa-na and Tu-lin) 
sangharama, i. 1243 site of, i. 44, 
and note. 

Mahdvibhdsha S‘dstra (Ta-pi-p’o-sha- 
lun) of Buddhadasa. 

Mahavira—Jaina ‘lirthamkara, i. 
145 n. 

Mahavihbara, i. 76. 

Mahaviharavasina (Mo-ho-pi-ho-lo- 
chu-pu), school, ii. 247. 

Mahavpksha Rishi (Ta-shu-sin),i.208, 


184, 


il, 


ii. 


348 


Mahayina (Ta-ching), the Great 
Vehicle, i. 25, 27, 36, 41, 56, 70, 
84; QI, 110, 112, 113, 120, 137; 
146, 147, 160, 176, 177, 180, 181, 
I9I, 197, 201, 207, 225, 226, 227, 
228, 229; ii. 64 n., 65, 78, 81, 
82, 100, 103, 104, 133, 182, 195, 
208, 210, 212, 221, 224 n., 229, 
247, 254, 257, 260, 264, 266, 269, 
270, 273, 275, 277, 281, 284, 288, 
308, 309. 

Mahdyéna Sétrdlaikdratika 
(Chwoug-yan-ta-shiug - king - lun), 
i, 226. 

Mahéndra (Mo-hi-in-t’o-lo), ii. 91, 92, 
231; brother of Asdka, ii, 246 f. 

Mahéndragiri, ii, 209 n. 

Mahéndramalé, ii. 207 n. 

MahéSvaradéva (Ta-tseu-t’sai-tien), 
god, i. 114, 2023 ii. 44, 119, 127, 
262, 263, 276, 277. 

MahéSvara (Mo-hi-sheu-lo) temple, 
i, 223. 

MahéSvarapura (Mo-hi-shi-fa-lu-po- 
lo), in Central India, ii, 271. 

Ma-Agags-pa—Aniruddha, ii, 38 n. 
Mahi (Mo-ho) river, ii, 139, 142, 

‘ 260, 269, 

Mahirakula or Mibirakula (Mo-hi-lo- 
kiu-lo), iu Chinese Ta-tso, king of 
Kagmir, i, 119 n., 120 n., 167, 
168, 169, 170, 171. 

Mahisdsaka (Mi-sha-se), 
pu, school, i, 121, 226. 

Mai-lin — Vikritavana convent, i. 
162, 

Mai-te—Chinese for Kritiyas, inha- 
bitants of Kagmir, i. 150 u. 

Maitréya (Mei-ta-li-ye) Bodhisattva, 
1, 29, 30, 68, 78, 79; 134, 137, 
155, 226, 227, 228, 238 n; ii, 22 
n., 46, 47, 119, 120, 142, 143, 144, 
ae 220, 223, 224, 225, 226, 228, 


Ch, Fa-ti- 


313. 


275 

Maiatbala (hee-i Bédhisattva, i. 
127; ii. 213. 

Majjima, a missionary, i. 134 n. 

makara (ma-kie) fish, 1,102; ii, 125. 

Makhadéwa, ii, 74 n. 

Makhai (Mo-ho-yan) desert, ii. 325 n. 

Malaikarram or Kumbhaghénam 
city, ii, 231 n. 

Malakita (Mo-lo-kiu-ch’a, and Chi- 
mo-lo), li, 230, 231 n., 232 n., 
233 0. 

Malasa or Sampazha, i. 199. 


INDEX. 


Malava (Mo-la-p’o), i. 16; ii. 260, 
265, 268. 

Malaya (Mo-lo-ye) mountains, ii. 
232, 233; Malayagiri, ii. 252 n. 

Maldive islands, ii. 252 n. 

Malla (Mo-lo) tribe, ii. 36 n., 37, 38, 
39% 41. 

Ma-ming—Afvaghésha, ii. 100 n. 

Man people, ii. 198, 

ma-nao—cornelian dish, ii, 129. 

Manava (Mo-na-p ”0), a youne Brah- 
man, ii. 176. 

Manéya, ii. 29 n. 

Mangala (Mong-kie-li), Mangalavor, 
or Muigali in Udyana, i, 121 n. 
Mangifera Indica, Amratree, i.196n. 

Mang-men Pass, i. 89. 

mani (mo-nt), gem, i. 72, 74. 

Manikydla tope, i, 136 n., 145 n., 
146 pn. 

Manirata or Manérhita. 

Maiijugri (Man-chu-shi-li, and Ch. 
Miu-kia-ts’iang p’u-sa), i. 39, 56; 
180 ; ii, 220. 

Man-kéa—-Madridévi, i. 98. 

manners of the Hindus, i. 83. 

manners of Népal people, ii. 80. 

Manérhita (Mo-nu-ho-li-ta, and Ch. 
Ju-i) or Manirata, i, 98, 105. 

Manushakritiyas of KaSmtr, in Chi- 
nese Mai-te, i, 156 n. 

Mara (Mo-wang), i. 54, 59, 62, 99; 
182 n.}; ii. 21, 53, 59 1., 69, 70, 
71, 121, 124, 132, 133, 154, 157- 

Mara’s temptation, ii, 09. 

Mapéxavda—Samarkand, i. 32 n. 

Maratha country, ii. 255 n. 

mdrga, way or means, il, 105. 

Margasirsha (Mo-kia-shi-lo), month, 
i. 72. 

Margiana, Margus (Mo-hiu), i. 97. 

Marpo (Mo-lo-po), Ladak, 1. 178 n. 

imarriage rites, i. 54; with a flower, 
ii, 84. 

Masér, ii. 63 n., 64 n. 

Ma-shing—ASvajita, ii. 175. 

Master of the law (San-tsiang-fa-sse) 
Pb au “Y'siang, 
i. 

Masa (Mo-su-lo) sanghframa, i. 

, 125 
Mathes (Mo- t’u-lo), 1.373 179, IST 
n., 182 n., 191 D.3 ii. ae inserip- 
tions, i, 11. 

Matipura (Ma-ti-pu-lo), in Rohil- 

khand, i. 189, 190, 191 n. 


INDEX. 349 


MAtrijéta (mother-child), ii. 100 n. 

mats, i. 75. 

Matsya or Virdta country, i, 179 un. 

mau-che—miécha fruit, i, 89. 

Maudgalyayana (Mu-te-kia-lo) Béd- 
hisattva, Ch. Teu-tsu, same as 
Maudgalaputra, i. 39, 187; ii. 6,175. 

mau-hu-li-to—muharta. 

Maurya—Moriyan, q. v. 

May& (Mo-ye), mother of Buddha, 
it, 15, 16, 23 n., 38, 39, 130. 

MayApurit or Mayfra (Mo-yu-lo), 
Haridvara, i. 197 n. 

mayiras, peacocks, i, 128 n. 

Maydra-rija (K’ong-tsio-wang), i. 
126 n. 

measures of Iength in India, i. 7o., 

medicines, i. 86. 

Megasthenés, i. 12 n. 

Mei-ta-li-ye-p'u-sa— Maitréya Béd- 
hisattva, il. 47. 

Mencius, ii. 210 n. 

merchaut chief—srésh thi, it. 12 oa. 

metempsychosis, i. 83. 

meu-che—wécha. 

Mid-India, i. 30, 48, 78. 

Middle Vehicle, ii. 100. 

Midnapur, ii. 206 n. 

Mihbirakula v. Mahirakula. 

Mimma’sconventat Valabhi, ii. 267 n. 

Mi-mo-kia—Maghian. 

Minagara, ii. 272 un. 

Ming, king, i. 87. 

ming—vridyds.” 

ming-ming bird, ti, 80. 

Ming-fo-chau, the land of Kau- 
chang, ii. 326 n. 

Ming-pin—Bhavavivéka, ii. 223 n. 

Ming Ti—Chinese Emperor (a.p. 58- 
76), dream of, i. 30. 

Mithila, ii. 78 p., 199 n. 

Miu-ki-ts’iang-p’u-sa— Mafijusri Bé- 
dhisattva, ii, 220. 

mécha (mau-che) fruit, plantain, i. 
88 ; ii. 66, 163. 

Médovpa, Mathuré, i. 179 n. 

Moh, city, i. 80. 

Mohana-nadi, ii, 139 n. 

MohAnt, ii. 112 n. 

Mo-hi-in-t’o-lo—Mahéndra, ii. 91,92. 

Mo-hi-lo-kiu-lo—Mahirakula. 

Mo-hi-shi-fa-lo-pu-lo —- Mahéévara- 
pura, ii. 235, 271. 

Mo-hiu— Margiana. 

Mo-ho—Mahi river, ii. 139. 

Mo-ho-chen-po—-Mahacham pa. 


Mo-ho-la-ch’a—Maharishtra, ii. 255. 
Mo-ho-pi-ho-lo-chu-pu — Mahaviba- 
ravdsina school, ii. 247. 
Mo-ho-sa-lo—Mahasila, ii. 63. 
Mo-kia-shi-lo— Margasirsha. 
Mo-k’ie—Magha month. 
Mo-kie-t’o—Magadha, ii. 81, 82. 
Méksha (Wu-che), Mahaparishad, i. 
52, 55, 2145 ii. 261. 
Mo-la-p’o—Malava, ii. 260, 
Mo-lo—Malla, ii. 38 
Mo-lo-kiu-cl’a—Malakita, ii. 186. 
Mo-lo-so, perhaps for Mo-lo-po— 
Marpo or Ladak, i. 178. 
Mo-lo-ye—Malaya, ii. 232. 
Mo-na-p’o— Manava, 
Mong lake, i. 3 n. 
Mougir—Hiranyaparvata, ii. 186 n., 
190 n. 
Mongols, i. 17. 
monkey ascetic, i. 234. 
Mora, @ grass-cutter, li, 123. 
Moriyan (or Maurya) dynasty, i. 17; 
128 n. 
Moriyanagara, city founded by the 
Sakya youths, i. 17. 
Mo-su—Masfira sanghdréma, i. 124, 
Mo-t’a-p’0—Madhava, ii, 104. 
Mo.-te-kia-lo-tseu—Mudgalaputra, ii. 


6, 175. ; 
Mother-child—MAtrijéta, ii, 100 n. 
Mo-t’ien-ti-kia—Madhydntika arhat, 


i. 149. 
Mo-ti-pu-lo-—Matipura. 
Mo-t’u-lo—Mathur, i. 179. 
Moulmien image of Buddha, i 51n. 
mo-tu-kia—madhuka fruit. 
Mo-yu-lo—Mayapura, i. 197, 
Mrigadava, ce eee L 473 ii. 
45, 51 n., 
Muchilinda (ite one lin-t’o), Chinese 
Wen-lin, i. 63; ii. 41, 128, 131. 
Mudgalagiri, Mongir hill, ii. 186 n. 
Mudgalaputra (Mo-te-kia-lo-tseu), 
Mudgala, the great, Pali Mugalan, 
i, 38, 39 ; 180, 183, 187; ii. 175, 
176, 177 n., and Maudgalyaya- 
naputra, i, 40, 59, 61, 108; 235; 
11.6, 7,9, 161, 178, 188. 
Mughian (mi-nio-kia) country, i. 33. 
Mu-ho—Amu river, i. 36 n. 
muhirta (mau-hu-li-to), division of 
time, i. 71. 
mu-i—apricot, i. 87. 
Milasthanapura (Mu-lo-san-pu-lo), 
Multan, ii. 274. 


350 


mulberry seed, ii. 319. 

Mu-lo-san-pu-lo — Miilasth@napura, 
ii, 274. 

Munda or Eraka rock, i. 145 n.; ii.2n. 

Mung king, i. 176 n., and 242. 

Mungali (Mung-kie-li), Mangala, or 
Mungali, Mangalavor, i. 99 n. ; 
121, 124, 133- 

Mung-kia-li—Mungali in Udydna, 
i, 121, 

Mung-kin — Télikén or Muiijan 
country, in Badakshan, i. 42; ii. 
288, 289. 

Mufijan (Mung-kin), in Badakshan, 
i, 42 n. 3 ii, 288, 280. 

Murali mountain, ii, 144 n. 

Murandas, natives of Lainpika, i. 


go n. 

Mardhabhishikta (Hwan -ting-pu) 
school, ii. 110 n. 

Murghab valley, i. 48 n. 

niustard seed—Sinapis glauca, i. 87. 

Musur-aola, Mongol name of Ling- 
shin mountains, i. 25. 

Mu-te-kia-lo—Mandgalydyana. 

Muzart, Icy mountains, i. 19. 

Mwan-chu—Pdarmavarmardja, ii. 174. 

Myn-bulak, or Thousand springs, i. 
27 2. 28 n. 

myrobalam emblica—mécha fruit, i. 
163 u. 

N, 

NapixAgyara (Nia-ti-kia-she-po), ii. 
113, 130. 

Na-fo-po—Navapa, ii. 325. 

Na-fo-ti-p’o-ku-lo—Naradévakula. 

Wagas (Na-kiel, i, 5 m., 11, 63 f., 
130 f., 136, 149 f., 159, 201, 237 ; 
ii, 27, 321. 

Naga Anavatapta, ii. 41. 

Naga Apalala (’O-po-lo-lo), i, 122. 

Naga-Dasaka, ii. 102 n. 

Naga fountain, i, 68. 

Naga Gopala, i. 93. 

Nagahrada, Ch. Long-ch’e,, ii. 297. 

Naga maiden, tale of, i. 129 f.; ii. 21. 

Naga Nanda—Nalanda, ii, 167 n. 

Ndgdnanda, i. 211 n. 

Nagapattanam, ii, 231 n., 233 n., 
254 D. 

Nagara or Nagarkét, old capital of 
Kuliita, 1.177 n. 

Neyapa Acovucérodts, Nagarahara, i. 

- gn 

Nagarahira (Na-kie-lo-ho), in Jala- 


INDEX. 


labad valley, i. 17, 31, 34, 35, 107 ; 
56 n., 91, 96 n. 

N&ga-rija (Ch. Long-wang), temple, 
i, 96. 

Nagarjuna Bédhisattva (Na-kia-’o- 
la-chu-na), Ch. Long-shu or Long- 
meng, i. 189 n., 210 f., 215 f., 220 
f.,223,224 n. 302; ii, 97, 98, 100n. 

Nagavadana, ii. 223 n. 

Naghur, ii, 209 n. 

Nagra city, ii. 18 n. 

Nai-mo-t’o—Narmada river, ii, 259. 

nai—plum, i. 89. 

Nairaijané (Ni-len-shin-na) river, 
Ch. Pen-la-cho-ho, ii, 54, 112, 
115, 120, 129, 130, 138. 

Naivasaijid Samddhi (Fet-siang- 
ting), il. 54. . 

Na-kie-lo-ho—Nagarahira, 

Na-kwa, sister of Fuh-hi, i, 7 n. 

Nalanda (Na-lan-tu) sanghdréma, i. 
204 n., 216; ii, 102 u., 110, 167, 
168, 196, 204 n. ; students, il. 170. 

Na-lan-tu—Ndlanda, 

nai-li-ki-lo—nirikéla, 

Na-lo, village, the K&élapinika of 
Hiuen Tsiang, t. 68. 

Na-lo-ki-lo—Narakira, ii, 252. 

Na-lo-yen-tin—Néardyanadéva, 

Nanda (Nan-t’o), ii, 2 n., 16 u., 17, 
46 n., 94, 102 n., 167 

Nankin, i. 12. 

Na-pi-ka, birthplace of IKrakuch- 
chhanda, i. 48. 

Narapati (Zin-chu), “lord of men,” 
i, 13 n., 14, 15, 16, 41. 

Narasimha (Na-lo-sting-ho), village 
in the Pafijab, i. 143 n., 166 n. 

Nardyanadéva (Na-lo-yen-tin), au- 
thor, i. 98. 

Nardyanadeéva, royal stock of Kima- 
rapa, ii, 196, 

Nardyanadéva, ii. 262, 263. 

ndévikéla (na-li-ki-lo) fruit, cocoa- 
nut, i, 873 ii. 196. 

Narmada (Nai-mo-t’o) river, ii. 252. 

Narukira (Na-lo-ki-lo) island, ii, 252. 

Nasik inscriptions, ii. 220 n, 

Navadévakula (Na-fo-ti-p’o-ku-lo), 
town on the Ganges, i, 223. 

Navandgarh, ii. 78 n. 

Navapa (Na-fo-po) country, ii. 325. 

Navasanghdrima—name of a tem- 
ple, i, 14 

Nejkath, town in Turkistén, i. 29 n., 
94 


‘ 


INDEX. 


Nelur, ii. 230 n. 

Néminatha, Jaina Tirthamhkara, ii, 
269 n. 

Népl (Ni-po-lo), i. 16; ii. 80, 81 n. 

Nesr, one of the Baimiyin images, 
i, Sin. 

Nevasuhfidnasaiiha, ii. 142 n. 

ngdn-mi-lo—Amla fruit, i. 89. 

ngén-mo-lo—Amala fruit, i. 89. 

Nia-ti-kia-she-po—Nadikasyapa, ii. 
113. 

Fiulinis (nito-na), Ch. In- yuen, 
twelve, i. 142. 

ni-fo-si-na—nivdsana robe. 

Ni-jang, town, ii. 324. 

Nijrao, valley in Kapiga, i. 54 n. 

nikdyas (Ch. Pu), the eighteen 
schools, i, 177. 

Ni-keu-liun—Nyagrodha, ii. 50, 126. 

Ni-kien—Nirgranthas, 

Ni-len-shan-va—Nairafijana diver, ii, 
138. 

Niléjan or Lilajan, western branch 
of the Nairaijana river. 

nilapita (ni-lo-pi-ch’a), public re- 
cords, i. 78 n. 

Ni-li city, i. 58. 

Ni-mahi-gung—Tibetan name of 
Madhyantika, i, 134 n. 

Ni-mo or Che-na-to-na country, ii. 
325. 

nine Soin or islands (khiu-kai- 
tsat-in), i. 3n., 17. 

Ni-po-lo—Népal, ii. 80. 

Nirgranthas (Ni-kien), Digambarasor 
naked Jainas, i. 59; 55 n., 76, 
145 n.; ii, 45, 66, 158, 168, 195, 
199, 208, 227, 231. 

nivodha, the extinction or destrue- 
tion of suffering, ii. 105 n. 

Niredaa (Nie-p’un), date of, i. 75; 
73, 99, 106 n.; 150 (100 years 
before Agdka), date from, i, 63, 
103; 151, 156, 1743 place of, i. 
63; il, 175. 

Nirvana Satra, i. 70, 

nishadyd, Pali nisidanam—mats, i, 

_ 75 ne : 

Niu-t’an country, i. 23 n. 

niu-teu-shan-t an—-yosirshachandana. 

nivaranas, five, i, 152 n. 

nivdsana, (ni-fo-si-na) role, i. 76. 

North India, i. 10. 

Northern range of mountains, i. 
160 and note, 

Nu-chih-kien country, i. 29, 30. 


351 


Nujkend (Nu-chih-kien), town, i. 
12; 20, 30. 

No-kia-’o-la-chu-na — Nagarjuna 
Bodhisattva, ii. 97. 

nyagrédha (ni-ku-liu), fruit, i. 207 ; 
grove, ii. 21, 22, 313 tree, i. 49, 
63; ii. 50, 126. 

Nydyadvératéraka Séstra (In-ming- 
ching-li-men-lun), ii, 218, 220 n. 

Nydydnusdra Sastra (?O-pi-ta-mo- 
shun-chan-li-lun and Shun-ching- 
li-lun) of Sanghabhadra, i. 160, 


195. 
Nyssa or Nuga, i. 95 me 
0. 


Ocu (U-cha), ii. 288, 324. 
’O-ch’a-li—Atali, ii. 265. | 
’O-che-lo — Achala or Achdara, 
Chinese So-hing, ii, 218, 2573 
arhat, ii, 268. 
O-chou-to-kiun—Ajitaktta, i. 98. 
’O-chu-kia—K4lasdka, ii. 90 n. 
O%inn, Norse god, i. 65 n, 
Odra or Udra (U-cha), Orissa, ii. 204. 
’O-fan-ch’a—Avanda, ii. 280. 
’Q-fo-lu-che-to-i-shi-fa-lo —A val6oki- 
téSvara, i. 127 n. 
’O-hi-chi-ta-lo—Ahikshétra, i. 200. 
Ohind, Udakhanda, or Wahand, 
i. 114 n., 135. 
’0-jo-kio-ch’iu-ju—Ajiiita Kaundin- 
ya, ii, 46. 
’0-ki-ni or Akni country, i.13,19; 17. 
’O-lan-kia-lan — corrupt form for 
Ardda K4lama, li. 54. 
olibanun—sdlai tree, ii. 265 n. 
O-li-ni—Ahreng, on the Oxus, i. 
42; ii, 285, 289. 
’O-lu-no—Aruna, Chehél Dukhta- 
ran, i, 61 n., 623 ii, 284. 
Olympus, i. Io n. 
’o-mo-lo-kia — dmalaka fruit, ii. 95, 
136n 
O-nan-t’o—Ananda, ii, 154. 
O-nan-t’o-pu-lo—Auandapura, ii. 
268. 
*O-ni-liu-t’?o—Anirnddha, ii. 38 n. 
’O-no-wei, king of, i. 100 n. 
O-pi-an—same as Upian, Kapiga, 
according to Cunningham, i. 55n, 
56n., 59 n., 63 n.5 ii, 285 n. 
’0-pi-t’o-kie-la-na — Aviddhakarna, 
ii. 61, 62, 63. 
?0-pi-ta-mo-ku-she-lun — Abhidhar- 
makésha S'‘dstra, i, 105. 


52 


> 


’0-pi-ta-mo-ming-ching-lun — Sarkr- 
yuktdbhidarmahridaya Sdstra, i. 
112, 

°0-pi-ta-mo-pi-po-sha-lun — Abhi- 
dharma Vibkdshd or Abhidharma 
mahdvibhdshd Sdstra, i. 155 n. 

’0-pi-ta-mo-shun-chan-li-lun—Nyd- 
ydnusdra Sdstra, i, 195. 

’?0-po-lo-lo—Apalala naga, i. 122, 


123. 

i aT atecere ne —Abhayagiri- 
vasina school, ii. 247. 

ordeals, i. 84. 

Oring-nor (Sing-su-hai ?), i. 12 n., 36. 

Orissa, ii. 236 n. 

Ormuz (Ho-mo ?), ii, 278. 

O-she-li-ni—Asidharana convent, i. 
22, 24. 

O-shi-po-kiu-sha-p’u-sa — Agvaghé- 
sha Bodhisattva, ii, 100. 

’0-shi-p’o-shi— A Svajita, ii. 150. 

’Q-sho-to-fa-ti—A jitavati. 

’O-ssu-lo—Asura, ii. 223. 

’0-tin-p’o-chi-lo—Atydnabakéla, ii. 
275, 277; 279. 

étu (wu-tii), cat, i, 146. 

Odapoa, see Uraga, 

Ourgha or R&gha (Po-lo-lo-kia), ii. 


322. 

ox-head sandal-wood, ii. 148. 

Oxus, Am@darya (Po-teu) river, i. 
97; 12, 33, 35 D-, 37) 38, 39 D., 40, 
41, 42 n., 43, 114, 115, 125, 126. 

’O-ye-mu-khi—Hayamukha, i, 229. 

’0-yu or Wu-yau, li. 90 n. 

*O-yu-t’o— Ayodhya, i. 224. 

Ofjrvy—Ujjayintin Malava, ii. 270 n. 


P. 
Pa, river in Shen-si, i, 5. 
pachyma (fu-ling) cocos, ii. 194 n. 
pdidési—pradd, it. 5 n. 
Padmapani or Avalékité$vara, 60 n. 
padmardja jewel, ruby, ii, 248. 
Padma Sambhava, a master of en- 
chantments, i. 120 n. 
Padmavati (Lien-hwa), mother of 
Kundla, i, 141 n., 204 n. 
Paithan, or Pratishthdna, town, ii. 
255 n. 
painted figure of Buddha, i. 102. 
Pajapati or Prajapati, ii. 2 n. 
Ilaxrviky, i. 148 n. 
Pa-la-na—Varana or Varnu, ii, 281. 
Puli, village in Kabul, i, 112 n. 


INDEX, 


Pa-lin-fu——-Pataliputra or Patna, i. 
56, 56. i 

Palodhéri, village in Kabul, i, 112 n. 

Pamgbin mountains, ii. 285 n. 

Pamir (Po-mi-lo) mountains, i. 19 ; 
41 n., 135 n.; ii. 299. 

panasa- (pan-na-so), jack-fruit, i. 
88 ; ii. 194, 196. 

patchabhijiids (U-shin-t’ong), ii. 139 
n., 208 n, 

Pafichala—Rohilkhand, i. 200 n. 

Pafichana river, ii. 180 n. 

Pafichagikha—Paiichasikho (P4li), a 
divine musician, i. 58. 

Paiichavarshad or Paiichavarshikd 
parishad (Pan-che yue-sse), festi- 
val, i. 28; 21 n., 52n. 

Pandréthan—Puranadhishthina in 
Kasmir, i: 158 n. 

Pandus or Pandavas, i. 183, 184 n. 

Panini (Po-ni-ni), the grammarian, 
i, 114, 116; his birthplace, S.la- 
tura, i. 114. 

Pafija river, i. 41 n. 

Paiijra district, ii. 194 n. 

Pafijshir valley in Kapiga, i. 54 n. 

pannasdld—parnasdld or pansala, i, 
98; ii. 29. 

pan-na-so—panasa, pansala, pan- 
nasild (q. v.), ii. 29. 

Pan-to—Kavandha, Kabandha, or 
Sarikkul, i. 89. 

P’ao-chu—Ratnadvipa or Ceylon, ii. 
236, 240. 

pao p’ing—precious pitcher or vase, 
ii, 137 n. 

Pao-ta—Topur, i. 187 n. 

P’ao-tsi—Ratnakara, ii. 68. 

Pao-yung, i. 18, 23, 25, 33. 

Parichis, a tribe in Afghanist4n, ii, 
285 n. 

Paradise, western, i, 227 n. 

paramdnu, infinitely small measure, 
iee7as 

Paramartba, A.D. 557-589, i. 105 n. 

Paramdrthasatya Sdstra (Shing-i+ 
tai) of Vasubandhu, i. 172. 

Pardvata (Po-lo-yu) monastery, i. 
68 n., 69; ii. 214. 

Parbatt village, ii. 182 n. 

Paribrajika, ii. 175 0. 

Parika (Po-li-ho), i, 42 n. 

Parsia, place mentioned by Ptolemy 
in Afghanistan, ii. 285 n. 

Pargushthina —(Fo-lo-shi-sa-t’ang- 
ua), ii, 285, 


. 


INDEX. 


Pargva or Arya Parévika (Po-li-shi- 
fo), Chinese Hie-tsun, i. 98, 104, 
105 n., 151, 153. 

Parthians, i. 37 n. 

Parvata (Po-fa-to) country in the 
Pafijab, ii. 275. a 

Parvati or Durga (Po-lo-yu), goddess, 
i. 60 n., 61; 114 n.; ii, 214 n. 

Paryatra (Po-li-ye-to-lo) country, i. 
178, 179. 5 

Pasenadi. See Prasénajit. 

Pasupatas (Po-shu-po-to), ascetics 
ameared with ashes, i. 55 n., 114, 
176, 200; ii. 45, 261, 271, 276, 
277, 270, 280, 281. 

patali (po-ch’a-li) tree, ii, 83. 

Pataliputra (Po-ch’a-li-tsu-ch’ing), 
i. 65, 56, 67, 70; ii. 70 n., 83, 
85, 86 n., go n., 167, 223. 

Patharghata, ii. 192 n. 

Patna, i. 16, 55, 56; il 
136 n., 142 n. 

pdtra (po-to-lo), begging-dish of 
Buddha, i. 78; 60'n., 98; ii. 
178, 210, 278. 

Patriarchs, first four, i. 53 n. 

Patti or Pati, perhaps Chinapati, i. 
167 0., 173 0., 175 0. 

P’au-I., same as Fab-hi. 

peach (¢’aw), chindni, i, 88, 174. 

pear (12), chtnardjaputra, i. 88, 174. 

pearls (fo), fire, i. 89. 

pearl-fishery in Ceylon, ii. 25. 

Pegu—Kamalanka, it. 200. 

Peh-shwui, white water, i. 29. 

pei-to tree, i. 62, 63, 66, 73. 

Pe-lo—Véssantara, i. 17, 93. 

P’eng-lai-shan—Fairyland, i. 95. 

Thepixdbros— Vaisgravana, i. 59 2., 
191 n. 

period of the true law, i. 94 n. 

period of the images, i. 94 n., 106 n. 

Persia (Po-li-sse, Po-sze and Po- 
la-sse), i. 16, 91, 92 and note; 37, 
51 u., 99; il. 240, 277, 279, 300. 

Persiana, town in Afghanistan, ii. 
285 n. 

Peshiwar—Purushapura in Gand- 
hara, i. 18, 103; Iog n., 119 n. 

persimmon, i, 88. 

Peucolais, Pushkalavati, ITevxeXa- 
Gris, IlevxeNarRres, Tevxédacs, i. 
109, 120 n. : 

Phalgu river, ii. 112 n. 

Philguna (P’o-li-kiu-na) month, i. 
72. 

VOL. IL 


113 n,, 
ts, 


353 

Pharasmanes, king of Khorasmia, i. 
35 n., 115. 

Pho-shu-mi—Vasumitra, ii. 268 n. 

Phulthambé, town, ii. 255 n. 

phyllanthus emblica (’an-mo-lo), i. 
180 n. 

pi—loquat, i. 87. 

P’i-chen-p’o-pu-lo — Vichavapura, 
Vasmapura, or Balmapura, capital 
of Sindh, ii. 272. 

Pidshan, i, 13; 17. 

Pien-Ki, editor of the Si-yu-ki, i. 1. 

Pi-lo-mo-lo—Ba4lmér, ii. 270, 

Pi-lo-sa-lo—Pilusira mountains, i. 


87. 
Pi-lo-shan-na— Viragana, i. 201. 
Piluséra (Pi-lo-so-lo), Ch, Siang-kiu- 
shan, mountain in Kapiga,i. 67,68. 
Pilu or Po-lu tree, i. 96. 
Pi-lu-shan for Pi-lu-che-na—Vaird- 
chana, i. 87. 
Pi-lu-tse-kia—Virddhaka raja, i. 128, 
Pima (Pi-mo), town, ii. 322, 323 n., 


324. 
Pi-mo-lo-kie-king — Vimalakirtti sa- 
tra, ii. 67, 
Pi-mo-lo-mi-to-lo— Vimalamitra, i. 
196. 
Pin-chin—Tattvavibhaiga Sdstra?, 
i, IOI n. : 
p'ing—pitcher, ii. 65 n. 
Ping—Sdmavéda, i. 79. 
P’ing-k’i-lo—Vingila, ii, 217. 
Ping-lo, village, i. 4. 
Ping-wang of the Chau family, i. 30. 
Ping-yang, district, i. 11. 
Pin-na mountain, i. 78. 
P’in-pi-sha-lo, P’in-pi-so-lo—Bimbi- 
sdra raja, ti. 102, 148. 
Pi-po-lo—Pippala-stone house, ii. 
156. 
Pispro-sha-lun—Vibhdshd Sdstra, i 
151i n. 
Pi-po-she—Vipasa, i. 165. 
pippala tree, i. 99; ii, 14, 116, 128. 
Pippala (Pi-po-lo), ii. 156; cave, i. 61. 
Pi-pu-lo—Vipula mountain, ii. 155, 
158. 
Pir Pitichal mountains, i. 163 n. 
Pi-sha-men—Vaisravana, ii. 309. 
Pi-so-kia—Visikha country, i. 239. 
Piguna, i. 99; it, 69 n. 
Pitaka Miscellaneous, i, 80. 
Pitakas, three, i. 104, 152, 153, 154, 
155, 196; ii, 307. 
Pitésila (Pi-to-shi-lo), ii. 279. 
Zz 


354 


Pi-to-kia (willow twig), tooth-brush 
sanghdrama, i. 68. 

Pi-to-shi-lo—Pitasila, ii. 279. 

Pi-tsu—Bhikshuy, ii. 5. 

Pi-t’u country— Bhida, i, 36. 

plantain—mdcha (meu-che), i. 163 n. 

plum (nai), i. 87. 

Po-ch’a-li—Patali, 
$3, 223. 

po-ch’i—crystal dish, ii, 129. 

Po-fu—Vashpa. 

Poh-luh-kia—Baluka or Aksu, i. 24. 

Po-ho—Balkh. 

Po-ho—Bolor (?) kingdom, i. 90. 

“ poisonous thieves, the,” i. 61. 

Po-keen, temple of, i. 99. 

Po-khu-lo—Vakula, ii, 190, 

Po-kia-i—Bhagai (4), town, ii. 314. 

Po-ki-lang—Baghlan. 

Po-la-sse—Persia, ii. 240. 

Po-li, town, i. 47. 

Po-li-ho—Farokhar, perhaps in Ba- 
daksh&n, -i. 42. 

Po-li-ho, Bolor district, ii. 289. 

P’o-li-kiu-na—Phalguna month. 

Po-li-shi-fo—Pargvika. 

Po-li-sse—Persia. 

politeness, forms of, i. 85. 

Po-li-ye-to-lo—Paryatra or Vairata, 

- 1,178, 179. 

P’o-lo-hih-mo-pu-lo — Brahmapura, 
i, 198, and additions, 241, 

Po-lo-kie-fa-t’an-na — Prabhakara- 
varddhana, i. 210. 

Po-lo-ki- -po-ti — Pr Aaghodhi 
tain, ii 114. 

Po-lo-lo—Bolor, ii, 298. . 

Po-lo-lo-kia — Ragha or Ourgha, 
town, ii. 322, 324. 

Po-lo-men—Brahinans. 

Po-lo-mo-lo-ki-li—Brahmaragiri, ii. 
214. 

Po-lo-ni for Po-lo-na—Viarané river, 
ii. 

Po-lo- Freee (Banaras), ii. 43, 44, 
45 n. 

Po-lo-’o-ti-to-wang — Baéladityaraja, 
ii, 168, 173. 

Po-lo -pho -mi-to-lo, Prabhimitra, 
ii, 171 n. 

Po-lo-si-na-shi-to-wang —Prasénajit 
raja, ii. 2, 

P’o-lo-st-na — Varaséna mountain 
pass, ii. 286, 

P’o-lo-tu-lo—Salatura. 

Po-lo-ye-kia—Prayaga, 


Pataliputra, ii. 


moun- 


INDEX. 


Po-lo-yu—Parvati monastery, i. 68, 
69; ii. 214 n. 

Po-lu—Pilu tree, i. 96. 

Po-lu-lai or Po-lu-lo—Bolor coun- 
try, i. 93; 135. 

Po-lu-sha in Gaudhéra, i. 11%, 112. 

Po-lu-kie-che-po — Bharukachhava 
or Bharéch, ii. 259. 

Po-lu-sha-pu-lo—Purushapura. 

polyandry, i. 17. 

pomegranates, i. 88. 

Po-mi-lo— Pamir, ii. 297. 

Po-na—Bannu country, i. 36. 

Pondua or Potrowa, ii. 194. 

Po-ni—Bhandi, miuister, i. 210. 

P’o-pi-fei-kia—Bhavavivéka, ii. 223. 

Porus, i. 136 n. 

P’o-sha—Paushya month. ~ 

Po-shi-p’o — Vasibha sangharima, 
ii, 195. 

Po- sse—Persia, i, 92 n.; ii, 174 n. 

Po-sz’-nih— Prasénajit, ii, 3 n. 

Po-tai— Bédhi tree, i, 106, 

Po-tai—perhaps the Fa-ti (Betik) 
of Hiuen Tsiang, but may stand 
for Badakshan, i. 101 n. 

po-ta-lo—Bhadra fruit, i. 88, 

Po-ta-lo-po- -to—Bhadrapada month. 

Pétaraka (Pu- 14-16-kia) mountain, i. 
114 n.3 ii, 231 n., 233, 252) Dy 
297 n. 

po-tau—grape, i. 88. 

Po-ti— Bodhi vihara, i. 76. 

Po-to-chang-na— Badakshan, i. 41. 

Po-to-lo-liu-chi, Bhadraruchi, ii. 263. 

Po-t’su—Vakshu or Oxus river, ii, 
289, 292, 204. 

Po-wang, marquis, or Chang-kien, i. 
5 n., 28. 

Prabhakaravarddhana (Po-lo-kie-fa- 
t’an-na) Chinese T’so-kwong, i. 210. 

Prabhimitra (Po-lo-pho-mi-to-lo), 
Chinese Kwang-yeu, died in China, 
A.D. 633, ii. 171. 

Prabhapila Bédhisattva (Hu-ming- 
p'u-sa), ii. 48. 

pradakshina or circumambulation, i. 
103 nD. 

Pragbédhi (Po-lo-ki-po-ti) moun- 
tain, il, 114, I15, 132. : 

Prigjyétisha, capital of Kamar(pa, 
ii, 195 n. 

Prajapati (Po-lo-she-po-ti), Ch. 
Sing-chu, a Bhikshuni, ii. 2, 23 n. 

Prajnabhadra (Pan-yo-p' o-t’o-lo), ii, 
102 n. 


INDEX. 


Prajfiachandra, ii, 102 n. 

Prajitipdramitd, i. 39 ; 204 n. 

Prasénajit rAja (Bo- lo-si-na-shi-to- 
wang and Po-sz’-nih), Chinese 
King-shing-kwan, i. 44; ii. 2, 
3.,4, 11 n., 13, 20, 

prastdra (t'ah-yuen) bed, i 123 0. 

_ Pratiméksha, i. 181 n. 

Pratyéka Buddha (Pi-le-chi-fo), i. 
36, 43, 54, 67, 88; vehicle, i. 52, 
79 0, 112 v.3 ii, 209. 

Pravaraséna raja of Kasmir, i. 158 n. 

Prayaga (Po-lo-ye-kia), Allahabad, i. 
230 f., 234n. 

Preface to ta Si-yu-hi by Chang 
Yueh, i. 

prétas, ii. oni n. 

procession of images, i. 22. 

Ipoxdats or Moxdats, Pushkalavati, i. 
109 n. 

Prome in Burmé, ii. 200 n. ¢ 

Pu-ho—Bokhara. 

Pu-ho-i mountains, i, 89. 

Pujasumira Ayushmat (Fu-she-su- 
ini-lo), ii, 74. 

Pulakési (Pu-lo-ki-she), Western 
Chalukyan king, i. 144 nn.,.213 n., 
il, 256. 

Pu-la-na-fa-mo--Parnavarma, i118, 

Pu-lo-ki-she— Pulakési. 

Pulumayi—Andhra king, ii. 269 n. 

Pu-nariver—Jumnaor Yamuna, i.37. 

Punach (Pun-nu-t’so). or Punats, a 


kingdom on the borders of Kas-, 


mir, i, 162 £. 

Pundarikavarna, for Padmévati, i. 
204 n. 

pundra, sugar-cane, ii. 194 D. 

Pundravarddhana (Pun-na- fii-t’an- 
na), country in Bengal, ii. 194. 


Pun-na-fa-t?an-na—-Pundravardhana.. 


Pun-nu-ts’o—Punach, i. 162 f. 
punyasdlds (pun-yang-she-lo), Ch. 
Fo-she and Tsieng-lu, mee of 
charity, i, 166, 198; il. 214 n., 303. 
Parna (Yuen- moun), author of ne 
Vibhdshd S‘dstra, i. 162. 
Parnddhishth4na in Kasmir,i. 158 n. 
Pargamaitray aniputra (Pu- la-na- 
mej-ta-li-yen-ni-fo-ta-lo), Ch. 
Mwan-t’se-tseu, i. 180, 181. 
Parnavarmé (Pu-la-na- ‘fa. mo), in 
Chinese Mwan-cheu, ii. 118, 174. 
Purushapura (Po-lu-sha- pu-lo}, now 
Peshawar, i. 32 n.; 97 0., 226 n, 


355 


Pfirvasila (Fo-p’o-shi-lo) monastery, 
iL 221, 

Parvavidéha (Fo-p’o-pi-ti-ho), one 
of the four dvipas, i, 11. 

Pu-se-po-k’i-li—Pushpagiri. 

Pushkalavati (Po-shi-ki-lo-fa-ti), 
TledxeXad@ris, capital of Gandhara, 
i. 109, III n., 112 n. 

Puashkra or Pushkala, son of Bha- 
rata, i. 109 n. 

Pushpagiri (Pu- Bere al) sangha- 
rama, i. 205. 

Pushya (Po-sha) month, i. 72. 

Pu-ti—Bédhi tree, ii. 1 16. 

Putlam or Pattaéla, in Ceylon, ii. 
251 n. 


R. 


Rapwa Svimi? (Lo-tai-sz-pi-mi), 
i, 56. 

Ragh (Ho-lo-hu), iu Badakshan, i. 
42 n, ii. 289. 

Ragha or Ourgha (Po-lo-lo-kia),i. 322. 

Rébula (Ho-lo-hu-lo or Lo-bu-lo), 
son of Buddha, i. 88 ; 60, 61, 180, 
181; ii. 18, 43, 167. 

Raivata or Girndragiri in Surdshtra, 
ii, 269 n. 

Raja Bisal-ka-garh, ii, 66 n. 

Rajagrtha (Ho-lo-she-ki-li-hi), Chi- 
nese Waug-she, i, 110 n., 1533 ii 
43, 46, 47 0., 85 n., 110 n,, 149 n., 
161 n., 162, 165, 166, 167 u., 
175 n., 176, 177, 188, 180. 

Rajagriha (Little), i. 44. 

Rajamahéndri, ii. 207 n., 209 n. 

Rajapuri (Ho-lo-she-pu-lo) or Ra- 
jauri, i, 163, 166 n. 

Rajasthaniya Sura at Valabhi, ii. 
267 n. 

Rajanri—Rajapuri. 

Rajgir, li. 155 n., 167 n. 

Rajjaua village, ii, 184 n. 

Rajyavarddhana (Ho-lo-she-fa-t’an- 
na), Wang-tsang, king, i. 210, 211. 

Rakshasa (Lo-ts’a), it. 244. 

Rakshasi (Lo-ts’a-uiu), 1.236n., 240, 
241. 

Raktaviti (Lo-to-wei-chi) saighd- 
rama, ii, 202, 

Rama, i. 109 n.3 Hi. 54. 

Ramagimoor Ramagrama (Lan- -m0), 
i, 50; ii, 26n. 

Ramanya, delta of the Ivawadi, ii, 
200 1. 


356 


Randavénuvana, ii, 159. 
Rafijimati, town in Bengal, i. 26 n. 
Rapti river, ii. 1 n. 

Rasht valley, i, 41 n. 

Ratnadvipa (P’ao-ch’u), Ceylon, ii. 
236, 239, 240, 246. 

Ratnikara (P” ao-tsi), li, 67, 68, 

Ratnaktita, ii. 67 n. 

ratndni or ratnatraya (sdn-p’ao), the 
seven, i. 205. 

Ratndvali of Bana, i, 211 n., 235 n. 

Ravana, ii. 248 n., 251 n., 252 n. 

Ravanahrada, lake in Tibet, ii, 155 n., 
297 n. 

Ravi river, i, 166n., 167 n., 173 n. 

Records, Buddhist (Chinese) Pilgrim, 
i. 9. 

‘* Recovered-sight copse ” (Te-yen- 
lin), Aptanétravana (Julien), Ap- 
tikshivana (Cunningham), i, 46 n. 

red garments interdicted, i. 25. 

relics (she-li) sartra, i. 46, 59, 60, 66 
n., 160, 161, 186; division of, ii. 
41; relic caskets, ii. 317, 318. 

Révata (Li-po-to) Ayushmat, ii. 74. 

Revelganj, ii. 64 n. 

Rishi (Sin-zhin), ii, 208. 

Righi-déva, i, 227. 

rice (keng-t’ao), i. 19; rice of Par- 
yAtra ripens in sixty days, i. 179. 

rock monastery, ii. 215 f. 

Rohitaka (Lu-hi-ta-kia) stfipa, i. 127. 

Roshén in Kiu-mi-to, i. 41. 

Royal family, i. 82. 

Rubruquis, cited, i.-14 0, 45. 

‘by dish (chin- chu), i ii, 129. 

Audraksha, a Brahman, i. 138 n. 

Rai-Samangin (Hi-lu-sih-min-kien), 


i430 

rapa (sth), ii. 94 n. 

Rapa, Brahma heavens, ii. 22, 30 n. 
ripadhdtu (sih-kiat), i. 2 n. 


8. 


SaBzan (Sa-poh) merchants, i. 74. 

Sabdavidyd (Shing-ming) Sdstra, i. 
78, 116, 153 2. 

Sabdavidyd Samyukta Sdstra, ii, 
171 n. 

Saddharma hall, i. 203; ii. 2 n. 

Saddharma Luikévatdra Sdatra, ii. 
251 n. 

Saddharma Pundarika Sétra (Fa- 
hwa-king), ii. 73 n., 


Sadvaha (So-to-p'o- ete Ch. In. 


INDEX. 


ching, raja of Késala, ii, 100 p. 
210, 212 f., 214 f., 224 n. 

Zayara 7 cal HvOvinula, i. 166 n. 

Saghdniin or Chaghanian, i, 39 n., * 
126 n. 

Sahflin, ii, 2 n. 

Sahaléka (Soh-ho) world, i. 9. 

Sahéwar village, i. 201 n. 

Séhet-Mahet, SrAvasti city, ii. 1 n. 

saiksha (in Chinese To-wan), dis- 

, ciple, ii. 76. 

Sailagiri, ii. 153 n. 

Sailin, Ceylon, ii, 236 n, 
aka era, i. 57 n. 

Sakala (She-kie-lo), town in Takka, 
i. 165 n., 166 n, 193, 

Sakéta, i. 239 n., 240 n. 

Saknia—Shigndn, Qe % 

Sakra (T’i-shih) Dévéndra or Indra, 
i, 58, 98; 115, 125, 184 n., 203, 
204, ‘218; ii. 9, 12, 25, 30, 33, 
34, 41, 59, 87 n., 123, 127, 133, 
145, 176, 180. 

Sakraditya (Sho - kia-lo-’o-t’ie-to) 
king, i, 163. 

Sakya Bédhisattva (Shih-kia-p’u-sa), 
i. 92, 933 ii. 9, 11, 20. 

Sakya family, country of, i. 48. 

Sakya maidens, ii, 11, 12. 

Sakyaputra, a title, i. 11, 

sda (so-lo), trees, i. 133; ii 32. 

Sala (Sha-lo) Ayushmat, ii, 74. 

silat (hiun-lu), gum olibanum tree, 

, i. 265 n. 

Saldtura (So-lo-tu-lo), near Ohind, i. 
114, 115. 

Salora district, i, 187 n. 

SAmaka (Shen- ma), son of Dukhula 
(Julien has Shanmukha), i. 111 n. 

Samadhi, i, 55; 53, 162, 204; it. 
179, 219. 

Sdma-jdtaka, i. 75 n., 763 111 n. 

So ey (Sa-mo-joh) monastery, ii. 
316. ' 

Samarkand (Sa-mo-kien), i. 31 n., 
32, 33, 34 n., 35 n, 36 n. 

Samatata or Samétata (San-mo-ta- 
ch’a), in Eastern Bengal, ii 110, 


, 199, 200, 

Samagina (Shi-mo-she-na), the field 
of tombs for laying the dead, i. 60. 

Samangan, town, i. 43 n. 

Sdmantamukha- dharani, ese 

Sdmavéda (Ping), i. 79 0. 

SAmbi (Shie- -mi), i. 933 ii. 21, 296, - 

Sambédhi state, ii, 151. 


INDEX. 


Sambdgha (San-p’u-kia) Ayushmat, 


ML. 745 75+ 5 , 
Sambuddhassa (Yih-tsai-chi)—Sar- 
, varthasiddha, ii. 16 n. 
Sambhurigvara — Cunningham’s re- 

storation of Su-nu-li-chi-fa-lo, ii. 

277 4. 
Sangha, asseinbly, i. 183 n.; ii. 63, 

168 n 
samjidna (stang), ii. 94 n. 
Samkagya (Sing-kia-she) country, i. 


39. : 

Sammatiya (Ching-liang} school, i. 
200 n., 202, 230, 240; ii. 2, 14, 
44, 45, 67, 186, 201, 261, 268, 276, 
279, 280. 

Sa-mo-joh (Samajiia) convent, ii. 316, 

Sai-mo-kieun—Samarkand, i. 32, 34, 


35. 

Samétata, —Samatata. 

Sampaha! (San-po-ho), Ladakh, i 
178 n., 199. 

samudaya, the increase or accum- 
mulation of misery from passions, 
ii, 105 n. 

Sam vat era, i, 106 n. 

Samvrijji (San-fa-sbi), ii, 77 n. 

Samyak Sambédhi (San-miao-san- 
pu-ti), ii, 122, 219, 

Samyuktdbhidharmahpidaya —S'ds- 
tra?(’O-pi-ta-mo-ming-ching-lun), 
i, 70; 112 n, 

Samyuktdbhidharma Sastra (Ts’0-’ o- 
pi-ta-mo-lun) of Dharmatrata, i. 
IIo. 

Sanyukidgama (Tsa-o-han-king), i. 
79. 

sanaka (she-no-ki), hemp, i. 53. 

Sanakavasa (Shang-no-kia-fo-so) or 
Sanavasika, patriarch or arhat, i. 
52, $3, 134 0. 

SAfichi, sculptures, i. 203 n.; ii. 87. 

Sandowé in Burma, Dvarapati, ii. 
200 n. 

Saugzeus (Saijaya), governor of 
TlevxeAasqris, i. 109 0 

Sanghabhadra (Seng-kia-p’ o-to-lo), 
Chin. Chung-hin, i. 160, 192 f., 193, 
194, 195, 196; author of the Nyd- 
ydnusdra Sastra, i. 160, 

Sanghadéda, i. 193 n. 

Sanghadéva, translator of the Abhi- 
dharmajitdnaprasthdna S‘dstra, i. 
17 

Picked rae (seng-kia-lan), i. 55 n., 
74, 92, ke, 


1.74. 
; ae (hing), ii. 


337 
saighdti (seng-kia-chi) robe, i. 47, 
53) 75 Dy 96; ii, 38. 
Sang-ho-pu-lo—Sithhapura, i. 143. 
Sangk4sya—Kapitha, i, 202 n. 
Sting-kia—Simha, i. 241, 243, 244. 
Siing-kia-lo—Simhala, ii. 234f., 241 f. 
Sing-kia-she—Sangkasya. 
Sting-k’ie—Saakhya, ii. 223 n. 
siing-k’io-ch’'a—sarighakshikd robe. 
Sang-king, i. 23, 33. 
Sanglawala-tiba, identified by Cun- 
ningham with Sakala, i, 166 n, 
Sangohi, town in the Panjab, i i,I43n. 
Sang-shan, i. 23, 27. 
Sang-teh—Sénti ?, 1. 102. 
Sani-raja (Shan-ui-lo-she), i. 125 n., 
126. 
Safijaya—Sangeus, i. 109 n, 
Sahjaya (Shen-she-ye)—Pali Saga, 
ii. 175, 178. 
satkaksrikd (sang-kio-ki) robe, i 


* 47, 76. 

Sankhya (Sang-ki’e), Ch. Su-dun, 
system of philosophy, ii. 104, 223. 

Sankisa—Kapitha, i. 202 n., 204 n., 
206 n. 

San-mo-ta-ch’a—Samatata, ii. 110. 

Sannipdta-nikidya, ii. 164. 

Sannipdta class of books, i. 80; ii. 
216 n, 

San-po-ho, otherwise Mo-lo-so—Sam- 
paha or ” Ladakh, i, 178, 

Bees u-kia—Sambogha Ayushmat, 


O4 DL 

Sa-pao-sha-ti—Sarpdushadi, i. 125. 

Sa-poh—Sabeean merchants, i. 74. 

Sa-p’o-ho-la-t’a-si-t’o--Sarvarthasid- 
dha, ii. 52, 53. 

Saptaparna cave, i, 153 n.; ii. 156 
n., 161 n. 

Saradd, fourth of the six seasous, i. 

, 720. 

Sara-kQpa—Sur-kuid, or arrow-well, 
ii, 23 0. 

SAran, ii, 64 n. 

sarana (i-kwai), ii. 64 n, 

Saranganatha, ii, 46 n. 

Sarhind in the Satadru country, i. 
178 n., 179 n. 

Sarik-kul (Pan-to) lake, i, 89, 12 n,; 
ii, 297 n., 299 n. ; 

Sariputra (She-li-tseu), Pali, Seri- 
yut, i. 38, 39, 59, 61; ii. 5, 6, 7, 
ae 67, 150, 154, 161, 175,177f., 
180. 


358 


garira (she-li) relics, i. 60, 66, 100, 
161; divided, ii. 39. 

Sarnath district, ii. 46, 48 n., 54 n. 

Sarpaushadi (Sa- -pao-sha-ti), She- 
yo convent, i, 125. 

Sarvarthasiddha (Sa. p’o-ho-la-Va-si 
to) school, ii. 38 n., 52, 53, 55. 

Sarvarthasiddha’s tiara (Yih-tsai-i- 
ch’ing), ii. 254. 

Sarvarthasiddha or Sambuddhasa 
(Yih-tsai-chi), ii. 16 n. 

Sarvistivida (Shwo-yih-tsai-yu-pu) 
school, i. 70; 18, 19, 24, 49, 121, 
174, 190, 192, 196, 224, 226, 230; 
ii, 182, 270, 278, 299, 300; Sar- 
vastivada books, i, 155 n 

Sarvadatardja jdtaka (Si-po-ta-ta or 
Tsi-shi), i, 124. 

Saganka (She-shang-kia). Ch. Yueh, 
king of Karnasuvama— Narén- 
dragupta, i. 210 f., 2123 ii, 42, 

_ Ot, 118, 121. 

Satadru (She-to-t’u-lu), country on 
the river Satadru, i. 178. 

Sa-t’a-ni-shi-fa-lo — Sthanésvara 
city, i. 183. 

Satasdstravaipulya (Kuang-pih), 4. 
231. : 

Satlaj or Satadru river, i. 167 u. 
173 n., 178 n. 

Sattagudai of Herodotos (lib. iti. c. 
91) and Thatagush of the inscrip- 
tions of Darius, i. 61 n. 

Sattaloka, i. 30 n. 

Sattapanni cave, i, 153 n.; ii. 156 
n., 161 nm 

Sattavasa or Saptavarsha, i. 61 n. 

Sautrantika(King-pu) schools, i. 139, 
226; ii. 302. 

schools of the Buddhists, i. 80.3 ii. 
24, 216. 

seasons (ritavas), six, i. 71 f., 72 n. 

sck-cheung, abbot's crosier, i. 96 n. 

Seng-kia-po-t’o-lo--Sanghabhadra, i. 
160 n. 

seng-kia-chi—saighdtt robe. 

** sesame,” ii, 226 n. 

Sétrashta—Sutrishna, i. 31 n., 99. 

seven Buddhas, ii. 261. 

seven mountain ranges, i. 10. 

seven precious things, i. 205. 

seven seas, i. 10. 

seven treasures of a holy wheel-king, 
li, 74.n. 

Sewet (She-wei) town, ji, 3 n. 

Sewist4n, i. 62 n. 


INDEX. 


Sha-chi, great country of, i. 43. 
shad ee Cee i, 149 
» 1§2 n.3 ii. 143 0., 1 63. 

shadow, cavern of the, i. 94, 95. 
« shadow-covered *—vame of a tem- 
ple, i. 47, 

Shahdheri, near the supposed site of 
Takshasila, i. 136 n. 

Shaduman (Hu-lo-mo), Tissar, i. 


39 n. 

Shahr-Sabz—Kesh. 

Shai-pao—strong ornament, ii. 87 n. 

Shakhnén or Shigndn (Shi-ki-ni), i. 
41 n. 

Sha-leh, perhaps for Su-leh—Kash- 
ghar, i. 90. 

Sha-lo—Sala, Ayushmat, ii. 74. 

Sha-lo-kia, doubtfully restored by 
Julien (Afém., vol. i, pp. 439,503) 
to Shares Lnpexh, 
i.57 n., 58n., 59 n 

Sha-lo-li- te. ele rene (2), ii. 75. 

Shambhi? (Shang-mi) country, il. 
296. 

sha- mi—Ssramanéra, i i, 99. 

Shan—Ay yur-véda, i. 79. 

Shang, tower of, ii. 325. 

shang and hoshang—upddhydya. 

Shan-ching—Girivraja, ii. 158. 

Shang-kiun—Uttaraséna, i. 126. 

Shang-mi—SAmbt, ii. 283, 296. 

Shang-mu- kia—Samaka (Julien has 
Shanmukha), iyi. 

Shan-ni-lo-shi—Samaraja. 

Shang -tso-pu—Sthavira school, ii. 24, 
133. 

Shan-si, province, i. 11. 

Sheikhpura hills, ii, 183 n., 184 n. 

She-kie-lo—Sakala, i. 166. 

She-lan-t’o-lo— Jalandbara, i. 175. 

She-li-kio- to—Srigupta, i ii. 151. 

She-li-tseu—Siriputra, ii. 5, 6, 150. 

shen (excellent) horses, i, 20 n., 32, 
54, 61: ii. 278. 

Shen— Védand, ii. 94 n. 

Shen-hien—Subhadra, ii. 35. 

Shen-kwet, period, i. 84. 

Sheu-ling-yan Sdtra, ii. 154 n. 

Shen-ma or Shang- ma-kia—Samaka 

Shen- “hung, one of the ‘‘ three sove- 
reigns,” i. 7 n. 

she-no-kia—sanaka. 

Shen-pu-chau—Jambudvipa, i. 11 n., 


30. 
She-se-ch’a—Jyéshtha month, 
Shen-shen, or Leu-lan, probably the 


INDEX. 


Cherchen of Marco Polo, i. 12, 

24 n., 85 and note. 
Shen-she-ye—Saiijaya. 
Shen-shi—Sudatta, 1. 97, 98; ii. 3. 
Shen- shi—Sugatas, i ii, 213. 
Shen-si, province, i. 12, 
She-shang-kia—Saganka. 
She-to-t’u- Ju—Satadru. 
She-wei—Sravasti, i. 44, 48: ii. 3n. 
She-ye-si-na—Jayaséna, ii. 146. 
Shie-mi—Sambi? i. 93. 
Shi-fo-kia—Jivaka, ii. 152. 
Shighnan or Shakhnan (Shi-k’i-ni), i. 

41; ii. 295. 
Shih—Sakra, ii. 145. 
shih—sdkyaputra, title, i, 11. 
Shih-kia- fo—Sakya Buddha, ii. 145. 
Cae kia-pu- sa—Sakya Bodhisattva, 

48. 

Shihan lun— Vijndka ya Ms i ie 


Shikbnan (Shi-k’i-ni), if. 29 
Shi-k’i-ni—Shighn&n or Shibhnan. 
Shi-lai-na-fa-ti— Hiranyavati river, 
ii, 32 n, : 
Shi-li-ch’a-ta-lo—Srikshétra, 
shi-li—dasabala, ii. 7 n. 
Shi-li-lo- to—Srilabdha. 
Shi-lo-fa-na—Sravana. 
Shi-lo-fa-shi- ti—Sravastt, il, 
Shi-lo-po-t’o- “lo_Silabhadra, ii ii, I10, 


197. 

Shi-lu-to-p’in-she-ti-ku-chi—Sruta- 
virhgatikéti. 

shing—a pint, i. 66. 

Shi-mo-she-na — Samagana, “the 
field of tombs for laying the 
dead,” i. 60. 

Shing-t-tai—Paramdrthasatya Sds- 
tra, i. 109, 172. 

Shing-Hau-du-shih-lun, i, 240. 

Shing-kwan—Prasénajit, ii, 2. 

Shing-lin—Jétavana, 1. 202. 

Shing-mi—Srigupta, ii. 151, 152. 

Shing-ming—Sabdavidyd. 

Shing-sheu—Srilabdha, i i. 226 n. 

Shing-tu, capital of Sz’chuen, i. 16. 

Shing-yun—Jimitavahana. 

Shin-tu—lIndia, i. 69. 

Shi-to-lin, Shi-to-yuen, garden of 
Jéta, ii. 4n., 5. 

Shi- t’sin—Vasnbandhn, T4122 

Sho-kia-lo-’o-t’ ie-to—Sakraditya, i ii, 
168, 

Shu-—Atharra-véda, 1, 79. 

shuh-tsiau—Sz’chuen pepper, ii. 265. 


359 


Shumaén (Su-man), in Mavarun- 

. nahar. 

Shun, a descendant of Hwang-ti in 
the eighth generation, i, 2; one 
of the five kings, i. 8n 

Shun - ching - li - lun—Nydydnustra 
Sdstra, i, 160. 

Shung-li, temple, i. 15. 

shun-lo, high-flavoured spirits, i. 
89 n. 

Shun-t’o—Chunda, ii. 32. 

Shu-t’o-lo—Sadra, 

Shwo-yih-tsai-yeou-pu—the Sarvas- 
tivada school, i. 121 n 

Siah-kéh (He-ling) mountains, i. 
orn. 

Siam, called Dwdéravati, i. 200 n. 

siang—lakshana, points of beauty, 
i. 102 n., 145 n., 188 n. 

siang—sarjitdna, ii. 94 n. 

Sida river, i. 12 n.; ii. 304, 309. 

Siddhartha, ii. 22, 226 n. 

Siddhavastu (Sih-an-chang), i. 78. 

sih—riipa, it. 94 n. 

Sth-Can-chang and Sih-ti-po-su-to— 
Siddhavastu, i. 78 n. 

Sihain river, ‘Syr- darya, i. 
31 n. 

sikshaka, a learner, i. 191 n. 

sikshyamdna, ii. 36 n. 


30 2, 


| Silds, five and ten, i, 47 n. 


Silabhadra (Shi-lo-po-t’o-lo), TKiai- 
hien, teacher of Hinen oe ii, 
110, 111, 112, 171, 19 

Siladitya (Shi-lo-’o- tie. to). Ch. 
Kiai-zhi, Harshavardhana of Ka- 
nanj, i, 210 n., 211 n., 213, 215, 
216, 217, 218, 219-221; ii. 170, 
174, 193, 198, 233, 234, 235 n. 

Siladitya of Ujjayini, i. 108 n.; ii. 
261, 267. 

Siladitya VI. of Valabhi, ii. 267 n. 

Si-lan-shan—Silangiri, ii. 249. 

Silis river, i, 12 n. 

silkworm’s eggs, ii. 319. 


Silpasthdnavidyd (Kiau-ming), i. 78, 


153 n. 

Sithha (Siing-kia), 
arch, i. 119 n., 
ji, 236 £., 241 f. 

Sirbhala (Chi-sse-tseu), son of Sim- 
ha, king of Ceylon, i. 188; ii. 
241 ff 

Sirhala (Sang- -kia-lo), Ceylon, i. 72, 
78; ii. 133, 183, 206, 228 n., 235 £., 
240 n., 246f,, 248 


Buddhist patri- 
120 n. ; legend of, 


360 


Sibhapura (Sing-ho-pu-lo), in the 
Panjab, i. 143, 144 0.3 iu Lala, ii 
240 n, 

simhdsana (sse-tseu-chwang), 
throne, i. 75. 

Simur or Chimor, Zluvdrda, ii, 231 a. 

sinapis glauca, inustard seed, i. 88. 

Sin—Sindh river. 

Sindhu (Sin-tu), Indus river, i. 30, 
36, 102; 97, 114, 133, 134, 165, 
172; ii. 272, 273 275, 276. 

Siughalese images of Buddha, i. 52 n. 


lion- 


Sing-suh-hai—Oring-nor or “ starry 
sea,” i, 1 3u 
Sin-t’0-lo-ni — "Hridayadhdrant, ii. 


224. 

Sin-tu—Indus or Sindh river, 

Sin-tu country, ii. 235, 280. ° 

Si-pi-to-fa-la-sse—Svétdvaras. 

Si-po-ta-ta—Sarvadata, 

Sir-i-pul, i. 48 n. 

Sirens, the, ii, 240 n. 

Sirmur in North India, i. 286 n. 

Sisira, the sixth season, i. 72 n. 

Sita (Si- -to), Zarafshau river, i. 12,13; 

_ ii. 298, 299, 304, 307. 

Sitadrus or Satadru river, i, 178 n. 

Sitavana, Ch, Han-lin, “cold forest,” 
ii, 166. 

Si-to—Sita river, i, 90 n, 

Siun-yu, i, 5 n. 

Sivadéva, ii. 81 n. 

Sivi Jdtaka, i. 125 n. 

Sivika or Sibike- -rfija (Shi-pi-kia), i. 
106, 107; 125. 

Si-wang-mu—Bhimadévt, i. 113 0. 

six extraordinary events (lu-khi), 
the six remarkable war stratagems 
that Ch’in-ping offered to the first 
Han emperor (B.c. 193), by which 
the latter brought the feudatory 
princes into subjection, i. 2. 

six parts, or four cardinal points 
with zenith and nadir, i. 8. 

six supernatural faculties, ii. 143, 
163. 

six ways of birth, ii. 214 n. 

Si-yu-ki, western world (see Bret- 
schneider’s N io vs Med. Gcog., p. 
42), 1, 21, 84; 

skandhas, i. 161 =, 

Skandhadhdtu-dyatanas (Yun-kiai- 
king), i. 95. 

Skandhadhdiw - upasthdna Sitra— 
( Wen-kiai-chu-king), i, 201. 

Skandhila (So-kin-ti-lo), author of 


INDEX. 


the Vibhdshdprakaranapdda Sds- 
tra, i, 161. 

skull-bone of Buddha, i. 67, 96, 97. 

Skull-bone vihara—Hidda, i. 95 n. 

Zxvdar—Skythians, i. 148 n. 

Skythian invaders—Vrijjis, i, 16. 

Snowy Mountains (Himalayas), i. 11; 
Hindu-Kush, &¢., i. 49, 50, 52-55, 
64, 90, 135, 143, 177, 199, ii. 62, 
80, 119, 127, 155, 188; Little, 36. 

Snowy-mountain-men—Tukharas g 

Zéacres, Subhavastu or SwAt river, 
i, 120 n., 126 n. 

Zwavos, Sushoma, Suvarna, or Suhin 
river, i, 145 n. 

Sogdh, i. 34 n. 

So- -hing —Achara or Achala arhat, 
ii, 218. 

So-kin-ti-lo—Skandhila, 

soldiers, i, 82, 87. 

So-li—Chéla, ii. 249 n. 

So-lin-teu-pim-teu-fa, “the prince 
who seizes and holds firmly,” title 
oi a king, i. 100. 

Sdéna Kolivisa and Séna Kutikanna, 
ii, 187 n., 189 n., 254 n. 

Sdénaka arhat, i, 53 n. 

Sénbh4éndar, ii. 156 n. : 

Soron, town on the Ganges, i, 201 n. 

So-to-p’o-ho—Sadvaharaja. 

ZYovderos river, i. 126 n. 

Sphitavaras, Julien’s restoration of 
Si-pi-to-fa-lo-sse, i. 61 n. 

gic (p’o-chi), rock crystal, ii. 
278. 

Sramana (Sha-men), i. 68, 71, 76; 
85, 89, &e. 

Srainana’s clothing, i. 76. 

Srava, | ravasta, king, li, I n. 

srdvaka (ching- wen), a disciple, ii. 
142, 143. 

Srdvana (Shi-lo-fa-na), month, i. 72. 

Sravasti (Shi -lo- fa-sih- ti), in 
Chinese She-wei, city, i, 44, 48 ; 
106, 240; ii. 1, 3,14 u., 18 n., 

sréshtht (shang-chu), merchant chief, 

, i. 125. 

Srigupta (She-li-kio-to), in Chinese 
Shing-mi, king, i. 10; ii. 151, 
152, 

Sriharsha era, i, 210 n. ; ii. 81 n, 

Srihatta, Silhet district, ii. 195 n. 

Srikritati (She-li-ki-li- to-ti), ii 306 n. 

Srikshétra (Shi-li-ch’a-ta-lo), in 
Burma, ii. 200. 

Srilabdha (Shi-li-lo-to), i. 226. 


INDEX. 


Srinagar, in Kagmir, i. 158 n. 

Sringa, i. 113. 

Srétdpanna (Sse-ko), i. 49, 61, 

Srughna (Su-lu-k’in-na), or Sugh, 
district, i. 186 £., 187 n. 


Srutaviréatikoti (Shi- lu-to-p’in-she- 


ti-ku-chi) Bhikshu, Chinese Wen- 
urh-pih-yih, ii. 187 £,, 254, 258. 
Sse—- Yajur-véda, i. 79. 
Sse-che—Maitréya, ii, 47. 
Sse-yeh-hu, a Turkish Khan, i. 45 n. 
staff (religious), hikkala or khakkha- 
ram, i, 96 n. 
Sthanésvara (Sa-t’a-ni-shi-fa-lo), in 


Northern India, i, 183 £., 186 n., 


187, 

Sthavira (Shang-tso-pw) school, ii. 
24, 133, 164, 199, 229, 247, 260, 
Sthiramati (Kin-hwui) Sthavira, ii. 

171, 268, 

stone (metallic), Chinese deou-shih, 

i.-ST. 

stdpa, i. §5 n., 61 n., &e, 

Suastos or SwAt river, i. 109 n. 

Subhadra (Su-po-t’o-lo), Chinese 
Shen-hien, i. 52; ii. 35, 36. 

Subhavastu (Su- -p "o-fa-sui- tu), river 
in Udyana, i. 
126 n., 135 n. 

Subhati (Su-p'u-ti), Chinese Shen- 
hien, a devotee, i, 204, 205. 

Suddna Jdtaka, i. 75 n. 

Sudana (Su-ta-na), in Chinese Shen- 
yu, Prince Visvautara, i. 112, 
113. 

Sudanta, a Pratyéka Buddha, i. 
112 n, 

Sudatta (Su-ta-to), in Chinese Shen- 
shi, i. 44, 46, 98; ii. 3-5, 10.5 
hill, i. 97, 98. 

Suddhavasa-déva (Tsing-kiu-tien), ii. 
30, 114. 

Suddhédana-raja (Tsing-fan-wang), 
i. 673 ii, 14-17, 21-23, 52, 125, 
151, 226 n.; ruined palace of, 

_ 1, 49. 

Siidra (Shu-t’o-lo) caste, i, 825 ii 
90, 272. 

Su-fa-la-na-kiu-ta-lo—Suvarnagétra. 

Subin, Sushéma, Zwavos river, i. 


145 nD. 

Suhridalékha, a work, ii, 100 n. 

sugandhikd rice, ii. 82 n. 

sugar-cane, 1. 163. 

Sugatas (Siu-kia-to), in Ch, Shen- 
shi, ti, 213. 


120, 121 p., 122, 


361 


Sugh or Srughna (Su-lo-k’in-na), i. 
186 n, 

suh—births, i. 100, 
suh-mai—spring wheat, i. 50 n. 
Su-ho-to—Svat. 

suicide, i. 232, 234. 

Sni dynasty, 581-618 a.D., i. 18; 8n. 
Sukhavati paradise, i. 134 n. 


‘sukla-paksha (pe-fen), light fort- 


night, i. 71. 
Su-la-sa-t’ang-na — Surasth4na, ii. 
277- ; 
Su-h, ancient name of Kie-sha, i. 
38; ii. 306 n. 
Sultanpur—Tamasavana, on the 
Gomati river, i. 173 n., 175 2, 
177 n., 181 v., 237 n. 
Su-lu-k’in-na—Srnghna, 
Sfima (Su-mo-she), a Naga, i. 126. 
Sumana or Samana, a déva, i.126 n. 
Sumédha Bodhisattva, i. 92 n. 
Suméru, Mount, i. 10; ii. 162, 
Su-mo-she—Sdma-naga, 
Siin, lived under the Eastern Hans 
(25-220 A.D. ) i, 4. 
Suva, a spirit, i. 62. 
Sunagir, Sunabir, or Sunaghir (Su- 
na-bi- lo) mountain, i. 62; ii. 
284. 
Sundari, a courtesan, i. 46. 
Sun-god, Sarya or Aditya, i. 273; 
ii, 274, 300, 301. 
Su-man—Sumin, i. 40. 
Su-nu-li-shi-fa-lo — Sanurigvara, 
capital of Langala, ii. 277. 
Sung-Yun, pilgrim, i, 15 ff., 81; his 
mission, 81-108. 
Su-p’o-fa-au-tu—Subhavastu, i121, 
122. 
Su-po-t’o-lo—Subhadra, 
Suprabuddha, father of May4, ii. 


23/0 

Su-p’u- “ti—Snbhati, 

S‘ardigama S titra, i. 60 n.; ii. 110 n., 
154 0. 

Saraséna, Prince, ii. 81 n. 

Sarasénaka, district, i, 179 n. 

Surdshtra or Sorath’ (Su-la-ch’a), ii. 
268, 270, 

Surasthana (Su-la-sa-t’ang), capital 
of Persia, ii. 277. 

Surat, ii. loz n. . 

Surkh-4b or Vakhsh river, i. 39 n. 

Surkh-&b (South) or Kunduz river, 
i. 43 0. 

Surkhan river, i. 39 n. 


362 


Surkhar river, i, 56 p., 91 n. 

Surkh-rud river, i, 56 n. 

Surkh-but, one of the Baimiydn 
images, i. 51 n. 

Sur- kuia—Sara-kapa, ii. 23 n. 

Sarparaka, Supara, iu the Konkan, 
i. 181 n. 

Strya-déva (Su-li-ye-ti-p’o) or Adit- 
ya, ii, 188, 274 n. 

Susima, king, ii. 2 n. 

Su-ta—Sudatta, ii, 3 n. 

Su-ta-lan-V sang—Sdtra Pitaka. 

sdtras (king), i. 73, 80. 

Sdtra Pitaka (Su-ta-lan-t’sang), i 
155; il, 164; towers in honour 
ot the, i. 38. 

Sutrishna (Su-tu-li-sse-na), i, 31, 
32 n., 100, 

Su-tu-li-sse—Sutrishna, 

Suvarnabhdmi—Burma, 

Suvarnagétra (Su-fa-la-na-kiu-ta-lo), 
in Chinese Kin-shi, i, 199. 

Suvastavadi, ii. 281 nu. 

Su-yeh, Cha or Chui, 
town, i. 19; 26, 27. 

Svat (Su-ho-to), i. 31; 109 n,, 119 n. 

Svétambara Jains, i. 144 n. 

Bue apie (Shi-fei-te-pu-lo), ii. 75, 


river and 


_ 79. 

Svétivaras (Si-pi-to-fa-la-sse), i, 61, 
95 0. cag 

Syawush, the Persian, ij. 301 n. 

Syr-darya, Sibfin or Jaxartes river, 
i, 27 n., 28 n., 29 n., 30 D., 31, 
88, 90, 93, 96, 97. ; 

82’ chuen (Shuh), province of China, 
i. 10; ii. 198. 


T. 


Ta-CH’A-SHI-LO— Takshaéila. 

Ta- -chong-pu—Mahéasdighika school, 
i. 121 n., 1623 ii. 287. 

Tadwa (To- -wai), birthplace of Ka- 
Syapa Buddha, i. 48. 

Tagdo, valley in Kapiga, i. 54 n. 

Ta-hia—Baktria, i 37 u., 38 n.; ii, 
222 n, 

Tai- Hau, Empress Dowager, i. 84. 

T’ai Tsung, Emperor, surnamed 
Wen-wang-ti, a.D. 627-649, i. 
In., 2, 6. ‘ 

takshana’ (ta-t’sa-na), a measure of 
time, i. 


Takshagila cena: ch’a-shi-lo), Taxila, 


INDEX. 


i 32n.; 136 f, 137 n., 138, 140 
» 143 n. +3 1453 ii, 302, 303, 309. 

Makehasilad, li, 275 n. 

Takshasgiré, the “severed head,” i. 
138. 

Takt-i -i-Bhai, i. 114 n. 

Takht-i- -Sulaiman, mountain in Kaég- 
mira, i. 158 11. 

Taki, village in Pafijab, i. 143 n. 

Takka (Tsih-kia), the country of 
the Babikas, i. 164, 165, 166 n., 
167 p., 173 D. 

tdla trees, il. 184, 255. 

Ta-la-kien—Talikan. 

Talas river, i, 29 n. 

Talikan in Badakshén-(Mung-kin), i. 
42 n., 43 0 

Talikan (Ta- la-kien), on the borders 
of Khurds&n, i, 48 and note. 

Ta-li-lo—Daril, i, 134 

Ta-lin—Mahavana sangh4réma, i. 
124. 

Ta-lo-pi-ch’a—Drdvida, ii. 228. 

Ta-lo-sse—Taras. 

Tapadtrys, Tamalitti or Taémralipti 
(Ta-mo-li-ti)—Tamluk (q. v.), ib. 
200 0D. 

Tamasavana (Ta-mo-su-fa-na)-——Sul- 
tanpur, i. 173 u., 174, 176 n.; 
convent, i. 181 n. 

Ta-mi—Termed. 

Tamluk, Témralipti, in Bengal, i. 
71, 72; 111 n.3 ii. 186, 200. 

Ta - mo-kiu - ti — Dharmakéti or 
Dharmagupta, a Shaman, i. 76. 
Ta-mo-po-lo-p’u-sa — Dharmapala, 

ii, 229 n. 

Ta-mo-sih-teh-ti—Termistat, i. 410.5 
ii. 292, 296, 298. 

Ta-mo-su-fa-na — Tamasavana, i, 
174, 

TAmralipti (Tan-mo-li-ti), ii, 200. 

Tan-Chu, son of the Emperor Yao, 
i. 8n., 10, 

T’ang, Emperor, i. 8; kingdom, 
i. 8n., 9, 9n., 16, 216, 217. 

T’ang(- -ti) - Yao, one of the five 
kings, i. 8. 

T’ang Hiian Tsung, Emer A.D. 
713-756, i. I n., 4. 

Tangut, Tanggod, "tribes of Tibetan 
blood, i. 57 n., 58 n. 

Tan-mo-li-ti—TAraraliptt, ii, 186. 

Tan-ta-lo-kia—Dantaldka, i, 112 n. 

Tantra, writings, i. 155 n. 

Tao-ching, pilgrim, i. 28, 26, 31, 33. 


INDEX. 


Tao-yung, pilgrim, i. 103, 104, 105, 
108. 

Tapdban—Taptap4ni, “hot water,” 
ii. 147 n. 

Tara (To-lo) Bodhisattva, i. 96; ii. 
103. 174. 

Taras (T'a-lo-sse), i, 19; 

Téravati, ii. 103 n. 

Tarim river, i. 12, 13, 25 n. 

Tartar (Hu) pilgrims, i. 19. 

Tartars, i. 103, 105, 108. 

Tésbland (Shi- kwo and Che- shi), 


28, 29 n. 


Ta. ‘thsin—Dakehina (Dekhan) coun- 
try, i. 68, 69. 

Tehina for China temple, i. 19. 

ten good qualities, i. 55. 

ten-power—dasabala, ii. 75. 

Tenghiz lake, i. 13; 17 n., 52. 

teou—a measure of ten’ potas; i. 


4 

ah. metallic stone, 1. 53, 89, 
166, 177, 197, 1983 i 45, 46, 
174 n. 

Termed (Ta-mi), i. 38, 39 n. 

Termistat (Ta-mo-sih-teh-ti), i. 
41 n.; ii, 292, 296, 298. 

Tersa (‘Taras 2), ‘river aud town, i. 
29 n. 

Tetragdnis, i. 95 n 

Thaikan or Talikan, i. 42 n, 

Thai Tsung or T’ai Tsung, surnamed 
Wen-wang-ti, Emperor, i. 6. 

Thakuri dynasty, ii. 81 n. 

Thanégvara, Sthanégvara, i. 183 n. 

thang-li, tree, ii. 265. 

Tharekhettara, Burmese form of 
Srikshétra, near Prome, ii. 200 n. 

Thatagush, of the Cuneiform i ingcrip- 
tions, the Sattagudai of Herodo- 
tos, i, 61 n. 

hi—persimmon, i. 88. 

Thien-sin— Vasubandhu, i. 105 n. 

thirty-two marks of a Buddha, i. 


In. 

Thougand springs — Myn-bulak, i. 
27, 28, 29 n.; ii, 288. 

three jewels, i. 50. 

three pifakas, ii. 75. 

three precious objects of worship, 
i. 79. 

three precious ones, the, i. 64. 

three sacred names, i. 79. 

three sovereigns, the, i. 7 n., 8. 

three species of knowlelge, ii. 163. 

three vidyds, ii. 75, 101. 


363 


three worlds, i. 1 n. 
Tiacrayys or Chashtana, king, ii. 
270. 
Tibet, i. 135 n.; Little, i. 15 
Tibetans—Fan tribes, i. 173 n. 
Tibetan cannibalism, i. 14 n.; trikes, 
Tanggod, i. 57 n., 58 n. 
Tieh-lo—Tirabhukti (Tirhut) i. 91; 
old land of the Vrijjis, i. 16. 
T’ien-chu—India, i. 69. 
Tien-kwan—Dévaséna, i. 191 n. 
Tien-ti—Indra, i. 111. 
Tih-hwui—Gunamati, ii. 17t. 
Tih-kwong—Gunaprabha, i. 191. 
Tilada, Tiladaka, or Tiléra, (‘Ii-lo- 
shi-kia) convent, il, 102, 102 n., 
103, 136 n. 
Ti-lo-shi-kia—Tilada. 
Ti-na-po—Dinava, ii. 278. 
tinduka (chin-t’u-kia) fruit, i. $8. 
tin-sse—harmaddna, ii. 96. 
Ti-p’o—Déva Bédhisattva, ii. 
210, 227. 
Ti-p’o-si-na—Dévaséna, i. 191. 
Ti-p’o-to-to—Dévadatta, ii. 150, 201. 
Tirabhukti (Tieh-lo), Tirhut, i. 16, 


97; 


gL, 
Tirthakas (Wai-tao), heretics, ii. 35 u., 
284, 285. 

Ti-shih—Sakra or ade ii, 176. 
Tishyarakshit& (‘Ti - shi-lo - ch’a), 
second wife of Aséka, i. 141 n. 
Ti-wei, town to the north-west of 

Balkh, i. 46. 
Tiz-Ab, affluent of the Yerkiang 
river, i. 90 n. 
To-ching, pilgrim, i. 45, 71. 
Toka, town, ii. 255 n. 
Tokhari (Tu-ho-lo), Toxapol,i. 20 n., 
37 0.3 ii. 62 n., 286, 287, 288. 
Tokharistén—Tukhara, i. 37 n. 
To-li, country—valley of ‘l'a-li-lo of 
Hiuen Tsiang, Dard country, i. 29; 
‘l, T nm. 
To-lo—Tara Bodhisattva, ii. 
174; temple, i. 96. 
To-lo-po-ti— Dvarapati, ii. 200. 
To-na-kie-tse-kia—Dhanakataka, ii, 
220 £. 
T’ong-sheu—Kuméralabdha, (‘youth 
received’), i. 139 1.3 ii. 3043 Jina 
Bodhisattva, ti. 218 1. 


103, 


‘tooth, Buddha’s, i. 45, 67, 92. 


Tooth-brush sangharama, i. 68. 
Topur or Topera, on the Yamuna 
river, 1. 187 n. 


364 


To- -wai—Tadwa, birthplace of Ka- 
Syapa, i. 48, 

towns, Indian, i. 73. 

To-ying, a Shaman, i, 99° 

traditional knowledge of the pre- 
cepts, i. 70, 

Trayastrimsas (To-lo-ye-teng-ling- 
she) heaven, i. 20, 39, 40, 44; 
202, 203 n.3 ii. 4, 69 n., 87 n. 

trees, i, 88, 

tree of the father-in-law and of the 
son-in-law, ii. 83 n. 

Trikdndasésha, ii, 1 0. 

trigrams, i. 7 0. 

Tripitaka (San-t’sang), i. 63 ii. 164, 


247 0. 
Tripitakacharya — Hiuen Tsiang, 


i, 2. 

trivatndni, ii. 168 n. 

trividyds— threefold knowledge, i. 
105 n., 142, 152 n., 163. 

Tsaghan Ashibantu, or Khadatu- 
bulak, town, i, 13 n. 

t’sa-na—kshana, i. 71. 

Tsau-kiu- ch’u—Tsaukta country, 
ii. 125. 

Tsa-’o-pi-ta-mo-lun — Samyuktabhi- 
dharma Sastra, i. 110. 

PT sa-ti- li—Kshattriyas, i i, 82. 

tsau—date fruit, i. 88. 

Tsaukata (Tsu- ‘ku-ch’a or Tsu- -li), 

' 4, 623 Hi, 125, 282, 283. 

T’se- -shi—Maitréya, } ii, 119, 143. 

‘T’se-li—Maitribala raja, ii. 213. 

Tseu-ho country,—probably Y4Ar- 
kand, i. 14, 27, 

‘ T’seu-na—Kshunadéva, ii, 284. 

Tsie- ku—ancient name of Cho-kiu- 
kia, ii, 307 n. 

Tsih-kia—Takka. 

Tsih rock (Tsih-shih-shan), i. 13. 

Tsih-chin-lun—Tattvasaiichaya S'ds- 
tra, i. 162. 

Tsin, king of China, ii, 198. 

Ts’in dynasty, i. 216, 217. 

Ts'in land, i, 25, 29, 33. 

Tsin - ching - kio - shan—‘ mountain 
leading to perfect intelligence,’ ii. 
114 n 

Tsing lake—Issyk- -kul or Temurtu, 
1,19; 25. 

Tsing-chau, town, i, 18, 83. 

Tsing-leu—Punyasdld, i, 214 n. 

Tsing-pin — Bhavavivéka, ii, 223 


™ 
Tsing-tu temple, i, 18, 


INDEX. 


Tsing-t?u— pure land” section of 
Buddhists, i, 227 n, 

Tsioh-li (Feou-thou) pagoda, i, 103, 
104, 106, 

Tsi-shi—Sarvadata birth, i. 124. 

Tso-hia, Tso-la-hia, period of rest, 
i, 73. 

t'so-mo—kshauma, i. 75. 

Ts0-nioh—city, probably the Ni-mo 
of Hiuen Tsiang, i. 85. 

Tso-ts’ze, i.95, + 

Tsui-shing- tseu—Jinaputra, li, 275. 

Tsu-ku-ch’a or Tsu-li—Tsauktita, ii. 
282, 283. 

ts’ung—light green, i. 52 n. 

T’sung-ling mountains, i. 14, 18, 27, 
29, 89, 93; 5, 25 n., 37, 41, 56, 
119 n.; ii, 288, 290, 297, 299 n., 
300, 304 

Te taai—Lévara, an author, i, 112 


Veit. tsai- tien—Iévaradéva, § il, 233. 

Ts’z’-li—Maitribala, i. 127. 

Tu-fan—Tibet, i, 199 n, 

Tuh-kiueh—Huns, Eastern Turks, 
i. 85; 20, 28, 30, 37 n. : 

Tu-ho-lo—Tukh4ra country, i, 373 . 
ii. 62, 63, 286-289, 291, 292, 296, 
302 n., 325, 

Tui - fan — “ sending - back - the- 
crowd ” stfipa, ii. 153. 

Tukatu (Tsu-na-hi- ple?) mountain, i. 
62 n, 

Tukhara (Tu-ho-lo) country, i, 29; 
37; 39 0., 49, 50, 54, 156,157; ii. 
62 n., 63, 286-289, 291, 292, 296, 
302 D., 325. 

Tu-kineh—a Turk, ii, 285, 286, 

Tulakuchi, ii. 2 n. 

T’u-lu-h’o-po-tu — Dhruvapata, ii, 
267. 

Tun-hwang, town south of the Bu- 
lunghir river, i, 12, 13, 15, 24 1., 
25 n., 84. 

Turfan (Kao-chang), capital of the 
Uighur country, 1.13; 17. 

turquans——horses, 3, 20 n. 

Turiva, satrapy of Baktria, i. 37 n. 

Turks, i. 37 n., 38, 40, 45; ii, 288, 
290, 296, 

Turks, Eastern (Tub-kiueh), i. 85. 

Turk Khan, i. 39 n. 

Turkhara (Tu-ho-lo), ii. 62. 

Turkistan, town of, i. 28 n., 29 n. 

Paoe ne (yo-kin), i, 120; f%-chii, i. 
148. 


INDEX. 


Tar or Turan, i. 37 2. 

Tushara or Tukbara, i. 37 n. 

Tushita (Tu-si-to) heaven, i, 29, 78; 
134, 155, 191, 226, 227, 228 n.: ah 
ji, 225. 

Tush Kurghan, ii, 299, 301. 


U. 


U-coa—Och kingdom, ii, 283, 

U-ch’a—Udra or Orissa. 

U-chang or U-chang-na—Udydna, 
i, 89, 93, 95, 99, 101, 108; 118. 

Uchh, ii, 265 n. 

U-chi-yen—Ujiyana, ii. 72. 

Udakhanda (U- ne a ch’a), O- 
hind, i. 114, 118, 135. 

Udaya, i ii, 85 n. 

Udayagiri in Orissa, ii, 205 n., 237 n. 

Udayana (U-to-yen-na). Ch, Chu- 
‘ai, king of KosAmbi, .. 20; 235; 
li, 4, 322. 

Udayasva, ii. 85 n. 

Udayibhadra, ii, 2 n. 

Udita (U-ti-to), king of North India, 
i. 176 n. 

Udra (U-ch’a) or Odra, Orissa, ii. 
204 f. 

Udra Ramaputra (You-tau-lan-tseu 
or U-teu-lan-tseu), ii. 54 0., 139, 
140, 141, 142 n. : 

udumbara (wu-t’an-po-lo) fruit, fig, 
i, 88, 163. 

Udyana, or Ujjana (U-chang or U- 
chang-na), i. 16, 30, 89, 93; 95 n., 
118, 119, 120 n., 126, 131, 134, 
149; ii. 21. 

Uh-po, a Rishi, i. 99. 

Dighurs (Hu) people, ii, 302, ae 

Ujain village, i. 199 n. 

Ujiyana (U-chi-yen), ii. 72, 

Ujjana for Udydua, i. 95 xn, 
11g n. 

Ujjanta or Ujjayanta (Yuh-chen- 
to), Girn4r hill, ii, 269. 

Ujjayini (U-she-yen-na), ii. 251 n., 
270, 271. 

unbelievers (azai-taw), i. 91 1. 

Upadésa Sdstra ( U-po-ti-sho), i. 155. 

Upadhyaya (shang and ho-shang), ii. 
169 n, 

Upagupta (Yu-po-kiu-to), in Chinese 
Kin-hu, and Japanese Uva-kikta, 
fourth patriarch, i, 182 ; ii. 88 n., 
89 n., 93, 273. 


365 

Upéli (Yeu-po-li), i, 49; 180, 181; 
li, 164. 

updsakas (u-po-so-kia), pure men, i. 
33; 81; il, 146, 

updsikd (u-po-sse-kia), a lay disciple, 
i, 11 1. 

Upian (U-pi-na), capital of Pargu- 
sthana, ii. 285. 

U-po- #i-sho—-Upadéla Sdstra, i, 155. 

drna—hair circle, topknot, i. I n., 


67 n. 

Uraga (Wu-la-shi), Uragi, “Apoa or 
Ovapoa, in Hazfra, i. 147. 

Uratiubé, Uratippa, or Ura-tape, i. 
31 n, 

Uravilva, ii, 46 n. 

Uravilva-KAgyapa (Yeu-leu-p’in-lo- 
kia-she-po), ii, 130, 131. 

trna—pe-hao, hair eircle, i. 1. 

Urtak-taii mountains, i. 27 n., 29 n. 

U-sha—Och, ii. 304. 

U-she-yen-na—Ujjayint, ii, 270. 

ushnisha, Ch. Fo-ting-ko, skull-bone 
like a dots leaf, i, 96; ii, 249, 
252. 

Ush-turfan, town, i. 24 n. 

Usinara, king, i, 125 n. 

Usira, a mountain in Kaégmir, i. 


1340 

U. -ta-lo-'an-sha-ch’a—Uttarfishadha, 
month, ii. 15. 

U-ta-lo-si-na—Uttaraséna, i, 132. 

U-teu-lan-tseu — Udra-Ramaputra, 
ii. 139. 

Utkala, Odra or Orissa, ii. 204 n. 

U- “to-kia -han-ch’a — Udakhanda, i. 
Il 

U-to-yen-na—King Udayana of Kau- 
Sambi, ii, 322. 

Utpala Bhikshuni, transformed into 
a Chakravarttin king by Buddha 
i. 40, 41. 

Utpalavarna (Lin-hwa-sih), a Bhik- 
shuni, i. 204, 205. 

Utrashta—Sutrishna, 

Uttara (Wu-ta-lo), an Arhat, ii. 
227. 

Uttaradharma or Dharmdttara, foun- 
der of the Sautrautika school, i. 
139. 

Uttara Kégala, country, ii. 1 n. 

Uttardsanga (Yu- -to-lo-sting-kla), i. 


47. 

Uttaraséna (U-ta-lo-si-na), Ch. 
Shang-kiun, king of Udydana, i 
17; 126, 127, 131, 132, 133. 


366 


UttardshAdha (U-ta-lo-’an-sha-ch’a), 
month, ji. 15. 

Uttardyana, northern march of the 
sun, 7 71 n. 


Uzbeks, i. 49 0. 


Vv. 


VarpyAra hill, ii. 
181 n, 

VaibhAshika sect or school, i. 
n., I10 n., 139 0., 193, 194. 

Vdipulya-parinirvdna Sdtra, i. 71. 

Vairdchana (Pi-lu-che-na), Arhat, i. 
87; il. 312. 

Vaigdékha (Fei-she-k’ie) month, i. 72; 
ii, 33, 122. 

Vaisa Rajputs, i. 209 n. 

Vaisali (Fei-she-li), country and 
city, i. 52, 53,54, 55, 78; ii. 66, 
67, 68 n., 69, 70n., 72,73, 745 75s 
76, 77, 81, 97, 98, 160, 164 n. 
165 n., 166, 

Vaisravana-déva (Pi-sha-men) Ku- 
béra, i. 14; 44, 45, 59, 191 n.3 ii. 
309; 311. 

Vaisya (Fei she) caste, i, 82, 89. 

Vaisya, perhaps for Vaisa, i. z09 n. 

vaitraka, a twig, i, 68 n. 

Vajjis or Vajjians, ii. 66 n., 68 n., 
77n.,78 np. See Vrijjis. 

Vajra (J'a-she-lo), ii, 170. 

Vajrachchhédikd, i, 204 n. 

ee lag for Vairasamddhi, ii. 


155 n., 156 n., 


105 


219. 

Vajrapani (Chi- -kin-kang)—Indra, i. 
52; 122; i. 22, 36, 225, 226; eight 
Vajrapania, li, 22. 

Vajrapdni dhdrant (Chi-king-kang- 
vo-lo-ni), ii, 225. 

Vajra saméddhi, ii, 114 n., 116, 219. 

vajrdsana (kin-kang-tso), imperish- 
able throne, ii. 114, 116. 

Vakhsh or Surkh-db river, i. 39 n., 


41 n. 

Vakkula or Vakula, a Sthavira, ii. 
190 n. 

Vakula (Po-khu-lo), a Yaksha, ii. 
190. 

Vakshu (Po-t’su), Oxus river, i. 12 5 
li. 289 n., 292. 

Valabhi (Fa-la-pi), i. 16; ii. 266, 
268, 269. 

Varaha Mihira, i. 202 n.; ii. 200 n. 

Varaha temple at Tamraliptt, i, 
IIl n, 


INDEX. 


Varand (P’o-lo-na) river, ii, 44 my, 
45. 

Varana or Varnu (Fa-la-na) district, 
ii. 281. 

Jarénasi (P’o-lo-ni-sse), See Ba- 
naras, 

Varaséna (P’o-lo-si-na), ii. 286. 

Varsakh river, in Badakshan, i. 42 n. 

Varshds (Yu-shi)—rainy season, i, 
72n, 

Vasanta—spring, i. 72 n. 

Vasavadattd, ii, 1 n. 

Vash pa (Po-fu), ii. 55 n. 

Vasibha (Po-shi-p’o) ae 
ii, 195. 

Vasmapura or Balmapura, Reinaud’s 
restoration of Pi-chen-p’o-pu-lo, 
li, 272 n. 

Vassd, season of retreat, ii, 161 n. 

Vasubandhu Bédhisattva (Fo-su- 
fan-tho), in Chinese Shi-shin-p’u- 

sa, Thien-sin or Shi-sin ; author 
of the Abhidharma-kosha Sdstra : 
sometimes called the 20th Patri- 
arch (Boyd’s Ndga-nanda, pp. 
62, 63, 67), i, 98, 105, 1038, 
110 nu, 120 n, 160, 168 n., 
172, 191, 192, 193-197, 225-229, 
236; il, 262, 263, 268 n. 

Vasumitra (Pho-shu-mi-to-lo), 
Chinese Shi-yu, i, 105 n., 
110 n., 154 £.; ii, 268 n. 

vatsura (seit), a year, i. 71. 

Vaya Rishi, i, 209 n. 

Véda Sastras (Fei-t’o), four, i. 79. 

védana (sheu), ii. 94 n. 

vehicles, the five, i. 79 n. 

Vengi, probably Vinigila, ii, 217 n. 

Vénuvana (Chu-lin) vihaéra ‘bamboo 
garden,’ ii, 43, 161, 165, 188. 

Venus-mountains, Fensberg,ii.225 n. 

Véssantara (Pe-lo), Prince Sudana, i. 
17,93; 1120. 

Véssantara jdtaka, i, 17, 98; 213 n. 

Vibhdshd (Pi-p’o-sho), ii, 307. 

Vibhéshaprakar anapdda Sdstra, 
(Chung-sse-fan-pi-p’o-sha), i, 161, 

Vibhdshdé Sdstra (Pi-p’o-sha-lun), 
composed by Manérhita, i, 105, 
117, 153, 191, 192; commentary 
on, by Parna, i. 162. 

Vibhdshé Sdstra, of Srilabdha, i. 
226. 

Vichavapura, Julien’s restoration of 
P’i-chen-p’o-pu-lo, ii, 272 n, 

vidala, leafless, 1, 68 n, 


in 
109, 


INDEX. 


Viddhals (Yueh-ti), i. 
66n. See Yue-chi, and ii. 370. 
vidyds, five (ming) Sabdavidy yd, 
Adhydtmavidyd, — Chikitsdvidyd, 
Hétuvidyd, and pees 

i. 78, 153 n., 1545 

Vidydmdtrasiddhi s ie (Wer. ehi- 
lun), of Vasubandhu, i. 236. 

viharas in Nép4l, i. 74 n. : 

Vijaya of Ceylon, ii. 236 n., 239 n., 
240 n.; ancestors of, i. 108 n. 

Vijayanagaram, i. 14; ii, 207 n. 

Vijayasambhava, king of Khotan 
(Li-yul) i. 87 u. 

Vijidnakdya Sdstra (Shib-sbin-lun), 
i, 240. 

2ijttdna (chi), intelligence, ii. 94,n. 

Vikramaditya (Chao-jih) of Srd- 
vasti, i. 106, 108 ; ii. In. 

Vikramaditya Harsha of Ujjayini, 
i, 106 n.3 ii, 81 n., 137 n. 

Vikramaditya, Western .Chalukya 
king, i. 213 n. 

Vikritavana ? (Mai-lin) saigharadma, 
i, 162. 

Vimalakirtti (Pi-mo-lo-kie), ii. 68. 

Vimalakiritt Satra (Pi-mo-lo-kie- 
king) ii. 67. 

Vimalamitra (Pi-mo-lo-mi-to-lo), in 
Chinese Wu-hau-yau, i. 196. 

Vimbasfra, ii. 102 n.; see Bimbi- 
sara. 

vimokshas, the eight deliverances, 
i, 104 n., 149. 

vind (kong-heu), lute, i, r4t n.; ii. 
189 n. 

Vinaya (liu), i. 23, 38, 39, 54, 63, 70, 
79; 58 n., 80, 181; ii. 4o n., 
55 n., 164. 

Viuaya ‘schools, i, 121. 


“inaya Vibhdshd Sastra (P'i-nai-ye- 


pi-p’o-sha-lun), i. 185. 
Vingila(P’ing-k’i-lo), probably Vengi, 
capital of Andhra, ii, 217, 218. 
Vipasa (Pi-po-she) or Vipat river, 

"Ygaots of Arrian, i. 165. 
Vipulagiri (Pi-pu-lo) ii. 155, 158. 
Viragana (Pi-lo-shan-na) in Northern 

India, i. 201. 

Virata or Bairft, town, i. 179 n. 
Virfidhaka (Pi-lu-tse-kia), in Chinese 

Liu-li, king, i. 48,49; 128, 156n.; 

ii, II, 12, 20.. 

Visakha (Pi-so-kia), district, i, 239. 
Visakha (Pi-she-k’ie), ii, Io, 11; 
chapel of Mother, i. 46 n, 


20 n.3 ii. | 


367 


Visala Raja, ii. 66 n. 

Visvantara, Visvantara, or Véssan- 
tara—Prince Sudana, i, 112 n. 

Vitasta river, 148 n. 

Vrihadaranya, ii. 62 n. 

Vrijjis or Vajjis (Fo-li- shi), Skythian 
invaders, i. 16, 108 n.; ii. 66 n., 
7On., 77, 81 n., $3 n., 236.n. 

Vritras, the nine, i. 186 n. 

“vulture, the peak of the,” ii, 47 n. 

Vydkarana (Ching-ming-lun) of Pa. 
‘nini, i. 114. 

Vyasa ‘(Pi-ye- so), Ch. Kwang-po, ii. 
148, 


W. 


WaAGESH, river, i. 40 n. 
wai—death, ii. 163. ° 

Wairdgarh, ii, 209 n. 

Wai-tao, unbelievers—Tirthakas, i. 

gi n.; ii. 35 n., 284. 

Wakhan (Ta-mo-sih-teh-ti?), i. 42 0. 
Wakhsh (Hu-sha), i. 40. 
Wakhsh-ab or Surkhab river, i. 41 n. 
Wang-she-ch’ing (Rajagriha), ii, 43 


n., 46, 
Wan-i, suburb of Lo-yang, i 
84 


washing basin of ae i, 45. 

wass (varshds), i. 53.n., 58. 

Wayhand or Ohind, Udakhinda, 
capital of Gandhara, i135 0. 

weapons, i. $3 n. 

Wei dynasty, Great, i. 15, 84, 94, 97, 
99, 101; country, 86; language, 
94; Tartar tribe, 84 n. 

Wen- hiai-chu- -king — Skandhadhdtu- 
upasthdna Satra, i. 201. 

Wen-lin—Muchhilinda, ii, 41. 

Wen-urh-pih- yih-—Srutavinhsatikoti, 
bhikshu, ii. 187 n,, 254. 

Western countries (Si- -yu), i, 84, 

Western Hia, the Tangut mason, 

i, 58 n. 

AY Satsrn paradise, ii. 225 n. 

wheat (spring) (suk-mai) i, 50 n. 

White Elephant palace—perhaps the 
Pilusdra stipa of Hiuen Tsiang, 
i, 102. 

White water or Peh-shwui, town, 


i, 29. 

Winfjhasaui hills, ii. 214 n. 

Wi-sing-yun—Ajatagatru raja, ii, 
150. 

wines, i. 89. 


368 


Women, country of W estern, li 
240, 279. 

worlds (thousand)—chiliocosm. 

writing, i. 77. 

Wu-chang—Udyana country, i. 30. 

Wu-cho, “without attachment ’— 
Asganga, i. 226 n. 

Wu - hau - yau — Vimalamitra, ii. 
196 n. 

Wu-hio—Arhats, i. 152 n, 

Wu-i or Wu-ki? kingdom of, perhaps 
same as Karshar, i, 12, 24 n., 25. 
Wu-jeh-no-ch’i, in Tibetan Ma-dros 

—Anavatapta lake, ii, 6, 155 and 
note. 
Wu-kan-ti-yuh—the lowest hell, i. 
172 n. 
Wu-ki, same as ’O-ki-ni, i. 17. 
Wv-la-shi—Uraga, 
Wu-shing, “invincible,”—Hirany4- 
vati river, ii. 32 p. 
Wu-ta-lo—Uttara Arhat, ii. 227. 
wu-tan-po-lo—udumbara fruit, fig, i. 


wu-Cu—otu, cat, i, 146. 

Wu-yang, town, i, 11. 

Wu-yau and Wu-yau-wang—Aséka, 
i, 203 ; il, 45, &e. 

wu-yu-ni-pan — complete nirvdna, 
i, 161-n. ; 


Y. 
Yajur-véda (Sse), i 1.79 n. 
yak (mao-nin), ii. 80. 
Yakkha-chétiyani, ii. 68 n. 
Yakkhinis, ii. 236 n. 
Yaksha (Yo-cha), i. 99; 59, 110 n., 
127, 153, 156; ii, 36 n., 190, IOI; 
fed by Maitribala raja, ii, 213. 


Yakshakrityas of Kagmir, i. 156 n. 
Yama-raja, infernal king, i. 64. 


Yamanadvipa or Yavanadvipa (Yen- |: 


mo-na-cheu), country, ii. 200. 

Yamgén in Badaksh4n, probably In- 
po-kin, i. 42 n. 3 ii. 291. 

Yamuna (Chen-mu-na), river, i. 187, 
188. 

yang—principle in Astronomy, i. 
71. 

Yang-chow, town, i. 83. 

Yangi-hissar, according to Klaproth, 
equal to Tseu-ho, i. 14. 

Yang - kiu-li-mo-lo—Angulimalya, 
ii, 3. 

Yang-lu mountains, i, 23. 


INDEX. 


Yaou-tsin, period (A.D. 406), i, 87. 

Yarkand, _probably Tseu-ho river, i. 
27 n.; ii, 299 n., 307 n. 

Yarkiang (Cha-kiu-kia 2), if, 307. 

Yaga, son of Kana, an Arhat, i. 53n 

Yaéada sre (Ye-she-t’ 0), i iL 67 
De, 745 

vasa (Ye-sse-chi- lin), ii. 145, 
1 47 

Yasodhars (Ye-shu-t’o-lo), wife of 
Buddha, ii, 8 n., 17. 

yava, breadth of a barleycorn, i. 70. 

Yavanas (Ye-mei-ni), ii. 236 n, 

Yavanadvipa. See Yamanadvipa, 

year, vatsara, i. 71. 

Yeh river—the Syr-darya. 

Yeh-hu—Khan of the Turks, i. 45 
and note. 

Yellow river, i, 13 0., 57 n., 173. 

Yen-chang, i, 87. 

Yen-mo-na-cheu— Yamanadvipa, 

Ye-po-kiu-to—U pagupta, 

Ye-po-lo, country, i. 99, 

Ye-po-ti—Java, or perhaps Sumatra, 
i, 81. 

Yerkiang river, i. 90 n. 

Ye-she-t’o—YaSada, ii. 74. 

Ye-tha—Ephthalites, Turk tribes,- 
Huns of Byzantine writers, i. 15, 
16, 90, 91, 92, 100, 101; 37 n.; 
royal ladies of, i. 91, 

Y eu-jih—Baladitya- raja, i, 168 0, 

Yeu-kin-ho, ii. 32 n. Z 

Yeu-leu-p’in-lo-kia-she-po--Uravilva 
KasSyapa, ii. 130. : 

Yeu-po-li—Upali, i. 180; ii. 164. 

Yih-cheun—Bh&skaravarma. 

Yih-tsai-chi —Sambuddhasa, Sar- 
varthasiddha, ii. 16 n. 

Yih-tsai-i-ch’ing — Sarvarthasiddha, 
ii. 52 n., 254. 

Yih-tsai-yau-i, ‘* possessed of every 

ene ”—Sarvarthasiddha, ii. 

16-n, : 

Yin-kwong-pu — the Kasyapiya 
school, i. 121 n. 

yin—principle in astronomy, i. 71. 

Yo-cha— Yaksha, 

Yoga (Yu-kia) discipline, ii. 220. 

Yogachara school, ii, 103 n. 

Yégdchdrya Séstra (Yu-kia-sse-ti- 
lun, i. 226. 

Y dgachéryabhimi Sastra (Yu-kia- 
ssc-ti-lun), ii, 220, 275. 

Yégdchdryabhdmi Sdstra kdrika, of 
Jinaputra, ii, 275. 


INDEX. 


ydjana (yu-shen-na) i. 70. 

yo-kin—turmeric, i. 120 ; ii. 283. 

yu—corner, ii. 102 n. 

Yuan-chiu, a Shaman, i. 176 n. 

Yu-cheu, town in Honan, i. 2. 

Yu-chi, country of the Western, i. 
78, 100 n. 

Yue -chi, Yueh-chi, or Yueh- ti, 
i. 15, Be 33; 20n., 37 n.; li. 67 
n., 70 


Yu- “hee sh -te-lun-shih — Yogdachar- 


yabhami Sastra-kdrika, i. 275 and 
note. 

yueh-ngai-chu-—the Chandrakdnta 
jewel, ii. 252. 

Yuei-chi tribe, i. 56 n, 

Yueh-kwang—Chandraprabha rja, 
lip 2K3. 

Yuen-mun—Parna, i. 162 n. 

yur fan—a gem from the Lu country, 
i, 66n 

Yu- hwui, also read Yu-fai, i, 14, 27. 

yu-kin—ginger, i. 54. 


VOL, IL 


369 


Yuh-kin-hiang—Kunkuma stfipa, ii, 
125. 

yuh-men—gem-gate, i, 16 n. 

Yu-kia-sse-ti lun—Yogdchdrya Sds- 
tra, i, 226. 

Yu-kia-sse-ti-lun — Yégdchdrya- 
bhami SGstra, ii, 220, 

Yun-kiai-king — Skandhadhdtu-dya- 
tanas, i. 95. 

yun-shih—cloud-stone, ii. 103 n. 

Yu-shih vibara, ii. 174. 

Yu(-ti) Shun. See Shun, i, 8. 

Yu-tien—Khotan, i. 199 n. 

Yuvanaséva, king, ii. 1 n. 

Yozafzai tribe, i. 128 mn. ~ 

Yeu-tau-lan-tseu — Udra Réma- 
putra, ii, <4 n. 


Z. 
Zapddpos or ras the Satadru 


river, i. 178 n. 
Zarafsh4n river, i, 12 n., 34 n. 


2A 


ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 


VOL. II. 


Page \, line 5.—For Kie-pi-lo-fu-sse“to read fa-su-tu. 

Page 13.—For Kie-pi-lo-fa-sse-ti read fa-su-tu. 

Pave 4av line Ror Fi-ahelas .d Foeghe We 

Page 44, line 3.—For Fo-li-she read Fo-li-shi. 

Page 66, n. 67.—Dele “the Viddhals” ; the Yue-chi were probably not the 
Viddhals or Ephthalites, but Goths. 

Page 150, line 16.—For lo read to. 

Page 186.—In heading of book, read in line 2 Ahé for kat; line 3, Wd for 
dae; line 5, hiao for kiu ; line 6, kiu for kin. 

Paye 23§.—In heading of book, line 2, read pu for po; line’ 5, read shi 
for chi; tu for to; line 7, read shi for cht. 

Page 289, n. 21.—Read Po-t’su for Fo-t’su, and so in every case. 

Page 251, n. 33, line 17.—For armadores read buzos. 

Page 283, line §.—For Ki-li-si-mo read Ki-li-sch-mo. 

Page 283, line 7.—For Chang-mi read Shang-mi. 


Other mis-spellings are corrected in the Index. 


PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO.” 
EDINBURGH AND LONDON, 


| PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 


* ‘<:. ate 
i 


unt 


Am 


re
