An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States (Charles A. Beard, 1913)
==========================================================
The most controversial American history book: the framers as economic interests; Progressive historiography's charter. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (economicinterpre0000char_s0i4).

“fal 
- 
i i 

Fiat vi Ad 


wenn 
can mes 


huis 
AC AMR 
See 
CAC eR Ci 
Gf 
if i Aan t : fl ye 
iit “3 Ha 60, salt Hef # AA 
iM i i ; 


i 


el hw E 
Fite y ey ea ee 
é Se A a 
: ia 
ie whan bh 
5 t 


vid 


aby, “ft 


TR NY 


¢) 
Mia 


Bi j f ry ¥ 
a t ae pee ye 


f 7 ‘ ya Fee 


7 MBP RB 5 ef 
Ree 
hit iiew eo 


ey aw Veritetis i Sie es ee ee 
way thy, : 


2 Wao BBE AA NINA IRD 
MEH Asad MMB ea ea A COW 
Pa VHOY Lage HARA AMER a a : Yaa ee 
420 ALTE Op Or NOOO eHDAA AUT AT EBD joe 
Wie rete ; a4 
rea 4 c 
ren ey eae ate) 
Hie Bp eee sty ua aD 
1 


Ta fee 

OPES Et i 
AH We ot 

a ye inst aoe 
Bip Sige’ 


ER ee 


fans 
rie OF 


149 AG we 
aT a 

ad 
aye eA 
Teen Pee ing 


Whee fee 
4 PGW Bes. 


(aa are 
eT ey 


PRA oie a 4 
SHR ay Ae 
77 G08 oa WE 
" ’ ee hee ee 
ry : ‘ ite ie ke eA A YON 
Se & Sw ie W " . ih p Lace) 
Pau HAE Ro RS are Oe ete ¥ 
DW HOS 
NOW aad pee’ f 
af yf Wey 3p 
Pk? ee ane 
i 


, vee % x 
Tae Ye ene e i 


Tenn ee 


‘Gy hs Th 
UP ey ew wee 
AAS fis 
inne eee > vr 
wd Aw fo 


its ni 
| a 
Sean teige Cie 


a gee 

« ERP 
e Env 

+ 5%4 

Poa aad 

pen 


pe ores 


¢ 
"9 # qi he 


‘+ ee 
Pema ste 
fol te fs 
BERL R61 e ® 
Bek ye Ae 


ay 
we 4 


Lat 
Pe etare 


de 


a 


het bo 
Cea 
LN Nags 


‘ we 
tS bow 
vi 4 it eae 


eit PA PPh ewer ey 
Ach ‘ in s we 
oS) (ef ke ae aH 


yt ‘ 
bee Pe a ae » 
Tey Boe tse py au ote 
reas : APE We $y ee Ma esses 
any ey rene wep ® 
prey oy WP tee 
ari Felis 
IB pike yoke 
un EN Rte eh 
PEGH MERE TP we ye 


eee Ny pase aA 


Pk yn amy 


a 
Lavin 
oa 
vey ita ae hy 
4 ee a eo Tey es ett ab 
PM AR 4 Pei OM te 
LanY eran bi rane Y Wore he ale 
a te aint teed opt : 
wes 
Fish Fay a oe 
atone curey Oe 


ee Pew Ll 
pe oe ee We 


uy 44 Nheo7W. (¥ 
NHS ENT Ge 
heh 


fiers et 
Weal wig 
WU RP AS: 
pre urn WR 
tae Rew 4 6 
oe ted 
Cea Oe ge 


eA 


ray ea Ry 


W 


ent un 


19 19 EHDA DOP DH 


. 
Oh ienas auhe oeaed 


Ce a ot tod 


Ke 
\; \ 


ra xe Y on le . N 
‘ear \ ee 1 oe nih 4 Uae Oias y | vale 
Me NC ee 


a y = 
=e J 7 iY ri) 
4 ‘ 
. 
, 
. ~ 
» 

“W 

> 
; f \ 

° 
a 
~ 


AN ECONOMIC INTERPRETATION OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
NEW YORK - BOSTON - CHICAGO - DALLAS 
F ATLANTA + SAN FRANCISCO 


MACMILLAN & CO., LimitEepD 
LONDON - BOMBAY - CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


OF CANADA, LimiTED 
TORONTO 


AN ECONOMIC INTERPRETATION 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF 
THE UNITED STATES 


BY 


CHARLES A. BEARD 


Neto Work 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
1935 


Copyrrieut, 191 


By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY. 


All rights reserved — no part of this book may be re- 
produced in any form without permission in writing 
from the publisher, except by a reviewer who wishes 
to quote brief passages in connection with a review 
written for inclusion in magazine or newspaper. 


Set up and electrotyped. Published April, 1913. 


* PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA * 


PREFACE 


Tue following pages are frankly fragmentary. They 
are designed to suggest new lines of historical research 
rather than to treat the subject in an exhaustive fashion. 
This apology is not intended as an anticipation of the 
criticism of reviewers, but as a confession of fact. No 
one can appreciate more fully than I do how much of the 
work here outlined remains to be done. The records of 
the Treasury Department at Washington, now used for 8 
the first time in connection with a study of the formation 
of the Constitution, furnish a field for many years’ re- 
search, to say nothing of the other records, printed and 
unprinted, which throw light upon the economic condi- 


tions of the Unj etw =1787. 
If it be asked why such a fragmentary study is printed 


now, rather than held for the final word, my explanation 
is brief. I am unable to give more than an occasional 
period to uninterrupted studies, and I cannot expect, 
therefore, to complete within a reasonable time the survey 
which I have made here. Accordingly, I print it in the 
hope that a few of this generation of historical scholars 
may be encouraged to turn away from barren “political” 
history ta study of the real economic forces which con-O 
dition great movements in politics. | 

Students already familiar withthe field here surveyed 
will discover that I have made full use of the Suggestive 
work already done by Professor Turner, Drs. Libby, 
Ambler, and Schaper. 


vi PREFACE 


I am indebted to Mr. Merwin of the Treasury Depart 
ment for his great courtesy in making available the old 
records under his jurisdiction; to Mr. Bishop, of the 
Library of Congress, for facilitating the examination of 
thousands of pamphlets as well as for other favors; and 
to Mr. Fitzpatrick, of the Manuscript Division, for keeping 
his good humor while bringing out hundreds of manu- 
scripts which seemed to yield results wholly out of pro- 
portion to the labor entailed. 

I am under deep obligation to two friends, nameless 
here, without whose generous sympathy and encourage- 
ment, this volume could not have been written. 


CHARLES A. BEARD. 
Wasuineron, D.C., 
February, 1918. 


CHAPTER 


T 


— 
ra 
II. 


CONTENTS 


HIsToRIcAL INTERPRETATION IN THE UNITED STATES : 
A Survey or Economic INTERESTS In 1787 5 “ : 
THE MOVEMENT FOR THE CONSTITUTION : : ‘ c 
PROPERTY SAFEGUARDS IN THE ELECTION OF DELEGATES . 


Tur Economic INTERESTS OF THE MEMBERS OF THE Con- 
VENTION . ‘ ‘ 2 : : : . 7 ; ‘ 
THE CONSTITUTION AS AN Economic DocUMENT. ‘ ‘ 


Tae PoxiticaL DoctrRINes OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CoN- 


VENTION . eres : 4 : ; ; 4 ; : 
Tue Proctss oF RATIFICATION . - = Ff 4 ° 
Tue Porputar VoTE ON THE CONSTITUTION. . ‘ 5 
Tue EconoMIcs OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 6 


Tue Economic ConFiicT OVER RATIFICATION AS VIEWED 


BY CONTEMPORARIES . : : ; : : d ‘ 


152 


“189 


217° 
239 
258 


292 


AN ECONOMIC INTERPRETATION OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE 
UNITED STATES 


CHAPTER I 
HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION IN THE UNITED STATES 


BROADLY speaking, three schools of interpretation have 
dominated American historical research and generaliza- 
tion. The first of these, which may be justly associated 


with the name of Bancroft, explains the larger achievementa~\) 


in our national life by reference to the peculiar moral en- 
dowments of a people acting under divine guidance; or 
perhaps it would be more correct to say, it sees in the course 
of our development the working out of a higher will than 
that of man. There is to be observed in the history of the 
struggle for the Constitution, to use Bancroft’s words, 
““the movement of the divine power which gives unity to 
the universe, and order and connection to events.” 4 
Notwithstanding such statements, scattered through 
Bancroft’s pages, it is impossible to describe in a single 
phrase the ideal that controlled his principles of historical 


construction, becausefhe was so often swayed by his def-. 


erence to the susceptibilities of the social class from which 
he sprang and by the exigencies of the public life in which he 
played a by no means inconspicuous part.) Even telling 


1 The History of the Constitution of the United States (1882 ed.), Vol. II, p. 284. 
B 1 


> 


{ 
} 
t 


\ 
} 


; 
é 


© 


2 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


the whole truth did not lie upon his conscience, for, speaking 
on the question of the number of Americans who were 
descendants from transported felons and indented servants, 
he said that ‘‘ Having a hand full, he opened his little finger.” 


Nevertheless, Bancroft constantly recurs in his writings to 
6 — 


that ‘‘higher-power”_which is operating in human_affairs, 


although he avoids citing specific events which may be 
attributed to it... It appears to him to be the whole_course 


_—ef-history, rather than any -event-or set of events, which 


~ 


‘~) 


O 


justifies his theory. “However great,” he says, “may be 
the number of those who persuade themselves that there is 
in man nothing superior to himself, history interposes with 
evidence that tyranny and wrong lead inevitably to decay ; 
that freedom and right, however hard may be the struggle, 
always-prove—resistless. Through—thiS assurance ancient 
nations learn to renew their youth; the rising generation is 
incited to take a generous part in the grand drama of time; 
and old age, staying itself upon sweet Hope as its companion 
and cherisher, not bating a jot of courage, nor seeing cause 
to argue against the hand or the will of a higher power, 
stands waiting in the tranquil conviction that the path of 
humanity is still fresh with the dews of morning, that the 
Redeemer of the nations liveth.”’ ? 


~ The second school of historical interpretation, which in 
the order of time followed that of Bancroft, may be called 


the Teutonic, because it ascribes the wonderful achieve- 
ments of the English-speaking peoples to the peculiar politi- 
cal genius of the Germanic race. Without ‘distinctly re- 
pudiating the doctrine of the ‘higher power” in history, it 


' finds the secret to the ‘“‘free” institutional development of 


the Anglo-Saxon world in innate racial qualities. 


1 American Historical Review, Vol. II, p. 13. 
2 Bancroft, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 6. 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION 3 


The thesis of this school is, in brief, as follows. The 
Teutonic peoples were originally endowed with singular 
political talents and aptitudes; Teutonic tribes invaded 
England and destroyed the last vestiges of the older Roman 
and British culture; they then set an example to the world 
in the development of ‘free’? government. Descendants 
of this specially gifted race settled America and fashioned 
their institutions after old English models. The full fruition 
of their political genius was reached in the creation ofthé 
Federal Constitution. 

For more than a generation the Teutonic theory of ours 
institutions deeply influenced historical research in the 
United States; but it was exhausted in the study of local 
government rather than of great epochs; and it produce 
no mdénument of erudition comparable to Stubbs’ Consti- 
tutional History of England. Whatever may be said of this 
school, which has its historical explanation and justifica- 
tion,’ it served one exceedingly useful purpose: it was 
scrupulously careful in the documentation of its preconcep- 
tions and thus cultivated a more critical spirit than that ./ 
which characterized the older historians.” ) 

The third school of historical research is not to be charac- (2 
terized by “Wily phrase. It is Jnarked-rather_by_an absence, ? 
of hypotheses. Its representatives, seeing the many pitfalls 

which beset the way of earlier arlene, have_resolutely__ 
turned aside from “interpretation” in the larger sense, and | 
rca cin iol sdong of t f the documents ~ ’ 
and with the “impartial ” presentation _ of Telated” facts. 


cere teria 


1]t has been left to a Russian to explain to Englishmen the origin of Teutonism 
in historical writing. See the introduction to Vinogradoff, Villainage in England. 
W. J. Ashley, in his preface to the translation of Fustel de Coulanges, Origin of 
Property in Land, throws some light on the problem, but does not attempt a sys- 
tematic study. 

2 Note the painstaking documentation for the first chapters in Stubbs’ great work. 


4. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


This tendency in American scholarship has been fruitful in 
ae 

its results, for it has produced more care in the usé of his- 
torical sources and has given us many excellent and accurate 
surveys of outward events which are indispensable to the 
student who would inquire more deeply into underlying 
causes.! 

Such historical writing, however, bears somewhat the 
game relation to scientific history. which—systematic botany 

ears to ecology ; that is, it classifies and orders phefhomena} 

ut does not explain their proximate or remote causes and 
| relations.) The predominance of such a historical ideal, 
in the United States and elsewhere is not altogether inex- 
plicable; for interpretative schools seem always to originate 
in social antagonisms.? The monarchy, in its rise and 
development, was never correctly understood as long as it 
was regarded by all as a mystery which must not be waded 
into, as James I put it, by ordinary mortals. Without the 
old régime there would have been no Turgot and Voltaire; 
Metternich and Joseph de Maistre came after the Revolu- 
tion. 
_~ But the origin of different schools of interpretation in 
controversies and the prevalence of many mere preconcep- 
tions bolstered with a show of learning should not lead us 

pres . . : : 

to reject without examination any new hypothesis, such as 

1 What Morley has said of Macaulay is true of many eminent American historical 
writers: ‘‘A popular author must, in a thoroughgoing way, take the accepted max- 
ims for granted. He must suppress any whimsical fancy for applying the Socratic 
elenchus; or any other engine of criticism, scepticism, or verification to those senti- 
ments or current precepts or morals which may in truth be very equivocal and may 
be much neglected in practice, but which the public opinion of his time requires to 
be treated in theory and in literature as if they had been cherished and held semper, 
ubique, et ab omnibus.” Miscellanies, Vol. I, p. 272.° 

* For instance, intimate connections can be shown between the vogue of Dar- 
winism and the competitive ideals of the mid-Victorian middle-class in England. 
Darwin got one of his leading ideas, the struggle for existence, from Malthus, who 


originated it as a club to destroy the social reformers, Godwin, Condorcet, and 
others, and then gave it a serious scientific guise as an afterthought. 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION 5 


of the body, the thousand concealed infirmities of the in- 
telligence conspire to reduce our discovery of justice and 
truth to a process of haphazard, in which we more often 
miss than hitthe mark.” Such a doctrine of pessimism would 
make of equal value for the student who would understand, 
for instance, such an important matter as the origin of the 
state, Mr. Edward Jenk’s severely scientific History of 
Politics and Dr. Nathaniel Johnston’s The Excellency of 
Monarchical Government, especially the English Monarchy, 
wherein is largely treated of the Several Benefits of Kingly 
Government and the Inconvenience of Commonwealths. . . . 
Likewise the Duty of Subjects and the Mischief of Faction, 
Sedition, and Rebellion, published in 1686. 

It is not without significance, however, that almost the 
only work in economic. atation -whi is_| don 
in the United States seems to have been inspired at the 
University 6f Wisconsin by Professor Turner, now of Har- 
vard. Under the direction of this original scholar and 


thinker, the influenc the material circumstances of the ss 
frontier on América itics was first clearly pointed out. C_ 


‘Under his direction also the most important single con- 
tribution to the interpretation of the movement for the 
federal Constitution was made: O. G. Libby’s Geographical 
Distribution of the Vote of the Thirteen States on the Federal 
Constitution. 

In a preface to this work, Professor Turner remarks that 
the study was designed to contribute “to an understanding 
of the relations between the political history of the United 
States, and the physiographic, social, and economic con- 
ditions underlying this history. ... It is believed that 


many phases of our political history havé~been obscured 


, 


6 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


by_the the attention_paid to state boundaries and-+e—the_sec- 
‘tional lines of North and South. At the same~time fhe 
economic interpretation of our his been negle 
In the study of the persistence of the struggle for state 
particularism in American constitutional history, it was 
inevitable that writers should make prominent the state 
as a political factor. But, from the _point_of view. of the 
rise and growth of sectionalism and nationalism, it-is much 
more important to note the-existence-of-great.social and 
economi¢ areas, independent of state lines, which have acted 
as units in political | history, and which have changed their 
“political attitude as se changed their economic organiza- 
tion and divided into ips, oe 

Alth h othesis that-economic « ic elements are the 


Ait te of political institutions ’ 
has thus been used in one or two serious works, and has 


been more or less discussed as a philosophic theory,’ it has 


\ not been applied to the study of American history at large 
~ réainly not with that infinite detailed“ aliaiysis which 


it requires. Nor has it received at the hands of professed 
historians that attention which its significance warrants. 
On the contrary, there has been a tendency to treat it with 
scant courtesy and to dismiss it with a sharpness bordering 
on contempt.2 Such summary judgment is, of course, 
wholly unwarranted and premature; for as Dr. William 
Cunningham remarks, the validity of no hypothesis can be 


1 See also the valuable and suggestive writings on American history by Professor 
W.'E. Dodd, of Chicago University ; W. A. Schaper, ‘‘Sectionalism in South Car- 
olina,” American Historical Association Report (1900), Vol. I; A. Bentley, The Process 
of Government ; C. H. Ambler, Sectionalism in Virginia. There are three works by 
socialist writers that deserve study; Simons, Social Forces in American History ; 
Gustavus Myers, History of Great American Fortunes and History of the Supreme 
Court. 

2 See Seligman, The Economic Interpretation of History. 

8 Vincent, in his treatise on Historical Research (1911), dismisses the economic 
theory without critical examination. 


Be 


Se ty iS 9 TE og 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION 7 


determined until it has been worked to its utmost limits. 
Tt ts easier to write a bulky volume from statutes, congres- 
sional debates,’ memoirs, and diplomatic notes than it is 
to ascertain the geographical distribution and political, sig- 
nificance of any important group of economic factors. ‘The 
theory of economic determinism has not been tried out in 


American history, and until it is tried out, it cannot be found, 


wanting. 


sadly as the economic factors have been ignored in his- 
torical studies, the ne as-been alt the-more-pronounced 


Ee cE ae ee 
in the field of private and public law. The reasoiifor-this 
i arent. The aim of instruction in these subjects is 


intensely practical ; oe research professorships | 
in law; and the “fase”’ eaching discourages 


“attempts at generalization and surveys.2 Not éven the 
entry spoke TESS TIGRE There how been_no gener- 
ous effort to describe the-merely-superficial a aspects of the 


development_of-private-law—in_the U United d States. There 


has*been no concerted attempt to bring together and make 
available to students the raw materials of such a history. 
Most of the current views on the history of our law are 
derived from occasional disquisitions of judges which are 


all too frequently shot through with curious errors of fact . 


and conception. 

Nor has England advanced far beyond us in the critical 
interpretation of legal-evolution — its explanation in terms 
of, or in relation to, the shifting economic processes and 


' 1 The Congressional Record requires more care in use than any other great source 
of information on American politics. 
2 Attention should be drawn, however, to the good work which is being done in 
the translation of several European legal studies, the ‘‘ Modern Legal Philosophy 
*Series,’’ under the editorial direction of the Association of American Law Schools. 
Perhaps the most hopeful sign of the times is the growth of interest in comparative 
jurisprudence. See Borchard, ‘‘Jurisprudence in Germany,” Columbia Law Re- 
view, April, 1912. 


ad 


8 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


methods in which the law is tangled. It is true that English 
scholars have produced admirable histories of the law in its 
outward aspects, such as the monumental work of Pollock 
and Maitland; and they have made marvellous collections 
of raw materials, like the publications of the Selden Society. 
But apart from scattered and brilliant suggestions thrown 
off occasionally by Maitland’ in passing, no interpretation 
s been ventured, and no effort_has been made to connect < 
An ses with economic ¢ es. 

In the absence of a critical analysis of legal evolution, 
all sorts of vague abstractions dominate most of the think- 
ing that is done in the field of law. The characteristic view 
of the subject taken by American commentators and law- 
yers immersed in practical affairs is perhaps summed up as 
finely by Carter as by any writer. “In free, popular states,” 
he says, ‘‘the law springs from and is made by the people; 
and as the process of building it up consists in applying, 
from time to time, to human actions the popular ideal or 
standard of justice, justice is only interest consulted in the 
work. ... The law of England and America has been a\ 
pure development proceeding from a constant endeavor to — 

apply to the civil conduct of men the ever advancing stand- 
ard of justice.’’? In other words, law is made out of some 
abstract stuff known as “ justice.” What set the standard, — 
in the beginning and why does it advance? 


7 


1 For examples of Maitland’s suggestiveness, see the English Historical Review; 
Vol. IX, p. 439, for a side light on the effect of money economy on the manor and 
consequently on feudal law. See also the closing pages of his Constitutional History 
of England, where he makes constitutional law in large part the history of the law 
of real property. ‘‘If we are to learn anything about the constitution, it is neces- __ 
sary first and foremost that we should learn a good deal about the land law. We : 
can make no progress whatever in the history of parliament without speaking of 
tenure; indeed our whole constitutional law seems at times to be but an appendix - 
to the law of real property ” (p.538). Maitland’s entire marvellous chapter on ‘‘ The 
Definition of Constitutional Law” deserves the most careful study and reflection. 
He was entirely emancipated from bondage to systematists (p. 539). 

4J. C. Carter, The Proposed Codification of Our Common Law (1884), pp. 6-8. 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION 9 


The devotion to deductions from “principles’’ exemplified 
in particular cases, which is such a distinguishing sign of 
American legal thinking, has the same effect upon correct 
analysis which the adherence to abstract terms had upon 
the advancement of learning — as pointed out by Bacon. 
The absence of any consideration of the social and economic 
elements determining the thought of the thinkers them- 
selves is all the more marked when contrasted with the 
penetration shown by European savants like Jhering, 
Menger, and Stammler. Indeed, almost the only indication 
of a possible economic interpretation to be found in current 
American jurisprudence is implicit in the writings of a few 
scholars, like Professor Roscoe Pound and _ Professor 
Goodnow,! and in occasional opinions rendered by Mr. 
Justice Holmes of the Supreme Court of the United States.? 

What has here been said about our private law may be 
more than repeated about our constitutional history and 
law. This subject, though it has long held an honorable 
position in the American scheme of learning, has not yet 
received the analytical study which its intrinsic importance 
merits. In the past, it has often been taught in the law’ 
schools by retired judges who treated it as a branch of 
natural and moral philosophy or by practical lawyers 


1 Of the newer literature on law, see the following articles by Professor Roscoe 
Pound: ‘“‘ Do we need a Philosophy of Law ?’’ Columbia Law Review, Vol. V, p. 339; 
“Need of a Sociological Jurisprudence,’”’ Green Bag, Vol. XIX, p. 607 ; ‘‘ Mechanical 
Jurisprudence,’ Columbia Law Review, Vol. VIII, p. 605; ‘‘ Law in Books and Law 
in Action,’ American Law Review, Vol. XLIV, p. 12; Professor Munroe Smith, 
_ “Jurisprudence” (in the Columbia University Lectures in Arts and Sciences) ; 

Goodnow, Social Reform and the Constitution. 

2 Consider, for example, the following remarks by this eminent Justice in his 
dissenting opinion in the New York Bakery case: ‘This case is decided upon an 
economic theory which a large part of the country does not entertain. ... The 
_ Fourteenth Amendment does not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer’s Social Statics. ... 
General propositions do not decide concrete cases. The decision will depend on a 
judgment or intuition more subtle than any articulate major premise.” 198 
U. 8. 76. 


10 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


who took care for the instant need of things. Our great 
commentaries, Kent, Story, Miller, are never penetrating ; 
they are generally confined to statements of fact; and 
designed to inculcate the spirit of reverence rather than of 
«x understanding. And of constitutional histories, strictly 


F [nthe Hy of hori and nature of of the 
Constitution is marked by the same ~anatysis of 
determining forces which Churaeterised—otder historical 
writing in general. It may be stated in the following man- 


ee ner: The Constitution proceeds from the whole people ; 
\E the people are the original source of all political al_authority 


exercised under it; it is founded on broad general principles 
of liberty and government entertained, f for some reason, by 
e€ whole people an _Teterence to the interest 


0 nantes fj en 8 gm 


ea particular ar group. or class. “By calm. 


editation iendly councils,” says s Ba “they 
[the people] had prepared a Constitution which, in the 


union of. freedom with strength and order, excelled every 
one known before. ... In the happy morning of their 
existence as one of the powers of the world, they had chosen 
ae justice for their guide; and while they proceeded on their 
way with a well-founded confidence and joy, all the friends 
of mankind invoked success on their endeavor as the only — 
hope for renovating the life of the civilized world.”’! 
s With less exaltation, Chief Justice Marshall states the 


theory, in his opinion in the case of McCulloch v. Maryland: 


Lhe: government proceeds directly from the people; is 
‘ordained and establis in the name of the people; and 
is declared to be ordained ‘in order to form a more perfect 
union, to establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, and 


1 Op. cit., Vol. II, p. 367. 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION 11 


secure the blessings of liberty’ to themselves and to their 
posterity. The assent of the states, in their sovereign 
capacity, is implied in calling a convention, and thus sub- 
mitting that instrument to the people. But the people 
were at perfect liberty to accept or reject it; and their act 
was final. ... The government of the Union, then (what- 
ever may be the influence of this fact on the case) is emphati- 
cally and truly a government of the people. In form and in 
substance it emanates from them. Its powers are granted 
by them, and are to be exercised directly on them, and for 
their benefit. ... It is the government of all; its powers 
are delegated by all; it represents all, and acts for all’? 
_ In the juristic view, the Constitution is not only the 
ars in it no traces of 
the party conflict from which it emerged. __ Take, Or ex-— 
ample, Of the traditional legal definitions of the Con- 
» stitution; Miller’s will suffice: “A constitution, in the 
American sense of the word, is any instrument by which 
the fundamental powers of the government are established, | 
limited, and defined, and by which these powers are dis- 
tributed among the several departments for their more safe 
and useful exercise, for the benefit of the body politic. ... 
It is not, however, the origin of private rights, nor the foun- 
dation of laws. It is not the cause, but the consequence of 
personal and political freedom. It declares those natural ' 
and fundamental rights of individuals, for the security and 
‘common enjoyment of which governments are established.” ” 
/ Nowhere in the commentaries is there any evidence of . 
 the-factthat the rules of our fundamental law are designed ‘Sika 


to protect any class in its s Tights, or or secure the property of 


ae 


14 Wheaton, p. 316. No doubt the Teitnad Justice was here more concenedé 
with discrediting the doctrine of state’s rights than with establishing the popular 
basis of our government. 

38. F. Miller, Lectures on the Constitution (1891), p. 71. 


12 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


.one group against the assaults of another. \{‘The Constitu- 
fain? ’ declares—Bancroft, “establishes nothing that inter- 
feres with equ ality_and individuality. duality. It knows-nothing 
of differences by descent, or.opinions, of favored classes, or 
legalized religion, or the political power of property. It 
leaves the individual along-side of the individual. As 
the sea is made up of drops, American society 1 is com baie of 
~separate, free, and constantly moving ‘atoms, ever in recip- 
rocal action.” “$0 that” the institutions and laws of the 
country rise out of the masses of individual thought, which, 
like the waters of the ocean, are rolling evermore.” } 

In turning from the vague phraseology of Bancroft to an 
economic interpretation of constitutional history, it is 
necessary to realize at the outset that law is not an abstract 
thing, a printed page, a volume of statutes, a statement b: by 
a judge. So far as it becomes of any consequence to the 
observer ii must take on a real form; ; it must ist govern a actions ; 
it must determine-positive relations | between’ men; it must 
prescribe processes and juxtapositions.2 A statute-may 
be on the books for an age, but unless, under its provisions, 
a determinate arrangement of human relations is brought 
about or maintained, it exists only in the imagination. 
Separated from the social and economic fabric by which 
it is, in part, conditioned and which, in turn, it helps to 
condition, it has no reality. 

Now, most. ofthe law (except the elemental law of com- 
munity defence) is concerned with the property relations 
of men, which reduced to their simple terms mean the pro- 
cesses by which the ownership of concrete fornis of property 
is determined or passes from one person to another. As 
society becomes more settled and industrial in character, 


1 Op. cit., Vol. II, p. 324. 
See A. Bentley, The Process of Government. 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION 13 


mere defence against violence (a very considerable por- 


tion of which originates in forcible attempts to change the — 


ownership of property) becomes of relatively less impor- 
tance; and property relations increase in complexity and 
subtlety. 

_ But it may be said that constitutional law is a peculiar 
branch of the law; that it is not concerned primarily with 
property or with property relations, but with organs. of 
government, the suffrage, administration. The super- 
ficiality of this view becomes apparent at a second glance. 


Inasmuch as the primary object of a government, beyond 


the mere repression of physical violence, is the making of 
the rules which determine the property relations of mem- 
bers of society, the dominant classes whose rights are thus 
to be determined must perforce obtain from the government 


- such rules as are consonant with the larger interests neces- 


- sary to the continuance of their economic processes, or they. 
must themselves control the organs of government. In a 
stable despotism the former takes place; under any other 
system of government, where political power is shared by 
any portion of the population, the methods and nature of 
_ this control become the problem of prime importance — 
in fact, the fundamental problem in constitutional law. 
The social structure by which one type of legislation is 
secured and another prevented — that is, the constitution 
—is a secondary or derivative feature arising from the 


nature of the economic groups seeking positive action and 
Pa 


negative restraint. 

In what has just been said theré is nothing new to scholars 
who have given any attention to European writings on 
jurisprudence. It is based in the first instance on the doc- 


trine advanced by Jhering that law does not “grow,” but’y 


i 
oe’, 
» “th 


is, in fact, “made” —adapted to precise interests which may, 


a 


sf 


14 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


d 


i aia eG It was not original with Jher- 
ing. Long before he worked out the concept in his epoch- 


making book, Der Zweck im Recht, Lassalle had set it forth 
in his elaborate Das System der erworbenen Rechte,? and 
long before Lassalle had thought it through, our own Madison 
had formulated it, after the most wide-reaching researches 
in history and politics.’ 

In a the inquiry which-follows is based pas: the 


pone 
, political science of James Madison, e Con- 
{ 


\ _stituti ésidé nion e ha “done so 


(ch to create. This-politicat-science runs through all of 


his really serious writings and is formulated in its most 
precise fashion in The Federalist * as follows: ‘The diver- 
sity in the faculties of men, from which the rights of prop- 
erty originate, is not less an insuperable obstacle to a 


1In the preface to his first edition, Jhering says: ‘‘Die Schrift, von der ich 
hiermit die erste Halfte der Offentlichkeit ibergebe, ist eine Auslduferin von 
meinem Werk iiber den Geist des rémischen Rechts. Der letzte Band desselben 

. . schloss ab mit einer Grundlegung der Theorie der Rechte im subjektiven Sinn, 
in der ich eine von der herrschenden abweichende Begriffsbestimmung des Rechts 
im subjektiven Sinn gab, indem ich an Stelle des Willens, auf den jene den Begriff 
desselben griindete, das Interesse setze. Dem folgenden Bande war die weitere 
Rechtfertigung und Verwertung dieses Gesichtspunktes vorbehalten. ... Der 
Begriff des Interesses nétigte mich, den Zweck ins Auge zu fassen, und das Recht 
im subjektiven Sinn dringte mich zu dem im objektiven Sinn, und so gestaltete 
sich das urspriingliche Untersuchungsobjekt zu einem ungleich erweiterten, zu dem 
des gegenwartigen Buches: der Zweck im Recht. ... Der Grundgedanke des 
gegenwirtigen Werkes besteht darin, dass der Zweck der Schdpfer des gesamten 
Rechts ist, dass es keinen Rechtssatz gibt, der nicht einem Zweck, d.i. einem prak- 
tischen Motiv seinen Ursprung verdankt.”’ 

2 Was ist es, das den innersten Grund unserer politischen und socialen Kampfe 
bildet? Der Begriff des erworbenen Rechts ist wieder einmal streitig geworden — 
und dieser Streit ist es, der das Herz der heutigen Welt durchzittert und die tief 
inwendigste Grundlage der politisch-socialen Kampfe des Jahrhunderts bildet. 
Im Juristischen, Politischen, Oekonomischen ist der Begriff des erworbenen Rechts 
der treibende Springquell aller weitern Gestaltung, und wo sich das Juristische als 
das Privatrechtliche véllig von dem Politischen abzulésen seheint, da ist es noch 
viel politischer als das Politische selbst, dann da ist es das sociale Element. Preface 
to Das System der erworbenen Rechte by Ferdinand Lassalle. 

And before Madison’s century, Harrington had perceived its significance. 
H. A. L. Fisher, Republican Tradition in Europe, p. 51. 

(Number 10. 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION 15 


uniformity of interests. The protection of these faculties is 
the first object of government. From the protection of | 
different and unequal faculties of acquiring property, the 
possession of different degrees and kinds of property im- 
mediately results; and from the influence of these on the 
sentiments and views of the respective proprietors, ensues 
a division of society into different interests and parties. . . . 
The most common and durable source of factions has been 
the various and unequal distribution of property. Those 
who hold and those who are without property have ever 
formed distinct interests in society. Those who are credi- 
tors, and those who are debtors, fall under a like discrimina- 
tion. A landed interest, a manufacturing interest, a mer- 
cantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser 
interests, grow up of necessity in civilized nations and 
divide them into different classes, actuated by different 
sentiments and views. The regulation-of these various and’ — 
interfering interests forms the principal task of modern 
legislation, and involves the spirit of party and faction in 
the necessary and ordinary operations of the government.” 
Here we have a masterly statement of the theory of 
economic determinism in politics.” Different degrees and 
kinda gifProperty inevitably exist in modern society ; pe - 
doctrines and.«‘‘principles’’ originate in the sentiments and 
views which the possession of various kinds” of property 


1 The theory of the economic interpretation of history as stated by Professor | 
Seligman seems as nearly axiomatic as any proposition in social science can be: ‘‘The — 


existence of man depends upon his ability to sustain himself; the economic life is 


therefore the fundamental condition’of all life. Since human life, however, is the 
life of man in society, individual existence moves within the framework of the 
social structure and ‘fy, modified by it. What the conditions of maintenance are to 
the individual, the similar relations of production and consumption are to the com- 
munity. To economic causes, therefore, must be traced in the last instance those 
transformations in the structure of society which themselves condition the relations 
of social classes and the various manifestations of social life.” The Economic In- 
terpretation of History, p. 3. 


16 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


creates.in the minds of the possessors; class and group 
divisions based.on property lie at the basis of modern govern- 
ment; and politics and constitutional law a itably a 
reflex of. these contending interests. Those who are in-\ 
clined-to-¥epudiate. the hypothesis of economic determinism 
as a European importation must, therefore, revise their 
views, on learning that one of the earliest, and certainly one 
of the clearest, statements of it came from a profeund student 
of politics who sat in the Convention that framed our fun- 
emai law. 


Pat The requirements for an economic interpretation of the 
formation and adoption of the Constitution may be stated 
in a hypothetical proposition which, although it cannot be 

/ verified absolutely from ascertainable data, will at once 

illustrate the problem and furnish a guide to research and 

generalization. 

It will be admitted without catitro VES that the Con- 
stitution wasthe creation of a Certain number of men, ahd 
it_was-epposed bya cértain number~ef men, Now, if it 
(were possible to have an economic bidgraphy~of all those 
connected with its framing and adoption,—perhaps about 
160,000 men altogether, —the materials for scientific analy- 
sis and classification would be available. Such an economic 
biography would include a list of the real and personal 
property owned by all of these men and their families: 
lands and houses, with incumbrances, money at interest, 
slaves, capital invested in shipping and manufacturing, and 
in state and continental securities. 


a 


assi j e 


osed the Constitution that 
there was no line of property division at all, that is, that 


men owning substantially the s of the same 


ee ee 


ae 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETATION 17 hea 


kinds of property were equally divided on the matter of / pee? 
adoption or rejection —it would then become apparent \ m 
that the Constitution had no ascertainable relation to \ 
economic groups or classes, but was the product of some \\ 
abstract causes remote from the chief business of life— 
gaining a livelihood. : 
Suppose, on the other hand, that substantially all of the “ 
merehants; money lenders, security holders, manufacturers, 
shippers, capitalists, and financiers and their professional 
associates are to be found on one side in support of the 
Constitution and that substantially all or the major portion 
of the opposition came from the non-slaveholding farmers 


and the debtors — would it not be conclusively Vetus 
demonstrated that ou as not the prod- 
uct of an abstraction known as “the » whole people,” b vat A, 


roup of economic interests which must have ex- 
pected beneficis a option? Obviously” 
all the facts h ed, but the data 
presented | in thé following chapters bear out the Tatter 
hypothesis, -and—thus~a_ reasonable “presumption “in ares 
of the theory is created. 

Of course, it may be shown (and perhaps can be shown) ‘—— 
that the farmers and debtors who opposed the Constitution 
were, in fact, benefited by the general improvement which | 
resulted from its adoption. It may likewise be shown, to 
take an extreme case, that the English nation derived im- 
mense advantages from the Norman Conquest and the 
_ orderly administrative processes which were introduced, as 
it undoubtedly did; nevertheless, it does not follow that 
the vague thing known as “the advancement of general 
welfare” or some abstraction known as “justice” was the 
immediate, guiding purpose of the leaders in either of these 
great historic changes. The peat a that the di 

. — 


None 


Dy wr 


18 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


pelling motive in both sages meee. the-sconomle. are 
which the beneficiaries ex _accrue_ to thein- 
fst, from their action. Further than this, economie 

f cannot go. It may be that some larger world: 


process is working through each series of historical events ; 
but ultimate causes lie beyond our horizon.) 


CHAPTER II 
A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 


“Tun whole theory of_the economic interpretation of 


history réstS Upon the concept that social progress in general 
i interests in s 


is ne ee 
favorable, others opposed, to change. On this hypothesis, 
we are required to discover at the very outset of the present 


study what classes and social groups existed in the United 
pestes jast_previote—eotire_adéption of the Constitution 
an ith of them, from the nature of their property; 
_ by the overthrow of the old system and the establishment, 


of the new. On the other hand, it must be discovered 
which of them might have expected more beneficial im! 
mediate results, on the whole, from the maintenance of 
the existing legal arrangements. e 


The importance of a survey of the distribution of prop- 
erty in économic as well as political historyUis so XK 


~ 


evident that it is strange that no attempt has been made to 


gees me Yeee acide, Not even 5 beetuniit tie 
been made. It is, therefore, necessary for us to rely for 
the present upon the general statements of historians who 
have written more or less at length about the period under 
consideration; but in the meanwhile it can do no harm to 
suggest, by way of a preface, the outlines of such a survey 
and some of the chief sources of information. ’ 
I_In the first place, there were the broad interests of 
real property which constituted, in 1787, a far larger pro- 
eer ae sgt erat cheat 


20 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


portion of all wealth than.it does at the present time.! The 
size, value, and ownership of holdings and their geographical 
distribution ought to be ascertained. In the absence of 
a general census, the preparation of such an economic 
survey would entail an enormous labor, and it could 
never be more than approximately complete. Neither the 
census of 1790 nor the assessment for direct taxes under the 
law of 1798 covers this topic. . The assessment rolls of the 
several states for taxation, wherever available, would yield 
the data desired, at least in part; but a multitude of local 
records would have to be consulted with great scrutiny 
and critical care. 

II. In order to ascertain the precise force of personalty 
in the formation and adoption of the Constitution, it would 
be necessary to discover not only the amount and geographi- 
cal distribution ' of money and public securities; but_also 


the exact fields of operation in.which personalty looked for 


immediate and prospective gains. A complete analysis 
of the economic forces in the Constitution-making pro- 
cess would require the following data :— . 

1. The geographic distribution of money on hand and 
loaned and the names of the holders. It is apparent that 
much of the material from which evidence on these points 
may be obtained has disappeared; but an intensive study 
of the tax returns of the states, the records of the local 
assessors, wills probated, mortgages recorded, and suits in 
courts over loans and mortgages, would no doubt produce 
an immense amount of illuminating information. * 

2. The geographic distribution and ownership of the 


public..securities. Fortunately the unpublished and un- 


worked records of the Treasury Department at Washing- 
ton throw great light on this fundamental problem. Shortly 


1 The question of geographic distribution will be considered below, Chap. X. 


ae oe 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 21 


after the federal government was established the old debt 
was converted into a new consolidated, or funded, debt ; and 
holders of public securities, state and continental, brought 
their papers to their local loan office (one for each state) or 
to the Treasury to have them recorded and transformed 
into the stocks of the new government. 

The records of this huge transaction (which was the first > 
really great achievement of nascent capitalism in the United 
States), if they had been kept intact, would constitute, 
perhaps, the most wonderful single collection on economic 
history ever possessed by any country. Were they com- 
plete, they would form a veritable Domesday Book of the 
politics during the first years of the new government. But 
unfortunately they are not complete. The records of 
Hamilton’s administration at the Treasury itself seem to 
have largely disappeared, and the records of the loan offices 
- in the several states are generally fragmentary, although 
in one or two instances they are indeed monumental. 

A complete set of these financial documents should show: 
(1) the owners of certificates of the old government as 
issued, during the Revolution and afterward, to original 
holders; (2) the transfers of certificates from original 
holders to other parties; (3) the names of those who held 
certificates in 1787, when the Convention was called to 
frame the Constitution; (4) the records of transactions in 
stocks between the announcement of the Convention’s work 
and the adoption of Hamilton’s funding system; (5) the 
names of those who brought in securities for funding into 
_ the new debt; (6) the names of those for whom the brokers, 
whose names appear on the loan office books, were, in fact, 
operating. 

ne. of the records preserved at the Treasury Depart- 
ment presents all of the evidence required for’ the scientific 


: ssi AE 
¢ bh 


22 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


study of a single state. | Nearly one-third of the operations 
were at the Treasury and of these only a meagre fragment 
seems to have escaped the ravages of time. In the docv- 
ments of some of the commonwealths, however, it is possible 
to ascertain the names of hundreds of patriots who risked | 
their money in original certificates or received certificates 
for services rendered. ‘The books of a few loan offices are so 
kept that it can be easily discovered who brought in securi- 
ties to be funded into the new debt and also to whom these 
securities were originally issued. 

In some states the ledgers were carefully preserved and 
it is possible to find out the names and addresses of the 
holders of securities funded at the local loan office and the 
amount held by each person. The ledgers of Connecticut, 
for example, offer a rich field for the study of the names 
and geographical distribution of public creditors, and the 
tracing of these interests through their myriad local rami- 
fications would afford an interesting and profitable under- 
taking. But unfortunately multitudes of the most signi- 
ficant operations are forever lost; it is to be particularly 
deplored that the “powers of attorney” for the period are 
not forthcoming. Unless the Government at Washington 
follows the example of enlightened administrations in Europe 
and establishes a Hall of Records, the precious volumes 
which have come down to us will be worked only with great 
difficulty, if they do not disintegrate and disappear alto- 
gether.! 

3. The geographic distribution of small mortgaged farms 
and their connection-with various schemes for depreciation 
of the currency and impairment of the obligation of contract. 

1A few years ago a negro attendant at the Treasury sold a cart-load or more of 
these records to a junk dealer. He was imprisoned for the offence, but this isa 


small consolation for scholars, The present writer was able to use some of the rec- 
ords only after a vacuum cleaner had been brought in to excavate the ruins. 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 23 


No doubt work in local records would yield valuable results 
in this field. 

4. Owners and operators in western lands. Speculation 
in western lands was one of the leading activities.of capital- 
ists in those days. ‘As is well known, the soldiers were paid 
in part in Jand scrip and this scrip was bought up at low 
prices by dealers, often with political connections. Fur- 
thermore, large areas had been bought outright for a few 
cents an acre and were being held for a rise in value. The 
chief obstacle in the way of the rapid appreciation of these 
lands was the weakness of the national government which 
prevented the complete subjugation of the Indians, the 
destruction of old Indian claims, and the orderly settle- 
ment of the frontier. Every leading capitali e time 
thoroughly understood the relation of a new constitution > 
to the rise in land values beyond the Alleghanies. This 
idea was expressed, Tor example, by Hugh Williamson, a 
member of the Convention from North Carolina and a 
land speculator in a letter to Madison.! The materials 
for the study of land operations exist in enormous quanti- 
ties, largely in manuscript form in Washington; and a 
critical scrutiny of the thousands of names that appear on 
these records, in their political relations, would afford results 
beyond all measure. Here, too, is Lhe ponies for~a-lifetime... 

5. The geographic distribution....of “manufacturing es- 
tablishments.and_the names of owners and investors. On 
this important topic a mass of printed and manuscript 
materials exists, but no attempt has yet been made to 
catalogue the thousands of names of persons with a view to 
establishing political connections. To produce the materials 
for this study, searches must be made in the local records 
from New Hampshire to Georgia. Wills probated, trans- 

1 See below, p. 50. 


24 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


fers of property, law suits, private papers, advertisements in 
newspapers, shipping records, Hamilton’s correspondence 
in the Manuscript Division of the Library of Congress, 
unclassified Treasury Records and correspondence, and 
innumerable other sources must be searched and lists of 
names and operations made. 


Pending _the_enormous—end—taborious—researches. here 


enumerated, the following pages are offered-merely~as an 
a em nS the superficial aspects of 
the subject may be treated.’ In fact, they. sketch ‘the broad 
outlines of the study which must be filled in and corrected 
by detailed investigations. —~~----~~~--_-— 


CS Riciraece 
THE DISFRANCHISED 


- lin 1787, we first encounter four groups W conomic 
‘say Tada gesion: Oh aves the in- 
_}7 dented servants, the mass of men who could not qualify 


“7” for voting under the property tests imposed by the state 
constitutions and laws, and women, disfranchised and sub- 
jected to the discriminations of the common law. These 
groups were, therefore, not represented in the Convention 
except under the theory 
that representation has no relation to voti a 
“Haw axtainive The tietranchisoment tealty was cannot be 
~ determined.? | In some states, for instance, Pennsylvania and 
Georgia, propertyless mechanics in the towns could vote; but 
in other states the freehold qualifications certainly excluded 
a great number of the adult males. 


1See Curtis, The Constitutional History of the United States, Book I, Chaps. II- 
VII; Fiske, Critical Period of American History ; McMaster, History of the People 
of the United States, Vol. 1; Channing, History of the United States, Vol. III. 

2See below, Chaps. IV and IX. 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 25 | 


i In no state, apparently, had.the working-class developed 
a conscio a separate interest or an organization 
that commanded the attention of the po lans of the 
time. | In turning over the hundreds of pages of writings 
left by eighteenth-century thinkers one cannot help being im- 


prossed with the fact that the existeties and special pr problems . 7 
a) orking-class, then already sufficientl numerous to 
letariat was foreseen and feared.* ee 
When the question of the suffrage was before the Conven- 
tion, Madison warned his colleagues against the coming 
industrial masses: ‘‘ Viewing the subject in its merits alone, 
the freeholders of the Country would be the safest deposi- 
tories of Republican liberty. In future times a great ma- 
jority of the people will not only be without landed, but any 
other sort of property. These will either combine under 
the influence of their common situation; in which case,” 
the rights of property and the public lberty will not be 
secure in their hands, or, which is more probable, they will 
become the tools of opulence and ambition; in which case 
there will be equal danger on another side.” ? 
So far as social policy is concerned, however, the work — 
ing-class problem had not made any impression on the 
statesmen of the time. \Hamilton in his report on manu- ’ 


factures,* dismisses the subject with scant notice. He ob- 


1 Working-men in the cities were not altogether indifferent spectators. See 
_ Becker, Political Parties in New York. They would have doubtless voted with 
the major interests of the cities in favor of the Constitution as against the agrarians 
had they been enfranchised. In fact, this is what happened in New York. See 
below, Chap. IX. 

3 “Tf the authority be in their hands by the rule of suffrage,” struck out in the 
Ms. See also the important note to this speech in Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 204, 
note 17. 

3 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 203. 

4 December 5, 1791. State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 126. 


26 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


serves that one of the advantages of the extensive intro- 
duction of machinery will be “the employment of persons 
who would otherwise be idle, and in many cases, a burthen 
on the community, either from bias of temper, habit, in- 
firmity of body, or some other cause, indisposing or disqual- 
ifying them for the toils of the country. It is worthy of 
remark, that, in general, women and children are rendered 
more useful, and the latter more early useful, by manufac- 
turing establishments, than they would otherwise be. Of 
the number of persons employed in the cotton manufactories 
, of Great Britain, it is computed that four-sevenths, nearly, 
are women and children; of whom the greatest proportion 
~. are children, many of them of a tender age.” Apparently 
this advantage was, in Hamilton’s view, to accrue prin- 
cipally to the fathers of families, for he remarks: “The 
husbandman himself experiences a new source of profit 
and support, from the increased industry of his wife and 
daughters, invited and stimulated by the demands of the 
neighboring manufactories.”’ 
j Passing beyond these groups which were politically non- 
existent, except in so far as those who possessed the ballot 
and economic power were compelled to safeguard their 
\rights against assaults\from such quarters, we come to the 
social groupin ithin the politically enfranchised ,mass. 
Here we find no lega istinctions. Social distine- 


ions were very sharp, it is true, as every stt of mannefs 
and customs well knows; bu e were no outward 1 


signs of special class privileges. | 


GROUPS OF REAL PROPERTY HOLDERS 


Nevertheless, the possessors of property were susceptible 
of classification into several rather marked groups, though 
of course they shade off into one another by imperceptible 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 27 


gradations. Broadly speaking,.there were..the.interests, of 


real and personal property. Here, however, qualifications | 


must be made. There.was no such identity of interest 
between the large planters and the small inland farmers 
of the south as existed in England between the knights and 
yeomen. The real propert holders.may be classified into‘ 
three general groups: cam fare, poly Back 
fromthe sea-coast, scattered from New Hampshire to 
Georgia, the manorial lords, such as we find along the 
banks of the Hudson,! and the slaveholding planters of the. 
south. St ate f 
1. |The fir 
temarkably homogeneous class. 
was founded and recruited by mec anics, 


hese..groups,..the small. farmers, consti- 
or The inland section 
the poorer whites, 


and European (particularly Scotch-Irish) immigrants. It» 


had peculiar social and political views arising from the 
' crude nature of its environment, but,its .active..political 
_ doctrines were derived*from. nasnctaganan in hs patent 
groups; One source of conflict was connected with the 
possession of the land itself. Much of the western country 
had been taken up by speculators and the settlers were 
either squatters or purchasers from large holders. This, 
is illustrated by the situation in Virginia, where, as Ambler 
points out, “liberality in granting her unoccupied lands did 
not prove to be good policy. ‘True, large numbers of settlers 
were early attracted to the state, where they made perma- 
nerit» homes, but much of the land fell into the hands of 
speculators. Companies. were formed in Europe and 
America to deal in Virginia lands, which were bought up 
in large tracts at the trifling cost of two cents per acre. 
This wholesale engrossment soon consumed practically 
all the most desirable lands and forced the home seeker to 


1 Roosevelt, Gouverneur Morris, pp. 14 fi. 


Na 


28 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


the settler sought to escape from the speculator by moving 
westward, the frontier line of speculation advanced. 
/In addition to being frequently in debt. for their lands, the 
sma upon the. towns for most ‘of 
thé capital to develep-their_resources pital to develep-their_resources. They were, in othér 
words, a large debtor class, to which must be added, of course, 
the urban dwellers who Were ina like unfortunate condition. 


That this debtor class had developed a strong conscious- 


{ purchase from speculators or to settle as a squatter.” *~ As. 


. ness~of- idéntical—inter the several states is clearly 
“evident in local politics and legislation.” ays’ Rebellion 
in Massachusetts, ces in Rhode Island, New 


Hampshire, and other northern states, the activities of the 
paper-money advocates in state legislatures, the innumer- 
able schémes for the relief of debtors, such as the abolition 
of imprisonment, paper money, laws delaying the collection 
of debts, propositions requiring debtors to accept land in 
lieu of specie at a valuation fixed by a board of arbitration, 
~— these and many other schemes testify eloquently to the 
fact that the debtors were conscious of their status and 
ctively engaged in establishing their interest in the form of 
Kec provisions. | Their philosophy was reflected in the writ- 
gs of L artin,delegate to the Convention from Mary- 
land,.who disapproved of the Constitution, on the 
,ground that it would put a stop to agral ian _legislati 
~2. [The gon group of landed proprietors, the manorial 
lords Oo udson valley region, constituted a peculiar 
De in Heel and weesthe Coa sa 
politics of New York during the period between the Revolu- 
Re ee 
2 Libby has shown the degree of correspondence between the rural vote on paper 
money measures, designed for the relief of debtors, and the vote against the ratifica- 


tion of the Constitution. Op. cit., pp. 50 ff. 
3 See below, p. 205. 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 29 


tion and the adoption of the Constitution, as it had heen. 
before the War. Jt was unable or unwilling to block the* 


ney because the burden of that opera- 
tion fell on the capitalists rather than itself.. It also took | 
advantage of its predominance to shift the burden of taxa- || 
tion from the-tamd to imports, and this fact_contributed 


"powerfully to its opposition y_to its opposition to to-theonstitution, because it 
implied .a transference of the weight “of taxation for state 
purposes to the soil. | he soil. 7 Its spokesmen indulged in much | high 
ae NE which Federalist leaders refuse 
to see more than a hollow sham made to cover the rural. 
gentry’s economic supremacy. |} 


3. |The-third group of landed proprietors were the slave- 


holders of the south: It seems curious at the first glarice 
that the représéhtatives of thé Southern states which sold , 


raw materials and want ition_in shipping were 
willing to jom: l at subjected them to commercial 


{| regulations devised immediately in behalf of northern 
-\interests. An e ination of the record hat they 


were aware of this apparent incongruity, but that Ons 


federal government:>+—— 
/Monéy-lending andthe holding of public securities were 


not confined to the north by any means; although, perhaps, 
as Calhoun long afterward remarked,’ the south was devoid 


1 The landholders were able to do this largely because New York City was the 
entry port for Connecticut and New Jersey. The opportunity to shift the taxes 
not only to the consumers, but to the consumers of neighboring states, was too 
tempting to be resisted. 

2 For a paragraph on nascent capitalism in South Carolina, see W. A. Schaper, 

“‘Sectionalism in South Carolina,’’ American Historical Association Report (1900), 
Vol. I. See the letter of Blount, Davie, and Williamson to the governor of North 
Carolina, below, p. 169. 
8 Jt is not without interest to note that about the time Calhoun made this criti- 
cism of New England capitalist devices he was attempting to borrow several thou- 
sand dollars from a Massachusetts mill owner to engage in railway enterprise in 
the south. 


30 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


of some of the artifices of commerce which characterized 
New England. | Neither were attempts at relieving debtors 
by legislative enactment restricted to Massachusetts and 
Rhode Island. cect eae men who were > Tich 


“in an onvention that f ae “Canstiiation “The. 
majority of the southern delegates at Philadelphia in in 1787 
. Owns or combined a Wi fange of personalty 


: -\ On this account there was 
a € identity of interest among angdon of Portsmou h, 


Jersey, Robert sae of Philadelphia, McHenry of Balti- 

more, Washington on the Potomac, Williamson of North 
Carolina, the Pinckneys of Charleston, and Pierce of Savan- 

nah than between these several men and their debt-burdened 

“neighbors at the back door. Thus nationalism _was created 

by a welding of economic interests that cut through state 
_boundaries. : 

ot {The southern planter was also as»much concerned in 
3 ScavitaiRINGiden. against, slave-revols- as thessteditor_in in 

Massachusetts was See meine down Shays’ 

Soe the possibilities of such-servile 

ri insurrections were by no means remote.j Every slave 


owner mu more secure in 1789 When he-knew 
<that the governor of his st uld call in the strong-arm 


of the federal administration in case a domestic disturbance 
got beyond the local police and-militia. The north"might 
make discriminator ial re ulations, but they could 
Scales 2) | oti, A GIR, conflagrations 
that might bring ruinin their train. It was obviously better 
to ship products under adverse legislation than to have no — 


productstoship.| = 8 — 


ee 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 31 


GROUPS OF PERSONAL PROPERTY INTERESTS 


1A secgnd brosd_sroup_of interesis-was.that-of personal 

property as contrasted_with real property This embraced, 

Be ciatysmonce leaned, pinto ana tomvnghrat securities, 

stocks of goods, manufacturing seri 1} 

e relative proportion of personalty to realty 

Sern Tihs not been determined and it is questionable 
whether adequate data are available for settling such an 
important matter.! 

PERSONALTY IN Monery.—Although personalty in the 
form of money at interest or capital seeking investment did 
not constitute in 1787 anything like the same amount, 
relative to the value of real estate, which it does to-day, 
it must not be thought that it was by any means incon- 
siderable in any state. The tax returns of New Hampshire 
for 1793 report the value of all buildings and real estate 
as £893,327:16:10 and the amount of money on hand or 
at interest as £35,985:5:6. The Massachusetts tax returns 
of 1792 show £196,698:4:6 at interest and £95,474:4:5 
onhand. The Connecticut returns for 1795 show £63,348 : 
10:1 at interest.” 

‘Money capital was suffering in two ways under t] the Articles 

‘Confederation. {. It was handicapped i in seeking prefigge= 
outlets by the’ ‘absence of protection for ‘manufactures, =i 
lack of security in investments in western lands, and 
criminations against American shipping by foreign coun- 
tries. It was also b itively attacked by the makers ~ 

Spee money, say anon barren set an ether “ae 
vices for depreciating the currency or delaying the-collec- 
tion of debts.) In addition there was a widespread de- 


1See, however, State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, pp. 414 ff. 
3 Jbid., Vol. I, pp. 442 ff. 


32 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


to eS ee 
 Credt naturally enough, resisted all of these schemes 
| per ace legislatures, and failing to find relief there at 
» length turned to the qdea-of a national government so con- 
struct prevent laws impairing the obligation ~of 
contra emitting paper money, and otherwise benefiting 
lIt is idle to inquire whether the Tapatityor the 

ater ‘or the total depravity of the debtors (a matter 
much discussed at the time) was responsible for this deep 


and bitter antagonism. It is sufficient for our purposes to 
discover its existence and to find its institutional reflex in| 


the Constitution. ¥It was t interest of the creditors 


to see the currency appreciate, to facilitate the ] procéss... 
_ for securing Losin of forfeited mortga ed property,” 
\(end to hold le law before the debtor who was 

V 


‘untrue to his obligations. ether the creditors were driven 
/ into class consciousness by the assaults of their debtors or 
ae attained it by the exercise of their wits is, for_scientific 
> eee 
purposes, immaterial. J 


PERSONALTY IN PUBLIC SECURITIES. poi ni 
diately concerned in the establishment of a stable national 
X Pras were the holders. of—state—and—continental 
he government under the Articles “ot Con- 
federation was not paying-the-interest on i its debt and its 
paper had depreciated: until _it was selling a at from one-sixth 
to one-twentieth ae its_par value.” Grave uncertainties, 
as to the actions of legislatures kept state paper at a low 
price, also, even where earnest attempts were being made 
to meet the obligations. ‘ 
The advantage of a strong national government that 


1 See the picturcegte escription of the monetary system or lack of system in 
Fiske, Critical Period of American History. 
2 See below, p. 146. 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 33 


could discharge this debt at its face value is obvious; and 
it was fully understood at ‘the time. The im vport 
of this element rsonalty in forcing on the | seaaann 
that overthrew the Articles of Confederation is all the more 
apparent.when it is remembered=that securities constituted 
a very large pr ion of the intangible wealth) In Massa-, 
chusetts, for example, it is set down in 1792 at a sum greater 
than all the money at interest and on hand in the state. 

The amount of the public securities of the United States 
and of the several states at the establishment of the new 
government was estimated by Hamilton, in his first report 
on credit, as Secretary of the Treasury.” The foreign debt, 
that is, money borrowed abroad, was fixed at $10,070,307 
and arrears of interest up to December, 1789, were esti- 
mated at $1,640,071.62, making a total of $11,710,378.62. 
The domestic continental debt, including the registered 
debt, army certificates, etc., amounted to $27,383,917.74, 
to which was added arrears of interest to the amount of 
$13,030,168.20, making a total of $40,414,085.94. The 
amount of the state debts was unknown in 1790, but Hamil- 
ton placed it at about $25,000,000, which appears to have 
been rather high. The issue, later authorized to cover them, 
was $21,500,000 and. the amount actually paid out was 
$18,271,786.47.° 

The enormous total of the national debt after state and 
national securities were funded is shown by Hamilton’s 
report of January 16, 1795 :— 


Foreign Debt . . » « 6 «6 $13,745,379.35 
Funded domestic debt oy ged we Sen OO;F89,014.18 
Unsubscribed debt . .. . . . 1,561,175.14 


Total unredeemed debt . . ... . $76,096,468.67 


1 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 451; also see below, pp. 261-2. 
2 State ‘Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 19. 
3 W. De Knight, History of the Currency, p. 21. 

D 


34 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


In addition to this sum, there was an amount of $1,400,000 
due to the Bank of the United States on account of the loan 
from that institution, but this was more than counter- 
balanced by the value of the stock.’ 

It is evident from this statement that a vast mass of state 
and—eontinental securities was scattered throughout the. 
country in 1787. The degree of its concentration or dis- 
tribution cannot be determined until the Domesday Books 
of the Treasury Department have been carefully studied, 
and their incompleteness makes an absolute statement 
impossible. The value of this paper in the hands of the 
holders in the spring when the Convention met cannot be 
ascertained with mathematical precision, for prices varied 
from state to state. Furthermore, the prices obtained by 
the holders of public paper after Hamilton’s funding system 
had gone into effect can only be roughly estimated, for it 
depends upon the market in which they were sold. For 
example, 6 per cents were bringing 17 shillings in the 
pound on March 5, 1791, and 22 shillings in the pound on 
October 3, 1792. On these dates, deferred sixes were 9/1 
and 13/7, respectively, and 3 per cents were 9/1 and 13/1, 
respectively.” 


“Tf we leave out nt_the forei bt, it_ appears 
that some $60, 000 000 worth of Res paper lay in_the 
hands of A. 87. This 


paper was changing hands all of the time at varying prices. 
The common selling price in good markets before the move- 
ment for the Constitution got under way ranged from 
one-sixth to one-tenth its face value;—and some of it sold as 
low as twenty-to one. In fact, many holders regarded 
continental paper as worthless, as it might have been had 
the formation of the Constitution been indefinitely delayed. 


1 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 325. 2 Ibid., Vol, I, p. 231. 


A eS 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 35 


/ It seems safe guess, therefore, that at least 

| $40,000,000 ) gain came-tothe holders of securities through | | 
the adoption of the Constitution and the souidfnancial, 
” syste lossible. “This leaves pubotercaun, 
the large fortunes won by the manipulation of stocks after 
the government was established and particularly after 
the founding of the New York Stock Exchange in 1792.1 

» It should be pointed out, however, that this was not all 
' gain for the original holders of public paper, that is, for 
those who had loaned the Revolutionary government 
money or had rendered it services during the War. Never- 
theless, they would have lost all their continental securities 
under_ the prevailing methods of the Congress, As Pitkin 


the interest of the debt was unpaic 
credit was gone, the debt itself was considered of little \ 
Vv ae Se \ 
for sbour_oeento-_nomns-vai”7 From this P.4 
poi €w, the appreciation due to the adoption of the De rm 


new government was so much clear gain, even to original ’ 
holders; and in some states more than one-half of the 
paper ha the hands 0 speculators at low figures. 
The significance of this ebt and of the 
enormous gain made in the appreciation of securities can 


-1Callender, not a very reliable authority on most matters concerning Hamilton, 
claims that twenty-five million dollars was made by the funding of the public 
debt, and that about ten millions more was made out of the state debt assumption 
process. He further declared that a public debt of eighty million dollars had been 
created of which only about thirty millions was all that was necessary. Gallatin 
held also that the unnecessary debt created by the assumption act amounted to 
about eleven million dollars. Callender, A History of the United States for 1796, 
pp. 224 ff. The ethics of redeeming the debt at face value is not here considered 
although the present writer believes that the success of the national government 
could not have been secured under any other policy than that pursued by Hamilton. 
Callendar claims that those who held it were, in large measure, speculators and that 
they made huge fortunes out of the transaction. By a stroke of the pen the federal 
government created capital to the amount of millions in the hands of the holders, 

2A Statistical View of the Commerce of the United States, p. 31. 


36 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


be understood only in comparison with other forms of wealth 
at that time. Unfortunately, our statistics for the period 
of the formation of the Constitution are meagre, but under 
an act of Congress passed in| 1798 a valuation of lands was 
made for the purposes of direct taxation. The surveys 
were made between the years 1798 and 1804. The follow- 
ing table+ exhibits the value of lands (not including houses, 
which amounted to more than $140,000,000 in addition) 
in each of the states at the close of the eighteenth century, 
and also the amount of money paid out by the loan offices 
of the respective states for the year 1795 in discharging 
the interest on the public debt and the payment of 2 per 
cent towards the reimbursement of the 6 per cent stocks 
held in the several commonwealths : — 


GARG) SE LARS INTEREST, ETC., 


DisBuRSED 2 

New Hampshire -| $19,028,108.03 $20,000.00 
Massachusetts : 59,445,642.64 309,500.00 
Rhode Island 8,082,355.21 31,700.00 
Connecticut 40,163,955.34 79,600.00 
Vermont 15,165,484.02 
New York 74,885,075.69 367,600.00 
New Jersey 27 287,981.89 27,350.00 
Pennsylvania 72,824,852.60 86,379.19 
Delaware 4,053,248.42 2,980.00 
Maryland 21,634,004.57 74,000.00 
Virginia ; 59,976,860.04 62,300.00 
North Carolina 27,909,479.70 3,200.00 
South Carolina 12,456,720.94 109,500.00 
Georgia 10,263 506.95 6,800.00 
Kentucky 20,268,325.07 
Tennessee 5,847,562.00 

Total » + | $479,293,263.13 /$1,180,909.19 


1 Tables from Pitkin, A Statistical View of the Commerce of the United States, 


pp. 367-368, and An Account of the Receipts and Expenditures of the United States 
for the Year 1796, p. 65. r 

3 No table showing the capital amount on the loan office books of the states after 
the funding was complete was discovered, so that the interest payment is given here. 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 37 


3 To the total amount of payments made through the loan of- 
fices must be added the payments made at the Treasury on 
the securities registered there, bringing the total annual inter- 
est and capital disbursements to $2,727,959.07. 


Tt.scems safe to assume from the table that. 400,000,000 ee 
would cover the total taxable value of all the lands in the * 
thirteen states in 1787.1 probably the estimate 

should be much lower, but Ear eee 
eifounty-#-witDe-aee-that-exrwdvance of $40,000,000 in a 
securities would have represente enth-of the total> is 


taxable value of all the land in the thirteen United States 
Se Sie of the Constitution. ‘ 

To put the matter in another way: Thesamount gaine 
by public security holders through the.adoption of the 
new system was roughly equivalent.to the value of, all the 
lands as Tisted for taxation.in Connecticut. It was but 
little less than the value of the lands in New Hampshire, 
Vermont, and Rhode Island. It was about equivalent 
to one-half the value of the lands in New York and to 
two-thirds the value of the lands in Massachusetts. It 
amounted to at least ten dollars for every man, woman, 
and child in the whole United States from New Hampshire 
to Georgia.” 

The significance of the figures showing the annual interest 
disbursement also when the debt had been funded becomes 


1 Undoubtedly a large appreciation had taken place between 1787 and 1800. 
2“The public securities of the United States of America were a dead, inactive 
_ kind of property, previous to the establishment of the constitution of the new govern- 
ment; then they became at once the object of avarice. They before had an ex- 
istence as to value, on the slender hope of having something done for them at some 
distant future period; and obtained a motion only from the sagacity of the few, who 
happened to be right in their conjectures respecting the then future events of 
American financeering. Upon the adoption of the new system of government they 
assumed all the properties of a rising credit, and became an immense active capital 
for commerce.” James Sullivan, An Inquiry into the Origin and Use of Money 
(1792). Duane Pamphlets, Library of Congress. 


38 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


evident only by comparison. Tench Coxe, as commissioner 
of the revenue, estimated the amount of goods, wares, and 
merchandise exported from the United States between 
October 1, 1791, and September 30, 1792, at $21,005,568. 
In other words, the annual interest on the domestic debt was 
more than one-tenth the total value of the goods exported 
annually. The average imports for each of the three years 
ending March 4, 1792, was $19,150,000, so that the interest 
on the domestic debt was more than one-tenth of the value 
of the goods imported into the United States.’ 

One of the most potent effective forces of these public 
securities was the Society of the Cincinnati which was com- 
posed of the officers of the Revolutionary Army organized 
into local branches in the several states. Like other sol- 
diers, the members of this order had been paid for their 
patriotic services partly in land warrants and depreciated 
paper; but unlike the privates, they were usually men of 
some means and were not compelled to sacrifice their hold- 
ings to speculators at outrageously low prices. The mem- 
bers of this Society appear in large numbers on the loan 
office records of the several states preserved in the Treasury 
Department; and many, if not all, of the state branches 
had funds derived from this source. 

The political influence of the Society was recognized in 
the Convention. When the popular election of President 
was under consideration, Gerry objected to it. “The ig- 
~norance of the people,” he said, “would put it in the power 
of some one set of men dispersed through the Union and 
acting in concert to delude them into any appointment. 
He observed that such a Society of men existed in the Order 
of the Cincinnati. They were respectable, United, and in- 


1 Tench Coxe, A View of the United States of America (1795), p. 360. Tucker, 
Progress of the United States (1843), p. 205. 


s 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 39 


fluential. They will in fact elect the chief Magistrate in 
every instance, if the election be referred to the people 
— His respect for the characters composing this Society 
could not blind him to the danger and impropriety of throw- 
ing such a power into their hands.”’! In this view Colonel 
Mason concurred.’ 

An observant French chargé d’affaires, writing to his 
home secretary of state for foreign affairs in June, 1787, 
calls attention to the weight of the Order of the Cincinnati 
in the movement for a new government, but remarks that 
their power has been greatly exaggerated. “‘Les Cincin- 
nati,’”’ he says, ‘‘c’est 4 dire les officiers de l’ancienne armée 
américaine, sont intéressés A l’éstablissement d’un Gouverne- 
ment solide, puisqu’ils sont tous créanciers du public, mais, 
considérant la foiblesse du Conseil national et Vimpossi- 
bilité d’étre payés par la présente administration, ils pro- 
posent de jeter tous les Etats dans une seule masse et de 
mettre 4 leur téte le gal. Washington avec toutes les 
prérogatives et les pouvoirs d’une téte couronné.” He 
also says that they threaten a revolution by arms in case 
the Convention fails, but adds that this project is too ex- 
travagant to merit the least consideration.* 

This society was, however, compactly organized. Cor- 
respondence among the members was frequent, extensive, 
and frank. Alm niformly, they were in_faver—of.a 
reconstruction of the national government_on a stronger 
basis.*__They were bitter in their denunciation of the popular 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 114. 2 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 119. 

3 Tbid., Vol. III, p. 43. 

4‘*A large majority of the officers of the army of the Revolution were in favor 
of the new Constitution. The Cincinnati were mostly among its warmest advo- 
cates; and as they were organized and were, many of them, of exalted private and 
public worth and could act in concert through all the states, their influence was 
foreseen and feared by its opponents.’’ Blair, The Virginia Convention of 1788, 


Voi. I, p. 36, note 41. 


40 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


movements in the states, particularly Shays’ revolt in 
Massachusetts. War had given them a taste for strong 
measures, and the wretched provisions which had been 
made for paying them for their military services gave them 
an economic interest in the movement to secure a govern- 
ment with an adequate taxing power. Moreover, they 
were consolidated by the popular hostility to them on 
account of their “secret” and “aristocratic” character. 
PERSONALTY...IN... MANUFACTURING AND SHIPPING. 
'The third group of personalty interests embraced the manu- 
facturing population, which was not inconsiderable even at 


‘that time.| A large amount of capital had been invested 


in the several branches of industry and a superficial study 
of the extensive natural resources at hand revealed the im- 
mense possibilities of capitalistic enterprise.| The indus- 
trial revolution was then getting under way in England 
and the fame of Arkwright was being spread abroad in the 
and. In the survey of the economic interests of the mem- 
bers of the federal Convention, given below, it is shown 
that a. few leading men were direct] n sted_with. in- 
~ dustrial concerns,| although it is not apparent that the pro- 
‘tection of industries was their chief consideration, in spite 
of the fact that they did undoubtedly contemplate such a 
system. But! outside of the Convention vehement. appeals 
were made by pamphleteers for protection, on the score 


\that the discriminatory measures of Great Britain were 


\disastrous to American economic independence.} 

As early as April, 1785, a memorial from prominent 
merchants and business men of Philadelphia was laid before 
the legislature of the state lamenting that Congress did . 
not have ‘“‘a full and entire power over the commerce of the 
United States," and praying that the legislature request 
Congress to lay a proposal conferring such a power before 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 4l 


the states for their ratification. The memorialists as- 
sured the legislature that there was a “disposition in the 
mercantile interest of Pennsylvania favorable thereto.” ! 
_. Among the signers were T. Fitzsimons and George Clymer> 
who were destined to sit in the constitutional Convention 
as representatives of the state of Pennsylvania and of the 
mercantile interest which they had so much at heart. Z 


\T orters Constitution nest and 


so persistent in their assertion that commerce 1 languish- 
_ ing and manufactures perishing for the lack of protection 
that there must have been some justification for their claims, 
e exaggeration of danger threatened by a 

tariff notions is not peculiar to our times; it was sharply 
marked in older days. That the consumer suffered from 
the lack of the protection sought in 1787 by merchants and 
manufacturers is not apparent. Indeed the ‘mechanics 
and manufacturers of New York” in their humble petition 
to Congress for relief in 1789 complain that ‘their country- 
men have been deluded by an appearance of plenty; by 
the profusion of foreign articles which has deluged the 
country; and thus have mistaken excessive importation 
for a flourishing trade. To this deception they [the peti- 
tioners] impute the continuance of that immoderate pre- 
possession in favor of foreign commodities which has been 
the principal cause of their distresses, and the subject of 


their complaint.” ? 
That, innumerable _ manufacturing, shipping, trading» 


and commercial-Hiterestsanc  dlowever, looke=wponthe—/ 


adoption Of the Constitution*as the sure guarantee that 


1 American Misdets Vol. I, p. 313. Other signers were C. Pettit, J. Ross, I. 
Hazlehurst, M. Lewis, T. Coxe, R. Wells, J. M. Nesbit, J. Nixon, J. Wilcocks, S. 
Howell, and C. Biddle. 

3 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 9. 


; 
| 
; 


f 


42 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


protection. could be procured agaist foreign competition, 


(Fs Tully —eviden: orials laid before Congress 


in April, May, and June, 1789, asking for the immediate 
enactment of discriminatory tariff laws. % 

The first of these petitions was from Baltimore in partic- 
ular and Maryland generally, and was communicated to 
the House of Representatives on April 11, 1789, a few days 
after that body had settled down to business. The second 
was laid before the House a week later by a committee rep- 
resenting the mechanics and manufacturers of New York. 
On May 25, 1789, the shipwrights of Philadelphia laid their 
pleas before Congress; and on June 5, the tradesmen and 
manufacturers of Boston put in their appearance. These 
petitions for protection from the four great trading and 
shipping centres of the country, Baltimore, Philadelphia, 
New York, and Boston, which had been most zealous in 
securing the establishment of the new government, are in 
themselves eloquent documents for the economic interpreta- 
tion of the Constitution. 

The first of these, from Baltimore, bears the names of two» 
members of the federal Convention from that state, Daniel’ 
Carroll and James McHenry, and the names of two or three 
hundred other citizens of that community, the analysis of 


- whose politico-economie ‘connections would doubtless repay 


the detailed scrutiny which the painful labor would entail. 
The petition cites the sad state of decline in which manu- 
facturing and trading interests have been since the close 
of the Revolution and the ineffectual attempts of the states 
acting alone ww remedy~the veviis’““The happy period 
having now arrived,” the memorialists exultingly exclaim, 
“when the United States are placed in a new situation; 
when the adoption of the General Governmen: gives one 
1 American State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, pp. 5 ff. 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 43 


sovereign Legislature the sole and exclusive power of laying 
duties upon imports; your petitioners rejoice at the pros- _ 
pect: this affords them, that America, freed from the com- — 
mercial shackles which have so long bound her, will see and 
pursue her true interest, becoming independent in fact as 
well as in name; and they confidently hope that the en- 
couragement and protection of American manufactures will 
claim the earliest attention of the supreme Legislature of 
the nation.” 

The Maryland petitioners are conscious of no narrow . 
motives in asking for relief at the hands of the government: ' 
“the number of her poor increasing for want of employ- 
ment; foreign debts accumulating; houses and lands 
depreciating in value; trade and manufactures languishing 
and expiring’? — these are the evidences of need for the 


expected legislation. ee 
- foreign articles that can be made in America, which wi 
_— BRE e-tcaild devided preference to ther Tabors” “And 

lest Congress might not understand the precise Character 

of the relief for which they ask, they append a long list of 


articles, which are, or can be, manufactured in Maryland, 
which protection is needed — including ships, hard- 


ware, clocks shoes, saddles, brushes, food-stuffs, ; and 
iron, to mention only a few. 


edt cs cslguich gaan 
ers of New York, recites how the memorialists had expected 


great prosperity on the successful issue of the Revolution 
and had seen their hopes blasted ecg: oy 5 x 
cial usurpation, originating in préjudices, and fostered 
by a feeble goverment” They had SRuggIed Tn vain 


against dire adversity and “wearied by their fruitless ex- 


ertions, your petitioners have long looked forward with 
anxiety to the establishment of a government which would 


44 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


have the power to check the growing evil, and extend a 
protecting hand to the interests of commerce and the arts, 
Such a government is now established. On the promul- 
gation of the Constitution just now commencing its opera- 
tions, your petitioners discovered in its principles the remedy 
which they had so long and so earnestly desired. They 
embraced it with ardor, and have supported it with per- 
severing attachment.”’ Lest Congress might not have the’ 
information necessary for the formulation of a protective 


tariff on correct principles, the petitioners subjoined a 


list of articles manufactured in the state a eptible / 
of protection. 


The petitioners from Philadelphia, humbly seeking pro- 
tection for shipping, lament that the tonnage built at that 
harbor has fallen to about one-third the amount constructed 
before the Revolution, and call attention to the fact that 
the British navigation act totally prevents them from build- 
ingfor Englishcustomers. They add thatthey “havewaited, 
with anxious expectation, for the sitting of the honourable 
Congress under the new Constitution of the United States, 
firmly relying that every exertion would be used to rein- 
state so necessary and useful a branch of business.” Like 
the representatives from Baltimore and New York, they, 
append for the information of Congress a list of suggestions 
as to the best method of protecting American shipping 
interests. 
| Finally come _the manufacturers and ship-builders of 

ston. Ship-building with them has also declined since 
the Revolution, and the revival of manufacturing in the 
spends—upon—adequate protection from the-federal 


eres | ants they request that “heavy—duties 
may bé laid on such a ow 


as are manufactured by our owr 
citizens, humbly conceiving that the ot 80 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 45 
considered by Congress as an object of revenue, but, in its 
(operntion Tntaiied to ieolue ses Eee wel ah _intended to exclude such importations, and, ulti- 
eee eee ea eta elacill 
among ourselves.” Rope-makers, hatters, pewterers, soap- 

- boilers, and tallow-chandlers, wool card-makers, ship-carv- 
ers, sailmakers, cabinet-makers, coachmakers, tailors, cord- 
wainers, glue and starch makers, brass-founders, and 
coppersmiths are among the memorialists. 

In the processions which celebrated the adoption of the 
Constitution in Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Charles- 
ton, and New York, the several local manufacturing con- 
cerns were extensively represented by floats and banner- 
men, which shows that they were not unaware of the gain 
that had been made in their favor by the establishment of | 
the new system./ But it.must not be supposed that the 
consolidation..of, interests~in. support.of the Constitution 
was purely localin character. On+thecontrary it was nation- 
wide. 

Immediately-after the.Revolution the local .groups were» 
being welded into a national™interest..bycorrespondenee 
committees. Before the-formation of the Constitution, 
Boston merchants were sending out appeals to ‘other mer- 
chants in the several states to join in a national movement 
for protection; and before the new government went into 
effect, they were active in stirring up united action among 
the merchants and manufacturers of the whole country, 
In 1788, a committee of the association of Boston merchants 
and manufacturers sent out a circular to “their brethren 
in the several seaports of the union,” asking for codperation 
in this grave juncture.' To this Boston appeal are appended 
the names of John Gray, Gibbins Sharp, Benjamin Austin, Jr., 


1 Carey, American Museum, Vol. IV, p. 348. See also Winsor, Memorial History 
of Boston, Vol. IV, p. 77. 


46 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Larson Belcher, William Hawes, and Joshua Witherle — 
all of whom signed the petition addressed to Congress the 
following year asking for protection.* 

| During the struggle over the reconstruction, the advo- 


“eates of a constitution made use of the argument that the 


consumption of foreign luxuries, m : ; ne 
of ief causes of the economic distress which was said 
to prevail; and declared tha tion was the 
only source of _relie this hea i 
merican Museum for February, 1787, com- 
plains that “the articles of rum and tea alone, which are 
drank in this country, would pay all its taxes. But when we 
add sugar, coffee, gauzes, silks, feathers, and the whole list 
of baubles and trinkets, what an enormous expense! No 
wonder you want paper currency. My countrymen are 
all grown very tasty. Feathers and jordans must all be 
imported. Certainly, gentlemen, the devil is among you. 


_A Hampshireman, who drinks forty shillings worth of rum 


in a year and never thinks of the expense, will raise a mob 
to reduce the governor’s salary.”* : 
The Connecticut Courant, of November 12, 1787, in an 
argument for ratification declares: “In the harbour of New 
York there are now 60 ships of which 55 are British. The 
produce of South Carolina was shipped in 170 ships, of 
which 150 were British. ... Surely there is not any 
American who regards the interest of his country but must 


1 For illustrative evidence that the protection of manufactures and shipping was 
being widely agitated previous to the adoption of the Constitution, and that an 
extensive consciousness of identity of interest was being developed among the 
individuals concerned, see the articles in The American Museum, Vol. I, on American 
Manufactures; Winsor, Memorial History of Boston, Vol. IV, Chap. III. See 
memorials in The American Museum, from Philadelphia mercantile interests (April 
6, 1785), Vol. I, p. 313; from Boston merchants, zbid., Vol. I, p. 320. For the mer- 
chants’ movement in New York, see the Magazine of American History, April, 
1893, pp. 324 ff. 

2 Vol. I, p. 117. 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 47 


see the immediate necessity of an efficient federal govern- 
ment; without it the Northern states will soon be depopu- 
lated and dwindle into poverty, while the Southern ones 
will become silk worms to toil and labour for Europe.” 

It is worthy of remark, however, that the gloomy view~ | 
of economic conditions persistently propagated by the ad- 
vocates of a new national system was not entertained by all 
writers of eminence and authority. One of the members 
of the Convention, Franklin, early in 1787, before the 
calling of that assembly, declared that the country was, on 
the whole, so prosperous that there was every reason for 
profound thanksgiving." He mentioned, it is true, that, 
there were some who complained of hard times, slack trade, 
and scarcity of money, but he was quick to add that there 
never was an age nor a country in which there were not 
some people so circumstanced as to find it hard to make a 
living and that “it is always in the power of a small number 


to make a great clamour.’’ ing the several classes*, 
in the community as a whole, prosperity, contended Frank- Xx 
lin, was wide and obyi ever was the farmer , 


"paid better prices for his products, “(as the published prices 
current abundantly testify. The lands he possesses are 
continually rising in value.” In no part of Europe are the 
laboring poor so well paid, fed, or clothed. The fishing 
trade, he thinks, is in a rather bad way, and mercantile 
branches are overcrowded; but he is not distressed by the 
extensive importation of English goods, because this is nothing 
new, and America has prospered in spite of it. 

It may very well be that Franklin’s view of the general 
social conditions just previous to the formation of the 
Constitution is essentially correct and that the defects in 
the Articles of Confederation were not the serious menace 


1M. Carey, The American Museum, for January, 1787, Vol. I, pp. 5 ff. 


48 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


to the social fabric which the loud complaints of advocates — 
of change implied. It may be that ‘the criti period” 


the imagination produced by some undoubted evils which 
: sould have been remedicd without apolitical revolution. 
“It does not seem to have occurred to those historians, who 
have repeated without examination Fiske’s picturesque 
phrase that it is a serious matter to indict a whole system, 
an entire epoch, and a whole people. It does ‘not appear 
that any one has really inquired just what precise facts 
,, must be established to prove that “the bonds of the social 
- order were dissolving.” Certainly, the inflamed declara- 
tions of the Shaysites are not to be taken as representing 
accurately the state of the people, and just as rons oh 


— 


alarmist letters and pamphlets of interested persons o the 

\ other side are not to be accepted without discount.“”"Whem } 
it is remembered that most of our history has been written 
by Federalists, it will become apparent that great care should 
be taken in accepting, without reserve, the gloomy pictures 
of the social conditions prevailing under the Articles of 
Confederation. } In fact, a very learned, though controver- 
sial, historian, Henry B. Dawson, in an article published 
more than forty years ago makes out quite a plausible case 
(documented by minute reséarch) for the statement that 
the “chaos” of which historians are wont to-speak when 
dealing_with the history of the years 1783-87, was acreation . 
of their fancies. 


’ However-this may be, and whether or not Franklin’s 
view is correct,*1t cann enied that the interests séeking 
| Provehion “wale exienstve. and ave ay This is ¢on- 


1 The Historical Magazine (1871), Vol. IX, Second Series, pp. 157 ff. 
1 For an interesting and novel view of the state of commerce under the Articles 
of Confederation, see Channing, History of the United States, Vol. III, pp. 422 ff. 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 49 


clusively shown by the petitions addressed to public bodi 
by the number of influential men-connected with the oe 
e by the rapidity with which the new government 
ar tior the Constitution responded to their demands. 7 
) Capital —peyEstEp—in— WESTERN LANDS. — Although 
companies had been formed to deal in westeri lands on a 
large scale before the Revolution, it was not until the close 
of the War that effective steps were taken toward settle- 
ment. At that time, says Professor Haskins, “‘the number 
of emigrants, the cheapness of the lands, and the lack of an 
established system of sale in small quantities offered many 
inducements for the formation of great land companies 


whose opportunities for Speculation were increased by the 
ee ae ae 
the West... . ‘All am now worth was gained by specula 
tions in land,’ wrote Timothy Pickering [2 member of the 
Pennsylvania ratifying convention] in the same year [1796] y 


and many eminent men could have said the same, often 
_with a later experience quite similar. Land speculatio 


Confederation adopted a polit’ “Or. accepting certificates im 
part payment for lands ; and it was hoped by some that 
' the entire national debt might be extinguished in this way. 
However, the weakness of the Confederation, the lack of 
proper puliveny: forces, the uncertainty.as to the~frontiers 
es of tire large sections held for appreciatio 


“nnn 


1 Haskins, The Yazoo Land Companies, p. 62. American Historical Association 
Papers for 1891. See also the lists printed in A. M. Dyer, First Ownership of Ohio 
Lands (1911). 


~~, 


50 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


funds in these lands or taken stocks in the companies felt 
the adverse effects of the prevailing public policy, and fore- 
saw the benefits which might be expected from a new and 
stable government.| Their view was tersely put by William- 
son, a member of the Convention from North Carolina, in 
a letter to Madison on June 2, 1788: “For myself, I con- 
ceive that my opinions are not biassed by private Interests, 
but having claims to a considerable Quantity of Land in 
the Western Country, I am fully persuaded that the Value 
of those Lands must be increased by an efficient federal 
Government.” ? 


!The weight of the several species of property in politics 
is not determined by the amount, but rather by the oppor- 
tunities offered.to each variety for gain and by the degree 
of necessity for defence against hostile legislation designed 
to depreciate values or close opportunities for increments. 
When viewed in this light the reason for the special pressure 
of personalty in politics in 1787 is apparent. It was receiv- 
ing attacks on all hands from the depreciators and it found 

s erations by governmental 


se If we may judge the~politics of 
the Congress.under the Articles of. Lorena eee two_re- | 


f eile 
lated groups were mosh active : those working for the es-" 
ablishment of a revenue sufficient to discharge the interest 
rT 
and principal of debt, and those working. for 
commercial regulations advantageous-to personalty opera- 
‘Strep tee 
tions In s eS and manufacturing | and_in western land 
| specula 


4 


sponses? santas 


} 


Cir should * remembered also that personalty is usually 
more active than real property, {t is centralized in 


1 Documentary onstitution, Vol. IV, p. 678. 
2? But see Madison’s view as to the chief reason for calling the Convention, 
below, p. 178. 


A SURVEY OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS IN 1787 51 


towns and can draw together for defence or aggression with 
greater facility. The expectation of profits from its manip- 
ulation was much larger in 1787 than from real property. 
It had a considerable portion of the professional classes 
attached to it; its influence over the press was tremendous, 
not only through ownership, but also through advertising 
and other patronage.' [It was, in short, the dynamic ele- 
ment in the movement for the new Constitution. ) Te ed 


1A study of the newspapers of the period shows a large number of prominen : 
advocates of the Constitution among the merchants and brokers advertising in the 
Federalist press. 


\ 


CANISIUS COLLEGE LIBRARY 
ax BUFFALO, N. Y. 


CHAPTER III 


THE MOVEMENT FOR THE CONSTITUTION 


'Di the system of government revailing in the United 
States in 1787 affect adversely any of the.economic interests 
enumerated in the preceding chapter? Furthermoré, were 


2 the leaders in the movement which led to the adoption of 
- the Constitution representatives of the interests so affected ? 


Fortunately, it is not necessary to devote-my consider- 
able attention to the first of these questions. | It is answered 
in part above, and jall of the standard treatises show con- 

{ clusively Ce ee ee 
Raehlaesrppereereeg i ey 
\, above enumerated.’ ‘That system was, in\ 
brief, as follows. There was a loose union of thirteen sover- 
eign states under“the “Articles of Confederation. The 
national government consisted of a legistature of one house 


. in which the states had an equal voting power. ane 
no_executive department and po general judiciary. The 
SRizel_pivemnent_badsnouborersig ame ae 

r to tax directly; and in the absence of these powers all 
prancha-of The government were rendered helpless. Par- 


ould not be se the holders 0 
public securities, either their interest or principal. Under 


this system, the state legislatures were substantially without © 
restrieti Ol ; private rights in property 


were continually attacked by stay laws, legal tender laws, 


1 Bancroft, op. cit., Book I, Chaps. II-VII; Fiske, Critical Period; Marshall, 
Life of Washington (1850 ed.), Vol. II, pp. 75 ff. 


52 


_* 


_ shall be protected by a national force from the Indians. 


lA final a econd question propounded above 
wo i ustive analysis of the =.movement for 


THE MOVEMENT FOR THE CONSTITUTION 53 


and a whol framed in behalf of debtors ; 
and in New England open rebellion had broke : 


SThat the economic groups in_question_looked to a new 


national government as the one source of relief and advan- 


tage, is shown in a hundred contemporary painphiets and 
“néwspaper articles. It was in fact the topic of the times, J 
Fe aoe Sie Eee Pu eee 
August 29, 1787, sums up concisely the interests which were 
turning to the new Constitution: “The states neglect their 
roads and canals, till they see whether those necessary im- 
provements will not become the objects of a national govern- 
ment. Trading and manufacturing companies suspend 
their voyages and manufactures till they see how far their 
commerce will be protected and promoted by a national 
system of commercial regulations. The lawful usurer locks 
up or buries his specie till he sees whether the new frame 
of government will deliver him from the curse or fear of 
paper money and the tender laws. . . . The public creditor, 
who, from the deranged state of finances in every state and 
their total inability to support their partial funding systems, 
has reason to fear that his certificates will perish in his 
hands, now places all his hopes of justice in an enlightened 
and stable national government. The embarrassed farmer 
and the oppressed tenant, who wishes to become free . . 


by emigrating to a frontier country, wait to see whether they 
m1 


the Constitution,” in the following form: — 
study of the economic Orces in the Revolution and 
particularly in the Continental Congress that drafted the l 

Articles of Confederation. 
. 1 The Connecticut Courant, September 10, 1787. 


3 


54 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


prevailing system, their geographic distribution, and their 
economic sources. 

3. An examination of the several attempts.in the Congress 

} under the Articles of Confederation to secure the power to — 

| regulate commerce and establish a revenue for. discharging © 
the debt. 

, 4. A description of the-economic interests of all the mem- 

| bers who were most.active in these attempts. 

5. A description of the economic forces.in the commu- 
nities whose representatives in Congress were zealous in 
securing a revision of the Articles. 

6. A study of the nature and distribution of the several 
\legislative attacks on private ‘rights in property between 
1783 and.1787: 

7. A minute study of the personnel of the movement for 
Le rant and the economic interests of the leading spirits in 
Congress and the state legislatures and outside of legislative 
chambers. 

Any one superficially acquainted with the sources of 
American history will see at once the nature of the work 
which must be done to secure the raw materials for such a 
study. The enormous mass of unprinted papers of the 
Continental Congress in the Library at Washington would 
have to be thoroughly searched ; proceedings in state legis- 
latures during the years under consideration would have to 
be scrutinized ; local archives and newspapers would have 
to be examined. 

Th the present state of our historical materials, therefore, 
_all that»can=be attempted here is a superficial commentary 
on some of the outward. aspects of the movement for the 
a which mate destnpee in the conventional. works, 


| 2. An inquiry into the first signs of discontent with the 


THE MOVEMENT FOR THE CONSTITUTION 55 


identified with the events which led up to the Convention 
of 1787 were themselves members of that Assembly, and 
their economic interests are considered below in Chapter V. 
But it is not without significance to discover that some of 
the leading men outside of the onvention who labored 
for_an_ overthrow of the old system were also directly in- 
terested in the results of their tabors-t= 

As early as January, 1781, General Philip Schuyler moved 
in the senate of New York “to request the eastern states 
to join in an early convention, which should form a per- 
petual league of incorporation, subservient, however, to 
the common interest of all the states; invite others to ac- 
cede to it; erect Vermont into a state; devise a fund for 
the redemption of the common debts; substitute a perma- 
nent and uniform system for temporary expedients; and 
invest the confederacy with powers of coercion.” General 
Schuyler was a large holder of depreciated securities.” 

In February, 1781, Congress recommended to the states 
that they vest in the national legislature a power to levy 
a duty to pay the principal and interest of the debt. In 
April, 1783, Congress again appealed _to the states for 
authority to lay duties for the purpose of supplying a 
revenue with which to—diseharge the debt. Among the 
leaders in Congress who favored this increase in power were 
Gorham, Higginson, Ellsworth, Dyer, Boudinot, Fitzsimons, 
Williamson, Izard, Johnson, and King, all of whom held 
securities which were daily depreciating under the failure - 
of the government to meet its just obligations.’ : 

In 1785, Governor Bowdoin, of Massachusetts, in his 
inaugural address urged the necessity of a stronger union 
with larger powers, and recommended a convention to de- 


1 Bancroft, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 29. 2 See below, p. 109. 
8 Elliot’s Debates, Vol. I, p. 95. See below, Chaps. V and VII. 


56 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


liberate upon the whole matter. G or Bowdoin was 

a large holder of public securities.” eee the 

*F cianics neal thazapanaoeed that the Articles of 

Confederation were inadequate, and directed the repre- 

sentatives in Congress to take steps looking toward a 
eecemncning of the union; but they failed to act. 

“Men less eminent than Bowdoin and Schuyler were being 
educated in Federalism by the march of events. In Boston 
merchants were petitioning Congress for relief from British 

_ discrimninations*;—in-the- Virginia ~ Tegislature the represen- 
tatives of the commercial interests were learning their 

lessons‘; the > demands for positive action were increasing 
daily in: number. Every failure to find a remedy under the 
of those who were ready for a complete reconstruction of the 
prevailing system. 

A few illustrations will serve to show how the demand for 
reform was being fostered and also the connection between 
the leaders in the agitation and the personnel of the public 
bodies which later achieved the great work of framing and 
ratifying the Constitution. Even before the war was over 

| and the Articles of Confederation tested in a time of peace, 
the inability of the government under it to afford defence 
to commerce on the high seas was deplored by merchants 
whose vessels were falling prey to the British. In April, 
1782, a number of prominent merchants presented a 
petition to Congress in which they lamented the British 
depredations on American trade and the want of adequate 
naval protection at sea.2 Among the signers of this 
petition were several men who were later known as warm 


1 Bancroft, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 190. 2 See below, p. 263. 

8 See above, p. 46 n. 4 Ambler, Sectionalism in Virginia, p. 48. 

5 Ms. Library of Congress : Papers of the Continental Congress (Memorials), No. 41, 
Vol. VI, p. 283. Simpson, Eminent Philadelphians. 


THE MOVEMENT FOR THE CONSTITUTION 57 


supporters of a strong federal government. One of them, 
Thomas Fitzsimons, was a member of the Convention 


which drafted the Constitution; another, John Barclay, | 
was a member of the Pennsylvania convention and voted | 


in favor of the ratification of the new system of govern- 
ment. 

/ Six years before the Convention met in Philadelphia, the 
disordered financial system under the Confederation was the 
subject of protest by interested parties.| In 1781, “divers 
inhabitants of the state of Pennsylvania,” were petition- 
ing Congress to take some action designed to put the credit 
of the country on a sound basis.’ Thus runs the petition: 
“Humbly sheweth that whereas you thought fit heretofore 
in the course of your widsom to emit bills of credit for good 
and great purposes, but the same depreciating to such an 
amazing degree beyond the expectation of all living did 
therefore lay open wide door for the most monstrous and 
absurd injustices by fraudulent payments which we conclude 
is directly contrary to your good and great purposes in 
emitting the same, we therefore, not only firmly relying 
on the extraordinary clearness of the circumstances of our 
agrievances, but likewise on the uprightness of your under- 
standings, Do therefore presume to pray your honors 
would be pleased to recommend to the several states to adopt 
such measures as they may think most likely to afford a 
safe and effectual redress to all such agrievances. .. .”’} 
Among the signers to this petition are Thomas Bull, John 
Hannum, and Thomas Cheyney, who six years later as 
- members of the Pennsylvania convention had the pleasure 
of voting for the ratification of an instrument of govern- 
ment that put an end to the evils against which they had so 
earnestly protested. 


1 Jbid., No, 42, Vol. VI, p. 254. 


ie) 


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


‘Phe failure of repasted-ettempis j in Congress to secure an 


amendment—at b ng_of impost-duties, the re- 


usal e aie to pay the eqns made by Congress, 


and the-obvious impossibility 0 Om: eee ng their-ends pheaae 


“drove the advocates of have | measures to desperation. 
f _ Republican g ae as it had been tried out, had failed 


despair of the representatives of the property inigeces thus 
jeopardized and their readiness for some heroic measures 
were fully manifest in the correspondence of the time. 
Washington, who was not given to undue alarms, wrote 
to John Jay ft y from Mount Vernon, on August 1, 1786, to the 
effect that men of leadership were ready for drastic action: 
“What astonishing changes,” he said, “a few years are 
capable of producing. I am told that even respectable 
characters speak of a monarchical form of Government with- 
out horror. From thinking proceeds speaking, thence to 
acting is often but a single step. But how irrevocable and 
tremendous! What a triumph for our enemies to verify 
their predictions — what a triumph for the advocates of 
despotism to find that we are incapable of governing our- 
selves, & that systems founded on the basis of equal liberty 
are merely ideal & fallacious! Would to God that wise 
measures may be taken in time to avert the consequences 
we have but too much reason to apprehend.” 4 
Later in that year, General Knox, who was a holder of 
public securities, wrote to Washington in the following 
~. strain: “The people who are the insurgents [Shaysites] have 
never paid any, or but very little taxes — But they see the 
weakness of government; They feel at once their own 
1 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 20. 


THE MOVEMENT FOR THE CONSTITUTION 59 


poverty, compared with the opulent, and their own force, 
and they are determined to make use of the latter, in order 
to remedy the former. Their creed is ‘That the property 
of the United States has been protected from the confisca- 
tions of Britain by the joint exertions of all, and therefore 
ought to be the common property of all. And he that 
attempts opposition to this creed is an enemy to equity and 
justice, and ought to be swept from off the face of the earth.’ 
In a word they are determined to annihilate all debts j 
public and private and have agrarian Laws, which are easily \ 
effected by means of unfunded paper money which shall be 

a tender in all cases whatever — 

“Thenumbers of these peoplemay amountin Massachusetts 
to about one fifth part of several populous counties, and to 
them may be collected, people of similar sentiments, from 
the states of Rhode Island, Connecticut, and New Hamp- 
shire so as to constitute a body of 12 or 15000 desperate 
& unprincipled men — They are chiefly of the young and 
active part of the community, more easily collected than 
perhaps kept together afterwards — But they will probably 
commit overt acts of treason which will compel them to 
embody for their own safety — once embodied they will be 
constrained to submit to discipline for the same reason. 
Having proceeded to this length for which they are now ripe, 
we shall have a formidable rebellion against reason, the 
principle of all government, and the very name of liberty. 
This dreadful situation has alarmed every man of principle 
and property in New England. ‘They start as from a dream, 
and ask what has been the cause of our delusion? what is 
to afford us security against the violence of lawless men? , 
Our government must be braced, changed, or altered to 
secure our lives and property. We imagined that the mild- 
ness of our government and the virtue of the people were 


60 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


so correspondent, that we were not as other nations requiring 
brutal force to support the laws — But we find that we are 
men, actual men, possessing all the turbulent passions be- 
™ longing to that animl[al] and that we must have a govern- 
ment proper and adequate for him. The people of Massa- 
chuse[tts] for instance, are far advanced in this doctrine, 
and the men of reflection, & principle, are determined to 
endevior] to establish a government which shall have the 
power to protect them in their lawful pursuits, and which 
will be efficient in all cases of internal commotions or foreign 
invasions — They mean that liberty shall be the basis, a 
liberty resulting from the equal and firm administration of 
the laws. They wish for a general government of unity as 
they see the local legislatures must naturally and neces- 
sarily tend to retard and frustrate all general government.” ! 
A few months te writing to Edmund 
Pendleton from New York, the seat of the government, 
corroborated the views expressed by Washington and Knox 
and set forth what he conceived to be the desperate 
state of republican government. His letter, dated Feb- 
ruary 24, 1787, three days after Congress had issued 
the call for a national Convention, ran as follows: “In 
general I find men of reflection much less sanguine as 
to a new than despondent as to the present System. In- 
dee stem neither has nor deserves advocates > 
and if some very strong props are not applied will quickly 
tumble to the ground. . . . If the approaching Convention 
should not agree on some remedy, I am persuaded that 
some very different arrangement will ensue. The late 
turbulent scenes in Massachusetts & infamous ones in 
Rhode Island, have done inexpressible injury to the republi- 
can character in that part of the U. States; and a pro- 


1 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 30. 


THE MOVEMENT FOR THE CONSTITUTION 61 


pensity towards Monarchy is said to have been produced 
by it in some leading minds. The bulk of the people will 
probably prefer the lesser evil of a partition of the Union 
into three more practicable and energetic Governments. 
The latter idea I find after long confinement to individual 
speculations & private circles, is beginning to show itself 
in the Newspapers.”’ ! 

A few days after this letter was written by Madison, 
John Armstrong wrote to Washington from Carlisle that 
the suppression of the insurrection in Massachusetts had 
not allayed the fears of leading men in his state. “The 
alarming flame in Massachusetts,” he says, “seems nearly 
extinguished, but if the subsequent measures of that State 
respecting the insurgents should be severe, amounting to 
death, Confiscation, or disfranchisement, the consequence 
may be bad, as tending to reinkindle the flame. Shall I 
tell you in confidence, I have now twice heard, nor from low 
authority (some principal men of that State) begin to talk 
of wishing one general Head to the Union, in the room of 
Congress ! me 

By correspondence such as this just cited, ly an increasing 
aenoenition of the desperate s straights I Which-theywere| 
placed, a remarkable fusion of interested forces was effected. 

alt i and a major portion of the edu-) 
cated men of oe country were drawn hogethent in @ CO 
informed by a cons interests,” 


Having,failed-to.obtain-relief.through | the he regular channels. . 


of amendment.by Congress-ratified by the st state legislatures, 
the. leaders-struck out on a new path. Operating through 


the Virginia legislature, they yy secured a resolution inviting 


1 [bid., Vol. IV, p. 83. 2 Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 88. 
3 Division and Reunion, p. 12. 


“” 


62 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


the sister commonwealths to send delegates to a convention, 
at Annapolis to take into consideration the trade and com- 
mercial system of the United States... The convention duly 
met, but the attendance was so slim that, as Professor 
Burgess has put it, “a coup d’état attempted by so small 
a body could not but fail.” ” 

“Although the Annapolis convention was ostensibly con- 
cerned with commercial regulation primarily, there is no 
doubt that it was the creation of the men who had been 
working in Congress and out for a general revision of the 


‘whole system. There is no doubt also that it was not 


regarded as of much significance in itself, but rather as a 
preliminary to a national convention which would afford 
an opportunity for reconstructing the government) For 
this view we have a witness of high authority, James Madi- 
son, who in a letter of August 12, 1786, to Jefferson, written 
a month before the Annapolis conference, said: ‘‘Many 
gentlemen, both within and without Congress, wish to make 
this meeting subservient to a plenipotentiary Convention 
for amending the Confederation. Tho’ my wishes are in 
favor of such an event, yet I despair so much of its accom- 
plishment at the present crisis that I do not extend my 
views beyond a commercial Reform.” * 

Under the influence of Hamilton, the conference at An- 


-napolis contented itself with merely recommending that 


another convention be called “to devise such further pro- 


1 James Monroe to James Madison. New York, September 3, 1786. ‘‘I consider 
the convention of Annapolis as a most important era in our affairs — the eastern 
men be assur’d mean it as leading further than the object originally comprehended. 
If they do not obtain that things shall be arranged to suit them in every respect, 
their intrigues will extend to the objects I have suggested above — Pennsylvania 
is their object — upon succeeding or failing with her they will gain or lose confidence 
—1I doubt not the emissaries of foreign countries will be on the ground.” Docu- 
mentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 25. 

1 Political Science and Constitutional Law, Vol. I, p. 103. 

3 Writings of James Madison (1865), Vol. I, p. 246. 


THE MOVEMENT FOR THE CONSTITUTION 63 


visions as shall appear to them necessary to render the con- 
stitution of the federal government adequate to the exigen- 
cies of the Union.” on_ this modest suggestion, 


Congress, in Februa 1787, invited the states to send dele- ‘ 

gates.to a Convention at Philadelphia for ‘the sole and 

express purpose of TSvisig-the-mrtivtes of Confederation.’ ‘ 
Sinners eecscies magenta gD enn nA StstiMinviniSSSInmnnnatama 


Certain tentative ‘conclusions emerge at this point. 

( Large and important groups of economic interests were~ 
adversely affected by the system of government under the tr 
Articles of Confederations snamely, those of public’sécutities, 
shipping and manufacturing, money, at interest ; in in Og 
capital as opposed to land. } “nen 

The representatives of these important interests attempted 
through the.regular_ legal ehannels to secure amendments 
to the Articles of Confederation which would safeguard 
their rights in the future, particularly those of the public 
creditors. 

Having failed to realize their great purposes through the 
regular | means,..the-leaders.-in..the-movement..set. to work 
to secure by_a.circuitous route.the assemblying of a Con- 
vention_to “revise.” the Articles of»Confederation™ with the 
hope of obtaining, outside of the existing legal framework, 
the adoption of a revolutionary programme. 


Ostensibly, however, the formal plan of approval by 


Congress and the state legislatures was to be preserved. / 


CHAPTER IV 


PROPERTY SAFEGUARDS IN THE ELECTION OF DELEGATES 
af tion afforded by these outward signs 
j n the movement for the new Con- 


\ of regula the le 1 
af stitution set to work in their respective legi re 
“the choice of delegates prepared to ta ic_meas- 


ich the circumsta; emanded. \The zealous and 
dynamic element, of course, was favored by the inertness, 
ignorance, and indifference of the masses, and the confidence 
of the legislatures in their ability to exercise the ultimate 
control through the ratifying power. No special |_ popular 
elections were called to complicate the’ problem of securing 
“the right kind of a Convention and the leaders were con- 
_ fronted with the comparatively simple task of convincing 
the legislatures of the advisibility of ‘sending delegates. 
“Naturally the most strenuous and interested_advocates of 
change came forward as candidates. 
The resolution of the Congress under the Articles of Con- 
federation calling for the Convention provided that the 
delegates should be “appointed by the states.” —The-actual 


AX ee ee both 
‘ houses participating, except in Georgia and Pennsylvania, 
_ which had unicameral assemblies. | That iss ates 
_to the federal Convention were selected in the same fashion 


as were United States Senators under the present Constitu- 


tion, in all states, previous to the adoption of the principle 
64 


tte 
anys 


SAFEGUARDS IN ELECTION OF DELEGATES 65 


of direct election. \ This fact-in“itself removed the choice of 


delegates one degree from the electorate. | 

ah aster asiemuant meaiict aye tntietion of too myth) 
popular feeling into the choice of delegates to the Conven- 
tion was afforded by the property qualifications generally 
placed on Voters and members. of the legislatures..by.the 
state constitutions. and laws.in force in 1787.!! In order to 
ascertain the precise character of the defence afforded to 
property by this barrier to universal manhood suffrage, it 
is necessary to inquire in detail into the qualifications then 
imposed.?) 

The New Hampshire constitution of 1784 was in force 
when the call for the election of delegates came. It provided 
that “no person shall be capable of being elected a senator 
who is not of the Protestant religion, and seized of a free- 
hold estate in his own right of the value of two hundred 
pounds.” * Members of the lower house were required to. 
possess an estate “‘of the value of one hundred pounds, one 


half of which to be a freehold.” The suffrage was wig 


extended, for freeholders, tax payers, and even those why -- 
paid a poll tax could vote. 

Massachusetts conferred the suffrage upon all males 
possessing a freehold estate of the annual income of three 
pounds, or any estate of the value of sixty pounds. A 


1On the suffrage and elections in general in the eighteenth century, see the 
state constitutions in the well-known collections of Poore and Thorpe; A. E. 
McKinley, The Suffrage Franchise in the Thirteen English Colonies; Paul- 
lin’s ‘‘The First Elections under the Constitution,’’ Iowa Journal of History 
and Politics, Vol. II; Jameson, ‘‘Did the Fathers Vote,’’ New England Magazine, 
January, 1890; Thorpe, Constitutional History of the American People; S. H. Miller, 
“'Legal Qualifications for Office,’ American Historical Association Report (1899), 
Vol. I; F. A. Cleveland, Growth of Democracy; C. F. Bishop, History of Elections 
tn the American Colonies; see below, Chap. IX. 

2 The data on the constitutions here given are taken from Thorpe’s collection, 
Charters, Constitutions, etc. 

8 Senators were apportioned among the respective districts on the basis of public 
taxes paid by the said districts. 


F 


66 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


senator was required to be “seized in his own right of a 
freehold within this commonwealth, of the value of three 
hundred pounds at least, or possessed of a personal estate of 
the value of six hundred pounds at least, or of both to the 
amount of the same sum.” | Every member of the house of 
representatives was required to be “seized in his own right 
of a free hold of the value of one hundred pounds, within the 
town he shall be chosen to represent, or any ratable estate 
to the value of two hundred pounds; and he shall cease to 
represent the said town immediately on his ceasing to be 
qualified as aforesaid.” 

Like the neighboring state of Rhode Island, which sent 
no delegates to Philadelphia, Connecticut had continued 
after the Revolution under the old royal charter form of 
government without taking the trouble to draft a constitu- 
tion. Under this old system, the suffrage was restricted to 

“holders of real or personal property of a certain value. 
According to McKinley, ‘The forty-shilling freehold, trans- 
lated later into seven dollars income from land, was retained 
as one of the alternative qualifications of the suffrage until 
the amendment in 1845 of the constitution of 1818.’’1 The 
alternative qualification here spoken of was the ownership 
of forty pounds’ worth of personal property, which was 
established in 1702.and remained until after the Revolution. 
The Connecticut Register of the time thus quaintly de- 
scribes the franchise: ‘The qualifications for freemen are 
that they be at least twenty-one years of age, possessed of 
freehold estate to the value of 40s. per ann. or £40 personal 
estate in the general list of estates in that year wherein 
they desire to be admitted Freemen; or are possessed of 
estate as aforesaid and by law excused from putting it into 
the list; and being of quiet and peaceable behaviour.” ? 


1 The Suffrage Franchise in the English Colonies, p. 414. 
2 Greene’s Register for the State of Connecticut, for the Year 1786, p. 4. 


SAFEGUARDS IN ELECTION OF DELEGATES 67 


New York gave a special position to the rights of property 
in the senate. Senators were required to be freeholders, 
and were chosen by freeholders “possessed of freeholds of 
the value of one hundred pounds.’”’ With regard to the 
voter for members of the lower house, it was stipulated 
that “he shall have been a freeholder, possessing a freehold 
of the value of twenty pounds within said county, or have 
rented a tenement therein of the yearly value of forty 
shillings, and been rated and actually paid taxes to this 
state.” An exception to this rule conferred the suffrage 
on all who were fresmen-in~Atbany, and i in New York CHT 


on o er 14, 1775. e 
These qualifications worked an extensive disfranchise- 


ment in New York. “The census of 1790 shows that out 
of a population of thirty thousand [in New York City], there 
were but 1,209 freeholders of £100 valuation or over; 1,221 
of £20, and 2,661 ‘forty-shilling’ freeholders. Property | 
interests — something like a landed aristocracy —con- | 
ee 1 Some notion of the extent 
to which the adult males would have voted if permitted, 
is afforded by the elections of 1788, at which members of the 
state ratifying convention were chosen under the universal 
manhood suffrage rule,? and members of the assembly 
were chosen under the regular property qualifications. 
For example, Richard Harrison received 2677 votes as 
member of the convention, and 1500 votes as member of 
the state assembly. In Albany county the vote for mem- 
_ bers of the assembly ran about 1600 under that for members 
of the convention.* It looks as if one could safely guess 
that about one-third more voters would have been active 


1 Magazine of American History, April, 1893, p. 311. 
2 See below, p. 241. 
3 New York Journal, June 5, 1788. 4 Ibid. 


68 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


| participants in elections if they had not been shut out by 
the prevailing property qualifications in New York. 

New Jersey had a legislature of two houses, a council 
and a general assembly. Every member of the former had 
to be a freeholder and “worth at least one thousand pound 
proclamation money, or real and personal estate within the 
same county ;” and every member of the latter body was 
required to possess at least half as much in real and personal 
property. As for the suffrage, the constitution provided 
“that all inhabitants of this colony, of full. age, who are 
worth fifty pounds proclamation money clear estate in the 
same... shall be entitled to vote for Representatives in 
Council and Assembly.” 

The Delaware constitution of 1776 provided that members 
of both branches of the legislature should be chosen from 
among the freeholders of the county, and that “the right of 
suffrage in the election of members for both houses shall 
remain as exercised by law at present.” The election law 
which then governed the suffrage in Delaware was the act 
of 1734 which enfranchised freeholders owning ‘‘fifty acres 
of land, with twelve acres cleared and improved, or other- 
wise worth £40 lawful money.” ? 

The first constitution of Pennsylvania established in 1776 
was the work of a radical party, and it provided for a single 
chambered legislature based on a widely extended suffrage. 
“Every freeman of the full age of twenty-one years,” runs 
the instrument, ‘“‘having resided in this state for the space 
of one whole year . . . and paid public taxes during that 
time, shall enjoy the right of an elector: Provided always 
that sons of freeholders of the age of twenty-one years shall 
be entitled to vote although they have not paid taxes.” ? 

1 McKinley, The Suffrage Franchise in the English Colonies, p. 270. 


2 Tench Coxe fixes the number of ‘‘taxables’”’ in Pennsylvania at 39,765 in 1770 
and 91,177 in 1793. A View of the Uniied States, p. 413. 


SAFEGUARDS IN ELECTION OF DELEGATES 69 


In Maryland a distinction was made between town and 
county in the choice of delegates to the lower house of the 
state legislature. Generally every freeman “having a free- 
hold of fifty acres of land,” or “having property in this 
state above the value of thirty pounds current money” 
could vote in the county in which he resided for members 
of the house of delegates. All persons qualified by the 
charter of Annapolis to vote for burgesses could vote for 
delegates from that city ; and in Baltimore persons “having 
the same qualifications as electors in the county” could vote 
for delegates. County delegates in the state legislature 
were required to possess “real or personal property above 
the value of five hundred pounds current money.” The 
senators were chosen indirectly by electors selected by the 
qualified voters for delegates. These senatorial electors 
were to possess the qualifications of delegates, and senators 
themselves had to possess “‘real and personal property above 
the value of one thousand pounds current money.” 

The Virginia constitution of 1776 stipulated that members 
of both houses of the legislature must be “freeholders or 
duly qualified according to law ;” and added that ‘‘the right 
of suffrage in the election of members of both houses shall 
remain as exercised at present.’ Under this provision, 
persons owning twenty-five acres of improved land or fifty 
acres of unimproved land were admitted to the suffrage, 
“together with certain artisans residing in Norfolk and 
Williamsburg.” ? 

At the time of choosing delegates to the Convention, 
North Carolina was under the constitution of 1776 which 
prescribed property qualifications for members of the legis- 
lature and for voters as well. Hach member of the senate 


1 Ambler, Sectionalism in Virginia, p. 29, note 11; for details see McKinley, op. 
ctt., pp. 40 ff. 


70 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


was required to possess “not less than three hundred acres 
of land in fee,’’ and each member of the lower house “not 

~less than one hundred acres of land in fee or for the term of 
his own life.” A freehold qualification of fifty acres of 
land was required of voters for senators, and the suffrage 
for voters for members of the lower house was extended to 
all freemen who paid “public taxes.” In the towns en- 
titled to representation the possession of a freehold or the 
payment of a public tax qualified for voting in the election 
of members of the lower house. 

The legislature of South Carolina, that chose the repre- 
sentatives of that state to the Philadelphia Convention, was 
elected under the constitution of 1778 which prescribed 
high property qualifications. “No person who resides in 
the parish for which he is elected shall take his seat in the 
senate, unless he possess a settled estate and freehold in 
his own right in the said parish or district of the value of 
two thousand pounds currency at least, clear of debt.” 
Non-resident senators were required to be the holders of 
such an estate worth at least seven thousand pounds, clear 
of debt. The member of the lower house was required to 
possess an estate and slaves or realty worth one thousand 
pounds,” while each non-resident member of that house had. 
to own a freehold estate worth at least three thousand five 
hundred pounds, clear of debt. The suffrage was restricted 
to persons owning fifty acres, or a town lot, or paying taxes 
equivalent to the taxes on fifty acres of land. 

In 1787, the Georgia legislature consisted of one chamber, 
under the constitution of 1777, which stipulated that mem- 

bers of the house of representatives ‘Shall be of the Pro- 
testant religion, and of the age of twenty-one years, and 


1Schaper, ‘‘Sectionalism in South Carolina,” American Historical Association 
Report (1900), Vol. I, p. 368. 2 Statutes at Large (S.C.), Vol. IV, p. 99. 


SAFEGUARDS IN ELECTION OF DELEGATES 71 


shall be possessed in their own rights of two hundred and 
fifty acres of land or some property to the amount of two 
hundred and fifty pounds.” The suffrage was widely ex- 
tended to every white male having in his own right property 
“of ten pounds value and liable to pay tax”’ or “being of any 
mechanic trade.” 

From this review Ge is apparent that a majority of the 
states placed direct property qualifications on the voters, 
and the other states eliminated practically all who were not 
taxpayers. Special safeguards for property were secured 
in the qualifications imposed on members of the legislatures 
in New Hampshire, Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey, 
Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. 
Further safeguards were added by the qualifications im- 
posed in the case of senators in New Hampshire, Massachu- 
setts, New Jersey, New York, Maryland, North Carolina, 
and South Carolina. . 

While these qualifications operated to exclude a lars 
portion of the adult males from participating in elections, 
the wide distribution of real.property created an extensive 
electorate and in most ‘rural regions gave the legislatures a 


_ broad popular basis.1 Far from rendering to personal 
_ property that defence which was necessary to the full reali- 
_ zation of its rights, these qualifications for electors admitted 


a 


to the suffrage its most dangerous antagonists: the small 
farmers and many of the debtors; who were the most active 
in all attempts to depreciate personalty by legislation. 
Madison with his usual acumen saw the inadequacy of such 
defence and pointed out in the Convention that the really 
serious assaults on property (having in mind of course, 
personalty) had come from the “‘freeholders.”’ ? 
“Nevertheless, in the election of delegates to the Conven- 
1 See below, p. 242. 2 Ibid., p. 167. 


YC 


72 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


tion, the representatives of personalty in the legislatures 
were able-by-the sheer weight of their combined intelligence 
and economic power to secure delegates from the urban centres 


—or_allied with their interests.. Happily for them, all the 


legislatures which they had to convince had not been elected 
on the issue of choosing delegates to a national Convention, 
and did not come from a populace stirred up on that question.) 
The call for the Convention went forth on February 21, 


1787, from Congress, and within a few months all the legis- — 


latures, except that of Rhode Island, had responded,__Thus 
the heated popular di ion usually incident to such.a 


delegates was rendered-possible.| ~~ 


1Some of the states selected delegates before Congress issued the call. Bancroft, 
op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 269 ff. 3 


momentous political undertaking was lar avoided, and 
an orderly and temperate procedure in the selection” of 


CHAPTER V 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS OF THE MEMBERS OF THE 
CONVENTION 


Havinc shown that four groups of property rights Bares 
adversely affected _b e government under the Articles 
‘of C Jeration, and th s-were behind 


the movement for a reconstruction of the Beet it is now 


“nece inquire whether-the-methbe 


_ the land possess the kinds of property which were immedi- 
ately and directly increased in value or made more seo 
by the results of their labors at Philadelphia? ( Did they 
have money at interest? Did they own public securities ? 
Did they hold western lands for appreciation ? Were they 
interested in shipping and manufactures I) 

The purpose of such an inquiry is not, of course, to show 
that the Constitution was made for the personal benefit of 
the members of the Convention. Far from it. Neither 
is it of any moment to discover how many hundred thou- 
sand dollars accrued to them as a result of the foundation 

_of the new government. The only point here considered 


is: Did they represent distinct groups eC ic 
interes u stood. in concrete, ehnite form. , 


through their own ont 
erty rights, or were they working merely under the guid- 
ance of abstract principles of gues science s 


X 


74 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Unfortunately, the materials for such a study are very 
scanty, because the average biographer usually considers as 
negligible the processes by which his hero gained his liveli- 
hood. The pages which follow are, therefore, more an evi- 
dence of what ought to be done than a record of results 


actually accomplished. (They would be meagre, indeed, 
were it not for the rich unpublished records of the ’ he Treasury 


Department) which are here used time in this 
~connection; an ey would doubtless have been fuller 


were it not for the fact that most of the books showing the 
central operations of the Treasury Department under 
Hamilton have disappeared. The names of the attending 
members of the Convention are given in alphabetical order. 


braham Baldwin’s private fortune there is little known. 
His father was evidéntly well-to-do, for he enjoyed the 


dvantage of a classical education at Yale before he estab- 
: ae himself in the practice of law at Savannah, Georgia. 


yor 


He soon rose to eminence in his profession, and was reckoned 
among the ablest and shrewdest lawyers of his adopted 
commonwealth. A short sketch of him states that by “his 
constant habits of economy and temperance,” he accumu- 
lated enough to enable him to assist many young men in 
their education and establishment in business. When his 
father died, in 1787, he was able to pay the debts of the 
insolvent estate, and he educated his six half brothers and 
sisters ‘‘in a great measure at his own expense.”’! 

Some portion of Baldwin’s fortune was invested in public 
securitiés-—He—possessed-a-few-thiousand dollars worth of 
the stocks of the new government at its very inception, 
which doubtless represented old paper of the Confederation 
acquired by original subscription or by purchase. The 
ledgers and other principal records of Georgia are appar- 


1 Herring, National Portrait Gallery, Vol. IV. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 75 


ently unavailable — at all events a search at the Treasury 
Department failed to reveal them; but Baldwin held some 
paper which is entered on the books of his native state, Con- 
necticut, in April, 1792: deferred 6 per cents, funded 6 
per cents, and 3 per cents to the amount of about $2500.! 
At later dates, 1797 and 1804, he appears on the Treasury 
Records for several thousand dollars worth of 6 per cents 
and 3 per cents, but the sources of these sums are not ap- 
parent.? It is probable, however, that these stocks were 
paper which Baldwin funded at the Treasury instead of a 
loan office. He was a member of Congress, and naturally 
would have transacted business with the agency nearest at 
hand. They may, of course, represent purchases for invest- 
ment, made after the great appreciation had taken place.’ 
There is no exhaustive biography of-Richard_Bassett, of 
Delaware. A brief sketch of him relates that he “was born 
in 1745. He was the adopted son of Mr. Lawson, a lawyer, 
who married a Miss Inzer. The Inzer family was Her- 
man’s heir to Bohemia Manor.... Mr. Bassett was 
educated and trained for the profession of law by Mr. Lawson, 
whose heir he became. By this inheritance he came into 
possession of six thousand acres of Bohemia manor, which 
we are informed, embraced the fairest and best portion of 


1 Ms. Treasury Department: Connecticut Loan Office, Ledger B, Assumed Debt, 
folio 135; ibid., Ledger C, folio 135; ibid., Ledger A, folio 136. 

2 Ibid., Ledger E, Treasury, Vol. 44, folio 46; Ledger C, Treasury, 6 per cents, 
Vol. 42, folio 55; and Treasury Ledgers, passim. Consult Index. 

3 It is here assumed that when a member of the Convention appears upon the 
funding books of the new government he was a public creditor at the time of the 
Convention. Of course, it is possible that some of the members who are recorded 
as security holders possessed no paper when they went to Philadelphia, but pur- 
chased it afterward for speculation. But it is hardly to be supposed that many 
of them would sink to the level of mere speculators. Thereis plenty of evidence for 
the statement that many of the members did possess public paper before the meeting 
of the Convention, but the incompleteness of the old records prevents the fixing of 
the exact number. Those members who purchased after the Convention for specula- 
tion must have had idle capital seeking investment. 


76 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


the Manor.” ! Through his inheritance and his accumu- 
lations in the practice of law, he became one of the wealthy 
men of his state. Another biographer notes that “His 
fortune was large and he entertained lavishly at his three 
homes in Wilmington, Dover, and at Bohemia Manor.” ? 
He was on intimate terms with the leading financial men of 
the community ; he was very active in securing a charter 
in Delaware for the Bank of North America when it was 
attacked by the Pennsylvania legislature, and was warmly 
thanked for his success by President Willing, in a letter 
dated February 6, 1786.° 

Whether any considerable amount of Mr. Bassett’s large 
fortune was invested in public securities at the inception of 
the new government it is impossible to ascertain, on account 
of the meagre records of the state of Delaware preserved 
in the Treasury Department. In the later documents of 
the central office of the Treasury there appears the remnant 
of ‘an old account”’ to the amount of a few hundred dollars 
worth of 3 per cents and 6 per cents under dates of 1796 and 
1797.4 A reasonable inference from the entry would be 
that Bassett, like other members of Congress, carried on his 
transactions directly with the Treasury (whose early records 
are missing), and that these holdings were based on paper 
originally funded. 

Gunning Bedford, of Delaware, was the son of a “sub- 
stantialland_owner” > and a Bedford of that name appears” 
on the tax lists of Newcastle county for the year 1776 for 
the amount of sixteen pounds, a moderate sum for those 


1 Papers of the Delaware Historical Society, No. X XIX (1900). 

2 National Encyclopedia of Biography, Vol. XI, p. 530. 

3 History of the Bank of North America, p. 68. 

‘Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger E, Treasury, Vol. 44, folio 26; and <bid., 
Ledger C, Treasury, 6 per cents, Vol. 42, folio 33. 

5 National Encyclopedia of Biography, Vol. XI, p. 530. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 77 


days.’ He was a lawyer, but the extent of his practice is 
not known. He was of high standing in the community, 
and was elected governor of his state a few years after the 
Convention met. He took an interest in the financial affairs 
of the state, and under his administration as governor the 
Bank of Delaware was organized. How far Bedford had 
an interest in public securities cannot be determined on 
account of the fact that only a few scraps of the loan office 
papers for Delaware seem to be preserved in the Treasury 
Department. An old loan office volume shows a Gunning 
Bedford down for one $400 certificate of May, 1779? and 
traces of the financial connections of the member of the 
Convention with the government are to be found in the 
Pennsylvania loan office records.? 
ohn Blair, of Virginia, was born in that state about 1731. 

He received a ébllegiate education, prepared for the law, and 
“in a very few years rose to the head of his profession.”’ 4 
Pierce, in his notes on the men of the Convention, says: 
“Mr. Blair is one of the most respectable men in Virginia, 
both on account of his Family as well as fortune. He is 
one of the Judges of the Supreme Court of Virginia, and 
acknowledged to have a very extensive knowledge of the 
Laws. Mr. Blair is however no orator, but his good sense 
and most excellent principles compensate for other defi- 
ciencies.”’ 5 = 

Blair took advantage of the excellent opportunity af-(. 
forded by the formation of the new Constitution to profit \ 

by the rise of securities. He appears frequently in the 

1 Delaware Mss., Taz Lists; Library of Congress. This was probably the father 
of the member of the Convention. 

2 Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office, Delaware, 1777-1784, see under date, 
May, 1779. 

3 Journal C; Register of Certificates (1777) ; and Ledger'C. 


4 Biographia Americana, p. 48. 
5 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 95. 


78 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


fiscal transactions between the federal government and the 
Virginia loan office, of which a few illustrations need be 
given here. In March, 1791, he presented £577: 16: 7 in 
Virginia certificates toward the United States loan; and of 
these securities £249 had been invested by Blair himself in 
1782. The remaining amount he had purchased on his own 
account.! In the same year an agent of Blair presented 
two small certificates which had evidently been purchased 
by the principal because they were issued to other parties 
in 1778.7 In September of that year, Blair himself turned 
in nearly $10,000 worth of paper on the United States loan, 
of which a part was purchased and a part original issues to 
the holder.* 

William Blount, of North Carolina, was the son of Jacob 
Blount who died in 1789, “leaving a large estate.’’* Of 
the younger Blount’s property interests in 1787 it is impos- 
sible to speak in detail. Very early after the establishment 
of the new government he was connected with land specula- 
tions on a large scale.> In 1790 he was appointed by Wash- 
ington to the post of governor of the Territory South of 
the Ohio and it seems that he did not consider the employ- 
ment of public office for personal gain as incompatible with 
the discharge of his administrative duties. In July, 1797, 
President Adams sent a message to Congress asserting that 
there was a conspiracy in the southwest to wrest New Orleans 
and the Floridas from the King of Spain and transfer them 
to the English crown, and adding that Blount, who was 
then a Senator from Tennessee, was implicated in the plot. 
The United States Senate immediately took action, and 

1Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office (Va.) Register of Subscriptions, 1791, 
see date March 8, 1791. 

3 Tbid., Register of Certificates of Public Debt Presented. 

3 Ibid., Virginia Loan Office, 1791, under date September 30, 1791. 


4 National Encyclopedia of Biography, Vol. VII, p. 206. 
§ Haskins, The Yazoo Companies, p. 83. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 79 


after inquiry expelled him by a vote of twenty-five to one on 
the charge of “high misdemeanor inconsistent with public 
trust and duty.” When the sergeant-at-arms went to ar- 
rest him and take him to Philadelphia for trial he refused 
to go; and in his refusal he was warmly supported by his 
friends, of whom he had a legion, for, as his biographer re- 
marks, “He was a man of commanding presence, courtly 
yet simple manners, and having a large salary and large 
private means, he entertained lavishly at his house.” ! 

It does not appear that Blount combined dealings in 
securities with speculations in land, for the loan office of 
North Carolina credits him with only a small holding, and 
the origin of that is not apparent.” It is true that the records 
of that state are incomplete, but Blount’s appointment to 
the western post at the beginning of Washington’s adminis- 
tration must have precluded extensive operations in securi- 
ties. 

David Brearley, of New Jersey, was the grandson of John 
Brearley, who “owned 1600 acres of land near Newton, 
N. J. . . . a hundred acre plantation on the Delaware .. . 
besides several thousand acres of land near Lawrenceville.’’ ’ 
A brief sketch of him states that he “received the honors of 
Princeton at the age of eighteen. On leaving that cele- 
brated seminary, he commenced the study of law, and in a 
few years stood foremost at the bar of his native state.” 4 
In 1779 he was appointed chief justice of New Jersey, a 
post which he held until 1789 when he resigned to accept 
a position as judge of the United States district court of 


that state.5 


1 Encyclopedia of Biography, Vol. VII, p. 206. 

2 Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office, N. C., 1791-1797, folio 75. 
3 The Brearley Family Genealogy (Library of Congress). 

4 Biographia Americana, p. 49. 

5 L. Elmer, Constitution and Government of New Jersey, p. 274, 


& ny 


80 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Brearley died in the summer of 1790 and consequently 
could not have established any fiscal relations with the new 
government. The incompleteness of the early loan office 
records for New Jersey, preserved in the Treasury Depart- 
ment, renders impossible a positive statement concerning 
Brearley’s holdings of securities at the time of the Conven- 
tion. Only one small entry appears in his name for a few hun- 
dred dollars in a certificate purchased in 1779 ;1 his relatives, 
however, appear frequently on the loan office books of his 
state; but their aggregate holdings were small. Joseph 
Brearley’s name occurs several times, for example in July, 
1791, for $505.80 worth of 3 per cents ;?, David Brearley had a 
son and a brother bearing that name.’ Elizabeth Brearley 
is also among the small holders, and the Chief Justice’s 
first and second. wife and a daughter bore that name.* The 
name of Zerujah Brearley — a sister of the member of the 
Convention ® — also appears. 

Jacob Broom, of Delaware, was born at Wilmington, in 
1752. His father “originally a blacksmith was regarded 
as one of ‘the gentry’ of the day, and was ‘a man of con- 
siderable substance, in real estate, silver, and gold,’ although 
not one of the very wealthiest of his class. ‘Class’ distinc- 
tions, arising from birth, education, and worldly possessions 
were not wholly ignored at that time by those who came to 
this land to find a home, a sanctuary, and liberty. And so 
in the transactions of the period we find James Broom, 
Jacob’s father, referred to as James Broom, Gentleman; 
and Jacob Broom as Surveyor. And both of these men had 


1Ms. Treasury Department: Register — Loan Office, N. J., under date, Feb. 
1779. 

2 Ibid., Loan Office, N. J., Ledger C/2, folio 38. 

3 Brearley Family Genealogy (L. C.). 

4 See records in Treasury for N. J. Loan Office, passim; also Family Genealogy. 

5 Genealogy. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 81 


lands and houses to rent and sell and gold and silver to loan 
on good security. And both of them sold and rented and 
loaned.”’ 

Broom was a man of diversified financial resources. He 
was interested in cotton mills and other enterprises. He 
was one of the original stockholders of the Insurance Com- 
pany of North America organized at Philadelphia in 1792.7 
He was also one of the organizers and original stockholders 
of the Delaware Bank established under Bedford’s adminis- 
tration.? As mentioned above, the fragmentary records 
of Delaware in the Treasury Department throw little light 
on the public security holders of that state at the time of | 
the formation of the Constitution; but the ledgers of the | 
central Treasury show that Broom was a holder of a small | 
amount of 3 per cents in 1797 and that this was a remnant 
of an older account. Broom was also willing to serve the 
new government in an official capacity, for he applied to 
Madison in April, 1789, for an appointment as collector at 
Wilmington.? 

Pierce Butler, of South Carolina, was a descendant of the 
Duke of Ormond and was very vain of his noble birth.® 


William Pierce in his notes on the members of the Convention | 


records that Butler ‘is a gentleman of fortune and takes 
rank among the first in South Carolina.” 7 He was a large 
slave holder, having thirty-one in his possession at the time 
of the first census. He also possessed some public securi- 
ties, for he was a stockholder and director of the first United 


1W. W. Campbell, Life and Character of Jacob Broom, Papers of the Historical 
Society of Delaware, Vol. LI, pp. 10, 26. 

2 History of the Insurance Company of North America, p. 138. 

3 Campbell, op. cit., p. 26. 

4Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger E, Treasury, 3%, Vol. 44, folio 57; also 
sbid., Ledger C, Treasury, 6%, Vol. 42, folio 67. 

5 Calendar Madison Correspondence, under Broom. 

6 National Encyclopedia of Biography, Vol. II, p. 162. 

’ Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 97. 

G 


82 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


States Bank, and must have purchased his shares on the 

same basis as other stockholders, that is, by the exchange 

of securities. He does not appear on the records of South 

Carolina, however, but his daughter, Sarah, had in 1792 

a small amount of the assumed debt. 

\ Daniel Carroll, of Maryland, is recorded by his contem- 
porary, Pierce, as “a man of large fortune and influence in 

his state.” ? His interests were wide and varied. He was a 

stockholder in the Potomac Company ;? and he favored the 

adoption of a protective tariff, for he was among the signers 

of the petition for such a measure laid before the first Con- 

gress under the new Constitution.* He was a holder of 

public securities, for his name occurs frequently in the 
Treasury records of the period.’ His chief source of-profit 
out of the new system was however in the location of the 

capitol at Washington, on land which he owned.® Inci- 

dentally, he was able to facilitate this last transaction, for 

he was a member of the Congress of 1789-1791 and was one 

of the commissioners appointed to lay out the District of 

Columbia. 
George Clymer, of Pennsylvania, was the son of “a well- 


1Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office, S. C., 1791-1797, folio 128. Theentry 
in the ledger notes the residence of Sarah Butler as Charleston; there was another 
Sarah Butler in South Carolina at the time, but according to the first Census she did 
not reside in that city. For the evidence that Sarah Butler was the daughter of Pierce 
Butler, see Salley, South Carolina Marriages, p. 108, for the record of her marriage. 

2 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 93. 

3 Madison Ms: Letter to James Madison, October 28, 1787. Library of Con- 
gress. 

4 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 6. 

5Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office, Maryland, 1790-1797, folio 98; 
Loan Office, Penna., 1790-1791, folio 94; Ledger C,3% Stock (Pa.), folio 54. Al- 
phabet to Dividend Book of Domestic Debt, Maryland, under ‘‘C” (book not found). 
Charles Carroll was also a holder of securities. Ms. Treasury Department: Mary- 
land Loan Office, 1790-1797, folios 157 and 226 for over $5000 worth of sixes and 
threes. 

‘Scharf, History of Western Maryland, Vol. I, p. 679; H. Crew, History of 
Washington, p. 108. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 83 


to-do merchant and ship builder of Philadelphia”? who had 
augmented his fortunes by marrying the daughter of a 
fellow merchant of the same city.! On the early death of 
his parents he was placed under the guardianship of William 
Coleman, one of the first business men of his native city, 
whose counting house he entered to learn all the arts of 
mercantile pursuits and “the principal part of whose for- 
tune he inherited.’ Clymer’s personal fortune was further 
enhanced by a happy marriage to Elizabeth Meredith, the 
daughter of Reese Meredith, ‘one of the principal mer- 
chants of Philadelphia.” * He was thus a brother-in-law of 
Mr. Meredith the first treasurer of the Union, also a man 
of “large fortune.” * For some time Clymer was associated 
in business with his father- and brother-in-law.® 

Mr. Clymer’s intimate associations. were therefore_mer- 
chantile and financial, and his large fortune and quick under- 
standing of the needs of trade and commerce made him one 
of the first men of his city in the Revolution and gave him a 
wide influence during the critical period, the formation of 
the Constitution, and the establishment of the new govern- 
ment, which he served as a member of Congress and later in 
several official capacities. 

In all financial matters he took a deep interest. He 
helped to create the temporary Bank of Pennsylvania in 
1780, and subscribed £5000 to its capital stock. When 
the Bank of North America was organized he became one 
of the directors and later was president of the Philadelphia 
Bank.® 

Clymer turned his extensive financial experience to some 


1 Magazine of American History, Vol. V, p. 196. 

2 Sanderson, Biography of the Signers (1831 ed.), Vol. III, p. 147. 

3 Sanderson, zbid., p. 150. 

4 Simpson, Lives of Eminent Philadelphians (1859 ed.), p. 693. 

5 Sanderson, ibid., p. 147. 

6 McMaster and Stone, Pennsylvania and the Federal Constitution, p. 705. 


84 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


account in handling the securities of the new government 
which he had been instrumental in framing, for he is recorded 
in the Pennsylvania books as holding, in August, 1791, over 
$3000 worth of 3 per cent securities.‘ If he held sixes de- 
ferred and funded, as may be assumed, although the in- 
complete records apparently do not permit of a verification 
or denial of this, he had in all over $10,000 worth of the 
government paper. 

Wm. R. Davie, of North Carolina, was born in England 

bers 1756 and was brought to America in 1763 by his father, 

who left him in care of his maternal uncle, William Richard- 
son, a Presbyterian clergyman, who took charge of his educa- 
tion and on his death bequeathed to him his estate.? Davie 
chose the profession of law, and by a lucrative practice 
“he quickly accumulated a large estate.”’* He was of 
counsel in the famous case of Bayard v. Singleton, and he had 
the satisfaction of securing from the court an opinion de- 
claring an act of the state legislature unconstitutional.* 
He held a fine plantation at Tivoli and at his death left a 
considerable estate which was the subject of litigation as 
late as 1892 in the Supreme Court of the United States. 
His personal property certainly was not small for he was 
able to pay $5000 for a thorough-bred colt.® His connec- 
tions with the landed proprietors of his region were intimate 
and extensive and he is reported to have drawn all the wills 
made during his time in that part of the state.® 

A Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger C, 3% Stock, Pa., folio 231; see also 
Ledger E, Treasury, 3%, Vol. 44, folio 170; and Ledger C, Treasury, 6%, 
_Vol. 42, folio 114. The existence of this latter small account in sixes in 1797 is 
the basis for the surmise above that Clymer held also his quota of sixes. With 
his business acumen he might very well have disposed of most of this stock after 
*“‘taking the rise’’ in 1787-1792, for he could have made more money in business 
than from the interest which the government paid. 

2 Peele, Lives of Distinguished North Carolinians, p. 59. 


3 Ibid., p. 69. 4 Ibid., p. 69. 
& Ibid., p. 80. 6 [bid., p. 78. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 85 


Jonathan Dayton, of New Jersey, was associated with, 
and agent for, John Cleves Symmes, in the purchase of an 
enormous tract of land in Ohio in July and October, 1787, 
the year of the Convention (formally consummated in 1788), 
and before the ensealing of the contract Symmes and his 
associates had paid into the Treasury $82,198 ‘‘one seventh 
in military rights and the residue in the public securities 
of the United States.” The remainder was to be paid in 
gold or silver or the securities of the United States, and part 
(one seventh) in military rights. In 1792 Symmes and 
Dayton complained that on account of the ‘advanced price 
of certificates,” they must have easier terms. It is ap- 
parent from this record,' that they were engaged in buying 
up military certificates and government securities about 
the time of the meeting of the Convention. 

Afterward, by collusion with Ludlow, the official surveyor, 
and the inadvertence of Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury, 
Symmes, Dayton, and associates secured “the advantage 
of paying almost two-sevenths of their contract and above 
one-half of their actual payments in military warrants of 
one acre for an acre and a half of the supposed million, 
instead of one-seventh part of the actual payments” at a 
loss to the United States of more than $30,000.2, In March 
and April, 1800, Dayton purchased about 15,000 acres of 
public lands with military certificates.? 

If further evidence were needed that Dayton was specu- 
lating vigorously in government securities and military 
certificates, it is to be found in a suit brought by him and 
his partner, Lawrence, against Childs, a member of their 
concern in 1800, which was carried before Chancellor 
Livingston and later withdrawn. In this case Childs ex- 


1 State Papers: Public Lands, Vol. I, pp. 104-106. 
2 Ibid., p. 129. 3 [bid., p. 118. 


86 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


hibited sixteen letters from Dayton, showing that while 
the latter was Speaker of the House of Representatives he 
had been engaged in speculations in public land warrants. 
Dayton was not unaware of the improper character of such 
transactions, for in a letter of April 17, 1796, he wrote to 
Childs: ‘‘The contents of this letter are of such a nature as 
to render it improper to be seen by any except yourself; 
burn it therefore, when you have perused it.” ? 
~ The conclusive evidence of Dayton’s extensive operations 

in public securities during the period of the establishment of 
the new government and his term of service as Speaker is 
afforded by the records of the Treasury Department. Here 
he appears so frequently on the books of the loan offices of 
several states that some pages of this volume would be re- 
quired to present the bare data of his transactions. How- 
ever, a few examples of his dealings may be given by way of 
illustration. He appears on the loan office books of New 
Yorkin February and March, 1791, for the following amounts: 
$17,060.82, $8530.40, $11,332.93, $7401.31, $3700.73, and 
$5100.61, totalling more than $50,000.27 At another point 
he is recorded for more than $15,000 ;* and at another point 
for $6000.4 Although Woods is not celebrated for the 
painstaking impartiality of his famous History of Adams’ 
Administration, he is singularly accurate in one of his char- 
acterizations: “Jonathan Dayton, of New Jersey, the late 
speaker of Congress, is notorious from Boston to Georgia. 
The deeds of other members of Congress were scarcely known 
beyond the circle of their respective states, but the specula- 
tions of this man have rung throughout the western world.’’® 

1 John Wood, Suppressed History of the Administration of John Adams, pp. 149 ff. 

2 Ms. Treasury Department: N. Y. Loan Office, 1791, folio 130. 

3 Ibid., N. Y. Office, Deferred 6%, 1790-1796, folio 208. 

4 Ibid., Ledger B, New York Office, Deferred 6% Stock, 1790, folio 55. 


5 J. Wood, Suppressed History of the Administration of John Adams (1846 ed.), 
p. 145. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 87 


John Dickinson, of Delaware, was a member of one of the 
established landed families of the south. He was born in 
1732, on a plantation in Talbot County, on the eastern shores 
of Maryland; and eight years after his birth, his father, 
Samuel Dickinson moved from Maryland to Delaware 
“where he purchased a large estate in Kent County, near 
Dover.’”’* Dickinson was a student of law in the Middle 
Temple and took up the practice of his profession in Phil- 
adelphia in 1757.2 Within five years he had acquired an 
extensive practice and won a respectable standing at the bar. 

If his personal fortunes, however, had not been sufficient 
to assure him a satisfactory position in the business and 
professional world at Philadelphia, his marriage into one 
of the first and wealthiest commercial families would have 
more than made up for his deficiencies. 

In 1770 he married Mary Norris, and for a time lived at 
the family estate, Fairhill, one of the show places of the day : 
“This house,”’ says Simpson,’ “was in its day a very grand 
mansion and a place of great celebrity, with a large front 
of sixty feet. It was surrounded by forest and evergreen 
trees of majestic growth and well-arranged shrubbery. It 
commanded a beautiful prospect of the city, with a distant 
view of the Delaware. ... The mansion was two stories 
high and most substantially built, with a very wide hall 
running through its centre. The library was papered, but 
the parlors and hall were wainscotted with oak and red 
cedar unpainted, but polished with wax and kept in bright 
and handsome order by constant rubbing. The carriage 
way was finely graduated and wound through an extensive 
lawn, from its approach on the Germantown road which 
was bordered with shrubbery. The pleasure grounds, 


1 §tillé, Life and Times of John Dickinson, p. 14. 
2 Ibid, p. 35. 3 Hminent Philadelphians, p. 747. 


sis 


88 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


lawn, green house, and gardens, fish-ponds, and walks, 
embraced a large area of several acres in extent.’”’ It is 
true the vast estates bequeathed to Miss Norris by her 
father were transferred to collateral male heirs in order to 
preserve the family holding and name, but she retained the 
“considerable personal property’? which her father left to 
her. Dickinson was able to make a large gift to Dickinson 
College, named in his honor; and he and his wife were widely 
celebrated for their extensive benefactions.” 

The meagreness of the Treasury records for Delaware 
make it impossible to determine whether Dickinson was 
engaged in fiscal operations along with his intimate friends, 
Robert Morris, Thomas Willing, George Clymer, and other 
prominent Philadelphia men of affairs. It is possible that 
he was not largely engaged in the public security transac- 
tions,’ for he was an extremely cautious man in finances, 
and had got into serious discredit with the patriot party 
during the Revolution, because it was rumored that he had 
advised his brother against accepting the payment of debts 
in paper which was sure to depreciate. He was also un- 
happily involved with Robert Morris to the amount of 
£7000 at the time of the latter’s embarrassment, and may 
not have wished to incur further risks.* 

Oliver Ellsworth, of Connecticut, was the son of a clever 

Rr Oren a farmer who inherited a hundred pounds and 
' 4% “had the industry and the shrewdness to accumulate a con- 
siderable estate and to win the reputation of an excellent 
farmer.”’> Oliver was educated at Yale and Princeton and 

became a lawyer in spite of his father’s determination to 


1 $tillé, p. 331. 2 Ibid., p. 327. 

*The Index in the Treasury Department gives the name of John Dickinson 
among the security holders, but the volume referred to was not found. 

‘Morris Ms. in the Library of Congress, Private Letter Book, Vol. III, p. 160. 

5G. Brown, The Life of Oliver Ellsworth, p. 11. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 89 


force him into the ministry. Though he was almost brief- 
less during the early days of his practice, he had the good 
fortune to wed the daughter of William Wolcott, of East 
Windsor, “a gentleman of substance and distinction.” } 
He is described by his biographer as a man of great purpose, 
persistency, and of little imagination, and he rose rapidly 
to wealth and power at the bar of his native state. “It 
is doubtful,” says Brown, “if in the entire history of the 
Connecticut bar any other lawyer has ever in so short a 
time accumulated so great a practice.... Measured 
either by the amount of his business or by his earnings, it 
was unrivalled in his own day and unexampled in the history 
of the colony. Naturally shrewd, and with nothing of the 
spendthrift in his nature, he quickly earned a competence, 
and by good management he increased it to a fortune which 
for the times and the country was quite uncommonly large. 
From a few documents still in existence it is clear that he 
became something of a capitalist and investor. He bought 
lands and houses and loaned out money at interest. He 
was a stockholder in the Hartford Bank and one of the 
original subscribers to the stock of the old Hartford Broad- 
cloth Mill (1788).” 

With that natural shrewdness and economy which his 
latest biographer ascribed to him, Ellsworth accumulated 
a by no means negligible amount in_public securities from 
which he profited by the rise of credit that accompanied 
the establishment of the new government. He was among 
the first citizens of Connecticut to have his paper funded 
into the new government securities, for he appears in Decem- 
ber, 1791, with $1330.50 in deferred sixes, $2660.98 in 
funded sixes, and $1995.75 in 3 per cents.? His wife, 

1 Brown, ibid., p. 23. 


2 Ms. Treasury Department: Connecticut Loan Office, Ledgers A, B, and C, folio 
21 in each volume. 


f 


90 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Abigail, and other members of her family, the Wolcotts, 
had also invested in securities.’ 

William Few, of Georgia, was almost unique among the 
members of the Convention in being a representative, in 
origin and education, of the small farming class. His father 
was a Maryland farmer who was led by a successive failure of 
crops to try his fortune in North Carolina, where young 
Few labored with the ax and plow. Even here the elder 
Few did not prosper, and he became so deeply involved in 
debt that his son had to take over the management of his 
property. William, afterward, in 1776, settled in Georgia, 
and soon became engaged in politics and the Revolutionary 
War. 

At the close of the War, he relates, “‘I possessed not much 
property nor had I any expectation that I did not acquire 
by my own industry. I therefore determined to commence 
the practice of law, although I had never spent one hour in 
the office of an attorney to prepare for business, nor did I 
know anything of the practice.’”’ He adds, however, that 
his practice grew in spite of his deficiencies and that his 
“pecuniary prospects were very flattering,” by the time 
he was elected a member of the Convention. At all events 
he acquired a plantation in Columbia County, and after 
the expiration of his term as Senator in 1793, he retired 
there and engaged in agricultural pursuits. In 1799 he left 
Georgia for New York, where he managed his small fortune 
in real and personal property, according to his own estimate, 
about $100,000.” 

Few’s personal interest in the new government was prob- 
ably rather small, but the absence of the full records of 
Georgia from the books of the Treasury Department renders 

1 Consult same volumes through the Index. 


2 Facts here are taken from his Autobiography, in the Magazine of American 
History, Vol. VII, pp. 343 ff. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 91 


impossible a categorical statement. He was connected with 
the Georgia Union Company, which was involved in the 
Yazoo land deals ;* and he presented for funding a certificate 
of the issue of 1779 to the amount of $2170 nominal value, 
which he had secured from one Spears.” His name appears 
occasionally on other records for small amounts, and the 
index in the office of the Register of the Treasury cites him 
as being among the security holders recorded in a volume 
not found, id 

% Thomas Fitzsimons, of Pennsylvania, was intimately 
identified with the mercantile interests of his city. He 8 a 
described as ‘“‘an extensive merchant,” and his family con 
nections were with people engaged in his own line. He 
married the daughter of Robert Meade, and established 
business relations with his brother-in-law “who was one of 
the prominent merchants and shipowners of Philadelphia.” 4 
It is recorded of him that “His influence in the country and 
especially among merchants was second to none. ... Mr. 
Fitzsimons was one of those efficient and able men who 
laid the foundations of the commercial and financial systems 
of the United States.” ® It is not surprising to find that he 
was also a “‘conspicuous advocate of a protective tariff.” ® 

Like his prominent associates in Philadelphia, Mr. Fitz- 

simons combined mercantile and financial operations. He 
was “for a long time a director in the Bank of North America 
and President of the Insurance Company of North America, 
in which latter office he continued until hisdeath.”” Indeed 


1 Haskins, The Yazoo Land Companies, p. 81. 

2Ms. Treasury Department: Register of Certificates of Public Debt Presented ta 
the Auditor of the Treasury. 

3 Volume 31, folio 346. 

4 McMaster and Stone, Pennsylvania and the Federal Constitution, p. 706. 

5 Simpson, Eminent Philadelphians, p. 373. 

6 McMaster and Stone, op. cit., p. 707. 

7 Simpson, op. cit., 373. 


92 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


he was so extensively involved in the speculations of Robert 
Morris that his resources were seriously crippled by the 
failure of that gentleman.’ 

His intimate knowledge of finance and his immediate 
business connections doubtless invited him to deal in public 
securities; and Maclay sets him down among the specula- 
tors as follows: “The Speaker gives me this day his opinion 
that Mr. Fitzsimons was concerned in this business [of 
speculating] as well as Mr. Morris, and that they stayed 
away (from Congress) for the double purpose of pursuing 
their speculation and remaining unsuspected.” ? It is prob- 
able that Maclay’s version is correct, for in 1791 Fitz- 
simon’s agent, Michael Conner, presented for him certificates 
of 1778 to the amount of nearly $12,000 nominal value which 
he had evidently bought up.* He appears also on the 
records of the 6 per cents and the threes for small amounts, 
and his operations extended beyond his native state.* 

Fitzsimons was also involved extensively in land_specula- 
tions with Robert Morris, for the latter in a letter of October 

9, 1795, writes to James Marshall, their European agent, 
to the effect that Fitzsimons and he had put on sale in 
London “about 360,000 acres of land situated in Georgia.” 5 
But as pointed out above Fitzsimons’ relations with Morris 
cost him dearly and snatched away from him all that he 
had made in public securities and more besides. 

Benjamin Franklin, of Pennsylvania, in the midst of his 


1 Sumner, The Financier and the Finances of the Revolution, Vol. II, p. 294. 

2 Maclay, Journal (1890 ed.), p. 178. 

3 Ms. Treasury Department: Register of Certificates of Public Debt Presented to 
the Auditor of the Treasury. 

‘Ibid., See Ledger E, Treasury, 3%, Vol. 44, folio 335. Also Ledger C, 
Treasury, 6%, Vol. 42, folio 300 for small entries. 

5 Morris Mss. in the Library of Congress: Private Letter Book, Vol. I, p. 529. 
Marshall (a brother of John Marshall) was the confidential and trusted agent ot 
Morris in large transactions in land, 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 93 


varied activities as printer, diplomat, statesman, and philos- 

opher, managed withal by thrift and investments to ac- 
cumulate a considerable fortune for his day, about $150,000.1 

At his great age on the assembling of the Convention, it 

would hardly have been practicable for him to have engaged 

in investments in public securities had he been so inclined ; 

and he died in 1790, before the funding system went into ! 
effect. A short time before his death, however, he was ‘“~ , p* 
interested in land speculations ;” and in his will he bequeaths a 
“lands near the Ohio” and three thousand acres granted 

by the State of Georgia to him.*? He does not appear to 

have held any public paper. 

Nicholas Gilman, of New Hampshire, was in public life 
from his youth until his death. He entered the army at ,2* 
the age of twenty-one, and after the War he served in Con- 
gress and in other public positions. He does not seem to 
have been a man of much weight either in private life or 

* the Convention. A French observer remarks of his election 
as a member of the Federal Convention: ‘Cette circon- 
stance prouve qu’il n’y a pas un grand choix 4 faire dans 
cet Etat, ou que du moins les hommes des plus sensés et 
les plus habiles ne sont pas assés riches pour accepter une 
place publique.” * 

In financial matters, there was no doubt. of Gilman’s 

ability. He managed to accumulate a considerable amount 
of public securities before the meeting of the Convention, 
and apparently added to his holdings later. In the Nicholas 
Gilman papers preserved in the Library of Congress there 

is a list of certificates of the liquidated debt to the amount 
of $5400.67, declared to be the property of Nicholas Gilman, 


1 Bigelow, Life of Franklin, Vol. III, p. 470. 
2 Haskins, The Yazoo Land Companies, p. 62. 
3 Bigelow, Works, Vol. X, pp. 206 ff. 

4 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 232. 


94 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


on December 9, 1786. This paper was bought up by Gil- 
man, for the list of original holders is given. A receipt bear- 
ing the date of June 29, 1787, preserved in the above papers, 
shows Nicholas Gilman to have received interest on $6654.79 
of the public debt. He and the various members of the 
Gilman family of New Hampshire were extensively en- 
gaged in transactions in public securities.. One entry in 
the Treasury books of the new government shows Nicholas 
Gilman to have $11,021.95 worth of 6 per cent Deferred 
Stock ;? and he supplemented his purely fiscal operations 
by dealing in military certificates (that is, soldier’s paper 
which could be bought from necessitous holders at a fraction 
of its value), and in public lands.’ 

While Gilman was quick to look after his own interests, 
his devotion to his native state made him anxious for 
her towns to participate in the general prosperity enjoyed 
hy holders of public securities after the formation of the 
Constitution. On September 3, 1787, he had already dis- 
covered the probable effect of the proposed Constitution, 
not yet ready to lay before the people, upon the securities 
of the government. On that day he wrote to the President 
of New Hampshire advising the towns to buy up public 
securities at the prevailing low price in order to have paper 
to transfer to the federal government in lieu of taxes and 
other charges. He says: “I find many of the states are 
making provision to buy in their quota’s of the final settle- 
ments, and I must ardently wish that the towns in New 
Hampshire may be so far awake to a sense of their interest 
as to part with their property freely in order to purchase 
their several quota’s of the public securities now in circula- 


1 Consult the Loan Office Records of New Hampshire in the Treasury Depart- 
ment, passim. : 

2 Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger C, Treasury, 6%, Vol. 42, folio 368. 

3 State Papers: Public Lands, Vol. I, p. 118. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 95 


tion, while they are to be had at the present low rate; which 
is in this place, at two shillings and six pence on the pound. 
If they suffer the present opportunity to pass and we should 
be so fortunate as to have an efficient Government, they 
will be obliged to buy them of brokers, hawkers, speculators, 
and jockeys at six or perhaps eight times their present 
value.” ? 

Elbridge Gerry, of Massachusetts, was born in Marble- 
head in 1744. His father was a merchant of good standing 


ee 


and comfortable estate. His biographer states that after 


his graduation from Harvard, Elbridge ‘“‘turned his atten- 
tion to that line of life in which his father’s prosperity seemed 
to hold out the greatest inducements to a young and enter- 
prising mind; and he plunged at once into the most active 
pursuits of commerce. His fairness, correctness, and as- 
siduity, and the extensive knowledge of commercial con- 
cerns which he acquired from his father’s experience and 
his own exertions were crowned with good fortune, and while 
yet young in business and in years he acquired a considerable 
estate and a very high standing at Marblehead.” ? 

As a merchant, Gerry was closely in touch with the needs 
of commerce, and was deeply impressed with the necessity 
for national resistance to the discriminations of Great 
Britain. In April, 1784, he presented a report to Congress 
in which he called attention to the fact that Great Britain 
had adopted regulations destructive to American commerce 
in the West India Islands, and that these measures of dis- 
crimination were growing into a system. “Unless the 
United States in Congress assembled,” he urged, “‘shall be 
vested with powers competent to the protection of commerce, 
they can never command reciprocal advantages in trade; 


1 Hammond, State Papers of New Hampshire, Vol. XVIII, p. 790. 
2 Sanderson, Lives of the Signers (1831 ed.), Vol. I, p. 197; Austin, Life of Gerry. 


96 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


and without these, our foreign commerce must decline and 
eventually be annihilated.”” The West Indian trade af- 
fected New England particularly, and Gerry is thus reflect- 
ing a local interest in demanding a national system of com- 
mercial protection.! 

In addition to his mercantile interests, Gerry was con- 
cerned in financial affairs. In the Convention he strongly 
urged inserting in the Constitution a clause conferring on the 
new government not only the power but also the obligation 
to provide fully for the holders of public securities. Ac- 
cording to Madison’s notes, “Mr. Gerry considered giving 
| the power only, without adopting the obligation, as destroy- 
; ing the security now enjoyed by the public creditors of the 

United States. He enlarged on the merit of this class of 
citizens, and the solemn faith which had been pledged under 
the existing Confederation.’’? Later in the Convention, 
* when Colonel Mason objected to making the full discharge 
of the debt obligatory, Gerry again took exceptions. He 
said, “that for himself he had no interest in the question, 
being not possessed of more of the securities than would by 
the interest pay his taxes. He would observe, however, that 
as the public had received the value of the literal amount, 
they ought to pay that value to somebody. ‘The frauds 
on the soldiers ought to have been foreseen. These poor 
and ignorant people could not but part with their securities. 
There are other creditors who will part with anything rather 
than be cheated out of the capital of their advances. .. . 
If the public faith would admit, of which he was not clear, 
he would not object to a revision of the debt so far as to 
compel restitution to the ignorant and distressed who had 
been defrauded. As to the Stock-jobbers he saw no reason 


1 Sanderson, Biography of the Signers, Vol. I, p. 230. 
2 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 356. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 97 


for the censures thrown on them. They kept up the value 
of the paper. Without them there would be no market.” ! 

Gerry_here explains to his colleagues that he is a holder 
of fecurities | but he modestly underestimates the amount, 
or his taxes were rather high, for the loan office records of 
Massachusetts show that the interest on his securities, 
issued pursuant to the act of Congress of April 28, 1784, was 
about $3500 a year, an amount which, even at the prevailing 
rate of depreciation,would have covered the taxes on a con- 
siderable estate.? The incompleteness of the records in the 
_Treasury Department does not permit of an exact estimate 
of Gerry’s holdings; but they must have been large, for the 
following items appear to his credit: $14,266.89 on the 
Liquidated Debt Book of the Massachusetts loan office,® 
$2648.50 worth of sixes and threes in 1790 on the Pennsyl- 
vania loan office books,* $409.50 in threes on the Pennsyl- 
vania ledger under the date of December 13, 1790,° and 
£3504 : 8: 10 worth of old paper funded into federal securities 
in the Massachusetts loan office, August 24, 1791.6 There 
may be of course some duplication of amounts but 
there can be no doubt that Gerry’s interest income from 
confederate securities in one year shortly before the meeting 
of the Convention was about $3500, and also there can be no 
doubt that Gerry had bought largely with a view to specula- 
tion, for a very few of his certificates were issued to him 
originally. He had therefore more than an academic sym- 
pathy with the stockbrokers. Nevertheless, it should be 

1 Ibid., 413. 

2 Ms. Treasury Department: Mass. Loan Office, Register of Certificates of Interest 
Issued (Vellum bound), folios 15 ff. 

3 Tbid., Mass. Loan Office, Certificates for Liquidated Debt, folios 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. 
This paper had evidently been bought by Gerry for speculation. 

4 Ibid., Loan Office, Pa., 1790-1791, folio 60. 

5 Ibid., Ledger C, 8% Stocks, Pa., folio 37. 

6 Ibid., Massachusetts Loan Office, 1791, Item 582; this was also paper bought 


up by Gerry for speculation. 
H 


98 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


noted that notwithstanding his large interests at stake, 
Gerry for several reasons strongly opposed the ratification 
of the Constitution.* 

However, Gerry during his entire public career seems to 
have intermixed his official relations with his private eco- 
nomic affairs. While he was a member of Congress, before 
the adoption of the Constitution, he became interested in 
the public lands. On March 1, 1785, Timothy Pickering,’ 
one of the leading land operators of the period, wrote to 
Gerry: ‘‘As you have expressed your wishes to be con- 
cerned in the purchase of lands on the other side of the 
Alleghany mountains thro’ our agency, we think it very 
material to your interest as well as our own that we be in- 
formed, if possible, what plan Congress will probably adopt 
in disposing of those lands which lie west of the Ohio. If 
they mean to permit adventurers to make a scramble . . . 
it will behove us to engage seasonably with some enterpris- 
ing, but confidential character, to explore the country and 
make locations. . . . If there must be a scramble, we have 
an equal right with others, and, therefore, the information 


1 Gerry was accused by Ellsworth (q.v.) of having turned against the new Consti- 
tution because the Convention refused to put the old continental paper money 
on the same basis as other securities. Toward the close of the Convention, “‘ Gerry,” 
says Ellsworth, ‘“‘introduced a motion respecting the redemption of the old continen- 
tal money — that it should be placed on a footing with other liquidated securities of 
the United States. As Mr. Gerry was supposed to be possessed of large quantities 
of this species of paper, his motion appeared to be founded in such bare-faced 
selfishness and injustice, that it at once accounted for all his former plausibility 
and concession, wuile the rejection of it by the convention inspired its author with 
the utmost rage and intemperate opposition to the whole system he had formerly 
praised.’”’ Ford, Hssays on the Constitution, p.174. Gerry indignantly denied that he 
ever made such a motion in the Convention, or that he held much continental money. 
Ibid., p. 127. It does not appear in Farrand, Records, that any such motion was 
made in the Convention; and under the circumstances it seems not unjust to re- 
mark that Ellsworth’s charges were made with very bad grace, particularly in view 
of the fact that he and members of his family and intimate friends held considerable 
amounts of public securities. ‘‘Bare-faced selfishness” was not monopolized by 
Gerry in the Convention. 

2 See above, p. 49. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 99 


desired in the beginning of this letter may be of essential 
importance. Your answer to this letter will much oblige 
your sincere friends who wish to advance your interest with 
their own.” ! 

_ Gerry was then a member of Congress, which had under 
consideration the disposal of the western lands. If this 
land company, of course, could secure inside information, it 
would be advantageous to Mr. Gerry who contemplated 
speculating in those lands, as well as to Mr. Pickering’s 
agency. 

Gerry undoubtedly took advantage of the opportunity 
to invest in western enterprises, for he was a share-holder in 
the Ohio Company, proprietors of lands on the Muskingum 
River *— a concern in which he apparently became inter- 
ested while a member of the Congress under the Articles of 
Confederation, during the organization of the Company 
and the procuring of the public grant. 

Nathaniel Gorham, of Massachusetts, was a successful 
merchant at Charlestown, the place of his birth. He was 
prominent in the political life of his community, having 
served as a member of the legislature and the constitutional 
convention of his state. 

In addition to his mercantile and political pursuits, Gor- 
ham engaged in land speculation on a large scale. In 1786, 
Massachusetts, by a compromise with New York, secured a 
large area of western country, and in April, 1788, ‘‘sold all 
this land to Nathaniel Gorham, of Charlestown, and Oliver 
Phelps, of Granville, for a million dollars, to be paid in three 
annual instalments in the scrip of Massachusetts, known 
as consolidated securities, which were then much below par. 
... Behind Phelps and Gorham there was a syndicate 


1 King, Life and Correspondence, Vol. I, p. 72. 
2A. M. Dyer, The Ownership of Ohio Lands, p, 68. 


100 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


of persons who deed to speculate in the lands, but who, 
in order not to compete with each other, had united and 
allowed these two to act for all.” ? 

Robert Morris was one of Gorham’s associates in this 
venture, and other prominent men were behind the project ; 
but the projectors were unable to realize fully on their 
scheme, because the rise of Massachusetts scrip, after the 
adoption of the Constitution, made it impossible for them 
to fulfil the original terms of their contract. Consequently, 
they received only a portion of the original purchase. 

The unhappy outcome of this venture apparently left 
Gorham without a very large fortune at his death in 1796. 
He does not seem to have combined any considerable trans- 
actions in continental securities with those in state scrip; 
although he was doubtless a holder in some amount because 
his will shows him to have been possessed of twenty shares 
in United States Bank stock. Inasmuch as holders of this 
paper secured it in exchange for old securities and some 
specie, it may be surmised that Gorham must have had 
some of the continental paper at the time of the establish- 
ment of the Bank, although it may be that he purchased 
the stock as an investment. The tangled state of his af- 
fairs at his death makes this latter conclusion improbable 
at least. 

We have now come to t enius of the new 
system, éxander Hamilton. It is true, that he had litfle 
part in the formation of the Constitution, but it was his 
organizing ability that made it a real instrument bottomed 
on all the substantial interests of the time. It was he who saw 
most keenly the precise character of the social groups which 


1Sumner, The Financier and the Finances of the Revolution, Vol. II, pp. 253 ff. 
See Turner, Pioneer History of the Holland Purchase of Western New York, pp. 
326 ff. 


2T. Wyman, Genealogies and Estates of Charlestown, Vol. I, p. 424. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 101 


would have to be rallied to the new government in order to 
draw support away from the states and give the federal 
system a firm foundation. He perceived that governments 
were not made out of thin air and abstract principles. He 


knew that the Constituti designed to acco 
definite objects, affecting in its operation certain 
defini ights in society. He saw that 


these interests were at first inchoate, in process of organiza- 
tion, and he achieved the task of completing their consolida- 
tion and attaching them to the federal government. 

He saw, in the first place, that the most igen consolidated 
and—timorous group was composes re 
financiers, bankers, and money lenders. He perceived 

_fnaia pn and money lenders 1 thus were easily 
drawn together. He saw that by identifying their interests 
with those of the new government, the latter would be 
secure; they would not desert the ship in which they were 
all afloat. It has been charged that he leaned always on/ 
the side of the financial interest against the public as rep- 
resented in the government; but it must be remembered 
that at the time the new system went into effect, the public 
had no credit, and financiers were not willing to forego their 
gains and profits for an abstraction. It is charged against 
him that he did not buy up government paper in behalf of 
the public at the most favorable terms; but to have done 
so would have diminished the profits of the very financiers 
whose good will was necessary to the continuance of the 
government. 


he second group of interests which Hami dy 
for 6 izett Chants and manufacturers\ 
who wished protective tariffs” have been blind, 


indeed, if he had not discovered and interpreted the wide- 
spread movement for protection which was swiftly gathering 


102 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


headway during the years preceding the formation of the 
Constitution. He was not blind. His first report on manu- 
factures show how keenly alive he was to the extent and 
diversity of the groups whose financial advantage lay in 
a system of protection. Whether this was for the good of 
the whole people need not be argued here. Hamilton’s 
relations were with the immediate beneficiaries. ‘They were 
the men who were to throw their weight on the side of the 
new government. How persistently Hamilton sought to 
inform himself of the precise nature of the interests needing 
protection in the separate localities, from New Hampshire 
to Georgia, is evidenced by his unpublished correspondence 
with business men in all the commercial centres.! 

The third interest which Hamilton consolidated was com- 
posed of the land ‘speculators and promoters and eni®faced 


all the leading men of the time — Washington, Franklin, 
obe ames Witson, William Blount, and other 
me minence.2 This dealing in land was intimately 


connected with public securities, for a large portion of the 
lands were bought with land warrants purchased from the 
soldiers, and with other stocks bought on the open market 
at low prices. Hamilton saw clearly the connection of this 
interest with thenew government, and his public land policies 
were directed especially to obtaining the support of this 
type of operators.’ 


¢ Without the conciliation and positive support of these 
powerilerank Amer iy, the new govoimet 
could not have been founded or continued. ith keen in- 
sight,Hamilton saw this. e made no attempt to-conceal- 
it; for whatever may have been his faults he did not add 


\the crime of demogogy. It is true that in private he often 


1 To be found in the Hamilton Mss., Library of Congress. 
2 Haskins, The Yazoo Land Companies. 
8 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 8. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 103 


expressed a contempt for popular rule which is absent from 
his public papers; but his public papers contain a plain 
statement of his policies, and show why he considered them 
necessary to the strength and stability of the government. 
Thousands of small farmers and debtors-and laboring me- 
chanics were opposed to his policies, but they did not have the 
_ organization or consciousness of identity of interests which 
was necessary to give them weight in the councils of the new 
government. They were partly disfranchised under the 
existing laws, and they had no leaders worthy of mention. 
The road to power and glory did not yet lie in championing 
' their cause. It required the astute leadership of Jefferson, 
and the creation of a federal machine under his direction, to 
consolidate the heterogeneous petty interests against the 
Federalist group. 
But during Hamilton’s administration, representatives of 
these smaller interests began to attack his policies as in- 
- imical to public interest, z.e., their own interests; and out 
of this attack grew the charge that Hamilton himself was 
privately engaged in augmenting his personal fortune by 
the methods which he had created for the advantage of 
public creditors and financiers generally. Although this 
charge, even if true, should not be allowed to obscure the 4 
real greatness of Hamilton’s masterly mind, and has little d te 
Ae 


bearing upon a scientific application of the economic in- 
terpretation to the period, it deserves examination at length. 
- Rumors that Hamilton was personally interested in securi- 
ties were persistent from the beginning of his career as 
Secretary of the Treasury, and in his famous Reynolds pam- 
phlet, published in 1797, he precisely states the charge against 
himself: ‘‘Merely because I retained an opinion once com- 
mon to me and the most influential of those who opposed 
me, that the public debt ought to be provided for on the 


104. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


basis of the contract upon which it was created, I have 
been wickedly accused with wantonly increasing the public 
burthen many millions in order to promote a stock-jobbing 
interest of myself and friends.” + That this heavy burden 
was necessary to secure the support of the financial interests 
concerned, and that their support was absolutely indispen- 
able to the establishment of the new national system on a 
substantial basis, was admitted by many of Hamilton’s 
worst enemies; but this did not prevent their attacking the 
| Secretary on mere rumors of private peculations. 

“—~Tt now remains to examine the evidence against Hamilton, 
and state the case fairly so far as our existing records will 
allow. In 1793, Hamilton was accused of a criminal viola- 
tion of the laws, and laid under the suspicion of being a 
defaulter. The House of Representatives was so impressed 
with the charges that it appointed a committee to investigate 
the conduct of the Treasury Department, particularly with 
regard to the charge that Hamilton had made the public © 
moneys ‘subservient to loans, discounts, and accomoda- 
tions” to himself and friends. 

The result of this investigation was a vindication of the 
Secretary by the committee on the basis of affidavits from 
the officers and employees of the various banks involved, 
public and private. Hamilton cites the report of this com- 
mittee of the House as containing the ‘materials of a com- 
plete exculpation.’’? But this investigation does not cover 
the dealings which Hamilton might have had with stock 
brokers and other persons handling public securities. 
Evidences of such relations would not have been contained 
in the public and private papers available to the committee. 
Indeed, on account of his intimate business relations with 
all the leaders who were buying and selling public securities, 


1 Hamilton, Works (Lodge ed.), Vol. VI, p. 453. 
2 Ibid., Vol. VI, p. 454; Annals of Congress, Vol. III, pp. 900 ff. 


i 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 105 


and, on account of the fact that he could have seen them 
personally at New York and Philadelphia, it would not have 
been necessary for him to make any written record of such 
transactions. But of the larger charges brought against 
him in Congress we may regard this report as a complete 
vindication. 

The direct charge, however, that Hamilton had violated 
the solemn obligations of his own office by buying up public 
securities, as distinct from the charge that he had employed 
his high authority in the interests of his friends and his class, 
first took on a serious form in 1797, when the notorious 
pamphleteer J. T. Callender, in his History of the United 
States for the Year 1796 published a series of papers pur- 
porting to show that in 1791 and 1792 Hamilton had been 
engaged in speculative ventures with one James Reynolds 
and Mr. Duer.' It appears that in 1792 a Mr. Clingman, 
then in jail for a crooked transaction with the government, 
got into communication with Speaker Muhlenburg and 
hinted that a fellow-prisoner, Reynolds, had been associated 
with Hamilton in security operations, and had in his posses- 
sion papers that would establish the facts in the case. Muh- 
lenburg communicated with Monroe and Venable, and the 
three heard from Reynolds and his wife grave charges against 
the Secretary. 

On learning of these serious charges, Muhlenburg, 
Venable, and Monroe confronted Hamilton with them and 
the Secretary explained that the whole charge of speculation 
was false and that his relations with the Reynolds grew out 


of an unhappy amour with Mrs. Reynolds. The three in- 


vestigators accepted this explanation, although Monroe 

prosecuted further inquiries which resulted in his accumu- 

lating additional charges. The papers in the case, it was 
1 See below, p, 112. 


Vv 


/ 


106. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


agreed by Hamilton and his three investigators,’ were to 
be kept secret and out of the reach of publication. It 
turned out, however, that Monroe, angered by the abuse 
‘heaped upon him later by the Federalists, gave the docu- 
‘ments out for publication, much to the scandal of the country. 
Hamilton promptly replied in a pamphlet in which he denied 
any improper financial relations with Reynolds, and ex- 
plained in painful detail his affair with Reynolds’ wife.” 
When all the external and internal evidence is taken in 
this case, and the documents connected with it are carefully 
analyzed, it will be apparent that a decision will rest upon 
the answer to this question: “Shall Hamilton’s testimony 
as to speculations outweigh that of an undoubted rascal and 
his wife?”’? Mr. F. T. Fox, in a recent study of the matter, 
attempts to convict Hamilton on the internal evidence of 
his vindication; and apparently does so. But on an ex- 
amination of Mr. Fox’s brief against the Secretary, it soon 
comes out that he has made a mistake in the crucial dates on 
which turns his whole case. Consequently, this particular 
matter rests just where it did more than a hundred years 
ago. Fair-minded men will be inclined to exonerate Hamil- 
ton of the charge brought in the Reynolds indictment. 
That Hamilton himself made any money in stocks which 
he held personally has never been proved by reference to 
any authentic evidence. He did hold a small amount of 
public securities, for in a letter of June 26, 1792, to William 


1 Mr. Lodge calls the three investigators ‘‘inquisitors,’” but this seems likea 
strong word to apply to members of Congress engaged in running down rumors 
relative to the official conduct of a government officer. Works (Lodge ed.), Vol. VI, 
p. 450 note. The impropriety of Monroe’s action in allowing the story to escape 
is another matter. 

2 The pamphlet by Hamilton in his defence in printed in the Lodge edition, Vol. 
VI, pp. 449 ff. 

3 Compare the date of the receipts on page 20 of Mr. Fox’s A Study in Hamilton 
with the date in the pamphlet (Lodge ed.), Vol. VI, p. 494. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 107 


Seton, he says, ‘“‘All my property in the funds is about $800, 
3 per cents. These at a certain period I should have sold, 
had I not been unwilling to give occasion to cavil.”’! The 
origin of this holding is not explained. Even if it was de- 
rived from the funding under the acts of August, 1790, and 
the 6 per cents, funded and deferred were added, it would 
not have made more than a trifling amount. Se. 
That Hamilton ever held any considerable sum in securi-|/ ‘ 
scm highly-improbblo- fs he uas al 10 TOE a eh 
~Inan, and at his death left_a small estate. Though he lived 
well, and had a large income apart from his paltry salary as 
Secretary, his earnings as an eminent lawyer may very well 
account for such sources of revenue as he may have en- 
joyed. Certainly, had he seen fit to employ his remarkable 
talents in private enterprise, he might have died one of the 
rich men of his day. However this may be, the question 
may be legitimately asked whether Hamilton had any per- 

* sonal connections with any of the security operations which 
were carried on during his administration of the Treasury ?_ — 
Hamilton’s defenders, in response to such an inquiry, 
will cite his famous reply to Henry Lee in 1789, when the 
latter asked him for his opinion about the probable rise of 
public securities: ‘‘I am sure you are sincere when you say 
that you would not subject me to an impropriety, nor do I 
know that there would be any in answering your queries; 
but you remember the saying with regard to Cesar’s wife. 
I think the spirit of it applicable to every man concerned in 
the administration of the finances of the country. With 

respect to the conduct of such men, suspicion is ever eagle- 
eyed, and the most innocent things may be misinterpreted.” ? 

1 Works of Hamilton (Lodge ed.), Vol. VIII, p. 268. Perhaps the remnant of an 

old account of Hamilton on the Treasury Books in 1797 refers to this petty hold- 


ing. Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger E, Treasury, 8%, Vol. 44, folio 434. 
2J. A. Hamilton, Reminiscences, p. 18. 


108 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


On the other hand, Maclay, who, as United States Senator 
during the funding operations, had opportunities for first- 
hand information, answers the above question in the af- 
firmative. He says, in his record of the Senate on February 
1, 1790: “If I needed proof of the baseness of Hamilton, I 
have it in the fullest manner. His price was communicated 
in manuscript as far as Philadelphia. Thomas Willing, in 
a letter to the speaker of the Representatives, after passing 
many eulogiums on Hamilton’s plan, concludes, ‘For I 
have seen in manuscript his whole price,’ and it has been 
used as the basis of the most abandoned system of specula- 
tion ever broached in our country.’”?! What Maclay doubt- 
less means here is that Hamilton had communicated to one 
of the leading financiers of Philadelphia, a partner of Robert 
Morris and dealer in securities,’ his proposed plans for re- 
demption of the public debt in full, previous to their pub- 
lication in the first report to the House on public credit, 
January 9, 1790. On the question as to how much cre- 
dence should be given to the assertions of the querulous 
Maclay, students of history will differ, and impartial scholars 
will seek further evidence. 

Far from admitting any truth in Maclay’s allegations, 
Hamilton’s friends would indignantly deny that he had any 
private connections with security operations in any form. 
Hamilton’s son, in his Reminiscences, states that “Hamilton 
requested his father-in-law, General Schuyler, not to permit 
his son to speculate in the public securities lest it should be 
inferred that their speculations were made upon information 
furnished by Hamilton; or were made in part on Hamilton’s 
account. Schuyler inhibited any speculations; as Van 
Rensellaer Schuyler, my uncle, told me, complaining at 


1W. Maclay, Journal (1890 ed.), p. 188. 
3 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 188. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 109 


the same time that, but for this inhibition, he would have 
made a large sum of money.” ! 

The General, however, evidently did not regard this in- 
hibition as binding upon himself, for he appears upon the 
records as one of the large dealers in public paper in New 
York. Examples of his extensive financial transactions 
can be readily found by reference to the old:loan books in 
the Treasury Department; there appear in March, October, 
and November, 1791, the following amounts to his credit: 
$23,189.21; $15,594.61, $8036.50, $20,689.21.2 

Neither did Hamilton deem it necessary to inhibit his 
brother-in-law, J. B. Church, from dealing in securities. 
During Hamilton’s administration of the Treasury, Church 
was a large holder of public securities.2 One entry credits 
him with $28,187.91 worth. Moreover, while Secretary 
of the Treasury, through his agents, Thomas Willing in 
Philadelphia, and Wm. Seton in New York, Hamilton bought 
and sold for his brother-in-law. In the Hamilton Mss. in 
the Library of Congress is preserved a letter from Thomas 
Willing bearing the date of February 24, 1790, and addressed 
to Hamilton, which shows that the former was then selling 
stocks under the latter’s orders for Church.‘ 


1 Reminiscences of J. A. Hamilton, p. 18. : 

2Ms. Treasury Department: N. Y. Loan Office, 1791, folio 24. See also 
the volume of N. Y. Loan Office Receipts in the Mss. Division of the Library 
of Congress for General Schuyler’s receipts for interest on securities. The intimate 
correspondence between Hamilton and General Schuyler during the period of the 
formation of the Constitution was destroyed by a son of one of the latter’s executors. 
American Historical Review, Vol. X, p. 181. See Tuckerman, Life of General 
Schuyler. 

3 Ms. Treasury Department: N. Y. Office, Deferred 6%, 1790-1796, folio 325. 


4 PHILADELPHIA, Feby. 24th 1790. 
[ALExaNDER HamittTon, Esa., 
Secretary of the Treasury at New York.] 
Sir: 
I have had this day the honor of yours inclosing your power of substitution on 
behalf of Mr. Church. At present the sale of stock, and indeed every other money 


vA 


110 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


At a later date, Hamilton was engaged in an extended 
correspondence with William Seton of the New York Bank, 
which shows that the latter was buying United States Bank 
stocks for Church, under Hamilton’s orders. On November 
21, 1793, Seton writes that he has not been able to make an 
investment for Mr. Church on account of the high price of 
bank stock. Five days later Seton writes to Hamilton 
that he thinks it will be possible in a day or two to purchase 
stock for Mr. Church “under your limits ;’’ and adds, after 
further remarks, ‘I therefore feel loth to enter into the mar- 
ket without further orders from you.’ ? Here follows 
voluminous correspondence showing Seton’s successful pur- 
chases. 

Hamilton’s operations for his brother-in-law, Church, 
also extended to speculations in public lands; for in the 
Hamilton Manuscripts there is a letter bearing the date of 
August 24, 1792, from William Henderson to him relative 
to the purchase of large quantities of land (45,000 acres).° 
It appears that Hamilton, Church, and General Schuyler 
were involved in this negotiation, and that Church was the 
principal. 

Hamilton was also personally interested in western land 
schemes, for he held five shares of the Ohio Company, pro- 
transaction is nearly at a stand. The produce of the State and the sale of Bills of 
Exchange will alone command it, untill we receive a supply from sea. 

Mr. Constable has informed me of the purchase he had made of 20 shares and 
when they appear the transfer will be compleated. 

I observe what you say respecting the sale of what remains of Mr. Church’s 
shares and shall do whatever may be in my power to dispose of them, whenever 


I receive the certificates and your orders to make the sale. I am, Sir, with great 
respect, 

YT Obedt Servt 
Hamilion Mss., Vol. XXIII, p. 1. TxHos. WILLING. 

1 Library of Congress: Hamilton Mss., Vol. XX, p. 180. 

2 Ibid., Vol. XX, pp. 182 ff. Lodge omits references to this correspondence on 
Seton’s part, although he gives selected letters from Hamilton toSeton. Works of 
Alexander Hamilton, Vol. VIII, pp. 231 ff. 

§ Library of Congress: Hamilton Mss., Vol. XXIII, p. 180. 


x 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 111 


prietors of land on the Muskingum River.? Although this 
concern was organized before the formation of the Constitu- 
tion, Hamilton as Secretary of the Treasury was called upon 
to pass upon the validity of claims involving thousands of 
acres. He felt the delicacy of this situation, for on May 9, 
1792, he wrote to Washington that he regretted that he was 
required by law to decide a case in which he was an interested 
party, and stated that he had left the matter to be adjusted 
by the accounting officers of the Treasury acting under an 
opinion of the Attorney General.’ 


Although Hamilton showed great hesitancy in passing V 
| upon his own land claims while Secretary, he did not deem 
it incompatible with his official duties to communicate 
occasionally with friends as to the probable prices of public 


securities and bank stock. 

For the communication to Willing, mentioned above,’ 
we have, of course, only Maclay’s testimony; and if his 
statement is true Hamilton transmitted official secrets of 
the most significant character to a financier who, however 
great his integrity, was in a position to take advantage of 
them, and was engaged in dealing in securities on his own 
account and for Hamilton’s brother-in-law, Church, under 
Hamilton’s orders. When we remember that Maclay’s 
journal was private in its nature, not intended for publica- 
tion, and not given to the world until long after all the men 
mentioned in it were dead, we are constrained to give some 
credence to his straightforward statements like the one in 
question, even though he was a bitter enemy of the Federal- 
ist leaders. But we are not constrained to attribute to 
Hamilton any improper motives. Those who assume that 
the Secretary of the Treasury could have carried out his 


1A.M. Dyer, The Ownership of Ohio Lands, p. 69. 
2Mss. Library of Congress: Treasury Department, 1790-1792 (Washington 


papers), folio 291. ’P. 108. 


\ 


v 


112 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


enormous reorganization of the finances without conferring 
with the leading financiers of the time have only an elemen- 
\ tary knowledge of Treasury administration. 

As Secretary, he often found it necessary to set rumors 
‘at rest. An instance is afforded in a letter written by 
Hamilton, on August 17, 1791, to Rufus King, in which he 
mentioned having given out his opinion on prices to counter- 
act an undue rise in script on the stock market, and con- 
cluded by giving King his standard of prices on that day, 
saying “I give you my standard that you may be able if 
necessary to contradict insinuations of an estimation on my 
part short of that standard for the purpose of depressing 
the funds.” } 

This letter from Hamilton was evidently drawn by one 
from King bearing the date of August 15, 1791, in which the 
latter cautions the former against giving out any statements 
which might affect prices, and informs him that his opinions 
had been quoted in efforts to depress stocks.? King also 
adds that Duer had been injured in attempts to raise prices, 
but is of the opinion that “his conduct has been as correct 
as any buyer’s and seller’s could be.” King had little liking 
for popular vagaries in finance, for he tells Hamilton that 
“the fall of Bank certificates may have some good effects; 
it will operate to deter our industrious citizens from meddling 
in future with the funds, and teach them contentment in 
their proper avocations.” 

On the same day that Hamilton replied to King’s letter 
which had informed him of Duer’s danger, he wrote to Duer 
cautioning him against pushing prices too high and repeating 
earlier warnings. He says: “I will honestly own I had 
serious fears for you — for your purse and for your reputa- 


1 Ife and Correspondence of Rufus King, Vol. I, p. 402. 
2 Library of Congress, Hamilton Mss., Vol. XVI, p. 126. The editor of King’s 
letters says this letter is lost. 


. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 113 


tion ; and with an anxiety for both, I wrote you in earnest 
terms. You are sanguine, my friend. You ought to be 
aware of it yourself and to be on your guard against the pro- 
pensity. ... I do not widely differ from you about the 
real value of bank script. I should rather call it about 190, 
to be within bounds, with hopes of better things, and I 
sincerely wish you may be able to support it at what you 
mention.” +. There is of course, little beyond friendly 
advice in this, although Hamilton’s enemies may see im- 
propriety in his communicating his own price to a man 
deeply engaged in speculation. 

There is some evidence, however, which may reasonably 
be interpreted to imply that Hamilton might have used his 
official power in behalf of Duer. In reply to a letter from 
Duer (after his disastrous failure) making some request 
which is not explained by Mr. Lodge, the Secretary says: 
“Your letter of the 11th got to hand this day. I am af- 
fected beyond measure at its contents, especially as it is 
too late to have any influence upon the event you were ap- 
prehensive of, Mr. Wolcott’s instructions having gone off 
yesterday.” * Wolcott was Hamilton’s subordinate in the 
Treasury Department, and evidently he had issued some 
instructions which affected Duer’s fortunes. Wolcott was 
the auditor of the Treasury whose duty it was under the act 
of September 2, 1789, ‘‘to receive all public accounts and 
after examination to certify the balance, and transmit the 
accounts with the vouchers and certificates to the Comp- 
troller for his decision thereon.” This connection with Duer 


is the sole piece of evidence of what might be termed the / 


possible use of the Secretary’s office in a private matter. The > 
nature of this is not clear, and the plan was not carried out. 


1 Hamilton’s Works (Lodge ed.), Vol. VIII, p. 234. 
3 Jbid., Vol. VIII, p. 240, date March 14, 1792. 


fi THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


; J The conclusion to be reached this—-evidence is that 


of reciate under a new 
system; that he did have-some—western_land; but that 
an extensive-augmentation_of_his_personal _{¢ fortune was no 
consideration with him. The fact that he died a poor man 
is conclusive evidence of this fact. That he was swayed 
' throughout the period of the formation of the Constitution 
by large policies of government — not by any of the personal 
interests so often ascribed to him — must therefore be ad- 
mitted. Nevertheless, it is apparent from the additional 
evidence given here that it was no mere abstract political 
science which dominated his principles of governed 


en at Bs en re Si Ob meh eoveramnentig mae 

William C. Houston, of New Jersey, was of no consequence 
in the Convention, and little is known of his economic in- 
terests. He was a Princeton graduate, and was for a time 
professor of mathematics and natural philosophy. He 
entered the practice of law at Trenton, and from 1784 until 
his death in 1788 he was clerk of the Supreme Court of his 
state. On account of ill health he was unable to remain 
through the sessions of the Convention. A search among 
the New Jersey loan office records in the Treasury Depart- 
ment failed to reveal Houston as a holder of securities; 
but the records for that state are incomplete and Houston’s 
death in 1788 would have prevented his appearing on the 
Treasury Records of the new government. A William 
Houston isrecorded in the New York books for small amounts 
of deferred sixes,! but, although William Churchill Houston 
had a son by that name, the identity of the son and the 
public creditor cannot be established. 


1Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger B, N. Y. Office, 1790, Deferred 6% Stock, 
folio 260; also N. Y. Office, Deferred 6%, 1790-1796, folio 144. ° 


= 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 115 


Houston was, however, interested in the possibilities of 
western land speculations, for his biographer relates that he 
“joined with others in procuring for John Fitch, the steam- 
boat inventor, the office of Deputy Surveyor. After the 
treaty of peace with England, the question of how the lands 
northwest of the Ohio should be disposed of was mooted in 
Congress. It was thought that they would be sold to pay 
the debts of the confederacy. Fitch was a land jobber and 
supposed that a good operation might be made by a pre- 
survey of the country, so that when the Land Offices were 
opened, warrants might be taken out immediately for choice 
tracts. He found no difficulty in forming a company to 
forward such an enterprise. It was composed of Dr. John 
Ewing, Rev. Nathaniel Irwin, Wm. C. Houston. . . . These 
gentlemen put £20 each in a fund to pay expenses.””?! How 
far this venture was carried and whether Houston acquired 
lands through it is not related. As a member of the Con- 
gress under the Articles of Confederation, he doubtless 
learned of the advantages to be gained in the West. 

William Houstoun, of Georgia, took some part in the pro- 
ceedings of the Convention, but he was of little weight. He 
was the son of a royal officer in the government of Georgia ; 
and he received his education in England and studied law 
at the Inner Temple. His colleague Pierce records that 
“Mr. Houstoun is an Attorney at Law, and has been a mem- 
ber of Congress for the state of Georgia. He is a gentleman 
of family, and was educated in England. As to his legal or 
political knowledge, he has little to boast of.” The meagre 


biographical details available do not permit a statement of 


his economic interests; and the paucity of the records of 


1T. A. Glenn, William Churchill Houston, pp. 71-72 (Privately printed), copy in 
Library of Congress. 
2 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 97. 


116 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


the Georgia loan office in the Treasury Department makes 
it impossible to say whether he was among the beneficiaries 
through the appreciation of public securities. An index 
to a volume of Treasury Records not found (Vol. XXVI, 
folio 44) contains the name of William Houstown, but 
whether this holder of public debt and the member of the 
Convention were identical cannot be determined. 

Jared Ingersoll, of Pennsylvania, was the son of Jared 
Ingersoll of Connecticut, sometime agent of that colony as 
commissioner in England and later admiralty judge in. 
Pennsylvania. He graduated at Yale and studied in the 
Middle Temple. At the bar in Philadelphia he “‘soon rose 
to first rank. His practice was larger than any others. 
His opinions were taken on all important controversies, 
his services engaged in every great litigation.’’’ Ingersoll 
was a man of considerable wealth, but he does not seem to 
be involved in the large transactions in public securities 
which engaged the attention of his intimate friends in the 
Convention.?, He does not appear on the Pennsylvania 
books as a holder of securities. If he held any, his trans- 
actions must have been with the Treasury direct, and this 
would have been very convenient as it was located in Phil- 
adelphia during the funding process. Ingersoll was a son- 
in-law of Charles Pettit, one of the security operators in 
Philadelphia.’ 

Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer, of Maryland, is reported 
by Pierce to have been ‘‘a gentleman of fortune”’ in his 
state.* He was a planter and a slave-holder; the census 

1 Simpson, Eminent Philadelphians, p. 596. 

2 His private fortune was much impaired by the failure of Robert Morris, for 
whom he had pledged his faith in several transactions. Morris Mss., Library of 
Congress: Private Letter Book, Vol. II. pp. 198, 261, 327, 351, 414. 

3H. Binney, Leaders of the Old Philadelphia Bar, p. 83; State Papera: Finance, 


Vol. I, p. 81. 
4 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 93. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 117 


of 1790 records his holding twenty slaves on one plantation 
under an overseer, but the number on his own plantation 
is illegible.t It is probable also that he held a small amount 
of public securities at the establishment of the new govern- 
ment. He died in the latter part of the year 1790, but his 
son,” Daniel Jenifer, Jr., appears on the loan office records 
as the holder of nearly six thousand dollars’ worth of paper 
in December, 1790,? which he disposed of the following 
year.* 

William Samuel Johnson, of Connecticut, was a son of 
Samuel Johnson, a clergyman of Stratford, Connecticut, 
and a gentleman of some means. He was a graduate of 
Yale, and entered the practice of law. He refused to aid in 
the Revolutionary cause, because he could not “conscien- | 
tiously’”’ take up arms against England, and he lived in / 
retirement until the War was over. After the establish- 
ment of independence he resumed the prominent position 
in public life which he had enjoyed before the struggle; 
and according to his biographer he took ‘‘the highest rank 
in his profession and became the renowned and high-minded . 
advocate who was always crowded with cases and had his 
clients in New York as wellas inevery part of Connecticut.” ® 
He added to his own patrimony by marrying the daughter 
of a ‘wealthy gentleman” of Stratford. 

Johnson was a member of the first Senate under the new 
Constitution, and he was included by Jefferson in the list of 
men “operating in securities.”® It is highly probable that he 
did not aid the Revolutionary cause by investing his money 
in the original paper; and he does not appear on the Treas- 

1 Census of 1790: Heads of Families, p. 51; consult Index. 

2 Appleton, Encyclopedia of American Biography, Vol. III, p. 426. 

3 Ms. Treasury Department: Maryland Loan Office, 1790-1797, folio 14. 

4 Tbid., folio 134. 


5 Beardsley, Life and Times of William Samuel Johnson, pp. 8-9. 
6 Writings of Jefferson (Ford ed.), Vol. I, p. 223. 


118 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


ury Books for large amounts of stock,’ but there is every 
reason for believing that he carried on extensive operations 
through his son Robert Charles Johnson. The latter was 
speculating extensively in New York and Connecticut 
immediately after the establishment of the new government, 
and two entries show a credit to the father through the son.” 
The loan office books under the date of December 13, 1791, 
credit Robert Charles Johnson, of Stratford, Gentleman, 
with nearly fifty thousand dollars’ worth of sixes and threes.? 
Connecticut loan office receipts confirm this evidence of his 
extensive holdings. The New York loan office also shows 
large transactions in the name of Robert Charles Johnson.* 

Rufus King, of Massachusetts, was born in Scarborough, 
Maine, then in the province of Massachusetts, March 24, 
1755. His father, in 1740, was “in prosperous business as 
a trader and factor for Ebenezer Thornton, one of the prin- 
cipal merchants in Boston for whom he purchased and pre- 
pared large quantities of timber.’”’ On settling at Scar- 
borough, his father became “‘both a farmer and a merchant, 
and in each capacity was so successful as to become the owner 
of three thousand acres of land divided into several valuable 
farms and to be the largest exporter of lumber from Maine.” 

1Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger B, New York Office, Deferred 6%, 1790, 
folios 10, 152, 457. 

2 Folios 152 and 457 of above Ledger B. 

* Ms. Treasury Department: Connecticut Loan Office, Ledger A, folio 15; Ledger 


B, folio 15; Ledger C, folio 15. Connecticut Loan Office Receipts, Library of Con- 
gress, Mss. Division. 

4Ibid., New York Loan Office, 6% Ledger, 1791-1797, folio 161; ibid., New 
York Office, Deferred 6%, 1790-1796, folio 107 — two entries of about $25,000 
each. Ledger B, New York Office, Deferred 6% Stock, 1790, folios, 152, 457. Ledger 
E, Treasury, 8%, Vol. 44, folio 529. There can be no question of the identity 
of the Robert Charles Johnson who appears on the public security records 
and the Robert Charles Johnson who was the son of William Samuel. The 
cross entries between father and son in the records constitute one piece of evidence. 
The residence of Robert Charles in Stratford presents another, for that was the 
family place. Furthermore, the signature to the Loan Office Receipts is the signa- 
ture of Robert Charles, son of William Samuel Johnson. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 119 


Rufus was educated at Harvard. When his father died in 
1775 he left a good estate which was divided among several 
children. Rufus King was also fortunate in his marriage ; 
his wife was Mary Alsop. Her father at first sympathized 
with the movement against Great Britain, but, “taking 
umbrage at the manner in which the New York convention 
had conveyed their adhesion to the Declaration of Indepen- 
dence to the Congress, and besides unwilling to close the 
door of reconciliation with Great Britain,’ — he retired to 
Middletown, Connecticut, and stayed until after the War 
was over, when he returned to New York, resumed busi- 
ness, and became president of the Chamber of Com- 
merce. According to King himself, his wife “was the only 
child of Mr. John Alsop, a very respectable and eminent 
merchant in this city [New York]. Mr. Alsop declined 
business in 1775 with a very handsome fortune.” ! King 
thus had extensive mercantile and other business interests 
which were largely managed for him by others, so that he 
‘was able to devote most of his time to politics. 
Nevertheless, he did not neglect matters of private econ- 
omy. Robert and Gouverneur Morris were engaged in 
1788 in a plan to associate a number of Americans in a pro- 
ject to purchase up the debt (or portions thereof) of the 
United States due to France. Wadsworth, General Knox, 
Osgood, and Colonel Duer were involved in it. It was first 
proposed tosend Gouverneur Morris as minister to Holland to 
further the scheme. The originators of the plan finally hit 
upon the appointment of Rufus King. King replied to the 
overture: “I told Col. Duer that I was not indisposed to a 
foreign appointment — that the honor and duties of such an 
office wd. be my sovreign rule of Cond. and that if in perfect 
consistence with the duties and dignity of the office, I ed. 
1 Rufus King, Life and Correspondence, Vol. I, 132. 


120 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


promote the interest of my friends, it wd. be a great satis- 
faction to me. But that I desired not to be considered as 
giving an answer any way at present, that . . . the opinions 
of Mr. Jay and Col. Hamilton were of consequence in my 
mind. That previous to any decision on my part I must be 
ascertained of their opinions.” + 

Whether King engaged in this ambitious project or not, 
there is evidence to show that he was a considerable holder 
of government paper shortly after its establishment. It 
may be that a part of his fortune had been invested originally 
in public securities, although this is not apparent from the 
early loan office books in the Treasury Department. Jef- 
ferson puts King down among the holders of bank stock 
and public securities ;? and he is correct in his statement. 
._. King was director in the first United States bank.* He 
“was also a large holder of government securities — one entry 
records more than $10,000 worth to his credit. King 
thought that speculations should be reserved to the ex- 
perienced, and rejoiced in the hope that one of the crashes 
would teach the ordinary industrious citizens “‘ contentment 
in their proper avocations.” 5 

John Langdon, of New Hampshire, was born on the family 
farm near Portsmouth in 1740, and “after a mercantile 
education in the counting room of Daniel Rindge, he entered 
upon a sea-faring life, but was driven from it by the revolu- 
tionary troubles.’ He must have prospered, however, 
before the War blighted his trade, for when the news of the 
fall of Ticonderoga reached Exeter, he rose in the legislature 


1 Life and Correspondence of King, Vol. I, p. 624. 

2 Writings (Ford ed.), Vol. I, p. 223. Maclay makes some quite uncompli- 
mentary remarks about King, Journal, p. 315. 

3 Dunlap’s Daily Advertiser, October 23, 1791. 

4Ms. Treasury Department: N. Y. Office, 6%, Ledger, 1791-1799, folio 14. 
Ibid., Ledger B, N. Y. Office, Deferred 6%, 1790, folio 60; ibid., Deferred 6%, 
1790-1796, folio 14. The Treasury Index gives a number of references to volumes 
not found. 5 See above, p. 112. 


be 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 121 


of which he was the speaker and said: ‘‘I have a thousand 
dollars in hard money; I will pledge my plate for three 
thousand more. I have seventy hogsheads of Tobago rum 
which will be sold for the most they will bring. They are 
at the service of the state. If we succeed ... I will be 
remunerated ; if we do not then the property will be of no 
value to me.” ! 

After the war, Langdon’s various mercantile and com- 
mercial enterprises took on new life, and there is every 
evidence that in his worldly affairs he was uniformly pros- 
perous. A French report to the Ministry of Foreign Af- 
fairs on the Congress of 1788 speaks of John Langdon as a 
man of great wealth and pressing commercial interests: 
“M. L. a fait une grande fortune dans le commerce, c’est 
le Rob. Morris de son Etat, faisant une grande dépense 
et s'attachant beaucoup de citoyens par ses lib¢ralités.”’ ? 

John Langdon-Elwyn, grandson of John Langdon, in 
whose family were preserved the valuable private papers 
of the elder Langdon, wrote, sometime in the early part of 
the nineteenth century, a pamphlet on his celebrated grand- 
father. The author of this useful brochure “was nine- 
teen years of age at the time of his grandfather’s death. 
A critical observer of men and affairs, his opportunities as 
a member of the family of Governor Langdon give the pro- 
duction of his pamphlet a special significance.” * This 
writer characterizes John Langdon as ‘“‘a man that. loved 
money, at an age when it gets the upper hand, that was prone 
to banking and funding, to whom such atmospheres were 
familiar and congenial, that knew how to make it and keep 
it, and felt no envy of others that did so too.” ‘ 
1C. W. Brewster, Rambles about Old Portsmouth (1859), pp. 360-361. 

2 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 233. 


3 Batchellor, New Hampshire State Papers, Vol. XXI, p. 804 note. 
4 Tbid., Vol. XX, p. 868. 


< 


122 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


That Langdon was deeply concerned in the financial 
operations connected with the new government is evidenced 
in many sources. According to his grandson, quoted above, 
‘“‘He voted for this bank [the first United States Bank]; 
and was we suppose an original subscriber of some account. 

We believe he had been concerned in the Bank of 
North America: the first real National Bank: He was an 
intimate friend of Robert Morris.” ? 

Maclay also adds his testimony to that of Langdon’s 


_ grandson. When he was a Senator, Langdon lodged in New 


York with a Mr. Hazard who followed the business of buying 
up government certificates of public debt which had been 
“issued in place of the paper money of the old Congress 
and bore interest for their face value,’ and had depreciated 
to even as low as seven cents on the dollar. Maclay writes, 
“Mr. Hazard told me he had made a business of it; it is 
easy to guess for whom. I told him, ‘You are then among 
the happy few who have been let into the secret.” Heseemed 
abashed and I checked by my forwardness much more in- 
formation which he seemed disposed to give.” ? 

The loan office books of New Hampshire show that 
Langdon was a large creditor of the new government, and 
indeed he was one of the heavy original contributors who 
risked their fortunes on the outcome of the War.* One 
entry in the New Hampshire ledger credits him with more 
than $25,000 worth of sixes and threes;* and there are 
other entries as well. His brother, Woodbury Langdon, was 
also among the holders of public paper. 

With that patriotism to his state and thrift in her interest 


1 Batchellor, New Hampshire State Papers, Vol. XX, p. 872. 

2 Journal of William Maclay (1890 ed.), p. 178. 

3 Ms. Treasury Department: See Loan Office Certificate Book, New Hampshire 
(Loan of 1777 passim). 

4 Ibid., New Hampshire Loan Office, Journal A, folio 4, date March, 1791, and 
passim. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 123 


that characterized his colleague, Gilman, Langdon sought 
to give the commonwealth some advantage in the various 
speculations in securities. On January 7, 1791, he wrote 
to the President of New Hampshire advising him of the 
approaching passage of the National Bank bill and advising 
that the state use its continental securities and some cash 
to buy stock in the new Bank. He says that the stock 
“would undoubtedly sell for specie at par at any time . . .; 
and in all probability it would soon sell above par, the state 
would therefore run no risque of looseing.”’ ? 

John Lansing, of New York, was a lawyer at Albany and 
the mayor of that city. William Pierce, in his notes on the 
Convention, speaks of him in the following language: “His 
legal knowledge, I am told, is not extensive nor his educa- 
tion a good one. He is however a man of good sense, plain 
in his manners, and sincere in his friendships.”? Lansing 
was one of the stout opponents of the Constitution and left 
the Convention early. He was there long enough however 
to learn (what was not a very deep secret) the certain effect 
of an efficient government on continental securities; for 
in January, 1791, immediately after the establishment of 
the new financial system, he appeared at the New York 
loan office with paper to fund to the amount of over seven 
thousand dollars.* All the members of the Lansing family 
in Albany seem to have taken advantage of the opportunity 
to augment their fortunes.‘ 

William Livingston, of New Jersey, was a member of the 
distinguished Livingston family which was among the 
largest proprietors in New York. He graduated at Yale, 


1 Hammond, State Papers of New Hampshire, Vol. XVIII, p. 824. 

2 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 90. 

®Ms. Treasury Department: New York Loan Office, 1791, folio 97. 

4 Johannis, Garrit, Abraham, John J., Henry: R., and other Lansings appear on 
Ledger C, Funded 6%, 1790, Ms. Treasury Department. Consult Index. 


124 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


and in 1745 married Miss French “whose father had been a 
large proprietor of land in New Jersey.’ He entered the 
practice of law in 1748 “and soon became a prominent 
member of the bar and employed in most of the important 
legal controversies of that day in New York and New 
Jersey.’ He apparently accumulated a comfortable for- 
tune, but had lost a portion of it in 1773 by the failure of his 
debtors, and the necessity of accepting depreciated continen- 
tal currency.’ 

Whether Livingston held any of the securities of the con- 
federacy, it is impossible apparently to determine, for his 
death in the summer of 1790, before the funding system went 
into effect, would have precluded his appearing on the Ledger 
records. It is probable, however, that he did not enter- 
tain views in regard to the relation of public and private 
affairs different from those of his eminent colleagues. This 
theory will seem justified when it is understood that his 
son and heir, Brockholst Livingston, a New York lawyer, 
was among the heaviest security holders in that city; and 
in view of the wide reaching ramifications of his operations 
and his connections with Le Roy and Bayard was reckoned 
among the princely speculators of his day. One entry in 
1791 credits him with about $70,000 worth; another in 
the same year, in conjunction with Le Roy and Bayard, 
with nearly $30,000.? -At a slightly later date, 1792 and 
1793, his 6 per cents alone amount to more than $100,000,’ 
and he appears frequently in the records of other states. 
How much of this was his own paper and how much was for 
friends who did not wish to appear among the records can- 
not be determined. 


1L. Elmer, The Constitution and Government of New Jersey (1872), pp. 57-59. 

2? Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger B, N.Y. Office, Deferred 6% Stock, 1790, 
folios, 72, 306, etc. 

3 Ibid., N. Y., 6%, Ledger, 1791-1797, folio 123. 


a 


} 


: 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 125 


James Madison, of Virginia, was a descendant of one of 
the old landed families of Virginia whose wealth consisted 
principally of plantations and slaves, and whose personal 
property was relatively small in amount. Madison’s 
father “was a large landed proprietor occupied mainly 
with the care and management of his extensive rural con- 
eerns.’”’ Madison graduated at Princeton and studied law, 
but the practice of his profession did not appeal to him. 
His inclinations were all toward politics, for which he was 
prepared by long and profound researches in history, law, 
and political economy. He was constantly in public life, 
and seems to have relied upon the emoluments of office and 
his father’s generosity as a source of income. The post- 
ponement of his marriage until 1794 enabled him to devote 
himself to political pursuits rather than commercial or 


‘economic interests of any kind. He does not appear to 


have been a holder of public securities ; for the small amounts 
credited to James Madison on the books of the Treasury 
Department! seem to have belonged to his father, also named 
James Madison.? 

Having none of the public securities, Madison was able 
later to take a more disinterested view of the funding system 
proposed by Hamilton; and the scramble of politicians and 
speculators which accompanied the establishment of the 
new government did more than anything else to disgust him 
with the administration party and drive him into opposi- 
tion. Writing to Jefferson in July, 1791, he said: “The 
subscriptions [to the Bank] are consequently a mere scramble 
for so much public plunder, which will be engrossed by those 

1 [bid., Virginia Loan Office, 1791, under date of September 30, 1791; Ledger A, 
Punded 6% Stock, 1790, folio 123. 

2 In a letter of February 13, 1791, Madison advises his father to fund his Virginia 
certificates at Richmond: “I do not see what better you can do with your certifi- 


cates than to subscribe them to the public fund at Richmond.” Writings of James 
Madison (1865 ed.), Vol. I, p. 529. 


126 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


already loaded with the spoils of individuals.... It 
pretty clearly appears, also, in what proportions the public 
debt lies in the Country, what sort of hands hold it, and by 
whom the people of the United States are to be governed. 
Of all the shameful circumstances of this business, it is among 
the greatest to see the members of the legislature who were 
most active in pushing this job openly grasping its emolu- 
ments. Schuyler is to be put at the head of the Directors, 
if the weight of the New York subscribers can effect it. 
Nothing new is talked of here. In fact, stock-jobbing 
drowns every other subject. The Coffee-House is in an 
eternal buzz with the gamblers.” ! 

Alexander Martin, of North Carolina, was a graduate of 
Princeton, and practised law. He was for a time governor 
of his state. Later he served in the United States Senate, 
and supported Adams and the alien and sedition laws; 
but was defeated for election in 1799.2, Martin was among 
the well-to-do planters and slave-owners of his state ;* but 
his tastes do not seem to have turned to dealings in public 
securities, for the Index to the holders of the public debt 
preserved in the Treasury Department does not contain his 
name, and a search among the papers of North Carolina 
fails to reveal any record of his transactions. 

Luther Martin, of Maryland, was a descendant of English 
ancestors who had obtained “large grants of land in New 
Jersey [and] removed their domestic establishment there 
when a greater part of the colonial domain was a dense wilder- 
ness.” He was a graduate of Princeton and took up the 
practice of law. Being the third of nine children, and having 
little or no assistance from his parents, who were in pinched 


1 Writings (1865 ed.), Vol. I, p. 538. 
2 National Encyclopedia of Biography, Vol. IV, p. 420. 


3 The Census of 1790 — Heads of Families, p. 168, places the number of Martin’s 
slaves at 47. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 127 


circumstances, he was thrown upon his own resources. He 
commenced his career in Virginia “‘where he soon acquired 
a full and lucrative practice, amounting, as he informs us, 
to about one thousand pounds per annum; which, however, 
was after a period diminished by the disturbance growing 
out of the American Revolution.” ! 

Luther Martin’s fortune was never very large, although 
he had among his clients men of great wealth and influence, 
like Robert Morris.” The census of 1790 records his owning 
only six slaves,*? and his holdings of public securities were 
apparently meagre — a few thousand dollars at most. One 
entry of sixes and threes on June 15, 1791, credits him with 
$1992.67, and he occasionally appears in other records.* 
He was always more or less in sympathy with poor debtors, 
and was unwilling to preclude altogether the issue of paper 
money or moderate impairments of contract. He was ac- 
cordingly a bitter opponent of the adoption of the Constitu- 
* tion in his state.® 

George Mason, of Virginia, was born in 1725. He was the 
son of a rich slave owning and planting family of Dogue’s 
Neck, and on account of the early death of his father he 
came into his vast estate on attaining his majority.® His 
family fortunes were augmented by speculations in western 
lands. He married the daughter of a Maryland merchant, 
from whom a large estate came into his family.’ He was a 
member of the Ohio Company which was organized in 1749, 
and obtained a grant of “six hundred thousand acres of 


ee 

1 Herring, National Portrait Gallery, Vol. IV. 

2 See Index to Private Letter Books of Robert Morris, Library of Congress: Mss. 
Division. 

3 Census of 1790 — Heads of Families, Maryland, p. 18. 

4Ms. Treasury Department: Maryland Loan Office, 1790-1797, folios, 80, 81, 
194. 5 See below, p. 205. 

6 Rowland, The Life of George Mason, Vol. I, pp. 48 ff, 55 ff. 

7 Ibid., I, p. 56. 


128 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


land, lying mostly west of the mountains and south of the 
Ohio.” ! In 1754 he also secured a patent for about fifteen 
hundred acres of land in Northern Neck.? He was con- 
stantly increasing his holdings,*® and in 1769 “he seems to 
have come into possession of two thousand acres of land in 
the district of Kentucky.” * As a member of the Virginia 
legislature he drew a bill “to encourage the making of 
hemp, woollen, linen, and other manufactures.” ® 

His property at the time of the establishment of the Con- 
stitution was unquestionably large, for at his death in 1792 
“he devised to his sons alone, some fifteen thousand acres, 
the greater part of his own acquisition, of the very best land 
in the Potomac region. Most of these estates were well 
improved, with large and comfortable mansions and all 
necessary outbuildings. But he left to be divided among 
his children what was solely acquired by himself: sixty 
thousand of among the finest acres in Kentucky, some 
three hundred slaves, more than fifty thousand dollars’ 
worth of other personal property, and at least thirty thou- 
sand dollars of debts due on his books, while his own indebted- 
ness was absolutely nothing.” ® Very little of this personal 
property seems to have been in public securities, for a search 
in the records of the Treasury Department shows one small 
entry of afew hundred dollars’ worth of threes and sixes to 
his credit.’ 

Mason frankly admitted his personal interest in certain 
landed property to be among his many objections to 
the Constitution — which he refused to approve and the 
adoption of which he bitterly opposed. Speaking on the 


1 Rowland, The Life of George Mason, Vol. I, p. 58. 

2 Tbid., I, p. 60. 3 Tbid., I, pp. 117, 154. 4 Tbid., I, p. 119. 

5 Ibid., I, p. 270. 6 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 368. 

™Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger A, Funded 6% Stock, 1790, folio 130; 
see Loan Office Virginia, 1790-1798, folio 132. The Index gives references to other 
volumes not found, Vols. 41, 43, 45, folios 93, 15, and 18 respectively. 


| 


. 
. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 129 


dangers from the supremacy of the federal courts, in the 
Virginia ratifying convention, he said: “I am personally 
endangered as an inhabitant of Northern Neck. The 
people of that part will be obliged, by the operation of this 
power, to pay the quit rent of their lands. ... Lord 
Fairfax’s title was clear and undisputed. After the revolu- 
tion we taxed his lands as private property. After his 
death, an act of Assembly was made, in 1782, to sequester 
the quit rents due, at his death, in the hands of his debtors. 
Next year an act was made restoring them to the executor 
of the proprietor. Subsequent to this, the treaty of peace 
was made, by which it was agreed that there should be no 
further confiscations. But after this an act of Assembly 
was passed, confiscating his whole property. As Lord Fair- 
fax’s title was indisputably good, and as treaties are to be 
the supreme law of the land, will not his representatives be 
able to recover all in the federal court? How will gentlemen 
like to pay an additional tax on lands in the Northern 
Neck ?”’? 

Mason proposed to limit the judicial power in such a 
manner that it should “extend to no case where the cause 
of action shall have originated before the ratification of 
this Constitution, except in suits for debts due the United 
States, disputes between states about their territory, and 
disputes between persons claiming lands under grants of 
different states.’”’ He expressed a fear that under the 


_ Constitution as it stood the titles to all the country between 


the Blue Ridge and Alleghany Mountains would be upset 
in the federal courts and that the vast Indiana purchase 
would be rendered a subject of dispute.” 

James McClurg, of Virginia, was an accomplished man of 


1 Elliot, Debates (1836 ed.), Vol. III, pp. 528-529. 
2 Ibid., p. 529. 


130 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


letters and distinguished physician of his native state. He 
was born there in 1747, studied at the college of William and 
Mary, and finished his training in medicine at Edinburgh 
and Paris. He established himself in the practice first at 
Williamsburg, and about 1783 he settled in Richmond, where 
he took first rank as a physician, scholar, and man of the 
world. 

McClurg’s knowledge of government was not academic. 
He knew the subject practically, as well as theoretically ; 
for as early as November 23, 1790, he was engaged in opera- 
tions in federal securities.» And on February 17, 1791, he 
presented to the local loan office Virginia certificates to the 
amount of $26,819, all of which, except a few hundred 
pounds originally subscribed by himself, he had evidently 
bought for speculation. McClurg was also an investor 
in stock in the first United States Bank and one of the 


“sdirectors.* 


James McHenry, of Maryland, received a classical educa- 
tion in Ireland, the country of his birth, and came to Balti- 
more in 1771. He studied medicine with Dr. Benjamin 
Rush at Philadelphia and became an army surgeon during 
the War. He was for a time secretary to Washington and 
later to Lafayette, and from 1783 to 1786 he was a member 
of Congress from Maryland.® 

McHenry was the son of Daniel McHenry, a Baltimore 
merchant, who achieved ‘considerable financial success ”’ 
and was in business with his son, John, a brother of James, 
until his death in 1782. John and James began buying 

1 Duyckinck, Cyclopedia of American Literature (1855 ed.), Vol. I, p. 283. 

2Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger A, Funded 6% Stock, 1790, folio 18. 

3 Ibid., Loan Office: Register of Subscriptions, Virginia (1791), see date, no 
folio given. 

4 Dunlap’s Daily Advertiser, October 23, 1791. 


5 Magazine of American History, Vol. VII, p. 104. 
6 Steiner, The Life and Correspondence of James McHenry, p. 2. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 131 


town property, and when the former died in 1790, the latter 
inherited the entire estate, as John had never married. The 
death of James’ father, says Steiner, left him financially 
independent. 

McHenry’s personal property must have been con- 
siderable. A casual letter of August 4, 1792, shows that 
one Dickinson owed him an amount secured by a bond for 
£5000. He was one of the original stockholders of the 
Insurance Company of North America organized in 1792.? 
It is not apparent that he was among the original holders 
of federal securities, but an entry in 1797 records an old 
account to the amount of $6970.90, brought forward.’ 

McHenry’s early mercantile interests left a deep impres- 
sion on him, and he sympathized with the efforts made in 
his state to secure an adequate protective tariff. Indeed, 
he was among the signers of the memorial from Baltimore 
laid before Congress on April 11, 1789, praying for the pro- 
tection and encouragement of American manufactures.* 

John Francis Mercer, of Maryland, was born in Virginia 
and graduated at William and Mary College in 1775. He 
served in the army and after the war studied law with 
Jefferson. He moved to Maryland in 1786. He seems to 
have been a man of some fortune, for he held six slaves,® 
and a moderate amount of public securities.° His sympathies, 
however, were with the popular party in Maryland. He 
joined with Luther Martin in violent opposition to the adop-— 

tion of the Constitution. In 1801 he was elected governor 
_ of the state, and as governor he attacked the property quali- 


1 Hamilton Mss., Library of Congress, Vol. XXIII, p. 156. 

2T. Montgomery, History of the Insurance Company of North America, p. 142. 

3 Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger E, Treasury, 83%, Vol. 45, folio 22. 

4 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 8. 

5 Census of 1790 — Heads of Families, Maryland, p. 41. 

6 Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office Maryland, 1790-1797, 8%, folios 72, 
135, and other loan office records of that state, passim. 


132 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


fications on voters under the constitution of the common- 
wealth, at length securing the repeal of the provisions. 

Thomas Mifflin, of Pennsylvania, was born in Philadel- 
phia in 1744 and graduated at the College of Philadelphia, 
where he distinguished himself as a student of the classics. 
His father introduced him to a mercantile life by placing 
him in the counting house of William Coleman, one of the 
most-eminent merchants of his native city. ‘‘When he 
was twenty-one years of age he visited Europe to improve 
his knowledge of commercial affairs, and after his return 
home he entered into business with his brother, the con- 
nection continuing until after the Revolution.” ? 

Mifflin was deeply interested in the protection of American 
manufactures. He was prominently identified with the 
Philadelphia Society for the Encouragement of Manufactures 
and Useful Arts, organized in the summer of 1787. In fact, 
he presided at the meeting at which it was established in 
August of that year, during the sessions of the Convention.’ 

General Mifflin was a holder of public securities, but it 
does not appear that his paper aggregated more than a 
petty sum. He and Jonathan Mifflin are down for a few 
hundred dollars’ worth of continental paper in 1788; and 
he held in his own name another small account in 1791.4 
It is, therefore, apparent that General Mifflin appreciated the 
position of the powerful class of security holders who looked 
\ to the Convention for relief, and had a more than abstract 
interest in the establishment of public credit. 

Gouverneur Morris, of Pennsylvania, was born in 1752 at 
the family manor house at Morrisania. He “belonged by 


1 McMaster and Stone, Pennsylvania and the Federal Constitution, p. 701. 

2 The American Museum, Vol. II, p. 248. 

* Ms. Treasury Department: Pa. Loan Office Certificates, 1788, folio 45. 

4TIbid.: Ledger C, 3% Stock, Pa., folio 48. John F. Mifflin was a holder of 
paper to the amount of several thousand dollars funded in 1790. JIbid., Loan Office, 
Pa., 1790-1791, folio 6; Ledger C, 8% Stock, Pa., folio 6. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 133 


birth to that powerful landed aristocracy whose rule was 
known by New York alone among all the northern colonies.” 
He graduated at King’s College, entered the practice of law, 
and very soon began to take a hand in colonial politics, 
attacking with great vehemence the propositions of the 
paper money party. “He criticised unsparingly the attitude 
of a majority of his fellow citizens in wishing such a measure 
of relief, not only for their short-sighted folly, but also 
for their criminal and selfish dishonesty in trying to procure 
a temporary benefit for themselves at the lasting expense 
of the community.’’+ 

He was a member of the Continental Congress and was 
regarded as a considerable expert in financial affairs. He 
assisted Robert Morris in the establishment of the Bank 
of North America, and seems to have been able, in the midst 
of his public engagements, to augment his private fortunes 
and to engage in divers economic enterprizes. At the 
time of the formation of the Constitution, he had accumu- 
lated enough to purchase the family estate from his elder 
brother, and ‘“‘he had for some time been engaged in various 
successful commercial ventures with his friend Robert 
Morris, including an East India voyage on a large scale, 
shipments of tobacco to France, and a share in iron works 
on the Delaware river, and had become quite a rich man.” 
He declared in the Convention that he did not hold any 
public securities, and the records seem to bear out his asser- 
tion, although his name does appear on an index to a volume 
of Treasury Records not found. 


-} Of all the members of the Convention, Robert Morris of 


Pennsylvania, had the most widely diversified economic 

interests. He was born of humble parents in Liverpool in 

1734, and came to America at an early age. The death of 
1 Roosevelt, G. Morris, pp. 1, 24. 2 Ibid., p. 167. 


134. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


his father, about 1750, left him a small estate of a few 
thousand dollars, which stood him in good stead in his 
relations with the Willings, whose counting house he had 
entered to learn mercantile arts, in which he showed an 
early proficiency.’ 

In the course of his long career he owned and directed 
ships trading with the East and West Indies, engaged in 
iron and several other branches of manufacturing, bought 
and sold thousands of acres of land in all parts of the country, 
| particularly in the west and south, and speculated in lots 
in Washington as soon as he learned of the establishment of 
the capital there. He was instrumental in organizing 
the Bank of North America in Philadelphia, with Thomas 
Willing, his partner, as first President, and Thomas 

itzsimons, an associate in his land and speculative enter- 
prises, as one of the directors,? and was in short a merchant 
prince, a captain of industry, a land speculator, a financier, 


‘and a broker combined.* Had he been less ambitious he 


would have died worth millions instead of in poverty and 
debt, after having served a term in a debtor’s cell. 

It is impossible to guage correctly the extent of his land 
speculations, for they ran into the millions of acres. Before 
and after the adoption of the Constitution, he was busy 
interesting his colleagues in every kind of enterprize that 
promised to be profitable. James Marshall, a brother of 
John Marshall, was his chief agent, and carried on opera- 
tions for him in the United States and Europe. Marshall 
was given the power of attorney by Morris and his wife to 
sell enormous quantities of lands and other properties, and 
received from his principal letters of introduction to European 


1 Oberholtzer, Robert Morris, p. 4. 

2 Ibid., p. 108. 

* For his multifarious operations see Oberholtzer, Robert Morris; Sumner, The 
Financier and the Finances of the American Revolution, 2 vols. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 135 


capitalists and persons of prominence, including Mr. Pinck- 

ney, the representative of the United States in France.! 
The exact extent of Morris’ speculations in the securities of 

the new government is a matter beyond the scope of the 


present inquiry, but it is sufficient fo for our purposes to know Y 


that he held practically every kind of continental “security,- 
that. his deals in stocks “mounted “upward into the tens of 
thousands of dollars,” and that in the Convention and in the 
first Senate u under the Constitution, of which he was a mem- 
ber, he was uniformly strenuous in his support—of-public 
credit. No man of his time had such wide-reaching interests 
or involved in his personal affairs so many eminent men, 
like Hamilton, John Marshall, Thomas Fitzsimons, Thomas 
Willing, Gouverneur Morris, John Langdon, and Robert 
Clymer, all closely identified with the new system of govern- 
ment. 


It may be truly said therefore that Morris was an effective Y 


representative of the speculative land operators, the holders 
of securities, the dealers in public paper, and the mercantile 
groups seeking protection for manufactures — in short every 
movable property interest in the country. It was fortunate 
for the new government to have in its support a man whose 
economic power and personal acquaintanceship extended 
from New Hampshire to Georgia. It seems fair to say that 
no man contributed more to the establishment of our 


1 Library of Congress: Morris Mss. Consult the Index to the three volumes of 
Morris’ Letter Books of Private Correspondence for references, under ‘‘ James Mar- 
shall.’’ Only by turning over this enormous mass of correspondence can one gain 
a correct notion of the ramifications of Morris’ interests and the number of promi- 
nent men involved in his schemes. 

2 Hamilton Mss., Library of Congress, Vol. XXII, p. 179; two minor illustra- 
tions of his operations may be given: January 1, 1791, $7588.78, July 1, 1792, 
$26,408.66. See also the enormous transactions in the name of Willing and Morris 
scattered through the books of nearly every state. Ms. Treasury Department: 
Ledger C, 3%, Pa., folio 334; Register of Certificates of Public Debt Presented: Audi- 
tor of Treasury; folios not given. Consult Index to holders of old securities in the 
Treasury Department. ; 


aie 
, 


vi 


V 


136 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Constitution and the stability of our national institutions 
than Robert Morris, ‘‘the Patriot Financier.” 

Washington, therefore, showed his acumen when, as 
first President of the United States, he selected Morris for 
the office of Secretary of the Treasury ; but the latter, on ac- 
count of the pressing nature of his private business, was 
unable to accept the post thus tendered. Indeed, he wisely 
concluded that he could be more serviceable to the new 
government in his capacity as senator from Pennsylvania ; 
and in this position he lent his powerful support to the 
funding system, the new Bank, and the establishment of a 
protective tariff. ‘Morris and Hamilton together worked 
out a tariff bill,” says Oberholtzer.’ “But for the influence 
of the Senator from Pennsylvania the measure, important 
because it would provide the national government with 
ample revenues, and because it had protective features 
of utility in the development of the country industries, could 
not have passed Congress in the form which would have 
commended it to the Secretary of the Treasury. ... All 
witnesses agree that Robert Morris was a stupendous politi- 
cal force in Washington’s administration, and his influence 
did not decrease when, in December, 1790, the capital was 
removed to Philadelphia, where he resumed his princely 
entertainment of public men, surrendering his home on 
Market Street to Washington, and becoming the President’s 
most intimate friend and closest companion.” 

William Paterson was born in the north of Ireland, came to 
this country in 1747, graduated at Princeton in 1763, and 
received his license to practise law in 1769. His father was a 
merchant, and he was himself for a time engaged in the 
mercantile business.2, A by no means extensive search has 


10p. cit., pp. 237 ff. 
2L. Elmer, The Constitution and Government of New Jersey, p. 77. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 137 


failed to bring out any of Paterson’s later economic 
interests. 

William Pierce, of Georgia, does not seem to have made 
any considerable impression on his age, for the biographical 
material relating to him is meagre indeed. His economic 
interests do not appear to have been looked into, although 
it is known that he was “in business in Savannah as the 
head of the house of William Pierce and Company.’ ! 
His private fortune was probably not large, for he ap- 
plied to Madison in 1788 for a position as collector in his 
district.” 

Charles Cotesworth Pinckney was the son of “Chief Justice 
Pinckney, a man of great integrity and of considerable 
eminence under the Provincial Government.” He received 
a fine classical and legal education in England. He began 
the practice of law in the provincial courts in 1770, and very 
soon ‘“‘began to acquire business and reputation.” After 
the Revolutionary war “his business was large and its profits 
commensurate — reaching in one year the amount of four 
thousand guineas, a considerable sum for that day.” He 
became “‘a considerable landholder in the city of Charleston. 
He had numerous tenants living on his property. ... His 
benevolence was of the most enlarged character, and was ex- 
perienced not only by the poor and such as were dependent 
on him, but in his liberal support of churches, seminaries 
of learning, and every object of public utility.”* He also 
held a country estate at Pinckney Island, and is recorded in 
_ the first census as the owner of forty-five slaves.* 

Pinckney had a large practice for the merchants of Charles- 
ton, and his knowledge of maritime law must have been 


1 American Historical Review, Vol. III, p. 312. 

2 Calendar of Madison Correspondence, Library of Congress. Mas. 
8 Herring, National Portrait Gallery, Vol. IV. 

4 Census of 1790 — Heads of Families, S.C., p. 33. 


138 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


extensive! Through this direct experience, he must have 
‘learned the importance of a national commercial system, 
not only to merchants and manufacturers, but also to those 
having occasion to appear in the courts. In the midst of 
the local conflict between the creditors and debtors, he took 
a firm stand against any weakening of public and private 
credit. 

The significance and importance of the public credit 
he understood from first-hand knowledge, for his holdings of 
public securities were large when compared with the average 
holdings in the South. Shortly after the establishment of 
Hamilton’s funding system, Pinckney is credited with over 
ten thousand dollars’ worth of sixes and threes on the loan 
office books of his state.” 

Charles Pinckney, like his distinguished cousin, was also 
an eminent lawyer in Charleston and enjoyed a large 
practice with the merchants. He was likewise a land-owner 
on a considerable scale, for the census of 1790 records the 
number of his slaves as fifty-two.® 

Charles Pinckney was also identified with the conservative 
forces of the state in their fight against the debtor or paper 
money party, and he thoroughly understood the meaning 
of the sacredness of private and public obligations. He was 
a holder of government securities on a large scale, his transac- 

1 Speaking of the nature of the practice in Charleston just after the Revolution, 
Charles Fraser says, in Reminiscences of Charleston, p. 71: “It was stated by 
the Duc de Liancourt, who was well acquainted with most or all of the gentlemen 
named, that General Pinckney, Mr. Rutledge, Mr. Pringle, and Mr. Holmes, made 
from eighteen to twenty-three thousand dollars a year. ... The extensive com- 
mercial business of Charleston at that time opened a wide field of litigation. Our 
courts were constantly employed in heavy insurance cases — in questions of charter 
party, foreign and inland bills of exchange, and in adjusting foreign claims. There 
was also a good deal of business in admiralty, and, occasionally, a rich prize case.”’ 

2Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office, S.C., 1791-1797, folio 38. For other 


entries, Loan Office, S.C., folio 70; a later entry of $8721.53 in trust for Mary 
Pinckney, tbid., folio 152. 


5 Census of 1790 — Heads of Families, S.C., p. 34. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 139 


tions early in the history of the new system amounting to 
more than fourteen thousand dollars.' In common with 
the men of his party he naturally feared the effect of popular 
lawmaking upon the value of personalty.? 

Edmund Randolph was a grandson of Sir John Randolph, 
an English gentleman of ancient and honorable lineage. 
Through an uncle he inherited ‘‘three farms . . . negroes, 
and other property ;” but this estate was burdened with 
debt.? As a lawyer, however, he enjoyed a magnificent 
practice which furnished him a considerable revenue. When 
charged with having defrauded the Treasury of the United 
States during his official service as Secretary of State, he 
advanced as a counter claim the fact that the condition of 
his fortune was evidence that he could not have engrossed 
any large government funds. He reported on that occasion 
(1801) that in money claims he had £14,200 Virginia cur- 
rency which he traced “‘to the best of all resources, the inde- 
pendent labors of my own hands.” * About that time, his 
other property which had come to him by way of inheritance 
amounted to “‘some seven thousand acres of land, several 
houses, and near two hundred negroes. The slaves had 
long been an incumbrance on account of his refusal to sell 
their increase and his inability while at Philadelphia to 
hire them properly.’ ® 

Indeed, Randolph was apparently never very prosperous. 
He held ten or fifteen thousand dollars’ worth of public securi- 
ties about the time of the establishment of the new govern- 
' ment; °® but he seems to have been in debt to Hamilton for 
1 Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office, S.C., 1791-1797, folio 221. 

2 Madison Mss., Library of Congress, under date of March 28, 1789. 
3M. Conway, Edmund Randolph, p. 48. 

4 Ibid., p. 372. 

5 Tbid., p. 384. 


6 Ms. Treasury Department: Current Accounts, Va., 1791-1796, folios 6, 13, 21; 
Ledger B, Assumed Debt, Va., folio 87. 


140 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


a considerable sum that gave him some embarrassment. 
On April 23, 1793, he wrote to Hamilton asking an exten- 
sion of time on the paper, saying: “I am extremely 
thankful to you for your readiness to accommodate me on 
the subject of the bills. ... The sum which I want to 
sell is much less than £2600 stg. It is only £1300; as I 
prefer waiting for arise... .”* 

George Read, of Delaware, was the grandson of a “wealthy 
citizen of Dublin.” His father had migrated to America 
and established himself as ‘‘a respectable planter” in Dela- 
ware. George studied law under John Moland, a distin- 
guished attorney in Philadelphia, and began business for 
himself in Newcastle in 1754 where he soon acquired a 
lucrative practice.? Although he surrendered all claim to 
his father’s estate on the ground that he had received 
his portion in his education,? Read managed to accumu- 
late a modest competence. 

Of his economic position, so far as it was reflected in his 
style of living, a descendant writes: ‘The mansion of Mr. 
Read commanded an extensive view of the river Delaware. 

It was an old-fashioned brick structure, looking very 
comfortable but with no pretensions to elegance.... Here 
Mr. Read resided for many years in the style of the colonial 
gentry who, when having no more than the moderate in- 
come of Mr. Read, maintained a state and etiquette which 
have long disappeared. . . . How could this be, Mr. Read 
not being affluent? His income would buy more then than 
now, and he had asmall farm . . . and besides he generally 
owned his servants.’’ In addition to his income from 
official positions and his practice, Read possessed some 
capital for investment, because he appears among the sub- 

1 Hamilton Mss., Library of Congress, Vol. XX, p. 57. 


2 Sanderson, Biography of the Signers (1831 ed.), Vol. III, p. 351. 
3W. T. Read, Life of George Read, p. 575. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 141 


scribers to the stock of the Bank of North America issued in 
1784.! 

A’small part of his worldly goods he had invested in the 
securities of the Continental Congress in 1779, during the 
dark days of the Revolution when the chances of ever recover- 
ing it were slight indeed. He was among those who risked 
their lives and fortunes in the Revolutionary cause, and has 
the honor of being one of the signers of the Declaration of 
Independence. The loan office of Delaware records that 
in March and April, 1779, Read subscribed for $2000 worth 
of certificates, and that Mary Read subscribed for $11,500 
worth of the same paper.” The incompleteness of the records 
of Delaware in the Treasury department prevents the tracing 
of these securities, but an entry of 1797 shows Read as 
holding a small account (old) of threes.2 At all events, 
Read had felt personally the inconveniences of depreciated 
paper, and knew the value of a stable government to every 
owner of personal property. 

John Rutledge, of South Carolina, was the son of Dr. 
John Rutledge, a native of Ireland who settled in Carolina 
about 1735. He was educated under a classical tutor and 
pursued the study of law in the Temple. He opened his 
practice in Charleston in 1761, and a biographer relates 
that “instead of rising by degrees to the head of his profes- 
sion, he burst forth at once the able lawyer and accomplished 
scholar. Business flowed in upon him. He was employed 
in the most difficult causes and retained with the largest 
fees that were usually given.” 4 


1 History of the Bank of North America, p. 147. 

2Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office, Delaware, 1777-1784, passim. His 
mother and daughter bore the name of ‘‘Mary.” J. W. Reed, The Reed Family, 
pp. 433 and 436. 

8 Ibid., Ledger E, Treasury, 3%, Vol. 45, folio 202. The Index gives references 
to several other volumes which were not found. 

4 Herring, National Portrait Gallery, Vol. IV. 


142 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Rutledge was elected president of South Carolina, under 
the first constitution, and when a new frame of government 
was made by the legislature, in some respects more demo- 
cratic, he vetoed it, preferring ‘‘a compound or mixed gov- 
ernment to a simple democracy, or one verging towards it.” ? 
“However unexceptionable democratic power may appear at 
first view,” said Rutledge, “its defects have been found 
arbitrary, severe, and destructive.” 

He resigned because he was unable to prevent the Saupe 
tion of the new constitution; but he was soon elected 
governor under it; and inasmuch as it provided that no 
person could be governor unless he held in his own right, on 
his election, “a settled plantation or freehold . .. of the 
value of at least ten thousand pounds currency, clear of 
debt,” it must be assumed that Rutledge was the owner 
of a considerable plantation and a number of slaves. Indeed, 
the census of 1790 records the number at twenty-six, which, 
though small, was considerable for a man whose interests 

ere not primarily in planting.? Unlike his other colleagues 
from South Carolina, John Rutledge does not seem to have 
invested in securities, though several members of the Rut- 
ledge family appear on the records. 

Roger Sherman, the shoemaker of New Milford,*® Connecti- 
cut, was one of the very few men of the Convention who had 
risen from poverty to affluence largely through his own efforts, 
and had none of the advantages of education and support 
which a family patrimony can give. But as his biographer 
remarks of him: “In regard to worldly circumstances, Mr. 
Sherman was very happily situated. Beginning life with- 

1 Flanders, Lives of the Chief Justices, Vol. I, p. 551. 

2 Census of 1790 — Heads of Families, S.C., p. 42. 

8’ When Roger Sherman resided in Park Lane and ran a store in New Milford, 
Connecticut, he lost money through the depreciation of bills of credit, and he there- 


upon declared a war on paper money which he continued to the end of his days. 
Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society, 1906-1907, pp. 214 ff. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 143 


out the aid of patrimonial wealth or powerful connections, 
with nothing but his good sense and good principles, he, 
by his industry and skilful management, always lived in a 
comfortable manner, and his property was gradually in- 
creasing.”’! 

In common with other far-seeing business men of his day, 
Sherman seems to have invested a portion of hisaccumula- 
tions in public securities, for shortly after Hamilton’s fiscal 
system went into effect he funded nearly eight thousand 
dollars’ worth of paper at the loan office of his native state.? 

Richard Dobbs Spaight, of North Carolina, was of respect- 
ableorigin. His father had been secretary of the colony under 
the crown, and his mother was a sister of Dobbs, a royal 
governor of the colony. He came into his father’s estate 
early; he studied in Ireland, and finished his education at 
the University of Glasgow. At the time of the Convention, 
he was, according to Pierce, a ‘worthy man, of some abilities, 
and fortune.”* He was among the large planters of his 
state, and is recorded to have held seventy-one slaves.* He 
seems to have taken no share in the public security transac- 
tions. At least a search in the incomplete records does not 
reveal him as an original holder—but an old account of 
3 per cents for the sum of a few dollars, shows that he was 
not unaware of the relations of public credit to stable in- 
stitutions.© It was largely through his influence that 
Washington went to North Carolina to aid in the fight for the 
adoption of the Constitution by that state. 

Caleb Strong, of Massachusetts, was the descendant of an 
old and honorable family of Northampton, the place of 


1 Sanderson, Lives of the Signers, Vol. II, p. 66. 

2Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office: Connecticut, Ledgers A, B, and C, 
Threes and Sizes, folio 28 in each; January, 1792. 

3 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 95. 

4 Census of 1790 — Heads of Families, N.C., p. 130. 

5 Ms. Treasury Department; Ledger E, Treasury, 3%, Vol. 45, folio 308. 


ve 


144 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


his birth. He was educated at Harvard and entered the 
practice of law.!_ He early began a public career for which he 
showed remarkable aptitudes, and was rewarded by election 
tothe convention which drafted the constitution of his state, to 
the federal Convention, to the first United States Senate, and 
later tothe office of governor of the commonwealth. Whether 
he inherited a fortune or accumulated considerable wealth 
in the practice of law is not recorded by his biographer, 

Senator Lodge,” but he took advantage of his superior knowl- 
edge of public affairs, and bought up £3271:0:6 worth of 
certificates of issues up to May, 1787, which he funded into 
federal securities in September, 1791.3 

. Washington, of Virginia, was ee in 
the United States in LiF ine. ancial ability was 
TO aaa) Saag EE countrymen anywhere, He 
SORGaTGA-in-EAdition to his great Gatate on the Potomac, a 
large amount of fluid capital which he judiciously invested 
in western lands, from which he could reasonably expect 
a large appreciation with the establishment of stable govern- 
ment and the advance of the frontier. 
— Perhaps the best way to illustrate his economic inter- 
ests is to give the data from the schedule of his property 
attached to his will, drawn up in 1799. He possessed in 
Virginia, counting the enormous holdings on the Ohio, 
and the Great Kenhawa, more than 35,000 acres, valued 
at $200,000; in Maryland, 1119 acres, at $9828; in 
Pennsylvania, 234 acres, at $1404; in New York, about 
1000 acres, at $6000; in the Northwest Territory, 3051 
acres, at $15,255; in Kentucky, 5000 acres, at $10,000; 
property in Washington, at $19,132; in Alexandria, at 
$4000; in Winchester, at $400; at Bath, $800. He held 


1 Encyclopedia of National Biography, Vol. I, p. 110. 
3 Massachusetts Historical Society Proceedings, 1791-1836, Vol. I, pp. 290 ff. 
5 Ms. Treasury Department: Mass. Loan Office, 1791, Vol. III, item No. 1284, 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 145 


$6246 worth of United States securities; and of this 
holding he said: ‘These are the sums which are act- 
ually funded; and though no more in the aggregate than 
7566 dollars, stand me in at least ten thousand pounds, 
Virginia money ; being the amount of bonded and other debts 
due me and discharged during the war when money had 
depreciated in that rate — and was so settled by the public 
authority.”” He held $10,666 worth of shares in the Po- 
tomac Company presented to him by the state of Vir- 
ginia (which he left to establish a national university) ; 
$500 worth of James River Company shares; $6800 worth 
of stock in the Bank of Columbia, and $1000 worth of 
stock in the Bank of Alexandria. His own slaves were 
to be emancipated on the death of his wife. His live-stock 
he estimated at $15,653 — making a grand total at a con- 
servative estimate of $530,000.1 : 
- Washington was also a considerable money lender and 
suffered from the paper money operations of the Virginia 
legislature. He “had bonds and mortgages to ‘nigh £10,000’ 
, paid off in depreciated paper currency worth at times as 
little as 2/6 in the pound, and when he attended the federal 
Convention he was in arrears for two years’ taxes through A 


having been unable to sell the products of his farms.” * 


_ If any one in the country had a just reason for being dis- 
| Washington. He had given the best years of life to~the 
i ade often Gauze, and had refused all remuneration for 
his great services. He was paid his personal expenses to the 
amount of $64,355.30 in paper that steadily depreciated. 
M. Otto writing to Vergennes on February 10, 1787, says of 
Washington’s losses: “I have before me a letter of this 


1 Sparks, Life of Washington, Appendix, No. IX. 
2 Ww. C. Ford, The Federalist, p. xi, aote 3. 


146 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


honored man in which he complains of being obliged to 
sell at a rate of twenty for one the certificates which Congress 
sent to him in payment for the arrearages due him.’’? 

Hugh Williamson, of North Carolina, was the son of “an 
industrious tradesman” of Dublin, who settled in America 
about 1730—five years before Hugh was born. The 
latter received a fine education and graduated at the College 
of Philadelphia in 1757. About this time his father died, 
leaving him sole executor of the estate, the settlement of 
which required the greater part of two years.? He studied 
divinity, but later turned to medicine and went to Edinburgh 
to pursue his studies in that subject. He practised for a 
tue in Philadelphia, but afterward went South to reside. 

During the Revolutionary War he engaged in mercantile 
speculations in Charleston and later at Edenton, “from 
which he afterward traded to the neutral islands in the West 
Indies.”” While continuing his mercantile connections with 
his brother, ‘‘ then also engaged in the West India trade, he 
determined to resume the practice of medicine; this he did 
with the same success as he had done formerly at Phila- 
delphia.”” He was an opponent of the emission of paper 
money in North Carolina and published an essay against 
fiat/currency. 

e happily combined a theoretical and practical knowledge 
of finance, forhe seems to have accumulated a large amount 
of public securities. He appears frequently on the records of 
the Treasury Department; for example in December, 1791, 
for $2444.84 worth of sixes and threes.* Furthermore, his 
correspondence with Hamilton and others shows that he 
had “the smallest of two large trunks”’ full of 6 per cents, 


1 Bancroft, History of the Constitution (1882 ed.), Vol. II, p. 411. 
2D. Hosack, Biographical Memoir of Hugh Williamson, p. 18. 
5 Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office, N.C., 1791, folio 3. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 147 


threes, and deferred stock which he had delivered to Hamil- 
ton for transfer to the New York loan office, in 1793.! 

Williamson also engaged in western land speculations, 
and was not unaware of the advantage to that class of prop- 
erty which the new Constitution afforded. On June 2, 
1788, he wrote to Madison from New York, “For myself, 
I conceive that my opinions are not biassed by private in- 
terests, but having claims to a considerable quantity of 
land in the Western Country, I am fully persuaded that the 
value of those lands must be increased by an efficient federal 
government.”’? After his long and assiduous public ser- 
vices, Williamson settled in New York, where he engaged 
in historical writing and the management of the considerable 
fortune which he had accumuiated in the midst of his press- 
ing public duties.’ 

James Wilson, of Pennsylvania, was born in Scotland in 
1742 and received a fine classical education there. He came 
to America in 1766, began the study of law with John 
Dickinson, and was admitted to the bar in 1767. He 
developed a lucrative practice at Carlisle, where he first 
settled; but in 1778 he removed to Philadelphia where he 
established a close connection with the leading merchants 
and men of affairs including Robert Morris, George Clymer, 
and General Mifflin. He was one of the directors of the 
Bank of North America on its incorporation in 1781;° and 
he also appears among the original stockholders of the In- 
surance Company of North America, organized in 1792.° 

Wilson’s largest interest seems to have been in public 
lands, for he was among the members of the Georgia Land 


1 Hamilton Mss., Library of Congress, Vol. XXIV, pp. 70 ff. 
2 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 678. 

3 Hosack, op. cit., p. 85. 

4Simpson, Eminent Philadelphians, p. 966. 

5 Oberholtzer, Robert Morris, p. 108. 

6 History of the Insurance Company of North America, p. 146. 


ve 


148 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Company, a highly speculative concern tainted with fraud, 
to put it mildly, for ten shares, £25,000 cash and 750,000 
acres.: Haskins says, “James Wilson, of the Supreme 
Court of the United States, held shares to the amount of at 
least one million acres and it is asserted was influential in 
securing the grants.” ? 

Wilson does not appear to have been a large holder of 
public securities; for a search in the records of the Pennsyl- 
vania loan office preserved in the Department of the Treasury 
reveals only a trivial amount of 3 per cents to his credit, on 
June 2, 1791.2 It may be that the extent of his other opera- 
tions prevented his taking advantage of the opportunities 
offered in this line. 

George Wythe, of Virginia, was born in 1726 on the shores 
of the Chesapeake in the colony of Virginia. ‘‘He was 
descended from a respectable family and inherited from his 
father, who was a farmer, an estate amply sufficient for all 
the purposes of ease and independence, although it was 
seriously impaired by the Revolution.” He studied law, 
and “by reason of his extensive learning, correctness of 
elocution, and his logical style of argument, he quickly 
arrived at the head of the bar.” * His second wife “was a 
lady of a wealthy and respectable family of Taliafero, residing 
near Williamsburg.” He was a slave-owner, but he eman- 
cipated his slaves and made provisions to keep them from 
want. His public security holding was not large. On 
March 12, 1791, he presented Virginia certificates to the 
amount of £513: 2: 8 which he had acquired from their 
original owners.® 

1 State Papers: Public Lands, Vol. I, p. 141. 

2 Yazoo Land Companies, p. 83. 

* Ms. Treasury Department: Ledger C, 8% Stock, Pa., folio 195. 

4 Sanderson, Biography of the Signers (1831 ed.), Vol. IV, pp. 172 ff. 


* Ms. Treasury Department: Loan Office: Register of Subscriptions, Va., 1791, 
see date. Also Ledger A, Assumed Debt, Va., folio 32. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 149 


Robert Yates, of New York, was born in Schenectady, 
and received a classical education at New York City. He 
read.law and began the practice at Albany where he soon 
built up an extensive business. He was made a judge of 
the Supreme Court under the state constitution of 1777, but 
his salary was small. “Indeed before the scale of deprecia- 
tion of continental money had been settled, he received one 
year’s salary in that money at its nominal value, the whole 
of which was just sufficient (as he humorously observed) 
‘to purchase a pound of green tea for his wife.’” He a 
fused to enrich himself by speculating in confiscated estates, 
a favorite occupation of some of his friends, and “‘he died 
poor.” He opposed the adoption of the Constitution, 
and apparently took no part in the transactions in public 
securities ; but several members of the Yates family, Richard, 
Adolphus, and Christopher were large operators.” 


— A survey of the economic interests of the members of the» 

Convention presents certain conclusions,; 

the members were lawyers by profession. 
Most of the members came from townsj;"0n or near the 

coast, that is, fr egions in which personalty was 


oe 
ot onegmember-represented.in.his immediate i oral , 


economic interests the small farming or mechanic classes. “\, 
_ The overwhelming majority of members, at leas 
_ sixths, were immediately, directly, and personally interested 
_ in the outcome of their labors at Philadelphia, and were 
| to a greater or less extent economic beneficiaries from the 


i 
adoption df the Constitution. / 


TEN 
Public ¢ security 1 interests were extensively represented” _ 


; 1 UiBpendés to the Secret Proceedings and Debates of the Federal Eig (1821, 
Albany). 
3 Records of the New York Loan Office in the Treasury Department. 


150 -THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


in the Convention.! Of the fifty-five members who attended 
no less than forty appear on the Records of the Treasury 
Department for sums varying from a few dollars up to more 
than one hundred thousand dollars.| .. Among the minor 
holders were Bassett, Blount, Brearley, Broom, Butler, 
Carroll, Few, Hamilton, L. Martin, Mason, Mercer, Mifflin, 
Read, Spaight, Wilson, and Wythe. Among the larger 
holders (taking the sum of about $5000 as the criterion) 
were Baldwin, Blair, Clymer, Dayton, Ellsworth, Fitz- 
simons, Gilman, Gerry, Gorham, Jenifer, Johnson, King, 
Langdon, Lansing, Livingston,? McClurg, R. Morris, C. 
C. Pinckney, C. Pinckney, Randolph, Sherman, miro: 
Washington, and Williamson. 

[It is interesting to note that, with the exception of New 
York, and possibly Delaware, each state had one or more 
prominent. representatives in the Convention who held more | 
_ than a negligible amount of securities, and who could there- 
fore speak with feeling and authority on the question of 
providing in the new Constitution for the full discharge of 
the public'debt | 

Langdon and Gilman, of New Hampshire. 

Gerry, Strong, and King, of Massachusetts. 

Ellsworth, Sherman, and Johnson, of Connecticut. 

Hamilton, of New York. Although he held no large amount 
personally, he was the special pleader for the holders of public 
securities and the maintenance of public faith. 

Dayton, of New Jersey. 

Robert Morris, Clymer, and Fitzsimons, of Pennsylvania. 

Mercer and Carroll, of Maryland. 

Blair, McClurg, and Randolph, of Virginia. 

Williamson, of North Carolina. 

The two Pinckneys, of South Carolina. 

Few and Baldwin, of Georgia. 


1 See above, p. 75, n. 3. 
3 See above, p. 124. Livingston’s holdings are problematical. 


THE ECONOMIC INTERESTS 151 


.Q) ‘Personalty..invested in-lands:for speculation was rep- 
resented by at least fourteen members? Blount, Dayton, 
| Few,. Fitzsimons, Franklin, Gilman, Gerry, Gorham, Hamil- 
ton, Mason, R. Morris, Washington, Williamson, and Wilson. 
3) Personalty in-the.form of money loaned at, interest 
was represented by at least twenty-four members: Bassett, 
Broém, Butler, Carroll, Clymer, Davie, Dickinson, Ells- 
worth, Few, Fitzsimons, Franklin, Gilman, Ingersoll, John- 
son, King, Langdon, Mason, McHenry, C. C. Pinckney, C. 
Pinckney, Randolph, Read, Washington, and Williamson. 
~) (4) Personalty i in mercantile, manufacturing, and shipping — 
lines was represented by»at-least-eleven members: Broom, 


* Clymer, Ellsworth, Fitzsimons, Gerry, King, Langdon, 


. 


aah Mifflin, G. Morris, and R. Morris. 

) Personalty in slaves was represented._by..at.least_. 
fifteen members: Butler, Davie, Jenifer, A. Martin, L. 
Martin, Mason, Mercer, C. C. Pinckney, C. Pinckney, 
age Read, Rutledge, Spaight, Washington, and Wythe. 

It cannot.be.said, therefore, that the members of the 

onvention were lisinterestel.”” On the contrary, we 
“ard Toroed +o accep profoundly significant ‘conclusion 
that they knew through their personal experiences in eco- 
nomic affairs the precise results which the new government 


that they were setting up was designed to attain. As a 
group of doctrinaires, like the Frankfort assembly of 1848, 


they would have failed miserably ; et eee eeroren 


_ they were able to build-the-new-govefnment upon the only- 


. foundations which could be stable: economic / 
-inté , 


1 The fact that a few members of the Convention, who had considerable economic | ‘ 
interests at stake, refused to support the Constitution does not invalidate the gen- | 
eral conclusions here presented. In the cases of Yates, Lansing, Luther Martin, and 
Mason, definite economic reasons for their action are forthcoming; but this 1s a 
minor detail. 


CHAPTER VI 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 


“Tri is difficul erficial student of the Constitu- 
tiofi, who has read only the com aries of the legists, 


.to conceive ofthat-instrument as an economic document. 
It places no property qualifications on voters or officers ; 
Var ao Oniward -cogMITGH Gt any cconwilG Gieups in 
society ; it mentions no special privileges to be conferred 
upon any class. It betrays no feeling, such as vibrates 
through the French constitution of 1791; its language is 
cold, formal, and severe. 

/¢ The true inwardness of the Constitution is not revealed 
by a examination of its provisions as si le_propositions 
ot law bat bys Tony and GaraTal atildy-of th voluminous 
correspondence of the period,’ contemporary newspapers and * 
pamphlets, the records of the debates in the Convention at 
Philadelphia and in the several state conventions, and par- 
ticularly, The Federalist, which was widely circulated 
during the struggle over ratification. The correspondence 
shows the exact character of the evils which the Constitu- 


tion was intended to remedy; the records of the pro- 
ceedings in the Philadelphia Convention reveal the succes- 


1 A great deal of this valuable material has been printed in the Documentary His- 
tory of the Constitution, Vols. IV andV; a considerable amount has been published 
in the letters and papers of the eminent men of the period; but an enormous mass 
still remains in manuscript form. Fortunately, such important papers as those 
of Washington, Hamilton, Madison, and others are in the Library of Congress; but 
they are not complete, of course. 


152 


ad 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 153 


sive steps in the building of the framework of the govern- 
ment under the pressure of economic interests; the pam- 
phlets and newspapers disclose the ideas of the contestants 
over the ratification; and The Federalist presents the 
political science of the new system as conceived by three of 
the profoundest thinkers of the period, Hamilton, Madison, 
and Jay. 

Doubtless, the most illuminating of these sources on the 
economic character of the Constitution are the records of 
the debates in the Convention, which have come down to 
us in fragmentary form; and a thorough treatment of 
material forces reflected in the several clauses of the instru- 
ment of government created by the grave assembly at 
Philadelphia would require a rewriting of the history of the 
proceedings in the light of the great interests represented 
there! But an entire volume would scarcely suffice to 
present the results of such a survey, and an undertaking of 
this character is accordingly impossible here. 

“The Federalist, on the other-hand;-presents.in_a relatively» 
brief and systematic form an economic interpretation of 
the Constitution by the men best fitted, through an intimate ' 
knowledge “of the ideals of the framers, to expound the 
political science of the new government... This wonderful, 


_ piece of argumentation by Hamilton, Madison, and Jay 


is in fact the finest study in the economic. interpretation of 


politics which exists in any language; and whoever would 
_understand- the Constitution as an economic document 
need hardly go beyond it. It is true that the tone of the, 
writers is somewhat modified on account of the fact that 


1 From this point of view, the old conception of the battle at Philadelphia as a 
contest between small and large states — as political entities — will have to be 
severely modified. See Professor Farrand’s illuminating paper on the so-called 
compromises of the Constitution in the Report of the American Historical Association, 
1903, Vol. I, pp. 73 ff. J. C. Welling, ‘States’ Rights Conflict over the Public 
Lands,” ibtd. (1888), pp. 184 ff. 


154 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


they are appealing to the voters to ratify the Constitution, 
but at the same time they are, by the force of circumstances, 
compelled to convince large economic groups that safety 
and strength lie in the adoption of the new system. 

“ Indeed, every fundamental appeal in it is to. some ae ‘ 


and. antia est. Someti ple at 
Yarge in the name of protection against eats armies 
and European coalitions. Itt he com- 


mercial classes whose business_is-represented as prostrate 
before the follies-of the 5 Confederation. Now it is to credit- 
ors seeking relief against paper money and the assaults of 
the agrarians in general; now it is to the holders of federal 
_ securities which are depreciating toward the vanishing point. 


eat ea to the owners of personalty anxious to 

find a foil a t_the attacks of levelling democracy;-that 

| Th authors of The Federale! wUaress thet Wos" 8 ost cogent 

arguments 1 in- ion. It is true there is much 
discussion of the details of the new frame-work of govern- 
ment, to which even some friends of reform took exceptions ; 
but Madison and Hamilton both knew that these were in- 
cidental matters when compared with the sound basis upon 
which the superstructure rested. 

“ # Jn reading the pages of this remarkable work as a study in 
political economy, it is important to bear in mind that the 
system, which the authors are describing, consisted of ‘two 
fundamental parts => one positive, the other negative: 

I. A government endowed with certain positive powers, 
but so “constructed as to break the force of majority rule 
and prevent invasions of the property rights of minorities. 

II. Restrictions on the state legislatures which had. been 
so vigorous in their attacks on capital. 

4 Under some circumstances, a 
>and whenever it desirés to make an 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 155 


economic gain through governmental functioning, it must 
have, of course, a system endowed with the requisite powers. 
in Ship subsidies, in railway land grants, in river and harbor 
pe provements, and so on through the-catalegue of s0-called 
“paternalistic” legislation. Of course it may be showr 
| that the “general good” is the ostensible object of any 
. particular act; but the general good is a passive force, and 
| unless we know who are the several individuals that benefit 
in its name, it has no meaning. When it is so analyzed, 
immediate and remote beneficiaries are discovered; and 
the former are usually found to have been the dynamic 
element in securing the legislation. ‘Take for example, the 
economic interests of the advocates who appear in tariff 
hearings at Washington. 
On the obverse side, dominant interests quite as often 
bene of governmental action as from 
positive assistance. They are able to take care of them- 
“selves if let alone within the circle of protection created by 
the law. Indeed, most owners of property have as much 
to fear from positive governmental action as from their 
inability to secure advantageous legislation. Particularly 
is this true where the field of private property is already ex- 
tended to cover practically every form of tangible and in- 
tangible wealth. This was clearly set forth by Hamilton: 
“Tt may perhaps be said that the power of preventing bad 
laws includes that of preventing good ones... . But this 
_ objection will have little weight with those who can properly 
estimate the mischiefs of that inconstancy and mutability 
in the laws which form the greatest blemish in the character 
and genius of our governments. They will consider every 
institution calculated to restrain the excess of law-making, 
and to keep things in the same state in which they happen 


156 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


to be at any given period, as more likely to do good than 
harm. ... The injury which may possibly be done by 
defeating a few good laws will be amply compensated by 
the advantage of preventing a number of bad ones.” ! 


CONSTITUTION? 


HE UNDERLYING POLITICAL SCIENCE 


Before taking up the economic implications of the struc-. 
ture of the federal government, it is important to ascertain 
what,~in the opinion of The Federalist, is the basis of_all 
government. The most philosophical examination of the 
oundations of political science is made by Madison in the 


“tenth number. Here he lays down uncertain lan- 


guage, the principle-that the first_and_elemental concern of 
\ SN ® 
ject_of..government,’’ he declares, is 
the protection of “the diversity.in-the faculties of men, from 
which the rights of property originate.”.The chief business 
of government, from which, perforce, its essential nature 
must be derived, consists in the control and adjustment of 
conflicting economic interests. After enume ari-- 
ous forms of propertied interests which spring up inevi- 
tably in modern society, he adds: “The regulation of these 
various and interfering interests forms the principal task of 
modern legislation, and involves the spirit of party and 
faction in the ordinary operations of the government.” ® 
2. What are theychief causes of these conflicting political 
forces )with which the government must concern itself? 
Madison answers. Of course fanciful and frivolous dis- 
tinctions have sometimes been the cause of violent conflicts ; 


Bos the most common and durable source of factions. has _ 


iT eo 


2See J. A. Smith, The Spirit of American Government. 
3 See Noah Webster’s consideration of the subject of government and property; 
Ford, Pamphlets on the Constttution, pp. 57 ff. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 157 


been the various..and unequal distribution. of property. 
Those who hold and those who are without property have 


i 


ever formed distinct interests in society. Those who are, 


_ereditors, and those who are debtors, fall under a like dis- 
crimination. A landed interest, a manufacturing interest, a 
mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser 
interests grow up of necessity in civilized nations, and divide 
them into different classes actuated by different sentiments 
and views.” 

3. The theories of government which men entertain 
te enero Oo thei propety interests. “From, 
the protection of different and unequal faculties of acquir- 
ing property, the possession of different degrees and kinds 
of property immediately results; and from the influence of 
these on the sentiments and views of the respective proprietors, 
ensues a division of society into different interests and parties.”’ 
Legislatures reflect these interests. “What,” he asks, “are 
the different classes of legislators but advocates and parties 
to the causes which they determine.” There is no help for 
it. “The causes of faction cannot be removed,” and “ 
well know that neither moral nor religious motives can be 


| Tae it contending factions will rise in ‘the § state. The | gov-/ 
ernment will reflect them, for they will have their separate 


_ principles and ‘‘sentiments”’; but the su e danger will’ 


arise from the fusion of eee interests into an overbearing — 

whic adison, another place, prophesied 
would be the landless proletariat,’ — an ov ~ 
jority which will make its “rights”? paramount, and sac- 
rifice the “rights” of the minority. “To—secure the 


publie-goed,;~—he _declares,‘and private rights against the 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 203. 


~ 


158 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


danger of such a faction and at the same time preserve the 
spirit and the form of popular government is then the great 
object to which our inquiries are directed.” 


5. How is this to be done? Since the contending cl 3 


cannot be eliminated and their i interests are bound to be 


and in balancing one over ak ee The aie 


for doing this is created by the new Constitution and by the 
(a) Publie-views are to be refined and enlarge 

“by passing them through the medium of a chosen body of 

citizens.”’ (0) The very size of the Union will enable the 


inclusion of more interests so that the danger of an over- 
majority is not so great. “The smaller the society, 
the fewer probably will be istinct parties and interests 
composing it; the fewer the distinct parties and interests, 
the more frequently will a majority be found of the same 
party. ... Extend the sphere, and you take in a greater 
variety of parties and interests; you make it less probable 
that a majority of the whole will have a common motive to 
invade the rights of other citizens; or if such a common 
motive exists, it will be more difficult for all who feel it to 
discover their strength and to act in unison with each other.” 
Q. E. D., “in the extent and proper structure of the Union, 
therefore, we behold a republican remedy for the diseases 
most incident to republican government.”’ 3 
1 This view was set forth by Madison in a letter to Jefferson in 1788. ‘* Wherever 
the real power in a Government lies, there is the danger of oppression. In our 
Governments the real power lies in the majority of the Community, and the inva- 
sion of private rights is chiefly to be apprehended, not from acts of Government con- 
trary to the sense of its constituents, but from acts in which the Government is 
the mere instrument of the major number of the constituents. This is a truth of 
great importance, tut not yet sufficiently attended to, and is probably more 
strongly impressed upon my mind by facts, and reflections suggested by them, 


than on yours which has contemplated abuses of power issuing from a very differ- 
ent quarter. Wherever there is an interest and power to do wrong, wrong will 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 159 


I, THE STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT OR THE BALANCE OF 
POWERS 


The fundamental theory of political-eeonomythus*stated 
by Madison was.the basis of the original American concep- 
tion of the balance of powers which is formulated at length 
in four numbers of The Federalist and.consists of the follow- 
ing elements : 

1. No mere parchment geparation of departments of 
government will be effective. “The legislative department 
is “everywhere extending the sphere of its activity, and 
drawing all power into its impetuous vortex. The founders 
of ourrepublic . . . seem never for a moment to have turned 
their eyes from the danger to liberty from the overgrown 
and all-grasping prerogative of an hereditary magistrate, 
supported and fortified by an hereditary branch of the legis- 
lative authority. They seem never to have recollected 
the danger from legislative usurpations, which, by assem- 
bling all power in the same hands, must lead to the same 
tyranny as is threatened by executive usurpations.”’ ? 

2. Some sure mode of checking usurpations in the’ 
government must be provided, other than frequent appeals 
to the people.| “There appear to be insuperable objectiony 
against the proposed recurrence to the people as a provision 
in all cases for keeping the several departments of power 
within their constitutional limits.”? |In a contest between 
the legislature and the other branches of the government, the 
former would doubtless be victorious on account of the 
ability of the legislators to plead their cause with the people.| 

3. \What then can be depended upon to keep the governy 
generally be done, and not less readily by a powerful and interested party than by a 
powerful and interested prince.’’ Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. V, 


p. 88. 
1 The Federalist, No. 48. 2 Ibid., No. 49. 


160 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


ment in close rein? | “The only answer that can be given 
is, that as all these exterior provisions are found to be in- 
adequate, the defect must be supplied by so contriving the 
interior structure of the government as that its several con- 
stituent parts may, by their mutual relations, be the means 
of keeping each other in their proper places. ... It is of 
great importance in a republic not only to guard the society 
against the oppression of its rulers, but to guard one part of 
the society against the injustice of the other part. Differ- 
ent interests necessarily exist in different classes of citizens. 
If a majority be united by a common interest, the rights of 
the minority will be insecure.” ! \|There are two ways of 
obviating this danger: one is by establishing a monarch 
independent of popular will, and the other is by reflecting 
these contending interests (so far as their representatives 
may be enfranchised) in the very structure of the govern- 
ment itself so that a majority cannot dominate the minority 


— which minority is of coursé Composed of those who possess 
property that_ma “Seciéty itse rll be 
broken into so many parts, interests, and classes of citizens, 


, that the rights of individuals, or of the minority, will be in 
little danger from interested combinations of the majority.” ? 
’ 4.\The structure of the government as devised at Phila- 
delphia reflects these several interests and makes improbable 
any danger to the minority from the majority “The House 
of Representatives being to be elected immediately by the 
people, the Senate by the State legislatures, the President 
by electors chosen for that purpose by the people, there 
\, would be little probability of a common interest to cement 
NX these different branches in a predilection for any particular 
ass of electors.” ° 

5. /All of these diverse interests appear in the amend- 


1 The Federalist, No. 51. 2 Ibid., No. 51. 3 Ibid., No. 60. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 161 


ing process but they are further reinforced against_majori- 
ties. An amendment must tecéive a two-thirds vote in 
“each of the two houses so constituted and the approval of 
three-fourths of the states.! 
_ 6. |The economic corollary of this system is as follows: \ 
Property..interests..may, through their. superior. weight..in \ 
power and_ intelligence, secure advantageous legislation 
whenever necessary, and they may at the same time obtain 
immunity from control by parliamentary. majorities. 

If we examine carefully the delicate instrument by which 
the framers sought to check certain kinds of positive action 
that might be advocated to the detriment of established and 
acquired rights, we cannot help marvelling at their skill. 
Their. leading idea was to break up the attacking forces at 
the starting point: the source of political authority for 
the several branches of the government. This disinte- 
gration of positive action at the source was further facil- 

* itated by the differentiation in the terms given to the 
respective departments of the government. And the crown- 
ing counterweight to “en—intéerested—and—ever-bearing 
majority;’—as Madison phrased it, was secured in the 
peculiar position assigned to the judiciary, and the use of 
the sanctity and mystery of the law as a foil to democratic 
attacks. 

It will be seen on examination that no two of the leading 
branches of the government are derived from the same 
source. ‘The House of Representatives springs from the 
mass of the people whom the states may see fit to en- , 
franchise. The Senate is elected by the legislatures of the | 
states, which were, in 1787, almost uniformly based on | 
property qualifications, sometimes with a differentiation 
between the sources of the upper and lower houses. The 
President is to be chosen by electors selected as the legis- 

M 


> 


162 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


latures of the states may determine—at all events by an 
authority one degree removed from the voters at large. 
The judiciary is to be chosen by the President and the 
Senate, both removed from direct popular control and hold- 
ing for longer terms than the House. 

A sharp differentiation is made in the terms of the several 
authorities, so that a complete renewal of the government’ 
at one stroke is impossible. The House of Representatives 
is chosen for two years; the Senators for six, but not at 
one election, for one-third go out every two years. The 
President is chosen for four years. ‘The judges of the 
Supreme Court hold for life. Thus “popular distempers,” 
as eighteenth century publicists called them, are not only 
restrained from working their havoc through direct elections, 
but they are further checked by the requirement that they 
must last six years in order-to make their effects felt in the 
political department of the government, providing they can 
break through the barriers imposed by the indirect election 
of the Senate and the President. Finally, there is the check 
of judicial control that can be overcome only through the 
manipulation of the appointing power which requires time, 
or through the operation of a cumbersome amending 
system. 


The. keystone.ofthe whole structure is, in fact, the system 
provided for judicial control = the most-URIGUE Goctribus 
tion feta cance of goverMant whieh Has DSO by 
American politteat-genms. is claimed by some recent 


writers that it was not the intention of the framers of the 
Constitution to confer upon the Supreme Court the power 
of passing upon the constitutionality of statutes enacted 
by Congress; but in view of the evidence on the other side, 
it is incumbent upon those who make this assertion to bring 
forward positive evidence to the effect that judicial control 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 163 


was not a part of the Philadelphia programme.! Certainly, 
the authors of The Federalist entertained no doubts on the 
point, and they conceived it to be such an excellent prin- 
ciple that they were careful to explain it to the electors to 
whom they addressed their arguments. 

After elaborating fully the principle of judicial control 
over legislation under the Constitution, Hamilton enumer- 
ates the advantages to be derived from it. Speaking on 
the point of tenure during good behavior, he says: “In a 
monarchy it is an excellent barrier to the despotism of the 
prince; in a republic it is no less an excellent barrier to the 
encroachments and oppressions of the representative body. 


bos spe nnons the courts of justice are tobe considered 98 

e bulwarks of imi Consti: ainst legislative 
ee strong 
argument for the permanent tenure of judicial offices, 
since nothing-wi i So much as this to that inde- 
pendent spirit in the judges which must be essential to the 
faithful performance of so arduous a duty. ... But it is 
not with a view to infractions of the Constitution only that 
the independence of the judges may be an essential safeguard 
against the effects of occasional ill humors in the society. 
These sometimes extend no farther than to the injury of 
private rights of particular classes of citizens, by unjust 
and partial laws. Here also the firmness of the judicial 
magistracy is of vast importance in mitigating the severity 
and confining the operation of such laws. It not only 
serves to moderate the immediate mischiefs of those which 
may have been passed, but it operates as a check upon the 


legislative body in passing them; who, perceiving that ob- 
stacles to the success of iniquitous intention are to be ex- 


1 Beard, The Supreme Court and the Constitution. See also the criticisms of this 
work by Professor W. F. Dodd, in the American Historical Review for January, 
1913. 


164 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


pected from the scruples of the courts, are in a manner com- 
pelled, by the very motives of injustice they meditate, to 
qualify their attempts. This is a circumstance calculated 
to have more influence upon the character of our govern- 
ments than but few may be aware of.” ? 
“N evertheless, it may be asked why, if the protection of 
property rights lay at the basis.of the new system, there is in 
othe Constittition no provision for pro alifieations for 
"voters or for elected officials and_representatives. This 
is, indeed, peculiar when it is recalled that the constitutional 
history of England is in a large part a record of conflict over 
the weight in the government to be enjoyed by definite 
economic groups, and over the removal of the property quali- 
fications early imposed on members of the House of Com- 
mons and on the voters at large. tthe explanation of 


x the absence of property ualifications from_ the Constitu-. 


tion-issnot difficult. alia 
{The members of the Convention were, in general, not 
opposed to property qualifications as such, either for officers 
or voters.) “Several propositions,” says Mr. 8. H. Miller, 
“‘were made in the federal Convention in regard to property 
qualifications. A motion was carried instructing the com- 
mittee to fix upon such qualifications for members of Con- 
gress. The committee could not agree upon the amount_ 
and reported in favor of leaving the matter to the legis- 
lature. Charles Pinckney objected to this plan as giving 
too much power to the first legislature. . . . Ellsworth ob- 
jected to a property qualification on account of the difficulty 
of fixing the amount. |If it was made high enough for the 
South, it would not be applicable to the Eastern States! 
Franklin was the only speaker who opposed the proposition 
to require property on principle, saying that ‘some of the 
1 Number 78. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 165 


greatest rogues he was ever acquainted with were the 
richest rogues.’ A resolution was also carried to require a 
property qualification for the Presidency. Hence it was 
evident that the lack of all property requirements for office 
in the United States Constitution was not owing to any 
opposition of the convention to such qualifications per 
se.” } 

Propositions..to~establish property restrictions were.de- 
feated, .not...because they were believed to be inherently 
opposed to the genius of American government, but for, 
economic reasons — strange as.itemay seem. ‘These eco- 
nomic reasons were clearly sét forth by Madison in the debate 
over landed qualifications for legislators in July, when he 
showed, first, that slight property-qualifications.would not 
keep out the small farmers*whose paper money schemes had 
been so disastrous to personalty; and, secondly, that 
landed property qualifications would exclude from Congress 
the representatives of “those classes of citizens who were 
not landholders,” 7.¢..the personalty interests. This was 
true, he thought, because the mercantile and manufacturing/ / 
classes would hardly be willing to turn their personalty into ys 
sufficient quantities of landed property to make them 
eligible for a seat in Congress. 

\The other members also knew that they had most to fear 
from the very electors who would be enfranchised under 
a slight freehold restriction,® for the paper money party was 
everywhere bottomed on the small farming class.| As 
Gorham remarked, the elections at Philadelphia, New York, 
and Boston, “where the merchants and mechanics vote, 
are at least as good as those made by freeholders only.” 4 

ee re that the pervert 
1 American Historical Association Report (1899), Vol. I, p. 108. 
2 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, pp. 123-124. 
3 Ibid., pp. 201 ff. ‘ Ibid., p. 216. 


age 


166 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


reflected in the Convention could, in truth, see no safe- 
,guard at all in a freehold qualification against the assaults 
on vested personalty rights which had been made by the 


agrarians in every state. .And it was obviously impossible 
- to establish nalty test, had they so desired, for there 


would have been no chance of securing a 1 ratification of the 
~Constitution at the hands of legislatures ¢ chosen ‘by _fre 
: hold oiders, or at_ or at _the hands c 1s of conventions-sele 
~K ve very neat t example ¢ of this an antagonism between Seale 
and personalty in the Convention came out on July 26, when 
Mason made, and Charles Pinckney supported, a motion 
imposing landed qualifications on members of Congress and 
excluding from that body ‘persons having unsettled ac- 
counts with or being indebted to the United States.” In 
bringing up this motion Mason “observed that persons of 
the latter descriptions had frequently got into the state legis- 
latures in order to promote laws that might shelter their 
delinquencies; and that this evil had crept into Congress if 
report was to be regarded.”’ } 

Gouverneur Morris was on his feet in an instant. If 
qualifications were to be imposed, they should be laid on 
electors, not elected persons. The disqualification would 
fall upon creditors of the United States, for there were but 
few who owed the government anything. He knew that 
under this rule very few members of the Convention could 
get into the new government which they were establishing. 
“As to persons having unsettled accounts, he believed 
them to be pretty many. He thought, however, that such 
a discrimination would be both odious and useless and in 
many instances unjust and cruel. The delay of settlement 
had been more the fault of the public than of individuals. 
What will be done with those patriotic Citizens who have 

1 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 121. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 167 


lent money or services or property to their country, without 
having been yet able to obtain a liquidation of their claims ? 
Are they to be excluded?” On thinking it over, Morris 
added to his remarks on the subject, saying, “It was a 


precept of great antiquity as well as of high authority that | 
we should not be righteous overmuch. He thought we ought — 


to be equally on our guard against being wise overmuch. . . . 
The parliamentary qualifications quoted by Colonel Mason 
had been disregarded in practice; and was but a scheme 
of the landed against the monied interest.” ? 

Gerry thought that the inconvenience of excluding some 
worthy creditors and debtors was of less importance than 
the advantages offered by the resolution, but, after some 
reflection, he added that “if property be one object of 
‘ government, provisions for securing it cannot be improper.”’ 
King sagely remarked that there might be a great danger in 
imposing a landed qualification, because ‘“‘it would exclude 
the monied interest, whose aids may be essential in particular 
emergencies to the public safety.” 

Madison had no confidence in the effectiveness of the 
landed qualification and moved to strike it out, adding, 
“Landed possessions were no certain evidence of real 
wealth. Many enjoyed them to a great extent who were 
more in debt than they were worth. The unjust laws of the 
states had proceeded more from this class of men than any 
others. It had often happened that men who had acquired 
landed property on credit got into the Legislatures with a 
view of promoting an unjust protection against their Credi- 
tors. In the next place, if a small quantity of land should 
be made the standard, it would be no security; if a large 
one, it would exclude the proper representatives of those 
classes of Citizens who were not landholders.” For these 

1 Ibid., pp. 121-122. 


we 


168 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


and other reasons he opposed the landed qualifications and 
suggested that property qualifications on the voters would 
be better.’ 
The motion to strike out the “landed” 
legislators was carrie to one; the prop- 
“$sition to strike out the disqualification of persons hav- 
ing unsettled accounts with the United States was carried by 
a vote of nine to two. Finally the proposition to exclude 
persons who were indebted to the United States was like- 
wise defeated by a vote of nine to two, after Pinckney had 
called attention to the fact that “it would exclude persons 
who had purchased confiscated property or should purchase 
Western territory of the public and might be some obstacle 
to the sale of the latter.” 

| Indeed, there was little risk to personalty in thus allowing - 
the Constitution to-go to the States for approval without 


any ¢ oper y qualifications _ on. es other than those 


: éstablished, a safe- 
guard was secured by the indirect process. ‘Two controlling 
bodies, the Senate and Supreme Court, were removed alto- 
ge I popular election except by 
constitutional amendment. Finally, the conservative mem- 
bers of the Convention were doubly fortified in the fact that 
nearly all of the state constitutions-then-in-force provided 
real oF patzoal “GrOpePty-aualitaations:-sor-vataraleree ad 
and radical democratic changes did not seem perilously 
near.”} 

1 Debate in Farrand, Records, Vol. II, pp. 123-124. 

2See above, pp. 65ff. The members of the Convention could not foresee ine 


French Revolution which was to break out just as the new federal government was 
being put into operation in 1789. 


"| 


ol 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 169 


II, THE POWERS CONFERRED UPON THE FEDERAL 
GOVERNMENT 


1. ‘The powers for positive-action-conferred-upon-the-new 
government»were.few, but they were adequate»to*the»pur- 
poses of the framers. They included, first, the power..to 
lay and collect taxes; but here the rural interests were con- 
ciliated by the provision that direct. taxes must be appor- 
tioned among the states according to population, counting 
three-fifths of the slaves. This, in the opinion of contem- 
poraries €minently qualified to speak, was designed to pre- 
vent the populations of the manufacturing states from shift- 
ing the burdens of taxation to the sparsely settled agricul- 
tural regions.’ | 

In a letter to the governor of their state, three delegates 


from North Carolina, Blount, Spaight, and Williamson, 


the southern planters and farmers: ‘We had many things 
to hope from a National Government and the chief thing we 
had to fear from such a Government was the risque of 
unequal or heavy Taxation, but we hope you will believe as 
we do that the Southern states in general and North Carolina 
in particular are well secured on that head by the proposed 
system. It is provided in the 9th section of article the first 
that no Capitation or direct Tax shall be laid except in pro- 
portion to the number of inhabitants, in which number 
five blacks are only counted as three. If a land tax is laid, 
we are to pay the same rate; for example, fifty citizens of 
North Carolina can be taxed no more for all their Lands 
than fifty Citizens in one of the Eastern States. This must 
be greatly in our favour, for as most of their farms are small 

1 Jt was a curious turn of fortune that this provision prevented the agrarians and 


populists in 1894 from shifting a part of the burden of taxes to the great cities of 
the East. Thus the Zweck im Recht is sometimes reversed. 


170 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


and many of them live in Towns we certainly have, one with 
another, land of twice the value that they possess. When 
it is also considered that five Negroes are only to be charged 
the same Poll Tax as three whites, the advantage must be 
considerably increased under the proposed Form of Govern- 
ment. The Southern states have also a better security 
for the return of slaves who might endeavour to escape than 
they had under the original Confederation.” * 

‘The taxing power was the basis of all other positive 
powers, and it afforded the revenues that were to discharge 
the public debt in full. Provision was made for this dis- 
charge in Article VI to the effect that “All debts con- 
tracted and engagements entered into before the adoption of 
this Constitution shall be valid against the United States 
under this Constitution as under the Confederation.”} 

But the cautious student of public economy, remembering 
the difficulties which Congress encountered under the Articles 
of Confederation in its attempts to raise the money to meet 
the interest on the debt, may ask how the framers of the 
Constitution could expect to overcome the hostile economic 
forces which had hitherto blocked the payment of the requisi- 
tions. The answer is short. Under the Articles, Congress 
had no power to lay and collect taxes immediately ; it could 
only make requisitions on the state legislatures. Inasmuch 
as most of the states relied largely on direct taxes for their 
revenues, the demands of Congress were keenly felt and 
stoutly resisted. Under the new system, however, Congress 
is authorized to lay taxes on its own account, but it is evident 
that the framers contemplated placing practically all of 
the national burden on the consumer. The provision re- 
quiring the apportionment of direct taxes on a basis of popu- 
lation obviously implied that such taxes were to be viewed 

1Clark, The Records of North Carolina, Vol. XX, p. 778. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 171 


as a last resort when indirect taxes failed to provide the 
required revenue. 

With his usual acumen, Hamilton conciliates the free- 
holders and property owners in general by pointing out that 
they will not be called upon to support the national govern- ° 
ment by payments proportioned to their wealth.! Ex- 


_ perience has demonstrated that it is impracticable to raise 


any considerable sums by direct taxation. Even where the 
government is strong, as in Great Britain, resort must be 
had chiefly to indirect~taxation. The pockets of the 
farmers “will reluctantly yield but scanty supplies, in the 
unwelcome shape of impositions on their houses and lands; 
and personal property is too precarious and invisible a fund 
to be laid hold of in any other way than by the imper- 


ceptible agency of taxes on consumption.”’ Real and per- 


sonal property are thus assured a generous immunity from 
such burdens as Congress had attempted to impose under 


the Articles; taxes under the new system will, therefore, be 


less troublesome than under the old. 

2. Congress was given,in the second-place,-plenary-power- 
to raise and support military and naval forces, for the de- 
fence of the country against foreign and domestic foes. 
These forces were to be at the disposal of the President in 
the execution of national laws; and to guard the states 
against renewed attempts of ‘‘desperate debtors”’ like Shays, 
the United States guaranteed to every commonwealth a 
republican form of government and promised to aid in quell- 
ing internal disorder on call of the proper authorities. 

The army and Davy are. considered by the authors of 
The Federalist as genuine economic instrumentalities. As 
will be pointed out below, they regarded trade and-Commerce 
as the fundamental cause of wars between nations; and the 

1 The Federalist, Number 12. 


172 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


source of domestic insurrection they traced to class con- 
flicts within society. ‘‘Nations in general,” says: Jay, 
“will make war whenever they have a prospect of getting 
anything by it’”’;1 and it is obvious that the United States 
dissevered and discordant will be the easy prey to the com- 
mercial ambitions of their neighbors and rivals. | 

The material gains to be made by other nations at the 
expense of the United States are so apparent that the former 
cannot restrain themselves from aggression. France and 
Great Britain feel the pressure of our rivalry in the fisheries ; 
they and other European nations are our competitors in 
navigation and the carrying trade; our independent voyages 
to China interfere with the monopolies enjoyed by other 
countries there; Spain would like to shut.the Mississippi 
against us on one side and Great Britain fain would close 
the St. Lawrence on the other. Thecheapness and excellence 
of our productions will excite their jealousy, and the enter- 
prise and address of our merchants will not be consistent 
with the wishes or policy of the sovereigns of Europe. 
But, adds the commentator, by way of clinching the argu- 
ment, ‘‘if they see that our national government is efficient 
and well administered, our trade prudently regulated, our 
militia properly organized and disciplined, our resources and 
finances discreetly managed, our credit re-established, our 
people free, contented, and united, they will be much more 
disposed to cultivate our friendship than provoke our re- 
sentment.”’? 

All the powers of Europe could not prevail against us. 
“Under a vigorous national government the natural strength 
and resources of the country, directed to a common interest, 
would baffle all the combinations of European jealousy to 
restrain our growth.... An: active commerce, an ex- 


1 The Federalist, No. 4. 3 Ibid. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 173 


tensive navigation, and a flourishing marine would then be 
the offspring of moral and physical necessity. We might 
defy the little arts of the little politicians to control or 
vary the irresistible and unchangeable course of nature.’’! 
Inthe present state of disunion the profits of trade aresnatched 
from us; our commerce languishes; and poverty threatens 
to overspread a country which might outrival the world 
in riches. 
|The_army and.navy are to be not only instruments..of..... 

defence in protecting the United States..against.the com- 
mercial and territorial ambitions of other countries; but 
they may be used also in forcing open foreign markets. 4 
What discriminatory tariffs and navigation laws may not 
accomplish the sword may achieve. The authors of The 
Federalist do not contemplate that policy of mild and in- 
nocuous isolation which was later made famous by Washing- 
ton’s farewell address.” On the contrary —they do not 
expect the United States to change human nature and make 
our commercial classes less ambitious than those of other 
countries to extend their spheres of trade. A strong navy 
will command the respect of European states. “‘There can 
be no doubt that the continuance of the Union under an 
efficient government would put it within our power, at a 
period not very distant, to create a navy which, if it could 
not vie with those of the great maritime powers, would at 
least be of respectable weight if thrown into the scale of 
either of two contending parties.... A few ships of 
the line sent opportunely to the reinforcement of either 
side, would often be sufficient to decide the fate of a cam- 
paign, on the event of which interests of the greatest mag- 


1 The Federalist, No. 11. 

2 Washington’s farewell address which was partially written by Hamilton is one 
of the most ingenious partisan documents ever written. It, too, has its economie 
interpretation. 


174 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


nitude were suspended. Our position is, in this respect, a 
most commanding one. And if to this consideration we 
add that of the usefulness of supplies from this country, 
in the prosecution of military operations in the West Indies, 
it will be readily perceived that a situation so favorable 
would enable us to bargain with great advantage for com- 
mercial privileges. A price would be set not only upon 
our friendship, but upon our neutrality. By a steady ad- 
herence to the Union, we may hope, ere long, to become 
the arbiter of Europe in America, and to be able to incline the 
balance of European competitions in this part of the world 
as our interest may dictate.” | 
_“1As to dangers from class wars within particular states, 
the authors of The Federalist did not deem it necessary 
to make extended remarks{ the recent events in New Eng- 
land were only too vividly impressed upon the public mind. 
“The tempestuous situation from which Massachusetts 
has scarcely emerged,”’ says Hamilton, “evinces that dangers 
of this kind are not merely speculative. Who can deter- 
mine what might have been the issue of her late convulsions, 
if the malcontents had been headed by a Cesar or by a 
Cromwell.” 2 |The strong arm of the Union must beavailable\ 
in such crises.| ¢ 
In considering the importance of defence against domestic 
insurrection, the authors of The Federalist do not overlook 
an appeal to the slave-holders’ instinctive fear of a servile 
revolt. Naturally, it is Madison whose interest catches 
this point and drives it home, by appearing to discount it. 
In dealing with the dangers of insurrection, he says: ‘I 
take no notice of an unhappy species of population abound- 
ing in some of the states who, during the calm of regular 
government are sunk below the level of men; but who, in 


1 The Federalist, No. 11. 2 Ibid., No. 21. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 175 


the tempestuous scenes of civil violence, may emerge into 
human character and give a superiority of strength to any 
party with which they may associate themselves.” 4 

3. [In addition to the power to lay and collect taxes and 
raise and maintain armed forces on land and sea, the, Con- 
stitution vests-im.Congress.plenary control over foreign and 
interstate..commerce, gad.thus authorizes it to institute 

rotective and discriminatory laws in avor of American 
Rrereste mt To Greate a Wide SWOSp TOE TGS trade through- 
out the whole Americar em sire. | A single clause thus reflects 
the strong impulse 0 of economic forces in the towns and young 
manufacturing centres. In a few simple words the mer- 
cantile and manufacturing interests wrote their Zweck im 
Recht; and they paid for their victory by large concessions 
to the slave-owning planters of the south.® 

| While dealing with commerce in The Federalist* Hamilton 
does not neglect the subject of interstate traffic and inter- 
course. He shows how free trade over a wide range will be 
to reciprocal advantage, will give great diversity to com- 
mercial enterprise, and will render stagnation less liable by 
offering more distant markets when local demands fall off | 
“The speculative trader,” he concludes, “will at once perceive 
the force of these observations and will acknowledge that 
the aggregate balance of the commerce of the United States 
would bid fair to be much more favorable than that of the 
thirteen states without union or with partial unions.” 

oa (Another great economic antagonism found its ee 
dispose of the territories and make rules and. ee istiot Pax 
their. government and admission to the Union. In this con- 
test, the interests of the states which held territories came 

1 The Federalist, No. 43. 2Tbid., No. 35. 


3 See the entire letter of Blount, Spaight, and Williamson, cited above, p. 169. 
4No. 11. 


176 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


prominently to the front; and the ambiguity of the language 
used in the Constitution on this point may be attributed to 
the inability of the contestants to reach precise conclusions.’ 
The leaders were willing to risk the proper management of 
the land problem after the new government was safely 
launched ; and they were correct in their estimate of their 
future political prowess.! 

These are the great powers conferred on the new govern 
ment: taxation, war, commercial control, and disposition 
of western lands. Through them public creditors may be 
paid in full, domestic peace maintained, advantages ob- 
tained in dealing with foreign nations, manufactures pro- 
tected, and the development of the territories go forward 
with full swing. ‘The remaining powers are minor and need 
not be examined here. What implied powers lay in the 
minds~of the framers likewise need not be inquired into; 
they have long been the subject of juridical speculation. 


V7“ None of the powers conferred.by~the Constitution on _ 


Congress permits a direct attack on property. \Ihe federal 
government is given no general ‘authority to define property. 
It may tax, but indirect taxes must be uniform, and these 
are to fall upon consumers. Direct taxes may be laid, but 
“resort to this form of taxation is rendered practically im- 
possible, save on extraordinary occasions, by the provision 
that they must be apportioned according to population — so 
that numbers cannot transfer the burden to accumulated 
wealth. The slave trade may be destroyed, it is true, after 
the lapse of a few years; but slavery as a domestic institu- 
tion is better safeguarded than before. 
Even the destruction of the slave trade had an economic 
basis, although much was said at the time about the ethics 


1J. C. Welling, ‘States’ Rights Conflict over the Public Lands,’”’ Report of the 
American Historical Association (1888), pp. 174 ff. 


—— 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 177 


of the clause. In the North where slavery, though wide- 
spread, was of little economic consequence, sympathy with 
the unfortunate negroes could readily prevail.\ Maryland 
and Virginia, already overstocked with slaves beyond the 
limits of land and capital, had prohibited the foreign trade 
in negroes, because the slave-holders, who predominated in 
\the legislatures, were not willing to see the value of their 
\chattels reduced to a vanishing point by excessive importa- 
‘tions. South Carolina and Georgia, where the death rate in 
the rice swamps and the opening of adjoining territories 
made a strong demand for the increase of slave property, 
on the other hand, demanded an open door for slave-dealers. 

South Carolina was particularly determined,’ and gave 
northern representatives to understand that if they wished 
to secure their commercial privileges, they must make con- 
cessions to the slave trade. And they were met half way. 
Ellsworth said: “As slaves multiply so fast in Virginia 


and Maryland that it is cheaper to raise than import them, 


whilst in the sickly rice swamps foreign supplies are neces- 
sary, if we go no farther than is urged, we shall be unjust 
towards South Carolina and Georgia. Let us not inter- 
meddle. As population increases; poor laborers will be so 
plenty as to render slaves useless.” ” 

General Pinckney taunted the Virginia representatives in 
the Convention, some of whom were against slavery as well 
as importation, with disingenuous interestedness. ‘‘South 
Carolina and Georgia cannot do without slaves. <As to 
Virginia she will gain by stopping theimportations. Her 
slaves will rise in value and she has more than she wants. 
It would be unequal to require South Carolina and Georgia 
to confederate on such unequal terms.” 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 371. 
2 Ibid., p. 371. 


Vv 


of 


a 


178 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


III. RESTRICTIONS LAID UPON STATE LEGISLATURES 


Equally important to personalty as the positive powers 
conferred upon Congress to tax, support armies, and regu- 
late commerce were the restrictions imposed_on the states? 
Indeed,| we have the high authority*of Madison for the state 
ment that of the forces which created the Constitution, 
those property_interests seeking protection against _omnipo7, 
tent legislatures were the most activel 

In a letter to Jefferson, written in October, 1787, Madison. 
elaborates the principle of federal judicial control over state 
legislation, and explains the importance of this new institution 
in connection with the restrictions laid down in the Constitu- 
tion on laws affecting private rights. “The mutability of 
the laws of the States,” he says, “is found to be a serious evil. 
The injustice of them has been so frequent and so flagrant 
as to alarm the most steadfast friends of Republicanism. 
I am persuaded I do not err in’saying that the evils issuing 
from these sources contributed more to that uneasiness 
which produced the Convention, and prepared the public 
mind for a general reform, than those which accrued to 
our national character and interest from the inadequacy 
of the Confederation to its.immediate objects. A reform, 

‘therefore, which does not make provision for private rights 
_ be materially defective.’ ? 

“Tyo small clauses embody the chief demands of personalty™ 

against agrarianism: the emfssion.of. -paper.money i is pro-_ 


1 There are, of course, some restrictions on Congress laid down in the Constitu- 
tion; but the powers of the national legislature are limited and the restrictions 
are not of the same significance. Radical action on the part of the national legisla- 
ture was anticipated in the structure of the government itself, but specific provision 
had to be made against the assaults of popular majorities in state legislatures on 
property rights. 

2 Writings of James Madison (1865), Vol. I, p. 350. This entire letter deserves 
careful study by anyone who would understand the Constitution as an economic 
document. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 179 


hibited and the states are forbidden to impair the obligation 
of.contract. The first of these mMéans a return to a specie, 
basis — when coupled with the requirement that the gold 
and silver coin of the United States shall be the legal tender. 
The Shays and their paper money legions, who assaulted 
the vested rights of personalty by the process of legislative 
depreciation, are now subdued forever, and money lenders 
and security holders may be sure of their operations. Con- 
tracts are to be safe, and whoever engages in a financial 
operation, public or private, may know that state legislatures 
_ cannot destroy overnight the rules by which the game is, 
played. 

A principle of deep significance is written in these two 
brief sentences. The economic history of the states 
between the Revolution and the adoption of the Constitu- 
tion is compressed in them. They appealed .to.every.money. 
lender, to every holder of public paper, to every man who 
had _any, “personalty at stake. | The intensity of the economic 
interests reflected in these two prohibitions can only be 
felt by one who has spent months in the study of American 
agrarianism after the Revolution. In them personalty won 
a significant battle in the conflict of 1787-1788. / 

The authors of The Federalist advance in support of these 
two clauses very substantial arguments which bear out the 
view here expressed. ‘‘The loss which America has sus- 
tained since the peace, from the pestilential effects of paper 
money on the necessary confidence between man and man, 
on the necessary confidence in the public councils, on the in- 
dustry and morals of the people, and on the character of 
republican government, constitutes an enormous debt 
against the States chargeable with this unadvised measure, 
which must long remain unsatisfied ; or rather an accumula- 
tion of guilt which can be expiated no otherwise than by a 


180 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


voluntary sacrifice on the altar of justice of the power which 
has been the instrument of it,’”’ Speaking on the contract 
clause — that ‘‘additional bulwark in favor of personal 
security and private rights’? — Madison is sure that the 
“sober people of America are weary of the fluctuating 
policy which has directed the public councils,’ and will 
welcome a reform that will “inspire a general prudence 
and industry and give a regular course to the business of 
society.” } 

Hamilton on several occasions laid great stress on the con- 
tract clause as one of the features of the Constitution which 
had warmly commended it to its supporters. In a com- 
munication to Washington, dated May 29, 1790, he wrote: 
“This, to the more enlightened part of the community, was 
not one of the least recommendations of that Constitution. 
The too frequent intermeddlings of the state legislatures in 
relation to private contracts were extensively felt and seriously 
lamented ; and a Constitution which promised a preventative 
was, by those who felt and thought in that manner, eagerly 
embraced.” ? 

There was not a little discussion of the obligation of con- 
tract clause in the contemporary press during the periodof 
ratification, and there can be no doubt that it was favorably 
viewed by the supporters of the Constitution as an added 
safeguard against. paper money and stay laws...A, writer 
in the New Hampshire Spy, on November 8, 1787, in 
commending the new frame of government to his fellow 
citizens, calls particular attention to this provision: “It also 
expressly prohibits those destructive laws in the several 
states which alter or impair the obligation of contracts; 
so that in future anyone may be certain of an exact fulfilment 

1 The Federalist, No. 44. 


2 Ms. Library of Congress: Treasury Department Letters, 1789-1790 (Washing- 
ton Papers), folio 297. 


em 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 181 


of any contract that may be entered into or the penalty 
that may be stipulated for in case of failure.” 

Another writer of the period approves the same principle 
with more vigor. ‘‘My countrymen, the devil is among 
you. Make paper as much as you please. Make it a 
tender in all future contracts, or let it rest on its own credit — 
but remember that past contracts are sacred things — and 
that legislatures have no right to interfere with them— they 
have no right to say, a debt shall be paid at a discount, or 
in any manner which the parties never intended. ... To 
pay bona fide contracts for cash, in paper of little value, or 
in old horses, would be a dishonest attempt in an individual : 
but for legislatures to frame laws to support and encourage ~ 
such detestable villainy, is like a judge who should inscribe 
the arms of a rogue over the seat of justice.” ? 

The full import of the obligation of contract clause was 
dcubtless better understood by Chief Justice Marshall than 
by any man of that generation. He had taken an active 
part in the adoption of the Constitution in his state, and he 
had studied long and arduously the history of the period for 
his classic defence of Federalism, The Life of Washington. 
In more than one decision he applied the clause with great 
effect, and voiced the views of his Federalist contem- 
poraries on this point, explaining the deep-seated social 
antagonism which is reflected in it.” And when at length, 
in his declining years, he saw it attacked in the legislatures 
by Jacksonian democracy, and beheld the Supreme Court 
itself surrendering the position which he had earlier taken, 
he spread on record in a dissenting opinion a warning and 
a protest which for cogency and vigor equals any of his 
great dissertations delivered in the name of the Court. 

In the case of Ogden v. Saunders, decided in the January 


1 The American Museum, Vol. I, p. 118. 2 See below, p. 295. 


182 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES ~ 


term of 1827, the Supreme Court was compelled to pass 
upon the issue: “Does a bankrupt law which applies to 
contracts made after its passage impair the obligation of 
those contracts?’’ The newer school on the bench, Wash- 
ington, Johnson, Trimble, and Thompson were of opinion 
that such a law did not impair the obligation of contract and 
was valid. Marshall, Duvall, and Story dissented. The 
Chief Justice took the high ground that the obligation of a 
contract inhered in the contract itself, and could not be 
changed by any external legislation whatever. Therefore, 
obviously, legislation affecting adversely the obligation of 
future contracts was just as unconstitutional as legislation 
attacking contracts already made. In other words, Marshall, 
who ought to have known what the framers of the Constitu- 
tion intended better than any man on the supreme bench, 
believed that it was designed to bring under the ban substan- 
tially all legislation which affected personalty adversely — in 
other words that it was similar in character to the due 
process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, 

Speaking on the contract clause he said with great solem- 
nity: “We cannot look back to the history of the times when 
the august spectacle was exhibited of the assemblage of 
the whole people by their representatives in convention, in 
order to unite thirteen independent sovereignties under one 
government, so far as might be necessary for the purposes of 
union, without being sensible of the great importance 
attached to the tenth section of the first article. The power 
of changing the relative situation of debtor and creditor, of 
interfering with contracts, a power which comes home to 
every man, touches the interest of all, and controls the con- 
duct of every individual in those things which he supposes 
to be proper for his own exclusive management, had been | 
used to such an excess by the state legislatures as to break 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 183 


in upon the ordinary intercourse of society, and destroy all 
confidence between man and man. The mischief had 
become so great, so alarming as not only to impair com- 
mercial intercourse, and threaten the existence of credit, but 
to sap the morals of the people, and destroy the sanctity of 
private faith. To guard against the continuance of the evil 
was an object of deep interest with all the truly wise, as well 
as virtuous, of this great community, and was one of the 
important benefits expected from a reform of the govern- 
ment.” } 


THE ECONOMICS OF INTERNATIONAL POLITICS 


| The authors of The Federalist carry over into the field of 
international politics the concept of economic antagonisms 
which lie at the basis of their system of domestic politics. 
Modern wars.spring primarily out of commercial rivalry, 


_ although the ambitions of prinéés have often been a source 


of international conflict.! ‘“‘Has commerce hitherto done 
anything more than change the objects of war ?”’ asks Hamil- 
ton. “Is not the love of wealth as domineering and enter- 
prising a passion as that of power or glory? Have there 
not been as many wars founded upon commercial motives, 
since that has become the prevailing system of nations, as 
were before occasioned by the cupidity of territory or 
dominion? Has not the spirit of commerce, in many in- 
stances, administered new incentives to the appetite, both 
for the one and for the other?” ? Let history answer. 
_ Carthage, a commercial republic, was an aggressor in a war 
that ended in her destruction. The furious contests of 
Holland and England were over the dominion of the sea. 
Commerce has been for ages the predominant pursuit of 
England, and she has been constantly engaged in wars. 
1 Ogden v. Saunders, 12 Wheaton, pp. 213 ff. 2 The Federalist, No. 6. 


184 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Even the Hapsburg-Bourbon wars have in a large meas- 
ure grown out of commercial considerations. 

In this world-wide and age-long conflict of nations for 
commercial advantages, the United States cannot expect 
to become a non-resistant, an idle spectator. Even were 
pacific ideals to dominate American policy, she could not 
overcome the scruples of her ambitious rivals. In union, 
therefore, is strength against aggression and in support of 
offensive operations. Moreover, the Union will be better 
able to settle disputes amicably because of the greater 
show of power which it can make. “Acknowledgements, 
explanations, and compensations are often accepted as 
satisfactory from a strong united nation, which would be 
rejected as unsatisfactory if offered by _a state or a con- 
federaey of little consideration or power.” ! 

| Turning from the material causes of foreiew wars the 
authors of The Federalist examine the possible sources of 
danger from domestic discord among the states, regarded as 
independent sovereignties. And how may such domestic 
discord arise? The North will probably grow strong and 
formidable and be tempted to despoil the South: nor “does 
it appear to be a rash conjecture,” says Jay, “that its young 
swarms might often be tempted to gather honey in the 
more blooming fields and milder air of their luxurious and 
more delicate neighbors.” ? 

Then the apple of discord may be thrown among the 
states by foreign countries if several confederacies take the 
place of union. And what is this apple of discord? Each 
of the proposed confederacies, says Jay, “would have its 
commerce with foreigners to regulate by distinct treaties ; 
and as their productions and commodities are different 
and proper for different markets, so would those treaties 

1 The Federalist, No. 3. 2 Ibid., No. 5. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 185 


be essentially different.’’ Treaties are subject to the law of 
greatest economic pressure. “Different commercial con- 
cerns,’ he continues, ‘‘must create different interests, and 
of course different degrees of political attachment to and 
connection with different foreign nations.” ! |The degrees “ 
of political attachment also follow the law of greatest eco- 
nomic pressure; and if foreign nations come to blows among 
themselves, their allies in America are likely to be drawn 
into the conflict. Thus domestic discord may arise among 
the states indirectly through their material connections with 
other countries. | 

But internecine warfare will more probably arise from 
causes operating within the states; and what may be the real 
sources of such conflict ? asks Hamilton.? They are numer- 
ous: ,lust for power and dominion, the desire for equality 
and safety, the ambitions of leaders. . Has it not invariably 
been found, he adds, “that momentary passions, and 
immediate interests have a more active and imperious 
control over human conduct than general and remote con- 
siderations of policy, utility, or justice? ... Has com- 
merce hitherto done anything more than change the objects 
of war? Is not the love of wealth as domineering and 
enterprizing a passion as that of power or glory? Have 
there not been as many wars founded upon commercial 
motives since that has become the prevailing system of 
nations, as were before occasioned by the cupidity of terri- 
tory or dominion ?” ee 

Of course such acute observers as the authors of The\ 
Federalist do not omit to remark that the personal ambi- 
tions of monarchs have been a cause of wars, and the 
passions of men for leadership have been a source of domes- 
tic insurrections. But they: are quick to add that the ag- 

«A Tbid. 4 Ibid., No. 6. 


186 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


grandizement and support of their particular families are 
among the motives that have led monarchs to undertake wars 
of conquest;1 and as to personal element in domestic in- 
surrections, Hamilton expresses a doubt whether Massa- 
chusetts would recently have been plunged into civil war 
“if Shays had not been a desperate debtor.” * 

Turning from the question as to the extent of the economic 
motive in the personal element, Hamilton makes an inquiry 
into the more probable sources of wars among the states 
in case a firmer union, endowed with adequate powers, is not 
established. These he enumerates :? 

1. “Territorial disputes have at all times been found one 
of the most fertile sources of hostility among nations.” 
The several states have an interest in the Western Terri- 
tories, and “to reason from the past to the future, we shall 
have good ground to apprehend that the sword would some- 
times be appealed to as the arbiter of their differences.” 

2. “The competitions of commerce would be another fruit- 
ful source of contention.’’ Each state will pursue a policy 
conducive to its own advantage, and “the spirit of enter- 
prize, which characterizes the commercial part of America, 
has left no occasion of displaying itself unimproved. It 
is not at all probable that this unbridled spirit would pay 
much respect to those regulations of trade by which particu- 
lar states might endeavor to secure exclusive benefits to 
their own citizens.’”’ The economic motive will thus prob- 
ably override all considerations of interstate comity and all 
considerations of international law. But that is not all; 
says Hamilton, in italics, “We should be ready to denominate 
injuries those things which were in reality the justifiable acts of 
independent sovereignties consulting a distinct interest.”” Com- 


1 The Federalist, No. 4. 2 [bid., No. 6. 
5 Ibid., No. 7. 


THE CONSTITUTION AS AN ECONOMIC DOCUMENT 187 


merce will have little respect for the right of other peoples 
to protect their interests, and it will stigmatize as an “injury”’ 
anything which blocks its enterprise. 

3. “The public debt of the Union would be a further 
cause of collision between the separate states or confedera- 
cies.” Some states would oppose paying the debt. Why? 
Because they are “less impressed with the importance of 
national credit, or because their citizens have little, if any, 
immediate interest in the question.” But other states, 
“a numerous body of whose citizens are creditors to the 
public beyond the proportion of the state in the total amount 
of the national debt, would be strenuous for some equitable 
and effective provision.”” In other words, citizens who had 
nothing at stake would be indifferent, and those who had 
something to lose would clamor. Foreign powers also might 
intervene, and the “double contingency of external invasion 
and internal contention’? would be hazarded. 

4. “Laws in violation of private contracts, as they amount 
to aggressions on the rights of those states whose citizens 
are injured by them, may be considered as another prob- 
able source of hostility.” Had there not beer plenty 
of evidence to show that state legislatures, if unrestrained 
by some higher authority, would attack private rights in 
property? And had there not been a spirit of retaliation 
also? ‘‘We reasonably infer that in similar cases, under 
other circumstances, a war, not of parchment, but of the 
sword, would chastise such atrocious breaches of moral 
obligation and social justice.” 

‘These, then, are the four leading sources of probable 
conflict among the states if not united into a firm union: 
territory, commerce, the national debt, and violations of 
contractual rights in property — all as severely economic 
as could well be imagined. | 


188 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


To carry the theory of the economic interpretation of the 
Constitution out into its ultimate details would require 
a monumental commentary, such as lies completely beyond 
the scopq@pof this volume. But enough has been said td 
show ee concept of the Constitution as a piece of ab- _ 
stract legislation reflecting no group interests and recog- 
nizing no economic antagonisms is entirely false. It was 
an economic document drawn with superb skill by men 
whose property interests were immediately at stake; and 
as such it appealed directly and unerringly to identical 
interests in the country at are] * 


CHAPTER VII 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CON- 
VENTION 


HAVING examined the economic implications of the Con- 
stitution in the light of the greatest of all commentaries, , 
The Federalist, it is now interesting to inquire whetheX 
the members of the Convention at large entertained sub- 
stantially ‘identical views as to~the political science of the 
system. There are several difficulties in the way of suchy 
an investigation. Not all of the delegates, indeed not all 
of the most influential, were speech makers or writers or 
philosophers. As intensely practical men they were con- 
cerned with tangible results, not with the manner in which 
political scientists might view the details of their operations. 
There is, accordingly, a considerable danger of attempting* 
too much in making generalizations, and to obviate this as 
far as possible, the method of taking the members in al- 
phabetical order is adopted, and the evidence of the Be 
entertained by each is fully documented.’ 

The leaders in politics and political philosophy in the 
eighteenth century were not far removed from that frank 
recognition of class rights which characterized English 
society, and they were not under the necessity of obscuring 
— at least to the same extent as modern partisan writers — 
the essential economic antagonisms featuring in law and 
constitution making. Their clarity of thought was greatly 
facilitated by the disfranchisement of the propertyless, 


1 A few whose views were not ascertained are omitted. 
189 


190 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


which made it unnecessary for political writers to address 
themselves to the proletariat and to explain dominant 
group interests in such a manner as to make them appear 
in the garb of “public policy.” 

There does not appear, of course, in the writings of Ameri- 
can political scientists in the eighteenth century, that sharp 
recognition of class rights which characterizes the feudal 
legists, because within the propertied interests politically 
represented in the government, there were divisions which 
had to be glossed over; and there were also mutterings of 
unrest on the part of the disfranchised which later broke 
out in the storm that swept away the property qualifications 
on voters and introduced political equalitarianism. Under 
these circumstances the supporters of the Constitution had 
to be somewhat circumspect in the expression of their views; 
but, happily for science, the proceedings at Philadelphia 
during the drafting of the Constitution were secret, and 
they were able to discuss with utmost frankness the actual 
politico-economic results which they desired to reach. 
Fortunately, also, fragmentary reports of these proceedings 
have come down to us, and have been put in a definitive form 
by Professor Farrand. 

Abraham Baldwin, of Georgia, did not indulge in any 
lengthy disquisitions on government in the Convention, 
and his literary remains are apparently very meagre. How- 
ever, his view that the Senate of the United States ought to 
represent property came out in the debate on June 29, over 
a motion by Ellsworth to the effect that the “rule of suffrage 
in the second branch be the same as that established by the 
Articles of Confederation.’ Baldwin immediately opposed 
the proposition, saying, ‘“He thought the second branch 
ought to be the representation of property, and that in 
forming it therefore some reference ought to be had to the 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 191 


relative wealth of their constituents, and to the principles 
on which the senate of Massachusetts was constituted.” 4 
At the time the senate of that commonwealth rested upon 
special freehold and personalty qualifications,? and the mem- 
bers were apportioned among the several districts on the 


basis of the amount of taxes paid by each. It is thus ap\ L 
parent that Baldwin wished the Senate of the new govern- 
4 


ment to be based frankly upon property. 

Gunning Bedford, of Delaware, did not participate ex- 
tensively in the debates of the Convention, but it seems 
from the character of the few remarks that he made that 
he favored a more democratic form than was finally adopted, 
although he signed the Constitution. This inference is 
drawn from a brief notice of his objection to the establish- 
ment of a council of revision composed of the executive 
and a certain number of the judiciary to exercise a sort of 
censorship over the acts of Congress. Madison records as 
follows: “Mr. Bedford was opposed to every check on the 
Legislative, even the Council of Revision first proposed. 


He thought it would be sufficient to mark out in the Con- 


stitution the boundaries to the Legislative Authority, which 
would give all the requisite security to the rights of the 
other departments. The Representatives of the People 
were the best judges of what was for their interest, and ought 
to be under no external controul whatever. The two 
branches would produce a sufficient controul within the 
Legislature itself.” * 

Jacob Broom was among those who wished to “lessen the 
dependence of the general government on the people,’’ to 
use Jefferson’s phrase, by lengthening the terms of public 
officers. He seconded Read’s motion to increase the term 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 469. 
2 Above, p. 65. 3 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 100, 


vA 


192 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


of Senators to nine years; he opposed the election of the 
executive by popular vote, and supported Luther Martin’s 
resolution in favor of election by electors appointed by the 
legislatures of the several states ;” he wished to give life ten- 
ure to the executive, that is, during good behavior,’ and he 
favored the suggestion that Congress should be given a 
negative over state legislatures.‘ Broom seldom spoke in \ 
the Convention, but there is no doubt that he believed in 
a restricted and well ‘“‘balanced’’ democracy. ¢ 
Pierce Butler, of South Carolina, on more than one och 
casion urged the desirability of making property at least 
one of the elements in the distribution of representation. 
On June 6, when Charles Pinckney moved that the lower 
house of the national legislature should be chosen by the 
state legislatures and not by the people, Butler said: “I 
am against determining the mode of election until the ratio 
of representation is fixed —if that proceeds on a principle 
favorable to wealth as well as numbers of free inhabitants, 
I am content to unite with Delaware (Mr. Read) in abolish- 
ing the state legislatures and becoming one nation instead 
of a confederation of republics.’””*> In connection with a . 
discussion of the Senate, ‘‘he urged that the second branch 
ought to represent the states according to their property.” ® 
Later in the sessions of the Convention he again “warmly 
urged the justice and necessity of regarding wealth in the ap- 
portionment of representation.””’ He was also particularly 
solicitous about slave property, and he declared that “the 
security which the southern states want is that their negroes 


may not be taken from them.” ® 
| / Daniel Carroll favored the popular election of the execu- 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p.421. | 2 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 32. 
3 Tbid., Vol. II, p. 33. 4 Tbid., Vol. II, p. 390. 
§ Tbid., Vol. I, p. 144, § Tbid., p. 529. 


7 Ibtd., p. 562. 8 Ibid., p. 605. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 193 


tive, but he advocated a three-fourths vote in Congress to 
overcome the executive veto. Speaking on this point, “He 
remarked that as a majority was now to be the quorum, 
seventeen in the larger and eight in the smaller house 
might carry points. The advantage that might be taken 
of this seemed to call for greater impediments to improper 
laws.” + Carroll did not indulge in any philosophic re- 
flections in the Convention so that his “political science,” 
if he had worked out any definite system, is not apparent 
in the records. 

George Clymer entertained the notions of government 
which were common to the Federalists of his time. He held 
that ‘‘a representative of the people is appointed to think 
for and not with his constituents” ;* and invariably, during 
the course of his career, he “showed a total disregard to 
the opinions of his constituents when opposed to the matured 
decisions of his own mind.” It was on these principles 
that he “warmly opposed the proposition introducing a 
clause in the Constitution which conferred upon the people 
the unalienable right of instructing their representatives.” ® 

W. R. Davie, although he is reputed to have been an ac- 
complished orator and profound student, does not figure 
extensively in Madison’s meagre records. At no point 
does he expound any philosophy of government. His 
views were always practical. On the proposition to count 
slaves in apportioning representation, he threw down the 
gauntlet to the Convention, and declared that if the rate was 
not at least three-fifths, North Carolina would not federate.* 
As to the basis of government Davie ‘‘seemed to think that 
wealth or property ought to be represented in the second 
branch; and numbers in the first branch.” ° 


1 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 300. 2 Sanderson, op. cit., p. 168. 3 Ibid., p. 169. 
4¥Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 593. 5 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 542. 


co) 


194. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Davie fully understood the significance of the obligation 
of contract clause which was designed as a check on the 
propensities of popular legislatures to assault private rights 
in property, particularly personalty. Speaking in the con- 
vention of North Carolina on this clause, he said: “That 
section is the best in the Constitution. It is founded on 
the strongest principles of justice. It is a section, in short, 
which I thought would have endeared the Constitution to 
this country.” Davie undoubtedly understood and ap- 
proved the doctrines of balanced classes in the government, 
as expounded in Adams’ Defence of American Constitutions.? 

At no time does Davie appear to have courted popular 
favor in his native state, for a writer speaking of his can- 
didacy for the legislature in 1798 says: ‘‘The ‘true Whigs,’ 
as they styled themselves, dined together under the oaks 
and toasted Mr. Jefferson. The other party, who were 
called ‘aristocrats,’ ate and drank in the house on entirely | 
different principles. General Davie dined in the house 
with the ‘aristocrats.’ The ‘true Whigs’ took offence at 
this and resolved to oppose his selection, and it was only 
with much address that they were kept quiet.... If 
any person had had the impudence to dispute the election, 
General Davie would certainly not have been returned. 
The rabble, which in all places is the majority, would have 
voted against him.” ® 

John Dickinson, of Delaware, frankly joined that minority 
which was outspoken in its belief in a monarchy—an action 
that comported with his refusal to sign the Declaration of 
Independence and his reluctance to embark upon the stormy 
sea of Revolution. At the very opening of the Convention, 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 350. 

2 McRee, Life and Correspondence of James Iredell, Vol. II, pp. 161, 168. 

3 Peele, Lives of Distinguished North Carolinians, p.75. Davie’s great collection 
of papers was destroyed in Sherman’s raid. Ibid., p. 78. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 195 


on June 2, he expressed his preference for a regal govern- 
ment, although he admitted that the existing state of affairs 
would not permit its establishment in America. Madison 
records him as saying: “A limited Monarchy he considered 
as one of the best Governments in the world. It was not 
certain that the same blessings were derivable from any 
other form. It was certain that equal blessings had never 
yet been derived from any of the republican form. A 
limited monarchy, however, was out of the question.” } 

Dickinson was also among the members of the Conven- 
tion who wished to establish a property qualification for 
voters because he thought no other foundation for govern- 
ment would be secure. In the debate on this subject on 
August 7, according to Madison’s notes: “Mr. Dickinson 
had a very different idea of the tendency of vesting the right 
of suffrage in the freeholders of the Country. He con- 
sidered them as the best guardians of liberty; And the re- 
striction of the right to them as a necessary defence agst. 
the dangerous influence of those multitudes without prop- 
erty & without principle, with which our Country like all 
others, will in time abound. As to the unpopularity of 
the innovation it was in his opinion chemirical. The great 
mass of our Citizens is composed at this time of freeholders, 
and will-be pleased with it.” ? 

-According to King’s notes: “ Dickinson—TIt is said 
yr. restraining by ye Constitution the rights of Election to 
Freeholders, is a step towards aristocracy—is this true, 
No. — we are safe by trusting the owners of the soil — the 
Owners of the Country—it will not be unpopular—be- 
cause the Freeholders are the most numerous at this Time 
— The Danger to Free Governments has not been from Free- 
holders, but those who are not Freeholders — there is no 

1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 86. 2 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 202. 


196 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Danger — because our Laws favor the Division of property 
— The Freehold will be parcelled among all the worthy men 
in the State — The Merchants & Mechanicks are safe — 
They may become Freeholders besides they are represented 
in ye State Legislatures, which elect the Senate of the U.S." 

No member of the Convention distrusted anything savor- 
ing of “levelling democracy” more than Oliver Ellsworth. 
Later as Chief Justice he denounced from the bench Jeffer- 
son and the French party as “the apostles of anarchy, 
bloodshed, and atheism.”? In the Convention, he op- 
posed the popular election of the President * and favored 
associating the judges with the executive in the exercise 
of a veto power over acts of Congress. He believed in the 
restriction of the suffrage to those who paid taxes.> He 
was a warm advocate of judicial control, in general, and 
thoroughly understood the political significance of the 
system.° 

Thomas Fitzsimons, the wealthy merchant and_ stock- 
broker from Pennsylvania, was, after his kind, not a loqua- 
cious man, but rather a man of action — a practical man; 
and the records of the Convention contain no lengthy 
speech by him. When Gouverneur Morris, on August 7, 
proposed to restrain the right to vote to freeholders, Fitz- 
simons seconded the motion, apparently without saying 
anything on the point.’ While he thus sympathized with 
the movement to set the Constitution frankly on a property 
basis, Fitzsimons was naturally more interested in such 
matters as protection to manufactures and harbor improve- 
ments.® 

1 Farrand, Ibid., Vol. II, p. 207. 

2H. J. Ford, Rise and Growth of American Politics, p. 113. 

* Farrand, Records, Vol. II, pp. 57, 58, 63, 101, 108, 111. 

4 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 73. 5 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 207. 


6 Beard, The Supreme Court and the Constitution, pp. 71-72. 
7 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 201. § Tbid., pp. 362, 529, 589. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 197 


Benjamin Franklin, who at the time of the Convention 
was so advanced in years as to be of little real weight in the 
formation of the Constitution, seems to have entertained a 
more hopeful view of democracy than any other member of 
that famous group. He favored a single-chambered legis- 
lature,! opposed an absolute veto in the executive,? and 
resisted the attempt to place property qualifications on the 
suffrage.* He signed the Constitution when it was finished, 
but he was accounted by his contemporaries among 
the doubters, and was put forward by the opponents of 
ratification in Pennsylvania as a candidate for the state 
convention, but was defeated.* 

Elbridge Gerry, of Massachusetts, participated exten- 
sively in the debates of the Convention, but his general view 
of government was doubtless stated in his speech on May 
31, when he expressed himself as not liking the election of 
members of the lower house by popular vote. He said on 
this point: “The evils we experience flow from the excess 
of democracy. The people do not want virtue; but are 
the dupes of pretended patriots. In Massts. it has been 
fully confirmed by experience that they are daily misled 
into the most baneful measures and opinions by the false 
reports circulated by designing men, and which no one on the 
spot can refute. One principal evil arises from the want of 
due provision for those employed in the administration of 
Governnt. It would seem to be a maxim of democracy to 
starve the public servants. He mentioned the popular 
clamour in Massts. for the reduction of salaries and the 
attack made on that of the Govr. though secured by the 
spirit of the Constitution itself. He had, he said, been too 
republican heretofore: he was still, however, republican, 

1 [bid., Vol. I, p. 48; Vol. III, p. 297. 


2 Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 94, 99. 3 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 204. 
‘Scharf and Wescott, History of Philadelphia, Vol. I, p. 447. 


198 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


but had been taught by experience the danger of the levil- 
ling spirit.” ! 

_/ When the proposition that Senators should be elected by 

ly the state legislatures was up for consideration, “Mr. Gerry 
insisted that the commercial and monied interest wd. be 
more secure in hands of the State Legislatures, than of the 
people at large. The former have more sense of character, 
“and will be restrained by that from injustice. The people 
are for paper money when the Legislatures are agst. it. In 
Massts. the County Conventions had declared a wish for a 
depreciating paper that wd. sink itself. Besides, in some 
States there are two Branches in the Legislature, one of 
which is somewhat aristocratic. There wd. therefore be 
so far a better chance of refinement in the choice.” ” 

Nicholas Gilman was by temper and interest a man of af- 
fairs, more concerned with the stability of public securities 
and the development of western land schemes than with 
political theorizing. From Madison’s record he does not 

jappear to have said anything in the Convention. 

Nathaniel Gorham was opposed to property qualifications 
on the suffrage in the federal Constitution and the associa- 
tion of the judiciary with the executive in the exercise of the 
veto power.® Speaking on the latter point, however, he 
said, “All agree that a check on the legislature is necessary. 
But there are two objections against admitting the judges 
to share in it which no observations on the other side seem 
to obviate. The 1st is that the judges ought to carry into 
the exposition of the laws no prepossessions with regard to 
them; 2d that as the judges will outnumber the executive, 
the revisionary check would be thrown entirely out of the 
executive hands, and instead of enabling him to defend him- 
self would enable the judges to sacrifice him.” 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 48. 2 Tbid., Vol. I, p. 154. 
8 [bid., Vol. II, p. 122 and pp. 73-79. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 199 


Alexander Hamilton had a profound admiration for the 
British constitution. “The House of Lords,’ he said in the ' 
Convention, “is a noble institution. Having nothing to 
hope for by a change and a sufficient interest by means 
of their property, in being faithful to the national interest, 
they form a permanent barrier against every pernicious 
innovation whether attempted on the part of the Crown or 
of the Commons.’”! Doubtless his maturely considered 
system of government wassummed up in the following words : 
“All communities divide themselves into the few and the 
many. ‘The first are the rich and well born, the other the 
mass of the people. The voice of the people has been said 
to be the voice of God; and however generally this maxim 
has been quoted and believed, it is not true in fact. The 
people are turbulent and changing; they seldom judge or 
determine right. Give therefore to the first class a distinct, 
permanent share in the government. They will check 
the unsteadiness of the second, and as they cannot receive 
any advantage by a change, they therefore will ever main- 
tain good government. Can a democratic assembly who 
annually revolve in the mass of the people, be supposed 
steadily to pursue the public good? Nothing but a per- 
manent body can check the imprudence of democracy. . . . 
It is admitted that you cannot have a good executive upon 
a democratic plan.”’* In consonance with these principles 
Hamilton outlined his scheme of government which in- 
cluded an assembly to consist of persons elected for three 
years by popular vote, a senate chosen for life or during good 
behavior by electors chosen by the voters, and a president 
also elected for life or during good behavior by electors 
chosen by the voters. The Convention failed to adopt his 
programme, and he entertained a rather uncertain view of the 

1 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 288. 2 Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 299 ff. 


200 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Constitution as it was finally drafted, doubting its stability 
and permanency. 

William Houstoun, of Georgia, seems to have spoken only 
once or twice; but he gave an indication of his political 
science in a remark which he made to the effect that the 

Georgia constitution “was a very bad one, and he hoped it 
would be revised and amended.’ The constitution to 
which he alludes was the radical instrument made in 1777, 
which provided for a legislature with a single chamber and 
an unusually wide extension of the suffrage.” ) 

Jared Ingersoll, in spite of his great abilities as a student 
and lawyer, seems to have taken no part at all in the debates 
of the Convention. Such at least is the view to which 
Madison’s records lead. Something is known, however, of 
the political principles which he entertained. Though he 
became intimately associated with President Reed on his 

i-thigration to Philadelphia in 1778, he never accepted the 
extreme democratic principles embodied in the constitution 
of that state in 1776. His biographer, after making an 
exception of Ingersoll’s services in the Convention, says: 
“T am not aware that he held or sought a position in any 
popular or representative body whatever. He was what is 
called conservative in politics; that is to say, he was not 
by constitutional temper a rebuilder or reconstructor of 
anything that had been once reasonably well built; nor was 
his favorite order of political architecture, the democratic. 
After the great subversion in 1801 he was found as rarely 
as anybody in Pennsylvania on the side of the majority. 
He was known to be inclined to the contrary, so far that 
with or without his consent he was selected in that state, in 
the year 1812, as the opposition or anti-Madisonian can- 
didate for the office of Vice-President of the United States.” 4 


1 Farrand, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 48. 2 See above, p. 70. 
3H. Binney, Leaders of the Old Bar of Philadelphia, p. 86. 4 Ibid., p. 87. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 201 


Rufus King correctly understood the idea of a balanced 
government independent of ‘‘popular whims” and endowed 
with plenty of strength. He favored a long term for the 
President, and speaking on the executive department in 
the Convention he ‘expressed his apprehensions that an 
extreme caution in favor of liberty might enervate the govern- 
ment we were forming. He wished the house to recur to 
the primitive axiom that the three great departments of 
governments should be separate and independent: that 
the executive and the judiciary should be so, as well as the 
legislative: that the executive should be equally so with 
the judiciary. ... He [the executive] ought not to be 
impeachable unless he hold his office during good behavior, 
a tenure which would be most agreeable to him; provided 
an independent and effectual forum could be devised; 
But under no circumstances ought he to be impeachable 

* by the legislature. This would be destructive of his in- 
dependence and of the principles of the constitution. He 
relied on the vigor of the executive as a great security for , 
the public liberties.””’ King also believed in the principle va 
of judicial control — that most effective check on the pop- 
ular attacks on property through legislatures.” 

It was largely on King’s initiative that the prohibition‘ 
against interference with contracts was placed in the Con-, 
stitution.® 

William Livingston took a middle ground between the 
“high-toned” system of John Adams and the simple de- 

- mocracy of such writers as “‘Centinel” of Pennsylvania.* 

The Defence of the Constitutions he impatiently char- 
acterized as ‘“rubbage”; and a ‘“ Humiliating and mortify- 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 66. 

2 Beard, The Supreme Court and the Constitution, p. 29. 
83 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 439. 

4See below, p. 312. 


2902 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


ing acknowledgement that man is incapable of governing 
himself.””’ But for the opposite party that would set up 
a simple democratic government through legislative ma- 
jorities, Livingston had just as little patience. ‘The 
security of the liberties of a people or state depends wholly 
on a proper delegation of power. ‘The several component 
powers of government should be so distributed that no one 
man, or body of men, should possess a larger share thereof 
than what is absolutely necessary for the administration 
of government. ... The people ever have been and ever 
will be unfit to retain the exercise of power in their own 
hands; they must of necessity delegate it somewhere. . . . 
But it has been found from experience that a government 
by representation, consisting of a single house of represen- 
tatives, is in some degree liable to the same inconveniences 
which attend a pure democracy; a few leading men influ- 
ence the majority to pass laws calculated not for the public 
good, but to promote some sinister views of their own. ‘To 
prevent this, another representative branch is added: 
these two separate houses form mutual checks upon each 
other; but this expedient has not been found to be alto- 
gether effectual. If the legislative power, even tho’ vested 
in two distinct houses is left without any controul, they will 
inevitably encroach upon the executive and judicial; ... 
But further, as prejudices always prevail, more or less, in 
all popular governments, it is necessary that a check be 
placed somewhere in the hands of a power not immedi- 
ately dependent upon the breath of the people, in order to 
stem the torrent, and prevent the mischiefs which blind 
passions and rancorous prejudices might otherwise occasion. 
he executive and judicial powers should of course then be 
vested with this check or controul on the legislature; and 
that they may be enabled fully to effect this beneficial pur- 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 203 


pose, they should be rendered as independent as possible. . . . 
Tho’ it is so short a time since our governments have been 
put in motion, yet examples have not been wanting of the 
prevalence of this dangerous thirst after more power in 
some of our legislatures; a negative therefore lodged in 
the hands of the executive and judicial powers, is absolutely 
necessary in order that they may be able to defend them- 
selves from the encroachments of the legislature.” Living- 
ston thought that there were some grave defects in the 
Constitution as drafted at Philadelphia and proposed some 
emendations. He believed that the President should en- 
joy the appointing power without any control by the Senate; 
he thought the Chief Justice should hold office during good 
behavior and be empowered to appoint his colleagues; 
and he further held that the President, the Chief Justice, 
and a Superintendent of Finance should be organized into 
a council of revision to pass upon the acts of Congress. 
James McClurg, of Virginia, left the Convention during 
the early part of August, and was silent on most of the 
questions before that body. On July 17th, he proposed 
thatthe term of the executive should be changed from seven 
years to ‘good behavior” ;? and he was particularly anxious 
to have the executive independent of the legislature. He 
said that he “was not so much afraid of the shadow of 
monarchy as to be unwilling to approach it; nor so wedded 
to republican government as not to be sensible of the tyran- 
nies that had been and may be exercised under that form. 
It was an essential object with him to make the executive 


1 Observations on Government, Including Some Animadversions on Mr. Adams’s 
Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America, etc., pub- 
_ lished in 1787, by Livingston, under the pen-name of ‘‘A Farmer of New Jersey.” 
The pamphlet is sometimes ascribed to J. Stevens, but there is good authority for 
believing that Livingston is the author. It is not inconsistent with his notions 
on judicial control; see American Historical Review, Vol. IV, pp. 460 ff. 

2 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 33. 


204 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


independent of the legislature; and the only mode left for 
effecting it, after the vote destroying his ineligibility the 
second time, was to appoint him during good behavior.” 
i/That McClurg had small respect for legislatures in general 
is shown by a letter which he wrote to Madison from Vir- 
ginia on August 7, 1787, in which he said: “The necessity 
of some independent power to controul the Assembly by a 
negative, seems now to be admitted by the most zealous 
Republicans—they only differ about the mode of constituting 
such a power. B. Randolph seems to think that a magis- 
trate annually elected by the people might exercise such a con- 
troul as independently as the King of G. B. I hope that 
our representative, Marshall, will be a powerful aid to Mason 
in the next Assembly. He has observ’d the continual de- 
pravation of Mens manners, under the corrupting influence 
of our Legislature; & is convine’d that nothing but the 
adoption of some efficient plan from the Convention can 
prevent Anarchy first, & civil convulsions afterwards.” ” 

( James McHenry belonged to the conservative party of 
his state and opposed “radical alterations” in the constitu- 
tion of that commonwealth as it stood in November, 1791.’ 

Writing in February, 1787, on the property qualifications 
placed on voters and representatives in Maryland, McHenry 
explained that “These disabilities, exclusions, and quali- 
fications have for their object an upright legislature, en- 
dowed with faculties to judge of the things most proper 
to promote the public good.”’ He was warmly opposed 
to the doctrine that the people had a right to instruct their 
Ta eats Democracy was, in his opinion, synony- 
_mous with ‘confusion and licentiousness. ue 

1 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 36. 

2 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 245. 


3 Letter to Hamilton, Library of Congress, Hamilton Mss., Vol. XXIII, p. 93. 
4 American Museum, Vol. IV, p. 333. 5 Steiner, Life and Correspondence, p. 527. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 205 


James Madison was the systematic philosopher of the 
Convention and set forth his views with such cogency and 
consistency on so many different topics that no short quota- 
tions will suffice to state his doctrines. His general scheme 
of political science was, however, embodied in the tenth 
number of The Federalist which has been discussed above 
and need not be reconsidered here.! 

Alexander Martin was among the silent members of the 
Convention, for Madison records only an occasional and 
incidental participation by him in the proceedings. 

Luther Martin was the champion of the extreme states’ 
rights’ view, and entertained rather democratic notions for 
his time, although, in arguing against the clause prohibiting 
Congress to issue paper money, he held that, “considering 
the administration of the government would be principally 
in the hands of the wealthy,” there could be little danger 
from an abuse of this power. Martin was in fact a cham- 
pion of paper money in his state, and he opposed that part » 
of the Constitution which prohibited the emission of bills 
of credit. As a representative of the more radical section 
of his community, he was against the clauses restricting 
the states to the use of the gold and silver coin of the United 
States, and was opposed to the clause forbidding the im- 
pairment of the obligation of contract. Speaking on the 
latter point he said: “There might be times of such great 
public calamities and distress, and of such extreme scarcity 
of specie, as should render it the duty of a government for 
the preservation of even the most valuable part of its citizens 
in some measure to interfere in their favor, by passing laws 
totally or partially stopping the courts of justice, or author- 
izing the debtor to pay by installments, or by delivering 


1 Above, p. 156. Mr. E. W. Crecraft, of Columbia University, has in preparation 
a dissertation on Madison’s political philosophy. 


206 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


up his property to his creditors at a reasonable and honest 
valuation. The times have been such as to render regula- 
tions of this kind necessary in most or all of the states, to 
prevent the wealthy creditor and the moneyed man from 
totally destroying the poor, though even industrious debtor. 
Such times may again arrive. ... I apprehend, Sir, 
the principal cause of complaint among the people at large, 
is the public and private debt with which they are oppressed, 
and which in the present scarcity of cash threatens them 
with destruction, unless they can obtain so much indulgence 
in point of time that by industry and frugality they may 
extricate themselves.’ ? 

As might have been expected, a man entertaining such 
radical notions about the power and duty of a government 
to interfere with the rights of personalty in behalf of the 
debtor could not have accepted the instrument framed at 
Philadelphia. In fact, Martin refused to sign the Constitu- 
tion; he wrote a vehement protest against it to the legis- 
lature of his state; he worked assiduously against its rati- 
fication; and as a member of the state convention, he 
voted against its approval by his commonwealth — but in 
vain. 

George Mason thoroughly understood the doctrine of a 
balanced government. Speaking in the Convention on the 
function of the upper house, he said: ‘One important 
object in constituting the senate was to secure the rights of 
property. To give them weight and firmness for this 
purpose a considerable duration in office was thought neces- 
sary. But a longer term than six years would be of no 
avail in this respect, if needy persons should be appointed. 
He suggested therefore the propriety of annexing to the 
office a qualification of property. He thought this would 

1 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, pp. 214 ff. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES : 207 


be very practicable; as the rules of taxation would supply 
a scale for measuring the degree of wealth possessed by 
every man.”! On another occasion, he presented a motion 
requiring “certain qualifications of landed property, in 
members of the legislature.’ ? Although Mason refused to 
sign the Constitution, his reasons were based on personal 
economic interests, not on any objections to its checks on 
democratic legislatures.’ 

J. F. Mercer, of Maryland, who opposed the Constitution 
in its final form and became the belligerent anti-federalist 
leader in that state, does not appear to have been so warmly 
devoted to the ‘“‘people’s cause,” behind the closed doors 
of the Convention, for he took exceptions to the proposition 
that the determination of the qualifications of voters should 
be left to the several states. But his particular objection 
was “to the mode of election by the people. The people 
cannot know and judge of the characters of candidates. 
The worst possible choice will be made.” # 

Thomas Mifflin took no part worthy of mention in the 
proceedings of the Convention, and expounded no views of 
government during the debates. 

Gouverneur Morris, of Pennsylvania, was the leader of 
those who wanted to base the new system upon a freehold 
suffrage qualification; and, on August 7, he made a motion 
to this effect. In the course of the discussion which followed, 
Morris said: ‘He had long learned not to be the dupe of 
words. The sound of Aristocracy, therefore, had no effect 
on him. It was the thing, not the name, to which he was 
opposed, and one of his principal objections to the Constitu- 
tion as it is now before us, is that it threatens this Country 
with an Aristocracy. The Aristocracy will grow out of 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 428. 2 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 121. 
3 See above, p. 128. 4 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, p. 205. 


208 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


the House of Representatives. Give the votes to people 
who have no property, and they will sell them to the rich 
who will be able to buy them. We should not confine our 
attention to the present moment. The time is not distant 
when this Country will abound with mechanics & manufac- 
turers who will receive their bread from their employers. 
Will such men be the secure & faithful Guardians of liberty ? 
Will they be the impregnable barrier agst. aristocracy ?— 
He was as little duped by the association of the words, 
‘taxation & Representation’ —The man who does not 
give his vote freely is not represented. It is the man who 
dictates the vote. Children do not vote. Why? because 
they want prudence, because they have no will of their own. 
The ignorant & the dependent can be as little trusted with 
the public interest. He did not conceive the difficulty of 
defining ‘freeholders’ to be insuperable. Still less that the 
restriction could be unpopular. 9/10 of the people are at 
present freeholders and these will certainly be pleased with 
it. As to Merchts. &c. if they have wealth & value the 
right they can acquire it. If not they don’t deserve it.” 4 
Jn all the proceedings of the Convention, Morris took a 
deep interest and expressed his views freely, always showing 
his thorough distrust of democratic institutions. As his 
biographer, Mr. Roosevelt puts it, “He throughout appears 
as the advocatus diaboli; he puts the lowest interpretation 
upon every act, and frankly avows his disbelief in all gener- 
ous and unselfish motives. His continual allusions to the 
overpowering influence of the baser passions, and to their 
mastery of the human race at all times, drew from Madison, 
although the two men generally acted together, a protest 
against his ‘forever inculcating the utter political depravity 
of men, and the necessity of opposing one vice and interest 
1 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, pp. 202 ff. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 209 


as the only possible check to another vice and interest.’” ! 
This protest from Madison, however, betrays inconsistency, 
for on more than one occasion in the Convention he ex- 
pounded principles substantially identical with those which 
he reprobated in Morris.? Indeed, what appeared to be 
cynical eccentricity on the part of the latter was nothing 
more than unusual bluntness in setting forth Federalist 
doctrines. 

Robert Morris, the merchant prince and speculator of 
Pennsylvania, seems to have broken his rule of absolute 
silence only two or three times in the Convention, and he 
apparently made no speech at all. He nominated Washing- 
ton as president of the assembly, and seconded Read’s 
motion that Senators should hold office during good be- 
havior. There is no doubt that Morris appreciated the 
relative weight of speeches and private negotiations.‘ 

In the proceedings of the Convention, William Paterson 
was chiefly concerned with protecting the rights of small 
states; but he signed the Constitution, and after its adop- 
tion became an ardent Federalist, serving as an associate 
justice of the Supreme Court. On the bench he was one of 
the most scholarly and eminent supporters of the doctrine 
of judicial control over legislation.° 

William Pierce took little part in the proceedings of the 
Convention. On the question of states’ rights he held a 
broad view, saying, “state distinctions must be sacrificed 
so far as the general government shall render it necessary 
—without, however, destroying them altogether. Al- 

1 Roosevelt, Gouverneur Morris, p. 140. 

2See The Federalist, No. 51. 

3 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 409. 

4 For an example see ibid., p. 11, note. He also entertained Washington during 
the sessions of the Convention. American Historical Association Report (1902), 


Vol. I, p. 92. 
5 Beard, The Supreme Court and the Constitution, p. 37. 


P 


ra 
\ 


210 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


though I am here as a representative from a small state, I 
consider myself as a citizen of the United States, whose 
general interest I will always support.” * On no occasion, 
apparently, did Pierce indulge in any general reflections on 
the basis of all government. He did not sign the Constitu- 
tion, but he explained this fact by saying, “I was absent in 
New York on a piece of business so necessary that it be- 
came unavoidable. I approve of its principles and would 
have signed it with all my heart had I been present. To 
say, however, that I consider it as perfect would be to make 
an acknowledgement immediately opposed to my judg- 
ment.” ” 

“ Charles Pinckney was among the members of the Con- 
vention who thought that it was desirable to fix the property 


{ qualifications of members of the national legislature firmly 


in the Constitution. Speaking on the subject of property 
and government he said: ‘‘The Committee as he had con- 
ceived were instructed to report the proper qualifications 
of property for the members of the Natl. Legislature; in- 
stead of which they have referred the task to the Natl. 
Legislature itself. Should it be left on this footing, the 
first Legislature will meet without any particular quali- 
fications of property; and if it should happen to consist of 
rich men they might fix such qualifications as may be too 
favorable to the rich; if of poor men, an opposite extreme 
might be run into.\ _/He was opposed to the establishment 
of an undue aristocratic influence in the Constitution, but 
he thought it essential that the members of the Legislature, 
the Executive, and the Judges — should be possessed of 
competent property to make them independent & respect- 
able. It was prudent when such great powers were to be 
trusted to connect the tie of property with that of reputation 
1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 474. 2 Ibid., Vol. III, p. 100. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 211 


in securing a faithful administration. The Legislature 
would have the fate of the Nation put into their hands. 
The President would also have a very great influence on it. 
The Judges would have not only important causes between 
Citizen & Citizen but also where foreigners were concerned. 
They will even be the Umpires between the U. States and 
individual States as well as between one State & another. 
Were he to fix the quantum of property which should be 
required, he should not think of less than one hundred 
thousand dollars for the President, half of that sum for 
each of the Judges, and in like proportion for the members 
of the Natl. Legislature. He would however leave the sum 
blank. His motion was that the President of the U.8., the 
Judges, and members of the Legislature should be required 
to swear that they were respectively possessed of a clear 
unincumbered Estate to the amount of in the case of 
the President, &c &« —’’! 

Pinckney, in fact, had no confidence in popular govern- 
ment, for on March 28, 1788, he wrote to Madison: ‘Are 
you not... abundantly impressed that the theoretical 
nonsense of an election of Congress by the people in the 
first instance is clearly and practically wrong, that it will in 
the end be the means of bringing our councils into con- 
tempt.” ” 

General Charles Cotesworth Pinckney entertained views ss 
with regard to the special position that should be enjoyed 
by property, which were substantially identical with those 
held by his cousin. He proposed that no salary should be 
paid to members of the Senate. As this branch, he said, 
“‘was meant to represent the wealth of the country, it ought 
to be composed of persons of wealth; and if no allowance 


1 Jbid., Vol. II, p. 248. 
2 Madison Mss., Library of Congress; date of March 28, 1788. 


212 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


was to be made the wealthy alone would undertake the 
service.” ! General Pinckney also wished to extend prop- 
erty qualifications not only to members of the legislature, 
but also to the executive and judicial departments.” 
Edmund Randolph was not only fully aware of the dis- 
tress to which property had been put under the Articles of 
Confederation, but he also understood the elements of a 
“balanced” government. Speaking on the subject of the 
structure of the Senate, he said: “If he was to give an 
opinion as to the number of the second branch, he should 
say that it ought to be much smaller than that of the first, 
so small as to be exempt from the passionate proceedings 
to which numerous assemblies are liable. He observed that 
the general object was to provide a cure for the evils under 
which the U. 8. Laboured; that in tracing these evils to 
their origin every man had found it in the turbulence and 
follies of democracy: that some check therefore was to be 
sought for agst. this tendency of our governments: and 
that a good Senate seemed most likely to answer the purpose. 
. . . Mr. Randolph was for the term of 7 years. The Demo- 
cratic licentiousness of the State Legislatures proved the 
necessity of a firm Senate. The object of this 2d. branch 
is to controul the democratic branch of the Natl. Legislature. 
If it be not a firm body, the other branch being more numer- 
ous, and coming immediately from the people, will over- 
whelm it. The Senate of Maryland constituted on like 
principles had been scarcely able to stem the popular torrent. 
No mischief can be apprehended, as the concurrence of the 
other branch, and in some measure, of the Executive, will 
in all cases be necessary. A firmness & independence 
may be the more necessary also in this branch, as it ought 
to guard the Constitution agst. encroachments of the Ex- 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 426. 2 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 122. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 213 


ecutive who will be apt to form combinations with the 
demagogues of the popular branch.” ! 

George Read was most outspoken in his desire to see the 
Articles of Confederation completely discarded. He said 
that “he was against patching up the old federal system: 
he hoped the idea would be dismissed. It would be like 
putting new cloth on an old garment. The Confederation 
was founded on temporary principles. It cannot last; it 
eannot be amended.” He favored vesting an absolute {~ 
veto power in the executive ;* and he proposed that Senators 
should hold office during good behavior.* 

John Rutledge held that the apportionment of representa- Ez 
tives should be on a basis of wealth and population.® He 
favored a property qualification for the legislative, executive, 
and judicial departments ;° and he thought that Senators 
should not be paid.’ In fact, he was one of the most ardent 
champions of the rights of property in government in the 
Convention. He was strictly opposed to the introduction 
of sentimental considerations in politics, for, speaking on an 
aspect of slavery and the Constitution, he said: ‘Religion 
& humanity had nothing to do with this question — In- 
terest alone is the governing principle with Nations — 
The true question at present is whether the Southn. 
States shall or shall not be parties to the Union. If thei 
Northern States consult their interests they will not oppose 
the increase of Slaves which will increase the commodities 
of which they will become the carriers.” ® 

Roger Sherman believed in reducing the popular influence 
in the new government to the minimum. When it was pro- 
posed that the members of the first branch of the national 


‘ 


1 Jbid., Vol. I, p. 51 and p. 218. 2 Thid., Vol. I, p. 136. 
3 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 200. 4 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 409. 
5 Jbid., Vol. I, p. 582. 6 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 249. 


7 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 211. 8 Tbid., Vol. II, p. 364. 


( 


214 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


legislature should be elected, Sherman said that he was 
“opposed to the election by the people, insisting that it 
ought to be by the state legislatures. The people, he said, 
immediately should have as little to do as may be about the 
government. They want information and are constantly 
liable to be misled.” ? 

Richard Dobbs Spaight does not seem to have made any 
very lengthy speeches in the Convention, but his occasional 
motions show that he was not among those who believed 
in “frequent recurrence to the people.” On September 6, 
he moved that the length of the President’s term be in- 
creased to seven years, and finding this lost he attempted to 

/substitute six years for four.? Spaight was the one member 
of the Convention, however, who came out clearly and de- 
nounced judicial control;* but he nevertheless proved a 
stout champion of the Constitution in North Carolina — 
defending it warmly against charges to the effect that it 
was aristocratic in character.‘ 

Caleb Strong carried into the Convention the old Massa- 
chusetts tradition in favor of frequent elections. He favored 
a one year term for representatives,° voted against a seven 
year term for President,® and also opposed a seven year 
term for Senators.” He supported the Constitution, how- 
ever, in his native state, and was a member of the conven- 
ion that ratified it. 

George Washington’s part in the proceedings of the Con- 
vention was almost negligible, and it does not appear that 
in public document or private letter he ever set forth any 
coherent theory of government. When he had occasion to 
dwell upon the nature of the new system he indulged in the 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 48; also p. 154. 2 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 525. 
’ Beard, The Supreme Court and the Constitution, p. 53. 

4 Elliot, Debates, Vol. IV, p. 207. 5 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, 361. 
6 Ibid., p. 72. 7 Ibid., p. 219. 


THE POLITICAL DOCTRINES 215 


general language of the bench rather than that of the pene- 
trating observer. For example, in his Farewell Address, 
which was written largely by Hamilton, he spoke of the 
government’s being “the offspring of our own choice, un- 
influenced and unawed, adopted upon full investigation, 
and mature deliberation, completely free in its principles, 
in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with 
energy.” ' He feared, however, the type of politics repre- 
sented by the Democratic Societies which sprang up during 
his administration, and looked upon criticism of the govern- 
ment as akin to sedition.? Like Jefferson, he also viewed 
with apprehension the growth of an urban population, for 
in a letter to La Fayette at the time of the French Revolu- 
tion, he said, ‘‘The tumultuous populace of large cities are 
ever to be dreaded. ‘Their indiscriminate violence pros- 
trates for the time all public authority.” ? 


> 


Hugh Williamson was against placing property quali- iY 


fications on voters for members of Congress;* and he was 


opposed to the association of the judges with the executive 
in the exercise of the veto power.’ He preferred to insert 
a provision requiring a two-thirds vote for every “effective 
act of the legislature.’”’® He was, however, an opponent of 
the paper money party in North Carolina‘ and in the Con- 
vention he supported a proposition forbidding the states 
to pass ex post facto laws, on the ground that “the judges 
can take hold of it.” § 

James Wilson was among the philosophers of the period 
_ who had seriously pondered on politics in its historical and 
practical aspects. In the Convention he took a democratic 


1 Writings (Sparks ed., 1848), Vol. XII, p. 222; see below, p. 299. 


2 Ibid., Vol. X, p. 429. 3 Tbid., Vol. X, p. 179. 
4 Farrand, Records, Vol. II, pp. 201, 250. 
5 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 140. 6 Tbid., Vol. I, p. 140. 


7 Above, p. 146. 8 Farrand, Vol. II, 376. 


216 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


view on several matters. He favored the annual election 
of representatives by the people,’ he advocated the popular 
election of United States Senators,? and he believed also in 
the popular election of the President.* He furthermore 
opposed the proposition to place property qualifications on 
voters. His check on popular legislation was to be found in 
judicial control, at first in the association of the judges 
with the executive in its exercise, and later in its simple, 
direct form.’ In fact, Wilson shared the apprehensions of 
his colleagues as to the dangers of democratic legislatures, 
though he did not frankly advocate direct property checks.® 
He doubtless believed that judicial control would be 
sufficient. 

George Wythe was a representative of the old school of 
lawyers in Virginia, and he was a profound student of his- 
torical jurisprudence, although he apparently made no 
attempt to apply his learning to any of the general political 
questions before the Convention. He was a warm advocate 
of the doctrine of judicial control and gave practical effect 
to principles while on the bench in Virginia.’ 

The conclusion seems warranted that the*authors_of The 
‘Federalist generalized the political doctrines of the members _ 
of the Convention with a high degree of precision,.in spite y 
of the great. diversity..of opinion which prevailed on many : 
matters. 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 49 and passim. 

2 Tbid., p. 52 and passim. 3 Tbid., p. 68 and passim. 

4 Tbid., Vol. I, p. 375; Vol. II, p. 125 and passim. 

5 Ibid., Vol. I, p. 98; Beard, The Supreme Court and the Constitution, p. 42. 
6 Lectures on Law (1804 ed.) Vol. I, pp. 398 ff. 

7 Beard, The Supreme Court and the Constitution, p. 48. 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 


On the 17th day of September, 1787, the Convention at 
Philadelphia finished its work and transmitted the new 
Constitution to Congress, with the suggestion that “it 


should afterwards be submitted to a convention of delegates 
tse ice te panpie thereunder the 


ommendation of i islature for their-assent and ratifica- 
tion ;—and-that-cach convention assenting to and ratifying 
the same should give notice thereof to the United States 
in Congress assembled.”” The Philadelphia Convention 
further proposed that when.nine.states had ratified the new 
instrument, it should go into effect as between the states 
ratifying the same. Eleven days later, on September 28, 
the Congréss, then sitting in New York, resolved to accept 
the advice of the Convention, and sent the.Constitution to 
the state legislatures to be transmitted by them to con- 
ventions chosen.by the voters of the respective common- 
wealths. 

This whole process was a departure from the provisions: 
of the then, fundamental law of theland= the Articles of 
~ Confederation — which providéd™ that all alterations~and 
amendments should be made by Congress and receive the 
approval of the legislature of every state. If to-day the 
Congress of the United States should call a national conven- 
tion to “revise” the Constitution, and such a convention 
_ should throw away the existing instrument of government 
217 


218 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


entirely and submit a new frame of government to a popular 
referendum, disregarding altogether the process of amend- 
ment now provided, we should have something analogous to 
the great political transformation of 1787-89. The revolu- 
tionary nature of the work of the Philadelphia Conven- 
tion is correctly characterized by Professor John W. Bur- 
gess when he states that had such acts been performed by 
Julius or Napoleon, they would have been pronounced 
coups d’ état.) 

This revolutionary plan of procedure was foreshadowed 
in the Virginia proposals at the opening of the Convention, 
and was, therefore, contemplated by some of the leaders 
from the beginning. When it was under consideration on 
June 5, Sherman, of Connecticut, opposed it on the ground 
that it was unnecessary and that regular provisions were 
already made in the Articles for amendments. Madison 
wanted to establish the Constitution on some foundation 
other than mere legislative approval. Gerry “observed 
that in the Eastern states the Confederation had been 
sanctioned by the people themselves. He seemed afraid 
of referring the new system to them. The people in that 
quarter have, at this time, the wildest ideas of government 
in the world. They were for abolishing the senate in 
Massachusetts.” King thought that “a convention being 
a single house, the adoption may be more easily carried 
through it than through the legislatures where there are 
several branches. ‘The legislatures also being to lose power 
will be most likely to raise objections.” ? 

1“ What they [the Convention] actually did, stripped of all fiction and verbiage, 
was to assume constituent powers, ordain a constitution of government and of 
liberty, and demand a plébiscite thereon over the heads of all existing legally or- 


ganized powers. Had Julius or Napoleon committed these acts they would have 


been pronounced coups d’ état.” Political Science and Comparative Constitutional 
Law, Vol. I, p. 105. 


1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, p. 123. 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 219 


On July 23 the resolution regarding ratification came 
before the Convention again for discussion,! when it was 
moved that the Constitution be referred to the state legis- 
latures. One of the principal objections urged against this 
plan was the possibility of a later legislature’s repealing the 
ratification by a preceding body of the same authority ; 
but the chief problem=was*whether. there was more likeli- 
hood of securing _ a_confirmation by legislatures or by con- 
ventions, “Whose opposition will be most likely to be 
excited against the system?” asked Randolph. ‘That of 
the local demagogues who will be degraded by it from the 
importance they now hold. These will spare no efforts 
to impede that progress in the popular mind which will be 
necessary to the adoption of the plan. ... It is of great 
importance, therefore, that the consideration of this sub- 
ject should be transferred from the legislatures where this 
class of men have their full influence to a field in which their 
efforts can be less mischievous. It is, moreover, worthy 
of consideration that some of the states are averse to any 
change in their constitution, and will not take the requisite 
steps unless expressly called upon to refer the question to the 
people.” 


% 
% 


Mr. Gorham, of Massachusetts, was of the same opinion.)/ 


He “was against referring the plan to the legislatures. 
1. Menchosen by the people for the particular purpose will 
discuss the subject more candidly than members of the 
legislature who are to lose the power which is to be given 
up to the general government. 2. Some of the legislatures 
are composed of several branches. It will consequently be 
more difficult in these cases to get the plan through the 
legislatures than through a convention. 3. In the states 
many of the ablest men are excluded from the legislatures, 
1 Ibid., Vol. II, p. 89. 


220 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


but may be elected into a convention. Among these may 
be ranked many of the clergy who are generally friends 
to good government.... 4. The legislatures will be 
interrupted with a variety of little business; by artfully 
pressing which, designing men will find means to delay 
from year to year, if not to frustrate altogether, the na- 
tional system. 5. If the last article of the Confederation 
is to be pursued the unanimous concurrence of the states 
will be necessary.” 

In the Convention, Ellsworth preferred to trust the legis- 


‘ latures rather than popularly elected conventions. ‘He 


thought more was to be expected from the legislatures 
than from the people. The prevailing wish of the people 
in the eastern states is to get rid of the public debt; and the 
idea of strengthening the national government carries 
with it that of strengthening the public debt.” After the 
plan of ratification by conventions was carried in spite of 
Ellsworth’s objections, he defended it in his appeal to the 
populace by saying: ‘“‘It proves the honesty and patriotism 
of the gentlemen who composed the general Convention, 
that they chose to submit their system to the people rather 
than to the legislatures, whose decisions are often influenced 
by men in the higher departments of government, who have 
provided well for themselves and dread any change least 
they should be injured by its operation. I would not wish 
to exclude from a state convention those gentlemen who 
compose the higher branches of the assemblies in the several 
states, but choose to see them stand on an even floor with 
their brethren, where the artifice of a small number cannot 
negative a vast majority of the people. This danger was 
foreseen by the federal convention and they have wisely 
avoided it by appealing directly to the people.” ? 
1 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 137. 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 221 


A study of the opinions of the members of the Conven- 


tion shows that four leading reasons led-to.the agreement on / es 


ratificationby._ state conventions... It.permitted..the dis-/ 
regard of the principle of unanimous. approval by the states. 
A firmer foundation would..be-taid for the Constitution if 
it had_ the sanction...of special conventions rather.than.. 
temporary legislatures. One.of thefirst.objects of the Con- 
stitution .was-to’ restrict..the-authority.of state legislatures, 
and it could hardly-be expected that. they would voluntarily, 
commit suicide. Another leading purpose..of the Conven- 
tion was to pay the public debt at par, and the members 
had learned from the repeated appeals to the state legis- 
latures.for funds to meet this national obligation that no 
relief was to be expected from this source. There was a 
better chance of getting the right kind of citizens elected to 
a convention than to a legislatures “By separating the 
election of delegates to state conventions from the election 
of members to the state legislatures, the supporters of the 
Constitution were better able to concentrate their cam- 
paign of education. As for the provision of the Articles 
of Confederation requiring the approval of every state for 
any amendment in the Articles, the urgent necessities of 
the advocates of the new system could not permit such a 
mere technicality to stand in their way. 

The question of their legal right to cast aside their in- 
structions and draft a totally new instrument was more or 
less troublesome for those who entertained a strict regard 
for the observance of the outward signs of propriety. No 
doubt thé instructions of the delegations from the several 
states limited them to the “revision” of the Articles of 
Confederation, and it is highly improbable that in the state 
of public temper then prevailing a Convention would have 
assembled at all if its revolutionary purposes had been 


222 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


understood. During the debates behind closed doors Mr. 
Paterson declared that the delegates were bound by their 
instructions, but Randolph replied that “he was not scru- 
pulous on the point of power”; and Hamilton agreed with 
this view saying, ‘‘We owed it to our country to do on this 
emergency whatever we should deem essential to its happi- 
ness. The states sent us here to provide for the exigencies 
of the union. To rely on and propose any plan not ade- 
quate to these exigencies merely because it was not clearly 
within our powers would be to sacrifice the means to the 
end.” ! 

Outside the halls of the Convention it also became neces- 
sary to defend this revolutionary departure from their in- 
structions. Madison took up the cause in The Federalist? 
and made out an unanswerable case for his side, frankly 
pleading the justification of revolution if the legal arguments 
which he advanced were deemed insufficient. 

ee At the outset he is unwilling to admit that the Con- 
vention had broken with its instructions and performed a 
revolutionary act. He, accordingly, puts forward a legal 
and moral justification first, based upon an analysis of the 
_ instructions of the delegates. They were bound, he shows, 
to make such revisions in the Articles as would render them 
adequate to the exigencies of the union; but an adequate 
government, he pleads, could not be made by revising the 
Articles, and the Convention was either compelled to sacri- 
fice the greater for the less by strictly obeying its instruc- 
tions or to do its whole duty by sacrificing the letter of the 
law. Then he clinches the argument: ‘Let them declare 
whether it was of most importance to the happiness of the 
people of America that the Articles of Confederation should 
be disregarded and an adequate government be provided 
1 Farrand, Records, Vol. I, pp. 255 ff.; p. 283, 2 No. 40. 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 223 


and the Union preserved; or that an adequate government 
should be omitted and the Articles of Confederation pre- 
served.” 

But Madison, after having paid his respects to Legality, 
hastens to add that in all great changes in government 
“forms ought to give way to substance.” A rigid adherence 
to mere technicalities ““would render nominal and nugatory 
the transcendent and precious right of the people ‘to abolish 
or alter their governments as to them shall seem most likely 
to effect their safety and happiness.’”’ That is, the right 
of revolution is, at bottom, the justification for all great 
political changes. If it is argued that this right of revolu- 
tion should not be exercised by a small group of men, such 
as the Convention of fifty-odd delegates at Philadelphia, 
Madison replies that it is impossible for the whole people 
to move forward in concert, and “it is therefore essential 
that such changes be instituted by some informal and un- 
authorized propositions made by some patriotic and respecta- 
ble citizen or number of citizens.” This was the manner in 
which the recent revolt against England was carried out; 
and in the present case the people had the right to pass 
upon the work of the Philadelphia assembly. 

The opponents of the Constitution were able to see the 
significance of that clause of the Constitution which cast 
aside the legal system under which they were living and pro- 
vided that the new instrument should go into effect when 
ratified by nine states — as between those states. “Cor- 
nelius,’’ in Massachusetts, exhibited great anxiety on this 
point, and in his letters of December 11 and 18, 1787, he 
asked concerning this departure: “Will not the adoption 
of this constitution in the manner here prescribed be justly 
considered as a perfidious violation of that fundamental 
and solemn compact by which the United States hold an 


224 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


existence and claim to be a people? If a nation may so 
easily discharge itself from obligations to abide by its most 
solemn and fundamental compacts, may it not with still 
greater ease do the same in matters of less importance? 
And if nations may set the example, may not particular 
states, citizens, and subjects follow? What then will be- 
come of public and private faith? Where is the ground of 
allegiance that is due to government? Are not the bonds of 
civil society dissolved? Or is allegiance founded only in 
power? Has moral obligation no place in civil govern- 
ment? In mutual compacts can one party be bound 
while the other is free? Or, can one party disannul such 


compact, without the consent of the other? If so, con- 


stitutions and national compacts are, I conceive, of no 
avail; and oaths of allegiance must be preposterous things.” ! 

On all hands the “unconstitutional”? procedure of the 
Convention was-attacked by the Anti-Federalists. “A sys>\ _ 
tem of consolidation,” says another writer, “has been me 
with the most profound secrecy and without the least 
authority: And has been suddenly and without any pre- 
vious notice transmitted by the federal convention for 
ratification — Congress not disposed to give any opinion 
on the plan, have transmitted it to the legislatures — The 
legislatures have followed the example and sent it to the 
people. The people of this state, unassisted by Congress or 
their legislature, have not had time to investigate the sub- 
ject, have referred to the newspapers for information, have 
been divided by contending writers, and under such cir- 
cumstances have elected members for the state convention 
—and these members are to consider whether they will 
accept the plan of the federal convention, with all its imper- 
fections, and bind the people by a system of government, of 

1 Harding, The Federal Constitution in Massachusetts, pp. 118-119. 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 225 


the nature and principles of which they have not at present 
a clearer idea than they have of the Copernican system.” ! 

Whatever was thought of the merits of the controversy 
over the proposed plan.of ratification, it was accepted by 
the state.legislatures which were invited by Congress to 
transmit the Constitution to special conventions. It re- 
mains to inquire, therefore, what methods were employed 
in calling these conventions and setting the seal of approval 
on the new and revolutionary proposals of the Philadelphia 
assembly. 

The resolution calling the convention in New Hampshire 
to pass upon the federal Constitution was adopted by the 
legislature on December 14, 1787. The time for holding the 
elections was left to the selectmen of the several towns, who 
were instructed to warn the duly qualified voters of the 
event. The date for the meeting of the convention was fixed 
on the second Wednesday of February, 1788. Four hun- 
dred copies of the Constitution were ordered to be printed 
for distribution. 

The elections seem to have been held about mid-January, 
for the New Hampshire Spy, for January 25, 1788, contains 
a long list of delegates already chosen, and adds that “several 
of the towns not mentioned in the above list were to have had 
their meetings this week.”’ 

A majority of the members of the state convention so 
chosen, writes a student, who has inquired into the per- 
sonnel of that body, “were undoubtedly opposed to the Con- 
stitution. ... The talent of the convention was decidedly © 
on the side of the Federalists and a majority of the ablest 
members were in favor of ratification. ... For a time the 


1 The Massachusetts Centinel, January 2, 1788. 
1 Batchellor, State Papers of New Hampshire, Vol. XXI, pp. 151-165; Docu- 
mentary History of the Constitution, II, p. 141. 


Q 


9296 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


friends of the Constitution had hopes of securing its rati- 
fication without a recess of the convention. Although the 
greater number of the members from the upper part of the 
state came down rather opposed to its adoption, yet on the 
final question it was hoped that a majority would be found 
to favor it. But these hopes proved delusive. While some 
of the members who came to the convention instructed to 
vote against the Constitution had been led by the discussions 
to a change of opinion and now favored it, they still felt 
bound by their instructions, and frankly said that if a final 
vote was to be taken before they had an opportunity to 
consult their constituents their vote would be adverse to 
ratification.””"! Under these circumstances the Federalists 
adjourned the convention and set to work to convert the 
enemy. When the convention reassembled a few months 
later, they were able to carry the day by the uncomfortably 
small margin of 57 to 47.’ 

In Massachusetts the Federalists lost no time in moving 
for a convention. As early as October 20, 1787, they 
carried a favorable resolution in the senate of the state, and 
secured the concurrence of the house four days later. This 
resolve provided that the delegates should be chosen by 
those inhabitants “qualified by law to vote in the election 
of representatives,’ and the elections should take place 
“as soon as may be” in the several towns and districts. 
The date for the meeting of the delegates was fixed as the 
second Wednesday in January next. On January 9, 1788, 
the Convention met at Boston; and a real battle of wits 
ensued. 


1J. B. Walker, A History of the New Hampshire Convention, pp. 22 ff. 

2 Four members are not recorded, and ‘‘there is a pretty well authenticated 
tradition that a certain prominent federalist of Concord gave a dinner party on the 
last day of the session at which several members reckoned as opposed to ratification 
were present and discussing the dinner when the final vote was taken.” Jbid., p. 
43, note. 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 227 


As in New Hampshire, the delegates, when they came to- 
gether fresh from their constituents, appeared to be opposed 
to adopting the new instrument of government. A careful 
scholar, who has studied the period intensively, takes this 
view: “Had a vote been taken on the adoption of the Con- 
stitution as soon as the convention assembled, there can 
be no question but that it would have been overwhelmingly 
against the proposed plan.” ! 

Even after powerful influences had been brought to bear, 
the margin for the Federalists was uncomfortably close — 
187 to 168. Harding remarks: “The majority in favor of 
ratification, it will be seen was only nineteen. The nine 
delegates whose names were returned to the convention, 
but who were not present when the vote was taken, might 
almost have turned the scale in the other direction. Bear- 
ing in mind that it was mainly the Antifederalist towns 
that were unrepresented, it may be safely asserted that 
out of the forty-six delinquent corporations there were 
enough which were Antifederalist to have procured the re- 
jection of the constitution. This calculation, however, is 
based on the assumption that a corresponding increase did 
not take place in the Federalist representation. Had all 
the towns entitled to send representatives done so, and had 
all the delegates been present to cast their votes, it is 
probable that the final result would not have been changed, 
though the Federalist majority would have been cut down 
to scarcely more than a bare half-dozen.” ? 

After turning over the debates in the Massachusetts 
convention, one can scarcely escape the conclusion that the 
victory in eloquence, logic, and pure argumentation lay on 
the side of the Federalists; and it would not be worth while 


1 Harding, The Federal Constitution in Massachusetts, p. 67. 
2 Harding, op. cit., p. 99. 


228 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


to consider at all the charges that improper influence was 
brought to bear on the delegates, were it not for the fact 
that they were made at the time and have lasted in the litera- 
ture on the ratification in Massachusetts. We have “the 
sober assertion of a reputable historical writer within the 
last thirty years”’ to the effect “that enough members of the 
Massachusetts convention were bought with money from 
New York to secure the ratification of the new system by 
Massachusetts.””! Harding, after making an examination 
of the charges, dismissed them as “baseless”; and quite 
properly, for whoever would convict men of such high stand- 
ing in the community as King, Gorham, and Strong of being 
associated with such a reprehensible transaction should pro- 
duce more than mere unsubstantiated evidence. | 

The legislature of Connecticut, determined not to be 
behindhand in setting the approval of the state on the new 
instrument, called a convention on October 11, 17872 A 
month was given to the electors to deliberate over the choice 
of delegates who were to decide the momentous issue. 
The election was held on November 12; the convention 
assembled on January 3, 1788; and after a few days’ dis- 
cussion gave its assent on January 9, 1788, by a vote of 
128 to 40.8 

In New York the voters were given more time than in 
Connecticut to consider the new Constitution before they 
were called upon to settle the question of ratification at the 
polls by choosing delegates to the state convention. It was 
not until February 1, 1788, that the legislature of that 
commonwealth issued the call for the special election to be 
held on the last Tuesday of the following April.* 


1 Harding, op. cit., p. 101. 

2 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. II, pp. 86-87; Connecticut 
Courant, October 22, 1787. 8 Bancroft, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 257. 

4 Debates and Proceedings of the New York State Convention (1905 ed.), p. 3. 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 229 


The contest in New-York was hot from the start..Governor 
Clinton, in his message to the legislature in January, 1788, 
did not mention the Constitution — an omission which gave 
the Federalists some hope as they had feared an executive 
attack. The resolution calling the state convention passed 
the lower house by a narrow margin; and in the senate 
a motion to postpone the matter was almost carried, 
receiving nine out of nineteen votes.! 

When, at length, the convention assembled, at least two- 
thirds of the sixty-four members were found to be against 
ratification. Such is the view of Bancroft, and the con- 
temporary press bears out his conclusion.? Nevertheless, 
by much eloquence and no little manceuvring, the Federalist 
champions were able to obtain a majority of 30 to 27. The 
assent of the requisite number of opponents was secured 
only after an agreement that a circular should be issued 
recommending the call of another national convention at 
once to revise the Constitution as adopted. 

In pursuance of this agreement, the legislature at its 
next session, on February 5, 1789, called upon Congress to 
summon another convention to revise the new instrument 
of government at once. ‘The address of the legislature 
stated that the Constitution had been ratified “in the 
fullest confidence of obtaining a revision of the said Consti- 
tution by a general convention, and in confidence that certain 
powers in and by the said Constitution granted would not 
be exercised until a convention should have been called and 
convened for proposing amendments to the said Constitu- 
tion.” The legislature went on to say that it complied with 
the unanimous sense of the state convention, “who all 
united in opinion that such a revision was necessary to 


1 Bancroft, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 340. 
3 Ibid., p. 340; and see below, p. 244. 


230 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


recommend the said Constitution to the approbation and sup- 
port of a numerous body of their constituents, and a majority 
of the members of which conceived several articles of the 
Constitution so exceptionable, that nothing but such confi- 
dence and an invincible reluctance to separate from our sister 
states could have prevailed upon a sufficient number to as- 
sent to it without stipulating for previous amendments.” + 

The commonwealth of New Jersey made haste to ratify the 
new Constitution as soon as possible after its transmission 
by Congress. On November 1, 1787, the legislature issued 
the call for the convention, ordering the inhabitants who 
were “entitled to vote for representatives in General Assem- 
bly,” to elect delegates on the fourth Tuesday in the follow- 
ing November, 7.e., November 27. The date for the meeting 
of the convention was fixed as the second Tuesday in Decem- 
ber, the 11th, and on the 18th day of that month, the mem- 
bers, “‘Having maturely deliberated on and considered the 
aforesaid proposed Constitution,” unanimously agreed to its 
adoption.” 

The legislature of Delaware, influenced by “‘the sense and 
desire of great numbers of the people of the state, signified 
in petitions to their general assembly,” adopted a resolution 
on November 10, 1787, calling for the election of delegates 
within a few days — that is on November 26 — for the state 
convention to pass upon the Constitution. The conven- 
tion met at Dover on December 3; and after four days’ de- 
liberation on the matter adopted the Constitution by unan- 
imous vote on December 6, 1787.3 


1 State Papers: Miscellaneous, Vol. I, p. 7. For valuable side-lights on the 
opposition to the Constitution, see E. P. Smith’s essay, ‘‘The Movement towards 
a Second Constitutional Convention,” in Jameson, Hssays in the Constitutional 
History of the United States, pp. 46 ff. 

2 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. II, pp. 46 ff. 

* Bancroft, History of the Constitution of the United States, Vol. II, p. 250; Docu- 
mentary History of the Constitution, Vol. II, p. 25; Delaware State Council Minutes, 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 231 


In Pennsylvania the proceedings connected with the 
ratification were precipitous and narrowly escaped being 
irregular. Before it was known that Congress would even 
transmit the Constitution to the states for their considera- 
tion, George Clymer,’ who had been a member of the 
national Convention and was then serving in the Pennsyl- 
vania legislature, ‘‘rose in his place and moved that a state 
convention of deputies be called, that they meet at Phila- 
delphia, and that they be chosen in the same manner and 
on the same day as the members of the next general as- 
sembly.” In vain did the opponents urge that this was 
irregular, that it was not known whether Congress would 
act favorably, and that deliberation rather than haste should 
characterize such a weighty procedure. The legislature, 
nevertheless, resolved to call the convention, and adjourned 
until the afternoon, leaving the date of the convention and 
manner of selecting delegates to be settled later. The 
opposition thereupon decided to secure delay by staying 
away and preventing the transaction of business for want 
of a quorum. 

Meanwhile the news reached Philadelphia that Congress 
had sent the Constitution to the states for their consider- 
ation. The Federalists in the legislature, now having 
secured the sanction of regularity, determined not to brook 
further delay, so they sent officers after some of the recal- 
citrants, who thought ‘“‘filibustering”’ justifiable in view of 
the importance of securing more deliberation before acting. 
These officers, ably assisted by a Federalist mob “broke into 
their lodgings, seized them, dragged them through the 
streets to the State house, and thrust them into the assembly 


1776-1792, pp. 1081-82 (Delaware Historical Society Papers); Connecticut 
Courant, Dec. 24, 1787. 
Mes See above, p. 82. 
2 McMaster and Stone, Pennsylvania and the Federal Constitution, p. 3. 


232 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


room, with clothes torn and faces white with rage. The 
quorum was now complete.” 1 The legislature (September 
29) fixed the election of delegates to the state convention at 
a date five weeks distant, November 6, 1787. Thus the 
people of the state were given a little over a month to 
deliberate on this momentous issue before selecting their 
agents to voice their will. Some Federalists, like Tench 
Coxe, expressed regret at the necessity of adopting these 
high-handed methods; but the stress was so great that 
it did not admit of delay. | 
After the convention assembled, the Federalists continued 
their irregular practices, although from the vote on the Con- 
stitution in the convention this latter manipulation seems 
to have been awork of supererogation. Everything was done 
that could be done to keep the public out of the affair. 
“Thomas Lloyd applied to the convention for the place of 
assistant clerk. Lloyd was a shorthand writer of con- 
siderable note, and when the convention refused his request, 
determined to report the debates and print them on his own 
account. His advertisement promised that the debates 
should be accurately taken in shorthand and published in 
one volume octavo at the rate of one dollar the hundred 
pages. ‘These fine promises, however, were never fulfilled. 
Only one thin volume ever came out, and that contains 
merely the speeches of Wilson and a few of those of Thomas 
M’Kean. The reason is not far toseek. He was bought up 
by the Federalists, and in order to satisfy the public was 
suffered to publish one volume containing nothing but speeches 
made by the two federal leaders.”’* The Federalists appear 
to have suppressed other attempts at issuing the debates, 
and they “withdrew their subscriptions from every publica- 


1 McMaster and Stone, op. ctt., p. 4. 
2 Ibid., p. 14. 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 233 


tion that warmly supported the Antifederal cause.”! The 
Constitution was ratified by a vote of 46 to 23. 

Against these precipitous actions on the part of the 
Federalists in carrying the ratification of the Constitution, 
a minority of the state convention, twenty-one members, 
protested in an address to the people after the day had been 
lost. The protestants told how the federal Convention had 
been called by Congress, and then recited the facts as they 
viewed them: “So hastily and eagerly did the states comply 
[with the call of Congress for the Convention] that their legis- 
latures, without the slightest authority, without ever stop- 
ping to consult the people, appointed delegates, and the 
conclave met at Philadelphia. To it came a few men of 
character, some more noted for cunning than patriotism, and 
some who had always been enemies to the independence of 
America. The doors were shut, secrecy was enjoined, and 
what then took place no man could tell. But it was well 
known that the sittings were far from harmonious. Some 
left the dark conclave before the instrument was framed. 
Some had the firmness to withhold their hands when it was 
framed. But it came forth in spite of them, and was not 
many hours old when the meaner tools of despotism were 
carrying petitions about for the people to sign praying the 
legislature to call a convention to consider it. The conven- 
tion was called by a legislature made up in part of members 
who had been dragged to their seats and kept there against 
their wills, and so early a day was set for the election of 
delegates that many a voter did not know of it until it was 
passed. Others kept away from the polls because they were 
ignorant of the new plan; some because they disliked it, and 
some because they did not think the convention legally 
called. Of the seventy thousand freemen entitled to vote 

1 Ibid., p. 15. 


234 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


but thirteen thousand voted.””! For a long time the war of 
the dissenters against the Constitution went on in Penn- 
sylvania, breaking out in occasional riots, and finally in the 
Whiskey Rebellion in Washington’s administration; but 
they were at length beaten, outgeneralled, and outclassed in 
all the arts of political management. 

In November, 1787, the Maryland legislature, after hear- 
ing Luther Martin’s masterly indictment of the Constitu- 
tion and McHenry’s effective reply, ““unanimously ordered 
a convention of the people of the state; it copied the ex- 
ample set by Virginia of leaving the door open for amend- 
ments; and by a majority of one the day for the choice and 
the day for the meeting of its convention were postponed 
till the next April.’ Several months were thus given 
for deliberation, in marked contrast to the speedy despatch 
of the business in Delaware, New Jersey, Connecticut, 
Pennsylvania, and Massachusetts. The elections were duly 
held on the first Monday in April, 1788; and the conven- 
tion assembled on April 21. The opponents of the Constitu- 
tion, Chase, Mercer, and Martin, hurled themselves against 
it with all their might ; but, it is related, ‘‘the friends to the 
federal government ‘remained inflexibly silent.’’’? After 
a week’s sessions, “the malcontents having tired themselves 
out,” the convention ratified the Constitution by a vote of 

1 McMaster and Stone, op. cit., p. 20. The following year [1788] when the 
ratification of the Constitution was celebrated in Philadelphia, James Wilson, in 
an oration on the great achievement said: ‘‘A people free and enlightened, estab- 
lishing and ratifying a system of government which they have previously con- 
sidered, examined, and approved! This is the spectacle which we are assembled to 
celebrate; and it is the most dignified one that has yet appeared on our globe. . . . 
What is the object exhibited to our contemplation? A whole people exercising 
its first and greatest power — performing an act of sovereignty, original and un- 


limited! ... Happy country! May thy happiness be perpetual!’? Works 
(1804 ed.), Vol. III, pp. 299 ff. 

2 Bancroft, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 278; Votes and Proceedings of the Senate of 
Maryland, November Session, 1787, pp. 5 ff. 

3 Ibid., p. 283. 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 235 


sixty-three against eleven on the afternoon of Saturday, 
April 26. The instrument was formally sealed on the 28th. 

The legislature of Virginia,..by~a resolution passed on 
October 25, 1787, and a law enacted on December 12th, called 
a convention to be elected in March, 1788, and to assemble 
on June 2,1788.' Innostate were the forees.for.and against. 
the Constitution more ably marshalled and led. In no 
state was there higher ordér of debaté”iftHe convention 
than took place in Virginia, the birthplace of the Constitu- 
tion. It was a magnificent battle of talents that was waged 
during those June days, from the 2nd until the 25th. Then 
“the roll was called; and from the cities of Richmond and 
Williamsburg, from the counties near the ocean, from 
the northern neck, and from the counties between the 
Blue Ridge and the Alleghanies, eighty-nine delegates 
voted for the Constitution. From the other central and 
southern border counties of Kentucky, seventy-nine cried 
No.” The margin of victory was small, but it was safe. 

North Carolina was recalcitrant. The call for the con- 
vention was issued by the legislature on December 6, 1787 ;? 
the election was held on the last Friday and Saturday of 
March, 1788; and the convention assembled on July 21, 
1788. In this body ‘the Antifederalists obtained a large 
majority. They permitted the whole subject to be de- 
bated until the 2d of August; still it had been mani- 
fested from the first that they would not allow of an uncon- 
ditional ratification.”’ On that day the convention deferred 


1 Bancroft, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 316. The resolution provided that the ‘‘election 
shall be held in the month of March next on the first day of the court to be held for 
each county, city, or corporation respectively.”” The qualifications of voters were 
“the same as those now established by law.’’ Blair, The Virginia Convention of 
1788, Vol. I, p. 56-57. Only freeholders were eligible to seats in the Convention, 
Ibid., p. 56. Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. XII, p. 462. 

2 Laws of North Carolina (1821), Vol. I, p. 597; North Carolina Assembly Jour- 
nals, 1785-98, p. 22. 


236 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


the ratification of the Constitution by a vote of 184 to 84, 
and adjourned sine die. The new federal government 
was inaugurated without North Carolina; but the economic 
pressure which it brought to bear on that state, combined 
with the influence of eminent Federalists (including Wash- 
ington), and the introduction of constitutional amendments 
in Congress, brought her into the union on November 21, 
1789.” 

South Carolina was one of the most deliberative of all 
the states, for it was not until January 18, 1788, that the 
legislature by unanimous resolution called a convention 
which was elected in April, and organized in Charleston, on 
May 13 of that year. ‘The discussion there was evidently of 
a high order. Those who participated in it took first rank 
in the commonwealth, and the defenders of the new system 
put forth efforts worthy of the distinguished forensic leaders 
of the Charleston bar. The opponents exhausted the arm- 
ory of their arguments, and seeing the tide running against 
them, they sought an adjournment of five months for further 
deliberation ; but a motion to this effect was lost by a vote of 
89 to 135. Finally at five o’clock on the tenth day of the 
sessions, May 23, the Constitution was carried by a large 
majority — 149 to 73.3 

The legislature of Georgia, on October 26, 1787, called for a 
state convention to be chosen “in the same manner as rep- 
resentatives are elected,” at the next General Election, 
held on the first Tuesday in December, 7.e., December 4, 1787. 


1 Bancroft, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 349. 

2 Hugh Williamson, writing to Madison on May 21, 1789, said: ‘Our people near 
the sea-coast are in great pain on the idea of being shut out from the Union. They 
say that unless they can continue in the coasting trade without the alien duty, they 
must starve with their families or remove from the state. Can no exception be 
made in favor of such apparent aliens for so long a period as the first of January 
next?” Madison Mss., Library of Congress. . 

3 Bancroft, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 293. 


s 


THE PROCESS OF RATIFICATION 237 


The convention was duly chosen, and met at Augusta on 
December 25; and after “having taken into serious consid- 
eration the said constitution”’ for four or five days, solemnly 
ratified the instrument on January 2, 1788.1 

Rhode Island was the last of the thirteen states to accept 
the Constitution. She had refused to send delegates to the 
federal Convention; and the triumphant paper money 
party there would have none of the efficiency promised by the 
new system. It was not until May 29, 1790, that Rhode 
Island ratified the Constitution, and this action was brought 
about by the immediate prospect of coercion on the part of 
the government of the United States,? combined with the 
threat of the city of Providence to join with the other 
towns which were Federalist in opinion, in a movement to 
secede from the state and seek the protection of the federal 
government.? Without these material considerations press- 
ing upon them, the agrarians of that commonwealth would 
have delayed ratification indefinitely; but they could 
not contend against a great nation and a domestic in- 
surrection. 


A survey of the facts here. presented yields several.im- 


portant generalizations : 


Two states,.Rhode Island.and North Carolina refused to 
ratify the Constitution until after the establishment. of the 
new government which set in-train powerful economic forces 
against them in their isolation 

In three states, New Hampshire, New York, and Massa- 
chusetts, the popular vote as measured by the election of 
delegates to the conventions was adverse to the Constitu- 
tion; and ratification was secured by the conversion of 

1 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. II, pp. 82 ff. 


2F. G. Bates, Rhode Island and the Union, pp. 192 ff. 
3 Ibid., p. 197. 


238 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


opponents and often the repudiation of their tacit (and in 
some cases express) instructions. 

In Virginia the popular vote was doubtful. 

In the four states which ratified the constitution with 
facility, Connecticut, New Jersey, Georgia, and Delaware, 
only four or five weeks were allowed to elapse before the 
legislatures acted, and four or five weeks more before the 
elections to the conventions were called; and about an 
equal period between the elections and the meeting of 
the conventions. This facility of action may have been 
due to the general sentiment in favor of the Constitution ; 
or the rapidity of action may account for the slight develop- 
ment of the opposition. 

In two commonwealths, Maryland and South Carolina, 
deliberation and delays in the election and the assembling 
of the conventions resulted in an undoubted majority in favor 
of the new instrument ; but for the latter state the popular 
vote has never been figured out.! 

In one of the states, Pennsylvania, the provssdiee con- 
nected with the ratification of the Constitution were con- 
ducted with unseemly haste. 


1See below, p. 248. 


al 


CHAPTER IX 


THE POPULAR VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 


In the adoption of the Constitution, says James Wilson, 
we have the gratifying spectacle of “‘a whole people exercising 
its first and greatest power — performing an act of sover- 
eignty original and unlimited.” + Without questioning the 
statement that for juristic purposes the Constitution may be 


viewed as an expression of the will of the whole people; 


a historical view of the matter requires an analysis of “the 
people”’ into its constiimantrelamchiin In_other words, how 
many of “‘the.people”’ favored the adoption of*the ere 
tution, and how many opposed it? 

At the very outset, it is necessary to recall that the 
question whether a constitutional Convention should be 
held was not submitted to popular vote, and that it was 
not specially passed upon by the electors in chosing the 
members of the legislatures which selected the delegates.” 

In the second place, the Constitution was not submitted 
to popular’ ratification. The referendum was not unknown 
at that time, but it was not a fixed principle of American 
politics.* At all events, such a procedure does not seem to 
have crossed the minds of the members of the Conven- 
tion, and long afterward, Marshall stated that ratification by 
state conventions was the only mode conceivable.* In 


1 See above, p. 234. 2 Ibid., p. 72. 

3 Dodd, The Revision and Amendment of Constitutions; and Garner, in The 
American Political Science Review, February, 1907. 

¢ McCulloch ». Maryland, 4 Wheaton, 316. 


239 


240 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


view of the fact that there was no direct popular vote taken 
on the Constitution, it is therefore impossible to ascertain the 
exact number of “the people’ who favored its adoption. 

The voters, who took part in_ the. selection of delegates 
to the ratifying conventions in the states, may be considered 
as having beéen=divided into four elements: those who were 
consciously in favor of the Constitution, those who werejust 
as consciously against it, those who were-willing to leave the 
matter to the discretion of their elected repress and — 
those who voted blindly. 

The proportions which these four groups bear to one 
another cannot be determined, but certain facts may be 
brought out which will throw light on the great question: 
“How many of the people favored the adoption of theCon- 


AStitution ? ? 


The first fact to be noted in this examination is that a 
considerable proportion of the adult white male population 
was debarred from participating in the elections of delegates 

Ao the ratifying state conventions by the prevailing property 
qualifications on the suffrage. The determination of these 
suffrage qualifications was left to the state legislatures; 
fand in general they adopted the property restrictions al- 
ready imposed on voters for members of the lower branch 
of the state legislatures. 

In New Hampshire the duly qualified voters for members 
of the lower house were authorized to vote for members 


_ of the convention, and those Tories and sympathizers with 


Great Britain who were excluded by law were also admitted 

for this special election! In Massachusetts the voters 

were those ‘‘ qualified by law to vote in the election of repre- 

sentatives.” ? In Connecticut, those “qualified by law 
1 Batchellor, State Papers of New Hampshire, Vol. XXI, p. 165. 


2 Debates and Proceedings in the Convention of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
tn 1788 (1856), p. 23. 


= 


THE POPULAR VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 241 


to vote in town meetings” were enfranchised.! In New 
Jersey, those who were “entitled to vote for representatives 
in general assembly ;”’ ? and in Delaware, those “ qualified by 
law to vote for Representatives to the General Assembly”’ 3 
were empowered to vote for delegates to their respec- 
tive conventions. In Pennsylvania, voters for members of 
the assembly selected the delegates to the convention.’ 
In Maryland, voters for members of the lower house;* in 
Virginia, those possessing the “ qualifications now established 
by law;”’® in North Carolina, those entitled to vote for 
members of the House of Commons;’ in South Carolina, 
those voting for members of the lower house; and in Georgia, 
those voting for members of the legislature (one branch) 
were admitted to participation in the election of delegates 
to their respective state conventions.® 

In New York alone was.the-straight principle of manhood 
suffrage adopted in the election of delegates to the ratifying 
convention. Libby ‘seems inclined to hold that this excep- 
tion wa’ made by the landed aristocracy in the state legis- 
lature because it was opposed to the Constitution and wished 
to use its semi-servile tenants in the elections; but this 
problem has not yet been worked out, and any final conclu- 
sion as to the “politics” of this move is at present mere guess- 
work.° 

It is impossible to say just what proportion of the adult 


1 Connecticut Courant, October 22, 1787. 

2 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. II, p. 61. 

3 Delaware State Council Minutes, 1776-1792, pp. 1080-1082. 

4 McMaster and Stone, Pennsylvania and the Federal Constitution, p. 72. 

5 Votes and Proceedings of the Senate of Maryland, November Session, 1787, pp. 5 ff. 

6 Above, p. 69. Blair, The Virginia Convention of 1788, Vol. I, pp. 56-57. 
Only freeholders could sit in the Convention. 

7 North Carolina Assembly Journals, 1786-1789, p. 22. 

8 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. II, p. 83. 

9 Libby, Geographical Distribution of the Vote on the Federal Constitution, p. 26, 
and note. 


~~) 


242 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


males twenty-one years of age was disfranchised by these 
qualifications. When it is remembered that only about 
3 per cent of the population dwelt in towns of over 8000 
inhabitants in 1790, and that freeholds were widely dis- 
tributed, especially in New England, it will become ap- 
parent that nothing like the same proportion was disfran- 
chised as would be to-day under similar qualifications. 
Dr. Jameson estimates that probably one-fifth of the adult 
males were shut out in Massachusetts,’ and it would probably 
be safe to say that nowhere were more than.one-third of the 
adult males disfranchised by the property. qualifications. 

Far more were disfranchised through apathy and lack of 
understanding of the significance, of politics. It is a note- 
worthy fact’that only a small proportion of the population 
entitled to vote took the trouble to go to the polls until 
the hot political contests of the Jeffersonian era. Where 
voting was viva voce at the town hall or the county seat, 
the journey to the polls and the delays at elections were 
very troublesome. At an election’ in Connecticut in 1775, 
only 3477 voters took part, out of a population of nearly 
200,000, of whom 40,797 were males over twenty years of 
age. How many were disfranchised by the property quali- 
fications and how many stayed away through indifference 
cannot be shown.’ 

Dr. Jameson, by most ingenious calculations, reaches the 
conclusion that in Massachusetts about 55,000 men in 
round numbers or about 16 or 17 per cent of the population 
were entitled to vote under the law. Assuming that 16 
per cent were entitled to vote, he inquires into the number 
who actually exercised the franchise in the years from 1780 
to 1790 in elections for governor; and his inquiry yields 


1 Article cited below, p. 243. 
* McKinley, Suffrage Franchise in the English Colonies, p. 420. 


THE POPULAR VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 243 


some remarkable results. To give his conclusions in his 
own words: “Something like three per cent [of the popula- 
tion, or about one-fifth or one-sixth of those entitled to 
vote] took part in the first election in the autumn of 1780. 
During the next six years the figures remain at about two 
per cent only. In 1784, only 7631 votes were cast in the 
whole state; in the spring of 1786 only a little over eight 
thousand. Then came Shays’ Rebellion and the political 
excitement of that winter brings up the votes in the spring 
election of ’87 to a figure nearly three times as high as in 86, 
and amounting to something between five and six per cent 
of the population. The political discussions of the next 
two winters respecting the new federal government keep 
the figure up to five per cent. Then it drops to some- 
thing between three and four and there it remains until 
1794,” } 

For the purposes of a fine analysis of the economic forces 
in the ratifying process, it would be of the highest value to 
have the vote on delegates to the state conventions in each 
town and county throughout the whole country; but un- 
fortunately no such figures are compiled and much of the 
original materials upon which the statistical tables could be 
based have doubtless disappeared.” Even such tables would 
be unsatisfactory because in several instances there were no 
contests and the issue of adoption or rejection of the Consti- 
tution was not squarely put before the voters. 

In a few instances, however, the number of voters partici- 
pating in the election of delegates to the state conventions 


1 Dr. J. F. Jameson, ‘‘ Did the Fathers Vote,” New England Magazine, January, 
1890. 

2 A detailed statement of the vote in many Connecticut towns on the members 
of the state convention could doubtless be compiled after great labor from the local 
records described in the report on the public archives of Connecticut, Report of 

_the American Historical Associaiion for 1906, Vol. II. 


244 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


has come down to us. In Boston, for example, where the 
fight was rather warm, and some 2700 men were entitled 
to vote, only 760 electors turned out to pass upon the 
momentous issue of the national Constitution — about half 
as many as voted in the next gubernatorial election.’ 

The treatises on the Constitution do not give any figures 
on the popular vote for delegates to the state convention 
in New York, but the following partial list taken from con- 
temporary papers shows that in some of the counties the 
vote ran to almost 10 per cent of the population, while in 
others the percentage of the electorate participating (even 
under the universal manhood suffrage provision) was about 
that in Massachusetts, namely, 5 per cent. It will be 
noted also that the distribution of representation in the con- 
vention was grossly unequal and decidedly unfavorable 
to the Anti-Federalists. The classification into Federalist 
and Anti-Federalist is based upon the election returns as 
reported in the contemporary press, not on the vote in the 
state-ratifying convention. 


FEDERALIST 


Poruna- | HicHrst HicHest |Devecates} Ratio or 
TION FrperRauist| ANTI-FEDER-| IN Con- |DELEGATESTO 
1790 VoTE ALIST VOTE | VENTION‘ | PopuULATION 


New York County | 33,131 | 2735? 134 


9 3,681 
Westchester . .| 23,941} 6943 399 6 3,990 
Queens’ . . .| 16,014 4 4,003 
Kinga ence fe ah i495 2 2,247 
Richmond . . .| 3,835 2 1,917 


1 Harding, The Federal Constitution in Massachusetts, p. 55, note 3. The Connect- 
icut Courant gives the number as 763, December 17, 1787. 

2 Daily Advertiser, May 30, 1788. 4 Elliot, Debates, Vol. II, p. 206. 

8 Tbid., June 3. 5 Queens vote was divided in the Convention. 


THE POPULAR VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 245 


ANTI-FEDERALIST 


Poruna- | HieHest Hieurst |Deiecates| Rario oF 

TION FEDERALIST| ANTI-FEDER-| IN Con- |DELEGATESTO 

1790 VorTE ALIST VOTE | VENTION | PoPULATION 
Albany . . . .| 75,921} 2627! | 4681 fs 10,845 
iswr.. . . .| 29,397 a> eis DN BS 6 4,899 
Dutchess . . .| 45,266) 892% | 1765 " 6,466 
Orange . . . .| 18,478 340 4 4 4,619 
Columbia . . .| 27,732 | 14985 | 1863 3 9,244 
Montgomery . ./| 28,839) 811°] 1209 6 4,806 
euffolk . . .-.| 16,440 5 3,288 
Washington? . .| 15,647 4 3,911 

41 


Several conclusions are obvious from this table. Meas- 

ured by the popular vote, New York was overwhelmingly 
_against the ratification of the Constitution. With the ap- 

portionment of representation against them, the Anti- 
Federalists elected nearly twice as many delegates as the 
Federalists. The popular vote in favor of ratification was 
largely confined to the urban centres of New York City 
and Albany City, thus correcting assumptions based on 
the convention vote alone. 

But with this decided popular vote against them the 
Federalists were able to carry through their program by a 
narrow margin of thirty to twenty-seven. Why did so 
many Anti-Federalists whose popular mandate was clear and 
unmistakable, for there was a definite fight at the polls on 

1 Daily Advertiser, June 4. 

2 Ibid., June 4. 8 Ibid., June 6. 

4 Ibid., June 14. 

5 New York Journal, June 5, 1788. 

6 Itbid., June 5. 


7 The Journal for June 5 reports the Anti-Federalist ticket carried in Washington 
County by a vote of two to one. 


246 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


the issue, go over to their enemies? Three Anti-Federalist 
members, who did go over and carry the day for the Federal- 
ists, John DeWitt, John Smith, and Melancton Smith, 
later appeared as holders of public securities ;' but this does 
not explain the event.? 

In Pennsylvania, the vote on the election of delegates 
to ratify the Constitution was apparently very slight. The 
dissenting minority in their famous manifesto declared: 
“The election for members of the convention was held at 
so early a period and the want of information was so great 
that some of us did not know of it until after it was over. .. . 
We apprehend that no change can take place that will 
affect the internal government or constitution of this common- 
wealth unless a majority of the people should evidence a 
wish for such a change; but on examining the number of 
votes given for members of the present State convention, 
we find that of upwards of seventy thousand freemen who 
are entitled to vote in Pennsylvania, the whole convention 
has been elected by about thirteen thousand voters, and 
though two-thirds of the members of the convention have 
thought proper to ratify the proposed Constitution, yet those 
two-thirds were elected by the votes of, only six thousand 
and eight hundred freemen.” * Though the partisan source 
of these figures might lead one to question their accuracy, 
nevertheless it is hardly probable that they would have 
greatly exaggerated figures that were open to all. 

Philadelphia was the scene of perhaps the hottest contest 


1 See below, p. 270. 

2See a forthcoming dissertation on this subject by Wm. Feigenbaum. There 
was a threat of secession on the part of some New York City interests in case the 
Constitution was defeated. Weight was given to this threat by the news of the 
ratification from New Hampshire and Virginia. The possibility of retaining New 
York as the seat of the new Government was used by Jay, Hamilton, and Duane 
as an argument in favor of ratification. James Madison, Writings, Vol. I, p. 405. 

38 McMaster and Stone, op. cit., p. 460. 


THE POPULAR VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 247 


over the election of delegates that occurred anywhere. 
The city had at that time a population of about 28,000 in- 
habitants. At the election, the candidate who stood the 
highest at the polls, George Latimer, received 1215 votes 
while his leading opponent received only 235 votes.1 Thus 
a total of 1450 votes was cast in the election — about 5 per 
cent of the population. 

The total population of the state in 1790 was 434,373, and 
allowing for the difficulty of journeying to the polls in the 
rural districts, it seems that the estimate of the dissenters 
was probably not far from correct. 

It appears that in Baltimore 1347 voters participated in 
the election of representatives from that city. McHenry 
at the head of the poll received 962 votes and it was known 
that he favored unconditional ratification of the Constitu- 
tion. His leading opponent received 385 votes.? This 
vote was taken after a considerable demonstration, for a 
newspaper report says that “On the same day, the ship 
builders, the tradesmen concerned in navigation, the mer- 
chants, the manufacturers and several thousand inhabitants 
walked in procession through the different streets of the 
town.”  Baltimore;had at that time a population of 13,000 
so that a very largé proportion of the adult males took part 
in the election. 

Further light is thrown on the vote in Maryland by an 
opponent of ratification in a long paper printed in the 
Maryland Journal of May 16, 1788, signed ‘‘ Republican.” 
The author, says Steiner, “asserts that the ‘common class’ 
of people knew little of the Constitution. The two thou- 
sand copies of that document printed by order of the As- 
sembly were too few to go far. The Annapolis paper is of 


a 


1 Scharf and Wescott, History of Philadelphia, Vol. I, p. 447. 
2 Hartford Courant, April 28, 1788. 


248 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


small circulation, and the two Baltimore ones are never 
seen on the Eastern Shore, while the severe weather during 
the past winter prevented any newspapers from being sent 
over thither. Of the 25,000 voters in the state, only 6000 
voted at the election and 4,000 of these votes were cast in 
Baltimore town and seven of the counties. The rich and 
wealthy worked for the Constitution to prevent the loss 
of their debts, and in some-counties the opposition had 
named no candidates.’ } 

In South Carolina, the distribution of representation 
in the convention was such as to give a decided pre- 
ponderance to the personalty districts along the sea-board. 
The convention of 1788 was composed of approximately 
twice the number of the house of representatives in 1794 
and the apportionment was similar in character. In the 
latter year, R. G. Harper, under the pen-name of ‘‘ Appius”’ 
pointed out the great disparity in the weight of the upper 
and lower districts in the legislature: “The lower country, 
including the three districts of Charleston, Beaufort, and 
Georgetown [which were strongly in favor of ratification 
of the Constitution], contains 28,694 white inhabitants, and 
it elects seventy representatives and twenty senators. 
Divide 149,596, the whole number in the state, by 28,694, 
those of the lower country, and the result will be more than 
five, from whence it appears, that a large majority of both 
branches of the legislature is elected by less than one-fifth of 
the people.” ? The upper district [largely Anti-Federal], 
on the other hand, contained 120,902 white inhabitants, and 
sent only fifty-four members to the house of representatives. 
On this basis, the seventy-three votes cast in the convention 


1 American Historical Review, Vol. V, p. 221. 
2“ Appius,’ To the Citizens of South Carolina (1794). Library of Congress, 
Duane Pamphlets, Vol. 83. 


THE POPULAR VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 249 


against ratification may in fact have represented a majority 
of the white inhabitants and voters in the state.! 

While one hesitates to generalize about the vote cast in 
favor of the Constitution on the basis of the fragmentary 
evidence available, it seems worth while, nevertheless, to 
put together several related facts bearing on the matter. 

In addition to the conclusion, brought out by Dr. Jame- 
son, that about 5 per-cent of the population voted in Massa- 
chusetts in the period under consideration, we have other 
valuable data. Dr. Paullin has shown that the electoral 
vote in the presidential election of 1788 in New Hampshire 
was 2.8 per cent of the free population; that the vote 
in Madison’s electoral district in Virginia in the same 
election was 2.7 per cent of the white population; that 
the vote in the first congressional election in Mary- 
land was 3.6 per cent. of the white population and that 
the vote in the same congressional election in Massa- 
chusetts was 3 per cent.” Speaking of the exercise of the 
franchise as a whole in the period, Dr. Paullin says, “The 
voting was.done chiefly by..a smail minority of interested 
property holders, a disproportionate.share of whom in the 
northern states resided in the towns, and the wealthier and 
more talented of whom like a closed corporation controlled 
polities.” 

In view of these figures, in view of the data given above 
on the election of delegates (to the ratifying conventions) 
in the cities of Boston, Philadelphia, and Baltimore, in 
view of the fact that the percentage participating in the 
country was smaller than in the towns, and in view of the 
fact that only 3 per cent of the population resided in cities 


1 By a careful study of local geography and the distribution of representation 
this could be accurately figured out. 

2“‘The First Elections under the Constitution,’’ Iowa Journal of History and 
Politics, Vol. II, pp. 3 ff. 


< 
ote 


950 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


of over 8000, it seems a safe guess to say that not more 
than 5 per cent of the population in general, or in round 
numbers, 160,000 voters, expressed an opinion one way or 
another on the Constitution. In other words, it is highly 
probable_that not more than one-fourth or one-fifth of the 
adult white males took part in the election of delegates to 
the state conventions. If anything, this estimate is high. 
Now in four of the states, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, 
New York, and Virginia, the conventions at the time of their 
election were either opposed to the ratification of the Con- 
stitution or so closely divided that it was hard to tell which 
way the final vote would go. These four states, with Rhode 
Island and North Carolina,! which were at first against 
ratification, possessed about three-fifths of the population 
— in round numbers 1,900,000 out of 3,200,000 free persons. 
Of the 1,900,000 population in these states we may, with 
justice it seems, set off at least 900,000, that is, 45,000 
voters as representing the opposition. Add to these the 
voters in Pennsylvania who opposed the ratification of the 
Constitution, approximately 6000, and we have 51,000 dis- 
senting voters, against ratification. Adding the dissenters © 
in Maryland, South Carolina,? and Connecticut, and taking 
the other states as unanimous, we may reasonably conjec- 
ture that of the estimated 160,000 who voted in the election 
of delegates, not more than 100,000 men favored the adop- 
tion of the Constitution at the time it was put into effect — 
about one in six of the adult males. 
( Admitting that these figures are rough guesses, it appears, 
| nevertheless, that the Constitution was not “an expression | 
of the clear and deliberate will of the whole people,’ ; 7 of 


nce 


ere 


1It will be recalled that the Constitution was put into effect without either 
North Carolina or Rhode Island. 


2 See above, p. 248. 


THE POPULAR VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 251 


a majority of the adult meen nor at the outside of one- 
fifth of them. 

Indeed, it may~very..well.be that a majority of those who 
voted were against. the adoption of the Constitution” as~it 
then stood. Such a conjecture can be based on the frank 
statement of no less an authority than the great Chief 
Justice Marshall who took a prominent part in the move- 
ment which led to the formation and ratification of the new 
instrument of government.’ 

At all events, the disfranchisement of the masses. through VA 
property qualifications and ignorance and apathy contrib- 
uted largely to the facility with which the personalty-in- 
terest representatives carried the day. The latter were alert 
everywhere, for-they*khew, not as"amatter of theory, but 
as a practical matter of dollars and cents, the value of the 
new Constitution. They were well informed. They were 
conscious of the identity of their interests. ‘They were well 
organized. ‘They knew for weeks in advance, even before 
the Constitution was sent to the states for ratification, what 
the real nature of the contest was. They resided for the 
most part in the towns, or the more thickly populated 
areas, and they could marshall their forces quickly and 
effectively: They had also the advantage of appealing 
to all discontented persons who exist in large numbers in 
every society and are ever anxious for betterment through 
some change in political machinery. 

Talent, wealth, and _professional.abilities were, generally 
speaking, on the side.ofsthe Constitutionalists. ‘The money 
to be spent in the campaign of education was on their side 
also; and it was spent in considerable sums for pamphleteer- 
ing, organizing parades and demonstrations, and engaging 
the interest of the press. A small percentage of the enor- 


1 See below, p. 299. 


252 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


mous gain to come through the appreciation of securities 
alone would have financed no mean campaign for those 
days. 

The opposition on the other hand suffered from the 
difficulties connected with getting a backwoods vote out to 
the town and county elections. This involved sometimes 
long journeys in bad weather, for it will be remembered that 
the elections were held in the late fall and winter. There 
were no such immediate personal gains to be made through 
the defeat of the Constitution, as were to be made by the 
security holders on the other side. It was true the debtors 
knew that they would probably have to settle their accounts 
in full and the small farmers were aware that taxes would 
have to be paid to discharge the national debt if the Con- 
stitution was adopted; and the debtors everywhere waged 
war against the Constitution — of this there is plenty of 
evidence.’ But they.had.no money.to carry on their cam- 
paign ;...they .were..poor..and uninfluential — the strongest 
battalions were-not on.their side. The wonder is that they 
came so near defeating the Constitution at the polls.) 


1 Libby, op. cit., pp. 50 ff. 


CHAPTER X 


THE ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 


As in natural science no organism is pretended to be 
understood as long as its merely superficial aspects are 
described, so in history no movement by a mass of people 
can be correctly comprehended until that mass is resolved 
into its component parts. To apply this concept to the 
problern before us: no mathematically exact conclusion 
can be reached concerning the material interests reflected 
in the Constitution until “the people’? who favored its 
adoption and “the people” who opposed it are individualized 


and studied as economic beings dependent upon definite 


modes and processes of gaining a livelihood. A really fine 
analytical treatment of this problem would, therefore, require 
a study of the natural history of the (approximately) 160,000 
men involved in the formation and adoption of the Con- 
stitution; but for the present we must rely on rougher 
generalizations, drawn from incomplete sources. 

It would be fortunate if we had a description of each of the 
state conventions similar to that made of the Philadelphia 
Convention ;+ but such a description would require a study 
of the private economy of several hundred men, with con- 
siderable scrutiny. And the results of such a search would 
be on the whole less fruitful than those secured by the study 
of the Philadelphia Convention, because so many members 
of the state-ratifying bodies were obscure persons of whom 
biography records nothing and whose property holdings do 


1 Above, Chapter V.° 
253 


254 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


not appear in any of the documents that have come down to 
us. In a few instances, as in the case of Pennsylvania, a 
portion of this work has been done in a fragmentary way — 
as regards economic matters; and it may be hoped that a 
penetrating analysis of the public security holdings and 
other property interests of the members of all state con- 
ventions may sometime be made — as far as the sources will 
allow. Nevertheless, for the purposes of this study, cer- 
tain general truths concerning the conflict over the rati- 
fication of the Constitution in the several states have already 
been established by scholars like Libby, Harding, Ambler. 

The first of these authors, Dr. Libby, has made a pains- 
taking study of the Geographical Distribution of the Vote 
on the Constitution, in which he sets forth the economic 
characteristics of the areas for and against the adoption of 
the Constitution. These conclusions are all utilized in 
this chapter; but they are supplemented by reference to 
the later researches of Harding! and Ambler,’ and by a 
large amount of new illustrative materials here presented 
for the first time. The method followed is to exhibit, in 
general, the conflict of economic interests in each of the 
several states over the adoption of the Constitution. 

New Hampshire. — There were. three rather sharply, 
marked economic districts in New Hampshire which found 
political expression in the convention that ratified the 
Constitution. Two of the three were the sea-coast area 
and the interior or middle region. “The former,” says 
Libby, “the coast area, represented the commercial and 
urban interests ; here were to be found most of the pro- 
fessional men,-leaders-of. thought, men of wealth and in- 
fluence. The second.section, the.interior, was composed 


1 Massachusetts and the Federal Constitution (Harvard Studies). 
2 Secttonalism in Virginia. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 255 


of those representing the small farmers; a population cut 
off from the outside world by lack of good roads, and which 
raised little for market except to exchange for the few things 
that could not be produced at home. The former class, 
progressive and liberal and familiar with the practical de- 
tails of government, as a rule voted for the Constitution: 
The latter, conservative by environment and having little 
knowledge of what went on outside the narrow bounds of the 
home village or township, quite as generally voted against 
the Constitution.” rs 
The third region in New Hampshire (whose representatives 
favored ratification) was “the Connecticut valley or border 
district” whose interests were akin to those of the sea towns 
because it had.commercial connection with the outside 
world through the Connecticut_.River. ,It was to this 
region particularly that Oliver Ellsworth must have ap- 
pealed in his open letter to the citizens of New Hampshire 
in which he said: “New York, the trading towns on the 
Connecticut River, and Boston are the sources from which 
a great part of your foreign supplies will be obtained, and 
where your produce will be exposed for market. In all 
these places an import is collected, of which, as consumers, 
you pay a share without deriving any public benefit. You 
cannot expect any alteration in the private systems of these 
states unless effected by the proposed government.” ” 
Several economic facts of prime significance in the rati- 
fication of the Constitution in New Hampshire are afforded 
by the tax returns of 1793. These show that of the £61,711: 
9:5 “total value of stock in trade” in the state in that year 
(Vermont being then cut off) no less than £42,512: 0:5 or 
over two-thirds was in Rockingham county, the seat of the 
commercial town of Portsmouth, whose citizens were the lead- 
1 Libby, op. cit., pp. 7-8. 2Tbid., p. 11. 


256 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


ing agitators for the new system, and whose delegates in the 
state convention were overwhelmingly in favor of ratification. 
Moreover, of the total amount of the “money on hand or 
at interest’ in the state, £35,985:5:6, about two-thirds, 
£22,770:9:4 was in Rockingham county. It is of further 
significance that of the £893,327 : 16: 10 worth of real estate 
and buildings in the state, less than one-half, £317,970: 7 : 2, 
was in that county.! Thus the stronghold of Federalism 
possessed about two-thirds of all the personalty and only 
about one-half of the realty values in the commonwealth. 
All personalty was not equally interested in ratifying 
the Constitution, as pointed out above; holders of public 
paper multiplied their values from six to twenty times in 
securing the establishment of the new system. Further 
interesting data would be revealed, therefore, if we could 
discover the proportion of public securities to other per- 
sonalty and their geographic distribution.2 The weight of 
the securities in New Hampshire is shown by the fact that 
the tax list for 1793 gives only £35,985 as the total 
amount of money on hand or at interest (including public 
securities) * in the state, while the accounts of the Treas- 
ury department show that $20,000 in interest on the 
public debt went to the loan office of that state to dis- 
charge that annual federal obligation.* It is highly prob- 
able that the tax list is very low, but even at that the public 
securities constituted a considerable mass of the capital of 
the commonwealth. The leading supporters of the Con-— 


1 Data given here are from State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 442. It should be 
remembered that the figures would have been relatively different in 1787 on ac- 
count of the union of Vermont with New Hampshire, but they are doubtless 
roughly correct. 

2 Some painstaking research in the Treasury Department would produce valuable 
data toward the solution of this problem. 

* State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 442 (public funds included. See p. 419). 

4 See above for the table, p. 36. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 257 


stitution in New Hampshire were large holders of public 
paper,’ and there is no doubt that as personalty was the 
dynamic element in the movement for the Constitution, so 
securities were the dynamic element in the personalty. 

Massachusetts. —'The vote in Massachusetts on the Con- 
stitution was clearly along class or group lines: those sec- 
tions in whichwere™to..be.found the commerce, money, 
securities — in a word, personalty — were in favor of the 
ratification of the new instrument of government; and 
those sections which were predominantly rural and _pos- 
sessed little personalty were against it. Libby classifies 
the sections on the basis of the vote as follows :— 


Eastern section . . . . Yeas, 73 percent Nays, 27 per cent 
Middle section . . . . Yeas, 14 percent Nays, 86 per cent 
Western section . . . . Yeas, 42 percent Nays, 58 per cent 


Speaking of this table he says: ‘Such striking differences 
as these indicate clearly that there is something fundamental 
lying back of the vote. Each of these sections is an economic 
and social unit, the first representing the coast region, the 
second the interior, and the third the Connecticut valley 
and border districts of the state. In the eastern section the 
interests were commercial; there was the wealth, the in- 
fluence, the urban population of the state. .. . The middle 
section of Massachusetts represented the interior agricul- 
tural interests of the state—the small farmers. From 
this section came a large part of the Shays faction in 1786. 
The Connecticut valley or western district may be subdivided 
into the northern, most interior, and predominantly Anti- 
federal section, and the southern section, nearest the coast 
and predominantly Federal, with the trading towns of the 
Connecticut River in its southeastern part.” ” 


1 Ms. Treasury Department: New Hampshire Loan Office Books. 
3 Libby, op. cit., p. 12. 
8 


258 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Harding, after an independent study of the opposition 
to the Constitution in Massachusetts, comes to substantially 
the same conclusion. Among the weighty elements in the 
struggle he places “the conflict of interest, partly real and 
partly fancied, between the agricultural and the commercial 
sections of the state.’’ Underlying the whole opposition, 
he continues, “was the pronounced antagonism between 
the aristocratic and the democratic elements of society in 
Massachusetts. .. . Massachusetts was not alone in this 
experience ; in most, if not all, of the states a similar contest 
had arisen since the war. The men who at Philadelphia 
had put their names to the new Constitution were, it seems 
quite safe to affirm, at that time identified with the aristo- 
cratic interest. ... There can be no question that this 
feeling [of antagonism between democracy and aristocracy] 
underlay most of the opposition in the Massachusetts con- 
vention.” ! 

Of course this second element of opposition — aristocracy 
versus democracy — introduced by Harding is really noth- 
ing but the first under another guise; for the aristocratic 
party was the party of wealth with its professional depend- 
ents; and the democratic party was the agrarian element 
which, by the nature of economic circumstances, could have 
no large body of professional adherents. This economic 
foundation of the class division was fully understood by 
Adams and set forth with unmistakable clearness in his 
Defence of the American Constitutions. Hamilton, Madison, 
and all thinkers among the Federalists understood it also. 
To speak of a democratic interest apart from its economic 
sources is therefore a work of supererogation; and it does 
not add, in fact, to an exposition of the real forces at work. 
Harding himself recognizes this and explains it in a luminous 
fashion in his introductory chapter. 

1 The Federal Constitution in Massachusetts, p. 75. 


* 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 259 


And what were the economic and social antecedents of 
the opponents of the Constitution in the Massachusetts 
convention? Harding, with his customary directness, meets 
the inquiry: “A half-dozen obscure men, it must be an- 
swered, whose names are utterly unknown, even to most 
students of this period.’’ He continues: ‘‘ William Widgery 
(or Wedgery) of New Gloucester, Maine, was one of these.! 
A poor, friendless, uneducated boy, he had emigrated from 
England before the Revolution, had served as a lieutenant 
on board a privateer in that contest, had then settled in 
Maine, had acquired some property, and by 1788 had 
served one term in the Massachusetts legislature. . 
Samuel Thompson, of Topsham, Maine, was another of the 
anti-federalist leaders. A self-made man, he had the ob- 
stinacy of opinion which such men often show. ... He 
was wealthy for the times, but inclined to be niggardly. .. . 
Another determined opponent of the proposed Constitution 
was Samuel Nasson (or Nason) of Sanford, Maine. Born 
in New Hampshire and a saddler by trade, he became a 
store keeper in Maine, served awhile in the War. . . and 
finally settled down as a trader at Sanford. ... In 1787 
he served a term in the General Court, but declined a re- 
election because he felt ‘the want of a proper education.’ . . . 
From Massachusetts proper, Dr. John Taylor, of Douglas, 
Worcester County, was the most prominent opponent of 


- the new Constitution. ... But the slightest information, it 


seems, can now be gathered as to his history and personality. 
He had been one of the popular majority in the legislature of 
1787 where he had taken an active part in procuring the ex- 
tension of the Tender Law. ... Another delegate from this 
part of the state who was prominent in the opposition was 
Captain Phanuel Bishop, of Rehoboth, Bristol County. In 


1 As to the opposition in Maine, see General Knox’s view, below, p. 301. 


260 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


him the Rhode Island virus may be seen at work. ... He 
was a native of Massachusetts and had received a public 
school education. When or why he had been dubbed Cap- 
tain is not now apparent. Belknap styles him ‘a noted in- 
surgent’; and he had evidently ridden into office on the crest 
of the Shaysite wave. His first legislative experience had 
been in the Senate of 1787 where he had championed the 
debtor’s cause.” * 

This completes the list of leaders who fought bitterly 
against the Constitution to the end in Massachusetts, accord- 
ing to a careful student of the ratification in that state: 
three self-made men from the Maine regions and two repre- 
sentatives of the debtor’s cause. Nothing could be more 
eloquent than this description of the alignment. 

Neither Harding nor Libby has, however, made analy- 
sis of the facts disclosed by the tax lists of Massachusetts 
or the records in the Treasury Department at Washington, 
which show unquestionably that the live and persistent 
economic force which organized and carried through the 
ratification was the personalty interests and particularly the 
public security interests. As has been pointed out, these 
had the most to gain immediately from the Constitution. 
Continental paper bought at two and three shillings in the 
pound was bound to rise rapidly with the establishment of 
the federal government. No one knew this better than the 
members of the federal Convention from Massachusetts 
and their immediate friends and adherents in Boston. 

Of the total amount of funded 6 per cents in the state, 
£113,821, more than one-half, £65,730, was concentrated — 
in the two counties, Essex and Suffolk, of which Boston was 
the urban centre —the two counties whose delegates in 
the state convention were almost unanimous in supporting 

1 The Federal Constitution in Massachusetts, pp. 63-66. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 261 


the Constitution. Of the total amount of 3 per cents, 
£73,100, more than one-half, £43,857, was in these two coun- 
ties. Of the deferred stock, amounting to £59,872, more 
than one-half, £32,973, was in these two counties. Of the 
total amount of all other securities of the state or the United 
States in the commonwealth, £94,893, less than one-third 
or £30,329, was in these counties. Of the total amount of 
money at interest in the state, £196,698, only about one- 
third, £63,056, was in these two counties, which supports 
the above conjecture that public securities were the active 
element.! 

Further confirmation for this conjecture seems to be 
afforded by the following tables, showing the distribution of 
the vote and of public securities.?, The first group shows the 
votes of the delegates from Essex and Suffolk counties — 
the Federalist strongholds — on the ratification, and also 
the amount of public securities in each as revealed by the 
tax lists of 1792: 


Essex 

For the Constitution. . . 38 votes Against . . . 6 votes 
SUFFOLK 

For the Constitution. . . 34 votes Against . . . 5 votes 


Table of public securities listed for taxation in each of these 
counties : 


SUFFOLK ESSEX 
Funded, sixes Pe £29,228 £36,502 
Funded, threes .. eet 17,096 26,761 
5 Funded, not on interest ene 14,854 18,119 
Other RemipitceaMeh Wins e06 es 14,056 16,273 
Money at Interest . . .... 29,941 33,115 


1 State Papers: Finance, Vol. 1, pp. 451. Of course some changes in distribution 
_ may have occurred between 1789 and 1792, but this may be taken as approxi- 
mately correct. 

3 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 443; Libby, op. cit., p. 107 for the vote. 


262 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Now let us take the vote in the convention, and the 
property in two counties which were heavily against the 
Constitution.1 The vote is as follows: 


WORCESTER 

For the Constitution . . . 7 votes Against . . . 48 votes 
BERKSHIRE 

For the Constitution . . . 7 votes Against . . . 15 votes 


The tables of public securities and money in these counties 
follow : 


WORCESTER BERKSHIRE 
Funded, sixes A AE 7 at at ORS £12,924 £981 
Funded, threes... Ray eae 2 8,184 665 
Funded, not on interest... 5,736 384 
Other securities’ tie ene at Sous 10,903 602 


Money at interest . . .... 25,594 6298 


Now if we take the securities in these two counties which 
went heavily against the Constitution several economic 
facts are worthy of notice. Of the total amount of 6 per 
cents in the state, only £13,905, or about one-eighth is 
to be found in them. Of the 3 per cents, we find £8849, 
or about one-eighth of the total amount in the common- 
wealth. But if we take money at interest, we find £31,892, 
or about one-sixth of the total amount in the state. This 
is not surprising, for Worcester was the centre of the Shays 
rebellion in behalf of debtors, and a large portion of their 
creditors were presumably in the neighborhood.? 

“The courts were burdened with suits for ordinary debts 
by means of which creditors sought to put in more lasting 


1 Libby, op. cit., for vote, p. 107; State Papers: Finance, Vol. I. pp. 450 and 449 
for taxes lists. 

2 The full significance of the Worcester vote and property lists would involve 
an analysis of the distribution of each among the towns. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 263 


form the obligations which their debtors could not at that 
time meet. In Worcester county alone, with a population 
of less than 50,000, more than 2000 actions were entered in 
1784, and during the next sppat 1700 more were put on the 
hist.” 

These figures, like all other statistics, should be used 
with care, and it would require a far closer analysis than can 
be made here to work out all of their political implications. 
We should have a thorough examination of such details 
as the distribution of the public securities among towns and 
individual holders; and such a work is altogether worthy 
of a Quetelet. 


Meanwhile, it may be said with safety that..the-com=" 


munities in which. personalty was-relativély.more.powerful 


these communities large quantities ‘of public se securities were 
_ held. Moreover, there was undoubtedly a vital connec- 
tion between the movement in support of the Constitu- 
tion and public security holding, or to speak concretely, 
among the leading men in Massachusetts who labored to 
bring about the ratification was a large number of public 
creditors. 

For example, Boston had twelve representatives in the 
state-ratifying convention, all of whom voted in favor of 
the Constitution. Of these twelve men the following were 
holders of public securities :? 


Samuel Adams John Coffin Jones 
James Bowdoin, Sr. William Phillips 
Thomas Dawes, Jr. Thomas Russell 
Christopher Gore John Winthrop 


1 American Antiquarian Society Proceedings (1911), p. 65. 

2Ms. Treasury Department: Index to the Three Per Cents (Mass.). Gore, 
Dawes, and Phillips appear on the New Hampshire Journals and other Massachu- 
setts Records. 


: 


By 


favored_the ratification of the Constitution, — and that in 


264 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


In other words, at least eight out of the twelve men rep- 
resenting the chief financial centre of the state were per- 
sonally interested in the fate of the new Constitution. How 
deeply, it is impossible to say, for the Ledgers seem to have 
disappeared from the Treasury Department and only the 
Index to the funded debt remains. Supplementary records, 
however, show some of them to have been extensively en- 
gaged in dealing in paper. ‘The four men who, apparently, 
were not security holders were John Hancock, Caleb Davis, 
Charles Jarvis, and Rev. Samuel Stillman. 

The towns surrounding Boston in Suffolk county also 
returned a number of men who were holders of securities :? 


Fisher Ames, Dedham Rev. Daniel Shute, Hingham 
John Baxter, Medfield Increase Sumner, Roxbury 
James Bowdoin, Jr., Dorchester Cotton Tufts, Weymouth 
Richard Cranch, Braintree Ebenezer Wales, Dorchester 
J. Fisher, Franklin Ebenezer Warren, Foxboro 
William Heath, Roxbury Rev. Anthony Wibird, Brain- 
Thomas Jones, Hull tree 


Benj. Lincoln, Hingham 


In other words, twenty-two of the thirty-four men from 
Boston and Suffolk county who voted in favor of the rati- 
fication of the Constitution in the Massachusetts conven- 
tion were holders of public securities, and all of the twenty- 
two except two (Wales and Warren) probably benefited 
from the appreciation of the funds which resulted from the 
ratification.* 


1 The Index shows several holders by the name of Davis: Jonathan, James, 
Aaron, Susanna, John, Nathl., Joseph, Moses, Thomas, Saml., Wendell, and 
John G. Whether they were relatives of Caleb is not apparent. Leonard and ~ 
Nathl. Jarvis also appear on the Book. Also Mary and Belcher Hancock. 

2 All of these men except Wales and Warren appear on the Index to the Three 
Per Cents (Mass.). Wales and Warren appear on the books as holders of old cer- 
tificates (Loan Office Certificates, 1779-1788, Mass.) ; and it does not appear when 
or how they disposed of their holdings. 

3See above, p. 75, note 3. 


oe z 


7 


t 


a 


~obeaahed Seeba Mlb \ ae 


- 


Tae 
sumo posopes{___| an pinian 
e 
paplaig 5 = if ’ \gioai . 
sumo, jesapes-4uY VW ACG as ent * \ we 
pn. or ies Gt ish te 
£92g pauinssy %9 S4eP/OH Ayanragereses CF \a7aluv ‘ as 
ys ™ Guodimis NV hoeee 
i \ —<~ < aN ms, 
Ste aa 
ae NOLONLLNAH ee at 
ee ; eoeee\ 
\ ie NMOLMAN \ AunaNvd \! 
1 % ; 4ayaa ra uM 
i \ noxous Asse SN vee es 
Veuete Nae ese Vee - Ler 
SHG ‘ [prison \ ged ~~ yunguunos , \ ba] | 
hecesanllae a \ 4 e Naa | ioe] ‘ z | 
\ Jost ee2eoe e-— \ \ Bs \ Ea 
Epes os: a ABNAGOOM | \ mt 
\ Nousaud OSs ; 3) ed 
A “Vt 
H &\ foes Ce ‘4 
| = p- — = ae 
1s He i ee H 
i: } 4S ZS / wei | et 
(Sit Dias } 
pees wrvcoue 8 “A ss 
}- AC CS yh N\ 


XTONTTUY 


~ . O—— 


Vy 


unasiys 


ees ee 


7 
= 
& 
KA 


5 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 265 


To recapitulate. There were thirty-nine members of the 
Massachusetts convention from Suffolk county, which in- 
cludes Boston. Of these, thirty-fourewoted™ for thé*rati- 
fication of the Constitution, and of the thirty-four who. so 
voted, two-thirds, or twenty¥=two to be exact,..were holders 
of puplic paper. — 

That other supporters of the Constitution from other 
Massachusetts counties held paper so extensively is not to be 
expected, and a casual glance through the records shows that 
this surmise is probably true. Boston was the centre of 
the Federalist agitation, and it supplied the sinews of war 
for the campaign which finally secured the adoption of the 
new system of government. 

Connecticut. — The vote on the Constitution in Con- 
necticut was so largely in favor of ratification that no very 
clear lines of cleavage are.apparent_on.the surface.’ The 
opposition, as measured by the vote of the delegates in the 
Convention, was “scattered and unimportant. Its two 
chief centres were in New Haven county on the coast, and 
in five or six towns on the Connecticut river at the northern 
boundary, connecting with a group of opposition towns 
in Massachusetts.” * It is worthy of note that the con- 
siderable towns for the time, Windsor, Norwalk, Stamford, 
Litchfield, Hartford, and New Haven were for the Con- 
stitution, while much of the opposition came from small in- 
land towns like Cornwall, Norfolk, and Sharon.’ 

The map facing this page shows that the Federalist towns 


1 On September 3, 1787, the Connecticut Courant in a léttér from Philadelphia 
(Aug. 24) says: ‘‘One of the first objects with the national government to be elected 
under the new constitution, it is said, will be to provide funds for the payment of 
the national debt, and thereby restore the credit of the United States, which has 
been so much impaired by the individual states. Every holder of a public security 
of any kind is, therefore, deeply interested in the cordial reception and speedy es- 
tablishment of a vigorous continental government.” 

2 Libby, op. cit., p. 14. 3 Jbid., p. 118. 


266 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


were the financial centres of the time in Connecticut. The 
representatives of thé ““Shaded ” towns in the state conven- 
tion voted against the Constitution ; those from the partially 
“shaded” towns were divided ; and those from the plain 
white towns voted for the Constitution.’ Each black dot 
represents a holder of one 6 per cent assumed debt bond.? 
It is apparent at a glance that there must have been some 
relation between security-holding and the “sentiments,” to 
use Madison’s term,’ of the respective proprietors. Hartford 
alone had almost as many security holders as all of the Anti- 
Federalist towns combined. It would be interesting to 
have a map showing the distribution of all other forms of 
wealth as well as the assumed debt. 

What a more searching study would produce were we able 
to carry the contest back into the town meetings that 
chose the delegates cannot be conjectured. But the local 
evidence — even that which was recorded — has largely 
disappeared or would require years of search to unearth. 
Moreover, the tax system in Connecticut at the time was 
not such as to yield the data most needed for such an in- 
quiry, for “‘loans to the state and the United States were 
exempt from assessment.” * Whether this grew out of a 
public policy or the fact that the chief politicians of the day 
were large holders of securities — evidenced by the records 
in the Treasury Department at Washington —is also a 

_matter for conjecture. No documents, no history. 

\/ Nevertheless, as in Massachusetts,.the public securities 


formed a-dynamic. element in the movement for 3 ratification.” 


as 


1 Towns not represented or not voting in the convention are counted against the 
Constitution. 

2The assumed debt is taken because the Ledgers of that debt are in excellent 
shape and apparently complete. They do not contain, however, half of the security 
holders in that state. Several of the towns that had no assumed debt-holders were 
represented in the convention by holders of other paper. See table, p. 267. 

3See above, p. 15. 4 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 423. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 267 


One hundred and twenty-eight members of the Connecticut 
convention voted in favor of the new system. Of these 
men at least sixty-five held public paper in some amount 
(ranging from a few dollars to tens of thousands) previous 
to or about the time of the adoption of the Constitution. 
They are given here in alphabetical order with the names 
of the towns which they represented. 


Nehemiah Beardsley, 
Fairfield 

Philip B. Bradley, Ridgefield 

‘Hezekiah Brainerd, Haddam 

Daniel Brinsmade, Washington 

Gideon Buckingham, Milford 

Thaddeus Burr, Fairfield 

Charles Burrall, Canaan 

Samuel Canfield, New Milford 

Samuel Carver, Bolton 

Jabez Chapman, East Haddam 

Moses Cleaveland, Canterbury 

Wheeler Coit, Preston 

Seth Crocker, Willington 

James Davenport, Stamford 

John Davenport, Stamford 

Benjamin Dow, Voluntown 

Joshua Dunlop, Plainfield 

Eliphalet Dyer, Windham 

Pierpont Edwards, New Haven 

Oliver Ellsworth, Winsor 

Jabez Fitch, Greenwich 

Daniel Foot, Colchester 

Isaac Foot, Stafford 

Mathew Griswold, Lyme (Presi- 
dent of the Convention) 

Nathan Hale, Canaan 

Asaph Hall, Goshen 

Jeremiah Halsey, Preston 

William Hart, Saybrook 


New 


Cornelius Higgins, Haddam 

Benjamin Hinman, Southbury 

Caleb Holt, Willington 

Jedediah Huntington, Norwich 

Samuel Huntington, Norwich 

Eli Hyde, Franklin 

Wm. Samuel Johnson, Strat- 
ford 

Richard Law, New London 

Andrew Lee, Lisbon 

Isaac Lee, Berlin 

Elisha Mills, Stratford 

Stephen Mitchel, Wethersfield 

Josiah Mosely, Glastonbury 

Roger Newberry, Winsor 

Wm. Noyes, Lyme 

Samuel H. Parsons, Middle- 
town 

Charles Phelps, Stonington 

John Phelps, Stafford 

Joshua Porter, Salisbury 

Jeremiah Ripley, Coventry 

Ephraim Root, Coventry 

Jesse Root, Hartford 

Lemuel Sanford, Reading 

Epaphras Sheldon, Torrington 

Roger Sherman, New Haven 

Simeon Smith, Ashford 

Jonathan Sturges, Fairfield 

Dyar Throop, East Haddam 


268 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


John Treadwell, Farmington Ebenezer White, Chatham 
Jeremiah Wadsworth, Hartford William Williams, Lebanon 


Ichabod Warner, Bolton Joseph Woodbridge, Groton 
John Watson, East Winsor Erastus Wolcott, East Winsor 
Jeremiah West, Tolland Oliver Wolcott, Litchfield! 


It must not be thought that the ramifications of economic 
interest ends with these names.” A large number of men 
who do not appear on the records as holding securities per- 
sonally, belonged to families having such holdings. For 
example, John Chester, of Wethersfield, is apparently not 
on the books, but he was a colonel in the war and doubtless 
received the soldiers’ certificates or other paper at some 
period. Thomas Chester and Sarah Chester of Wethers- 
field appear on the records. Whether there were family 
connections might be ascertained by a study of local history. 
It is evident what infinite pains would be required to trace 
out all of these genealogical data. 

New York.— There can be no question about the pre- 
dominance of personalty in the contest over the ratification 
in New York. That state, says Libby, “presents the prob- 
lem in its simplest form. The entire mass of interior coun- 
ties........ were solidly Anti-federal, comprising the agricul- = 
tural portion of the state, the last settled and the most 
thinly populated. There were however in this region two 
Federal cities (not represented in the convention [as such]), 
Albany in Albany county and Hudson in Columbia county. 

1 The sources for the information as to these securities are in the Treasury De- 
partment: Connecticut Loan Office, 1781-1783 (Register of Certificates) ; Con- 
necticut Loan Office, Ledger B, Assumed Debt; Ledger C, 1790-1796; Ledger A, 
1790-1797 ; Loan Office Certificates of 1779, etc. 

* No doubt a study of local economic interests in Connecticut would yield highly 
important data. See, for example, the early capitalist enterprises connected with 
the navigation of the Connecticut River. Proceedings of the American Antiquarian 
Society, 1903-1904, p.404. Such local histories as E. D. Larned, A History of Wind- 


ham County, contain veritable mines of information on the economic interests of 
men prominent in local politics. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 269 


The Federal area centred about New York city and 
egunty: to the southwest lay Richmond county (Staten 
Island); to the southeast Kings county, and to the north- 
east Westchester county; while still further extending this 
area, at the northeast lay the divided county of Dutchess, 
with a vote in the convention of 4 to 2 in favor of the 
Constitution, and at the southeast were the divided coun- 
ties of Queens and Suffolk. ... These radiating strips 
of territory with New York city as a centre form a unit, in 
general favorable to the new Constitution; and it is sig- 
nificant of this unity that Dutchess, Queens, and Suffolk 
counties broke away from the anti-Federal phalanx and 
joined the Federalists, securing thereby the adoption of 
the Constitution.” ! 

Unfortunately the exact distribution of personalty in New 
York and particularly in the wavering districts which went 
over to the Federalist party cannot be ascertained, for the 
system of taxation in vogue in New York at the period of 
the adoption of the Constitution did not require a state 
record of property.?, The data which proved so fruitful 
in Massachusetts are not forthcoming, therefore, in the 
case of New York; but it seems hardly necessary to demon- 
strate the fact that New York City was the centre of person- 
alty for the state and stood next to Philadelphia as the great 
centre of operations in public stock. 

This somewhat obvious conclusion is reinforced by the 
evidence relative to the vote on the legal tender bill which 
the paper money party pushed through in 1786. Libby’s 
analysis of this vote shows that ‘‘No vote was cast against 
the bill by members of counties north of the county of New 
York. In the city and county of New York and in Long 

1 Libby, op. cit., p.18. Libby here takes the vote in the New York convention, 


but that did not precisely represent the popular vote. Above, p. 244. 
2 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 425. 


270 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Island and Staten Island, the combined vote was 9 to 
5 against the measure. Comparing this vote with the 
vote on the ratification in 1788, it will be seen that of the 
Federal counties 3 voted against paper money and 1 for 
it; of the divided counties 1 (Suffolk) voted against 
paper money and 2 (Queens and Dutchess) voted for it. 
Of the anti-Federal counties none had members voting 
against paper money. ‘The merchants as a body were op- 
posed to the issue of paper money and the Chamber of 
Commerce adopted a memorial against the issue.” ! 

Public security interests were identified with the sound 
money party. (There were thirty members of the New 
York constitutional convention who voted in favor of the 
ratification of the Constitution and of these no less than 
sixteen were holders of public securities :?_ 


James Duane, New York (C 6) 

John DeWitt, Dutchess (N.Y. 3) 
Alexander Hamilton,’ New York 

Richard Harrison, New York (C 6) 
Jonathan Havens, Suffolk (C 6 as Trustee for a religious society). 
John Jay, New York (C 6) 

Samuel Jones, Queens (C 6) 

Philip Livingston, Westchester (C 6) 
Robert R. Livingston, New York (N.Y. 3) 
Nicholas Low, New York (C 6) 

Richard Morris,* New York (C 6) 

Isaac Roosevelt, New York (R) 

Gozen Ryerss, Richmond (N.Y. 3) 

John Smith, Suffolk (C 6) 


1 Libby, op. cit., p. 59. 

2 Those marked ‘‘C 6,”’ Ms.’ Treasury Department: New York, 6% Funds, 1790; 
“N. Y. 3” ibid., 3% Funds; ‘‘R,’’ New York Loan Office Receipts, Ms. Division, 
Library of Congress. Melancton Smith appears on the Ledgers of the Connecti- 
cut Loan Office; and NV. Y. Loan Office, 1791, folio 138, for $10,000 worth of sixes 
and threes. 3 See above, p. 107. 

4Not present on final vote, but see Elliot, Debates, Vol. II, p. 411. 


»” 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 271 


Melancton Smith, Dutchess (Conn.) 
Philip Van Cortland, Westchester (C 6) 
Jesse Woodhull, Orange (C 6) 


New Jersey. — New_Jersey~was-amone=the statés“which 
pushed through | ‘the Taisboetray, ef the Constitution without 
giving the agrarian party timé to.oreanize its forces ; ; and, 
from the records, the vote in the state convention was 
unanimous. This unanimity is rather startling in view of 
the fact that the year before a paper money party had 
been able to force through an emission bill by a narrow mar- 
gin. Hither there was a violent reaction against inflation, 
or the Federalist campaign had been highly organized. 
What little opposition appears to have been raised in that 
state seems to have been by the debtor and paper money 
class.! 

It must be admitted, however, that no detailed study of 
the ratification in New Jersey has ever been made. Libby 
passes it over briefly; and the older writers like Bancroft 
and Curtis dismiss it with their usual lightness of touch. 
Unfortunately for such a study, the records of the conven- 
tion in that state are no more than bare minutes; and the 
materials in the Treasury Department from the New Jersey 
loan office are extremely fragmentary. Until extended 
search in local and state history is made on the points 
here raised, New Jersey must be dismissed cursorily. 

There were thirteen counties in the state represented in 
the Convention, and each of nine counties had one or more 


representatives who had learned the elementary lessons in 


public finance through holding at least some small amounts 
of public securities — often certificates of only trivial value. 
1 Libby, op. cit.,pp. 60-61. Writing on October 14, 1787, Madison said ‘‘I do not 


learn that any opposition is likely to be made [to the ratification] in New Jersey,” 
Writings of James Madison, Vol. I, p. 342, 


272 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


The meagre character of the records of that state do not 
permit of a satisfactory statement. There were three dele- 
gates from Bergen county; of these John Fell appears on 
the Register of Land Office Certificates; there is no record 
of Peter Zabriskie either as a subscriber to original funds or 
as owner of securities; but a Jacob Zabriskie appears on a 
later Ledger. Fron. Essex county, John Chetwood and 
David Crane appear among the holders; from Middlesex, 
John Beatty, John Neilson, and Benjamin Manning — the 
-entire delegation; from Somerset, Fred. Frelinghuysen ; 
from Gloucester, Andw. Hunter; from Salem, Edmund 
Wetherby; from Hunterdon, David Brearley and Joshua 
Corshon; from Morris, John Jacob Faesch; and from 
Sussex, Robert Ogden and Thomas Anderson, and even 
the Secretary, Saml. W. Stockton, was a considerable holder. 
Thus every county except Cumberland, Cape-of-May, Bur- 
lington, and Monmouth had its spokesmen for public credi- 
tors. 

Delaware. — Although there had been a strong paper 
money “party in Delaware it does not seem to have mani- 
fested any considerable influence in the ratification of the 
Constitution, for that commonwealth was the first to set 
its seal on the new instrument, and it did so with apparent 
unanimity. No detailed scrutiny of the local contests over 
the election of delegates has ever been made; and the records 
of the loan office of that state preserved in the Treasury 
Department are defective. The records for taxation are 


1 These records are drawn principally from incomplete lists of early certificates 


issued, or from some later funding books in the Treasury Department. The real ~ 


weight of securities in the New Jersey convention must remain problematical, at 
least, for the present. The amounts set down to the names above recorded are 
for the most part insignificant — a few hundred or thousand dollars at the most, 
and often smaller. The point, it may be repeated, is not the amount but the 
practical information derived from holding even one certificate of the nominal 
value of $10. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 273 


also of little help. The absence of any contest,.of-course.. 
contributes to obscuring the scoroniid forces which may have | 
been at work.” 

Pennsylvania. — In strong contrast to the uniformity in 
Delaware is the sharp division which existed in Pennsyl-_ 
tution came.from.those..counties. belonging - to. the _great . 
interior highland of the state, extending from the head 
waters of thé Schuylkill to the Alleghany and Mononga- 
hela rivers, with only Huntingdon county (one vote — 
Federal) interrupting the continuity from east to west. . . 
The Federal area_contained . . . York, Lancaster, Chester, 
Montgomery, Philadelphia; Bucks,.Luzerne,.and Northamp- 
ton, and the largest population, most of the men of wealth 
and influence and the commercial classes of the state. 
Pittsburg with 400 inhabitants was Federal in an Anti- 
Federal county.” ? 

Each of the eastern counties of Pennsylvania was repre- 
sented in the state convention by one or more members 
who held public securities? From Philadelphia city and 
county, five of the ten members, all of whom favored ratifica- 


1 Dr. Jameson says of the records of the Delaware convention: ‘‘ Neither journal 
nor debates, has, I believe, ever been published,’ American Historical Asso- 
ciation Report (1902), Vol. I, p. 165. 

2 Libby, op. cit., pp. 26 ff. 

3 The Massachusetts Gazette, on October 19, 1787, prints a letter from Philadel- 
phia (dated October 5) in which the activities of speculators in public securities are 
fully set forth: “Since the grand federal convention has opened the budget and 
published their scheme of government, all goes well here. Continental loan office 
_ certificates and all such securities have risen twenty-five per cent. Even the old 
emission which has long lain dormant begins to show its head. Last week many 
thousand pounds’ worth of it were bought up. Moneyed men have their agents 
employed to buy up all the continental securities they can — foreseeing the rapid 
rise of' our funds. Such men as have the cash to spare will certainly make large 
fortunes. ... We send our factors to the distant towns who know nothing of 
the rise and buy them cheap; for there is no buying them on reasonable terms in 
Philadelphia, as the wealthy men are purchasing them tolay up. Thus we go on — 
pray how is it with you?”’ 


T 


vania. There, says Libby, “the” Opposition tot ‘the Consti-_ Ns 


274 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


tion, were interested in stocks, George Latimer, James Wil- 
son, Thomas M’Kean, Samuel Ashmead, and Enoch Edwards. 
From Bucks came John Barclay, a large dealer, to whose 
credit $17,056.56 is set down in one entry. ‘Two of the six 
members from Chester, John Hannum and Thomas Bull, 
were security holders. James Morris, of Montgomery 
county, John Black and David Grier, from York, Timothy 
Pickering, from Luzerne, Stephen Balliet, David Deshler, 
and Joseph Horsfield of Northampton (three of the four 
from that county) were interested. From Lancaster came 
Jasper Yeates, a large holder (one entry $11,986.65), Robert 
Coleman, Sebastian Graff, and John Hubley (four of the six 
delegates), who had a first-hand knowledge of the relation of 
a new and stable government to public paper. 

In other words at least nineteen out of the forty-six 
men who voted for the Constitution in the Pennsylvania con- 
vention were interested in public paper at or about the 
time of the adoption of the Constitution. Their names 
follow with the references to each,! but it is not to be sup- 
posed that this list is complete, for the records of Pennsyl- 
vania are not full, and a great many of the transactions in 
that state were not with the local loan office, but directly 
with the Treasury, a part of whose early records were 
probably burned in one of the fires at the Treasury 
Building : 


Samuel Ashmead (I) Robert Coleman (R) 
Stephen Balliet (LT) David Deshler (M) 
John Barclay (JA) Enoch Edwards (JA) 
John Black (M) Sebastian Graff (I) 
Thomas Bull (1) David Grier (I) 


1Ms. Treasury Department: “‘I,’’ Index to Funded 6 C; “JA,” Journal A, 
1790-1791 (sixes and threes) ; ‘‘JB,’’ Journal B; ‘‘R,”’ Register Loan Office Cer- 
tificates, 1788 ; “77,” Register Certificates of 1777; ‘‘3.C,’’ Ledger C, 3% Stock; “LT,” 
Treasury Ledger; ‘‘ M,’’ Miscellaneous, 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 275 


John Hannum (3 C) Thomas M’Kean (M) 
Joseph Horsfield (M) James Morris (1) 
John Hubley (77) Timothy Pickering (I) 
George Latimer (JB) James Wilson (1) 


Jasper Yeates (JA) 


Fortunately, also other data are easily available for the 
study of the economic interests of the members of the 
Pennsylvania convention. McMaster and Stone! have 
appended to their work on the ratification of the Consti- 
tution in that state brief biographical sketches of the mem- 
bers of the convention, in which many clues are given to 
their respective economic interests. The following table 
is prepared from these biographies, and every effort is made 
to state in the language of the authors the exact occupation 
and interests of the delegates. These details are given so 
that the student may draw his conclusions independently. 


MEMBERS WHO VOTED IN FAVOR OF RATIFICATION 


John Allison ‘‘received a thorough English and classical educa- 
tion ;” laid out the town of Greencastle in 1781; in the War, rank 
of Colonel. 

John Arndt. Father a mill owner on the Bushkill; for a time 
a commissary of supplies during the War; ‘‘advanced large sums 
of money to the government, most of which was refunded to him ;”’ 
devoted the latter years of his life to ‘‘mercantile pursuits.” 

Samuel Ashmead. ‘Little is known of his early history, save 
that he received a good education and was brought up to mer- 
cantile pursuits.” [Securities.] 

Hilary Baker “received a good classical education, entered 
mercantile life, became an iron merchant, which business he car- 
ried on for some years.” 

Stephen Balliet, “‘acquired a very limited education and was 
brought up to mercantile life under his father;” an agent for 

1 Pennsylvania and the Federal Constitution. It will be noted that there were 


at least seven members of the Order of Cincinnati in the convention, all of whom 
were in favor of the Constitution. 


276 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


forfeited estates in Northampton county. Held many offices. 
Colonel in War. [Securities.] 

John Barclay “was a son of Alexander Barclay, an officer of 
the Crown under the proprietary government, and received a classi- 
cal education.” Captain in the War and member of the Cin- 
cinnati. Sometime president of the Bank of the Northern 
Liberties. [Securities.] 

John Black was a graduate of Nassau Hall. Was an eminent 
Presbyterian clergyman in his time. [Securities.] 

John Boyd. Little known of early life and education. In the 
War. Member of the Cincinnati. After the War “entered into 
merchandising at the town of Northumberland” and was interested 
in a mill. 

Thomas Bull. ‘‘Meagre education” and “learned the trade 
of a stone-mason. Prior to the Revolution he was the manager 
of Warwick Furnace.’”’ Resumed this place after service in the 
War. [Securities.] 

Thomas Campbell ‘‘was a farmer by occupation.” Captain 
in the War and member of the Cincinnati. 

Stephen Chambers. A lawyer. Captain in the War and mem- 
ber of the Cincinnati. 

Thomas Cheyney, ‘‘An intelligent and progressive farmer.” 
Grandfather bequeathed to his father half of a large tract of land 
in Thornbury. 

Robert Coleman. ‘By his energy and indomitable persever- 
ance became the most enterprising and successful iron-master in 
Pennsylvania.”’ ([Securities.] 

David Deshler was a shop-keeper and afterwards operated 
grist and saw mills. He ‘‘advanced money out of his private 
means at a time when not only the United States treasury but 
also that of Pennsylvania was empty.” ([Securities.] 

Richard Downing operated ‘‘a fulling, grist, and saw mill.” 

Enoch Edwards ‘‘received a classical education, studied medi- 
cine, and was in practice when he went into the War serving as a 
surgeon. ([Securities.] 

Benjamin Elliott “settled in the town of Huntingdon prior 
to the Revolution.” Held many local offices. Regular occupation, 
if any, not given. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 277 


William Gibbons resided for a time in Philadelphia and later 
moved to ‘‘a fine farm left him by his parents.’”’ Later held local 
offices. Lieutenant Colonel. 

Sebastian Graff. Son of a Lancaster “shopkeeper,” and was in 
“active business when the War broke out.” [Securities.] 

George Gray. ‘The fifth of that name in the line of descent 
from George Gray, a wealthy member of the Society of Friends.” 
Office-holder ; in the War; apparently a gentleman of means. 

David Grier. Classical education. Lawyer. Served in the 
War, rank of Colonel. [Securities.] 

John Hannum. Settled on a large farm. Local office-holder. 
In the War, rank of Colonel. [Securities.] 

Thomas Hartley. Classical education. Lawyer. Inthe War, 
rank of Colonel; member of the Cincinnati. Purchased a tract 
of one thousand acres of land during the Revolution. 

Joseph Horsfield. Man of good education. Local postmaster 
under Washington. ([Securities.] 

John Hubley was a lawyer by profession. [Securities.] 

John Hunn was a captain in the merchant marine service at 
the outbreak of the War. Engaged in privateering during the 
war and saw service in the field also. 

George Latimer was a merchant, bank director, and wealthy 
capitalist. [Securities.] 

Thomas M’ Kean received a classical education. Was a lawyer. 
Extensive office-holder. In the War, and a member of the Cin- 
cinnati. Capitalist of some quality. ([Securities.] 

William MacPherson was the son of a noted “privateersman in 
the French and Spanish wars.”’ Educated at the College of New 
Jersey. Officer in the British Army; but joined the American 
eause. Major and member of the Cincinnati. Man of some 
means. 

James Morris possessed “‘a house and gristmill and ninety-four 
acres of land”’ which his father had given him. [Securities.] 

F. A. Muhlenberg. Studied at the University of Halle. Clergy- 
man, but entered into the politics of the Revolutionary War. Ex- 
tensive office-holder. 

John Neville. Soldier and large landholder. Office-holder 
and member of the Cincinnati. 


278 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Benjamin Pedan. Farmer and office-holder. 

Timothy Pickering. Harvard graduate. In the War, rank 
of Adjutant-general; member of the Cincinnati. Lawyer and 
office-holder and land speculator. [Securities.] 

John Richards owned a fine estate. He was “a progressive 
farmer, a store-keeper, and iron-master.” 

Jonathan Roberts was brought up as a farmer. Office-holder. 

Benjamin Rush, graduate of the College of New Jersey and dis- 
tinguished physician in Philadelphia. 

Thomas Scott settled in Western Pennsylvania as a farmer. 
Became local office-holder and later (1791) entered the practice 
of law. 

Henry Slagle was a provincial magistrate. Joined the Revolu- 
tionary cause and held a number of political offices and was con- 
nected with the loan office. 

Abraham Stout seems to have been “‘an influential farmer.” 

Anthony Wayne was the son of a farmer and surveyor. Sol- 
dier, and a member of the Cincinnati. 

James Wilson. Lawyer. Member of the constitutional Con- 
vention of 1787. Wealthy land speculator. [Securities.] 

William Wilson. Officer in the War. Office-holder. In mer- 
cantile business and millowner. 

Henry Wynkoop. Collegiate education. Major in the War 
and office-holder. 

Thomas Yardley, farmer owning a large tract of land. 

Jasper Yeates, educated at the College of Philadelphia, lawyer, 
judge, and man of large means for his time. [Securities.] 


OPPONENTS OF RATIFICATION 


John Baird ‘“‘took up land” and “appears to have been a man 
of mark west of the Alleghanies.”’ Held local offices. 

Richard Bard was a farmer and proprietor of a mill. 

John Bishop “was brought up as a farmer, an occupation he 
was engaged in all his life... . He had extensive business con- 
nections, and became an iron-master. He was a large landholder.” 
Advanced large sums of money to the Revolutionary cause. 

Nathaniel Breading received a classical education, taught 
school, was in the War, and held local offices. ‘In deference to 
his constituents he did not sign the ratification.” 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 279 


William Brown descendant of a farmer; was a frontiersman; 
in the War. 

James Edgar was born on a farm and died on a farm. 

William Findley received a fair English education and “towards 
the close of the war he removed with his family to Western Pennsyl- 
vania and took up a tract of land . . . on which he resided until 
his death.” 

John Andre Hanna received a good classical education; ad- 
mitted to the bar and was a successful lawyer at Harrisburg. 

John Harris was a farmer and laid out Mifflintown. 

Joseph Hiester acquired the rudiments of a good education, and 
‘until near age he worked upon his father’s farm when he went 
to Reading and learned merchandising.”’ Was in the War. 

Jonathan Hoge. Nothing known. 

Abraham Lincoln was brought up on a farm and died on a farm. 
Local office-holder. 

John Ludwig was a substantial farmer. Was in the War. 
Local office-holder. 

Nicholas Lotz was a millwright by occupation and established 
amill near Reading. Wasin the War. 

James Marshel “‘moved to the western country some three 
years prior to the Revolution, and settled in what is now Cross 
Creek Township.” Frontiersman and local officer. 

James Martin was born in the Cumberland valley and resided 
in what was then (1772) Colerain township. Was in the War. . 

Adam Orth was “brought up amid the dangers and struggles 
of Pennsylvania pioneer life. He received the limited education 
of the ‘back settlements.’ . . . He was one of the pioneers in 
the manufacture of iron in Lebanon county.” 

John Reynolds. 

Joseph Powell. 

John Smilie. His father settled in Lancaster county and 
evidently was a farmer. In 1781 John Smilie “removed with his 
- family to then Westmoreland county,” which meant that he went 
to the frontier. Office-holder. 

William Todd went to Western Pennsylvania about 1765 and 
later ‘‘removed to Westmoreland county where he settled upon 
land subsequently warranted to him.” 


280 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


John Whitehill, ‘son of an Irish immigrant who settled on 
Pequea Creek in 1723.” Received a good education. Local office- 
holder. At his death he left ‘‘a large landed estate.” 

Robert Whitehill, brother of the above Whitehill. “In the 
spring of 1771 he removed to Cumberland county, locating on a 
farm two miles west of Harrisburg.’’ Extensive public career. 
“Died at his residence in Cumberland county two miles west of 
the Susquehanna.” Evidently dependent largely upon agricul- 
ture, but farmer of some means. 


Obviously such a table is more or less superficial so far 
as economic aspects are concerned, for the forms of wealth 
possessed by each member and the numerical proportions 
of the several forms at the time of the Pennsylvania state 
convention arenot apparent. Morethan theordinary margin 
must therefore be allowed for error on both sides. Evidently 
also it is difficult to classify these men from the meagre data 
given; but the following table may be taken to be roughly 
correct as to the men about whom we have some economic 
facts. 


FOR THE CONSTITUTION a AGAINST 

Merchants 4 1 
Lawyers 8 1 
Doctors tie hw Ft Mae 2 
Clergymen =>. aes er ie. 2 
Farmers Be ar BUR, oe 10 13 
Capitalists sl a care a 12 3 

Total classifiable. . . . 38 18 


Of the thirty-eight in favor of the Constitution, who may 
be reasonably classified, ten, or one-fourth, represented agri- 
cultural interests primarily. Of the eighteen, opposed to 
the Constitution, who may be satisfactorily classified, thir- 
teen or more than two-thirds were primarily identified with 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 281 


agricultural interests. Of the forty-six favorable, twenty 
were capitalists and lawyers; of the twenty-three opposed, 
four were in these categories. When all allowance for error 
is made, the result is highly significant and bears out the 
general conclusion that the Constitution was a reflex of 
personalty rather than realty interests. 


Marylande=-In. Maryland the.mereantile interests..of the. 


towns were all on the side of the Constitution ; ; and as the 
urban centres were the seats of operations in public securi- 
ties these too must be thrown into the balance. The oppo- 


sition came from _the-ruralvdistricts and particularly from, 


the paper money constituencies. Libby discovered there, 
“a correspondence between the friénds of paper money and 
debt laws and the Anti-Federal party of 1788, both as to 
leaders and to the rank and file of the respective parties.” 4 

But it should be noted that we are now leaving the regions 
of small farms and of estates tilled by free labor and are com- 
ing into the districts where slavery and the plantation system 


dominate rural economy. Indeed, the slave-holding planta- — 


tions were so extensive and the small farming class so re- 
stricted that the paper money party would have been seriously 
weakened had it not been for the fact that their ranks were 
recruited from other sources. A contemporary, speaking 
of the election of delegates to the convention, says: “‘ Balti- 
more and Hartford counties alone are clearly anti-Federal, 
in which are many powerful and popular men who have 
speculated deeply in British confiscated property and for 
that reason are alarmed at shutting the door against state 
paper money. The same men, their relations and particular 
friends are more violently anti-Federal because they paid 
considerable sums into the treasury indepreciated continental 
- eurrency and are scared at the sweeping clause . . . which 
1 Libby, op. cit., p. 66. 


282 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


may bring about a due execution of the treaty between Great 
Britain and America to their loss.’ 

Virginia. — Fortunately, for Virginia we have a somewhat 
detailed study of the economic forces in the politics of that 
commonwealth by Dr. Charles H. Ambler. By way of 
preparation he examines the geographical distribution of 
economic characteristics, and takes up first the Tidewater 
region. Of this portion of the state, he says, ‘‘The industrial, 


social and political life of the Tidewater centered in the large 


estate. . . . The society which developed in the Tidewater 

. resembled that of the mother country. It consisted 
of several strata separated by no clearly marked lines. 
Along the large rivers there were the great landowners who 
lived in a style of luxury and extravagance beyond the means 
of other inhabitants. Immediately below them were the 
half-breeds, persons descended from the younger sons and 
daughters of the landed. proprietors. They had all the 
pride and social tastes of the upper class but not its wealth. 
Then came the ‘pretenders,’ men of industry and enterprise 
but not of established families... . Below these classes 
were the ‘yeomen,’ most of whom were very poor. The 
system of entail and primogeniture operated to preserve 


“am 


“ these strata intact.” ? The. Tidewater region..was_ almost 


solid i in favor of-ratifying the Constitution. 

“The second geographical division of Virginia, according 
to Dr. Ambler, was the Piedmont mont region, which resembled 
in many respects the Tidewater but had some decided charac- 
teristics of its own. “Although one and two-thirds times 


as large as the Tidewater, the Piedmont, in 1790 contained — 


a much smaller negro slave population. Immigrants from 
the northern colonies, who, as will be shown, had pushed 


1 Letter, quoted in Libby, op. cit., p. 65. 
3 Secttonalism in Virginia, pp. 6-9; p. 58. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 283 


into the Valley, came into the Piedmont from the rear. For 
the most part they were conscientiously opposed to slave- 
holding and consequently did not become tobacco-growers. 
On the other hand the poorer whites of the Tidewater had 
been pushed by the gradual advance of the plantation into 
the less desirable lands of the Piedmont. Lack of ability and 
the presence of conscientious scruples prevented them from 
becoming large planters. These elements constituted a large 
and influential democratic and non-slaveholding population 
in the Piedmont.” * This region was largely against ratify- 
ing the Constitution: 

Beyond the Piedmont lay the Valley which was largely 
settled by Scotch-Irish and Germans, and the economic 
basis was the small farm with all that it implies. Here 
the political theories, says Ambler “differed widely from 
those entertained in the east. The Germans and the Scotch- 
Irish brought to the Valley the sacred traditions of the years 
of religious wars which taught hatred to an established 
church, antipathy to a government by the privileged, and 
a love for civic and personal liberty. To the Scotch-Irish, 
the political leaders, civil liberty meant freedom of person, 
the right of fee-simple possession, and an open door to 
civic honors.” ? The markets.for-this-region..were_at_Balti- 
more and Philadelphia. This.fact, coupled with several 
peculiar social characteristics may partially account for 
the heavy vote for the Constitution; but the sentiment in 
favor of the new government in this region has not yet been 
traced to. economic reasons. 

To the far West lay ‘the-Kentucky, region whose frontier 
economic characteristics need no description. There the 
sentiment was almost solid against the ratification of the 
Constitution.” 


“1 Ambler, 6p. Git., pp. 8, 59. 2 Ibid., pp. 15-16. 


a 
ae 


284 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


At the time of the movement for the adoption of a new 
national Constitution, the self-sufficient western regions of 
Virginia were practically indifferent ; and the eastern section 
was the part of the state in which there was a conscious de- 
termination to bring about a change. At this time, says 
Ambler, “‘The towns of the Tidewater chafed under the 
British restrictions upon trade and desired better commercial 
relations between the states. Of.the numerous petitions to 
the assembly on these subjects, that from Norfolk was, per- 
haps, the most significant. It claimed that the restrictions 
on the West India trade and the foreign commercial mo- 
nopolies were producing injury to Virginia, and asked for re- 
striction on British trade and better commercial relations 
between the states. . .. Petitions of a similar tone came 
from Fredericksburg, Falmouth, Alexandria, and Port 
Royal.” + 

Against the indifference and opposition of the western 
districts, the east prevailed in the contest over the proposi- 
tion to send delegates to the federal Convention; and 
Washington, Madison, Mason, Henry, Randolph, Wythe, 
and Blair were named — “all residents of the Tidewater, 
except Henry and Madison.” ? This result was partly 
due to the fact that the Tidewater region was over-repre- 
sented in the state legislature according to population, and 
partly to the superior cohesion of the interests affected.’ 

The same economic antagonism that was manifested in 
the selection of delegates to the federal Convention was 
again manifested in the state convention called to ratify 
the Constitution. “The democratic leaders of the interior, 
says Ambler, “declared that it [the Constitution] sacrificed 


1 Ambler, op. cit., pp. 48-52. 

2 Henry not only refused to attend but opposed the adoption of the Constitution 
with all his might. 

8 Ibid., p. 36. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 285 


the state’s sovereignty. Accordingly they made a desperate 
fight to secure the election of delegates pledged to vote 
against ratification. When the canvass was ended it was 
not known which side would be successful, so evenly were the 
friends and enemies of the new plan of federal government 
matched. From the Tidewater came a strong delegation 
favorable to ratification. It numbered among its members 
the most prominent characters of the Virginia bar, former 
sympathizers with Great Britain, and representatives of 
interests essentially commercial. The other delegates favor- 
able to ratification came from the Valley and the north- 
western part of the state. Most of them had seen service in 
the Revolutionary armies and were largely under the in- 
fluence of Washington. The Kentucky country and the 
Piedmont sent delegates opposed to ratification. ... 
The vote on the ratification was: ayes 89, nays 79 . 

practically all the lower Tidewater™[being]..in_ favor of 


ratification. Only two delegates from Shenandoah valley 


and that part of the Trans-Alleghany north of the Great 


Kanawha voted nay. The democratic Piedmont and the | / 
Kentucky country was alniost tnanimous in opposition..to- 


the Constitttion.” ! 

These conclusions reached by Ambler closely support 
Libby’s survey. In speaking of the distribution of the vote 
on the Constitution in Virginia, he says: “Four well- 
marked sections are to be noted.... The first, the 
eastern, comprised all the counties in tidewater Virginia. 
Its vote on the Constitution stood 80 per cent for and 20 per 
cent against ratification. This was the region of the large 
towns, and where commercial interests were predominant. 
The middle district, lying farther west to the Blue Ridge 
mountains, represented the interior farming interests of the 

1 Ambler, op. cit., pp. 53 ff. 


- 


286 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


state; the class of small farmers made up the principal part 
of its population. Its vote on the Constitution stood 26 
per cent for and 74 per cent against adoption. The third, the 
West Virginia district is really double, composed of the 
Shenandoah Valley, in which lay the bulk of the population 
and the sparsely settled Trans-Alleghany region. ‘This, 
also, was an agricultural section with a population chiefly 
Scotch-Irish and Germans from Pennsylvania. Its vote 
stood 97 per cent for and 3 per cent against the Constitu- 
tion! ... The fourth, or Kentucky district comprised 
all that territory west of the great Kanawha to the Cumber- 
land River. Its vote stood 10 per cent for and 90 per cent 
against. ... The question of the opening of the Mississippi 
river was the decisive one in determining the vote of this 
section.” ? 

That public securities also carried some weight in the 
Virginia counties which were strongly favorable to the 
Constitution is shown by the following table of the delegates 
(all, except Thomas Read, favorable to the Constitution) 
to the state convention from the towns and the seaboard 
or tidewater regions. Those italicised were holders of paper 
to some amount and appear on the Index to Virginia Funds 
in the Mss. of the Treasury Department. Those not ital- 
icised were not discovered on the books. 

Fairfax County — David Stuart and Charles Simms. 

King George — Burdet Ashton and William Thornton. 

Westmoreland — Henry Lee and Bushrod Washington. 

Northumberland — Walter Jones and Thomas Gaskins. 


Richmond County — Walker Tomlin (as Executor) and William 
Peachy (as Executor). 

Lancaster — James Gordon and Henry Towles. 

Gloucester — Warner Lewis and Thomas Smith. 

1 For an explanation of the Federalist complexion of this region see Ambler’s 


explanation, Sectionalism in Virginia, p. 16. 
2 Libby, op. ctt., pp. 34-35. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 287 


York — John Blair and George Wyeth. 

Princess Anne — Anthony Walke and Thomas Walke. 

Norfolk — James Webb and James Taylor. (Portsmouth.) 

Henrico — (Richmond City) — Edmund Randolph and John 
Marshall. 

James City — Nathl. Burwell and Robert Andrews. 

Elizabeth City — Miles King and Worlich Westwood. 

Charlotte — Paul Carrington and Thomas Read.! 


North Carolina. — North Carolina was at, first.overwhelm- 
ingly. Anti-Fedei ral. Tt nad peculiar economic characteristics. 
PY. hough i in the south, it had a large body of small farmers; 
and the great slave-tilled plantation was not such a marked 
feature of its economy as it was of South Carolina. It had 
small mercantile interests as compared with Massachusetts, 
Mew York, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina, 
with their considerable seaport towns. And _ perhaps 
most significant of all was the fact that a very large pro- 
portion of the public securities in that state were bought 
up by speculators from northern cities* and therefore not 
held by native inhabitants i in the centres of influence. This 
must have had a very deadening effect on the spirit of the 
“movement for ratification. 

Owing to these peculiarities, it is impossible to lay out 
North Carolina into such sharply differentiated economic 
regions as some of the other commonwealths. Nevertheless, 
certain lines are marked out by Libby in his survey of the 
vote in 1789 when the Constitution was finally ratified. 
“The counties around Albemarle and Pamlico Sounds 
constituted the bulk of the federal area. ... This region 
was the earliest settled, the most densely populated, and 
represented most of the mercantile and commercial interests 
of the state.”” With this region went some additional inland 


1 Voted against ratification. 
2 This is evident from the records in the Treasury Department. 


288 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


districts when the swing to the Federalists carried the state 
for ratification. The second region was in the centre of the 
state where the ‘interests were wholly agricultural ;” this 
region was strongly Anti-Federal. To it was added the 
Tennessee region, also Anti-Federal, for the same reasons 
that carried western Virginia against the Constitution.! 

South Carolina. — South Carolina.presents.-the»economic 
elements in the ratification with the utmost simplicity. ~ 
There we find two rather sharply marked districts in an- 
tagonism over the Constitution. ‘The rival sections,” 
says Libby, “were the coast or lower district and the.upper, 
or more properly, the middle and upper country. The 
coast region was the first settled and contained a larger 
portion of the wealth of the state; its mercantile and com- 
mercial interests were important; its ‘church was the “Ep.and 
pebal supported by the state.” This région, it is scarcely 

“necessary to remark, was overwhelmingly in favor of the 
Sees The upper area, against the Constitution, f 

“was a frontier section, the last to- “receive settlement ?~ 
its lands were fertile and its mixed population were largely 
small farmers. ... There was no established church, each 
community supported its own church and there was a great 
variety in the district.” ? 

A contemporary writer, R. G. Harper, calls attention to 
the fact that the lower country, Charleston, Beaufort, and 
Georgetown, which had 28,694 white inhabitants, and about 
seven-twelfths of the representation in the state convention, 
paid £28,081: 5:10 taxes in 1794, while the upper country, 
with 120,902 inhabitants, and five-twelfths of the represen- 
tation in the convention, paid only £8390:13:3 taxes.’ 
The lower districts in favor of the Constitution therefore 

1 Libby, op. cit., pp. 38 ff. 2 Tbid., p. 42-43. 


3“ Appius,” To the Citizens of South Carolina (1794), Library of Congress, Duane — 
Pamphlets, Vol. 83. 


* 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 289 


possessed the wealth of the state and a disproportionate 
share in the convention — on the basis of the popular dis- 
tribution of representation.! 

These divisions of economic interest are indicated by the 
abstracts of the tax returns for the state in 1794 which 
show that of £127,337 worth of stock in trade, faculties, 
etc. listed for taxation in the state, £109,800 worth was in 
Charleston, city and county — the stronghold of Federal- 
ism. Of the valuation of lots in towns and villages to the 
amount of £656,272 in the state, £549,909 was located in 
that city and county.” 

The records of the South Carolina loan office preserved 
in the Treasury Department at Washington show that the 
public securities of that state were more largely in the hands 
of inhabitants than was the case in North Carolina. They 
also show a heavy concentration in the Charleston district. 

At least fourteen of the thirty-one members of the state- 
ratifying convention from the parishes of St. Philip and 
Saint Michael, Charleston (all of whom favored ratification) 
held over $75,000 worth of public securities, which amount . 
was distributed unevenly among the following men: 


John Blake Isaac Motte 
Danl. Cannon C. C. Pinckney 
Edw. Darrell John Pringle 
John F. Grimke David Ramsay 
Wm. Johnson Nathaniel Russel 

_ Thomas Jones Josiah Smith 
Lewis Morris Danl. de Soussure ° 


1 See above, p. 248. 

2 State Papers: Finance, Vol. I, p. 462. In 1783 an attempt to establish a bank 
with $100,000 capital was made in Charleston, 8.C., but it failed. ‘‘Soon after 
the adoption of the funding system, three banks were established in Charleston 
whose capitals in the whole amounted to twenty times the sum proposed in 1783.” 
D. Ramsay, History of South Carolina (1858 ed.), Vol. II, p. 106. 

3 Ms. Treasury Department: South Carolina Loan Office Ledger, consult Index. 
No general search was made for other names. 

U 


290 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Georgia. — Georgia was.one of the states that gave a 
speedy and unanimous consent to”the"addption.of-the-Con- ~ 
stitutions--If-there was any considerable contest there, no 
record of it appears on the surface; and no thorough re- 
search has ever been made into the local unprinted records.’ 
Libby dismisses the state with the suggestion that the press- 
ing dangers from the Tndians. on the frontiers, which were ~ 
formidable and threatening in the summer and atitumn-of— 
1787, were largely responsible for the swift and favorable— 
action of the state in ratifying the new instrument of govern- ~ 
ment that promised protection under national arms.” - 

Three conclusions seem warranted by the data presented 
in this chapter : 

Inasmuch _as»the movement for the ratification.of the 
Constitution centred ..particularly in the regions in which 7 
mercantile, manufacturing, security, and_1personalty—in-_ 
terests.generally had their greatest strength, it is impossible 
to escape the conclusion that holders of personalty saw in 
the new government a strength and defence to their_ad- 
vantage. 
~~ Inasmuch as so many leaders-in-the_ movement for rati=~ 
fication weré large security holders, and inasmuch as securi- 
ties Constituted such a large proportion of personalty, this 
economic interest must have formed a very considerable 
dynamic element, if not the preponderating elemént;~in— 
bringing about the adoption of the new system. bs 

The state conventions do not seem to have been more 


1On the subject of ratification in Georgia, Dr. Jameson says: “Nothing of 
either journal or debates is known to have been printed, unless in some contempo- 
rary newspaper outside the state; the Georgia newspapers seem to have nothing 
of the sort.”” American Historical Association Report (1902), Vol. I, p. 167. 

This danger may have had some influence in the concessions made by the 
Georgia delegates in the Convention for they were kept informed of the Indian 
troubles in the summer of 1787. Force Transcripts, Georgia Records, 1782-1789: 
Library of Congress. 


ECONOMICS OF THE VOTE ON THE CONSTITUTION 291 


“disinterested” than the Philadelphia convention; but in 
fact the leading champions of the new government appear to 
have been, for the most part, men of the same practical 
type, with actual economic advantages at stake. 

The_ opposition _to»the..Constitution..almost uniformly 
came from.the~agricultural. regions, and from the areas 
in which debtors.had been formulating paper money and 
other depreciatory schemes:? 


1 Some holders of public securities are found among the opponents of the Con- 
stitution, but they are not numerous. 


nemo, 
Nore 


ee 


oe 


CHAPTER XI 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT OVER RATIFICATION AS VIEWED 
BY CONTEMPORARIES 


HAVING discovered the nature of the social conflict con- 
nected with the formation and adoption of the Constitution, 
and having shown the probable proportion of the people 
who participated in the conflict and the several group- 
interests into which they fell, it is interesting, though not 
fundamentally important, to inquire whether the leading 
thinkers of the time observed the nature of the antagonisms 
present in the process. A full statement of the results of 
such an inquiry would require far more space than’ is at 
command in this volume; and consequently only a few 
illustrative and representative opinions can be given. 

W o one can pore for weeks over the letters, newspapers, 
and pamphlets of the years 1787-1789 without coming to the 
conclusion that there was a asen-seated conflict. between. re 
popular party based on paper money and agrarian interests, 
‘and a conservative party centred in the towns and resting 
on financial, mercantile, and personal property interests 
generally. It is true that much of the fulmination in pam- 
phlets was concerned with controversies over various features 
of the Constitution; but those writers who went to the 
bottom of matters, such as the authors of The Federalist, 
and the more serious Anti-Federalists, gave careful atten- 
tion to the basic elements in the struggle as well as to the 
incidental controversial details. 

292 


* 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 293 


The superficiality of many of the ostensible reasons put 
forth by the opponents of the Constitution was penetrated 
by Madison. Writing to Jefferson, in October, 1788, he 
says: ‘The little pamphlet herewith inclosed will give you 
a collective view of the alterations which have been pro- 
posed by the State Conventions for the new Constitution. 
Various and numerous as they appear, they certainly omit 
many of the true grounds of opposition. The articles re- 
lating to Treaties, to paper money, and to contracts, created 
more enemies than all the errors in the system, positive and 
negative, put together.” ! 

Naturally the mcre circumspect of the pamphleteers 
who lent their support to the new system were careful about 
a too precise alignment of forces, for their strength often 
lay in the conciliation of opponents rather than in exciting 
a more deep-seated antagonism. But even in such concilia- 
tory publications the material advantages to be expected 
from the adoption of the Constitution are constantly put 
forward. : 

Take, for example, this extract from a mollifying “‘ Address 
to the Freemen of America” issued while the Convention 
was in the midst of itsdeliberations: “‘ Let the public creditor, 
who lent his money to his country, and the soldier and citi- 
zen who yielded their services, come forward next and con- 
tribute their aid to establish an effective federal govern- 
ment. It is from the united power and resources of America 
only that they can expect permanent and substantial jus- 
tice. . . .. Let the citizens of America who inhabit the 
western counties of our states fly to a federal power for 
protection [against the Indians]. ... Let the farmer who 
groans beneath the weight of direct taxation seek relief 
from a government whose extensive jurisdiction will enable 

1 Writings, Vol. I, p. 423. 


294. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


it to extract the resources of our country by means of 
imposts and customs. Let the merchant, who complains 
of the restrictions and exclusions imposed upon his vessels 
by foreign nations, unite his influence in establishing a power 
that shall retaliate those injuries and insure him success in 
his honest pursuits by a general system of commercial 
regulations. Let the manufacturer and mechanic, who are 
everywhere languishing for want of employment, direct 
their eyes to an assembly of the states. It will be in their 
power only to encourage such arts and manufactures as 
are essential to the prosperity of our country.’ ! 

It is in the literature of the contest in the states where 
the battle over ratification was hottest that we find the 
most frank recognition of the fact that one class of property 
interests was in conflict with another. This recognition 
appears not so much in attacks on opponents as in appeals 
to the groups which have the most at stake in the outcome 
of the struggle, although virulent abuse of debtors and 
paper money advocates is quite common. erchants, 
money lenders, public creditors are constantly urged to 
support the Constitution on the ground that their economic 
security depends upon the establishment of the new national 
government) 

Perhaps the spirit of the battle over ratification is best 
reflected in the creed ironically attributed to each of the 
contending parties by its opponents. The recipe for an 
Anti-Federalist essay which indicates in a very concise way 
the class-bias that actuated the opponents of the Con- 
stitution, ran in this manner: “Wellborn, nine times— 
Aristocracy, eighteen times — Liberty of the Press, thirteen 
times repeated — Liberty of Conscience, once — Negro 


1 Address to the Freemen of America,’’ The American Museum for June, 1787, 
Vol. I, p. 494. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 295 


slavery, once mentioned — Trial by jury, seven times — 
Great Men, six times repeated — Mr. Wilson, forty times. . . . 
— put them altogether and dish them up at pleasure.” ? 

To this sarcastic statement of their doctrines, the Anti- 
Federalists replied by formulating the “Political Creed of 
Every Federalist” as follows: “I believe in the infallibility, 
all-suficient wisdom, and infinite goodness of the late 
convention ; or in other words, I believe that some men are 
of so perfect a nature that it is absolutely impossible for 
them to commit errors or design villainy. I believe that 
the great body of the people are incapable of judging in 
their nearest concerns, and that, therefore, they ought to 
be guided by the opinions of their superiors.... I be- 
lieve that aristocracy is the best form of government... . 
I believe that trial by jury and the freedom of the press 
ought to be exploded from every wise government.... I 
believe that the new constitution will prove the bulwark 
of liberty — the balm of misery — the essence of justice — 
and the astonishment of all mankind. In short, I believe 
that it is the best form of government which has ever been 
offered to the world. I believe that to speak, write, read, 
think, or hear any thing against the proposed government 
is damnable heresy, execrable rebellion, and high treason 
against the sovereign majesty of the convention — And 
lastly I believe that every person who differs from me in 
belief is an infernal villain. AMEN.” ” 


MARSHALL’S ANALYSIS OF THE CONFLICT 


It must not be thought that this antagonism of economic 
interests which, in the language of controversy, frequently 
took on the form of a war between “aristocracy” and 


1 New Hampshire Spy, November 30, 1787. 
2 American Museum, July, 1788, Vol. IV, p. 85. 


296 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


“democracy” was observed only by partisans whose views 
were distorted by the heat of battle. On the contrary, it 
was understood by the keenest thinkers—in fact, one may 
say that the more profound the wisdom of the observer, 
the clearer was his comprehension of the issues at stake. 
Next to Madison, whose concept of the Constitution-mak- 
ing process has already been fully discussed,’ John Marshall 
probably understood best. thenature of the newumstrument;= 
the social. forces*which. produced it, and the great objects it 
was designed. to.accomplish. In speaking from the bench, as — 
Chief Justice, he used, of course, the language of jurispru- 
dence and spoke of the Constitution as a creation of 
the whole people.’ But as a historian of great acumen, in 
which capacity he was not hampered by the traditional 
language of the bench and bar, Marshall .sketched=with.un-__ 
erring.hand the.economic conflict which led to the adoption 
of the Constitution, and impressed itself upon the nature of — 
that instrument. In his masterly Life of Washington, he sets 
forth this conflict in unmistakable terms: 

1. In the first place, the mercantile interest was sorely 
tried under.the.Articles of Confederation. There~“‘was a 
genéral discontent with the course of trade. It had com- 
menced with the native merchants of the north who found 
themselves incapable of contending in their own ports with 
foreigners; and was soon communicated to others. The 
gazettes of Boston contained some very animated and angry 
addresses which produced resolutions for the government of 
the citizens of that town, applications to their state legis- 
lature, a petition to congress, and a circular letter to the 
merchants of the several sea ports throughout the United 
States. ... The merchants of the city of Philadelphia 


_ 1 Above, p. 156. 
\/ 2 McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheaton, 316; below, p. 299. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 297 


presented a memorial to the legislature of that state, in 
which, after lamenting it as a fundamental defect in the 
constitution that full and entire power over the commerce 
of the United States had not been originally vested in Con- 
gress . . . they prayed that the legislature would endeavour 
to procure from Congress a recommendation to the several 
states to vest in that body the necessary powers over the 
commerce of the United States.” ? 

2. The public creditors had lost faith in the old govern- _ 
ment. ““That the débtf the United States should have 
“greatly depreciated will excite no surprise when it is recol- 
lected that the government of the Union possessed no funds, 
and without the assent of jealous and independent sovereigns 
could acquire none to pay the accruing interest; but the 
depreciation of the debt due from those states, which made 
an annual and adequate provision for the interest, can be 
ascribed only to a want of confidence in the governments 
which were controlled by no fixed principles; and it is 
therefore not entirely unworthy of attention. In many 
of those states which had repelled every attempt to intro- 
duce into circulation a depreciated medium of commerce 
or to defeat the annual provision of funds for the payment 
of the interest, the debt sunk in value to ten, five, and 
even less than four shillings in the pound. However un- 
exceptionable might be the conduct of the existing legis- 
lature, the hazard from those which were to follow was too 
great to be encountered without an immense premium.” 


3. A profound, d division_ensued..throughout..the.United 


States based on different views of the rights of propertyenn- 


erat ee 


“At length,””"cont continues Marshall, “two great parties were 

formed in every state which were distinctly marked and 

which pursued distinct objects with systematic arrange- 
1 Vol. II (1850 ed.), p. 99 ff. 


298 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


ment. The one struggled with unabated zeal for the exact 
observance of public and private engagements. By those 
belonging to it, the faith of a nation or of a private man was 
deemed a sacred pledge, the violation of which was equally 
forbidden by the principles of moral justice and of sound 
policy.. ‘The distresses of individuals were, they thought, 
to be alleviated only by industry and frugality, not by a 
relaxation of the laws or by a sacrifice of the rights of others.) 
They were consequently the uniform friends of a regular 
administration of justice, and of a vigorous course of taxa- 
tion which would enable the state to comply with its en- 
gagements. By a natural association of ideas, they were 
also, with very few exceptions, in favor of enlarging the 
powers of the federal government. . . . 

“The other ‘party marked out for themselves a more 
indulgent course. Viewing with extreme tenderness the 
case of the debtor, their efforts were unceasingly directed 
to his relief. To exact a faithful compliance with contracts 
was, in their opinion, a harsh measure which the people 
would not bear. They were uniformly in favor of relaxing 
the administration of justice, of affording facilities for the 
payment of debts, or of suspending their collection, and of 
remitting taxes. The same course of opinion led them to 
resist every attempt to transfer from their own hands into 
those of congress powers which by others were deemed 
essential to the preservation of the union. In many of 
these states, the party last mentioned constituted a decided 
majority of the people, and in all of them it was very power- 
ful. The emission of paper money, the delay of legal pro- 
ceedings, and the suspension of the collection of taxes were 
the fruits of their rule wherever they were completely pre- 
dominant. ... Throughout the union, a contest between 
these parties was periodically revived; and the public 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 299 


mind was perpetually agitated with hopes and fears on sub- 
jects which essentially affected the fortunes of a considerable 
proportion of society.” 

4. Finally, so sharp was this division into two parties 
on the lines of divergent views of property rights, that the 
Constitution, far from proceeding from ‘“‘the whole people,” 
barely escaped defeat altogether. So positive is this state- 
ment by the great Chief Justice and so decidedly does it 
contradict his juristic theory of the nature of the supreme 
law that the two should be studied together. For this 
reason, the two views enunciated by Marshall are printed 


in parallel columns: 


“So balanced were the parties 
in some of them [the states] that 
even after the subject had been 
discussed for a considerable time, 
the fate of the constitution could 
scarcely be conjectured; and so 
small in many instances, was the 
Imajority in its favor, as to afford 
strong ground for the opinion that, 
had the influence of character been 
removed, the intrinsic merits of 
the instrument would not have 
secured its adoption. Indeed it 
is scarcely to be doubted that in 
some of the adopting states a ma- 
jority of the people were in the 
opposition. In all of them, the 
numerous amendments which were 
proposed demonstrate the reluc- 
tance with which the new govern- 
ment was accepted; and that a 
dread of dismemberment, not an 
approbation of the particular sys- 
tem under consideration, had in- 
duced an acquiescence in it. 
North Carolina and Rhode Island 
did not at first accept the consti- 
tution, and New York was appar- 
ently dragged into it by a repug- 
nance to being excluded from the 
confederacy.’’ Marshall, in his Life 
of Washington, written in 1804-07. 


“The government [of the United 
States] proceeds directly from the 
people; it is ‘ordained and estab- 
lished’ in the name of the people; 
and it is declared to be ordained 
‘in order to form a more per- 
fect union, establish justice, insure 
domestic tranquillity, and secure 
the blessings of liberty’ to them- 
selves and to their posterity. .. 
The government of the Union then 
(whatever may be the influence of 
this fact on the case) is, emphati- 
eally and truly, a government of 
the people. In form and _ sub- 
stance it emanates from them. Its 
powers are granted by them and 
are to be exercised directly on them 
and for their benefit. . It is 
the government of all; its powers 
are delegated by all; it represents 
all, and acts for all.’’ Marshall, 
in McCulloch vs. Maryland (4 
Wheaton, 316), in 1819. 


300 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


THE CONFLICT IN THE STATES 


Turning aside from these more general observations on the 
nature of the conflict over the ratification of the Constitu- 
tion, let us now take up the struggle in the several states and 
examine the views entertained by some of the representative 
participants in it. 

New Hampshire.— That New Hampshire was rather ' 
sharply divided into an “aristocratic” and a “country” 
party at the period of the adoption-of the Constitution was 
remarked by an observing Frenchman ;' and the New Hamp- 
shire Spy, published at Portsmouth, in the issue of October 
27, 1787, aligns the mercantile and mechanical interest on 
the side of the new Constitution, adding that the ‘‘honest 
farmer” can have no objections, either. ‘“‘The honest man,” 
runs the plea, “can have no objection to a federal govern- 
ment, for while it obliges him to pay a sacred regard to past 
contracts, it will eventually secure him in his person and his 
property. The mercantile interest have suffered enough to 
induce them to wish for, and espouse a federal reform. .. . 
The mechanical interest can have no aversion to it, when 
they are informed that an efficient government will protect 
and encourage commerce, which is the very soul of mechan- 
ism. ... Nor can the honest farmer have any objection; 
the increase of commerce will naturally increase the demand 
for such articles as he may have for sale; he will be enabled 
to pay his taxes and, if economy shakes hands with industry, 
increase his farm and live independent of troublesome credi- 
tors. Since then no one respectable order of citizens can 
have any just reason to reject the new Constitution, we may 

1 Farrand, Records, Vol. III, p. 232. Speaking of New Hampshire, Madison says, 
“The opposition [to the Constitution], I understand, is composed precisely of the 


same description of characters with that of Massachusetts and stands contrasted 
to all the wealth, abilities, and respectability of the State.’’ Writings, Vol. I, p. 383. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 301 


venture to conclude that none but fools, blockheads, and mad 
men will dare oppose it.” 

Massachusetts. — The contest over..the “Constitution in 
Massachusetts was a™sharp~conflict. between the~personalty 
interests on the one hand.and the small farmers and débtors 
on the other, and this fact seems to. have beeti recognized 
by every thoughtful leader on both sides. This view of the 
social struggle’ was set forth on so n@wy occasions and by 
so many eminent observers that it is difficult to select from 
the mass of material the most typical statement of the situa- 

‘tion. Perhaps that by General Knox is not excelled for its 
clarity and conciseness. Writing to Washington, January 
14, 1788, a few days after the state convention had begun its 
labors, he describes the alignment over ratification as 
follows: 

“There are three parties existing in that state [Massachu- 
setts] at present, differing in their numbers and greatly differ- 
ing in their wealth and talents. 

“The Ist. is the commercial part of the state to which are 
added all the men of considerable property, the clergy, 
the lawyers — including all the judges of all the courts, and 
all the officers of the late army, and also the neighborhood 
of all the great towns — its numbers may include 3/7ths of 
the state. This party are for vigorous government, perhaps 
many of them would have been still more pleased with the 
new Constitution had it been more analogous to the British 
Constitution. 

“The 2d party are the eastern part of the state lying 
beyond New Hampshire formerly the province of Main — 
This party are chiefly looking towards the erection of a 
new state and the majority of them will adopt or reject 
the new Constitution as it may facilitate or retard their 
designs —this party 2/7ths. 


3802 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


‘The 3d party are the Insurgents or their favorers, the 
great majority of whom are for an annihilation of debts, 
public and private, and therefore they will not approve the 
new Constitution — this party 2/7ths.”’? 

Several months before Knox had formulated this view 
of the conflict, indeed, early in the struggle over ratification, 
the Federalist agitators were busy with appeals to practical 
economic interests. “he Massachusetts Gazette of October 
26, 1787, for example, contains a letter signed by “‘ Marcus”’ 
in which the groups likely to be affected advantageously 
by the new Constitution are enumerated and an argument 
directed to each of them: “It is the interest of the mer- 
chants to encourage the new constitution, because com- 
merce may then be a national object, and nations will form 
treaties with us. It is the interest of the mechanicks to 
join the mercantile interest, because it is not their interest 
to quarrel with their bread and butter. It is the interest of 
the farmer because the prosperity of commerce gives vent 
to his produce, raises the value of his lands, and commercial 
duties will alleviate the burden of his taxes. It is the inter- 
est of the landholder, because thousands in Europe, with 
moderate fortunes will migrate to this country if an efficient 
government gives them a prospect of tranquillity. It is the 
interest of all gentlemen and men of property, because they 
will see many low demagogues reduced to their tools, whose 
upstart dominion insults their feelings, and whose passions 
for popularity will dictate laws, which ruin the minority 
of creditors and please the majority of debtors. It is the 
interest of the American soldier as the military profession 
will then be respectable and. Florida may be conquered in 
a campaign. The spoils of the West-Indies and South 
America may enrich the next generation of Cincinnati. 


1 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 442. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 303 


It is the interest of the lawyers who have ability and genius, 
because the dignities in the Supreme Court will interest 
professional ambition and create emulation which is not 
now felt. ... It is the interest of the clergy, as civil 
tumults excite every passion — the soul is neglected and the 
clergy starve. It is the interest of all men whose education 
has been liberal and extensive because there will be a theatre 
for the display of talents.’ = 
In fact, from the very beginning of the movement, the} 
most eminent advocates of a new system were aware of the’ i 
real nature of the struggle which lay before them. They/ 
knew that there was a deep-seated antagonism between the \ 
“natural aristocracy”’ and the “turbulent democracy” which 
was giving the government of Massachusetts trouble. Such’ 
an analysis of the difficulty isset forth by Stephen Higginson, 
a leading Federalist of Boston, in March, 1787: “The 
people of the interior parts of thesestates [New England] have 
by far too much political knowledge and too strong a relish 
for unrestrained freedom, to be governed by our feeble 
system, and too little acquaintance with real sound policy or 
rational freedom and too little virtue to govern themselves. 
They have become too well acquainted with their own weight 
in the political scale under such governments as ours and 
have too high a taste for luxury and dissipation to sit down 
contented in their proper line, when they see others possessed 
of much more property than themselves. With these 
feelings and sentiments they will not be quiet while such 
distinctions exist as to rank and property; and sensible of 
_ their own force, they will not rest easy till they possess the 
reins of Government and have divided property with their 
betters, or they shall be compelled by force to submit to 
their proper stations and mode of living.” ? 


1 Report of the Manuscripts Commission of the American Historical Association, 
December 20, 1896, p. 754. A writer in the Chronicle of Freedom (reprinted in the 


304 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


Discerning opponents of the Constitution, as well as its 
advocates, were aware of the alignment of forces in the battle. 
Rufus King explained to Madison in January, 1788, that the 
opposition was grounded on antagonism to property rather 
than to the outward aspects of the new system. “Appre- 
hension that the liberties of the people are in danger,” 
he said, “and a distrust of men of property or education 
have a more powerful effect upon the minds of our op- 
ponents than any specific objections against the Constitu- 
tion. . . . The opposition complains that the lawyers, 
judges, clergymen, merchants, and men of education are all 
in favor of the Constitution — and for that reason they 
appear to be able to make the worse appear the better 
cause.” } 

The correctness of King’s observation is sustained by a 
vigorous writer in the Boston Gazette and Country Journal 
of November 26, 1787, who charges the supporters of the 
Constitution with attempting to obscure the real nature of 
the instrument, and enumerates the interests advocating its 
adoption. ‘At length,” says the writer, “the luminary of 
intelligence begins to beam its effulgent rays upon this im- 
portant production; the deceptive mists cast before the 
eyes of the people by the delusive machinations of its INTER- 
ESTED advocates begins to dissipate, as darkness flies before 
the burning taper. . . . Those furious zealots who are for 
cramming it down the throats of the people without allowing 


Massachusetts Centinel, October, 27, 1787) complains of the dangers to the freedom 
of the press from the new Constitution and continues: ‘‘One thing, however, is 
calculated to alarm our fears on this head; I mean the fashionable language 
which now prevails so much and is so frequent in the mouths of some who formerly 
held very different opinions; — That common people have no business to trouble — 
themselves about government.”’ The Massachusetts Centinel (November 24, 1787) 
declares it to be “‘a notorious fact that three of the principle enemies of the 
proposed constitution were heart and hand with the insurgents last winter.” 
1 Life and Letters, Vol. I, pp. 314 ff. 


ae) 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 305 


them either time or opportunity to scan or weigh it in the 
balance of their intelligences, bear the same marks in their 
features as those who have been long wishing to erect an 
aristocracy in THIS COMMONWEALTH — their menacing cry is 
for a RIGID government, it matters little to them of what 
kind, provided it answers THAT description. . . . They in- 
cessantly declare that none can discover any defect in the 
system but bankrupts who wish no government and officers 
of the present government who fear to lose a part of their 
power. ... It may not be improper to scan the characters 
of its most strenuous advocates: it will first be allowed that 
many undesigning citizens may wish its adoption from the 
best motives, but these are modest and silent, when compared 
to the greater number, who endeavor to suppress all at- 
tempts for investigations; these violent partizans are for 
having the people gulp down the gilded pill blindfolded, 
whole, and without any qualification whatever, these consist 
generally, of the NOBLE order of C—s, holders of public 
securities, men of great wealth and expectations of public 
office, B—k—s and L—y—s: these with their train of 
dependents from [form] the aristocratick combination.” 
Probably the most reasoned statement of the antagonism 
of realty and personalty in its relation to the adoption of 
the Constitution in Massachusetts was made in the letters of 
“Cornelius” on December 11 and 18, 1787: “I wish,” he 
said, “there never might be any competition between the 
landed and the mercantile interests, nor between any differ- 
ent classes of men whatever. Such competition will, how- 
ever, exist, so long as occasion and opportunity for it is given, 
and while human nature remains the same that it has ever 
been. The citizens in the seaport towns are numerous; 
they live compact; their interests are one; there is a con- 


‘stant connection and intercourse between them; they can, 


x 


306 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


on any occasion, centre their votes where they please. 
This is not the case with those who are in the landed interest ; 
they are scattered far and wide; they have but little inter- 
course and connection with each other. ... I conceivea 
foundation is laid for throwing the whole power of the federal 
government into the hands of those who are in the mercantile 
interest; and for the landed, which is the great interest 
of this country, to lie unrepresented, forlorn, and without 
hope. It grieves me to suggest an idea of this kind: But I 
believe it to be important and not the mere phantom of 
imagination, or the result of an uneasy and restless dis- 
position.” } 

Connecticut. — There was no such spirited battle of wits 
over ratification in Connecticut as occurred in Massachu- 
setts. Nevertheless, Ellsworth, in that state, produced a 
remarkable series of essays in support of the new Constitu- 
tion which were widely circulated and read. In these papers 
there is revealed a positiveantagonism between agrarianism 
and personalty, but an attempt is made at conciliation by 
subtly blending the two interests. Ellsworth opens: ‘‘The 
writer of the following passed the first part of his life in mer- 
cantile employments, and by industry and economy acquired 
a sufficient sum on retiring from trade to purchase and 
stock a decent plantation, on which he now lives in the 
stateofafarmer. By his present employmenthe is interested 
in the prosperity of agriculture and those who derive a 
support from cultivating the earth. An acquaintance with 
business has freed him from many prejudices and jealousies 
which he sees in his neighbors who have not intermingled 
with mankind nor learned by experience the method of 
managing an extensive circulating property. Conscious 
of an honest intention he wishes to address his brethren on 


1 Harding, The Federal Constitution in Massachusetts, pp. 123-124. 


a) 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 307 


some political subjects which now engage the public atten- 
tion and will in the sequel greatly influence the value of 
landed property.” ! 

The fact that the essential implications of this statement 
about his primary economic interests being those of a farmer 
are untrue does not affect the point here raised: Ellsworth 
recognised that the opposition was agrarian in character, and 
he simulated the guise of a farmer to conciliate it. Later 
on Ellsworth classifies the opposition. In the first rank he 
puts the Tories as leading in resisting the adoption of the 
Constitution because it would embarrass Great Britain. In 
the second class, Ellsworth puts those who owe money. 
“Debtors in desperate circumstances,” he says, ‘““who have 
not resolution to be either honest or industrious will be the 
next men to take alarm. They have long been upheld by 
the property of their creditors and the mercy of the public, 
and daily destroy a thousand honest men who areunsuspicious. 
Paper money and tender acts is the only atmosphere in 
which they can breathe and live. This is now so generally 
known that by being a friend to such measures, a man 
effectually advertises himself as a bankrupt. ... There is 
another kind of people who will be found in the opposition : 
Men of much self-importance and supposed skill in politics 
who are not of sufficient consequence to obtain public em- 
ployment, but can spread jealousies in the little districts of 
country where they are placed. These are always jealous 
of men in place and of public measures, and aim at making 


themselves consequential by distrusting everyone in the 


higher offices of society. ... But in the present case men 
who have lucrative and influential state offices, if they act 
from principles of self interest will be tempted to oppose 
an alteration which would doubtless be beneficial to the 


1 Ford, Essays on the Constitution, p. 139. 


308 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


people. To sink from a controulment of finance or any other 
great departments of the state, thro’ want of ability or oppor- 
tunity to act a part in the federal system must be a terrify- 
ing consideration.” ! 

Leaving aside the Tories and office-holders, it is apparent 
that the element which Ellsworth considers the most weighty 
in the opposition is the agrarian party. The correctness 
of his analysis is supported by.collateral pieces of evidence. 
Sharon, one of the leading paper money towns which opposed 
the ratification of the Constitution in Connecticut had 
voted to assist Shays and had repeatedly attempted to secure 
paper emission legislation.” In a few letters and speeches 
against the Constitution the plaintive note of the agrarian 
is discernible. . 

The opponents of the Constitution in Connecticut found 
no skilled champions such as led the fight in Pennsylvania 
and Massachusetts; and no such spirited discussion took 
place. The debates in the state ratifying convention 
were not recorded (save for a few fragments) ; but the contest 
in the legislature over the proposition to send delegates to 
the Philadelphia Convention showed that the resistance 
came from the smaller agrarian interests similar to those in 
Rhode Island and Massachusetts which had stood against 
the whole movement. 

Mr. Granger from Suffield was opposed to the proposition 
to send delegates to Philadelphia because “he conceived it 
would be disagreeable to his constituents; he thought the 
liberties of the people would be endangered by it; . . . and 
concluded by saying that he imagined these things would — 
have a tendency to produce a regal government in this 
country.” Mr. Humphrey from the inland town of Norfolk 


1¥ord, Essays on the Constitution, pp. 144 ff. 
2 Libby, op. cit., p. 58. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 309 


sided with Mr. Granger and “concluded by saying that he 
approved the wisdom and policy of Rhode Island in refusing 
to send delegates to the convention and that the conduct 
of that state in this particular, was worthy of imitation.” 
Mr. Perkins of Enfield ‘‘was opposed to the measure and said 
that the state would send men that had been delicately bred 
and who were in affluent circumstances, that could not feel 
for the people in this day of distress.” 4 

New York. — When it is remembered that the greatest 
piece of argumentation produced by the contest over 
ratification, The Federalist, was directed particularly to 
the electorate in New York, although widely circulated 
elsewhere, it will appear a work of supererogation to inquire 
whether the leaders in that commonwealth understood the 
precise nature of the social conflict which was being waged.’ 
Nevertheless, it may be worth while to present Hamilton’s 
analysis of it. On the side of the Constitution, he placed 
the “very great weight of influence of the persons who framed 
it, particularly in the universal popularity of General 
Washington — the good will of the commercial interest 
throughout the states which will give all its efforts to the 
establishment of a government capable of regulating, pro- 
tecting, and extending the commerce of the Union — the 
good will of most men of property in the several states who 
wish a government of the Union able to protect them against 
domestic violence and the depredations which the demo- 
cratic spirit is apt to make on property . . . —a strong 
belief in the people at large of the insufficiency of the present 
confederation to preserve the existence of the Union.” 

Over against these forces in favor of the Constitution, 
Hamilton places the antagonism of some inconsiderable 


1 Connecticut Courant, May 21, 1787. 
2 See above, p. 156. 


310 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


men in office under state governments, the influence of 
some considerable men playing the part of the demagogue 
for their own aggrandizement ; — “and add to these causes 
the democratical jealousy of the people which may be 
alarmed at the appearance of institutions that may seem 
calculated to place the power of the community in a few 
hands and raise a few individuals to stations of great pre- 
eminence.” 4 : 

New Jersey and Delaware.—The speedy ratification of the 
Constitution in these states gave no time for the develop- 
ment of asharp antagonism, even had there been an economic 
basis for it. In the absence of this actual conflict over the 
Constitution we can hardly expect to find any consideration 
of the subject by contemporary writers of note.” 

Pennsylvania. — 'The opposition between town and 
country, between personalty and realty in other words, was 
so marked in this commonwealth during the struggle over 
the ratification of the Constitution that it was patent to all 
observers and was the subject of frequent and extensive com- 
ment by leaders on both sides. On September 28, 1787, 
Tench Coxe wrote to Madison describing the disturbance 
over the resolution in the state legislature calling the ratifying 
convention, and after reciting the events of the day he added, 
“It appears from these facts that the Western people [i.e. 
the agrarians| have a good deal of jealousy about the new 
Constitution and it is very clear that the men who have been 


1 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 288. On the antagonism 
in New York see some clues afforded in an article in The Magazine of American ~ 
History, April, 1893, pp. 326 ff. 

2 Dickinson’s Fabius letters were printed after the ratification by Delaware and 
were directed to the ‘‘general public’’ rather than fellow-citizens in that common- 
wealth. Among the opponents to the Constitution, he put ‘‘men without princi- 
ples or fortunes who think they may have a chance to mend their circumstances 
with impunity under a weak government.” Ford, Pamphlets on the Constitution, 
p. 165. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 311 


used to lead the Constitutional [or radical party]! are against 
it decidedly.”’? A month later Coxe again writes to Madison: 
“The opposition here has become more open. It is by those 
leaders of the constitutional [local radical] interest who have 
acted in concert with the Western interest. The people 
of the party in the city are chiefly federal, tho’ not so I fear 
in the Counties.” 3 

Writing about the same time from Philadelphia to Wash- 
ington, Gouverneur Morris, said : ‘“‘ With respect to this state, 
I am far from being decided in my opinion that they will 
consent. It is truethat the City and its Neighborhood was 
enthusiastic in the cause; but I dread the cold and sower 
temper of the back counties and still more the wicked in- 
dustry of those who have long habituated themselves to 
live on the public, and cannot bear the idea of being removed 
from power and profit of state government which has 
-been and still is the means of supporting themselves, their 
families, and their dependents.’”’* Such comments on the 
nature of the alignment of forces might be multiplied from 
the writings of other Federalist leaders in Pennsylvania, but 
it appears to be unnecessary to say more. 

The leaders on the other side were constantly discanting 
upon the opposition between town and country. The re- 
calcitrant members of the legislature in their protest to 
the people against the hasty calling of the state convention 
declared, ‘‘We lamented at the time [of the selection of 
delegates to the national Convention] that a majority of 
our legislature appointed men to represent this state who 
were all citizens of Philadelphia, none of them calculated to 
represent the landed interests of Pennsylvania, and almost 


1See Harding, ‘‘Party struggles over the First Pennsylvania Constitution,” 
American Historical Association Report (1894). 

2 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 305. 

3 Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 339. 4 Ibid., Vol. IV, p. 358. 


312 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


all of them of one political party, men who have been 
uniformly opposed to that [state] constitution for which you 
have on every occasion manifested your attachment.” ! 

The author of the famous ‘‘Centinel” letters saw in the 
movement favorable to the new Constitution a design of 
“the wealthy and ambitious who in every community think 
they have a right to lord it over their fellow creatures.” ? 
In fact the most philosophic argument against the adoption 
of the new system on account of its intrinsic nature was 
made by the author of these letters. 

At the opening of his series, Centinel inveighs against the 
precipitancy which characterized the movements of the 
Federalists, and then attacks the Constitution as the work of 
an active minority. “The late revolution,” he says, “having 
effaced in a great measure all former habits and the present 
institutions are so recent that there exists not that great 
reluctance to innovation, so remarkable in old communities 
and which accords with reason, for the most comprehensive 
mind cannot foresee the full operation of material changes 
on civil polity. ... The wealthy and ambitious, who in 
every community think they have a right to lord it over 
their fellow creatures have availed themselves very success- 
fully of this favorable disposition; for the people thus un- 
settled in their sentiments have been prepared to accede 
to any extreme of government. All the distresses and diffi- 
culties they experience, proceeding from various causes, 
have been ascribed to the impotency of the present con- 
federation, and thence they have been led to expect full 
relief from the adoption of the proposed system of govern- 
ment; and in the other event immediately ruin and annihila- 
tion as a nation.” ® 


1 McMaster and Stone, op. cit., p. 73. 
2 Tbid., p. 567. 8 Ibid., p. 367. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 313 


After warning his countrymen against being lulled into 
false security by the use of the great names of Washington 
and Franklin in support of the Constitution, Centinel takes 
up the fundamental element in the new system: the balance 
of powers as expounded in Adams’ Defence of the Constitu- 
tions; and shows the inherent antagonism between “‘demo- 
cracy”’ and the Federalist concept of government in a 
manner that would do honor to the warmest advocate of 
the initiative and referendum in our time. “Mr. Adams’ 
sine qua non of good government is three balancing powers; 
whose repelling qualities are to produce an equilibrium of in- 
terests and thereby promote the happiness of the whole com- 
munity. He asserts that the administrators of every gov- 
ernment will ever be actuated by views of private interest 
and ambition to the prejudice of the public good; that 
therefore the only effectual method to secure the rights of 

*the people and promote their welfare is to create an opposi- 
tion of interests between the members of two distinct bodies 
in the exercise of the powers of government, and balanced by 
those of a third. This hypothesis supposes human wisdom 
competent to the task of instituting three co-equal orders 
in government and a corresponding weight in the community 
to enable them respectively to exercise their several parts and 
whose views and interests should be so distinct as to prevent 
a coalition of any two of them for the destruction of the 
third. Mr. Adams, although he has traced the constitution 
of every form of government that ever existed, as far as 

history affords materials, has not been able to adduce a 

single instance of such a government; he indeed says the 
British constitution is such in theory, but this is rather a 
confirmation that his principles are chimerical and not to be 
reduced to practice. If such an organization of power were 
practicable how long would it continue? Not a day—for 


314. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


there is so great a disparity in the talents, wisdom, and in- 
dustry of mankind, that the scale would presently prepon- 
derate to one or the other body, and with every accession 
of power the means of further increase would be greatly 
extended. The state of society in England is much more 
favorable to such a scheme of government than that of 
America. There they have a powerful hereditary nobility, 
and real distinctions of rank and interests; but even there, 
for want of that perfect equality of power and distinction 
of interests in the three orders of government, they exist 
but in name; the only operative and efficient check upon 
the conduct of administration is the sense of the people at 
large. ... If the administrators of every government are 
actuated by views of private interest and ambition, how is 
the welfare and happiness of the community to be the result 
of such jarring adverse interests?” ! 

In opposition to the Adams-Madison theory of balanced 
economic interests and innocuous legislatures, which was 
the essence of the Federalist doctrine, Centinel expounded 
his reasons for believing that distinct property groups 
should not be set against one another in the government, 
and that trust in the political capacity of the broad undif- 
ferentiated mass of the community should be the basis of 
the Constitution; but it should be noted that his undif- 
ferentiated mass was composed largely of property holders. 
“T believe,” he says “that it will be found that the form of 
government which holds those entrusted with power in the 
greatest responsibility to their constituents, the best calcu- 
lated for freemen. A republican or free government can only 
exist where the body of the people are virtuous and where 
property 1s pretty equally dwided. In such a government the 
people are sovereign and their sense or opinion is the criterion 

1 McMaster and Stone, op. cit., pp. 568-569. 


_* 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 315 


of every public measure ; for when this ceases to be the case, 
the nature of the government is changed and an aristocracy, 
monarchy, or despotism will rise onits ruins. The highest 
responsibility is to be attained in a simple structure of 
government, for the great body of the people never steadily 
attend to the operations of government, and for the want of 
due information are liable to be imposed upon. If you 
complicate the plan by various orders, the people will be 
perplexed and divided in their sentiment about the sources of 
abuses or misconduct; some will impute it to the senate, 
others to the house of representatives, and so on, that the 
interposition of the people may be rendered imperfect or 
perhaps wholly abortive. But if imitating the constitution 
of Pennsylvania, you vest all the legislative power in one 
body of men (separating the executive and the judicial), 
elected for a short period, and necessarily excluded by 
rotation from permanency and guarded from precipitancy 
and surprise by delays imposed on its proceedings, you will 
create the most perfect responsibility ; for then, whenever 
the people feel a grievance, they cannot mistake the authors 
and will apply the remedy with certainty and effect, discard- 
ing them at the next election.” ? 

It is evident that a considerable number of the voters in 
Pennsylvania clearly understood the significance of the 


_ division of powers created by the Constitution. In a peti- 


tion circulated and extensively signed by Philadelphia 
citizens immediately after the completion of the labors of 


. the Convention and directed to the state ratifying conven- 


tion, the memorialists expressed their approval of the Con- 

stitution, and added: “The division of the power of the 

United States into three branches gives the sincerest satis- 

faction to a great majority of our citizens, who have long 
1 Jbid., pp. 569-570. 


316 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


suffered many inconveniences from being governed by a 
single legislature. All single governments are tyrannies — 
whether they be lodged in one man —a few men —or a 
large body of the people.” ? 

Maryland. — The contest in Maryland over the ratifica- 
tion was keen and spirited and every side of the question 
was threshed out in newspaper articles and pamphlets.? 
Through all the controversy ran the recognition of the fact 
that it was a struggle between debtors and creditors, be- ) 
tween people of substance and the agrarians. Alexander” 
Hanson in his considerable tract in favor of the ratification, 
dedicated to Washington, treats the charge that the Con- 
stitution was an instrument of property as worthy of a dig- 
nified answer. ‘‘You have been told,” he says, “that the 
proposed plan was calculated peculiarly for the rich. In 
all governments, not merely despotic, the wealthy must, 
in most things, find an advantage from the possession of 
that which is too much the end and aim of mankind. In 
the proposed plan there is nothing like a discrimination in 
their favor... . Is it a just cause of reproach that the 
Constitution effectually secures property? Or would the 
objectors introduce a general scramble ?”’ 3 

Recognizing the importance of the interests at stake, 
another Federalist writer, ‘‘Civis,” in the Maryland Journal 
of February 1, 1788, appeals to the voters for delegates to 
the coming state convention to be circumspect in order to 
procure the ratification of the Constitution. He laments 
that “men of property, character, and abilities have too 
much retired from public employment since the conclusion 
of the war,’”’ but expresses the hope “that, in this all-im- 

1 Connecticut Courant, Oct. 1, 1787. 

2See the valuable articles on ‘‘ Maryland’s Adoption of the Constitution,’’ by 


Dr. Steiner in the American Historical Review, Vol. V. 
8 Ford, Pamphiats on the Constitution, p. 254. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 317 


portant crisis, they will again step forth, with a true patriotic 
ardour, and snatch their dear country from the dreadful 
and devouring jaws of anarchy and ruin.” He cautions 
the citizens against voting for undesirable persons: ‘The 
characters whom I would especially point out as your 
particular aversion, in the present critical conjuncture, are 
all those in desperate or embarrassed circumstances, who 
may have been advocates for paper money, the truck-bill, 
or insolvent act; and who may expect to escape in the 
general ruin of the country.” 

On the other hand many opponents of the Constitution 
in Maryland definitely declared the contest to be one be- 
tween property and the people of little substance. Such 
was practically the view of Luther Martin! in basing his 
resistance on the ground that the new system prevented 
the states from interfering with property rights. The 
spirit of this opposition was also well reflected in a reply 
to the letter of “Civis,’”” mentioned above, which took the 
form of an ironical appeal to the voters to support only 
men of property and standing for the coming state conven- 
tion. “Choose no man in debt,” it runs, ‘because being 
in debt proves that he wanted understanding to take care 
of his own affairs. ... A man in debt can scarcely be 
honest. . . . Vote for no man who was in favor of paper 
money, for no honest man was for that measure. None but 
debtors and desperate wretches advocated the diabolical 
scheme. ... Elect no man who supported the law allow- 
_ ing insolvent debtors to discharge their persons from per- 
petual imprisonment, by honestly delivering up all their 
property to the use of their creditors. The legislature 
have no right to interfere with private contracts, and debtors 
might safely trust to the humanity and clemency of their 

1 See above, p. 205. 


318 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


creditors who will not keep them in gaol all their lives, un- 
less they deserve it... . Men of great property are deeply 
interested in the welfare of the state; and they are the most 
competent judges of the form of government, best cal- 
culated to preserve their property, and such liberties as it is 
proper for the common and inferior class of people to en- 
joy. Men of wealth possess natural and acquired under- 
standing, as they manifest by amassing riches, or by keeping 
and increasing those they derive from their ancestors, and 
they are best acquainted with the wants, the wishes, and 
desires of the people, and they are always ready to relieve 
them in their private and public stations.” ? 

Virginia. — Madison remarked that he found in his 
state ‘“‘men of intelligence, patriotism, property, and in- 
dependent circumstances”? divided over the ratification 
of the Constitution although in some other commonwealths 
men of this stamp were “zealously attached” to the new 
government. This general reflection is not borne out how- 
ever by some of his contemporaries. Marshall, as we have 
noted above, * regarded the conflict as being between two 
rather sharply divided parties, those who favored maintain- 
ing public and private rights in their full integrity and those 
who proposed to attack them through legislation.* In fact, 
Madison himself at a later date declared that “the supe- 
riority of abilities” was on the side of the Constitution.® 
Charles Lee claimed that ‘except a few characters, the 
members [of the Virginia convention] with the most knowl- 

1 Maryland Journal, March 21, 1788. 


2 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 398. For the economics — 


of this, see above, p. 30. 

3P, 295. 

‘“Tt is currently reported, ’’says the New Hampshire Spy, on December 7, 
1787, ‘‘that there are only two men in Virginia who are not in debt, to be found 
among the enemies to the federal constitution. Debtors, speculators in papers, 
and states demagogues act consistently in opposing it.” 

5 Documentary History of the Constitution, Vol. IV, p. 584. 


a 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 319 


edge and abilities and personal influence are also in favor 
of the Constitution.”’! 

In the opposition Patrick Henry put the whole mass of 
small farmers. ‘‘I believe it to be a fact,” he declared in 
the Virginia convention, “that the great body of yeomanry 
are in decided opposition to it. JI may say with confidence 
that, for nineteen counties adjacent to each other, nine- 
tenths of the people are conscientiously opposed to it. I 
may be mistaken but I give you it as my opinion; and my 
opinion is founded on personal knowledge in some measure, 
and other good authority. ... You have not solid reality 
— the hearts and hands of the men who are to be governed.”’ ? 

North Carolina. —It would have been strange if the 
leaders for and against the Constitution in this common- 
wealth had not taken cognizance of the nature of the con- 
flict they were waging. The popular paper money and 
debtor party had been powerful and active and had aroused 
the solicitude of all men of substance; and the represen- 
tatives of the latter, as practical men, knew what they were 
doing in supporting an overthrow of the old system. “It 
is essential to the interests of agriculture and commerce,” ex- 
claimed Davie, in the state ratifying convention, “ that the 
hands of the states should be bound from making paper 
money, instalment laws, and pine-barren acts. By such 
iniquitous laws the merchant or farmer may be defrauded 
of a considerable part of his just claims. But in the federal 
court, real money will be recovered with that speed which 
is necessary to accommodate the circumstances of individ- 
uals.” ° Speaking on the same theme, paper money, Gover- 

1 [bid., p. 577. 

2 Elliot, Debates, Vol. III, p. 592. See W. C. Ford, “‘The Federal Constitution 
in Virginia,’’ in the Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical Society for October, 


1903. 
3 Elliot, Debates, Vol. IV, p. 159. 


320 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


nor Johnston said: ‘Every man of property — every man 
of considerable transactions, whether a merchant, planter, 
mechanic, or of any other condition — must have felt the 
baneful influence of that currency.” ! 

The recognition of the nature of the clash of interests is 
manifest in scattered correspondence, as well as in speeches. 
For example, in a letter to Iredell, January 15, 1788, Maclaine 
says: ‘In New Hanover county the people if left to them- 
selves are in favor of the change. Some demagogues, a few 
persons who are in debt, and every public officer, except 
the clerk of the county court, are decidedly against any 
change; at least against any that will answer the purpose. 
Our friend Huske is the loudest man in Wilmington against 
the new constitution. Whether ambition, or avarice, or a 
compound of both actuates him I leave you to judge... . 
I expect in a few weeks The Federalist in a volume. He is 
certainly a judicious and ingenious writer, though not well 
calculated for the common people. ... Your old friend 
Huske and Col. Read have joined all the low scoundrels in 
the County [7.e. the country party] and by every underhand 
means are prejudicing the common people against the new 
constitution. The former is a candidate for the county.’ ” 

This conflict between the town and country is explained 
by Iredell’s biographer: ‘‘Soon after the [Revolutionary] 
War commenced a feud between the town of Wilmington 
and the county of New Hanover. The leading men ‘upon 
’Change’ were either Tories or those whose lukewarm- 
ness had provoked suspicion: the agrestic population could 
but illy brook their prosperity. From that day to the pres- 
ent [1857] the politics of the burgess have been antagonis- 
tical to those of the former. The merchants have ever 


1 Elliot, Debates, Vol. IV, p. 90. 
2? McRee, Life and Correspondence of James Iredell, Vol. II, pp. 216, 219. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT 321 


been the predominant class in the borough: daily inter- 
course has enabled them with facility to form combinations 
that have given them the control of the moneyed institutions 
while their patronage has added a potent influence with the 
press.”’ ! 

South Carolina. — The materials bearing on the ratifica- 
tion of the Constitution in South Carolina which are avail- 
able to the northern student are relatively scanty.?_ Never- 
theless, in view of the marked conflict between the agrarian 
back-country and the commercial seaboard, it may easily 
be imagined that it was not unobserved by the leaders in 
the contest over ratification who championed the respective 
regions. ‘This antagonism came out in a pamphlet war 
over the amendment of the state constitution which was 
being waged about the time of the adoption of the new 
federal system. In this war, “Appius,” the spokesman for 
the reform party is reported to have declared that “wealth 
ought not to be represented; that a rich citizen ought to 
have fewer votes than his poor neighbor; that wealth should 
be stripped of as many advantages as possible and it will 
then have more than enough; and finally, that in giving 
property the power of protecting itself, government be- 
comes an aristocracy.” * 

“ Appius,” after this general statement of his theory, then 
explains wherein the distribution of economic interests en- 
gendered antagonism in politics in that state. ‘The upper 
and lower countries, have opposite habits and views in 
almost every particular. One is accustomed to expence, 
the other to frugality. One will be inclined to numerous 
offices, large salaries, and an expensive government; the 


1McRee, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 164 note. 

2See W. A. Schaper, ‘‘Sectionalism in South Carolina,” American Historical 
Association Report (1900), Vol. I. 

’ Summary by T. Ford, The Constitutionalist (1794), p. 21. 


Y 


322 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


other, from the moderate fortunes of the inhabitants, and 
their simple way of life will prefer low taxes, small salaries, 
and a very frugal civil establishment. One imports almost 
every article of consumption and pays for it in produce; 
the other is far removed from navigation, has very little to 
export, and must therefore supply its own wants. Conse- 
quently one will favor commerce, the other manufactures ; 
one wishes slaves, the other will be better without them.” * 
In view of this opposition of interests, “Appius” holds that 
there should be a redistribution of representatives which 
will give the back-country its proper proportion and enable 
the majority to rule. 

To this argument Ford replies in the language of Federal- 
ism. The rights of property are anterior to constitutions ; 
the state constitution recognizes and guarantees these 
rights; the substantial interests of the minority must be 
forever immune from attacks by majorities. Otherwise 
“the weaker party in society,”’ he declares, ‘‘would literally 
have no right whatever: neither life, liberty, or property 
would be guaranteed to them by the social compact, seeing 
the majority are not bound by it, but might destroy the 
whole and by the same rule any part of it at pleasure. . . . 
Virtue and vice would lose their distinction; the most 
vicious views would be sanctified if pursued by the greater 
number, and the most virtuous resistance punishable in the 
less. If the principles of justice are derived from a higher 
source than human institutions (and who will deny it?) 
I contend that the majority have no right to infringe them.” 2 
Hence, any change in the system which deprives the sea- 
board minority of their preponderance in the state govern- 
ment cannot be too severely reprobated. 

It can hardly be supposed that an economic antagonism 

1 Ford, op. cit., pp. 21-22. 2 Op. cit., p. 13. 


THE BCONOMIC CONFLICT 323 


in the state that was so clearly recognized by publicists in 
1794, and that manifested itself in the vote on the ratifi- 
cation of the Federal Constitution six years before, was over- 
looked in the earlier contest. 

Indeed, evidence that it was not appears in a pamphlet 
written in defence of the Constitution by Dr. David Ram- 
say, who was afterward a member of the ratifying conven- 
tion in South Carolina. He particularly warns his fellow- 
citizens against the debtor element. ‘Be on your guard,” 
he says, ‘‘against the misrepresentations of men who are 
involved in debt; such may wish to see the Constitution 
rejected because of the following clause, ‘no state shall emit 
bills of credit, make anything but gold and silver coin a 
tender in payment of debts, pass any ex post facto law, or 
law impairing the obligation of contracts.’ . This will doubt- 
less bear hard on debtors who wish to defraud their creditors, 
but it will be real service to the honest part of the com-— 
munity. Examine well the characters and circumstances of 
men who are averse to the new constitution. Perhaps you 
will find that the above clause is the real ground of the op- 
position of some of them, though they may artfully cover 
it with a splendid profession of zeal for state privileges and 
general liberty.” ? 

Georgia. — The speedy and unanimous ratification of the 
Constitution in Georgia seems to have prevented any very 
vigorous pamytleteering on the question. Indeed, the 
energies of the state were being strained to the limit in pre- 
paring for defence against the Indians, and there was little 


1 Ford, Pamphlets on the Constitution, p. 379. On May 24, 1788, after the Con- 
stitution had been approved in South Carolina, General Pinckney wrote to Rufus 
King, saying, ‘‘The Anti-Federalists had been most mischievously industrious in 
prejudicing the minds of our,citizens against the Constitution. Pamphlets, speeches, 
& Protests from the disaffected in Pennsylvania were circulated throughout the state, 
particularly in the back country.” King, Life and Correspondence,” Vol. I, p. 329. 


324 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 


time for theorizing. Foreign invasion generally silences 
domestic discord. 


CoNCLUSIONS 


At the close of this long and arid survey — partaking of 

the nature of catalogue —it seems worth while to bring 
together the important conclusions for political science 
which the data presented appear to warrant. 
* The moyement.for.the Constitution of the United. States | 
was originated..and carried. through principally by_ four 
groups of personalty interests which had been adversely | 
affected under the Articles. of Confederation’ money, public 
securities, manufactures, and trade and shipping. 

The first firm steps tow ardtheférmation of the Con- 
, stitution were taken” by a small and active group of men 
immediately interested through. their personal possessions 
in the outcome’of their labors. 

‘No popular vote was taken directly.or indirectly on the~ 
proposition-to call the Convention which drafted the Con- 
stitution.” 

A, large propertyless mass was, under the_prevailing suf- 
frage qualifications, excluded at the outset from participation 
(through representatives) in.the work-of framing the.Con- 
stitution. 

The members of the Philadelphia Convention which 


drafted the Constitution were, with a fearr éxceptions, im- 
mediately, directly, and personally interested in, and derived — 


economic advantages from, the establishment of the new 
system. 

The Constitution was essentially. an economic document 
based upon the concept that the fundamental private rights 
of property areanterior to government and morally beyond 
the reach of popular majorities. 


THE ECONOMIC CONFLICT “325 
The major portion of the members of the Gonveetion are 
on record as recognizing the claim. of property to a special 
and defensive. position.in-the Constitution. 3 
In the ratification.of the Constitution, about three- 
fourths of the.adult»males failed..to..vote.on.the question, 
having abstained from the elections.at..which delegates to 
the state conventions».were chosen, either on account of 
their indifference or their disfranchisement by~ property 
qualifications. 


The Constitution.was-ratified by a vote of probably not», 


more than-one-sixth of.the adult males: 

It is questionable whether a majority of the voters par- 
ticipating in the elections for the state conventions in New 
York, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Virginia, and South 
Carolina, actually approved the ratification of the Consti- 
tution. 

The leaders who supported the Constitution in the ratify- 
ing conventions represented the same economic groups as 
the members of the Philadelphia Convention; and ‘in a 
large number of instances they were also directly and per- 
sonally interested in the outcome of their efforts. 

In the ratification, it became manifest that the line of 
cleavage for and against the Constitution was between sub- 
stantial personalty interests on the one hand and the small “ 
farming and debtor interests on the other. 

he Constitution was not created by ‘‘the whole people” 
as the jurists have said; neither was it created by ‘‘the 
states” as Southern nullifiers long contended ; but it was 
the work of a consolidated group whose interests knew 
no state boundaries and were truly national in their 
scope. 


INDEX 


Adams, John, theories attacked, 313. 

Annapolis convention, 62. 

Army, place in government, 171 ff. 

Articles of Confederation, conditions 
under, 47, 58; system of government, 
52. 


Baldwin, Abraham, economic interests 
of, 74; political philosophy of, 190. 
Baltimore, petitions for protection, 42; 

popular vote in, 247. 

Bancroft, interpretation of history, 1. 

Bassett, Richard, economic interests of, 
75. 

Bedford, Gunning, economic interests 
of, 76; political philosophy of, 191. 

Blair, John, economic interests of, 77. 

Blount, William, economic interests of, 
78. 

Boston, petitions for protection, 44; 
property interests in, 261 ff.; vote in, 
244, 

Bowdoin, Governor, demands stronger 
union, 55. 

Brearley, David, economic interests of, 
79. 

Broom, Jacob, economic interests of, 80; 
political philosophy of, 191. 

Burgess, Professor, cited, 62. 

Butler, Pierce, economic interests of, 81; 
political philosophy of, 192. 


Capital, attacks on, 31 ff.; invested in 
lands, 49; see Money and Securities. 
Carroll, Daniel, economic interests of, 
82. 
Centinel,’’ essays of, 312. 
_ Checks and balances, 159 ff. 
Cincinnati, Society of the, 38 ff. 
_ Cities, populace feared, 215. 
Clymer, George, 41; economic interests 
of, 82; political philosophy of, 193. 
Commerce, demands for protection of, 
40 ff.; influence in politics, 172, 183 ff. 

Congress, under the Articles of Con- 
federation, 52; calls the Convention 
at Philadelphia, 63. 


Connecticut tax returns, in, 31; suffrage 
qualifications, 66; elections to state 
convention, 228; vote on the Constitu- 
tion, 228; voters for members of con- 
vention, 240; economic interests and 
ratification of the Constitution, 265 ff.; 
public securities in, 265; conflict over 
ratification, 306 ff. 

Constitution, U. S., juristic theory of, 
10 ff., 299; economic forces in creation 
and adoption, 16 ff.; movement for, 
52 ff.; nature of, 152 ff. 

Constitutional law, interpretation of, 
13° ff. 

Contracts, provision for safeguarding, 
179 ff. 

Convention, at Philadelphia, called, 63; 
movement for, 52 ff.; method of 
electing delegates, 64; 73 ff. 

Creditors, consolidation of, 32. 

Currency, depreciation of, 31. 


Davie, William R., economic interests 
of, 84; political philosophy of, 193. 
Dayton, Jonathan, economic interests 

of, 85. 

Debt, Public, see Securities. 

Debtors, political schemes, 28; war on 
creditors, 31 ff.; in revolt in New 
England, 59. 

Delaware, suffrage qualification, 68; 
elections to state convention, 230; 
vote on the Constitution, 230; voters 
for members of convention, 241; 
ratification of the Constitution, 272. 

Depreciation, of securities, 32. 

Dickinson, John, economic interests of, 
87; political philosophy of, 194. 

Disfranchised, the, 24 ff. 


Economic interests, appealed to, in 
behalf of the Constitution, 53. 

Economic interpretation of history, 
5 ff.; of law, 7 ff.; of constitutional 
law, 13; Madison’s, 14 ff.; 156 ff. 

Elections, popular, feared, 214; annual, 
216; popular vote on the Constitu- 


827 


328 


tion, 239 ff.; to state conventions, 
226 ff.; number voting in, 242 ff.; see 
Suffrage. 

Ellsworth, Oliver, economic interests of, 
88; political philosophy of, 196; on 
ratification, 220. 

Executive, veto power, 213; 192, 193, 
195, 197, 198, 199, 201, 202, 203, 210, 
211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216. 


Farms, mortgaged, 22; small, 27. 

Federalist, The, on the Constitution, 
152 ff. 

Few, William, economic interests of, 90. 

Fitzsimons, Thomas, 41; economic in- 
terests of, 91; political philosophy of, 
196. 

Franklin, Benjamin, on conditions of 
the country in 1787, 47; and land 
speculation, 49; economic interests 
of, 92; political philosophy of, 197. 

Freeholders, dangers from, 71; best 
guardians of liberty, 195; 189-216 
passim; see Suffrage and Elections. 


Georgia, suffrage qualifications, 70; 
elections to state convention, 236; 
vote on the Constitution, 236; voters 
for members of convention, 241; 
reasons for speedy ratification, 290. 

Gerry, Elbridge, views on the Cincinnati, 
88; economic interests of, 95; politi- 
cal philosophy of, 197; on property 
qualifications, 167. 

Gilman, Nicholas, 
of, 93. 

Gorham, Nathaniel, economic interests 
of, 99; political philosophy of, 198; 
on ratification, 219. 


economic interests 


Hamilton, Alexander, views on the work- 
ing-class, 25; estimate of debt, 33; 
economic interests of, 100; political 
philosophy of, 199; on ratification, 
222. 

Henry, Patrick, and land speculation, 
49. : 

History, interpretation of, 1 ff. 

Holmes, Justice, economic views cited, 
9 n. 

Houston, W. C., economic interests of, 
114. 

Houstoun, William, economic interests of, 
115; political philosophy of, 200. 


Ingersoll, Jared, economic interests of, 
116; political philosophy of, 200. 


INDEX 


Jenifer, Daniel, 116. 

Jhering, work cited, 14 n. 

Johnson, W. S8., economic interests of, 
117. 

Judicial control, nature of, 162, 196; 
Spaight against, 214; 216. 


King, Rufus, economic interests of, 118; 
political philosophy of, 201; on rati- 
fication, 218. 

Knox, General, believes the Confedera- 
tion is in ruins, 58; 301. 


Land, policy, 27; western, speculation 
in, 23, 49; members of the Conven- 
tion, interests in, 151. 

Langdon, John, economic interests of, 
120. 

Lansing, John, economic interests of, 
123. 

Lassalle, cited, 14 n. 

Law, interpretation in the United States, 
7 ff.; England, 7. 

Libby, O. G., work on the Constitution, 
5. 


Livingston, William, economic interests 
of, 123; political philosophy of, 201. 


Madison, James, interpretation of his- 
tory and politics, 14 ff.; on universal 
suffrage, 25; on the dissolution of the 
Confederation, 60; on the Annapolis 
convention, 62; economic interests 
of, 125; political philosophy of, 156; 
on property qualifications, 165, 167; 
on ratification, 222; view as to causes 
of opposition to Constitution, 293. 

Maitland, and economic interpretation, 
8 n. 

Majority rule, 
156 ff. 

Manufacturing, 23; demands for pro- 
tection, 41 ff.; 175. 

Marshall, opinion as to nature of the 
Constitution cited, 10; on the obliga- 
tion of contracts, 181 f.; 287; analysis 
of the conflict over the Constitution, 
295 ff. 

Martin, Alexander, economic interests 
of, 126. 

Martin, Luther, and debtors, 28; 
economic interests of, 126; political 
philosophy of, 205. 

Maryland, petitions for protection, 43; 
suffrage qualifications, 69; elections 
to state convention, 234; vote on the 
Constitution, 235; voters for members 


devices for checking, 


INDEX 329 


of convention, 241; vote on Constitu- 
tion in, 247; economic interests and 
ratification of the Constitution, 281; 
conflict over ratification, 316 ff. 

Mason, George, economic interests of, 
127; political philosophy of, 205. 

Massachusetts, tax returns in, 31; re- 
bellion in, 59; suffrage qualifications, 
65; elections to state convention, 226; 
vote on the Constitution, 227; voters 
for members of convention, 240; elec- 
tions in, 242; economic interests and 
ratification of the Constitution, 257 ff. ; 
public securities in, 261; conflict over 
ratification, 301 ff. 

McClurg, James, economic interests of, 
130; political philosophy of, 203. 

McHenry, James, economic interests of, 
130; political philosophy of, 204; elected 
to the Maryland convention, 247. 

Mercer, J. F., economic interests of, 131; 
political philosophy of, 207. 

Merchants, petition for adequate naval 
protection, 56. 

Mifflin, Thomas, economic interests of, 
132. 

Minority, rights of the, 156 ff.; 322. 

Monarchy, favored by Dickinson, 195. 

Money, distribution of, 31; paper, 28 ff. ; 
forbidden in the Constitution, 179; 
281. 

Money lending, 28. 

Monroe, on the Annapolis convention, 
62. 

Morley, on Macaulay, 4 n. 

Morris, Gouverneur, economic interests 
of, 133; political philosophy of, 207; 
on property qualifications, 166; view 
of conflict in Pennsylvania, 311. 

Morris, Robert, and land speculation, 
49; economic interests of, 133; polit- 
ical philosophy of, 209. 


Navy, see Army. 

New England, rebellion in, 59. 

New Hampshire, tax returns in, 31; 
suffrage qualifications, 65; elections 
to state convention, 225; vote on the 
Constitution, 226; voters for members 
of state convention, 240; economic 
interests and the Constitution, 254; 
conflict over ratification, 300. 

New Jersey, suffrage qualifications in, 
68; elections to state convention, 
230; vote on the Constitution, 230; 
voters for members of convention, 
241; economic interests and ratifica- 


tion of the Constitution, 271 f.; pub- 
lic securities in, 271. 


New York, petitions for protection, 43; 


suffrage qualifications, 67; number of 
voters in, 67; elections to state con- 
vention, 229; vote on the Constitu- 
tion, 229; demand for a second na- 
tional Convention, 229; voters for 
members of convention, 241; popular 
vote on the Constitution, 244; eco- 
nomic interests and ratification of the 
Constitution, 268 ff.; public securities 
in, 270; conflict over ratification, 309. 


North Carolina, suffrage qualifications, 


69; elections to state convention, 235; 
ratification of Constitution deferred, 
235; ratification, 236; voters for 
members of convention, 241; eco- 
nomic interests and ratification of the 
Constitution, 287f.; conflict over 
ratification, 319. 


Paper money, 28 ff. 
Paterson, William, 136, 209, 222. 
Pennsylvania, suffrage qualifications, 68 ; 


elections to state convention, 231; 
vote on the Constitution, 233; con- 
flict over ratification, 231 ff.; voters for 
members of convention, 241; popular 
vote on the Constitution, 246; eco- 
nomic interests and ratification of the 
Constitution, 273 ff.; public securities 
in, 274; conflict over ratification, 
310 ff. 


Personal property, distribution of, in 


the United States, 19 ff. 


Philadelphia, petitions for protection, 


40, 44; residents seek relief from finan- 
cial disorders, 57 ; popular vote in, 247. 


Pierce, William, economic interests of, 


137; political philosophy of, 209. 


Pinckney, Charles, economic interests of, 


138; political philosophy of, 210. 


Pinckney, C. C., economic interests of, 


137; political philosophy of, 211. 


Pound, Professor, writings cited, 9. 
Powers, balance of, 159 ff. 

President, see Executive. 

Property, rights of, 156 ff.; qualifica- 


tions on voters and officers, 164 ff.; 
position under the Constitution, 
176; qualifications for officers, 213; 
see Suffrage and Elections. 


Protection, for manufacturing, demanded, 


40; for trade, 175. 


Public securities, records of, at Treasury 


Department, 20. 


330 


Randolph, Edmund, economic interests 
of, 139; political philosophy of, 212; 
on ratification, 219. 

Ratification, see separate states; plan 
suggested by the Convention, 217; 
accepted by Congress, 217; criticism 
and defence of, 218 ff.; accepted by 
the states, 225. 

Read, George, economic interests of, 
140; political philosophy of, 213. 

Real property, groups of interests, 26 ff. 

Referendum, 239. 

Representatives, House of, 160, 162, 
191, 192, 197, 199, 207, 210, 212. 

Rhode Island, ratification of the Consti- 
tution, 237. 

Rutledge, John, economic interests of, 
141; political philosophy of, 213. 


Schuyler, Philip, demands a national 
convention, 55, 108. 

Securities, Public, amount of, 32f.; 
depreciation of, 32; gain in apprecia- 
tion of, 34 ff.; members of the Con- 
vention holding, 149 f.; in Massachu- 
setts, 261 ff.; in Connecticut, 266 f.; 
in New York, 270; in New Jersey, 
271; in Pennsylvania, 273; in Vir- 
ginia, 286; in North Carolina, 287; 
in South Carolina, 289. 

Senate, 161, 162; and property, 190, 
192, 199, 206, 211, 212, 213; see Sena- 
tors. 

Senators, life term proposed, 213; term 
of, 214; popular election, 216. 

Shays’ Rebellion, 39. 

Sherman, Roger, economic interests of, 
142; political philosophy of, 213; 
view of plan of ratification, 218. 

Slave-holders, interest in the Constitu- 
tion, 29. 

Slaves, members of the Convention hold- 
ing, 151; danger of revolt, 174; trade 
in, discussed in the Convention, 176; 
Rutledge’s view of, 213. 

Smith, Melancton, 246. 

South Carolina, suffrage qualifications, 
70; popular vote on the Constitution, 
248; elections to state convention, 
236; vote on. the Constitution, 236; 
voters formembers of Convention, 241 ; 
economic interests and ratification of 
the Constitution, 288 f.; public se- 
curities in, 289; conflict over ratifica- 
tion, 321. 


INDEX 


Spaight, R. D., economic interests of, 
143; political philosophy of, 214. 

States, restrictions on, 178 ff.; causes of 
conflict among, 186 ff. 

Stock Exchange, founding of, 35. 

Strong, Caleb, economic interests of, 144; 
political philosophy of, 214. 

Suffrage, qualifications on, in 1787, 64 ff. ; 
discussed in the Convention, 164 ff., 
190 ff.; manhood in New York, 241; 
for electors voting on the Constitu- 
tion, 240f.; number disfranchised, 
242, 


Taxation, absence of power under the 
Confederation, 52; power conferred 
by the Constitution, 169; interpreta- 
tion of the system, 170; Hamilton 
on, 171. 

Territories, provisions for, in the Consti- 
tution, 175. 

Teutonic school, interpretation of his- 
tory, 2. 

Tories, 240. 

Turner, Professor, historical interpreta- 
tion, 5. 


Veto, absolute, proposed, 213. 

Veto power, 215. 

Virginia, suffrage qualifications, 69; 
elections to state convention, 235; 
vote on the Constitution, 235; voters 
for members of Convention, 241; 
economic interests and ratification of 
the Constitution, 282 ff.; public se- 
curities in, 286; conflict over ratifica- 
tion, 318; 

Vote, popular, see Elections. 


Washington, George, and the Cincinnati, 
39; and land speculation, 49; fears 
for the safety of the country, 58; 
economic interests of, 144; political 
philosophy of, 215. 

Williamson, Hugh, and land speculation, 
23, 50; economic interests of, 146; 
political philosophy of, 215. 

Wilson, James, economic interests of, 
147; political philosophy of, 215. 

Wilson, Woodrow, description of the 
movement for the Constitution, 61. 

Women, legal position of, 24. 

Working class, and politics, 25. 

Wythe, George, economic interests of, 
148; political philosophy of, 216. 


CANISIUS COLLEGE LIBRARY 


economic 


visio 


9140 | 


DATE DUE 


jis ==. ‘aay 


=, 


it 
{ 
ie ai i 
\ ap 
ad x) 
> rl 
“, : = 
caf 
“ie 
om 
4 
ep) f 


Demco, Inc. 38-293 


a 


“~~ 


—— 


; os | UO 
<7 W9-BQJ-873 


