M-Vj 


2>fy 


ffr4» 


^r^3/ 


<**" 


& 


^  tip  ®¥ologim 


*** 


% 


PRINCETON,  N.J. 


fyj 


^ 


Purchased  by  the  Mary  Cheves  Dulles  Fund. 


COLLECTION  OF  PURITAN  AND 
ENGLISH  THEOLOGICAL  LITERATURE 

? 

LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 
PRINCETON,  NEW  JERSEY 


MIS^ 


(Tliartemonf, 

(E&gBaefon. 


/7    pft~~CrtM    AjToG    ■ 

(&6~c     6^-^    ex    rv^^J*     ^£^e-     ^     >     ■y^t    *> 

J/   .sec  th^J: 


S4 


^  1 


Ie\*  r>  going  out  in  the  Afoonjliitxe to kncwr tti eir  Fortune. 


— 


'+\ 


A  N 
Hiftorical,  Phyfiological  and  The* 

TREATISE 


SPIRITS, 

Apparitions,    Witchcrafts, 

and  other  Magical  Pradfcic 

CONT  AINI  NG 

An  Account  of  the  Genii  or  Familiar  Spirits, 
both  Good  and  Bad,  that  are  faid  to  attend 
Men  in  this  Life  :  and  what  fenfible  Per- 
ceptions fome  Perfons  have  had  of  them : 
(particularly  the  Author's  own  Experience 
for  many  Years.) 

Alfo  of  Appearances  of  Spirits  after  Death ;  Di- 
vine Dreams,  Divinations  ,  Second  Sighted 
Perfons,  &c. 

Likewife  the  Power  of  Witches,  and  the  reality 
of  other  Magical  Operations,  clearly  aflerted. 

With  a   Refutation    of  Dr.  Btkkr  I  be- 

witch'J;  and  other  Authors  that  have  opp 
the  Belief  of  them. 

~By  jon h  Beaumont,  Gent. 

Frdftat  aliqua  probability  nojfe  de  rebus  fuper'mibus  &  Cxlefti- 
bus,  quam  de  rebus  inferioribus  mult  a  Jemohjtrare. 

Arid.  Moral.  9. 


Lendin  :  Printed  for  D.  Browne,  at  the  Black  Swan  wirhouc 
Templ$-Bar  •  J.Taylor,  at  the  Ship  in  St.Paurs  Church-Tar  J; 
R.Smithyzt  the  Angel  without  Temple-Bar  ;  F.Coggati,  in  the 
Inner-Temple  Lane  j  and  T.Browne  without  Temple-Bar,  • 


To  the  Right  Honourable 

JOHN- 

Earl  of  GAR BURT, 

Baron  Vaughan  of  Emblin 
in  England ,  and  Baron 
Vaughan  of  Molinger  in 
the  Kingdom  of  Ire- 
land, &c. 

My  Lord, 

YOUR  Lord/hips  great 
Genius  to  a  Contem  - 
plative  Life,    which 
raifes  Humane  Nature  to  an 
excellency  above  it  felf,  and 
highly  Influe?iccs  the  Oecono- 
A  2  my 


The  Epiftle. 
my  of  this  World,  has  natu- 
rally induced  me  to  make  an 
Humble  Dedication  to  you  of 
this  Booh  The  SubjeB  is 
abfirufe ,  and  treated  of  by 
few,  and  that  fparingly.  If 
I  have  more  eruargd  my  felf 
upon  it,  it  is,  thatfome  ex- 
traordinary Vifitations  ha- 
ving  happened  to  me,  in  which 
I  have  had  a  Coiwerfe  with 
thofe  Genii  /  treat  of,  have 
made  jo  ftrong  an  Impreffion 
on  my  Mind,  that  I  could 
not  well  with-hold  my  felf, 
from  peru fing  the  Beft  Au- 
thors I  could  meet  with,  re- 
lating to  it ,  in  Order  to 
draw  an  AbflraB  of  what  I 
found  mofi  Material  in  them, 
and  to  publijb  it   together 

with 


Dedicatory. 

with  my  own  Experience  and 
Thoughts  in  that  kind,  as  I 
have  here  done.  I  treat  of 
this  SubjeS  Hiftoricallv, 
Phyfiologically ,  andTljeofo- 
gically  ,  thd  not  in  diftinft 
Books,  hit  promifcuoufly,as 
I  found  Occafion  prejented 
it  felf  As  for  my  Perfor- 
mance herein,  I  could  hear- 
tily wifb  it  might  prove  to 
your  Lordjbips  good  liking, 
and  humbly  Jubmit  it  to  your 
Lordjbips  .Great  Judgment 
andCenfure,  being, 

My  Lord, 

Your  Lordfhip's, 

Moft  Humble  and 

Moft  Obedient  Servant. 

John  Beaumont* 


TO    THE 


READER. 


HAving    long    promis'd    the 
World  this  Book,  perhaps, 
.  the  Jocofe  part  of  Mankind 
may  now  be  apt  to  fay, 

fluid  ferat  *bic  tanto   dignum  promijfor 

hiatu  ? 
Parturiunt  mantes >  &c. 

Be  it  as  it  may ,  I  have  here  made 
good  my  Promife  -y  and  though  I 
may  noc  perfwade  my  felf,  that 
all  Men  will  acquiefce  in  what  I 
here  deliver,  I  noc  pretending,  in  this 
Subject,  to  Mathematical  Demonftra- 

tion ; 


To  the  Redder, 
tion  3  yet  I  (hall  be  free  to  fay,  That 
1  fear  no  Man,  who  fhall  pretend  to 
bring  more  Reafon  for  an  Opinion, 
contrary  to  that  I  aflert  5  and  I  be- 
lieve whoever  fhall  perufe  this  Book, 
will  find,  chat  I  am  not  Ignorant  of 
what  Oppofers  of  all  kinds  may  take 
upon  them  to  offer  againft  it.  In- 
deed, while  we  relie  meerly  on  Rea* 
fon  in  Subjects  of  this  Nature,  I  doubt 
we  may  have  all  too  much  caufe  to 
lament  our  felves  with  the  Ingenious 
Fracaftor'ws,  in  Ep.  ad  Flaminium. 

Quid  dk am  miferum  me  agere,  <sr  quam- 
ducere  vitam, 

Irreqnietam  animi,  <&  quarentem  inda~ 
gine  Vana. 

*Katmam  femper  fugientem,  qua  fe  ubt 
paulum 

Qftendit  tnthi,  mox  fades  in  miUa  repente\ 

Cm  Proteus  confer  fa  fequentem  elttdit  0* 
angit, 

Mkrentemfeniique  horas,  cajfumque  labo- 
rer». 

Unhappy 


To  the  Reader. 

Unhappy  Man !  What  can  I  fay,  I  do? 

How  lead  my  Life  ?  thus  rcftlefs  to 
punue. 

Still  flying  Nature ,  which  altho'  by 
chance, 

May  now,  and  then  prefent  m'  a  lit- 
tle glance, 

Strait  ,  <Pmeus  like ,  in  thoufand 
in  pes  ihe's  dnft, 

So  mocks  my  Toyle,  and  frets  my 
penfive  Breaft. 

We  read  of  Tentheus  ,  that  upon 
his  getting  upon  a  Tree,  and  making 
himfelf  a  Spectator  of  the  hidden  Sa- 
crifices of  Bacchus,  he  was  ftruck  with 
fiich  a  kind  of  fury  ,  that  all  things 
feem'd  double  to  him ;  two  Suns  and 
two  Thebes  prefented  themfelves  to 
his  fight  j  lb  that  when  he  was  hafl> 
ina  to  Thebes,  prefently  feeing  ano* 
trier  Ihehes,  he  was  drawn  back  :  and 
thus  he  was  continually  carryed  to 
and  fro,    in  a  reftlefs  Condition. 

Eutne- 


To  the  Redder: 

Eumenidum  Veluti  demens  Vtdet  agmina 

<Penthew, 
Et  folem  geminuttiy  0*  duplicesfe  oftendere 

Thebas, 

As  Penthem  maz'd  whole  Troops  of 

Furies  Spyes, 
Two  Suns,  two  Thebes  i>refented  to 

his  Eyes. 

Now  this  Fable ,  as  the  Lord  $a* 
con  tells  us,  relates  to  Divine  Secrets  5 
for  thofe  who  forgetting  frail  Mor» 
tality,  rafhly  afpire  to  Divine  My- 
fteries  by  high  Flights  in  the  Study 
of  Nature  and  Philofbphy,  as  tho' 
they  were  mounted  on  a  Tree,  have 
this  for  their  Punifhment ,  that  they 
are  perplext  with  a  perpetual  incon- 
ilmcy  and  wavering  in  Judgment  j 
For  the  Light  of  Nature  being  one 
thing,  and  the  Divine  Light  another, 
it  happens  with  them  as  though  they 
law  two  Suns  j  and  fince  the  Acti- 
ons of  Life,  and  the  Decrees  of  the 

Will 


1 


To  the  (fijiider. 

Will  depend  of  the  Underftanding, 
it  follows,  That  they  hefitace  no  lets 
in  their  Wills,  than  in  Opinion,  and 
arc  altogether  at  variance  with  them- 
f elves  ;  and  therefore  they  like  wife 
fee  two  Thebes  j  for  by  Thebes,  which 
Was  the  Habitation  and  retiring  >)ace 
of  fentheusy  the  ends  of  our  Actions 
are  reprefented  :  hence  it  happens, 
that  they  know  not  which  way  to 
turn  themfelves,  but  being  uncertain 
and  wavering  as  to  the  main  of  things, 
they  are  Whirl'd  about  by  fudden  Im« 
pulfes  of  Mind  in  every  particular 
Matter ;  and  I  believe  that  thofe  that 
will  not  acquiefce  in  what  we  have 
delivered  us  in  the  Scriptures,  and  by 
Chriftian  Tradition,  concerning  Spi- 
rits, but  will  be  medling  in  fetting 
up  other  Hypothecs  by  their  frail 
Reafon,  for  folving  Fatts  common- 
ly afcribed  to  Spirits,  will  find  their 
Judgment  fo  perplext,  and  brought 
into  fuch  a  Labyrinth  ,  upon  pe- 
rufing  what  is  here  Written  (and  that 
even  fetting  by  what  I  affirm  from 

my 


To  the  %ede<u 

my  own  Experience ,  as  to  an  Exi- 
ftence  of  Spirits ,  and  their  Operati- 
ons, which  I  leaft  rely  on,  or  urge 
as  Argumentative)  that  they  will  ne- 
ver be  able  to  extricate  themfelves : 
And  upon  this  iiTue  I  leave  it  •  only 
adding  this  faying  of  the  Learned 
inFrtf.  Monfieur  le  Clercy  jcerbos  homines 
-  *-  non  morory  indignos  quippe  qui  bac  ftudia 
traBent,  ant  quorum  Judicii  ulla  rath 
babeatur. 


THE 


THE 

CONTENTS 

O  F    T  H  E 

CHAPTERS 


CHAP.    I. 

H  AT  the  Ancients  underftood 
the  Genii,    that   are  /aid  to 
attend  Men,  to  be,  as  to  their 
Nature  and  Offices. 


w 


CHAP.     II. 

Concerning  the  Genii,  that  are  afcribed  to 
Socrates,  Ariftotle,  Plocinus,  Por« 
phyrius,  Jamblicus,  Chicus,  Sca- 
liger  and  Cardan. 

CHAP. 


The  CONTENTS; 

chap.   m. 

What  perception  Men  have  had  of  Genii, 
or  Spirits ,  and  their  Operations  by  the 
Sight. 

CHAP.     IV. 

What  perception  fome  Per/ons  have  had  of 
Genii,  or  Spirits,  and  their  Operati- 
tions,  by  the  Senfe  of  Seeing,  when  g* 
thers  prefent  at  the  J  ante  time  have  feen 
nothing, 

CHAP.     V. 

Wlxit  perception  Men  have  had  of  Genii, 
or  Spirits,  and  their  Operatiotis,  by  the 
Senfe  of  Hearing* 

CHAP,    VI. 

lVl\it  perception  fome  Werfons  have  had  of 
Genii,  or  Spirits,  and  their  Operati- 
ons by  the  Senfe  of  Hearing>u>hen  others 
prejent  have  heard  nothing. 

CHAP.    VII. 

What  perception  Men  have  had  of  Spirits, 
and  their  Operations  by  all  their  Senfes. 

CHAP. 


The  CONTENTS. 

CHAP.    VIII. 

What  perception  Men  have  had  of  Genii, 
or  Spirits  and  their  Operations,  by 
Dreams. 

CHAP.  IX. 

What  perception  Men  have  had  of  Genii, 
or  Spirits,  and  their  Operations ,  by 
Magical  Practices. 

CHAP.    X. 

What  may  be  fuggefted  from  fyafon,  con* 
cerning  the  Exigence  and  Operations  of 
Spirits» 

CHAP.   XL 
Con/lderations  on  2)r.   Bekker'*  <Booky 
againft  Spirits  5  with  a  Conclufion  to 
this  'Booh 


Errata* 


Errata 

PAge  p.  line  ir.  read  dffc8s>  p.  ai.  1.  8.  r.  Plotinu*, 
p.  38.. I  i.r.Ccrne,  p.  4. 1.  3.  after  infancy,  add,  4ni 
fJM/  1/  4//0  4  manifeft  refutation  if  that  fpecUus  way  if  ex- 
plaining the  Genius  of  Socrates,  us'd  by  Naiuheus,  Mara- 
▼iglia,  and  their  Followers.  lb.  in  the  Margin,  r.  in  hunc 
locunty  p.  41. 1. 1 1,  bloc  out  the  Margin,  and  put  /.  De  Rer. 
Vef.  p.  48.  i.  3$.  r.  tetim.  p,  55.  fc  3*.  r.  there,  p.  74. 1. 
a  5.  r.  no  more»  p.  80. 1.  2.x. Table  Tali.  p.  94.  I.  6.  i. above. 
p*  9$.  1«  2d.  rJ  Poflure.  p.  128, 1.  2.  r.  C4/>4/.  p.  ido.  1. 17, 
r.  Boefartus.  lb.  I.  23.  r.  Columella.  lb.  1.  27.-  r.  ^4*  /?. 
p.  173.  1.  37.  r  qua,  p.  178.I.  2.  r.  as  he,  p.  190.  !•  12.  r. 
empty  Stage,  p.  192. 1.  9.  r.  nmbrantur  pnpMa,  p.  217.  1. 
2$.  r.  Jureux%  p.  219«  1.  4/  r.  concreted,  p.  254.  1.  3.  r. 
thing*9  p.  279. 1.  33.  r.  Coelitus  comparandL  p.  311. 1.  12. 
r.  TranfaOion.  p.  319. 1.  17.  r.  <fryir*.  p.  331. 1. 14.  r.  Im< 
yjiwre*.  p.  380. 1,  29.  r.  Ader%  a. 


( I  ) 

A  N 

ACCOUNT 

G  EN  1 1, 

O  R 

FAMILIAR  SPIRITS, 

that  are  (aid  to  attend 
Men  in  this  Life,  &c. 


c  H  a  P.   I. 

What  the  Ancients  underftood  the  Genii, 
that  are  /aid  to  attend  Men,  to  bct 
as  to  their  Nature  and  Offices. 

HAVING  undertaken  to  write  a 
Trad  concerning  the  Genii  that  ftfe 
faid  to  attend  Men  during  thii 
Life,  I  think  it  proper  for  me.  to 
firft  place,  to  fet  forth  what,  according  to  the 
Ancients  thofe  Genii  were  underftood  to  be. 
as  to  their  Nature  and  Offices. 

B  C,n- 


2  An  Account  of  Genii, 

l.  it  Dies  Cenforinm  tells  US,  that  Genius  is  a  God,  un- 
Nat.  c  3.  £cr  whofe  Tuition  each  Man  is  born  and  lives ; 
and  whether  it  be  that  he  takes  Care  of  our  Ge- 
neration, or  is  engender'd  with  us,  or  takes 
upon  him  our  Guardianfhip  after  we  are  be- 
gotten, he  fays,  he  is  called  Genius  from  Geno, 
an  ancient  Latin  Word,  fignifying  to  beget, 
in  lieu  of  which  the  Word  Gigno  is  now  us'd. 
Genius  is  faid  to  be  Son  of  Jufiter  and  the 
Earth,  as  being  held  to  be  of  a  middle  Nature 
betwixt  Gods  and  Men,  or  for  that  he  fome- 
what  partakes  of  Body.  Some  have  thought 
our  Genim  to  be  the  Symmetry  of  the  Ele- 
ments, which  preferves  humane  Bodies,  and 
all  living  Creatures :  Others,  the  fecret  Pow- 
er of  the  Celeftial  Bodies,  by  which  we  are 
impelFd  to  do  all  things ;  and  thefe  were  call'd 
OeruU3  from  Gero  or  Ingero  ;  that  is,  from  fup- 
portingus,  or  fuggefting  good  or  bad  Thoughts 
into  our  Minds. 

What  the  Latins  call'd  Genius,  the  Greeks 
calFd  Damon ;  which  Word,  to  pafs  by  other 
Significations,  according  to  its  Etymology, 
fignifies  prudent,  knowing,  skilful  in  Affairs, 
and  forefeeing  things,,  they  giving  Anfwers 
to  thofe  that  confulted  them.  In  which  Senfe 
Socrates  thought  famous  Men,  after  Death, 
for  a  Reward  of  their  Vertue,  were  made 
Damons,  of  a  middle  Nature,  mediating  be- 
twixt Gods  and  Men. 
In  Aug.  de  LuJovicus  Fives  fays,  it's  a  wonder  to  fee 
civ.  Dei,  how  differing  the  Opinions  of  the  Gentiles  were, 
'•  ?•  c»  9*  concerning  the  Gods  and  Damons :  So  that 
Jpdeius  thinks  other  wife,  than  Plato  ;  Plctlnus, 
than  Afuleius ;  Porphyrins  differs  from  them 
both;  nor  does  Prcclus  agree  in  all  things  with 
Jamblicusy  or  any  other*    As  for  the  Genii, 

fome 


or  lamili.ir  Spirit?.  ^ 

fome  think  them  to  be  our  own  Soul.,  fome 

our  Inclinations,  rtain  i  :'( 

ing  us,  iomc  the    i  >n- 

which  I  (hall  ice  d<  i 
feveral  Authors. 

ires  thus  :  In 
Mind  of  Man,  even  while  it 
calld  a  Daemon* 

Dm  ne  i  :  lurit 

Ei. 

And  there!  ;ood  Defirc  of  \  a 

good   God  5  whence   (bme  think 
calld  bleit  kuJ<emons,  v 
that  is,  whofe  Mind  is  perfect  with  \ 
which,  I  think,  you  may  properly  call  a  Gauds, 
becaufe  that  God  which  is  each  Alan's  Mi: 
tho'  it  be  immortal,  yet  in  fome  fort  is  en- 
gendered within  us.      And  there   are  fome, 
who,  as  it  feems  to  me^  would  have  the  Mind 
of  Alan  freed  from  the  Body,  to  be  a  fecond 
fort  of  Demons :    This*  I  find,,  in  the  ancient 
Latin  Tongue  to  be  call'd  Lemur.  And  he  of  thefe 
Lemuresy  who,  taking  care   of  his  Pofterity, 
keeps  the  Houfe  as  a  calm  and  quiet  Deity,  is 
call'd  a  Family  Lar :  But  he  that,  by  reafon  of 
Demerits  in  Life,  is  punifhed  by  a  wandring 
in  the  World,  having  no  quiet  Seat,  and  be- 
comes a  vain  Terror  to  good  Men,  and  often- 
five  to  evil,  is  commonly  called  L  But 

when  it's  uncertain   what  Lot  has  happei 
to  a  Man,  whether  he  be  a  he 

is  call'd  the  God  Manes  ;  the  Word  God  be. 
added  for  Honour's  lake:  They  callin 
Gods,  who  among  them  having  juftly  and 
prudentlv  govern  d  the  Couril 

B  i 


4  An  Account  of  Genii, 

arc  afterwards  Deify 'd  by  Men,  and  admit- 
ted to  Temples  and  Sacred  Rites,  as  in  Bxotia, 
Amphi  gratis ;  in  Africa,  Mopfus  ;  in  Egypt,  Oft- 
rls ;  others  elfewhere  $  i&fculapm  every  where. 
And  fo  far  concerning  thofe  Damons  that  have 
had  Bodies.  But  there  is  another  kind  of  more 
auguft  Damons,  which  being  always  free  from 
the  Fetters  and  Ties  of  Bodies,  are  drawn  to  us 
by  certain  Prayers.  From  this  fort  of  fublime 
Damons,  Plato  thinks  each  Man  has  one  given 
him,  as  a  Witnefs  and  Guard  in  paffing  this  Life ; 
which  tho5  feen  by  no  Man,  are  always  pre- 
fent  as  Witneffes,  not  only  of  our  A&ions,'  but 
even  of  our  Thoughts ;  and  that  upon  our 
Return,  at  the  End  of  our  Lives,  the  faid 
Genii  prefently  carry  us,  as  their  Charge,  to 
Judgment,  and  there  Hand  as  Witneffes  at  our 
Trial, 3  where,  if  we  falfifie  in  any  thing, 
they  reprove  us  j  if  we  fpeak  Truth,  they 
vouch  it,  and  Sentence  is  paft  according  to 
their  Teftimony.     So  far  Apukius. 

Porphyrins,  L.  de  Abftinentia,  fays,  That  as 
evil  Damons  hurt  Mankind,  fo  good  Damons 
never  intermit  their  Offices,  but  foreftiew  us 
Dangers,  as  far  as  they  may,  hanging  over 
our  Heads  from  the  evil  Damons,  while  they 
make  us  Signs  both  by  Dreams,  and  by  the 
Soul  divinely  infpir'd,  and  many  other  things ; 
and,  that  if  any  Man  could  diftinguifh  thefe 
things  which  are  fignify'd,  he  would  know 
and  precaution  himfelf  againft  all  Frauds  j  for 
they  fignifie  to  all  Men,  but  all  Perfons  do 
not  perceive  the  things  that  are  fignified. 
ytu^l  2  Agrippa  fays,  that  each  Man  has  a  threefold 
'  Genius  to  guard  him,  one  Sacred,  another  of 
the  Gmiture,  the  third  of  the  Profeffion  a  Man 
follows.    The  firft  is  not  deriv'd  from  the  Stars 

or 


C.  22. 


or  Familiar  Spirits. 

or  Planets,  but  given  by  God,  it  I.  ni 
verfal,  and  above  Nature,      This  direr 

I,  (till  fuggeftir  m- 

Hgl  ;  d: 

Kve  in  a  C  aim, 
chen it's  |  then  it  fpeaks,  as  it 

its  \  (  ice, 
being  prefent  before  L  md  labours 

continually   to   bring  us  to  ilicrcd  i  on. 

,  we  may  Hum 
Malignity  of  Fate  :  Whom   if  we  religi- 
outly  oblerve,  by   an  Uprightnefs  and  I  [oli- 
ve   know  Socrates  did)  the 
■cnlcks  think  we  are  wonderfully  aided  by 
him,  both  by  Dreams  and  Signs,  for  putting 
by  Evils,  and  fecuring  Good  to  us.     The  Ge- 
r,  or  Daemon  of  the  Geniturc,  defcends  to  us 
from  the  Difpofition  of  the  World,  and  the 
Circuits  of  the  Stars,  that  are  concernd  in 
our  Generation  :  This  is  the   Suftainer  and 
Guardian  of  Life,  it  procures  it  to  the  Body, 
and  takes  care  of  it  afterwards,  and  aids  the 
Perfon  for  performing  that  Office  for  which 
the  Heavens  deputed  him  at  his  Birth.     Thofe 
therefore  who  have  received  a  fortunate  Genius, 
are  rendred  ftrong,  powerful,  efficacious,  and 
profperous    in  their  Works  :    Wherefore  by 
Philofophers,    they  are   call'd   bene   Fortimatiy 
I   bene  N^ti,     The  Damon  of  the  Profeliion 
is   given   from  the  Stars,    to  which    fuch  a 
Profeliion  or  Sedt,  as  a  Man  profeiTes,  is  fub- 

ted,  and  which  the  Soul,  when  it  begin 
life  Election  in  this  Body,  and   takes  upon  it 

wifhes  ;     which   Da 
ching'd   for   a  more   worthy   or  Ids,    upoit 
:  Change  of  the  Profeliion.     When  thfc 
Profeffion  agrees  with  our  Natu 
B  3 


6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

we  get  a  Dxmon  like  us ;  and  agreeing  with 
our  Genius,  and  our  Life  is  made  more  calm,, 
happy,  and  profperous :  But  when  we  take 
on  us  a  Profeffion  unlike,  or  contrary  to  our 
Gemxsy  our  Life  is  rendred  more  laborious  and 
troublefome,  by  difcording  Patrons.  Whence 
it  happens,  that  a  Man  makes  Proficiency  in 
a  little  time,  and  with  a  little  labour,  in  one 
Science,  Art,  or  Miniftry,  who  in  others 
Toils,  with  much  Sweat  and  Labour,  to  no 
purpofe.  And  tho'  no  Science,  An,  or  Ver- 
tue  is  to  be  defpifed  j  yet,  that  you  may  live 
profpercufly,  and  ad  fortunately,  know  firft 
of  all  your  good  Genius  and  your  Nature,  and 
what  Good  the  Difpofition  of  the  Heavens, 
and  God,  the  Difpofer  of  all  thefe,  promifes 
you,  who  diftributes  to  each  Man  as  he  plea- 
fes :  Follow  thefe  Beginnings,  profefs  thefe, 
apply  your  felf  to  that  Vertue,  to  which  the 
prime  Diftribater  raifes  and  conduds  you  j 
and  in  what  Virtue  you  find  your  felf  to 
profit  moil  eafily,  endeavour  to  rife  to  the 
height  of  it,  that  you  may  excel  in  one,  which 
you  cannot  do  in  all.  However  do  not  flight 
any  Perfection,  as  far  as  you  are  able  to  pror 
peed  in  it ;  and  if  you  have  Guardians  ac- 
cording to  your  Nature  and  Profeffion,  you 
will  find  a  double  Proficiency  of  your  Na- 
ture find  Profeffion :  But  if  they  are  unlike, 
follow  the  bell ;  for  fometimes  you  will  find 
the  Aid  of  an  egregious  Profeffion  better  than 
lb.  c.  :o.  that  of  your  Nativity.  The  fame  Author 
writes  thus :  As  to  each  Man  is  given  a  good 
Spirit,  fo  there  is  an  evil  one,  both  which 
feek  an  Union  with  our  Spirit,  and  endea- 
vour to  draw  it  to  them,  and  fo  mix  them- 
felves  with  it :  The  Good  by  good  Works  con- 
fer- 


or  Familiar  Spirits* 

loanable  to  him,  changes  us  into  Angels  by 
Union,  as  he  that  adheres  to  God,  is  ma 
one   Spirit   with   him  :    The  Evil  Damon,  by 
bad  Works,  endeavours  to  mate  us  conform 
hie  and  united  to  him  ;  and  this  is  what  Htrmes 

,  when  a  Damon  Hows  into  an  Humane 

lj  he  fpfinkles  in  it  f  his  own  No- 

tions ;  whence  Inch  a  Soul,  fprinkled  with 
Seeds,  railed  in  a  Fury3  brings  forth  wonder- 
ful thir  1  are  the  Performances 
of  D<e?>;,  •  .  For  a  good  D*m4*j  when  he 
pallcs  into  an  holy  Soul,  he  raifes  it  to  the 
Light  of  Wifdom  ;  butxm  tx\\  Damon  tranf- 
ked  Soul,  incites  it  to  Thefts, 
Murthers  and  Lulls,  and  whatfoever  are  the 

fonnances  of  evil  Damons.  Good  Damons 
(as  Jamblicus  fays)  moft  perfe&ly  purge  Souls, 
and  others  give  us  other  things :  being  pre- 
fent,  they  give  Health  to  the  Body,  Virtue 
to  the  Spirit,  Security  to  the  Mind,  deftroy 
what  brings  Death  in  us,  foment  the  Heat, 
and  render  it  more  efficacious  for  life  ;  and, 

an  intelligible  Harmony,  always  infufe 
Light  into  the  Mind.  I  am  of  the  Opinion 
of  thofe,  that  think  all  Men  are  governd 
by  the  Miniftery  of  many  Spirits,  and  are 
led  to  all  Degrees  of  Vermes,  Merits,  and 
Dignity,  if  they  render  themfelves  worthy 
of  them  :  But  thofe  that  render  themfelves 
unworthy  ,  are  call  down  and  detruded  by 
the  evil  Damons,  as  well  as  by  the  good  Spi- 
rits, to  the  loweft  Degree  of  Mifery,  as  th 
Demerits  require.  But  thofe  who  are  com- 
mitted to  the  more  lublime  Angels,  are  pre- 
ferr'd  before  other  Men :  For  the  that 

have  Care  of  them,  raife  them,  and  by  a  cer- 
uip    fecret  power  fubject    other^  p  them, 
B  4  wi 


8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

1  which  tho'  neither  perceive,  yet  he  that  is 
fubjeded  finds  a  certain  weight  of  pre- 
fidency,  from  which  he  cannot  eafily  difin- 
gage  himfelf ;  nay,  he  fears  and  reverences 
that  force,  which  the  fuperiour  Angels  influ- 
ence the  Inferiours  with,  and  bring  the  In- 
feriours  by  a  certain  Terror  into  the  fear  of  ^ 
Prefidency.  So  we  read  that  Mark  Antony  for- 
merly being  join'd  in  a  fingular  Friendftiip 
with  Off  avian  Auguftm,  they  werewont  often 
to  play  together  j  but  Augufius  being  always 
Conqueror,  a  certain  Magician  thus  admo- 
ni.fh'd  Mark  Antony':  What  do  you  do  Antony 
with  that  young  Man  ?  Fly,  and  fliun  him ; 
for  tho'  you  are  elder,  and  more  experience! 
in  Affairs,  of  a  more  Illuftrious  Family,  and 
have  been  a  great  Commander  in  Wars,  yet 
your  Genius  much  dreads  the  Genius  of  this 
Youth,  and  your  Fortune  flatters  his,  and 
unlefs  you  fly  far  from  him,  it  will  wholly 
rbu.  *urn  t0  k*m#  Again,  Agrippa  tells  us,  the 
Lib.\.  c,  ancient  Sages  teach  us  to  know  the  Nature 
*i.  of  each  Man's  Genius  from  th?  Star§,  and  their 

Influences  and  Afpc&s  at  each  Man's  Birth, 
but  by  fo  differing  and  difagreeing  Rules,  that 
it's  very  hard  to  get  thefe  Myfteries  out  of 
their  hands  :  For  Vorphyrius  feeks  the  Genius 
from  the  Star  that  is  Lady  of  the  Geniture ; 
Maitmns  either  thence,  or  from  the  Planets  that 
have  been  moft  dignified  there ;  or  from  that 
whafe  Houle  the  Moon  is  to  enter,  after  that 
it  hojds  at  the  time  of  the  Perfon's  Nativity. 
But  the  ChiUians  feek  the  Genius  only  from 
the  Sun,  or  _Moon.  Others  again,  and  many 
of  the  Hibriws*  \rom  feme  cardinal  Point  of 
the  Heaven?,  or  from  all  of  them.  Others 
feck  ior  jhs  good  Genius  from  the  eleventh 

Hcufe, 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  9 

Hmife,    which  therefore  they  call  the  good 
Damon  5    and  the   evil  Genius   from  the  fixth, 
which  the)  call  the  evil  Damon.  Since  therefore 
the  fcarch  of  thefe  is  laborious  and  very  ab- 
flrufe,  wc   may   much  more  cafily  fcek  the 
nature  of  our  Genius  from  our  fclves,  attend- 
to  thole  things  which  our  Mind  fuggefts 
OS,    the  inilinrt:  of    Nature  dictates,    and 
1  inclines  us  to  from  our  firft  untainted 
innocency  ;   or  when  our  Mind  is  purg'd  of 
1  Cares,  and  finifter  Effeds  and  Impedi- 
ments are  removed  from  it.      Thefe  doubt- 
are  the  kindlv  Suggeftions  of  the  Genius 
«  Man  at  his  Birth,  leading 
and  pejrlwading  us  to  that  which  our  Conftel- 
lation  inclines.     So  far  Jgrippa.      He    that 
would  fee  more  concerning  the  fearch  after 
each  Mans  peculiar  Damon ,  may  read  a  little 
Trad  on  that  Subject,  printed  at  the  end  of 
a  Book,  entitled,  Trinmn  Maglcuw,  fet  forth 
by  Longinus. 

N^t.ilis  Comes    fays,    Tho  Genii   or   Damons  M)th.l.$, 

prefent   us  with  the   Species   or  Images   ofc#3- 

thofe  things  they  would  perfwade  us  to,  as 

in  a  Glafs ;   on  which  Images,  when  our  Soul 

privately  looks,   thofe  things  come  into   our 

id  ;    which,    if    confider'd  with  Reafon, 

j    us    a  right    determination  of    Mind  : 

But  beting  Reafon  afide,  be  carried 

\    with  the   guidance  of  evil  Species,  or 

he  will  of  neceility  incur  many  Er- 

if  the  Images  are  prefented  us 

Whence  many  become  whol- 

n  over  to  i  ty,  Ccvetouf- 

J  to  the  ( 


io  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Dijfert.ii.  Maraviglia,  in  his  Pfetidomantia,  writes  thus, 
Tho'  many  have  thought  the  Genii  to  be  no- 
thing but  a  certain  Light  placed  by  God  in 
our  Minds,  at  our  Birth,  whereby  we  un- 
derhand all  things  $  and  being  underftood, 
if  they  are  good,  we  love  and  purfue  them  ; 
if  bad,  we  decline  and  avoid  them,  yet  the 
more  common  Opinion  was^  that  the  Genii 
were  not  only  a  light  difcovering  and  fore- 
fhewing  future  things  to  us,  but  certain  pure 
Spirits  ftajiding  by  us  always  to  guard  and  ad- 
monifn  us :  Tho'  it  be  far  more  credible  that 
thofe  Genii  in  all  Ages  were  the  very  Wills  of 
Men,  naturally  predifpofed  with  a  defire  and 
love,  or  an  aversion  and  abhorrence  of  things 
Good  or  Evil,  difcus'd  and  proposed  to  them 
by  the  Underftanding.      The  fame  Author 

Ammadv.  tells  us,  that  Pythagoras  thought  the  Genii  were 

,0'  certain   Lights  naturally  implanted   in    our 

Minds.  Afuleiiis  thought  they  were  the  Minds 
themfelves,  and  Difpofition  of  each  Man. 
The  ancient  Pagans  >  that  they  were  good 
and  evil  Damons  appointed  to  each  Man, 
from    the    beginning  ,    for  his  Governance. 

Vffirt.  o.  Again,  He  writes  as  follows.  The  Prophe- 
cying  Spirits,  call'd  in  the  Scriptures  Angels, 
are  call'd  by  the  ancient  Pagans,  Genii  Fattdici, 
as  tho'  generated  from  God,  and  knt  from 
Heaven  to  us,  to  foretel  future  things ;  for 
they  thought  thefe  fatidical  Spirits,  whom 
they  varioufly  worfhipd,  knew  all  things  that 
were  to  come  in  the  World,  and  could  fore- 
tel them,  becaufe  themfelves  were  a  part,  or 
a  certain  Particle  of  the  Soul  of  the  World, 
which  is  every  where :  For  they  were  of 
Opinion,  that  this  Soul  was  diffused  through 
the  whole  World,  but  chiefly  ieated  in  the 

'  acthe- 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 1 

xthcrial    Regiott,    and   confcquently   in    the 
Stars    theml  and   more    cfpecially   in 

the  Sun,  from   which  all  interior  things  are 
fom<  s  it  were,   bj   Rays  of  a  vivifying 

infmkted  to  them  ;  whence  alfo  they 
ght  theft  kinds  of  Subftances  compos'd  of 
ly,  fuch  as  an  aerial  Body  is  j  and 
gels,' Damons,  and  Souls  were  from  a 
ricle  of  the  mundane  Soul.     Which  Sub- 
Afukius  fays,  are  placd  in  the  aerial 
;ion  of  the  Worlds  that  they   might  pro- 
cure :\  more  ealie  Commerie   betwixt  Gods 
ny  and  more  readily  unfold  the  Secrets 
the  Gods,  &c 

i   writes  thus  :    Plato  in  hisIn.A9g?e 
Thtoem  and  Cratylm,  calls  the  beft  part  of  our  £*  c^ 
Mind  a  Damon:    His  words  are  thefe;    You 
know  what  they  are  whom  He  find  calls  Damons ; 
.  that  golden  Race  of  Men,  of  whom  he 
S  thus  : 

Bn  his  Race  has  took  away, 

/re  pure  t  err  eft  rial  Damons  call*  a1,  and  they 
re  Mtns  blesi  Guard,  all  Evils  keep  away. 

Tho  I   think  that  Race  was  call'd  Golden, 
not  that  it  confifted  of  Gold,  but  that  it  was 
good  and  excellent  j  and,  I  conceive,  we  are 
•J  an  Iron-Age  in  comparifon   of  that,- 
but  if  any  one  now  living  be  good,   Hefiod 
pumber'd  him  among  his  Golden  Men.    And 
what  are  the  Good  but  the  Prudent  j  and  I 
vc  he  call'd   them  Damons  from  their 
:id  Skill  in  Affairs,  the  Name  it  felf, 
in  our  ancient  Tongue,  (hewing  it.      There- 
fore it's  well  faid   of  him,  and  moft  of  the 
f?ft  of  the  Poets;  that  when  a  good  Man 

de- 


12  An  Jccoun^  of  Genii, 

departs  this  Life,  he  is  plac'd  in  fome  excel- 
lent Poft  of  Honour,  and  made  a  Damon  for 
his  Wifdopi.  After  this  manner  therefore  I 
affirm,  that  a  wife  Man,  fo  he  be  good,  both 
living  and  dead;,  is  a  Damon,  and  juftly  fo  call'd. 
Uifi  This  we  find  in  Plato,  whence  doubtlefs,  Origen 
ZfKcov*  drew  his  Error,  where  he  writes  that  human 
Souls  are  changd  into  Damons,  and  thefe  a- 
gaininto  thofe.  Vorfhjri?*  i\£o  fays,  that  each 
Mans  peculiar  Damon  is  a  certain  part  of  the 
Soul,  viz*  the  Mind.,  and  he  is  an  happy  Man, 
and  one  Eudamon,  that  has  got  a  wife  Mind  ; 
and  unhappy  on  the  contrary :  And  that  Souls 
Infefted  with  Vices,  pafs  into  the  nature  of  evil 
Damons,  and  are  rendred  like  them  in  Lies  and 
Impoftures,  Vrpclus  explains  all  thefe  things, 
laying  down  a  threefold  *  nature  of  a  Damoni 
He  writes  thus ;  Plato,  in  his  Timaus,  fays,  our 
Animal  Nature  is  a  Damon:  but  this  mull  be  ad- 
mitted but  comparitively ;  for  there  is  a  Damon 
by  Effence,  another  by  Comparifon,  another 
by  Reference  or  Refped ;  for  every  where  that 
which  next  prefides,  being  a  certain  order  of 
Damon,  in  refpsd  of  the  Inferior,  is  ufually 
call'd  a  Damon.  In  which  fenfe»jf#p7er,  in 
Orpheus,  calls  his  Father  Saturn  a  Damon.  And 
Plato,  in  his  Timaus,  call'd  thofe  Gods  Damons^ 
that  immediately  order  Generation.  Indeed,, 
by  comparison,  fuch  an  one  is  a  Damon  which 
next  provides  for  every  one,  whether  it  be 
God,  or  inferior  to  God.  And  in  fome  re- 
fped  that  Mind  is  faid  a  Damon,  which  per- 
forms wonderful  Aclions,  more  like  to  thofe 
of  a  Damon  than  of  a  Man,  and  has  his  whole 
JLife  fufpended  from  a  Damon.  After  this  way, 
n  I  think,  Socrates  call'd  thofe  Minds  Damons  in 
a  Republick,    which  had   paisd  their   I4ye$ 


II 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 5 

well,  and  were  tranflatcd  into  a  better  State. 
Finally,  a  /  ifence  is  call'd  a  L. 

won,  not  b\  lents,  nor  byrea- 

•  fon  of  fomc  funilitude  to  another  thing,  but 
has  got  hifl  Pi  of  himfclf,  and  lias  a  cer- 

tain diftin&Exiftence  3  and  his  proper  Powers, 
and  his  different  ways  of  ailing.  [nde< 
the  rational  Soul  in  Timaus  is  always  call'd  an 
Animal  Damon,  but  he  does  not  mean  it  a 
Damon  limply  ;  for  when  we  fay  a  Damon  fini- 
ply,  its  a  certain  middle  Nature  betwixt  Gods 
and  Men.  By  Plotinus  and  others,  its  queried, 
whether  our  Minds  are  mov'd  of  themfelves 
to  Defires  and  Determinations,  or  by  the  im- 
pulfe  of  fome  Deity.  And  firft,  they  faid 
humane  Minds  were  fpontaneoufly  mov'd ; 
but  they  found  upon  fearch,  that  we  were 
impeird  to  all  honeft  A&ions,  by  a  certain 
Familiar  Genius  or  Numcn,  given  us  at  our 
Birth  ;  and  that  we  defire  or  covet  evil  things 
by  our  Mind  :  For  it  cannot  be  that  wre  covet 
evil  things  by  the  Will  of  a  Deity,  whom, 
its  manifeft,  no  Evil  can  pleafe  •  tho'  doubt- 
lefs  by  many  of  th?  flatonicks,  the  Affe&ions 
alfo  with  which  we  are  carried  away,  are 
call'd  Damons. 

Ammiamts  MarceHinus  writes  thus  :  Divines  Hlf:. 
tell  us,  that  as  all  Men  are  born,  (faving  the  u  2l- 
Itedfaftnefs  of  Fate)  certain  Divine  Powers 
are  afTociated  to  them,  to  be  a  fort  of  Gover- 
nours  of  their  Actions.,  tho5  they  are  feen  by 
few,  whom  manifold  Vermes  have  dignified  : 
And  this  Oracles  and  famous  Authors  have 
taught,  among  whom  Menander  : 

tadqut  homini  fiatim  nafcenti 
Damon  vita  ?njftiigogw. 

And 


1 4  M  Account  of  Genii, 

And  fo  we  are  given  to  underftand  from  Ho- 
mers Ipimortal  Poems,  that  the  Celeftial  Gods 
have  not  fpoke  to  Valiant  Men,  nor  have 
been  prefent  to  them,  nor  aided  them  in  their 
Fights,  but  Familiar  Genii  attended  them,  by 
whofe  Aid  Pythagoras  and  Socrates  are  faid 
chiefly  to  have  rais'd  their  Fame.  Numa  Pom- 
fifim  alfo,  and  the  Elder  Scipio,  and,  as  fome 
think,  Marias  and  Offavianus,  who  had  firft 
the  Title  of  Augufius  given  him,  and  Hermes 
Trifmegifiusy  and  AfoUonius  Tyanausy  and  Ploti- 
nusy  who  has  adventured  at  fome  Reafonings 
about  this  myftical  Matter,  and  profoundly 
to  fhew  from  what  beginnings  thefe  Genii  be- 
come connected  to  the  Minds  of  Men,  which 
receiving,  as  it  were  in  their  Embraces,  they 
defend  as  far  as  they  may,  and  teach  them 
great  things,  if  they  find  them  pure,  and  fe- 
ver d  from  the  corruption  of  finning,  by  an 
immaculate  Society  with  the  Body. 
L.diVit.  ^  Hieronymus  Cardanus  fays,  in  general,  thefe 
W*c*47*were  manifold  differences  of  Damons  among 
the  Ancients  ;  forbidding,  as  that  of  Sccrates ; 
admonifhing,  as  that  of  Cicew  at  his  Death ; 
teaching  things  to  come  by  Dreams,  Brutes, 
Cafualties ;  advifing  us  to  go  to  a  place,  and 
deceiving  us  by  one  Senfe,  or  more,  and  by 
fo  much  he  is  the  nobler,  likewife  by  natural, 
and  alfo  by  non-natural  things  j  and  this  we 
think  the  nobleft  ;  alfo  a  good  and  a  bad. 
In  not.  in  Gilbertus  Cvgnatus  writes,  that  fome  think  by 
Lncian  de  the  word  Manes,  Souls  feparated  from  the 
Lucy  a.  Body  are  fignified ;  whence  we  fee  that  an- 
cient Monuments  of  Sepulchers  are  infcrib'd, 
DUs  Manibus  j  and  thofe  that  demolifh  Sepul- 
chers are  thought  to  violate  the  God  Ai.nes. 
In  the  Body,  they  are  call'd  Genii  ^  feparated 

from 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  15 

from  the  Body,  Ltnnwes ;  when  they  infeft 
Houfes  thev  are  call'd  Lmrv*  \  on  the  con- 
trary, if  the  -od,  Fstmliar  lAns. 

That  egregious   Philologer  7  I  $. 

Oedt  the   following  ao**474« 

count  of  the  >rding  to  the  Dodxine 

of  tl  had  always 

in  great  veneration  certain  Statues,  which  tk 
call'd  Serapes  •  the  Latins >  Pen.  Some 

fay  the  Penates  are  nought  but  thofe  Genii  or 
Deafters,  by  which  we  Breathe»  we  Know,  we 
See,  we  behold  the  Sun,  n  riter,  Juno, 

Mmerv*t  and  Vefta  5    for  they  call'd  the'mid- 
die  Region  of  the  Air,  Jufiter;  the  lower,  Ju- 
no;  the  top  part  of  the /Ether,  iV//Ww,  who  is 
the  power  of  divine  Intelligence  j  the  Earth, 
Vefta :  Thefe  they  call'd  and  believ'd  to  be  the 
Gods  of  Provinces,  and  of  our  Births,  and 
Prefidents  over  Cities,  and  guards  of  private 
Houfes.         And    Dionyfius   Halicarnajfaus  fays, 
the  Romans  call  thefe  Gods  Penates ;  and  fome 
tranflating  them  into  Greek y  call  them  Genetblios; 
or  Genitales ;  others  call  them  domeftick  and 
familiar  Gods ;  fome  the  Prefidents  of  Poffef- 
fions ;  others,  fecret  Gods.      They  are  call'd 
Genetbliiy  becaufe  they  are  thought  to  be  ap- 
pointed to  the  guard  of  Men,  prefently  upon 
their  being  Born;  or  becaufe  by  their  vigi- 
lancy  all  things  are  generated ;  whence  the 
Genii  are  alfo  call'd,  the  Prefidents  of  things 
that  are  to  be  Generated.      They  are  call'd 
Patrii,  becaufe  they  were  thought  to  prefide 
only  over  thofe  things  which  are  common  to 
fome  Region   or  Province ;  in  which,  with 
great  diligence,  they  order  d  things  not  only 
longing  to  every  City,  but  alfo  to  every 
Houlg;  to  all  Men,  Plants,  and  Ajiimals,  ac- 

cor- 


1 6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

cording  to  the  care  committed  to  them. 
The  Serafes  of  the  Egyptians  were  nought  but 
Images,  without  any  eminency  of  their  Limbs, 
roll'd,  as  it  were,  in  Swadling-Cloaths,  part- 
ly made  of  an  appropriate  Stone,  partly  of 
Metal,  Wood,  or  Shell.  Some  of  thefe,  as 
tutelary  Gods,  were  plac'd  in  publick  Places, 
for  a  guard  of  them.  Others  of  them  were 
appointed  for  a  guard  of  Perfons,  and  were 
Handing  Tutelaries.  Some  others  were  por- 
table, which  whither  foever  Men  went,  they 
carried  with  them.  Some  alfo  they  carried 
as  Amulets  about  their  Necks,  at  their  Girdles, 
and  about  their  Hand-wrifts.  Moreover, 
their  Countenances  were  varioufly  figured ; 
for  fome  had  a  Womanly  Countenance,  and 
their  Heads  veiFd  ;  fome  were  in  the  Form 
of  Boys,  with  a  Vina  about  their  Heads; 
others  were  reprefented  other  ways.  They 
differed  alfo  in  Inftruments ;  fome,  which 
they  QzlYdAverrunei,  or  Apotropai,  were  figured 
with  various  Inftruments,  as  Whips,  Scourges, 
Nets  hanging  from  their  Shoulders ;  and  thefe 
are  the  Images  which  the  Hebrews  call  Thers:- 
fhim,  and  which  the  Scriptures  tell  us,  Rachel 
Hole  from  her  Father  Lab  an,  Gen.  31.  which 
were  brought  from  Egypt  by  the  Servants  of 
Abraham  into  Paleftina,  and  propagated  there. 
They  call'd  them  Therapbim,  becaufe,  as  they 
could  not  pronounce  5,  changing  S  into  Ty 
according  to  the  ufe  of  the  Cbaldaans  >  and 
changing  the  laft  5  into  im>  they  calFd  thofe 
Images  Tberaphim,  which  the  Egyptians  call'd 
Serapes.  Now  the  Penates  of  the  Egyptians 
were  the  fame  with  Ofiru,  Ifis,  Nephte,  Horns, 
Harpocrates,  Arveris,  Apopps,  and  innumerable 
Deafters  of  this  kind,  which  tho'  they  were 

ac- 


An  Account  of "Genii,  17 

accounted   the  1 

and  the  fame  as  to  Subftance,  1 

in  effect  I  1 

guard  ol 

wonhipd  as  • 
Dciti  -%  s 

1  roraf 
my  thinks  Chriftian  Di  in 
(on  two  Aiig 
€110*  I  think   he  fays  it 
Communion  with  Angels  being  fo  ufual  v. 
the  Patriarchs;  from  whom,  in  all  probabili 
the  GemHts  took  their  Do 
The  Genii  were  drawn  un  al  For. 

as  of  a  Serpent,  a  ltoy,  a  Girl,  a  Youth,  or 
old  Man,  as  Cebes  in  his  Tahle.     Cenforinusy  and 
many  of  the  Ancients  tell  us,  the  La 
the  Genii  were  the  fame  :  Now  the  Leres  wt 
reprefented   in    the   Form    of  Young-Men, 
cloath'd  with  Dog-Skins,  and  having  a  D 
to  attend  them,  intimating,  that  they  were 
friendly  and  fawning  to  Domefticks,  and  for- 
midable to  Strangers,  as  Dogs  are  wont  to  be. 
Ticrius  tells  us,  from,  Cbr  that  the    I 

were  cloath'd  with  Dogs-Skins,  bec  b%  c* ' 

reprefent  the  Genii,    who  are  appointed 
our  Guard  j  and  as  Commiilioners  to  inflict   L 
Punifhments  on  us  for  all  our  evil  Words  aj 
Deeds,  and  to  avenge  Crimes  and  all  Inipie: 
as  often  as,  Humanity  laid  by,  we  decline  to 
a  brutal  Life;  which  the  Genii,  as  fag  - 
Dogs,  purfue  and  draw  to  condign  Pun: 
ments.     He  adds,  And  as  the  Genii  are  given 
us  for  afliduous  Attendants,  never  departing 
from  us,  it's  withjuftice  he  fays,  that  ti 

was  hi  phicauy 

ing  the  I         wim 

iG  the 


J  8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

the  Genii  which  we  may  more  properly  call 
Angels :  And  he  fays  he  cannot  pafi  by  what 
he  has  read  among  ancient  Writers,  viz,,  that 
there  was  a  Temple  of  Vulcan  at  Mount  <lx£*#*, 
in  Sieifyj  in  whofe  Grove  there  were  Dogs,  , 
which  fawn  d  on  thofe  that  came  thither  with 
Purity  and  Piety ;  but  miferably  rent  the  Im- 
pure and  Polluted,  as  tho'  divinely  prefaging 
t*he  thing. 

I  could  write  more  concerning  the  Genii  of 
the  Ancients,  as,  of  the  Sacrifices  that  were 
made  to  them,  and  other  particulars,  but  it  is 
befide  my  bufinefs  here  j  and  I  fball  only 
note,  that  befide  the  Genii  attending  each  Per-* 
fon,  the  Ancients  fuppos'd  others  prefiding 
over  each  Country,  City  &c.  Thofe  in  the 
Figure  prefixt  to  this  Book  being  fuch,  as  I 
took  them  from  Cartarius  his  Images  of  the 
Gcds  of  the  Ancients.  The  Explanation  of 
which  Figures  is  as  follows. 

The  Figure  on  the  lQft-hand  reprefents  the 
evil  Genius,  that  Infefted  the  Inhabitants  of  the 
Town  Temeffa,  in  Italy.  The  Story  is  thus : 
In  Cliac.  Paufanias  writing  of  Euthymus,  the  Champion, 
rtfer.  tells  us^  that  Ulyffes,  in  his  Wandrings,  coming 
to  the  Town  of  Temejfa,  one  of  his  Affociates, 
for  having  ravifh'd  a  Virgin,was  Hon  d  to  death 
by  the  Townfmen ;  whereupon  his  Ghoft  con- 
tinually infefted  them;  fo  that  they  were  upon 
quitting  the  Town,  till  they  were  told  by  Ayol- 
/?s  Oracle,  that  to  appeafe  him,  they  mult 
build  him  a  Temple,  and  facrifice  to  him  year- 
ly the  raoft  beautiful  Virgin  they  had  among 
them  ;  which,  as  they  prepar'd  to  perform, 
it  chane'd,  that  one  Euthymusy  a  Champion, 
came  to  the  Town,  and  defir'd  to  be  admit- 
ted into  the  Temple ;  vvho  feeing  the  Virgin, 

and 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  19 

and  falling  in  love  with  her,  undertook  to 
fight  with  the  (,  line  him,  and 

fore'd  him  out  df  die  Country,  and  mai 

the  Virgin.     This  iitm-.i  >ck 

Colour,  and  a  iblc  Appearance,  h 

ring  a  Wolfs  Skin  I  >ut  him. 

As  to  the  little  Figure  in  the  middle,  the 
is  thus,  as  Paufamas  relates  it  in  the 
lame  Book  :  The  Eleans  Worfhip,  as  their 
Country  God,  Sofipolts,  which  lignihes  the 
Preferver  of  their  City.  His  Sacrifices  being 
wont  to  be  yearly  Celebrated  in  the  Temple 
of  Lucwa.  Concerning  this  God,  what  fol- 
lows is  recorded  :  When  the  Arcadians  invaded 
the  Country  of  the  Eleans,  and  the  Eleans  pre- 
fented  an  Army  againft  them,  a  Woman,  with 
a  Child  fucking  at  her  Breaft,  came  to  the 
chief  Commanders  of  the  Eleans,  and  told 
them,  that  when  fhe  brought  forth  that  Child, 
fhe  was  admonifh'd  in  a  Dream,  to  place  him 
with  the  Eleans  in  the  Battle  :  whereupon  the 
chief  Commanders  of  the  Eleans,  having 
thought  fit  to  credit  the  Woman,  plac'd  the 
Child  before  their  Standard.  Upon  the  A 
c.ulians  Onfet,  the  Boy,  in  their  light,  turnd 
into  a  Serpent  ;  by  which  Prodigy  being 
frighted,  they  prefently  fled,  the  Eleans  fmart- 
ly  purfuing  them  :  And  upon  getting  this  fa- 
mous Vidory,  they  gave  him  the  Name  of 
Sojipolis ;  and  at  a  place  where  the  Serpent 
was  feen  to  go  into  a  Cavern,  a  Temple  was 
built  after  the  Victory ;  and  Honours  were 
decreed  to  Lucln  r,  becaufe  they  thought  the 
Boy  was  brought  into  the  World  by  her.  This 
God  was  drawn  as  a  Boy,  wish  a  Garment  of 
various  Colours,  fprinkled  with  Stars,  hoi  - 
ing  in  h:s  Hand  an  Horn  of  Plenty  :   for  m 

C  2 


2  0  or  Familiar  Spirits* 

this  Form  he  was  feen  by  fomc  Perfon  in  a 
Dream.  I  may  here  note,  that  the  Form  of 
Serpents  under  which  the  Genii  were  wor- 
fhip  d,  denotes  the  wife  and  vigilant  Care 
they  have  over  lis. 

As  for  the  Figure  on  the  Right-hand  :  In 
fome  of  Adrians  Coin,  this  Infcription  is 
found,  Gen.  P.  R.  where  is  feen  the  Image  of 
a  Military  Man,  compafs'd  about  with  a  Gar- 
ment, which  reaches  to  the  middle  of  his 
Legs,  having  in  the  Right-hand  a  Difh  like 
a  Sacrificing  Veffel ;  and  in  the  Left,  an  Horn 
of  Plenty  :  This  probably  being  the  Genius  of 
the  People  of  Rome,  under  whofe  Guardian- 
Jhip  their  City  was  j  the  Horn  and  Difh  fhew- 
ing,  that  the  Roman  State,  as  all  others  are 
fupported  by  outward  Plenty,  and  Religious 
Devotion  towards  God. 

In  fome  of  the  Ancient  Coins  of  Trajan  and 
Adrian,  is  feen  a  Genius,  prefenting  with  his 
Right-hand  a  Difh  on  an  Altar,  adorn  d  with 
Garlands;  and  holding  in  his  Left-hand  a 
Whip,  or  fomewhat  like  it,  hanging  down. 
This,  by  fome,  is  thought  to  denote  Rewards 
and  Punifhments.  In  the  Coin  of  Marcus  Au- 
rolliii  is  a  Genius,  having  fuch  a  Difh  in  the 
Right-hand,  and  an  Horn  of  Plenty  in  the 
other,  with  this  Infcription,  Geniis  Exerci :  Et 
Genio  Augufii.  So  in  the  Coin  of  FL  Valerius 
Coyifianrinus,  Genio  Populi  Romani  P.  L.  C.  where 
he  holds  in  the  Right-hand  a  Difh  with  a  Star, 
in  the  Left,  an  Horn  of  Plenty.  Again,  in 
that  of  Maxlminus,  fometimes  with  this  In- 
fcription, Germ  Augufii \  fis ;  fometimes  Genio 
Tcpu/i  Romani  T.  F.  fometimes  Genio  Imferatoris. 
Thefe  and  the  like  Infcriptions  are  gather3  d 
together  in  a  particular  Book,  by  the  Learned 

Phy- 


An  Account  of  Genii ,  z  i 

Phyfician  Adolphus  Occo.  In  the  Antiquities 
alfo  of  Appian  fuch  Inlcriptions  of  Monuments 
are  found  in  the  City  of  Tarraco  in  w*. 

^«^/  fo  much  for  a  general  Notion  oj  aii 

of  the  Ancients. 


CHAP.     II. 

Concerning  the  Genii  that  are  afcribed 
to  Socrates,  Ariftotle ,  Ptolinus, 
Porphyrins,  Jamblicus ,  Chicus, 
Scaliger  and  Cardan. 

THO'  the  Genii  of  thefe  Men  are  redu- 
cible to  the  Chapters  I  fhall  go  upon 
beneath,  where  I  fhall  examine  what  percep- 
tion Men  have  had  of  Spirits,  or  Genii,  by  their 
feveral  Senfes;  yet,  in  regard  the  Learned 
Naudans,  in  his  Apology  for  all  the  great  Men 
that  have  been  accufed  *of  Magicky  has  Writ  par-  Part  *. 
ricularly  concerning  the  Genii  of  thefe  Men,  <*•*!• 
and  exploded  them ;  and  other  Authors  have 
writ  againft  the  Genius  of  Socrates.  I  fhall  here 
particularly  confider  what  may  be  faid  con- 
cerning thefe  Genii. 

The  moft  celebrated  Inftance  of  a  Geniut 
among  the  Ancients  is  that  of  Socrates.  Te- 
ftimonies  for  it ,  are  given  by  Vino,  Xencphon 
and  Antijiheves ,  his  Contemporaries ,  con- 
firm'd  by  LaertiitSy  Plutarch,  Maximm  Tyrim* 
Dion  ChryfoftomrrSy  Cicero,  Apuleius,   Ficinrtsy  and 

other?,  many  of  the  Moderns,  befides  Ttrtulli- 
an,  Origeny    Clemens  Alexandrinvs*  Aujlin  and 
C  ?  oth. 


22  An  Account  of  Genii, 

others.  Socrates  himfelf  in  Plato  s  Theage  fays, 
by  fome  Divine  Lot,  I  have  a  certain  Damon 
which  has  followed  me  from  my  Childhood, 
as  an  Oracle ;  and  this  is  a  Voice,  which 
when  it  happens,  always  diflwades  the  thing 
I  am  about  to  do,  but  never  prompts  me  to 
do  any  thing :  and  if  any  of  my  Friends  com- 
municate any  thing  with  me,  and  the  Voice 
is  heard,  it  diflwades^  and  is  againft  the  doing 
of  it :  And  prefently  after  he  relates  how  a 
perfon  loft  his  Life,  for  having  defpifed  the 
command  of  his  Damon,  warning  him  not  to 
depart  from  him.  Again,  fpeaking  to  Alcihi- 
ades,  he  fays,  my  Tutor,  is  Better,  and  Wi- 
fer  than  you :  And  fpeaking  concerning  the 
power  of  his  Damon,  e'en  on  other  perfons 
that  ufed  his  Company  and  Converfation, 
he  fays,  if  it  be  grateful  to  my  God,  you 
will  profit  much,  and  in  a  little  time;  if  on 
the  contrary,  not :  And  again,  in  his  Apology, 
he  fays,  going  out  of  doors  this  Morning, 
the  fign  of  God  did  not  oppofe  me. 

Many  have  been  of  opinion,  that  Socrates 
had  not  only  a  perception  of  his  Genius  by 
his  fenfe  of  Hearing ,  but  likewife  by  his 
Sight  and  Feeling.  So  Afukius  fays,  he  judg'd 
Socrates  perceived  the  fign  of  his  Damon,  not 
tib.de  Deo  only  by  his  Ears,  but  by  his  Eyes  alfo;  ber- 
$ocr.  caufe  he  affirmed,  that  often  not  a  Voice, 
but  a  divine  Sign  was  prefented  to  him ; 
which  he  was  the  more  induced  to  believe, 
for  that  it  was  fo  common  a  thing  with  the 
Pythagoreans  to  fee  Damons,  that  they  won- 
dred  if  any  Man  faid  he  had  (hen  none. 
Which  Gift  I  impute  to  their  great  filence, 
and  their  deep  recefs  of  Mind ;  for  as  Para- 
tftfm  With   Others  fay,  Silence  u  the  joy  of  a$ 

Sprits, 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  i  ] 

Spirits.    The  Author  of  the  fmall  Tract,  ei 
titled,    De  proprii  cujufque   nati  \D<ew 
gatione,  Printed  at  the  end  of  the  Tri 
gicum,  before  mentioned,   fey s  the  fame,   ; 
that  Socrates  both  heard  his  Damon,  and  lav/ 
him.  And  ftBorius,  in  his  Dialogue  dcM 
Damonum,  f^>'^  that  Socrates  affirms  his  Dxmon 
often  to  havefpoke  to  him,  who  he  fometimcs  /  j   D^ 
law    and   touch'd.     So    again ,    Theocritus  in  m^oc^. 
Plutarch,  will  have  it,   that  a  Viiion  attended 
him  from  his  Childhood,  guiding  him  in  all 
the   actions  of  his  Life,  which  Vifion  going 
before  him,  was  a  light  in  Affairs,  where  hu- 
mane  prudence  could^  not  reach;    and  that 
the   Spirit  often  fpoke  to  him,  divinely  go- 
verning and  infpiring  his  Intentions. 

Notwithftanding  the  opinion  of  thefe  Men, 
and  others,  that  Socrates  had  a  perception  of 
his  Genius  by  more  fenfes  than  one,  I  fhall 
only  here  infift  on  the  perception  he  had  of  # 
him  by  his  fenfe  df  Hearing ;  which  in  re- 
gard it's  fo  well  attefted  by  Plato  and  Xenc — 
fbotty  his  Difciples  (  who  were  envious  Com- 
petitors for  Learning,  if  it  maybe  fo  faid  of 
Philosophers,  fo  that  they  can  no  ways  be  fu- 
fpefted  for  having  combined  together  to  im- 
pofe  on  the  World  )  I  wholly  give  credit  to, 
tho'  I  well  know  there  always  have  been,  and 
ftill  are  fome  Men  in  ithe  World,  who  have 
caveled  at  what  is  faid  of  Stcratts's  Genius,  as  a 
thing  feigned  •  whofereafons  I  fhall  no  wexamine. 

The  learned  Naudaus,  in  his  laudable  Work 
above-mentioned,  and  the  tyb.  Chapter  of  it, 
treating  concerning  the  Genii  afcrib'd  to  So- 
re*,  and  others,  as  above,  writes  thus,  According 
to  the  Authority  of  all  Authors,  each  of  thefe 
Ions  may  boaft  of  having  been  led  into 
C  4  Ter 


24. 


£,  de  . 
Sock* 


€) 


lAe  my  jr. 
Miypt. 
J  a  com- 
pient  in 
Tbddm, 


L.   de 

Anlm.  fa 
Dm* 


or  Familiar  Spirits. 

Temple  of  Glory  and  Immortality,  by  the 
afliftance  of  '  fomt  Genius ,  or  Famllar  Damon, 
which  was  to  them,  as  Apukius  fays,  a  Angu- 
lar Guide,  a  domeftick  Infpe&or,  an  infe- 
parablc  Judge  and  Witnefs,  a  difapprover  of 
Evils,  and  an  approver  of  Good  ;  but  fince  we 
cannot  maintain  this  Opinion,  without  aba- 
ting much  of  thefe  Mens  Merit ,  and  the  Ob- 
ligation we  owe  to  their  labours  3  by  the  means 
of  which,  and  not  of  thofe  Damons  and  tutelary 
Gods,  fo  many  precious  Relicks  and  Monu- 
ments of  their  Learning  are  come  to  our 
Knowledge ,  I  think  it  very  proper  to  pre- 
fer ve  the  praife  due  to  them,  and  to  fliew  by 
the  true  Conftru&ion.  that  ought  to  be  given 
to  this  Converfation,  how  far  thofe  are  out  of 
the  way  in  their  Imaginations,  who  perfwade 
themfelves  it  was  fuch  as  that  of  Angefs  with 
Holy  Pesfons,  or  of  Damons  with  Magicians ; 
for  to  come  as  near  to  the  Truth  as  we  may, 
we  ought  to  obferve,  that  the  Platonicks,  ac- 
cording to  the  Teftimcnies  of  Jamhlieus  and 
Fcxiu£  fuppos'd  four  forts  of  rational  Animals, 
under  that  they  calTd  the  firft  Being,  or  the 
fir  ft  Good  j  who  is  the  Prime  Author,  and 
Mover  of  all  things,  i/i&.  the  Celeftial  Gods, 
crAngels,  Damons  that  were  Inferiors  to  them, 
Herccs^nd  theSouls  of  Men  in  general,and  that 
the  chief  Office  and  Duty  of  Damcnsybzing  no 
other  (as  ?roclmfoy$)\mt  to  concern  themfelves 
in  the  Affairs  and  Ccndud  of  the  laft,  and  to 
ferve  theniasGuides  andMediators  towards  the 
Gods.  Men  have  taken  an  cccafion  from  the 
refemblance  of  thefe  Actions,  to  thofe  that 
Souls  exercife  on  their  Bodies ,  to  give  thefe 
fpmstimes  the  Name  of  Damws,  and  efpecial- 
•  fo  to  free  themfelves  from 

the 


A i  Account  of  Genii,  25 

the  Shivery  and  Tyranny  of  the  matter,  where 
it  were,  inten  d3  th  a  the 

Mittrell       1  '    ill  their  1 
culn  no  longer  produce  but  Miracles, 

like  thole  of  Oaim 
the  true  Senle  according  to   which 
JpttUim   laid,    that  the  Mind  of  Man,   CVCm.L>ieDt* 
i  the  Bo  call  d  1  i) 

:!iat  the  Spirit  of  Man  ferv  d  him 
I  Genius  ;    and  the   juft   del  I  good 

ration  of  the  Soul  n  ;  quali- 

with  the   name  of  God,    fmce    cvn  For- 
(aid  to  this  purr  .    in  his 

p  that  God  has  given   us  the  Superior 
faculty  of  our  Spirit,  as  a  Dccmon  to  guide  us  -y 
and  that  he  may  rightly  be  call'd  an  Eudxmov, 
that  takes  Wifdom,  as  a  watch  Tower  to  guide 
him  in  all  the  Adions  of   his  Life  :    which 
might  ferve  us  for  a  General  folution  to  An- 
all  that  is  laid  of  the  Familiarity  and 
iConveifatbn  of  certain  Dxmons,  with  Socra- 
iftotk ,    and  others;    if  it  were   not 
rather  requiiite   to  fatisfie  particular  Objecti- 
ons, that  may  be  made  againft  each  of  them, 
and  to  examine  firft  what  we  ought  to  be- 
8  concerning  the  fo  famous  and  renown'd 
Dwwon  of  Socrates,  no  lefs  celebrated  by  the 
Authority    of  thofe  that  have  giv'n  us  the 
it,  than  by  the  great  Diverfities  of 
;ments  that  have  been  made  of  him  ;  fome 
faying,  that  there  may  be  fome  likelihood  of 
:h  for  its  being  really  fo;  others,  that  it 
1  meer  Fiction  of  this  Philofopher,  or  of 
his  two  Difciples,  X(  .    -  ,   who  as 

v  publifh'd  the  report  of  this  Divine  Affift- 
9  that  of  the  Oracles  declaring  him  the 

re 


z6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

fore  us  all  the  Dirt  that  envy  or  prejudice  has 
throwh  on  Socrates, and  then  goes  on  thus :  But 
fince  I  ftiould  but  expofe  my  felf  to  the  laugh- 
ter of  all  Men,  to  follow  the  licentioufnefs  of 
thefe  dangerous  Spirits  ,  who  fo  freely  (ham 
the  Authority  of  thefe  two  great  Philofophers, 
as  alfb  that  of  Afuleius,  Maximus  Tyrius,  Cicero', 
Plutarch,  and  almoft  all  the  good  Authors,  to 
fhew  themfelves  more  fubtle  and  clear  fighted 
than  others,  by  cruftiing  to  pieces  this  old  I- 
mage :  I  rather  chufe  to  range  my  felf  of  their 
fide  that  refpe&  it ;  fince  I  cannot  perfwade 
my  felf,  that  fo  great  a  number  of  Writers 
would  have  leaded  Socrates  with  fo  many  Prai- 
X.7  Epkr.  ^  or  ca^d  him  ,  as  Martial  did,  the  great 
6%.sat.t.  Old-man ;  Perfius,  die  reverend  Mafter  ;  VaU-* 
L.  de  Deo  rius  Maximus ,  the  Mind  veiled  with  virile 
Socra.  Strength  ;  or  finally,  zsApukius,  the  Old-man  of 
Divine  Wifdom,  if  he  hadnotfignalized  himfelf 
by  his  Wifdom  ;  fo  that  we  ought  rather  to  ex- 
cufe,  than  reprehend  thofe,  who  do  not  judge 
without  reafon,that  he  had  acquired  it  thro'  the 
favour,  and  Afliftance  of  fome  Damon.  Tho' 
neverthelefs  there  be  no  lefs  uncertainty  con- 
cerning the  Explication  of  his  Nature,  than 
of  malice  and  calumny  in  the  precedent  Opi- 
nion ;  for  Afukius  would  have  it  to  be  a  God, 
Latfantius  and  TertuUian  a  Devil ;  Plato  thought 
he  was  invifible ;  Apuleius,  that  he  might  alfo 
be  vifible;  Plutarch,  that  it  was  a  freezing  on 
the  right  or  left  fide,  according  to  which  So- 
crates foretold  a  good  or  evil  Event  of  the 
thing  undertaken  ;  Maximus  Tyrius,  that  it  was 
£  remorfe  of  Confcience  againft  the  prompt- 
nefs  and  violence  of  his  Natural  Temper, 
which  was  neither  heard,  nor  feen,  by  which 
Socrates  w^s  with-held,  an4  hindred  from  do- 
ing 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  17 

ing  fome  evil  d  1C  was 

the  Stars  that  ra  is  Nativity  ;  dn,i  I 

Mv>.  of  Opinion,   it  Lin 

imp  bis  Will  chat  prefcntcd  it  fclfto  1 

without  Council  of  his  Difcourk 

my  icli,  1  believe  it  may  be  laid.,  conformably 

enough  to  truth,  that  thi^ 

SocrattS;  which  was  to  him  a  forefecr  in  un- 

:ain  things,  a  pre^admonifher  in  doubtli.l, 
a  guide  in  dangerous  was  nought  bait  the  good 
rule  ofhisLife5thewifeConduct  of  his  Actions, 
ink  of  all  his  Virtues,  that  form'd 
in  him  this  Prudence;  which  may  with  Juftice 
be  calld  the  luftre  and  teafoning  of  all  his  Acti- 
ons, the  Eye  that  fee^  all,  guides  and  orders  all, 
and  in  a  WorjJ,  the  Art  of  Life,  as  Phyfick  is 
the  Art  of  Health.  So  that  there  is  much 
more  feeming  ground  to  believe,  that  the  Soul 
of  this  Philosopher  ,  purifyed  from  its  violent 
Paflions,  and  enriched  with  all  kinds  of  Vermes, 
was  the  true  Daemon  of  his  Condud  j  than  to 
imagine,  that  he  entangled  himfelf  with  Illu- 
fions,'  and  Vbanumes,  gave  credit  to  them,  or 
follow'd  their  Counfels;  being  a  thing  whol- 
ly abfurd ,  which  Plutarch  feems  to  have  a 
mind  to  root  out  of  our  Fancies,  when  he  fays 
in  the  Book  he  has  compos' d  concerning  this 

mop,  that  Socfates  did  not  defpife  Celeftial 
things,  as  the  Athenians  would  perfwade  him 
at  his  Condemnation,  though  it  be  very  true, 
that  many  Apparitions,  Fables  and  Superflu- 
ous things  being  crept  into  the  Philofophy  of 
Vjthagorasy  and  his  Difc  which  rendered 

it  wholly  ridiculous  and  con  >le,    he  did 

what  he  could  to  manage  it  with  prudenc 
and  to  clear  it  of  all  thefc  Tal  to  be- 

•e  of  it  but    what  |  unable ; 


2  S  or  Familiar  Spirits. 

and  beneath,  having  folv'd  fome  difficulties 
to  be  met  with  concerning  the  Damon  of  So- 
cratusy  he  adds,  but  befide  that  this  would  be 
a  too  manifeft  interfering  with  the  Precept 
of  Horace. 

Fo^9   *         Nee  Deus  Inter/it,  ntfi  dignus  vindice  nodus. 
Incident ■ 

to  refer  the  Predictions  of  Socrates,  and  the. 
Counfel  he  gave  his  Friends,  to  fome  Divi- 
nity, we  may  more  reafonably  fay,  that  as  he 
was  wholly  carried  to  moral  A&ions,   fo  he 
had  particularly  confidered  all  the  accidents 
that  happen'd  to  Men,  and  that  the  leaft  thing 
made  him  forefee  and  judge  of  the  future. 
This  is  what  Naudaus  has  writ  concerning  the 
Damon  of  Socrates, 
FfekJom.        Maraviglia  writes,  that   Socrates  being  who- 
vtt.Differ.  jy  taken  Up  jn  giving  Moral  Precepts  ,    afcri- 
1U  bed  all  to  a  Genius ,   thinking  thereby  to  give 

weight  to  his  profitable  Arguments,  which  he 
every  where  ufed  for  Inftru&ion;  well  know- 
ing what  authority  a  Man  carries,  who  is  be- 
lieved to  give  his  Inftru&ions,  by  the  dire- 
&ibn  of  a  Divine  Afflatus :  Hence  though 
Vlutarch  and  Apuleius  believed  Socrates 's  Genius 
was  a  true  Daemon,  which  by  reafon  of  his 
moft  pure  and  calm  mind,  convers'd  with 
him  from  his  Infancy,  yet  nothing  evinces  it 
to  be  ought  but  the  natural  Subtilty ,  Sagacity, 
Reafon  and  Prudence  of  his  Mind,  cultiva- 
ted by  Meditation  and  Practice,  which  as  a 
right  *  AiBamm  admonifht  and  propofed  to  him 
things  to  be  rightly  done,  and  judged  well  of 
Futurities :  for  its  reafon,  which  continually 
whifpers  unto  us  what  is  to  be  hopd  for,  or 

feared. 


An  Account  of  Genii,  2  9 

feared,  and  that  is  wont  to  be  called  our  Ge- 
nius, and  Inward  Voice  always  fpeaking  to 
us,  without  having  need  of  a  feparate  Gw/w. 
And  Timarcus  ,  in  Plutacch,  who  went  into 
Trofhonluss  Cave  to  enquire  after  the  truth  of 
Socr.  whs,  could  receive  nothing  more 

probable,  but  thofe  Genii  were  portions  of  the 
Mind,  feated  about  the  head  of  Man,  as  be- 
ing naturally  eadow'd  with  a  greater  Wifdom. 

The  Learned  Anton.  Van  Dale,  M.  D.  in  his  ^iffeft.  r. 
lift  Edition  of  his  Book  of  Oracles,  rejeds  thcc#  I# 
Damon  of  Socrates  thus:  What  have  not  the 
Ancient  Pagans  faid  concerning  the  Damon  of 
Socrates  ?  what  not  even  the  Christians  ?  but 
from  what  Men  of  Authority  does  it  appear 
that  Socrates  ever  had  fuch  a  Familiar  Damvn  ? 
fince  all  of  them  ought  to  have  had  it  from 
the  mouth  of  Socrates,  or  of  the  Socraticksy 
Cherepben,  and  others,  to  whom  Socrates  had 
told  it.  And  after  having  exploded  what  the 
Oracle  is  faid  to  have  deliver'd  of  Socrates, 
viz,,  that  he  was  the  Wifeft  of  Men,  he  con- 
cludes the  Chapter  thus :  But  truly  thofe  things 
which  were  fo  rafhly  believed,  and  delivered 
by  fo  many,  both  Chriftians  and  Pagans,  con- 
cerning his  Damon,  which  is  teftified  only  by 
himfelf  (for  fo  he  boafts  of  himfelf  in  Plato's 
Dialogue  Entitled,  Theage,  and  others  of  his  Dif- 
ciples  forfooth )  carry  the  fame,  or  rather 
the  like  (hew  of  Truth;  for,  who  may  not  as 
well  believe  Pythagoras  ?  who,  as  Laertius  te- 
ftities  from  others,  faid  he  was  firft  v£tbali- 
its,  then  Euvhorbus^  then  Hermotimns,  then 
•bus,  a  Fifnerman  of  Delos,  before  he  was, 
in  the  laft  place,  P  ,  for  the  Reafons 

and  Arguments  of  Socrates  concerning  his  Da- 
mon, in  Plato,  carry  the  lime  w 


3  o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Nifl.  def.  Monjleur  Le  Loyer  delivers  himfelf  in  a  diffe^ 
Spetlres.  rent  way  concerning  the  Damon  of  Socrates, 
•  9* c- J  •  writing  thus :  Do  we  not  find  that  the  Idola- 
trous Egyptians  believed  there  were  Genii,  who 
admonimed  Men  committed  to  their  Care 
and  Government,  by  a  well  form'd  and  ar- 
ticulate Voice :  and  from  whom  had  they  this , 
but  from  the  Hebrews  ?  Thofe  that  examine  the 
Do&rine  of  the  Egyptians,  and  their  Priefts, 
know  that  they  are  but  the  'Hebrews  Apes, 
tho'  concealing  as  much  as  poffible  their  Au- 
thors, and  thole  whofe  Dodxine  they  follow ; 
which  they  do  with  fuch  an  affe&ed  diffimu- 
Iation,  that  he  that  does  not  look  near  to 
thern^  fhall  never  be  able  to  difcover  the  tra- 
ces and  footfteps  of  thefe  Thieves.  They  had 
learnt  that  the  Hebrews,  by  a  fecret  Traditi- 
on, held  their  Patriarchs  had  Angels  which 
i  guarded  them.,  and  that  the  Patriarch  Jacob 
had  not  concealed  his  having  an  Angel,  which 
had  preferved  him  in  all  places  where  he  had 
been;  they  held  alfo  that  thefe  Angels  Invifi- 
bly  admonifht  the  faid  Patriarchs ,  and  that 
their  Voice  was  heard. 

From  this  Hebrew  Tradition  and  Do&rine, 
the  Egyptians  forged  their  Genii,  confounding 
them  with  the  Angels,  tho'  the  Genii  are  but 
Damons,  and  gave  them  a  Voice  by  which 
they  advertized  Men :  and  I  certainly  be- 
lieve,  that  from  the  Egyptians,  Plato  drew  and 
took  the  Genius  or  Damon  of  Sacrates,  which 
he  makes  Invifible,  and  to  be  heard  Speaking, 
and  forming  fome  Voice.  And  tho  Plato,  imi- 
tating in  this  the  Egyptians,  feems  to  fey,  that 
the  Genius  which  governed  and  guided  Socra- 
a  good  Damon  and  Genius,  yet  I  take 
him  but   for  a    Devil,     which    led    Socrates 

to 


or  Familiar  Spirits*  31 

to  an  unhappy  Death.     The  fame  Le  Loyer, 

in  his  faid  Book,  fays  he  concludes  with' fe-  Cap.  17. 

vera  I  Dcxftors  of  the   Church .    that   Socrates 

was  a  Magician,  becauie  he  uled  Divination. 

Now,  to  conlider  what  thefc  Authors  have 

faid,   concerning  the  G  mitts  of  Socrates,   we 

gn  thofe  that  deal  the  moft  mildly 

with  him,  as  NutUaus  and  Msraviglia,  deny 

;any  Voice   coming  to  him    from    without, 

which  the  words  in  Plato  plainly  and  naturally 

import  he  had.      And  I  believe  it  muft  be 

granted  me,  that  the  main  ground  thefe  Men, 

and  others  of  the  fame  Opinion  go  upon,  is, 

that  not  having  had  any  experience  of  any 

,  fuch  thing  in  themfelves,  and  not  being  fully 

convinced,   that  any  other  Perfon  has,   not- 

withftanding  the  Teftimonies  of  Men  in  all 

,  Ages,  and  the  Inftances  I  fhall  give,  they  are 

;  uneafie  to  yield  the  Point,  even  in  the  Cafe 

1  of  Socrates.   And  I  muft  here  fay,  I  have  hun- 

\  dreds  of  times,  feen,  heard,   and  convers'd 

\  with  thofe  they  call  Genii,  Angels,  Spirits,  or 

t  Damons,  appearing  to  me  inhumane  Shapes; 

k  of  which  I  fhall  give  fome  Relation  beneath, 

'  befide  the  Experiences  of  many  other  Perfons, 

I  known  to  me,  and  now  living,  in  the  fame 

kind ;  whom  oppofers,  (notwithftanding  any 

i  relu&ancy )  muft  give  me  leave  to  believe  to 

be  Men  of  as  found  Senfe  as  themfelves. 

When  fuch  Perfons  of  an  over  cautious  be- 
1  lief,  meet  with  any  thing  in  Hiftory,  or  hear 
fomething  related  in  this  kind,  we  find  they 
proceed   two  ways ;  either  being  fomewhat 
I  tender  of  the  Authority  fuch  things  arc  de- 
liver d  by,  they  excogitate  various  Explicati- 
I  ons  of  the  Fad,   as  each  Man's  Fancy  fug- 
I  gefts  to  him  ^   fo  that  they  will  allow  fome- 

what 


Tfi  or  familiar  Spirits. 

what  of  Truth  in  it,  after  the  way  they  ex^ 
plain  it  j  as  we  find  in  the  Cafe  of  Socrates, 
NaudauS)  and  Maraviglia  have  done  ;  which 
is  like  the  Complement  young  Philofophers 
have  been  taught  to  pay  to  Arlftotk,  in  di- 
ftinguifhing  his  Text,  when  it  has  feem'd  to 
make  againft  them  ;  or  they  flatly  deny  it, 
and  explode  it  as  a  Fable,  with  Dr.  Van  Dale, 
Gallaus,  and  many  others  ;  as  any  Man  may 
eafily  do  of  any  Hiftorical  Fad,  however  at- 
tefted  (fince  it  will  not  bear  a  demonftrative 
proof)  and  boldjy  cry  out,  Affirmant}  Incumbit 
frobatio. 

It  was  a  laudable  Undertaking  of  Nana1  tens, 
to  write  an  Apology  for  all  the  Great  Men 
accufed  of  Magick  by  fome  narrow  Under- 
ftandings ;  and  which,  I  think,  he  has  gene- 
rally well  performed  ;  But  as  to  his  way  of 
Apologizing  for  the  Men  above-mentioned, 
I  cannot  fee  how  it  fhould  abate  of  their 
Merit,  or  of  the  Obligation  we  have  to  them, 
for  the  Works  they  have  left  us  (as  he  feems 
to  think  it  would )  tho'  they  had  receiv'd  a 
good  part  of  their  Knowledge  from  the  Sug- 
geftion  of  Intelle&ual  Beings ;  for  the  World 
has  been  long  under  a  Miftake,  if  prophetick 
Learning  (which  befide  what  has  been  imme- 
diately infpir'd  from  the  prime  Caufe,  Men 
may  have  fometimes  had  by  a  fuggeftion  from 
Intelligences)  be  not  of  as  great  a  Merit,  and 
has  not  laid  as  great  Obligations  on  Mankind, 
as  any  excogitated  by  Humane  Wit;  and  we 
are  as  well  owing  to  the  prime  Caufe  for 
what  we  deliver  by  our  ordinary  Faculties, 
as  for  what  in  this  extraordinary  way. 

Again,  Thb?  the  primary  end  of  good  An\ 
gt!s>  in  directing  Mankind,  be  in  things  re- 
lating 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  ^ 

latingto  their  eternal  Salvation  ;  yet  I  know  not 
why  they  may  notfometimes,  inlpirc  or  openly 
dired  them  in  humane  Studies,  and  in  thin 
relating  to  humane  Life,  lo  they  arc 
tendency  ;  as  I  tind  not  but  the  knowledge  of 
Socrates y  and  that  of  others,  whom  I  fhall  men- 
tion beneath  were  ;  tho'  that  fome  have  had 
Knowledge  infpifd  them  by  Evil  Spirits :  its 
what  Divines  generally  teach  :  Neither  fhall 
1  here  take  upon  me  to  maintain,  that  the 
Genii  which  attended  fome  of  the  Perfons  a- 
bove    mentioned   by  Naudaus    (  if  they  had 

)  were  of  the  better  fort. 
There  is  one  thing  I  (hall  note  in  Nr.HrUw's 

>unt  of  the  lXvmon  of  Socrates,  -viz,.  Where 
he  tells  us>  Tlutarch  faid  it  was  a  Sneezing  on 
the  right  or  left  fide,  according  to  which, 
Socrates  foretold  a  good  or  evil  event  to  the 
thing  undertaken.  -Now,  tho>  Tlutarch ,  in 
his  Academical  way  of  Writing,  in  his  Tra<5t 
of  SocratesS  Damon,  introduces  one  Toljmnis, 
who  fet  forth  this  Opinion,  viz*  that  Socrates 
was  guided  in  his  judgment  by  a  Sneezing, 
happening  to  himfelf,  or  fome  ftander  by, 
yet  I  fee  no  colour  of  reafon,  why  this  opi- 
nion fliould  be  fathered  upon  Tlutarch  himfelf, 
more  than  others  there  fet  forth.  Mr.  Bogatt, 
tho'  otherwife  a  'learned  Man,  in  his  additi- 
ons to  Mr.  Roufss  Archeologia  Attica,  feems  to 
me  a  little  over-comical  in  fporting  with  So-  /..  7,  ge^ 
crates,  and  his  Genius,  faying,  Socrates  (  as  £-  2.  *•  *, 
mun:te  nans  as  he  was)  had  fo  little  Senfe  him- 
felf, as  to  fetch  advice  himfelf  from  another 
mans  ]\ofe,  and  to  make  a  Sneeze  fervc  in- 
id  of  a  Genius,   or  Dkm<miw#>   to  tell  him 

Good  and  the  Bad,  &c.  but  all  men  are 
not  admirers  of  Pedantick  Railerv. 

D  To 


24  An  Account  of  Genii, 

To  come  to  Maraviglia,  we  find  he  will 
have  it,  according  to  his  prejudice,  that  So- 
trattss  Genius  was  only  his  pretence  to  gain 
authority  to  the  Do&rine  he  delivered  •  tho' 
ftill  he  allows  fcpmewhat  extraordinary  in  him, 
that  may  be  call'd  his  Genius ,  viz,,  the  won- 
derful Sagacity  of  his  Mind,  cultivated  by  a 
long  Meditation,  which  might  in  a  particular 
manner  have  dire&ed  his  Judgment,  as  to 
prefent  and  future  things.  But  I  think  this 
fufpition  of  Socrates's  defign  in  his  Ganius 
is  poorly  grounded ,  fince  it  no  way  appears 
that  ever  Socrates  imputed  the  Do&rine  he  de- 
livered to  the  Suggeftion  of  his  Genius,  as  JVh- 
ma  and  others  did,  but  only  his  being  with- 
held by  him,  from  doing  fome  A&ions  which 
would  have  prov'd  prejudicial  to  him. 

As  for  Dr.  Van  Dale,  he  allows  Socrates  no 
more  than  other  Men,  and  wholly  rejects  his 
Genius,  as  not  being  well  attefted,  and  char- 
ges Chriftians  and  Pagans  for  having  over 
rafhly  believ'd,  and  deliver  U  as  a  truth  the 
Story  concerning  him. 

Now  as  to  this  (with  reverence  to  the 
Learning  of  fb  great  a  Man)  I  mull  take 
freedom  to  fay,  it  feems  to  me  he  has  over- 
done the  matter  in  this  cafe,  by  preffing 
things  too  far;  as  I  conceive  he  has  in  feveral 
other  parts  of  his  Works :  for  as  to  his  reje<5Hng 
the  testimonies  of  Xenophon  and  Plato,  as  not 
worth  minding  ,  I  believe,  by  unprejudiced 
Readers  they  maybe  look'd  upon  asunexcepti- 
onable  Teftimonies  in  that  matter,  as  any  two 
Men  now  living  on  the  face  of  the  Earth ;  for 
what  they  fhall  deliver  by  hear-fay ,  if  we 
fhall  be  led  by  fufpicions,  and  remote  poffibi- 
lities  of  Fraud,  and  contrivance  of  fuch  Men, 

all 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  3  5 

all  htftorica!  truth  faM  be  eluded,  when  it 

confifts  not  with  1  Mar  or 

'mit  it.  \  I  :  what  he  fur- 
ther urges,  that  it"  we  1  '  boaft 
( as  he  c  ills  it  )  ot 

well  beKeVc  who  fai  ft 

*.yfjbalidesy    then    /  he 

came  to  be  Pythagoras;  I  think  t 
dlfparity  iii  the  cafe;  for,  as  to  Divine  Voi 

},  it-  no  more  than   what  all  t1 
Andent  Prophets  teftified,  befi 
find  recorded  of  theai  in  all  (  hriftian  and 
Pagah  ffiftories,  nor  are  living  Teftimoni 
wanting:  where  ther,    it>  well 

known  how  all  the  learned   h a 
the  Pythagorean  Tranfoiygication  :  concerning 
which  the  very  learned  Joan.  Reucblin  write 
thus.     The  Pythagorean  Metemffycofis  fignify*d  Cab.L  a. 
nothing  among  the  truly  learned,  but  a  fimi- 
lirude   of  notions  and  itudies,   which  were 
formerly  in  fome  Men,  and  afterwards  (prong 
up  again  in  others :    and  fo  it  was  formerly 
faid,  that  Eupborbus  was  reborn  in  Pythagoras^ 
becaufe  that  warlike  Valour  which  was'cele- 
brated  in  the  Trojan  Eupborbus,   fome  way  ap- 

})ear'd  again  in  Pythagoras,    by  reafon  of  r. 
ove  he  bore  to  the  Athlete,    or  thofe  that 
gave  themfelves  to  manlike  exerciles,     Plclnus  In  £* 
alfo  teftifies    the  fame,    affirming,    that  the 
Tranfmigration  alfo,  as  it  refpccls  Brutes  and 
Men,  according  to  the  fenfe  of  all  the  learn- 
ed Platonicks  (  except  Phtinus  )  imported  od 
that  as  affefts  of  Brutes  became  habituated 
Men,  Man  feem'd   to   have    pall  into   th 
Natures.      But   if  Dr./:.?/   D.iU  will  have 
that  Pythagoras  declared  this  as  a  tfbth,  in  a 
litteral  fenfe:    when  he  ftiall  produce  f .  • 

D  2  ethers, 


3<5  An  Account  of  Genii, 

others,  who  have  declared  the  likeexperiencs 
of  a  Transmigration  in  themfelves,  as  I  have 
given  inftances  backing  what  is  faid  of  Socrates, 
we  may  allow  it  a  like  motive  of  credibility. 

L  it  Orac.  And  if  the  opinion  of  Origen  (  whom  the  Dr. 

Dhjcrt.  i.  praifes  as  more  difcreet  in  his  opinion  concer- 

c-  -•  ning  the  Pagan  Oracles,  than  the  other  primi- 
tive Fathers)  weighs  any  thing  with  him,  he 
will  find  him  pretty  fmart  againft  thofe  that 
reje<9t  the  Genius  of  Socrates,  where  he  fays ; 

tJs.t.6.  Nor  w*^  there  ever  be  wanting  calumny  to  the 
uncandid,  who  have  a  malicious  fenfe  even  of 
the  beft  of  Men.,  fince  they  make  a  fport  even 
of  the  Genius  of  Socrates,  as  a  thing  feign'd. 

Since  I  have  intimated  it  above ,  I  fliall 
here  give  a  farther  inftance,  or  two,  of.  this 
learned  Perfons  over-arguing  himfelf,  as  I  con- 
ceive ,  in  the  Third  Chapter  of  his  Firft 
D/JJlrtation,  treating  of  the  Origen  of  Oracles y 
where  he  writes  againit  the  Impofture  of  the 
Gentiles  in  that  kind,  he  charges  them  for  ha- 
ving contrived  generally  the  feats  of  their 
Oracles  on  Mountains ,  where  were  Caves 
and  Subterraneous  Vaults,  partly  made  by 
•  Nature,  partly  by  Art,  for  carrying  on  their 
Cheats ;  and  that  none  but  Kings,  Princes, 
and  Great  Men,  confeious  of  the  Cheat,  were 
admitted  to  confult  them.  Now,  if  any  of 
the  Gentiles,  who  had  a  belief  in  their  Oracles, 
as  I  think  itbeyond  difpute,  that  many, even  of 
the  moll  learned  of  them,  had ;  nay,  if  they 
knew  them  to  beCheats^as  fome  thought  them 
o  be,  would  they  not  prefently  reply,  that  a 
Mountain  was  made  choice  of  for  Mofes  to~ 
receive  the  Law  of  God,  and  that  no  Man 
finder  pain  of  Death,  was  to  approach  the 
^Mountain  but  himfeif  and  A*t<m  (  and  like- 
wife 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  37 

wife  that  the  Jews  kept  their  S 
rum  altogether  as  pi  i  id  as  liable  to  a  fuf- 

picion  of  a  Cheats  and  admitted  none  bill  the 
Prince,the  Senate,or  feme  great  Perfon  to  con- 
fult  the  Oracle  of  Urim  and  Tbummkn  ;  and  the 
High-Prieft  only  faw  the  fign  of  God  in  the 
Breftplate,  directing  an  Anfwer,  as  the  learn- 
ed Joan.Leufden  has  fet  forth  in  his  Thilologrts  I 
bro  mixxus.  So  that  we  find  the  force  of  this  Ar- 
gument wholly  evacuated  j  it  prcflwg  equally  • 
on  both  fides.  And  I  am  lorry  I  muft  fay  it,  F 
find  too  many  Arguments  made  ufeof  by  fome 
Writers,  againft  the  Religion  of  the  Gentiles, 
which  fall  indirectly,  1  will  not  fay  defignedl 
on  all  Religion. 

Again,  the  faid  Author,  in  his   Trad  De  ch.  t„ 
Divination*  IiololatricA,  after  having  told  us  of 
the  Superftitious  Pra&ice  of  the  Gentiles,  in  dri-  ■ 

ving  away  the  Lemur es  with  a  noife  of  Brafs, 
adds-   Thofe  that  will  believe  thefe  things, 
may  as  well  believe  what  Tlmy  writes,  w*.^,-^^ 
Above  all  things  that  have  ever  been  heard  of, 
is  the  prodigy  happening  in  our  Time,  by  a 
ruine    in  the  Marrwine  Territories,  where  the 
Olive-field  of  Veftitts  Marcellus,  a  chief  Perfon 
of  the  Equeftral   Order,  paft  over  the  wh< 
common  Road,  and  on  the  contrary,  Plow  a 
Lands  came  thence  into  the  Olive-field, 
this  feeind  very  ftrange  to  Vlinj  (  who,  t 
.an  admirer  of  great  things,  and  a  Man  pxc 
lently  qualified  for  recording  hiftorica? 
was  never  lookt  upon  by  the  learn, 
ligent  enquirer  into  caufes )   and  wholly 
credible  to  the  Author;   dip1   I   (think  it  no 
fuch    extraordinary    Vhjenomcnon    i 
there  being  feveral  Initances  to  I  s 
the  like  kind,  as  well  within  our 
?lfewiv;re<  P  $ 


■ 


3  8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Stow  tell  us,  in  his  Summary,  that  An.  1582, 
Jew.  the  i  %th  at  Hermitage  'm Dor cetjhire,  a  piece 
of  Ground  of  three  Acres,  remov'd  from  its 
place,  and  was  carryed  over  another  Clofe* 
where  Alders  and  Willows  grew,  the  fpace  of 
forty  Rods,  or  Perches,  and  flopt  up  the  High- 
way that  leads  to  Cirne,  a  Market-Town,  and 
yet  the  Hedges  it  was  inclos'd  with,  inclofe  it 
rtill.,  and  the  Trees  Hand  bolt  upright,  and 
the  place  where  the  Ground  was  before  is  left 
a  Pit.  So  An.  ipi.  Marchy-hill y  in  the  Eaft 
part  of  Herefora'jhire,  with  a  roaring  noife  re- 
moved it  felf  from  the  place  where  it  flood, 
and  for  three  days  together  travell'd  from  its 
old  Seat.  It  began  firft  to  remove  Febr.  the 
ijth  being  Saturday,  at  Six  of  the  clock  in  fhe 
Evening,  and  \>y  Seven  of  the  clock  the  next 
Morning,  it  had  gone  forty  Paces,  carrying 
with  it  Sheep  in  their  Folds,  Hedge-rows  and 
Trees,  whereof  fome  were  overturn  d  ,  and 
fome  that  flood  upon  the  Plain  ,  are  firmly 
growing  upon  the  Hill ,  thofe  that  were  Eaft 
were  turn  a  Weft,  and  thofe  in  the  Weft,  were 
fet  in  the  Eaft  :  In  this  remove  it  overthrew 
Kippaftvn-Cbuffely  and  turn'd  two  High-ways 
near  an  hundred  Yards  from  their  old  Courfe. 
The  Ground  that  thus  removed  was  about  26 
Acres ;  which  opening  it  felf  with  Rocks 
and  all,  bore  the  Earth  before  it  400  Yards 
fpacc,  without  any  flay,  leaving  Pafturage  in 
the  place  of  die  Tillage,  and  the  Tillage  over- 
fpread  with  Pafturage  ;  at  laft  over- whelming 
its  lower  parts  it  mounted  to  an  Hill  of  twelve 
Fathoms high,  and  fo  relied  after  three  Days. 
travel.  More  inftanccs  may  be  giv'n  of  the, 
tunc  Nature,  this;  being  wrought  by  that  kind 
of  Earthgniakcs,   wo  i#ii  BrsjU,  or  Brafmaii^s, 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  3  p 

from  &*£*  ftrvcoy  bullio,  *vi  afius  ejiclo ,  which 
raife,  and  protrude  the  Earth,  many  Ilia: 
having  been  io  caft  up  from  the  bottom 
the  Sea  on  a  Hidden.  As  for  the  Plough'd 
Lands  coming  in  the  place  of  the  Olive- held, 
we  may  eafily  conceive  this  to  have  happen  d 
by  a  Gyrative  motion  of  that  piece  of  land 
following  upon  the  protrulion  from  the  deep. 

I  intimate  thefe  things  only  to  caution 
Men  not  to  be  over  hafty  in  rejecting  things 
that  may  feem  Strange,  and  do  not  prefently 
fall  within  their  Comprehenfion  ;  and  that  in. 
oppofing  Adverfaries  they  ufe  due  Circum- 
fpettion  in  attending  to  the  valt  extent  of  the 
Power  of  Nature,  and  the  various  Manifcita- 
tions  of  God  in  Men,  many  things  being  evi- 
dent to  fome  Perfons ,  which  to  others  feeni 
wholly  incredible. 

In  the  laft  place  ;  as  for  the  Suggeftions  of 
Monfieur  le  Loyer,  viz.  that  Plato  had  his  Noti- 
on of  Socratcs's  Genius  from  the  Egyptians,  &c. 
I  think  them  altogether  groundless,  fince  Py- 
thagoras, who  liv'd  before  Socrates,  is  averr'd 
to  have  made  his  great  Proficiency  in  Lear- 
ning from  his  Converfe  with  Spirits,  and  fince 
it  was  fo  ufual  a  thing  for  the  Pythagoreans  to 
fee  Spirits  ,  as  Apuleius  acquaints  us.  And 
why  mult  it  be  an  evil  Genius,  bringing  Seer^r 
tes  to  an  unhappy  end  ?  If  we  believe  Plato, 
we  find  Socrates  did  not  think  it  fb  ,  but  oa 
the  contrary  was  defirous  to  die  ;  and  I  think 
no  confidering  Man,  who  has  liv  d  an  upright 
Life,  would  think  it  an  unhappy  thing  to  be 

^d  from   the  grievances  of  decrepit   Al 
Socrates,  according  to  the  loweft  Computati- 
on, being  70  Yeas  of  Age  when  he  died  ;  S 
s  80,  others  90.    And  as  for  his  being 
D  4  * 


40  M  Account  of  Genii, 

a  Magician,  this  need  not  to  have  been  feign'd 
to  procure  him  a  Genius,  fince  his  Damon  isfaid 
to  have  attended  him  from  his  Infancy.  And 
fo  much  concerning  the  Genius  of  Socrates. 

I  fhall  now  proceed  to  give  an  Account 
from  Naudavs,  of  the  Genii  afcrib'd  to  the  o- 
ther  Men  before-mentioned  by  him.  As  for 
the  Genim  of  Arifioth  j  he  thinks  it  a  Jeft  in 
thofe  Men  that  have  afcrib'd  one  to  him ;  it 
being  manifeft,  according  to  all  his  Interpre- 
ters^ that  he  never  admitted  other  Intelligences, 
but  thofe  he  aflign'd  as  movers  to  each  Sphere 
of  the  Heavens,  rejecting  all  other  kinds  of 
Damons,  fo  ftanding  firm  to  his  Principles,,  and 
not  admitting  any  things  that  was  not  known 
to  him,  either  by  Motion  or  Operation  :  He 
likewife  referring  all  that  is  wont  to  be  afcrib'd 
to  Damons,  to  Nature,  that  is ,  to  the  Pro^ 
perties  of  Natural  things  j  to  Humours,  and 
Temperaments  of  Animals,  to  the  Nature  of 
Places,  and  to  their  Vapours  and  Exhalations, 
leaving  nothing  to  do  for  thefe  Subftances. 
And  after  Naudam  has  giv'n  feveral  Reafons 
* againft  Ariftotles  admitting  of  Damons ,  he 
adds,  I  think,  one  probable  Argument  may  be 
drawn  from  his  Book  concerning  Divination 
by  Dreams,  where,  to  fliew  that  there  is  no- 
thing Supernatural  in  them  ;  he  fays,  but  be- 
caufe  fome' Animals  likewife  Dream,  certain- 
ly Dreams  are  not  fent  from  God,,  nor  caus'd 
by  him ,  but  muft  b6  Damonkal,  fince  Nature 
is  Damonkal,  not  Divine.  And  though  it  be 
greatly  controverted  among  Interpreters  and 
in  em-  Commentators ,  in  what  Senfe  we  muft  ex- 
™mhu  P^n  t^s  fylfot  ^v'n  by  Arijtotle  to  Nature  ; 
In  c.  iga  it  feems  Lecnicus  has  better  hit  on  it  than  the 
Mvm.      others^    and  that  the  L^^rncd  Char$enUriH$> 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  41 

found  the  whole  Energy  of  thisPhrai 
otic  would  (hew  by  it,  that 
that  >und  in  Nature  weilordci 

tie  Conversion  of  the  Celefti- 
al  Orbs,  which  may  fenre  to  explain  all  thofc 
things,  for  which  others  have  recourfe  to  / 
mom  ^  by  the  means  of  which  Explication  he 
ly  anfwer  the  fole  Reafon,  giv'n  by 
ms>  for  eftablifhing  Damons  according  to  z-  de  Tn~ 
trine  of  Arift#le.  ^J 

In  rc  2  therefore  to  the  Genius  of  /;V-  ' ' 

ftotL,  aicrib  d  to  him  by  fome  Perfons  ;  I  fhail 
let  v.  .  hat  Piccolomini  and  Cafalfinus  have 

writ  concerning  his  Opinion,  as  to  the  Exi- 
gence of  Damons  ,  the  former  contending 
againlt  his  Admillion"  of  them,  the  latter  for  it, 
(hall  fubjoyn  my  own  Senle  in  the  Matter. 
Ticcclorr.hu  Rates  the  cafe,  whether  Arijtotk  l  dc  fe. 
thought  there  were  Damons,  and  concludes  in  *  ?/f.  Dm 
the  Negative,  writing  as  follows:  The  word  ?*rif- 

raken ,    either  metaphorically, 
or  propcily,  if  metaphorically  ,   Arijtotk  m 
be  allow'd  to  have  granted  Damons ,  he  faying,  2  7ty.  lot, 
that  Xenocrates  affirms  him  to  be  an  E.  l>- 

who  has  a  ftudious  Mind  ;    for  thisis  to  e 
Man  dn  EuJamon;  ib   we  may  al£  ithj 

,  that  the  Mind  coming  froh 
and  governing  a  Man,  is  i.:  in 

his    Book    of    Divination   b) 
That  Dreams  are  not  ft 

1  Natur;. 
iritimati  > 

becaufe  \i  I 

ch  things  a: 
l 


f 

^i  An  Account  of  Genii, 

the  Mind  leading  us,  we  may  fay  with  Arijh- 
*/e,  that  two  Damons  are  born  and  live  with  us, 
viz,.  Reafon,  and  the  fenfual  Appetite  :  and 
he  that  is  led  by  right  Reafon,  is  led  by  a  good 
Damon ,  and  he  that  is  led  by  Anger,  or  Con- 
cupifcence  is  carryed  away  by  an  evil  Damon  ; 
but  the  doubt  is  concerning  a  Damon  properly 
taken,  whether  it  be  a  Damon  by  its  Nature, 
or  a  foregin  Damon :  the  former  of  which  may 
be  aptly  enough  defin'd  to  be,  An  Animal  having 
a  reafon,  and  understanding  fuperior  to  Many  ujing 
afubtle  body ,  and  mediating  betwixt  God  and 
Man  ;  the  latter  is  the  Soul  of  a  Man,  depar- 
ted this  Life,  being  freed  from  the  grofs  Body, 
and  ufing  a  fubtle  vehicle.  And  in  this  Senfe 
Arifioth  did  not  think  $here  were  Damons ; 
not  Damms  by  Nature  ,  Firft,  becaufe  as  he 
profeft  to  explain  all  particular  degrees  of 
things,  to  fet  forth  a>compleat  Philofophy,  he 
no  where  fpeaks  of  Damons.  Secondly,  in  his 
Tclt.  66.  third  Book  of  the  Soul ,  he  plainly  reje&s 
them,  fetting  forth,  that  no  Animal  can  confift 
either  of  Air,  or  Fire,  or  any  other  fimple  Bo- 
dy j  though  he  makes  particular  mention  of 
Air  and  Fire,  becaufe  the  Academicks  thought 
the  Bodies  of  Damons  to  be  aiery,  and  in  fome 
fort  fiery.  But  to  pafs  by  many  other  Paffages 
of  Ariflotk  againft  Damons,  he  thinks  this  a 
moft  firm  Reafon  ,  That  there  is  nothing  in 
the  Univerfe  in  vain,  fpeaking  of  the  Degrees 
2nd  Species  of  things  ;  whereas  if  there  were 
Damons,  they  would  be  of  no  ufe,  according 
to  Arifiotle,  which  hence  appears,  becaufe  all 
thofe  things  which  are  commonly  judgd 
Works  of  Damons,  are  afcrib'd  by  him  to  o- 
ther  Caufesj  never  any  to  Damons :  For  thofe 
things  whicl)  excited  the  ancient  Philofophers 
i  to 


■ 

H 


I 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  45 

to  excogitate    Demons,  were   chicHy  DiviiuuU 

,  which  Arifiotlt  afcrib'd  to  \ 
tore  inds  of  Furies  or  Rapturi 

which  he  attributes  to  a  various  temperamtnfl 
Melancholy  \    the  Anlwers  of  Oracles,  which 
he  1  erty  of  certain  Steams  pro- 

&om   tl  :ies  of  the  Earth  ;  the 

a  \ die  by  an  ignorant  Perfon, 

which  Ariflfitk  likewiie  cefen  to  Melancholy  : 

efore    Philofophers    are   raisM   by 

W(   ks  to  the  fearch  of  Caufes,  and  ArifiotU 

ib'd  all  thofe  Works  to  other  Caufes.,  and 
not  to  Djtmmu  we  gather,  he  thought  there 

e  none.     And  io  as  to   I  Damons,  or 

the  Souls  of  Men  feparatcd  from  the  Body, 
Arifiotle  held  there  were  none  :  For  in  his  Se- 
cond Book  of  the  Soul,  he  fays,  there  is  no  Text  26. 
Soul  without  the  Body  :  And  in  the  Seventh 
of  his  Metaphyjicksy  he  fays,  there  is  no  Man 
without  Flefti  and  Bones :  And  in  his  Second 
Book  of  the  Generation  of  Animals,  he  fays*  Cap.  13. 
there  is  no  Inftrument  without  a  Faculty,  notf 
an  organical  Faculty  without  an  Inftrument : 
\o\v,  the  Soul  of  Man  is  organical,  &c. 

Cafalfinus,  after  having   quoted   Plate,    in-L.deln- 
troducing  Socrates,  concluding  againft  his  Ca-  veft; D£m- 
lumniators,  who  charg'd  him  of  admitting  net    er^' ca^' 
Gods,  that  he  that  grants  there  are  Damonial 
Works,  of  neceffity  admits   Damons ,  wliicbi 
are  either  Gods,  or  Sons  of  Gods,  in  his  Se- 
venth Chapter  he  writes  thus :  We  may  ga4 
ther  in  Arifictle,  that  there  are  Damons,  by 
that   Argument    by  which    Socrates    gather'd 
there  were.     He  that  alFcrts  there  are  D*mo± 
'  frks,  is  compcld   of  neceffity  to  coil» 

,  there  are  Damons.     Arljhtle  afterts,  there 
arc  Damonical IWrks,  viz,.  Dreams  and  Nature; 

there- 


44  An  Account  of  Genii, 

therefore  of  Neceffity  he  muft  confefs  there 
are  Demons,  whence  they  are  fo  denominated. 
And  the  Philofopher  feems  to  have  under- 
flood  that  middle  Nature  betwixt  God  and 
Mortal  things,  mention'd  before  by  us,  to  be 
a  Damon ;  for  when  he  had  deny'd  Dreams  to 
be  fent  by  God,  (as  fome  thought  they  were) 
becaufe  they  happen  not  only  to  the  wifeft  of 
Men,  but  indifferently  to  Idiots  y  and  fome 
other  Animals ;  yet  he  fays  Dreams  are  D*~ 
montcal$  becaufe  Nature  is  Damonical,  not  Di- 
vine j  tho'  therefore  fomewhat  Divine  be  con- 
tain'd  in  Nature,  yet  it  does  not  merit  the 
Name  of  Divine,  but  Dammkal,  becaufe  it 
Follows  the  Wifdom  of  an  Intelligence,  whence 
it's  rendred  admirable,  even  in  the  leaft  things, 
and  Dreams  are  Damonical^  by  reafon  of  the 
wonderful  force  of  the  Imagination. 

Now,  thefe  two  Authors  confider'd,  I  think 
it  may  be  agreed,  that  Arlfiotle  did  not  admit 
a" Damon  properly  taken,  as  Ph'colomlnl  has  fet 
forth ;  but  he  admitted  the  Fads  commonly 
afcrib'd  to  Damons,  which  he  accounted  for 
from  other  Caufes ;  as  we  find  by  what  is 
quoted  from  Charpentarlm,  by  Naudaus,  accor- 
ding to  which  (as  Naudaus  fays)  Cafalfmms 
fole  reafon  for  eftablifhing  of  Damons,  accor- 
ding to  Arifiotle \  Do&rine,  may  be  folv'd. 
Yet  however,  iince  Arifiotle  admits  the  Fa&s 
commonly  afcrib'd  to  Damons,  I  fee  not  why 
he  may  not  properly  enough  be  faid  to  have 
had  a  Genius,  tho'  it  may  be  explain' d  by  an 
IntelleBus  Agens,  coming  from  without,  or  by 
an  orderly  influx  from  the  Intelligences  that 
move  the  Heav  ns,  he  having  a  mind  to  fet  up 
for  himfelf,  by  an  hypothecs  of  his  own,  con- 
trary to  that  o[  Plato  reeeiv'd  before,   and 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  45 

which  is   more    confonant  to    Chriftianity, 
Nor  can  I  think  Ariftottis   fo  plaufible  for 
folving  Phenomena,  tho'  it  may  more  gratify 
the  Humour  of  fome  Perfons.     In  reference 
to  Ariftotlcs  Genius,  I   may  add  what  Rhodigi-  Le[}.  An- 
nus writes,  viz.   That,  among  the  Ancients,  r/j./.-*-«- *; 
VUto  had  the  Symbol  of  Divine  given  him, 
and  Ariftotk  of  Damonical^  the  reafon  why 
AriftotU  was  fo  ftil'd,  feems  to  be,   that  he 
chiefly  treated  of  natural  things,  the  confide- 
ration  of  which  lies,  in  a  manner,  in  the  fub- 
lunary  World,  where  they  thought  Damons 
had  their  abode  :   But  Vlato  railing  himfelf 
higher,  being  addi<5ted  to  the  Contemplation 
of  Intelligible  Beings,  got  him  a  more  emi- 
nent guide  of  Life,  and  defpifing  thofe  things 
which  others  admir'd,  even  to  a  Madnefs,  he 
ftrove  with  all  his  force  to  bring  that  which 
is  Divine  in  us,  to  that  Divine  Being  which 
only  is  truly  fo,  whence  he  got  his  name  of 
Divine. 

Naudausy  after  he  has  reje&ed  the  Genius  of 
Arijtotley  proceeds  to  the  others  3  but  firft  tells 
us,  That  what  all  the  VhtonUh  have  fet  forth 
concerning  Damons  and  J-Ltgicky  can  neither 
be  prov'd  by  Reafon  nor  Experience  ;  and  as 
for  the  Realon  they  draw  from  many  Effe&s, 
which  they  fay  muft  ncceflarily  be  referrd  to 
thefe  Caufes,  before  he  obliges  himfelf  to 
receive  it,  he  firft  wifties  they  would  well  fa* 
tiify  Pomponatiusy  Cardan  ^  and  Bemardns  Mir  an* 
dulanusy  who  fhew,  pertinently  enough,  that; 
its  better  to  have  recourfe  to  the  Proots  of  out 
Religion,  to  believe  Angels  and  Damons,  thun 
to  that  heap  of  Experiences,  of  which  a  vea- 
fon  may  be  rendred  by  the  Principles  of  Na- 
tural Philofophy.    After  which  he  lays,  We 

ought 


46  An  Account  of  Gtm\y 

ought  no  longer  to  make  doubt,  but  all  that 
is  laid  of  the  Genii  of  Vhtinus,  Vorphyrius,  and 
Jambticusy  ought  to  be  referred  to  what  he  has 
iaid  before  concerning  the  Damon  of  Socrates. 

To  this  I  reply 3  that  even  fetting  by  the 
Proofs  of  our  Religion  for  Angels  and  Damons, 
I  fee  not  but  as  for  folving  the  Experiences 
he  Ipeaks  of,  by  natural  Principled,  Arifiotles 
Hypothefis  of  Intelligences  moving  the  Heavens, 
4s  altogether  as  precarious,  and  lefs  fatisfa&ory 
than  the  other,  us'd  by  ottjers  of  the  Gentiles : 
And  as  for  his  reserving  what  is  faid  of  the 
\  Genii  of  the  three  Philofophers  before-menti- 

on  d,  to  what  he  has  faid  of  the  Genius  of  So- 
crates, I  think  I  have  fhewn   above,  that  he 
lias  not  validly  refuted  his  Damon. 
\  As  to  the  Genius  of  Vlotinus  ;  Porphyrins  his 

\      Scholar,    who  has  writ   his  Life,    which  is 
\     prefixed  to  Vlotinus  s  Works,    fet  forth   with 
\    ^Commentaries,  by  Ficinus,    fays  thus  in  it : 
\    "  An  Egyptian  Prieft  coming  to  Rome,  and  be- 
cc  ing  foon  made  known,  by  a  Friend  of  his, 
cc  to  Vlotinus.,  and  having  a  defire  to  fhew  a 
cc  Specimen  of  his  Wifdom  at  Rome,  perfwa- 
64  ded  Vlotinus  to  go  along  with  him,  and  he 
cc  would  prefently  /hew  him  his  Damon,  or 
'"  Familiar  Spirit,  whom  Vlotinus  readily  obey'd. 
cc  The  Invocation  of  the  Damon  was  made  in 
the  Temple  of  Ifis  \    for  ^Vlotinus  faid,  this 
was  the  fole   place  in  Rome]   which  the 
Egyptian  found  pure  ;  But  when  the  Damon 
was  calFd  to  prefent  himfelf  to  his  view, 
ci  inftead  of  a  Damon,  a  Gad .appeaj'd,  which 
*c  was  not  of  the  Species   of  Damons ;    the 
Cf  Egyptian  thereupon  thus  prefently  cry'd  out, 
u  Tew  are  b*"PV>y,  O  Plotinus  !   who  hive  a 


a 


|CC 


"for  your  Da 


W 


God 


mon,  and  have  not  light  on  a  Guide 


€ 


or  Famliiar  Spirits  47 

€C  of  an  Inferior  kind.  Plotinus  therefore  having 
a  Familiar  of  the  Order  of  Divine  Demons,  it 
was  with  reafonthat  he  always  (ublimely  rais'd 
the  Divine  Eye  of  his  Mind  to  that ;  and  foi 
this  reafon  heffterwards  compos'd  a  Book  con- 
cerning each  Man's  particular  Daemon,  where 
he  endeavours  diligently  to  afltgn  the  Caufcs 
of  the  difference  of  Familiar  Spirits.  Porphy- 
rins, to  (hew  the  Divine  Spirit  of  his  Matter, 
Tlotinus,  adds  beneath  :  cc  I  had  once  thoughts 
"  of  killing  my  felf,  which  Vlotinns  wonder- 
w  fully  perceivd  5  and  as  I  was  walking  in 
iC  the  Houfe,  he  prefently  came  to   me,  and 

Lid,  11 'hat  you  meditate,  O  Porphyrius  !  js 
€C  not  like  that  of  a  found  Mind ;  but  rather,  of  a 
Cf  Mind  grown  mad  with  Melancholy  ;  and  there- 
*  fore  he  commanded  me  to  depart  from 
"  Rome.  Thofe  that  would  read  Plotinus\ 
Trad  concerning  each  Man's  Familiar  Spirit, 
may  find  it  in  his  Works. 

Naudaus  proceeds  next  to  the  Genii  ofChicus, 
Scaliger,  and  Cardan.  As  for  Chicus,  he  looks 
upon  him,  by  what  he  has  writ,  as  a  Super- 
fluous Perfon,  who  affirmed,  he  often  made 
ufe  of  Revelations  from  a  Spirit  call'd  Floron, 
which  he  faid  was  of  the  Order  of  the  Cheru- 
bims.  But  Naudaus  reje&s  this,  with  other 
fabulous  Relations  of  other  Perfons,  faying 
with  Lucretius : 

£hiis  dubitat  quin  omne  fithoc  ratioms  agefias. 

a  fhort  way  of  refuting. 

Concerning  the  Genii  of  Scaliger  and  Cardan, 
Naudaus  writes  as  follows.  It  it  were  per- 
mitted me,  and  it  became  me  to  follow  rather 
my  will,  than  my  duty,  I  fliould  freely  ex- 

cufe 


4^  An  Account  of  Genii, 

cufe  my  felf  from  faying  any  thing  againft 
the  Genii;,  which  the  two  fole  great  Perfons 
whom  we  may  oppofe  to  the  two  moft  learn- 
ed, and  famous  among  the  Ancients,  have  at- 
tributed to   themfelves,  and  who   have  been, 
as  it  were,  the  laft  effort,  and  miracle  of  Na- 
ture, Scaliger  and  Cardan :  for  I  certainly  be- 
lieve, either  they  deceived  themfelves,  in  ad- 
mitting thefe  Genii,   becaufe,    after    having 
well  examined  themfelves,    they  could  not 
find  in  them  the  caufe  of  fuch,  and  fo  extra- 
ordinary Perfe&ion ;  or  that  they  did  it  thro' 
modefty,  not   to  difcover  by  their  Learnings 
how  much  all  the  reft  of  Mankind  were  infe- 
rior to  them  j  or,  finally,  that  they  would  co- 
ver from  envy,    under  this  particular  aflift- 
aiice,    and  free  from  the  jealoufy    of  Men, 
that  gr£ at  renown  they  had  acquir  d  to  them^ 
felyes,  by  their  ftudious  diligence  and  labours. 
However,  as  truth  is  fooner  found  out  when 
many  Peffons  employ  themfelves  in  the  fearch 
of  it,  the  opinion  of  thofe   is  not  to  be  re- 
je&ed,  who,  fay  Scaliger,  pra&ifed  this  ftrata- 
gem,  in  imitation  of  all  great  Perfons,  and 
not  to  yield  in  Ambition  to  his  AntagQnift,   | 
1. 3. c.  26  <  attributing  to  himfelf  for  a  Genius,  in  his  Art 
of  Poetry,  a  meer  fally  or  emotion  of  Mind; 
by  which  the  Soul  is  heated,  as  it  were,  in  it 
felf,  to  raife  it  to  the  knowledge  of  fomewhat, 
during  which,  a  Man  may   at  any  time  fay 
and  write  many  things,  which  he  underftands 
not  after  the  heat  of  this  enthufiafm  is  over. 
And  as  for  Cardan,  he  fpeaks  fo  varioufly  of 
his  Geruuss  that   after  having  fa  id   abfolutely   | 
in  his  Dialogue  entitld  Telion,  that  he  had  one, 
which  was    Venereal,    mixt    with   Saturn   and 
Mercury  ;  and   in  his  Book,    De  libra  propria, 

that 


or  Familiar  S pints.  4. 2 

that  he  communicated  :f  to    him    ! 

his  Dreams,  he  doubts  at  th< 
ther  he  had  OriC,  or 

the  e\c\ 

he  )   ivhtthv  from    \ 

rney  or   th.it  my  N  ) 

of  an  human  jLite ,     and   in    tbt  co>  ' 

Immortals,  &C    And  fiiul!\     COI1 

Book,  De  Rerun;  i  at  he  :C, 

duty  laying  ,    I 
lXvmon,  or  Genius  me.     \\ 

may  furcly  judge,  that  he  SU  no 

othc  p  but  the  gn 

acquired,  by  their  diligence  and  lal 
the  experience  they  had  of  things ;  on 
coming  to   raife   their  jqdgmeilts  M   on  two 
Pyramids,  they  judg'd  pertinently  of  all  mat- 
ters ,    and   let    nothing  efcape    from   being 
known,  and  manifeft  to  them. 

We  here  fee   what  conjectures  NauJ*us  has 
made    concerning  the  Genii  of  thefe    Men, 
which  are  as  eafily  rejected  as  they  are  grow 
lefly  fuggefted  by  him.    And  tho'  Cardan  feysj 
in   his  Book  De  Rerum  Varictate3  he  knew  no  l 
Genius  attended  him ;  we  know  that  Book  v. 
writ  many  Years  before   he   writ  his   Life , 
which  was  but  a  little  before  his  Death,  and 
on  which  I  think  we  have  moft  realon  to  rely  • 
where  he  plainly  fays,  he  had  a  Genius  tho'  net 
well  difcovered  by  him  till  his  latter 
And  this  Book   writ  by  CarJtn,    of  hi 
Life,  was  fet  forth  by  3N  him  ft  If 

makes  it  feem  fomewhat  ftraoge  th: 
deny  he  had   any  Genii 
ders  fa tibfadion,  I  (hall  hi 
thefe  two  great  M 

Gi 


RV 

5  o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Genii,  and  fhall  leave  it  to  him  to  judge  of  it, 

as  he  fhall  think  fit. 

To  pafs  by  the  Genius  of  Fachts  Cardanus9 
L.  De  T)&-  which  his  Son  Hierom  Cardan  fays,  his  Father 
mon.  own'd  to  have  attended  him  for  Thirty  Years, 
and  where  he  gives  an  account  of  Seven  De- 
mons more,  whom  he  faw  and  converft  with ; 
I  here  give  you  feveral  particulars,  tho'  not 
all,  which  Hierom  Cardan  has  left  recorded 
concerning  a  Genius  that  attended  himfelf. 
In  his  Book  of  his  own  Life,  fet  forth  by 
£•  47-  Naudrtus,  where  he  writes  of  his  good  Spirit, 
he  fays ,  its  received  as  a  manifeft  truth,  that 
familiar  Spirits  (  which  the  Greeks  call  Angels, ) 
have  forewarned  fome  Men,  Socrates ,  Vloti- 
nus,  Synejtus,  Dion,  Flavins  Jofefhus,  and  even 
my  felf:  All  lived  happily  befides  Socrates  and 
my  felf,  who  neverthelfes  am  in  a  very  good 
condition :  but  C.  Cafar  the  Dictator,  Cicero, 
Antony,  Brutus  and  Cajjius  had  evil,  tho5  illuftri- 
ous  Spirits.  Thofe  of  Antony  and  Cicero,  were 
Glorious.,  but  both  Pernicious;  that  of  Jofe- 
fhus was  particularly  famous,  and  of  a  rare 
excellency  for  Warlike  Valour ,  favour  with 
Vefp.fian  and  his  Sons ,  Riches  ,  Monu- 
ments of  Hiftories,  a  threefold  Offifping,  and 
in  his  conteft  with  the  calamities  of  his  Na- 
tion; alfo  in  a  forefight  of  future  things, 
wherewith  he  was  illuftrated  in  Captivity, 
being  freed  from  the  outrage,  of  his  Friends^ 
and  preferved  from  the  Waves  of  the  Sea. 
But  thefe  were  manifeftly  Damons,  tho'  mine, 
as  I  believe,  a  good  and  merciful  Spirit.  I 
was  long  perfwaded  that  I  had  one,  but  could 
not  find  how  he  fhould  certify  me  of  immi- 
nent events-,  till  after  the  Seventy  Fourth 
Year  of  my  Age^  when  I  fet  upon  writing 

my 


or  Familiar  Spirits. 

my  Life;  but  that  to  mam    immifl 

fhould   be  foreknown  ;  trufy 

fecn,    and  that  juft  before   th 

and  s  to  roe  a 

to  be  done  without  a  Divine  ALL  ith 

nirit;  for  Initance,  Spirit  I 

what  was  ready   to  befall  mr  iat  my 

Son  was  to  Marry  the  nefc't  & 
tunate  Match,    in  the  Night-time  he  rail 
fuch  a  beating  of  my  ileair,  by    a  pe- 

culiarly known  to  him,    that  the  Chamber 
feenfd  to  tremble ;    mv   !    n 
fame,    at    the  feme  time,    fo  that  hot! 
thought  there  Was  an  Eardrqtiafce  ,    which  no 
body  elfe  perceived. 

He  adds   beneath  ;     There   may  be  fomc 
doubts,  why  this   care  for  me ,    and    not 
others;  for  I  do  not  excel  in  Learning,  as 
fome  think,  but  haply  en  the  contrary  ?  Is  ic 
immence  love  of  Truth,    and  Wifdoni,  with 
contempt  of  Riches,  even  in  this  ftate  of  Po- 
verty ?    or  by  reafon  of  my  defire  of  j 
or  that  I  afcribe  all  to  God,  nothing  to  my 
felf  ?  or  haply  for  fome  end  known  to  C 
alone  ? 

Again,  why  does  he  not  openly  admonifli 
me  (  as  I  could   wifh  )  of  thole  things,    of 
which  he  does  admonifh  me  ?  but  teaches  onz 
thing    for  another,    as  by   thofe  diforderly 
Noifes  (  of  which  he  gives  fcucral  inftmcts, 
ning  before    Deaths,    in    bis   43  d.  Chaffer    of 
fame  Book)  for  me  to  allure  my  (elf  that  God 
beholds  all  things,  tho'  I  fee  him  not 
Eyes ;  for  he  could  have  admcnifh'd  fni 
\y  by  a  Dream,  or  fon  r  way  of  mani- 

festation: but  haply  this  ftiew'd  more  die  Li- 
vine  Care,  and  thofe  greater  things  ti, 

£  2  aed 


j2  An  Account  of  Genii, 

ried  to  me^  Fears,  Impediments,  Anxieties, 
&c.  there  is  need  alfo  of  Obfcurity,  for  us  to 
underftand  that  they  are  the  Works  of  God, 
and  ought  not  to  be  oppofed  ;  its  folly  there- 
fore to  be  overhaftily  follicitous  for  knowing 
thefe  things. 

At  the  end  of  the  fame  Chapter,  he  writes, 
that  having  ftuck  to  a  fplendor  that  attended 
him  above  Forty  Years,  he  had  all  his  art  of 
Writing  and  publick  Teaching ,  from  his 
Spirit  and  Splendour,  tho'  this  kind  of 
Science  had  got  him  among  Men,  more  Envy 
than  Renown,  and  more  Glory  than  Profit : 
but  it  gave  him  no  fmall,  nor  vulgar  Pleaiure> 
and  contributed  to  the  prolonging  of  his 
Life,  being  a  comfort  to  him  in  many  Ca- 
lamities, an  aid  in  Adverfities,  an  help  in 
Difficulties  and  Labours-  upon  the  whole,  he 
fays,  the  h£t  was  plainly  fo,  he  might  err  in 
the  Caufes,  and  refers  himfelf  to  fuch  as  are 
Wifer,  viz*  Divines. 

In  the  fame  Book  he  writes  thus,  Hitherto 
chip.  38.  j  kaye  fp0ken  0f  my  fejf  .  as  0f  a  Man,  and 

that  is  fomewhat  beneath  other  Men,  in  my 
Nature  and  Learning,  but  now  I  fhall  fpeak 
of  fome  admirable  Difpofition  of  my  felf ;  and 
fo  much  the  more  wonderful,  that  I  find  fome- 
what in  my  felf,  which  I  know  not  what  to 
make  off  :  And  that  that  thing  is  my  felf,  tho' 
I  do  not  perceive  fuch  things  to  proceed  from 
me  :  That  it's  prefent,  when  its  meet,  and  not 
when  I  will  have  it.  That  which  rife* 
thence  is  greater  than  my  Abilities ;  which 
was  firfl  dilcover'd  to  me,  in  the  Year  15-26. 
So  that  it's  above  Forty  four  Years  fince.  I 
perceive  a  thing  from  without  enter  into  my 
Ear  with  a    noifc  from  that   part  diredly, 

where 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  c  3 

where  People  are  talking  of  me :  If  it  fends  to 
Good   in  the  right  fide,  or  if  it  comes  from 
the  left,  it  penetrates  to  the  right,  and  an  or- 
derly noife  is  made  :    And  if  the  Dilcoui  ie 
contentious,  I  hear  a  wonderful  Contention  ; 
if  it  inclines  to  Evil  in  the  left  fide,  it  corner 
exa&ly  from  the  part  where  thole  tumultuous 
Voices  are.    Therefore  it  enters  on  both  iides 
of  my  Head  ;  and  very  often  when  the  thing 
falls  out  ill,  the  Voice  on  the  left  fide,  when 
it  ftiould  end,    grows  louder,  and  Voices  are 
multiply^,  and  very  commonly,   if  the  thing 
be  in  the  fame  Town,   it  happens  that  d 
Voice  being  fcarce  over,  a  MelTenger  comes 
in  to  call  me  to  them  ;  and  if  it  be  from  ano- 
ther City  ,    and  a  MelTenger  comes ,  upon 
computing  the  rime  betwixt  the  Deliberation, 
and  the  beginning  of  the  Journey,  they  come 
to  the  fame,  and  I  find  Sentence  paft  after  the 
form  it  is  concluded,  and  this  continued  with 
me  to  the  Year  i  j68,  and  I  wondred  it  ceas'd. 
In  the  Year  15-34.  I  began  to  fee  in  Dreams 
what  things  would  happen  in   a  fhort  time, 
and  if  the  fame  Dgiy,  I  faw  them  clearly,  and 
after  Sun  rifing^  •    fo  that  I  faw  a  Sentence 
paft  in  a  Caufe  of  the  College,  and  that  I 
fhould  be  Profeflbr  at  BononU  5  this  peas'd  An* 
1  j  67. 

The  third  thing  was  a  Splendor,  this  I  en- 
creas'd  by  Degrees  ;  it  began  about  the  Year 
IC7J  or  74,  but  particularly  this  Year  if"). 
itfeems  to  me  I  have  it  perfect,  and  it's  a  thing 
which  does  not  leave  me  ;  but  inftead  of  the 
two  foregoing  which  are  ceas'd ,  it  fortifies 
me  againft  Emulators ,  and  as  neceility  re* 
quires.  Its  compos'd  of  an  Artitical  Practice, 
and  a  Circumfluent  Light,  being  very  PI 


^  4  An  Account  of  Genii, 

fant,  and  alone  performs  much  more  ,  as  to 
Efficacy,  Exercitation,  Advantage,  and  Soli- 
dity or  Studies  ,  than  thofe  two  joyn'd  toge- 
ther j  and  does  not  take  a  Man  from  his  com- 
mon Studies,  and  humane  Gonverfation,  but 
makes  him  ready  at.  all  things,  and  is  moft 
excellent  for  compofing  Books,  and  feems,  as 
it  were,  the  utmoft  reach  of  our  Nature,  for 
it  reprefents  all  things  together,  that  make  for 
the  matter  under  Confideration ;  and  if  it  be 
not  a  Divine  thing ,  certainly  it's  the  moft 
perfect  of  Mortal  Works. 
cbap\}7.  In  the  fame  Book  he  writes  as  follows: 
While  I  liv'd  at  Favia,  and  profeft  Phyfick 
there,  looking  cafually  on  my  Hand,  Ifaw 
at  the  root  of  my  ring  Finger,  of  my  right 
Hand,  the  form  of  a  bloody  Sword,  I  was  pre- 
fently  ftruck  with  a  great  fear.  In  the  Evening 
a  Meffenger  came  with  a  Letter  from  my  Son 
in  Law,  acquainting  me  that  my  Son  was  ta- 
ken into  Cuftody,  and  that  I  ftiould  come  to 
Milan  the  next  Day,  and  for  fifty  three  Days 
the  Mark  increas'd,  and  went  upwards,  and 
behold,  the  laft  Day  reacht  to  the  top 
of  my  Finger,  and  look'd  red  like  a  flaming 
Sword.  I,  fufpe&ing  no.  fuch  thing,  and  be- 
ing frighted,  and  not  my  folf,  knew  not  what 
to  do,  fay,  or  think ;  at  midnight  my  Son 
was  beheaded  ;  in  the  Morning  the  Sign  was 
.almoft  gone,  in  a  Day  or  two  it  wholly  va- 
nifli'd. 

In  the  fame  Book,  having  giv'n  an  accoun? 
of  fome  ftrange  Noifes,  and  Voices  he  had 
heard,  and  of  a  ftrange  Smell  he  perceiv'd 
before  Deaths,  he  concludes  thus.  But  con- 
cerning thefe  wonderful  things,  it's  thus  with 
Men,  that  when  they  are  prefent ,  or  a  lit- 
tle 


Chap,  4.] 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  c  r 

tie  before  they  have  happ'ned,  they  draw  the 
whole  Man;  after  they  are  a  while  over,  th 
are  fo  little  hecded,that  unlefs  they  arc  brought 
frefh  to  the  Mind  by  fome  force, they  doubt, 
it  were  ,  whether  they  have  (ion  or  heard 
them ;  which,  I  fuppofe,  chiefly  happens  both  by 
Reafon  of  much  more  profound  Gaufes,  and 
for  the  diftance  of  our  Nature  from  the  Caufes 
that  produce  them.  I  know  what  Scoffs  and 
Laughter,  fome,  that  would  feem  wile,  raife 
at  fuch  things  ;  the  chief  ring  Leader  of  whom 
is  Tolybius,  a  Philofopher,  without  Philofophy, 
who  underftood  not  even  the  Duty  of  an  I  li- 
ftorian,  but  by  extending  it  too  far  ,  became 
ridiculous,  fometimes  admirable,  as  where  he 
fpeaks  of  the  Achxam.  In  fhort ,  Tartdia  ^  2.mjl, 
rightly  faid,  that  no  Man  knows  all  things, 
and  thofe  nothing  ,  that  do  not  know  their 
Ignorance  of  many  things.  You  fee  ?li*}3 
who  has  deliver'd  fo  clear  an  Hiftory,  (hews 
himfelf  a  Blockhead,  where  he  treats  of  the 
Sun  and  Stars ;  what  wonder  therefore  that 
Tolybiusy  (while  he  meddles  of  the  more  fub~ 
lime  and  Divine  things )  has  fo  clearly  expos'd 
his  Ignorance.  I-religioufly  Swear,  that  a 
Senfe  and  Confcioufhels  of  only  one  of  thefe 
things,  is  more  dear  to  me,  than  a  long  laft- 
ing  Reign  over  the  whole  Earth  would  be. 
And  beneath,  but  let  this  fuffice,  for  I  have 
only  here  fet  down  in  fhort,  when  thefe  things 
frappend,  and  how,  and  fuch  in  which  thefe 
could  be  no  Sufpifcion  of  Error  or  Impofture  j 
and  I  only  beg  you,  Reader,  when  you  read 
fuch  things,  do  not  propofe  humane  Pride  for 
your  Scope,  but  the  greatnefs  and  ampli- 
tude of  the  World,  and  of  the  He;  ,nd 
the  vile  Darkuefs  in  which  we  live,  and  you 
E  4 


■ 


An  Account  of  Genii, 

will  eafily  Underftand,  I  have  related  no  iiv 
cr edible  things.  The  fame  Author ,  in  his 
Dialogue,  intitrd  Tetim  ,  or  of  Humane  Coun- 
feli,  where  he  makes  Tetim  and  Ram,  Inter- 
locutors^ makes  Ram  fay,  I  believe  Cardan  hgs 
a  Genius  for  his  Companion ,  which  difco- 
ver'd  himfelf  late  to  him  ,  being  wont  before 
to  admonifh  him  by  Dreams  and  Npifes;  and 
beneath  ,  fo  many  and  fo  wonderful  things 
have  happen d  to  him,  in  his  Life,  th^t  I  am 
fore  d  to  believe,  being  intimate  with  him,  he 
has  a  great,  powerful,  and  rare  Genius,  fo  that 
he  is  not  Matter  of  his  Anions ;  but  thofe 
things  he  defires,  he  has  not,  the  things  he 
has  he  did  not  covet  or  hope  for. 

At  the  end  of  his  fourth  Book  of  TVifdom, 
he  writes  as  follows,  concerning  the  Genii  of  o- 
therMen.    All  great  Men Teem  to  be  led  by 
fome  Divine  Spirit,  or  Damon  ;    Socrates,  be- 
fore his  Death,  had  warning  of  the  Day  in  a 
Dream,  Dion  faw  a  Speflre  in  his  Houfe,  what 
was  it  open'd  Cains  Cafars  door  the  Night  be- 
fore he  was  (lain  ?  What  was  it  faid  to  Brutus, 
as  he  was  alone,  I  am  thy  Evil  Genius,  thou 
(halt  fee  me  again  at  Philhpi  ?  What  was  that 
auguft  Figure  feen  by  Cajjius  in  his  Tent,  that 
was  like  to  C*far  ?  What  foretold  Sylla  in  his 
Dream,  of  his  imminent  Death  ?    Or  what 
was  it  lie  heard  fo  Pleafant  in  a  clear  Sky  ? 
What  from  a  Maufolaum    called  Nero  before 
his  Death  ?   What  admonifh'd  Caligula  of  his 
Death  in  a  Dream  .;    Why  did   Antony  hear 
the  departure  of  Bacchus  from  Alexandria,  the 
Night  before  his  D^ath?  What  mixt  afleeping 
Potion   for  Adrian  in    a   Dream   before   his 
Peath  ?  Certainly.,  the '  Dxmcn  that   was  in 
themj  for  Humane  Nature,when  highly  exal- 
ted, 


or  V miliar  Spirits.  57 

ted,  rifes  to  the  force  of  a  Damcn.  Thefc  forc- 
faw  thiir  Deaths,  but  could  not  prevent  the 
violence  of  it.  Neither  are  thefe  the  only  Pcr- 
fonSj  who  having  this  Wifdom  have  had  vio- 
l  or  Vaul,  who,  aided  by  the  Divine 
Spirit;  could  fee  the  Secrets  of  God,  and  Stt* 
fhen  the  Heavens  open,  and  Philip,  who  was 
\  d  invilible  through  the  Defart ,   died  all 
b\  the  Hands  of  others,  But  there  is  this  gi  < 
brence  betwixt  thefe  Spirits,  that  the  Di- 
is  joyn'd  with  Juftice  and  Piety,  and  the 
Other  Vertues,  and  has  tranquility  and  reft 
always  attending  it;   the  Demonical  is  rais'd 
Uurthers,  Robberies,  and  Falfe-dealings ; 
is  always  accompanyed  with  fufpifcious 
manifold  Difquiets.  Who  but  a  Perfon  of 
troubled  Senfes^anda  difcompos'd  Mind  would 
thufe  to  embrace  the  Dammical  ?    But  as  in 
lick  Perfo^,  the  vitiated  tafte  'abhors   Sweet 
and  Fat  things  ?  and  is  more  delighted  with 
fuch  as  are  fharp  and  infipid  ;    fo  the  Nature 
of  Mortals  being  corrupted  with  Vice,  abhors 
the  beft,  and  adheres  to  the  worft  ;  and  this 
is  done  chiefly  by  the  likenefs  of  thefe  two 
kinds,  which,   how- great  it  is  may  eafily  be 
pnderftood  by  this,  that  Si mon  and  Elim as,  the 
Magicians,  were  accounted  Divine  Men,  and 
rift ,  who  was  God,  was  thought  by  many 
to  have  a  Devil.     And  fo  much  for  Cardan. 

Scaligerfyezkiixg  of thzGen'ws  afcrib'dby  Virgil  1  :  - 

to  *"    ♦     pi  res,  fo  called  from  £ yj<  &fa 

.res  thus  of  the  Genii  chat  attend  JVf  en.     We 

1  in  the  Books  of  the  Pythagoreans,  enrichc 

by  the  Yhtonicks,  that  we  have   two  Genii  at- 

I  Good  and  a  Bad  ;  by  the  guidance 

jflfels  of  the  Good,  Good   and   Elea 

1  erfons  joyn  chcmfelvcs  to  God;  from  whom 

t-hey 


5  8  An  Account  of  Qenii, 

they  have  received  him  as  a  Mediator.  To 
fome  Heroes,  he  fliews  himfelf,  by  others  he 
is  never  feen  but  is  heard,  which  Socrates  pro- 
feffes  of  his,  in  more  than  one  place  in  Plato, 
by  fome  Divine  Spirits  he  is  neither  feen,  nor 
heard,  but  fo  introduces  and  prefents  him- 
feu,  that  by  his  light  he  difcovers  an  intelli- 
gence of  fecret  things,  for  Men  to  write : 
wherefore  it  often  happens,  that  when  that 
Celeftial  Heat  is  over  in  us,  we  our  felves 
either  admire  thofe  our  Writings,  or  do  not 
own  them  for  ours,  and  do  not  underftand 
fome  things  after  the  way  they  were  dire&ed 
and  di&ated  by  him ;  nor  do  I  think  it  hapned 
otherwife  to  Plato,  to  whofe  Writings  a  light 
is  added  by  Interpreters,  much  greater  than 
may  proceed  from  vulgar  judgments.  As  for 
my  felf,  who  think  I  am  not  to  be  compared 
even  with  the  leaft,  if  any  thing  falls  from  me 
at  any  time  unawares,  I  may  not  hope  fb 
much  may  be  performed  by  me  afterwards, 
which  is  the  reafon  I  never  let  upon  medita- 
ting, or  writing,  unlefs  invited  by  my  Genius, 
who  fpeaks  inwardly  with  me,  tho*  not  heard, 
Viewing  the  fpacious  fields  of  the  Divinity  in 
our  Minds,  which  being  abftra&ed  and  fuf- 
pended  from  the  offices  of  the  Body,  it  de- 
putes to  other  Functions;  fo  that  he  did  not 
fpeak  wholly  at  random,  who  though t,  that  Arh 
ftotles  Intelleclm  JgensjNcrt  the  fame  with  Plato's 
Genius ;  we  have  inftances  of  both  in  Hiftory, 
for  an  Evil  one  appeared  to  Brutus,  and  fore- 
told him  an  unhappy  end ;  A  Good  one  to 
Cafar,  when  he  paft  Rubicon,  fliewing  him 
the  way  to  that,  in  which  he  plac'd  his  chief 
blifs,  &c 

HeinjSm 


or  TFdmlluxr  Spirits,  59 

Heinjtm  fays,  in  a  manner,  the  fame  thing  inDedk. 
of  himfelf  with  Scjliger,  writing  thus ;  Here  *%P°*M 
are  fome  things  to  which,  being  my  felf,  I  am 
not  able  to  afpire,  which  after  the  heat  has 
left  my  Mind,    I  confider   as  a  Reader   of 
another  Man's  Works.    Scaliger  alfo  elfewhere  £^.544. 
calls  his  Genius,    moft  Learned,  whofe  defire 
is   vail  and    immence  :     And   ffeinfim   fays,  /*• 
uninitiated  Perfons  do  not   underftand  thefe 
things. 

Scaliger  alfo,  on  Ariflole  De  TIantts  ,  writes  Z7.  9.  2.  in 
thus;  Jnmblicffs,  in  his  Myfteries,  fays,  he  that'- 
being  infpird,  receives  the  Deity,  has  a  fort 
of  appearance  of  Fire  before  its  ingrefs,  and 
its  teen  the  God  either  coming,  or  departing; 
therefore  thofe  Spirits  that  apply  themfelves 
to  our  Mind  with  Darknefs,  bring  us  frivo- 
lous, wavering  and  doubtful  things:  And  I 
know  a  Perfon  to  whofe  Eyes  a  Fire  pre- 
fentsit  felf  often,  either  meditating,  or  ex- 
pecting Meffengers. 

T^is  is  what  Scaliger  and  Cardan  have  faid 
concerning  their  own  Genii,  and  thofe  of 
others;  from  which  the  judicious  Reader  may 
ealily  difcern  their  fenfe  concerning  them. 


©HAR 


6o  An  Account  of  Genii, 


CHAP.     III. 

Wloat  perception  Men  have  had  of  Ge- 
nii, or  Spirits,  and  their  operations 
by   the  Sight. 


A 


S  I  come  now  to  give  an  account  of 
the  perception  Men  have  had  of  Genii> 
or  Spirits,  and  their  operations,  by  their  par- 
ticular fenfes;  I  ftiall  begin  with  the  moft 
fpiritualized  fenfe,  vix*  the  Sight  ,  and  fet 
forth  what  perception  Men  have  had  of  them 
by  that;  and  whereas  in  my  account,  ac- 
cording to  the  feveral  fenfes,  it  may  fome- 
times  happen,  that  more  than  one  fenfe  may 
be  concerned  at  one  and  the  fame  time,  in  a 
perception  of  them,  I  fhall  entitle  the  Chap- 
ters, according  to  the  predominant  fenfe  in 
that  A<5Hon.  And  whereas  it  often  happens 
that  fome  particular  Perfons  have  a  percep- 
tion of  Spirits,  both  by  the  Sight  and  Hear- 
ing, when  other  Perfons  prefeht  perceive  no- 
things I  fliall  treat  of  thefe  Perfons  in  par- 
ticular Chapters. 

To  begin  therefore  with  ijiftances  of  Per- 
fons perceiving  Spirits   by  the  Sight ;    Cam- 
De  Sens,   fmella  tells  US.,    there  are  Angel  Guardians  for 
Rer.  L  i.  each  Species,  and  individual  Perfon,  as  St.  Hi- 
f-  7*         erom  writes,  and  himfelf  has  found   by  expe- 
rience ,    which  he    did  not  underftand   be- 
fore. 

In 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  61 

In  the  (lime  work,  he  tells  us  of  a  Friend  L.2.c.2$. 
of  his,  who  was  no  ignorant,  nor  timerous 
Perfon,  nor  given  to  fpeak  untruths,  who  af- 
fured  him  he  Bad  often  fccnand  converfed  with 
Evil  Damons  j  and  he  fays,  he  met  with  many 
others  afterwards,  who  had  been  incredulous 
in  this  kind,  but  upon  their  feeing  and  con- 
verting with  Spirits,  chang'd  their  Opinions, 
and  their  Lives. 

Elfewhere  he  writes  thus  ,«  Torphyrius  and  ib.l.+.c.i. 
Tlotinm  fay  there  are  Avgels  Good  and  Bad, 
as  daily  experience  teaches  j  and  my  felf  alfo 
have  found  by  manifeft  experience,  not  when 
I  greatly  endeavoured  it,  but  when  I  was 
minding  another  thing  ;  and  therefore  it's  no 
wonder  if  they  did  not  appear  to  curious 
Nero. 

In  his  Atheifmus  Triumph  at  us,  he  alfo  tells  us  c.  if. 
of  a  Friend  of  his  that  had  a  fenfible  experience 
of  Spirits,    whofe  Voice  he  ufed  to  hear  be- 
twixt fleeping  and  waking,    and  efpecially 
when  any  evil  was  to  happen  to  him. 

Father  Le  Brun  Printed  a  Book  two  Years 
fince  at  Paris,  in  French,  which  has  for  Title, 
Hifiorire  Critiqug  des  pratiques  fuperftitieufes,  &C 
In  the  Second  part  of  this  Book,  Chap.  7.  he 
writes  concerning  Trithemius ,  as  follows: 
The  Abbot  Trithemius,  after  an  ardent  defire 
of  knowing  Secrets  unknown  to  all  Mankind, 
learned  fuch  as  were  Aftonifhing  by  a  Reve- 
lation, which  has  no  way  the  character  of 
being  Divine.  I  examine  not  whether  all  he 
faid  he  had  learnt,  be  natural ;  I  know  fome 
Perfons  pretend  it ;  but  it's  plain  it  was  with- 
out making  a  due  refle&ion.  However  it  may 
be ,  I  (hall  only  fpeak  of  the  manner  after 
which  Trithemius  learnt  thefe  Secrets ;  He  Writ 

it 


6i  An  Account  of  Genii y 

it  confidently  to  a  Carmelite  Father  ,  a  Friend 
of  his,  call'd  Borfiius,  who  died  at  GjW,  be- 
fore the  Letter  came  to  him :  It  was  open'd 
and  communicated  to  many  Perfons,  and  7W- 
themius  did  not  difown  it.  I  have  in  hand, 
fays  he,  in  his  Letter,  a  great  Work  which 
will  amufe  the  whole  World,  if  ever  it  fees 
the  Light;  it's  divided  into  Four  Books,  and 
the  Firft  has  for  Title  of  it,  Steganographj ;  the 
Work  throughout  is  full  of  great  and  afto- 
nifhing  things,  which  Man  has  never  heard 
of,  and  will  feem  incredible.  If  you  ask  me, 
how  I  learnt  thefe  things  ?  It's  not  by  Man, 
but  by  the  Revelation  of  I  know  not  what 
Spirit;  for  thinking,  on  a  day,  this  Year  1499. 
if  I  could  not  dilcover  fecrets  unknown  to 
Men;  after  having  a  long  while  ponder'd  on 
thofe  I  have  mentioned ,  and  being  at  length 
perfwaded  that  what  I  fought  for  was  not 
poffible,  I  went  to  Bed,  being  fomewhat  afha- 
med  for  having  carried  my  Folly  fo  far,  as 
to  attempt  an  Impoffible  thing.  In  the  Night- 
time fome  one  prefented  himfelf  to  me,  and 
calling  me  by  my  name,  Trithemius,  faid  he, 
do  not  believe  you  have  had  all  thefe  thoughts 
in  vain,  tho'  the  things  you  fearch  are  not 
poffible  to  you,  nor  to  any  other  Man,  they 
will  become  fo.  Teach  me  then  ,  I  reply 'd , 
what  I  mufi  do  to  fucceed.  Then  he  laid 
open  the  whole  Myftery ,  and  fhew'd  me  that 
nothing  was  more  eafy.  God  is  my  Witnefs, 
that  I  fpeak  the  Truth,  and  that  I  have  taught 
thefe  Secrets  but  to  a  Prince,  who  by  an  evi- 
dent proof  has  been  convinced  of  the  poffi- 
billity  of  it.  It  Imports  that  none  but  Prin- 
ces fiiould  know  thefe  forts  of  Secrets,  leaft 

Traitors> 


or  Familiar  Spirits  6] 

Traitors,  Impoftors,   or  other  111  Men  make 
ufe  of  them  tor  doing  many  Mifchiefs. 

Boijfardus   L.  de  Magia  ,    Geniu    &  Angelis,  G  $. 
mentions   this  Letter  of  Trithemius,    and  fays 
he  there  adds ,    that  he  could  teach  all  the 
things  he  had  of  the  Spirit,  in  all  the  Langua- 
ges of  the  World  j  and   that  he  clears  himfelf 
of  the  Crime  of  Magick,  and  any  commerce 
with  Evil  Spirits,  by  a  Sacred  Oath  and  Ex- 
ecration.    Naud.vus  writes  that  Trithemius  in-  Apol.  des. 
deed  lay  under  a  fufpicion  of  Magick,  on  the  Grands  ho- 
account  of  that   Letter,   and  endeavours  to  ^ine^^\ 
clear  him  of  it,  but  I  leave  it  to  the  Readers, 
to   confider  what   Tritbemiuss  Words'import, 
as  to  a  converfation.  with  fome  Spirit,  be  he 
Good  or  Bad. 

The  fame  Boijfardus  writes,  that  an  Illuftri-  c.6: 
ous  German  Count,  whom  he  knew ,  profeft, 
he  had  a  Familiat  Spirit,  whom  he  affirm'd  to 
be  of  the  Celeftial  Order,  whole  Counfel 
he  ufed  in  all  things  he  undertook,  at  home 
and  abroad. 

Fhilip  MelanEihon  tells  us,  that  he  had  fcQti  l.  de  Am- 
Spectres,  and  that  he  knew  many  Men  worthy  we. 
of  credit,   who  affirm' d  they  had   not  only 
feen  Spettres,  but  had  likewife  difcourfed  with 
them.     So  Maximus  Tjrrms  fays,  he  faw  ts£fcu-  scm,  2p 
lapiusy  but  it  was  in  a  Slumber,    but  Hercules 
he  faw,  as  he  was  Waking. 

There  was  a  Pamphlet  Printed  in  London, 
Anno  1 64  $\  in   Quarto,    Entitled,    A  True  and    ' 
exact  Relation  of  the  feveral  Informations,    Exa- 
minations and  Ccnfejficns  of  the  late  Witches  Ar~ 
raigned  and  Executed  in  the  Count j  of  Effex. 

Who  were  Ajxaignzi  and  Condemned  at 
the  late  Seffions  held  at  Chelmsfird,  before  the 
Right   Honourable  Robtr:  Earl  of  Warwick, 

and 


6\  An  Account  of  Genii, 

and  feveral  of  his  Majefty's  Juftices  of  the 
Peace.  Julythz  2,9th.  1645-. 

Before  this  Seffions  feveral  Informations 
concerning  Witches ,  and  their  Pra&ifes  3 
were  taken  before  Sir  Harbottel  Grim  ft  on,  and 
Sir  Thomas  Bowes,  His  Majefty's  Juftices  of 
Peace  for  the  faid  County.  Some  of  which 
Informations  are  as  follows. 

I.  The  Information  of  Matthew  Hopkins  of 
Manningtree,  Gent.  Taken  upon  Oath  be- 
fore us,  the  ajth.  of  March,  1645-. 

This  Informant  faith,  that  the  faid  Elizabeth 
Clarke,  alias,  Beddingfield  (fufpe&ed  for  a  Witch 
.  as  aforefaid,  and  whofe  Mother  and  fome  others 
of  her  Kinsfolk,  did  fuffer  Death  for  Witchcraft 
and  Murther)  being  by  appointment  of  the  faid 
Juftices,  watcht  feveral  Nights^  for  the  better 
difcovery  of  her  wicked  Pra&ifes :  This  In- 
formant came  into  the  Room,  where  the  laid 
Elizabeth  was  watcht,  as  aforefaid,  the  laft 
Night,  being  the  24^.  of  this  Inftant  March, 
but  intended  not  to  have  ftay'd  long  there,  - 
but  the  faid  Elizabeth  forthwith  told  thus  In- 
formant, and  one  Mr.  Sterne,  there  prefent, 
if  they  would  ftay,  and  do  the  faid  Elizabeth 
no  hurt,  fhe  would  call  one  of  her  white  Imps, 
and  play  with  it  in  her  Lap  j  but  this  Infor- 
mant told  her  they  would  not  allow  of  it ; 
but  that  ftaying  there  a  while  longer,  within 
a  quarter  of  an  Hour  after,  there  appeared 
an  Imp  like  to  a  Dog3  which  was  White  with 
fome  Sandy  Spots,  and  feem'd  to  be  very 
Fat,  and  Plump,  with  very  fhort  Legs,  and 
forthwith  Vanifht  away  :  and  the  laid  £/ 
beth  faid  the  name  of  that  Imp,  was  Jannara  ; 

Up, 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  6$ 

and  immediately    there     appeared    i 
Imp  y   which   flic"  culled   Vinegar  Tom,     \ 
fhapcofa  Grey-hound,  with  long  Leg 
the  laid  Elizabeth  then  laid,   that  tl. 
Ihould  be   a   black  Imj>y  and  fhould  a 
the  (aid  Mr.  Stcrney  which  appeared,  but  pj 
fently   Vanifht  ;    and  the  lad   that  apj 

s  m  the  ftiape  of  a  Pole-cat,  but  the  Head 
fomewhae  bigger-  and  the  faiJ  Elh 
told  this  Informant,  that  (lie  had  hve  Imp 
her  own,  and  two  of  the  Imps  of  the  01 
lam  meaning  one  Ann  Wefi  3    Widow 

who  is  now  alfo  fafpccieJ  to  be  guilty  of 
Witchcraft)  and  faid  fometimes  the  Imps  of 
the  Old  Bedlam  Suck'd  on  the  faid  Elijah 
and  fometimes  her  Imps  Suck'd  on  the  ( 
Beldam  Wtfti  and  the  faid  Elizabeth  farther 
told  this  Informant,  that  Satan  would  never 
let  her  be  at  reft,  or  quiet,  till  fhe  did  con- 
fent  to  the  Killing  of  the  Hogs  of  one  Mr.  Ed- 
wards  of  Mannintree,  and  the  Horfe  of  one 
Robert  Taylor,  of  the  fame  Town. 

II.  The  Information,  of  John  Sterne,  Gent. 
Taken  upon  Oath  before  us,  the  2jth.  L>>y 
of  March,  1645-. 

This  Informant  faith  ,  that  Watching  with 
Elizabeth  Clarke  (fufpe&ed   for  Witchcraf,  as 
afor^faid)  fhe  defired  this  Informant,  and 
reft  that  were  in  the  Room  with  her,    to 
down,  and   fiid  fhe  would  (hew  this  Inf< 
mant   and  the  reft   fome  of  her  tiii 

within  half  an  Hour,  there  appear'd  a  wh 
thing  in  the  likenefs  of  a  Cat,  but  no:  alt 
gethcr  fo  big,  and   being  askd  if  fhe  would 
not   be  afraid    of  her    Imf 

F 


66  An  Account  of  Genii, 

what  do  you  think  I  am  afraid  of  my  Chil- 
dren?   and  that  ftie  call'd  the  name  of  that 
white  Imp  Hoult.    A#d  this  Informant  farther 
faith,  that  prefently  after  there  appear'd  ano- 
ther white  Imp  with  Red  Spots,  as  big  as  a 
fmall  Dog,    which  Ihe  then  called  Jarmara; 
and  that  immediately  after  there  appear'd  at 
the   Threfhold  of  the  Door  another  Imp,  a- 
tout  the  bignefs  of  the  firft,  but  did  prefent- 
ly Vanifli  away  :    and  then  the  faid  Elizabeth 
being  ask'd  if  any  more  Imps  would  come  ? 
Ihe  anfwer'd  that  Vinegar  Tom  would  come  by 
and  by,  and  forthwith  there  appear  d  another 
in  the  likenefs  of  a  Dumb  Dog,  fomewhat 
bigger  than  any  of  the  former  ;    and  the  faid 
Elizabeth  alfo  told  this  Informant,   that  lhe 
had  three  Imps  from  her  Mother,  which  were 
of  a   Brown  Colour,  and  two  from  the  Old 
Beldam   Weft ;    and  that  there  had  five  Imps 
appeared ;   but  fhe  had  one  more  call'd  Sack 
and  Sugar,   which  had  been  hard  at  Work, 
and  it  would  be  long  before  it  came,  but  it 
fhould  Tear  this  Informant. 

III.  The  Information  of  Frances  Mills,  Grace 
Norman,  Mary  Phillips,  and  Mary  Par- 
fley :  Taken  upon  Oath ,  before  the  faid 
Juftiees,  the  2  J th.  Day  of  March,  1645^ 

Thefe  Informants  fay  joyntly,  that  watch- 
ing with  the  faid  Elizabeth  Clarke,  fufpe&ed 
as  aforefaid,  about  Twelve  of  the  Clock  laft 
Night  j  the  faid  Elizabeth  fmack'd  with  her 
Mouth,  and  beckon  d  with  her  Hand,  and 
Inflantly  there  appeared  a  white  thing,  about 
the  bignefs  of  a  Catj  and  that  thefe  Infor- 
mants 


or  familiar  Spirits.  67 

mants  faw 

Elizabeth  name  J . 

IV.    Toe   Information    of   Edward    ! 
Manninuee  •     'I '..ken  upon   Oath  htfi 
faid  J uji ices,  the  25th.  of  March,   164J. 

This  Informant   faith,  that  watching  \vi 
the   faid    Elizabeth  Clarke  the  la  ft:  Night,    be 
ask'd  her  if  he  fhould  continue   ftill  in   I 
Room  with  her:  and  the   Grid  Elizabeth  d* 
red  he  fhould,    if  he   would 
with  the  Devils;    for  they  would  come  this 
Nighty  and  that  which  (lie  call'd  Hw.dt  would 
come   firft,    and   then  that  which  file  call 
Jarmara;    which  did  appear    in   the  liken 
of  a  white  Dog,  with    red  Spots;  and  pi 
fently  after  there  appeared  that  Imp  which  fhe 
call'd  Vinegar  Tom;  and  then  that  which  (lie  call'd 
Sack  and  Sugar  :  and  the  faid  Elizabeth  then  told 
this  Informant,  that  the  Devil  had  had   poi- 
feffion  of  her   Six  or  Seven  Years,  and  that 
he  had   oftentimes   knock'd  at  her  Door  in 
the  Night-time,    and  that  fhc  did  rife,  open 
the  Door,  and  let  him  in,    and  that  he  went 
to  Bed  to  her  three   or  four  times  a  Week, 
and  had  the  Carnal  knowledge  of  her,  as  a 
Man. 

V.  The  Information  0/John  Banks  c/'Mannin- 
tree,  Taken  upon   Oath  before  tie  faid  J^ 
cesy  the  2jth.  of  March,  1645'. 

This  Informant  faith,    that  watching  w 
the  faid  Elizabeth  Clarke,    he  did  Inform  . 
Confirm  all  the  particulars  expreft  y    and  fee 
down  in  the  Information  of  the  faid  Mi 

F  1  To 


An  Jccount  of  Genii, 

To  the  Five  Informations  before  fet  down, 
I  fhall  add  the  Examination  of  Ann  Leech  of 
Mijhy,  in  the  County  aforefaid,  Widow^  taken 
before  the  faid  Juftices,  April  the  14^.1645;. 
as  follows. 

This  Examinant  faith,  That  fhe  had  a  Grey 
Imp  fent  her,  and  that  fhe,  together  with  Eli- 
zabeth Clarke,  and  Elizabeth  Gooding,  did  about 
a  Year  fince,  fend  their  Imps  to  kill  a  Black 
Cow,  and  a  White  Cow  belonging  to  Mr.  Ed- 
winds,  which  was  done  accordingly  •  and  fays, 
That  fhe  fent  her  Grey  Imp  ,  Elizabeth  Clarke  a 
Black  Imp  ,  and  Elizabeth  Gooding  a  White  Imp  ; 
and  that  about  30  Years  fince  fhe  fent  a  Grey 
Imp  to  kill  two  Horfes,  of  one  Mr.  Bragg,  of 
Mhfley,  which  were  kill'd  accordingly.  That 
fhe,  and  the  faid  Elizabeth Gooding,  fent  either 
cf  them  an  Imp,  to  deftroy  the  Child  of  the 
faid  Mv.  Edwards ;  this  Examinants  Imp  being 
aWhite  one,  and  Elizabeth  Good'mgsz  Black  Imp  • 
and  that  about  thirty  Years  fince  this  Exami- 
nant had  the  faid  White  Imp  ?  and  two  others, 
a  Grey  and  a  Black  Imp ,  of  one  Anne  ,  the 
Wife  of  Robert  Pierce,  of  Stoake,  in  Suffolk,  be- 
ing her  Brother  ;  and  that  thefe  Imps  went 
commonly  from  one  to  another,  and  did  mif- 
chief  where-ever  they  went.  And  that  when 
this  Examinant  did  not  employ  them  abroad 
to  do  mifchief,  fhe  had  not  her  Health  j  but 
n  they  were  employed,  fhe  was  healthful 
and  well;  and  thefe  Imps  did  ufually  fuck  thofe 
Teats,  which  were  found  about  the  privy  Parts 
of  her  Body  ;  and  that  thofe  Imps  did  often 
ak  to  this  Examinant,  and  that  in  an  Hollow 
,  which  fhe  plainly  underltood,  &c.  fhe 

was 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  69 

was  executed  ac  Cbclms;  alfo  BUzai 

CUrh  before  mentiond. 

Now,   at>  to  the  fire    Informations  before 
fet  down  (in  which  Eight  Pcrfons   are  con- 
cerned    all   given  in   upon  Oath,    that  they 
law  fuch*  Imps,  as  they    mention  ,    I  cannot 
well  conceive  what  an  oppofer  of   any  re 
Apparitions  of  Spirits  can  lay;   for  here  I  do 
not  tell  you  of  afflicted  Perfons,  who  pi 
tended  to  fee Speft res,  which  were  feen  by  none 
but  themfelves,  nor  of  an  Old  diftra&ed  Wo- 
man,  who  fancies  flic  has  and  fees  Spirits,  at- 
tending her,  when  there  is  no  iuch  thir. 
Nor  do  I  give  you  the  Teftimonies  of  Crafi 
Melancholy  Wenches,  or  Old  Women  ,    as 
fome  fuch  there  may  have  been  ;  but  here  are 
the  Teftimonies   of    Eight    unexceptionable 
PerfonSj    as  I  conceive,    concurring  in  one 
thing:  And  if  this  be  not  a  fair  Proof,  I  know 
not  what  is  fo. 

As  to  the  Examination  of  Anne  Luc&3  coiv 
cerning  her  Imps,  though  the  Fact  ftands  but 
upon  herTeftimony,yet  in  regard  it  relates  to 
fomewhat  that  I  fhall  write  elfewhere  in  this 
Book,  I  thought  fit  to  infert  it.  And  I  here 
forbear  to  infert  the  Spirits  raifed  by  Mrs. 
Boimariy  who  was  executed  at  Salisbury,  for 
which  Fad  there  was  alfo  but  one  Teftimony- 

Sometime  fince,  I  drew  the  Account  before 
fet  down  from  the  foremention'd  Pamphlet, 
printed  Anno  1647.  I  cafually  met  with  a 
Pamphlet  publifh'd  in  London  ,  Anno  1 6 
bv  Mr.  Siearne  above  mentioned  ;  the  Title 
of  it  is,  A   Confirmation  every  of  Witch* 

ft j  Sic.  by  John  Stearne,  90s  'ill,         , 

-  Bury  St.  Edmonds 
of  Manningtree  in  Effex. 


7©  An  Account  of  Genfi, 

In  this  Tamphkt,  among  other  things,  he 
gives  an  Account  of  the  Fads  abovementi- 
nondy  as  follows. 

Mr.  Hofkin,  and  my  felf  went  together  to 
Elizabeth  Clarke ,  of  Manningtree  in  Ejfex;  who 
had  been  kept  three  Days  ,  and  three  Nights 
under  a  guard,  and  when  I  had  ask'd  her,  who 
fhe  had  accused  as  Witches,  we  were  going  a- 
way  ;  but  fhe  faid  to  us,  if  you  will  ftay,  I 
will  fliew  you  my  Imps,  for  they  are  ready  to 
ccme  ;  then  faid  Mr.  Hcfkin,  Betfe !  Will  you 
do  us  no  harm  ?  No  faid  fhe.  What  ?  Do  you 
think  I  am  afraid  of  my  Children  ?  You  fhall 
fit  down  ;  fo  we  did,  where  fhe  appointed  us; 
then  one  of  the  Company,  who  was  appoin- 
ted to  be  with  her  that  Night,  faid  to  her, 
Beffe,  I  ask'd  you  a  Queftion  of  late,  but  you 
anfwer'd  not;  then  Ihe  faid,  What  is  it  ?  He 
reply'd,  tell  the  Truth,  has  not  the  Devil  had 
the  ufe  of  your  Body  ?  She  faid,  Why  fhould 
you  ask  me  fuch  a  Queftion  ?  He  anfwer'd, 
I  defire  to  know  the  Truth,  and  no  otherwife»; 
then  fhe  fetph'd  a  deep  Sigh^  and  faid,  it  is  true; 
then  faid  Mr.  Hcpkin  ,  in  what  manner  and 
liken efs  came  he  to  ycu  ?  She  faid  ,  like  a 
Tall,  Proper ^  Black-hair'd  Gentleman,  a 
Prcperer  Man  than  your  felf;  and  being  ask'd, 
which  fhe  had  rather  lie  withal,  fhe  faid  the 
Devil ;  and  fo  particulariz'd  every  thing,  and 
how  he  came  in,  and  his  Habit,  and  how  he 
lay  with  her,  and  fpake  to  her ,  and  fhe  then 

::m'd  this  to  be  Truth,  and  fo  prefently 
fell  a  fmacking  with  her  Lips^and  call'd  Lought, 
two  or  three  times,  which  prefently  appeared 
to  us  eight,  (for  there  were  fix  which  were 
appointed  to  be  with  her  that  Night  before 
went)  in  the  likeiiefs  of  a  Cat  (fcr  fhe 

told 


or  bumilijr  Spirits.  y\ 

told  us  before  in    what    fhapes   they   would 
come,  and  fo  that  prcfently  vanifh  d.     Th 
(he  calfd  a  before,  im  !  Then 

appcai  d  another  like  a  Red,  or  Sandy  (potted 
Dog,  with  Legs  not  fo  long  as  a  Finger,  to 
our  |  mce,  but  his  back  as  broad  as  two 

Dogs,  or  broader  of  that  bignefs,  and  vaniftfd: 
After  that  fhe  calfd  more,  as  before  by  fevcral 
Names,  which  came  in  feveral  fhapes ,  one 
like  a  Greyhound,  with  Legs  as  lon;^  gs ; 

another  like  a  Fenit;   and  one  like  a  Rabbit, 
to  in  feveral  fhapes  tK  aftM  to  us, 

till   there     were   fbme    [even    or   eight  feeij. 
Some  by  fbni£  of  us,  and  others  by  other  fume 
of  us ;  then  I  ask'd  her  if  they  were  not    ill 
come,   for  there  were  more  come  thin  flic 
fpake  of,  fhe  anfwer'd,  that  they  came  dou- 
in  feveral  fhapes,  but  (kid  one  was  ftillto  come, 
which  was  to  tear  me  in  pieces :   I  ask'd 
why?  fhe  faid,  becaufe  I  would  have  h 
try'd  by  Swimming  ,  and  told  me,  that  n 
fhe  would  be  even  with  me  ^  and  fo  told  in 
what  manner  it  fhould  come,  black  and  like 
a  Toad,  and   fo"  afterwards  it  did  come,  as 
the  reft  averred  that  faw  it,  &c. 

This  Account  we  find  fomewhat  differs 
from  the  former,  but  whether  enough  to  in- 
validate the  Teftimony,  I  muft  leave  it  to  the 
Readers  Coniideration. 

Mr.  Glanvil,  in  his  Colle&ions  of  Relati- 
ons, for  proving  Apparitions  ,  Spirits,  and 
Witches,  tell  us  of  an  Iriftm.m  ,  that  had  like 
to  have  been  carry 'd  away  by  Spirits ;  and  of 
the  Ghoft  of  a  Man  who  had  been  feven  Year> 
dead,  that  brought  a  Medicine  to  his  Bed-iid<? 
The  Relation  is  thus. 

F  4  AG 


7f  A\  Account  of  Genii, 

A  Gentleman  in  IreUnd,  near  to  the  Earl  of 
Orrery's,  fending  his  Butler  one  Afternoon  to 

buy  Cards ;  as  he  pafs'd  a  Field, to  his  wonder, 
he  efpy'd  a  Company  of  People  fitting  round 
a  Table,  with  a  deal  of  good  Cheer  before 
them  in  the  niidft  of  the  Field  :  And -he  going 
up  towards  them,  they  all  arofe  and  faluted 
Ui,  and  defir'd  him  to  fit  down  with  them  ; 
but  one  of  them  Whifper'd  thefe  words  in  his 
Ear  :    Do    nothing    this  Company   invites    yen   to. 

reupon  he  refus'd  to  fit  down  at  the  Table^ 
dnd  immediately  Table  and  all  that  belong  d  to 
it  wTcre  gone  ;  and  the  Company  are  now 
dancing  and  playing  upon  Mufical  Inftru- 
mencs.  And  the  Butler  being  defir'd  to  joyn 
himfelf  with  them  ,  but  he  refuiing  this  alfa, 
the)'  all  fail  to  Work.,  and  he  not  being  to  be 
prevaifd  with,  to  Accompany  them  in  work- 
ing any  more  than  in  feafting,  or  dancings 
they  all  difappear  d,  and  the  Butler  is  now 
alone,  but  inftead  of  going  forwards^  home  he 
returns  as  faft  as  he  couid  drive,  in  a  great 
Confirmation  ;  and  was  no  fooner  entred  his 
Matter's  Door,  but  foils  down,  and  lay  fome- 
time  Senfelefs,  but  coming  again  to  himfelf, 
he  related  to  his  Maifer  what  had  pafs'd. 

The  ISiight  following  there  comes  one  of 
this  Company  to  his  Bed-fide,  and  tells  him, 
That  If  he  efftred  to  Jiir  out  t  vext  Day, 

v?cu!d  be  ctrryed  awty*     He  he  kept 

vvi;h:n^    but   towards    the  Evening,  having 
need  to  make  Water,  he  adventur'd  to  put  one 

of  ever  the  Threfhoid,  fcveral  Handing by^ 
which  he  had  no  fooner  dene,  but  they  elpyed 
a  Rope  call  about  his  Middle  •  and  the  Poor 
Man  was  hurried  away  with  great  Swiftn 
ffeey  following  him  as  faft  as  they  cculd,  but 

cculd 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  75 

could  not  overtake  him,  at  length  they  cfpy'd 

.  ;  one  Man,  coming  toward* him,  and  made 

itop  the  whom  he  faw 

u  him,  and  both  ends  of  the  Rope, 

but  -  J  drawing  ;  when  they  met,  he  bid 

:  end  of  the  Rope,  and  immediately 

had  a  fmartblow  given  him  over  his  Arm  with 

the  other  end  ;  but  by  this  means  the  Man  was 

Uid  the  Horfe-Man  brought  him  back 

h  him. 

I  of  Orrery  hearing  of  thefe  ftrange 
Pall,  nt  to  the  Mafter  to  defire  him  to 

is  Man  to  his  Iloufe,  which  he  accord- 
ingly did  ;   and  the  Morning   following  ,    or 
auickly  after,  he  told  the  Earl,  that  his  Speftre 
had  been  with  him  again,  and  alfur'd  him,that 
that  Day  he  fliould  moll  certainly  be  carry 'd 
ind  that  no  endeavours  fhould  avail  to 
the  laving  of  him  ;  upon  this  he  was  kept  in 
a  large  Room  ,    with  a  confiderable  number 
of  Perfons  to  guard  him,  ampng  whom  was 
the  Famous  Stroker,  Mr.  Grtatrixy  who  was  a 
Neighbour.     There  were  befide  other  Perfons 
of  Quality,  two  .Bilhops  in  the  Houfe  at  the 
fame  time  ,  who  were  confulted  concerning 
the  making  ufe  of  a  Medicine,  the  Spetfre  or 
Ghoft  prefcrib'd  ,   of  which  mention  will  be 
made  anon^but  they  'etermin'dontheNegative. 
Till  part  of  the  Afternoon  were  fpent  all 
s  quiet,  but  at  length  he  was  perceiv'd  to 
:  from  the  Ground  ,    whereupon  Mr.  Gr 

.other  luity  Man  clapt  their  Arms 

over  his  Shoulders,  one  of  them  before  him_> 

and  the  other  behind,  ;  ;lf  d  him  down 

with  a:  forcibly 

t  n  up  from  r  rid  they  were  too  weak 

fheir  he  Tor  a  confiderable  time 

he 


74  An  Account  of  Genii, 

he  was  carryed  in  the  Air,  to  and  fro  over 
their  Heads,  feveral  of  the  Company  ftill  run- 
ning under  him,  to  prevent  his  receiving  hurt, 
if  he  fhould  fall,  at  length  he  fell  and  was 
caught  before  he  came  to  the  Ground,  and 
had  by  that  means  no  hurt. 

All  being  quiet  till  Bed  time,  my  Lord  or- 
dered two  of  his  Servants  to  lye  with  him,  and 
the  next  Morning  he  told  his  LordJJup,  that  his 
Spe&re  was  again  with  him,  and  brought  a 
Wooden  Difh,  with  grey  Liquor  in  it,  and  bid 
him  Drink  it  off;  at  the  firft  fight  of  the  SpeBre, 
he  faid  he  endeavour'd  to  awake  his  Bed-fel- 
lows ,  but  it  told  him,  that  that  endeavour 
fhould  be  in  vain.;  and  that  he  had  no  caufe  to 
fear  him,  he  being  his  Friend,  and  he  that  at 
firft  gave  him  the  good  advice  in  the  Field, 
which  had  he  not  followed,  he  had  been  be- 
fore now  perfectly  in  the  Power  of  the  Com- 
pany he  faw  there  j  he  added,  That  he  con- 
cluded it  was  impoffible,  but  that  he  fhould 
have  been  carryed  away  the  Day  before, 
there  being  fo  ftrong  a  Combination  againft 
him ;  but  now  he  could  affure  him,  that  there 
would  be  more  Attempts  of  that  Nature,  but  he 
being  troubled  with  two  forts  of  fad  Fits,  he 
had  brought  that  Liquor  to  Cure  him  of  them, 
and  bid  him  Drink  it;  he  peremptorily  refufing, 
the  Spelire  was  angry,  and  upbraided  him  with 
great  Difingenuity,  but  told  him,  however, 
he  had  a  kindnefs  for  him,  and  that  if  he 
would  take  Plantane  Juice  ,  he  fhould  be  well 
of  one  fort  of  Fits,  but  he  fhould  carry  the  o- 
ther  to  his  Grave  j  the  Poor  Man  having  by 
this  time  fomewhat  recover'd  himfelf ,  ask'd 
the  Spectre,  whether  by  the  Juice  of  Plantane 
he  meant  that  of  the  Leaves,  or  Roots  ?  It  re- 
ply'd  the  Roots.  Then 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  75 

Then  it  ask\l  him,whether  he  did  not  know 

him  J  no;  itreply'd,  I  am  fuch  an 

one:  the  Man  anfwered,hehad  beenlongDcad: 

I  have  been  Dead,  faid  the  Spcttre,  or  Ghoft, 

Sj  and  you  know  that  I  liv'd  a  loofe 

\    and  ever  fince  I   have  been  hurried  up 

and  down  in  a  refllefs  condition,    with  the 

mpany  vou  faw,  andfhallbe  to  the  day  of 

Judgment  •  then  he  proceeded  to  tell  him,  that 

he  acknowledged  God  in  his  ways,  he 

had   not  fuffer'd  fuch  fevere  things  by  their 

means ;   and  further  faid,   you  never  Pray'd 

to  God  that  day  before   you  met  with  this 

Company  in  the  Fields. 

This  Relation  was  fent  to  Dr.  Henry  M 
bv  Mr.  E.  Fowler,  who  faid,  Mr.  Greatrix 
told  it  feveral  Perfons:  The  Lord  Orrery  alfo 
own'd  the  Truth  of  it;  and  Mr.  Greatrix  told 
it  to  Dr.  //  nn  More  himfelf,  who  particularly 
enquired  of  Mr.  Greatrix  about  the  Mans  be- 
ing carried  up  into  the  Air,  above  Mens 
Heads  in  the  Room,  and  he  did  exprefly  affirm 
he  was  an  Eye^witnefs  thereof. 

tells  us',     that  a   Young  Woman,  V*  prefltgl 
was  miferably  tormented  with  an  Evil  Spirit,  D*m-L  ■• 
in   the  Caftle    of  Caldcnhroc,    in    GuelderlandyC' 
and  had    been   carried  away  in   the  Air  by 
him,    if  himfelf   had  not  with-held  her   by 
Violence.    He  fays  alfo,    that  at  Magdeburg,  / 
a  certain  Magical  Juggler,  who  was  wont  to 
lead  about  a  little  Horfe  for  a  Show  ,  would 
let  him  walk  about  in  a  Circle  in  an  open 
Theatre,  and  at  the  end  of  the  Show,  would 
tell  the   Company,  that  he  could  get  but  lit- 
tle Money  among  Men,    and  therefore  he 
would  go  up  to  Heaven  ;  whereupon  he  would 
throw  a  Cord  up  in  the  Air,  and  the  little 

Horft 


2.  €•  7. 


y6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Horfe  would  go  up  after  it,  himfelf  taking 
hold  of  the  Horfes  Tayl  ,  would  follow  him, 
his  Wife  taking  hold  of  him,  would  follow 
alfo,  and  a  Maid  Servant  would  follow  her, 
and  fo  mount  up  in  the  Air,  as  it  were  link'd 
together ,  the  Spectators  Handing  in  great  ad- 
miration; till  a  certain  Citizen  coming  by 
chance  that  way, and  asking,  what  was  done? 
It  was  anfwered  that  a  Jugler  with  his  little 
Horfe  was  gone  up  into  the  Air  :  whereupon 
he  affured  them  that  he  faw  him  juft  before 
going  into  an  Inn  in  the  Street ;  therefore 
finding  themfelves  deluded,  they  went  away. 
Wierus  adds,  no  Man  may  deny  but  all  this  kind 
of  allyance  with  Damons ,  by  whatever  means 
gotten,  and  all  the  way  of  thefe  delufions  is 
a  peftiferous  Fraud,  introduc'd  for  the  utter 
deftru&ion  of  Men. 

Mr.  Thomas  Tilfon,  Minifter  of  Aykpworth 
in  Ke?it,  in  a  Letter  dated  July  the  6th.  1691. 
which  he  fent  to  the  late  Mr.  Baxter  in  London , 
gives  an  Account  of  an  Apparition  at  Rochefter; 
which  Account  Mr.  Baxter  has  Printed  in  his 
Hifiorical  Difcourfe  of  Apparitions  and  Witches. 
It  is  as  follows. 

Mary  the  Wife  of  John  Gcfe  of  Rochefter, 
being  Affli&ed  with  a  long  Illnefs,  re- 
moved to  her  Fathers  Houfe  at  Weft-Mulling, 
which  is  about  Nine  Miles  diftant  from  her 
own,  there  fhe  Died  June  the  4th.  this  prefent 
Year  1641.  The  day  before  her  departure, 
fhe  grew  very  impatiently  defirous,  to  fee  her 
two  Children ,  whom  me  had  left  at  home, 
to  the  care  of  a  Nurfe ;  fhe  pray'd  her  Huf« 
band  to  hire  an  Horfe,  for  fhe  muft  go  home, 
"and  Dye  with  the  Children;  when  they  per- 
/V/qded   her  to  the  contray,  telling  her  fhe 

Wi  s 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  77 

was  not  fit  to  be  taken  out  of  Bed,  nor  able 
to  lit  on  Horfe-back,  fhe  entreated  them,  how- 
ever to  try,  if  I  cannot  fit,  faid  fhe,  I  will  lie  a- 
long  upon  the  Horfe,  for  I  mult  go  to  fee  my 
Poor  Babes. 

A  Minifter,  who  lives  in  the  Town,  was 
with  her  at  Ten  of  the  Clock  that  Night,  to 
whom  fhe  exprefs'd  good  Hopes  in  the  Mer- 
cies of  God,  and  Willingnefs  to  die,  but,  faid 
fhe,  it  is  my  Mifcry  that  I  cannot  fee  my 
Children. 

Between  One  and  Two  of  the  Clock  in  the 
Morning  fhe  fell  into  a  Trance  ;  one  Widow 
Turner,  who  watch'd  with  her  that  Night,  fays, 
That  her  Eyes  were  open,  and  fixt,  and  her 
Jaw  fall'n  ;  fhe  put  her  Hand  upon  her  Mouth 
and  Noftrils ,  but  could  perceive  no  Breath  • 
fhe  thought  her  to  be  in  a  Fit,  and  doubted 
whether  fhe  were  alive  or  dead. 

The  next  Day,  this  dying  \Voman  told  her 
Mother  that  fhe  had  been  at  home  with  her 
Children.  That  is  impoflible ,  faid  the  Mo- 
ther, for  you  have  been  here  in  Bed  all  the 
while  ,•  yes,  reply'd  the  other,  but  I  was  with 
them  laft  Night,  when  I  was  a  deep. 

The  Nurfe  at  Roche fier  ,  Widow  Alexander 
by  Name  ,  affirms ,  and  fays ,  fhe  will  take 
her  Oath  on  t  before  a  Magiftrate,  and  receive 
the  Sacrament  upon  it,  that  a  little  beforeTwo 
of  the  Clock  that  Morning,  fhe  faw  the  like- 
nefs  of  the  faid  Mary  Goffe,  come  out  of  the 
next  Chamber,  (where  the  Elder  Child  lay  in 
a  Bed  by  it  felf)  the  Door  being  left  open, 
and  ftood  by  her  Bed-fide  about  a  Quarter  of 
an  Hour  j  the  Younger  Child  was  there  lying 
by  her  •  her  Eyes  mov'd,and  her  Mouth  went, 
but  fhe  faid  nothing.    The  Nurfe  moreover 

fax 


/8  An  Account  of  Genu, 

fays,  that  fhe  was  perfe&ly  awake,  it  was  then, 
Day-light,  being  one  of  the  longeft  Days  in 
the  Year.  She  late  up  in  her  Bed,  and  look'd 
itedfaftly  upon  the  Apparition ;  in  that  time 
fhe  heard  the  Bridge  Clock  ftrike  Two,  and  a 
while  after  faid  ,  In  the  Name  of  the  Father , 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghoft,  what  art  thou  ?  There- 
upon the  Appearance  remov'd,  and  wenta- 
way.  She  flipt  on  her  Cloaths  and  followed, 
btit  what  became  on't  fhe  cannot  tell ;  then, 
and  not  before,  fhe  began  to  be  grievoufly 
affrighted,  and  went  out  of  Doors,  and  walk'd 
upon  the  Wharf,  fthe  Houfe  being  juft  by  the 
River  fide)  for  fome  Hours,  only  going  in, 
now  and  then  ,  to  look  to  the  Children  ;  at 
Five  of  the  Clock  fhe  went  to  a  Neighbour's 
Houfe,  and  knock'd  at  the  Door,  but  they 
would  not  rife  ;  at  Six  fhe  went  again,  then 
they  arofe  and  let  her  in  :  She  related  to  them 
all  that  had  pafs'd ;  they  would  perfwade  her 
fhe  was  miftaken,  or  Dreamt ;  but  fhe  confi- 
dently affirm'd,  If  ever  I  faw  her  in  all  my  Life, 
I  faw  her  this  Night. 

One  of  thofe  to  whom  fhe  made  the  Rela- 
tion (  Mary  the  Wife  of  John  Sweet )  had  a 
MefTenger  came  from  Mulling  that  Forenoon, 
to  let  her  know  her  Neighbour  Goffes  Wife  was 
dying,  and  defir'd  to  fpeak  with  her ;  fhe  went 
over  the  fame  Day  and  found  her  departing, 
The  Mother,among  other  Difcourfe,related  to 
her  how  much  her  Daughter  had  long  d  to  fee 
the  Children ;  and  faid,  fhe  had  feen  them. 
This  brought  to  Mrs.  Sweets  Mind,  vvhat 
the  Nurfe  had  told  her  that  Morning,  for  till 
then  fhe  had  not  thought  to  mention  it,  but 
difguis'd  it  rather,  as  the  Woman's  difturb'd 
Imagination, 

The 


or  Familiar  Spirits  79 

The  fubftancc  of  this  I  had  related  to  me, 
by  John  Carpenter,  the  Father  of  the  Deceas'd, 
next  Day  after  her  Burial;  July  the  id.  I  fully 
Difcours'd  the  Matter  with  the  Nurfe/ind  two 
Neighbours,  to  whofc  lloufe  flic  went  that 
Morning. 

Two  Days  after,  I  had  it  from  die  Mother, 
the  Minifter  that  was  with  her  in  the  Evening, 
and  the  Woman  that  fats  up  with  her  that  laTt 
Night  j  they  all  agree  in  the  fame  Story,  and 
every  one  ftrength'ns  the  others  Teftimony. 

Tney  appear  to  be  fober  intelligent  Perfons, 
far  enough  from  defigning  to  impofe  a  Cheat 
on  the  World,  or  to  mannage  a  Lye,  and  what 
Temptation  they  lie  under  forfo  doing,  lean- 
not  conceive.  So  far  the  Letter  to  Mr.  Baxter. 

According  to  the  foregoing  inftance,  Hel- 
mont  tell  us  of  a  Boy,  who  through  an  excuf- 
five  defire  of  feeing  his  Mother ,  fell  -into  an 
Extafy  ,  and  gave  her  a  vifit,  flie  being  many 
Miles   diftant  from  him,  and  that  upon   his 
coming  to  himfelf,  remembring  all  things,  he 
gave  People  many  Marks  of  his  having  been 
with  her.      Marcus  Marci,  having  fet  down  phyf.  vet. 
this  Relation  from  Helmont,  adds,  though  we  reft,  part 
ihould  grant  the  Boy's  Mind  or  Imagination  *' 
had  reach' d  to  that  place,  it  would  be  ridiculous 
to  think  he  could  have  perceived  thofe  fenfible 
things  being  prefent,  unlefs  we  likewife  ad- 
mit the  Organs  of  his  Senfes  alfo,  with  which 
he  could  have  received   thofe  Images,    had 
pafs'd  thither  :  Therefore  we  mult  fay,  that  as 
the  Imaginative  Faculty  comes  fometiines  to 
the  Knowledge  of  future  things,   fo  it  does  to 
the  Knowledge  of  things  abfent  ;   and  as  for 
the  manner  after  which  it  is  done,  he  has  ex- 
plained it  elfewhcre.  Captain 


8o  An  Account  of  Genii > 

Captain  Henry  Bell,  in  his  Narrative  prefix t 
to  Luther 's  Table ,  printed  in  Englifh,^;.  165*  2. 
having  acquainted  us  how  the  German  Copy 
printed    of  it ,    had  been  difcover'd   under 
Ground  ,  where  it  had   lain   hid   Fifty  two 
Years,  that  Edition  having  been  filppreft  by 
an  Edid  of  the  Emperor  Rudolphus  the  Second^ 
fo  that  it  was  Death  for  any  Perfon  to  keep  a 
Copy  thereof -and  having  told  us,  that  CafpurUs 
Van  Sparry  ^German  Gentleman,  with  whom  he 
was  familiarly  acquainted  while  he  negotiated 
Affairs  in  Germany  y  for  K  ing  James  the  Firft, 
was  the  Perfon  that  difcover'd  it,  An.  1626. 
and  tranfmitted   it  into  England  to  him,  and 
earneftly  defir'd  him  to  tranflate  the  faid  Book 
into  English,   fays,   he  accordingly  fet  upon 
the  Tranflation  of  it  many  times ,  but  was  al- 
ways hindred  from  proceeding  in  it  by  fome 
intervening  Bufinefs.    .  About  fix  Weeks  after 
he  had  receivM  the  Copy,,  being  in  Bed  with 
his  Wife,,  one  Night  between  Twelve  and  One 
of  the  Clock,  fhe  being  alleep  ,  but  himfclf 
awake^  there  appear'dto  him  an  Ancient  Man, 
ftanding  at  his  Bed's-fide,  array'd  ali  in  White,, 
having  a  long  and  broad  White  Beard,  hang- 
ing down  to  his  Girdle,  who  taking  him  by 
his  right  Ear,  faid  thus  to  him,  Sirrah  !  Will 
not  you  take  time  to  tranflate  that  Book  which 
is  fent  unto  you  out  of  Germany  ?  I  will  fhortly 
provide  for  you  both  place  and  time  to  do  it ; 
and  then  he  variifh'd  ;    hereupon  being  much 
affrighted,  he  fell  into  an  extream  Sweat,  fo 
that  his  Wife  awaking,  and  finding  him  all 
over  Wet,  fhe  ask'd  him  what  he  alTd  ?  He 
told  her  what  he  had  feen  and  heard  5  but  he 
never  regarded  Vifions  nor  Dreams,  and  fo  the 
the  fame  fell  out  of  his  Mind.    But  a  Fort- 
night 


orFunuhi  ts.  8i 

night  after,  being  on  fl  edging 

in  Kingjlutt  mnfttr>  at  Dinner  with 

Wife  j   two  t   from  t 

whole  Counfd  I 

ry  him  to  the  Gateboitft  ,  fl  fr  ,    the 

to  b  rill  farther  (  I  rom  the 

of  the  Council.     Upon  which   W  -     he 

kept  there  ten  whole  Years  clolePriioner  ; 
where  he  fpent  five  V    8UTS  of  it  in  I 
the  laid  Book,  I  ,ood  caufe  [ 

ful  of  the  Old  ng  :   I  v. 

provide  for  you  both  plac e  and  time  to  tra 
flate  it. 

Car  J  n  tells  us/That  Jacobus  Don*m>  a  rich  Se-  uc  Ktr4 
nator  of  Vt ma ,  was  wont  to  relate  how  himfelf  varied 
being  in  Bed  with  his  Wife   one  Night,  and  L  ' 
having  a  Wax  Candle  burning  by  him,  and  9*' 
two  Nurfes  at  the  fame  time  lying  there  in  a 
Truckle-Bed  with  a  Child  under  a  Year  old  ; 
he  faw  the  Chamber  Door  to  be  open  d  by  de- 
grees, and  I  know  not  what  Man  to  put  his 
Head  in  ;  the  Nurfes  faw  him   too,  but'  nei- 
ther knew  his  Face  ;   the  young  Man  being 
affrighted,  arofe,  and  fnatch'd  his  Sword  and 
Buckler,  and  the 'Nurfes  each   of  them  gr 
Wax  Candles,he  goes  into  the  Hall  adjoyning 
to  the  Chamber,  there  he  found  all  things 
faft  fhut,  he  return  d  with  great  Admiration. 
The  Infant  who  was  well  in  Health,  dyed  the 
next  Day.      This  he  never  related  without 
fighing. 

We  have  alfo  feveral  inftances  in  Hiftory  of 
frightful  Speftres  appearing  before  I 
and  other  Afflictions.  Prccopi+s,whcr(  ires 

of  the  great  and  wonderful  Peftilence^    that  in  D^  ML 
the  time  of  Cofrot  and  eopl'd  t)  I 

;,  there  wei  Q  publickly, 

G 


82  An  Account  of  Genii, 

and  in  private  Houfes  Damons  in  an  Humane 
ihape,  which  ftruck  thofe  they  met,  and  thofe 
they  ftruck  were  prefently  feiz'd  with  the  Di- 
feafe,  and  this  happen'd  to  fome  waking,  in 
open  Day,  to  others  in  the  Night  time. 


CHAP.     IV. 

What  Perception  fome  Verfom  have  had 
of  Genii,  or  Spirits  by  the  Senfe  of 
feeing  j  when  others  pre fent  at  the  fame 
time  have  feen  nothing. 

LUcas  Jacobfon  Debesy  M.  A.  and  Provoft 
of  the  Churches  in  the  feventeen  Iflands 
of  Focroe,  fubjedt  to  the  King  of  Denmark,  in  his 
Defcription  of  the  faid  Iflands ,  and  Inhabi- 
tants, and  his  Account  of  feveral  Obfervables 
there,  in  his  eighth  Chapter  tells  us,  how  Sa- 
tan, even  fince  the^ure  Light  of  the  Gofpel 
there,  as  well  as  before,  has  behav'd  himfelf 
in  deluding  and  feducing  thofe  Inhabitants  : 
They  having  many  Examples  how  he  has  ta- 
ken away  fome,  and  carry'd  away  others,  re- 
lloring  them  afterwards,  but  weaken'd  in  their 
Underftandings  ;  whereof  he  gives  us  fome 
certain  Relations,  that  are  yet  in  the  Memory 
of  Man,  and  fome  others  that  happen  d  while 
he  himfelf  was  at  Foeroe  j  he  tell  us,  That  Ap- 
paritions of  Spirits  is  a   thing  fo  generally 
known  in  Fcerce,  that  almoft  every  where  in 
the  Country,  where  they  haye  read  no  Books 

thereof, 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  83 

thereof,  nor  he  Relation  froiv. 

Places  ,   know   it  1  .ks 

and  ;n,  that  the) 

doubt  at  all  of  it.     And  that  they  m 
and  not  by 

. 

a  nicer  en  lowment  of  their  Nature  ; 
and,  People  grow  much  altered  tt] 

on  feeing  fuch  Apparitions,  which  A; 
ons  the\  .  An  expreffion  e 

agreeing  with  that  of  V'ngU,  where 

t  the  Sybil,  who  undertook  to  carry        1       En.  6. 
as  to  the  (aid  to  him  at  the  en- 

trance  of  Hell,  where  {he  Ghofts,    came 
gainlt  him. 

Et  ni  doBj  comes  tenues  fine  corpo . 
Admonedty  volitare  cava  fub  imagine  forms y 
Irruat  &  frujtra  ferro  dinverbtra 

and  fuch  they  always  appear'd  to  my  fclf,  not 
with  folid  Bodies  of  Flefh  and  Bones. 

For  particulars,  I  refer  the  Reader  to  Mr. 
Debe/s  Book,  and  fhall  only  fet  down  one  Re- 
lation from  him  of  a  thing  which  happend, 
1667.   It  is  as  follows :  A  Perfon  caiTd  J* 
0/*$>»,beingthen  at  Glow,  inOjhroe,  in  the 241/1 
Year  of  his  Age,  on  the  17th  of  Jar.  fell  in- 
to a  Sicknefs,  lying  a  Bed  during  a  Fortnigl 
and  on  the  14s b  Day  of  his  Illnefs,  as  he 
afleep  at  Night,  there  came  one  into  him  v. 
Ihining  Cloathson,  whereat  he 
perceiv'd  him  in  that  Figure,  in 
mm,  the  Room  appearing  full  or' 
antfitask'd  the  Man  where  I. 
Whereunto  he  anfwer'd  nothing 

land  ale 
G  x 


$4  An  Account  of  Genii, 

his  Breaft,  and  round  about,  whereby  he  was 
prefently  heal'd. 

Nov/,  though  Damonologers  generally  give 
inftances  cf  fome  Perfons  feeing  Spirits,  when 
others,  in  the  fame  Room,  at  the  fame  time, 
fee  them  not  ,  and  feme  Men  undertake  by 
Thyfiognomy,  to  tell  who  fhall  have  Vifions  of 
Spirits,  or  Angels,  and  who  fhall  never  fee 
Apparitions  of  them,  though  they  are  in  the 
Room  with  others  that  fee  them ;  yet  the  moll 
convincing  inftance  of  this  peculiar  Sight, 
that  I  know  of  in  the  World,  is,  that  of  the 
Second  fight  ed  Terfons  in  Scotland,  who  are  calfd 
Second  fight ed,  becaufe  they  have  the  Gift  of 
feeing  more  than  others  can  that  are  with 
-them. 

My  late  Friend,  Mr.  John  Aubrey ,  at  the 
end  of  his  Book  of  Mifcellanies,  Printed  in  Lon- 
don, An.  169^  gives  an  Account  of  thefe  Se- 
cond fight  ed  Verfons,  which  was  fent  him  from  a 
Learned  Perfon  in  Scotland ,  whofe  Letters  he 
fhew'd  me  before  he  Printed  them  :  And  I 
fhall  here  fet  down  a  few  Particulars ,  taken 
from  that  Account,  relating  to  my  purpofe. 

I.  They  generally  term  this  Second  fight, 
in  Irifh  Taijlutarxugh,  and  fuch  as  have  it,  Tai- 
fy  trim,  from  Txijh,  which  is  properly  a  fha- 
dowy  Subftance  ,  and  fuch  as  can  only  be 
fome  way  difcenf  d  by  the  Eye,  but  not  lay'd 
hold  on  by  the  Hands ;  for  which  they  at 
fign'd  it  to  Bugles  or  Ghofis  ;  fo  that  Taijhtar  is 
*  "  as  much  as  one  that  converges  with  Ghoits,  or 
Spirits,  or  as  they  commonly  call  them  the 
Fairies,  or  Fairy-folks  ;  others  call  thefe  Per- 
fons TbiJJichin,  from  This,  which  is  properly 
fordight,  or  foreknowledge. 

II.  Thofe 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  8  ^ 

II.  Thofe  that  have  the  Second  fight y  fee  a 
multitude  of  Men  and  Women,Nighta;id  Day, 
round  about  them,  and  a  particular  Rcl 
is  made  of  one  of  thofe  Perfons,  a  Man  of  an 
npright  Converfation,  vvhousd  ordinarily  by 
looking  to  the  Fire,  to  foretel  what  Sti 
would  come  to  his  Houfe  the  next  Day,  or 
fhortly  after,  by  their  Habit,  and  Arms,  and 
fometimes  alio  by  their  Names ;  and  it'  any  of 
his  Goods  or  Cattle  were  milling,  he  would 
dired  His  Servants  to  the  very  place  where  to 
find  them  ,  whether  in  a  Mire  ,  or  upon  dry 
Ground  :  he  would  alfo  tell  if  die  Ikaft  Wt 
already  dead,  or  if  it  fhould  die  e're  they  could 
come  at  it;  and  in  the  Winter,  if  himfelf  with 
others  with  him  fate  thick  about  the  Fire-iide, 
he  would  defire  them  to  make  Room  for  fome 
others  that  flood  by  ,  though  they  did  not 
fee  them :  He  faw  two  Spirits  continually, 
and  fometimes  many  more,  though  others, 
fay  he  continually  faw  more  ,  and  would  of- 
ten feem  very  angry,  and  fomething  troubl'd^ 
nothing  vifible  to  others  moving  him.  The 
two  particular  Spirits  that  conftantly  attended 
him  were  called,  one  Brownie,  in  the  fhape  of  a 
Boy,  the  other  t  talUeb,  or  Meg  Mullack. 

in  the  fhape  of  a  Girl ,  who  were  two  Ghofts, 
which  (a$  it's  conftantly  reported)  of  Old 
haunted  a  Family  in  Straths  ?ey>  of  the  Name 
of  Grant ;  of  which  Name  and  Family  this 
Perfon  was. 

Note,  That  King  Jamas  in  his  Dxmonolcgy  L  3 
mentions  alfo  a  Spirit,  call'd  Brownie ,  that 
was  wont  formerly  to  haunt  divers  Houfes, 
without  doing  any  Evil,  but  doing,  as  it  were, 
neceflary  turns  up  and  dovyn  the  Houfe  ;  h$ 
appear'd  like  a  rough  Man,  nay,  fome  beliei 


$6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

that  their  Houfe  was  all  the  Sonfier  ,  as  they 
call'd  it  ,  that  is,  the  more  lucky  ,  or  fortu- 
nate^ that  fuch  Spirits  reforted  there. 

III.  As  to  the  extent  of  thefe  Peoples  know- 
ledge this  fecret  way,  it  reaches  both  prefent^ 
palsd,  and  future  Events.  They  forefee  Mur- 
thers,  Drownings,  Weddings,  Burials,  Com- 
bats, Manflaughters,  &c\  of  all  which  there 
are  many  inftances  to  be  given  ;  they  com- 
monly forefee  fad  Events  a  little  while  before 
they  happen;  for  inftance,if  a  Mans  fatal  end 
be  hanging,  they'll  fee  a  Gibbet,  or  a  Rope 
about  his  Neck  ;  if  beheading  ,  they'll  fee  a 
Man  without  a  Head  ;  if  drowning,  they'll 
fee  Water  up  to  his  Throat  ;  if  Itabbing,  they'll 
fee  a  Dagger  in  his  Breaft;  if  unexpected  Death 
in  his  Bed,  they'll  fee  a  Winding  Sheet  about 
his  I  lead  :  They  foretel  not  only  Marriages, 
but  of  good  Children,  what  kind  of  Life  Men 
fhall  lead,  and  in  what  Condition  they  fhall 
die  ;  alfo  Riches,  Honours, Preferments, Peace, 
Plenty,  and  good  Weather.  There  is  one  in-^ 
fhinpe  of  uSeccnd fight ed?irfonjNho  fawayoung 
Man  ,  attending  a  young  Gentlewoman ,  as 
me  went  up  and  down  the  Houfe,  and  this 
was  about  three  Months  before  her  Marriage 
with  him  ;  and  fometimes  they  foretel  things 
which  fall  out  feveral  Years  after.  It's  like- 
wife  ufual  with  Perfons  that  lofe  any  thing  to 
go  to  fome  of  thefe  Men,  by  whom  they  are 
directed  how  ;  with  what  Perfons ,  and  in 
,  what  place  they  fhall  find  their  Goods.  It's 
alfo  to  be  noted,  that  this  Gift  bears  a  Lati- 
tude, fo  that  fojne  have  it  in  a  far  more  Emi- 
nent degree  than  others. 

IV,  As  for  the  way  of  receiving  this  Gift, 
pnd  QonrawmQzting  if  to  other^  the  Account 

tstfl 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  %j 

tells  us,  that  in  the  Iflc  of  Stye,  efp:cial!y  i 
fore  the  Gofpel  came  thither,  fcvcraj  Fami- 
lies had  it  by  Succeflion  ,    defcending  from 
Parents  to  Children,  and  as  yet  there  are  ma- 
ny that  have  it  that  way.    So  Cardan  tell  us,  j)eRffu 
it  runs  in  a  Blood  among  the  Turks,  for  Per-  wir.  i.B 
fons  to  caft  themfelves  into  an  Extaiy  at  Plea-  c-  4J- 
fure.     Some  fay,  they  get  this  Gift  by  corn- 
pad  with  the  Devil,  others,  fay,  by  convc  i 
with  thofe  Demons,  we  call  Fairies.    They  fay, 
they  can  communicate  the  Gift  to  others  in  a 
few  Days,  and  have  offer'd  to  do  it  for  a  fmall 
Matter  ,•  and,  they  fay,    that  if  ax  any  time, 
when  they  fee  thofe  ftrange  lights,  they  fct 
their  foot  on  the  foot  of  another    who  has 
not  the  fecond  fight,  that  other  will,  for  that 
time,  fee  what  they  are  feeing.    And  as  I  am 
told  by  a  Perfon  who  has  convers'4  with  thofe 
Second  fightedVerfonsy  the  Gift  will   continue 
with  the  Man  that  has  fo  receiv'd  it,    all  his 
Life 

V.  This  Gift  is  very  troublefome  to  thofe 
that  have  it,  and  they  would  gladly  be  rid  of 
it  j  for  if  the  objed  be  a  thing  that  is  terrible, 
they  are  {ccn  to  fweat  and  tremble,  and  fcreek 
at  the  Apparition  ;  at  other  times  they  laugh 
and  tell  of  the  thing  cheerfully  j  juft  accord- 
ing as  the  thing  is  Pleafant ,  or  aftonifhing. 
A  certain  Perfon  defir'd  a  Second  fighted  M.m 
to  teach  him  his  Skill ;  who  told  him  he 
could  do  it  in  three  Days  time  ,  but  faid  he 
would  not  advife  him,  or  any  Man  to  learn 
it ;  for  upon  learning  it  he  would  never  be  a 
minute  in  his  Life,  but  he  would  fee  innume 
ble  Men  and  Women,  Night  and  Day,  round 
about  him ,  which  he  believ'd  would  be 
troublefome  to  him  :  Whereupon  the  Perfon 
G  4  would 


88  An  Account  of  Genii, 

would  not  learn  it.  And  thofe  that  have  if 
wifii  to  be  rid  of  it,  judging  it  a  Sin,  and  that 
it  came  from  the  Devil  •  and  fome  of  them 
have  apply 'd  themfelves  to  the  Miniftry  ,  de- 
firing  their  Prayers  for  their  being  freed  of  it, 
and  they  have  been  freed  accordingly.  In  the 
Ifle  of  Skje ,  if  a  Woman  has  it  her  felf,  and 
be  marry  ed  to  a  Man  that  has  it  alfo,  unlefs  £ 
Child  of  theirs  be  baptiz'd  juft  upon  the  deli- 
very, he  has  it  all  his  Life ;  if  he  be  then 
baptiz'd,  he  is  freed  from  it. 

VI.  The  Perfons  that  have  this  Gift,  areob- 
ferv'd,  for  the  moft  part,  to  be  vicious,  tho* 
fome  very  honeft  Perfons,  of  an  upright  life, 
have  it 

\ir.  Aubrey y  in  a  fmall  Addition,  which  he 
has  annext  to  his  Account  of Second  fighted Perfons, 
ltfcj>efa.  gives  us  a  Relation  from  Diewbrcke,  of  an  old 
Woman  with  whom  it  was  ufual,  where  any 
Friend  of  hers  dyed,  to  fee  their  Apparitions 
wichout  an  Head,  and  this  though  the  Per- 
fons were  never  fo  far  off.  And  I  have  been 
credibly  inform' d  of  a  Gentleman  in  the  Low- 
Copntries,  who  ,  as  he  walk'd  the  Streets  of  a 
Town  would  often  meet  People  without  Head^, 
&sit  feenrd  to  him  ,  and  would  ask  the  next 
Perfon  he  met  with,  who  fuch  Perfons  were, 
and  would  acquaint  his  Friends  that  thofe 
Perfons  would  die  within  a  Year,  which  al- 
ways came  to  pafs. 

Relating  to  this  we  find  it's  a  Cuftom  with 
the  Jews,  pn  the  7th  Day  of  their  Feaft  pf  To? 
bemacles^iz.  the  iiftDay  of  the  Month  pf  Sefc 
to  go  forth  in  the  Night  time,iri  the  Moonfhine, 
fcee£ctfe  they  think  all  things  that' will  happen 
fO  them  that  Year,  are  revsaPd  to  them  tha? 
fright  hi  the  Mpohftine,    %f*ffltpf  }n  his  Thh 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  89 

Ulogus  Hcbrjto  mixtus,  has  givn  us  a  cut  of  this0'^'-*1' 

which  I   have  alfo  here  infcncJ  : 
Whc  are  going  forth  in  the  Moonfhinc 

with  Brunei.  'alms,  Olives,  and  Willows 

in  thcL    Hands,  to  (larch  out  the  Events  of 
the  whole  Year  ;  but  the  Head  of  one  of  them 
.  and  is  not  feen  in  the  fhadow,  whence 
the  Pcilon  concludes  he  fhall  die  that  Year. 

\in  his  SynagogaJudakajStttR  fets  forth  all  chap.  21. 
thefe  things.    They  go  forth  in  the  Night  time, 
in  t!  ifhine,fome  having  only  their  Heads 

bare,  fome  with  a  Shirt  on  only,  or  alfo  na- 
,  having  a  Sheet  about  them,  which  they 
let  fall,  and  ftretch  forth  their  Arms  and  Hands; 
if  any  Mans  Head  be  feen  wanting  in  the  fha- 
dow,  he  is  in  danger  of  Life,  and  it's  a  lign 
he  will  die  that  Year;  if  a  Finger  be  wanting, 
the  Death  of  a  Friend  is  forefhown  •  if  the  right- 
hand,  a  Son ;  if  the  left,  a  Daughter  will  die ; 
if  he  fee  no  fhade  at  all,  he  muft  prepare  for 
Death,  for  there  is  no  hope  of  avoiding  it ; 
and  if  he  be  upon  undertaking  a  Journey,  it's 
a  fign  he  will  never  return  home,  &c.     This 
the  Rabbins  make  x>ut  from  the  Words,  Numb. 
14.  9.  Their  fliadow  is  departed  from  them  ;  but 
they  write,  it  is  not  to  be  underftood  of  the 
fimfle  fiadow,  becaufe  it  cannot  be  but  a  Man 
muft  fee  his  fhadow  in  theMoonfhine ;  but  of 
the  JhadoTi/  oftbefrado-w ;  for  if  it  be  well  mind- 
ed, we  fhall  find  a  twofold  fhadow,  whereof 
the  fecond  is  a  Refle&ion  of  the  firft,  whigh 
the  Rubbins  call  the  fhadow  of  the  fhadow. 

I  know  not  how  far  this  may  relate  to  the 
Dotfrine  of  the  Cabalifts.  for  as  BoiJJlirdus  tells  L.  de  Di- 
us,  the  Arabian  jPriefts  held   with  them,  that  ™n- &c» 
there  are  Three  parts  of  the  Soul,  the  Firft     '*  3> 
55  called  Nefchama.  and  is  wholy  Divine,  ab- 
le* 


1 

po  An  Account  of  Genii, 

ftraftcd  and  feparated  from  the  Body;  this 
JEn.  6.  Virgil  calls  Aural  fimplicis  Ignem.  The  Second 
is  called  Ruah,  and  it  is  the  Rational  Soul 
which  partakes  of  the  Divinity  and  the 
Body,  joyning  both  together  with  a  wonderful 
Harmony,  it  gives  Life  to  the  Body,  and  caufes 
that  it  has  not  an  abhorrence  for  the  Frail  and 
Mortal  Flefh,  in  which  it  lives.  The  Third  part 
of  the  Soul  is  that  which  diffolves  this  Harmo- 
ny, and  it  is  as  the  Idol,  Image,  Shadow,  and  as 
the  out-coat,  drawn  from  the  furface  of  the 
Body ;  the  Cabalifis  call  it  Nephes  y  it  wanders 
about  Sepulchers,  and  is  fometimes  vifible, 
but  to  the  eyes  of  thofe  whom  God  Illumi- 
nates ;  and  this  Nephes  is  that  Fatal  Hair  in 
the  Crown  of  Mens  Heads,  Sacred  to  Tluto 
and  Proferpine,  which  before  it  be  cut,  and 
drawn  away  from  the  Crown  of  the  Head, 
the  Soul  cannot  be  feparate  from  the  Body  ; 
fo  alfo  unlefs  this  Nephes  be  drawn ,  as  it 
were  from  the  outmoft  furface  of  the  Body, 
a  Man  cannot  leave  this  life ;  and  this  part 
of  the  Soul  ( if  we  believe  the  Doftrine  of 
the  Cabalifis  )  is  that  which  is  called  out  by 
Magicians  and  Necromancers,  Tluto  and  Vwfer- 
fine  being  ftrft  appeas'd,  which  if  they  put  on 
their  former  Bodies,  and  fuch  an  Habit  as 
they  wore  alive,  their  Anfwers  are  called  Ne- 
cromantical,  if  they  appear'd  only  in  flitting 
and  fubtile  Shadows,  their  anfwers  were  faid 
to  be  Scyomantical ;  So  far  Boijfardus.  Whenae 
I  only  Note,  that  if  there  be  fuch  a  fliadowy 
and  wandring  part  of  the  Soul,  as  is  here 
mentioned ,  call'd  Nephes ;  its  probable  the 
Woman  mentioned  by  Diemhroh*  few  that 
at  the  death  of  Perfons* 

As 


or  Familur  Sjiyits. 

As  to  my  ov.  lice,  relating  to  that 

/  Vtrfan  n'i, 

all  here   let  it  dow;:  nCC  to  tV 

pfthc  particulars  above  Wir 

int ,    vfc.   the  Sec«  I  ifch. 

As,  fecond   particular,  It*j  laid,  that 

thofc  chat    have  the  Second  ^c  a  multi- 

tude of  Men  and  Women,  Day  and  Night, 
about  them:  So  it  was  with  my  felf  for  ir 
time,  for  I   few  Hundreds,  tho'  I  never  i 

.    in  the   Night  time,  without  a   lire,    or 

^die-light,  or  in  the  Moonfhine,  and  as 
the  Peribfi  mention  d  in  that  Paragraph,  I 

i  particular  Spirits  there  Named,  which 
conftantly  attended  him,  beikles  others  with- 
out ;  fo  it  was  with  my  felf,  two  Spi- 
rits conftantly  attending  me,  Night  and  Day, 
for  above  Three  Months  together;  who  call'd 
each  other  by  their  Names,  and  feveral  Spi- 
rits would  often  call  at  my  Chamber  Door, 
and  ask,  whether  fiich  Spirits  lived  there, 
calling  them  by  their  Names,  and  they  would 
anfwer,  they  did.  As  for  the  other  Spirits 
that  attended  me,  I  heard  none  of  their 
Names  mentioned",  only  I  ask'd  one  Spirit 
which  came  for  fome  Nights   together    and 

Ig  a  little  Bell  in  my  Ear,    what  his  Name 
was,  who  anfwer'd  Ariel,    We  find  that  c  ne 
of  :he  spirits  which  attended  the  Secot 
id  V  rfon,   appeared  as  a  Boy,  the  othej  as  a 

;  1 :  but  the   two   that  c  *ed 

my  felf,    appear \\   both    ii 

v   being  of  a    Brov  :   a- 

bout  Three  lore  in  Statu  I  fh 

vjk,   loot 

&fll  abc  i 

ippear'd  a  Qq\ 


pi  An  Account  of  Genii , 

Colour,  wfrth  fomewhat  of  a  Light  ftriking 
thro'  it;  their  Heads  were  not  dreft  with 
Topknots,  but  they  had  white  Linnen  Caps 
on,  with  Lace  on  them,  about  three  Fingers 
breadth,  and  over  it  they  had  a  Black  loofe 
Network  Hood. 

As  the  forefaid  Second  Sighted  Verfon,  fitting 
by  the  Fire  with  others  in  the  Winter-time, 
would  fee  Spirits  Handing  by,  and  often  feem 
angry  and  difturbed.,  tho5  nothing  vifible  to 
ethers  mov'd  him  $  fo,  as  I  have  been  fitting 
by  the  Fire  with  others,  I  have  feen  feveral 
Spirits,  and  pointed  to  the  places  where  they 
were,  telling  the  Company  they  were  there. 
And  one  Spirit,  whom  I  heard  calling  to  me, 
as  he  Hood  behind  me,  on  a  fiidden,  clapt 
his  Finger  to  my  Side,  which  I  fenfibly  per- 
ceived, and  ftarted  at  it ;  and  as  I  faw  one 
Spirit  come  in  at  the  Door,  which  I  did  not 
like,  I  fuddenly  laid  hold  of  a  pair  of 
Tonges,  and  ftruck  at  him  with  all  my 
force,  whereupon  he  Vanifh'd. 

As  in  the  Fifth  Particular  above  Written ; 
He  faid  that  the  Gift  of  theS<*W  Sight  is  very 
troublefome  to  thofe  that  have  it,  and  they 
would  gladly  be  rid  of  it.  So  I  muft  declare, 
that  I  would  not  for  the  whole  World,  under- 
go what  I  have  undergone,  upon  Spirits  co- 
paing  twice  to  me ;  their  firft  coming  was  moil 
dreadful  to  me,  the  thing  being  then  alto- 
gether new,  and  confequently  more  fur- 
prifing,  tho'  at  the  firft  coming  they  did  not 
appear  to  me,  but  only  called  to  me  at  my 
Chamber  Windows,  Rung  Bells,  Sung  to  me, 
and  play'd  on  Mufick,  &c  but  the  laft  co- 
ming alfo  carried  terrour  enough;  for  when 
chey  came,  being  only  Five  in  Number,  the 

Two 


or  ¥amli\ar  Spirits.  p  2 

Two  Women  before  mentioned,  and  Three 
Men  ( though  afterwards,  there  came  Hun- 
dreds )  they  told  me  they  would  kill  me,  if  I 
told  any  Perfon  in  the  Houfe,  of  their  being 
there,  which  put  me  in  fome  Confternation, 
and  I  made  a  Servant  fit  up  with  me  Four 
Nights  in  my  Chamber,  before  a  Fire,  it  being 
in  the  Chrifimas  Holydays,  telling  no  Perfon  of 
their  being  there.  One  of  thefe  Spirits  in  Wo- 
mans  dre(s,lay  down  upon  my  Bed  by  me  eve- 
ry Night :  and  told  me,  if  I  Slept,  the  Spirits 
would  kill  me,  which  kept  me  waking  for  three 
Nights :  In  the  mean  time  a  near  Relation  of 
Mine,  went  (tho'  unknown  to  me)  to  a  Phyfi- 
cian  of  my  acquaintance,  defiring  him  to  pre- 
fcribe  me  fomewhat  for  Sleeping ;  which  he 
did,  and  a  Sleeping  Potion  was  brought  me, 
but  I  fet  it  by,  being  very  defirous  and  inclin- 
ed enough  to  Sleep  without  it.  The  Fourth 
Night  I  could  hardly  forbear  Sleeping,  but 
the  Spirit  lying  on  the  Bed  by  me,  told  me 
again,  I  fhould  be  KiU'd  if  I  Slept,  where- 
upon I  rofe,  and  fat  by  the  Fire  fide,  and  in 
a  while  return  d  tcr  my  Bed;  and  fo  I  did  a 
Third  time,  but  was  ftill  threatned  as  before : 
whereupon  I  grew  impatient,  and  ask'd  the 
Spirits  what  they  would  have  ?  told  them,  I 
had  done  the  part  of  a  Chriftian,  in  humbling 
my  felf  to  God,  and  fear'd  them  not,  and 
rofe  from  my  Bed,  took  a  Cane,  and  knock'd 
at  the  Ceiling  of  my  Chamber,  a  near  Rela- 
tion of  mine  lying  then  over  me,  who  pre- 
fently  rofe,  and  came  down  to  me,  about  two 
of  the  Clock  in  the  Morning ;  to  whom  I 
fiid,  you  have  feen  me  difturbed  thefe  Four 
Days  paft,  and  that  I  have  not  Slept,  the  oc- 
cafion  of  it  was,  that  Five  Spirits  which  are 

ao 


94  An  Account  of  Genii, 

now  in  the  Room  with  me,  have  threatned 
to  kill  me  if  I  told  any  Perfon  of  their  being 
here,  or  if  I  Slept,  but  I  am  not  able  to  for- 
bear Sleeping  longer,  and  acquaint  you  with 
it,  and  now  ftand  in  defiance  of  them;  and 
thus  I  exerted  my  felf  about  them,  and  not- 
withftanding  their  continual  Threats,  I  Slept 
very  well  the  next  Night,  and  continued  fo 
to  do,  tho'  they  continued  with  me  above 
Three  Months,  Day  and  Night. 

A  Gentleman  having  lately  fupply'd  me 
with  another  Account,  concerning  the  Second 
Sighted  Perfons,  which  was  fent  fome  Years 
fince  to  a  Lady,  by  a  Perfon  of  whom  fhe 
had  defired  it.  I  fliall  here  fet  down  the  par- 
ticulars of  it,  as  follows. 

I.  He  fays  the  more  general  Account  given 
of  the  Second  Sighted  Verfons,  is ,  that  many 
Highlanders,  but  far  more  Inlanders  are  qualified 
with  this  Sight.  That  Men,  Women  and  Chil- 
dren, are  indifferently  gifted  with  it;  fome 
Children  have  it,  whofe  Parents  have  it  not, 
and  fome  Parents  have  it,  whofc  Children 
have  it  not  j  fome  adult  Perfons  have  it,  who 
had  it  not  in  their  Youth,  and  cannot  tell  by 
*  what  means  or  caufe  it  was  produc'd  in  them. 

It  is  a  great  trouble  to  thofe  that  have  it,  and 
they  would  be  rid  of  it  at  any  rate.  The 
Sight  is  of  no  long  duration,  continuing  for 
the  moil  part,  but  as  long  as  they  can  keep 
their  Eyes  fteady,  without  twinkling;  the 
moft  Aniired  therefore  fix  their  look,  that  they 
fee  the  longer,  but  the  Timerous  fee  only  by 
glances,  their  Eyes  always  trembling  at  the 
ftrft  light  cf  the  obje<5t. 

IL  That  which  is  {ccn  generally  by  them, 
is  the  fpecies  of  Living  Creatures,  and  of  In* 

animate 


'  or  Familiar  Spirits.  95 

amimate  things,  as  Ships,  and  the  Habits  up- 
on Perfons :  They  never  fee  the  Species  of 
any  Perfon  already  Dead  •  what  they  forefec 
fails  not  to  exift  in  the  mode  and  place  where 
it  appears  to  them;  they  cannot  well  know 
what  fpace  of  time  fhall  intervene  betwixt 
the  Apparition  and  the  real  Exiftence,  but 
fome  of  the  boldeft  and  longeft  experienced 
have  fome  Rules  of  Conjectures.  As  if  they 
fee  a  Man  with  a  Shroud  in  the  Apparition, 
they  will  conje&ure  at  the  nearnefs,  or  re- 
motenefs  of  his  Death,  by  the  more  or  lefs 
of  his  Body  that  is  cover'd  with  it.  They  will 
ordinarily  fee  their  abfent  Friends  ,  tho'  at 
a  great  diftance  •  fometimes  no  lefs  than  from 
America  to  Scotlandy  fitting,  or  ftanding,  or 
walking  in  fome  certain  place,  and  then  they 
conclude  with  aflurance,  that  they  fhall  fee 
them  fo,  and  there.  If  a  Man  be  in  Love 
with  a  Woman,  they  ordinarily  fee  that  Man 
ftanding  by  her,  and  fo  if  a  Woman  be  in 
Love.  They  conjecture  of  their  enjoyments 
by  the  Species  touching  the  Perfon,  or  ap- 
pearing at  a  diftarfce  from  her.  If  they  fee 
the  Species  of  a  Perfon,  who  is  Sick  in  any 
other  place,  in  an  Healthful  Pafture ,  or 
Action ,  they  conclude  a  recovery ;  but  if 
they  are  to  Dye,  they  fee  them  cover'd  with 
a  Winding-Sheet. 

Thefe  generals  were  verified  to  Perfons  of 
Honour,  by  fuch  of  them  as  did  See ,  and 
were  efteem'd  Honeft  and  Sober  by  all  the 
Neighbourhood.  And  becaufe  there  were 
more  of  thefe  Seers,  in  the  Ifles  of  Le: 
Harris  and  Vift,  than  elfewerej  fome  Perfons 
of  Quality  intreated  Sir  James  /ho 

is  now  dead,  Sir  Ihrman  M  Mt.Va- 

niei 


p  6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

mel  Morifon^  a  very  honeft  Minifter,  who  arc 
ftill  alive,  to  inquire  into  this  Sights  and  to 
acquaint  them  therewith,  which  they  did, 
and  all  of  them  found  an  agreement  in  thefe 
generals,  and  Informed  them  of  many  par- 
ticular and  notorious  Inftances,  confirming 
what  they  faid. 

He  fets  down  fome  remarkable  Inftances , 
which  he  fays  were  of  very  knowing  and  in- 
genious Perfons,  who  had  made  it  their  bu- 
finefs  to  be  well  informed  concerning  the 
Second  Sight ;  which  Inftances  being  not  Prin- 
ted in  any  other  Author,  that  I  know  of,  I 
fliall  infert  them  here. 

The  Firft  Inftance,  he  fays,  is  from  a  Per- 
fon  of  great  Learnings  and  eminent  Quality, 
,     who  gave  the  following  Relation. 

I  was  once  Travelling  in  the  Highlands, 
writh  many  Servants,  one  of  them  going  a 
little  before  me,  and  entring  into  a  Houfe, 
where  I  wastoftay  all  Night,  fuddenly  ftept 
back  with  a  fcreech  and  a  noife,  and  fell  by 
a  Stons  which  hit  is  Foot :  I  askt  what  the 
matter  was  (  for  he  look'd  as  one  very  much 
Frighted )  he  told  me  very  ferioufly,  I  muft 
not  Lodge  in  that  Houfe  ♦  I  ask'd  why  ?  he 
faid,  he  wifti'd  fo,  becaufe  a  Dead  Corps 
would  very  fhortly  be  carried  out  of  it,  and 
that  feveral  Perfons  carrying  of  it,  met  him 
at  the  Door,  when  I  heard  him  cry;  and 
therefore  he  would  not  have  me  Lodge  in  fo 
unlucky  a  place ;  and  feeing  me  Laugh  and 
go  in,  he  faid  to  the  other  Servants,  he  was 
very  fony  I  did  fo,  for  he  was  fure  what  he 
faw  would  very  fhortly  come  to  pafs;  this 
made  me  inquire  if  there  were  any  lick 
Perfon  in  the  Houfe,  but  there  was  none  ;  the 

Land- 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  97 

Landlord  was  a  ftrong  1 1 

before  I  went  from  die  I  [oufe,  the  ncxi 

he  Di  an  Apoplecn 

The  Pcr- 

fon,  who  writes  thus. 

In   :  ;•  r6jj,  Alexander  Monro  3    who 

irds  I  ieutenaht  Colloncl  to  the 
1  of  Dunbar  Clit ,    and  my    I 

were  walking  in  a  place  called  VlabiUm 
Broomey  in  a  litcle  Plain  at  the  foot  ol  a  ragged 
Hill  •  there  was  a  Man  working  with  a  Spade, 
in  the  walk  us,    and  his  Face  to  the 

Hill  J  he  did  not  mind  us  as  we  part  near  him, 
which  made  me  look  at  him,  and  perceivi: 
him  to  flare  a  little  ltr  ,    I  conjectured 

him  to  he  z  Sccry  I  called  him,  at  which  he 
flared  ahd  fmiled  :  what  are  you  doing  faid 
I?    he  anfwered    me,    I  have  icQn  a  very 
ftrange  thing  ;  an  Army  of  Englifimen,  lead» 
ing  their  Horfes  down  that  Hill,  and  a  num- 
ber of  them  are  come  down  to  the  Plain,  and 
eating  the  Barley  which  is  growing   in  the 
Field,  near  to  the  Hill.     This  was  on  the 
Fourth  of  Majy  for  I  noted  the  Day,  and  it 
was  Four  or  Five"  Days  before  the  Barly  m 
Sown  in  the  Field  he  fpoke  of.  Alexander  Mon- 
ro ask'd  him,  how  he  knew  they  were  English* 
men?  he  faid  becaufe  they  had  on  Hatts  and 
Boots,  which  he  knew   no  Scats  would  have 
there  j    we  as  little  fee  by  what   he    faid,   2$ 
other  foolifh  Vilions,  but  in  the  beginning  of 
Auguft  following,  the  Earl  of  Middleton,  th 
Lieutenant  for  the  Fang  in  the 
ving  occafion  to  march  a  Par, 
South  H  ,    fenc   his  Foot  thro'   a  pla 

called  b  ,  buc  was  I  ^>    lend  his 

Horfe,    with  A  fonro  to  pais   etc  in 

H 


5>3  An  Account  of  Genii, 

the  very  forementioned  Hildas lefs  rugged, tho* 
bad  enough,  than  that  of  Innerlawl\  and  the 
formoft  Party,  which  was  firft  down  the  Hill, 
fell  to  eating  the  Barly,  on  the  little  Plain 
under  it  j  and  Monro  call'd  to  mind  what  the 
Seer- had  told  us,  in  May  before  •  he  writ  of 
it,  and  fent  an  exprefs  to  me  with  it. 

The  Relator  of  the  Third  Inftance  writes 
as  follows. 

I  had  once  an  occafion  of  being  in  Com- 
pany with  a  Young  Lady,  and  was  told  there 
was  a  notable  Seer  in  the  Company  ;  I  call'd 
him  to  fpcak  with  me  (as  I  did  ordinarily 
when  I  found  any  of  them  )  and  as  he  had 
anfwered  me  to  feveral  Queftions,  I  ask'd 
him  if  he  knew  any  Perfon  to  be  in  Love 
with  that  Lady,  he  faid  he  certainly  knew 
that  there  was  a  Man  in  Love  with  her  (  but 
he  did  not  know  the  Man  )  for  in  the  Two 
Days  he  had  been  in  Company  with  her,  he 
perceived  one  ftanding  near  her,  and  his 
Head  leaning  on  her  Shoulder ;  which  he  faid, 
according  to  his  Obfervations,  foretold,  that 
the  Man  would  Marry  her.  This  was-  in  the 
Year  165*5'.  I  defired  him  to  defcribe  the 
Perfon,  which  he  did,  fo  that  I  could  con- 
jedure  by  the  defcriptiou,  it  was  fuch  an  one 
of  the  Lady's  Acquaintance,  tho*  there  were 
no  thought  of  their  Marriage,  till  Two  Years 
after ;  and  happening,  in  the  Year  1657.  to 
find  this  Seer,  who  was  an  Ijhnder,  in  Com*- 
pany  with  the  ether  Perfon,  whom  I  con- 
jectured to  have  been  defcribed  by  him;  I 
ealfd  him  afide,  and  ask'd  him,  if  that  were 
the  Perfon  he  faw  by  the  Lady's  fide,  Two 
Years  ago?  he  faid  it  was  truly  the  fame,  and 
lie  had  feen  that  Lady  juft  then  landing  by  him 

Hand 


or  Frtwliar  Spirits.  99 

Hand  in  Hand.     This  was  fom 
before  their  Marriage:  and  the  Maais  fii 
Dead,  and  the  Lady  ilillu!1 
The  Fourth  Inftance  is  ch 

In  f  great  Note  ) 

Lieutenant     Collonel     Monro  , 

hapned  to  be  in  the  1 

'did   in 
die    Landlord   and  my    ml  Ml  Thl 

Chairs  near  the  lire.,  and    in  the  corner  or  It 
great  Chimney  were  KM  n^ 

that  very  Ni  ale,  an  I  were  rc- 

!  to  the  Landlord  :  while  One  of  them 
was  talking  to  Afo#ny  1  perceived  the 
to  look  odly  towards  me;  from  his  Look, 
and  being  an  Iflmder ,  I  conjetfhired  him  a 
Seer,  and  ask'd  him  what  he  itar'd  at?  he  an- 
fwered  by  defiring  me  to  rife  from  that  Chair, 
becaufe  it  was  an  unlucky  one.  I  ask'd  him 
why  ?  he  (aid  there  was  a  Dead  Man  in  the 
Chair  next  to  me :  well,  faid  I,  if  he  be  in 
the  Chair  next  me,  I  may  keep  my  own, 
but" what  kind  of  Man  is  he  ?  he  laid  he  wa-s 
a  tall  Man,  with  a  long  grey  Coat,  having 
Boots  on,  and  one  of  his  Lcggs  hanging  over 
the  arm  of  the  Chair,  and  his  Head  hanging 
down  to  the  other  fide,  and  his  Arm  bac 
as  if  it  were  broken.  There  were  fome 
Troops   of  Englilh-Men  then   (  A  near 

that  place,    and  there  being  at  that  time  a 
great  Froft  after  a  Thaw,    the  Country  (>. 
covered   all  over  with  Ice  :    Lour  or  I 

Riding  by  this  Hci, 
Days  aft  \iiion; 

by  the  lire,  we  h-  nft3  whi 

proved  to  be  thefe  Troopers,   who   w 
.  .  ..      .     Jars,  were  earn,  i 

II  z  thi 


too  An  Account  of  Genii, 

their  Number,  who  had  got  a  very  mifchie- 
vous  fall,  and  his  Arm  Broken,  and  falling 
frequently  into  Swooning  Fits,  they  brought 
him  into  the  Hall,  and  fet  him  in  the  very 
Chair3  and  in  the  very  Pofture  the  Seer  had 
defcribed  •  but  the  Man  did  not  Die,  tho'  he 
recovered  with  great  difficulty. 

The  Fifth  Inftance  is  taken  from  the  Ac- 
count given  in  by  Sir  Norman  Maclod^ 

There  was  a  Gentleman  in  the  Ifle  of  Har- 
ris, who  was  always  feen  by  the  Seers,  with 
an  Arrow  in  his  Thigh:  Thofe  in  the.  IJk 
who  thought  thefe  Prognoftications  Infallible^ 
did  not  doubt  but  he  would  be  Shot  in  the 
Thigh,  and  Die  of  it.  Sir  Norman  faid,  he 
always  heard  it  the  Subject  of  their  Difcour- 
fes  for  many  Years ,  when  that  Gentleman 
was  prefent,  at  laft  he  Died  without  any  fuch 
Accident ;  Sir  Norman  was  at  his  Burial,  at 
St.  Clements  Church  in  the  IJIe  of  Harris.  At 
the  fame  time  another  Gentleman  was  brought 
to  be  Buried  in  the  fame  Church.  The 
Friends  on  either  fide  came  to  a  debate  who 
fhould  firft  enter  the  Church,  and  from  Words 
came  to  Blows;  one  who  was  Arm'd  with  a 
Bow  and  Arrows  let  fly  amongft  them  (  every 
Family  in  that  Ifle,  have  their  Burying  Places 
in  the  Church,  in  a  Stone  Cheft,  and  their 
Bodies  are  carried  in  open  Biers  to  the  Bu- 
rial Place. )  Sir  Norman  having  appeafed  the 
Tumult,  One  of  the  Arrows  was  found 
flicking  in  the  Dead  Mans  Thigh.  To  this 
Sir  Norman  himfelf  was  Witnefs.  Mr.  Aubrey, 
in  his  Account  of  the  Second  Sight,  has  a  Re- 
lation much  of  the  fame  with  this»  tho'  with 
feme  variation. 

The^ 


cr  Familiar  Spirits.  101 

The  Sixth  Inftance  is  taken  from  the  Ac- 
count which  Mr.  D  mid  Morifon,  Miniftcr  in 
the  rjk  of  Ltwu,  gave  in. 

This  Relation,  tho*  fomewhat  of  a  diffe- 
rent Nature  from  the  others,  may  be  worth 
Notice.    He  tells  us  of  a  Young  Worn 

l\irifh,    who  was  mightily   Frighted   by 
Dg  her  own  Image  ftill  before  hjr,  when 
fhe  went  into  the  open  Air,  the  Back  of  I 
ige  being  always  towards  her:    So  that 
was  not  a  Refle&ion,  as  in  a  Mirror,  but  tl 
Species  of  fuch  a  Body  as  her  own,  and  in  the 
very  fame  Habit,-  the  Miniftcr  kept  her  a  long 
while  with  him,  but  fhe  had  no  Remedy,  till 
fhe  was  about  Four  or  Five  Years  Elder,  and 
then  it  left  her. 

The  Gentleman  who  writ  the  foregoing 
Relations,  in  a  Letter  to  a  Lady,  adds  in  the 
clofe  of  it,  that  in  order  to  folve  the  Tbanome- 
non  of  the  Second  Sight ,  a  hint  may  be  taken 
from  this  Image,  which  appeared  to  the  Wo- 
man abovementioned,  and  from  fuch  another 
mention'd  by  Arijlotle,  in  the  Fourth  Book  of 
his  Metafhyficks ;  as  alfo  from  that  common 
Opinion  that  Young  Infants  fee  Apparitions, 
which  are  not  feen  by  Elder  Eyes;  and  like- 
wife  from  this,  that  fcveral  who  have  had  the 
Second  Sight,  when  in  the  Highhnds,  or  TJIes, 
upon  their  being  tranfported  to  Live  in  other 
Countries ,  efpecially  in  America ,  lofe  this 
quality,  as  it's  reported  by  Gentlemen,  who 
knew  fome  of  them  in  Earbadoes,  that  law 
no  Vifions  there,  tho'  they  were  known  to 
have  been  Seers,  when  they  lived  in  the  Tfles  of 
S:otlmd. 

H    J  L<M~ 


I  oi  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Laurenuiis  Ananias '>  Printed  £  Book  in  Latin, 

at  Venice.  An.'itfi.  concerning  the  nature  of 

L.  2.  arc*  Damons,    where  he  writes  fomewhat  which 

fiptm.       feems  ally'd  to  this  Gift  of  the  Second  Sight.    It 

is  thus. 

Seme  Damons  fo  miferably  delude  fome  Old 
Women,  and  Children,  that  they  certainly 
perfwaded  themfeives ,  that  on  fet  Nights, 
and  at  fet  Hours,  their  Souls  being  called, 
depart  from  their  Bodies,  and  joyn  themfeives 
to  the  Souls  of  the  Dead  ;  which  proceeds 
but  from  Damons  corrupting  the  Imagination 
of  thole  Creatures,,  thro5  Infidelity  after  that 
manner;  and  as  they  relate  this  to  credulous 
Old  Women,  they  Predid  the  Deaths  of  cer- 
tain Perfons;  and  if  the  event  fometimes  an^ 
fwers,  they  confidently  affirm,  even  upon 
their  Oath,  that  rhey  were  Souls  from  whom 
they  had  it,  when  in  truth  they  are  nothing 
but  lllufions  of  the  Devil ,  perverting  their 
Fancy  ;  which  error  has  poffeft  the  Minds  of 
feme  Perfons,  above  the  Vul gar:  though  it 
Jience  appears  they  are  all  under  a  delufion; 
for  it  hapned  fome  Years  fince,  that  in  a 
Town  where  fome  Perfons  were  found  ob- 
noxious to  thefe  afre&s  and  il!ufions  of  the 
Devil,  one  Mark  Antony ,  who  was  look'd 
upcia  as  an  Honcfl:  Upright  Perfon,  no  way 
given  to  fpeak  Untruths,  was  feized  with  it, 
and  often  gave  true  Predictions  concerning 
certain  Perfons,  efpecially  fuch  as  were  near 
their  Deaths:  this  Man  being  fent  for  by  my 
Brother,  %chn  AMt*#j  MmHifr,  who  is  a  Prieft, 
and  he  coming  to  him,  my  Brother  ask'd  him, 
whether  what  was  reported  of  him  w?ere  true, 
2nd  he  did  not  deny  it,  whereupon  my  Brother 
adviild  him  to  quit  thai  errontous  Opinion, 

teli' 


or  familiar  Spirits.  10} 

telling  him,    chat  thofe  could  rot  potfibly   he 
the  Souls  0$  the  Dead,  but  that  they  \w 
ceitful  J)4  moris,  and  that  lie  greatly  offended 

:!ore  he 
begg'd  him,  that  for  Gods  lake,  and  the  welU 
faiv  voul.,  as   he  perceived   that  Dicmo- 

.  j  coming  upon  him,  (as  he  I 
edit  beforehand)  or,  when  he  began 
to  be  fei/.ed  with  it,  he  would  forioufly  pro- 
teft  againit  obeying  them  any  longer,  and 
that  he  would  carneftly  Pray  to  God  to  Free 
htm  from  that  Diabolical  Delufion  and  Madneft 

v  being  fomewhat 
ftonifhed  at  what  was  laid  to"  him,  believed 
my  Brother,  and  promifed  him  to  follow  his 
Advice,  to  the  utmoft  of  his  Power,  and  fo 
w  nt  Home,  and  when  the  ufual  Day  came, 
that  he  was  obnoxious  to  thofe  Illusions,  he 
was  not  leiz'd  with  them,  and  was  very  Joy- 
ful, and  gave  God  thanks  for  it.  But  upon 
the  next  return  of  the  Day,  and  Hour  |  fox 
he  was  not  wont  to  be  Infefted  with  thofe  II- 
lufions  every  Day  of  the  Week ,  but  only 
Tuefdjys  and  Tbnrfdays )  finding  his  wonted 
feizure  coming  upon  him,  and  that  he  was 
called  by  thofe  unclean  Spirits ,  and  being 
greatly  afflicted  in  Mind  by  their  Signs,  he 
ay\l  out  with  great  Vehemency  ,  that  he 
would  no  longer  follow  them.  Upon  which 
outcry,  almoft  all  the  People  in  the  Houfe 
were  Awakend,  and  went  to  him,  to  whom 
he  related  all  that  had  paft,  and  fhew'd  how 
he  was  feverely  Beaten  by  thofe  Spirits,  and 
from  that  time  he  was  wholly  freed  from 
Jthem ;  for  which  he  gave  God  great  Thanks, 

H  4  Note, 


1 04  '  An  Account  of  Genii, 

K*te,  in  Reference  to  this  Relation  ,  "what  is 
-written  by  Henry  Boguet,  a  Judge  in  Cafes 
of  Witchcraft,  in  the  Country  of  St.  Claude, 
in  Burgundy,  concerning  the  particular  Nights 
on  which  Witches  have  their  Sabbaths ,  or 
meetings.  In  his  Difcourfe  of  Witches,  prin- 
ted in  French,  at  Lyons,  i6oj\  Chap.19, 
he  writes  as  follows, 

I  formerly  thought  that  the  Sabbath  was  held 
only  Thurfday  Nights,  becaufe  all  the  Witches, 
I  have  feen,  have  fo  declar'd  :  but  fince  that 
I  have  read  that  fome  of  them  have  confefs'd, 
they  affembled,  fome  the  Night  betwixt  Mon- 
day and  Tut f day  ,  fome  the  Night  betwixt  Fri- 
day and  Saturday  ;  others  the  Night  preceeding 
Thurfday ,  or  Sunday  ;  thence  I  have  conclu- 
ded, that  there  is  no  Day  prefixt  for  their  Sab- 
bath3  but  that  the  Witches  go  to  it  when  the 
Devil  requires  them,  I  fhall  add  here,  that 
Antide  Colts,  a  Witch,  confefs'd,  fhe  had  been 
at  the  Sabbath,  each  good  Day  of  the  Year, 
as  at  Chriftmas,  Eafer,  and  the  like  Holidays. 
So  far  Bcguet. 

Conformably  to  the  Relation  of  Laurentiur 
Ananias,  I  have  been  well  inform'd  of  a  Wo- 
man in  Gkucefterflure ,  who,  when  any  Perfbn 
of  the  Neighbourhood  was  taken  111 ,  would 
generally  predict  their  Death ,  or  recovery, 
and  was  much  reforted  to  on  that  Account  ; 
at  length  fhe  was  feized,  and  had  to  an  Ajfix.es 
at  GhuccftLr,  concerning  this  Fad;  where  being 
ask'd  by  the  Judge,  how  fhe  came  by  her 
ki>owledge,as  to  theDeath  or  Recovery  of  Perr- 
fons  fick  ;  fhe  told  him,  fhe  could  give  no  o- 
ther  Account  of  it,  but  that  when  any  Perfon 

w?s 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  501 

was  fick,and  flic  had  aiMind  to  know  the  Iflue, 
a  Jury  of  Faints  came  to  her  in  the  Night  time, 
who  confiderd  of  the  Matter;  and  if  afterwards 
they  look'd  cheerful,  the  Party  would  recover; 
if  they  look'd  fad,  he  would  die.  Nothing 
elfe  i  ought  againft  the  Woman,  fhewas 

clear.l.  The  Pcrfon  from  whom  I  had  this 
Information,  was  a  Juftice  of  Peace  of  that 
County,  then  on  the  Bench.  And  here  I 
mult  lay,  that  before  I  heard  this  Relation,  or 
had  read  Ananias,  I  faw  a  Jury  of  Fairies,  or 
Gbofts,  or  what  you  pleafe  to  call  them,  ram- 
mon  d,  and  pafs  a  Verdid  on  a  Perfon  known 
to  n 

Cardan  tells  US,  That   Genii  fometimes    ap-  rye  Ktr, 
pear  fad  before  the  Deaths  of  Perfons,  and  vxr.  L  1  $. 
gives  an  inftance  in  Julian  the  Emperor,  who  c>  78- 
being  near  Ckfyhm,  and  ftudying  I:nilofophy, 
faw  his  Genius  looking  fad  (whom  formerly  he 
had  {ccn  in  France,  looking  cheerfully,  and  I 
know  not  whatVerfes  foretelling  the  Death  of 
Conftantiusy and  confequently  his  Happinefs)and 
the  Horn  of  ^'Wt/^?,  with  which  tYis.  Genius 
of  the  Republick  was  wont  to  be  drawn,  be- 
ing fhut,  and  his  Chamberlane  ,    or  Steward 
of  his  Houfe ,  going  from  him  ,  and  fo  the 
next  Day  the  Emperor  was  kilfd. 

Baptifia  Fulgofus  tells  us,  That  fometimes  the  ^  ufAzt. 
Spirits    remain    inclos'd  in  Humane  Bodies,  fr  s<t.  * 
but  their  Motions  are  fo  occult,  and  the  Senfes  Mcmor&. 
fo  bound,  that  we  cannot  eaiily  know  whe-  c*  *• 
ther  thofe  Bodies  are  alive,  or  not :  Hence 
fome  are  faid  to  be  rais'd  from  the  dead,  who 
were  never  really  dead,   experience  having 
fhewn  they  were  ftill  living ;  of  thefe  Perfons 
fome  relate  wonderful  things,  as  that  they  had 
been  whoie  they  never  WC  icir  Spi- 


ic6  An  Account  of  Gcm\y 

lit  being  colle&ed  in  it  felf,  comprehends,  and 
fees  thofe  things ,  which  being  in  its  ufual 
State,  through  various  diftra&ed  Thoughts,  -by 
reafon  of  the  Corporeal  Sight ,  it  does  not 
know.  As  St.  Auftin  teftifies,  of  one  Carina, 
who  liv'd  in  the  Country  of  Hipp,  in  Africa, 
and  falling  into  an  ill  Diftemper,  was  look'd 
upon  by  all  Men  as  in  a  manner  dead,  having 
loft  his  Senfes,  fo  that  he  took  no  Food  ;  and 
having  continued  in  this  State  for  fome  Days, 
his  Friends  would  have  buried  him,  only  they 
perceiv'd  a  little  breathing  at  his  Noftrils,  but 
when  afterwards  all  Perlons  thought  him  to 
be  departed^  on  a  fudden  \  opening  his  Eyes, 
he  defir  d  that  fome  one  fhould  be  prefently 
Cent  to  Carina,  the  Blackfmith,  his  Neighbour, 
to  fee  how  he  did,  and  when  it  was  found  he 
was  dead  at  that  very  hour,  he  affirnfd,  that 
he  was  led  before  a  certain  Judge,  who  vehe- 
mently chid  thofe  Spirits  by  whom  himfelf 
was  brought  before  him  ,  becaufe  he  would 
have  Carina  the  Blackfmith,  and  not  him,  and 
for  that  caufe  he  was  reftor'd  to  Life.  In 
this  Extafy  he  faid  ,  he  faw  Paradife ,  and 
many  other  things  ;  and  among  others,  that 
he  was  baptiz'd  by  St.  Aufiin,  at  Hippo,  and  he 
was  admonifh'd  fo  to  be,  becaufe  what  then 
feem'd  to  be  done  was  a  Vifion;  therefore  be- 
ing reftor'd  to  his  Health,  he  had  fulfifd  what 
he  was  admonifh'd. 
InD'ifc.  de  ^>0,  as  Bonayjleau  tells  us,  The  Spirit  of  Her- 
pLteL  &  motimts,  as  it  feem'd,  leaving  his  Body  as  dead, 
dig.  bom'h  wandred  about  various  Places,  and  afterwards 
related  thofe  things  which  could  be  known  on- 
ly by  thofe  Perfons,  which  were  prcfent  to  the 
things  themfelves.  Herodotus ,  and  Maxiwm 
Tjrius  write  the  fame  of  Arlfidm. 


JUS. 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 07 

U  us  j    That  a  certain  /</, 
nominated  fix  of  his  equals,  and  fid 
1  would  die  firft,  wlv  and  fo  on,  and 

:iction. 
A  \  iiion  which  happen  d  to  the  Ingenious 
d  Dr.  Dcnne,  may  not  improperly 
be  1  ].     Mr.  Tfaac  H  /riting 

the  1  ifc  of  the  fi  .\r,  tells  us,  That   the 

fed  hi$ Wife,  living  with  Sir  Robert  Drury, 
who  gave  them   a  tree  Entertainment  at  his 
lane  1  It  happen  d  that  the  Lori 
if  •,   wis  by  JCi»jg  jnnw  fent  in  an  Ambaffy 
»  the  Fh*t  ,  H,nry  the   Fourth  j  whom 

/wrr:  refolv'd  to  accompany,  and  ingag'd 
Dr.  DpntH  to  go  \vith  them,  whofe  Wife  was 
then  with  Child  at   Sir  Robert's  Honfe.      Two 
:er  their  arrival  at  Paris,  Dr.  Dome  was 
left  a  I  r      ■  Room,  in  which  Sir  Robert, 

and  he,  w  ether  I  riends  had  dined  to- 

gcthe  r.   To  tee  Sir  Robert  return  d  with- 

in half  an  hour  ;  and  as  he  left,  fo  he  found 
Dr.  D'jfirte  alone  ;  bur  in  fuch  an  Extafy,  and 
fo  altet'd  in  his  Ixoks,  as  amaz'd  Sir  Robert  to 
behold  him,  infomuch,.  that  he  earnestly  de- 
llr'd  Dr.  Donne  to  declare  what  had  befalfn 
him  in  the  fhorttime  of  his  abfence.  To  which 
Dr.  js  not  able  to  make  a  prefent  An- 

fter  a  long  and  perplext  Paufe,  did 
at  laft  fay,  I  have  feen  a  dreadful  Vifion  fince  I 
you;  I  have  feen  my  Dear  Wife  pafs twice 
by  me  through  this  Room,  with  her  Hair  hang- 
ing about  her  Shoulders,  and  a  dead  Child  in 
her  Arms :  this  I  have  feen  fince  I  faw  you.  To 
ieh  Sir  Robert  reply 'd,  fure,   Sir,  you  have 
:  fince  I  faw  you,  and  this  is  the  refult  of 
fome  Melancholy  Dream,  which  I  defire  you 
to  forget,  for  you  are  now  awake,     To  which 

Dr 


ip8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Dr.  Donne  $  reply  was,  I  cannot  be  furer  that 
1  now  live,  than  that  I  have  not  flept  fince  I 
faw  you,  and  am  as  fure  at  her  fecond  appear- 
ing ftie  ftopt,  and  look'd  me  in  the  Face  and 
vanifh'd.    Reft  and  Sleep  had  not  alter'd  Dr. 
bonnes  Opinion  the  next  Day  •  for  he  then  af- 
firm5 d  this  Vifipn  with  a  more  deliberate,  and 
fo  confirm'd  a  Confidence,  that  he  inclin'd 
Sir  Robert  to  a  faint  belief,  that  the  Vifion  was 
true  ;   who  immediately   fent  a  Servant  to 
Druy-Houfe  ,    with  a  Charge  to  haft'n  back, 
and  bring  him  word  whether  Mrs.  Donne  were 
alive  ;  and  if  alive^  in  what  Condition  ihe  was 
as  to  her  Health;  the  Twelfth  Day  the  Mef- 
fenger  return'd  with  this  Account :  That  he 
found  and  left  Mrs.  Donne  very  fad^  and  fick 
in  Bed  ;  and  that  after  a  long  and  dangerous 
Labour,  ftie  had  been  deliver'dof  a  dead  Child; 
and  upon  Examination  the  Abortion  prov'd  to 
be  the  fame  Day,  and  about  the  very  hour  that 
Dr.  Donne  affirmed  he  faw  her  pafs  by  in  his 
Chamber.    Mr.  Walton  adds.,  This  is-a  Relation 
which  will  beget  feme  wonder^  and  well  it 
may,  for  moft  of  our  World  are  at  prefent 
poilefs'd  with  an  Opinion ,    that  Vifions  and 
Miracles  are  ceas'd  j   and  though  'tis  moft  cer- 
tain ,    that  two  Lutes ,    being  both  ftrung 
and  tun'd  to  an  equal    pitch,  and  then  one 
play'd  upon,  the  other ,  that  is  not  touch'd, 
being  lay'd  upon  a  Table  at  a  fit  Diftance^ 
will  (like  an  Eccbo  to  a  Trumpet)  warble  a 
faint  audible  Harmony ,  in  Anfwer  to   the 
fame  tune,  yet  many  will  not  believe  that  there 
is  any  fuqh  thing  as  a  Sympathy  with  Souls, 

Aa 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  109 

An  Ancient,  and  Learned  Gentleman,  now- 
living  ,  and  well  known  in  London,  has  told 
me,  that  being  at  a  Widow  Gentlewoman's 
Houfe,  about  feven  Miles  from  London,  one 
Day  about  three  of  the  Clock  in  the  After- 
noon, 'he  retir'd  to  his  Chamber  j  where  he 
had  not  long  been,  but  a  ftrange  Light,  fuch 
as  he  had  never  feen  before,  appear'd  in  the 
Room,  in  which  Light,  he  faw  a  Child  of  the 
Gentlewoman  of  the  Houfe  ,  which  had  been 
left  fick  in  London,  lye  dead,  as  alfo  a  Friend 
of  his  own  j  he  was  much  furpriz'd  at  this, 
and  after  the  thing  was  over,  he  went  down 
from  his  Chamber  to  the  Gentlewoman  of  the 
Houfe;  and  as  he  had  been  defir'd  to  come  tho' 
next  Day,  to  the  Houfe  of  a  Lady,  who  liv  d 
in  the  fame  Parifh,  he  defir'd  the  forefaid  Gen- 
tlewoman to  fend  word  to  the  Lady,  that  he 
could  not  wait  on  her  the  next  Day,  as  he  had 
promis'd  ,  for  he  knew  that  both  the  faid 
Gentlewoman  and  himfelf  fhould  be  fent  for 
to  London ;  and  then  he  told  the  Gentlewo- 
man what  had  pafs'd  ;  and  in  a  while  a  Coach 
came  for  them  from  London  accordingly.  The 
fame  Gentleman  told  me ,  that  upon  his  fal- 
ling into  a  Trance  at  Cambridge,  he  faw  alfo  a 
Friend  of  his  dead  in  London,  who  upon  en- 
quiry was  found  to  have  died  juft  at  the  time 
he  faw  him. 

Cardan  gives  a  Relation  fomewhat  of  this  De  Rer. 
Nature  as  follows :  My  Kinfman  Baptifia  C.r-  «**  L  s- 
dan,    fiudying  at  Prvia,  on  a  certain  Night  Ct   4# 
tryed  to  make  a  little  Fire  as  he  rofe,  and  in 
the  interim  heard  a  Voice  fay,  farewel  my  Son, 
I  am  going  to  Rome ;  and  he  faw  a  raft  Splen- 
dor,   as  that  of  a  bundle  of  Straw  all  on  Fire; 
being  affrighted  ,  and  throwing  by  the  Fii 


i oi  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Shovel,  he, hid  himfelf  under  his  Bcd-cloaths, 
till  his*  School-fellows  return  d  from  the  Aca- 
demy ;  upon  their  return,  thinking  him  to  be 
fick,  they  knock' d  at  his  Door,  he  open'd  it, 
and  they  asking  him  the  caufe  of  his  ftay  there, 
he  anfwer'd,  he  thought  his  Mother  was  dead, 
and  told  them  what  he  had  feen  and  heard, 
and  wept  withal :  They  turn  d  the  thing  to  a 
Jeft,  fome  laughing  at  him,  fome  comforting 
him ;  the  Day  following  ,  having  heard  no- 
thing of  his  Mother's  ficknefs,  he  was  certify- 
ed  of  her  Death  ,  and  that  fhe  expired  at  that 
very  hour  that  he  perceiv'd  thofe  things.  The 
Town  Cardan  is  diftant  Two  and  Forty  Miles 
from  Vavia.  That  Man  was  not  given  to  Lyes, 
vain  or  fuperftitious,  and  who  faid  he  had  ne- 
ver feen  ,  or  heard  any  preternatural  thing 
till  then. 

A  Book  newly  coming  to  my  Hands,  which 
contains  a  more  particular  Account,  in  fome 
refpe&s,  of  the  Second  fight  in  ScotUnd^th&n  any 
I  have  met  with,  I  fhall  give  here  fome  Ac- 
count of  it. 

Mr.  M.  Martin,  Printed  the  laft  Year  in  Lon- 
don, 2.  Book  in  80.  intirfd,  A  Defer  iption  of  the 
Weftern  Jjles  of  Scotland  ,  calFd  by  the  ancient 
Geographers  Hebrides.  It  contains  many  curious 
Particulars,  relating  to  the  Natural  and  Civil 
Hiftoiy  of  thofe  Tjlandsy  with  a  Map  of  them, 
and  in  his  Preface  he  tells  us,  that  perhaps  its 
peculiar  to  thofe  Tiles,  that  they  have  never 
been  defcrib'd  till  now  by  any  Man,  that  was 
a  Native  of  the  Country,  or  bad  travell'd  them, 
as  himfelf  has  done ;  21  ie  Goneiulion  of 

the  faid  Preface,  he  teils  us,  he  fes  giv'n  here 
fuch  an  Acoou  ;  figbt^   as  the 

Nature  of  the  c  ear,  and  which  has 

al\* ; 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  I  i  i 

always  been  reckond  fufficient  among  the  im- 
byAfs'd   pan  d  Mankind;  but  for  tool 
will  not  be  V  ought  to  ob!i 

us   with  tc,  by  which  we  m 

judge  K)f  Ma  etc;  t     The  chief  partic 

lar*  he  b  Second  fig 

r  by  it  k  allows. 

L  In  the  Ummipght  the  Vilion  makes  fuch  a 
lively  Impreflton  on  the  Seers,  that  they  nei- 
,  nor  think  of  any  thing  elfe,  but  the 
Vifion,  as  long  as  it  continues  j  and  then  they 
appear  penlive  ,  or  jovial,  according  to  the 
Object,  which  was  prcfented  to  them. 

(I.  At  the  fight  of  a  \  ilion,  the  Eye-lids  of 
the  Peribn  are  erected,  and  the  Eyes  continue 
flaring  till  the  Object  vanifh,  as  has  often  been 
obferv'd  by  the  Author,  and  others  prefent. 

III.  There  is  one  in  Skyey  an  Acquaintance 
of  whom  obferv'd ,  that  when  he  fees  a  Vi- 
fion, the  inner  part  of  his  Eye-lids  turns  fo  far 
upwards,  that  after  the  Object  difappears,  he 
muft  draw  them  down  with  his  Fingers  ;  and 
fometimes  employs  o:hers  to  draw  them  down, 

ich  he  finds  to  be  much  the  eaiicr  way. 

IV.  The  faculty  of  the  Second  fight  does  not 
lineallv  defcend  ina  Family,  as  fome  imagine, 
for  he  knows  (everal  Parents  that  are  endowed 
with  it,  but  not  their  Children ;  and  fo  on  the 
contrary ,  neither  is  it  acquir'd  by  any  previous 
compadt ;  and  after  a  ftridl  enquiry,  he  could 
never  learn  from  any  among  them  ,  that  this 
faculty  was  communicable  any  way  whatfo- 
ever. 

! ,  That  this  Account  is  difl  from 

the   Account   givn  before  from  Mr.   A*h 
And  I  thin!;  rfartims  reaf  . 

defcent  of  this  faculty  from   I  to 

Children 


ii2  •  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Children,  is  not  generally  conclufive,  for  the/ 
he  may  know  Parents  endow'd  with  it,  and 
not  Children,  and  fo  on  the  contrary ,  yet 
there  may  be  Parents  who  are  endow'd  with  it, 
being  qualifyed  as  Mr.  Aubrey  has  faid  ,  (viz. 
both  being  Second  fight  ed)  whofe  Children  may 
have  it  by  defcent.  And  as  to  this  faculty's 
being  any  other  ways  communicable  ,  (fince 
the  Accounts  differ)  I  mull  leave  it  to  a  far- 
ther Examination. 

V.  The  Seer  knowTs  neither  the  objed,  time, 
nor  place  of  a  Viiion  before  it  appears,  and  the 
fame  Objed  is  often  feen  by  different  Perfon^ 
living  at  a  confiderable  diftance  from  one 
another.  The  true  way  of  judging,  as  to  the 
time,  and  circumftance  of  an  Objed:,  is  by 
Obfervation ;  for  feveral  Pcrfons  of  Judg- 
ment, without  this  faculty,  are  more  capa- 
ble to  judge  of  the  defign  of  a  Vifion,  than  a 
NoYice  that  is  a  Seer.  As  an  Objed  appears  In 
the  Day  or  Night,  it  will  come  to  pafs  fooner 
or  later  accordingly. 

VI.  If  an  Objed  be  feen  early  in  the  Morn- 
ing (which  is  not  frequent)  it  will  be  accom- 
plifh'd.in  a  few  Hours  afterwards  :  If  at  Noon, 
it  will  commonly  be  accomplifh'd  that  very 
Day  :  If  in  the  Evenings  perhaps  that  Night : 
if  after  Candles  be  lighted,  it  will  be  accom- 
plifh'd that  Night :  it's  later  always  in  accom- 
plifhment  by  Weeks,  Months,  and  fometimes 
Years,  according  to  the  time  of  the  Night 
the  Vifion  is  feen. 

VII.  When  a  Shroud  is  perceiv  d  about  one, 
it's  a  fure  Prognoftick  of  Death  ;  the  time  is 
judg  d  according  to  the  height  of  it,  about  the 
Perfon  ;  for  if  it  be  not  fett  above  the  mid- 
dle, Death  is  not  to  be  expeded  for  the  fpace 

of 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  I  I } 

of  a  Year,  and  perhaps  Tome  Month*  lo 
and  as  it  i>  frequently  feen  to  afcend 

towards  the   Head  ,  Death  is  conclu 

be  at  Hand  within  a  few  Days,  if  not  1 1 

as  daily  Experience  confirms.     Examf 

this  kind  were  fhown  the  Autk 

Perfons  of  whom  theObiorvation>  were  nuulc, 

ecjoy'd  perfect  Health. 

Tnere  was  one  inftance  1 
on  in  this  kind  by  a  Seer,  that  was  \  N 
corning  the  Death  of  one  of  the  Author's  Ac- 
quaintance ;  this  was  communicated  to  a  few 
onl\  lie  Author 

being  one  of  the  Number,  did  not  in  the  leift 
regard  it,  till  the  Death  of  the  Perlon,  about 
the  time  foretold,  confirmd  to  him,  the  c 
tainty  of  the  Prediction ;  the  forefaid  Novice 
is  now  a  skilful  Seer,  as  appears  from  many 
late  inftances  :  he  lives  in  the  Parifli  of  St. 
Marys,  the  moft  Northern  in Skye. 

VIII.  If  a  Woman  be  feen  {landing  at  a 
Man's  left  Hand,  it's  a  prefage  that  fhe  will 
be  his  Wife,  whether  they  are  Marry  ed  too- 
thers, or  Unmarryed  at  the  time  of  the  Appa- 
rition. If  two  or  three  Women  are  feen  at 
once  {landing  near  a  Man  s  left  Hand,  fhe  that 
is  next  him  will  undoubtedly  be  his  Wife  firft, 
and  fo  on,  whether  all  three,  or  the  Man  bz 
fingle,  or  Marryed  at  the  time  of  the  Viiion, 
or  not,  of  which  there  are  feveral  late  inftan- 
ces of  the  Author's  Acquaintance.  It's  an  or- 
dinary thing  for  them  to  fee  a  Man  that  is  to 
come  to  the  Houfe  fliortly  after ;  and  if 
be   not  of  the  Seers  Acquain  he 

gives  fuch  a  lively  Dcfcription  of  his  Statu i 
Complexion,  Habit,  &■:.  that  upon  his  Arri- 
he  Anfv.  Charader  givnOfhinK  in 

I  all 


i  1 4  An  Account  of  Genii, 

all  refpe&s.  If  the  Perfon  fo  appearing  be 
one  of  the  Seers  Acquaintance,  he  can  tell  by 
his  Countenance  whether  he  comes  in  good  or 
bad  Humour.  The  Author  has  been  feen  thus 
by  Seers  of  both  Sexes,  at  fome  Hundreds  of 
Miles  diftance :  Some  that  fa  whim  in  this  man- 
ner, had  never  feen  him  Perfonally,  and  it 
happen5  d  according  to  their  Vifions,  without 
any  previous  Defign  of  his  to  go  to  thofe  pla- 
ces, his  coming  there  being  purely  Accidental. 
And  in  the  i  yth  Page  of  his  Book,  he  tells  us> 
that  Mr.  Daniel  Morifon,  a  Minifter,  told  him, 
that  upon  his  Landing  in  the  IJIand  Rona ,  the 
Natives  received  him  very  affe&ionately,  and 
Addrefs'd  themfelves  to  him  with  this  Saluta- 
tion. God  fave  you  ,  Pilgrim  !  you  are  hear- 
tily welcome  here,  for  we  have  had  repeated 
Apparitions  of  your  Perfon  among  us,  viz*  af- 
ter the  manner  of  the  Second  Sight. 

IX.  It's  ordinary  with  them  to  fee  Houfes^ 
Gardens ,  and  Trees ,  in  places  void  of  all 
three,  and  this  in  Procefs  of  time  ufes  to  be 
accomplifti'd  ;  of  which  he  gives  an  inftance 
in  the  IJIand  of  Skie. 

X.  To  fee  a  fpark  of  Fire  fall  upon  ones 
Arm  ,  or  Breaft ,  is  a  fore-runner  of  a  dead 
Child  to  be  feen  in  the  Arms  of  thofe  PerfonsA 
of  which  there  are  feveral  frefh  Inftances. 

To  fee  a  Seat  empty  at  the  time  of  ones 
fitting  in  it,  is  a  prefage  of  that  Perfons  Death 
,    quickly  after. 

When  a  Novice,  or  one  that  has  lately  ob- 
tain d  the  Second  fight,  fees  a  Vifion  in  the  Night 
time  without  Doors3  and  comes  near  a  Fire,. 
he  prefently  falls  into  a  Swoon. 

Some 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  I  I 

Some  find  themfeh  in  .1  cro 

of  People,  having  a 

long  with  them  ;    and  after  fuch  \ 
Seers  conic  in  fwcating,  and  defcribc  th( 
pie  that  appear'd  ;    it  there  icir 

Acquaintance  among  th 
count  of  their  Names,  and  alio  of  tl 
but  they  know  nothing  concerning  the  Co 

All  thole  that  have  the  Second  lo  not 

alwa  Virions  at  once,  tn 

sthcr  at  the  time  ;  but  it  one  who  iuis 
this  faculty  defignedl)  touch  his  Fellow  Seer,  at 
the  inftant  of  a  V iiions  appearing,  then  1 
cond  fees  it  as  u  ell  as  the  tirft. 

\1.  .  is  a  way  of  foretellhgDc 

by  a  Cry,  that  they  ciMTaisk,  which  fome  call 
a  Wrath,  in  the  Low-land.  They  hear  a  loud 
Cry  without  Doors,  exactly  reiembling  the 
Voice  of  fome  particular  Perfon,  whofe  Death 
is  foretold  by  it  j  of  which  he  gives  a  late  in- 
ftance  which  happen d  in  the  Village  Rigg,  in 
Shye  Ifle. 

XII.  Things  are  alfo  foretold  by  Smelling 
fometimes,  as  follows  :  Fifh,  or  Flefh  is  fre- 
quently fmelt  in  the  Fire,  when  at  the  fa 
time  neither  of  the  two  are  in  the  Houfe,  or, 
in  any  probability  like  to  be  had  in  it ,  for 
fome  Weeks,  or  Months.  This  fmell  fevera I 
Perfons  have,  who  are  endued  with  the  Second 
fight,  and  its  always  accomplifh'd  foon  after. 

XIII.  Children.  Horfet,  and  Ccvjs  ,  have  the 
Second  fight,  as  well  as  Men  and  Women  ad- 
vancd  in  Years. 

Thar  >  fee  it  is  plain,  from  their  cry- 

ing aloud  at  the  very  inftant^tha 
other  Viiion  appears  to  an  ordinary   Seer  :    Of 
I  z 


1 1 6  M  Account  of  Genii, 

which  he  gives  an  inftance  in  a  Child,  when 
himfelf  was  prefent. 

That  Horfes  fee,  it's  like  wife  plain,  from  their 
violent  and  fudden  ftarting  ,  when  the  Ri- 
der, or  Seer,  in  Company  with  them ,  fees  a 
Vifion  of  any  kind,  Night  or  Day  ;  it's  obfer- 
rable  of  an  Horfe  that  he  will  not  go  forward 
that  way,  till  he  be  led  about  at  fome  di- 
ftance  from  the  common  Road,  and  then  he 
is  in  a  fweat ;  he  gives  an  inftance  of  this  in 
an  Horfe,  in  the  ijk  of  Skye. 

That  Cows  have  the  Second  fight ,  appears  from 
this ;  that  if  a  Woman  Milking  a  Cow,  hap- 
pens to  fee  a  Vifion  by  the  Second  fight ,  the 
Cow  rune  away  in  a  great  fright  at  the  fame 
time,  and  will  not  be  pacifyed  for  fome  time 
after. 

In  reference  to  this,  Taracelfus,  Tom.  9.  /.  de 
Artefrafagdy  writes  thus,Horfes  alfo  have  their 
Auguries,  who  perceive  by  the  fight  and  fmell 
wandring  Spiris,  Witches  and  Spectres,  and 
the  like  things ;  and  Dogs,  both  fee  and  hear 
the  fame  things. 

Here,  in  the  next  place,  the  Author  anfwers 
Objections  that  have  lately  been  made  againft 
the  reality  of  the  Second  fight. 

Firft,  It's  objeded ,  that  thefe  Seers  are  Vi- 
fonary,  and  Melancholy  People,  who  fancy 
they  fee  things-  that  do  not  appear  to  them, 
or  any  Body  elfe. 

He"  Anfwers,  The  People  of  thefe  IJles,  and* 
particularly  the  Seers  are  very  Temperate,  and 
their  Diet  is  Simple  and  Moderate,  in  Quanti- 
ty and  Quality  j  fo  that  their  Brains  are  not, 
in  all  Probability  diforder'd  by  Undigefted 
fumes  of  Meat,  or  Drink.  Both  Sexes  are  free 
from  Hvfterick  Fits,  Convulfions,  and  feve- 

,ral 


i 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  117 

ral  other  Diftempers  of  that  fort.  There  arc 
no  Mad-men  among  them,  nor  any  inftance 
of  fclf  Murther.  It's  obferv'd  among  them, 
that  a  Man  drunk  never  has  a  Vifion  of  the 

ccrul  And  lie  that  is  a  Vilionary,  would 

difcovcr  himfclf  in  other  things,  as  well  as  in 
that ;  nor  arc  fuch  as  have  the  St  <  n  I  jlrht> 
judgd  tobeVifionaries  by  any  of  their  Friends, 
or  Acquaintance. 

Sicondly,  It's  objected  ,  That  there  are  none 
among  the  Learned,  able  to  oblige  the  World, 
with  a  fatisfactory  Account  of  thefi  Vilions, 
therefore  they  are  not  to  be  believ'd. 

He  Anfwers,  If  every  thing  for  which  the 
Learned  are  not  able  to  give  a  Satisfa&ory  ac- 
count, fhall  be  condemn'd  as  Falfe  and  Im- 
poffible,  we  fhall  find  many  other  things,  ge- 
nerally believ'd  ,  which  muft  be  reje&ed  as 
fuch. 

Thirdly,  It's  objected,  That  the  Seers  arc  Im- 
poftors,  and  the  People  who  believe  them  arc 
Credulous,  and  eaiily  impos'd  upon. 

He  Anfwers,  The  Seers  arc  generally  Illite- 
rate, and  well  meaning  People,  and  altoge- 
ther void  of  Defign,  nor  could  he  ever  learn 
that  any  of  them  made  the  leaft  gain  of  it ; 
neither  is  it  reputable  among  them  to  have  that 
faculty  :  beiide,  the  People  of  the  IJks  are  not 
fo  Credulous ,  as  to  believe  an  Impoffibility, 
before  the  thing  foretold  be  accomplifh'd,  but 
when  it  actually  comes  to  pals,  afterwards  it 
is  not  in  their  Power  to  deny  it,  without  of- 
fering Violence  to  their  Senfes  and  Reafon ; 
beJkle,   if  the  S<  :  Deceive! -$  ,   can  it  be 

fonable  to  imagine ,    that  all  t  !  r j, 

>  have  not  the  Second  hould  combine 

together  ,   and  offer  Violence  to  their  Under- 

1  1 


i  S  An  Account  of  Genii, 

findings  and  Senfes-,  to  force  themfelvsto  be- 
lieve a  Lye  from  Age  to  Age  ?  There  are 
feveral  Perfons  among  them,  whofe  Birth  and 
Education  raife  them  above  the  fufpicion  of 
concurring  with  an  Impofter,  merely  to  gra- 
tify an  illiterate  and  contemptible  fort y  of 
Perfons.  Nor  can  a  reafonable  Man  believe, 
that  Children,  Horfes.,  and  Cows  could  be 
ingaged  in  a  combination  to  perfwade  the 
World  of  the  reality  of  the  Second  Sight. 

Every  Villon  that  is  feen,  comes  exa&ly  to 
pais.,  according  to  the  Rules  of  Obfervation, 
tho'  Novices  and  heedlefs  Perfons  do  not  al- 
ways judge  by  thofe  Rules :  concerning  which 
he  gives  Inftances. 

There  are  Vifions  feen  by  feveral  Perfons, 
in  whofe  days  they  are  not  accompliihed : 
and  this  is  one  of  the  reafons ,  why  fome 
things  have  been  feen.,  that  are  faid  never  to 
have  come  to  pafs^  and  there  are  alfo  feveral 
V  iiicns  fcen,  which  are  not  underftood  till 
they  are  accomplifh'd. 

The  Second  Sight  is  not  a  late  difcovery, 
feev,  by  one  or  two  in  a  Corner,  or  a  remote 
/;/<,  but  ins  {cen  by  many  Perfons,  of  both 
Sexes,  in  feveral  IJles,  Separated  about  Forty 
or  Fifty  Leagues  from  one  another ;  the  Inha- 
bitants of  many  of  thefe  IJles,  never  had  the 
leaft  Ccnverfe,  by  Word  or  Writing:  and 
this  faculty  of  Seeing  Vifions.,  having  con- 
tinued, as  we  are  informed  by  Tradition, 
ever  f  nee  the  Plantation  of  thefe  Ijk3  with- 
out being  difprov'd  by  the  Niceft  Scepfick, 
after  the  ftri&eft  Enquiry,  feems  to  be  a 
clear  prccf  of  its  Reality. 

Its 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  i  ip 

It's  obfervablej  that  it  was  much  more  com 
mon  Twenty  ^  >,  than 

One  in  lOt  ice  it  now,    that  law  it 

thei 

Second  Sight  is  not  confind  to  the 
,jne<    the  Author  having  an  Ac- 
count ,   that   its  likewife  in  fevcral  parts 

,  hut  particularly  in  Bowmel,  where  a 
Woman  has  it,  for  which  flie  is  courted  by 
IC,  and  dreaded  by  others.  She  fees  a 
it  ones  Face,  which  is  a  forerun- 
ner of  the  Death  of  a  Pcrfon  fo  feen,  and 
fhe  actually  foretold  the  Deaths  of  feveral 
that  lived  there ;  flic  was  living  in  that  Town 
this  laft  Winter. 

The  Second  Sight  is  likewife  in  the  IJle  of 
Man,  as  appears  by  this  Inftance;  Captain 
Leat/jSy  the  chief  Commander  of  Belfijt,  in 
his  Voyage  1690,  loft  Thirteen  Men  by  a 
violent  Storm,  and  upon  his  Landing  in  the 
IJle  of  Man,  an  Ancient  Man,  Clerk  to  a  Pa- 
fifli  there,  told  him  immediately,  that  he  had 
loft  Thirteen  Men;  the  Captain  enquired 
how  he  came  to  the  knowledge  of  that,  he 
anfwered,  that  it  was  by  Thirteen  Lights,  which 
he  had  feen  come  into  the  Church-yard;  as 
Mr.  Sacheverel  tells  us,  in  his  late  description 
of  the  I/!e  of  Man.  Note,  That  this  is  like  the 
fight  of  the  Corps-Candles  in  Wales,  which  is 
alfo  well  attefted. 

Here  the  Author  adds  many  other  Inftan- 
ces  concerning  the  Second  Sight,  of  which  I 
fhall  fet  down  only  a  few. 

A  Man  in  Knockow,\n  theParifli  of  St,  Marys, 

the  Northermoft  part  of  Skye,  being  in  perfedt 

1th,  and  fitting  with  his  fellow  Servants^ 

ight,  v/as  on  a  fudden  taken  HI,  dropf 


no  An  Account  of  Genii, 

from  his  Seat  backward,  and  then  fell  a  Vo- 
miting, at  which  the  Family  was  much  con- 
cerned, he  having  never  been  fubjed  to  the 
like  before;  but  he  came  to  himfelf  foon  after, 
and  had  no  fort  of  Pain  about  him.  One  of 
the  Family  who  was  accuftotnd  to  fee  the 
Second  Sight,  told  them  that  the  Man  s  Illnefs 
proceeded  from  a  very  ilrange  caufe,  which 
was  thus.  An  illnatured  Woman  (  whom  he 
named  )  who  lives  in  the  next  adjacent  Vil- 
lage of  Bomskittag,  came  before  him  in  a 
very  furious  and  angry  manner,  her  Counte- 
nance full  of  Paffion,  and  her  Mouth  full  of 
Reproaches,  and  threatned  him  with  her  Head 
and  Hands,  till  he  fell  over,  as  you  have  feen 
him.  This  Woman  had  a  Fancy  for  the  Man, 
but  was  like  to  be  difappointed  as  to  her 
Marrying  of  him.  This  Inftance  was  told,  the 
Author  by  the  Mafter  of  the  Family,  and 
others  who  were  prefent  when  it  happened. 

Sir  Norman  MackUad,  and  fome  others,  Play- 
ing at  Tables,  at  a  Game  calVd  in  Mjh,  Fal- 
wtYmcrt,  wherein  there  are  Three  of  a  Side, 
and  each  of  them  throw  the  Dice  by  turns, 
there  happened  to  be  one  difficult  Point  in  the 
dif  poling  of  one  of  the  Table-men  ;  this  obliged 
the  Gamefter  to  deliberate  before  he  was  to 
change  his  Man,  fmce  upon  the  difpofing  of 
it,  the  Winning  or  Lofing  of  the  Game  de- 
pended ;  at  length  the  Butler,  who  flood  be- 
hind.,  advifed  the  Player,  where  to  place  his 
Man,  with  which  he  comply'd,  andvvon  the 
Game.  This  being  thought  extraordinary, 
znd  Sir  Ncrrvr.n  hearing  one  Whifper  him  in 
the  Ear,  askfd  who  advifed  him  fo  skilfully  ? 
he  anfwerd  it  was  the  Butler;  but  this  fetmd 
more  ftr&ngey  for  he  could  xiotiPlay  at  Tables. 

Upoi} 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 1 1 

Upon  this  Sir  Norman  ask'd  him  how  long  it  was 
iince  he  had  learnt  to  Play  ?  and  the  Fellow 
own'd  that  he  had  never  Play'd  in  his  Lite, 
but  that  he  faw  the  Spirit  Brownie  (  a  Spirit 
ufually  feen  in  that  Country  )  reaching  his 
Arm  over  the  Players  Head,  and  touching  the 
part  with  his  Finger,  on  the  Point  where  the 
Table-man  was  to  be  plac'd.  This  was  told 
the  Author  by  Sir  Norman  and  others.,  who 
happen'd  to  be  prefent  at  the  time. 

Daniel  Bow,  alias  Black ,  an  Inhabitant  of 
Bvrnsktit.g,  who  is  one  of  the  precifeft  Seers 
in  the  IJles,  foretold  the  death  of  a  young 
Woman,  in  M'mgims,  within  lefsthan  24  Hours 
before  the  time,  and  accordingly  fhe  Died 
fuddenly  in  the  Fields ;  tho'  at  the  time  of 
the  Prediction  fhe  was  in  perfect  Health  ;  but 
the  Shroud  appearing  clofe  about  her  Head, 
was  the  ground  of  his  Confidence,  that  her 
Death  was  at  hand. 

The  fame  Perfon,  foretold  the  Death  of  a 
Child  in  his  Mafter's  Arms,  by  feeing  a  fpark 
of  Fire  fall  on  his  Left  Arm:  and  this  was 
likewife  accomplifh'cl  foon  after  the  Predicti- 
on. 

Some  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Harries ,  Sail- 
ing round  the  Ife  of  Sky,  with  a  defign  to  go 
to  the  oppofite  Main-land,  were  itrangely 
furprifed  with  an  Apparition  of  Two  Men 
Hanging  down  by  the  Ropes  that  fecured  the 
Maft,  but  could  not  conjedure  what  it  meant ; 
they  purfued  their  Voyage,  but  the  Wind 
turning  contrary,  they  were  forced  into  Broad- 
ford  ,  in  the  IJle  of  Skye,  where  they  found- 
DonaldMac  Donald  keeping  a  Sheriffs  Court, ' 
and  Two  Criminals  receiving  Sentence  ef 
Death  there;   the  Ropes  and" Maft    of  that 

veryj 


1 

I 


12  2  An  Recount  of  Genii , 

very  Boat  were  made  ufe  of  to  Hang  thofc 
Criminals.  This  was  told  the  Author  by 
feveral  who  had  this  Inftance  related  them  by 
the  Boat's  Crew. 

Several  Perfons,  living  in  a  certain  Family, 
told  the  Author  that  they  had  frequently  feen 
two  Men  Handing  at  a  Gentlewoman's  Left 
Hand,  who  was  their  Mailer's  Daughter ; 
they  told  the  Mens  Names,  and  being  her 
equals  it  was  not  dQubted  but  fhe  would  be 
Marry'd  to  one  of  them  ;  and  perhaps  to  the 
other,  after  the  Death  of  the  Firft.  Sometime 
after;,  a  Third  Man  appeared,  who  feemed 
always  to  Hand  neareft  to  her  of  the  Three, 
but  the  Seers  did  not  know  him  ,  tho'  they 
could  defcribe  him  exa&ly ;  and  within  fome 
Months  after,  this  Man  who  was  feen  laft, 
ft&ually  came  to  the  Houfe,  and  fully  an- 
fwer'd  the  defcription  given  of  him  by  thofe 
who  never  faw  him,  but  in  a  Vifion,  and  he 
Marry'd  the  Woman  ftiortly  after:  they 
live  in  the  IJIe  of  Skye3  and  both  themfelves 
and  others  confirm'd  the  truth  of  this  Inftance, 
when  the  Author  faw  them. 

Archibald  Mac  Donald  ,  of  the  Pariftl  of 
St.  Marys  in  the  IJIe  of  Skye ,  being  reputed 
famous  for  his  Skill  in  foretelling  things  to 
come,  by  the  Second  Sigh ,  hapning  to  be  in 
the  Village  Knockow  one  Night,  and  before 
Supper,  told  the  Family  that  he  had  juft 
then  feen  the  ftrangeft  thing  he  ever  faw  in 
his  Life,  viz.  a  Man,  with  an  ugly  long 
Cap,  always  fhaking  his  Head ;  but  that  the 
ftrangeft  of  all  was  a  little  kind  of  an  Harp, 
which  he  had,  with  Four  Strings  only,  and 
that  it  had  Two  Hart's  Horns  fixt  in  the  front 
of  it :   all   that  heard  this  odd  "Vifion  fell  a 

lUugBng 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 1  ^ 

laughing  at  Archibald ,    telling  him  that  he 

ing,  or  had  not  his  Wits  about  hi 
fince  he  pa  fee  a  thing  which  had 

no  being,  and  was  not  lb  much  as  heard  of 
in  any  part  of  the  World  All  this  could  not 
r  Archibald's  Opinion,  who  told  them, 
that  they  mull  excufe  him,  if  he  Laught  at 
them  after  the  accomplifbment  of  the  Vifion. 
Archibald  returned  to  his  own  Houfe,  and 
within  Three  or  Four  Days  after,  a  Man  with 
a  Cap,  Harp ,  drc.  came  to  the  Houfe,  and 
the  1  >trings,  Horns  and  Cap  anfwer'd, 

the  defcription  of  them  at  firft  view,  and  he 
fhook  his  Head  when  he  play'd ;  for  he  had 
Two  Bells  fixed  to  his  Cap.  This  Harper  was 
a  Poor  Man,  who  made  himfelf  a  Buffoon 
for  his  Bread,  and  was  never  feen  before  in 
thofe  parts,  and  at  the  time  of  the  Prediction 
he  was  in  the  Jfe  of  Barray  ;  which  is  about 
Twenty  Leagues  diftant  from  that  part  of 
Skye.  This  Relation  is  Vouch'd  by  Mr.  Daniel 
Martin,  and  all  his  Family,  and  fuch  as  were 
then  prefent,  and  live  in  the  Village  where 
this  happened. 

One  Daniel  Nicbolfon,  Minifter  of  St.  Marys 
in  Skyey  the  Parifh  in  which  Mr.  Archibald 
Donald  liv'd,  told  the  Author,  that  one 
lajy  after  Sermon,  at  the  Chappel  Ugey 
he  took  an  opcafion  to  inquire  of  Archibald, 
if  he  ftill  retained  that  unhappy  Faculty  of 
Seeing  the  Second  Sight,  and  wifh'd  him  to  get 
rid  of  it,  if  poffible,  for  faid  he,  it's  no  true 
Character  of  a  Good  Man.  Archibald  was 
highly  difpleafed,  and  anfwered  that  he  hop'd 
he  was  no  more  unhappy  thanhi*  Neighbours, 
for  feeing  what  they  could  not  perceive. 
I    hud ,    faid  he>   as    ferious    Thoughts    as 

my 


ii4  ^n  Account  of  Genii, 

my  Neighbours,  in  time  of  hearing  a  Sermon  to 
Day,  and  even  then  I  faw  a  Corps  lay'd  on 
the  Ground  clofe  to  the  Pulpit  •  and  I  affure 
you  it  will  be  accomplifh'd  fliortly,  for  it  was 
in  the  Day  time.  There  were  none  in  the 
Parifh  then  Sick,  and  few  are  buried  at  that 
little  Chappel,  nay  fometimes  not  one  in  a 
Year.  Yet  when  Mr.  NiMfon  return  d  to 
Preach  in  the  faid  Chappel,  a  Fortnight,  or 
Three  Weeks  after,  he  found  one  buried  in 
the  very  Spot,  named  by  Archibald.  This 
Story  is  Vouch'd  by  Mr.  Nicholfon,  and  feveral 
of  the  Parilhioners  ftill  living. 

Note,  That  it's  an  Argument  of  fomewhat 
Evil,  attending  this  faculty  of  the  Second  Sight , 
becaufe  there  are  Inftances  given  of  fome 
Perfons,  who  have  been  freed  of  it,  upon 
ufing  fome  Chriftian  Practices. 

Sir  Norman  Mac  Lead y  who  has  his  Refidence 
in  the  Tfle  of  Bernera,  which  lies  between  the 
JJIes  ofN.  Vift  and  Harries,  went  to  the  Ifle  of 
Skye  about  Bufinefs,  without  appointing  any 
time  for  his  return ;  his  Servants  in  his  ab- 
fence,  being  all  together  in  the  large  Hall  at 
Night,  one  of  them,  who  had  the  Second  Sight, 
told  the  reft  they  muft  remove,  for  there 
would  be  abundance  of  other  Company  in 
the  Hall  that"  Night;  one  of  his  Fellow-Ser-r 
vants  anfwered,  rhat  there  was  very  little 
likelyhood  of  that,  becaufe  of  the  Darknefs 
of  the  Night,  and  the  danger  of  coming 
thro'  the  Rocks,  that  lie  round  the  Ifle :  but 
within  an  Hour  after  ,  one  of  Sir  Normans 
Men  came  to  the  Houfe,,  bidding  them  pro- 
vide Lights,  &c.  for  his  Mafter  had  jiewly 
landed. 


or  Familiar  Spirits^  1 1^ 

Sir  Norman  being  told  of  this,  caird  for  the 
Seer,  and  examined  him  about  it  j  he  anfwer'd, 
that  he  had  feen  the  Spirit  Brownie,  in  hu- 
mane fhapc,  come  feveral  times,  and  make  a 
fhew  of  carrying  an  Old  Woman  that  fate 
by  the  Fire,  to  the  Door,  and  at  laft,  feem'd 
to  carry  her  out  by  Neck  and  Heels,  which 
made  him  Laugh  heartily,  and  gave  occafion 
to  the  reft  to  conclude  him  Mad,  to  Laugh 
fo  much  without  any  reafon.  This  Inftance 
was  told  the  Author  by  'Sir  Norman  him- 
felf. 

Four  Men  from  the  Ifle  of  Skye  and  Harriet, 
went  to  Barbadoes,  and  nay 'd  there  fome  Years, 
who  tho'  they  had  wont  to  fee  the  Second 
Sight  in  their  Native  Countrey,  never  faw  it 
in  Barbadoes;  but  upon  their  return  to  Eng- 
land, the  Firft  Night  after  their  Landing, 
they  faw  the  Second  Sight;  as  the  Author  was 
told  by  feveral  of  their  Acquaintance. 

John  Morifon,  who  lives  in  Bernera  of  Har- 
ries, wears  the  Plant  called  Fuga  Damonum, 
Sewsd  in  the  Neck  of  his  Coat,  to  prevent 
his  feeing  of  Vifions,  and  fays,  he  never  faw 
any  fince  he  firft  carry 'd  that  Plant  about 
him. 

A  Spirit,  by  the  Country  People  call'd 
Brownie,  was  frequently  feen  in  all  the  moft 
confiderable  Families  in  the  IJles,  and  North 
of  Scotland,  in  the  ftiape  of  a  tall  Man, 
having  very  long  brown  Hair:  but  with- 
in thefe  20  Years  paft,  he  has  been  feen  but 
rarely. 

There  were  Spirits    alfo  that  appeared  in 
the  fhape  of  Women,   Horfes,  Swine,    Cats, 
and  fome  like  Fiery  Balls,  which  would  fol 
low  Men  in  the  Fields  ;  but  there  have  been 

but 


1 2  6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

but  few  Inftances  of  thefe  for  40  Years  paft. 

Thefe  Spirits  us'd  alfo  to  form  founds  in  the 
Air,  refembling  thofe  of  an  Harp,  Pipes,  the 
crowing  of  a  Cock,  and  of  the  grinding  of 
Hand  Mills :  and  fometimes  Voices  have  been 
heard  in  the  Air  at  Night,  Singing  Irijh  Songs ; 
the  words  of  which  Songs  fome  of  the  Author's 
Acquaintance  ftill  retain ;  one  of  them  refem- 
bled  the  Voice  of  a  Woman,  who  died  fome 
timd  before,  and  the  Song  related  to  her  State 
in  the  other  Worfd.  Thefe  Accounts  the  Au- 
thor fays,  he  had  from  Perfbns  of  as  great 
Integrity,  as  any  are  in  the  World.  So  far 
Mr.  Martin. 

As  for  Sounds  in  the  Air  refembling  that  of 
Mufical  Inftruments ,  crowings  of  a  Cock, 
Singing,  &c.  I  have  often  heard  them  my  felf. 

In  my  reading,  I  have  met  with  many  well 
attefted  Inftances,  which  may  ftrongly  induce 
a  belief  of  what  is  faid  concerning;  the  Se- 
cond fight  :  Of  which  Inftances  I  mall  here 
give  a  few. 

Sicillusy  an  Herald  to  Alfhonfus  King  ofAra- 
gon,  in  his  Book  entitled,  Le  Blafon  des  Couleurs, 
writes  thus :  There  is  a  Town  in  Italy  y  call'd 
Teridony  where  this  Miracle  is  wont  to  happen, 
if  any  Citizen  or  Labourer  be  to  die  that 
Year,  when  he  labours  his  Field,  there  clear- 
ly appears  a  great  effufion  of  Blood,  and  the 
Blood  fignifies  a  near  enfuing  Death  of  the 
PoffeiTor  of  that  Field. 

The  Lord   Henry  Howard,  in  the  Book  he 
chaP-  x7-  wrjt  againft  Sufpo/J  Trofhefies,  writes  thus. 

It  chanc'd,  after  the  Deceafe  of  a  certain 
honeft  Gent,  (whom  I  forbear  to  Name  in  fome 
Refpe&s)  the  Devil  appearing  (Jo  he  Exprefes 
it;  tkft  to  one  of  his  Daughters,  in  his  wonted 

fhape 


or  Familiar  Spirits,  1 17 

fliape,  and  with  a  Voice  and  Countenance  an- 
(werable  ;  an  pun  to  another,  he  brought 

the  Young  Woman  into  fo  ttrange  a  Condi- 
tion, that  it  would  have  griev'd  any  Mm  to 
;  and  this  feem\l  llrange  with- 
al,  that  at  the  time  his  Appearance  haunted 
them  ,  they  could  as  well  tell  who  came  into 
the  Houfe,  what  they  faid  and  did,  &c.  as  any 
that  were  prefent  in  their  Companies.  The 
like  Story  ,  for  all  the  World,  is  written  of 
Hicronyrw  an  batian5  andlikewife  of  one  of  the 
nperors.  So  far  the  Lord  Howard;  who 
I  think  :  look'd  upon  as  an  unexcepti- 

onable Tcftimony ,  in  the  Story  he  relates  of 
his  own  Knowledge,  he  having  otherwife  lit- 
tle Faith  in  things  of  this  kind. 

The  Learned  Camtrarius  writes  thus :  I  could  //^.  fu&. 
eafilyName,  and  (hew  a  Man  living  in  my  cis.ecm.u 
Neighbourhood,  while  I  write  this,   v/ho  for-  c«  l°* 
merly  having  been  Famous  for  his  Manage- 
ment of  Serious  Affairs,  as  well  as  other  ways, 
has  now  for  many  Years  been    kept  under 
a  Guard,  becaufe  now  and  then,  for  certain 
intervals  of  time,  he  is  a&ed  by  a  wonderful 
and  troublefome  Spirit ;  for  he  docs  not  onl) 
(wherein  a  fedate  Mind)  call  many  that  come 
to  him  ("though  Strangers  and  fuch  as  he  had 
never  f^cn  before)  by  their  proper  Names, 
and  talk  to  them  Pleafantly  concerning  their 
Parents,  Relations,  and  the  Coats  of  Arms  of 
their  Families ,  and  this  as  Familiarly  as  tho' 
he  had  been  a  long  time  Converfant    with 
them    (and  which  he  did  to  niy  felf     and  if 
he  be  in  a  troubl  \  mixes  Falfe  and  Ob- 

fcene  things  with  what  he  fays ;  but  alfo  fome- 
times  he  fpeaks  and  does  other  unufual  and 
ftrange  thin  .trcicularly  ic  was  obferv'd, 

that 


1 1 8  rAn  Account  of  Genii, 

that  fome  Years  fince ,  about  that  rery  time 
that  Ciffar  Cafialion,  Admiral  of  France,  with 
his  Son  in  Law,  and  many  Noblemen  of  his 
Religion,  were  by  furprize  kill'd  in  their  Beds 
at  Paris,  he  had  wonderful  Vifions,from  which 
it  might  have  been  gather'd,  that  fom©  cruel 
Enterprize  was  fomewhere  contfiv'd  ahd  exe- 
cuted. Among  other  things,  the  very  Night 
of  that  cruel  Butchery  made  at  Paris,  he  of- 
ten cry'd  out,  all  is  in  Blood  ;  and  a  little  af- 
ter, fee,  fee,  what  great  Troops  of  Devils  do 
I  fee  wandring  in  the  Air,  on  every  fide,  co- 
ming from  feveral  remote  Parts,  Congratula- 
ting each  other,  and  skipping  for  Joy,  as  tho' 
they  had  executed  fome  ftrange  and  cruel  En- 
terprize, long  defir'd  by  them  ;  but  he  added, 
crying  out,  that  all  thofe  things  were  a<5ted 
out  of  Germany. 

I  think  this  a  great  inftance  from  a  Learned 
Man  •  and  if  any  Men  can  fatisfie  themfelves 
with  ArifiotU,  to  folve  Facfts  of  this  Nature, 
fey  faying,  they  are  Operations  of  Melancho- 
ly, I  leave  them  to  their  Fancies.  If  this  Fad, 
and  others  fet  down  before  by  me  may  be  re- 
ceiv'd  as  a  Truth,  I  fee  not  what  difficulty 
there  may  be  in  admitting  for  a  Truth,  what 
is  reported  of  Afollonius  Tyanaus,  viz/  that  as 
he  was  difputing  in  an  open  Auditory  at  Epbc- 
Jus,  he  cry'd  out  on  a  fudden,  that  he  faw  Do- 
mitian  ftab'd  at  Rome,  at  the  very  time  that  it 
was  done. 

To  give  one  infti nee  nearer  hortie.  There 
liv'd  not  many  Years  fince,  a  very  aged  Gen- 
tlewoman, in  London,  in  Water-Lane,  by  Fleet- 
5W<?ef,whofeName  was  Pig.^who  was  endowed 
with  aProphetick  Spirit,  fhe  was  very  well 
known  to  many  Perfons,  of  my  Acquaintance, 

aow 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  129 

row  living  in  /.  ujm.     An 
tlenun, 

has  told  me,  that  i. 
to  an  Orach  chat  as  I 

to  her  Prefl 
that  (he  km 
feci 

out  hfa  ,  any  thing  to  her,  :: 

him  j    what  die  I 
ich  he  came  to  corrflilth 
the  Event  1  !    V^bich  he 

-  ,  now  li\  \i  Ex- 

.   in  his  /  ;-  r.rrf  2. 

tdl  us  of  a  Boy  fei/Al  with  the  PL 

who  being  thought  dead,  on  a  Hidden 
came  to  himfclt;  and  calling  his  Mailer,  told 
him  he  had  really  been  in  Heaven,  and  there 
had  underftood  how  many,  and  who  were  r 
out  the  Houfe,  and  naming  them  ;  he  affirm'd 
his  Maftar  fhould  ilirvivc,  and  to  create  a  be- 
lief cf  what  he  faid,  he  fhew'd  that  lie  had 
irn'd  all  Languages ;  and  prelently  theroup- 
on  fpake  in  Greek  with  his  Mailer  ;  he  made  ;t 
Tryal  alio  in  other  Tom  converl 

with  thofe  who  were  skill  d  in  them,  whe 
before  he  had  only  learn  d  the  R  m.  n  Lsu 
and  when  he  hadliv'd  thus  three  Da\  iy  foili 
into  a  1  e  lay'd  hold  ofhisHan  Is  -  id 

Teeth,  ;  and  the  others  wl 

he  had  nam\l  dicd,his 
To  the   foregoing  Account  ox  the 

\  I  fhall  fubjoin  athi 
no  lefs  ftrange,  -viz.  An  Ac. 

- 

re 


; 


x$o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

fions,  violent  Agitations,  &c.  they  were  wont 
to  fee  the  Spettres  of  thofe  Perfons,  who  they 
laid  tormented  them. 

Mr.  Cotton  Mather,  a  Minifter  of  New-Eng- 
Und,  in  his  Relation  of  the  Wonders  of  the  in- 
*uifiblc  World,  inferted  in  his  Ecclefiafiical  Hifio* 
ry  of  that  Country j  Printed  in  London,  An.  1702. 
infol.  has  gir'n  us  feverallnftancesof  this  kind, 
as  alfo  of  many  other  Diabolical  Operations. 
And  Mr.  Robert  Calef,  a  Merchent  of  Bofion, 
in  Ntjv-Enghnd,  has  giv'n  us  a  pretty  full  Ac- 
count of  the  fame,  in  his  Book,  intitl'd,  More 
wider  s  of  the  invifible  World,  or,  The  wonders  of 
the  iniujible  World  diftlayd,  in  five  Parts,  Prin- 
ted in  London,  An.  1700  in  40.    And  whereas 
thefe  two  Authors  feem  to  differ  in  Opinion, 
the  former  thinking  things  to  have  been  real, 
and  proceeding  from  the  Operations  of  Evil 
Spirits,  and  the  later  looking  upon  them  gene- 
rally to  have  been  Illufion  and  Impofture,  I  fhall 
give  here  an  Abilract  of  both,  for  Men  to  fee 
what  they  may  Rationally  judge  in  the  Matter. 
Mr.  Mather,  in  the  fixth  Book  of  thefaid  Hi- 
*  7-     ftory,relates  many  of  thefe  Fa&s^and  that  with 
all  fincerity,  as  he  declares,  and  fays,  that  no 
Rational  Man  of  all  that  Country  ever  que- 
ftion'd  them. 

His  Firft  Inftance  is  of  one  Anne  Cole,  a  Per- 

fon  of  ferious  Piety  (as  he  writes)  living  in 

the  Houfe  of  her  Godly  Father  at  Hartford 

in   New-England ;  who,  An.  1662.  was  taken 

with  ftrange  Fits  ,  fo  that  flie  would  exprefs 

flxange   things ,    unknown  to  her  felf ,  her 

'  Tongue  being  guided  by  a  Damon.    The  ge- 

bral  purport  of  her  Difcourfe  was,  that  fuch 

•  and  fuch  Perfbns ,   whom  fhe  nam'd  ,   were 

niulting  how  they  might  carry  on  Mifchie- 

us  Deligns  againft  her,  and  feveral  others, 

by 


or  Familiar  Spirits. 

in  ! 

(he  with  Aft 

nam'd  in  the 

Devi!,    wh< 

A- 
grccmcnt  betwixt  them  fho 
(he 

firft  in  the  Deer  , 

her,  length,  in  that  I 

and  that    the    Devil   had    frequently    C 
Knowledge  of  her.  On  this  Confemon,  with 
other  concurring  Evidences,  the  Woman  v 
executed,    and  other  Perfons    accus'd  ma 
their  efcape  reupon  , 

extraordinary  \  exatu 

Second  Inftance  is  1 
in  October,  1 67 1.  was  taken  after  a  \ 
mer,  Weeping, "Laughing,  R<  .• 
violent   Agitations  ,    &c. 

g  in  her ;    among  other  things  , 
cry'd  out  in  her  Fits,  that  a  cert 
the 

thus  cry'd  out  c 

who  ,  b 

the  affli       I,  who  :. 

in» 

: 


1 1 1  An  Account  of  Genii, 

nocent  Woman  pray'd  earneftly  with  >  and 
for  this  poffefs'd  Creature  j  whereupon,  as  (he 
came  to  her  felf  y  fhe  confefs'd  flie  had  been 
deluded  by  Satan,  who,  in  the  fhape  of  dirers 
Perfons,  cruelly  tormented  her  after  divers 
Manners,  and  then  told  her  it  was  not  him- 
f  elf,  but  they  were  her  Tormentors. 

The  Third  Intfance  is  of  the  Houfe  of 
Mr.  William  Morfe  of  Newbury,  which,^#.  1679. 
was  infefted  with  Demons,  not  unlike  the  Da- 
won  of  Ted-worth.  Bricks,  Sticks,  Stones,  Pieces 
of  Wood,  &c.  were  often  thrown  at  the  Houfe, 
a  long  Staff  danc'd  up  and  down  the  Chim- 
ny,  and  afterward  was  hung  on  a  Line,  and 
fwung  to  and  fro;  an  Iron  Crook  was  violently 
hurryed  about  by  an  invifible  hand  -3  and  a 
Chair  flew  about  the  Room,  till  at  laft  it  light 
on  the  Table,  where  Meat  flood  ready  to  be 
Eaten,  and  was  like  to  have  fpoil'd  all.  A 
Cheft  was  by  an  invifible  Hand  carry 5d  from 
one  place  to  another ,  and  the  Doors  Barrica- 
do'd,  and  the  Keys  of  the  Family  taken,  fome 
of  them,  from  the  Bunch  ,  where  they  were 
tyed,  and  the  reft  flying  about  with  aloud 
Noife  of  their  Knocking  againft  one  another  ; 
and  many  other  unaccountable  things  of  this 
kind  pafs'd^too  long  for  me  here  to  fet  down  ; 
a  little  Boy  belonging  to  the  Family,  was  a 
Principal  Sufferer  in  thefe  Moleftations,  he 
was  flung  about  at  fuch  a  rate  that  they  fear'd 
his  Brains  would  have  been  beaten  out ;  nor 
did  they  find  it  poffible  to  hold  him,  his  Bed 
Clothes  were  pull'd  eft  from  his  Bed,  his  Bed 
fhaken-  a  Man  took  him  to  keep  him  in  z 
Chair^  but  the  Chair  fell  a  dancings  and  both 
were  very  near  being  thrown  into  the  Fire.,  he 
was  pricVd  on  the  Back,  they  found  an  Iron 

Spindle 


or  Fatmliir  Spirits.  i  j  J 

Spindle  and  Pins  ihuk  in  him,  all  the  Knives 
in  the  H  leaner  another  (luck  in 

Back,  which  the  Spectators  pulfdout :  Some- 
times lie  bark'd  like  :i  Dog,  then  clock'd  lij 
an  Hen,  he  complain' d,  that  a  Man  call'd  P — I 
appear d  to  him  ,  as  the  caufe  of  all.  Before 
the  Devil  put  an  end  to  thefe  Tricks,  the  in- 
vifible  Hand  which  did  all  thefe  things ,  put 
on  an  aftonifhing  vilibility.  They  often 
thought  they  felr  the  Hand  that  fcratchd  them, 
while  yet  they  faw  it  not ;  but  when  they 
thought  they  had  hold  of  it,  it  would  give 
them  the  flip.  Once  the  Fift  beating  the  Man 
was  dilcci  nable,  but  they  could  not  catch  hold 
of  it:  at  length  an  Apparition  of  a  Blackamoor 
Child  fhew'd  it  felf  plainly  to  them  ;  another 
time  a  Drumming  on  the  Board  was  heard, 
which  was  followed  with  a  Voice  that  fang, 
Revenge,  Revenge,  Sweet  is  Revenge  ;  at  this  the 
People  being  terrify  ed  call'd  upon  God;  where- 
upon there  followed  a  Mournful  Voice  uttering 
thefe  Expreflions.  Alas !  Alas  !  we  knock  no 
more ,  we  knock  no  more  ,  and  there  was  an 
end  of  all. 

The    Fourth   Inftance  is  of  the  Houfe  of 

Nicolas  Desborough,Zt  Hartford,  which,  An.  1683. 
was  troubl'd  much  after  the  fame  manner  ;  ic 
began  upon  a  Controverfie  happening  betwixt 
the  Man  of  the  Houfe,and  another  Perfon,con- 
cerning  a  Cheft  of  Cloaths,  which  the  Mar? 
apprehended  the  other  unjuitly  detain  d  from 
him,  and  it  lafted  divers  Months,  till  upon  re- 
tiring the  Cloat'.s  the  trouble  ceasd.  He 
adds,  at  Brlgbling  in  Sifjjcx,  in  England  ,  (the 
happend  a  ^Tragedy  not  unlike  "to  this,  , 
x6 J 9.  It's  Recorded  by  CLrL,  in  the  Second 
Volume  of  his  Examples. 

K  ?  Km 


34  An  Account  of  Genii, 

His  Fifth,  and  Sixth  Inftances  are  Relati- 
ons of  the  fame  Nature; 

His  Seventh  Inftance  is  of  one  Mr.  Fbilip 
Smith,  aged  about  Fifty  Years ,  a  Deacon  of 
the  Church  of  H  Mey,  a  Member  of  the  general 
Court,  ajuftice  of  the  County  Court,  a  Lieute- 
nant of  a  Troop,  and  a  Man  very  Exemplary 
for  Devotion,  Sanctity,  and  Gravity,  who,  An* 
1689.  was  miferably  Murther  d  by  Witchcraft, 
he  was,  by  his  Office,  concernd  about  relie- 
ving the  Indigences  of  a  wretched  Woman  in 
the  Town.,  who  being  diffatisfy'd  with  him, 
exprefs'd  her  felf  in  a  threatning  manner,  fo 
that  he  apprehended  receiving  mifchief  at  her 
Hands;  he  fell  ill  of  a  wearing  Diftemper,  and 
at  length  became  delirious,  and  crv'd  out  not 

o  J  J 

only  of  Pains,  but  alfo  of  Pins  tormenting  him 
in  ieveral  Parts  of  his  Body.  In  his  Affii&ion  he 
exclaim'd  much  on  the  faid  Woman,  and  o- 
thers ,  as  being  fc^n  by  him  in  the  Room. 
Some  young  Men  in  the  Town  went  and  gave 
cMurbance  to  the  Woman  fo  complain'd  of, 
2nd  all  the  while  they  were  difturbing  her,  he 
was  at  eafe  and  flept,  as  a  weary  Man.  Galli- 
pots of  Medicines  prepar'd  for  him,  were  un- 
accountably empty ed,  audible  fcreechings  were 
made  about  the  Bed,  when  his  Hands  and  Feet 
lay  wholly  ftill,and  were  held  by  others.  Mr. 
SMth^  at  length  dies ;  the  Jury  that  view'd  his 
Corps,  found  a  fwelling  on  one  Breaft  ,  his 
Privities  wounded,  or  burnt,  his  Back  full  of 
Bruifes,  and  feveral  Holes  that  feem'd  made 
with  Awlesj  divers  Noifes  were  heard  in  the 
Room  where  the  Corps  lay,  as  the  clattering 
of  Clrirs  and  Stools,  whereof  no  account 
could  be  givn, 

His 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 j  $ 

His  Ninth  Inltance,  to  tl 
the  Author  was  himfelf  a  V  >ur 

Children  Of  John  Goodwin   of  Boftotty    all   R 

:d.     Theft  Children  ./;;.  1688. 
j  wrought  on  by  Witchcraft,  by  an  Old 

Woman,  whom    the  Eldeft  Daughter,    v. 
was  about  Thirteen  Years  of  Age,   had   pm- 
vok'dj  fo   that   (he   was    immediately   feiz'd 
with  odd  Fits :    in  a  fhort  time  after, 
her   SifteiSj  and   two  Broth  re   horribly 

d  with  the  fame,  all  the  Children  we 
tormented  ftill  juft  in  the  fame  part  of  the 
Bodies,  at  the  fame  time,  tho'  their  Pains  ffew 
like  Lightning  from  one  part  to  another,  and 
they  were  kept  fo  far  afunder,  that  they 
neither  faw,  nor  heard  one  anothers  Com- 
plaints; at  Nine  or  Ten  of  the  Clock  at 
Night  they  ftill  had  a  releafe  from  their  Mil !•- 
ries,  and  Slept  all  Night  pretty  well  j  but 
when  the  Day  came,  they  were  again  mife- 
rably  handl'd;  fometimes  they  were  Deaf, 
fometimesDumb/fometimes  Blind,  and  fteij 
all  Three  at  once,  and  many  other  unaccoun- 
table Symptoms  attended  them;  they  made 
mod  pitious  out-cries ,  that  they  were  cue 
with  Knives,  and  ftruck  with  Blows,  and  the 
plain  prints  of  the  Wounds  were  feen  upon 
them;  the  fufpecled  Woman's  Houfe  being 
fearch'd,  feveral  Images,  or  Puppets,  or  Babi 
made  of  Rags,  and  ftufc  with  Goats  Ha 
there  found,  and  the  Woman  confeft  that  the 
way  to  Torment  the  Objects  of  h 
was  by  wrettingof  her  Finger  with  i!e, 

and  ftroaking  thofe  little  Images.  The  abuied 
Children  were  then  prefent  in  the  Court,  and 
one  of  the    In.  cing  brought    to    the 

Won;an,  flic  Parted  up,  and  fhatch'd  it  into 

K.  4 


}  6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

her  Hand,  when  prefently  upon  it  one  of  the 
Children  fell  into  fad  Fits,  before  the  whole 
Aifembly.  The  Judges  caufed  a  repetition  of 
the  Experiment,  and  ftill  found  the  fame  ef- 
fect of  it,  tho'  the  Children  faw  not  when  the 
Hand  of  the  Witch  was  laid  upon  the  Images. 
To  make  all  things  clear,  the  Court  appointed 
Five,  or  Six  Phyficians  to  Examine  her  very 
frrictly ,  whether  fhe  were  no  way  craz'd  in 
her  Under  (landing,  who  after  fpending  feve- 
ral  Hours  with  her,  return  d  her  Compos  Men- 
//-,  and  Sentence  of  Death  was  pafs'd  on  her* 
After  her  Condemnation,  Mr.  Mather  fiys,  he 
vifjeed  her  fe : veral  times,  and  fhe  then  told  him, 
fhe  us'd  to  be  at  Meetings  where  her  Prince, 
and  four  more  were  prefent ;  fhe  told  him  who 
the  four  were,,  and  plainly  faid,  that  her  Prince 
was  the  Devil;  at  her  Execution  fhe  faid,  the 
arrlicted  Children  fliould  not  be  relieved 'by  her 
Death,  for  others  beiides  her  felf  had  a  Hand 
in  their  Afflidiojtt  :  And  accordingly,  the  Chil- 
dren continued  afflicted  far-worfe  than  before  j 
one  of  the  Children  difcern  d  the  Spectres,  and 
told  the  Names  of  thofe  that  tormented  them  ; 
a  blow  ftru'ck  at  the  place  where  he  faw  the 
Spetfirey  was  always  felt  by  the  Boy  himfelf, 
in  that  part  of  his  Body  ,  which  anfwer'd  to 
that  was  ftruck  at  5  and  this,  though  his  Back 
\wztq  tiirn'd,  and  the  thing  fo  done,  that  there 
could  be  no  Collufion  in  it,yet  after  the  Agonies 
were  oyer,  to  which  a  pufh  ,  or  a  ftab  at  the 
Spe&H  had  put  him  to,  as  in  a  Minute,  or  two 
they  would  be,  he  would  have  a  refpite  from 
his  Ails ^  a  coniiderable  while,  and  the  Speftri 
would  be  gone.  The  Affiiftion  of  the  Chil- 
dren Went  on  till  they  bark'd  at  each  other  like 
Dc  gs,  and  then  purrd  like  Cats.   They  would 

complain 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 37 

complain  they  were  in  a  Red  hot  Oven,  and 
:ucd,  as  it  they  had  been  really 
fo.    Then  they  would  lay  j  that  cold  Water 
>wn  on  them  ,    at  which  they  would 
fhiver  very  much.     They  would  complain  of 
1  called  on  an  invilible  Spit,  and  lie,  and 
roll,  and  groan  a>  if  it  had  been  fo  ;  and  by 
,  (creech  out,  that  Knives  were  cutting 
them      They  would  complain  that  their  Heads 
were  naifd  to  the  Floor,  and  it  was  beyond  an 
ftrength  to  pull  them  from  thence. 
,  the  Demons  did  not  know  our 
Thoughts;  for  if  himfelf,    or  others  us'd  a 
.,  and  iaid,  untie  its  Neckcloth,  but  the 
Iden  underilood  their  meaning  to  be, 
untie  his  Shooe ,  the  Neckcloth,  and  not' the 
Shooe  has  been,  by  wrythen  Poftures,  rendred 
ilrangely  unacceffible  ;    no  good  thing  could 
then   be   endued  near  thofe  Children,  who 
while  they  were  themfelves,  lov'd  every  good 
thine.     The  eldeft  Girl ,  being  at  Mr.  Mather  % 
Iloufe,  a  Chain  irivifible  to  any  butherfelf, 
would  be  clap'd  about  her,    and  fhe,  in  much 
pain  and  fear,  would  cry  out  when  they  began 
ro  put  ic  on  ;  fometimes  Perfons  prefent  couldL 
with  their  Hands  knock  it  off,    as  it  began  to 
he  fallnd  j  bur  ordinarily  when  it  was  on  (he 
would  be  pulfd  out  of  her  Seat,  with  much 
violence  towards  the  Tire,  that  it  was  as  much 
as  one  or  to  two  could  do,  to  keep  her  out ; 
if  Perfons  prefent  ftamp'd  on  the  Hearth,  juft 
between  her  and  the  Fire  ,  fhe  fcream'd  out, 
that  by  fairing  the  Chain  they  hurt  her.     An 
5  with  a  cruel  Noofe  was  put  about 
her  Neck,,  whereby  fhe  was  choak'd  ,  till  fhe 
black  in  the  Tace  ;  and  though  it  were  got 
off  before  it  had  kill  d  her,  yet  there  were  the 

red 


i  £g  An  Account  of  Genii, 

red  Marks  of  it,  and  of  a  Finger  and  a  Thumb 
near  it,  remaining  to  be  feen  for  fome  while 
afterwards  •  thefe  Children  were  often  near 
burning  and  drowning  ,  and  ftrangling  them- 
felves  with  their  Neckcloths,  but  Hill  feafona- 
bly  fuccor  d ;  and,  to  omit  many  other  Circum- 
fiances,  they  were  at  length  deliver'd  from  this 
great  Affiidion. 

Mr.  Mather ,  at  the  end  of  Fourteen  In^ 
fiances  of  this  kind  ,  written  by  himfelf,  lays 
before  us  an  Account  ofVifitations  of  the  fame 
Nature,  which  happen  d  in  New~Enghnd,  An. 
1 692.  and  written  by  Mr.  John  Hales ,  a  Perfon, 
who  ,  as  Mr.  Mather  fays ,  would  not  for  a 
World  be  guilty  of  overdoing  the  Truth^in  an 
Hillory  of  fuch  Importance.  The  Account  is 
as  follows. 

At  the  latter  end  of  the  Year,  1 691.  Mr.  Pa- 
ris, Paftor  of  the  Church  in  Salem  Village,  had 
a  Daughter  of  about  Nine  Years  of  Age,  and 
a  Niece  of  about  Eleven,  fadly  affiided  with 
unaccountable  Diftempers,  as  Phyficians  that 
were  confulted  thought,and  one  of  them  judgd 
.  they  were  betwkch'd.  Mr.  Paris  had  an  Indian 
Man  Servant ,  and  his  Wife  an  Indian  Woman, 
who  confefs'd  that  without  the  Knowledge  of 
their  Mafter  and  Miftrefs,  they  had  taken  fome 
of  the  afflicted  Perfons  Urine,  and  mixing  it 
with  Meal,  had  made  a  Cake,  and  baked  it,  to 
find  out  the  Witch,  as  theyfaid.  After  this  the 
afflided  Perfons  cry '4  out  of  the  Indian  Woman, 
nam'd  Tituba,  that  flie  pinch'd  ,  prick'd,  and 
grievoufly  tormented  them ,  and  they  faw  her 
here  and  there  ,  where  no  Body  elfe  could, 
2nd  could  tell  where  ilie  was,  and  what  fhej 
did  when  flie  was  abfent  from  them,  thefe 
Children  were  bitten  and  pinch'd  by  invifibl? 

Agents,'     • 


or  Familiar  Sf  irits.  i  ]  9 

Agents,  thei  re  rack'd  grid  tormen- 

ted, and  mifcrably  contorted  ,  1 

tag  of  ti 
hrefs  in  her  (  m- 

;  had  taught  her  fome 
mcai  ■  as'd  for  1  :h, 

ing  of  being  bcwitchul.     In  :i 
flio;  ther  Pcrfons,  who  were  of  Age  to 

ere  molefied  in,  and  in 

thei:  out  upon  7  md  GooSy 

Orb.r  ,  that  they,   or  Spt&res 

in  tl  .voufly  torment  them. 

The  Jufticcs  at  £*&*»  examin'd  the  Affliftcd 
and  Accus'cl  together,  and  upon  the  Examinati- 
on:, Tituba  confefs'd,  that  fhe  was  a  Witch,  ahd 
that  flie,  and  the  other  two  accused,  did  tor- 
ment and  bewitch  the  Complainers ;  and  that 
thefe,  with  two  others,  whofe  Names  fhe  knew 
not,  had  their  Witch-Meetings  together,  re- 
lating the  times  wherij  and  places  where  they 
met,  with  otherCircumftances.  Upon  this  Tit** 
77,  zndGeod  were  committed  to  Priibn, 
on  fufpicion  of  a&ing  Witchcraft.  Scon  after 
thefe  Afflicted  Pcrfons  complain'd  of  others  af- 
ing  them  in  their  Fits ;  and  the  Number  of 
i&ed  ,  and  Accus'd  began  to  increafe  j 
and  upo  more  confefs'd  them- 

es gui  ty  of  the  dimes  they  were  fufped- 
ofConfeffors   mounting  at 
to  Fifty.     Thejuftices,  Judges,  and  o- 
the  ;     ned,  us'd  all  Conscientious  end. 

what  was  right,  according  to  for- 

*d  ,  in  the  like 

TtteMatter  was  carry ed  on  c  e  Com- 

md  Accufations  of  ti  by 

Confeffion-  mning 

txd  others :  Yet  lixpeiuncwfh.w'd 

that 


!l 


1 40  An  Account  of  Genii, 

that  the  more  were  apprehended ,   the  more 
were  ftill  affli&ed  ;    and  the  Number  of  the 
Confeflbrs  enereafmg,,    did  but  increafe  the 
Number  of  the  Accus'd  j  and  the  executing  of 
fome  made  way  for  the  apprehending  of  others: 
for  ftill  the  affli&ed  complain'd  of  being  tor- 
mented by  new  Obje&s  y   as  the  former  were 
removed ;  fo  that  thofe  that  were  concerned 
were  amaz  d  at  the  Number  and  qualicy  of  the 
Perfons  accus'd^and  fear'd  Innocent  Perfons  fuf- 
fer'd  :  and  henceforth,  the  Juries  generally  ac- 
quitted fuch  as  were  try'd^  fearing  they  had 
gone  too  far  before^  and  all  were  fet  at  Liber- 
ty^ ev'n  the  Confeflbrs.  The  Number  of  the  Ac- 
cus'd  was  increas'd  to  above  an  Hundred,,  and 
many  of  them  were  Perfons  of  blamelefs  and 
holy  Lives.    Nineteen  were  executed_,  and  all 
deny'd  the  Crime  dying  ;   and  fome  of  thera 
were  knowing  Perfons.,  and  had  before  this 
been  accounted  blamelefs  Livers.     The  Perfe- 
cution  ceaiing  ,  the  Afflided  grew  prefently 
well  y   the  accus'd  were  quiet  y    and  for  Five 
Years  paft  there  has  been  no  Moleftation  by 
them.    So  in  Suffolk,  in  England  3    about  the 
Year  1645-.  th&z  was  fuch  a  Profecution.,  till 
they  faWj  that  unlefs  a  ftop  were  put  to  it,  it 
would   bring  all  into  Blcod  and  Confiifion. 
The  like  has  been  in  France  ,  till  900  were  put 
to  Death  ;  and  in  fome  other  Places  the  like. 
So  that  Nevi-England  is  not  the  only  place  cir- 
cumvented by  the  Wiles  of  Satan  in  this  kind. 
He  relates  from  Witrm  >  p,  6783  that  an  Incfui- 
fitor  in  the  Subalpine  Valleys  3    enquir'd   after 
Women  Witches,,  and  burnt  above  an  Hun- 
dred,, and  was  profecuting  more,, till  the  Coun- 
try People  rofe,  and  by  force  of  Arms  hindred 
thenr,  and  refer'd  the  Matter  to  the  Bifhop. 

Theii, 


or  Famliiw  Spirits  14I 

Their  Husbands  affirm'd,  that  at  that  very  time 

t  them,  that  they  play'd  and  danc  d 

Undc  ee,    they  were  in  Bed  with  them. 

At  CMmsj  ■  1647.  there  were 

eforc  Judge  Coniers,  and  Fourteen 
of  them  Hbng'dj  and  an  Hundred  more  de- 
tained id  feveral  Prifons  in  Suffolk  and  Ejjix. 

As  for  the  Cafe  at  Salem,  he  conceives  it 
proceeded  from  fome  miftaken  Principles;  as 
that  Satan  cannot  affume  the  fhape  of  an  In- 
nocent Perfon,  and  in  that  fhape  do  Mifchief 
to  the  Bodies  and  Goods  of  Mankind  •  and 
that  when  the  Devil  does  harm  to  Perfons 
in  their  Bodies  or  Goods,  irs  at  leaft,  for  the 
mod  part  by  the  help  of  our  Neighbours,  fome 
which  are  in  Covenant  with  him.  This  is  the 
fubftance  of  what  Mr.  Hales  delivers ;  and 
Mr.  Mather  tells  us,  that  Mr.  Hales,  from  whofe 
Manufcript  he  Tranfcribed  this,  does  there 
Confute  thefe  miftaken  Principles :  yet  fpends 
whole  Chapters  to  prove  that  there  is  a  Witch, 
whom  he  thus  defines.  Tis  a  Perfon  that  ha- 
ving the  free  ufe  of  his  Reafon,  does  know- 
ingly and  wittingly  obtain  of  the  Devil,  or  of 
any  other  Divine  Power,  but  the  True  God, 
an  ability  to  do  or  know  ftrange  things,  or 
things  which  he  cannot  by  his  own  humane 
abilities  arrive  unto. 

Mr.  Mather,  in  an  Appendix,   at  the  end  of 
his  bixth    Chapter  of  his   Sixth  Book,  before- 
mentioned,    gives  a    fliort  Relation   of  fome 
pracHfcs  of  Witchcraft,  ufed  by  the  Indians  of 
New  Er.glmd,  as  follows. 

The    Indians  C  ,     who  3' 

now  Cbrlfiiansy    abunda  w- 

ledge  the  Witchcraft,  wl 

Converfarions,  and  expli  \  ith 

i 


142  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Devils,  while  they  were  Vagons.  They  know 
that  many  Perfons  among  them  have  been, 
by  the  zeal  of  their  Parents,  dedicated  to  their 
Infernal  Gods,  and  educated  for  their  efpecial 
Service :  but  that  the  Damons  accept  only  of 
fome  here  and  there  to  make  7  aw  aw  s  or  Wizards 
of.  They  know  that  thefe  7  aw  aw  s  often  Im- 
ploy  their  Damons  to  fmite  their  Neighbours 
with  Blindnefs,  and  Lamenefs,  and  other  Mif- 
chiefs,  and  fometimes  to  Kill  them,  and  fome- 
times  to  Cure  their  Maladies.  They  know  that 
their  manner  is  to  form  a  piece  of  Leather  like 
an  Arrow's  Head,  and  then  tye  an  Hair  to  it ; 
or  to  take  a  Bone  of  fome  dead  Creature ; 
over  thefe  things  they  ufe  Magical  Ceremonies, 
whereupon  the  Damon  prefently  fnatches  them 
away,  and  conveys  them  into  the  Bodies  of 
Perfons  to  be  affli&ed  ;  or  fometime  the  Da- 
mon pretends  to  them,  that  he  brings  a  portion 
of  the  Spirit  of  the  Perfon,  clofely  imprifon'd 
in  a  Fly ;  and  as  they  deal  with  the  Fly.,  fo  it 
fares  with  the  Body  of  the  Perfon  intended. 
Some  of  the  7awaws  faculty  chiefly  confifts  in 
difcovering  and  recovering  Stoln  Goods,  by 
the  help  of  their  Damons.  A  7awaw,  turnd 
Chriftlan,  faid  he  had  often  employed  his  God, 
who  appeared  to  him  flill  in  the  form  of  a 
Snake,  to  Kill ,  Wound.,  and  Lame,  fuch  as 
he  defign  d  Mifchief  to.     So  far  Mr.  Mather. 

I  fhall  now  give  an  Account  of  what 
Mr.  Calefy  above  mentioned,  has  delivered  in 
his  Book,  Entitled,  More  Wonders  of  the  Inviji- 
bleV/orld,  &C. 

In  his  Preface  he  tells  the  Reader,  he  pub- 
lifhes  thefe  his  Collections  and  Sentiments,  in 
hopes.,  that  having  well  coniider'd  and  com- 
pared  them  with  the  Scriptures,   he  will  fe^ 

Reafon, 


- — 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  }4' 

Reafon,  as  well  ashimfelf,  to  queftiun  a  be- 
lief  fo  that   there  treated 
llfo    the  pradua  flowing  from  thence;  he 
his  disbelief  of  the  operations  and  ef- 
fects   of  the  Devil,  cxpreft  by  Mr.  Mather y  in 
bis  WmJcrs  of  the  hcvi&blc  WmU\  BS  that  the 
ited  himfelf  ordinarily  as  a  Black 
Occoy'd  Miferable  Malicious  Crca- 
tures  to  •  Lift  themfelves  in  his  Service,  by  en- 
tring  their  Names  in  a  Book  5    and  that  they 
j  had  their  Meetings  and  Sacraments,  ha- 
ving each  of  them  their  Spettrcs,    or   Devils 
commiffion'd  by  them,    and  reprefenting  of 
them,   to  be  the  Engines  of  their  Malice:  By 
thefe   wicked  Spettrcs  affli&ing   poor  People 
with  various  Torments,    even  Killing  fome, 
andcaufing  fome  to  deftroy  themfelves,  and 
carrying  fome  over  Trees,  and  Hills,  Miles 
together,  many  of  them  being  tempted  to  fign 
the  Devif s  Laws. 

He  takes  this  matter  to  be,  as  others  under- 
ftand  it,  iij*.  that  the  Devil  has  been  too  hard 
for  many  in  Neu>*EngLind,  by  his  Temptati- 
ons, Signs,  and  Lying  Wonders,  with  the  help 
of  pernicious  Notions,  formerly  imbibed  and 
profeft ;    together  with   the  accufations  of  a 
parcel  of  Poffeft,  Diftra&ed  or  lying  Wenches, 
accuiing    their  Innocent  Neighbours ,    pre- 
tending they  fee  their  Spectres,  that  is,  the  De- 
vil in  their  likenefs,  affli&ing  of  them :  where- 
upon many   Tragedies  followed,    which  tho' 
begun   in  one  Parifh,  fpread  over  the  w] 
Country  j  and  he  thinks  a  Zeal  led  by  Blind- 
nefs  and  Paffion,    and  former  Prefidents  had 
herein  precipitated  Perfons  into  thefe  \ 
nelfes,    or  Witchcrafts,   an 
fame  has  been  acted  1 

His 


144  4n  Account  of  Genii, 

His  Book  being  divided  into  Five  Parts,  he 
begins  his  Firft  Part  with  a  Letter  fent  by 
Mr.  Cotton  Mather  to  a  Friend  of  his,  contain- 
ing a  Relation  of  an  Apparition  happening  to 
one  Margaret  Rule,  living  in  the  North  part  of 
Bofton.     This  young  Woman,    oji  a  Sunday, 
December  the  10th.  169;.  after  fome  Hours  of 
previous  difturbance  in  the  Publick  Affembly, 
fell  into  odd  Fits,  which  caufed  her  Friends  to 
carry  her  home,  where  her  Fits  in  a  few  Hours 
appeared  to  be  preternatural:  She  was  affaul- 
ted  by    eight  cruel  Spettres ,    of  which   fhe 
thought  fhe  knew  three  or  four,  but  the  reft 
came  Hill  with  their  Faces  cover'd :  fhe  pri- 
vately  told   Mr.  Mather  the  Names  of  thofe 
fhe    knew,    Who  fays,   they  were  miferable 
Wretches,   that   for  many    Years   had   been 
ftrongly  fufpe&ed  for  Witches.     Thofe  Spettres 
brought  her  a  red  thick  Book,  not  very  broad, 
about  a  Cubit  long,  and  demanded  her  to  fet 
her  Hand  to  it,  or  at  leaft  to  touch  it  with 
her  Hand,  as  a  fign  of  her  becoming  the  De- 
vil's Servant;  which  flie  peremptorily  refufmg 
to  do,  they  fell  a  Tormenting  her  cruelly,  fo 
that  fhe  was  forced  to  keep  her  Bed  fix  Weeks 
together.    Sometimes,    tho'  not  always,    to- 
gether with  the  Spectres,  there  look'd  in  upon 
her,    as  fhe  faid,    a  Short  Black  Man,   whom 
they  called  their  Mafter,  being  eax&ly  of  the 
fame  Dimenfions,  Complexion  and  Voice  with 
the  Devil,  that  has  exhibited  himfelf  to  ether 
Infefted  People;  not   only  in  other  parts  of 
New  "England,    but  aifo  in  other  Countries  of 
Europe,    as  relations  from  thence    inform  us. 
She  was  cruelly   Pmch'd  with  Invifible  Hands, 
very  often  in  a  Day,  and  the  Black  and  Blue 
Marks  of  the  Pinches  became  immediately 

iible  ( 


or  Familiar  Spirits?  145 

viffble  to  the  flandeiVby  ,  fhe 

raiferably  hurt  with  Pins, that  were  ; 

in  her  Neck  ,    Back  and  Arms ;   though  tfa 

|e  by  the  Pins,  vrould  in  a  lew  Mi- 
nutes ordinarily  be  cur\l  ;  fhe  would  alio  be 
ftrangely  diltorted  in  her  Joints  by  Exorbitant 
Convulsions.   To  pafs  by  other  ftrai  lati- 

ons  of  her,  in  which  Mr.  Muthv  thinks  there 
could  be  no  Impofturc,  once  in  the  middle  of 
the  Night  fhe  lamented  fadly,  that  the 
threatn  d  the  drowning  of  a  Young  Man  in 
the  Neighbourhood  ,  whom  fhe  nam'd  to  the 
Company  ;  and  it  was  found,  that  at  that  very 
time,  this  Young  Man  having  been  Prefs'd  on 
Board  a  Man  of  War  ,  then  in  the  Harbour  , 
was  attempting  to  Swim  on  Shoar  ,  and  had 
been  drown  d  in  the  Attempt,  if  a  Boat  had 
not  feafonably  took  him  up.  Thers  were  won- 
derful Noifes  every  now  and  then,  made  about 
the  Room  where  fhe  lay,  which  the  Perfons 
prefent  could  afcribe  to  no  other  A&ors,but  the 
Spettrcs.  Once  her  Tormentors  pull'd  her  up  to 
the  Ceiling  of  Her  Chamber  ,  and  held  her 
there  before  a  very  Numerous  Company  of 
Spe&ators^  who  found  it  as  much  as  they  could 
all  do  to  pull  her  down  again.  She  had  alfo  a- 
White  Spirit  which  came  to  her,  whofe  bright 
fhining  and  glorious  Garments  fhe  had  a  fre- 
quent v;.  He  ftood  by  her  Bed  conti- 
nually heart'ning  and  comforting  of  her  y  and 
Coumeling  her  to  maintain  her  Faith  and  Hope 
in  G  ►  coi  iply  with  the  Tem- 
ptations of  her  Adv.  Mr.  M 
he  h  it  fulfiFd  more  than  three  ti 
the  x  of  in  1  and  poft;. 
Perfons 

theii  -  '  \  *ore 

I 


146  An  Account  of  Genii, 

the  third  Fall  kept  for  them,  and  the  third  Day 
ftill  obtain'd  the  Deliverance ;  and  after  Mar- 
garet Rule,  had  been  more  than  Five  Weeks  in 
her  Miferies,the  White  Spirit faid  to  her;  Well, 
this  Day  fuch  a  Man  (whom  he  nam'd)  has 
kept  a  third  Day  for  your  Deliverance,  now 
be  of  Good  Chear ,  you  fhall  fpeedily  be  de- 
liver'd.     Mr.  Mather  enquir'd  ,  whetner  what 

;  been  faid  of  that  Man  were  true,  and  was 
certainly  inform' d  ,  that  it  was  precifely  fo. 
On  the  laft  Day  of  the  Week  her  Tormentors, 
asfhe  faid,  approaching  towards  her ,  would 
be  fore'd  ftill  to  recoil  and  retire,   as  unac- 

.ntably  unable  to  meddle  with  her  ;  and  they 
would  retire  to  the  Fire  fide  with  their  Puppets, 
but  going  to  ftick  Pins  in  thofe  Puppets,  they 
could  not  make  the  Pins  to  enter,  and  lhe  faw 
their  Black  Mafter  to  ftrike  them,  and  kick 
them,  to  make  them  do  their  Work  ,  and  re- 
new the  Marks  of  his  Vengeance  on  them, 
when  they  fail'd  of  doing  it  :  At  laft,  being  as 
it  were  tir'd  with  their  inefFe&ual  Attempts  to 
mortifie  her ,  they  furioufly  faid ,  Well,  thou 
Jhali  not  be  the  laft  ;  and  after  a  paufe  ,  they 
added,  Go,  and  the  Devil  go  with  you  ,  we  can 
do  no  wore.  Whereupon  they  flew  out  of  the- 
Room  j  and  (he  returning  perfe&ly  to  her 
felf,  gave  thanks  to  God  for  her  Deliverance  : 
Her  Tormentors  left  her  extream  Weak  and 
FaSnt,  and  overwhelmed  with  Vapours,  which 
would  not  only  caufe  her  fometimes  to  fall  in 
a  Swoon,  bur  likewife  now  and  then  ,  for  a 
lictfe  while  difcompofe  her  Reafon ,  though 
h   .      .  mer  troubles  returned  not. 

j  this  Relation  Mr.  Mather  adds,  He  has 
a  ays  been  of  this  Opinion,  that  we  are  Ig- 
norant of  what  Powers  the  Devils  may  have 

to 


or  familiar  Spirits.  I  j, ; 

to  do  their  Mifchich,  in  the  (ha j 
had  never  been  cxplicitely  engaged  in  D 
cal  (  and  that  th<  ugh 

ma:  ifts  had  been  fairly  d 

enquirk  ►k'd  and  begun  b) 

•  hitnfelf  has  been  lo 

redit  of  ms3  chat 

H: 111  charg'd   the  Afflicted,  committed  to  his 
:,  chat  they  fhould  cry  out  on  n  for 

m  ;    though  if  it  mighi 
Advantage  to  th  y  might  tell  their  Mil 

to  fonic  one  Perfon,  or  Discretion  enough  to 
make  no  ill  ule  of  it.  Nor  had  the  Civil  Au- 
thority profecuted  thofe  things,  had  not  a  Con- 
:itious  regard  to  the  Crys  of  MiferaMe  Fa- 
milies, overcome  the  Relu<5tancies  of  the  Judges 
to  meddle  with  them. 

The  Second  Part  of  this  Book  begins  with  a 
Narrative  of  what  paft  at  two  Vifits,  given  by 
Mr.  Cotton  Mather,  and  his  Father,  to  Mur^aret 
Rule,  written  by  Mr.  Calef ,  as  he  fays,  from 
the  Mouths  of  fome  Pcrfons  who  were  then 
prefent  •  of  which  Narrative  Mr.  Cotton  Ma- 
ther greatly  complains  ,  as  very  unfairly  and 
falfly  reprefenting  things,  in  reference  to  his 
Father  and  himfelf. 

It  contains  alfo  Letters  from  Mr.  Calef]  tc 
Mr.  Cotton,.  offering  a  meeting   wirh 

him ,  and  defiling  an  Information  in  fome 
Doctrinals  relating  to  Witchcraft  •  which  meet- 
ing Mr  Mather  declind  at  the  place  nomi- 
nated by  Mr.  Calef,  though  he  offered  to  Dif- 
courfe  with  him  concerning  it  in  hi:>  Study^ 
or  any  other  Convenient  j 
alfo  Papers  attefted  by  feveraj  Hands  of  Per* 
lent,  tha  feed  up 

to  the  Ceiling  of  the  Room.  by 

L2  in 


An  Account  of  Genii, 

an  invifible  Hand,  and  that  feveral  of  the  Per- 
fons  prefent  had  much  ado ,  with  all  their 
ftrength  to  pull  her  down.  This  is  followed 
by  another  Letter  from  Mr.  Calef  to  Mr.  Ma- 
ther, in  which,  notwithftanding  the  Atteftati- 
ons  of  the  Perfons  prefent,  he  declares  his  dis- 
belief of  Margaret  Rule's  being  (6  lifted  up; 
his  reafon  is,  that  then  Miracles  are  not  ceas'd, 
(  this  feeming  to  him  as  true  a  Miracle,  as  for 
Iron  to  Swim)  and  that  the  Devil  can  work 
fuch  Miracles. 

Next  follows,  feveral  Letters  from  Mr.  Calef 
to  Mr.  Mather  and  others,  relating  to  the  Do- 
<5trinals  of  Witchcraft,  both  defiring  Mr.  Ma- 
ther to  explain  it,  andfetting  forth  what  himfelf 
conceives  of  it,  according  to  the  Scriptures : 
and  having  Inferted  a  Letter,  which  he  writ 
to  the  Minifters,  whether  Englifi,  French,  or 
Dutch,  in  New  England,  he  concludes  it  thus, 
That  the  only  Decifive  Circumftancc  to  Con- 
vid  a  Witch,  as  far  as  he  can  find  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, is  a  maligning  and  oppugning  the 
Word,  Work,  or  Worlhip  of  God,  and  by  any 
extraordinary  Sign  feeking  to  feduce  any  from 
it;  tho'  not  excluding  any  other  Branch,  when 
as  well  prov'd  by  that  Infallible  Rule;  and 
that  the  going  to  the  affli&ed,  or  poffeft  to  Di- 
vine who  are  Witches  by  their  Spetfre-Sight,  is  a 
great  wickednefs,  and  that  the  fearching  for 
Tets,  the  experiment  of  their  faying  the  Lords 
Prayer,  the  falling  at  the  Sight,  and  rifing  at 
the  Touch  of  the  fuppofed  Criminal,  being 
all  of  them  foreign  from  Scripture,  as  well 
as  Reafon,;  are  Abominations  to  be  Abhorr'd 
and  Repented  of.  Laftly,  That  their  Salem 
Witchcraft,  either  refpeding  the  Judges  and 
Juries,    and  their  tendernefs  of  Life,   or  the 

tjiulri-* 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  j^p 

multitude  and  pertinency  of  Witncffcs,  both 
affli&ed,  and  confeflbrs  ,  or  the  integrity  of 
Hill  ire  as  Authcntick,  and  made  a^  cer- 

tain^ as  any  ever  of  that  kind  in  the  World  have 
been,  and  yet  every  one  now  fees  through  it; 
and  that  it  was  the  abovementioned  Sentiments 
that  procured  this  faddeft  Affli&ion,  and  moft 
lading  Infamy  that  ever  befel  that  Country. 
Mr.  Calef s  next  Letter  is  to  Mr.  Samuel  Wil- 
lardy  a  Member  of  Harvard  College  in  New 
England,  where  among  other  things  he  fays 
that  by  the  late  Profecution,  under  the  notion 
of  Witches  ,  Twenty  fuffered  as  Evil  Doers 
(  befides  thofc  that  Died  in  Pi  ifon  )  above  Ten 
more  Condemned,  and  an  Hundred  Irnpri- 
fond,  and  about  200  more  Accufed;  and  the 
Country  generally  in  Fears,  when  it  would 
come  to  their  turn  to  be  Accufed  ;  that  thofe 
very  Accufers,  which  had  been  Imprifoned  a* 
Witnefles  againft  fo  many,  Accufed  at  length 
thofe  in  moft  High  Efteem,  both  Magiftrates 
and  Minifters,  %9  guilty  of  Witchcraft,  which 
fhew'd  their  Rulers,  that  neceflity  lay  upon 
them  to  confound  what  had  fo  long  confound- 
ed the  Country,  as  being  unwilling  to  run  the 
fame  rifque. 

Mr.  Mother  having  fent  Mr.  Calef  a  Book 
Printed  by  Mr.  Baxter,  Entitled,  The  certainty 
of  the  World  of  Spirits,  for  his  Inftru&ion  in 
that  kind  ;  Mr.  Calef  has  here  inferted  a  Let- 
ter which  he  fent  to  Mr.  Mather,  containing 
Animadverlions  on  that  Book.  And  in  ano- 
ther Letter  which  he  Writ  to  the  Minifters  in 
and  near  Boficn,  he  fpeaks  of  the  Do&rine  of 
the  Manicheans,  and  endavours  to  fhew  that  the 
prefent  Age  is  not  free  from  that  InfeAion  ; 

1  afiribes  the  deluge  of  Bloqd-fhed  amc 
L  }  O 


1 5  o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Christians,  to  this,  that  Men  having  taken  up  a 
belief  of  a  Covenanting,  Affli&ing  and  Killing 
Witch,  and  finding  no  footfteps  of  fuch  a  Witch 
in  the  Scriptures,  have  concluded,  that  though 
the  Scriptures  be  full  ink.,  that  a  Witch  fhould 
not  LiVe3  yet  that  it  has  not  at  all  defcribed 
the  Grime,  nor  means  whereby  the  Culpable 
might  be  dete&ed  J  and  hence  they  account  it 
neceflary  to  make  ufe  of  thofe  Diabolical,  and 
Bloody  ways,  always  heretofore  pra&ifed  for 
their  Difcovery  ;  finding  that  the  Rules  given 
to  dete&  other  Crimes,  are  wholly  ufelefs  for 
the  difcovery  of  fuch. 

Mr.  Calif*  laft  Letter  of  his  Second  Part,  is 
to  Mr.  Benjamin  IVadj ( worth,  a  Minifter,  whom 
he  feems  to  charge  with  not  well  explaining 
the  Scriptures j  in  reference  to  Witchcraft, 
and  fays,  the  late  dangerous  Notion,  that  the 
Devi!  appears  to  Perlons,  and  that  they  and 
the  Devil  make  mutual  Ingagements,  Con- 
firmed by  Signing  the  Devil's  Book,  and  are 
from  hence  Inabled  not  only  to  know  Futuri- 
ties, and  things  done  at  a  Diftance,  but  are 
alfo  Impower'd  thereby  to  do  harm  to  Neigh- 
bours, to  raife  Storms,  and  do  things  above 
and  aeainft  the  Courfe  of  Nature,  has  been 
the  cccaiion  of  (bedding  fo  much  Blood  in  the 
World.  He  adds,  It's  manifeft  that  the  belief 
ci  the  Witches  Power  to  do  the  things  above-» 
mentioned,  was  an  ancient  belief  of  the  Hea- 
thtns ;  and- that  from  them  it  was  received  by 
the  T*Mftsp  who  have  fince  Improved  upon  it, 
and  brought  in  the  notion  of  a  Covenant  < 
and  that  Trpufitiits  feem  to  have  lately  Im- 
proved it  farther,  by  faying,  that  Witches  can 
Cbmmiffionate-  Devils  to  do  thofe  Mifchiefs, 
thereby  fitting  the  Witch  in  the  place  pf  God, 

He 


or  Fatmltar  Spirits.  i  c 

He  has  writ  alio  in  a  precedent  Letter,  that 

two  Parties  in  difpute,  were  not  agreed  which 

to  put  it  upon,  whether  the  Devil  [mpOW 
the  Witch,  or  the  Witch  CommiiTions  him 
the  (  t:   but  both  Parties  are  ag 

this,    that  one  way  or  other  the  Milchiei 
ted,  and  fo  the  Criminal  becomes  Gu 
of  Death;  in  the  fearch  after   which   Crimi 
nab,    many  Countries   have  fallen  into  fu 
Convullions,  that  neither  the  Devaluation  made 
by  a  Conquering  Enemy,  nor  the  Plague  it 
felf  has  been  fo  formidable. 

The  Third  Part  of  this  Book  gives  an  ac- 
count of  the  Differences  happening  at  S>; 
Village,  on  the  account  of  Profecutions  for 
Witchcraft,  which  began  there,  where  one 
Mr.  Pans  was  Paftor ;  who,  notwithftanding 
his  acknowledging  fome  Errors  he  might 
have  fallen  into  in  that  refped,  was  at  lad 
difmift  from  that  Cure.  In  his  acknowledg- 
ment under  his  hand,  he  owns,  that  the  hor- 
rid Calamity  of  afflicting  that  Country,  broke 
out  firft  in  his  Houfe,  and  that  in  his  Family 
there  were  fome  of  both  Parties,  viz*  Accu- 
fers,  and  Accufed. 

The  Fourth  Part  contains  an  Ingenious  Let- 
ter, Writ  by  a  Gentleman  without  a  Name, 
endeavouring  to  prove  the  commonly  received 
{^pinion  about  Witchcraft;  to  which  Mr.  Calef 
has  Written  a  Reply.  And  a  ;>econd  Letter  is 
Written  by  the  forefaid  Gentleman,  to  which 
Mr.  Calef  has  a  Rejoynder. 

The  Fifth  Part  contains  an  account  of  the 
moft  Memorable  matters  of  Fa  A,  touching 
the  fuppofed  Witchcraft  in  New  /.  Now 

tho*  Mr.  Calef  s  Account  of  Facls ,    contains 
many  m<?re  Particulars,  than  what  I  have  fet 
L  4  dov 


i^2  An  Account  of  Genii, 

down  before  from  Mr.  Hdts ,  yet  iinee  they 
would  be  too  tedious  for  me  to  infert  here^ 
I  fhall  only  note  fome  odd  paffages  in  them. 

He  tells  uSj  that  about  the  end  of  the  Year 
1692  y  a  new  Scene  relating  to  Witchcraft 
was  begun:  One  Jofepb  Ballard  at  Andover, 
whofe  Wife  was  III,  and  after  Died  of  a  Fever, 
fent  to  Salem  for  fome  of  thofe  Accufers.,  to 
tell  him  who  Afflicted  his  Wife;  others  did  the 
fame,,  and  Horfe  and  Man  were  fent  from  fe- 
veral  places  to  fetch  thofe  Accufers^  who  had 
the  Spefire  Sight y  that  they  might  thereby  tell, 
who  afhi&ed  thofe  that  were  any  way  111. 
When  thefe  came  into  any  place  where  fuch 
were^  ufiially  they  fell  into  a  Fit;  after  which 
being  ask'd  who  it  was  that  affli&ed  the  Per- 
ion,,  they  would  for  the  moil  part  name  one 
whom  they  faid  fat  on  the  Head.,  and  another 
that-  fat  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  affii&ed.  Soon 
after  Ballard's  fending.,  more  than  Fifty  of  the 
People  of  Andover  were  complain'd  of  for  af- 
flicting their  Neighbours:  Here  it  was  that 
many  accufed  themfelves  of  riding  upon  Poles 
through  the  Air.,  many  Parents  believing  their 
Children  to  be  Witches.,  and  many  Husbands 
their  Wives,  &c.  when  thefe  Accufers  came 
to  the  Houfe  of  any  Perfon  upon  fach  an 
Account.,  it  was  ordinary  for  other  Young 
People  to  be  taken  with  Fits,  and  to  have  tte 
fame  Spectre  Sight.  Mr.  Dudley  Br adftreet  y  a" 
Juftice  of  Peace  in  Andovtr,  having  granted 
out  Warrants  and  Committed  Thirty  or  Forty 
Perfons  to  Prifons.,  for  the  fuppoied  Witch- 
crafts^ at  length  faw  caufe  to  forbear  granting 
out  any  more  Warrants ;  fbpn  after  which,,  he 
and  his  Wife  were  cry'd  out  of,  himfelf  was  by 
therii  feid  to  haygKilTd  Nirte  Per£>ns  by  Witch- 
craft, 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  \  5  3 

craft,  and  found  it  his  fafcft  courfe  to  make 
his  Efcapc. 

'  A  Dog  being  afflicted  at  Sakm  Village,  and 

thole  that  had  the  Sfeihe  Sight  being  fent  for, 

they  accufed  Mr.  John  Bradjfreet,    Brother  to 

the  Juftice,  that  he  affii&ed  the  faid  Dog,  and 

now  Rid  upon  him,  he  made  his  Efcape  into 

:e<\na  Government,  and  the  Dog  was  put 

leathj  and  was  all  of  the  affii&ed  that  fuf- 

I  Death. 

At  Auiover  they  complain  d  of  a  Dog,  as 

nffli&ing  of  them,    and  would  fall  into  their 

at  the  Dogs  looking  on  them.     The  Dog 

put  to  Death. 

Note,   In  reference  to  this,  that  in  my  precedent 

Account  of  the   Second  Sight ,    Children ,  Horfcs 

and  Cows  had  it  as  well  as  Men  and  Women. 

A  worthy  Gentleman  of  Bofton  being  about 
this  time  accufed  by  thofe  of  Andover,  he  fent  by 
fome  particular  Friends  a  Writ  to  Arreft  thole 
Accufers  in  a  1000  /.  A&ion,  for  Defamation, 
with  Inftru&ions  to  inform  themfelves  of  the 
certainty  of  the  Proof;  in  doing  which  their 
bufinefs  was  perceived,  and  from  thence  forward 
the  Accufation  at  Andover  generally  ceas'd. 

And  now  Nineteen  Perfons  being  Hang'd, 
and  One  Prefsd  to  Death,  and  Eight  more 
Condemned ,  in  all  Twenty  Eight ,  about 
Fifty  having  confeft  themfelves  to  be  Witches, 
of  which  not  One  Executed;  about  One 
Hundred  and  Fifty  in  Prifon,  and  above  Two 
Hundred  more  Accufed,  the  Special  Com- 
million  of  Oyer  and   Tl  came  to   a  Pe- 

riod ;   after  which  Six  Women,  who  had  con- 
felfed  themfelves  to  be  Witches,    gave  Ufl 
their  rland  that  they  did  it  only  in  complyance 
with  their  neareft  Friends,  who  told  them  k 
was  their  only  way  to  efcape,  As 


I  j  4  ^n  Account  of  Genii , 

As  for  the  Tryals,  and  the  Evidence  taken 
for  Convi&ion  at  Salem,  they  are  fet  forth  in 
Print  by  Mr,  Cotton  Mather,  in  his  Wonders  of 
the  InvifibU  World,  at  the  Command  of  Sir  Wil- 
liam Phips,  then  Governour  of  New  England  j 
but  Mr.  Calef  confidering  that  his  Book  might 
fall  into  the  hands  of  fuch  as  never  faw  thofc 
Wonders,  has  Tranfcribed  here  the  whole  Ac- 
count he  has  given  thereof,  without  any  vari- 
ation, but  with  one  of  the  Inditfments  annext 
to  the  Tryal  of  each.  After  Mr.  Calef  has  fet 
down  Mr.  Mathers  faid  Account  of  the  Pro- 
ceedings at  Salem,  he  writes  fome  Animad- 
verfions  on  it,  and  then  proceeds  to  give  an 
Account  of  the  proceedings  in  the  like  cafe 
at  Charles-Town,  Bofion,  and  other  places ;  and 
concludes  with  a  Proclamation,  at  laft,  Iffu'd 
out  by  the  lieutenant  Governour,  Counfel 
and  AfTembly  of  the  Majfachufetts  Bay,  wherein 
they  beg  God  Pardon  for  any  Errors  might 
have  been  committed  in  the  late  Profecutions. 
And  upon  the  Day  of  Fall,  in  the  full  AfTembly 
at  the  South  Meeting-Houfe  in  Bofion,  one  of  L 
the  Judges,  who  had  fat  in  Judicature  at  Sa- 
lem, delivered  in  a  Paper,  defiring  the  Prayers 
of  the  People  to  the  like  efFeit.  And  fome 
that  had  been  of  feveral  Juries,  gave  forth  a 
Paper  fignd  with  their  own  Hands,  owning 
that  they  fear'd  they  had  been  fadly  Deluded, 
and  Miftaken,  and  beg'd  Pardon  of  God  and 
their  Country  Men,  for  what  had  paftj  and 
declaring  that  none  of  them  would  do  fuch 
things  again,  on  fuch  Grounds  for  the  whole 
World. 

I  thought  good  to  give  this  Account  at  large 
of  the  two  foregoing  Books,,  becaufe  they  give 
its  a  full  Information  of  the  laft  confiderable 

Vifi- 


it  Familuu  Spirits.  155 

Viiitation  by  Witchcrafts,  or  fo  fuppofcd,  that 
has  happncd  to  any  Country  in  the  World, 
and  I  hope  it  may  be  a  farewcl  to  them. 

As  to  my  own  Opinion  in  rhefe  Matters,  I 
am  convinced  by  my  own  Experience  (which 
to  m  I  1  houfand  Witnefles  )  that  there 

Much  a  thing,  as  a  Spcttre-Sight,  fo  that  one 
Perfon  may  lee  SfeBrts^  when  others  prefent 
at  the  fime  time  fee  nothing;  wherefore  I 
think  it  not  Impoflible  that  the  afflifted  Perfons 

Viw  England  fbould  fee;  nay,  I  believe  they 
faw  the  Sv.drcs  of  Perfons,  who  as  they  con- 
ceived ,  TormeHted  them  j  all  Hiftorics  of 
Witches,  both  in  England,  and  in  all  other 
Countries,  teftifying  the  fame ;  tho'  I  no  way 
think  that  fuch  Spectre-Sight  fhould  be  received 
a  Judicial  Proof  againft  any  Perfon,  it  being 
manifeft  by  fome  foregoing  Examples,  that  it's, 
at  leaft  fometimes,  fubjed  to  Illufions,  of 
which  I  (hall  here  add  a  particular  Inftance 
from  Erommannn' ,  wTho  in  his  Third  Book  of 
Magical  .  quotes  the  Author  of  Cri*  r*rt.4. 

minal  Cautions,  writing  thus.  c£p.  7. 

A  Prince  of  Germany  Invited  two  Religious  Dkb-  **• 
Fathers,  of  eminent  Vertue  and  Learning ft  34?* 
to  a  Dinner.  The  Prince  at  the  Table  faid  to 
one  of  them,  Father!  Think  you  we  do  right- 
ly In  Hanging  Perfons,  who  are  accufed  by 
Ten  or  Twelve  Witches,  to  have  appear' d  at 
their  Meetings  or  "Sabbaths?  I  fomewhat  fear 
we  are  Impofed  on  by  the  Devil,  and  that  it 
is  not  a  fafe  way  to  Truth  that  we  walk  in  by 
thefe  Accufations ;  efpecially  hnce  many  Grave 
and  Learned  Men  every  where  begin  to  ciy 
out  againft  it,  and  to  charge  our  Confciences 
with  it ;  tell  me  therefore  your  Opinion.  To 
whom   the  Father,    being   fomewhat  of  an 


1 5  6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

eager  Spirit,  faid,  what  fhould  make  us  doubt- 
ful in  this  Cafe  ?  or  what  fhould  touch  our 
Confidences,  being  convinced  by  fo  many  Te- 
ftimonies  ?  Can  we  make  it  a  Scruple  whether 
God  will  permit  Innocent  Perfons  fhould  be 
fo  tradue'd  ?  there  is  no  caufe  for  a  Judge  to 
flick  at  fuch  a  number  of  Accufations,  but  he 
may  proceed  with  fafety.  To  which  when 
the  Prince  had  reply'd,  and  much  had  been 
faid  pro  and  con,  on  both  fides  about  it,  and  the 
Father  feem'd  wholly  to  carry  the  Point,  the 
Prince 3  at  lengthy  concluded  the  Difpute, 
faying,  I  am  forry  for  you,  Father,  that  in  a 
Capital  Cafe,  you  have  Condemned  your 
felf,  and  you  cannot  complain  if  I  commit 
you  to  Cuftody,  for  no  lefs  than  Fifteen 
Witches  havq  depofed,  that  they  have  feen  you 
at  their  Meetings,  and  to  fliew  you  that  I  am 
not  in  Jefl,  I  will  prefently  caufe  the  publick 
Ads  to  be  brought,  for  you  to  Read  them. 
The  Father  flood  in  a  Maze,  and  with  a  De- 
jected Countenance,  had  nothing  here  to  op- 
pofe  but  Confufion,  and  Silence,  after  all  his 
Learned  Eloquence.     So  far  Frommannm. 

It's  obfervable,  that  when  the  Spetlre-Sighted 
Accufers  came  to  an  Houfe  to  difcover  who 
affli&ed  a  Perfon  taken  111,  it  was  ordinary 
for  other  Young  People  to  be  taken  in  Fits 
like  the  Speclre-Sigbtetl-Pcrfons,  and  tp  have 
the  fame  Spectre-Sight;  as  we  know  if  a  Perfon 
falls  into  Convulfion  Fits  in  the  prefence  of 
Young  Perfons,  it's  ufual  for  thefe  to  fall  into 
Convulsions  alfo. 

This  ftrange  Vifitation  in  New  England,  in 
which  Perfons  were  feized  with  flrange  Fits, 
and  came  to  have  a  Spectre-Sight,  feems  to  be 
ally'd  to  what  Vint  arch,  in  his  Book  of  tht  Ver- 

txm» 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 57 

tuous  Atts  of  Women  y   relates  concerning  the 

Mile  fun  Virgins,   as  follows. 

There  was  a  time,  that  the  Mikfian  Virgin* 
fell  into  a  ftrange  Humour,  and  raving  with- 
out am  apparent  Caufe,  only  it  was  fufpe&ed, 
that  there  wasfome  Venemous  Conftitution  of 
the  Air  ,  which  caus'd  in  them  this  Delirium, 
and  alienation  of  Mind  ,•  for  they  all  on  a 
fudden  were  feiz'd  with  a  defire  to  die,  and  a 
furious  Inclination  to  hang  themfelves,  and 
there  were  many  that  fecretly  did  it ;  and  no 
Remonftrance  nor  Tears  of  their  Parents,  nor 
Confolation  of  Friends  avail'd  any  thing,  but 
they  would  Deftroy  themfelves ,  and  they  al- 
ways found  means  to  elude  all  the  Subtleties 
«nd  Inventions  of  thofe  that  Watch'd  them  : 
So  that  it  was  look'd  upon  as  fome  Divine  Pu- 
niftiment,  which  no  Humane  Provifion  could 
remedy;  till  at  length,  by  the  advice  of  a  wife 
Citizen,  an  EJift  was  fet  forth  ,  that  if  any 
Perfon  ftiould  hang  her  felf  for  the  future,  her 
Body  fhould  be  carryed  Naked  through  the 
open  Streets  in  the  fight  of  all  Men  ;  which 
put  a  foil  flop  to  this  Tragedy.  And  if  inftead 
of  an  Indulgent  Non  Compos,  found  generally 
by  our  Juries  of  late,  on  all  Felos  defc,  fome- 
what  exemplary  were  orderd  by  the  Govern- 
ment, poflibly  it  might  deter  Perfons  from 
that  Crime.  Plutarch  Notes  it  as  a  fign  of  a 
Good  and  Vertuous  Difpolition,  that  the  fear 
of  Infamy  and  Difhonour  works  more  upon 
Humane  Minds,  than  the  fear  of  thofe  horrible 
Accidents  Death  and  Torment:. 

Rbodigitius  writes  thus.     Its  (aid  the  Al 
while  Ljfimachus  ru!  d  ,    began  to  be  infefted  '•  30.  c.  4. 
with  a  certain  New  and  V  full  kin  . 

Difeafe,  the  man::  1  Firft 

the 


158  An  Account  of  Genii, 

there  generally  reign'd  among  them  a  fierce 
and  burning  Fever  ,  when  the  Seventh  Day- 
was  come,  an  abundance  of  Blood  flow'd  from 
their  Noftrils,  fome  fell  into  a  plentiful  Sweat, 
and  this  ended  the  Fever  ;  but  a  very  Ridicu- 
lous affed  feiz'd  the  Minds  of  them  all,  for 
they  were  ftir'd  up  to  Ad  Tragedies,  and  thun- 
dered out  Iambicks  with  a  very  loud  Voice,  but 
chiefly  the  Tragedy  of  Andromeda,  writ  by  Euri- 
pides, and  the  words  of  Verfeus ;  the  City  was 
fill'd  with  thefe  kinds  of  weekly  Tragedies, 
the  People  bawling  out  thefe  and  the  like  kind 
of  Words.  O  King,  thou  Love  of  Gods  and  Aden! 
This  unufual  Delirium  held  a  long  while,  till  the 
Winter,  and  a  fierce  Cold  coming,  put  an  end 
to  the  Evil  It's  thought  the  rife  of  this  Dif- 
eafe  proceeded  from  this  ,  That  at  that  time 
Archdaus,  a  Famous  Tragedian,  in  the  midft 
of  the  Summer  ,  when  the  Heats  were  very 
great,  Aded  there  Andromeda,  whereupon  the 
Abderites  contraded  the  caufe  of  their  Difeafe 
in  the  Theater  ;  and  when  fas  its  ufual)  the 
Appearances  of  what  was  Acted  in  that  Tra- 
gedy, were  prefented  to  their  Minds,  they 
fell  to  the  faid  Tragedy  through  a  Delirium, 
upon'their  Recovery,  Andromeda  flicking  in  their 
Memories,  and  Verfus  with  Medufa. 

L.  8.  c.  8.  As  to  a  Difpofition  of  the  Air  in  Reference 
to  a  Spectre-Sight ,  Purch.is,  in  the  Second  part 
of  his  Pilgrim,  writes,  from  a  Relation  af&tndps 
journey  from  Venice  to  Conft^ntincple,  as  follows. 
We  lay  in  a  little  Bay,  and  under  a  Clift,  in  the 
Gulf  of  Calonus,  where  not  one  of  us  but  hid  his 
Sleep  interrupted  by  fearful  Dreams  ;  he  that 
rchVi  affirming,  that  he  had  Cccn  the  Devif, 
fo  that  in  a  great  difinay  we  put  from  thefhore 

v  abcut  midnight ;    but  whether  it   proceeded 

from 


or  Familiar  Spirits,  159 

from  the  Nature  of  the  Vaporous  place,  or  that 
infetted  byiome  Spirit,  I  leave  to  decide.  It's 
reported  of  a  little  Rocky  Illand  hard  by,  nam'd 
formerly c/£x j  Sacred  to  Neptune,  that  none 
could  Sleep  on  it,  for  being  troubl'd  with  Ap- 
parit,  The  Gulf  belongs   to   the   Ifland 

,Un>  or  Lesbos. 

Thus  we  find  what  Difpofitions  of  Mind 
Men  may  fall  into  fundry  ways ,  and  how  far 
the  Diabolical  feifures,  relating  to  pra&ices  of 
Witchcrafts,  may  be  caus'd  upon  the  Minds  of 
Miferable  People,  being  impregnated  with 
Notions  of  Damons,  and  the  like  ;  and  what 
Communication  of  Minds  there  may  ba  be- 
twixt fuch  People,  will  deferve  Confederation. 

Hippocrates  in  his  Tra<5t  of  Virgins  Difeafes,  (if 
it  be  his )  enquires  into  the  Nature  and  Caufes 
of  fuch  Diftempers ,  as  Affli&ed  the  Milefian 
Virgins,  and  confiders  the  Difeafe  call'd  Sacred y 
which  he  fays  is  attended  with  Frights,  and 
Terrors,  by  which  Perfons  are  Vehemently 
fcar'd,  fo  that  they  grow  Delirious-  andfome- 
times  by  Night,  fometimes  by  Day,  and  fome- 
t:mes  both  Night  and  Day  ,  they  think  they 
fee  Damons  infeiting  them,  and  that  upon  thofe 
Vifions  many  have  hang'd  themfelves,  though 
more  Women  than  Men,  they  being  of  a  wea- 
ker Difpofition  of  Mind  j  and  Virgins  that  are 
almoft  ripe  for  Marriage,  find  this  about  the 
time  of  the  firft  defcent  ot  their  Menfe j,being  free 
from  thofe  Evils  before  j  but  about  that  time 
the  due  Courfe  of  the  Blood  being  ftopt,  it  re- 
turns up  to  the  Heart  and  Midriff,  cauiing  an 
acute  Inflammation,  and  brines  an  alienation  of 
Mind,  with  Crys  and  Terrors  j  and  fometimes, 
he  fays,  without  Sfeftresy  a  certain  Pleafureof 
Death  f  Thing  ; 


i(5o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

as  they  return  to  themfelves,  he  fays,  the  Wo- 
men are  wont  to  Confecrate  their  moft  preci- 
ous Garments,  with  other  things,  to  Diana, 
being  deceived  by  the  Prophets,  who  Com- 
mand them  fo  to  da 

Now  though  the  Caufes  aflign'd  by  Hippocrates, 
feems  plaufible  enough  for  him,  as  a  Phyfiai- 
an ,  yet  I  doubt  they  will  not  reach  all  Cafes, 
and  we  muft  have  recourfe  to  a  Superiour  Sci- 
ence for  them.  It's  known  to  the  Learned, 
that  there  has  been  a  Science  in  the  World^call'd 
ScientiaUmbrarum,  which,  as  to  the  publick  teach- 
ing of  itj  has  been  fupprefs'd  upon  goodPolitick 
grcunds,  though  there  are  ftill  fome  Societies 
of  Men,  in  the  World  who  allow  the  ftudy  of 
it,  and  teach  it  to  Perfons  of  whofe  Integrity 
they  are  fatisfied ;  and  as  Boefatas  fays,  of  Ma- 
gick^of  which  this  is  apart,  Eft  tanquam  res  Sacra, 
qua  no  nifii:iris  magriis  ,  &  peculiari  beneficio  de 
etch  inftruBis  Communicatur ,  &  nil  aufi  funt  ag~ 
gredi  quidam  Frincipes  in  Toliticis  ,  in  Sacris,  in 
confibiis  fine  eorum  arbitrio. 

Columella  knew  there  was  a  Science  built  on 
Higher  Principles ,  than  what  are  accountable 
for  in  Thyficksy  when  he  faid ,  concerning  the 
Cure  of  his  Bees. 

Hort.L  i  oi         ^  flt  nu^a  valet  Mediclna  repellere  peftem, 
Dardantd  'yeniant  artes. 

But  if  this  Plague  no  Medicine  can  repel, 
To  Arts  Dardanian  let  US  fly.  ~— 

The  Schntia  Vnibrarttm  5  being  a  Branch  of 
thefe  Arts  ^    the  Ignorance  of  which  pofi 
may  have  been  the  cccaiion  of  many  miftakes 
•  in  Judicial  proceedings  relating  to  Witchcraft,  ■ 

the 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  161 

the  Dif|  I  Mro,being  kn 

able  only  b\  cience.    And  though  m 

I  upon  i 
licy,  perhaps,  has  rather  chofen  my 

than  to  admit  the  Publick  te 
ence,  which  might 

to  the  Publick.     But  I  write 
thefe  tilings  only  by  the  by  ,  and  as  opening. 
It  feems  to  me  ,  that  Mr.  Cahf  deals  forae- 
what  hardly  with    Mr.  M*th*r  in  this,,  that 
Ml  for  !  id  lent 

him  a  Paper,  arretted  by  fereral  Subfcribqrs, 
that  Margaret  Rule,  with  whom  * 
fent,  v.  as  lifted  up  to  the  Ceiling  of  the  Room, 
and  that  feveral  times,  notwithstanding  the 
Endeavours  of  ftrong  Perfons  to  keep  her 
down,  and  there  held  her  for  a  confiderable 
time  $  and  that  they  had  much  ado  to  pull  her 
down  $  yet  Mr.  C^/declares  his  disbelief  of  it, 
for  this  reafon,  that  then  Miracles  are  not  ceas'd  • 
as  though  a  manifeft  Experience  were  to  be  Co 
exploded.  I  have  giv'n  before  two  Experien- 
ces in  the  like  kind ,  one  from  Mr.  Gla»vi/3 
concerning  a  Perfon  fo  lifted  up  in  the  Lord 
Orcr/s  Houfe  in  Ireland ;  another  from  WUrm^ 
a  Perfon  well  known  to  have  been  of  no  Light 
belief,  who  declares  that  a  Woman  had  been 
carried  up  in  the  Air  by  Spirits,  if  himfelflnd 
not  violently  with-held  her,  and  kept  her 
down.  As  to  his  great  Ground  ,  of  the  CeiTa- 
tion  of  Miracles,  I  well  know  many  Lear. 
Divines,  have  been  of  that  Opinion,  though  I 
think  it  no  fuch  Eflential  Point  of  Faith,  tl 
Chriftianity  cannot  well  confift  without  it. 
Dr.  .    in  his  Religio  Medici y  writes  thi 

That  Miracles  are  ceas'd,   lean 

eny,  much  lefs  define  the  time 
M  and 


1 61  An  Jccowtt  of  Gcnill 

Seff.iS*  and  period  of  the  Ceflation,  And  again,  There- 
fore that  Miracles  have  been,  I  do  believe,  and 
that  they  may  yet  be  wrought  by  the  living,  I 
do  not  deny,  and  Dr.  Stubbe,  in  his  Account  of 
the  Miraculous  Cures  wrought  by  Mr.  Greatrix 
writes ,  according  to  the  Impetuofity  of  his 
Spirit ,  That  to  fay  ,  Miracles  are  ceas'd  ,  is  a 
groundlefs  Folly ,  if  not  a  difingenious  Impu- 
dence, in  giving  the  Lye  to  various  Religions : 
And  if  Mr.  Calef  admitted  the  point  of  Marga- 
ret Rule's,  being  fo  lifted  up,  I  cannot  fee  why 
this  mull  be  concluded  a  Miracle  ,  unlefs  all 
things  Providence  permits  the  Devil  to  a£t,  and 
which  feem  ftrange,  (hall  be  called  Miracles. 

And  whereas  Mr.  Calef  y  fo  often  urges  Mr, 
Mather ,  with  Mr.  Gaules  Fourth  Head  for 
C  nvi&ing  a  Witch,  *riz.  That  a  Witch  is  one 
that  maligns ,  and  oppugns  the  Word,  Work, 
or  Worfhip  of  God,  and  by  any  Extraordinary 
figns  feeks  to  feduce  any  from  it ;  as  appears, 
Dent.  13.  1,  2.  Matth.  24.  24.  AEl.  15.  8.  10. 
2  Tim.  3.  8.  which  Mr.  Calef  will  have  to  be 
the  only  Head  well  prov'd  in  the  Scripture  for 
difcovering  a  Witch ,  and  often  challenges 
Mr.  Mather  to  produce  any  other  ;  and  fays, 
That  his  not  bringing  plain  Scripture  Proof, 
that  there  is  a  Covenanting  Witch,  is  a  fuffi- 
cientDemonftration  there  is  none  ;  it's  no  con- 
fequence  but  there  may  be  fuch  a  Witch,  and 
that  fairly  reducable  to  the  Head  of  Witch- 
craft mentiond  in  the  Scriptures  •  for  as  there 
are  New  Difeafes  of  the  Body  ,  which  were 
unknown  to  the  Ancients,  fo  I  know  not  why 
t  irz  may  not  be  NcwDiftempersof  the  Mind, 
Crimes  being  fuch  ;  and  fince  Mr.  Calef 
it  nds  fo  much  for  plain  Scripture  Proof  for 
what  he  Credits,  he  may  do  well  to  give  us  a 

plain 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  16] 

plain  convincing  Scripture  IV 
nvn  Gloffes)  for  the 

or  of  the  rime  that   V- 

Iland^  i 

ry  courfc  uf  Nature  >mmandi 

permitting  any  Good  or  Evil  A 
ny  fuch  thing. 

J  think  it  worthy  Confidei  ition,  that  in  the 
Account  the  abovemention'd  Mr. 
of  himfelf,and  hisAction^ina  Letter  to  the  !a:<5 
Mr.  Boyle  %   Printed  in  / 
feemsa  ftrange  Agreement  in  lorne  Partk 
with  what  happend  in  I :  (ita- 

tion  ;  for  as  the  Perfons  there  Afflicted,  afibori 
as   they  lookd  on   tl  at  Aihiacd   them, 

would  fall  down  in  Fits,  (o  Mr. 
fbmewhat  of  the  like  Nature,  relating  to  him- 
felf,  addreffing  himfelf  to  Air.  Boyle,  as  folio 

'Sir,  I  hope  you  will  Pardon  me,  when  i 
€  relate  to  you  my  own  Obfervations  y  and 
€  what  my  Experience  inclines  me  to  believe, 
€  in  faying,  that  I  have  met  with  feveral  In- 
€  ftanccs  which  feernd  to  me  to  be  PoflefHon, 
€  by  Dumb,  Deaf,  and  talking  Devils  ;  and 
€  that  to  my  Apprehenfion,  and  others  prefent, 
c  feveral  Evil  Spirits,  one  after  the  other  have 
c  been  purfued  out  of  a  Woman  ,  and  every 
€  one  of  them  has  been  like  toChoak  her,  wh<  n 
c  it  came  up  to  her  Throat,  before  i:  wenc 
c  forth ;  and  when  the  laft  was  ^onc,  (lie  w 
c  perfectly  well,  and  fo  continued.  There  have 
€  been  others,  that  have  falfn  down  immediatc- 
My  aflbon  as  they  have  feen  me,  which  the 
c  Mayor  of  liorce/fer  ,  Colonel  Birch  ,  Major 
c  Wlldiy  and  many  Hun.  rh  at  Worn  ter, 

a1  here  in  London  ,  and  other  Places 
1  I  ve-Witneflfes  of:     Many  when  they  I 

M  2  card 


1 64  An  Account  of  Genii, 

hetqrd  my  Voice,  have  been  tormented  in  fo 
ftrange  a  manner,  that  no  one  prefent  cotild 
conceive  it  lefs  than  a  Poffeffion ;  as  I  will 
Inftance  in  one  at  Tork-houfe,  (where  Sir  John 
Hinton,  Colonel  Talbot,  and  many  others  were 
prefent) who  had  fomewhat  within  her,  which 
would  fwell  her  Body  to  that  exceffive  De- 
gree, on  a  fudden,  as  if  it  would  burft  her  j 
and  then  affoon  as  I  put  my  Hand  on  that 
part  of  her  Body ,  where  it  did  rife  up,  it 
would  fly  up  to  her  Throat ,  or  fome  other 
place,  and  caufe  her  Neck  to  fwell  half  fobig 
again,and  then  almoft  Choak  her,  then  Blind 
her,  and  make  her  Dumb ,  and  Foam ,  and 
fometimes  fly  into  her  Hand,  and  fo  con- 
trad  and  faftn  it,  that  neither  Sir  John  Hintony 
or  any  elfe  that  did  try  ("as  there  were  many) 
could  with  all  their  ftrength  open  one  Finger 
of  her  hand,  nor  would  it  fly  his  Hand  in  the 
leaft,  nor  any  other  Perfons  there,  till  I  put 
my  Hand  on  it,  or  my  Glove ;  nay,  I  often- 
times brought  it  up  into  her  Tongue,  by 
running  my  Hand  on  her  Body,  on  the  out- 
fide  of  her  Cloaths,  up  to  her  Throat,  which 
was  fwolln  in  an  Inftant  as  big  again  ,  and 
has  been  feen  plainly  to  fly  from  place  to 
place,  and  at  length  with  great  violence  of 
Belching,  which  did  almoft  Choak  her,  and 
force  her  Eyes  to  ftart  out  of  her  Head, 
it  went  forth,  and  fo  the  Woman  went  a- 
way  well.  Whether  this  were  a  Natural  Di- 
ftemper  let  any  one  Judge,  that  is  either  Di? 
%ine0  Philofopher  ,  or  Vhyfecian.  I  could  In- 
ftance you  in  Forty  as  ftrange,  or  ftranger  ; 
but  I  will  go  no  farther  then  London,  and  Pla- 
ces adjoyning,  for  Inftances  of  this  Nature. 


He 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  I  £5 

He  adds  beneath, c  That  going  to  the  Town 
€  of  Copoqucen  in  Ireland y  thci  'oor 

c  People  that  came  out  of  England,  foj  I 
c  Diftempers  they  labourd  under  j  and  am< 
'the  reft,  two  that  had  the  Falling-Sickn, 
c  who  no  fooner  faw  me ,    but  they  fell  into 
€  their  Fits  immediately,  and  upon  putting  my 
c  Hands  on  them,  they  were  reftord  to  their 
€  Senfes  forthwith ;  and  he  purlucd  their  Pains 
€  from  place  to  place,  till   they  went  out  of 
€  them.     So  far  Mr.  Greatrix. 

Here  we  find,  that  as  the  Pcrfons  Afflicted  in 
Ncw-EngUnd ,  aflbon  as  they  look'd  on  the  Af- 
fliftors,  or  fo  by  them  fuppos'd,  fell  into  their 
Fits,  and  were  reftord  to  tliemfelves  upon  the 
Affli&ors  touching  them,  fo  the  Diftemper'd 
Perfons,  aflbon  as  they  look'd  on  Mr  Greatrix, 
fell  into  their  Fits,  and  upon  his  touching  them 
were  recover'd. 

There  was  a  Book  Printed  in  London,  An. 
1656.  intitTd,  Enthufiasmm  Triumpbattts ,  writ- 
ten  by  one  who  aflum'd  the  Name  of  Philofo- 
fhilus  Parrefiaftes ;  near  the  end  of  which,  we 
find  a  Relation  of  a  Perfon,  who  had  a  Power 
of  healing  by  ftroaking,  like  that  of  Mr.  Grea- 
trix.  The  Relation  is  thus,  p.  5-7.  It's  ve- 
ry credibly  Reported,  and  1  think  cannot  be 
deny'd,  That  one  by  the  ftroaking  of  a  Mans 
Arm ,  that  was  dead  and  ufelefs  to  him,  re- 
cover^ it  to  life  and  ftrength.  When  I  he;i 
of  it,  and  readfome  few  Pages  of  that  Mir 
culous  Phylicians  writing  ,  my  Judgment  was> 
that  the  Cure  was  Natural,  but  that  his  Blood 
and  Spirits  were  boil'd  to  that  height, 
would  hazard  his  Brain  ,  which  proved  true  j 
for  he  was  ftark  mad  not  very  long  after, 

M  5  vYj 


1 66  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Now,  however,  this  Perfon  might  have  va- 
lued his  Skill  in  judging  of  an  enfuing  mad- 
riels  in  fuch  Cafes ,  the  effed  having  followed 
here  according  to  his  guefs;  yet  we  find  it  will 
not  hold  in  all  Cafes  ,  Mr.  Greatru  having 
always  livd  free  from  any  fuch  Sequel. 

To  proceed  to  other  Accounts  of  Perfbns, 
who  have  had  a  Perception  of  Genii,  or  Spi- 
rits not  vifible  at  the  fame  time  to  others ;  The 
Famous  Torjua'tus  TaJJb  ,  Prince  of  the  Italian 
Tnets,  ftrongly  afferted  his  own  Experience  in 
that  kind.  His  Life  was  writ  and  publiftfd  in 
French,  Jn.1692.  by  D.  C.  D.  D.  U.  who  in  his 
Preface  tells  us,  that  in  what  he  has  writ,  he 
has  followed  chiefly  the  Hiftory  given  us  in 
Italian  ,  by  John  Baftifia  Manfo,  a  Neapolitan, 
Gent,  who  had  been  a  very  Intimate  Friend  to 
Tajfo.  In  his  Life,  among  other  things,  he  ac- 
quaints uS,  that  Tajfo  was  Naturally  of  that 
Meivmcholick  Temperament,  which  has  always 
made  the  ereateft  Men,  and  that  this  Temper 
rament  being  aggravated  by  many  hardships 
he  had  undergone,  it  had  made  him  fometimes 
beiide  himfelf j  and  that  thofe  Melancholick 
Vapours  being  diffipated,  he  came  again  to 
himfelf,  like  thofe  that  return  from  Fits  of  the 
Falling-SiCknefs,  his  Spirit  being  free  as  before. 
That  near  his  later  end  he  retired  from  the  Ci- 
ty of  Naftes ,  to  his  Friend  Manfo,  ZtBifaccia, 
a  ihiall  Town  in  the  Kingdom  of  Naples,  where 
Manfo  had  a  considerable  Eftate  ;  and  pafs'd  an 
Autumn  there,   in  the  Divertifements   of  the 

tfon,  as  Hunting,  vill ting  Ladies,  and  fre- 
quenting o:  rmpanies,  &c  And  here  the 
French  Author  gives  us  an  Account  of  Trjjcs  Sen- 
sible Perception  of  a  Genius  ,  as  follows.  As 
after  thele  Amufements  he  ufually  rctir'd  to  his 


cr  Familiar  Spirits.  1 67 

Chamber,  to  entertain  himfelf  there  with  his 
Friend  Manfij  the  later  had  the  Opportunity 
to  enquire  into  one  of  the  moil  lingular  effc 
of  TjJ/o's  Melancholy,  of  this  Hcroick  Melan- 
choly,  a>  1  may  call  it,  which  rais'd  his  Spirit, 
fo  far  it  was  from  rendring  it  obfeure 
which,  among  the  Ancients,  would  have  caus  d 
them  to  have  afcrib'd  a  Familiar  Damon  to  him, 
as  to  Socrates.  They  were  often  in  an  hot  dif- 
3  concerning  this  Spirit,  with  which  T  jfo 
pretended  to  have  a  Communication.  I  am 
too  much  your  Friend  ,  find  Manfo.  to  him, 
one  Day,  not  to  let  you  know  what  the  World 
thinks  of  vou  concerning  this  thing,  and  what 

1  think  of  it  my  felf.  Is  it  poflible  that  being 
cnlightn'd  as  you  are,  you fhould  be  fall'n  into 
fo  great  a  Weaknefs,  as  to  think  you  have  a  Rx- 
miliar  Spirit ;  and  will  you  give  your  Enemies, 
that  Advantage,  to  be  able  to  prove  by  your 
own  acknowledgment ,  what  they  have  pub- 
lifh'd  to  the  World  ?  You  know  they  fay  you 
did  not  publifh  your  Dialogue  of  the  Mejftngery  as 

2  Fidion,  but  jqm  would  have  Men  believe 
that  the  Spirit  which  you  make  to  fpeak  there, 
wa>  a  real  and  true  Spirit ;  fo  that  Men  have 
thence  drawn  this  Injurious  Confequence,  that 
your  Studies  have  embroil'd  your  Imagination, 
fo  that  there  is  made  in  it  a  confus'd  Mixture  of 
the  Fidions  of  the  Poets ,  the  Inventions  of 
the  Philofophers,  and  the  Do&rine  of  Religion- 
I  am  not  Ignorant,  anfwer'd  Tajjo ,  of  all  that 
is  fpread  abroad  in  the  World  on  the  Account 
of  my  Dialogue :  I  have  taken  care  divers  times 
to  difabufe  my  Friends,  both  by  Letter ,  and 
word  of  Mouth.  I  prevented  ev'n  the  Malig- 
nity of  my  Enemies  ,    as  you  know  ,   at  thz 

;  I  publifti'd  my  Dialogue.    Men  could  net 
M  4 


1 68  An  Account  of  Genii, 

j?be  Ignorant  that  I  compos'd  it  for  the  Young 
[  Prince  of  Mantua,  to  whom  I  would  explain, 
after  an  agreeable  Manner,  the  Principal  My- 
fleries  of  the  PUtonick  Philofophy.     It  was  at 
Mantua  it  felf,  after  my  fecond  flight  from  Fer- 
ram,  that  I  form'd  the  Idea  of  it  ,  and  I  com- 
mitted it  to  Paper  a  little  while  after  my  unfor- 
tunate return.     I  addrefs'd  it  to  this  Prince, 
and  ail  Men  might  have  read  in  the  Epiftle 
Dedicatory,  the  Pre teftation  I  there  make  ,  that 
this  Dialogue  being  writ  according  to  the  Do- 
<5trine  of  the  flatonicks,  which  is  not  always 
conformable  to  reveal'd  Truths,  Men  muft  not 
confound  what  I  expofe  there  as  a  Thilofopber, 
with  w!  :at  I  believe  as  a  Chriftian.    This  Diftin- 
&ionis  by  fo  much  the  more  reafonable^that  at 
that  time  nothing  extraordinary  had  happen'd 
to  me  ,  and  I  lpake  not  of  any  Apparition. 
This  can  be  attefted  by  all  thofe  with  whom  I 
lodged.,  or  frequented  in  this  Voyage  ;    and 
therefore  there  is  no  reafon  for  confounding 
the  Fi&ion  of  my  Dialogue  with  what  has  hap- 
pen d  to  me  fince.    I  am  perfwaded  of  all  you 
fay  to  me,  reply'd  Manfo,  but  truly  I  cannot  be 
of  what  you  believe,   at  prefent,  concerning 
your  felf.     Will  you  Imagine  to  your  felf,  that 
you  are  in  Commerce  with  a  Spirit  ?  And  I 
ask  you  of  what  Order  is  that  Spirit  ?  Shall  us 
place  him  in  the  Number  of  the  Rebels,,  whom 
their  Pride  precipitated  into  the  Abyfs  ?  Or  of 
the  Intelligences  who  continued  firm  in  Faith, 
find  Submiffion  to  their  Creator  ?  For  there  is 
no  mean  to  take  in  the  true  Religion.,  and  we 
pujft  not  fall  into  the  Extravagances  of  tji§ 
Gnomes    and  Silfhes,  pf  the  Cabalijts, 

Now 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 69 

Now,  the   Spirit  in  queftion  cannot  be  a 
no»,   you  own,  that   inftead   of  Infpiring 
you  any  thing  contrary  to   Piety  and  Religi- 
on, I  Q  for  cities  in    you   the  Maxims   of 
Chriftianity  j    he  ftrengthens   your  Faith  by 
bund  Reaionings,  and  has  the   Tune  re- 
with  you  for  Sacred  Names  and  Things. 
Neither  can  you  fay  that  It's   an  Anul\  1 
tho'  you  have  always  led  a  Regular  Lire,  and 
i  all  Diffolutenefsj  tho  for  fomc  Years 
Lpply'd  j  tl  after  a  parti- 
cular manner  to  the  Duties  of  a  True  Chri- 
ftian,  you  will  agree  with  me  that  thefe  forts 
ivours  are  not  common;  that  a  Man  muft 
B   attained  to   an  high  degree   of  Sancti- 
ty, and  not  be  far  from  the  Purenefs  of  Ce~ 
leftial  Spirits  to  merit  a  familiar  Convcrfe, 
and  bear  an  Harmony  with  them.     Believe 
me,    there  is  nothing  in  all  thefe  Difcourfes 
which  yon  imagine  you  have  with  this  Spirit. 
You     know    better     than    any    Man    thefe 
Symptoms,  which  the  black  Humours  where- 
with you  are  Tormented,  caufes  in  you.  Your 
Vapours  are  the  fourfe  of  your  Vilions,  and 
your  felf  would  not  judge  otherwife  of  ano- 
ther Perfon,  to  whom  a  like  thing  fhould  hap- 
pen ;    and  you  will  come  to  this  in  your  own 
relped:    alfo ,   if    you    will   make  a    mature 
reflection,  and  apply  your  felf  to  blot  out,  by 
an  effort  of  Reafon,  thefe  Imaginations  which 
the  violence  of  your  evil  effed  caufes  in  you. 
You  may  have  Reafon,  reply'd  Tajfo,  to  think 
fo  of  the  things  that  pafs  in  me;  but,  as  to  my 
felf,  who  have  a  fenfible  perception  of  them, 
lam  forced  to  reafon  after  another  manner. 
Jf  it  were  true  that  the  Spirit  did  not  fhewi 
jumfelf  to  me  but  in  the  Violent  iUTault  of  my 


17  o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Vapours :  If  he  offer'd  to  my  Imagination 
but  wandring  and  confus'd  Species,  with- 
out Connexion  or  due  Sequel ;  if  he  ufed  to 
me  frivolous  Reafonings  which  ended  in  no- 
thing ;  or  if  having  begun  fome  *folid  Reafo- 
nings he  left  it  off  on  a  fudden,  and  left  me 
in  darknefs,I  fhould  believe,  with  you,  that  all 
that  paffes,  is  but  Dreams  and  Fantoms;  but 
it's  quite  otherwife.  This  Spirit  is  a  Spirit  of 
Truth  and  Reafon,  and  of  a  Truth  fo  diftinft, 
of  a  Reafon  fo  fublime,  that  he  raifes  me  often 
to  Knowledges  that  are  above  all  my  Reafo- 
nings ,  tho*  they  appear  to  me  no  lefs 
clear ;  that  he  teaches  me  things  which  in  my 
moll  Profound  Meditations  never  came  into 
my  Spirit,  and  which  I  never  heard  of  any 
Man ,  nor  read  in  any  Book.  This  Spirit 
therefore  is  fomewhat  of  Real ;  of  whatfoever 
order  he  be,  I  hear  him  and  fee  him,  never- 
thelefs  for  its  being  impoffible  for  me  to  com- 
prehend and  define  him.  Manfo  did  not  yield 
to  thefe  Fadis,  which  TaJJo  would  have  pafs'd 
for  Proofs:  he  preft  him  with  new  Shteftiom, 
which  were  not  without  Anfwers.  Since  you 
will  not  believe  me  on  my  Word,  faid  Taj]b  to 
him,  another  Day,  after  having  well  Difputed,  I 
muft  convince  you  by  your  own  Eyes,  that 
thefe  things  are  not  pure  Imaginations  i  and 
the  next  Day  converfing  together,  in  the  fame 
(Chamber,  Manfo  perceived  that,  on  a  fudeft, 
he  fixt  his  Eyes  towards  the  Window,  and  that 
be  Hood,  as  it  were  Immovable ;  he  call'd  to 
him,  and  jogg'd  him  many  times,  but  inftead 
of  Anfwering  him;  See  there  the  Spirit,  fays 
Ttiffoy  at  laft,  that  has  been  f  leafed  to  come  and 
yifit  me,  and  to  entertain  himfelf  with  me; 
look    on    him,      and  you    will    acknowledge    the 

Truth 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  171 

Truth  of  wb.it  I  f.ij.  Manfoy  fomcwhat  fur- 
prifed,    call  hi^  towards  the  place  he 

(hew'd  him,    and  perceived  nothing  but  the 
Rays  of  the  Sun  palling  through    the  Glafs: 
nor  did  he  fee  any  thing  in  all  the  Chamber, 
tho' he  cart  his  Eyes  round  it  with  curiofity, 
and  he  delircd  him  to  fliew  him  the  Spirit, 
cfa  he  look'd  for  in  vain,  while  he  heard 
Tujjh  (peak  with  much  Vehcmency.     lie  de- 
es in  a  Letter,  which  he  writ  concerning 
to  the  Admiral  of  Naples,  that  he   really 
dno  other  Voice  but  Tajfos  own  ;  but  they 
e  fometimes  ghteftUns  made  by  him  to  the 
pretended  Spirit,  fometimes  Amfweri  that  he 
made  to  the  pretended  j®u§ftions  of  the  Spirit, 
and   which  were  conceived  in  fuch  admirable 
Terms,  fo  Efficacious,  concerning  Subjeds  fo 
Elevated,  and  fo  Extraordinary,  that  he  was 
Ravifh'd  with  Admiration,  and  dared  not  to 
Interrupt  him.     He  hearken'd  therefore  Atten- 
tively, and  being  quite  befide  himfelf  at  this 
myfterious  Converfation,  which  ended  at  laft 
a  rccefs  of  the  <Spirit;  as  he  found  by  the 
la  11  words  of  TtiJJb  j  after  which  Tajjb  turning  him- 
ro  him,  Well,  faid  he,  are  your  doubts  at  laft 
diflipated-   on  the  contrary,  anfwer'd  Manfo>  I 
am  more  Imbroyled  than   ever ;  I  have  truly 
rd   wonderful  things;    but  you  have  not 
(hew\l  mc  what  you  promifed  me.    You  have 
(ten  and  heard,  refunrfd  Toffoy  perhaps,  more 

than -he    ftopt   here;    and  Alan  fo,    who 

could  not  recover  himfelf  of  his  furprife,  and 
had  his  Head  filfd  with  the  Ue.is  of  this  extra- 
ordinary entertainment,  found  not  himfeif  in 
a  condition  to  prefs  him  farther.  Mean  while 
he  ingaged  himfelf  not  to  fpeak  a  word  to  any 
Mat)  of  thefe  things  he  had  heard,  with  a  de- 

fign 


172  An  Account  of  Genii , 

fign  to  make  them  Publick,  the/  he  fhould 
have  liberty  granted  him.  They  had  many 
other  conversations  concerning  this  Matter: 
after  which  Manfo,  owrid  he  was  brought  to 
that  pafs,  that  he  knew  net  what  to  think  or  fay, 
only,  that  if  it  were  a  weaknefs  in  his  Friend 
to  believe  thefe  Vifions,  he  much  fear'd  it 
would  prove  Contagious  to  him,  and  that  he 
Ihould  become  at  laft,  as  credulous  as  himfelf. 

I  was  willing  to  fet  down  this  Relation  at 
large,  becaufe  I  think  it  contains  a  fufficient 
Anfwer  to  what  many  Learned  Friends  have 
faid  to  my  felf,  on  the  like  occafion. 

Perhaps  it  may  not  be  ungrateful  to  the 
Reader,  if  I  fubjoyn  here  the  fhort  Eloge  writ 
on  Taffb,  by  the  Famous  Thuanus^  which  is 
as  follows. 

Torquatus  TaJJo  died  about  the  Forty  Fifth 
Year  of  his  Age,  a  Man  of  a  wonderful  and 
prodigious  Wit,  who  w#s  feized  with  an  in- 
curable Fury  in  his  Youth,  when  he  lived  at 
the  Court  01  Ferrara ;  and  neverthelefs  in  lucid 
Intervals  he  writ  many  things  both  in  Verfe 
and  Profe,  with  fo  much  Judgment,  Elegancy, 
and  extream  Corrednefs  of  Style,  that  he 
turnd,  at  length,  that  Pity,  which  many 
Men  had  conceived  for  him,  into  an  Amaze- 
ment •  while  by  that  Fury,  which  in  others 
makes  their  Minds  outragious,  or  dulls  them, 
after  it  was  over,  his  Understanding  became 
as  it  were  purified,  more  ready  in  Inventing 
things,  more  accute  in  aptly  difpofing  them 
1  after  they  were  Invented,  and  more  copious 
in  adorning  them  with  choice  of  Words,  and 
weight  of  Sentences;  and  that  which  a  Man 
of  the  foundeft  Senfe  would  fcarce  excogitate 
at  his  Leifure ,  with  ths  greateft  Labour  and 

Care 


or  Familiar  Spirits,  173 

Care  imaginable,  he, after  a  violent  agitation  of 
the  Mind,  fet  beiide  it  felf,  naturally  perform'd 
with  a  wonderful  Felicity,  fo  that  he  did  not 
feem  ftruck  with  an  alienation  of  Mind,  but 
with  a  Divine  Fury.  He  that  knows  not  thefe 
things,  which  all  Men  know  that  have  been 
in  Italy ,  and  concerning  which  himfelf  fome- 
times  complains,  tho'  modeftly,  In  his  Wri- 
tings ;  let  him  Read  his  Divine  Works,  and  he 
muft  neceflarily  conclude,  either  that  I  fpeak 
of  another  Man  than  Tajfo  >  or  that  thefe 
things  were  written  by  another  Man  than 
Tajfo. 

What  (hall  we  fay  of  Horace,  as  to  a  fenfible 
perception  of  Spirits,  who  feems  to  defire  Po- 
fterity  to  believe  him,  where  he  fays, 

Bachum  in  remotis  Carmina  montibus 

Vidi  dccentemy  credite  pofteri, 

Nymphafque  difcentes ,  &  anres  C*rm.  1. 2« 

Capripedum  fatyrorum  acutas  °*c  ,?' 

JLvot  recenti  mens  trepidat  metu. 

Bacchus  in  diftant  Roch  Tve  feen 

Teach  Charms,  and  Nymphs  to  learn  of  him. 

Believe  it,  and  the  priclid  up  Ears 

Of  Goat-feet  Satyrs.     Oh  !  it  Scares 

Me  ftill  to  think  ont  with  new  Fears. 

And  I  know  not  why  Horace  (  tho'  an  Epi- 
curean )  being  Enthufiaftically  raifed ,  might 
not  have  feen  Apparitions,  as  well  as  other 
Men :  as  when  with  a  Scalded  Imagination, 
he  cry's  out, 

J^ho  me  Bacha  raptis  tut 
Plenum  ?  quo  nemora,  nut  quos  agor  in /pec  ^\m'     & 

rriox  wente  no:  0/> 


1 74  4n  Account  of  Genii, 

Cruqulus  has  writ  a  Learned  Comment  on 
the  former  Ode  of  Horace,  which  I  recommend 
to  the  Curious  Readers  perufal :  he  there  re- 
fleAs  on  Lambinus,  who,  in  his  Comment  on 
the  fame  Ode,  fays, 


Non  Ego 


•  Credat  Judaus  Apella, 


he  not  having  duly  examined  the  Scope  of 
that  Divine  Poet,  in  that  Ode. 

Having  aver'd  my  own  Experience  in  feeing 
Gently  or  Spirits,  I  fhall  conclude  this  Chapter 
with  what  the  moll  Ingenious  Poet  fays  of 
himfelf,  in  the  like  cafe. 

FaBa  canam,  fed  erunt  qui  me  finxijfe  loquantur, 
NuHdqi  mortali  numina  vifa  putuent. 

Eft  Deus  in  nobis  agitante  calejjimus  Mo  ; 
Impetus  hie  Sacra  femina  mentis  habet, 

Fas  mihi  pracipue  vultus  vidiffe  Deorum 
fall.  6*  yd  <Hutafum  vates,  vel  quia  Sacra  cano. 

They  re  Faffs  TU  Sing,  tho  fome  may  fay  I  feign. 
And  think  no  Gods  were  e'ver  feen  by  Man* 
God  Reigns  in  us,  bfs  Attings  we  take  Fire 
Such  Salleys,  Seeds  of  Sacred  Mind  Infpire. 
Of  all  Men  I  may  freely  Gods  behold. 
Or  caufe  !m  Prophet,  or  Gods  Truths  Unfold. 


CHAR 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  I?  ) 


CHAP.     V. 

What  perception  Men  have  had  of  Genii, 
or  Spirits,  and  their  Operations  by  the 
Senfe  of  Hearing. 

T'.raus  tells  us.   That  God  propofed  to1-*^ 
Himfelf,  in  his  way  of  a&ing  with  Men,  ££  ™ 
Firlt,    to   render  Himfelf  Familiar   to  them  j 
afterwards,  in   fuccccding   Times,  to    remit 
fomewhat  of  Hi*  Familiarity ;  at  laft  to  Go- 
vern Men,  not  by  Himfelf,  but  by  Men. 

The  moll  familiar  way  that  God  has  mani- 
fefted  Himfelf  to  Men,  has  been  by  prefenting 
.  Himfelf  in  an  outward  appearance,  and  fpeak- 
ing  to  Men  in  an  Humane  Shape.  He  came 
fomewhat  fhort  of  this,  when  he  was  only 
heard  and  not  fcen.  It's  Inferior  to  both 
when  he  was  neither  feen  nor  heard,  but  in- 
finuatcd  Himfelf  in  a  Dream,  or  the  Fancy; 
the  loweft  degree  was  when  he  occupied  only 
the  underltanding  of  Man. 

If  we  run  over,  and  examine  all  Gods  ma- 
nifeftations  of  Himfelf,  we  fhall  find,  for  the 
moll  part,  that  to  the  firft  Men  God  ofteneft 
prefented  himfelf  in  an  outward  humane  Form: 
Afterwards,  That  with  later  Men  he  had  Dif- 
courfes,  hiding  his  external  Form.  Third 
That  he  was  neither  feen  in  a  pcrfbnal 
nor  his  Voice  perceiv'd,  but  he  accomplifn'd 
many  things  in  Dreams.  Tint  he  en- 

lightcn'd  the  Mind  ;  yet  it  mult  no  be  thought 


\y6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

that  God  fo  nicely  obferv'd  this  Rule,  that 
he  never  pafs'd  it  by ;  for  when  he  has  appeared 
in  an  outward  Form,  he  has  often  alfo  been 
heard,  often  appeared  in  Dreams,  often  en- 
lighten d  the Underftanding.  Again,  in  later 
Times  alfo,  fometimes  He  has  been  feen,  forne- 
times  heard;  but  I  relate  what  has  happen'd 
for  the  moll  part. 

The  Minds  of  Men  being  at  length  pra&is'd, 
He  afforded  them  hisPrefence,  partly  by  Oracles , 
which  he  gave  Viva  Voce ;  partly  the  Under- 
Handing  being  enlightend  by  Himfelf,  and 
the  Miniftry  of  Angels,  He,  in  a  manner,  with- 
drew Himfelf,  and  govern  d  Men  by  Men, 
as  His  Deputies ;  and  left  them,  in  a  manner, 
to  themfelves,  as  He  now  Governs  them.  So 
far  Thyraus. 

I  have  premitted  this  from  Thyrsus,  to  give 
a  general  Notion  of  the  Manifeftations  of  God, 
and  the  Intelle&ual  World  to  Man  :  This  Do- 
ctrine being  ftrongly  back'd  by  the  Scriptures, 
and  delivered  down  to  us  from  all  Ages ;  as 
likewife  that  Genii,  Spirits,  Angels,  and  Damons, 
have  manifefted  themfelves  to  Man  after  the 
like  manners. 
jppar.Dci,  Now  Thyrsus  tells  us  farther,  That  as  thefe 
vifib.  c.  2.  Manifeftations  differ  in  excellency  according 
to  the  dignity  of  the  Powers  they  are  made  to; 
and  each  Power  has  its  Dignity,  according  as 
it  is  abftra&ed  from  Matter  ;  fo  the  Sight,  in 
this  regard,  exceeding  the  Hearing  j  the  Ima- 
gination, the  Sight ;  the  Underftanding,  the 
Imagination  ;  the  moft  excellent  Manifeftati- 
on  will  be  the  Intellectual,  next  the  Imaginary, 
then  the  Viiible,  and,  in  the  laft  place,  the 
Vocal. 

As 


or  familiar  Spirit*.  1 77 

As  I  pretend  to  coniklcr  chiefly  theft  r 
laft  ways,  and  have  already  giv'n  Accounts  in 

reference  tO  the  Senfe  of  Seeing,  1  lhall  Ik 
Inftances  of  what  perception  Men  h  ive  had  of 
GtmHy  or  Spirits  by  the  S$nfc  $f  Hearings  the  ma- 

nifeflation  ofSocratts's  Genu*  : icioiTd, 

being  by  a  Voice,  and  many  having   heard 

ftrange  \  oices  or  Noifes,  who  have  ne^ 

any  thing.     And  as  to  thefe  \  oites  or  Noifes 

heard,  we  muft  conlider  them  in  a  two- fold 

refped  :    Either  only  the  Perfon  concernd 

hears  them,  and  not  others  prcfent  at  the  f: 

time,  (as  it  was  the  Cafe  of  Socrates;  I  or  they 

are  heard  by  all  Perfons  prcfent.    I  (hall  th£i 

fore  firft  give  a  few  Instances  of  the  latter,  and 

then  of  the  others :  only  noting  by  the  bv, 

what  Wicnu  fays  of  thefe  Voices  or  Noifes,  vn.  De  Pr*r* . 

€  Spirits  appear  fometimes  inviiibly,    ib  thut^*™'  '7# 

<  only  a  Sound,  or  Voice,  or  Noile  is  percciv'd 

c  by  Men,  viz.   a  Stroke,    or  Knocking,   or 

*  Whiffling,  or  Sneezing,    or  Groaning,    or 

€  Lamenting,  or  clapping  of  the  Hands,  to 

€  make  Men  attent  to  Enquire,    or  Anfwer. 

So  far  Www. 

In   Luther  s  Colloquii  Menfalia,  &C.    fet  forth  To™'  »•  f- 
in  Latin  at  Francfort,  An.  i)~?l>  it  being  a  dif-  itSt*&ri'<> 
ferent  Colle&ion  from  that  of  Aarifiber,  which 
is  tranflated  from  the  High-Dutch  into  Englsjb, 
we  have  the  following  Relation. 

c  It  happen  d  in  Prujfu,  that  as  a  certain  Boy 
€  was  Born,  there  prefently  came  to  him  a  Gt- 
c  mm,  or  what  you  pleafe  to  call  it  (for  I  leave 
\  it  to  Mens  Judgments)  who  had  fo  faithful  x 
€  care  of  the  Infant,  tha;  there  was  no  need  ei- 
c  ther  of  Mother  or  Servant ;  and  as  he  grew 
c  up  he  had  a  like  care  of  him  :  He  went  tp 
€  School  with  him,  but  fo  that  he  could  never 

N  'be 


378  An  Account  of  Genii, 

c  be  feen,  either  by  himfelf  ,  or  any  other,  in 
c  all  his  Life.  Afterwards,  he  travelled  into 
c  Italy,  he  accompanyed  him,  and  whenfoever 
c  any  Evil  was  like  to  happen  to  him,  either 
c  on  the  Road,  or  in  the  Inn  ,  he  was  percei- 
'  ved  to  foretel  it  by  fome  touch  or  ftroke  ;  he 
c  drew  off  his  Boots  as  a  Servant;  if  he  turn  d  his 
6  Journey  another  way,he  continued  with  him, 
c  having  the  fame  care  of  him  in  foretelling 

*  Evil  ;  at  length  he  was  made  a  Canon,  and  as, 
c  on  a  time,  he  was  fitting,  and  feafting  with 
c  his  Friends ,  in  much  Jolity  ,  a  vehement 
c  Stroke  was  ftruck  on  a  fudden,  on  the  Table, 
c  (6  that  they  were  all  terrified  ;  prefently  the 
c  C^non  faid  to  his  Friends,  be  not  afraid,  fome 
c  great  Evil  hangs  over  my  Head ;  the  next 
c  Day  he  fell  into  a  Fever  ,    and  the  Fit  con- 

*  tinued  on  him  for  three  whole  Days ,  till 
c  he  died  Miferably. 

V*mm.  The  Second  Inftance,  I  fliall  give,  is  from 
s-lc*2*  Bod  In,  which  though  it  has  been  Printed  in 
Englijl)  already,  yet  it  relating  to  the  Point  I 
am  treating  of,  and  containing  many  perti- 
nent Inftances ,  I  have  thought  fit  to  infert  it 
here.  He  writes  therefore  as  follows  j  c  I  can 
c  affure  you,  a  Perfon  now  living  has  told  me, 
c  he  had  a  Spirit  Daily  attending  him,  and  that 
c  he  began  to  have  knowledge  of  him,  about  the 
c  37th  Year  of  his  Age,  though  he  believ'd  he 
c  had  accompanyed  him  all  his  life  by  pre- 
c  ceding  Dreams  and  Vifions  he  had  to  keep 
c  him  from  Vices  and  Inconvenicies ;  but 
c  he  never  fenfibly  perceived  him ,  as  he  had 
c  done  fince  his  57th  Year  ;  which  happend 
c  to  him,  he  fays  ,  having  for  a  Year  before 
'  continually  pray'd  to  God  heartily,  Morning 
€  and  Evening,  that  he  would  pleafe  to  fend 

'  him 


or  FdmHU  \t<. 

'him  a  Good  Angel,  to  g: 

c  on 

c  very  Enftn 

1  times  for  bin)  to 

c  times  another,  fom 

c  from  1  fometim 

c  one  Difficulty  ,  fometi 

c  this  not  only  concerning  1 

'wife  Humane   thi; 

.m'd  to  hear  a  Voice  or 
f  faying  to  him  ,    j 

'  Morning,  about  Three 

c  the  Spirit  knock'd  ar  . 

c  fometimes,  and  open'd  his  Door,  ' 

c  Body  ;  an  Morning  the  Spiri 

c  nued,  and  if  he  did  not  rile  he  knock'  i 

c  and  kept  him  waking  till  he  role,  then  he 

c  gan  to  be  afraid;  thinking  itfome  Evil  Spirit, 

c  as  he  faid  ;  and  the  continued  to  Pray 

c  to  God,  without  failing  a  Day,  that  hewoiild 

c  fend  him  a  Good  Angel ,    and  c 

c  Pfilwsy  which  he  could  fay  in   a 

c  by  heart,  and  then  the  Spirit  ma 

c  known  to  him,  as  he  was  awake,    ftriking 

c  foftly  the  firft  Day,   fo  that  he  fenfibly  | 

c  ceiv'd  many  ftrokes  on  a  Glafs  \ 

c  very  much  amaz'd  him;  and  two  Days  a 

c  having  a  Friend  of  his,  the  King's  Sec 

c  who  is  itill  living,  dining  with  him,   I 

c  cretary  heard  the  Spirit  ftrike  after  th 

c  ner,  on  a  little  Stool  (landing  by  hi 

c  upon  he  begun  to  look  Red,  and  to  fear,  but 

c  he  faid  to  him,   be  not  atrai 

c  however,  to  give  him  an  afturance 

'  to  him  the  Truth  of  the  Fa&  ;    now^  he 

•  affur'd  me  ,    t 

N    z  ;  Ac  . 


i  8o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

c  Accompany ed  him,  giving  him  a  fenfible  fign, 

*  as  touching  him  fometimes  by  the  right  Ear, 
c  if  he  did  fomewhat  that  was  not  Good  j  and 
c  by  his  left  Ear  if  he  did  Well ;  and  if  any  one 
c  came  to  deceive  and  furprife  him,  he  prefent- 
€  Iy  perceiv  d  the  fign  at  his  right  Ear  j  and  if 
1  it  were  fome  good  Man  ,  and  came  for  his 
c  Good  ,  he  perceiv'd  alfo  the  fign  at  his  left 
'  Ear ;  and  if  he  were  about  to  Eat  or  Drink 
f  any  thing  that  was  Evil,  he  perceiv'd  the  fign ; 
c  if  he  doubted  of  doing  or  undertaking  fome- 
f  thing f  the  fignal  happen'd  to  him.  If  he 
c  thought  of  fome  Evil  things  and  was  at  a 
€  ftand  5  he  prefently  perceiv'd  the  fign  to  put 
c  him  off  from  it  :  Sometimes  when  he  began 
r  to  Praife  God,  with  fome  Tfelmy  or  to  fpeak 
c  of  his  Wonders,  he  found  himfelffeized  with 
c  a  certain  Spiritual  force  3  which  gave  him 
c  Courage,  And  for  him  to  difcern  a  Dream 
c  by  Infpiration  from  thofe  idle  Fancies  that 

*  happen  ,  when  a  Perfon  is  indifpos'd  ,  or 
c  troubled  in  Mind,  he  was  awak'd  by  the  Spi- 
c  rit  about  Two,  or  Three  of  the  Clock  in  the 
c  Morning,  and  falling  afleep  a  little  after,  he 
c  had  true  Dreams  of  what  he  ought  to  do,  or 
c  believe,  or  of  doubts  he  had,  or  of  what 
c  would  happen  to  him ;  fo  that  fince  that 
c  time,  he  lays,  there  is  fcarce  a  thing  that 
c  has  happenq  to  him,  but  he  has  had  an  Ad- 
c  vertifement  of  it ;  nor  a  doubt  of  things  that 
c  he  ought  to  believe,  but  he  has  had  it  refolv'd, 
c  he  duly  Praying  to  God  to  teach  him  his  Will, 
c  Law,  and  Truth  ;  and  as  for  his  Comport- 
i  ment  otherwiie,  he  was  of  a  Joyous  Difpoii- 

*  tion  enough,  in  all  his  Aliens,  and  of  a  Gay 

*  Spirit,  alledging  to  this  purpofe  that  Paflage 

*  t  f  the  Scripture,    which  fays,    I  fair  the  Court- 

1  tenancts 


or  Fatfiitiar  Spirits,  181 

tenanecs  of  the  Angel  I  C#d  in 

Coropai  me  i^vil  wor  . 

fom 

adrertfz'd  in  p.     if  be  r  I      k 

char  t  Good,  the  Spirit  ftruck  on  tl 

Book  to  make  him  leave  off ^  and  he  was  ai- 

foon  directed  ,  if  he  did  any  tiling  againft  h 
Health,  and  was  carefully  guarded   in  his 

In  fhort,  he  has  told  me  fo  many 
Particulars,  that  it  would  be  endlefs  to  relate 
them  all; but  above all^he  wa$adyertis'd  to  rile 
in  tl  nd  commonly  about  lour 

of  the  Clock  ,  and  lavs,  he  heard  a  Voice  in 
hisfleep  which  laid.,  Who  is  it  th.it  will  riftfirjt 
to  fcrve  God  ?  He  fays  alfo,  he  was  often  adver- 
tised to  give  Alms,and  the  more  Alms  he  gave, 
the  more  he  found  his  Affairs  to  profper  ;  and 
as  his  Enemies  had  refolved  to  kill  him,  know- 
ing that  he  was  to  go  by  Water,  he  had  £ 
Vilion  in  his  Dream,,  that  his  Father  brought 
him  two  Hories,one  Rcd,and  the  other  White  • 
which  made  him  fend  to  hire  twoHorfes,  and 
his  Man  brought  him  two  Horfes  ,  one  Red, 
and  the  other  White,  he  having  net  told  him 
of  what  Colour  he  would  have  them.  I  ask'd 
him,  why  he  ipoke  not  openly  to  die  Spirit  ; 
he  anfwer'd  me,  that  he  once  pray'd  him  to 
fpeak  to  him,  but  prelently  die  Spirit  ftruck 
with  violence  againft  the  Door,  as  though  ic 
had  been  with  an  Hammer  j  giving  him  to 
Underftand,that  he  tookno  Pleafurein  it,and 
often  he  put  him  bv  of  reading  and  writing, 
that  he  might  give  reft  to  his  Mind,  and  Me- 
ditate ylone,  he  hearing  often  a  very  fubtle 
and  inarticulate  Voice.  1  ask'd  him  if  he  had 
never  iccn  the  Spirit  in  a  Form,  he  told  me, 
he  had  never  fee:}  any  thing  waking  unicu 
N  a  ?ll 


i  8  a  An  Account  of  Genii, 

c  it  were  a  fort  of  a  Light,  in  a  round  Form, 
c  and  very  clear.  I  omit  fome  other  Immate- 
rial Particulars  concerning  this  Perfonin  Be- 
din  ,  who  concludes  his  Relation  of  him  thus* 
c  I  was  willing  to  relate  what  I  have  known 
c  from  fach  a  Pei  fon,  to  let  Men  undeftand,, 
c  that  an  Aflbciation  withEvil  Spirits  ought  not 
c  to  be  look'd  upon  as  ftrange ,  if  Angels,  and 
c  Good  Spirits  have  fuch  a  Society  and  Intelli- 
f  gence  with  Men.  But  as  for  what  he  fays, 
c  that  the  Good  Angel  touch'd  his  Ear,  this  is 
*  well  noted  in  the  Book  of  J  oh,  chap.  33.  and 
c  in  Ifaiah,  chap.  50.  where  he  fays,  Dominus 
c  veUicarit  mihi  aurem  diluculo ;  and  Job  fays  it 
c  better  yet,  difcovering  to  underftanding  Men 
c  the  Secret,  by  which  God  by  little  and  little 
c  makes  himfelf  fenfibly  known ;  and  as  for 
c  wtiat  he  fays ,  he  heard  ftriking  with  an 
f  Hammer,  we  read  it  was  the  firft  Mark  of  the 
c  Prophets,  for  in  the  Book  of  Judges ,  it's  faid 
c  of  Manoa*  that  the  Angel  of  God  began  to 
c  knock  before  him,  as  Rabbi  David  fays,  where 
f  the  Hebrew  word,  Lefaghamoy  fignifies  to  knock, 
c  and  to  found,  ring  or  ting ,  from  the  word 
€  Verb  :?nc?7,  which  fignines  a  little  Bell,  or  Ta- 
c  hrette,  &c.     So  far  'Bodin. 

Mr.  fiaxter,  in  his  Hifioricd  Dlfcourfe  of  Jp- 
tan:h?is  >md  IVitches,  writes  thus.  There  is  now 
in  London  an  Underftanding  ,  Sober ,  Pious 
Alan,  oft  one  of  my  Hearers,  who  has  an 'El- 
der Brother,  a  Gentleman  of  confiderable 
Rank,  who  having  formerly  feem'd  Pious,  of 
late  Years  does- often  fall  into  the  Sin  of  Drun- 
kennefs  •  he  often  Lodges  long  together  here 
in  his  Brother's  Houfe ;  and  whenfoever 
\vc  is  Drunk ,  and  has  (lept  himfelf  Sober, 
ipmejdiing  Knocks  at  his  Bed's  Head,  as  if  one 

knocked 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 8 ; 

knock'd  on  a  Wainfcot ;  When  they  remove  his 
Bed,  it  follows  him  :   Betid. 
on  othej  IV  all  die  Hi 

heaj  .  have  often  watch'd  him,  and  I. 

his  Hands,  left  he  ftiould  do  ithimfelf: 
Brother  Ins  often  told  it  mc,  and  brought  Ms 
Wife  ,  a  dii  erect  Woman  ,  to  atteft  it  ;  who 
,  that  as  fhe  watch'd  him,  Ave 
has  iccn  his  Miooes  under  the  Bed  taken  up, 
and  nothing vifible  touch  them.  They  brought 
the  Man  himfelf  to  mc,and  when  we  ask'd  him, 
how  he  dare  >in  again  ,  after  fuch  a  warning, 
he  has  no  Excule  :  but  being  Perfons  of  Qua- 
lity .  for  fome  fpecial  Reafon  of  Worldly  In- 
tercity 1  muft  not  Name  him.  Two  things 
are  Remarkable  in  this  Inftance.  i.  What  a 
Powerful  thing  Temptation  and  Flefhly  Con- 
cupifcence  is ,  and  what  an  harden'd  Heart 
Sin  brings  Men  to ;  if  one  rofe  from  the  Dead 
to  warn  fuch  Sinners,  it  would  not  of  it  felf 
perfwade  them. 

2.  It  Pofes  me  to  think  what  kind  of  Spi- 
rit this  is,  that  has  fuch  a  care  of  this  Man's 
Soul ,  which  makes  me  hope  he  will  recover. 
Do  good  Spirits  dwell  fo  near  us  ?  or,  Are  they 
fent  on  fuch  Meflages  ?  or,  Is  it  his  Guard 
Angtlt  or,  Is  it  the  Soul  of  fome  Dead  Friend  ? 
that  fuffers  ,  and  yet  retaining  Love  to  hini> 
as  Dives  to  his  Brethren,  would  have  him  la- 
ved ?  God  yet  keeps  fuch  things  from  us  in  the 
Dark.  The  fame  Author,  in  his  faid  Book  has 
inferted  a  Relation  fent  him  by  a  Gentleman 
in  a  Letter,  concerning  ftrange  Noiles,  as  fol- 
lows. 

c  Mr.  HdrliLndtn,  who  liv'd  at  Coin  Tricry  in 

c  Ejjix  (where  I  often  was,  his  Son  being  my 

*  Pupil)  formerly  the  Houlc  of  the  Earls  of  O.v- 

M  4.  7*ri; 


184  An  Account  of  Genii , 

€  ford  j  off  from  the  Houfe  was  aTomb-Houfe, 
'with  a  Chamber  over  it  ;  his  Butler,  Robert 
c  Crcwy  and  William  his  Coachman,  us'd  to  lie 
c  in  that  Room  ;  at  two  of  the  Clock  in  the 
€  Morning  there  was  always  the  found  of  a 
c  great  Bell  tolling  ;  they  affirming  it  fo  ,  Mr. 
'  Harlaktnden  flept  in  the  Evening  ,  fo  as  to  be 
c  awak'd  at  one  of  the  Clock  ,  and  lay  betwixt 
c  h's  two  Servants  to  fatisfie  himfelf  j  at  two  of 
€  the  Clock  comes  the  ufual  found  of  a  great 
c  Bell  tolling,  which  put  him  into  a  fright  and 
€  fweat,  fo  as  he  jog'd  his  Servants ;  who  a- 
€  waking,  faid,  Hark  !  Tom  is  at  his  Sport.  It 
crcvivid  him  to  hear  them  fpeak.  Upon  a 
€  particular  occafion ,  Mr.  Thomas  Shepherd 
c  (who  afterwards  went  to  New-England)  with 
€  fome  other  Minifters,  and  good  People,  fpent 
c  a  Night  in  Prayer  ,  and  had  fome  refped  to 
€  the  place, ferving  God,  to  caft  out  the  Devil ; 
c  and  from  that  time  ,  never  was  any  fiich 
c  Noile  heard  in  the  Chamber.  This  I  had 
c  from  Mr.  Harlaiendcn  sow  A  Mouth;  and  his 
c  Servants,  ear  Witneffes,  when  I  was  upon  the 
c  place.    So  far  this  Account. 

Another  Relation  in  this  kind ,  I  have  fent 
me  in  a  Letter  by  an  Ingenious  and  Learned 
Clergy-Man  of  Wilttyire,  who  had  given  me 
the  Relation  before,  by  word  of  Mouth.  It 
is  as  follows. 

*  Near  Eighty  Years  fince,  in  the  Parifh  of 
c  IVihot  (which  is  by  the  De<viz,es)  in  the  Vi- 
c  car  s-Houfe  there,  was  heard  for  a  coniidera- 
c  ble  timeuhe  found  of  a  Bell  conftantly  tolling 
c  every  Night ;  the  occafion  was  this  j  a  De- 
c  bauch'd  Perfon  who  Iiv'd  in  the  Parifh,  came 
?  one  Night  very  late,  and  demanded  the  Keys 
r  cf  the  Church  of  the  Vicar,  that  he  might 

ring 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  185 

ring  a  Peal ,  which  the  Vicar  refus'd  to  let 
c  him  have  ,  alledging  the  unfcaibnablcneis  of 
f  the  time,  and  that  he  fhould  by  granting  his 
4  dtfires  ,  give  a  diilurbancc  to  Sir  George 
c  IVroughron,  and  his  Family,  whole  Houfe  ad- 
cjoynd  to  the  Church-Yard.  Upon  this  re- 
c  fatal  the  Fellow  went  away  in  a  Ragc,threat- 
c  ning  to  be  reveng'd  of  the  Vicar,  and  going 
c  ibmetimc  after  to  the  Vtvizts  J  met  with  one 
ntley  or  Cantlow,  a  Perfon  noted  in  thofe 
c  Davs  for  a  Wizard;  and  he  tells  him  how  the 
€  Vicar  had  feiVd  him  ,  and  begs  his  help  to  be 
c  even  with  him.  The  reply  Cantel  made  him 
c  was  this ;  Does  he  not  Love  Ringing  ?  He 
c  (hall  have  enough  of  it:  And  from  that  time, 
c  a  Bell  began  to  toll  in  his  Houfe  ,  and  contU 
c  nued  fo  to  do  tiWCantels  Death,who  confefs'd, 
c  at  Fifrcrton  Coal ,  in  Sarum,  (where  he  was 
c  confin  d  by  King  James  during  his  life)  that 
v,  c  he  caus'd  that  found,  and  that  it  fhould  be 
<  heard  in  that  place  during  his  Life.  The  thing 
€  was  fo  Notorious,  that  Perfons  came  from  all 
c  Parts  to  hear  it*:  And  King  James  fent  aGen- 
c  tleman  from  London  3  on  purpofe  to  give  him 
v  fatisfa&ion  concerning  the  truth  of  the  Re- 
€  port.  This  Relation  I  had  from  Francis 
Wrought  on  Efq;  Sir  Georges  Son,  who  liv'd  more 
than  Ninety  Years;  henever  heard  the  found  of 
the  Bell,  being  abroad  at  School,  but  he  has  heard 
it  averr'd  to  be  true,  by  all  the  Neighbours  of 
repute  ;  and  particularly  often  by  his  Father, 
who  was  at  no  fmall  Expence  in  Entertaining 
Strangers,  whofe  curiofity  led  them  thither.  I 
have  only  this  Circumftance  to  add,  That  the 
found  was  heard  only  by  thofe  who  were  in  the 
I  loufe,  nay,  if  any  one  put  his  Head  out  of 
the  Window  ,  he  could  not  hear  the  found, 

rich, 


1 8  6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

which  yet  they  at  the  fame  time  did  ,  who 
were  in  the  Room. 

The  Gentleman's  Name  who  fent  me  this 
Relation,  is  Wroughton ,  and  is  of  Sir  Georges 
Family. 

Beda  ,  treating  of  the  Seven  Wonders  of  the 
World,  tells  us  ,  That  in  the  Capital  at  Rome, 
there  were  Statues  fet  up  for  all  the  Pro- 
vinces Conquered  by  the  Romans,  or  Images  of 
their  Gods ;  and  that  on  the  Breafts  of  the  Sta- 
tues the  Names  of  the  Nations  were  written, 
and  little  Bells  were  hung  about  their  Necks, 
and  Priefts  were  appointed  to  attend  there  Suc- 
ceflively  Day  and  Night ,  to  guard  thofe  Sta- 
tues, and  to  obferve  them  with  great  Attenti- 
on, whether  any  of  them  mov'd  ,  and  caused 
the  little  Bell  to  ring ,  by  which  they  knew 
what  Nation  was  about  to  rebel  againft  the  Ro- 
mans ;  of  which  the  Priefts  gave  the  Roman 
Princes  Notice ,  who  prefently  provided  for 
things  accordingly. 

Angelas  Rocca,  L  de  Campan.  c.  6.  tells  US  of 
mam-  Bells ,  that  were  wont  to  found  before 
Perions  Deaths  of  their  own  accord.  Accounts 
of  the  like  Nature  having  been  given  us  by  o- 
ther  Writers :  And  Monfieur  de  L'Ancre,  in  his 
Book  intitl'd,  Of  the  Inconftancy  of  Damons,  and 
evil  Spirits,  tells  us,  That  in  the  Town  of  Bour- 

tftfj  there  was  an  honeftOwwi  of  a  Church, 
who  had  his  Houfe  for  fome  time  troubled  with 
Spirits,  and  that  among  other  things,  there 
was  heard  almoft  every  Night  a  kind  of  Mu- 
fick,  like  that  of  an  Ejpinette,  fet  with  certain 
link  Bells ,  fo  Pleafant ,  that  this  partly  took 
from  him  the  fear  and  apprehenfion  of  the  Spi- 
rits. 

K;rchcrP  in  his  Obeli/cm  ?amphilmsy  p.  5^4.  tells 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  187 

us,  The  vCgfttUus  thought,  that  by  the  found 
of  the  Siftrum  ,    their  Pi  re  varioufly  in- 

fpird  for  performing  Works  of  Divination, 
which  Jami  u  explain.  ,  fiying>  c  Va- 

c  rious  kinds  of  Motions  in  the  World,  anfwer 
c  to  various  Orders  of  the  Gods  ,  and  certain 
c  kinds  to  certain  of  them;  now  from  thefe  va- 
c  rious  Melodies  flow  ,  which  likewifc  agree, 
c  each  by  their  Motions,  to  ceitain  Gods  in  Or- 
f  der,  tne  Principles  of  thofe  Motions.    Thefe 

y  where,  beftow  their  Gifts  chiefly 
fe  that  belong  to  them,  are  chiefly  pre- 

inds  and  Melodies  that  chiefly  agree 

c  to  them  ,  and  infinuating  thcmfelvcs  into  our 

c  Spirits  affeded  with  them  ,    they  poffefs  the 

'  in ,  and  prefently  wholly  Work  in  him  by 

c  their  Eflence  and  Power. 

I  fhall  conclude  this  Chapter  ,  with  a  Rela- 
tion fomewhat  in  this  kind  from  m  j  tho' 
how  far  Spirits  may  be  concern  d  in  the  Mat- 
ter, I  fhall  not  determine. 

He  begins  the  Sixth  Book  of  his  Arcbidoxt^ 
thus.  No  Mafl  can  deny  but  Compofitions  of 
Metals,  may  Work  wonderful  things  in  Super- 
naturals,  which  ma\  ^de  good  by  many 

Proofs,  as  I  lhall  clear1  beneath;   forif 

you  Compound  all  the  S 
Order  and  tit  time,  and  1 
as  it  were  into  one  Mafs,  you  will  have  fuch  a 
Metal,  in  which  all  die 
Planets  r  ;    yon  ind 

all  thefe  Virtues  in  that  on  :h  w 

call   Eleftrum.     And  b*  f 
muft  know  that 
pounded  of  the  Seven  V. 
evil  Spirit  ;i  our  F.: 

on  C  ;is,  and 


1 8  8  An  Account  of  Genii  $ 

Planets  are  ftor'd  up.  Therefore  the  Ancient 
Terjian  Magi,  and  the  Chaldeans  found  out  and 
performed  many  things  by  its  means.  I  cannot 
here  conceal  a  very  great  Miracle,  which  I 
law  wrought  by  iSpanifi  Nercromancer,  who  had 
a  Bell  not  exceeding  two  Pounds  Weight, 
which,  as  often  as  he  rung,  he  could  caufe  to 
appear  about  him  many  Spirits  and  Speffres  of 
various  Kinds  ->  for  when  he  pleas'd,  he  drew 
fome  Words  and  Characters  on  the  inward  fur- 
face  of  the  Bell,  and  afterwards,  if  he  rung  it, 
a  Spirit  prefently  appear'd  in  any  Form  h<? 
would  have  him:  By  the  found  alfo  of  the  faid 
Bell  he  could  draw  to  him  alfo,  or  drive  from 
him  many  other  Vifions  and  Spirits ,  and  even 
Men  and  Beafts ;  as  I  faw  with  my  Eyes  many 
of  thefe  things  done  by  him  :  But  as  often  as 
he  would  undertake  fome  New  thing,  fo  often 
he  renewed  his  Words  and  Chara&ers ;  but  he 
would  not  reveal  to  me  the  Secret  of  thefe 
Words  and  Characters  j  though  deeply  confi- 
dering  the  thing  my  felf,  I,  at  length,  cafually 
found  it  ;  which  I  fhall  not  here  difclofe :  but 
I  plainly  enough  obferv'd,  there  was  more  Im- 
portance in  the  Bell  than  in  the  Words,  for  the 
Bell  was  certainly  made  of  our  Ek&trum.  So 
far  Paracelfus. 

I  may  here  note,  That  fome  Perfons  have 
told  my  felf,  that  they  have  feen  a  conftellated 
Plate  here  in  London  ,  made  of  fuch  Eiettrum, 
which,  if  put  under  a  Man  s  Pillow  at  Night, 
will  make  him  hear  Heavenly  Mulick. 


CHAR 


or  Familiar  Spirits,  1 8p 


CHAP.     VI. 

What  perception  fome  Terfons  have  had  of 
Genii,  or  Spirits,  and  their  Operations 
hy  the  Scnfe  of  Hearing,  when  others 
prejent  haVe  heard  nothing. 

THO'  as  LuJovkus  Vlves  fays,  Good  and  LMAnim. 
Evil  Spirits  have  certain  A&ions  unknown  c-  'f  CiCn* 
to  us,  as  Men  have  among  themfelves,  which  lnttr% 
Brutes  underftand  not ;  for  as  Men  move  each 
others  Fancies  and  Minds  by  Words ,  Nods, 
Geftures,  Letters,  or  Signs  which  furpafs  the 
Knowledge  of  Brutes ;    fo  Spiritual  Effences 
may  agitate  our  Fancy  by  fome  A&ion,  pro- 
per, and  known  only  to  themfelves ,  the  Ima- 
ginative faculty  firfi  mov'd  •    yet  we  do  not 
afcribe  all  ftrange  things  wrought  by  the  Fan- 
cy, to  the  Operation  of  Spirits ;    for  as  the 
fame  Author  lays,  fome  by  the  meer   Action 
of  the  Fancy ,    feem  to  have  got  themfelves 
ported  in  a  ftate  of  great  Happinefs,  as  we  find 
of  him  in  Horace. 


fuit  baud  Ignobills  Argisy 
J^ui  fe  credebat  miros  audire  Tragadosy 
In  "vacuo  Latns  fejjcr  flauforq,  Tbeatro  : 
ra  dum  way  fewaret  munia  reilo 
Afore :  bonus  fane  vie  mm y  ambailis  bofpesy 
ComU  in  vxorem  :  fojjet  j«i  Ignofare  Jtrviiy 


Et 


tpo  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Et  figno  lafo  non  infanire  Lagena : 
"Pojjet  qui  rupem  &  puteum  'vitare  patent  cm. 
Hie  ubi  cognatoYum  opibus,  curifque  refetlus, 
Expulit  helleboro  morbum,  bilemque.  meraco, 
Et  redit  ad  <fefe,  pol,  me  occidifiis  amici 
Non  fervafiis  ,  ait,  cut  fie  extort  a  voluptas, 
Et  demptuspervim  mentis gratijjimus  error. 
Nimirumfapere  eft  abjeclis  utile  nugis, 
Eptfl.  1.2*      Et  tempeflmum  pueris  concedere  ludum. 

1  a  Gentleman  of  Greece 

Thought  he  heard  Abated  wondrous  Tragedies 
And  fate  and  clapt  them  at  an  open  Stage, 
In  all  things  elje  comporting  him  as  J age  I 
Good  Neighbour  truly,  hofpitable  Friend, 
Kind  to  his  Wife,  if  Servants  did  offend 
Would  eafily  Tar  don,  not  ote  ftirrdto  Wrath, 
Could  Jhun  a  Rock  and  Precipice  in  his  Path  j 
This  Man  by  charge  and  care  of  Friends  being  cur  d, 
His  Senfe  with  Helebore  and  good  Wine  refiord, 
When  come  t  himfelf,  cry  d,  Friends,  you  <ve  kill' d 

(]  m*  outright, 
Not  faved  me,  thus  extorting  my  delight. 
And  robbing  m  of  my  minds  dclufive  Joys; 
It  s  good  to  pleafe  us  thus  with  abjeB  toys, 
And  in  fit  time  to  allow  their  f port  to  Boys. 

This  Inftance  we  find  relates  to  the  Senfe  of 

Hearing,  {Horace  faying  he  heard  A&ors)  when 

only  .thcSPerfon  concern  d  Hears,  though  we 

may  probably  judge  he  faw  the  A&ors,  as  well 

LJeSymt.^  heard  thehi.     So  Galen  tells  us,  of  a  certain 

dlff.  c.  3. '  Phyfician,  nam'd  Theophilus,  who  being  ill  of  a 

Fever,  heard  Mufical  Inftruments  continually 

playing  in  his  Chamber,  and  being  recovered 

Cent,  7.     perlifted  {till*  to  affirm  the  thing  real.     So  Bar- 

Hijl.9^  tholin  tells  us,  of  a  Student  of  a  Melancholick 

Complexion^ 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 9  i 

Complexion,  and  diftra&ed  with  Grief  for  the 
Death  of  a  Sifter,  who  faid  he  heard  a  Celcitial 
kind  of  Mulick. 

We  know  its  faid  of  Vythngor.u  and  Apollo- 
yiius  T)>mxj*y  That  they  heard  the  Harmony  of 
the  ,v  ,  which  tho'    fome  interpret  other- 

wife,  I  know  not  why  it  may  not  be  thought, 
they  heard  fome  Celcltial  1  larmony ;  this  having 
hapned  to  feveral  Pei  fons  befide  themfelvcs.  An 
Ancient  contemplative  Gent,  now  living  in 
Ixndon,  has  told  me,  That  for  Forty  Years  pad 
he  had  never  retired  to  Contemplation  ,  as  he 
daily  did,  but  he  heard  an  Heavenly  Mufick  : 
And  I  know  many  others  who  have  often  heard 
the  fame,  as  I  muft  declare  I  have  often  heard 
it  my  felf ,  tho7  other  Perfons  prefent  with  us 
at  the  fame  time,  hear  it  not,  as  we  do. 

Delrio  and  Torreblavca  write,  That  theHearing  Difq.  mug. 
being  vitiated,   is  wont  to  deceive  tis,    as  it  '•  2.  vcft- 
happens    in  Perfons  troubled  with  the  Morbus  V'j^ll  u 
Imdginoftts ;  of  which  Diftemper  Learned  Men  0^f.c,^ 
make  two  kinds,  one  more  commonly  calfd 
a  Frenfy ,  when  Phantafms  are  reprefented  to 
the  Mind  in  <v\fibU  Species :  Concerning  which 
kind  you  may  coufult  Cornelius  Celftts,  and  CU- 
lim  Aurelianus,  and  this  belongs  to  the  depra- 
vation of  the  Fancy :  the  other  kind  is  called 
Corybantiafwus ,    which  takes  Sleep  from  the 
Sight,  and   vitiates  the  Ears,  whereby  Men 
feem  to  hear  Ringings  and  Sounds. 

Concerning  this  Difeafe  Sca/iger  writes  thus.         ^  ;, 
Corybamiaf?nits  is  a  Difeafe  of  the  Imagination, In  ( 
which  fuperftitious  Antiquity  believd  to  be 
fent  by  the  Corybantes.  It  feem  d  to  the  Per! 
affected  with    it,   that  their  Ears  were  alw 
filled   with  a  Noife  of  Mufick  and    Singing: 
thofe  who  labour  under  this  Dillail  are  u 

with 


192  An  Account  of  Genii, 

with  Watchings,  or  want  of  Sleep,  or  at  leaft 
with  a  light  Sleep,  having  their  Eyes  open; 
for  they  have  always  their  Minds  intent  on 
Images  j  whence  thofe  that  Sleep  with  their 
Eyes  open  were  faid  to  a&  like  the  Corybantes, 
fuch  having  no  found  Sleep,  by  reafon  of 
Images  and  Sounds.  So  Varro  in  Vrometheo  Satyr, 

Levifomna  mens  fonorinas  Imagines 
Affatur,  non  umbrantur  fomno  pupiUa, 

To  this  relates  that  Paffage  of  Plautus,  in 
fome  Comedy  of  his,  the  name  of  which  is 
Hill  in  queftion. 

Mecum  habet  Vatagus  as  morbus. 
L. $.c.  19*  Which  paffage,  in  the  Notes  fet  forth  by 
Gronovius  on  Macrobius  is  referr  d  to  the  Cory- 
banteS)  or  Priefts  of  Cybele.  Vatagus  denoting 
the  fhaking  of  their  Heads,  *s£s  the  confus'd 
found  of  Brafs.    Whence  is  that  of  the  Poet. 

Nee  te  progenitum  Cybeleius  are  fonoro 
Luftravit  Corybas  ■     »   «—  — — 

The  Difeafe  it  felf  is  called  Corybantiafmus. 
l.  1.  in    To  this  Claudian  feems  to  have  alluded. 

Ruff. 

Impatienfq;  ful  Morbus 

And  Lucretius , 

Solllcita  fonro  plenaque  fonoribus  aures. 

The  word  Vatagus  comes  from  t*7*«»,  cum 
Strepitu  palpitoy  Item  Percutio,ferio:  For  when  the 
Corybantes  were  raifed  in  a  Fury,  they  fhak'd 
their  Heads ,  Dancd,   and  run  againft  each 

othr 


or  familiar  Spirits.  193 

each  other,  (fail  Buckle: 

p     not:    without   a 
Rhythmical 
from  which  Mount  j 

call 

:ho'   the  :ch  a  Difeal 

Mufical  Sounds  in  theEar,this  cajunot 
be  impq  ,  AvoUoninsy  or  the  Gen- 

tleman [before  >nea,  and  others ^  they 

not  being  trotiW  nt  of  Sleep,  orfliort 

difturbed  Sleep,  nor  Sleeping  with 
open,  which  are  let  forth  as  Symptoms  of  i 

To  proceed   to  give  an  account  of  a  pc 
ception   of  other  Sounds   by    the    Hearir 
which  by  fome  are   imputed   to   Spirits,    by 
others  to  other  Caufes,    we  find  among   the 
fuperftitious  obfervations   of  the    Gentiles ,  if 
any  Perfon  had  a  Ringing  in  his  Ears,  it  was 
taken  as  an  Omen;  and  as  Pliny  fays,  it  wasi. :-. 
ufual  for  Perfons  abfent  to  perceive  that  others 
were   talking  of  them,   by  a  Ringing  in  the 
Ear :  and  to  this  purpofe   there  is  an  Elegant 
Latin  Etngram ,  writ  by  a  very  ancient  Poet, 
and    firii  made  publick  by  Jofefh  Scaliiger,  as 
he  fays,  in  his  Notes  oh  Aufomus  c.  i<s, 

Garrula  quid  tot  is  refonas  mibi  notlibus  amis  ? 

Nefcio  ij u cm  dlcttnt  nunc  meminijfe  met. 
Hie  quis  Jit,  qitxrisy  refenant  tibi  noilibits  cu> 

Et  refomen!  totis  ;    Delia  te  loquitur. 
Non  dubie  loquitur  me  Delia  :  mollior  r.ura 

Vcnit  :   &  txili  murmure  dulct:  [remit. 
De  fecreta  filentia  nod  is 

Summijjjy  ac  tenuir; 

1   night  my  frattin^  .  fay 

I  know  not  w  '0  i  7  0  v  cf  me, 

o 


194  ^n  Account  of  Genii, 

Would  you  know  who  ?  your  ear  all  night  does  found, 
All  night :  It's  Delia'*  Voice  there  does  rebound* 
It  s  furely  Delia  talks  of  me,  a  noife 
Comes  foft  and  gently,  with  fweet  murmuring  voice, 
Evn  as  my  Delia  with  foft  voice  delights 
To  break  the  fecret  Silence  of  the  Nights. 

Var.  bift.         ^nd  as    y£fcan  tells  us  ,    Pythagoras  thought 

*4' Ctl7'  fomewhat  Divine  lay  hid  in  thefe  Ringings, 

he  faying,  the  found  which  very  often  happens 

in  the  Ears,  is  the  Voice  of  the  Gods,  or  Da- 

mons. 

As  for  the  way   that  Men  perceive  thefe 

Sett.Anhq  s)0un(js  an(J   Voices,    Rhodiginus  tells    US,    that 

-2'  *     'Socrates  perceived  his  Spirit  by  Senfe,  not  by 

the  Senfe  of  his   Body,  but,  as  the  Thtonicks 

were  fully  perfwaded,by  the  Senfe  of  the  jEthe- 

aftreal  Body  lying  hid  within  us ;  after  which 

way  alfo  Aw&nn*  thought  Angels  were  wont 

to  be  feen  and  heard  by  the  Prophets  •  for  the 

L.deDtm.  words  of  Damons  pafs  every  where,  as  Plutarch 

Socret.        £^   kut  ^k  fQun(j   js    onjy  hear(J  by  th0fe 

that  keep  their  Minds  in  a  calm,  and  com- 
pofed  State,  undifturbed  by  Paflions,  whom 
we  call  Sacred  and  Demonial  Men:  unlefs  we 
had  rather  explain  Socrates  s  perception  of  his 
inA'ab.  Damon,  according  to  Proclus,  as  follows,  The 
Voice  did  not  come  to  'Socrates  paffively  from 
without,  but  an  Infpiration  of  his  Damon 
from  within,  proceeding  throughout  the  whole 
Soul,  and  paffing  to  the  Organs  of  the  Senfes, 
a  Voice  at  length  manifefted  it  felf,  as  coming 
to  knowledge,  not  fo  much  by  Senfe,  as  by 
Confent ;  for  fuch  illuftrations  are  wont  to 
happen  from  good  Damons,  and  the  Gods. 
Whence  Maxmus  Tyr\us  fays,  You  wonder 
Sacratm  came  to  a  familiarity  with  a  Da?non, 

who 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  i  p  c 

who  was  as  a  friendly  Prophet  to  him,  and 
continually  fo  attendee!,  him,  that  he  feem'd,  as 
it  were,  Interwoven  with  his  Mind. 

So  Piccolomcni  f  iys,    Socrates  heard   the  voice  £  *  n  '• 
of  his  Damon,  not   with  the  Ear  of  his  Body,  i^(Ren 
but  of  his   Mind:    wherefore  others  did  not  tr/.  c.  / >«. 
Hear  it,  for  it  was  an  internal  reprefentation  m^ 
of  the  Voice  to  the  common  Senfe  and  Pain 

James  Gohory  alfo,  who  took  on  him  the 
Name  of  Leo  S*sviw'3  in  his  Comment  on  a 
Paflage  in  Paraceljus ,  /.  f.  de  vita  lo7iga  c.  3. 
tells  us  of  a  found  that  is  made  by  the  Pow- 
der of  Projedion  in  the  Tranfmutation  of 
Metals,  (  which  I  think  is  to  be  taken  in  a 
Spiritual  Senf<f)  of  which  found  he  fays  the 
myftical  Books  of  the  Spagyrifts  make  mention, 
as  Augurellus. 

Indicio  eft  etiatn  fonus  bine  obtufus  &  aure 
Deprebendi  baud  facilis ■ 

He  adds,  The  Author  of  The  dangerous  Foun- 
tain fays,  There  is  made  a  certain  Melody, 
which  fometimes  ceafes  as  it  were  by  the 
Magick  Art.  And  elfewhere,  the  wonderful 
found  of  a  ftrange  Bell  ftrikes  my  Ear.  And 
Paracelfus  himfelf  fays,  Tympj7::<fr  nobis  Anonid:-  ^  je  . 
dicareddunt:  by  the  word  .  Ilea,  mean-  long.  c.  5. 

ing  gentle  Anodine  Sounds ,  compoling  the 
Mind. 

Cardan  writes  thus  :  Not  only  in  all  '    DeHer, 

ings,  but  in  other  kinds  of  Prdagings,  there  V"J-  "*• 
are  thefe  things  to  be  obferved  ;  1  int,  ,8:# 

be  no  natural  thing,  but  fomething  differ i 
from  the  natural ;  as  it  was  in  thac  RingL 
wherewith  I  was  admonifh'd  for  ma  irs, 

of  anv  Fame  or  Rumour  concerning  1 

O  2 


ip6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

this  was  not  like  to  a  Morbous  affe&,  which 
now  I  have  fometimes  experience  of;  for  this 
is  inward  ,  and  as  it  were  fix  d  and  trouble- 
fome,  Light,  and  coming  from  without,  and 
as  it  were  feparate;  moreover  it  fliakes  my 
whole  Head,  as  tho'  it  would  compel  me  to 
take  notice  of  it ;  a  wonderful  thing  truly , 
and  almoft  Incredible :  and  it's  known  chiefly 
from  this,  that  it's  Familiar,  and  in  a  manner 
always  happens  when  I  am  upon  fome  bufinefs 
of  concern ;  nor  does  it  happen  in  Difeafes. 
So  far  Cardan.  We  know  the  caufes  of  com- 
mon Ringings  in  the  Ear. 

Scbol.  Sa-      Motusylonga  fames ,  vomitus,  fercufflo,  cafus, 
tern.  Ebrietas,  Frigus,  tinnitum  caufat  in  aure. 

But  thefe  Ringings  Cardan  fpeaks  of,  are  of 
another  nature,  of  which  I  have  had  a  woder- 
ful  experience  my  felf;  tho5 1  may  not  exprefs 

C.  54.  it  as  Luther  does,  who  in  his  Table  Talk  tells  us, 
that  An.  1  n  °3  he  was  at  Coburg,  where  he  was 
plagu  d  in  fuch  fort  with  a  founding  and  ring- 
ing in  his  Ears,  that  it  was  as  if  a  \Vind  went 

c.  13.      out  of  his  Head,  the  Devil  driving  it. 

Rlcoldus ,   in  his  confutation   of  the  Law 
given  by  Mahomet  to  the  Saracens,  writes  thus./ 
Mahomet  being  troubled  with  the  Falling 
Sicknefs  (  a  Dikafe  incident  to  Great  Men, 

In  Prob.  as  ^ifiotle  obferves  in  Socrates ,  Callimachus, 
and  Hercules,  to  whom  we  may  add  Scotus  and 
many  others )  leaft  others  fhould  think  him 
really  troubled  with  it ,  ftill  as  he  fell  down 
in  his  Trances,  fay'd  that  an  Angel  Convers'd 
with  him,  and  gave  him  certain  Anfwers,  with 
the  found  of  a  Bell  in  his  Ear.     Inftar  Cam^ana 


&nrwusc-rcHmfcnantts. 


NoWj 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  197 

Now,  as  for  hen  ring  founds  of  Bells,  I  never 
Heard  of  an  :>n,  who  has  had  (b  much 

bat  kind  as  my  felf ;  tho'  I  know 
one  Perlon,  and  hare  been  well  inform'd  i  f 
others,  who  have  foinetimes  heard  the  Sounds 
of  Bells  after  the  fame  manner.  Bur  in  two 
Spiritual  Vifitations  that  have  happen'd  to  me, 
fome  Years  diftance  the  one  from  the  other 
which  I  may  give  fome  account  in  this 
Book  )  I  have  heard  Bells  for  fevers!  Weeks 
together,  and  that  pf  all  forts,  from  the  great- 
eft  Church  Bel!>,  to  a  little  Hawk's  BelL 
Sometimes  I  have  heard  a  Church»  Bell  gently 
Tolling;  fometimes  Bells  Ringing  in  Peal  So- 
lemnly, as  at  a  Funeral  •  fometimes  Merry 
round  Ringing,  as  at  Weddings:  For  fome 
Weeks  together,  every  Night,  as  foon  as  I 
was  in  Bed,  a  Spirit  came  with  a  little  Bell 
Ringing  in  my  Ear,  and  a  Voice  always  Talk- 
ing to  me,  and  many  other  varieties  I  have 
had  in  that  kind,  and  that  both  by  Day  and  by 
Night  :  tho'  no  Perfon  prefent  with  me  at  the 
fame  time,  has  heard  any  thing,  as  they  told 
me,  upon  my  enquiry  of  them.  I  have  heard 
every  Night,  for  fome  time,  Hundreds  of  Spi- 
rits, coming,  as  it  feem'd  to  me,  firft  at  a 
great  diftance,  Singing,  and  Ringing  hand 
Bells,  who  gradually  approach'd  my  Iloufe, 
the  Sound  feeming  nearer  and  nearer,  till  at 
length  they  came  to  my  Chamber  Windows, 
and  fome  would  come  into  my  Chamber.  The 
firft  Ringing  Sound  I  heard,  was  of  a  Bell 
gently  Tolling  at  one  of  my  Chamber  Win* 
dows,  which  looks  to  the  South  ;  and  at  the 
fame  time,  at  the  fame  Window,  I  heard  a  Spi- 
rit ftriking  gentle  ftrokes  with  a  fmall  Rod,  as 
|t  feem'd  to  me,  on  a  Brafs  Pan,  or  Bafon, 
O  5  tur. 


i  98  An  Account  of  Genii, 

tuning  his  ftrokes  to  a  call  he  us'd,  Cofnt  away 
to  me,  Come  away  to  me;    and  juft  upon  it  ano- 
ther Spirit,  at  another  of  my  Chamber  Win- 
dows, which  look'd  to  the  Eaft,  called  to  me 
in  a   louder  and  earneft  Tone,    Come  away 
to  me,  Come  away  to  me.    I  fhall  here  forbear 
any  farther  particular  Account  in  this  kind, 
as  to  my  own  Experience,  and  fhall  fet  down 
fomewhat  relating  to  what  is  faid  before,  as 
to  Ringing  of  Bells  and  Brafs,  pra&ifed  by 
the  Ancient  Gentiles. 
LJecamp.     Angelm  Rocca,  tells  us,  It  was  believed  by 
*fc         the  Gentiles,  that  the  Manes,  or  rather  Damens 
*aJ  •  ' 5#  were  driven  away  by  the  ringing  of  Brafs,  or 
Bells,  as  it  appears  from  Ovid,  where  he  fays 
of  the  Ghofts  or  Manes. 

Rurfus  aquam  tangit,  Temefadq;  concrepat  ara, 
Et  rogat  ut  tectss  exeat  umbra  fuis  : 

Cum  dixit  novies,  manes  exite  paterni, 
Refpicit,  &  pure,  Sacra  per  att  a  put  at* 

Again  he  wajlus,  rings  Tempfaan  Brafs, 
And  prays  the  Manes  from  his  Houfe  topafs; 
Thtn  Nine  times  Cries,  Paternal  Ghofts  begone. 
So  looks  about,  thinks  Sacred  Rites  are  done. 

Therefore  the  Gentiles  thought  that  by  the 

found  of  Bells,  Evil,   or  offenfive  Genii  were 

driven  away,    or   reftrained  from  giving  di- 

fturbance,    becaufe  the  Manes  (  as  Hieronymus 

:iu*  fays)   were    thought   to  love  Silence. 

v  the  Toets  they  were  called  Silentes, 

in  the  fame  Book, 

1    res  an\tnas  dixere  fihntum. 

Where- 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  199 

Wherefore  as  often    as  fach   Gholls  have 
fpoken,  thev  are  faid  to  hive  us'd  rather  a  1 
and  muttering  Voice  ,   th;m  a  clear  oc 
OWfays,  lb. 

Umbra  cruenta  Remi  vifa  eft  affiftere  It 
Attfr  h<ec  exiguo  murmur e  vi fa  lo<jui. 

Rem/ts  his  Bloody  Ghoft  flood  by  the  Bed, 
4  with  low  murmur  thefe  words  utu 

In  reference  to  this  Remigiw  writes  concer-  nm7nl. 
ning  fucli  as  were  accusd  of  Witchcraft,  and  utr.  L  1, 
com  ihevil  Spirits,  as  follows.     Nicolaa  t.  8. 

Granatin  E*va  HtfJttia,  Jana-nigra  Armacurianay 
and  many  others,  foy,  the  Spirits  have  fuch  a 
Voice,  as  one  that  puts  his  Head  in  an  Empty 
Hogfhead,  or  craz'd  Veffel,  and  therefore  al- 
ways in  fpcaking  hold  their  Heads  downwards, 
as  Perfons  aftiam'd,  or  felf  confeious  of  fome 
Crime  are  wont  to  do  ;  or  at  lead,  they  have 
a  fmall  and  weak  Voice.  So  HermoUrrs  Barka* 
rw,  faid  he  heard  a  Voice  of  an  hiding  Da- 
mon, as  he  anfwer'd  himfelf,  and  Georgius  Vlu- 
centinvs  ,  asking  him  concerning  the  meaning 
of  Arijtotles  En:  The  Elm  alfo,  menti- 

on d  in  Vhiloftratnsy  that  is,  as  I  conceive ,  the 
Daemon  of  Thejpion,  fpeaking  from  the  Elm,  by 
his  command,  who  was  the  Eldeftof  the  Gym- 
nofopbijlsy  faluted  ApoUonius  coming  to  them, 
with  a  Slender  Voice.  The  Lecanomsncy  alfo  of 
the  Alfyrlans  and  CbdlsLems,  was  wont  t 
this,  that  the  Demons  deliver  d  their  W 
from  the Bafon  with  a  ftridulous  and  low  hilling. 
So  far  Remigim* 

O  4  To 


i  oo  An  Account  of  Genii, 

L  4.*.  i69  To  this  I  may  add,,  what  Le  Loyer  writes^  in 
i  in  his  Hiftory  of  Spe&res  3  viz*  Damafcitts  a 
Tagan  Philofopher,  relates,,  that  the  Familiar  Spi- 
rits lying  hid  in  round  confecrated  Bowls^ 
which  he  calls  Betyles,  anfwer'd  thofe  that  con- 
sulted them.,  in  a  fmall  and  Inarticulate  Voice3 
that  it  feem'd  rather  an  hiding,,  than  aSpeeclr, 
aiid  had  need  of  Interpreters.  The  name  Be- 
rries is  Syriack  ,  and  was  taken  from  the  He- 
brews, who  call'd  thofe  Places  Bethel  y  where 
the  Patriarch  Jacob  plac'd  Stones  ,  for  a  Mark 
that  he  had  there  ador'dGod ;  the  Syrians  turn'd 
tins  to  their  Superftition,  and  call'd  Betyks  their 
a  vim  at  ed  Stones,  or  Stones  in  which  a  God  or 
Dtemcn  was  hid.  Our  Learned  Selden,  writes  of 
thofe  Betyks.     L.  de  Diis  Syris. 

But  to  pafs  by  other  Relations  in  this  kind,, 
and  to  fpeak  of  my  own  Experience  ;    fome 
Spirits  that  convers'd  with  me  for  fome  Months 
together^  had  a  Low-funk  Voice  5   as  many  Per- 
fons  have  in  Colds  ,    but  it  was  without  any 
Hoarfenefs,    being  very  clearly  difcernable; 
the  Spirits  I  heard  coming  to  me  finging  in 
the  Evenings,  had  clear  Voices;  and  that  Spi- 
rit which  came  Nightly  to  me  for  fome  time, 
with  a  Bell  in  my  Ear,  had  a  very  clear  and 
pant  Voice. 
Br :./<•_,  and  its  ringing  were  alfo  us'd  by  the 
Gevtiks-,  on  feveral  other  Accounts ,  and  that 
the  fame  Reafon ,    viz.  It's  purifying  Na- 

;..  to.  c.i.  ture  ;i  concerning  which  Cc/.  Rholig.  writes 
thus  :  The  Interpreter  of  Theocritus  ,  in  the 
Feet's  Vharmacmtria  writes ,  that  Brafs  was 
thought  by  the  Ancients  to  be  of  great  Virtue 
in  Sacred  Rites,  and  Excantations.,  and  there^ 
fere  was  wont  to  be  us'd  in  EcUpfes  of  the 
Don,,  and  at  Mens  Deaths^   becaufe  it  was 

thought 


cr  Familiar  Spirits.  201 

thought  more  pure  than  other  things  ,    and 
expiatory  of  P(  '  us^d  it 

in  all   Puriticati  \S  writ, 

in  his  Tragedy,  which  is 
izjtomi,  that  is,  -beCutters  of  Roots,  writes 
of  Medea  cutting  Herbs  with  a  brafs  Knife,  and 
putting  thejuicc  into  braf  \  clfels.  And;V/«o-o- 
rhat  brafs  Vcliels  were  us'd  chiefly 
in  tl  red  Rites ,  with  which  they  would 

compote  the  Minds  of  Perfons,  or  confecrate 
them,  or  Cure  Difeafes.  And  the  Priefts  of 
the  re  wont  to  have  their  Hair  Cut 

with  a  Brafs  Knife  ;  and  it's  manifeft,  that  the 
moft  Ancient  Greeks  us'd  in  many  things  the 
found  of  Brafs,  as  a  molt  Powerful  thing.  As 
for  the  Reafon  of  the  Ancients  in  giving  aid 
to  the  Moon,  when  in  an  Eclipfe ,  by  a  con- 
fus'd  noife  of  Brafs,  Alexander  gives  it  us  thus; 
Men  rung  Iron  and  Brafs,  becaufe  they  thought 
Damons  were  driven  away  by  it ,  at  the  time 
that  the  Planets  cannot  convey  their  Influence 
to  the  Earth  ,  which  is  for  the  Benefit  of 
Men. 

Some  tell  us ,  That  by  the  ringing  Noife  of 
Brafs,  the  force  of  Magick  Charms  was  hun- 
dred from  reaching  to  the  Moon ,  the  Char- 
mers Voice  being  confounded  by  it,  and  that 
by  this  means  relief  was  thought  to  be  giv'n 
the  Moon,  when  in  a  Eclipfe  ;  for  Brafs  is  the 
moft  fonorous  of  all  the  Metals,  it  having  a 
fhrill  and  penetrating  found;  whence  Homer 
gave  Juno  the  Epithet  y^^o^ JS  and  Sf 

#3  on  Homer,  thinks  a  moft  refonant  Voice 
was  aptly  giv'n  her,  becaufe  a  Voice  is  nothing 
but  the  Air  ftruck  ,  and  by  Juno  is  meant  the 
Air. 

Magiu$} 


2o2  An  Account  of  Genii, 

L.itTt*r  Mftgius  ,  fays  the  Searchers  into  Natural 
tm,  c  i\.  Caufes,  think  by  the  found  of  Bells  the  vio- 
lent injury  of  Tempefts,  Winds  and  Hail- 
ftorms  is  driven  away  ,  becaufe  fuch  ringing 
greatly  agitates,  cuts  and  breaks  the  Air,  which 
appears  from  hence ;  that  when  Bees  rife  in  a 
Swarm,  and  begin  to  fly  awa^  they  are  fore  d 
to  pitch  again  by  a  gentle  ringing  of  Brafs,, 
the  Air  being  cut  and  fever'd  ,  and  fcarce 
bearing  their  flight ;  though  fome  think  Bees 
then  pitch  upon  the  Air's  being  moved,  becaufe 
they  are  delighted  with  the  ringing  ;  which  I 
leave  to  the  judgment  of  others. 
L.  de  Bits,  Apollodorus  fays,  the  Prieft  of  Vrojerpina  was 
wont  to  ring  a  little  Bell  in  her  Sacred  Cere- 
L.  de  Dea  mon^i  and  the  Prieft  of  the  Syrian  Goddefs,  alfo 
Syria.  was  wont  to  ufe  a  little  Bell,  zsLucian  writes. 
The  Prieft,  after  he  is  come  to  the  uppermoft 
part  of  the  Temple  ,  Prays  for  the  whole 
Congregation  ;  and  in  praying  he  alfo  rings 
a  certain  little  Bell.  Robertellus,  alfo  in  Otta- 
£.  1 9#  *fe»  Auguftus,  gives  teftimony  of  this  Cuftom, 
when  he  fpeaks  of  the  Gates  and  tops  of  Tem- 
ples. The  top  is  compafs'd  about  with  Bells ; 
the  Bells  were  wont  to  hang  for  the  moft  part 
over  the  Gates  of  Temples. 

Fungerus;  in  his  Etymologicum  TrUinquey  tells  US, 
the  Hebrew  word  for  v&$,  is  Necufchob>  or  Necbof- 
cbeth,  from  the  word  Nachofob,  that  is,  he  made 
an  Auguration,  he  has  Di vin'd^he  has  Ominated, 
he  has  had  certain  Conje&ures.  Some  think  the 
reafon  of  the-  Name  to  be,  that  haply  from  the 
found  of  a  ringing  Bell  ,  fome  Obfervation 
was  made  in  Auguries  ,  Divinations ,  and  the 
like  Conje£tures;  and  Gronovius,  in  his  learned 
Exercitations  on  St:pbanus  Byz,antinus\  Frag- 
tnm>  d:  DrhnZ)  tells  us,  That  becaufe  Oracles, 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  2  0$ 

and  Divinations  are  denoted  by  the  word  Ne- 
chofob  ,  which  fignifies  alfo  Brafs  and  Lebetes, 
hence  in  the  Dodon*an  Orach  Brafs  Bells,  Lebe- 
tes and  'Tripods,  were  excogitated  ,  when  only 
Oracles  and  Divinations  were  tobeunderftood. 
Mr.  Rq(ft  in  his  View  of  the  Religions  of  Afia, 
will  have  it,  that  the  Bells  hanging  at  the  V al- 
lium of  the  High  Prieft  of  the  Jews,  denoted 
ChrifVs  Prophetick  Office,  though  I  know  ci- 
ther Significations  are  afcrib'd  to  it  by  other 
Writers.  And  Plutarch,  In  Sympofi.  introduces 
Metagenes,  an  Athenian,  who,  as  well  for  Other 
Rcafons  there  given  ,  as  for  the  Jews  High 
Priefts  wearing  the  faid  Bells ,  which  make  a 
noife,  as  he  walks,  will  have  the  God  of  the 
Jews  to  be  the  fame  with  Bacchus ,  becaufe  in 
their  Country,  in  the  No&urnal  Sacrifices  of  • 
Bacchus ,  call'd  Nyttelia ,  they  made  a  great 
noife,  and  the  Nurfes  of  Bacchus,  were  call'd 
Chalcodrifia,  as  much  as  to  fay,  Scrapers  of  Brafs. 
The  ftrong  Impreffion  made  on  me  by  the 
noife  of  Bells  in  my  Spiritual  Vifitations  led  me 
to  draw  thefe  things  together  from  the  Anci- 
ents, which  I  leave  to  the  Readers  Confidera- 
tion. 


CHAP. 


204  An  Account  of  Genii, 


CHAP.     VII. 

What  perception  Men  have  had  of  Spirits y 
and  their  Operations  hy  all  their  Senfes* 

THO'  the  Senfes  of  Seeing  and  Hearings 
are  the  chief  Senfes  concern'd  in  a  Per- 
ception of  Spirits  ,  and  their  Operations,  yet 
the  other  Senfes  fometimes  are  fome  way  af- 
fected by  them.  For,  as  St.  Auftin,  fays,  The 
Evil  work  of  the  Devil  creeps  through  all  the 
Paflages  of  the  Senfes ;  he  prefents  himfelf  in 
Figures,  applies  himfelf  to  Colours ,  adheres 
to  Sounds,  introduces  Odours,  infufes  himfelf 
In  Savours,  and  fills  all  the  Paffages  of  Intelli- 
gence ;  fometimes  cruelly  tormenting  with 
Grief  and  Fear,  fometimes  fportingly  diverting 
Man,  or  taunting  with  Mocks. 

According  to  this  Paffage  of  St.  Auftin, 
Mr.  John  Tcrdage,  in  his  Book  writ  in  vindi- 
cation of  himfelf  from  Necromancy,  &C.  pub- 
lifli'd  in  London,  An.  1655.  After  having  fet 
forth,  that  his  Maid-Servant,  Elizabeth  Benwd, 
had  deposed  before  the  Commiffioners,  that 
fhe  had  heard  Mufick  in  his  Houfe,  when  fhe 
knew  not  that  any  Inftruments  or  Muficians 
were  in  the  Houfe ;  and  that  fhe  had  heard  it 
in  the  Kitchen,  and  in  her  Miftreffes  Clofet, 
and  thought  the  fame  to  be  near  her,  but  faw 
none  playing  :  Which  Fad  Mr.  Pordage  does 
not  oppofe.    And  he  there  confefling,  that  in 

Augufi 


or  Famiiur  Spirits,  205 

Jugufl  1649,  there  ippca/d  in  his  Bed-Cham- 
ber, about  the  I  of  the  Night,  a  .Spirit 
in  the  fhape  of  one  Ever. r  J  (whom  he  fufpe- 
<fted  to  I            rijurer,  and  to  he  inftrnmen 

in  railing  Op  thole  Apparitions  which  himfelf 
and  oth  )  with  his  wearing  Apparel, 

Ban  who,  after  his  Hidden 

drawing  of  the  Bed-Curtains,  feem'd  to  walk 
jh  the  Chamber  very  caiily,  and  fo 
difappear'd  :  AnJ  that  the  fame  Night  there 
appeared  to  him  a  great  Dragon,  which  feem'd 
to  take  up  mod  of  a  large  Room,  having  great 
th  and  open  Jaws;  whence  he  often  ejefted 
Fire  againft  him,  which  came  with  fuch  a  Ma- 
gical Influence,  that  italmoft  (truck  the  Breath 
out  of  his  Body  ;  and  this  Apparition  continued 
'till  the  Day  began  to  dawn,  and  then  difap- 
pear'd.  I  fay,  having  fet  forth  this,  he  pro- 
ceeds to  declare  fome  extraordinary  things, 
which  few  had  been  made  acquainted  with, 
and  which  at  that  time  were  feen  and  experi- 
mented by  himfelf,  and  others  with  him.  He 
writing  as  folloXvs : 

Our  inward  fpiritual  Eyes  being  open'd  in 
an  extraordinary  way,  two  invifible  internal 
Principles  were  laid  open  and  difcover'd  to 
us,  which  may  be  call'd  MunJi  Ideales,  being 
two  fpiritual  Worlds,  which  feem'd  very  much 
differing  the  one  from  the  other,  as  having 
contrary  Qualities  and  Operations,  by  which 
they  work  upon  this  vilible  Creation.  He 
fcys,  One  of  thofe  internal  Worlds  may  be 
calfd  Mundm  tenekrofm ,  the  dark  World  , 
whofe  Objeds,  by  their  correfpondent  in- 
ward Faculties  or  ^enfes  were  then  difcover'd 
and  made  known  to  them.  The  other  World, 
he  fays,  may  be  call'd,  M  or, 


io6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

the  light  World,  which,  with  its  various  Ob- 
jects, was  then  likewife  open'd  to  their  in- 
ward Senfes ;  for  befide  their  internal  Sight, 
they  had  their  other  internal  f|>iritual  Faculties 
of  fpiritual  Senfation,  open'd  to  difcern  their 
various  Obje&s  within  thefe  Worlds. 

i.  As  to  the  Objeds  of  the  internal  Sight, 
when  the  dark  Principle  or  World  was  open  d, 
they  beheld  innumerable  multitudes  of  evil 
Spirits  or  Angels,  prefenting  themfelves  in  ap- 
pearing diftin&ions  of   Order  and  Dignity. 
The  Princes  of  this  dark  World,  and  their  Sub- 
jects, prefented  themfelves,  as  paffing  before 
their  Eyes,  in  Pomp  and  State ;  all  the  mighty 
ones  appearing  to  be  drawn  in  dark  aiery 
Clouds,  Chariots  with  Six,  or  at  leaft  Four 
Beafts  to  each  one  j  befide,  every  figure  or 
fimilitude  of  a  Coach  was  attended  with  many 
inferior  Spirits,  as  Servants  to  the  Princes  : 
The  Animals  that  drew  the  cloudy  Coaches, 
appear'd  in  the  fhapes  of  Lyons,  Dragons,  Ele- 
phants, Tygers,  Bears,  and  fuch  like  terrible 
Beafts.    Befides,  the  Princes  and  thofe  that  at- 
tended them,  tho'  all  in  the  fhapes  of  Men, 
yet  reprefented  themfelves  monftroufly  mifha- 
pen,  and  with  Ears  like  thofe  of  Cats,  cloven 
Feet,  ugly  Legs  and  Bodies,  Eyes  fiery,  fharp, 
and  piercing.    Befide  thefe  appearances  within, 
the  Spirits  made  fome  wonderful  Impreffions 
on  Bodies  without ;    as,  Figures  of  Men  and 
Beafts  upon  the  Glafs- Windows  and  the  Ceil- 
ings of  the  Houfe ;  fome  of  which  yet  remain. 
But  what  was  moil  remarkable  was,  the  whole 
vifible  World  reprefented  by  the  Spirits  upon 
the  Bricks  of  the  Chimney,  in  the  form  of  two 
half  Globes,  as  in  Maps.     After  which,  upon 
other  Bricks  of  the  fame  Chimney  was  figured 

a. 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  207 

a  Coach  and  four  Horfes,  with  Perfons  in  it, 
and  a  Footman  attending ,  all  Teeming  to  be 
in  motion;    with  many  other  fuch   Imai 
whi<  1  'd  to  be  wonderful,  exadrly  done. 

Now,  fearing  left  there  might  be  any  danger 
in  thefe  [mages,  through  unknown  Conjura- 
tion, and  falfe  Magick,  we  endeavour'd  to 
wadi  them  out  with  wet  Cloaths,  but  could 
not,  finding  them  engraven  in  the  fubllance 
of  the  Bricks,  which  indeed  might  have  con- 
tinued 'till  this  Day,  had  not  fear  and  fufpici- 
on  of  Witchcraft,  and  fome  evil  defign  of  the 
Devil  againft  us  in  it,  caus'd  us  to  deface  and 
obliterate  them  with  Hammers. 

He  adds  beneath.  But  to  fhut  up  this  rela- 
tion of  the  Obje&s  we  faw  in  this  dark  World, 
I  mull  add  this,  that  were  but  the  Eyes  of  Men 
open  to  fee  the  Kingdom  of  the  Dragon  in 
this  World,  with  the  multitudes  of  evil  Angels, 
which  are  every  where  tempting  and  enfna- 
ring  Men,  they  would  be  amaz'd,  and  not 
dare  to  be  by  themfelves,  without  good  Con- 
fciences,   and  a  great  aflurance  of  the  Love  ^ 

and  Favour  of  God,  in  proteding  thenr,  by 
the  Miniftration  of  the  Holy  Angels. 

2.  As  to  the  Objeds  of  the  inward  and  out- 
ward Smell,  he  fays,  That  within  three  Weeks 
fpace,  in  which  thefe  Wonders  appear'd,  at  fe- 
veral  times,  the  evil  Angels,  or  Spirits  raifed 
up  fuch  noifome  poyfonous  Smells,    that  both 
the  inward  and  outward  p.irts  of  thofe  that 
were  exercifed  with  them  ,  became  much 
fturbed  and  offended  ,    for  through  the  Sym- 
pathy betwixt  the  Body  and  the  Soul,  l 
phurous  hellifh  Smells  much  exercifed  both 
Magical  Tin&uration. 

;.  In 


8  02  An  Account  of  Genii, 

3.  In  reference  to  theObje&s  of  the  7*/*, 
he  fays,  That  fometimes  both  Night  and  Day 
they  were  exercis'd  with  the  loathfome  Hel- 
lifh  Taftes  of  Sulphur,  Brimftone^  Soot  and 
Salt  mingled  together  •  which  were  fo  loath- 
fome to  them  ,  that  they  were  like  to  caufe 
great  Diftempers  ,  and  Naufeoufnefs  in  their 
Bodies.,  had  they  not  been  fupported  by  God, 
beyond  their  own  ftrength* 

4.  In  Relation  to  their  outward  and  inward 
Touchy  they  were  much  exercifed  both  in  Body 
and  Soul ;  as  to  their  Souls  they  fometimes  felt 
fuch  ftrange  and  Magical  Wounds,  and  pier- 
cings by  the  fiery  Darts  of  the  Devil  5  that 
none  can  Exprefs  them,  but  thofe  that 
have  been  exercis'd  in  fome  Meafure ,  as  Job 
was.  As  to  their  Bodies  they  felt  Material 
Impreffions  from  the  Powers  of  Darknefs^  ve- 
ry noxious,  in  themfelves,  as  to  their  Natural 
Spirits,  and  Life,  but  born  by  them,  by  quiet 
Submiffion  to  the  Will  of  God. 

As  to  the  Internal  Light  World.  1.  There 
appear'd  then  to  their  inward  Sight,  multitudes 
almoft  innumerable  of  pure  Angelical  Spirits, 
in  Figurative  Bodies,  which  were  clear  as  the 
Morning  Star ,  and  tranfparent  as  Cryftal, 
fparkling  like  Diamonds,  and  fending  forth 
Beams  like  the  Sun,  powerfully  refrefhing  their 
Souls,  and  enlivening  their  Bodies. 

2.  In  Relation  to  the  inward  Senfe  of  Hear- 
ing, there  were  many  Mufical  Sounds  and  Voi- 
ces, like  thofe  that  St.  John  heard  in  Mount 
Sion,  the  Sweetnefs,  Harmony  and  Pleafant- 
nefs  of  which  cannot  be  exprefs'd ;  nor  that 
Spiritual  Joy  and  Delight,  which  by  them  was 
infus'd  into  their  Souls ,  be  utjter'd  by  the 
Tongue,  it  ravifhing  their  Spirits  into  the 
high  Praifes  of  Jehovah.  3.  In 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  icy 

;.  In  Relation  to  the  faculty 
the  Tongue  can  hardly  exprcfi 
1\    Odours  ,  and   Perfumes  which  then  v. 

uneltj  i  into  the  the 

quic  which  oy  them  •  >m- 

municated  and  [nfinuated  into  the 

their  outward  Bodies, which  like  a  ( 
d  able  to  have  renewed  the  Itrength  i 

nguifhing  Nature. 

4.  Their  Senfe  or  Faculty  of  1  ve- 

ry Pleafantly  entertain'd  with  thofe  invifible 
Dews,  which  w  seter  than  Honey  •  with 

which;  inllead  of  Food,  they  were  many 
times  wonderfully  refreflfd. 

j.  In  Relation  to  the  Senfeof  Spiritual  Centre: , 
that  was  alio  delighted  with  its  Heavenly  Ob- 
je&s :  for  he  fays,  none  can  utter  thofe  pleating 
Impreflions,  which  the  burning  Tincture  of 
the  Light  World  afforded  them,  coming  like  an 
hot  Cordial  into  the  Center  of  their  Spirits,  be- 
ing fenfibly  felt  in  the  inner  Parts,  fo  as  to  caufe 
much  Joy  and  Heavenly  Pleafures,  which  pe- 
netrated through  their  Souls ,  and  gave  them 
occafion  toPraife  and  Magnify  God. 

Thus,  he  fays,  for  the  fpace  of  three  Weeks, 
or  a  Month  ,  they   were  exercifed  inwardly 
and  outwardly  ,  through  that  great  Combat 
that  was  betwixt  thofe  two  Worlds,  and  their 
Inhabitants ;   the  Dark  World  fometimes  Af- 
flicting them  with  dreadful  Shapes,  abominable 
Smells,  loathfome  Tafts,  with  other  Operatic 
of  the  evil  Angels  ;  the  light  World  ,  at  o:i 
times  opening,  and  relieving  them  with  Odo- 
riferous Perfumes,  molt  fweetDews,  Glori 
Vifions ,  and  Angelical  Harmony.     lie  adds, 
That  now  for  the  fpace  of  4  Years,  ever  iince 
the  time  of  thefe  great  MamfeftationSj  they 
P  have 


2  i  o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

have  enjoy 'd  the  exercife  of  their  Spiri- 
tual Senfes,  which  were  never  fince  ftiut,  nor 
would  be.,  unlefs  through  Tranfgreffion  and 
Difobedience,  they  ran  back  into  the  earthly 
Nature. 

I  have  fet  down  this  Relation.,  in  fhort,  from 
Mr.  Yordage.  And  as  for  the  Truth  of  it,  it 
mull  rely  upon  him  ,  and  the  orher  Perfons 
then  concerned  with  him ;  but  for  my  felf,  I 
hare  no  Reafon  to  Queftion  the  Truth  of  it : 
it  being  ufual  with  thofe  that  are  train  d  up  to 
a  contemplative  Life  ;  to  have  Vifitations  in 
that  kind;  both  Internal  and  External. 
z.  i.  Part  The  learned  Walter  Hilton  (  a  great  Mailer 
i.  c.  io.  0f  a  contemplative  Life)  in  his  Scale  of  Perfecti- 
on, fets  forth,  that  Appearances,  or  Reprefen- 
tations  to  the  Corporeal  Senfes  may  be  both 
Good  and  Evil.     Writing  as  follows. 

By  what  I  have  faid  you  may  fomewhat 
underftand,  that  Vifions,  or  Revelations,,  or  a- 
ny  manner  of  Spirit  in  Bodily  appearing ,  or 
in  imaginings  fleeping.,  or  waking,  or  any  o- 
ther  feeling  in  the  Bodily  Senfe ,  made  as  it 
were  Spiritually^  either  by  founding  in  the  Ear, 
or  favouring  in  the  Mouthy  or  fmelling  at  the 
Nofe,  or  elfe  any  fenfible  Heat ,  as  it  were 
Fire  glowing,  and  warming  the  Breall,  or  any 
other  part  of  the  Body  ,  or  any  other  thing 
that  may  be  felt  by  Bodily  feme,  though  it 
be  never  fo  comfortable  and  liking,  yet  are 
they  not  contemplation  it  felf,  but  fimple  and 
fecondary  (though  they  are  good )  in  refped 
of  the  Spiritual  Vermes,  and  of  this  Spiritual 
knowing  and  loving  of  God  ,  accompanying 
true  contemplation  •  but  all  fuch  manner  of 
feeling  may  be  good.,  wrought  by  a  good  An- 
gel,  and  they  may  be  deceivable  wrought  by  a 

wicked 


or  Familiar  S  211 

ked  Am 

\t ;  for  1 

fame  thi 

for  a  ngtl  comes  with 

tn  do  thi 
fo  can  he  do  it  in  Matt 
he  that  has  felt  both  ,    cati  w 
which  were  good,  and  which  '• 

It  cither,  or  cue  bur  one  of 
them,  r 

Thefe  two  are  alike  in  ihe  man 
outwardly,  but  thej 
and  therefore  they  are  not  to  I 
fired,  nor  to  be  ettteftain'd  ,    onlefi 

Soul  can  by  the  Spirit  of  Discretion,  know 
the  good  from  the  evil ;  that  it  be  not  begaii'd, 
as  St.  John  fays  ,    Twft  not  every  Sf  !  7oh-  l$ 

fir  ft-  whether  it  be  cf  God,  cr  no.     And  to  know  '* 
whether    the    Reprefentation    to    the  Bodily 
fenfes ,    be  good  or  evil,  Hilton  gives  the  foi-  ckaP* in 
lowing  Rule. 

If  you  fee,any  manner  of  Light,  or  bright- 
nefs  with  your  Bodily  Eye  ,  or  in  Imaginati- 
on, other  than  every  Man  fees ;  or  if  you  hear 
any  wonderful  pleafant  founding  with  your 

,  or  have  in  your  Mouth  any  Fweet 
Savour,  other  than  what  you  know  to  be  Na- 
tural, or  any  heat  in  your  Breail  like  Fire,  or 
any  manner  of  Delight  in  any  part  of  your 
Body,  or  if  a  Spirit  appear  Bodily  to  you  , 
it  were  an  Angel  to  Comfort  von  ,  or  reach 
you;  or  if  any  Rich  feeling,  j  know 

well  comes  not  from  your  icif,  nor  from  any 
Bodily  Creature,  beware  at  that  rime,  or  pre- 
fently  upon  it,  and  wifely  a  (Wirings 

of  your  Heart;  for  if  by  Occafion  c 
P  2 


An  Account  of  Genii, 

fure  and  liking  you  take,  in  the  faid  Feelings 
or  Vifion,  you  fee  your  Heart  drawn  from  the 
minding  and  beholding  of  Jefus  Chrifi  ,  and 
from  Spiritual  Exercifes  •  as  from  Prayer,  and 
thinking  of  your  felf,  and  your  defe&s,  or  from 
the  inward  defire  of  Vermes,  and  of  Spiritual 
knowing  and  feeling  of  God  ,  to  fet  the  fight 
of  your  Heart,  and  your  Affe&ion,  your  De- 
light and  your  reft  Principally  on  the  laid  Feel- 
ings or  Vifions,  fuppofing  that  to  be  a  part  of 
Heavenly  Joy,  or  Angels  Blifs,  and  thereupon 
come  to  think  that  you  fhould  neither  Pray, 
nor  think  of  any  thing  elfe  ,  but  wholly  at- 
tend thereto,  for  to  keep  it,  and  delight  your 
felf  therein,  then  is  this  Feeling  very  fufpifci- 
ous  to  come  from  the  Enemy  j  and  therefore 
though  it  be  never  fo  liking  and  wonderful,  re- 
fufe  it,  and  affent  not  thereto  >  for  this  is  a 
flight  of  the  Enemy  to  let,  and  beguile  the 
Soul  by  fuch  bodily  Savours ,  or  Sweetnefs  in 
the  Senfes,  to  bring  it  into  Spiritual  Pride,  and 
into  a  Falfe  fecurity  of  it  felf ,  flattering  it 
felf  that  it  had  thereby  a  Feeling  of  Heaven- 
ly Joy,  and  that  it  is  half  in  VaraJife ,  by  rea- 
fon  of  the  Delight  it  feels  about  it ,  when  in- 
deed it's  near  to  Hell  Gates ,  and  fo  by  Pride 
and  Preemption  it  might  fall  into  Errors,  or 
Herefies ,  or  Phantafms ,  or  other  Bodily  or 
Spiritual  Mifchiefs. 

But  if  it  be  Coy  that  this  manner  of  Feeling 
lets  net  your  Heart  from  Spiritual  Exercifes, 
hut  makes  you  more  devout,  and  more  fervent 
to  Pray,  more  wife  to  think  Spiritual  Thoughts; 
xrA  tno'it  be  fo,  that  it  aftonifhes  you  in  the 
beginnings  nevenhelefs,  afterwards,  it  turns 
2nd  quickens  your  Heart  to  more  defire  of  Ver- 
tices, and  encreafes  your  Love  more  to  God, 

.  and 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 1  3 

ami  ibour;  alfo  ir  makes  you 

more  humble  in  your  own  Eyei    By  mcfe 

Tok  I  now  ir  is  of  God,  wrou; 

by  the  prcftnCC  an d  working  of  a  good  Angel, 
and  comes  from  the  goodnefs  of  God,  either 
for  the  comfort  of  fimple  devout  Souls,  to  in- 
crcafe  their  trull  and  del  ire  towards  God,  to 
feek  thereby  the  knowing  and  loving  of  God 
moft  6ttVj  bv  means  of  fuch  Comforts : 

or  elfe  if  they  be  Perfect  that  feel  fuch  delight, 
it  feems  to  them  to  be  an  earned,  and  as  it 
were  a  fhadow  of  the  glorifying  of  the  Body, 
which  it  (hall  have  in  the  Blifs  of  Heaven;  but 
1  know  not  whether  there  be  any  fuch  Men 
on  the  Earth. 

He  goes  on.  Of  this  way  of  difcerning  the 
working  of  Spirits,  fpeak*s  (St.  John  in  his 
Epiftle)  thus,  I  John  4,  5.  Omms  fpiritus  (fui 
folvit  Jefuniy  hie  non  eft  ex  Deo,  Every  Spirit 
loofesy  or  unknits  Jefus,  he  is  not  of  God. 
This  knitting  and  faftning  of  Jefus  to  a 
Mans  Soul,  is  wrought  by  a  good  Will,  and 
a  great  defire  to  him,  only  to  have  him,  and 
fee  him  in  his  Blifs  fpiritually.  The  greater 
this  defire  is,  the  fafler  is  Jtfm  knit  to  the 
Soul ;  and  the  lefs  this  defire  is,  the  loofer  is 
he  knit.  Whatfoever  Spirit  therefore,  or  feel- 
ing it  is,  which  leffens  this  Defire,  and  would 
draw  it  down  from  the  iledfaft  minding  of 
Jefm  Chrift,  and  from  the  kindly  breathing 
and  afpiring  up  to  him,  this  Spirit  will  unknit 
Jefus  from  the  Soul  ;  and  therefore  it  is  not 
of  God,  but  is  the  working  of  the  Enemy. 
But  if  a  Spirit,  or  a  Feeling,  or  a  Revelation 
make  this  defire  more,  knitting  the  knots  oi 
Love  and  Devotion  fader  to  %Jtfusy  opening 
the  Eyes  of  the  Soul  into  fpiritual  know 
V  3 


2  14  An  Account  of  Genii, 

more  clearly,  and  makes  it  more  humble  in  it 
ic\fy    this  Spirit  is  of  God. 

And  hereby  you  may  learn,  that  you  are 
not  to  fuffer  your  Heart  willingly  to  reft,  nor 
to  delight  wholly  in  any  fuch  bodily  Feelings, 
of  fiich  manner  cf  Comforts.,  or  Sweetnefs, 
tho'  they  were  good ;  but  rather  hold  them  in 
your  fight  nought.,  or  little  in  comparifon  of 
bpirital  Defire,  and  itedfaft  thinking  of  Jefus  : 
nor  fhall  you  faftn  the  thought  of  your  Heart 
ever-much  on  them. 

Hp  goes  on.  But  you  fhall  feek  with  great 
diligence  in  Prayer,  that  you  may  come  to  a 
fpifhua!  Feeling  or  Sight  of  God  ;  that  is,  that 
you  may  know  the  Wifdom  of  God.,  the  end- 
lefs  Might  of  him,  his  great  Goodnefs  in  Him- 
felf,  and  in  his  Creatures ;  for  this  is  Con- 
templation, and  that  other  mentioned  is  none. 
Ephcf.  -\   Thus,  fays  St  being  rooted  and  grounded 

i8.  ;        in  Charity,  we  may  be  able  to  comprehend 
with  all  the  Saints.,  what  is  the  breadth,  and 
length,  and  height,  and  depth.      That  you 
may  know,  he  fays,  not  by  found  of  the  Ear, 
nor  fweet  favour  in  the  Mouthy  nor  by  any 
fuch  bodily  thing,  but  that  you  may  know 
feel  with  all  Saints,  what  is  the  length  of 
the  endlefs  Being  of  God  ;  the  breadth  of  the  ' 
wonderful  Charity  and  Goodnefs  of  God  ;  the 
height  of  His  Almighty  Majefly,  and  thebot- 
s  depth  of  His  Wifdom,    In  Knowing 
fpijitual  Feeling  of  thefe,  fhould  be  the 
e  of  a  Contemplative  Man ;  for  in  thefe 
ma  nderftood  the  full  knowing  of  all 

:,    &c. 
ave  fet  down  thefe  things  fomewhat  at 
bis  Author,  becaufe  I  conceive 
,efui  to  feme-Men,  who  lie  un- 
der 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  215 

dcr  fpiritual  Vilitations  of  this  kind.      We  fee 
he  fuppofes  it  no  uncommon  thing,  for  M( 
to   have  their  Spiritual   ar. 
wrought  on  in  this  extraordin  nd 

teaches  how  they  may  difcern  Good  from  Bad 
in  fuch  cafes.  F  know  the  Contempt  many 
Men  For  Studies  of  this  nature;   but  its 

not  to  thofe  I  here  write  :  Nor  is  it  every 
Man's  Talent  to  be  Mafter  of  a  Contemplative 
This  Pcrfon,  by  a  deep  Infpection  into 
the  difpofition  of  Mens  Minds,  in  all  the  gra- 
dati  a  Contemp!  \'c,  had  a  clear 

view  of  the  Figmentum  of  Man  in  every  pofture 
of  it,  and  that  difcretion  of  Spirits  which  the 
Scriptures  mention. 

Somewhatbeingoccafionally  faid  before  con- 
cerning the  inward  Senfes,  I  fhall  here  give  you 
a  fhort  account  of  the  internal  Senfes,  according 
to  the  Platonkk  tbilofopbr,  by  the  benefit  of  which 
one  Man  perceives  what  another  does  not. 

C*Iim  Rbodig.  tells  us,  That  the  vivifying  Antt  1^, 
Ad  of  the  Soul  on  the  Vehicle,  that  is,  on/.i7.c.i5 
the  xthereal  Body,  is  calj'd  the  Idol  of  the 
Soul  :  But  you  muft  know  this,  that  the  An- 
cients thought  there  was  in  this  Idol  a  confus'd 
energy  of  the  Fancy  without  Reafon  ;  and 
fuch  Senfes,  that  the  Sight  is  generally  pro- 
pagated throughout  this  whole  Vehicle,  as 
likewife  the  Hearing;  but  that  many  do  not 
enjoy  thefe  Senfes,  nor  is  it  often  ,  but  there 
is  in  them  a  power  of  an  admirable  nature ; 
fo  that  the  harmony  of  the  Spheres  is  perceived 
by  them,  being  otherwife  (ilefat  ;  and  there  is 
heard  alfo  a  Demonical  Voice,  and  Bodies 
prefent  themfelves  to  the  Sight,  if  the  Soul 

thdfaws  it  (elf  in  the  xtherial  corpufcle, 
ing,  after  a  manner  fever  d  from  the  Clog  or 
5*  4 


ii6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

the  terreftrial  and  grofs  Body.  So  its  faid  that 
Tatius,  the  Son  of  Mercury,  being  duly  expi- 
ated by  Sacred  Rites,  prefently  cry'd  out,  that 
he  liv'd  now  in  an  Immortal  Body,  and  being 
carry'd  aloft,  he  faw  and  heard  wonderful 
things  ;  which  Mercurlm  approving,  faid  the 
fame  was  ufual  with  himfelf.  There  are  fome 
that  write,  and  among  others  the  Vhtonkk  O- 
lymfwdorus,  that  ApoUonms  Tyanaas,  by  the  pow- 
er of  thefe  Senfes,  when  he  was  in  the  City, 
being  rais'd,  as  it  were,  on  a  Watch-Tower, 
faw  and  told  what  things  were  done  in  Egypt. 
Vktinw  thought  that  the  firft  Intellect  was  the 
firft  Effence,  from  which,  and  in  which  other 
Intelle&s  are ;  not  only  by  Ideas,  but  by  their 
proper  Intelle&ual  Exiftences  (  as  I  may  fay) 
of  the  Soul,  according  to  an  Intelle&ual  Fa- 
culty proper  to  themfelves,  even  while  they 
are  in  the  Body,  juft  as  Lines  drawn  from  a 
Center  to  a  Circumference,  do  not  depart 
from  the  Center  while  they  touch  the  Circum- 
ference. Hence  he  will  have  it,  that  the  In- 
tellect of  a  Prophet  and  of  an  abftra&ed  Man, 
tho'  it  feems  to  be  only  in  the  Eafi,  may  have 
a  profpe$:  alfo  of  what  things  are  done  in  the 
Wtfty  becaufe  all  Intellects  are  every  where, 
and  in  each  other  ;  fince  always  they  are  all 
in  the  fingle  Divine  Mind,  which  is  always 
wholly  prefent  every  where.    So  far  Rhodig. 

Now,  as  the  Vytb  goreans  and  Vlatonich,  who, 
many  of  them  had"  a  fenfible  perception  of 
what  they  call'd  the  Harmony  of  the  Spheres, 
Divine  Voices,  &c.  fet  up  thefe  Hypothcfes  for 
explaining  things  of  this  kind  ;  fo  it's  no  won- 
der, that  the  other  Philofbphers,  who  had  not 
fuch  abftr  acted  Minds,  and  had  no  fenfe  of 
fugh  things,  did  not  fet  up  any  hypothecs  for 


or  Famiiidr  Spirits.  2  \7 

«plaining  thin  had  no  icnfc  of,  and 

rejuftcJ  xbtfU  of  this  nature. 

1  doubt  what  1  have  here  defirerfl  may  be 

too  fpeculative  to  pleafc  all  Headers $    and 

therefore  I  (hall  not  dwell  upon  things  of  this 
nature;  hut  only  fay  in  general,  that  in  all 
Ages,  and  in  all  Religions  there  have  been 
lemplative  Perfons,  or  fuch  as  have  mueh 
fpiricualiy/d  thcmfelves  in  the  ftudy  of  Divine 
things ,  for  detaching  Souls  from  the  Crea- 
v  bringing  them  to  an  opening  of  their 
Inw  to  fix  them  on  the  being  in- 

finitely Perfect  :  As  the  Ejjeens  among  the 
Jews,  and  the  Tlatonicks  among  the  P'JgftUj 
who  detach'd  Minds,  as  much  as  poffibly 
they  could  from  Matter,  to  fix  them  on  Meta- 
phy  Ileal  Meditations ;  and  this  is  what  is  chiefly 
driven  at  by  Myftical  Divines  among  Chrifti- 
ans :  And  it  mull  be  granted,  that  humane 
Reafon  ftands  much  indebted  to  this  Philo- 
fophy ;  for  having  driven  the  knowledge  of 
GOD,  and  of  a  Being  infinitely  Perfect, 
and  of  the  foLe  Creator  of  the  World,  much 
farther  than  other  Philofophers  have  done  ; 
as  Monfieur  Dnreuxy  afferts  in  the  beginning 
of  his  Book,  Intituled,  Traitee  hiftorique  fur  la 
Theologie  myfti^ue. 

To  add  Tome  farther  explanation  of  the  way 
that  fome  Perfons  fee  Spirits,  when  others  do 
not,  Cardan  tells  us.,  that  Averrhoes,  in  his  Col-  L.  de 
Utt*neay  feems  fairly  to  have  accounted  for  ir,  Mirab. 
faying.   When   the  Spirit  which  attends  the 
Imagination,  has,  by  Imagining,receiv'd  for 
of  a  Sound,  or  of  any  quality  for  difcerning 
hv  the  Smell  or  Tafte,  or  of  a  dead  Man,  or 
ot  a  \Daimm ;   and  being  imbued  with  it,   is 
convey 'd  to  the  Senfe  which  correfponds  to 

that 


2i8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

that  A&ion,  as  in  Odours,  tc  the  proper  In- 
ftrument  of  Smelling;  in  Hearings  to  the  Ears; 
in  Spectres,  to  the  Eyes,  it  will  neceffarily 
Smeli^  Hear,  and  See,  without  any  Obje&j 
for  if  Seeing  be  nought  but  a  Perception  of 
a  Species  in  the  Chrifialloldes ,  whether  that 
Species  comes  from  the  Objed  or  not,  its 
manifeft,  as  often  as  this  happens  it  truly  fees ; 
and  fo  it  happens  that  Perfons  fee  Demons,  or 
dead  Perfons,  being  awake ;  and  alfo  hear 
Voices  of  Perfons  they  know,  and  fmell  Smells, 
and  touchy  as  in  the  Incubi  or  Succubi :  But  thefe 
things  are  more  feldom  feen  than  they  are 
heard  or  touched  ;  becaufe  in  the  reft  of  the 
Senfes  it  fuffices  to  obferve  one  difference,  and 
one  only  Spirit.,  convey'd  to  the  Senfe  with 
that  Image  may  reprefent  this :  But  as  in  the 
Eyes  there  are  more  differences  neceffary, 
Magnitude,  Form,  Colour,  of  neceffity  more 
Spirits  muft  be  convey'd ;  and  for  this  reafon 
Nature  has  made  thofe  Nerves  hollow,  which 
pais  to  the  Eyes,  and  only  thofe  fo,  becaufe 
thofe  in  their  operations  ftand  in  need  of  far 
more  Spirits,  than  any  of  the  other  Senfes  in 
decerning.  Hence  arifes  a  folution  of  many 
Problems,  which  tho'  carrying  a  certain  truth, 
yet  have  brought  many  to  fuch  ftreights,  that 
feme  have  been  fain  to  fly  to  Miracle,  others 
to  Demons,  others  have  flatly  denied  the  Fa6ts. 
As  in  IJland  and  Nor&ay,  &c.  they  think  they 
fee  fome  of  their  Family  who  are  dead,  and 
thin!;  they  embrace  them ;  and  fay,  they  va- 
nifn  in  their  Embraces :  Now,  IJltnd  is  full  of 
Bitumen,  and  the  Inhabitants  live  on  Fruits, 
Roots,  Bread  made  of  Fifh  and  Water,  and  it 
lying  in  the  frozen  Sea,  by  reafon  of  its  great 
Cold,  it  cannot  bear  Handing  Corn,  and  much 

1q& 


or  Ewuliar  Spirit f,  219 

lefs  Win  the  Spirits,  by  reafon  of 

the  Food;  the  Air,  by  reafon  of  the  Soil,  are 
therefore,  by  reafon  of  the  thick- 
nef*  and   the  Vapours  concerted 

through  Cold,  [mages  wander  about,  as  in 
the  Clouds,  which  being  conceiv'd,  through 
Error,  I  ear,  and  Thought,  the  denfe  and 
hy  Spirit  fo  long  retains ,  till  it  be  con- 
0  the  Inftrument  of  Senfe;  therefore 
they  perfwade  themfeives  they  fee  and  talk 
with  them  :  They  think  they  fee  Perfons  of 
their  Acquaintance,  and  fuch  as  are  dead,  be- 
caufe  thev  know  they  are  not  there  living, 
and  becaufe  th(  \fp  in  their  Embraces ; 

but  no  Man  has  feignd  to  himfelf  an  un- 
known Figure  in  the  Clouds,  as  of  a  Chimera, 
or  an  Hippocentaure ;  for  we  are  all  carry'd  to 
known  things.     So  far  Card 

But  after  all  this  Philofophizing,  for  View- 
ing that  all  our  Senfes  may  be  impos'd  on  by 
Phantoms,  I  do  not  find  how  this  any  way 
accounts v  for  thofe  Apparitions  which  have 
reveal'd  future  or  hidden  things,  and  the  like, 
which  were  not  pofltbly  difcoverable  by  any 
affiftance  of  our  Senfe  or  Reafon. 


CHAP. 


2  2  o  An  Account  of  Geni  i , 


CHAP.     IX. 

What  perception  Men  have  had  of  Genii , 
or  Spirits,  and  their  Operations  by 
Dreams. 

TO  fay  abfolutely,  that  all  Dreams,  with- 
out any  diftin&ion,  are  vain  Vifions, 
and  fports  of  Nature,  the  Images  of  things  at 
random  coming  into  our  Minds,  and  poffef- 
fing  them  while  we  Sleep ;  and  to  banifh  all 
Divination  from  the  Life  of  Man,  as  Epicurus, 
Meterodorus,  and  Xenophanes  did,  is  contrary  to 
Experience,  and  the  common  Confent  and 
Agreement  of  Mankind.  So  that  we  may 
argue  with  Averrhoes,  in  his  Varaphrafe,  there 
is  no  Man  but  has  had  Dreams,  which  have 
foretold  him  fomething,  and  therefore  they 
are  not  only  the  Sports  of  Nature,  and  vain 
I.  25.  Appearances.  Pliny,  a  Man  little  credulous 
in  matters  of  Faith,  writes,  That  the  cures  of 
many  Difeafes,  unknown  before,  had  been 
difcover'd  in  Dreams.  Porphyrins,  to  explain 
Divine  Dreams,  fays,  That  God  has  given  to 
each  Man  two  Damons  to  attend  him,  a  good 
and  a  bad ;  and  that  the  good  and  propitious 
Demons,  foreftiew  us,  in  our  Dreams,  Evils 
to  come,  prepared  for  us  by  evil  Damons ;  add- 
ing, that  if  any  Man  could  rightly  difcern 
riiofe  things  that  are  intimated  to  us  in  our 
Sleep,  he  would  be  freed  from  all  Evils,  and 
become  an  egregious  Prophet.      Tfellus  I  de 

Damon : 


or  Familiar  Spirits,  221 

Damon:  fays,  That  Damons  come  to  thofc  that 
arc  worthy  of  their  &  and  give  them 

the  knowledge   of  future  things.       And  the 

ripatcticks  for  referring 
die  Works  of  Damons,  as  Divinations,  a  ma- 
nifestation of  occult  things,  and  the  (peaking 
of  various  Tongues  to  Humours,  and  the 
Steams  of  the  Earth. 

Dion  Cajjiwy  writes  thus,  The  caufe  which 
moved  me  to  write  this  Hiftory  was  this :  7  "^  * ' 
When  I  had  writ  a  Book  of  thofe  Dreams  and 
Prodigies,  which  had  given  Scverrts  hopes  of 
the  Principality,  and  had  fent  it  to  Severn, 
and  he  had  read  it,  and  had  writ  me  back 
many  kind  things;  after  receiving  his  Letter 
in  the  Evening,  I  went  to  Bed,  and  in  my 
Sleep  it  was  Divinely  Commanded  me,  to 
write  an  Hiftory  ;  wherefore  I  writ  the  things 
I  now  treat  of ;  which  proving  very  pleafing 
to  Swtrus  and  others,  I  prefently  refolved  to 
go  through  writing  the  whole  Roman  Hiftory. 
And  tho'  I  took  upon  me  the  Compofing  of 
this  Hiftory  with  relu&ancy,  and,  at  firft, 
wholly  reje&ed  it,  my  Goddefs  encouraged  me 
in  my  Sleep,  and  gave  me  good  hopes  that 
this  Hiftory  fhould  never  Periih  ;  which  God- 
defs I  take  to  be  the  Guardianefs  of  my  Life, 

The  lame  Author  concludes  the  laft  Book  of 
his  Hiftory  thus,  At  length  being  taken  ill 
in  my  Feet,  I  was  difmift  of  all  Employs,  to 
pafs  all  the  remainder  of  my  Life  in  my  Coun- 
try, as  my  Genim  had  plainly  lignirijd  to  me 
in  Bjtbinid  :  who  alfo  once  feem'd  to  com- 
mand me,  in  my  Dream,  to  a  rfes 
to  the  end  of  my  Hiftor 


212  An  Account  of  Genii, 

From  Arms  and  cruel  Slaughters,  Dufl  and  Tain 
Iliad.  3«         Suftained  in  Wars,  Jove  Hedor  h 

Cardan,  tho'  he  had  writ  ten  Eooks  of  Dreams^ 
yet  in  his  Book  De  Mirabilibus,  tells  us  how,  he 
was  often  admoniflfd  in  his  Dreams  to  write 
his  One  and  Twenty  Books  De  Subtitin  e\  of 
which  the  foremention'd  Book  is  one  ;  and 
he  fays  thefe  did  not  feem  Dreams  to  him, 
but  fomewhat  greater,  and  that  his  Books 
De  Rerum  varietcte  were  fo  likewife  fhewn 
him,  and  that  it  was  a  property  belonging 
to  his  Family ,  which  he  had  both  by  his 
Fathers  and  Mothers  fide,  to  Dream  of  what 
would  happen  to  him ;  and  this  he  has  fet 
forth,  that  Men  may  know  there  is  fome- 
what in  us  befides  our  felves.  There  is,  he 
fays,  in  all  Men,  but  it  incites  fome  to  Ver- 
tue,  becaufe  they  will  have  it  fo,  others  to 
Murther,  Poifonings,  &c.  what,  fays  he,  do 
they  think  the  Mind  of  a  Wicked  Man  to  be  ? 
is  Man  there  alone  ?  or  are  there  Fears,  Ha- 
treds, Sufpifcions,  Angers  and  Torments  of 
Mind,  fo  that  when  a  Man  has  given  himfelf 
over  to  their  power,  he  cannot  be  mailer  of 
himfelf  ?  In  all  of  us  there  are  buried  Seeds 
and  Sprouts  of  a  contrary  Fa&ion;  wherefore 
no  Man  can  be  exeitfed  to  Vertue,  nor  have 
an  experience  of  Truth  in  Dreams,  who  over- 
whelms and  buries  that  which  is  in  him  befide 
himfelf;  for  there  are  three  Factions  within 
us,  Evil  Damons,  a  clear  Light,  andPleafure; 
wherefore  trueDreams,  a  forefight  of  Futurities, 
and  wonderful  things  happen  even  to  wickecf 
Men.  I  know  what  may  be  obje&ed  againft  me, 
that,  forfooth,  I  would  feem  a  Divine  Man:  Do 
they  think  me  of  fo  little  Senie,  that  I  know 

not 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 1 3 

not  Men  will  rather  impute  this  as  a  Vanity  to 

me,  than  turn  it  to  my  Praifc?  bur 
I  have  icon  and  know,  I  cannCM 
it  be  to  my  extream  prejudice.     Jt  ^  i: 
comfort   to  mc,    that  when   the  fame 
hup;  \kn,  the  lame  Fear,    the  fiu 

Sufpicion,  which  he  confclt  he  was  not  Igfl 
rant  of,  yet  he  chofe  rather  to  obey  his  Im- 
pulfe,  and  not  to  conceal  the  things  he  knew, 
to  the  hazard  of  his  Fame,  than  to  mind  the 
Glory  of  Men.  If  any  Man  may  h;;ply  fu- 
(peft  me  for  leeking  from  this  ,  an  opinion 
of  Sanetirv,  let  him  know,  that  no  Man  a- 
mong  the  Ancients  more  conftantly  afferted 
the  Mortality  of  the   Soul,   than  md 

that  I  am  a  dinner.  Wherefore  the  reafon  of 
thefe  things  muft  be  dedud  elfewhere  •  for 
they  belong  to  the  Books  De  Arcnnis  zALttml- 
tatts  &  de  Fate,  not  to  the  prefent  difpute,  nor 
are  they  proper  for  it.  So  far  Cardan.  And 
I  defire  this  may  ferve  for  an  Anfwer  to  what 
fome  Men  haply  may  be  inclined  to  objed 
to  my  felf,  in  reference  to  what  I  have  deli- 
vered in  this  Book,  as  to  any  experience  of 
my  own,  in  this,  or  the  like  kind;  for  I  as 
freely  own  my  ielf  guilty  of  many  Failings, 
as  Car  dm  did,  or  any  other  Man  may. 

To  come  nearer  to  our /Times,  G^ndas, 
in  the  Life  of  Peireskitfs,  writ  by  himfelf,  re- 
lates fo  ftrange  a  Dream  which  happened  to 
him,  that  Yeireskixs  upon  telling  it  him  more 
than  once,  faid  that  if  another  Man  had  re- 
lated it,  he  fhould  not  have  believed  him. 

In  his  return,  Anno  1610 ,  in  the  I  ng 

of  May,  fromil'  a  his 

Company  one  James  Raitwr,  a  ( 
who  was  wont  to  Lodge  in 

with 


22  4  Jn  Account  of  Genu, 

with  him,  and  now,  did  fo  in  an  Inn  on  the 
Road:  as  Veireskius  Slept,  Rainer  obferved  he 
muttered  fomewhat  to  himfelf,  after  an   un- 
ufual  manner ;  whereupon  Rainer  Awakened 
him,  and  ask'd  him  what  was  the  matter  ?  Oh ! 
faid  he,   from  what  a  pleafant  and  grateful 
Dream  have  you  roufed  me !    Rainer    asking 
him,   what  it  was  ?  I  was  Dreaming,  faid  he, 
that  I  was  at  Nifmes,  and  that  a  Goldfmith  offe- 
red me  a  Golden  Medal  of  Julius  Cafar ,  for 
four  Crowns,  and  I  was  upon  paying  him  his 
Mony  for  it;    when  upon  your   unfeafonable 
Awaking  me,   both  Goldfmith  and  Medal  Va- 
nifhed.    They  went  on  to  Nifmes,  and  being 
there,  Peireskius  took  a  turn  in  the  City,  till 
Dinner  was    ready,    and,    by    a  wonderful 
qhance,    he  happened  on  a  Goldfmiths  Shop, 
and  asked  the  Goldfmith,  whether  he  had  any 
Rarity  to  fhew  him?    he  told  him  he  had  a 
Julius  Cafar  of  Gold;  he  asked  him  the  Price ; 
and  was  anfwered   four  Crowns,    which  he 
prefently  paid  him,  and  taking  the  Medal;  by 
an  admirable  hit  of  Fortune  he  fulfilled  his 
Dream.     It  may  be  faid  admirable,    for  he 
might  eafily  have  thought  of  Nifmes,  where  he 
was  to  be  the  next  Morning;  he  might  have 
thought  of  that  Coin  of  Julius  Cafar,  which 
he  had   often    wiftied  for,  being  awake ;    he 
might   have  thought  it  found  in  that   City, 
in  which  there    were  fo  many  Footfteps  of 
Roman  Antiquities  \  he  might  have  thought,  at 
a  Goldfmiths ,  to  which  fort  of  Perfons,  fuch 
things  found,  ?sc  commonly  carried ;  he  might 
have  thought  of  a  fmall  Price,  at  which  Gold- 
,  fmiths  rather  value  thofe  things ,    than  Anti- 
quaries;   he    might    have    thought    of    four 
Crowns,  with  which  moderate  Price  a  Gold- 
fmith 


or  Vmtlidr  Spirits.  225 

fmitb  mi  In  fhort, 

and 

all  tl  the 

Eve-  tm.     And  n 

Ten 

thought 

done,  if  the  like  Dn 

n\\  ;   b 
of  (  2    only  this  ann 

thofe  which  to 

create  a  ftupor  in  tl 

cerili  ^,    which  Difcou;  I 

Tranflated  and  Printed  in  Englijh  ,    W//.  ic 
In  it  this  Dream  of  inferted 

placed  among  Angelical  Dreams.  I  fhall  here 
give  you  fome  account  of  that  Diicourfe  y  as 
follows. 

The  Firft  Chapter  treats  of  tJatur  msy 

which  he  concludes  thus :  It's  true,  foi 
it  happens,  that  fome  of  thefc  Dreams  come 
to  pafs  ^  which  makes  us  think,  there  is  fome 
refemblance  or  agreement  betwixt  the  Dream 
and  the  Event;  and  by  confequence  that  fome 
AvgA  or  Spirit  is  concen  rein  j  bu  t, 

has  obferv'd  ,  This  happens  b\ 
chance,  as  he  that  without  any  aim  fhould 
fhoot  a  thoufand  Arrows,  may  at  la  ft  by  chance 
hit  the  Mark.  So  in  our  Dreams,  fuch  an 
finite  number  of  Vilions  pafs  in  our  Imaginati- 
on ,  that  it's  not  only  no  Wonder  ,  if  one 
fhould  fometimes  chance  to  be  true,  but  it 
would  be  much  more  ftrange,  if  once  or  twice^ 
in  our  Life,  it  did  not  fo  happen  ;  but  if  any 
of  our  Dreams  do  not  only  come  to  pafs ,  but 
there  alfo  is  a  remarkable  Agreement  betv. 


226  An  Account  of  Genii, 

it  and  the  Event,  and  fuch  as  we  ought  necef- 
farily  to  fuppofe  the  Operation  of  an  In- 
telligent Agent  to  Intervene ,  we  ought  not 
then  to  reckon  this  among  Natural  Dreams, 
but  to  refer  it  either  to  God,  or  to  fome  A&i- 
on  of  Angels. 

His  Second  Chapter  treats  of  Angelical 
Dreams  in  general,  with  fome  Refle&ions  on 
particular  Dreams;  he  fays,There  are  two  forts 
of  Dreams,  which  we  may  impute  to  created  In- 
telligences ;  one  where  the  things  fignify'd  are 
contain  d  in  fymbolical  and  myfterious  Repre- 
fentations,  the  other  where  they  are  proposed 
naked,  without  any  fuch  refemblances.  The 
common  Rule  of  interpreting  the  former,  he 
fays,  is  to  obferve  the  Agreements  which  are 
betwixt  the  Dreams ,  and  their  Events ;  and 
fome  of  thefe  Dreams  regard  prefent,  others 
future  things ;  of  both  which  he  gives  Inftan- 
ees.  Thole  other  Dreams  which  propofe 
things  nakedly,  as  they  are  in  themfelves,  have 
no  need  of  an  Interpreter  to  underftand 
them,  but  when  the  Event  confirms  them  they 
are  not  the  lefs  wonderful,  as  the  Dreams  of 
Tclreskius,  and  others  which  he  mentions. 

The  Third  Chapter  treats  of  Divine  Dreams, 
which  are  alfo  of  two  forts,  one  contains  Fu- 
ture things,  under  enigmatical  and  myfterious 
E.eprefentations,  the  other  are  much  more 
plain  and  naked  j  of  both  which  he  gives  In- 
stances. Concerning  Divine  Dreams,  in  general 
he  makes  three  Enquiries,  i.  Why  God  has 
fonietimes  reveal'd  himfelf  in  Dreams  to  his 
Servants.  2.  How  they  could  certainly  know 
that  thofe  Dreams  had  God  for  their  Author. 
3.  Whether  this  way  of  Revelation  by  Dreams 
be  yet  pra&ifed,  ahd  whether  God  does  ftill 

make 


or  Fdmil'ur  Sfut  its.  i  27 

make  nfc  of  it,  under  the  1  the 

ofthele  Queftioc  ,rcJ 

(  trious  in.  il  him- 

<  and  by  them  to  others,  fo 

no  reafoh  why  he  (hould  hare  cxclu- 
that  of  Dreams  j  and  there  is  yet  this  far- 
the:  in  particular,  for  them  above  the 

,  that  though  there  be  a  gi  !  of 

\  Dreams ,    and  that  thofe 

w)  from  Angels  have  very  often 

miK  biguity  ,   and  that 

forne  Philof  >chcrs,  fup- 

pos'd  no  regard  to  be  had  to  that  \vray  of  Divi- 
nation, yet  it  has  always  been  almolt  the  uni- 
verfal  Opinion  of  all  Nations/hat  tlrj  Divine  Be- 
ing did  principally  communicate  it  felftp  Men 
by  Dreams ;  and  generally  this  Opinion  in  the 
Eaftern  Nations  had  a  very  great  Reputa- 
tion 3  fo  that  it  was  Principally  in  thofe  Na- 
tions, that  they  have  redue'd  the  Interpretati- 
on of  Dreams  into  an  Art,  and  have  laid  down 
Rules  .concerning  it :  and  becaufe  the  People 
of  Ifrael  were  alio  of  the  fame  Opinion,  God 
chofe  to  fend  them  fuch  Dreams,  as  were  tru- 
ly Divine  ,  thus  to  fix  them  to  thefe ;  and 
lo  divert  them  from  that  Vanity,  to  which  o- 
ther  Nations  fuffer'd  themfelves  to  be  carry  ed  by 
thofe  others.  Befide,  the  Church  being  then 
in  her  Infant  State,  the  People  were  more  ea~ 
iily  inftruded  by  Dreams,  than  by  other  ways, 
in  which  there  was  need  of  more  clearnefs  and 
ftrength  of  Underitanding. 

The  Second  Queftion,  concerning  the  Cha- 
racters by  which  we  may  know  Dreams  rruly 
Divine,  from  vain  Delufion ,  is  treated  of 
in  his  Fourth  Chapter,  where  he  would  have  us 

Q  z  firft 


2 1 8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

firft  note,  That  among  thefe  Dreams  that 
proceed  from  the  Operations  of  Angels,  there 
may  alfo  be  found  Divine  ones,  inafmuch 
as  God  does  not  only  permit ,  but  may  com- 
mand the  Impreffion  of  them  ;  but  thofe  he 
properly  calls  Angelical  Dreams,  are  meerly 
fuch  as  neither  the  Formation  of  the  Images 
exceeds  their  Power,  nor  is  the  knowledge  of 
the  things  which  thefe  Images  reprefent  a- 
bove  theif  Intelligence ,  nor  above  the  quick- 
nefs  of  their  Conje&ures  and  Divination,  He 
calls  fome  Dreams,  Divine,  becaufe  whether 
it  were  that  God  employed  Angels  to  con- 
vey them,  or  whether  they  are  immediately 
caus'd  by  himfelf ,  the  things  fignifyed  by 
them  far  exceed  the  Natural  capacity  of  an 
Angels  underftanding  ;  fo  that  it  was  abfolute- 
ly  impoffible  they  fhould  ever  attain  to  the 
Knowledge  of  them,  but  by  a  particular  Reve- 
lation ;  therefore  thofe  Dreams  may  be  repu- 
ted to  come  from  God  ,  whjch  by  what  Mef- 
fenger  foever  they  are  conveyed,  yet  contain 
fuch  things  as  God  only  is  able  to  know  and 
reveal.  As  for  the  Marks  o£  Divine  Dreams,  he 
fays,  it's  certain  that  Mofes ,  and  others  had 
fome  certain  Marks  which  abfolutely  deter- 
min  d  them  to  fet  upon  fuch  A&ions  as  they 
did,  though  others  might  not  know  wherein 
thofe  Marks  did  confift ;  he  obferves  that  God 
Rules  in  the  Underftanding  of  Wife  and  Vertu- 
ous  Men  ;  and  powerfully  inclines  it  to  a  Be- 
lief and  Refolution,  though  it  does  not  fee  in 
the  objed  reafons ,  altogether  proportionate 
to  the  effect  it  feels  in  the  Soul ;  fo  that  the 
extraordinarily  determination  of  the  Under- 
ftanding is  an  evident  Proof  of  the  Divinity 
of  the  Dream, 

The 


or  Fan         Spirits.  229 

The  Third  Queftion  ,  Whether  God 

makes  ufe  of  this  kind  of  D  now  un 

the  DUpenfarion  of  the 
in  hi>  Fifth  Chapter  ,  where  he 
for  thole  Divine  I  to 

gprical  Reprefentation^or  to  convey  lb 
to  Men  in  order  to  lom 
and  extraordinary  Defign,  for   which  there  is 

1  of  Divine  Authority  for  the  undertaking 
and  executing  of  it  3  he  conceives  that  time  is 
wholly  cxpir'd.,  and  thofe  who  pretend  to^  and 
boaft  of  any  fuch,  are  either  Impoftors  y  who 
would  abufe  the  World  by  their  feign'd  Vifi- 
ons^  to  ferve  their  own  private  Intereft.,  or 
Fools,  who  have  their  Brains  difturb'd  by  Hy- 
pochondriacal Vapours ;  and  here  he  delivers 
his  Thoughts  concerning  a  certain  kind  of 
People  of  both  Sexes,  who  both  in  Tola  Wand 
Germany  have  pretended  to  Divine  Vifions  in 
thefe  latter  Days;  he  does  not  accufe  them 
of  Impofture  >  they  having  given  a  fufficient 
Experience  of  their  Piety  y  but  affirms,  That 
in  their  Aftions  they  had  fome  tranfport  of 
Underftanding,  which  proceeded  from  fome 
other  Caufe ,  than  what  was  truly  Divine. 
They  were  Perfons  that  gave  themfelves  ex- 
traordinarily to  the  reading  of  the  Afocalypfe, 
and  the  other  Prophefies;  and  their  Spirits  were 
fo  polTefs'd  with  the  Ideas  of  thofe  things  they 
there  faw,  where  future  Events  were  repreferiT 
ted  to  them  3  that  they  perfwaded  themfelves, 
their  yery  Dreams  y  and  the  things  thi 
gin  d  they  faw  in  thofe  Extafk 
times  fwll  into,,  were  Real  and  Divine  \  ilior.s  j 
and  what  contributed  to  this  be 
they  fuffpr'd  fhemfelves  to  be 

Q 


2  jo  An  Account  of  Genii, 

by  the  hopes  of  thofe,  who  exped  in  due  time, 
a  Profperity  of  the  Church  of  God  on  Earthy 
and  a  terrible  Subverfion  of  all  thofe  States  and 
Powers  which  now  oppofe  the  Eftabliftiment 
of  Chrift's  Kingdom  :  And  as  they  zealoufly 
defired  this,  they  eafily  imagin  d  it  to  be  cer- 
tain and  indubitable;  divers  Texts  of  Scripture 
alfo  having  fome  feeming  appearance  of  fome 
fuch  Promifes  made  to  the  Church  of  Chrift : 
Befide  the  Melancholick  Humour  which  was 
naturally  predominant  in  them,  the  Affli&i- 
oi*s,  Hardships,  and  Anxieties  they  underwent^ 
as  well  from  the  publick  Affairs^  as  their  own 
private  Concerns  made  them  very  ready  to 
receive  all  Impreffions  of  Fancy,  which  might 
fhew  them  any  hope  of  Deliverance  ,  or  any 
mitigation  of  their  Troubles ;  be  it  then  that 
either  they  Dreamt ,  or  that  waking  ,  they 
were  furpriz'd  with  fome  tranfport  of  Fancy, 
in  which  their  Soul  was  perfedly  abftra&ed 
from  the  Body,  and  from  all  Commerce  with 
their  Senfes  (as  this  fometimes  happens  in  Hy- 
pochondriacal Diftempers)  thefe  Apocalypti- 
cal Images  were  thus  put  into  a  violent  moti- 
on, and  fram'd  in  their  Imaginations  thofe 
pretended  Vifions,  which  they  have  fince  re- 
lated to  us ;  though  we  have  feen  ,  in  great 
part,  by  Experience,  that  thofe  Images  which 
they  faw  in  their  pretended  Enthufiafms,  either 
fignified  nothing  at  all,  or  if  they  did ,  yet 
their  vanity  and  falfenefs  have  been  confuted 
by  the  Events. 

He  fabjoyns  here  a  Refle&ion  on  thofe  are 
called  ^uakersy  for  boafting  of  Vifions,  Reve- 
lations ,  Divine  Infpirations ,  extraordinary 
Gifts  of  the  Spirit ,  of  Extafies  and  ftrange 
Tra.ipoimions ;  who  by  their  tremblings  and 

qua:.; 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  231 

quakings  would  reprefent  the  Motions  of  f 
thufiafts  and  Prophets;  and  he  tells  us,  the  S 
rit  of  Chrifl  is  a  Spirit  of  Undemanding  and 
Pru  U  fettled 

and  ■  which  tills  empty  B  ritfa 

Darl  iiantaftical  Imaginations ,  nor  ex- 

pofes  the  true  Religion  to  I  e;htcr  of  its 

nies,  and  to  the  fcandal  of  Sober  and  In- 
telligent Men,  by  its  indecent,  and  unnatural 
Motions. 

As  for  thofe  Dreams  which  may  proceed 
meerly  from  the  Impreflion  and  Operation  of 
els3  both  good  and  bad  ,    he  fays,  he  will 
not  deny  but  there  may  be  yet  foj  im- 

ples  of  that  kind  to  be  leen  ;   and  though  - 
Difpenfation  of  the  Law,  under  which  good 
Angels  were  more  efpccially   Employed   in 
things  relating  to  Religion,  be  now  pafs'd, 
yet  they  continue  ftill  to  be  Minifters  and 
Inftruments  of  Divine  Providence  in  what  re- 
lates to  civil  Life  and  humane  Society,  and 
efpecially  the  Protection  of  the  Faithful ,    and 
the  Ddfence  of  the  Church  of  Chrift.    And  as 
it  is  not  impoflible,    but  the}'  may  fometimes 
appear  to  Men  waking,  fo  it  is  not  incredible 
but  God  may  make  ufe  of  them  ,  from  time  to 
time,  to  convey  to  Men  the  notices  of  fome 
things  by  Dreams  j  he  fays ,  there  are  many 
Examples  of  both  kinds  in  the  Books  of  thofe 
who  have  made  Collections  of  them,  to  which 
Books  he  refers  the  Reader  j  but  gives  us  one 
Inftance  of  Monfieur  Calirnan ,    Chancellor  of 
,  a  Man  of  fingular  Vertue  j    who  be- 
ing nt  y    one  Night,  as  he  lay  afi? 

Lrd  a  Voice  which  call'd  him  b] 
Calignam\  Hereupon  awaking,  and  he. 
more  of  it,  he  imagmd  he  Dreamt,  and  fell 

0.4 


2 1 1  An   Account  of  Genii, 

afleep  again  j.  a  little  after  he  heard  the  fame 
Voice,  calling  him  in  the  fame  manner,  which 
made    a  greater  impreffion  on  him  than  be- 
fore, fo  that  being  awaken' d^he  call'd  his  Wife, 
who  was  with  him  ,   and  told  her  what  had 
happen'd  ;  fo  that  they  both  lay  waking  for 
fome  time,  expe&ing  whether  they  might  hear 
the  Voice  again  ,  at  laft  the  Voice  awaken  d 
him  a  third  time  ,  calling  him  by   his  Name, 
and  advifed  him  to  retire  prefently  out  of  the 
Town,  and  to  remove  his  Family,  for  that  the 
Plague  would   rage  horribly    in  that  place 
within  a  few  Days ;  he  followed  the  direction, 
and  within  a  few  Day?  after  the  Plague  began 
in  the  Town,  and  deftroyed  a  great  number 
of  People.     Now,  the  Author  lays  ,   whether 
the  Plague  came  by  the  Infe&ion  of  the  Air, 
or  by  fome  Infectious  Perfons ,    or  whether 
fome  Sorcerers  and  Witches,  (as they  fay  they 
fometimes  do  )   diffus'd  their  Infectious  Poy- 
fons  in  that  place,  neither  exceeded  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Angels  that  fpake  to  him.    He 
next  relates  a  Dream  as  ftrange  which  hap- 
pened to  Lai'zsJeEowfon,  Prince  of  Covde,  and, 
in  his  Conclufion,  he   fays  ,  there  is  need  of 
great  Circumfpedrion  to  Judge   of  thefe  No- 
cturnal Vifions  ;  if  any  fuch  Dream  induce  us 
to  a  good  Adion,  and  from  whence  there  can 
follow  no  bad  Event,  fuch  a  Dream  ought  not 
to  be  fafpeited  by  us;  but  if  it  prompts  us  to 
evil,  we  ought  abfolutely   to  condemn ,  and 
reject   it ,  as  a  Delufion  of  the  Devil.    So  far 

Mehmftkon,  I.  de  Anima^  writes  concerning 
the  Natijre  of  Dreams,  as  fellow^  I  (hall  not 
follow  the  Ambages  of  Natural  Philofophers, 
Who  {laving  tp  refer  Dreams  of  all  kinds  to 

Natural 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  2  3 5 

Nat  foolifhly  j  but  I  find  four 

is,    which  t. 
be  C  lufcj    the  Natural  and 

immediate    <,  of  them  are  in  view  |    as 

ire  prefentcd  of  thofe  things, 
which  we  mink  on  being  awake;    or  when 
Dreams  infwer  to  certain  Humours ;  a  redun- 
<>r  agitation  of  which  moves  the  Ima- 
gation,  or  Spirits. 

Second  kind  I  call  prefaging  ,  which 
neverthelefs  is  not  Divine,  but  as  by  a  Natural 
temperament^  or  peculiar  property ,  or  by  a 
Natural  Gift,  one  Perfon  is  more  Mufical  than 
another,  or  has  a  greater  Activity  of  Body, &c. 
Co  by  a  Natural  Gift  or  property  ,  many  have 
prefaging  Dreams ,  painting  forth  future  fi- 
vers, as  it  were  by  certain  Allegories.     So 
Tontanus  tells  us ,  That  a  certain  Soldier  at  Ge- 
noa, Dreamt  he  was  devoured  by  a  Serpent, 
wherefore  on  a  Day,  when  the   other  Soldi- 
ers were  put  on  board  Ships  to  Fight  with  the 
Enemy/  he  kept  himfelf  at  home;  but  a  tu- 
mult cafually  arifing  in  the  City,  he  was  kill?d 
by  the  Bail  of  a  fort  of  Canon,  which  we  call 
a  Serpent.     This  kind  of  Dreams  has  not  an 
apparent  caufe  in  the  Motion,  or  Plenty  of  the 
Humonrs,  or  the  firft  Qualities,  as  we  faid  of 
the  firft  kind,  but  there  are  certain  prefaging 
Natures,  call  iCCh* 

k&ASi  x)  ivav  reiCn  {  that  have  frequent 

fignifying Dreams  ;    nor  fhall  I  be  it, 

ny  Men  fhall  contend,  that  the  caufe  of  this 
property  is  the  e  cy  of  the 

as  Aftrologers  v  idle 

of  explaining  and 

lumors. 

The 


254  ^n  Recount  of  Genii, 

The  Third  kind  is  Divine,  which  God  fends 
into  Minds,  either  by  himfelf,  or  by  Angels ; 
fuch  as  the  Scriptures  tell  us  were  divinely 
fent  ,  and  thefe  only  are  to  be  rely'd  on  , 
as  certain,  the  others  being  all  fallacious. 

The  Fourth  kind  is  Diabolical  ^  as  when 
Witches  (as  it  feems  to  them  )  are  prefent  at 
Feafts  and  Sports ,  when  it  has  been  often 
known  by  experience,  ,  that  they  never  went 
to  them,  but  as  they  lay  Sleeping,  fignified 
by  their  Geftures  and  Cries,  that  they  Dream'd 
of  Feafting  and  Dancing.  Of  this  kind  have 
been  many  Superftitious  Dreamers  of  Former 
Ages,  and  in  thefe  our  Times  we  have  heard 
of  many  Fanatical  Dreams  of  Anabaptifts , 
Commanding  Crimes ,  and  Confirming  Er- 
rors ;  which  are  eafily  judged  of  by  Pious 
and  Prudent  Perfons. 

Sennertus  3  in  Epit.  V.hyf.  I.  7.  c.  9.  writes 
thus.  To  Supernatural  Dreams  we  refer  all  thofe 
which  are  fent  us  from  Superiour  Caufes,  and 
External  to  us,  be  they  from  God,  Angels  or 
Devils.  Thofe  that  are  fent  from  God  and 
Good  Angels,  are  efpecially  called  Divine, 
whereof  there  are  fome  inftances  in  the  Scri- 
ptures :  for  God  is  wont  either  to  prefent  new 
Species  to  Men  in  Dreams ,  or ,  fo  to  order 
and  conjoyn  thofe  that  are  in  Men  before, 
that  they  are  figns  of  future  things ;  and  Angels 
are  wont  to  ftir  up  and  aptly  difpofe  thofe 
Species,  Spirits  and  Humours  that  are  in  the 
Body  ,  that  they  admonifh  Men  of  good 
and  neceffary  things.  And  Diabolical  Dreams 
are  caufed  the  fame  way,  as  by  Angels,  but 
for  a  different  end,  viz?  the  Deftruction  of 
Men. 

From 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  135 

From  thcfc  things  it  appears  how  even  ab- 
fent  and  future  thir,  be  preferred  to  us 

by  our  Dreams.  is  think  many 

Dreams  may  be  itfenrtl  tot  md  Dx- 

monsy  which  they  think  attend  all  particular 
Pcrf  >n>,  and  conclude,  that  they  admonifii 
them  or  many  things;  but  our  Divines  much 
more  rightly  refer  them  to  Angels,  which 
attend  each  Man.  To  which  we  may  add 
what  TertuU.  writes,  vw.  The  gift  of  Divine  L.de Anim. 
Dreams  defcends  ev'n  on  Prophane  Perfons, 
God  equally  affording  Rain  and  Sunfliine  on 
the  Juft  and  Unjuft  :  Since  ev'n  Nebuchadnezzar 
had  a  Dream  lent  him  by  God.  And  as  the 
ur  of  God  reaches  even  the  Pagans,  (6  the 
temptation  of  the  Devil  does  the  Saints,  from 
whom  he  is  never  abfent,  that  he  may  fteal 
upon  them  unawares,  when  a  Sleep,  if  he 
cannot  prevail  with  them  when  awake. 

He  there  further  Philofophizes  concerning 
Dreams,  as  follows. 

Becaufe  in  Dreaming  Perfons  the  Fancy  is 
employed,  and  fome  Fantafm  is  prefented  to 
it,  and  we  do  not  Dream  only  of  thofe  things 
which  we  have  done  in  the  Day,  or  of  thofe 
things  which  lye  hid  in  the  Body,  but  alfo  of 
thofe  things  which  are  at  a  vaft  diftance  from 
us,  and  which  we  have  neither  feen,  heard, 
nor  perceived  by  any  Senfe;  nay,  of  thofe 
things  which  are  not  yet  in  being,  but  to  come 
afterwards ,  its  queried  how  the  Images  of 
things  abfe-  I   never    perceived  by  the 

ies,  and  which  are  nor  vet  in   King.,  can 
be   1  .  i  to  th  :v  ?   The 

fuppofe  that  In  which  fly    to  and   fro, 

Air,  are  the  caufes  of  this 
chLn?.  \  Antw.  11.    dc 

the 


i  5  6  An  Account  of  Genii , 

thofe  Images,  but  contends  there  are  certain 
Motions,  which  exercife  us  inftead  of  Images  > 
and  that  thofe  Motions  proceed  from  certain 
beginings  of  thofe  things ,  which  are  fhortly 
after  to  be  faid,  or  done  by  us,  the  Air  firft 
chang'd,  and  then  being  convey d  through  the 
paffages  of  the  Ears  and  Noftrils  to  the  Hearty 
caufe,  that  we  feem  to  foreknow  the  events 
of  future  things ;  and  thefe  motions  can- 
not at  any  time,  bring  a  more  ample  fenfe  of 
themfelves,  than  in  the  Night.  But  how  can 
there  be  motions  of  things  that  are  not  yet  in 
being  ?  or  how  can  things  abfent  Fifty,,  or  an 
Hundred  Miles  prefently  affect  the  "Air?  or 
why  do  not  thofe  Motions  affed  all  Perfons 
indifferenly  afleep  in  their  way  ,  but  only 
thofe  whom  it  concerns  to  know  that  thing  ? 
We  refer  all  thofe  Dreams  which  we  have  con- 
cerning things^  that  we  never  perceived  before 
by  Senfe,  or  from  caufes  that  do  not  lye  hid 
in  our  Body,  to  a  Divine  operation. 
JL.&  Dku  j5Wm7;?;iPhilofophizes  of  Supernatual  Dreams 
thus:  Supernatural  Dreams  are  in  the  middle  be- 
twixt Divine  and  Natural;  in  regard  their  caufes 
are  neither  referr'd  immediately  to  God,  nor  to 
the  malignity  of  evil  Humours,  on  which  the 
rife  of  Natural  Dreams  depends;  but  to  our 
Soul,  which  is  awake,  the  Body  fleeping;  and 
which  being  ftirr'd  up  by  a  certain  Superna- 
tural Rapt,  especially  the  good  Genius  Infpiring, 
feprelents  to  us  by  Dreams  and  Vifions,  many 
FantafmSj  which,  for  the  moll  part,  Prefcge 
ibmewhat  certain ,  the  certitude  of  which  is 
commonly  known  by  the  event  of  things; 
many  Inftances  of  thofe  Dreams  occur,  where 
it-  has  oftem  feemed  to  Perfons  in  Dreams, 
y  fill  into  feme  Difeafe,  or  recover  of 

it. 


or  Familiar  Spirits  237 

it,  to  which  Vifions  the  Event  afterwai 

fwer'd  to  all  things,  chat  they  had  fee 
fore  in  I  were  not  de- 

fied ,  as  Diabolical  D  are 

wont  to  be  (ought  tor.     Arnold* 
Dreamt  ,  That  he  was  bit  in  the  loot  by  a 
Black  Cat  ,  the  next  Day  there  broke  out  in 
that  part  ot   his]    0       C     xerous  and  Mali 
nam  Ulcer.     S  n. 

So  Siwlerus  tells  us  ,    in  the  Life  of  ( 
That  Gefner  on  a  Night  Dreamt,    that  he  was 
bit  by  a  Serpent,  and  the  next  Morning  faid, 
that  he  fliould  be  with  a  PctlilcntialC 

buncle  :  a  few  Days  after  a  Carbuncle  appeared 
in  his  left  Pap  ,  five  Days  before  he  dyed. 

To  procceed  now  to  give  fome  farther  In- 
ftances  of  Dreams  from  other  Authors.  Fra- 
cajlorius  tells  US,  That  Marcus  Antomus  Flamh: 
being  at  Genoa ,  and  fomewhat  indifpofed  in 
his  Health,  borrow'd  a  Book  of  a  Friend,  to 
divert  him  ;  which  having  read  fome  Days, 
he  chanc  d  to  leave  it  on  a  Couch,  with  fome 
other  Books,  and  that  when  the  Perfon  thar 
lent  it,  came  for  it,  it  could  by  no  means  be 
found.  In  the  Night  time  he  faW  ,  in  his 
Dream,  a  Maid  Servant  of  the  Houfe,  take  the 
Book  from  the  Couch,  and  as  flie  was  laying 
it  on  a  Table,  the  Book  chane'd  to  fall  on 
the  Ground ,  and  one  fide  of  the  Cover  was 
broken,  and  the  Maid  hid  it,  for  fear,  in  a  fe- 
cret  place.  Flamhuns  riling  in  the  Morning, 
and  remembring  his  Dream  ,  fought  for  the 
Book  and  found  it  in  that  place,  and  charging 
the  Maid  Servant  with  what  was  done,  fhe 
confefs'd  that  all  pafs'd  as  1. 


3  8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Celfus  Mancinim  of  Ravenna,  has  writ  an  In- 
genious Tra&,  intitl'd,  De  Somniis>  &  Synefi  per 
Somnia,  viz.  of  Dreams,  and  a  fagacious  per- 
ception of  things  by  Dreams  ,  in  which  he  has 
inierted   the  Dream  before  fet  down.    In  his 
Work  he  has  fet  forth  the  Opinions  of  the  moft 
Famous  PhiJofophers  concerning  the  Caufes  of 
Dreams ;  and  though  he  allows  the  Divine  and 
Angelical  Dreams  recorded  in  the  Scriptures, 
yet  for  all  other  wonderful  Dreams,  he  thinks 
a  reafonmay  be  rendred  of  them  according  to 
the  Dodxine   of    Jriftotk ,     viz.   as  cafually 
hapning.    He  gives  Inftances  of  many  ftrange 
Dreams,  and  among  others  of  that  of  Flamini- 
us>  and  explains  them  all  according  to  Arifio- 
ties  Do&rine.    In  his  19th  Chapter  ,  he  fays, 
Its  known  that  thofe  who  apply  themfelves  to 
Philofophy,  and  other  Arts  and  Sciences ,  in 
their  fleep,  by  the  help  of  a  Powerful  Imagi- 
nation, a  recent   exercife  ,    and  a  ftrong  At- 
tention of  Mind,  Difcourfe,  find  out  and  do 
many  things  which  they  had  not  done ,  nor 
were  able  to  find  out,  waking ;  and  he  fays^ 
Flawinius  faw  thofe  things  in  his  Dream  ,    be- 
caufe  being  troubl'd  about  the  Book  he  had 
borrowed,  and  much  concern'd,  that  he  could 
not  reftore  it ,    he  began  to  think  where  the 
Book  might  be  found  ;    he  did  not  Judge  it 
flol'n,  but  feeing  other  Books  removed  from 
one  place  to  another,  viz»  from  the  Couch  to 
the  Table,  he  began  to  confider  who  had  done 
it  •  as  he  thought  of  this ,  no  one  could  oc- 
curr  to  him  more  readily ,  nor  more  fufps- 
ded  than  the  Maid  Servant ,  that    conftantly 
attended  him.      That   Servant  was  doubtlefs 
free  from  any  Sufpicion  of  Theft;    for  the 
Book  was  not  likely  to  yield  her  much  Money, 

or 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  239 

or  to  be  of  any  ufe  to  her ;  the  he  mull 

conclude  within  himfelf,  that  in  Cfl  the 

Book^  fronj  the  Couch  to  the  Table,  that  Book 
Ctfuaily  fell  tnd  broke  its  cover;  and  becaufe 
Peo!  .nt  to  hide  their  Faults,  or  at 

lead  to  lcffen  them  by  fome  excufe  ,  thatfim- 
ple  Maid  tearing  chiding,  or  beating,  or 
lelt  Ionic  ill  might  follow,  wifely  to  avoid  all, 
hid  the  Book  in  the  moft  fecret  place  fhe  could, 
v  Chefl,  or  fome  like  place.  Having 
ourfs'd  thefe  things  by  Night,  in  his  deep,  and 
upon  waking  in  the  Morning,  remembring  his 
Dream,  he  try'd  whether  it  were  true  ,  and 
found  all  things  exa&ly  to  anfwer  his  Dream, 
He  explains  other  ftrange  Dreams  after  the 
fame  manner,  according  to  Arijtattts  Opinion, 
as  cafually  hapning  ,  by  a  lucky  hit  of  the 
Mind,  in  its  improv'd  way  of  reafoning  in  our 
Sleep. 

But  I  doubt  this  way  of  explaining  will  not 
do  in  all  Cafes  ,    but  we  mull  often  have  re- 
courfc  to  the  Direction  of  fome  Superior  In- 
.  telligences. 

Mr.  Cotton  Mather  ,     in    his  Ecclcjiafiicdl  Hi-  L 
fiory   cf  New  England,    writes    thus,  Within  a  Exa'mpU 
Fortnight   of  my  writing  this,  a    Phyfician,  is. 
who  fojourned  within  a  Furlong  of  my  Houfe, 
for  three  Nights  together,  was  miferably  di- 
fturbed  with  Dreams  of  his  being   Drown'd ; 
on  the  third  of  thefe  Nights  his  Dreams    were 
fo  troublefome,  that  he  was  caft  into  extream 
Sweats,  by  ftrugling  under  the  imaginary  Wa- 
ters :  With  the  Sweats  yet  upon  him,  he  came 
down  from  his  Chamber,  telling   the  People 
of  the  Family  what   it  was  that  had   fo  dif- 
compofed  him.     Immediately  there  came  in 
two  Friends,  that  asked  him  to  go  a  little  way 

with 


240  An  Account  of  Genii, 

with  them,  in  a  Boat,  upon  the  Water:  he 
was,  at  firft,  afraid  of  gratifying  them  in  it, 
but  being  very  calm  Weather,  he  recolleded 
himfelf,  why  ftiould  I  mind  my  Dreams,  or 
diftruft  Divine  Providence  ?  he  went  with 
them,  and  before  Nighty  by  a  Thunder  Storm 
fuddenly  coming  up  ,  they  were  all  three 
Drown  d.  Mr.  Mather  fays,  he  enquired  into 
the  truth  of  this  Relation,  juft  as  he  writ  it, 
and  could  affert  it. 

So  again,  Camerarim  tells  us  in  the  Life  of 
Melancthon,  that  Gulielmus  Nejfenus,  on  a  Day 
after  Dinner,  in  a  gentle  Sleep  he  had,  Dreamt 
that  he  was  paffing  a  River  in  a  Fifher  Boat, 
(as  he  ufually  did  for  his  Diverfion  )  and  that 
the  Boat  ftriking  on  the  Trunk  of  a  Tree, 
was  overturned,  and  he  was  Drowned.  This 
Dream  he  told  to  Philip  Melan&hon,  who  then 
cafually  came  to  fee  him,  deriding  withal  the 
Vanity  of  Dreams;  but  that  fame  Evening 
what  he  had  Dreamt  came  to  pafs. 

Mr.  William  Smythies  \  Curate  of  St.  Giles's 
Criplegate,  An.  1698,  publifhed  an  account  of 
the  Robbery  and  Murther  of  John  Stcckden , 
Victualler,  in  Grub-fireet,  within  the  faid  Parifh, 
and  of  the  Difcovery  of  the  Murtherers,  by 
feveral  Dreams  of  Elizabeth,  the  Wife  of  Tho- 
mas Greenwood,  a  Neighbour  to  the  &id Stockden: 
An  Abftrad  of  which  Account,  I  give  you  as 
follows. 

Mr.  Smithies,  firft  telling  us,  that  none  can 
doubt  but  great  Difcoveries  have  been  made 
by  Dreams,  who  read  the  Life  of  Sir  Htnry 
Wotton ;  and  our  Englijh  Chronicles  (  particu- 
larly the  Murther  of  Waters,  and  the  Difco- 
very of  it  by  a  Dream,  recorded  by  Sir  Pochard 
Baker,   in  his  Chapter  of  Cafuaities,  in   the 

Reign 


or  familiar  Spirits.  uri 

Reign  of  Jama  the  Firft  )   and  other  iiiito- 
ries;    he   wy*j    Ms.  Stockden  was   Kobb'd 
Murthered  by  three  Men,  in  his  own  Hou 
on   the    2;./   day  of    December,    1695-.    about 
Midnight.     A   little  after  the  Mu:\  .ere 

came  a  Woman  into  the  Street,  and  UjuL  I 
believed  one  MspurJ  to  be  one  of  the  Mur- 
therers,  btcaufe  fhe  was  informed  he  wa>  I iifl 
of  Mony,  both  Silver  and  Gold  ;  upon  which 
there  was  a  Warrant  agaiofl  him;  but  he  could 
not  be  found.  Soon  alter  this  Stockden  appeard 
to  EUzs.ibeth  Greenwood,  in  a  Dream,  and  fhew'd 
her  an  Houfe  in  Tbames-jheet,  near  the  George 
and  told  her,  that  one  of  the  Murtherers  was 
there  j  fhe  went  the  next  Mornings  and  took 
one  Mary  Buggaf,  an  Honeft  Woman,  who 
lived  near  her,  to  go  with  her  to  the  Place  to 
which  her  Dream  directed  ,    and  asking  for 

nardy  was  inform'd  that  he  Lodg'd  there, 
but  was  gone  abroad.  After  that  Stockden 
foon  appeared  again  to  Mrs.  Greenwood,  and 
then  reprefenting  Maynard's  Face,  with  a  flat 
Mole  on  the  fide  of  his  Nofe  (  whom  fhe  had 
never  feen)  fignified  to  her,  that  a  i 
muft  take  him,  and  that  he  ftiould  be  carried 
to  Newgate  in  a  Coach.  Upon  enquiry  they 
found  out  one  of  that  Trade,  who  was  his 
great  Intimate,  and  who,  for  a  reward  of  Ten 
Pounds,  promifed  him  on  his  Taking,  under- 
took it,  and  effeded  it.  He  fem  to  M*jn<  rd 
to  meet  him,,  upon  extraordinary  Buftnefs,  at 
a  Publick  Houfe  ,  near  Hockley  in  the  HJc, 
where  he  Played  with  him    till   a  Conftable 

e,  who  apprehended  him,  and  carried  him 
before  a  Magistrate,  tfho  Commuted  him  to 

ikhcr  in    a 

R 


i^i  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Mayn.rd .  being  in  Prifon,  confeft  the  hor- 
rid Fad,  and  difcover'd  his  Accomplices;  who 
were  one  Marjl),  Bevel  and  Mercer,  and  faid, 
that  Marjh  was  the  fetter  on,  being  a  near 
Neighbour  to  Stockden,  who  knew  he  was  well 
furnifhed  with  Mony  and  Plate;  and  though 
Marjh  were  not  prelent  at  the  Robbery,,  yet 
he  met  to  have  a  fhare  of  the  Booty.  M»rjh 
knowing  or  fufpe&ing  that  Majmrd  had  dif- 
coverd  him.,  left  his  Habitation.  Stockden  ap- 
peared icon  after  to  Mrs.  Greenwood,  and  feem'd 
by  his  Countenance  to  be  difpleas'd :  he  car- 
ried her  to  an  Houfe  in  Old-ftreet,  where  Ihe 
had  never  been,  and  fliew'd  her  a  pair  of 
Stairs,  and  told  her  that  one  of  the  Men 
Lodg  d  there  ;  the  next  Morning  (he  took 
AUr]  Buggas  with  her  to  the  Houfe,,  accord- 
ing to  the  direction  of  the  Dream,,  where  fhe 
asked  a  Woman,  if  one  Marjh  did  not  Lodge 
there  ?  to  which  the  Woman  replyed  that  he 
often  came  thither.  This  Marjh  was  taken 
foon  after  in  another  place. 

Afrer  this  Mrs.  Greenwood  Dreamt  that 
Stockden  carried  Her  over  the  Bridge,  up  the 
Bwovgh,  and  into  a  Yard,  where  fhe  faw 
Bevil,  the  third  Criminal  ( whom  flie  had 
never  Cctn  before )  and  his  Wife :  upon  her 
telling  this  Dream.,  it  was  believed  that  it  was 
one  of  the  Prifon  Yards ;  and  thereupon  fhe 
went  with  Mrs.  Footman  (  who  was  Stockden  s 
Xinfvvoman  and  Houfe  keeper,  and  wasGaggd 
in  his  Houfe  when  he  was  Murthered  )  to  the 

,  Mtljkalfea  ,  where  they  enquired  for  Bevil, 
and  were  inform5 d,  that  he  was  lately  brought 
rhither  for  Coining,  and  that  he  was  taken 
near  the  Banijid-,  according  to  a  Dream  which 

_    M:s.  G%hnwQcd  had  before  of  his  being  there; 

hey 


or  Familiar  Spit  its.  24  j 

they  defired  him,  an  nj, 

he    (aid    co  rman  ,     Do  nt  ? 

fhe  reply cd j  /  do  not;    whereupon  he 

from  than  I    Mrs.  Greenwood  then  told  Mrs, 

Sis  lure   of  his  b  Man, 

whom  1;  ill  her  Sleep.     They  then  wej 

into  the  Cellar,  where  Mrs,  a 

lufty  Woman,  and  privately  (aid  to  Mrs, 

t,  that's  Bevits  Wife  whom  I  few  in  my 
Sleep  :  they   defired  that  Bevil  might  come  to 
them,  and  tirft  put  on  his  Periwig,  vvhi 
not  on  the   time  before ;    the   lufty  Woman 
faid,  why  fhould  you  fpeak  with  my  Husband 
again,  lince  you  laid  you  did  not  know  him  ? 
he  came  the   fecond  time,    and   faid,   Do 
know   nt  mow  ?  Mrs.  Footman  reply  cd,    No  ;  but 
it  proceeded  from  a  iudden  Fear,  that  foil 
Mifchief  might  be  done  to  her,  who  had  very 
narrowly  efcaped  Death  from  him  when  (he 
was  Gaggd ;  and   as  foon  as   fhe  was  out  of 
the   Cellar,  fhe  told  Mrs.  Greenwood,  that  fhe 
then  remembred  him  to  be  the  Man.    l^hey 
went  foon  after  to  the   Clerk  of  the  Peace, 
and  procured  his  removal   to  Nnrgate,  where 
he  confeft  the  Fa#,  and  faid,  To  the  G 
Heart,  I  Kill  J  him. 

Mrs.  Greenwood    did  not  Dream  any  thing 
cone  Mercer  j  who  was  a  Party  concern  d, 

but  would  not  confent  to  the  Murdu  1  ct- 

den,  and  preferved  Mrs.  Footman's  Life  j  nor  I 
there  been  any  difcovery  of  him  fince,  but  he 
Efcaped,  and   the  three  others  were  Ran 

After  the  Murtherers  were  taken  Mrs. f 
I  Dreamt  th  came  to  her  in 

Street,  and  faid,  I 
(f   H 

k  .  fhe  has  been  a 
R  1 


^44  ^n  Account  of  Genii, 

from  thofe  Frights,  which  had  much  Tormen- 
ted her,  and  caufed  an  alteration  confiderable 
in  her  Countenance. 

This  Relation  is  Certified  by  the  Lord  Bifiop 
tf  Gloueefter,  who,  with  the  then  Dean  of  York, 
the  Mafier  of  the  Chart  erhonfe  ,  and  Dr.  Alix, 
had  the  Particulars  of  the  foregoing  Narra- 
tive, from  Mrs.  Greenwood  and  Mrs.  Buggas. 

When  Dr.  Harvey  ( who  was  afterwards 
Fellow  of  the  College  of  Vhyficians  in  London  ) 
being  a  Young  Man,  went  to  Travel  towards 
Tadua,  he  went  to  Dover,  with  feveral  others, 
and  fhew'd  his  Pafs,  as  the  reft  did,  to  the 
Governour  there.  The  Governour  told  him, 
that  he  mull  not  go,  but  he  muft  keep  him 
Prifoner;  the  Do&or  defired  to  know  for 
what  reafon,  how  he  had  Tranfgrefs'd ;  he 
faid,  it  was  his  will  to  have  itfo;  the  Pacquet 
Boat  hoifted  Sail  in  the  Evening  (  which  was 
very  Clear  )  and  the  Do&or's  Companions  in 
•  it.  There  enfued  a  terrible  Storm ,  and  the 
Pacquet  Boat,  and  ail  the  Paffengers  were 
Caii  away.  The  next  day  the  fad  News  was 
brought  to  Dover,  the  Do&or  was  unknown 
to  the  Governour  ,  but  by  Name  and  Face  j 
but  the  Night  before  the  Governour  had  a 
perfect  Vifion,  in  a  Dream,  of  Dr.  Harvey, 
who  came  to  pafs  over  to  Calais  ;  and  that  he 
had  a  warning  to  flop  him.  This  the  Gover- 
nour told  the  Do6ior  the  next  day,  and  the 
Doctor  told  this  Story  to  feveral  of  his  Ac- 
quaintance here  m  London.  This  Relation  I 
took  from  Mr.  Aubreys  Mifcellanies  :  and  I 
.  think  it  hard  (  I  may  fay  impoffible  )  to  ac- 
count for  this  Dream,  and  that  of  Monlieur 
Chignon,  before  fct  down,  by  any  occult  way 


of  improy'd  Reasoning  in  our  Sleep 


Claud' 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  24$ 

Je  Ttffer*  I        ted  ail  Hi 

1  j7j\  where  he  wi  i 

|  one  of  the  (  I 
nee,  Dreamt  that  her  Husband 
•jcuted,  illy  was,  in  the  Ci: 

•  her  Awaking;  found  her  Hand 
io  ftiffj  that  (nc  could  not  ply  it,  and  in  it  I 

of  her  Husband  reprefentcd,  with 

his  (  ut  off,    the  faid  Image  being  all 

j  this  Image  having  been  feen  by  many 

e,  it  not  being  above  20  Years 

iince  the  thing  happen'd. 

>hl.  tells  us,  That  an  Ingenious  Gen.  Dier. 
S   rang  Man,  who  lived  with  him,  he  having  '• *■  c*lfi 
the  care  of  his  Education,  faw,  in  his  Dream, 
his  Mother  carried  in  a  Funeral,  to  be  Interr'd  j 
whereupon  he  fell  into   great  Sighs  and  I  a- 
mentations,  whom  Alexander  caufed  to  be  a- 
ken'd,  and  then  a^k'd   him  why   he  fo  La- 
mented ?  he  anfweredj  his  Mother  was  De 
and   in  his  Sleep,  he   favv  her  carrying  to  be 
,  Bur  ndcr  obferved  the  day  and  time 

that  this    Vifion  happen  d  ;  a  little  while  after, 
a  Meffenger  came  to  him  with  the  News  of 
•-  his  Mother's  Death  ;  of  whom  asking  the  day, 
it  happened  he  found  (he  died  the   fame  d 
that  the  Vifion  was  feen.    By  which  Example, 
belays,  with  others  of  the  like  kind,  we  are 
prompted  to  believe  that  God  has  given  us  a 
Divinatory  Spirit,   ar.i  Prophetick  Foref" 
of  future  things,  in  our  Dreams. 
.  writes  thu. 
,  a  Senator  of  Venice,  Friend, 

while   he  was  Prator  in  Dslmatia,  faw  in  his c*  23> 
Dream,  one  of  his  Brothers,  whom  he  much 
lov W  ,  Embrace  him,  and  bid   him  farewel, 
be,  ;  was  going  to  the  other  World. 

R  I 


24S  An  Account  of  Genii, 

'  Jor.n.  Maria  having  followed  him  a  little 
way  Weeping,  awak'd  all  in  Tears,  and  was 
in  a  great  fear  for  his  Brother  at  Venice*  On 
the  third  day  Letters  were  brought  him  from 
home,  fignifying  that  his  Brother  Donatm 
(  for  that  was  his  Name  )  died  on  that  night 
and  hour,  after  he  had  lain  three  days  Sick  of 
a  Peftilential  Fever.  This  he  related  to  me 
more  than  once,  with  Tears  in  his  Eyes. 

The  fame  Author  writes  in  the  next  Para- 
graph, That  Ludcvicm  Matin*  his  Countryman, 
h^d  a  Soldier  Sleeping  in  a  Chamber,  who 
on  a  certain  Night  cry'd  out  in  his  Sleep,  his 
Mafter  ask'd  him,  What  ayl'd  him  ?  he  an- 
fwered  ,  That  he  Dreamt  he  had  received  a 
great  Wound  in  the  Head,  and  that  he  was 
upon  Dying  ,  and  therefore  he  awak'd  in  a 
Fright ;  his  Mafter,  who  Loved  him,  com- 
manded him  not  to  ftir  out  of  Doors:  mean 
while,his  Companions,  the  next  day,had  a  mind 
to  vifit  the  Enemy  ;  he  forgetting  his  Dream, 
goes  forth  with  them  j  the  Enemy  appearing, 
his  Companions  Fled,  and  he  was  Slain,  his 
Head  being  Cloven  afunder. 

He  there  tells  us  alfo,  That  Mr  Anfon.Taard- 
fcr  was  admonifhed  by  a  Dream,wherein  he  faw 
himfelf  a  Drowning,  whereupon  he  refolved 
not  to  go  a  Swimming  that  day,  but  forgeting 
his  Dream,  and  returning  to  his  Swimming, 
he  was  Drownd. 

S.  At* ft  in  tells  us, That  one  ?r<efi*ntim defired 
a  Solution  of  a  Doubt  of  a  Philofopher , 
which  he  refufed  to  give  him ;  the  night  fol- 
lowing Vrtflantim  being  awake,  law  this  Phi- 
lofopher ftand  by,  and  folve  the  Doubt,  and 
prefently  to  go  away.  Traftantius  meeting  him 
the  next  day,  ask'd  him,  why  having  refufed 

to 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  :  \y 

to  folvc  the  Qucftionthe  day  before,  he  came 
to  him    at  midnight,  c(  his  own  accoi  I 
Solv  '  lilofopher  rcply'd, 

m  I  jctmd  tc  do 

0    JON. 

in  his  Extrcitatlms  on  T  fa  ;,  £Xcr.  c.  *<• 

5  as  thefe  happen,  for  that  tl 

fon  that  Dreams  reprefentingto-himfeif  fuch  a 
ivours  to  produce  a  fenfe  of  things 
not  I  i  the  authority  of  that  Man,  or  the 

the  has  of  him;  hence,  fbmetmies,  they 
e  Rich  Conceptions,  which  are  owing,  not 
to  tl  es,  but  to  tht  reputation  of  Co  gr 

a   Man.     Wife  very  well   knew  this, 

who  commands  tnat   our  Mind  be  raifed 
fome  Man  of  great  Repute,  which  we  r 
propofe  to  our  lelves  to  be  Imitated,  and  n 
hear  and  behold  him  as  prcfent :  Propofe 
fe!f,  lays  he,  what  Socrates,  or  Zeno  would  ft* 
V.     Encbrli  c  j. 
lie  adds  beneath;    That  Sagacious  Vertue 
which  exerts  it  fclf  in  Man,  freely  difcover* 
it  felf  by  an  Inftincfrul  Impetus,    and  I  h 
often    perceived   in  my   Sleep,    what  exactly 
:he  next  day  :  So  when  I  havegenp 
to   Sleep   with   a   fixed   thought  on  a  Pcrfon 
Sick,  a  meet  Remedy  has  been  rcprefented  to 
mc  in  my  Dream,  which  nicely  weighing  in 
my  Judgment  the  next  morning,  I  have  thought 
it  Excellent,  and  given  it   with  great  Succefs. 
I  had  read  the  fame  had  happen'd  to  Hippocrates 
and  Galen ,    bat  doubted  of  its  Truth;   but  I 
have  found  ]>v  my  own  experience  that  a  Na- 
ture prone  to  a  Buhnefs,  finds  molt  compen- 
dious   ways   for  «it,  which  others  fcarce  trpr3 
attain  j     ;.  fwerva;    as    Ttolomj     fa 

j. 

R  4 


248  An  Account  of  Genii , 


Galen  tells  us,  That  Women  while  they  are 
with  Child,  often  fee  their  Childrens  For* 
tunes  in  their  Sleeps  and  that  Cypfalts,  and  Pe- 
ricles began  to  be  formidable  to  Greece,  from 
the  Womb,  Here  Cardan  adds,  The  Soul  feems 
then  to  be  moft  pure,  as  it  newly  comes  from 
Heaven,  and  to  forefee  and  (hew  future 
things  to  Parents. 

In  the  Life  of  the  late  Sir  Henry  Wotton,  we 
find  an  account  of  a  Dream   of  his  Father 
Thomas  JVotton,  Efq;  as  follows.     A  little  be- 
fore his  Death,  he  Dreamt,  that  the  Univer- 
fity of  Oxford  was  Robb'd  by  Townfmen,  and 
poor  Scholars,  ajid  that  the  Number  was  Five; 
and  being  that  day  to  write  to  his  Son  Henry 
at  Oxford  ;  he  thought  it  worth  fo  much  pains, 
as  by  a  Toftfcrip  to  his  Letter,  to  make  a  flight 
enquiry  of  it.     The  Letter  was  writ  out  of 
Kent,   and  came  to  his  Sons  hands  the  very 
morning  after  the  night,  in  which  the  Rob- 
bery was  committed;  for  the  Dream  was  true^ 
and  the  Circumftances,  tho'  not  in  the  exa& 
time ;  and  when  the  City  and  Univerfity  were 
both  in  a  perplext  Inqueft  of   the  Thieves; 
then  did  Sir  Htnry  Wottm  fliew  his  Fathers  Let- 
ter; and  by  it,  fuch  light  was  given  to  this 
work  of  darknefs,   that  the  Five  Guilty  Per- 
fcns   were  prefently   Difccvered   and  appre- 
hended,  without  putting  the  Univerfity  to 
fo  much  trouble.,  as  the  Calling  of  a  Figuer. 

We  are  alfo  tcld  in  the  next  Paragraph,  That 
the  faid  Thomas  JVottcn,  Efq;  and  his  Uncle 
TSlchoUs  Wcttm^  who  was  Dean  of  Canterbury, 
both  fcrefaw  and  foretold  the  days  of  their 
Peaths. 

Selnec- 


or  Ftimiiur  Spirits.  249 

Selneecerus  tells  us  in  his  Calendar ,  concerni: 
Cbrijlun  Ring  of  Dtnm ark yT\\nt  he  foretold  his 
Death,  both  to  his  Chaplain  M.  Paul  us  Novio- 
tsj   and  to  D.  Cornelius  his  Phyfician.      / 
Scutellaria ,    a    Famous    Allronomer  of 
Phvlician  to  the  Emperour  Rodolphus 
the  Second,  had  a  foreknowledge  of  his  Death 
eight  days  before  it  happened,  and  affirm'd  for 
certain,  he  fhould  Die  on  the  10th  of  Decern* 
An.  IJ89.  That  Famous  Aftronomer  Ltmardus 
Tbur  tainly  foreknew  the  day  of  his  death, 

made  his  Will,  and  commanded  his  Landlord 
that  he  fhould  Bury  him  by  the  fide  of  Albert  us 
Magnus,  which  was  done.  He  Died  the  9th  of 
July,  An.  1  j96.iThere  is  at  Rome  this  Monument. 

To  Seraphinus  Odu(5Hus  Strancionieus,  F- 
mous  Phyfician  ,  a  mofi  Ingenious  Prophet,  and  a 
Man  skilled  in  all  manner  of  Learning  *,  who  being 
feized  with  a  vehement  Fever,  foreknew,  and  moji 
cenfiantly  foretold  the  day  jsnd  Hour  of  his  Death. 
Theophilus  his  Son  creeled  this  Monument :  he  Died 
>  the  9th  of  the  Calends  of  Sept.  An.  1 J  5  8.  having 
Lived  J4  Tears,  9  Months  end  22  Days. 

This  I  take  from  Kormannus,  L.  de  Mirac.Mort* 
t  9.  c.  102.  who  in  the  faid  Book,  and  the 
fame  part.  c.  1 64.  writes  as  follows,  concerning 
Trefging  Dreams.      That   Dreams  fometimes 
prefage  Death,  many  examples  teftify.     That 
of  King  Pharaohs  Baker,    Gen.   c   4.     The 
Dream  of  Imams  ScyUa  the  Roman.  The  Dream 
of  Calpbumia,  the  Wife  of  Julius  Cafr.      The 
Dream  of  Cicero,  in  Valerius.    The  Dream  of 
I  e  Great,  in  the  fame.    The  Dream 
of  Simcnides.    The  Dream  of  Crejfits,  King  of 
a.    The  Dream  of  the  Arcadian  in  Megaraj 
in  the  fame,    The  Dream  of  Flav.  Valerius,  of 

Marcian 


2*5:0  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Martian  the  Emperor.  The  Dream  of  Eliza- 
beth de  VArche,  the  Mother  of  the  Pucelle  of 
Orlennce.  The  Dream  of  Poljcarpe.  The  Dream 
of  the  Scholar  of  Pavia.  All  which  M.  Ancer- 
mm  Juliunus,  has  learnedly  compiled  in  his 
Book  of  Dreams  and  noBwnal  Vijions. 

An  ancient  Gentleman,  now  living  in 
London,  has  told  me  ,  That  many  Years  fince 
he  had  occafion  to  make  a  Journey  into  the 
North,'  and  that  being  a  Bed  in  his  Inn,  the 
firft  Night  of  his  Journey,  a  Friend  of  his, 
Dead  not  long  before,  appeared  to  him  in  his 
Dream,  and  told  him,  he  had  lodgd  1000/, 
in  the  hands  of  a  Perfon,  whom  he  named 
(and  who  was  well  known  to  the  Gentleman  I 
write  of)  for  the  ufe  of  his  Daughter ;  and 
he  defired  him,  That  upon  his  return  to  Lon- 
don, he  would  put  the  Perfcn  in  mind  of  it, 
and  defire  him  to  take  care  to  pay  the  Mony. 
The  Gentleman,  after  his  return ,  toojc  an 
oportunity  to  vvait  on  the  faid  Perfon,  and 
after  common'difcourfes  were  over,  told  him, 
That  fuch  a  Friend  of  theirs  (whom  he  nam'd) 
lately  Dead,  had  communicated  a  Secret  to 
him,  viz»  that  he  had  lodg'd  1000  /.  in  his 
hands,  for  the  ufe  of  his  Daughter,  and  that, 
as  fhe  would  grow  Marriagable  in  a  fhort  time., 
he  might  do  well  to  pay  it :  The  Perfon  freely 
own'd  the  thing,  and  pay'd  the  Mony  accord- 
ingly; the  Gentleman,  from  whom  I  had  the 
Relation,  having  known  nothing  of  it  but  in 
his  Dream.  And  this  is  remarkable,  that  the 
Gentleman  who  paid  the  Mony,  chanced  to 
foil  in  about  three  Months  after. 

To  give  fome  Account  of  what  experience 
Swfu       J  jiave  jiacj  my  f^if  {n  Dreams.     As  Cardan  tells 

jt.T.'  '  l'yih  that  befide  the  Oracle  and  Prophecy,  there 

are 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  1 5  l 

are  four  kinds  of  Dreams,  viz.  Monitory y  Ter- 

d   Impelling;  Sol  have  hid 

fome  of  all  four   kinds,  and  have  been 

lem  in  many  material  circumftan- 

I  ife  ;    many  times  the   Genii  which 

c,  as   I   have  lain  in  my  Bed, 

have  hid   me  go  to  Sleep,  laying,  That  they 

rhing  to  me  in  my  Dream; 

\\  hich  they  have   performed  ;    and  when  the 

Dream  was  over,  they  having  fuggefted  what 

thev  .'  have  fenfibW    pufh'd  my 

Shoulder,    or  taken  me   by  the  Arm-rift,  or 

toucht  fome  other  parts  of  my  Body,  to  awake 

.  and  have  bid    me  confider  of  what  I  had 

lien  in  mv  Sleep.     And  though    I   have   then 

generally  found  the  things   enigmatically  re- 

prefented  ,    yet    the   meaning    was     obvious 

enough,  and  I  have  guided  my  felf  by  it. 

Dr.  Bekktr,  who  takes  upon  him  to  folve  all 
Appearances  in  Dreams  ,  or  others,  by  Natu- 
ral Reafon  ,    without  any  Agency  or  Spirits ; 
in  the  Third  Volume  of  his  Work,  entitled,  Lt- 
rr.omle  Encbanti,  c  22.  writes  thus.    There  is  a 
tain  way  ofPrefage^or  of  Prognoftick  Signs, 
which  relates  to  certain  particular  Perfons  and 
their  Concerns ,    when  a  Man  by  fome  extra- 
ordinary Vifion ,  bv  the  hearing  or  lbme  fen- 
j   Perception  of  fomething  ,    is  advertis'd 
before  hand^of  fomething  which  will  happen 
tofhim,  or  of  what  is  prefently  to  happen.  This 
is  what  I  agree  in,  and  I  fhall  give  the  Rea- 
fon of  it  in  my  Fourth  Part;  and  here  I  fhall 
only  explain  the  thing  after  the  way  I  conceive 
it :  for  Inftance,  fome  one  Dreams ,   that  him- 
fj  crone  of  his  will  die,  or  that  he  fees  his 
own  Figure,  or  that  of  another  Perfon  before 
him.  or  in  a  Coffin,    or  that  he  hears   fome 

one 


tfi  An  Account  of  Genii , 

one  knocking  on  it  to  Nail  him  in  ,  that  he 
preceives  fome  one  to  take  him  by  the  Hand, 
or  to  ftrike  him  on  the  Shoulder,  and  all  other 
things  of  this  Nature  •  but  in  the  fame  degree, 
as  thofe  beforemention  d  ,  without  going  far- 
ther :  that  is  to  fay ,  in  things  that  concern 
our  felves,  and  thofe  that  belong  to  as ,  and 
in  refped  of  what  is  Natural,  not  with  Per- 
fons  that  have  no  Communication  with  us ,  or 
concerning  things  that  are  wholly  contingent 
and  cafual,  and  that  depend  on  the  Choice  of 
Mens  Wills.  If  beyond  this  fomewhat  often 
happens,  it  is  not  againft  Nature,  nor  above  it, 
nor  out  of  its  Power;  for  before  fuch  a  Dream 
happens ,  a  Man  has  thought,  perhaps,  more 
than  once,  with  great  Affi&ion  of  his  Death ; 
fince  a  Dream  comes  from  much  thinking  on  a 
thing,  and  that  the  Affliction  partly  caufes  the 
Diftemper,  or  having  increas'd  it,  Death  Na- 
turally follows ;  but  it's  more  difficult  to  com- 
prehend how  this  may  alfo  happen  in  refpe*a  of 
other  Perfons;  for  a  Man  has  not  fo  ftrong  a  tye 
with  another.  Mean  while,  as  I  obferve,  that 
Naturalifts  afligns  two  Caufes,  that  give  Birth 
to  Sympathy ,  or  a  mutual  Inclination,  which 
manifeftly  appears  in  Men ,  Beafts ,  Plants, 
Trees,  and  in  many  other  Bodies ,  by  which 
they  naturally  Unite  therafelves  together ,  or 
keep  far  afunder  from  each  other  >giid  in  their 
Operations ,  they  find  not  Reafon  to  rejed  as 
incredible  ev'n  thefe  Apparitions,  in  a  Dream, 
but  we  ought  alfo  to  conclude  from  thence, 
that  the  Natural  caufe  being  thus  known,  the 
Devil  has  nothing  to  do  in  it. 

We  explain  more  particularly  Sympathy,  after 
the  way  following :  We  fay  then,  firft,  That 
each  Body ,  ev'n  though  fo  little  it  can  fcarce 

•       '  "  be 


P  Familiar  Spirits,  253 

be  pefceiv'd,  is  composd  of  an  Infinity  of  lit- 
tle Parts  5  and  that  thefe  little  Pares  arc  int.. 

en  the  one   with  the  other  ,  after  a  very 
unequal  maimer \  tl  ■;  this  that  two  Bo- 

dies ift  Parts  or  Atoms  are  wo- 

ven  after  an  equal  manner,    have  aifo  a  tye 

with  the  other  j  for  they  are  invcllcd  with 
anobjed,  which  is  the  fame,  or  at  lead  of  the 
fame  Nature,  and  of  an  equal  manner  ;  where- 
fore thofe  which  are  of  an  equal  Compofition 
of  Parts,  will  receive  the  one  as  well  as  the  o- 
ther,  after  fuch  or  iuch  a  manner  ,  a  like  dc- 
fire,  or*  like  food  in  eating  and  drinking,  and 
as  this  texture  has  place  particularly  in  the  Na- 
turnal  mixture  of  Man's  Body  ,   we  call  this 
Equality  of  Humors,  and  according  then  as  thefe 
Particles  agree ,    and  are  woven  and  difpos'd 
well,  or  ill  together  ,    this  is  call'd  Good  or  Iff 
Humor  of  a  Man  ,  but  this  is  not  yet  all,  the 
Particles  thus  Interlace   for  the  Compofition 
of  a  Body  ,    are    withal  little   volatile  Parts, 
*  which  pafsaway  in  Vapours  continually  both 
outwardly,  and  inwardly,    whereof  we  may 
fee,  as  far   as  the  Eye   can  difcover ,    fome 
what  a  Proof  in  the  Smoak,  or  Vapour  of  hot 
Blood,  for  this  Vapour  is  nought  but  a  quanti- 
ty of  thofe  little  Parts,   mixt  the  one  with  the 
other,  in  a  volatile  and  continual   Motion; 
thefe  Particles  exhale  from  one  Body  into  ano- 
ther :  Now  in  all  things  this  holds,  that  every 
where,  like  feeks  its  like,    and  joyns  with  its 
like  •  when  in  rhe  commerce  of  Humane  I 
this  does  not  happen  {o  exteriourly , 

coupling  v 

iry  of  Nature,  but 

the  Sympathy 

no 


54  An  Account  of  Genii, 

We  muft  add  to  what  we  hare  faid  before, 
the  force  of  the  Imagination  ,  whereof  Expe- 
perience  teaches  us  amazing  thinks ;  It  is  (to 
(peak  thus  as  openly  as  we  may )  as  out  of  the 
Operation  of  the  Exteriour  Senfes,  that  Spi- 
rits^ (that  is  to  fay)  the  faid  Exhalation,  and 
Evaporation  of  the  moft  fubtle  Parts  moun- 
ting from  the  Heart  to  the  Brain,  where  they 
expofe  a  like  Reprefentation ,  as  that  of  the 
common  Senfe  of  Man,  by  the  means  of  the 
Senfes,  but  otherwife  brought  from  without  ; 
according  then  as  the  Brain  is  tender  or  hard, 
moiftj  or  dry;  or  that  aPerfon  is  old  oryoung; 
1  a  Man,  or  a  Woman  ;  that  the  one  or  the  o- 
ther  finds  himfelf  Sick  or  in  Health  :  According 
to  all  this,  I  fay,  fomething  is  imprinted,  more 
eafily  or  more  difficultly  in  the  Brain  ;  the  Spi- 
rits having  more  or  lefs  Communication  with 
thofe  of  another  Body  ,  equal  to  this,  by  the 
means  of  the  Exhalation  ,  and  Evaporation 
of  the  leaft  Parts  ,  outwardly  and  inwardly ; 
this  happens  moft  commonly  in  a  Sicknefsj 
and  above  all  in  a  Mortality ;  thence  comes 
the  contagion  of  the  Air  ,  and  of  the  Blood. 
This  being  fo  ,  Men  may  alfo ,  in  cafe  of  a 
Sicknefs,  or  Mortality  ,  or  of  fome  Iminent 
danger  ,  while  the  Blood  and  Spirits  are  par- 
ticularly mov'd,  have  a  lively  fore-perceiving,- 
that  is  to  fay  ,  the  Woman  in  refped  of  her 
Husband,  the  Child  in  regard  of  his  Mother, 
and  the  Mother  in  regard  of  her  Child  ;  Bro- 
thers and  Sifters  in  regard  the  one  of  the  o- 
ther^  and  even  a  Friend ,  and  a  Comrade  in 
refped  of  thofe  with  whom  they  have  contra- 
cted a  Friendflup  and  Society  ;  and  though 
they  are  far  diftant  ,  they  ceafe  not  to  have 
this  fore-perceiving,  fince  the  volatile  Particles 

difperfe 


or  Famtlltr  Spirits. 

difperfe  themfelves  to  manv  Leagues  diftknc 

and  tend  the  en  1$  the  other. 

wholly  proves  what  1  fay  ,    the    . 
moft  llihtle  !  heir  Exteriour  and  In- 

iour   act:  of  cue  Body   in  anoth- 

.  it  chc  1  oadftone  draws  the  [ran  ;    f<  r 
reciprocally  touches;   Tins  touch 
the  texture  of  the  Particles  the  one  with 
the  (  and  fc>  that  what  docs  not  touch 

reciprocally  does  not  draw.    That  theft  little 
Parrs  difperfe   themfelvcs  very  far  is  what  is 
taught  us  by  the  trace  of  a  Dog  ;   this  Beaft  in 
following  it ,  will   find  bv  the  fole  means  of 
fmell,    in  which  confifts  the  Motion  of 
thefe  fubtle  Parts,  the  Tract  of  any  one  that 
craveU'd,  to  Fifty,  nay,  even  to  an  Hun- 
dred Leagues   of  way,  by  Land  and  Water, 
in  fair  Weather,  and  Tempeftuous.  As  for  the 
Imagination,  its  a  thing  manifeft,  by  the  won- 
derful Experience  and  Operation  it   has  while 
Women  are  with  Child,  on  the  Fruit ;  without 
(peaking  at  prefem.of  other  Examples  which 
may  find  their  place  in  the  Sequel. 

I  conclude  therefore,  at  prefent,  that  this 
Communication,  and  this  Motion  of  the  vo- 
latile Parts  of  the  Bodies  of  Perfons,  that  have 
love  the  one  for  the  others,  or  that  are  of  i 
equal  Nature,  be  it  far,  or  near,  produces 
fiicha  thing.This  admirabbParticipation  makes 
an  equal  Impreflion  on  the  Brain  ,  as  we  find 
ill  Weather  caufes  it  felf  to  be  fore-percciv'd  in 
a  Man's  Limbs,  or  chiefly  in  thofeof  a  Bead. 
I  fay,  fuch  an  Impreffion  is  mad 

fon  iick  ,    or  that  a  ficknefs  I  om 
,  or  that  he 
point  of  Death  :    its  to  t  nv, 

he  underftands,  he 


256  An  Account  of  Genii 

things  and  this  alfo  troubles  him.  When  there 
has  happen'd  to  him  after  an  extraordinary  man- 
ner, fuch  a  Perception  or  Dream  Wakings  it's 
the  fame  thing  as  the  Imaginations  that  never 
happen  d  to  him  after  the  fame  manner,  or  near 
it;  or  that  he  has  been  ufed  all  the  times  he 
has  made  this  experience,  to  fee  fomewhat  like 
this  to  follow,  he  may  take  it  for  a  fign  not  of 
a  Devil,  or  of  a  Spirit,  but  as  being  wholly 
Natural.  We  may  alfo  freely  believe,  that  by 
reafon  of  the  unequal  conftitution  of  the  Brain, 
Blood  and  Spirits  in  fome  Men,  one  alfo  ought 
to  be  fubjed  more  to  thefe  kinds  of  rencoun- 
ters than  another;  this  caufes  that  we  may 
fay  in  fome  manner  with  Reafon,  that  one 
Man  may  fee  more  Fantoms  than  another. 

I  fhall  forbear  to  incert  more  here  from 
Dr.  Bekker,  referring  the  Reader  to  his  Works ; 
and  I  fhall  conclude  this  Chapter  with  a  Re- 
lation, or  two,  for  Men  to  confider  how 
Dr.  Bekkers  Philofophy  before  laid  down,  may 
ferve  to  explain  them,  tho*  in  truth  thefe  Re- 
lations might  have  been  fomewhat  more  pro- 
perly inferted  in  fome  precedent  Chapter  y 
than  this  of  Dreams. 

The  firft  is  concerning  that  Duke  of  Buck 
ingham,  who  was  Stabbed  by  Feiton,  Aug.  2 
1628. 

Mr.  Lilly  the  AJtrologer,  in  his  Book,  End- 
ailed  ,  Monarchy ,  or  no  Monarchy  in  England y 
Printed  in  40.  i6yi.  Having  mentioned  the 
Death  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham ,  writes  as 
follows.  Since  I  am  upon  the  Death  of 
Muckintrbant,  I  Ilia  11  relate  a  true  Story  of  his 
being  admoniihed  often  of  rfee  Death  he  jQioulq 
Die,  in  this  manner. 


i 


An 


cr  Familiar  S  2  5  7 

An  Aged  Gentleman,  on.- 
remember,  having  formed) 
Duke  ,    or   of  great    acquaintan-j   with 
Duke's  Father,  and  now  retired,  ha  non 

appeared  fcvcral  times  to  him,  in  tl 
Sir  George  Villiers,  the  Duke, 
mm  walk' J  many  times  in  r 
ber,   without  any  aftion  of  terrour,    110 
hurt,  or  fpeech;  but  at  laft  one  Night 
out   in  thefe  Words  ,  Mr.  Parker,  /  know 
loved  me  formerly  ,    and  my   Son  George 
time   very  well  j    I   would  have  you  go  from  me 
( you  know    me   very  well  to  be   hts  Father,  i 
Sir  George  Villiers  of  Leiceiterfhire )  and  to 
quaint  him  with  thefe,  and   thefe  particulars,  &C. 
and  that  he  above  all  refrain   the  Council  and  0 
fany  of  fucb  and  fitch,  whom  he  then  nominated, 
or  elfe  he  will  come  to  deftruttion,  and  that  fudden- 
ly.    Parker  though  a  very  difcreet  Man,  partly 
imagined  himfelf  in  a  Dream  all  this  time, 
and  being  unwilling  to  proceed  upon  no  better 
grounds,    forbore  addreffing   himfelf  to   the 
Duke,  for  he  conceived  if  he  fhould  acquaint 
the  Duke  with  the  words  of  his  Father,  and 
the  manner  of  his  appearance  to  him  (fuch 
Apparitions  being  not  ufual)    he  fhould  be 
Laugh'd  at,  and  thought  to  dote,  in  regard  he 
was  Aged.  Some  few  Nights  paft,  without  far- 
ther Trouble   to  the  Old  Alan,  but  not  very 
many  nights  after,    Old  Sir  George  Villiers  ap- 
peard  again,  walked  quick  and  furioufly  in  the 
Room,  feem'd  Angry  with  Parker,  and  at  I 
laid,  Air.  Parker  ,    I   thought  you  had   been   my 
Friend  fo  much,  and  loved  my  Son  George  jo  ;. 

you  would  have  acquainted  him  with  what  I 
ti,  but  I  know  you  have  not  done  it  •  by  all  the 
*:djhip  that  ever  was  betwi... 

s 


2-48 


An  JccountaFGi 


the  great  reffett  you  bear  my  Scu^ 
deliver  what  I  formerly  commanded  you  ,  to  my 
Son.  The  Old  Man  feeing  himfelf  thus  fol- 
licited,  promifed  the  Daemon  he  would,  but 
firft  argued  it  thus,  that  the  Duke  was  not 
eaiy  to  be  fpoken  withal,  and  that  he  would 
account  him  a  Vain  Man  to  come  with  fuch  a 
Menage  from  the  Dead  ;  nor  did  he  conceive 
the  Duke  would  give  any  credit  to  him :  to 
which  the  Damon  thus  anlwered  •  If  he  will  not 
believe  you  have  this  Difcourfe  from  me,  tell  him 
of  fuch  a  Secret  (  and  named  it  )  ivhich  he  knows 
none  in  the  World  ever  knew  but  my  felf  and  him. 
Mr.  Parker  being  now  well  fatisfied  that  he 
was  not  afleep,  and  that  the  Apparition  was  not 
a  vain  Delufion,  took  a  fit  oportunity,  and  fe- 
rioufly  acquainted  the  Duke  with  his  Father's 
words,  and  the  manner  of  his  Apparition. 
The  Duke  heartily  Laught  at  the  Relation, 
which  put  old  Parker  to  a  Hand,  but  at  laft  he 
affumed  Courage,  and  told  the  Duke,  that  he 
acquainted  his  Fathers  Ghoft ,  with  what  he 
found  now  to  be  true,  <viz>  Scorn  and  Derifion; 
but  my  Lord,  fays  he,  your  Father  bid  me 
acquaint  you  by  this  token,  and  he  faid  it 
was  fuch  as  none  in  the  World  but  your  two 
felves  did  yet  know-  hereat  the  Duke  was 
amazed,  and  much  aftonifhed,  but  took  no 
warning,  or  notice  thereof,  keeping  the  fame. 
Company  fall,  advifing  with  fuch  Counfel- 
lors,  and  performing  fachA&ions,  as  his  Fa- 
ther by  Parker  countermanded.  Shortly  after, 
Old  Sir  George  Villiers,  in  a  very  quiet,  but  for- 
rowful  Pofture,  appears  again  to  Parker,  and 
d,  Air.  Parker,  I  know  you  deliver  \l  my  words 
eorge  my  Son,  I  thank  you  fir  fo  doing,  but 
k%  jtigbted  thcmy  and  now  I  only  requefi  this  ?nvre 


Spirits. 

to  my  S 

the  Coanfi 

a  Kmfc 
I 

i    time.     Mr.  cn- 

jd,  though  very  unwillingly 3  to  acquaint 
the  Duke  with  this  did, 

but  the   Duke   delirYi  him   C  no 

farther  with  fuch  Meflfagei  and  Dreams,  and 
told  him  he  perceived  he  was  now  an  Old  Man 
and  Doted ;  and  within  a  Month  after  meet- 
ing Mr.  Parker  on  Lambeth-  faid,  A 

.  Parker  a  y  you   of  yon 

only  rcturn'd,  Sir  I  ivifh  it  may  never  have  S 
cefsy  &c.    but  within  fix  Weeks  after, 
Stab'd  with  a  Knife,  according  to  his  Fathers 
Admonition  beforehand,  and  Mr.  Parker  Died 
foon  after  he  had  feen  the  Dream  or  Villon 
perform'd. 

This  Relation  is  Inferted  alfo  in  the  Lord 
Clarendon's  Hifiory  ,  and  in  Sir  Richard  Raker's 
Chronicle.  The  Lord  Clarendon,  in  hisHiftory, 
Vol  I.  L.  i.  having  given  feme  Relations,  favs, 
That  amongft  others  there  was  one  (  meaning 
this  of  Taker  )  which  was  upon  a  better  foun- 
dation of  Credit,  than  ufualiy  fuch  Difcourfes 
are  founded  upon.  And  he  tells  us,  that  Parker 
was  an  Officer  in  the  Kings  Wardrobe  in  Wind- 
for  Ctifile,  of  a  good  reputation  for  honeity  and 
difcretion,  and  then  about  the  Age  of  Fifty 
Years,  or  more.  This  Man  had  in  his  Youth 
been  bred  in  a  School,  in  the  Parifh 
Sir  Gcorg  ,  the  Father  of  the  Duke  K\ 

and  had  been  much  cherifhed  and  obli- 
ged  in  that  Seafon  of  his    Age,    1  faid 

S     2 


260  An  Account  of  Genii, 


Sir  George,  whom  afterwards  he  never  few. 
About  Six  Months  before  the  miferable  end  of 
the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  the  Apparition  was 
feen  •  after  the  third  appearance  he  made  a 
Journey  to  London,  where  the  Court  then  was; 
he  was  very  well  known  to  Sir  Ralph  Freeman, 
one  of  the  Mafters  of  Requefis,  who  had  Mar- 
ried a  Lady,  that  was  near  allied  to  the  Duke, 
and  was  himfelf  well  received  by  him.  He 
Informed  the  Duke  with  the  Reputation  and 
Honeily  of  the  Man,  and  Sir  Ralph  Freeman 
carry'd  the  Man,  the  next  Morning,  by  Five 
a  Clock  to  Lambeth,  according  to  the  Duke's 
appointment,  and  there  prefented  him  to  the 
DukCj  who  received  him  Courteoufly  at  his 
Landing,  and  walked  in  conference  near  an 
Hour  with  him  and  Sir  Ralph' s,znd  theDuke'sSer- 
vants  at  ftich  a  diftance,  that  they  heard  not 
a  word ;  but  Sir  Ralph  always  fixt  his  Eyes  on 
the  Duke,  who  fometimes  fpoke  with  great 
commotion  and  diforder;  and  that  the  Man 
told  Sir  Rt.lph  in  their  return  over  the  Water, 
that  when  he  mentioned  thofe  particulars  that 
were  to  gain  him  credit,  the  Duke's  colour 
changed,  and  he  Swore  he  could  come  to  that 
Knowledge  only  by  the  Devil ;  for  that  thofe 
particulars  were  known  only  to  himfelf,  and 
to  one  Perfon  more,  who  he  was  fure  would 
never  fpeak  of  them.  So  far  the  Lord  Claren- 
And  I  think  Dr.  Bekkers  Hypothefis  will 
hardly  clear  this  matter. 

I  (hall  only  add  here  a  fmall  relation  of  a 
thing  that  happened  to  my  felf ;  About  Six 
Years  fince,  a  Gentleman,  whom  I  had  never 
feen,  nor  heard  of  before,  came  to  my  Lodg- 
ing- (which  was  then  in  Fetter-l&ne)  about 
cf  the  Clock  in  the  Morning,   it  being 

Summer 


or  iar  Spirit*.  261 

Summer   time  ,    he  found    a  Servant  of 

ked  him  whether  I   were   ftir- 
ring,  and  finding  not,  he  defired  the  : 

0  to  mc,  and  acquaint  me  of  his  being 
defired;  if  it  might  not  be 
troublefome  ,  he  might  be  admitted  to  my 
Bed-fide  ;  1  admitted  it;  and  upon  his  com: 
to  me,  he  told  me  he  was  direded  to  me  by 
tion  of  mine,  whom  he  had 
met  at  Hamftead,  he  having  a  defire  to  dif- 
courfe  with  me  concerning  an  Affair  in 
which  he  underftood  I  had  fome  knowledge  : 
After  fome  difcourfc  was  over  I  asked  him 
his  Name,  which  he  told  me;  then  I  asked 
him  where  he  Lived,  he  reply  ed,,  in  Cane- 
1Vood'y  whereupon  I  was  fomewhat  furpri- 
zed;  for  that  very  Morning,  at  Three  of 
the  Clock,  I  was  awaked  out  of  my  Sleep  by 
a  loud  Voice,  faying,  Cane,  Cane>  Cane ;  now 
whether  the  intentnefs  of  the  Gentlemans 
Thought  of  coming  to  me,  wrought  this 
upon  my  Mind,  or  how  elfe  it  came  to  pafr, 
may  require  confideration. 


S  3  CH 


1 

251  An  Account  of  Genii, 


CHAP.     X. 

What  perception  Men  have  had  of  Genii, 
&r  Spirits,,  and  their  Operations  by 
Magical  Tr a  Bices. 


fTH  H  E  Learned  Ludovkm  CapeUus  writ  a 
X  Book,  Entituled,  The  Hinge  of  Faith  and 
Religion,  which  was  Published  in  Englijh,  An. 
1660.  In  the  Tenth  Chapter  of  that  Book, 
he  draws  a  reafon  to  prove  a  Deity  from 
Wizards;  Magicians,  Inchanters,  and  from  all 
the  Heathen  Idolatry,  and  Superftition;  where  . 
he  writes  thus: 

It's  a  certain  things  which  the  experience 
of  our  days,  and  that  of  all  Ages  does  averr, 
which  the  monuments  of  Hiftories,"' both  Anci- 
ent and  Modern  confirm ,  and  which  the 
Writings,  as  well  of  Heathens,  as  of  Chrifti- 
sns  certifie;  that  there  are  and  have  been  at 
all  times  in  the  World  ,  Witches,  Magicians, 
Diviners ,  Inch  ant  ers ,  and  fuch  like  notorious 
wicked  People,  that  have  a  familiar  Commu- 
nication,, and  a  frequent  Commerce  with  De- 
vils ;  by  whofe  help  and  power  they  do  many 
ftraLge  and  prccigious  things,  above  and  be- 
void  all  humane  Wifdom;  ail  which  conse- 
quently infers,  that  thefe  things  proceed  from 
k  fuperaatural  and  immaterial  caufe,  fuch  as 
Dtfmcms  are, 


Tl 


'miliar  Spirits.  2  5  5 

well 

:id  of  tl  tm  themfeh 

do  i  z  this  to  us.     The  J  ,md 

hichjuftice  frequently  inflids  on 
»ffes,  the  Relations  and 
re  made  about  them, 
allure  us  of  this,    and  leave   no   doubt  of  it. 
The  damnable    curiofity    of  many    Pcrfons, 
which  e  efcourfe  to  fuch  as  they, 

to   knov  d  do  all  thofe  things  that 

cannot  be  done  '  other  means,  d< 

confirm  this,      J  he  Writings  of  the   Heathens, 
ell  Greeks  as  Romans,  are  full  oflnftances 
of  fuch  Perfons,  and  of  their  effefts,   which 
are  ftupendious  and  wonderful :  ib  that  a  Man 
muft  wholly  renounce  his  Reafon,  and  believe 
nothing  or  thofe  things   that  are  done,  if  he 
will  not  alfo  believe  that  there  are  fuch  Per- 
fons ;    which  is  true  and  manifeft  by  all  thofe 
kinds  of  Tellimonks,  and  Monuments,  which 
induce  us  to  believe  any  thing. 
ow,    if  there  are  any  Witches,  Incbantcrs, 
&c.  it  neceffarily  follows  that  there  are  Da- 
mons,   by  whofe  help  and  power,  they  caufe 
fe  prodigious  effeds  to  come  to  pafs,  which 
'i  wonder  at,  and  look  upon  with  horrour 
and  amazement;    it  being  net  poflible  thai 
tl.ofe  things  fhould  be  done  by  any   humane 
Power.     The  Hiftories  therefore  and  Writings 
til  Nations,    and  even    of  die  Heathens 
themfelves,  are  full  of  examples  of  the 
Apparition^,  and  of  their  ftrange  eff(  >w, 

he  fays,  if  there  ware  any  Damons  (:s>  it  can- 
not be  denied  )  it  follows  that  there  is  a  Deity 
vcthem,  which fo  reftrains  than,  that  they 
S  4 


2 ($4  An- Account  of  Genii, 

(hall  not  overthrow  all  things  by  their  might; 
for  they  have  ftrength  and  malice  enough  to 
do  it. 

He  adds  beneath.  The  publick  profeffion 
of  Magical 'Arts ,  which  has  been  fometime  ttN 
lerated  in  fome  of  the  moft  famous  Univerfities 
of  Chriftendom;  the  common  diftin&ion  of 
black  snd  white  Magick,  which  has  been  in- 
vented by  feme  excellent  Philofophers  of  the 
Seds  of  Plato  and  Pythagoras,  who  would  have 
found  a  way  by  which  they  might  have  fub- 
je6ted  the  good  Damons  to  them,  and  recon- 
cile them  to  themfelves,  and  which  has  from 
them  paft  to  the  Jevjijh  Cabalifis,  and  from 
them  to  the  Chrifiians,  are  an  invincible  Argu- 
ment, that  there  are  Magicians  and  Damons : 
The  certain  and  averred  Relations  of  the  Nor- 
thern Countries,  and  of  both  the  Indies,  do  teftify, 
that  all  thofe  do  fwarm  with  them,  and  that 
there  is  fcarce  one  which  has  not  his  Damon, 
and  Familiar  Spirit.     So  far  Capellus. 

To  give  fome  account  now  of  the  Magick 
and  communion  with  Spirits,  pra&ifed  in  the 
Northern  Countries.  Shefferus,  ProfeflTor  of  Law 
at  Uffal  in  Sweden,  has  writ  an  Hiftory  of  Lap- 
land, which  was  Printed  in  Englijh  at  Oxford, 
An.  1674.  anc^  *n  ^s  Eleventh  Chapter,  which 
is  concerning  the  Magical  Ceremonies  of  the 
Laplanders,  he  writes  as  follows. 

It  has  been  the  received  Opinion  among  all 
that  have  known  the  Name  of  the  Laplanders, 
that  they  are  a  People  addided  to  MagicL 
This  Judgment  of  Hiftorians  concerning  the 
Laplanders ,  is  no  lefs  verified  of  the  Biarmi, 
their  Predeceffors,  fo  that  we  may  juftly  fup- 
ppfe  both  of  them  to  have  defcended  from  the 
fame  original  3  for  the  Biarmi  were  fo  expert 

in 


or  Familidr  Spirits.  165 

thefe  Arts,  that  they  could  either  by  their 
rds,  orfome  other  wicked  Artifice, 
and    bewitch    Men,    as    to    de- 
|  of  the  ufe  of  Limbs  and  Reafon, 

and  very  often  to  bring  them  into  extream 
o\  their  Lives:    but  though  in  thefe 
i   times  they  do  not  fo  frequently  pra&ice 
i  dare  not  profefs  it  fo  publickly  as 
t  there  are  ftill  many   that  give 
nfelves  wholly   to  this  Study  :  for  every 
one  thinks  it  the  fureft  way  to  defend  himfelf 
from    the  injuries   and   malicious  defigns  of 
others.     And  they  commonly  profefs  that  their 
knowledge  of  thefe  things  is  abfolutely  necef- 
fary  for  their  own  Security;  upon  which  ac- 
count they  have  Teachers  and  Profeffors  in  this 
Science;    and  Parents  in  their  laft  Wills  be- 
queath to  their  Children,  as  the  greateft  part 
of  their  Eftate,  thofe  Spirits  and  Devils,  that 
j  been  any  way  ferviceable  to  them,  in 
their  life  time.     And  Sturlfonius  gives   an  ac- 
count of  the  moft  Famous  Laplanders  of  that 
Profeflion :  and  though  fome  arrive  at  a  grea- 
ter knowledge  in  this  Profeflion,  and  are  more 
able  Mailers  to  teach  it  than  others ,  yet  it's 
very  feldom  but  the  Parents  themfelves  are  fo 
learned,  as  to  perform  the  duty,  and  fave  the 
cxpences  of  a  Tutor.    According  to  an  aptnefs 
of  difpoiition  in  Learning,  fome  arrive  at  a 
greater  perfection  in  this  Art,    than   others, 
who  may  be  excellently   qualified  for  other 
Imployments. 

As  to  their  bequeathing  their  Familiar sto  their 
Children,  they  fuppofe  it  the  only  means  toraife 
their  Family :  So  that  they  excel  one  another  in 
this  Art,  according  to  the  largenefs  of  the  Lega- 
Thus  each  Houfe  has  its  pe- 
culiar 


i$6  An  Account  of  Genii , 

Culiar  Spirits,  and  of  different  and  quite  con- 
trary natures  from  thofe  of  others.  And  noi 
only  each  diftind  Family,  but  fingle  Perfon 
in  them  alfo  have  their  peculiar  Spirits,  fome- 
times  one,  two,  or  more,  according  as  theyj 
intend  to  ftand  on  the  defenfive  part,  or  ar$ 
malicioufly  inclined,  and  defign  to  be  upon* 
the  offensive  :  but  there  is  a  fet  number  of  ob-* 
fequious  Spirits,  beyond  which  no  one  has  $ 
and  fome  of  thefe  will  not  engage  themfelves, 
without  great  follicitation  and  earned  entrea- 
ties, when  others  readily  proffer  themfelves  to 
little  Children,  when  they  find  them  fit  for 
their  turn;  So  that  divers  of  the  Inhabitants 
are  almoft  naturally  Magicians :  for  when  the 
Devil  takes  a  liking  to  any  Perfon  in  his  In- 
fancy, as  a  fit  Instrument  for  his  defigns,  h$ 
presently  feizes  on  him  with  a  Difeafe,  ia 
which  he  haunts  him  with  feveral  Apparitions ; 
from  whence,  according  to  the  capacity  of 
his  Years  and  Understanding,  he  learns  what 
belongs  to  the  Art.  Thofe  which  are  taken 
thus  a  fecond  time,  fee  more  Vifions,  and 
gain  greater  knowledge.  If  they  are  feized  a 
third  time,  which  is  feldom  without  great 
torment,  or  utmoft  danger  of  their  Life,  the 
Devil  appears  to  them  in  all  his  fhapes,  by 
which  they  arrive  to  the  very  perfection  of 
this  Art ;  and  become  fo  knowing,  that  with- 
out the  Drum,  they  can  fee  things  at  great 
diftances,  and  are  fo  poffeft  by  the  Devil,  that 
they  fee  them  even  againft  their  will :  For  in- 
ftance,  not  long  fince  a  certain  Lap,  who  is 
yet  alive,  upon  my  complaining  againft  him  * 
for  his  Drum,  brought  it  to  me,  and  confefi 
with  Tears,  that  though  he  fhould  part  with 
it,  and  not  make  him  another,  he  fhould  have 

the 


or  F-vniliar  Spirits.  257 

ad  formerly:    and  he 

and 

not  wh  ed 

oiik  Lapland  UT- 

new  not   how   to 
nee  things  altogether 
prefent  to  him. 

it's  according  to 
of  Inftruments  they  make  ufe  of 
ided  inn  rts  ;  one  comprehends 

at  to  which  their  Drum  belongs.,  the  other 
rhofe  things  to  which  Knots,  Darts,  Spells,  Con- 
i  the  like,  refer.  Concerning  their 
Drum  ,  it's  made  of  an  hollow  Piece  of  Wood,, 
and  mud  be  either  of  Pine,  Fhre,  or  Birch-tree, 
which  grows  in  fuch  a  particular  place^  and 
turns  directly  according  to  the  Suns  Courfe ; 
which  is3  when  the  grain  of  the  Wood,,  tur- 
ning from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  the  Tree, 
winds  it  felf  from  the  right  hand  to  the  left ; 
from  this  perhaps  they  believe  the  Tree  very 
acceptable  to  the  Sun,  which  under  the  Image 
ofTfjcr  they  Worfhip  ,  with  all  imaginable  A- 
:tion.     The  Piece  of  Wood  they  make  it  of 
is  the  Root  cleft  afunder,  and  made  hollow  on 
one  fide,  upon  which  they  ftretch  a  Skin ;  the 
other  iide  being  convex,   is  the  lower  Part,  in 
which  they  make  two  Holes,  where  they  put 
rs   to  hold  it.    The  fhape  of  the 
upper  fide  is  Oval,  and  in  Diameter  about  half 
an  Ell.     Its  like  a  Kettledrum  ,  but  not  alto- 
gether fo  round,  nor  fo  hollow,  and  the  SI 
is  faften'd  with  Wooden  Pegs;  fome  are  few 
with  the  Sinews  of  RrA»*  Dear.     They  Paint 
upon  the  Skin  feveral  Pictures  in  red,   ftain'd 
with  the  Bark  of  an  Aliier-tree.     As  for  the 
particular  Pictures  of  thole   Drums  ,    I  refer 


%6%  An  Account  of  Genii, 

you  to  the  Author.    They  put  a  Bunch 
Brafs  Rings  on  the  Drum  ,  when    they  beat 
them.  Several  of  the  Drams  have  not  the  fame 
Pictures  upon  them.     They  have  the  Pictures 
of  feveral  Animals  on  their  Drums  ,    to  fignifie 
when,  and  in  what  place  they  may  find  thei 
If  a  Rain  Dear  be  loft  ,  how  they  may  get  hi 
again  ?  whether  the  Rain  Dears  Young  on 
will  live  ?  whether  their  Fishing  will  be  fui 
cefsful  ?  if  Sick  Men  will  recover,    or  not 
whether  Women  great  with  Child ,  fliall  have 
a  fafe  delivery  ?  or  fuch,  or  fuch  a  Man  fhall 
die  of  fuch  a  Dift.emper,  or  of  what  other  ? 
and  other  things  of  the  like  Nature  ,  whi 
they  are  defirous  to  know/ "He  fays  he  ca: 
give  no  Account  of  the  Reafon  for  the  Diffi 
rence  in  their  Drums,  unlefs  it  be  that  fome 
them,  are  made  for  more  malicious  Defigns 
others  again  for  each  Man's  private  Purpofe 
On  this  Account  he  believes,  according  to  th 
Nature  of  the  Bufinefs  they  intend ,  they  adc 
and  blot  out,  and  fometimes  wholly  chan 
the  Figures. 

There  -are  two  things  requir'd  to  fit  a  Drum 
for  ufe,  an  Index,  and  an  Hammer.  Ttie  firft 
fliews,  among  the  Pi&ures  that  thing  they  en- 
quire after,  with  the  Hammer  they  beat  the  Drum. 
The  Index  is  the  bunch  of  Brafs  Rings  before 
mention' d.  They  firft  place  one  great  Ring 
upon  the  Drum  ,  then  they  hang  feveral  fmall 
ones  upon  that  •  the  fhape  of  the  Index,  is  ve^ 
ry  different,  he  had  one  of  Copper,  of  the  big- 
nefs  of  a  Dollar,  with  a  fquarehole  in  the  mid- 
dle, and  feveral  fmall  Chains  hanging  about 
it  inftead  of  Rings.  Another  has  an  Alchimy-  \ 
ring,  on  which  a  fmall  round  plate  of  Copper  is 
hung  by  little  Chains  j  he  had  feen  another  of 

Bone 


Wfniluir  Spirits.  269 

ie  Greek  A,  with  rings  abovj 

JVfe  J  quite  different  make.     At 

re  Cutts  of  feveral  Drums,  fo  he 

is  of  u  ««ij  and  /t/»f /;  fome  Writers  call 

;^j  Sirpents,  or  Brazen  Frogs  and  Toads  y 
nble  them  ,  but  becaufe  by 
lcm  t;  Creatures ,    whofe  Pi- 

urcs  :  en  make  ufeof  in  their  Conju- 

1  ppofing  them  very  grateful  and  ac- 
)  the  Devil.  They  make  the  Index 
idiffcrcntly  of  any  fort  of  Metal.  The 
[ammer  they  ufe  in  railing  their  F arm- 
or sy  as  for  the  Head  of  it,  it's  made  of  Rain- 
wears Hom;thc  other  partferves  for  the  Handle: 
nd  he  has  given  us  two  Cuts  of  the  Hammers, 
nth  this  Hammer  they  beat  the  Drum,  not  fo 
mch  to  make  a  noile  ,  as  by  drumming  to 
love  the  ring,  lying  on  the  Skin  ,  fo  as  to 
afs  over  the  Pi&ures  >  and  fhevv  what  they 
:ek  after.  This  is  the  Defcription  of  the 
)rum  with  all  its  Neceffaries,  as  it's  us'd  by  the 

far*}  that  are  Subjeft  to  Sweden.  The 
"inlafs  alfo,  that  are  under  the  Crown  of  Den- 
$ark,  make  ufe  of  Drums  y  though  fomewhat 
ifferent  in  their  make  from  the  former; 
owever,  he  conceives  them  not  of  a  different 
ind,  but  made  for  fome  particular  ufes.    The 

Itrs  ufe  their  Drums  for  divers  Deiigns, 
nd  are  of  Opinion,  that  what  ever  they  do, 
s  done  by  the  help  of  it ;  and  therefore  they 
;eep  ic  very  choicly  with  the  Index  and  Ham- 

\  re  are  three  very  ftrange  things  which 

ve  they  can  etfed  by  their  Drum3  and 

I  .longing  either  to  their  Hunting,  their 

.  or  lalti  r  enquiring  into 

mentioned 


2<So  An  Account  of  Genu, 

mentioned  by  another  Writer  •  the  firft  is  the 
knowing  the  State  of  Affairs  in  Foreign  Coun- 
tries ;  the  fecond  what  fuccefs  their  Defigns  in 
Hand  will  meet  with ;  the  third,  how  to  Cure 
Difeafes^  the  fourth,  what  Sacrifices  their 
Gods  will  be  pleased  to  accept,  and  what  Beaft 
each  God  defires,  or  diflikes  moil.  The  Ar- 
tifts  that  beat  the  Drums  ,  beat  not  altogether 
in  the  fame  place,  but  round  about  the  Indx  J 
they  beat  foftly  at  firft,  prefently  quicker,  and! 
continue  this  till  they  have  effected  their  in- 
tent. The  Drummer  firft  lifts  up  the  Drnm  by 
degrees,  then  beats  foftly  about  the  Index  till  it 
begins  to  ftir,  and  when  it's  remov'd  fome  di- 
ftance  from  its  firft  place  to  either  fide  ,  he 
ftrikes  harder  till  the  Index  Point  at  fomething 
from  whence  he  may  Colled  what  he  look'd 
for,  both  the  Drummer,  and  thofe  prefent  are 
upon  their  Knees.  Thofe  who  defire  to  know 
the  Condition  of  their  Friends ,  or  Affairs  a- 
broad,  whether  joo  or  iooo  Miles diftant,  go 
to  fome  Laplander  ,  or  Finlander  Skilful  in  this 
Art,  and  prefent  him  with  a  Linnen  Garment, 
or  Piece  of  Silver,  as  his  reward.  An  exam- 
ple of  this  Nature  is  to  be  feen  upon  Record  at 
Bergen,  in  Norway ,  where  the  effe&s  of  th 
German  Mafiers  are  regiftred. 

In  this  place  one  John  Delling,  a  Fa&or  to  a 
German ,  enquired  of  a  Finlapper  of  Norway, 
about  his  Mafter  in  Germany :  the  Finlapper 
readily  affented  to  tell  him ;  like  a  Drunken 
Man,  he  prefently  made  a  bawling,  then  reel- 
ing and  dancing  about  feveral  times  in  '< 
Circle,  fell  at  laft  upon  the  Ground,  lyini 
there  for  fome  time,  as  if  he  were  Dead,  then 
ftarting  up  on  a  fudden,  related  to  him  al 
things  concerning  his  Mafter;    which   were 

after- 


er 


or  FamiHtr  Spirits,  26 1 

afterwards  found  to  agree  to  what  he  reported. 
A   L>  !  ndt\  ,    gave 

an  Account  of  the  journey  he  firft 
made  i,  though  he  never  had  feen 

him  before  that  time;   which  though  it  were 
true,  m  diflembled  to  him,  left  he  might 

glory  too  much  in  his  devilifh  Practices. 

fays>  the  Authority  of  this  Man  is  i^o  con- 
iiderable,  that  it  may  give  Credit  enough  to 
the  Ston 

As  to  the  Method  taken  in  making  thefe  Dif-  Hift.tob. 
coveries,    its  very  different,    Oh  \nus  /.  j-catf. 

defcribes  it  thus ;  the  Drummer  goes  into  fome 
private  Room ,  accompanved   by  one  tingle 
Perfon,  belide  his  Wife,  and  beating  the  Dm, 
moves  the  Index  about,  muttering  at  the  fame 
time  feveral  Charms ;  then  prefently  he  falls 
into  anExtafy,  and  lies ,  for  a  fhort  time,  as 
Dead  j  mean  while  his  Company  takes  great 
Care  that  no  Gnat,  Fly,    or  other  Animal 
touch  him ;  for  his  Soul  is  carryed  by  fome  e- 
vil  Genius  into  a  Foreign  Country,  from  which 
it  is  broughtback  with  fome  fign,as  a  Knife,  or 
Ring,  as  a  token  of  his  Knowledge  of  what  is 
done  in  thofe  Parts ;  after  this,  rifing  up.,  he  re- 
lates all  the  Cireumftances  belonging  to  the  Bu- 
finefs  that  was  enquired  after.   Petrus  Claudius 
makes  no  mention  either  of  the  Drum,Charms, 
Company,  or  thofe  things  he  brings  with  him; 
but  he  fays,  he  cafts  himfelf  on  the  Ground, 
;  grows  Black  in  his  Face,  lying  as  if  Dead  for 
anHour,or  two,  according  as  the  Diftana 
the  place  is,  of  which  he  makes  enquiry-  when 
he  awakes,  he  gives  a  full  Account  of  all  Af- 
fairs there.     Samuel  Rhetny   in  his  Hiftory,  fays, 
The   Drummer  fings  a  Song,  c  .  them 

Joiikt',  and  the  Men  and  Womej  re- 

lent, 


272  An  Account  of  Genii, 

fent,  fing  like  wife,  fome  in  higher,  fomein 
lower  Notes  ,  this  they  call  Duma.  As  for 
their  cafting  themfelves  on  the  Ground  in  a 
Trance ;  and  what  is  faid  by  fome  of  their 
Souls  parting  from  their  Bodies  ,  Scbefferm  be* 
lieves,  the  Devil  only  then  ftifles  the  Faculties 
of  the  Soul  for  a  time,  and  hinders  their  Ope- 
rations. As  the  Drummer  falls  down,  he  lays 
the  Drum ,  as  near  as  poffible  on  his  Head* 
Thofe  in  the  mean  time,  that  are  prefent  leave 
not  offfinging  all  the  while  he  lies  fweating  in 
his  Agony  $  which  they  do  not  only  to  put  him 
in  Mind,  when  he  awakes  of  the  Bufinefs  he 
was  to  know  $  but  alfo  that  he  might  recover 
out  of  his  Trance,  which  he  would  never  do, 
as  they  imagine,  if  they  either  ceas'd  finging, 
or  any  one  ftirr'd  with  their  Hand  or  Foot : 
And  this  perhaps,  is  the  reafon  ,  why  they 
fuffer  no  Fly,  nor  any  living  Creature  to  touch 
him ,  and  watch  him  fo  diligently.  It's  un- 
certain how  long  they  may  lie  in  their  Trance, 
but  it's  commonly  according  as  the  place 
where  they  make  their  difcovery  is  nearer,  or 
farther  of  ->  but  the  time  never  exceeds  24 
Hours,  let  the  place  be  at  never  fo  far  a  Di- 
ftance.  As  for  their  farther  Pra&ice  with  the 
Drum,  I  refer  you  to  the  Book  it  felf. 

Concerning  their  other  Parts  of  Magick,  the] 
firft  is  a  Card  tyed  with  Knots  for  raifing  of  Wind. 
Schefferus  fays,  he  thinks  it  not  at  all  probable, 
that  the  Laf  landers  ftiould  be  concerned  in  this 
Practice  ,  fince  they  live  in  an  Inland  Country, 
Bordering  no  where  upon  the  Sea,  wherefore 
this  properly  belongs  to  the  Finlappers  of  Nor- ; 
7v ay ;  and  thofe  that  are  skilled  in  this  Art 
have  command  chiefly  over  the  Winds  that 
blew  at  their  Birth  j  now,  he  fays^  as  this  be- 
longs 


or  Vimiltar  Spirits.  273 

longs  chiefly  to  the  ind  FmUnJers  of 

Norway,  fo  Joes  the  flopping  of  the  Co.uL 
Ships,  which  ib  altogether  oi 

Somewhat  relating  to  this  I  (ind  i  m 

HimmingiM)  vvho  in  his  Trad  dc  SmftrJHtiowbm 
:icu,  printed  at Copenbagucn,  An.  ipf.  t 
Th.it  fitrm  Palladia*  ,  fomctime  Bifliop 
Setlandt ,  and  Profeflbr  of  Divinity  at  Cf 
bjguen,  could  from  a  Part  of  his  Body  affected, 
foretelfrom  what  Part  of  the  Heavens  Temp. 
would  come,  and  was  fcldom deceivd. 

Next,  he  comes  to  their  Magical  Darts,  which 
they  make  of  Lead,  in  length  about  a  Finger  ; 
by  thefe  they  Execute  their  Revenge  on  their 
iinemies,  and  Wound  them  with  Cancerous 
Swellings,  either  in  the  Arms  or  Legs,  which 
by   the   extremity  of  its  Pain,  kills  them  in 
three   Days  time ;  they  (hoot  thefe  Darts  to 
what  diftance  they  pkafe ,    and  feldom  rnifs 
their  Aim.     Scbtffcrus  thinks,  that  both  QUus 
Magnus,  who  writes  this,    and   Zeigler  from 
whom  he  tranferib'd  it,  as  he  has  many  other 
things,  are  miftaken  ,    in  fetting  down  Leadtn 
Darts,  (ince  he  finds  no  Perfon  now  that  knows 
any  fuch  thing,  nor  is  there  any  mention  made 
of  fuch  in  any  other  Writers  :    he  thinks  the 
miftake  may  be  ,    by  mifunderftanding  the 
word  Skot,  which  is  commonly  us'd  for  explain- 
ing thofe  Darts;' for  when  Man,  or  Bead  is 
fuddenly  taken  with  a  Difeafe  ,  People  call 
this  that  takes  them  fo,  Skat,  that  is  a  Dart. 
Tttr/rs  Claudius  calls  it  a  Gan,  which  they  fend 
abroad  ;  he  likens  it  to  a  /v  c,  but  (ays  its  fome 
little  Devil,  of  which  the  Finland^  s  in  Norw 
that  excel  moft  in  this  Art,  kc^p  great  Num- 
bers in  a  Leather  Bag,  and  difpatch  daily  fonv: 
of  them  abroad  •  but  he  feems  to  intimate  no  I 
1  more 


2/4  An  Account  of  Geriii, 

more  by  this  word  Gan,  than  that  very  thing 
which  endangers  Mens  Health  and  Lives  •  for 
he  fays,That  thefe  Finlanders  cannot  live  peace- 
ably,, except  they  let  out  of  their  Ganeska  ,  or 
Gan-tiid,  which  is  the  Satchel ,  every  Day  one 
of  the  Gans,  that  is  a  Fly  or  Devil ;  but  if  the 
Gan  can  find  no  Man  to  Deftroy,  after  they 
have  fent  him  out,  which  they  feldom  do  up- 
on no  Account  at  all,  then  he  Roves  about  at 
a  venture,  and  deilroys  thefirft  thing  he  meets 
with.  Therefore  this  word  Gan  fignifies  no 
more  than  what  Zeigltr  meant  by  his  Dcrty  for 
the  term  by  which  they  exprefs  going  out,  is^ 
de  Skiuda  devis  Gan,  that  is  ,  he ,  as  it  were, 
(hoots  out  his  Gan,  like  an  Arrow,  for  Skiuda 
is  only  proper  to  the  (hooting  out  of  an  Ar- 
row. 

This  Magical  Practice ,  they  ufe  as  well  a- 
gainft  one  another,  as  Strangers  j  nay,  fome- 
times  againft  thofe  that  they  know  are  Equals 
in  the  Art.  Some  of  the  Conjurers  are  con- 
tented only  with  the  power  to  expel  the  Gan 
out  of  Men  ,  or  Beafts,  which  others  fend ; 
this  is  remarkable  among  them  ,  that  they  can 
hurt  no  Man  with  their  Gan  ,  except  they 
firft  know  his  Parents  Name. 

Now,  all  that  the  Finlanders,  and  Finlappers 
of  Norway  effect  by  their  Gan ,  the  Laplanders 
do  by  a  thing  they  c^ll  Tyre.  This  Tyre  is  a 
round  Ball,  about  the  bignefs  of'  a  Wall-Nut, 
or  fmail  Apple,  made  of  the  fined  Hair  of  a 
Bead,  or  elfe  of  Mofs,  very  fmooth,  and  fo 
Kght,  that  it  feems  holtew  j  its  Colour  is  a 
mixture  of  Yellow  ,  Green,  and  Afh,  but  fo 
that  the  Yellow  appear?  moft.  This  Tyre  they 
fay  is  quicken  d  ,  and  moved  by  a  particular 
Art.     Its   fold    bv^the   Laplanders;,  fo  that  he 

that 


or  Familiar  S [tints. 

tha~  'horn  he  ; 

the 

the  -a  (end  i 

Mk  natthey  pleafe  into  any  M 

mak  i 

Whirl-in  as   an  Arrow,  and 

deftroys  the  rtrfl  Man  ,  or  Beaft,  that  it  lights 
on,  bur  it  often  miftakes ;  of  thefc 

[nftantes  at  this  time  ,   which 
are  too  long  to  infert  here.     So  far 

There  are  twq  things  I  fhall  note  in  rei 
rence  to  this  Account  of  Schtfftrus.     i.  As 
:hing  to  their  Children  t! 
Spirits  at  their  I  j  of 

bes  in  England^  chit  the  fame  has  be 
dis'd  here  •  and  that  Tome  have  had  Spirits 
ven  them  by  their  Parents  ,  others  by  ether 
Relations ,  and  other  Friends .    befide  thofe 
which  Originally  came  to  themfelv^s. 

2.    As  fo/  uticular   Opinion, 

That  the  Itrs  did  net  really   fend  Darts 

to  thofe  Mind  to  deftroy,  I  cannot 

*eafily  agree  in  Opinion  with   him ;    for  you 

find  before  in  Mr.  s  Account  of  the 

yard,  in  X.  nJ3 

that  the  /awaws  were  wont  to  form  a 

piece  of  Leather  like  an  Arrow's  Head,  and 
then  to  tye  an  Hair  to  it,  and  over  thefe  to  ufe 
fome  Magical  Ceremonies ,  whereupon  the 
Damon  \  fnatclVd  them  away,  and  con- 

vey'd  them  into  the  Bodies  of  Perfons  to  be 
afflicted  :  and  as  the  Laptanhrs  fend  their  Gs.ns, 
or  Flies  to  deftroy  Perfons,  fo  Mr.  Mather  fays, 
fometimes  the  Damon  pretends  to  the  Pav/aws^ 
that  he  brings  a  Portion  of  the  Spirit  of  a  Per- 

tfon  clofely  imprifon  d  in  a  Fly  ,  and  as  they 
deal  with  the  Fly,  fo  it  fares  with  the  Bodv  of 
T  2  'the 


i?6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

the  Perfon  they  intend  to  Affiid.     The  Drums 
alfo  us'd  by  the  Laplanders,  are  us'd  by  the?Te/?- 
Indiansy  fo  that  there  is  a  ftrange  Agreement 
in  their  Magical  Practices  ,    as  I  fhall  fet  forth 
beneath. 
Chap,  t:       jjie  Learned  Olaus  Rudbeck,  in  the  Second 
Volume  of  his  Atlantic^  treats  concerning  the 
Lapland  Drums,    the  Heads  of  which  he  fays> 
are  divided  into  three  Parts  ,*  the  uppermoft 
Region  contains  the  Heavens,  and  all  Celefti- 
al  things,  and  all  Volatiles ;  the  middle  Regi- 
on contains  the  Earth,  with  Men  and  all 
Animals  j  the  lowermoft  Region  contains  all 
Infernals  and  Subteraneous  Places:  and  then 
he  gives  a  particular  Explication  of  all  the  Fi- 
gures, or  Marks  on  the  Tympana  j  and  fays^  if 
the  Laplanders   would  know  whether,  when 
they  go  a  hunting ,   they  fhall  have  fuccefs, 
they  beat  their  Drum  with  Thors  Hammer ,  and 
diligently  obferve  a  certain  Ring  leaping  on 
the  Drum,  which  if  they  fee  to  reft  on  the  I- 
mage  of  a  Ranger ,   they  no  way  doubt  but 
they  fhall  kill  a  Ranger  that  Day,  if  it  refts 
on  the  Figure  of  a  Wolf,  they  conclude  they 
fhall  have  a  Wolf  for  their  Prey.  He  refers  us 
for  other    things,  relating  to  the  ufe  of  the 
Lapland  Drums,  to  SchefferusS  Lapponia ,    Olaus 
Magnus,  and  others  j   however  ,   I  (hall  give 
you  here  what  feems  to  be  Olaus  RudbecKs 
Senfe,  concerning  what  may  be  expe&ed  from 
the   Superfluous  ufe    of  the   Lapland  Drums, 
inferted  by  him  in  the  Fifth  Chapter  of  the 
faid  Book;  p.  28;.  it  is  as  follows.      Since  the 
Do&rine  of  Chrift  came  to  Lapland ,    Men 
could  not  but  forget  many  things  relating  to 
Superftition,    and  call  off  others,  or  at  leaft, 
fee  at  an  uncertainty  in  them;  whether  there- 
fore 


or  Familiar  Spirits]  277 

*ore  the  Laplanders  themfelves  are  now  Igno- 
rant of  the  true  make  of  the  moft  Ancient 
Drums,  or  whether  the  very  differing  fitting 
the  Drums  deprives  them  of  the  Knowledge  of 
a  thing  fo  cxtreamly  vain,  they  now  luffer 
themfelves  with  extream  difficulty  to  be  drawn 
to  make  known  their  Superftition  to  others  j 
perhaps  alfbfhame,  or  fear  deters  fome.  To 
pafs  by  that,  the  chief  Arcanum  of  Superftition 
will  not  be  Revealed  ;  be  it  as  it  may,  you 
fhall  now  hardly  find  any  Man,  who  knows 
rightly  how  to  manage  this  Drum,  or  to  ex- 
plain it  to  others ;  and  thofe  who  think  they 
know  fomewhat  of  this  kind,  either  fo  obfti- 
nately  conceal  it,or  fo  diffemble  their  skill,  that 
thofe  Labour  in  a  manner  in  vain,  who  with  a- 
ny  Gifts,  how  great  foever,  or  high  drinking 
(which  is  wont  to  go  a  great  way  with  them 
otherwife)  endeavour  to  break  or  Conquer 
that  filence  ;  but  among  Gifts  (if  any  Man 
will  purchafe  this  Art  of  thern)  the  Laplanders 
are  carneft  Lovers  of  Imperial  Rix-De!lars. 

In  the  Sixth  Chapter  of  his  faid  Second  Vc* 
lume,  he  tells  us  of  wonderful  Performances, 
faid  to  have  been  wrought  by  the  means  of 
their  Scipio  Runicus,  or  Runftaffe  (by  us  call'd  the 
Runick  Almanack,  of  which  there  are  many  in 
England)  being  anointed  with  a  certain  Magi- 
cal Ointment,  wc.  of  Mens  flying  in  the 
Air  on  it,  and  the  like  ;  and  fays  a  more  con? 
itant  Fame  of  nothing  has  remain  d  in.  their 
Country,  from  the  remoteft  times  of  Paganifmy 
than  of  fuch  flights  in  the  Air  ;  and  that  no-» 
thing  i$  more  readily  believed,  than  that  the 
prefenx  Laplanders,  who  continue  ftill  in  P#- 
ganifm,  ule  the  fame  kind  of  flights  now  ;  and 
ph?t  beflde  Runftaffts  Sticks  ,  Pales  ,  Calves, 
T   2  Horjhj 


j^g  An.  Account  of  Gemi, 

Hcrfes.,  Dogs  ,  and  other  living  Creatures  a- 
nointed  with  the  fame  kind  of  Ointment,  were 
thought  to  be  able  to  carry  their  Riders  to 
Places  defign'd  ;  and  thefe  things  were  wont 
to  be  afcrib'd  to  Diam,  or  Difa  as  the  firft  In- 
ventrefs  of  them. 

He  here  tells  us  alfo,  That  the  Tympanum  of 
the  Mother  of  the  Gods,  fo  much  celebrated 
by  the  Greeks  and  Latine  Writers,  though  ex- 
plaind  by  none  of  them,  as  it  ought,  was  no- 
thing but  a  Copy  of  the  Lapland  Tympamim, 
convey'd  to  Foreign  Parts  by  Difa,  Jfhy  Uaa, 
or  Diana,  whofe  Ring  and  Hammer  were  fome- 
time  found  in  the  left  Hand  of  the  Figure  of 
Ifis  at  Rom:,  the  Tympanum  it  feif  being  over 
the  Head  of  the  Goddefs ,  and  there  being 
Marks  under  her  Feet  like  to  thofe  that  are 
feen  in  the  Lapland  Drums.  The  Egyptian  Ifis 
alfo,  according  to  a  Cut  giv'n  of  her  by  Fig- 
nvfite 3  holds  this  Ring  and  Hammer  in  her  left 
Hand.  And  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  (as  Du 
Choul.hzs  fet  forth)  handles  a  Tympanum  ;  and 
he  fays,  he  will  make  out  in  his  Chronology,  that 
Ifis  the  Daughter  of  Inachus,  going  into  Egypt, 
a  little  before  the  times  of  Mofes,  taught  the 
Egyptians  Incantations,and  withal  fhew'd  them 
that  Infamous  ufe  of  the  Hieroglyphical  Marks, 
with  which  Art  the  Egyptian  Magi  afterwards 
contended  with  Mofes  before  Fharoah.  But  he 
does  not  think  that  till- the  Goths  were  giv'n  to 
thofe  Arts,  becaufe  the  Teftimonies  of  the 
Scalds,  and  of  Smrro  himfelf  free  the  moft  Va- 
liant of  the  Goths  from  that  Infamy ,  thofe 
Arts  being  beneath  their  Valour  and  Dignity, 
and  feem'd  muchto  prejudice  theFame  and  Re- 

wn  due  to  Valiant  Men ;  and  therefore  great 
Puniftiments  was  never  inli&ed  on  Men  giv 9n 
to  iiich  Arts,  by  Magnanimous  Kings.  I 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  279 

I  muft  here  vote,  That  notwithftanding 
this  Difcourfe,  concerning  Tiers  Hamn 

its  being  convey'd  from  Sweden  to  foreign 
Parts,    given   us   by  the   Learned   ,  /  I 

muft  wh  Id  to  what  the  Learned  Khrcberp 

in  his  Obelifctu  Fampbilim,  has  delivered  us  con- 
cerning it;  he  has  there  writ  a  Paragraph; 
with  this  Title  to  it ;  Concerning  the  Tautick  ( 

Crefs  with  an  Handle  to  it,  (  that  is, 
a  Ring  annexe  to  the  top  of  it  )  the  chief  of  all 
the  Hieroglif  hicks  ,  (  this  being  the  fame  with 
what  Rudbeck  calls  TborS  Hammer.) 

Kircher  there,  among  other  curious  things,, 
tells  us,  that  the  Egyptians,  in  the  Character 
T.  Tauy  as  in  a  Looking-Glafs,  plac  d  the  Idea 
of  the  whole  Pantomorphous  Nature,  by  the 
Circle  or  Ring,  which  they  commonly  place 
on  the  top  of  it ,  they  denoted  the  Celeftial 
Orbs,  in  which  the  Spirit  of  the  World  mixes 
it  felf ;  firft  communicating  its  Virtue  to  them^ 
the  Crofs,  the  virtue  of  the  four  Elements 
on  the  Sublunary  World,  through  the  media- 
tion of  the  Celeftial  Bodies,  from  which  the 
generation  of  all  things  arifes ;  for  they  ob- 
ferved  there  were  two  motions  chiefly  appear- 
ing in  Nature,  w*.  a  Strait,  and  a  Circular 
one  j  they  represented  this  by  a  Circle,  the 
other  by  Strait  Lines  j  for  the  Elements  being 
moved  out  of  their  natural  places,  they  found 
xperience,  they  return'd  to  them  but  by 
Strait  Lines,  and  beneath,  he  quotes  the  follow- 
ing PalTage  from  Ficinuss  Third  Book  De  v 
Ctfhftns  Comparendd. 

The   1  ns    preferred    the    1  off 

the  Crofs  before  all   others,   becaufe   Bo; 

by  the   vertue   diffufed  to   the  Superri-- 

the    firft  Superficies  is  defcrifcd 

?4  by 


2  So  An  Account  o/  Genii, 

by  the  Crcfs ,    for    fo  it  has  chiefly  Lon- 
gitude and  Latitude ;  and  this  is  the  firft  Fi- 
gure^   and  the  ftraiteft  of  all,  and  contains 
four  Strait  Angles ;    now  the    effe&s  of  the 
Celeftial  Bodies  chiefly  refult  from  the  Re&i- 
tude  of  the  Rays  and  Angles ;    for  then  Stars 
are  moft  powerful,  when  they  hold  the  four 
Angles  of  Heaven.,  viz.  the  Points  of  the  Eaft 
and  Weft,  and  of  the  mid  Heaven  on  either 
iide ;  and  being  fo  difpofed,    they  fo  call  their 
Rays  againft  each  other  that  they  thence  make 
a  Crofs,  the  Ancients  therefore  faid  the  Crofs 
was  a  Figure  made  of  the  fortitude  of  the 
Stars.,  and  the  Sufcepticle  of  their  fortitude, 
and  therefore  it  had  a  mighty  power  in  Images, 
and  received  the  Powers  of  the  Spirits  and 
Planets. 
Tom.  2.         The  fame  Author  in  his  Oedipus  zs£gypt.  fays, 
*UY\2'      The  Crux  Anfata,  or  JJJaca  is  feen  carried  almoft 
r* 3>         in  every  Images  Hand  of  the  Egyptians  $  which 
Character  they   had  in  fo  great  Veneration, 
that  they  thought  nothing  could  be  rightly 
done  without  it,  and  it  was  the  moft  powerful 
Amulet,  and  a  Chara&er  made  by  a  wonder- 
ful Subtlety  of  Wit,  according  to  the  pattern 
of  Nature,  the  only  guide  and  light  to  fhow 
the  way  to  Happinefs. 
?*77?'3'     ASain*    he  tells  us  elfe where,  That  by  the 
Crux  Anfatay  which  confifted  of  a  Circle  and 
a  Crofs,  they  denoted  the  motion  of  Vhthay 
viz.  the  Soul  of  the  World  artificially   difpo- 
fing  all  things  that   are  in  the  World ;  and  by 
the  Circle,  the  circular  motion  of  the  Celeftial 
Bodies.,  whereby  it  in  fome  fort  animates  them, 
and  renders  them  apt  for  influencing  Inferi- 
ors:   and  by  the  Crofs,  or  the  lines  cutting 
each  other,  they  fignify  the  motion  which  \t 

performs 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  l8l 

performs  in  the  Inferior  World,  for  the  Gene- 
ration and  Production  of  things,  according  to 
I  Elementary  Bodies;  for  the  mo- 
tion of  Sublunary  things  is  according  to  ftrait 
I        Sj  as  it  appears  in  the  motion  of  Light  and 
V)   things,  and  of  fuchas  are  of  a  middle 
ic;    whereof  thofe  being  carried,  fome 
upwards  fome  downwards,  according  to  Strait 
Lines,  thefe  participating  equally  of  Gravity 
and  1  having  got  a  middle  Nature,   and 

diffus'd,  asi:  wt  e,on  the  fides,  appofitelycxprefs 
the  cut  Lines  of  a  Crofs,  and  therefore,  by  this 
only  Character,  for  the  faid  reafons,  they  do 
not  unmeetly  denote  the  whole  procefs  or  Na- 
ture ;  wherefore  alfo  they  reputed  this  Cha- 
racter, as  the  moft  Myfterious  of  allHierogli- 
phicks,  and  thought  the  fame  had  the  greateft 
force  of  all,  both  to  allure  Good  Genii,  and  fa- 
cinate  the  Evil  ones ;  hence  calling  it  the  Sym- 
bol of  Health,  the  greateft  Spell,  the  Mono- 
gram Tbtbs  ;  and  by  other  Names,  they  had  it 
put  in  all  Obelisks,  Statues,  Tables,  &C 

Here  we  find  a  pretty  fatisfa<ftory  Account 
of  the  Original  Inftitution  of  this  Character  y 
which  I  cannot  find  in  the  the  Works  of  the 
Learned  Rudbtck;  and  therefore  as  far  as  it 
appears  to  me  hirherto,  I  mull  conclude  it  of 
an  -^Egyptian  Original. 

To  proceed  now  to  fome  further  account 
from  Olaus  Rudbeck,  in  reference  to  Magical 
Practices,  in  his  3/  Vol.  c.  11.  he  tells  us, 
when  we  find  any  itrange  Relation  in  that 
kind,  we  ought  duly  to  weigh  what  is  really 
perform'd  by  the  Magick  Arty  and  what  con- 
tains fome  abftrufe  {enfe,  and  is  propofed 
tranflatitioufly,  and  by  way  of  zsEnigma :  he 
it's  a  firm  Argument  with  him  for  the  pra- 
ctice 


282  An  Account  of  Genii , 

<9:ice  of  Witchcraft  and  Horrible  Magick  in  the 
North,  that  Men  came  thither  at  the  fame 
time  from  Greece,  *s£gypt,  and  Phoenicia,  as  to 
a  famous  Academy y  and  gave  themfeives  over 
wholly  to  the  ftudy  of  thofe  Arts  \  and  that 
Tythagoras  was  not  the  only  Man  that  learnt  to 
Fly  of  the  Hyperborean  Aborts ,  but  others  of 
the  fame  Age,  as  we  find  from  Diogenes,  in 
Thotius,  viz.  Garmanus,  Cylla,  DercyUis,  &c.  who 
thinking  themfeives  in  Thule,  on  a  fudden 
awaking,  as  it  were  from  a  Dream,  found 
themfeives  in  the  Temple  of  Hercules  at  Tyre. 
And  the  Author  fetting  down  fome  of  their 
chief  Cuftoms,  agreeing  with  what  the  Greeks 
and  Latins  write,  tells  us,  that  the  Golden  Apples, 
raifing  the  Gods  themfeives  from  Death  to 
Life,  that  is,  which  fet  forth  the  Ads  of  their 
Anceftors,  encouragements  to  Vertue,  and 
determents  from  Vice ,  are  interpreted  by  him 
Letters  which  were  cut  on  Stones,  or  Wood, 
or  writ  on  Parchment;  and  thofe  Stones, 
Tables,  Parchments  and  Lapland  Tympana,  from 
their  Oblong  Figure,  got  the  name  of  FineA 
apples,  Apples  and  Eggs :  and  thofe  Letters  which 
•  were  writ  on  Parchment  or  Magical  Tampana, 
were  done  over  with  a  Gold  Colour,  drawn 
from  the  Bark  of  an  Alder ;  which  Alder  was 
much  efteemed  by  their  Anceftors,  and  is  now 
by  the  Laplanders ,  becaufe  from  its  inward 
Bark  chew'd  with  the  Teeth,  they  get  that 
Gold  Colour  wherewith  they  Paint  all  kinds 
of  Letters  and  Figures  on  their  Tympana.  And 
as  for  its  being  faid  that  fome  defcended  into 
Hell,  being  carried  on  Alder  Sticks ,  it's  on  this 
account,  that  in  their  Divinations  they  ufed 
fuch  Sticks,  in  the  Barks  of  which.  Letters 
and  Circles  were  Cut,  compaffing  about  the 

Stick 


' 


tr  Familiar  Spirits.  28$ 

.,  like  the  various  fj  Serpents.     As 

in  their  Divinati- 
ons, Saturn,  an  J  his   Worfhippcrs 

help  of  the  Drum,  would 
5  in  one  Hand 
p  in  the  other  an  Hammer y  made 
.   of  Alder  or  Horn,    and  has  alio 
1  Serptnr  made  c  f  Copper,  and  not  much  dif- 
g  from  Gold  in  Colour,  which  upon  the 
on  the  Head  of  the  Drum, 
in  and  out,  till  it  fettles  on  fome  Letter 
X  1  igurc,  (hewing  that  to  be  it,  from  whence 
:he  A  is  given  •  moreover,  the  Saturnine 

jpon  beating  the  Drum  a  while,  fell  into  a 
ice,  as  tho'  he  were  Dead,  and  the  Lap- 
landers, by  miftake,  then  thought  the  Soul 
went  out  of  the  Body,  and  after  having  learnt 
many  things,  return d  again;  whereas  their 
Anceftors,  with  Plutarch,  thought  the  Soul 
did  not  go  out  of  the  Body,  but  yielded  for 
fome  time,  and  gave  a  loofe  to  the  Genius, 
which  having  rov'd  about,  told  it  inwardly 
many  things,  which  it  had  fcen  and  heard 
without.  New,  the  things  they  defire  to  fee 
are  of  various  kinds,  either  the  Soul  of  the 
Dead,  or  the  A&icns  of  Men  at  a  great  di- 
stance, or  paft,  or  future  things;  and  he  gives 
inftances  of  fome  eminent  Perfons,  who  came 
from  other  Countries  to  theirs,  to  lee  the 
iGhofts  of  their  Anceltors,  raifed  after  this 
manner,  and  VlaU  owns  that  all  the  Tradition . 
concerning  t  As  and  Hell,   owes 

ts  rife  to  their  North,  which  being  cut  on  a 
:  of  Brafs  was  carried  by  Ops  from  the  Hy- 
iging  to  the  Greeks. 

In 


284  An  Account  of  Genii,1 

;  In  his  Tenth  Chapter  of  his  faid  Third  Vol. 
fpeaking  of  their  Cum  a  which  lies  bfeyond  the  ] 
Baltick,  over-againft  PhUgra,  he  fays,  it  was 
known  formerly  for  Horrible  Magick,  and  the 
Impofture  of  Witches;  where  UlyJJes  and  tineas  \ 
were  feduced,  confulting  the  old  Fate-telling 
Cumaan  Sibyl,  call'd  the  Prophetefs  of  Hell,  be-  I 
caufe  fiie  lived  in  the  remoteft  part  Norths  as  j 
it  were  in  a  Subteraneous  place;    this    Sibyl' 
being  different  from  the  Cumane  Sibyl  in  Italy ; 
jiay,  and  he  here  tells  us,  it  is  to  be  noted>N 
that  whatfoever  of  the  Magick  Art  and  Natu- 
ral Science,  is  afcribed  to  the  Antediluvian 
Giants  by  SynceUus  and  others,  all  this,  both  the 
Greek  Hifiories ,    and   thofe  of  their  Country, 
unanimoufly  afcribe  to  the  North. 

In  his  Twelfth  Chapter  of  the  fame  Volume, 
he  tells  us,  that  Thor,  amongft  other  Names 
given  him,  was  called  Fluge-Guden,  the  Goc 
of  Flies,  driving  away  Magical  Flies  with  his 
Hammer ,  he  being  the  fame  with  Bel&ebub 
mentioned  in  the  Scripture. 

As  for  the  Magical  Flies,  they  were  Damon 
in  the  fhape  of  Blue  Flies,  which  the  Finlander 
kept  in  a  Magical  Touch  or  Satchel,  they  being 
called  by  them  Gan,  that  is,  Spirits,  which  the; 
daily  fent  forth  for  their  Magical  purpofes,  <ui\ 
to  bring  them  News  from  all  parts  of  the  Uni 
verfe,  and  to  do  things  deftru&ive  to  Men^ 
&c  and  thefe  Flies  were  driven  away  by  Sa- 
crifices to  Thor,  tho'  the  Vi&ims  ofrer'd  by 
the  Jews  at  the  Temple  of  Hierufalem  were 
freed  from  Flies,  by  reafon  of  the  Jew*  Faith 
in  God. 

I  thought  fit  to  fubjoyn  this  account  from  Olaus 
Rudbeck,  to  that  of  Schefferus,  they  both  relating1 
to  Magical  Practices,  and  giving  fome  light  to, 
each  other.  I  may 


"8 

! 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  285 

I  may  here  acquaint  the  Reader,  that  Ohms 
\uihtck,  Son  to  the  Famous  Obus,  before  quo- 
:ed,  was  deputed,  Anno  169^  by  the  late  King 
vtden^    Charles  XL  to  Trarel  through  the 
Morthern  Provinces  of  Sweden,  viz.  Lapland, 
|       *ul,  &c.    to   Write  a  Natural  Hiftory  of 
:hem,  giving  an  Account  of  things  peculiar  to 
thofe  Countries,  viz.    the   Plants  and  Flowers, 
S roms,  Metals,    Ghtadrupes,  Birds,  Fiji),  &c.  and 
Anno  1 701.  he  Printed  a  Firft  Part  of  this  in- 
tended Account,  at  Upfal,  in  Quarto,  the  Ge- 
neral Title  of  the  Work  being,  Lipoma  Illu- 
fhata ;  and  the  particular  Title  of  this  Firft  Part 
being  Iter  per  Uplandiant.     In  his  General  Title 
Page,  he  fays,  he  fhall  fet  forth  in  his  Work, 
the  Scituation  of  each  of  the  Countries  he 
there  Names,  and  the  Genius  of  the  Inhabitants, 
but  chiefly  both  the  Habit  of  Body,  and  Dif- 
pofition  of  Mind  of  the  Laplanders,  their  Re- 
ligion, Manners,  Language,  way  of  Converfe, 
and  their  firft  Origin,  beiide  the  account   of 
their  Annimals,  Minerals,  Mountains,  Woods, 
Lakes,  Rivers,  Catarads,  &c.  fo  that,   as  he 
defigns  to  divide  this  W ork  into  feveral  Parts, 
we  may  hope,  in  one  of  them,  to  have  as  ac- 
curate an  Account,  as  may  be  of  their  Magical 
JraRices  and  Superftitions. 

Having  intimated  before  the  Magical  ufe  of 
Drums,  with  other  Superftitious  Pra&ifes  in 
the  Weft-Indies,  I  fhall  give  you  here  what 
Mr.  Wafer .  in  his  Defcription  of  the  Ifthmus  of 
DarUn,  Printed  Anno  1699,  writes  of  it,  which 
is  thus :  We  enquir'd  of  the  Indians  when  they 
cxpedled  any  Ships,  who  faid,  they  knew  not, 
but  would  enquire  concerning  it ;  and  there- 
upon fent  for  fome  of  their  Pawaws,  or  Con- 
jurer ,,  who  came,  ani  went  into  an  Apart- 
ment 


2  86  An  Account  of  Genii, 

ment  by  themfelves,  ftay'd  for  fome  time  at 
their  Exercife,  and  he  and  his  Companions 
could  hear  them  make  moft  hideous  Yeliings> 
and  Shrieks,  imitating  the  Voices  of  all  their 
Birds  and  Beafts :  With  their  own  Noife  they 
joind  that  of  feveral  Stories  ftruck  together,  and 
of  Conch-Shells,  and  of  a  fort  of  Drums,  made  of 
hollow  Samboes,  which  they  beat  upon-,  ma- 
king alfo  a  jarring  Noife  with  Strings  faften'd 
to  the  larger  Bones  of  Beafts ;  and  every  now 
and  then  they  would  make  a  dreadful  excla- 
mation and  clattering,  all  of  a  fudden,  and 
as  fuddenly  make  a  paufe,  with  a  profound 
filence  :  But  finding,  that  after  a  coniiderable 
time,  no  Anfwer  was  made  them,  they  con- 
cluded that 'twas  becaufe  we  were  in  theHoufe, 
and  fo  turn  d  us  out,  and  went  to  work  again ; 
but  ftill  finding  no  return,  after  an  Hour  or 
two  more,  they  made  a  fearch  in  our  Apart- 
ment, and  finding  fome  of  our  Cloaths  hang- 
ing up  in  a  Basket  againft  the  Wall,  they  threw 
them  out  of  Doors  in  a  great  difdain  ;  then 
they  fell  once  more  to  their  Tawawing,  and 
after  a  little  time  they  came  out  with  their 
Anfwer,  but  all  in  a  muck  Sweat ;  fotheyfirft 
went  down  to  the  River,  and  wafh'd  them- 
felves,  and  then  came  and  deliver'd  the  Oracle 
to  us ;  which  was  to  this  effed  :  That  from 
the  tenth  Day,  from  that  time,  there  would 
arrive  two  Ships ;  and  that  in  the  Morning  of 
the  tenth  Day,  we  ihould  hear,  firft  one  Gun, 
and  fome  time  after  another  j  that  one  of  us 
fhould  die  foon  after ;  at  that  going  aboard 
we  fhculd  lofe  one  of  our  Guns ;  all  which 
things  fell  out  exactly,  according  to  the  Pre- 
diction. 
A  Perfon  who  has  fpent  many  Years  in 

Voy- 


or  Familiar  Spirits,  2  %? 

Voyages,  has  alfo  told  mc,  that  he  has  fccn 
Drums  us'd  in  America,  particularly  at  Dominlcoy 
vhere  che  W/.w  ufc  them  to  Paw^w  with, 
or  caufing  Raid  ofr  fair  Weather  5  but  thofe 
>„„/,  h:  hara&ers  on  them  j  they  beat 

hem  with  Micks,  and  have  fome  little  piece  of 
run  br  Stone  on  the  Head  looie,  Which  plays 
rhilethe  jating;  they  utter  alfo  many 

s  all  the  while  they  are  beating,and  fpeak 
rery  loud.    The  fame  Perfon  acquainted  me, 
hie  faw  in  Norwafa  near  ,  an  Artift 

a  Drum,  like  a  Li?!md  Drum,  with  two 
nd  he  obferv'd  nis  Lip  to  move  all  the 
frhifc  >  he  beat  thereon  above  a  quarter  of  an 
Hour,  till  he  was  all  in  a  Sweat,  and  then  he 
'ell  into  a  Trance,  in  which  he  lay  above  half 
m  Hour,  or  near  three  quarters ;  and  upon 
lis  coming  to  himfelf,  he  anfwer'd  the  Que- 
stion had  been  propos'd  to  him. 

Concerning    thefe     Diabolical     Extafies, 
Mr.  Pereaudy  in  the  feventh  Chapter  of  his 
De?nonology3  prefixt  to  his  Antidamon  of  Mafcony 
printed  in  French  at  Geneva,  An.  1656,  writes 
:hus :  The  Devil  caufes  Witches  fometimes  to 
:all  into  Extafies  in  the  Day-time,  caufing  in 
irheir  Bodies  a  deftru&ion  of  their  Spirits  and 
benfe  for  fome  time  j    fo  that  a  Man  would 
fay    their  Soul  were  out  of  their  Body,  and 
"  en  he  puts  lively  Impreffions  of  things  into 
iem  j    while  they  are  in   this  Preternatual 
cep  ,    their  Souls  being ,    as  it  were  ,   re- 
reated  into  themfelves ,    and  fo  fixt,  by  the 
Devil,   to  the  Fancies  and  Illusions  ,  where- 
|  vith    he    amufes    them ,    that    they  firmly 
,    by  this  Imagination  thus  lively  im- 
>refs'd,  that  they  have  done  themfelves,  what 
he   Devil  represented  to  them  by  fuch  Ima- 
ginations. 


2  8  8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

ginations.  There  are  many  Hiftories  of  thefe 
Diabolical  Eitafies,  but  I  fhall  content  my 
felf  in  alledging  one,  and  fo  much  the  rather 
feecaufe  it  happen  d  in  my  time,  in  the  Coun- 
try of  Vaux  ;  about  the  Year  15:94,  as  I  have 
been  affur'd  by  very  Credible  Perfons.  There 
was  at  that  time,  and  in  that  place  ,  a  Bailiff 
of  Berne,  who  having,  one  Day,  invited  the 
Minifter  of  the  faid  place  to  Dinaer,  and  be- 
ing at  Table ,  they  came  to  a  Difcourfe  of 
Witches,  occafion'd  by  the  then  Confinement 
of  one,  as  a  Prifoner,  in  the  Caftle  of  Echakns 
where  they  were,  and  which  Prifoner  was  al- 
ready Condemn'd  to  Die  ,  for  the  Crime  of 
Witchcraft,  and  was  in  a  fhort  time  to  be  Exe- 
cuted, as  he  really  was.  This  Bailiff  fpake  his 
Mind  freely  to  the  Minifter,  his  Paftor,  con- 
cerning many  things  which  this  Witch  con- 
fefs'd  to  have  done,  and  which  he  had  a  diffi- 
culty to  believe  it  poflible  for  him  to  do,  and 
hereupon  being  rifen  from  Table  ,  the  Bai- 
liff went  to  the  Prifon,  and  brought  the  Pri- 
foner, and  having  fpoken  to  him,  among  o- 
ther  things ,  concerning  the  Confeffions  he 
had  made,  and  of  his  Condemnation  follow- 
ing, thereupon  he  Courteoufly  told  him,  that 
he  fhould  confider  v/ell  whether  he  had  not 
done  himfelf  injury,  in  having  confefs'd  thing 
that  he  had  not  done,  minding  him  of  fome  of; 
thofe  things  in  particular ;  hereupon  the  Pri-: 
foner,  who  was  already  difpos'd  to  die  ,  fert- 
Oufly  told  him  ,  that  what  he  had  faid  and 
fonfefs'd,  was  really  true,  and  that  for  Proof 
of  this,  if  he  pleas' d  to  permit  him,  he  would 
kill  the  Cattle  of  a  Neighbour,  whom  he 
nam'd,  fo  he  had  his  Box,  and  his  Stick* 
which  were  at  his  Houfe,  in  a  place  which  he 

nam'd  j 


6r  Familiar  Spirits.  28^ 

nam'd  ;  hereupon  the  Bailiff,  wilUl  .-is- 

fie  t. 

\,  refolving  alio  to  pay  for  the  Cattle 
to  whom  they  bdong'd.      The  Stic!;  an  t  B 
being  brought  ,    \\  I   into  the   Wite 

who  in  the  Pj  of  the  Bailiff, 

the  Miniftcr,  and  fome  others  perform 'd  all 
the  Ceremonies  that  other  Witches  are  wont 
toufe  with  thofe  Inftruments  of  Satan,  till  he 
fell  as  Dead,  at  their  Feet ,  without  any  Mo- 
tion or  Senie  ,  till  about  an  Hour,  or  three 
Quarters  after ,  he  came  to  himfelf,  as  from 
Death  t<  1  ifc  ,  or  as  from  a  molt  profound 
Sleep  j  and  then  being  ask'd  by  the  Bailiff 
whence  he  came  }  I  [e  fai<J  >  he  came  from  kil- 
ling the  Cattle,  which  he  had  mention'd  to 
him,  and  according  to  the  leave  he  had  giv'n 
him  >  prefently  the  Bailiff  fent  to  know  whe- 
ther this  wers  true ,  and  the  Cattle  were 
found  really  Dead,  as  he  had  faid. 

Mr.  Pereaud  adds ;  The  Queftion  is  ,  who 
then  kill'd  the  Cattle,it  could  not  be  the  Witch, 
his  Body  continued  always  in  the  Prefence  ot 
the  Bailiff  and  others ;  to  fay  that  he  went  in 
his  Soul,  feparated  from  the  Body,  this  cannot 
be  ,  for  Realbns  which  he  gives.  It  follows 
then,  it  was  the  Devil  himfelf  that  did  it,  ha- 
ving wrought,  in  the  mean  time^fo  powerfully 
on  the  Imagination  of  the  Witch,  that  he  be- 
liev'd  it  was  done  by  himfelf. 

Varacelfm  has  another  way  of  explaining 
thsfe  things  j  which  I  fhall  leave  to  the  Readers  T§m*  u.c 
Confideration;  it  is  as  follows  ,  TheConftel-  2-f**-  *• 
lation  of  a  Man  may  be  fo  great  in  its  thought,  ™*+Dh  l 
that  in  a  Mans  fleep,  it  may  fend  his  Sydereal  4>^r" 2" 
Spirit  to  another  place,  without  the  aid  of  the 
Elementary  Body  $    that  Aftral  Body  has  a 
U  Powe* 


290  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Power  of  infe&ing  with  Poifon,  weakning, 
diftorting,  blinding,  beating,  killing,  and  in- 
fpii  ing ,  and  that  in  a  Moment,  and  after- 
ward of  returning  to  its  Elementary  Body. 
And  its  a  thing  very  well  known,  that  the  An- 
cients, through  a  ftrong  Imagination,  by  the 
force  of  the  Aftral  Body,  attempted  and  per- 
formed many  things  of  this  kind  againfl:  their 
Enemies;  fo  that  fome  on  a  fudden,  have 
been  rendred  Paraiitical ,  no  Natural  Caufe 
concurring  ;  fome  depriv'd  of  their  Sight, 
fome  made  Leprous,  fome  Strangl'd.  Thefe  and 
the  like  Evils  have  been  infli&ed,  which  could 
fcarce  be  cur'd  again  in  a  very  long  time. 
Therefore ,  let  thofe  Phyficians,  who  meet 
with  fuch  Difeafes  know ,  that  neither  the 
Elements,  nor  Nature  it  felf  breeds  them,  but 
that  they  were  the  Works  of  the  fole  Sydereal 
Body  of  others ;  and  thefe  things  are  eaus'd  in 
Dreams,  when  this  or  that  Man  Dreams  fuch 
a  thing  ;  therefore  according  to  this  Dream, 
judge  of  the  Difeafe  of  others. 

He  adds  beneath.  Though  the  Body,  Soul, 
and  Spirit  are  not  together  at  the  fame  time, 
yet  the  thought  and  Speculation,  or  Ima- 
gination remains  ftill  in  the  Spiiit ,  where- 
fore they  are  often  feen  with  fuch  kinds 
of  Thoughts.  Since  therefore  the  thought  of 
a  Man  is  of  fuch  a  Nature,  therefore  by  the  Sy- 
dereal Spirit  that  thing  is  fo  exprefs-d,  and 
fignified  by  a  Dream,  according  as  one  Spirit 
is  difpos'dto  another  before  he  be  confumed; 
nor  is  this  only  fo  ,  but  alfo  in  Mountains  and 
Woody  Places,  and  in  the  Alps,  a  great  Num* 
-  ber  of  thefe  Sydereal  Spirits  have  been  fome- 
times  feen,  which  have  hurt  Cattle  and  other 
Creatures ,  becaufe  the  Sydereal  Spirits  of 
ne  maintained  an  hatred ,  and  executed  a 

Revenge 


or  Vdtnithr  $ph  p  i 

Revenge  after  Deatfi ,    againft  ch<  I 
bours  vA 

The  folio 
mi; 
the 

.  >•,  in  his  Tra  t  - 

.  r.     3.    qilOtC  ,!US. 

No  I  is  that  Judgment  o; 

ich  I  learnt  atNteies,  /....  1  >. 
when  therefore  thfcy  had  took  upon  them  to 
tell  ,  within   a  Iittl6  lpslce  ,   w  ,   done 

ten  Miles  round,  they  presently  fell  all  down 
as  Dead,  and  laj  to  for  three  Hours;  and  then 
arifing,  thev  told  whatfoevcr  they  had  fcen 
done  in  the  whole  Town  of  N".  «to,  and  in  the 
Country  round  about  it  to  a  goodDiftancc  ; : 
PfactsjtXSH  and  Men  being  obferv'd,all  Which 
things  upm  enquiry  were  found  true;  there- 
fore all  cf  them  being  accus'd  and  found  Gi: 
of  many  Malefices,were  condemn'd  to  the  Fire. 

Ttircbasy    in  his  Extra  :1s  from  Gmiah  Fer di-  p 
jtMnJo  Ovidoj    his  Summary  and  General  Hifto-  c/?#' 
ry  of  tl  :3   writes  thus.     Before  the  In- 

habitants of  J    had  receiv'd  the  Chrl- 

ftian    Faith,    there  was  among  them  a  S 
of  Men,  who  Hv'd  fclitarily  in  tne  Defarcs,  a 
led  their  Life  in  Silence  and  Abftinence,  more 
ftridly   than   t!.  gettsns  3  abftaining  in 

like  manner  from  all  things  that  liv'd  of  Blood, 
contented  only  with  Fruits,  Herbs,  and  Rocts, 
which  the  Detarts  afforded  then!  the  Profef- 
fors  of  this  Sedt  being  calld  they  ap- 

ply 'd  themfelves  to  the  Knowledge  of  Natural 
things,  and  us'd  certain  Secret  Magical  O 
rations  and  Supe;  Virions,  whereby  they  had  a 
Familiarity  with  Spirits,  which  they  allur'd  in- 
to their  Bodies  at  fuch  time  as  they  would 
take  upon  them  to  tell  of  things  to  come, 
U   2  whi 


292  An  Account  o/Genii^ 

which  they  did  as  follows.  When  any  of  the 
Kings  fent  for  any  of  them  out  of  the  Defarts 
for  this  purpofe,  the  Piaces  comes  with  two  of 
his  Difciples  waiting  on  him,  of  whom  one 
brings  with  him  a  Veffel  of  a  Secret  Water^ 
and  the  other  a  little  Silver  Bell ;  when  he 
comes  to  the  place,  he  fits  down  on  a  round 
Stool,  made  for  him  on  purpofe,  one  of  his 
Difciples  ftanding  on  one  Hand  of  him,  and 
the  other,  on  the  other,  in  the  Prefence  of  the 
King;  and  certain  of  his  chief  Retinue  (for 
the  common  People  are  not  admitted  to  thefe 
Myfteries)  and  turning  his  Face  toward  the 
Defart,  he  begins  his  Incantations ,  and  calls 
the  Spirit,  with  a  loud  Voice,by  certain  Names 
which  no  Man  underftands  but  himfelf  and 
his  Difciples.  After  he  has  done  this  a  while, 
if  the  Spirit  deferrs  his  coming  ,  he  drinks  of 
the  faid  Water,  and  therewith  grows  Hot  and 
Furious,  and  inverts,  and  turns  his  Inchant- 
ment ,  and  lets  himfelf  Blood  with  a  Thorn, 
ftrangely  turmoiling  himfelf,  as  we  read  of  the 
furious  Sibyls,  not  ceafing  till  the  Spirit  comes, 
who  prefently  overturns  him,  as  a  Greyhound 
overturns  a  Squiri)  ,-  then,  for  a  while,  he 
feems  to  lie  as  though  he  were  in  great  Pain, 
or  in  a  Rapture ,  wonderfully  tormenting 
himfelf ;  during  which  Agony  ,  one  of  his 
Difciples  fliakes  the  Silver  Bell  continually  ; 
when  the  Agony  is  over ,  and  he  lies  quiet 
(though  without  any  Senfe  or  Feeling)  the 
King,  or  fome  other  in  his  Head,  asks  of  him 
what  he  defires  to  know,and  the  Spirit  Anfwers 
him  by  the  Mouth  of  the  rapt  Places, 
With  a  dired  arid  perfed  Anfwer  to  all  Points. 
On  a  time  a  certain  Spaniard  being  prefent  at 
thofe  Myfteries  with  one  of  the  Kings ,  and 

in 


or  Familiar  Spirit r.  2pj 

in  the  Spanifh  Tongue,  asking  the  Places  con- 
cerning certain  ^hips,  which  they  Iook'd  for 
out  of  Sfam3  tfcic  Spirit  anfwer'd  in  the  hit 

Tongue,  and  told  them  what  Day  and  Hour 
the  Ship  departed  from  Sp  tin3  how  many  they 
were,  and  what  they  brought,  without  failing 
in  any  Point.  If  he  be  ask'd  concerning  the 
Eclipfe  of  the  Sun  or  Moon  which  they  great- 
ly fear  and  abhor  Jhe  gives  a  perfed  anfwcr,and 
the  like  of  Tempefts,  1  amine  ,  Plenty,  War, 
or  Peace ,  and  luch  orher  things.  When  all 
Queftions  are  over, his  Difciples  call  him  aloud, 
ringing  the  Silver  Bell  at  his  Ear,  and  blowing 
a  certain  Powder  into  his  Noftrils,  whereby  he 
is  raifed  as  it  were  from  a  Dead  fleep  ,  being 
yet  fomewhat  heavy  headed,  and  faint  for  a 
good  while  after.  Since  the  Chriftian  Faith 
has  been  difperfed  through  this  IJland  ,  thofe 
Diabolical  Practices  have  ceas'd. 

The  fame  Author  from  the  Fifth  Book  of  ?<«*•  l-: 
Joffhus  Ac*ftay  fpeaking  of  the  Weft-Indians  of  '• 5#  c'  *' 
Mtxkoy  writes  as  follows. 

When  the  Priefts  went  to  Sacrifice,  and  give 
Inccnfe  in  the  Mountains,  or  on  the  tops  there- 
of, or  in  any  dark  and  obfeure  Caves ,  where 
their  Idols  were,  they  us'd  a  certain  Ointment, 
doing  certain  Ceremonies,  to  take  away  fear, 
and  to  give  them  Courage.  This  Un&ion  was 
made  with  divers  little  Venemous  Beafts ,  as 
Spiders ,  Scorpions  ,  V aimers  ,  Salamanders  and 
Vipers.  To  make  an  Ointment  of  thefe  Beafts, 
they  took  them  altogether,  and  burnt  them 
on  the  Hearth  of  the  Temple,  which  was  be- 
fore the  Altar  ,  till  they  were  confum'd  to 
Afhes  ;  then  they  put  them  in  Mortars  with 
much  Tobacco  (which  Herb  they  much  us'd 
to  Benumb  the  Flefh,  that  they  might  not  feel 
U  3  their 


294  ^n  Account  of  Geni\% 

their  Travail  )  with  which  they  mingle  the 
Afhes,  making  them  to  lofe  thtir  force ;  they 
likewife mingl'd  with  th&A(hcs3Scorpio?: .,  Spi^ 
ders^ndPalmers^livQ,  then  they  put  to  it  a  cer- 
taia  Seed  being  ground,  which  they  call'd 
Qkiucbqui,  whereof  the  Indians  make  a  Drink 
to  fee  Vifions ;  the  Vertue  of  this  Herb  be- 
ing to  deprive  a  Man  of  Senfe.  They  like- 
wife  ground  ,  with  thefe  Afhes,  Blacky  and 
Huh j  Worms,  whofe  Hair  only  is  Venemous  ; 
all  which  they  mingled  together  with  the 
Black  3  or  the  fume  of  Rofm,  and  put  it  in 
fmall  Pots,  which  they  fet  before  their  God, 
faying  it  w^s  his  Meat;  and  therefore  they 
called  it  a  Divine  M.at,  by  means  of  this 
Ointment  they  K  came  Witches,  and  law,  and 
fpake  with  the  Devil.  The  Priefts  being 
flubber'd  wit  h  this  Ointment  loft  all  fear,  put- 
ting on  a  Spirit  of  Cruelty;  by  reafon  where- 
of they  very  boldly  kilfd  Men  in  their  Sa- 
crifices, going  all  alone  in  the  Night  to  the 
Mountains,  and  into  obfeure  Caves,  contem- 
ning all  Wild  Eeafts  ,  and  holding  it  for  cer- 
tain, and  approv'd  that  Lions,  Tigers,  Serpents, 
and  other  Furious  Beafts,  which  bred  in  the 
Mountains  and  Forefts,  fled  from  them  by  the 
Vertue  of  this  Tobacco  of  their  God. 
ibid.  The  fame  Author  tells  us,    There  is  a  kind 

cf  Sorcerers  among  the  Indian*  allow'd  by  the 
Kings,  or  Inguas,  who  take  upon  them  what 
form  and  figure  they  plcafe*  flying  far  through 
the  Air  in  a  fliort  time  ,  beholding  all  that  is 
done;  they  talk  with  the  Devil,  who  anfwers 
them  in  certain  Stones,  or  other  things  which 
they  Reverence  much j  they  tell  what  has  pafs'd 
in  the  fartheft  Parts  before  any  News  can 
ccme  j  as  it  has  chane'd  fmce  the  Spaniards  ar- 
rived 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  ipj 

rived  there,  th  it  in  the  Diftance  of  two  or 
three  Hue  Irod  1  eaguesj  thcyhavc  known  the 

Mutinies  Battles,  R  ns  jn]  Deaths,  both 

of  ]  lid  of  thofe  of  the  Kinj/s  Party, 

and  of  p\  tvatc  Men,  which  have  been  known 
the  I  a  \  happen'd  or  the  Day  after, 

a  thing  inwottjble  by  the  Courfe  of  Nature/To 
work  this  Divination  they  fhur  themfelves  in- 
to a  Uld  became  drunk  tiil  they  loft  their 
Senfes,  a  Day  after  rhey  anfwer'd  to  what  was 
demanded,  fome  affirm  they  ufe  certain  Un&i- 
ons.  The  hi.!:  m  fiy,  their  Old  Women  com- 
monly ufe  this  Office  of  Witchcraft,  and  efpe- 
cially  thofe  of  one  Province  ,  which  they  call 
Cojih'o,  and  of  another  Town  they  call'd  Man- 
,  and  of  the  Province  of  Gutirochivi.  They 
likewife  (hew  what  is  become  of  things  ftoln 
and  loft  ;  there  are  cf  thefe  kinds  of  Sorcerers 
in  all  Parts,  they  tell  of  the  Succefs  of  things 
pafs'd ,  or  to  come,  whether  Voyages  ftiall 
be  Profperous ,  whether  a  Man  fh  ill  be 
Sick,  or  (hall  Die,  or  return  fafe,  or  fhall  ob- 
tain that  he  pretends  to  j  they  give  their  An- 
fwers,  yea,  or  no,  having  firft  (poke  with  the 
Devils  in  an  obfeure  place  ;  fo  as  the  Enquirers 
hear  the  found  of  the  Voice,  but  fee  not  to 
whom  thefe  Conjurers  fpeak,  neither  do  they 
underftand  what  they  fay,  they  make  a  thou- 
fand  of  Ceremonies  and  Sacrifices  to  this  ef- 
fect, and  grow  exceeding  Drunk  ,  for  doing 
whereof  they  particularly  ufe  an  Herb  call'd 
Villa,  the  Juice  whereof  they  mingle  with 
their  Cbicay  or  take  it  in  (bme  other  fort. 

The  fame  Author,  from  the  Journal  of  WiU  P.  ?.  /•  u 
Ham  de  Rubrucjuis  a    French  Minorite  Friar j  COn-  c*  *• 
cerning  his  Travels  into  the  Eaftern  parts  of 
World,  An.iz$$.  tells  us,  That  when  the 

u  4  ck*m 


% 96  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Cham  of  Eaft-Tartary  purpofed  to  do  any 
things  he  caufed  Three  Shoulder  Bones  of 
Ramms  to  be  brought  him ;  and  holding  them 
in  his  Hands j  he  thought  of  the  thing  where- 
of he  would  Confult,  whether  he  might  do 
it,  or  not,  and  then  delivered  the  Bones  to 
be  Burnt;  when  they  were  burnt  Black,  they 
brought  them  to  him ;  then  he  lookt  upon 
them,  whether  the  Bones,  by  the  Heat  of 
the  Fire,  were  Cleft  right  length  ways,  if  fo 
he  might  do  it ;  but  if  the  Bones  were  Crackt 
athwart,  or  round  pieces  were  flown  out  of 
them,  then  he  did  not  proceed  ;  for  that  Bone 
is  always  Cleft  in  the  Fire,  or  the  thin  Skin 
which  overfpreads  it,  and  if  one  of  the  three 
were  Cleft  forth  right,  yet  he  did  it.  In 
Mr.  Jenkinforis  Voyage  among  the  Tartars,  we 
may  read  of  fuch  Divinations.  &o  far  Pur- 
chas. 

Now  in  reference  to  this  way  of  Divina- 
tion, a  Lady  now  in  London,  has  told  my  felf, 
that  flie  knew  a  Perfon  in  Ireland,  who  by 
looking  on  the  Plate  Bone  of  a  Shoulder  of 
Mutton,  it  being  of  a  Sheep  that  belong'd  to 
the  Mailer  of  a  Family ,  would  predid  the 
whole  Fate  of  that  Family,  and  that  ufually 
with  fuccefs,  as  to  who  fliould  firft  Die,  and 
rnany  other  Accidents  relating  to  them. 

Mr.  Bedford,  Minifter  of  Temple  Parifh  in 
Brlfiol,  writ  a  Friend  of  his  the  laft  Year,  a 
ftrange  Relation  of  an  Acquaintance  of  his^ 
who  often  cojiverfed  with  Spirits,  and  the 
unhappy  confequences  of  it.     It  is  as  follows. 

About  Thirteen  Years  fince,  I  was  acquain- 
ted with  one  Thomas  Jtrfs9  a  Man  about  20 
Years  of  Age,  who  lived  with  his  Father,  at 
M«ng€rfirfd,    in    the    County    Gkixefter  ,    by 

Trade 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  297 

Trade  a  Bhel-Smitb,  he  was  a  very  good 
Temper'd  N  ireamly  well  Skilled  in  the 

Mac  which  were  his  con- 

ftant  Delight j    to*.  mitty3 

p  Smvifing  and  Algebra ,  and  much 
addided  himfelf  to  Afironomyi  at  length  he  ap- 
plic  and  would  fome- 

times  Calculate  Nativities,  and  refolve  Hora- 
ry Queftions,  &c.  which  he  told  me  prov'd 
oftentimes  very  true ;  but  he  was  not  fatisfied 
with  it,  becaufe  there  was  nothing  in  it,  which 
tended  to  a  Mathematical  Demonftration. 

ring  not  feen   him  for  fome  time,  he 
came  to  me  one  Day,  and  we  being  in  Pri- 
vate, aik'd  me  very  ferioufly  concerning  the 
Lawfulnefs  of  converting  with  Spirits  ;  and 
after  I  had  given  my  Thoughrs  in  the  Nega- 
tive, and  confirnrfd  them   with  the  beft  Rea- 
fons  I  could,  he  told  me  he  had  confidered  all 
thofe  Arguments,  and  believed  they  all  related 
only  to  Conjuration;  but   there  was  an  Inno- 
cent Society  with  them,- 1  hicha  Man  might  ufe, 
if  he  made  no  ccntrad  with  them,  did  no  harm 
by  their  means,  and  was  not  curious  to  pry  into 
hidden  things;  and  that  he  himfelf  had  Dif- 
courfed  with  them,  and  heard  them  Sing,  &c. 
to  his  great  Satisfaction,    and  once  made  an 
offer  to  myfelf,  and  another  time  to  Mr.  Bayfy, 
now  Minifter  of  St.  James's  in  Briihl,  that  if 
we  would  go  with  him  one  Night  to  Kings- 
e  fliould  fee  them,    and  hear 
them  both  Speak  and    Sing,   and  talk  with 
them  on  whatfoever  Subject  we  had  a  mind 
toy  and  we  fhould  return  very  fare  j   but  nei- 
r  of  us    had  the  Courage  to  venture.     I 
I  him  of  the  Subtlety  of  the  Devil  to  de- 

Insform  himfelf  into  an 
T 


2  p  8  An  Account  of  Genii , 

Angel  of  Light;  but  he  could  not  believe  that  it 
was  the  Devil.  •!  had  feveral  conferences  with 
him  on  this  Subjed,  but  could  never  convince 
him  :  In  all  which  I  never  obferv'd  the  leaft  dif- 
order  of  Mind,hisDifcourfe  being  very  rational. 
I  ask'd  him  feveral  particulars  concerning 
the  method  he  ufed,  and  the  difcourfe  he  had 
had  with  the  Spirits ;  He  told  me  he  had  a  Book 
whofe  directions  he  followed,  and  according- 
ly^ in  the  dead  time  of  the  Night,'  he  went 
to  a  crofs  way,  with  a  Lanthorn  and  Candle, 
which  were  Confecrated  for  this  purpofe, 
with  feveral  Incantations:  He  had  aTo  a  Con- 
fecrated Chalk ,  having  a  mixture  of  feve- 
ral things  within  it;  and  with  this  he  ufed  to 
make  a  Circle  at  what  diftance  he  thought 
fit,  within  which  no  Spirit  had  power  to 
enter ;  after  this  he  Invoked  the  Spirits,  by 
ufing  feveral  forms  of  Words ;  fome  of  which 
he  told  me  were  taken  out  of  the  Scriptures, 
and  therefore  he  thought  them  lawful.  The 
Spirits  appeared  accordingly  to  him,  in  the 
fhapes  of  little  Girls  about  a  Foot  and  an  half 
high,  and  play'd  without  the  Circle  :  at  firft 
he  was  fomewhat  affrighted,  but  after  fome 
fmall  Acquaintance,  he  became  pleafed  with 
their  Company  :  He  told  me  they  fpake  with 
a  very  Shrill  Voice  like  an  Ancient  Woman,* 
he  asked  them  if  there  were  a  God,  an  Heaven, , 
and  an  Hell  ?  they  Anfwered  there  were ;  he 
asked  them  what  oeconomy  they  had  among 
themfdves  ?  they  told  him  they  were  divi- 
ded into  Three  Orders:  that  they  had  a  Chief, 
whofe  Refidence  was  in  the  Air,  that  he  had 
feveral  Counfellors,  which  were  placed  in 
the  form  of  a  Globe,  and  he  in  the  Center, 
which    was    the  chiefeft    Order ;     another 

Order 


«r  Familitr  Spirits.  zyy 

Order   was  imp  in  going    to  and   f 

from  thence  to  the  Earth,  y  Intelli- 

gence tVom   the  Lower  Spirits,  according   to 
cLe  Dire&i  >ns  ihey  received  from  thoft  in  the 

This   Defcription    being  contrary    to   the 
account  we  in  Scripture,   of  the  Hie- 

rarchy of  Angels,  made  me  conclude   them 
hut  I  could  never  convince  him :  He 
told  me  he  bid  them   Sing,  and  they  went  to 
behind  a  Eufh,  from  whence 
could  hear    ;i    pleafant   Confort ,   but  of 
fuch  Mufick,    c  f  which  he    never  heard  the 
like  j    and  in  the   upper  part  he  could  hear 
fomething  very  harfh  and  fhrill  like  a  Reed,  but 
as  it  was  managed,  gave  a  particular  Grace 
to  all  the  reft. 

About  a  Quarter  of  a  Year  after  this,  he 
came  to  me   again,    and  told  me  he  wiflied 
now  he  had  taken  my  Advice,  for  he  thought 
he  had  done  that,  which  would  coft  him  his* 
,  and  his  Eyes  and  Countenance  fhew'd 
a  great  alteration.     I  asked   him  what  he  had 
done  ?    he  told  me  that  being  Bewitch'd  by 
his  Acquaintance,    he   refolved  to  proceed 
farther  in  this  Art,  and  to  have  fome  Familiar 
Spirits  at  his  Command,  according  to  the  di- 
rections of  his  Book ,    which  were  to   get  a 
#£ook  made  of  Virgin  Parchment,  and  Con- 
fecrated   with  feveral  Incantations,    as  alfo 
particular  Ink,    Inkhorn,  Pens,  &c.   for  this 
purpofe;  with  thefe  he  was  to  go  out  as  ufual 
to  a  Crbfs-way,    call  upon  a  Spirit,  and  ask 
him  his  Name,  which  he  was  to  enter  in  the 
Firft  Page  of  his  Book ,  and  this  was   to  be 
his  Chief  Famiiiar.     Thus  he  was  to   dc  by  as 
I  many  as  hepleafed,  Writing  their  Names  in 

diftind 


3  o©  An  Account  of  Genii, 

diftind:  Pages,  only  one  in  a  Leaf,  and  then, 
whenever  he  took  the  Book  and  opened  it, 
the  firft  whofe  Name  prefented,  fhould  ap- 
pear :  his  Chief  Familiar  he  faid  was  called 
Malchiy  after  he  had  done  this,  they  appear'd 
to  him  falter  than  he  defired,  and  in  mod 
Difmal  Shapes,  as  of  Serpents,  Lions,  Bears, 
&c  and  hift  at  him ,  and  attempted  tc 
throw  Spears,  and  Balls  of  Fire;  he  was  very 
much  Affrighted,  and  the  more  becaufe,  he 
found  it  not  in  his  power  to  Lay  them,  info- 
much  that  his  Hair  ftood  an  end,  and  he  ex- 
pected every  moment  to  be  Torn  in  Pieces. 
This  was  in  December  about  Midnight,  when 
he  continued  there  in  a  Sweat  till  break  oi 
Day,  at  which  time  they  left  him,  and  from 
that  time  he  was  never  well  as  long  as  he  liv'd 
He  always  faid  he  never  made  any  Compacts 
with  any  of  thefe  Spirits,  nor  ever  did  any 
Harm  by  their  means,  nor  pry'd  into  Future 
Concerns,  relating  to  himfelf,  or  others,  anc 
expreft  an  hearty  Repentance  for  his  Sin. 

A  farther  account  of  this  Matter  may,  per- 
haps, be  had  from  his  Relations,  or  Neigh- 
bours  in    Mangerfield   in    Gloucefter-jhire ,    not 
above  a  Mile  out  of  the  Road,  betwixt  Brifto 
and  Bath. 

I  formerly  gave  an  Account  of  this  Affair, 
to  the  late  Bifhop  of  Hereford,  in  which  pro- 
bably there  are fome  things  containd,  which 
I  do  not  now  remember,  and  which,  perhaps, 
may  be  procured  from  his  Lady,  now  living 
near  Gloucefler,  which  Account  would  be  more 
Authentick.     So  far  Mr  Bedford. 

Janus  Matthew,  an  Italian  Phyfician,  Prin- 
ted a  Book    of  Problems,  at  Venice,  Anno  i)6j. 
The  Firft  Problem  there  treated,  is  this :   Whe- 
ther. 


or  familiar  Spirits*  301 

ther  there  are  Demons,  and  whether  they  arc 
fes  of  Dit  according  to   the  Opi- 

nions of  Divines,  Philofophers  and  Phyficians. 
In  the  Third  Book  of  this  Problem,  he  gives  us 
a  Relation  much  like  the  foregoing  Relation 
of  Mr.  Bcdfvriy  and  lays,  he  had  it  from  many 
Pcrfons  worthv  of  Credit,  and  from  the  Au- 
thor of  the  thing  himfelf.     It  is  as  follows. 

After  the  Death  of  Julius  Albcrtus,  a  Law- 
yer, a  certain  Friend  of  mine,  a  Lawyer  alfo, 
lei  zed  on  a  certain  i  ntick  Book,  which 

had  been  kept  in  a  Box  of  the  (aid  Alhm  • 
having  got  it  into  his  poffeflion,  he  prcfently 
returnd  into  a  \  n,  where  his  Wife  was 

Born,  before  the  dilcovcry  of  the  Theft; 
there  he  Lived  a  long  time,  and  Died,  never 
having  tried  the  Power  of  the  Bcok,  he  being 
[wholly  Ignorant  oftheMagick  Art;  but  oa 
a  day  unwarily  whifper'd  out  fomething,  con- 
cerning its  Magical  Power,  to  his  only  Son^ 
named  Arri<vabenusy  my  familiar  Acquaintance, 
his  Father  being  Dead,  and  he  having  Mar? 
fried  a  Rich  Wife,  was  drawn  by  fame  falfe 
Companions,  into  the  Fallacious  Pxadice  ofc 
Chymiftry,  and  when,  after  a  while,  he  had 
fpent  much  of  his  Wives  Fortune,  and  almoft 
all  of  his  Paternal  Eftate  in  Chymical  Practi- 
ces to  no  purpofe,  he  lights  on  a  day,  on  a  cer- 
tain German  Traveller,  who  was  Skilful  in  the 
.Art  of  Chymiftry,  whom  he  carried  to  his 
Houfe,  and  they  there  try'd  Chymical  Expe- 
riments together  a  long  time,  but  ftill  in 
vain  ;  whereupon  at  length  he.difcover'd  to 
the  German,  that  he  had  a  Magical  Book,  and 
fhew'd  it  him,  but  with  engagement  of  Secrefy ; 
the  German  conlidering  the  Book,  laid  to  him,, 
pray  let  us  try  whether  this  Book  contains 

Tr 


3  oi  An  Account  of  Genu, 

Truth  or  Dreams,  and  en  an  appointed  Day 
Arrivabenus  took  with  him  the  Book,  and  a 
Sword  (  the  German  going  with  him  unarm' d, 
(  for  fo  it  was  agreed  betwixt  them ;  )  and  be- 
fore Sun  Rifing  they  went  into  a  Valley,  thro* 
which  a  Torrent  ran,  and  fo  went  into  a 
thick  Wood;  on  the  left  fide  of  the  Torrent, 
in  the  midft  of  which  having  cut  fome  Bufhes 
with  the  Sword,  and  made  an  Area,  as  it  was 
neceflary ;  prefently  fome  Ceremonies  being 
premitted  by  the  German,  wont  to  be  ufed  for 
fuch  end,  and  a  large  Circle  being  made  with 
a  Rod j  with  certain  Geometrical  Figures, 
they  both  enter  into  it.  Then  Arrl'vubenui 
himfelf,  who  would  not  deliver  the  Book  to 
the  German,  (  they  having  fo  agreed  ,  held  it 
firmly  in  his  Left  Hand,  and  the  Sword  in  his 
Right,  and  at  the  Germans  Command  open'd 
it;  which  being  done,  the  German  in  the 
German  Tongue,  called  only  two  Damons  to 
appear  in  Soldiers  Habits;  and  prefently 
with  a  great  Wind  and  Noife,  two  Damons 
came,  one  a  Horfeman  with  an  Head-piece 
and  a  Coat  of  Mail,  and  all  other  meet  Arms, 
and  Riding  on  a  Black  Horfe ;  the  other  a 
Foot  Soldier,  going  befcre  him,  girt  with  a 
Sword,  and  having  a  Snapfack  on  his  Shoulder, 
whofe  Eyes  fliined  with  certain  movable 
Flames,  that  you  would  have  judg'd  them 
Colliers,  and  would  fcarce  have  been  able  to 
look  on  them  :  prefently  as  thefe  Damons  ap- 
peared to  the  Men,  they  faid,  what  do  you 
Ask  ?  to  thefe  the  German  made  an  Anfwer, 
and  asked  them  many  things  in  the  German 
Tongue,  and  received  their  Anfwers  to  all 
things  in  particular.  At  length  as  he  had 
commanded  them  to  return  to  Hell,  as  they 


were 


or  Familiar  Spirits,  305 

e  going  away  ,  At  W 

think  you   will  become   of  our  A 
which    as    the 
fwer ,  begone   ftys  the 
man  Tongu  ik  no   more;  w  n, 

they  rettirn'd  to  Hell,    with  the  fame  Wl 
and    N(  rtA     After 

ilfhed  ifi  ■>  began  to  Upbraid  the 

for  having  done  111,  in  hindrll  g  tlic 
Devil  from  giving  them  an  Anfwer,  as  to 
theii  .    md  the  next   day  difmift  him. 

And  by  reafon  that  for  two    Yeafi  aftxrwa: 
Arrvvjibtvus\  Wives    Uncles  would    not   Pay 
him  what  rcm;iind  in  th<  \i  of  her  For- 

tune,, as  he  delired,  becaufe  he  had  managed 
his  Affairs  111 ;  being  ftruck  with  a  Rage,  he 
takes  his  Dxmonical  Book,  and  goes  to  the 
fame  Wood  and  Area  j  and  having  performed 
all  things  but  one,  which  the  German  had 
done  there  before;  behold,  prefently,  with 
the  fame  Wind  and  Noife  of  the  Trees,  innu- 
merable ]\imons>  with  Frightful  Countenan- 
ces, and  carrying  rugged  Staves  in  their  crock- 
ed Hands,  appear  (  for  through  Rage  Arr\<v.:~ 
got  to  command,  Both  how  man}', 
and  in  what  appearance  they  fliould  come  to 
him,  as  the  German  had  done  before )  and 
flood  about  the  Circle  he  had  made,  within 
which  the  Miferable  Man  flood ;  and  they 
fcar'd  him  with  Threats,  and  endeavoured  to 
pull  him  out  of  the  Circle,  ?V  ofthemear- 
neftly  Asking,  what  will  you  have?  what  will 
Vou  have  ?  whereupon  being  Frighted  and 
befide  himfelf,  and  running  to  and  fro  within 
the  Gircle,  in  an  horrid  Fear,  he  fell  at  length 
out  of  the  Circle  unawares ;  the  Damom  then 
fell  a  Beating  him,  pulling  him  here  and  there, 

and 


304  An  Account  of  Genu, 

and  ftrove  to  take  the  Book  from  him,  bi 
could  not  do  it,  he  having  hid  it  in  his  Bofor 
Mean  while  Arrivabenm  fometimes  Running, 
ft  metimes  Creeping,   came  at  length  to  the 
Bridge,  which  is  over  the  River,  for  he  wa< 
not  fo  far  befide  himfelf,  that  he  had  quite 
forgot  his  right  way,    but  the  Damons  thre\ 
him  from  the  Bridge  into  the  River,  fo  tha 
he  was  nigh  Suffocated  in  the  Mud  and  Wa 
ter;  now,  a   Country  Man  cafually   driving 
an  Afs  to  fetch  Wood,  paft  over  the  Bridge 
where  his  Afs  being  frighted,  and  flying  back 
he  faw  Arrivabenus  tumbling  in  the  Mud,  hal 
Dead,  he  called  to  him,  and  laying  hold  of  his 
Hair,  drew  him  out  of  the  Mud,  and  by  the 
help  of  his  Afs,  carried  him,  with  much  ado 
to  his  Wife  in  the  Town ;    who  finding  th 
Book  in  his  Bofom,  which  fhe  had  heard  him 
fpeak  of  before,  fhe  took  it  privately  from  him 
and  had  it  burnt.    Arrivabenus  lookt  Pale  anc 
111  ever  after  it,  tho5  he  Lived  a  long   time 
And   Anno  1J91.    upon  my  requeft,    freely 
gave  me  this  Relation ,   word  for  word,    I 
having  heard  of  it   long  before  from  fome 
others.    Janus  JVLttbeus  adds  for  a  clofe;  Now 
what  poffibly  may   our  great   Philofophers, 
the  Perepateticks  here  Anfwer  ?  Truly  they  will 
either  deny  Inftances  of  this  kind,  for  that 
they  confift  of  Particulars,  which  are  neither 
known  bv  Difcipline,  nor  by  the  Undemand- 
ing :  or  fuch  things  being  granted,  they  would 
fay  that  thefe  are  not  Hiftories,   but    mee 
Dreams  of  fome  Melancholly  Relators,    fo 
certain  Melancholly  Perfons  fo  fixtly  Drear 
in  the  Night  (  as  it  fometimes  happens  to  Lc 
vers  and  Jealous   Perfons )    of  thofe    thing 
which  with  a  moft  vehement  afFed  they  Defire, 

Hope, 


or  Kvniliar  Spirit*.  305 

hope,  abhor  or  fear  in  the  Day,  that  they  fecra 
molt  truly  to  fjc  the  Ante  waking  in  tne  Day 
time  ;  according  to  that  of  Averrbocs.     Its  no  r-  *  Jto* 
ftrange  thine  that  fome  Man  m  iv  fee  when  a-  ^  ^* 
wake,  what  flecping  he  did  in  his  Dr  ]  iy, 

perhaps  he  will  fee  the  very  form  of  the  thing, 
and  not  irs  likenefs,  as  its  (aid  of  G»um.*r.     bo 
[anus  Matthctus. 

Kirchcr,  in  his  OeJip.  <s£nfi.Tom.  5.  f>.  82.  tells 
us,  That  in  the  mid  ft  cf*  the  Subterraneous 
AAytAoi  the  Egypt  L?:*  ,  there  was  an  Altar  or 
Table  plac'd,  and  in  it  the  whole  Concatena- 
te*! Series  of  the  Gw/,  were  ixp  eilnted  by  fuch 
hidden  .symbols,  that  they  did  not  only  notioe 
the  hidden  Recefles  of  the  greateft  MyfLries, 
but  they  had  alfoan  infallible  efficacy, to  make 
one  of  them  which  the  Priefts  had  a  Mind,per- 
fonally  to  appear,by  horrible  and  execrabL  Ad - 
juratiens,and  Analogons  Rites  and  Ceremonies, 

There  are  many  Relations  of  Houfes  infefted 
with  Demons  by  Magical  Practices  ,  caullng 
Noifes  in  them  ,  throwing  Stones ,  &c.  of 
which  I  fhali  give  only  this  Inftance.  joam  ln£pit. 
Chtvrrim  tells  us,  that  An.  85^,  an  evil  Spirit  Mftor. 
infefted  the  City  of  Mentz,,  and  the  Neigh- 
bouring Places :  firft  throwing  Stones ,  and 
making  Noifes  againft  the  Walls  of  the  Houfes, 
and  then  growing  troubl  fome  to  Men,  he  be- 
gan, in  a  while  to  fpeak  ,  and  to  tell  what 
things  were  ftoln  ,  and  fo  to  fow  (Mfcord  a- 
mong  Neighbours ;  at  length  he  rtirr'd  up  the 
Minds  of  all  againft  one  Man,  as  though  they 
fuffer'd  all  thofe  things  for  his  Sins  ;  and  into 
whatfoever  Houfe  he  went,  it  prefently  took 
on  Fire  :  nor  was  he  free  in  the  Fields,  for 
Fruits  being  there  heap'd  together,  they  were 
cenfum'd   with  Fire  ,    and  when  the  Neigh- 

X  bours 


^oo  An  Account  of  Genii, 

bours  for  this  fell  upon  him  ,  and  were  about 
to  kill  him,  he  prov'd  his  Innocency  by  car- 
rying a  burning  hot  Iron  in  his  Hands.  He 
continued  acting  thus  for  three  Years  ,  till  he 
had  confum'd  all  the  Houfes  with  Fire. 

There  was  an   Inftance  of  this  kind,  the* 
iaft  Year  in  Somerfetjhire  ,  at  Butley  ,  near  G/*- 
ftenbury,  where  lives  one  Mr.  Tope,  whofe  Son 
being  about  13  or  14  Years  of  Age,  fell  often 
into  Fits  ,    and  in  his  Fits  faid ,  his  Fathers 
Houfe  would  be  Burnt  by  Spirits,  whom  he 
fometimes  faw  j    and  the  Houfe  was  Burnt 
down  accordingly  ,    and  a  Stall  with  three 
Oxen  in  it  ,  and  feme  Wheat  Mows  in  his 
backfide  :  and  Stones  were  feen  to  come  in  at 
the  Windows  in  the  Day  time,  no  Man  per- 
ceiving from  what  Hand  they  came  ;    as  a 
Perfon   of   Ghfienbury  told   my  felf,  the  laft 
Summer,  at  IVells,  in  the  faid  County ;  he,  up- 
on his  being  in  the  Houfe,  having  feen  many 
Stones  fo  come  in  at  the  Windows.  This  Vex-* 
ation   continued  a  long  time,  though  now  I 
hear  it's  ceas'd,  and  the  Houfe  is  rebuilding : 
There  are  many  more  particulars  to  be  brought 
concerning  this  Fact  ,  and  ,    if  any  Man  can 
make  out,  that  all  thefe  things  were  done  by 
Trick,and  Contrivance  as  fome  fay  they  werej 
they  may  do  well  to  fatisne  the  World  of  it. 

I  know  the  late  Dr.  Bekker ,  in  his  Book  en- 
titled, Le  monde  Encb  ,ntey  laughs  at  all  things  of 
this  Nature,  as  done  by  Humane  Contrivance^ 
and  Mr.  Scot,  in  his  Difcovery  of  Wttchcr,fty 
writes  thus :  .  I  could  recite  a  great  Number 
'  c#  of  Tales,  how  Men  have  ev'n  forfaken  their 
Houfes ,  becaufe  of  fuch  Apparitions  and 
Noifes ;  and  all  has  been  by  iheer  and  rank 
Knavery  ^    and  wherefoever  you  fhall  hear 

that 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  307 

that  there  is  in  the  Night  Seafon  fuch  rnmblii 
and  fearful  Nc "  Ilalfur'd,  tl 

it  is  flat  Knavery  ,  performed 
feem  mod  to  compl  tin,  and  are  lead  fufped- 
ed;  and  hei\  ry  Art  ,  which  for 

fome  refpeds  I  will  not  difcoVer.     The  Devil 
s  daily,  as  w  nightly   whom  he  may 

Devour,  and  can  do  his  Feats  as  well  1 
as  by  Night,  or  elfc  he  is  a  Young  Devil,  61 
very  Bungler. 

I  ki  t  what  may  be  offend  to  Men  of 

fuch  obftin  (ions,  who   will  h 

all    things  done  by   Impofture  ,   which  fee 
ftrange  10  them, and 

I  may  indulge  their  Humour  Co  for,  that  if<  n- 
ly  one  Perlon  tells  a  very  ftrang:  ,  a 

Man  may  be  more  apt  to  think  i:  poilible  for 
that  Perfon  to  lye,  than  that  fo  ftrange  a  Re- 
lation fhould  be  true ;  but  if  a  coniiderable 
number  of  Perfons,  of  feveral  Countries,  fede- 
ral Religior.>  il  Ptfofeffion  i  I  Ages, 
and  thefe  Perfons  look'd  upon  to  be  of 
great  Sagacity  ,  as  any  the  Countries  afford, 
agree  in  Relations  of  the  fame  kind,  though 
very  ftrange  ,  and  are  ready  to  vouch  the 
Truth  of  them  upon  Oath  ,  after  having  well 
confider'd  Circumftances  ,  I  think  it  a  violati- 
on of  the  Law  of  Nature,  to  reject  all  thefe 
Relations  as  fabulous,  meerlv  upon  a  felf  pre- 
fuming  Conceit,  unlefs  a  Man  can  fairly  fhew 
the  things  to  be  Impoflible,  or  wherein  thofe 
Perfons  were  impos'd  on.  T)T.KBeiter  rejc 
all  the  Fads  alledg'd  for  proving  the  Operations 
of  Demons,  and  among  others  the  Fads  of  the 
Demons  of  M  {con  and  Teiwirth ,  as  being  done 
by  Combinations  of  Servants,  or  others;  and 
Would  have  the  World  acquiefe  in  his  Ar- 
X  2                          bit; 


308  An  Account  of  Genii, 

bitrary  fay  fo  3  without  any  manner  of  Proof, 
01  ly  alledging  this  frivolous  Pretence,  that 
there  have  been  Impoftures  in  that  kind  ,  and 
therefore  thofe  mull  be  fo ;  a  notable  confe- 
rence which  fhould  a  School-Boy  infer,  he 
would  deferve  lafhing  y  but  I  (hall  fay  fome- 
what  concerning  Dr.  Bekker  sWovk  beneath  fit 
being  Inftar  Omnium  in  its  kind)  and  therefore 
fhall  fay  no  more  of  it  here  :  leaving  the  Fads 
at  lie  {con  and  Tedworth  to  Men  of  unbyafs'd 
Thoughts  to  judge  of  them  as  they  fee  caufe  : 
Tb.fe  Relations  feeming  to  me  well  attefted, 
2nd  as  well  examin  d  as  if  the  Critical  Dr. 
Belter  had  been  a  Party  concerned  on  that  Ac- 
count. Indeed  it  may  not  be  eafy  fometimes 
to  difcover  how  a  thing  is  done  by  Trick3  tho' 
it  be  really  fo  ;  as  the  Lord  Howard,  in  his  De- 

.  fmfatyOt  g,  infi  fupposd  Prophecies,  c.  17.  where 
he  treats  of  Mens  Conference  with  damnd 
Spirits  and  Familiars,,  tells  us3  That  himfelf 
was  prefent  with  divers  Gentlemen  and  No- 
blemen, who  undertook  to   defcry  the  fineft 

s  Sights  ♦'hat  Schotto  ,  the  Italian  ,  was  able  to 
Play,  by  Leger  Ju  M  in,  before  Queen  Eliza- 
beth, Who  notwithftanding  were  no  lefs  be- 
guird  than  the  reft.,  that  prefum'd  lefs  on  their 
Dexterity  and  Skill  in  thofe  Matters.  And  ne- 
vertheless I  think  it  may  not  be  difficult  to  di- 
fcern  that  fome  Fa&s^and  among  others,  thofe 
that  pafs'd  at  Majcon  and  Ted-worthy  were  above 
'  all  Humane  Performance.  Mr.  Scot ,  indeed 
tell  US,  There  is  a  peculiar  Art  for  doing  thefe 
things,  which  for  fome  refpetls  he  will  not  difco- 
ver. I  fuppofe  by  this  Art  he  does  not  mean  a 
common  Combination  of  Servants  (  as  Dr. 
Bckker  feems  to  be  of  Opinion  it  is.,  though  he 
prefently  fubjoins,   that  the  Devil  can  (hew 

Tricks 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  jop 

Tricks  as  well  by  Day,    as  by  Night,  intima- 
ting as  though  thofcN"  .  only  happen 
in  Houfes  by  Night  (a  time  favouring  lm| 
fturea  )  which  is  a  great  tniftakej   for  in  the 

Relations  of  the  Damons  I  >;  and  7i  dworthy 

and  that  I  have  given  before/and  in  many  other 
Relations  of  the  like  kind;  we  find  that  many 
Fads  pafs'd  in  the  Day  time,  as  wellas  by  Night, 
and  that  Stones  have  been  thrown  at  Perfons 
in  open  Fields,  in  the  Day  time,  by  an  invi- 
fible  Hand  ,  when  many  have  been  prefnt. 
And  notwithftaning  this  pretence  of  an  Art, 
unlefs  Men  have  an  Art  to  make  themfelves 
inviiible,  (as  Hijhry  tells  us,  I  know  not  with 
what  truth,  fome  have  done  )  I  fhall  never  be- 
lieve that  any  Man  fliall  be  able  fairly  to  folve 
the  Fads  we  have  recorded  of  Hcufes  and  o- 
ther  Places  infefted  ,  bv  any  Performance  of 
Man;  allowing  ftill  that  there  have  been  many 
Jmpoftures  in  this  kind,  and  that  manyftrange 
things  may  be  performed,  as  to  the  Conveyance 
of  Voices  and  Sounds  by  a  deep  infight  in  Acou- 
fitch  and  Vhonicks. 

I  fhall  not  conceal  here,  that,  in  reference 
to  what  pafs'd  at  Tcdworth  ,  a  Perfon  lately 
told  me,  Mr.  MompejJ'on  own  d  privately  to  the 
late  Kir  Us  the  Second,  that  all  that  pafs'd 

at  his  Houfe  at  Tedworth  was  done  by  Contri- 
vance: And  another  Perfon  has  told  me.it  was 
done  by  two  Young  Women  in  the  Houfe, 
with  a  defign  to  fcare  thence  Mr.  Munpejjins 
Mother  ;  this  was  told  them  by  others,  and  I 
found  them  inclin'd  to  a  Belict  of  it,  bu:  who- 
ever related  this  ,  unlefs  they  were  obfti  arc 
Oppofers  of  the  Truth,  cither  had  not  {:cny 
or  duly  coniider'd  the  Letter  writ  by  Mr. 
i  to  Mr.  GLnvil,  Nov.  the  8;£.  16-2. 


3  l  o  An   Account  of  Genii, 

nor  that  writ  by  him  to  Mr.  Collins,  one  of  the 
Bookfellers  that  undertook  the  Impreflion  of 
his  Book  ,  it  being  dated  Aug.  the  8tb.  1674, 
in  the  firft  mention'd  of  thofe  Letters  he 
writes  thus  :  I  have  been  very  ofcen  of  late 
ask'd,  whether  I  have  not  confefs'd  to  his  Ma- 
jefty,  or  any  other,  a  Cheat  difcover'd  about 
that  Affair.  To  which  I  gave,  and  fhall  to 
my  dying  Day;,  give  the  fame  Anfwer,  that  I 
mull  belye  my  felf,  and  perjure  my  felf  alfo, 
to  acknowledge  a  Cheat  in  a  thing,  where  I 
am  fure  neither  was,  nor  could  be  any,  as  my 
felf,  the  Minifter  of  the  Place ,  and  two  o* 
ther  honeft  Gentlemen,  depos'd  at  the  AJJIz.es, 
upon  my  impleading  the  Drummer ;  and  tho* 
I  am  fure  this  damnable  Lye  does  pafs  for  cur- 
rent among  one  fort  of  Perfons  in  the  World, 
yet  I  Queftion  not  but  the  thing  obtains  Credit 
among  thofe ,  whom  I  principally  defire 
fhould  retain  a  more  Charitable  Opinion  of 
me,  than  to  be  any  way  a  Devifer  of  it,  only 
to  be  talk'd  of  in  the  World,  to  my  own  Difad-> 
vantage  and  Reproach. 

In  his  Letter  to  Mr.  Collins ,  he  informs  him 
of  what  was  depos'd  upon  Oath,  and  by  whom 
at  the  Ajjiz.es  at  Sarum,  concerning  this  Affair, 
where  he  writes  thus  5  The  Evidence  upon 
Oath  were  my  felf \  one  Mr.  William  Mat  on,  and 
one  Mr.  Waiter  Dowfe ,  all  yet  living,  and  I 
think  of  as  good  Repute,  as  any  this  Country 
has  in  it  ;  and  one  Mr.  John  Craggy  then  Mi- 
nifter of  the  Place  ,  but  fince  dead :  We  all 
depos'd  feveral  things  ,  that  we  conceiv'd  im- 
poffible  to  be  done  by  any  Natural  Agents,  as 
the  Motion  of  Chairs,  Stools,  and  Bedftaves, 
no  Body  being  near  them  ,  the  beating  of 
Drums  in  the  Air ,  over  the  Houfe,  in  clear 

Nights, 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  3 1 1 

Nights,   with  feveral  other  things  of  the  like 
Nature.      Theft  Witncffcs  hbours, 

1  depos'd  that  diey 
tilings  almoft  every  Day   or  Night,   for  many 
Months  togcthu 

The  ling  Letters  are  Printed  at  the 

end  to  the  Second  Part  of  Mr. 

Glan  mphatMs,  Printed  toge- 

ther with  the  Firft  Part,  Atm.  1681. 

After  the   io\  Declaration    of   Mr. 

Mo».  I   mull   free  v  tell  all  Men,  that 

fhall  pretend  a  Cheat  in  the  Tranflation  at 
vorth,  that  till  they  fairly  make  appear  to 
the  \\rorld ,  by  whom  the  Cheat  was  play'd, 
and  how  the  Fads  Sworn  to  were  perform' d, 
the  Impofture  muft  lie  at  their  Door. 

If  we  may  believe  Luther,  he  tells  us,  in  hisc^.  3$.-] 
TMeTJk,  That  he  departed  from  Worms,  and 
not  far  from  Eifinacb,  was  taken  Prifoner,  and 
was  lodged  in  the  Caftle  oi  Wart  burg  inPathmoy 
in  a  Chamber  far  from  People  ,  where  none 
could  have  accefs  to  him  ,  but  only  two  Boys 
that  twice  a  Day  brought  himMeatand  Drink, 
among  other  things  they  brought  him  Hazle 
Nuts,  which  he  put  into  a  Box,  and  fome- 
times  us'd  to  eat  of  them.  In  the  Night  times  the 
Devil  came,  and  got  the  Nuts  out  of  the  Box, 
and  crack'd  them  againft  one  of  the  Beds  Pofts, 
making  a  very  great  Noife,  and  a  rumbling 
about  his  Bed,  but  he  regarded  him  not  j  when 
afterwaid  he  began  to  [lumber,  he  kept  fuch 
a  racket  and  rumbling  upon  the  Chamber 
Stairs,  as  if  many  empty  Hogflieads  and  Bar- 
rels had  beeji  tumbled  down  ;  and  tho'  he 
knew  the  Stairs  were  ftrongly  guarded  with 
Iron  Bars,  fo  that  no  PalVage  was  either  up 
or  down  ,  yet  he  arofe  and  went  towards  the 
X  4  Stairs 


jii  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Stairs  to  fee  what  the  matter  was,  but  find- 
ing the  Deor  faft  fhut,  he  faid,  Art  thou  there  ? 
So  be  there  ftitt ;  and  fo  he  committed  him- 
felf  to  Ckrift,  and  laid  him  down  to  reft  again. 
So  far  Luther. 

I  went  my  felf  once  to  fee  a  Gentleman  near 
Bath,  and  came  to  his  Houfe  about  Eleven  of 
the  Clock  in  the  Morning,  his  Lady  faid  to 
me,  ftie  wifh'd  I  had  come  fooner,  for  about 
an  Hour  before  ,  as  fhe  was  coming  in  at  the 
fore-door  of  the  Houfe,  fhe  faw  the  Minifter 
of  the  Parifh  come  into  the  Entry,  at  the  back- 
door, and  to  go  into  the  Hall,  whom  fhe  pre- 
fently   followed  ,    but  found  him  not  there, 
whereupon  fhe  went  up   to  her  Chamber, 
where  a  Midwife  was  to  attend  her,  fhe  being 
nar  her  time  of  being  brought  to  Bed,  and 
finding  the  Minifter  not  there,  as  fhe  expe&ed, 
fhe  was  much  furprifed,  and  fent  to  his  Houfe 
to  enquire  for  him,  and  it  was  found  ,  he  had 
not  ftirred  out  of  his  Houfe  that  Day  ;  but 
withal  the  Gentleman,  I  was  to  fee,  told  me, 
they  had  every  Night  Noifes  in  their  Houfe,  as 
though  a  Man  fhould  ft rike  Hundreds  of  ftrokes 
with  a  Mallet  on  an  empty  Hogfhead  ,  which 
kept  himfelf ,  and  his  whole  Family  waking  ; 
and  faid,  if  I  would  ftay  a  Night  with  him  I 
fhould  hear  the  fame;  but  my  occafions  would 
not  then  permit  me  to  ftay. 

There  are  a  World  of  well  attefted  Relati- 
ons in  this  kind  ,  but  all  muft  be  Cheat  and 
Impofture  with  feme  Men,  becaufe,  forfooth, 
they  will  have  it  Co. 

To  deliver  fomewhat  of  my  own  Opinion 
concerning  the  Power  of  Magick ;  I  muft  own 
my  felf  to  have  been  long  guided  by- the  Cau- 
tion giv  n  us  by  Com  Jgrippa,  to  prevent  being 

impos'd 


or   Familiar  Spirits.  }  '  ] 

impos'd  on  by  Pretenders  to  M  'gick  ,  and  o- 

thcr  curious  mid  abftrufe  Arcs  ,  in  m  Lni- 
ftle  he  font    to  his  I  rund,  the  Ahb<  }ua  fy  '-  *• 

he  writes  as  follows :    I)  P#lf 

care  you  are  not  deceived  by  thefe  who  have 
been  deceived,  for  no  reading  of  Books  what* 
foever  cin  dire#  you  in  this,  they  being  fill  d 
with  meer  v±nlgtnas.  O  !  How  great  things 
arc  written  concerning  the  Power  of  the  M.- 
gick  Art  ?  Concerning  the  prodigious  Images 
of  A  s  ?  of  the  powerful  Metamorphofis 

of  the  Mchvnijts  ?  and  concerning  th  if  Bieffcd 
Stone,,  with  which  b  ?fer  Metals  being  touch'd, 
they  are  prefenrly  turned  into  Siver  or  Gold  ? 
all  which  things  are  found  vain  ,   when  they 
are  practise  according  to  the  Letter.     And 
never thelefs  th.  fe  things  are  delivered   and 
written  by  great,  and  moft  grave  Phiifophers 
and  holy  Men,    whofe  Traditions,  who  fhall 
dare  to  Charge  with  Falfhood  ?  Nay,  it  would 
be  impious  to  belicve,that  they  purpofely  writ 
Lyes.     Therefore  there  is  another   Senfe  in 
what  they  write,   than  is  delivered  by  the  Let- 
ter, and  that  covered  with  various  Myfteries, 
but  hitherto  openly  explained  by  none  of  the 
Matters;  and  which  I  know  not  whether  any 
Man  can  attain,  by  the  fole  reading  of  Books, 
without  a  skillful  and  faithful  Mailer,  unlefs  he 
be  divinely   inlightned  ,    which  is  granted  to 
few.      Therefore  many  labour  in  vain, 
who  purfue  thefe  moft  Secret  Arcana  of  Nature, 
applying  their  Minds  to  the  bare  words  as  they 
lie;  for  by  an  urhappy  Genius, being  fal  nfrom 
a  right  underftanding ,  and  intangi'd  in  falle 
Imagi nations,  by  the  craft  cfexteriour  Spirits, 
they  become  dangerous  Servants  to  t&ote,  o- 
whom  they  migh:  Rule,  and  not  know- 
ing 


i  i  4  An  Account  of  Genii, 

ing  themfelves,  they  go  fcrrh  after  theFootr 
fteps  of  their  Herds ,  feeking  w  ithout  them- 
\  felvcSj  what  they  poffefs  within  them.  And  this 
is  what  I  would  new  have  you  know,  taat  the 
Worker  of  all  wonderful  things  is  in  our  felves, 
who  knows  how  to  effect,  and  that  without  all 
Crime,  Offence  of  God,  or  Injury  of  Religi- 
on, whatfoever  the  portentous  Aftrologers^  the 
prodigious  Mrgici.ns ,  the  envious  Perfecutors 
of  .Narure,  the  Alchimifls,  and  the  wicked  Ne- 
cromancers, worfe  than  Devils,  dare  promife. 
I  fay,  that  Worker  of  wonderful  things  is  in 
VS, 

Nos  habitat,  non  tartar  a  fed  nee  fid  era  codi, 
Sprit  us  in  nobis  qui  viget,  ilia  facit. 

He  lives  in  us,  not  in  the  Stcrs,  nor  Hell, 
'That  Sprit  does  it,  which  in  us  does  dwell. 

But  thefe  things  are  not  to  be  committed  to 
Paper,  but  to  be  delivered  by  Word  of  Mouth, 
which  I  may  do  when  I  fee  you.  As  to  the 
PhLofophy  you  require^  let  you  know,that  to 
know  God,  the  Maker  of  all  things,  and  to  pals 
into  him  by  a  whole  Image  of  likenefs,  as  by  a 
certain  ElTenial  contad  ,  or  tye  ,  whereby 
you  may  be  transformed  and  made  a  God,  this 
is  the  true  and  folid  Philofophy  ,  as  the  Lord 
fpeaks  cf  Mffes,  faying,  Behold  I  have  m.M 
thee  a  God  ofjfbaroah  >  this  is  the  higheft  ,  and 
moft  occult  Philofophy  of  wonderful  Works. 
Its  Clarvis  is  the  underloading  ,  for  the  higher 
things  we  underltand,the  more  fublitneVertues 
we  put  on,  and  the  more  wonderful  things  we 
Work  with  more  eafe  and  efficacy,  but  our  un- 
derlianding  being  inclcfed  in  corruptible  Flefh, 

unlefs 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  3 1 5 

unlefs  it  rifes  above  the  ways  of  the  Flefh,  and 
comes  to  its  pro:  are,  cannot  be  united 

to  thofe  Divine  Powers  for  they  do  not  join 
buc  with  their  like  ,  and  is  wholly  impotent 
for  p  rceiving  thofe  moft  hidd  of 

God  ;  n  !  Nature  ;  fhall  a  Man  fee  God  and 
Live  ?  What  1 1  ait  will  a  Grain  of  Corn  bring 
forth,  uniefs  it  firft  dies  ?  He  muft  die,  die  to 
the  World  and  the  Flefh,  and  to  all  his  Senfes, 
and  the  whole  Animal  Man,  who  would  en- 
ter the  recelTLs  ts ;  not  that  the  Body 
is  feparated  from  the  Soul,  but  that  the  Soul 
leaves  the  Body ;  concerning  which  Death, 
■**/  lays  to  the  (  dead,  and  your 
lift  itb  Cbrift  ;  and  elfewhere  he  fays, 
more  clearly  of  himfelf ,  I  know  a  Man,  whe- 
ther in  the  Body  or  out  of  the  Body  I  know 
not ,  God  knows  ,  rapt  to  the  third  Heav'n, 
&c.  I  lay  we  muft  die  this  Death ,  which  is 
precious  in  the  fight  of  the  Lord,  which  hap- 
pens to  very  few,  and  haply  not  always  j  for, 

panel  quos  a^uHs  atnavit, 

Jupiter,  &*  ardtns  tvexit  ad  athera  virtuf, 
Diis  gtnlti  hoc  potuere 

firft  thofe  who  are  born,  not  of  Flefh  and 
Blood,  but  of  God  ;  next  thofe  who  by  a  Pri- 
vilege of  Nature,  or  a  Genethliacal  Gift  of 
the  Heav'ns  are  Dignified  for  it  ;  the  reft 
build  on  Merits  and  Art,  concerning  which  I 
fhall  certifie  you  by  Word  of  Mouth.  So  far 
mgrippa,  who  has  much  more  to  the  fame  pur- 
pofe. 

Dr.  Flood ,  as  well  elfewhere  in  his  Works, 
as  in  his  Cl  vis  to  hts  Vhitt  ^imy,  to- 

wards the  end  of  it ,    writes  conformably  to 

what 


3 1 6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

what  is  delivered  us  by  Agrippa  ,  as  follows. 
That  the  true  Cabalijts,  and  true  Alchimifis  are 
employed  about  one  and  the  fame  things  and 
(6  the  Magi,  wife  Men,  and  Philofophers,  its 
what  no  Man  of  a  found  Mind  can  be  Igno- 
rant of  ,  fince  there  is  but  one  fummum  bonum, 
and  one  true  Stone  ,  at  which  Mark  all  that 
are  truly  Wife,  moil  attentively  Aim ;  fome 
of  whom  are  employed  about  the  Cabala,  others 
about  Alchimy,  others  about  the  Tbe<rPt>ilofcphy9 
others  about  Natural  Magick. 

As  to  Agrippa,  I  have  heard  fome  Learned 
Men  fay,  "that  in  his  Youth,  when  he  writ  his 
Books  of  Occult  Thilofophy  ,  he  had  fome  efteem 
of  Maghk,  but  as  he  grew  Eider ,  and  when 
he  writ  hi$  Vanity  of  Sciences  ,  he  fhew'd  his 
contempt  of  it ;  but  I  wonder  Learned  Men 
fhould  talk  thus  j  for  in  his  Vanity  of  SciencejL 
he  explodes  Magick,  no  more  than  he  does  all 
other  Arts  and  Sciences,  and  indeed  he  writes 
little  there  againft  it :  And  he  fays  elfewhere, 
that  he  writ  that  Book  fportingly,  only  to  try 
what  Young  Students  could  fay  for  the  Arts 
and  Sciences  they  were  fo  fond  of,  and  fb 
valued  themfelves  by.  And  in  his  Epiftle  to 
Eplft.  /.  6.  Erafmus,  he  fays,  He  writ  that  Book  in  a  De- 
ty*  36>  clamatory  way, in  which  all  Liberty  of  Speech 
js  ufed  and  allowed ;  this  being  as  Scholars, 
that  take  a  Theme,  and  declaim  Pro,  or  Con,  at 
Pleafurq.  If  I  look  for  Agrippa  $  true  Senfe  of 
a  matter,  I  feek  for  it  in  the  Epifiles  he  writ 
to  his  Learned  Friends  and  Correfpondents, 
and  there  he  fufficiently  expreffes  the  efteem  j 
he  had  cf  the  true  Magick. 

As  to  the  Death  of  the  Animal  Man,  men- 
tioned by  Agrippa,  as  requir'd  for  iniciacing  us 
towards    the  Performance   of  greac   things, 

Dn 


y 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  3  1 7 

Dr.  JVtUis  y  as  a  skillful  ?bifu>lorer,'m  his  Book  **"*  >- 

Of  the  Soul  of  Brutts,  excellently  lets  forth  the  c' 7* 
tonteft  which  happens  betwixt  the  Corporeal 
Soul,  and  the  Rational,  in  the  Purgative  Life, 
before  the  latter  can  fettle  the  fc  rmerin  a  due 
Subjection,  and  keep  ic  felf  to  its  due  Purity. 
He  writes  thus:  The  Corporeal  Soul  does  notfo 
readily  obey  the  Rational  in  Dcfn  ables ,  as  in 
Knowables,  for  that  being  nigher  the  Body, 
and  fo  having  a  more  intimate  Affinity  to- 
wards the  Flefh  ,  its  wholly  bound  to  take 
care  of  the  good  and  Perfervation  of  that ; 
for  the  careful  Performance  of  which  Office, 
its  very  much  drawn  by  the  various  Allure- 
ments continually  prefented  by  the  Objeds  of 
each  Scnfe  •  hence  being  employed  about  the 
care  of  the  Body,  and  under  that  pretext  be- 
ing apt  to  indulge  Feafting  and  Pleafures,  fhe 
fery  often  gives  a  Deaf  Ear  to  Reafon,  per- 
fwading  the  contrary  ;  moreover  ,  the  Inferi- 
our  Soul  being  weary  of  the  others  Yoak,  on 
occafion  being  given  ,  clears  it  felf  of  its  Fet- 
ters, affe&ing  Liberty,  or  Rule;  and  then 
you  may  clearly  obferve  Twins  ftriving  in  the 
fame  Belly,  or  rather  a  Man  wholly  divided 
by  two  Armies  fighting  againft  each  other 
Within  him. 

Infiftis  ohviafigttis 
Signa,  fares  Aquilas,  &  <vota  rninantia  <votts. 


This  Inteftine  conteft  does  not  wholly  ceafe, 
till  one  of  the  Combatants  being  become  Su- 
perior,leads  the  other  wholly  Captive,  though, 
in  the  mean  time,  to  eftablifh  the  Empire  of 
the  Rational  Soul,  and  to  vindicate  its  Right 
and  Empire  from  the  Ufurpation  of  the  fen- 

fitive 


..._^7* 


1 8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

fitive  Soul,  the  Precepts  of  Philcfophers  ,  and 
Moral  Inftitutions  are  put  in  ure,  and  when 
thefe  will  not  do  ,  Sacred  Religion  furnifhes  a 
far  more  powerful  Aid,  whofe  Laws  and  Pre- 1 
cepts  being  duly  obferv'd  ,  they  are  able  to 
raife  a  Man  not  only  above  a  Brute  ,  but  ev'n 
himfelf,  that  is,  above  his  Natural  State ;  in  as 
much  as  they  fubjed:  the  Senfitive  Soul  to  the 
Rational ,  and  both  to  God.  Neverthelefs 
this  Divine  Policy  is  not,  ev'n  fo  ere&ed  in 
Man,  without  a  great  Contention  ;  for  while 
Reafon  ufing  its  own  ftrength  ,  joyn'd  with 
Moral  and  Sacred  Precepts  endeavours  to 
draw  the  Faculties  of  the  Corporeal  Soul  to  its 
fide,  this  rifing  on  the  contrary  ,  obftinately 
adheres  to  the  Flefh,  and  is  hardly  drawn  from 
its  Flatteries,  nay,  and  which  is  to  be  lamented, 
fhe  too  often  feduces  the  chief  Soul  in  us,  and 
carries  it  away  with  it ,  to  wallow  in  the  Dirt 
of  fenfual  Pleafures ;  fo  that  a  Man  becomes 
either  like  to,  or  worfe  than  a  Brute  ,  info- 
much  that  Reafon  being  become  Brural,  leads 
to  every  excefs ;  and  notwkhftartdij  g  the 
Minds  Empire  is  not  always,,  and  wholly  o- 
verthrcwn,  but  fometime  or  other,  either  re- 
turning to  her  felf,  of  her  own  accord,  or 
being  awaken  d  by  fome  cccafipn  given ,  and 
confcious  of  her  Lapfe.,  fhe  rifes  up  againft  the 
fenfitive  Soul,  as  an  Enemy  and  Traitor,  and 
throwning  her  from  her  Throne,  commands 
her  Obedience.  Nay,  fometimes  fhe  compels 
her,  by  reafon  of  Crimes  committed  ,  to  tor- 
ture her  felf,  and  her  beloved  Flefli ,  and  fo 
by  inflicting  Punifhments  on  her  felf,  to  Expi- 
ate,  as  fhe  may  her  own  Faults ;  which  kind  of 
A£fc  and  Affed  of  Confcience  of  a  Man's  tor- 
turing himfelf,  being  proper  to  Man,  plainly 

fiiew* 


-^ 


or  Familur  Spirits.  719 

fliews  him  cither  to  have  two  (ubordinate  S01 
within  him,  or,  at  leaft  that  the  Pares  of  I 
Soul  arc  vej  tig  ;    where*  \\  as  the  one 

oppofes  the  other,  ai  tends  for  the  Ma- 

ttery, it  happens  that  M  m  ;  f  to 

jomrary  purpofes,  and  I  little  I 

than  a  IV, m  rniack,  obfefs'd  b  ion. 

The  lame  Author,  in  the  lame  Hook,  writes  D]rcrt  ^ 
I    Conteft  as  follows.     Super-  c.d'Mc^ 
ftition,  and  Defpair  rnal  salvation  are  Lire 

Wont  to  imprint  on  the  fenfitive  Soul,  the 
Blood  and  1'ody,  in  a  manner  the  like  affe&s 
of  Melancholy  ,    a  ;nd  Jeaioufie,   the/ 

fonu  f  a  fleet  i 

for  in  the  former,  the   Object  whole  letting 
or  lofs  is  in  danger,  is  wholly  Immateral,  and 
its   defign  being  firft  conceiv'd  by  the  Rati- 
onal Soul,  is  Imprinted  on  the  Corporeal  j  in 
the  profecution  of  which,  if  this  readily  obeys, 
then  no  Perturbation  of  a  Mans  Mind  arifes; 
but  if  the  Corporeal  Soul  withftanding,   as  it 
often  happens,  the  Rational  ftill  inlifts  with 
1  Admonitions  and  Threats,  prefently  the  other 
growing  hot, moves  the  Blood  and  Spirits  after 
difcrderly    manner,     oppofes     Corporeal 
Goods  and  Pleaf  ures,  to  the  Spiritual  prefent- 
cd  by  the  Underftanding,  and  endeavours  to 
draw  the  Man  to  her  fide  ;  and  as  thus  there  is 
a  continual   ftruggle  betwixt  the   two  Souls, 
and  fometimes  the  Will  is  Superior,  femctimes' 
the  fenfitive  Appetite   prevails ;   at  Length  a 
Court  of  Conscience  is  erected  by  the  Mindl- 
y/here all  particular  Acts  are  fcrupuloufly  ex- 
amined, by  reafbn  of  thefe  c  \  arianc 
of  the  Souls,  the  Animal  Spirits,  as  roo 
much,  and  in  a  manner  per;  hd3 
and  being  commanded  here  and  there  con- 


$20  An  Account  of  Genii, 

trary  ways,  and  almoft  diftra&ed  ,  fall  fome* 
what  ac  length  from  their  Vigour ,  and  Natu- 
ral Difpofition ,  and  at  laft  being  rendr  d 
fixt  and  melancholick ,  as  they  are  detained 
from  their  wonted  Expanfion,  they  frame  out 
of  Cou  rfe,  and  unufal  traces  in  the  Brain,  and 
fo  caafe  a  Delirium,  with  an  excefs  of  Fear  and 
Sadnefs.  In  thofe  kinds  of  affe&s,  the  Cor- 
poreal Soul  being  carryed  away,  as  it  were  by 
Violence,  both  Divorces  it  feif  from  the  Bo- 
dy, and  being  modified  according  to  the  Cha-; 
rafter  of  the  Idea  imprinted,  is  wont  to  take ! 
a  New  Species,  either  Angelical^  or  Diabolical ; 
mean  while  the  Underftanding,  inafmuch  as 
the  Imagination  fuggefts  to  it  only  disorder- 
ly and  monftrous  Notions,  is  wholly  perverted 
from  the  ufe  of  the  right  Reafon. 

After  the  like  way  of  affe&ing,  it  happens 
that  fome  melancholy  Perfons  fall  into  Ima- 
ginary Metamcrpbofesy  either  as  to  their  Fortunes, 
or  their  Bodies,one  imagining  himfelf  and  Act- 
ing as  a  Prince,  another  as  a  Beggar, one  thinks 
his  Body  to  be  made  of  Glafs,  another  thinks 
himfelf  a  Dog  ,  a  Wolf,  or  fome  other  Mon- 
fter;  for  after  the  Corporeal  Soul,  being  af* 
fe&ed  with  a  lading  Melancholy,  and  blinded 
in  Mind  ,  has  wholly  departed  from  her  felf 
and  the  Body,  (he  affe&s  a  New  Sfecies,  or 
Nature,  and,  as  much  as  in  her  lies,  really 
affumes  it.     So  far  Dr.  IVillis. 

I  hope  this  may  not  feem  an  overlong  Di- 
greffion,  in  regard  it  feems  to  me  to  contain 
a  more  clear  Explication,  than  may  eafily  be 
found  in  other  Authors,  of  the  conteft  which 
happens  betwixt  our  two  Souls  within  us,  in 
order  to  the  Spiritual  Death  of  the  Animal 
Man ,    and  our  affuming  a  Divine  Nature, 

capable 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  311 

capable  of  wonderful  Works,  as  mentioned  by 

"But  after  all   1  ifbning  of  A  in 

which   I 

lates  to  Internal  Operations  of  the 

the  way  of  bringing  it  to  its  flighted  P 

on  and  Purity,  1  do  not  ice  how  he  Accounts 
for  the  External  Operations  perform'd  by  Ma- 
gicians of  which  there  are  a  World  of  Inftan- 
ces,  xinlefs  he  will  have  it  with  tl 
Philofophcrs,  that  the  Soul  by  the  Power  of 
the  Imagination  can  perform  what  it  pleal 
as  penetrate  the  s ,  force  the  Elements, 

demoiifh  Mountains  ,  1  lies  to  Moun- 

tains, and  do  with  all   Material  Forms  as  it 
pleafes. 

Mr.  Bhmden,  having  fent  a  Letter  from  Lt 
don  to  Vaulus  Felgenbalder %  at  Amfiird.m ,  to 
defire  his  Opinion  concerning  M  g:al  Per- 
formances, he  returned  him  an  Anfvver,in  L  niny 
An.  165^,  which  Anfwer  a  Gentleman  having 
favour'd  me  with  a  fight  and  perufal  of,  I 
give  you  here  the  Subftance  of  it. 

He  divides  Magick ,  and  Magicians  into 
three  kinds,  <viz~  Divine  ,  Natural,  and  Dia- 
bolical. Now  all  xMagick  ,  he  fays ,  confifts 
in  the  Spirit  by  Faith,  for  Faith  is  that  Mag 
of  the  Magicians,  by  which  they  draw  Spirits 
to  them,  and  by  which  Spirits  they  do  great 
things ;  inx*  either  by  the  spirit  of  God,  or 
by  Natural  Spirits,  or  by  the  Spir  of  Damon  si 
Therefore  all  Magick  coniifts  in  a  Spirit,  and 
every  Magician  Ads  by  a  Spirit.  Magicians 
that  «re  or  God  Work  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and 
the  Holy  Ghoft  by  Magicians,  1  Cor.  12.  Na- 
tural Magicians  Work  all  things  by  the  Natu- 
ral Spirits  of  the  Elements,  but  Witches  and 
Y  Drmo- 


322  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Demoniacal  Magicians,  as  Jannes  and  Jambres 
in  zs&gypt,  Work  their  Magical  Performances 
by  the  Spirit  of  Latnons  ;  he  concludes  there- 
fore, that  all  Operations  and  Works  of  efficacy 
are  wrought  by  a  Spirit.  Now,  he  fays,  it 
muft  be  well  obferv'd  ,  that  the  Magicians 
which  are  of  God,  and  the  Natural  Magicians 
very  much  differ.  Natural  Magicians  are 
fhewn  us ,  Matth.  7.  22.  and  by  Natural  Ma- 
gick  Damons  are  alfo  caft  forth,  but  not  all 
kinds  of  Damons ,  and  fo  many  Works  of  effica- 
cy are  wrought  by  Natural  Magick,  alfo  Na- 
tural Divinations  and  Prophecies,  AB.  16.  16* 
.  fuch  the  Vythonijfa  was  that  raifed  Samuel ,  Sam* 
28.  who  appeared  in  a  Body  of  Wind  and  Air, 
as  all  the  Bodies  of  the  Dead ,  till  the  Refur- 
re&ion,  which  produces  a  Spiritual  Body, 
confifting  of  a  Spirit,  Light,  and  the  Heav'ns, 
Spiritual  Elements.  The  Spirits  of  the  Elements 
attend  this  Natural  Magick,and  obey  the  Magi- 
cian :  but  we  muft  know,  that  in  fomePerfons 
the  Natural  Magick  and  Daemoniacal  are  mixt 
and  promifcuous,  as  the  Magick  which  is  from 
God,  and  the  Natural  Magick;  and  alfo  in 
fome  parf  the  Demoniacal  were  mixt  in  Ba- 
laam, who  alfo  fought  Aururies,  Numb.  24.  be- 
ing willing  to  make  himfelf  gracious  to  God, 
and  alfo  to  Man  ,  and  fo  to  pleafe  both ;  and 
therefore  the  Angel  of  God  refifted  him,  c.  25. 
and  for  this  Hypocrifie,  he  died  by  the  Sword, 
c.  50.8. 

Though  therefore,  he  fays ,  Natural  Magi- 
cians do  many  Works  of  efficacy  by  Spirits, 
yet  they  do  nr:t  do  thefe  in  the  Name  of  £Iod 
and  Chrift,  though  they  talk  much  of  the 
Name  Adonai,  and  call  upon  it,  yet  this  Name 
may  be  taken  in  vain  •   and  by  the  Permiffion 

of 


or  r  Spirits. 

of  God  Natural  bring  t< 

So  alfo  Natural  \ 

are  promifcuous   in 

Perl,  n    by  Natural   Magick   Di 

Damons,   it   docs   not  follow,   that  I  1 

fo  from  Divine  M 

caft  out  by  Natural  Magick,  by  i  i 

the  fear  or  is 

a  true  M  ;  for  Natui  ick 

truly   calls 

true  Natural  k,  but  if  it  exorbi; 

Demoniacal,  t!  m'd,  and  when 

Natural  Magick  lin  its  bounds,  i:  i> 

not  condetnn'd  by  Chi  ill  >  read  \  they. 
49.  ^o.  wherefore  the  Name  .  I  of 

Chrifi  may  be  us'd  both  rightly  ,  and  in  a  fun- 
fter  way  ;  rightly,  as  in  the  place  before  quo- 
ted ;  in  a  Siniikr  way,  Act.  c.j.  15.  14.  and 
fo  the  Magicians  of  Dxmons,  reiifted  the  Ma- 
gicians of  God,  c.  1;.  8.  and  2  Tim.  5.  8. 

He  fubjoins,  that  ev'n  Natural  Magick  is 
not  to  be  pra&is^d  by  any  Chriftian  ,  becaufe 
all  Magick  is  wrought  by  a  Spirit ,  and  we 
ought  not  to  feek  a  Convention  with  Spirits, 
and  for  that  Satan  mixes  himfelf  with  the  Natu- 
ral Spirits.And  whereas  fome  allow  the  pra&ife 
of  Magick  with  the  Angels  of  God,  he  fays, 
That  no  Man  ought  to  have  to  do  with  An- 
gels without  God's  Command.  A,  d  with 
this  Abftrad  of  that  Letter  ,  I  concu.de  this 
Chapter  of  Magick. 


Y  2  CHAP, 


3  24  dn  Account  of  Genii, 


CHAP,     XL 

What  may  he  ftggefted  from  f\eafon^  con* 
cerning  the  Exi/ience  of  Spirits,  and 
thtir  Operations. 

KIrcher  ,  in  Epft.  Varanet.  prefixt  to  his 
Obelifctts  Vamphilhts  ,  writes  thus  :  We 
know  a  threefold  Demonftration  has  been  al- 
ways us'd  by  the  unanimous  Confent  of  Phi- 
lofophers  in  the  Acquifition  of  Science ;  Ma- 
thematical^ Phyficai,  and  Mor^.l.  Mathema- 
tical Demonftration,  as  it  inquires  into  the  af- 
fects and  Properties  of  Quantity,  by  Principles 
known  by  the  I  ight  of  Nature,  of  Eternal 
Truth,  and  void  of  all  deceit ,  fo  it  begets  a 
certain,  and  properly  called  Science,  all  fcru- 
ple  of  doubt  being  remov'd.  Phyfical  Demon- 
ftraticn,  as  it  comes  by  Experiments  of  things, 
to  the  Secret  knowledge  of  Caufes,  it  begets 
indeed  Science  ,  but  by  reafon  of  the  Experi- 
ment, which  for  the  moft  part  is  expofed  to 
the  falfe  Reprefentations  of  the  Senfes ,  it  is 
not  void  of  Deception,  nor  does  arrive  at  the 
certitude  of  the  former  ;  yet  according  to 
Ariftotlt,  it  Triumphs  with  the  Title  of  true  Sci- 
ence. Moral  Demc  nitration,  as  it  depends  on 
the  Experience  of  Humane  Anions ,  begets 
indeed  Science,  but  fuch  as  the  Nature  of  Mo- 
ral things  admits,  and  which  is  call'd  Humane 
Faith,  and  for  the  moft  part/  relies  on  the 
Authority  of  the  Rehuer.  For  the  like  caufe 

thQr 


-W 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  325 

the  Authority  of  the  Revealer  begets  Divine 
Faith,  more  certain  than  all  Science.  Hu- 
ftian  v  is  a  certain  imitation  of  t! 

on  which  we  mull  r<  ;lcfs  we  will  make 

void.  tinihilate  the  lliftorics  of  all  pafs'd 

things;  I  fpeak  not  here  of  the  Authority,  and 
Hiflories  of  fufpe&ed  Credit,  but  of  thole 
which  have  the  clear  Prcfcription  of  many 
Ages  for  their  Authority.     So  far  Kirch 

Now  laying  this  before  us,  it  is  to  be  noted, 
That  Chriilian  Divines  do  not  pretend  to  a 
Mathematical,  or  Phyfical  Demonftration  of 
the  Eiiftence  of  Spirits ;  fur  their  Exiftence 
cannot  be  demonftrated  from  their  ElYence,  or 
the  effeds  afcrib'd  to  them,  not  from  the  Hrft, 
becaufe  it's  not  from  the  Nature  of  Spirits, 
nor  from  that  of  any  other  Creature  that  they 
Exift ;  for  God  fo  freely  created  all  Beings, 
that  he  might  have  left  them  uncreated  j  nor 
from  their  effects,  becaufe  the  concourfe  of 
God  alone  ,  or  other  Caufes  might  be  con- 
ceived to  fuffice  for  fuch  efFeds ;  but  Chrifti- 
an  Divines  build  chiefly  on  Divine  Revelation, 
which  is  fuperior  to  all  Science  ,  and  on 
the  conftant  Tradition  of  all  Chriftian  Di- 
vines, from  the  firft  Ages  of  Christianity  ;  and 
all  they  pretend  to,  as  Phyfiologers,  in  what 
they  fay  concerning  Spirits,  is ,  that  there  is 
nothing  in  it,  which  implies  a  Contradiction, 
or  is  inconfiftent  with  Reafon  ;  and  as  there 
have  been  ,  and  are  many  Phenomena  in  the 
World,  which  it  has  concerned  Philofophers  to 
Account  for,  the  Doctrine  of  the  Exiftence  of 
Spirits  has  been  Hypothetically  introducd  in- 
to the  World,  and  back'd  by  as  great  Men  a- 
jnongthe  Gtntiles^s  the  World  has  had;  and  tho' 
Other  Philofophers  have  fet  up  other  Hypothe- 
Y  I 


,,n     A 


%i6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

fis  for  explaining  tho&Thanomena ;  yet  I  think 
it  would  be  a  ftrange  rafhnefs  in  any  Perfon 
owning  the  Law  of  Afofes  or  Chrift,  to  throw 
by  an  Hypothefis  back'd  by  Divine  Revelati- 
on^ or  rather  introduced  by  the  moft  Learned 
of  the  G^»rf/ei,Cohfonant  to  it ;  and  to  adhere 
to  any  other  Hypothefis  ,  excogitated  meerly 
by  the  Wit  of  Man;  and  which;  in  truth,  does 
not  fo  fairly  account  for  Vhanomtna  as  the  o- 
ther  does  ;  or  fhamefully  to  deny  Fads,  which 
are  to  be  accounted  for ;  as  I  know  not  with 
whac  unbounded  Confidence ,  fome  ev'n  a- 
morg  Chriftians  have  done  ;  whereas  Vaniniy 
who  died  a  Martvr  to  Atheifm,  and  Tompona- 
ttWy  who  has  been  look'd  upon  by  fome  to 
have  been  of  the  fame  Opinion  ,  and  many 
others ,  freely  own'd  the  Fads ,  which  they 
found  unconteftably  manifefted  to  them  by 
Experience  and  Teftimonies,  though  they  did 
not  think  fit  to  explain  them  by  the  Agency 
of  Spirits,  but  as  free  Naturalifts,  fet  up  other 
Hypothefis  as  they  thought  good  for  explain- 
ing them.  So  Jlck'mdus,  in  his  Works,  refer- 
red to  Nature,  all  things  that  are  afcribed  to 
Angels  and  Devils,  as  fince  him  Tetrus  Aponus, 
and  Vomponatius  have  done  ,  imagining  that  all 
Sublunary  things  were  wholly  fubjed  to,  and 
depending  on  Celeftiuls ;  and  that  they  re- 
ceived all  Vermes  and  Properties  the  one  from 
the  other,  and  each  particular  from  the  whole 
together,  by  the  means  of  certain  Corporeal 
Rays ,  which  pafs  from  the  leaft  even  to  the 
greateft,  and  which  they  fuppofed  the  caufe 
of  airthat  is  done  in  Nature.  As  Marcus  Mar- 
<  i,  of  late  referred  all  to  Ideas ;  fo  Airicenna  to 
Intelligences,  Gakn  to  the  Temperament,-  and 
thefe,  with  many  other  Philofophers,  have  ex- 
erted 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  327 

erted  all  their  force  to  take  off  the  Admiration 
of  many  extraordinary  Effccls,by  fetting  forth 
the  moft  like  y  (  aufes  of  them  they  could  ima- 
gine; but  how  far  a  Man  may  have  Reafon 
to  acquiefce  in  any  of  thofe  Hypothefis  ,  will 
ftill  he  the  Queftion. 

the  Rationality  of  the  Hypothefis  of  £.  de  It- 
Spirits,    Plutarch   introduces  Cleombrotus,   thus  fell,  Or  ac. 
delivering  himfelf :   As  thofe  fay  very  well, 
who  hold  that  P/  rto  having  invented  this  Ele- 
ment, whence   Qualities  fpring   and  are  in- 
gendred,  which  is  fometimes  called  the  firft 
Matter,  and  fometimes  Nature,  has  freed  the 
Philofophers  from    many   Difficulties ;    fo  it 
feems  to  me,  that  thofe  who  have  introduced 
the  Nature  of  Damons,  betwixt  that  of  the 
Gods  and  Men,  have  refolv'd  more  Doubts 
and  Difficulties,  and  greater;  having  found  the 
tye,  which  conjoins  and  holds  together  as  it 
were,  our  Society  and  Communication  with 
them  ;  be  it  that  this  Opinion  came  from  the 
Ancient  Magi  and  Zoroafter ,    or  from  Tbracia 
and  Orpbew,  or  from  zs£gypt,  or  from  Phrvgia, 
as  we  Conje&ure ,   confidering  the  Sacrifices 
that  are  made  in  thofe  Countries. 

Father  U  Brun ,  in  his  Book  quoted  before 
by  me,  c.  3.  after  having  fet  forth  many  odd 
Difcoveries  of  hidden  things ,  made  by  the 
Virgulz  divinatori'x  ,  in  his  fecond  Part,  c.  6. 
examines  the  Caufes  of  its  turning  in  order 
to  Difcoveries ,  and  having  ( as  I  conceive) 
validly  refuted  all  Natural  Caufes  which  o- 
thers  have  pretended  to  aflign  for  it,  he  con- 
cludes it  is  done  by  the  Agency  of  evil  Spi- 
rits j  the  Exiftence  of  which  he  proves  as  fol- 
lows, 

Y«  if 


p8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

If  there  are  Effe&s  that  cannot  be  produced 
by  Bodies.,  there  muft  neceftarily  be  in  the 
World  other  Beings  than  Bodies,  and  if  among 
thefe  prodigious  Eife&s,  there  are  fome  that  do 
not  carry  Men  to  God>  and  make  them  fall 
into  Error  and  Illufion.,  it's  a  farther  invincible 
Argument  that  we  muft  acknowlegde  other 
Beings  than  the  Being  abfomtely  perfed  and 
Bodies.  So  thofe  extraordinary  Efft  &s  which 
can  neither  be  called  in  doubt ,  nor  be  Attri- 
buted to  God,,  or  to  Bodies,,  are  an  Incontefta- 
ble  proof  that  we  muft  admit  created  Spirits 
capable  of  amufing  Men5  and  feducing  them 
by  Deceits.  Though  therefore  the  Scriptures 
had  not  clearly  taught  us  the  Exiftence  of  Spi- 
rits feperated  from  Bodies,,  I  dare  fay  ,  that 
extraordinary  Efte&s,,  fuch  as  the  difcovery  of 
many  hidden  things  by  the  turning  of  the 
Virgula  Divinatoria,  would  give  a  ftrong  proof 
that  there  are  wicked  Spirits.  But  their  Exift- 
ence is  clear  enough  in  the  Scriptures ;  and 
certainly  its  the  beft  eftablifh'd  of  all  the  Ar- 
ticles of  our  Faith ,  the  leaft  contefted,  and 
the  moft  univerfally  difperfs'd  through  the 
Part  3»  World.  Maimonides,  in  his  More  Nevochan  proves 
c.46.  with  much  Learning  and  Judgment  ^  that  be- 
fore Mofesy  the  Sabeans  ,  Egyptians  and  ChaU 
<l<£<  vsy  knew  the  good  and  evil  Genii ;  all  the 
Ancient  Poets  ajid  Philofophers  own;d  this 
Dogma,  and  we  find  in  the  Hiftory  of  the 
Converfion  of  People.,  that  it  has  been  always 
found  eftablifh'd  among  the  moft  remote  Na- 
tions^  nor  can  it  be  faid  (  as  fome  may  pre- 
tend !  that  this  is  a  proof  of  the  ftupidnefs  of 
fome  Nations j  fpr  the  moft  Polite  People  dif- 
fer not  in  this ,  from  thofe  they  call  Burfarh 
an$  ^  and  we  may  fee^  in  the  Works  of  Porphy- 

rius^ 


or  Familiar  Spirits,  329 

Tins,  AlexanJrinus,  how 

much  the  Dextrine  of  the  Greeks,  was  like  to 
that  oft!  w,c<  ncerning  theExiftence 

of  good  il  Spirits. 

The  new  converted  Chriftians  of  the  Pri- 
mitive Times,  who,  being  difabas'd  of  the  Fol- 
lies of  Paganifm  ,  were  watchful  on  the  pra- 
ctice of  I  Us  to  difcover  their  Impoftures, 
ownd  that  fometimes  Prodigies  were  wrought 
by  the  Damons.     Minutius  Foelix,  who  liv'd  in 

fecond  Century,  has  very  well  fet  forth 
what  the  Senfe  of  the  Chriftians  of  thofe 
Times  was,  concerning  the  Nature,  and  Ope- 
rations of  thofe  Demons,  whom  the  Gmtiles 
^Worfhip'd.  Terhdlian;  and  Origen^  and  almoft 
all  the  Writers  of  the  Three  firft  Centuries  have 
delivered  the  fame ,  with  all  the  Aflii- 
rance  that  Truth  may  give  :  And  what  thefe 
great  Men  have  faid,  is  a  very  good  Anfwer  to 
what  is  fome  imes  Objeded  ,  that  Chrift  de- 
ftroyed  the  Kingdom  of  Satan,  and  that  the 
Prince  of  this  World  is  now  judg  d,  Job.  16.  11. 
St.  Peter,  St.  P  nl,  and  St.  John,  Men  well  in- 
truded in  the  Words  of  Chrift,  and  in  the 
(Senfe  that  ought  to  be  giv'n  them,  tell  us,  that 
the  Devil,  as  a  roaring  Lyon  ,   goes  about  to 

sive  us,  that  we  ought  to  have  recourfe  to 
Praver,  and  keep  us  firm  in  Faith ,  to  pre- 

.  e  us  from  his  Artifices,  and  the  fnares  he 
1  5  for  us.  The  Devil  therefore  is  not  out 
of  the  World,  fo  that  he  Ads  no  longer,  but 
is  driven  from  a  great  many  Places  where  he 
had  Rule.   It's  a  Truth  of  our  Faith,  that  God 

left  fome  Power  to  Devils,   and  hey 
mics   them,  on  ma:  lions,  to  put  it  in 

Execution.      The  frequent  Poffeffions  in  the 
s  of  the  Church  are  authentick  Tefti- 

monies 


5 3°  ^n  Account  of  Genii, 

monies  of  it,   and  the  belt  averred  Hiftories 
fince  Chrift :  And  a  thoufand  Superfluous  Pra- 
<5tices,  producing  extraordinary  Effe&s,  furnifh 
us  with  inconteftable  Proofs  of  the  Operation 
of  Damons ;  and  is  there  any  Ecclefiaftical  Wri- 
ter, who  has  not  either  prov'd  or  fuppos'd  this 
Part  j.     Truth?  The  Learned  Gafcn  tells  us,  what  we 
p.  ti. '     ought  to  believe  in  this  Cafe,  and  whence    it 
is  that  this  Truth  makes  fo  little  Impreffion  on. 
the  Spirits  of  many  Perfbns,  faying,  Certain-^ 
ly  its  an  Impiety  and  an  Error,  dire&ly  con-J 
trary  to  the  Scriptures,  to  deny,  that  Damons- 
are  Authors  of  many  furprizing  Fa&s;  andT 
thofe  that  look  upon  all  that  is  faid  of  it,  as  a 
Fable,  and  make  a  Mock  of  Divines ,  for  a- 
fcribing  Effe&s  to   Damons,  deferve  a  fevere 
Correction.    Sometimes  even  the  Learned  fall 
into  this  Error,  becaufe  they  let  their  Faith  be 
weakened,  and  their  Natural  Light  be  darken  d. 
Their  Souls  being  all  poffefs'd  with  fenfible 
things,  refer  all  to  Bodies ,  and  cannot  raifb 
themfelves  to  Spirits  detached  from  Matter, 
It's  what  Plato  has  faid,  that  nothing  fo  much 
hinders  the  finding  of  Truth,  as  to  refer  all 
things  to  what  the  Senfes  prefent  us  with. 
Cicero,  St.  Auftin,  Albertus  Magnus,  GulieL  Pari* 
fienfis,  and/above  all,  Experience  have  taught  us 
the  fame,  we  may  fee  a  Proof  of  it  in  the  Sad- 
duces  and   Epicureans,    who  admitting  nothing 
but  what  is  Corporeal,  find  themfelves  among 
thofe  Senflefs  Perfons,  of  whom  Solomon  fpeaks 
in  Ecckji:ftes,  and  the  Book  of  iVifdom,  who 
have  puflfd  their  Folly  fo  far,  that  they  can- 
not own  they  have  a  Soul,  and  effe&s  that 
cannot  be  produe'd  but  by  Spirits.     I  would 
there  were   no  more  Perlons  of  that  Mind ;  j 
tut  we  ftall  always  find  foais,  who  will  tell 

us  i 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  331 

ps  in  cold   Blood  ,  that  thcv  cannot  believe 
TroJi'hs,  n«  I  en 

not  I  Diipote  not  with 

fuch  Perfon  1  will  he  incredu- 

lous, in    the    mid  ft  of  ?rodig 

and  found  People 

tempered  like  \any  who  will  have 

#11  things  to  be  Fabtej  Illulion,  and  Impolture. 
Man  11  things  by  what  they 

ill  for  faife,  that  fur- 
Nature.     They  believe 
hile   they  appear   Natural ;  convince 
nnot  fo  be5  and  you  fhall 
fee  the  v  conclude  them  Impoftors. 

It's  maniRft,  that  we  conceive  but  two  forts 
/of  Beings,  Spirits  and  Bodies 3  and  that  fince 
we  can  reafon  but  according  to  our  Ideas,  we 
ought  to  afcribe  to  Spirits  what  cannot  be  pro- 
duct by  Bodies.  So  far  the  Abftrad  from  Fa- 
ther Le  Brim. 

The  Author  of  the  I  :  cf  Learning,  m 

the  Month  of  Augujt,  An.  1686,  has  given  us 
a  rough  Draught  for  wriring  a  good  Trad  of 
ft ,  which  he  looks  upon  as  a  Defidera- 
tum  ;  where,  among  other  things,  he  writes 
thus :  i>ince  this  Age  is  the  true  time  ofSyftems, 
.one  Ihould  be  contrived  concerning  the  Com- 
merce, that  may  be  betwixt  Demons  and  Men. 

On  this  Paffage  Father  L§  Bmn  writes  thus :  ^mpart  ^ 
Doubtlefs  here  the  Author  complies  with  thec.  14. 
Language  of  a  great  many  Perfons,  who,  for 
want  of  Attention  and  Light,  would  have  us 
put  all  Religion  in  Syftttns.  Whatever  regard 
I  ought  to  have  for  many  of  thefe  Perfons,  I 
rnufl  not  be  afraid  to  fay,  that  there  is  no 
to  be  made  of  thofe  Truths,  which  we 
:  :m  diftinctly  by  Faith  j  beciufe  v 

mult 


g}  2  An  Account  of  Genii, 

muft  advance  nothing  here,  but  what  we  receive 
from  the  Orach.    We  mufl:  ma. 
plain  the  effe&s  of  the  Lo  d-ftme,  the  Ebbing  anc 
flowing  of  the  St?,,  the  mptionof  thcPUnets^  for 
that  the  Caufe  of  thefe  Effe&s  is  not  evidently 
fignified  to  us3  and  many  may  be  conceived  by 
us;  and  to  determine  u$y  we  have  need  of  a 
great  number  of  Obfervanons.,  whicli,  by  an 
exad  Indu&ion.,  may  lead  us  to  a  Caufe  tha 
may  fatisfie  all  the  Vh<enomena,     It's  not  the 
fame  in  the  Truths  of  Re^gion.,  we  come  no 
at  them  by  groaping;  and  it  were  to  be  wifh'c 
Men  fpake  not  of  them  but  after  a  decifive 
and  infallible  Authority.    It's  thus  we  fhoulc 
fpeak  of  the  Power  of  Damons,  and  of  the 
Commerce  they  have  with  Men.    It's  of  Faith 
that  they  have  Power,  and  that  they  attack 
Men3  and  try  to  feduce  them  divers  ways 
We  find  it  in  Job,  in  Tobit,  and  in  a  thoufanc 
other  places  of  Scripture  and  Tradition.     It' 
certain  alfo.,  that  the  Power  they  have  de- 
pends not  of  us,  that  they  have  it  over  the 
Juftj  fince  they  may  tempt  them  as  they  die 
Chrifi  :  Tho'  they  have  it  not  ordinarily  ^  bu 
over  thofe  that  want  Faith^    or  fear  not  to 
partake  of  their  Works ;  and  that  to  thefe  laf 
particularly  the   diforder'd  Intelligences  try  to 
Dialog.  4.  make  exa&ly  fucceed^  what  they  wifh ;  In- 
fpiring  them  to  have  recourfe  to  certain  Pra- 
difesj  by  which  thofe  feducing  Spirits  enter 
in  Commerce  with  Men.  All  this  is  difcover'd 
without  Syfiem.     So  far  Le  Brim. 

Gregory  fetting  forth  the  Orthodox  Opinion 
concerning  Spirits,,  fays.,  That  all  things  in  this 
viiible  World  are  govern'd  by  an  invilible  Being; 
tut  Arlftotk)  tho'  he  affign'd  fpiritual  Sub-' 

ftances 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  j  J  $ 

lances  to  the  Ccleflial  Bodies,  vvhofc  nun 
le  conceiv'd  according  to  the  number  of  the 
s  mov'd  ;  yet  he  tells  us  of  none  that 
irefide  over  Inferior  Bodies,  unlefs,  haply, 
-luman  Souls:  And  this  becaufe  he  thought 
)f  no  Operations,  in  reference  to  inferior 
hings,  but  natunr  hich  the  Motion  of 

he  Cetcftial  Bodies  lufficd. 

But  the  Aflertors  of  Chriftian  Truth,  who 
iffirm  many  things  to  be  done  here  which  ex- 
:eed  the  Power  of  Nature,  have  thought  it 
leceflary  that  Angels  fhould  prefide  immedi- 
Itely  over  us.     .  was  of  Opinion,  that 

Dnly  one  Immatc  liancc  preiided  over  all 

Inferior  Bodies,  which  he  call  d  the  TntetttQus 
:s  :  But  the  Holy  Doctors  not  difagreeing 
with  :he  Pla tonic ks,  have  taught,  that  diftind: 
Spiritual  Subftances  prefided  over  differing 
Corporeal  Things.     So  far  Greg. 

Having  fet  forth  the  Opinion  of  Chriftians, 
Concerning  Spirits,  eftabiifh'd,  as  well  by 
Reafon,  as  by  Authoriy,  both  Divine  and 
Humane,  I  fhall  now  confider  the  Opinions  of 
the  PertVateticks,  Epicureans,  and  S^dduces,  de- 
nying the  exiftence  of  Spirits  ;  and  fhall  here 
fet  down  the  notorious  Principles  they  gene- 
rally go  upon,  leaving  thofe  that  pleafe  to 
follow  them,  and  to  partake  of  the  Confe- 
quents  of  them. 

Firfty  Jrifiotk  held,  That  God  is  not  the 
Creator  of  the  World,  but  that  it  was  from  E- 
ternity,  and  will  fo  continue,  Phyf.  8.  &  Met.  12- 
where  Aquinasy  left.  2.  fays,  That  he  held  this 
Opinion  firmly,  and  not  problematically,  tho' 
in  his  Topicks  he  fays,  it  was  a  Problem  among 
the  ancient  Philosophers. 

2,  That 


334  M  Account  of  Genii, 

2-.  That  God  does  not  take  care  of  Inferior 
Things  j  nay,  That  he  would  become  Vile  if 
he  minded  them.     Met.  12.  Text.  5. 

3.  That  God  is  a  neceifary.,  and  no  free 
Ag  ;nt,  as  being  the  Soul  of  the  firft  Sphere,, 
which  he  cannot  but  move  $  and,  that  he  can- 
not move  a  Stone  with  us.     Vhyf.  8.  &Met.  12. 

4.  That  Heaven  and  Hell  are  the  Fables  of 
Legiflators.     Met.  2..  &  in  12. 

5-.  That  the  particular  Souls  of  Men  die 
with  the  Body ;  and,  Th^t  there  is  only  one 
Immortal  Soul,  which  is  not  the  Form  of  the 
Body,  but  affifting  to  all  Bodies. 

6.  That  there  are  no  Damons  nor  Angels^ 
but  the  Movers  of  the  Spheres,  who  are  in 
Blifs  by  that  motion,  and  cannot  but  move 
them.     Met.  12.  &  I.  de  Mundo. 

7.  That  God  does  not  fend  Dreams,  becaufe 
he  would  fend  them  to  the  Wife,  and  not  to 
Idiots,  as  it  commonly  happens.     L.  delnfomn. 

8.  That  Prophets  are  not  Infpir'd  by  a  Di- 
vine Afflatus,  but  grow  Mad  through  Melan- 
choly, and  Prophecy  in  their  Madnefs.  In 
Troblem,  Sect.  30. 

Thefe  Dogmas,  with  others  of  his,  were  cen- 
fur'd  by  the  Councils  and  Fathers ;  and  if  ad- 
mitted, all  Religion  and  Government  muft 
fall :  And  Arijtotle,  for  holding  them,  was 
fore'd  to  fly  from  Athens,  otherwife  he  had 
been  queftion  d  by  the  Court  oi  the  Areopagites. 

Secondly,  The  Epicurean  Thilofofhy  contains 
thefe  Errata  in  Vhyftcks. 

1.  It  takes  away  the  two  chief  Caufes  of 
Nature,  viz»  the  eternal  efficient,  i  and  final 
Caufe, 

%.  It 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  3 $5 

2.  It  feigns  all  things  to  arife  from  a  cafual 
concc  Atoms. 

3.  ;ns  the  Sun  and  Stars  to  be  Vapou: 
kindle  urning. 

4.  It  affirms  the  Souls  of  Men  to  die  with 
the  Body. 

,,    The  Saddles,    i.  Deny  the  Refur- 

reffion. 

2.  They  rejed  all  Tradition  of  the  Fathers ; 
and  fome  of  them,  all  the  Prophets,  but  Mofes. 

3.  They  believe  the  Souls  of  Men  to  be 
Mortal,  and  to  die  with  the  Body.     The 

,  which  was  trump  d  up,  about 
131  Years  after  Chrlff,  (as  it's  obferv'd  by  the 
Learned  tf IganJus,  in  his  Traff  it  Homine)  ha- 
ving fome  Alliance  with  this  Opinion  of  the 
laJJuces,  it  aflerting  the  Souls  of  Men  to  die 
with  the  Body,  tho'  it  allows  it  to  be  reftor'd 
with  the  Body  at  the  Refurre&ion.  Which 
Dogma  has  been  new  vampt  of  late  by  fome  of 
our  Authors.  Whereas  Christ  plainly  fays, 
Matth.  10.  28.  They  cannot  kill  the  Soul. 
,  4.  They  deny  God's  Providence,  and  afcribe 
ill  things  to  Mans  Free- Will. 

y.  They  deny  Angels  and  Spirits. 

NoWj  the  Sadduces  being  a  Se&  among  the 
JeviSy  and  owning,  at  leaft,  the  Books  of 
Mofes >  and  finding  mention  there  made  of 
Angels  and  Spirits,  they  fay  that  by  the  word 
Spirit  in  the  Scriptures  we  are  not  to  under- 
hand any  fubftantial  Being,  but  either  certain 
Qualities,  Motions,  or  Infpirations  in  Men, 
pr  elfe  certain  Divine  Phantafms,  or  Appear- 
inces  created  by  God  to  ferve  fome  prefent 
■cafions,  which  ceafe  to  be  as  foon  as 
iifappear- 


a  *  i 


3  ]  6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

And  indeed,  as  Mr.  Lawrence  obferves,  in 
his  Difcourfe  of  Angels,  c.  I.  fett.  2.  the  word 
Spirit  is  fometimes  us'd  in  thefe  Seafes  in  the 
Scriptures;  becaufe  Spirits  being  very  a&ive 
Natures.,  working,  tho'  powerfully,  yet  infen* 
fibly,  therefore  fuch  Impreffions,,  Qualities  and, 
AfFe&ions  in  Men>  as  powerfully  and  fecretly 
move  them,  are  calfd  Spirits.  Again,  Becaufe 
Spirits  are  fuch  pure  Subftances  as  cannot  be 
perceiv  d  by  our  Senfes,  therefore  meer  Phan- 
tafms  and  Appearances  are  fometimes  calFd 
Spirits.  But  when  it's  faid,  John  4.  24.  that 
God  is  a  Spirit,  &c.  Is  God  only  a  Quality  or  meer 
Phantafm  ?  Is  He  not  a  proper  Spirit,  or  a 
fpiritual  Subftance  ? 

The  Scdduces  Notion  of  Spirits,  feems  to  re- 
femble  that  which  Monfieur  Char  as  has  of  the 
Venom  of  Vipers :  He  thinks  no  Man  can  affign 
any  part  in  a  Viper  where  there  is  real  Venom,- 
and  fays.,  the  Venom  has  nothing  material  in 
it,  that  it's  a  pure  effed  of  the  Imagination  of 
the  Viper,  which  forms  to  it  felf  an  Idea  of 
Vengeance,  which  he  produces  but  in  the  In* 
ftant  of  his  Anger  $  and  that  its  annihilated  as 
foon  as  he  ceafes  to  be  irritated  :  For  confirm- 
ing which  he  gives  us  this  Experiment,  that 
upon  fwahowing  the  Blocd  of  a  Viper,  or  pour- 
ing it  on  a  Wound,  no  ill  accident  follows, 
which  a  Man  would  think  it  would,  if  Venom 
were  really  included  in  it. 

Having  laid  down  the  general  Principles  of 
thefe  Philofophers,  I   (hall  now  particularly  | 
confider  their  Ground  for  reje&ing  Spirits, 
and  their  Operations. 

Thefe  Philofophers,  efpeclally  the  two  later, 
who  have  many  adherents  even  to  this  Day, 

chiefly 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  *3)7 

chiefly  rejeft  Spirits ,  becaufe  they  fey      they 
can  have  no  Notion  of  fuph  a  thing  as  ^Spi- 
ritual Subftance.    Now  ,  as  to  this  ,    I  chink 
our   late  Mr.  Lock  ,    in  his  Elaborate   / 
Humane  Underjt>i>  is  tairly  made  our,  Hide  i%  2.  c%29. 

Men  have  as  clear  a  Notion  or  a  Spiritual  Sub- 
fiance,  as  they  have  of  any   Corporeal  Sub- 
fiance,  Matter,  or  Body;  and  that  there  is  as 
much  Reafon  for  admitting  the  Exiftence  of 
the  one,  as  of  the  other  •  lb  that  if  they  admit 
the  latter,it  is  but  Humour  in  them  to  deny  the 
former.He  reafons  thus:  If  a  Man  will  examine 
himfelf,  concerning  his  Notion  of  pure  Sub- 
fiance,  in  general,  he  will  find  he  has  no  o- 
ther  Idea  of  it,  but  only  a  fuppofition  of  lie 
knows  not  what  fupport    of  fuch   Qualities, 
which  are  capable  of  producing  fimple  Ideas 
in  us,   which  Qualities   are  commonly  called 
Accidents  •  thus,  if  we  talk,    or  think  of  any 
particular  fort  of  Corporeal  Subftance ,    as 
Horfe,   Stone  ,  &c  though  the  Idea  we  have 
of  either  of  them  ,  be  but  the  Complication, 
or  Collection  of  thofe  feveral  fimple  Ideas,  or 
fenfible  Qualities  ,   which  we  ufe  to  find  uni- 
ted in  the  thing  call'd  Horfe  ,    or  Stone  ;  yet 
becaufe  we  cannot  conceive  how  they  fhould 
fubfift  alone,  nor  one  in  another,  we  fuppofe 
them  to   Exift  in,    and  fupported  by  fome 
common  fubjed  ;    which  fupport  we  denote 
by  the  name  of  Subftance,  though  it  be  certain 
we  have  no  clear,  or  diftind;  Idea  of  that  thing 
we  fuppofe  a  fupport. 

The  fame  happens  concerning  the  Opera- 
tions of  our  Mind,  viz*  thinking,  reafoning, 
fearing,  &c.  which  we  concluding  not  to 
fubfift  of  themfelves  ,  and  not  apprehending 
how  they  can  belong  to  Body ,  we  are  apt  to 
Z  think 


338  An  Account  of  Genii, 

think  thefe  the  Actions  of  fome  Subftance, 
which  we  call  Spirit :    Whereby  its  evident, 
that  having  no  other  Notion  of  Matter,  but 
fomething  wherein  thofe  many  fenfible  Qua- 
lities, which  affed  our  Senfes  do  fubfift  ;  by 
fuppofing   a   Subftance    wherein    thinking, 
knowing,  doubting,  and  a  Power  of  moving, 
&c.  do  lubfift ,   we  have  as  clear  a  Notion  of 
the  Nature  ,   or  Subftance  of  Spirit ,  as  we 
have  of  Body  ;  the  one  being  fuppos'd  to  be 
(without  knowing  what  is  the  Sublhatum  to 
thofe  fimple  Ideas,  which  we  have  from  with- 
out j  and  the  other  fuppos'd  (with  a  like  ig- 
norance of  what  it  is  )   to  be  the  Subfiratum, 
of  thofe  Operations  which  we  Experiment  itt 
dur  felves  within  j  'tis  plain  then,  that  the 
Idea  of  Corporeal  Subftance  in  Matter,  is  as 
remote  from  our  Conceptions  and  Apprehenfi- 
ons  as  that  of  Spiritual  Subftance  j    and  there- 
fore from  our  not  having  any  Notion  of  the 
Subftance  of  Spirit,  we  can  no  more  conclude 
itsNonexiftencejhan  we  can  for  the  fame  reafon 
deny  the  Exiftence  of  Body  ;  it  being  as  Rati- 
onal to  affirm,  there  is  no  Body,   becaufe  we 
cannot  know  its'  Effence,  as  its  called,  or  have 
the  Idea  of  the  Subftance  of  Matter,  as  to  fay, 
there  is  no  Spirit,  becaufe  we  know  not  its  EC- 
fence,or  have  no  Idea  of  a  Spiritual  Subftance. 
Mr.  Lock  alfo  comparing  our  Idea  of  Spirit 
with  our  Idea  of  Body,    thinks   there  may 
feem  rather  lefs  Obfcurity  in  the  former,  than 
in  the  latter.  Our  Idea  of  Body  he  takes  to  be 
an  extended  fblid  Subftance,  capable  pf  com- 
municating Motion  by  Impulfe  ;  and  our  Idea 
of  Soul  is  a  Subftance  that  thinks ,   and  has  a 
Power  of  exciting  Motion  in  Body,  by  Will, 
or  Thought.    Now  fome ,  perhaps  will  fay, 

they 


or  Familiar  Spirits'  i  ? 9 

they  cannot  comprehend  a  thinking  thing, 
Which  perhaps  is  true  ;  but  he  fays  ,  if  th 
confider  it  well,  they  can  no  more  compre- 
hend an  extended  thing  ;  and  if  they  fey,  they 
know  not  what  'tis  thinks  in  them,  they  mean, 
they  know  not  what  the  Subftancc  is  of  that 
thinking  thing  ;  no  more,  fays  he,  do  they 
know  what  the  Subftancc  is  of  that  folic!  thing; 
and  if  they  fay,  they  know  not  how  they 
think,  he  fays ,  neither  do  they  know  how 
they  are  extended,  how  the  foiid  Parts  of  Body 
are  United,  or  Cohere  to  make  Extenfion,c^r. 

The  Learned  Monfieur  Le  CLrc,  who  gene- 
rally confiders  how  far  Humane  Reafon  can 
bear,  in  judging  of  Points  laid  before  it,  ar- 
gues confonantly  to  what  is  before  deliver'd  by 
Mr.  Lock,  in  his  Coronis  ,  added  at  the  end  of 
the  Fourth  Volume  of  his  Philofophical  Works, 
in  the  Third  Edition  of  them.  Where  he 
writes  as  follows. 

When  we  contemplate  the  Corporeal  Na- 
ture, we  can  fee  nothing  in  it  but  E*tenfion, 
Divifibility,  Solidity,  Mobility,  and  various 
Determinations  of  Quantity, or  Figures ;  which 
being  fo,  it  were  a  rafti  thing  ,  and  contrary 
to  the  Laws  of  right  reafoning,  to  affirm  other 
things  of  Bodies  ;  and  confequently  from 
meer  Body ,  nothing  can  be  dedue'd  by  us, 
which  is  not  joyn  d  in  a  neeefTary  connecti- 
on with  the  faid  Properties  :  Therefore  thofe 
who  have  thought  the  Properties  of  perceiving 
by  Senfe,  of  Underftanding  ,  Willing  ,  Ima- 
gining, Remembring,  and  others  the  like, 
which  have  no  Aftimity  with  Corporeal  things, 
to  have  rifen  from  the  Body  ,  have  greatly 
tranfgrefs'd  in  the  Method  of  right  Reafoning, 
and  Philofophizing,  which  has  been  done  by 

Z  a  Epicurus, 


340  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Epicurus ,  and  thofe  who  have  thought  as  he 
did,  having  affirm'd  our  Minds  to  be  ccmpos'd 
of  Corporeal  Atoms  j  but  whence  fhall  we  fay, 
they  have  had  their  rife  ?  Truly,  they  do  not 
owe  their  rife  to  Matter,  which  is  wholly  de- 
ftitute  of  Senfe  and  Thought  ;  nor  are  they 
fpontaneoufly  fprung  up  of  nothing ,  it  being 
an  Ontologkal  Maxim  of  moft  evident  Truthf 
that  nothing  firings  from  nothing. 

Therefore  the  moft  Ancient  Thyfiohgcrs ,  as 
dap.  i.  t^ie  very  Learned  Dr.  Cuclworth  has  fhewn  in 
his  Intellectual  Syfiem  of  the  World,  when  they 
faw  nothing  in  Matter,  befide  what  we  have 
faid,  and  had  confider'd  the  Maxim  alledged  j 
they  pafs'd  from  the  Confideration  of  Bodies, 
to  the  Contemplation  of  a  much  more  excel- 
lent Nature,  by  which  they  gathered  Humane 
Minds  were  created,  and  all  other  Intelligent 
Natures ,  therefore  the  Confideration  of  the 
Corporeal  Nature,  joyned  with  the  knowledge 
of  the  Properties  of  our  Mind,  lead  Men  the 
ftrait  way  to  two  Tenents  of  the  greateft  Mo- 
ment, 1//&.  the  Exift^nce  of  a  Supream  Deity, 
and  the  Creation  of  Man  s  Soul ,  by  God, 
whence  alfo  is  deduced  its  Immortality,  to 
which  we  may  add,  that  though  the  Autho- 
rity of  Divine  Revelation  be  worthy  of  Credit 
by  it  felf,  yet  it  is  not  a  little  confirmed  in  our 
Minds,  when  we  fee  the  Lights  of  Revelati- 
on and  right  Reafon  friendly  confpire  be- 
twixt themfelves,  for  they  are  two  Sifters  fall'n 
from  Heav'n  together,  wherefore  their  Agree- 
ment muft  neceffarily  be  very  great,  as  being 
Iprung  from  one  Father,  but  we  do  not  ap- 
prehend their  Agreement,  at  firft  fight,  nor 
can  underftand  it  without  an  intent  Medita- 
tion. If  right  Reafon  deny'd  what  right  Re- 
velation 


or  familiar  Spirits.  341 

velation  affirms ,  and  we  thought  they  cUfa- 
fhould  ftand  doubtful  betwixt 
n  ,  nor  fhould  vvc  well  fatisfie  our  felv 
which  we  ought  to  believe  ;  but  they  agree- 
ing, who  can  with-hold  his  Faith  from  them, 
but  he  that  would  be  accounted  not  only 
to  have  little  Religion  ,  but  likewife  wholly 
deftitute  of  Rcafon  ?  Wherefore  there  is  no 
caufe  for  thofe  that  give  not  Credit  to  Reve*. 
lation  to  flatter  themfelvcs ,  as  though  they 
were  Wifer  than  the  vulgar,  when  at  the  fame 
time  they  naturally  exclude  themfelves  from 
the  Number  of  Men  that  ufe  Reafon.  See  tkm 
alfo  what  he  further  fmartly  argues  for  the  Imm  - 
I  of  the  Soul. 
The  fame  Monfieur  It  Clerc,  in  his  Vneurna^ 
tologia,  has  delivered  feveral  things  concern- 
ing Spirits  and  their  Operations,  of  which  I 
have  extra&ed  the  few  following  Heads,  as 
thinking  them  of  ufe  for  dire&ing  our  Judg- 
ments in  Confiderations  of  that  Nature. 

1.  Thofe  who  affirm  ,  or  deny  that  Spirits 
can  be  without  any  Corporeal  property  ,  go 
farther  than  they  ought;  for  we  cannot  gather 
from  the  Nature  of  Spirits ,  which  is  unknown 
to  us,  whether  they  are  without  all  Corporeal 
proprety3  or  have  a  fubtle  Body.     Sett.  2.  c.  1. 

2.  As  for  Apparitions  of  Spirits ,  he  fays, 
we  cannot  by  any  Reafon,  fhew  from  the  Na- 
ture of  the  thing  it  felf,  that  it  is  not  poffible 
for  Spirits  to  be  joyn'd  with  a  fubtle  Body  5 
nor  is  it  likely  that  lo  many  Nations ,  and  fo 
remote  in  Places  and  Opinions  agreed  in  a 
Lye,  as  to  all  they  have  faid  concerning  Ap- 
paritions of  Spirits. .  Its  much  more  likely, 
that  the  ground  of  the  Lyes  invented  about 
this  Matter ,    was  fome  true  Apparition ,  to 

Z  \  \yh: 


542  ^n  Account  of  Genii, 

which;  as  it's  ufual,  a  World  of  other  Rela- 
tions of  the  like  kind  have  been  feign'd.     Ibid. 

%.  We  are  fo  far  from  determining  what  is 
the  Nature  of  an  Angels  Intellection,  that  we 
do  not  comprehend  evn  the  Nature  of  our 
own  Intelle&ion.    Sect.  2.  c  2. 

4.  In  what  the  Gentiles  fay  of  Damons,  and 
the  Hebrews  of  Angels ,  there  is  nothing  con- 
trary to  any  certain  Knowledge  we  have$ 
therefore  it  may  be  they  fay  true,  if  the  thing 
be  confider'd  in  it  felf.    Sett.  2.  c.  3. 

j.  As  it  cannot  be  doubted,  but  there  are 
many  Lyes  in  what  is  related  concerning 
ilrange  Performances  by  Witches,  upon  a  con- 
trad  with  Damons,  fo  it  would  be  rafhnefs  to 
Charge  them  all  of  Falfhood,  efpecially,  fince 
the  Scriptures  relate  fome  things  like  them  ; 
and  truly  the  thing  it  felf  is  not  fo  known  to 
us,  that  we  may  gather  from  the  Nature  of 
Damons ,  which  may  not  confift  at  leaft  with 
many  things  that  are  related  of  them  ;  if  any 
Man,  becaufe  both  good  and  evil  Angels  are 
believed  to  be  thinking  Subftances ,  fhould 
contend  that  they  have  no  Power  on  Bodies, 
becaufe  naked  thought  has  no  Power  on  Bo- 
dies, before  this  were  granted  him  ,  he  ought 
to  fhew,  and  that  evidently,  Firfl,  That  there 
is  nothing  in  Angels  befide  Thought  3  Secondly y 
That  there  is  no  tye  inftituted  by  God  betwixt 
their  Wi  lis ,  and  fome  Changes  of  Bodies ;  for 
if  either  of  thefe  may  be  admitted  without  ab- 
furdity,  they  may  alfo  be  thought  able  to  A& 
on  Bodies  without  abfurdky.     Sett.  2.  c.  4. 

6.  Some  fay  no  true  Miracles ,  but  Cheats 
are  perform'd  by  Damons ;  but  to  Underftand 
what  this  means ,  we  muft  define  the  Words 
that  are  here  us'd :  a  Portent,   a  Miracle,  or 

9 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  $4$ 

A  Prodigy  are  here  the  fume  things,  and  they 
denote  an  Effect.  Firft>  Abe ve Humane  Power. 
Second1),  Befidc  the  conftant  Courfe  of  Nature. 
Thir  it  it's  done  at  Mans  Pleafure,  or 

at  the  Moment  he  will.  Now,  who  can  make 
out  by  certain  Arguments,  that  nothing 
can  be  done  by  evil  Demons  above  Humane 
Power,  bcfide  the  ufual  Courfe  of  Nature,  it 
the  Moment  the  Magician  pleafes ,  fince  the 
bounds  of  Angelical  Power  are  unknown,  we 
can  here  affert  nothing  but  from  Experience. 
Ibid. 

7.  Thofe  that  deny  fome  wonderful  Fads, 
for  the  moft  part  contend  they  are  Vrafrigia ; 
but  befide  that,  they  affirm  what  they  know 
not ;  this  word  may  be  taken  in  a  twofold 
Senfe ;  Vraftigla  by  fome  are  fo  underftood,  as 
tho  Damons  prefent  to  the  Senfes,  a  thing  that 
is  not,  as  if  it  were ;  as  that  an  Houfe,  for  In- 
stance, may  feem  to  be  there  where  there  is  . 
none;  but  to  do  this,  either  they  move  the 
Brain  of  Spedators,  as  its  wont  to  be  moved 
when  an  Houfe  is  before  them  ;  or  they  pre- 
fent a  certain  fort  of  an  Appearance  of  an 
Houfe  in  the  Air,  which  (hikes  the  Eyes  of 
Spectators ;  but  choofe  either  of  thefe,  it  muft 
be  (hewn  how  this  is  no  Miracle,  for  both  are 
done  above  Humane  Power ,  and  befide  the 
Order  of  Nature,  and  at  the  time  the  Magi- 
cian pleafes.     Ibid. 

8.  Thofe  Opinions,  orDifeafes  of  the  Brain, 
which  Witches  have  ,  who  think  they  go  to 
Feafts  and  Dancings,  upon  their  talking  of  it 
to  others  that  are  of  a  timorous  Difpoficion, 
and  weak  Brains,  bring  others  into  the  fame 
Fits  of  Fury,  and  like  a  contagion  fpread  far 

tand  near  ,  infeding  many  Heads.     Though 
Z  4  Vs 


344  ^n  Account  of  Genii, 

it's  obfervable  that  thofe  Difeafes  are  more  fre- 
quent among  Inhabitants  of  Mountains  and 
Solitary  places,  than  among  thofe  that  live  in 
Cities  ,  or  among  a  Concourfe  of  People. 
Whence  alfo  it  appears  ,  that  the  Terror  of 
vaft  Solitudes,  which  is  apt  to  move  the  Brain, 
contributes  much  to  this  Madnefs ;  we  muft 
add  to  this,,  that  Perfons  abounding  with  Me- 
lancholy, are  more  capable  of  this  Madnefs  j 
and  on  the  contrary,  thofe  are  freeft  from  it, 
who  are  of  a  merry  Difpofition  ;  which  raifes 
my  Sufpicion,  that  all  thefe  Vifions  are 
•  nought  but  the  Sports  of  a  timerous  and  me- 
lancholy Brain. 

If  it  fhall  feem  ftrange,  that  fo  many  Men 
fliould  be  impos'd  on  by  their  fear  and  temper 
of  Body,  all  Admiration  may  be  taken  away 
by  Inftances  of  a  greater  fury  j  many  Difeafes 
fo  trouble  the  Brain,  that  thofe  that  labour 
under  them,  feem  to  themfelves  to  fee  things 
that  are  no  where  ;  that  kind  of  Difeafe  if  it 
be  joined  with  a  vehementMotion  of  the  Blood, 
and  lafts  long ,  it  at  length  confumes  the  Di- 
feas'd  ;  and  if  the  Motion  of  the  Blood  abates, 
the  Difeafe  is  leffend  ,  and  the  Difeas'd  re- 
turns to  a  found  Mind ;  but  if  the  Difeafe 
does  not  io  vehemently  affect  the  Blood,  bue 
that  it  may  continue  a  long  time ,  without 
deftroying  the  Difeas'd  ,  or  a  leffening  of  his 
ftrength  ,  ftrange  things  are  prefented  to  his 
Mind  for  many  Years,  as  it's  manifeft  in  many 
Inftances.  Nor  are  there  only  thofe  who 
think  they  fee  without  themfelves  things  that 
are  no  where ;  but  alfo  fuch  as  obftinately  afc 
fert  themfelves  to  be  Wolves ,  or  I  know  not 
what  Wild  Beafts.  Whoever  weighs  thefe 
things  will  not  wonder  if  Opinions  of  Witches 
are  accounted  melancholy  Difeafes.  Yet: 


or  Familiar  Spirits,  34^ 

Yet  tho'  thefe  things  may  be  fo,  I  will  not 
affirm  that  thole  things  which  Witches 
hav  I ;  but  thing  that 

has  truly  happen'd,  1  believe  there  have  been 
a  thoufand  Dreams  of  a  deluded  Mind.  So 
far  Monlieur  U  Chrc.     Sec:.  2.  c.  5-. 

But,  to  return  a  little  to  the  Epicureans  and 
,  perhaps  they  may  defire  of  m.  a 
clear  Definition  of  a  Spirit,  or  fuch  an  one  as 
they  would  like.  Now,  I  think,  Monfieur  le 
Clerc,  has  well  anfwered  this ,  in  his  Preface 
to  his  Vnatm.tologli,  writing  thus:  We  call  all 
things  endow'd  with  an  Underftanding  and  a 
Will,  Spirits ;  but  as  we  confider  them  as  Spi- 
x  ritual  Subftances ,  he  fays ,  he  has  (hewn  in  par$ ,; 
his  Logick,  that  the  inward  Nature  of  any  c.  y 
Subflances  Ivhatfoever,  as  well  as  that  of  Spi- 
rits is  unknown  to  us,  wherefore  Men  ought 
not  to  expect  from  us  an  abfolutely  compleat 
Defcription  of  Spirits. 

But  fince  thefe  Gentlemen  are  for  having 
all  things  made  out  very  plainly  to  them ,  let 
us  examine  their  Phyfical  Principles,  Demo- 
critus  and  Epicurus  would  have  all  Natural  Ef- 
fects whatfoever,to  proceed  from  a  Conflux  of 
Attorns  varioufly  Figured  ,  fo  that  in  every 
Body  there  are  Particles  that  are  round,  acumi- 
nated, fquare  ,  cylindrical,  ftriated ,  and  of 
other  Configurations,  and  that  according  to 
the  various  locking  together  of  them,  a  fab- 
led is  of  this,  or  another  Figure  ,  Operation, 
or  Efficacy. 

Now,  as  our  Learned  Dr.  Willis  has  obfer-  Ljcpernu 
ved,  this  Eficurea?i  Opinion  ,    rather  fuppofes  c.  1. 
than    demonftrates     thjir    Principles  ,      and 
teaches  of  what  fort  of  Figure  thofe  Elements 
pf  Bodies  are^  not  what  they  are,  and  alfo 

induces 


34^  An  Account  of  GetiH^ 

induces  Motions  very  fubtle,  and  remote  from 
our  Senfes,  and  which  do  not  fatisfie  the  Vh** 
nomena  of  Nacure  ,  when  we  defcend  to  Par- 
ticulars j  and  thinks  it  concerns  them  to  ftiew 
that  thofe  Conceptions  of  theirs  are  Real ;  he 
being  tco  fliort  fighted  to  difcern  them  fo. 

Again  ,  As  for  Ariftotles  reafoning  againft 
the  Exiftence  of  Spirits  ,  in  his  Book  De  Mun- 
do  (if  it  be  hisj  viz»  thatfince  God  can  do  all 
things  of  himfelf ,  he  does  not  Hand  in  need 
of  Miniftring  Angels  and  Damons ,  a  multi- 
tude of  Servants  fhewing  the  weaknefs  of  a 
Prince.  But  if  this  Argument  would  hold 
good,  Ariftoth  fhould  not  fuppofe  Intelligences 
moving  the  Celeftial  Spheres,  for  God  fuf- 
fices  to  move  all  without  miniftring  Spirits, 
nor  would  there  be  need  of  a  Sun  in  the 
World,  for  God  can  enlighten  all  things  by 
fiimfelf,  and  fo  alt'Second  Caufes  were  to  be 
taken  away.  Therefore  there  are  Angels  in 
the  World  for  the  Majefty  of  God ,  not  for 
that  he  wants  them ;  and  for  Order,  not  for  his 
Omnipotency :  and  who  told  Ariftoth  there 
were  Intelligences  that  moved  the  Celeftial 
Spheres  ?  Is  not  this  Hypothefis  as  precarious, 
as  any  Man  may  pretend  that  of  Spirits  to  be  ? 
And  I  believe  therg  are  few  Philofophers  at 
prefent,  who  agree  with  Ariftoth  in  that  Opi- 
nion. And  indeed ,  I  think  Kircher  in  the 
right,  where  he  tells  us,  it's  certain,  Ariftoth 
QbeU  t(iok  k*s  Intelligences  from  the  Hebrews,  who 
Pamph.  beholding  the  Multiform  face  of  the  World^and 
Pag.  2?2.  the  difcording  concord  of  things,  believed  it 
tQ  be  governd  by  certain  prefidirig  Angels ; 
and  hence  alfo  the  Fi&ion  of  the  Nine  Mufes 
took  its  rife. 

Moreover, 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  347 

Moreover,  when  Arifiotk  lays  down  his 
Principles  of  Natural  Tilings,  he  tells  us,  they 
are  Matter,  Form,  :md  Privation,  unintelli- 
gible Terms  y  and  when  he  comes  to  define  his 
Matter,  he  tells  us,  it  is  what  is  neither  quid, 
nor  cju.intum3  nor  e^uaky  nor  alicjuid  eorum  qui- 
bus  ens  dctcrminatur,  a  notable  clear  Notion  of 
Matter,  obfeurum  fer  obfeurius  ,  and  I  think  no 
Man  will  pretend  the  notion  we  have  of  Spi- 
rits, to  be  more;  obfeure  than  this. 

In  fhert,  thofe  that  will  take  upon  them  to 
rectify  our  notions  of  things,  ought  to  bring 
us  notions  of  things  more  clear  than  what  we 
have,  efpecially  where  Religion  is  concern'dj 
as  in  this  cafe  it  is,  and  Young  Wits ,  who 
arc  well  opinioned  of  their  Parts,  may  do  well 
to  try  here,  what  they  can  fuggeft  to  us  be- 
yond what  is  here  argued  ,  and  I  am  apt  to 
think  whatever  conceit  they  may  have  of 
themfelves,  they  will  not  be  found  fo  over- 
doing in  Argument,  but  they  will  Jlill  find  a 
valid  reply  ready  for  them. 


CHAP.     XII. 

Confederations  on  Dr.  Bekker's  $o*ks 
againft  Spirits,  with  a  Condufion  to 
this  Booh 

FRomm annus  in  hisTracS:  of  Fascination ,  tells  L.  3.  part 
us,  that  Vbetim,  above  all  others,has  made  ■• '*  ' 
out  by  firm  Reafons,  that  there  is  fucha  thing 
as  Diabolical  and  Magical  Fafdmarims  and  this 
he  undertook,  as  he  lays,  becaufe  upon  read- 
ing 


2. 


3  48  An  Account  of  Genii, 

ing  Mr.  Scot's  Book  (  in  which  he  has  openly 
deny'd,  and  profeffedly  oppugnd  the  Crime 
of  Magick,  and  afcribcs  all  its  wonderful  ef- 
fg#s,  either  to  Melancholy  y  or  other  natural 
Difeafes,  or  to  the  Art,  Induftry  and  Agility 
of  Men^  impofing  on  us  by  their  Trteftigia,  or 
to  the  foolifti  Imaginations  of  the  faid  Magi^. 
cians,  cr  to  their  vain  Fables  and  Fi&ions  ) 
after  it  was  Tranflated  into  Low  Dutch,  not  a 
few,  from  that  time,  both  Learned  and  Un- 
learned began  to  Scepticize  and  turn  Liber- 
tines concerning  Magick. 

From  this  Source,  I  conceive,  among  other 
Works,  the  Four  Volumes  of  the  late  Dr.  Bek- 
ker, Entituled,  Le  monde  enchante,  that  is,  the 
World  Bewitched  (  of  which  the  Firft  Volume 
is  Tranflated  into  EngUJh)  have  flown:  he 
generally  therein  agreeing  with  Mr.  Scot,  and 
reje&ing  all  Magical  Incantations. 

Indeed  the  great  Principle  Dr.  Bekker  goes 
upon,  is,  That  there  were  Devils  once  in  the 
World,  who  corrupted  Humane  Nature,  but 
fince  that  time,  God  Almighty  put  them  in 
Chains,  fo  that  they  have  never  made  any 
Figure  in  the  World  fince,  by  a&ing  any  way 
againft  Mankind,  or  otherwife. 

As  I  perufed  Dr.  Bekker  s  faid  Volumes  in 
French,  I  found  fome  Perfons  had  writ  againft 
him,  and  thereupon  I  fent  to  Holland  for  all 
that  was  Writ  againft  him,  and  any  Reply's  he 
had  made ;  but  could  get  only  one  fmall  Vo- 
lume writ  by  Monfieur  Binet,  in  French,  En- 
titled, A  general  Idea  of  the  Pagan  Divinity, 
Serving  for  a  refutation  of  Monfieur  Bekkers  Sj- 
fiem  ,  concerning  the  Fxi fence  and  Operations  of 
Damons.  Printed  at  .Amferdam,  An.  1698. 
This  Book  is  compofed  of  Six  Letters,  writ  by 
1  Mr; 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  349 

Mr.  Bhet  to  a  Friend,  and  I  fliall  here  give 
you  an  Abltract,  of  what  I  find  mod  material 
in  them,  in  reference  to  Dr.  Bekktft  Syftem. 
In  his  firft  1  etter  he  cells  us,  He  finds  in 
Mr.  Works  ,    much  Zealand  Confi- 

dent Ivancing  Novelties,  but  no  proofs 

to  Maintain  them,  and  unlefs  you  fuffer  your 
(elf  to  be  furpri/  h  a  certain  Air  of  Tri- 

umph, wherewith  he  animates  his  Exprefli- 
ons,  you  will  run  a  rifque  of  remaining  ftill 
Inchanted  ,  efpecially  if  you  deny  certain 
Principles,  which  he  has  laid  down  without 
proof,  all  the  Work  will  fall  of  it  felf. 

He  obferves ,  thaf  where  Mr.  Bckker  fpeaks 
of  Spirits,  all  things  fecm  to  him  perplext  with 
difficulties,  you  fhall  fcarce  find  a  paflage  in 
the  Scripture  that  fpeaks  of  them,  all  is  My- 
sterious, Allegorical.  The  proper  Names  of 
Angels,  Devils,  Daemons,  &c.  are  but  Men 
fent ,  Calumniators ,  Evil  Thoughts,  or,  at 
moft  mere  Symbols  to  give  us  fome  Metapho- 
rical Idea  of  the  Majefty  of  God. 

He  next  cites  the  Paflage  following  from 
Mr.  Bekkers  Preface  to  his  firft  Vollume. 

It's  now  looked  on  as  a  piece  of  Piety  for  a 
Man  truly  to  Fear  God,  and  alfo  the  Devil : 
if  we  do  not  this,  a  Man  paffes  for  an  Atheift, 
that  is ,  for  a  Man  who  believes  no  God  ; 
becaufe  he  cannot  believe  there  are  two,  one 
Good,  and  another  Evil  j  but  I  believe,  fays 
he,  we  may  with  reafon  call  thofe  Men  Di- 
tbeifis ;  or  fuch  as  believe  two  Gods.  On  this 
Paflage  Mr.  Bintt  writes  as  follows. 

This  Paflage  extreamly  reflecting  on  our 
Belief,  I  have  rendered  it  word  for  word 
from  the  Text,  becaufe  the  Tranflator  has 
corrupted  it,    by  his  ufual  foftnings.     This 

Accufation 


350  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Accufation  which  Mr.  Bekke r  charges  us  with, 
of  making  the  Devil  a  God  Almighty,  ftrikes 
an  Horror  j  mean  while  it's  the  foundation 
on  which  he  builds  his  whole  Work,  it's  the 
Idol  he  will  pull  down,  it's  in  which  the  force 
of  his  Proofs  confifts,  and  you  fhall  fcarce  read 
a  Chapter  in  him,  but  you  will  find  this  Im- 
putation. But  whoever  believ'd  amongft  us, 
that  the  Devil,  properly  fpeaking,  is  the  ab- 
folute  Author  of  all  the  Works,  they  fay,  we 
afcribe  to  him  ?  What  Divine  has  ever  con- 
fider'd  him  as  a  Firft  and  Independent  Caufe  ? 
If  we  afcribe  much  Power  to  the  Devil,  it's 
manifeft  we  fpeak  with  the  Scriptures,  and  if 
there  be  any  thing  which  does  not  agree  with 
the  Author  s  Conceptions,  we  nfe  but  the  Ex- 
preffions  which  the  Holy  Ghojt  has  Confecra- 
ted;  and  thus  all  Mr.  Bekkers  Obje&ions  Ad- 
drefs  themfelves  to  God  himfelf,  who  has 
prefcribed  us  a  way  of  expreffing  our  felves  in 
this  refpeft. 

Again,  he  writes  beneath.  You  pretend  to 
be  well  grounded  in  maintaining  that  we  un- 
juftly  afcribe  to  the  Devil,  the  Works  that  are 
afcribed  to  him,  becaufe  he  is  but  an  Inftru- 
ment,  who  borrows  from  God  all  his  A&ions, 
and  I  think  we  have  as  much  reafon  to  fay 
that  we  deceive  our  felves,  in  afcribing  to 
Man  all  his  operations ,  fince  of  himfelf  he 
can  do  nothing ;  therefore  it  will  no  longer 
be  Man  that  Moves  himfelf,  Speaks,  Eats, 
Drinks,  but  God  himfelf,  for  the  Devil  and 
Man  are  in  this  cafe,  in  reference  to  God, 
one  and  the  fame  thing,  in  an  equal  Impo- 
tence, and  an  entire  Dependency. 

You  may  objed  that  this  comparifon  of  the 
Devil  with  Man  is  not  Juft :  the  bufinefs  is  to 

know 


cr  Familiar  Spirits.  35 

know,  if  the  one  be  the  Author  of  thofe  high 
and  fublime  Operations  that  are  afcribed  to 
him ;  whereas,    we  confider  in  the  other  but 
anions  proper  and  natural  to  him  ;    but  this 
difference  tho'  real  betwixt  the  two  Creatures, 
is  bur  a  mcer  Illufion,  in  reference  to  God, 
in  which  properly  confifts  the  ftate  of  the 
Queftion.  We  confider  the  Devil  always  as  an 
Inftrument  in  the  hand  of  God,  as  a  Rod  of 
Fury,  which  ftrikes  but  when  God  lets  it  fall 
on  thofe  he  will  Vifit.     To  explain  this  far- 
ther, I  ask  what  vertue  had  Mofcs  or  Aaron 
and  his  Rod  to  do  fo  many  Miracles  ?  to  Infiift 
fb  many  Plagues   on  Vbaroab  and  his  People  ? 
the  fimple  Rod  in  the  hand  of  a  Man  could 
not  produce  fo  many  Miracles  of  it  felf,  but 
one  was  the  Minifter,  the  other  the  Vifible 
Sign  which  God  accompanied  with  a  Divine 
Efficacy.    And  what  would  you  fay  of  a  Man 
that  would  impute  it  to  us  to  believe,  that 
Mofes,  Aaron  and  his  Rod  were  the  fole  caufe 
of  all  thefe  Miracles ;    if  he  inlarged  himfelf 
in  writing  great  Volumes,  and  making  large 
Reflexions,  for  giving  colour  to  this  Abfur- 
dity  ?  and  in  the  mean  time  the  Scripture  fays, 
Ex.  8.  y.  That  Aaron  having  ftretcht  forth  his 
Hand  with  his  Rod,  on  the  Rivers,  Brooks, 
and  Ponds,  caufed  Frogs  to  IiTue  from  them 
to  cover  the  Land  oi^Egypt.    Therefore  when 
we  conceive  the  Devil  as  a  Rod  of  Fury, 
without  any  Vertue  of  his  own,  it  is  but  by 
relation  to  God,  the  firft  caufe  who  precedes, 
determines^  accompanies,  bends  the  Creature, 
how  excellent  foever  it  may  be.  But  it's  mani- 
fell  if  you  compare  the  Devil  with  Man,  you 
will  find  more  excellency  in  his  Nature,  light 
in  his  Knowledge,    penetration  in  his  Sight, 

faci- 


3  5  *  An  Account  of  Genii, 

facility  and  power  in  his  Operations,  his  na- 
tural Knowledge  is  more  extended,  not  only 
becaufe  he  beholds  things  with  a  more  fimple 
view,  but  alfo  by  reafon  of  the  experience  of 
all  Ages,  which  difcovers  to  him   the  conne- 
ctions, which  makes  him  penetrate  the  bottom 
of  Nature;  whofe  Springs,  Caufes  and  Ef- 
fects he  knows  after    a  more  perfed  manner 
than  the  greateft  Philofopher :    and  it's  this 
great  Knowledge  the  Devil  has  of  Nature, 
which  teaches  him  how  to  move   the  various  < 
parts;  whence  it  is  that  we,  who  know  not 
thefe  Springs,  and  the  manner  to  make  th^m 
ad,  are  ftrangely  ftruck  at   the  light  of  his 
operations3  and  that  we  look  on  as  a  Miracle, 
what  is  often  but  the  operation  of  a  Damon, 
produced  by  Caufes  otherwife  apply'd    and 
moved,  than  according  to  the  ordinary  courfe 
of  Nature  ;   and  thus  as  the  Devil  has  much 
more  Light,  Penetration  and  Adivity  than 
Man  ,    we  muft  not  doubt  but  his   Power 
is  much  fuperiour   to  his.      You  fee  there- 
fore that  the  Author's  odious  Imputations  va- 
nifh  of  themfelves,  and  that  our  Dodrine  is 
neither  repugnant  to  Reafon,  nor  Revelation, 
nor  to  the  Idea  of  the  Divine  Perfedions. 

And  I  cannot  comprehend  how  thefe  Per- 
fons  will  find  oppofition  betwixt  the  Almighty 
Power  of  God,  and  the  Miniftry  of  the  Devil, 
for  by  this  Objection  the  Author  fo  often 
makes,  he  wholly  overthrows  his  own  Hypo- 
thecs :  He  will  have  it,  that  the  clear  and  di- 
ftind  Idea  of  the  Divine  Perfedions  exclude 
the  operations  of  Damons ,  that  there  is  a  con- 
tradiction in  believing^  that  thofe  Spirits  op- 
pofe  themfelves  to  the  Will  of  God  :  Now  this 
Devil,  this  Sat  an,  thefe  Damons,  according  to 

you 


or  Familir  X  35  5 

Vouj  are  fome  Calumniating  Men,  foi 
verfary,    Humane    I 
ons  of  the  Spin 

cannot  deny  at  lead  but  th 

radx 

of  his  Go(peIj  Sedu 

thing  much  more  Inconfiftent  wit' 

of  God's  Perfections,    to  oppofe   to  himl 

tures,   tl 
than  the   Devil,    who    i  ged 

from  Matter,  onfummgte  experien 

And  1  1   vain  Ms.Bekhr  im- 

putes to  us  the  fear  of  the  Devil,  no  he  is  an 
Enemy  overcome,  the  Seed  of  the  Woman 
has  bruifed  his  head  j  if  he  has  any  Power  re- 
maining., he  derives  it  from  God  alone,  he  is 
in  his  Hand  as  a  Rod  of  Fury  to  Chaftife 
Men,  and  I  fear  him  but  as  the  Chaftifements 
that  God  dil plays  by  his  Miniftry  are  to  be 
fear'd.  You  fzc  then  that  the  Author  Con- 
demns Himfelf,  while  having  eftablifhed  for 
Principle  that  according  to  us,  this  abomina- 
ble and  Curs'd  Creature  does  things  more  Mi- 
raculous than  God  himfelf  has  ever  done.  He 
adds,That  fuppofing  what  is  ufually  afcrib'd  e- 
very  where  to  the  Devil  and  his  Angels,  there 
cannot  be  convincing  Proofs  that  Jefirs  is  the 
Chrift  yor  that  there  is  but  one  God  :  And  I  con- 
fefs,fays  he,  that  if  I  do  not  polTefs  the  Reader 
with  a  clear  Conception  of  this^in  what  I  have 
Writj  it's  in  vain  that  I  have  Compofed  it. 
Now  fuppofing  that  the  Devil  a&s  but  Mini- 
fterially  ,    and  dep  y  of  God  ,  fuppo- 

fing that  we  attribute  nothing  to  the  Devil, 
properly  fpeaking,  cf  Miraculous,  that  can 
be  put  in  oppofition  to,  or  parallel  vvith  the 
A  a  Works 


254  dn  Account  of  Genii, 

Works  of  God,  our  Proof  that  Jefik  is  the 
Clmrt,  and  that  there  is  but  one  God,  are  ex- 
clufive  to  all  other,  in  regard  that  it  being 
very  far  from  there  being  any  prerogative  in 
this  Curs'd  Spirit,  that  can  be  confounded  with 
thofe  which  God  poffeffes  in  the  higheft  de- 
gree of  Eminency  j  he  has  deprived  himfelf, 
by  his  revolt,  of  his  moft  pure  advantages, 
and  has  precipitated  himfelf  into  an  Abyis  of 
Miferies,  where  the  Idea  of  a  fevere  God 
makes  him  tremble. 

In  his  Fifth  Letter  he  writes  thus/ 
Becaufe  a  truth  has  been  corrupted  by  divers 
t ictions,  muft  it  prefently  be  reje&ed  ?  there 
is  no  Principle,  no  natural  Notion  that  can 
undergoe  this  examen,  without  being  con- 
demned :  there  is  none  but  has  been  ill  con- 
ceived and  abufed,  then  there  will  be  npne 
that  can  lawfully  be  admitted.  Let  us  con- 
clude therefore  in  general,  that  tho'  Men  have 
err'd  infinite  ways,  concerning  the  Do&rine 
of  Damons,  that  they  have  been  conceived  as 
Subftances  either  Material,  or  Spiritual,  or 
mixt ,  tho'  fome  have  placed  them  in  the 
Stars,  others  on  the  Earth,  others  in  Hell- 
tho5  there  have  been  as  many  Sentiments,  as 
Heads  concerning  their  Offices;  tho*  they  have 
been  cali'd  Sjlfkes ,  Gnomes,  Salamanders,  all 
this  will  but  prove  at  moft  that  Men  have  ill 
conceived  the  naturffand  operations  of  Da- 
mens,  but  no  way  that  we  muft  entirely  rejed 
the  ground  of  this  Dodrine,  by  reafon  of  the 
Tables  Superftitiori  has  mixt  with  it. 

And  beneath.  Were  it  true,  as  it's  gather- 
ed from  the  expofitions  of  Mr.  Bekker,  always 
oppofite  to  himfelf,  that  there  were  in  the  Old 
Tffiment  no  Term  which  figftified  properly  > 

or 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  ?rc 

or  that  could  according  to  the  Qtn'w 
Ihbr  v  and   the   ufe   then,    figpi 

thofe  Spirits  which  wc  caU  St*** y  PrviU*  &c. 

the  Jews  would  have  taken  th  I  .this  in 
their  proper  lignitication  •  fo  that  by  this  name 
mi»,  they  had  not  underltood  s.it>.vs,  An- 
gels of  Dcftrurtiojij  or  of  Death,  but  only 
Adverfaries,  Men  Enemies  to  God  and  hU 
Truth ;  the  Stulducc*,  for  example,  had  had 
grounds  to  accufc  St.  Paul  of  Ignorance,  for 
following  the  fentiments  of  the  Tharifas, 
who  took  the  affirmative,  fince  the  Yharifecs 
would  have  ill  underftood  all  the  Terms  of 
the  Old  Tefiament,  which  had  iignified  Origi- 
nally, and  according  to  the  then  ufe,  not 
Angels  and  Satans^  but  only  Men  either  Good 
or  Evil.  If  then  the  Jews  were  Imbibed  in 
Subftance  with  the  common  Doctrine  of  De- 
vils j  it's  becaufe  they  took  thefe  Expreflions 
either  for  thefe  pure  and  favourable  Intelli- 
gences, or  for  thefe  impure  and  adverfary  Spi- 
rits •  and  if  they  underftood  them  in  this  Senfc^ 
being  the  fame  which  the  Holy  Qbofi  has  us'd 
in  the  Books  of  the  Old  Tefiament ,  they  will 
have  the  fame  Signification,  and  if  they  have 
the  fame  Signification  ;  they  will  confe- 
quemly  be  thefe  fame  Spirits  which  operate 
here  below ;  for  there  is  not  one  Paifage: 
where  thefe  Terms  are  found  ,  but  formally 
teaches  us  their  Operations;  fo  (hack's  an  un~ 
conteftable  Principle  ,  which  Mr.  Bckktr  did 
not  forefee,  that  if  the  Old  Tejtameut  teaches 
xiftence  of  Devils,  we  ought  neceffa- 
rily  to  infer  their  Operations ,  becaufe  they 
there  appear  every  where  operating. 

A  a  2  Againj 


'^$6  An  Jccount  of  Genii } 

Again,  If  thofe  Terms  of  the  Old  Tefta- 
ment,  which  fome  pretend  we  abufe,  to  efta- 
blifh  the  Operations  of  Damons ,  fignifie  pro- 
perly but  Men,  Adverfaries .,  and  if  the  Holy 
Tongue  had  never  employ'd  them  to  exprefs 
thefe  wicked  Spirits,  it's  not  to  be  doubted  but 
the  Jews  would  have  thrown  it  in  our  Difli ; 
you  fhould  have  feen  them  exagerate  the  ea- 
finefs  of  the  Chriftians  to  admit  this  Fable  of 
the  Operations  of  Demons,  as  being  purely  Pa- 
gan, and  reproach  them  their  grofs  Ignorance 
in  Understanding  the  Hebrew  Tongue.  If  they 
forbear  it,  £nd  concur  with  us  in  defending 
the  Opinion  of  the  Operations  of  Damons, 
tho'  they  have  added  to  them  fome  Fables, 
it's  becaufe ,  that  befide  they  know  the  true 
Signification  of  thefe  Terms,  and  that  we  do 
not  make  ufe  of  them  to  contend  againftthem, 
there  would  be  too  much  abfurdity  to  con- 
teft  the  Senfe  of  them. 

We  find,  according  to  Mr.  Bekker,  that  what 
we  believe  of  Damons ,  is  in  fubftance ,  but 
what  the  Babylonians  taught  the  Jews.  It's 
what  this  Gradation  from  the  Babylonians  to 
the  Jeivsy  from  the  Jews  to  the  firft  Chriflians, 
from  the  firft  Chriftians  to  the  Pafifts,  from 
the  Paftfls  to  the  Prctefiants ,  evidently  makes 
out ;  but  I  wonder  God  has  fuffer'd  his  Church 
alway  to  be  infeded  with  this  Error,  and  that 
neither  the  Prophets  that  were  at  Babylon,  nor 
thofe  that  Inftrudted  the  Israelites ,  after  their 
re-eftabiifhment,  who  thundred  with  fo  much 
rehemency  againft  Errors,  did  not  oppofe 
th'emfelyes  to  a  Superftition  fo  grofs  and  Im- 
pious. 

Chrifi  came  into  the  World  to  Deftroy  the 
Works  of  the  Devil  f  his-  Prophetick  Office 

obligd 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  357 

oblig'd  him  to  inltrurt  the  Ignorant,  aid  1 
pofc  Superftitiofl  5  him  every  wh 

repi\  md  thin,  mft 

Enroi  n  :   But 

for  the  Operations  of  Aug.  ils,  we 

find  not  the  ft  Cor- 

rection j    would  he   ha  d  theft    wan- 

derings of  Mans  Mind,  without  recalling  it  to 
its  Duty  ?  T 

undermined  the  Foundation  of  the  Chiiitian 
Religion  ;  and  would  Jtfm  Cbrifi  have  left 
them  in  their  full  vigour  ;  in  tiling  the  fame 
Terms  the  Jews  had  corrupted,  the  Pagans 
,  and  giving  then  the  fame  Ideas  ? 

If  the  Jews  had  corrupted  the  Terms  of  An- 
gels and  Damons,  in  giving  them  a  falfe  Signi- 
fication^ would  Jefm  Cbrifi  inftead  of  dimpa- 
ting  thefe  Prejudices  of  the  Jevjs  ,  have  con- 
firm'd  them  in  their  Error,  in  expreffing  him- 
felf  in  the  fame  Terms^without  having  reftor'd 
them  to  their  true  Senfe  y  and  in  fomenting 
Superftition.,  by  fabulous  Examples  of  Men, 
obfefs'd  and  deliver'd  from  Damons?  Would 
the  Afo files  have  Authoriz'd  Error,  in  afcribing 
every  where  Operations  to  Devils ;  which  nei- 
ther the  Jevs,  nor  Pagans  could  have  took  in 
another  Senfe  y  than  that  which  was  then 
in  ufe  ;  compare  this  Objection  with  the  28th 
Chapter  of  the  Author's  Second  Book  ;  for  I 
pretend  >  that  the  way  Mr.  Bekier  there  An- 
fwers  ,  renders  my  Obje&ion  wholly  unan- 
fwerable. 

In  his  Sixth  Letter,  he  writes  thus :  Mr. 
Bekktr  owns,,  that  all  the  Pagans  Ancient  and 
Modern  y    Europeans  y  .  Africans, 

,  both  North  and  South  y    agree  in  thefe 

three  chief  Points.,  which  are  of  an  incontefta- 

A  a  3  ble 


55  8  An  Account  of  Genii, 

ble  Truth,  i.  That  there  is  only  one  firft 
Beings  or  one  fupream  Deity.  2.  That  there 
are  Spirits  that  haye  had  a  Beginning ,  and 
that  are  diftind  from  Humane  Souls.  3.  That 
thofe  Spirits  are  either  Good  or  Evil;  and  that 
fome  of  them  are  Friends  to  Men,  and  others 
JEnemies. 

See  here  then  all  the  World  imbib'd  with 
an  Opinion  of  D/emons;  whence  I  infer,  that 
what  they  know  ,  how  erroneous  foever  it 
may  be,  mult  be  known  to  them  by  the  way 
of  Operation;  and  to  fet  this  Truth  in  a  clear 
Light,  obferve  :  It's  impoffible  ,  that  one  felf 
fame  Belief  univerfelly  difperft,  and  conftant- 
ly  teceiv'd ,  can  be  entirely  fklfe  in  the  Bot- 
tom ;  I  fay  in  the  Bottom  ,  not  to  confound 
with  the  Subftance  of  thisDo&rine,  the  er- 
roneous Ideas  under  which  it  has  been  con- 
ceiv'd,  and  which  have  been  divers,  accord- 
ing to  the  diverfity  of  the  Imaginion. 

And  beneath.  We  cannot  find  by  any  cer^ 
tain  Hiftory,  that  the  Americans  had  any  Com- 
munication with  the  reft  of  the  World  till  of 
late  Years  ,  yet  this  Imagination  of  Damons 
lias  been  preierv'd  among  them  for  a  great 
number  of  Ages ,  notwithstanding  their  Ig- 
norance, Brutifhnefs  and  Extravagances. 

You  may  fay  ,  you  cannot  maintain  that 
the  knowledge  of  Damons  carries  the  Cha- 
raders  proper  to  natural  Truths.  God  has 
not  imprinted  them  in  the  Imagination;  and 
Reafon,  how  clear  foever  it  may  be,  cannot 
raife  it  felf  fo' far  without  the  aid  of  Revela- 
tion ;  but  I  fay,  if  Damons  have  been  univer- 
1  felly  and  constantly  receiv'd  by  all  the  People 
of  the  World  ,  this  Knowledge  mult  flow 
from  fome  folid  Caufe.  It  comes  neither  from 

the 


or  Familiar  Spirit*.  359 

the  Scripture  ,    nor  from  Reafon,  nor  from 
Imagination  ,    it's  deriv'd  therefore  only 
11  the  Op  ns. 

Again;  As  for  the  :ng  Operations  of 

Damons  on    the   hi  Mr.    Bekj&r  fa 

Thofe  who  know  notGod  asChriftuaij  know 
not  alfo  the  Devil;  but  a  Clown  would 
have   reafon  to  Laugh  at  Mr.  ,    if  he 

would  perfwade  him  ,  that  becaufe  he  kno 
not  the  Nature  of  the  Soul,  and  of  the  Body, 
and  the  f  Motion  ,  he  fhould  not  pr 

I  to  foel  a  found  Box  on  the  Ear  given 
him;  and  it's  ridiculous  t6  deny  the  Operati- 
ons of  Demons  on  People  ,    becaufe  they  arc 
not  fo  good  Divines,  2$  to  raife  themfelves  to 
the  Knowledge  of  God  ,    and  the  Myfteries 
which  his  Word  has  revealed  to  us,  or  becaufe 
the\-   are  Ignorant  of  the  true  Dodrine   of 
nons.     So  far  Mr.  IliruU 
This  Author   having  made  the  foregoing 
Reflexions  on  Dr.   fiekkets  Four  Volumes,  I 
fhall  have  the  lefs  to  fay  to  them.     However, 
as  I  think  it  proper  for  me  to  add  fome  Con- 
siderations of  my  own,    I  fhall  firft  fet  down, 
as  briefly  as  I  may  ,  what  I  find  moft  Materi- 
al in  Dr.  Bekiers  Volumes ,  deferving  an  An- 
fwer,  and  then  offer  what  I  have  to  reply- 
In  his  Firft  Volume,  he  fets  fprth  the  vari- 
ous Opinions  of  People  in  the  World,    con- 
cerning evil  Spirits  and  their  Operations;  and 
having  there  giv'n  an  account  of  many  Chri- 
stian Authors ,  as  well  as  others ,  who  have 
countenane'd  their  Operations  in  feveral  re- 
fpeds ,  in  his  2 2d  Chapter  ,  he  writes  thus  : 
But  I  find  no  Author,  who  in  time  pafs'd,  has 
afcrib'd  fo  little  Undcrftanding,   and  Vertue 
to  the  Devil,  as  for  what  relates  to  all  thofe 
A  a  4  Know- 


3<5o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Knowledges  and  Effe&sfet  forth  by  me,,  a§ 
Reginald  Scot.  We  have  at  prefent  Antony  Van 
Dak,  who  afcribes  no  more  to  him  in  his  Book 
of  Or^cks.  Thefe  two  Authors  hold,  that  there 
is  no  other  efficient  Caufe  of  all  thofe  things 
that  are  practised  or  wrought ,  but  the  Impo- 
ftures  of  Men,  the  Devil  having  nothing  to  do 
in  them.  I  hear  alfo  every  Day  while  I  am 
employ'd  in  this  Work,  that  the  Men  of  the 
belt  Senfe  among  us ,  afcribe  but  very  little 
Power  and  Knowledge  to  the  Devil  ,  and 
that  there  are  many  more  than  I  thought, 
who,  as  to  Perfons  poffefs'd  and  bewitch'd, 
are  of  the  fame  Opinion  with  Monfieur  Dail- 
lcn,  who,  in  what  he  has  writ  in  French  con- 
cerning Damons y  maintains,'that  all  that  is  con- 
tained in  the  Scriptures  concerning  evil  and 
impure  Spirits,,  ought  not  to  be  underftood 
ptherwife,  than  of  certain  Difeafes,  to  which 
the  Jews  were  wont  to  give  fuch  Names ;  he 
believing.,  neverthelefs,,  that  it  might  be  that 
evil  Spirits  came  at  the  fame  time  to  concern 
themfelves  in  it.  And  beneath,  he  adds.  My 
fcope  here  is  to  relate  what  is  faid  of  the  De- 
vil and  his  Power,  ;md  to  examine  whether  it 
be  true  or  not,  and  I  hold  the  Negative  ;  be- 
caufe  it's  much  contrary  to  me  to  maintain  an 
Opinion  which  afcribes  fo  much  Power  and 
Vertue  to  Spirits ,  efpe daily  evil  Spirits  ; 
wherefore  I  mull  rank  my  felf  with  Scot ,  Van 
Dak,  and  many  ethers.,  who  are  oppofite  to 
the  belief  Aden  have  of  this  Power, 

In  his  24th  Chapter,  §.  10.  ij.  he  tells  us, 
We  have  all  the  Reafon'of  the  World  to  hold 
fcr  Tagan  Legends,  ail  the  Vegans  have  publifll- 
ed  concerning  Miracles^Oracles  of  their  Gods, 
apreal  Spe&f  es ,  Dreams ,  and  fo  many  other 

Prodigies, 


ok  Familiar  Spirits.  361 

Prodigie  II  as  all  rlic  Papifts  obtrude  u 

onus  in  that  kind.     And  he   thinks  irly 

all  the  Citations  he  has 
made  in  thi  ,  that  t!  no  Mira- 

Apparitions  1 

or  Souls,  of  Diabolical  Arts  and  illuiions, 
or  Sorceries,  by  Letters  and  Characters,  or  of 
(  hoice  of  Days,  neither  mJudaiGnjiox  Wyfm, 
but  draws  its  Origine  from  u  We  mult 

ft  all  atone.  (\e  all  to  fubfift  tog 

j  of  what  I  veritbe;  we  ought  to 

difcharge  our  (elves  of  all  thefe  Prejudices, and 

1  Realon  with  the  Scriptures  to  ground  our 
(elves  on  them,  and  look  upon  thofe  alone  as 
pure  Sources. 

In  his  Second  Volume,  c.  7.  (.  7.  he  writes 
thus:  All  the  Learned  agree,  thzt /.ffirmanti 
incnmlnt  probatio,  but  he  that  denies  a  thing,  or 
doubts  only  of  it ,  does  enough  when  he  al- 
ledges  Reafons  of  his  doubts  j  and  much  more 
yet  when  he  fifts  and  curioufly  examines  thofe 
Reafons  he  might  exped  from  thePerfons  con- 
cerned. It's  what  he  has  refolved  to  do  in 
this  place  :  firft  as  to  what  has  never  been  al- 
ledg'd  by  Reafon,  and  afterwards  as  to  what 
has  never  been  taught  by  the  Scriptures. 

C.  19.  §.  19.  He  lays,  That  the  Devil  by  the 
firft  Sin  that  was  committed  in  Paradice,  is 
the  Caufe  of  all  evil,  and  confequently  all  the 
evil  that  is  done  ,  ought  with  juft  Realon  to 
be  imputed  to  him.  And  beneath,  You  can 
find  nothing  that  can  prove  ,  that  the  De- 
vil after  having  Man  at  the  beginning 
of  the  Creation,  has  had  fince,  in  Perfon,the 
leaft  Power  on  him,  or  his  A&ions;  but  indeed 
that  all  the  evil  that  ever  happen'd,  or  is  ftill 
committed  in  the  World  is  confider'd  by  Rea- 
fon 


362  An  Account  of  Genii, 

fon  of  this  ,  as  if  the  Devil  himfelf  did  it, 

C,  %o.  \.  19.  He  fays  j  As  for  the  Fall  of 
Man,  it's  certain  it  was  caufcd  by  the  Devil, 
but  to  know  the  way  how.,  it's  altogether  un- 
certain. 

C.  27.  f>  i.y  He  argues  thus :  As  its  mani- 
feft,  that  that  which  has  noExiftence  can  pro- 
duce nothing,whence  comes  it  that  the  Devils, 
or  unclean  Spirits  did  thofe  things ,  which  the 
Gofpel  mentions.,  and  by  thofe  that  were  pof- 
fefs'd  by  them  ?  I  anfwer,  The  pretended  un- 
clean Spirits  are  always  named  in  cafe  of  Ma- 
ladies, and  that  fo  it  was  underftood  by  thofe 
that  were  attaqued,  or  infe&ed  with  Difeafes 
and  Scourges  of  God  ,  that  reign  d  at  that 
time.  And  he  fays ,  If  you  fay,  the  Apoitlcs 
fince  Chrift  have  not  freed  us  from  that  Error,  ' 
that  the  Damons  are  really  fuch  Spirits,  and 
that  they  have  fuchaPower,heanfwers,  This  i$ 
not  fo  ealily  granted,  becaufe  EidoU,  falfe 
Gods  or  Idols ,  and  the  Daimcnia  are  one  and  - 
the  fame  thing.  Now  St.  Vaul  tells  us,  that  the 
Idols,  or  falfe  Gods  are  nothing  at  all. 

C  32.  ^.  10.  He  fays,  As  for  Angels  he  does 
not  deny  but  they  have  appear'd  fometinics, 
but  he  believes  not  fo  many  Apparitions  of 
the  Devil ,  ^.12.  He  owns ,  there  are  Men 
that  naturally  feeSpe<5tre§  andPhantomes  more 
often  than  others,  but  he  fays  it's  the  natural 
Difpofition  of  the  Body  of  the  Man,  of  his  Blood 
and  Spirits ,  which  makes  him  believe  he  really 
fees,  what  he  fees  no  farther  than  he  believes* 

C.  33.  §.  10.  He  fays,  He  concludes,  that 
the  Devil  has  not  the  leaft  Knowledge  of  the 
World,  nor  of  the  things  that  concern  Religi- 
pn,  nor  of  the  Affairs  of  Faith. 

C  34.  S,  16,  He  fays,   He  has  fhewn  that 

the 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  36$ 

the  Devil  can  do  nothing  in  reality  J  nor  in 
appearance.  §.  2j.  Ha  lays,  The  Angels  arc 
the  ML  f  God  in  all  Places,  bo:h  toPu- 

nifh  and  to  Proteft  and  Defend  them  ; 

but  as  for  the  Devil,  he  is  God's  Prifoner.  Af- 
ter which  he  has  no  more  to  lay  on  this  Matter. 

In  his  Third  Volume,    C.  1.  §.  6.  He  fays, 
The  Queftion  is  not,  whether  there  are  1 
chanrments,   or  the  like  ;  hut  what  we  ought 
to  underftand  hv  Enchantments,   and  in  what 
it  confifts ;  whether  it  be  Deceit,  Subtlety,  Go- 

t  wickednefs,  frc.  or  whether  thofe  they 
call  Magicians  really  work  by  the  Devil. 

C.  y.  §.  y.  He  fays,  He  is  of  Opinion,  Thit 
what  the  * .-Egyptians  did  was  only  in  Appear- 
ance, and  nothing  real. 

C.4.  $  15.  He  fays,  If  we  think  to  fright 
People  with  Spetfres ,  to  teach  them  fo  much 
more  to  fear  God  ,  it's  a  miferable  thing  in 
Chriftianity,  that  People  muft  be  brought  to 
God  by  a  fervileFear,  which  naturally  makes 
us  fly  God  ,  or  that  we  ferve  him  without 
love.  If  it  be  with  this  Fear,  with  which  we 
ought  to  ferve  God  ,  has  not  Cbrifi  rendrecj 
us  a  poor  Service  for  having  delivered  us  ? 

C  22.  §.  18.  As  for  thofe  they  call  poifefs'd 
Perfons ;  he  fays ,  He  confeiles  he  has  no 
Knowledge  of  the  leaft  Operation  of  the  De- 
vil, on  the  Body,  in  the  Body ,  and  by  means 
of  the  Body,  no  more  than  of  thofe  fome 
will  have  him  do  on  the  Soul  of  Man ;  for 
none  of  all  thefe  evil  Spirits  ever  were,  or  are 
in  any  place  of  all  the  Bible,  Devils  fo  called^ 
but  the  evil  Spirits  were  troublefomeTorments3 
and  incurable  Ills,  of  which  Cbrifi  cured  many 
Perfons  bv  his  foie  Word,  and  affifted  the  A- 
poftles  when  they  undertook  to  do  it. 

1* 


3^4  ^n  -Account  of  Genii, 

In  his  Fourth  Volume,  C.2.  §.i.He  fays,  He 
has  ftiewn  that  the  Ancient  Mcgick  was  nothing 
but  furprize  ,  or  impofture  according  to  all 
the  Scripture  fays  of  it.  §",  3.  He  fays,  That 
all  which  Men  think  to  be  an  A&ion  of  Spi- 
rits^ by  Reafon  of  the  fubtlety  with  which  it's 
done,  is  an  effed  of  fubtle  and  indivifible  Sub- 
ftances.  The  knowledge  of  the  moll  fubtle 
Matters,  and  of  the  extent  of  their  Motion 
may  fhew  us,,  that  ail  that  is  commonly  afcri- 
bed  to  Magick,  or  the  Operations  of  the 
Devil  may  be  natural.  The  moft  fubtle  Parts 
of  Bodies,  entring  in  ,  iffuing  forth,  and  paf- 
fing  through  Bodies,  are  the  Caufe  of  all  the 
Changes  which  happen.  §.  10.  He  fays,  All 
he  has  faid,  is  to  fhew  that  there  are  fome- 
times  very  furprifing  things  done,  whereof 
we  cannot  outwardiy  knpw  the  Caufes.,  and 
which  neverthelefs  ought  to  be  afcribed  to  the 
Motion,  affembling,  or  feparation  of  thefe  lit- 
tle Bodies,  one  way,  or  other. 

C.  2.  S.  11.  He  fays  ^  We  fhall  now  exa- 
mine.,  whether  there  has  ever  happened  in  the 
Worlds  that  any  thing  of  the  Nature  of  thofe 
we  call  Apparitions,  Phantoms,  or  Magick^that 
ought  not  to  be  afcribed  to  thofe  Atoms,  which 
often,  in  moving  themfelvep  ,  in  fepaxating, 
or  joyning  themfelves  to  one  another  ,  can 
caufe  the  fame  Afpe&s,  the  fame  Sounds,  the 
fame  Motions  in  Men,  and  aboup  them,  that 
are  afcribed  to  Spirits,  or  the  Devil  in  parti- 
cular. 

C.  34.  §.  10.  He  fays  j  Men  take  the  word 
Devil,  Satan,  Witch  and  Magick,  in  quite 
another Senfe  than  it's  found  in  the  Scripture, 
fearching  with  all  the  exa&nefs  Imaginable. 
So  much  from  Dr,  Bekker* 

On 


or  Evnilutr  Spirits.  365 

On  what  I  have  fet  forth  from    this  Au- 
thor, 

lume  ;  but  1  (hall  contract  my  (elf  in  :i  little 
comp 

As  for  thisPerfons  undertaking  from  Scrip- 
ture and  Reafoiito  into  new  Do&rine 
amongii  aing  Evil  s;  i  its,contrary 
hat  the  whole  ftreaift  of  thofe  Learned 
Teachers,  who  ha\  2  Religion  to  us, 
have  constantly  taught  us  hitherto.  I  think  it 
may  be  look'd  upon  as  a  very  bold  and  fur- 
priiing  attempt.  And  I 'believe  the  Learned 
part  df  C  htiftians  will  conlider  the  Matter 
Very  maturely,  before  they  part  with  a  Do- 
ctrine fo  long  taught  them. 

Ic  feems  to  me    a   tt range  Confidence  in 

Dr.  Btklury  and  indeed,  no  left  than  that  of 

Socinusy  and  other  Innovators,  that  through  a 

felf-prefuming  Conceit  of  his  out-doing  in- 

fight  in  the  Scriptures,  he  fhould  now  pretend 

to  tell   us,  That  tho'  he  allows  good  Angels 

have  appear'd  fometimes,  yet  there  has  been 

no  Devil  in  the  World  fince  he  tempted  our 

firft  Parents  to  fin ;    whereas   the   Scriptures 

every  where  fpeak  as  plainly  of  Evil  Spirits, 

and  their  Operations  fince  the  Fall,  as  of  Good 

Spirits.     Neither  do. I  believe,  that  any  Perfoa 

adhering  to  Dr.  Bekkers  Dodrine,  will  ever 

be  able  to  aflign  the  leaft  Reafon,  why  God 

Almighty  fhould  have  permitted  the  Devil  to 

tempt  Man  before  the  Fall,and  not  fince.  And 

tho'  Dr.  Bel  have  fhewn 

themfelves  Men  of  Learning ;  yet  we  know 

there  have  been  man  Divines,  fince 

the  Reformation,  who  I  the  World 

much  greater  Specimens  of  t!  ight  in  the 

OrL  eh 

pre- 


^66  An  Account  of  Genii, 

pretend  to,  for  inabling  them  to  a  right  uri- 
derftanding  of  the  Scriptures ;  who,  notwith- 
Handing,  never  took  the  words,  D^i/,  Sttani 
Witch,  and  Magick  in  that  fenfe  they  have 
done. 

But  as  for  the  Origin  of  Idolatry,  and  th$ 
Do&rine  of  Damons  among  the  Gentiles  >  I  think 
no  Man  has  better  fet  it  forth  than  Kircher,  in 
his  Oedipus  zsJEgyptuicus,  whom  thofe  Authors 
have  not  pleas' d  to  take  notice  of,  as  I  think 
it  might  have  been  proper  for  them ;  he  ha* 
ving  given  an  account  of  it  quite  contrary  to 
what  they  have  writ.  This  Man  had  all  the 
Advantages  that  a  great  Writer  could  have  : 
He  had  great  Natural  Parts,  us'd  great  Indu- 
itry,  had  a  great  Correfpondence  with  the 
Learned  in  moll  Parts  of  the  World,  had  the 
Command  of  near  twenty  Languages,  and 
the  Favour  of  many  great  Princes,  who  af- 
fifted  him  with  all  forts  of  Books,  and  other 
Neceffaries  for  carrying  on  fo  great  a  Work  $ 
in  which  he  acquaints  the  World,  he  fpent 
Twenty  Years  Labour,  with  a  very  intent 
Pag.  171.  Study.  In  his  firft  Tome  of  his  faid  Work  he 
writes  thus : 

St.  Jmhrofe  wifely  and  truly  fays,  that  Hu- 
mane Error  was  the  caufe  of  Idolatry  :  And 
Ad.  Ajckp.  with  him  Hermes  Trifmegifius,  that  the  Origin 
Ct  *3'  of  the  deteftable  Idolatry  of  the  Egyptians, 
was  the  Error  and  Incredulity  of  their  An- 
ceftors,  in  which  os£gyPt  always  wallowed: 
For  as  they  did  not  apply  their  Minds  with  a 
due  Reverence  and  Consideration  to  the  Wor- 
fhip  of  the  true  God,  and  the  Divine  Religi- 
on ;  and  neverthelefs  were  poffefl  with  a  de- 
lire  of  fome  Religion,  they  found  out  the  Art 
of  making  Idols;  but  as  they  knew  not  how 

to 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  367 

animate  them,  ufing  wicked  Arts,  and 
Diabolical  Conjurations  ,  and  calling  forth 
Demons,  they  fore'd  ihttn  into  them;  and  to 
gtve  them  more  vertue  and  Mrem'rii,  they 
ifecrited  to  them  Animals  of  divers  kinds, 
which  they  called  Sacred,  adoring  in  them  the 
ikof  thofe  Peribns  ,  who  have  been  ru- 
inous for  Vertues,  and  Farts ,    chcy  had  per- 

.  forthudj  calling  by  their  Names  thofe  Cities, 
rhat  had  been  either  built,  or  inftru&ed  with 
wholfome  Laws  and  Ordinances  by  them. 
To  their  Honour  alio  they  inftituted  various 
S  leritice^  which  fort  of  Rites  and  Ceremonies, 
Mc .  u>,moft  elegantly  defcribes 

ltlhis  Sfrii  n  Vhilofcpby,  as  follows. 

Then  arofe  Men  of  the  Seed  of  Cham>  ha- 
ving corrupt  Manners ,  whofe  Minds  were 
corrupted  through  ignorance  ,  and  Damons 
that  ieduc  d  them,  and  they  taught  one  thing 
for  another  ,  and  thought  the  Stars  were  en- 
dowed with  a  Spirit  of  Intelligence,  that  they 
had  a  free  Liberty  and  Power,  and  by  degrees 
the  Devil  made   them  Err,  till  they  thought 

1  the  Stars  to  be  Creators  and  Makers;  and  they 
gave  to  each  Star  the  Name  of  a  God ,  and 
they  Worfhip'd  them  with  various  Ceremo- 
nies, foiling  down  before  them,  and  adoring 
them  ;  and  they  fet  up  various  Idols  in  their 
Names,  and  plac'd  them  on  the  tops  of  High 
Pillars,  and  Walls  of  Houfes,  exhibiting  their 
Figures  after  various  Manners  •  and  to  thefe 
they  offered  Victims,  and  Sacrifices ,  burning 
Incenfe  before  them  ;  and  the  Devil  at  cer- 
tain times ,  fpeaking  from  each  of  them, 
gave  Anfwers  to  thofe  that  ask'd  them  ,  pre- 
dicting future  things,  and  revealing  things 
hidden,  and  prefentlytoH  of  things  that  were 

do:  - 


3  6  8  An  Account  of  Genii,' 

done  in  Places  very  remote ;  and  putThoughts 
into  their  Minds.,  which  he  revealed  to  ethers; 
and  he  has  fedue'd  very  many  of  thofe  Men 
even  to  this  Day.  Now  thefe  Rites  were 
proper  to  the  lALgyptians,  which  afterwards., 
parting  to' others^ infeded  by  degrees  the  whole 
World. 

No Wj  from  what  is  here  delivered  by  kireb'er, 
we  find  we  may  allow  what  Dr.  Bekker  fays., 
'viz.  That  the  Eidola,  falfe  Gods.,  or  Idols,,  and 
the  Diamonia  of  the  Gentiles ,  are  in  a  manner 
one  and  the  fame  thing;  and  fay  with  St.PauI, 
that  the  Idols  .,  or  falfe  Gods  are  nothing  at 
all  ;  for  as  the  Pagans  adored  in  their  Idols  the 
Souls  of  Perfons  y  that  had  been  Famous  for 
Vermes ,  or  great  Adlions  done  for  the  Bene- 
fit of  Mankind  .,  or  their  fuppos'd  Spirits  of 
the  Stars  .,  thefe  indeed  were  nothing  there  ; 
but  as  they  apply'd  themfelves  to  thefe  y  for 
receiving  Anfwers^  they  defired.,  or  for  being 
otherwife  gratifyed  by  them  in  other  de- 
iires,  it  was  the  Devil  who  deluded  them.,  in 
giving  them  Anfwers ,  and  doing  other  things 
as  they  defired ;  fo  that  their  Converfation  was 
with  him  y  who  kept  them  in  continual  Ido 
latry.,  though  they  did  not  dired  their  Worftiip 
diredly  to  him. 

So  agaia,  Kircher  in  his  Second  Tcme>  of  his 
faid  Oedipus  ,  Part  2.  treating  of  Hieroglyphical 
Mapcky  in  his  Third  Chapter  y    which  treats 
concerning  the  Divinations  and  Oracles  of  the 
p  \Mgjptamy  fets  forth  ^  that  the  Mind  of  Mail 

frlV/  being  ftill  agitated  with  a  deiire  of  the  goods 
both  of  Body  and  Soul  .,  and  eagerly  wifhing 
to  fecure  them  perpetually  to  himfelf,  applies 
its  Study  to  the  Knowledge  of  future  things; 
whence  the  Devil,  as  being  Enemy  of  Man- 
kind, 


or  Familiar,  Spirits.  369 

kind,  laying  as  many  Snares,  as  there  are  Ap- 
petites of  Humane  Machinations,  at  length 
fets  upon  him  with  an  Hope  of  the  Know- 
ledge of  thofe  future  things.  Now  there  are 
two  chief  Nets  he  h\y%3  AJhologj  and  Ptfymfmpi 
by  the  firft  he  teaches  the  Lot ,  which  each 
Man  has  gotten  from  the  firft  Minute  of  his 
Nativity,  as  to  a  good  or  bad  Fortune  ;  by 
the  latter  he  prefents,  as  under  the  Veil  of  na- 
tural Caufes,various  kinds  of  Divinations,  with 
which  the  uncautious ,  while  they  unadvifed- 
ly  §0  about  to  purfue  Good  ,  and  fhun  Evil, 
are  juftly  depriv'd  of  the  eternal  Good.  Thefe 
Arts  Cham%  the  Son  of  No  >b  ,  firft  introduc  d 
into  the  World,  by  the  Inftigation  of  the  De- 
vil ;  which  the  *A.gytians,  inftru&ed  by  Chamy 
have  transfused  into  the  whole  World,  as  it 
were  by  a  certain  Hereditary  Tradition.  As  for 
their  siftrology,  he  has  treated  amply  of  it  be-1 
fore,  and  here  he  takes  upon  him  to  give  an 
Account  of  their  Divinations,  and  their  Ori- 
gine ,  and  concerning  the  Nature  of  their 
Oracles. 

Before  I  give  you  an  Account  of  what  he 
fays,  concerning  the  latter  ,  I  fhall  give  you 
two  or  three  Particulars  of  what  he  fays  con- 
cerning their  Ajtrology. 

In  his  foi  ementioned  Tomerf*  141.  he  writes 
thus :  I  dare  folemnly  affirm,  that  all  our  pre- 
fent  Judicial  Afirokgy ,  relating  to  Nativities 
and  horary  Queftions,  retains  even  to  this 
Day,  that  occult  pad  with  Devils,  which  the 
Ancienc  ^/E^yptian  AJtrology  did. 

P.  176.  He  fays,  The  ^Egyptians  did  not  fo 
much  afcribe  to  the  Stars  ,  as  to  the  Genii  pre- 
siding in  them,  tha  Events  of  things ;  hence 
there  was  an  earneft  defire ,  care,  andfolici- 
B  b  tud* 


$70  An  Account  of  Genii, 

tude  to  render  them  Propitious,  by  previous 
Ceremonies  and  Sacrifices.,  otherwise  then  the 
Afirokgers  of  our  Times  deal  ,  who  raffily'a- 
fcribe  the  Fortune  of  Men  to  a  certain  fatal 
neceffity  of  the  Stars, 

P.  200.  He  fays.,  The  *s£gyftians  held,  that 
Gods  or  Genii,  inhabited  the  Stars ;  for  they 
thought  the  Inferior  World  depended  on 
their  Vertue  and  Efficacy,  not  by  the  pro- 
per infhifive  force  of  the  Stars,  but  by  the  dif- 
poling  Power  of  the  Deities,  who  being  feat- 
ed  in  the  Stars  as  an  Inftrument  for  the  Difc 
pofition  of  Inferiors,  &c.  As  for  what  is  laid 
more  concerning  their  Afirology ,  I  refer  the 
Reader  to  the  Author. 

As  for  the  v£ygj>tians  Divinations,  and  their 
Origine,  and  the  Nature  of  their  Oracles,  they 
thought,  that  befide  the  Celeftial  Gods,  there 
were  certain  middle  Natures,whieh  they  call'd 
Angels ,  Damons  ,  Gently  or  Terrtfirial  Gods,  to 
which  they  afcribed  the  rife  and  fall  of  their 
Oracles ,  and  fo ,  that  the  Oracle*  lafted  fo 
long.,  as  the  faid  Genii  continued  in  the  Statues, 
which  'delivered  Oracles,  and  that  they  ceas'd, 
when  the  Statues  were  deferted  by  the  Genii  or 
Damons.  Now  they  affirmed  thefe  Genii  to  In- 
habit the  Region  betwixt  the  Heavens  and 
the  Earth,  and  to  confift  of  Herbs,  Stones,  Spi-^ 
ces,  and  other  Terreftrial  Matters,  contain-' 
ing  a  natural  Power  of  a  Divinity  in  them  ; 
3nd  that  as  living  near  us ,  they  were  joyned 
to  us  .by  a  friendly  Alliance  j  and  they  thought 
them  to  be  affe&ed  with  a  lingular  Love  to- 
wards Mankind  ,  according  as  their  Nature 
bears ;  predi&ing  future  things  by  Oracles, 
and  taking  care  of  other  things  belonging  to 
u*,  Wherefore  they  entred  Statues  rightly  pre- 
pared 


or  Familiar  Spirits]' 

pared  by  Men,  and  gave  Anfwcrs  from  them 
to  thole  that  confiil:  !   flayed   in 

them  many  Years ,  by  fo  much  the  more  wil- 
lingly, by  how  much  the  i  ide 
of  Matters  more  ag  |  by 
how  much  the  more  skilful  they  w'jre  to  d 
tain  them  by  Sacrifice-,  Hvmns, Pik^er*,  and 
Harmonics  with  which  only  AUr  of 
them,  they  are  delighted.  And  Trijfhieff/l 
in  his  VjmanJcr  fays,  their  Artceftors  had  not 
a  perfeft  Knowledge  of  the  celeftial  Deity, 
for  God  being  known,  they  had  not  cared  for 
terreftrial  Gods  ,  but  as  being  uncertain  of 
him,  greatly  flraying  from  the  Divine  Religi- 
on ,  they  excogitated  an  Art  whereby  they 
might  make  Gods ,  ere&ing  Statues ;  and  as 
they  could  not  create  Souls  for  therrt  ,  they 
called  the  Souls  of  Angels  or  Damons  into 
them,  which  came  upon  calling,  both  becaufe 
the  Power  of  thefe  Men  was  great ,  and  be- 
caufe Angels  and  Damons  have  \o  great  an  Alli- 
ance with  Men  j  that  they  are  drawn  by  a 
natural  Obfequioufnefs  to  them. 

But  to  return  to  the  Oracles,  they  were  the 
Root  and  Foundation  of  all  Divinations  and 
Superftition ;  nor  did  the  Devil  always  give 
Anfwrers  with  a  fenfible  Voice,  but  difcovered 
what  he  pleafed  by  certain  Signs.    Hence  firft 
arofe  the  various  kinds  of  Rites  and  Ceremo- 
nies,  with  which  ,    as  it  were  with  previous 
Difpofitions ,   they  were  wont  to  purge  the 
Mind  ,  that  it  might  become  confeious  of  fu- 
ture things  j     then  turning  themlelves  to  vain 
obfervances,  they  took  all  the  Ludibria  of  ob- 
•  vious  things  for  Auguries.  But  let  us  explain 
•  them  in  particular.     I  find  that,  in  a  manner, 
in  all  rhe  Prefectures  of  *s£gypt>  there  was  an 
Bb  i  Oracle^ 


J72  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Oracle,  from  which  Confulters  received  Arv* 
fwers  concerning  various  Events  j  not  that  e- 
very  particular  Oracle  anfwered  concerning 
every  thing  propofed  to  them,  but  only  con- 
cerning things  agreeing  to  their  Natttre  : 
Thus  the  Oracle  of  Serapis,  about  things  that 
concerned  Agriculture  j  of  Anubu,  of  things 
relating  to  Sciences  $  of  Horw,  about  things 
concerning  the  good  of  the  Body  and  Soul ; 
of  Ifisy  about  things  concerning  NHus,  or  Ferti- 
lity ;  but  the  Oracle  of  Ammon,  as  being  the 
inoft  Famous  of  all ,  gave  Anfwers  concern- 
ing all  things  propofed.  So  in  Innumerable 
other  Places  Oracles  were  fetf  up,  all  which 
gave  Anfwers  in  obfeure  Places ,  obfeft'd  by 
evil  Spirits,  by  a  Voice ,  Dreams,  a  Gefture^ 
and  a  Nod  of  the  Statues,  by  a  found ,  a  ring*. 
ing,  or  other  Signs  j  and  they  were  given  ei- 
ther by  the  Damon  himfelf,  or  by  Tythonijts^ 
by  Priefts  infpir'd  with  a  Fate-telling  Spirit, 
which  from  Caves ,  and  obfeure  deep  Vaults, 
with  an  horrible  found  and  noife,  rufh'd  out 
on  the  Enthufiafts ,  in  the  likeitefs  of  Fire, 
with  which  being  wholly  furrounded,  and  dri- 
ven into  a  fury ,  they  uttered  thofe  things 
which  the  Damen  fuggefted  to  them  ,  with  a 
Palpitation  of  all  their  Limbs,  their  Eyes 
turnd  upwards ,  and  their  Mouths- diftorted. 
After  this  manner  Satan  the  Architect  of  Su- 
perftitions ,  infinuating  himfelf  by  ftealth  into 
the  Minds  of  Men  by  Idolatry,  made  it  his 
Bufinefs  to  inculcate  to  them,  devoted  Ser- 
vices of  Rites  and  Ceremonies,  by  which 
they  fhould  Worfhip  his  Commentitious  Gods 
tinder  a  pretext  of  Piety  and  Vertue,  that  un- 
der thefe  Colours  he  might  involve  and  pol- 
lute them  in  all  kinds  of  Impiety  and  Wicked- 

nefs* 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  37  $ 

fiefs,  and  derive  to  himfclf  the  Honour  due  to 
Gcw. 

And  as  there  was  nothing  fo  obvious  to 
our  Senfes,  wftich  the  Damon  did  not  affiime, 
as  certain  Signs,  to  (hew  his  Will,  and  nilling 
to  thofe  that  confuked  him  j  hence  manifold 
kinds  of  Dmnatory  Magick  arofe,  hence  ilfu- 
ed  the  Spawn  of  all  kinds  of  portentous  Sor- 
ceries, and  Divinations,  &c  So  far  Kircher. 

Now  ,  laying  this  before  us ,  I  muft  fay, 
That  notwithftanding  all  Dr.  Van  Dale  has 
writ  concerning  Oracles,  as  being  wholly  con- 
trived  by  the  Impoftures  of  Men,  I  muft  whol- 
ly aflent  to  what  Kirckcr  has  here  fet  forth  con- 
cerning diem  ;  and  this  ,  not  only  becaufe 
Kircher,  and  others,  have  fo  deliver'd  it  to  us, 
but  chiefly,  becaufe ,  even  at  this  Day,  there 
are  Perfons ,  who  upon  cafting  themfelves  in-, 
to  a  Trance  j  and  otherwife ,  can ,  and  do 
predict  future  things ,  reveal  things  hidden, 
and  tell  of  things  done  in  Places  very  remote, 
like  to  what  was  done  by  the  Oracles,  as  I 
have  fet  forth  in  this  Work ,  which  muft  be 
afcribed  to  the  Agency  of  evil  Spirits ,  as  I 
fhall  (hew  beneath. 

Indeed  that  many  things  in  the  ^Egyptian  O- 
racltsy  were  done  by  the  Impoftures  of  their 
Priefts ;  it's  what  Kircher  freely  owns  in  the 
Third  Tome  of  his  faid  Oedipus?  p.  46.  where 
tie  writes  as  follows. 

We  have  fhewn  in  feveral  Parts  of  this  Work, 
that  Damons  did  not  only  fpeak  from  various 
Statues,  a$  from  certain  Oracles,  but  that  ev'n 
Priefts  themfelves ,  to  keep  the  People  in  a 
greater  cult  and  veneration  towards  theGojs, 
jmpos'd  on  their  Simplicity  by  thier  Craft;  and 
£he  ufe  of  thck  forking  Statues  was  fo  frequent 
Bb  3  jfl 


974  An  Account  of  Genii, 

in  zsggypt,  that  there  was  fcarce  a  Prefe&ure 
Without  them;    and  fo  that  the  chief  end  of 
the  Priefts  feems  to  have  confifted  in  this^  to 
draw  Damons  by  Magical  Adjurations,  and  va- 
rious Incantations  into  Statues,  firft  confecra- 
ted  by  due  Rights  ,    in  the  Adyta,  and  being 
drawn  to  confult    them  concerning  various 
Demands.    And  becaufe  the  Damons  did  not 
always  give  Anfwers  agreeing  to  Truth,  but 
wholly  fool'd  thofe  that  confulted  them  many 
ways.,  hence  the  Priefts  performing  the  Office 
of  a  Dscmony%nd  applying  themfelves  to  Fraud, 
made  Statues  with  fuch  an  Artifice  ,   that  by 
occult  Pipes  convey'd  to  the  Head  of  the  Sta- 
tues, they  mutter'd  Voices,  as  it  were  of  the 
Gods,  and  what  Anfwers  they  pleas'd,  to  im- 
pofe  on  the  Superftirious  People  ;  who  being 
deluded  by  this  impious  Cheat  of  the  Priefts, 
were  more  and  more  animated  to  make  Ob- 
lations, and  offer  Gifts,  due,  as  they  thought, 
to  the  Gods,  but,  in  Truth,  to  thofe  deceitful 
Pjrieftsj    who  thought  they  had  done  fome 
great  thing,  if  what  was  done  by  the  Craft  of 
a  fraudulent  Wit,  obtain  d  in  the  Minds  of  the 
fimple  People,  the  Opinion  of  a  Divine  Work 
of  the  Gods,  and  of  a  Miracle.   So  far  Kircher. 
But  to  conclude  from  this  with  Dr.  Van  Daley 
that  all  that  pafs'd  in  the  Oracles  of  the  Anci- 
ents, was  done  by  Humane  Contrivance,  with- 
out any  Agency  of  evil  Spirits,  is  what  I  can 
no  way  alfent  to,  for  the  Reafon  above  giv'n. 
To  return  to  Dr.  Bekker,    As  to  what  he 
fays,  That  the  Knowledge  of  the  moft  fubtle 
Parades   of  flatter,    and  'pf  the  Extept  of 
their  Motion  may   ftiew  us ,   that  all  that  is, 
commonly  r  fcrib'd  to  Magick  ,  and  the  Ope- 
rations of  the  Devil ,   may  be  Natural ,  and 

that 


Or  Familiar  Spititt.  375 

that  all  Apparitions  and  Phanr Q 
«nmonly  afcri 

os'd  h\  the  Aition  ot~  the 

Atonic     I  1  nctlur  the 

AAaon  of  thole  fubde  r  •  ;  la 

cxerc  ic  lclf  to  an  intelle<ffa*al  and  voluntary 
Agencj  p    tor  this  is  the  tnu  acr 

ftion)  and  not  to  tell  us,  that  feemingiy  occult 
ipathies  and  Antipathies,  and  the  like,  may 

(olv'd  that  way  j    which  we  own   maybe 
true  I  think  1  have  (utficiently  (hewn  in 

this  Bookj  in  the  1  5  of 

Mens  prcception  of  Spirits  ,  that  the  Actions 
I  there  afcribe  to  Spirits  have  refulted  from  in- 
tellectual and  voluntary  Agents.  If  he  fhould 
lav,  the  Actions  of  fuch  fubtlc  Particles  could 
arile  to  fuch  Agency  ;  I  think  I  have  fairly 
ftiewn  before  from  Mr.  Lock  ,  and  Monfieur 
It  Ctercj  that  the  Notions  of  Mart er,  and  of  an 
intellectual  and  voluntary  Agent,  are  clearly 
diftinct,  and  incommunicable  to  each  other. 

Again,  As  for  his  railing  the  Action  of  the 
Particles  of  Matter  to  this  pirch,  this  would 
equally  take  away  the  Operations  of  good 
Spirits,  as  well  as  evil,  whereas  he  allows  the 
former  ;  So  that  I  think  he  had  been  more 
confonant  to  his  Principles,  in  fetting  up  for 
Sadducifru  or  Epicurifm,  denying  both  good 
and  evil  Spirits,  than  to  take  up  with  this  half- 
fpiritcd  Opinion ,  which  I  know  not  whether 
any  Man  has  ever  held  but  himleif. 

indeed  we  may  allow  what  Dr.  B  vs, 

That  good"* Angels    may    fometimes    Punifh 
Men  by  God's  Appointment ,    as  well  as  pro- 
tect and  defen  1  them  ;    bu:  we  fay  there  have 
n  frequent  manifeftations  of  wicked  Fa<5ts3 
ipiri$j  and  fuch  as  could  no  way 
Bb  4  cou- 


\?6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

confift  with  the  Nature  of  good  Angels,  there-> 
fore  there  muft  be  allowed  of  both  Kinds  j 
unlefs  the  Dothrs  fubtle  Particles  fhall  folve 
Chap.  6.  a^'  And  whereas  in  his  Second  Volume,  he  fays, 
&S*  $.'  The  Facts  afcribed  to  Spirits,  are  perhaps  fuch 
as  a  Man's  Spirit  can  do,  as  when  a  Man  pof- 
ft fs'd  with  a  pretended  evil  Spirit  ,  fpe^ks 
itrange  Languages,  which  he  had  never  Lear- 
ned before :  this  he  fays  may  be  folv'd,  if  we 
embrace  the  Opinion  of  Juftin,  viz,,  that  the 
Souls  of  the  Dead  can  enter  into  the  Bodies  of 
the  Living ;  for  then  he  fays,  Why  may  it  not 
be,  that  the  Soul  of  a  Man,  skilled  in  many 
Languages,  is  that  which  after  the  Death  of 
its  Body,  fpeaks  by  the  means  of  that  which 
is  yet  alive  ,  thofe  fame  Languages  he  had 
learned  Living  ?  But,  he  fays ,  He  is  not  of 
this  Opinion,  though  this  may  fuffice  to  con- 
vince thofe  by  what  they  fay  themfelves,  that 
Confound  one  thing  with  another,in  believing 
this  of  the  Soul ,  and  that  there  are  Angels 
for  the  fame  Reafon,  which  Experience 
proves  not  that  there  are,  or  that  they  exift* 

]Sow,  as  to  this,  fince  the  Doctor  did  not 
hold  the  Opinion  of  Jufiin  ,  nor  deny  that 
flrange  Languages  had  been  fpoken  by  Igno- 
rant Perfons  j  he  might  have  done  well  to 
have  explain'd  how  that  could  be  done  without 
the  Agency  cf  Spirits  j  and  as  for  his  charg- 
ing thofe  with  an  inconftftency  that  hold  this 
Opinion,  and  with  all  the  Agency  of  Spirits, 
is  it  that  becaufe  fome  particular  Perfon  has 
fet  up  fuch  an  Hypothecs  for  folving  that 
Fa<5t,  there  muft  be  no  Spirits  ?  So  we  know 
that  Msrc*s  Marci  (  who  generally  takes  upon 
him  to  folve  all  Vbanomen  ?  without  God ,  An- 
gelj  or  Devil)  has  fet  up  another  Hypothecs 

(9? 


or  Familiar  Spirits  ^yy 

for  folving  the  faid  Fad:  ,  he  fuppofcs,  that 
Ideas  are  convey  \1  into  all  Perfons ,  with   the 

linal  Principles ,  derived  from  Parents  and 
Anceftorsj  and  chat  when  thefe  Ideas,  upon 
certain  critical  Junctures  ,  come  to  an  Evo- 
lution, a  Man  may  com  <  my  of  thofe 
Languages,  which  any  of  his  Anceitors  were 
skilled  in  :  But  what  if  Men  fet  up  fuchHypo- 
thefis^the  Queftion  will  ftill  be  whether  thefe 
Hypothecs  are  more  cogent  upon  our  under- 
ftandingfor  their  Admittance  ,  than  that  of 
Spirits  ,  or  whether  our  Realbn  acquiefces 
more  eafily  in  them  ? 

And  I  think,  I  may  here  juftly  charge  thefe  Ap*l.  2, 
Men,  as  Juftin  Martyr  does  others,  in  a  like 
Cafe,  faying  ,  Some  oppofe  to  us  Marcion, 
who  even  now  teaches  Men  to  deny  God,  the 
Maker  of  all  things  in  Heaven  and  Earth,  and 
Chrift  his  Son  predi&ed  by  the  Prophets,  and 
introduces  another  God  befide  the  Maker  of 
all  things,  and  alfo  another  Son  $  by  whofe 
Authority  many  being  fway'd,  they  deride  usf 
as  though  he  were  the  only  Man  that  knew 
Truth  ;  and  as  they  have  no  Demonstration 
of  thofe  things  they  fay,  without  all  Reafon, 
being  feized  as  Lambs  by  a  Wolf,  they  become 
the  foul  prey  of  Mens  Dogmas,  and  of  Devils. 

Tandltms ,  in  his  Anfwer  to  a  Queftion  pro- 
pos'd  concerning  the  Divination,  and  other 
wonderful  Effe&s  of  Melancholick  Perfons, 
firft  tells  us,  that  thofe  Melancholick  Fads  or 
Energies  may  be  reduc'd  to  two  kinds ;  or»p 
is,  of  thofe  who  are  faid  to  have  fpoken  Lan- 
guages of  which,  while  they  were  themfelvesj 
they  were  wholly  Ignorant,  or  to  have  fhewn 
an  underftanding  of  hofe  Arts  ,  which  they 
never  acquired  to  thcmfelves  by  Learning* ,-  the 

other 


17%  An  Account  of  Genii, 

other  is,  of  thofe  who  are  faid  to  have  had  a 
certain  Power  and  Faculty  of  difcovering  oc- 
cult things,  of  commemorating  pad  things 
that  were  unknown  to  them.,  and  of  predict- 
ing future  Events.,  whofe  Truth  experience  it 
felf,  at  length,  has  fhewn  to  be  fo.  To  the  firft 
kind  belongs  that  ruftick  mentioned  by  Guai- 
nerim3  who  always ,  the  Moon  being  com- 
buft,  made  Verf_s,  and  the  combuftion  being 
pafs  d  about  two  Days ,  till  (he  came  to  ano- 
ther combuftion,  could  not  fpeak  a  word  of 
Latin  $  and  this  Man  had  never  Learned  Let- 
ters. And  here  that  Saylers  Boy  has  place,  who, 
as  Forefius  tells,  having  received  a  Blow  on  his 
Head,  as  he  pafs'd  a  Bridge ,  in  his  Delirium^ 
always  made  Syllogifrns  in  the  German  Tongue^ 
and  thn  excellently  •  and  that  afterwards  be- 
ing cur'd  he  knew  not  how  to  do  it. 

Of  the  latter  kind  we  have  Rhafis  aWitnefs, 
among  the  Arabians ;  and  Alexander,  who  was 
in  no  mean  rank  among  the  Ancient  Phyfici- 
ans,  and  among  thefe  Perfons,  he  thinks  we 
may  not  unfitly  place,  Exftaticks. 

Now,  he  fays,  There  is  a  very  great  Dif- 
fention  among  Authors,  in  afligning  the  Caufes 
of  thefe  ftupendious  Actions  of  Perfons  feized 
with  a  Melancholy  Diftemper/ome  laborioufly 
inquire  into  the  natural  Caufes  of  them, others 
afcend  to  Supernatural ;  as  for  thofe  who  ac- 
quiefce  in  natural  Caufes,  he  finds  two  Se&s  of 
them.  The  firft  is  of  Aft  rologers, Scribing  all  the 
Works  of  MelancholickPerfons  to  the  Influences 
of  the  Stars,  as  Quainerim  does,  building  on  cer- 
tain Tlatcnick  and  Aftrological  Principles,  he  fays, 
That  the  Soul  before  it's  infus'd  into  the  Body, 
contains  the  Knowledge  of  ail  things  in  it  felf, 
but  ta.it  it's  hi  a  manner  aboiiflfd ,    by  the  U- 

nion 


or  FitrmUar  Spirits.  37J? 

nion  with  i!  Fetters  it's 

nor  can  ic 
by 
•  imprci  *iic  Riai*  ich 

!  his  i\ai.\  ity  at  the  'me  the 

Soul  svasinfufed  int  Jlhave 

the  force  pf  this  innpreffion  to  be  uat 

it  may  endow  the  Soul  with  a  1  >t  pro- 

ducing fuch  Actions  3    as  the  Star  is  wont  to 
produce  elk  who  re  ;    fo  that  it   may  make  a 
well  Man    iick,    and  a  fick  Man  well  j  alfo 
caufe  Snow  and  Rain  ;  but  that  the  Bod^  and 
corporeal  Senfes  refill  this  Impreffion,   elpeci- 
ally  as   to  Knowledges ,    it   being  otherwife 
of  efficacy  enough  in  it  felf  •    thefe  Senfes 
therefore  being  bound  ,    as  it  happens  in  Me- 
lancholick  Perfons ,  and  the  Star  working  on 
the  Soul  without  refiftency,  it  comes  to  pafs 
that  the  Soul  underftands  all  things  without 
Difcourfe,    forefees  future  things ,     anfwers 
concerning  Arts,  to  which  it  inclines  by  the 
force  of  the  influencing  Planet.    The  lecond 
Se&  is  of  natural  Philofophers ,   who  feeing 
that  the  Minds  of  Men  are  varioufly  afFeded 
with  the  Melancholick  Humour,  and  that  moft 
that  have  excelled  others  in  Underftanding, 
or  in  Learning  Arts,  or  in  Adminiftration  of 
Government,   or  in  performing  other  things, 
were  naturally  Melancholick  ,  they  ftiick  not 
to  afcribe  fo  great  force  to  it  j  for  as  there  are 
many  found,   who  are  naturally  enclined  to 
divers  Arts,  fo  Melancholy, they  fay,  is  natural- 
ly inclined  to  Work  wonderful  things  j  and  as 
high  fermented  Wine,    immoderately   taken, 
changes  Mens  Manners,  and  Caufes  them  to 
differ  from  themfelves ;  fo  they  contend,  that 
~ he  Melancholick  Juice  exceeds  its  conve- 
nient 


l%o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

'  aient  Meafure  in  a  Perfon  ,    or  be  rendred 
more  hot,  or  cold  than  is  fitting  ,  gets  a  cer- 
tj     jtain  fingular  force  wholly  to  change  theMind, 
and  to  nir  up  wonderful  Motion^  in  it. 

Now,  Tandkrm  ,  after  having  ftated  thefe 
Opinions,  reje&s  them ;  for  though  he  does 
not  deny  the  Power  of  the  Stars,  for  changing 
the  temperament  of  the  whole  Body  ,  and  of 
each  of  its  Parts  in  particular ,  and  for  giving 
an  Inclination  either  for  the  Knowledge  of 
Tongues,  or  for  divers  Difdplines  ;  yet  this 
he  ftifly  denies ,  that  the  very  Knowledge  of 
Tongues  is  any  way  conferred  by  the  Stars^ 
without  teaching  ,  or  their  ufe  without  any 
precedent  Knowledge,  for  certain  Reafons  he 
gives ;  nor  can  he  acquiefce  in  their  Opinion, 
who  think  thefe  kinds  of  Prodigies  ought  to 
be  afcribed  to  the  property  of  the  Melancho- 
lick  Humour  j  for  though  there  be  a  <?ertaiij 
occult  force  of  the  Melancholick  Juice  ,  that: 
it  may  produce  Operations  caufing  Admirati- 
on, yet  it  cannot  be  fp  great  as  to  beget  z 
Knowledge  of  Languages ,  and  of  occult  and 
future  things  j  thefe  certainly  are  owing  to 
a  fuperior  Caufe ,  not  that  while  he  denies 
thefe  things  to  have  place  in  the  Melancholick 
Humour ,  he  therefore  denies  what  Arifiotle 
fays,  viz»  that  Melancholick  Perfbns  are 
•uAifojriettj  that  is  have  direA  Dreams  .  by 
which  they  may  have  a  fore-preception  of  cer- 
tain future  things ;  for  there  are  two  kinds  of 
Divination.,  one  natural,  common  to  Men  with 
Brutes,  whereby  without  Difcourfe  ,  by  the 
lble  guidance  of  Nature,  fome  Animals  have 
a  'fore-fenfe  of  things  >  as  well  for  avoiding 
hurtful  things  themfelves^  as  for  admonifliing 
Men  of  certain  iminent  Events ;  fo  Ants  have 


) 

or  Familjdr  Spirits.  381 

ft  natural  ;fore-fenfe  of  theapproachingWinter; 
from  the  going  away  ofSnarrows,manyPhyfid- 
ans  believe  we  are  admonifh'd  of  an  approach- 
ing Peitilence  ;  fuch  a  prefaging  faculty  is  of- 
ten found  in  fome  Fools,  who  by  Nature  have 
a  vitiated  Renfon  ,  in  whom  doubtleft  Nature 
makes  a  recompence  one  way  for  what  it  takes 
away  in  another.     So  Atircm  Mad  fays,  Thofc  pf)l^vttm 
whofe  Minds  arc    employed  in  Speculations»  -which  &eft]par.2« 
take  up  the  Souly  do  not  eafily  perceive  Sympathetic  SeS.  4. 
cal  Impnjfions  ,   whence  pnfi'ging    *nd  predittions 
art  wont  to  be  fent  to  flmple  Perjons  ,   rather  than 
to  Wife  Men  ;  and  that  happens  much  more  to  brute 
Animals,  than  no  Meny  thofc  being   prefently  filled 
with  the  celeftial  Image,  being  void  of  any  of  their 
c-wn.    The  fame  things  haply  fometimes  oc- 
cur in  Melancholick  Perfons ,    efpecially  in 
thofe  whom  Nature  has  particularly  brought 
forth  foch.  The  other  kind  is  Artificial,  which 
is  grounded  on  an  obfervation  of  Events,  or 
on  certain  Signs ;  and  becaufe  itconfifts,  fof 
the  greateft  part,  in  a  comparing  together  of 
I,  natural  Caules,  as  well  betwixt  themfelves,  as 
of  the  EfFe&,  it  is  alfo  called  Natural ;  though 
this  depends  of  certain  Rules,  yet  the  Inclina- 
tion 01  Nature  which  proceeds  partly  from 
the  temperament  and  Humours ,  and  partly 
from  a  fortunate,  and  meet  pofition  of  cer- 
tain Stars,  Hold  the  chief  place  in  it  •   for  w$ 
fee  fome  by  a  peculiar  guidance  of  Nature, 
being  cultivated  with  an  indifferent  know- 
ledge of  the  Stars ,  for  more  truly  and  readily 
I  to  hit  out  future  things  from  obvious,  or  little 
previous  Marks  3  than  thofe  who  excel  only 
in  Art ,  being  deftitute  of  the  Aids  of  Na- 
ture.   Nay,  iome  by  this  very  force  of  Spi- 
rit arrive  at  a  full  infight  in  many  things, 

which 


1 


•382  An  Account  of  Genii^ 

Which  Art  with  Labour  would  not  come  to 
the  Knowledge  of,  or  attain  with  Difficulty. 
Such  a  Facility  of  conjecturing,  fmce  it  hap- 
pens for  the  molt  part  in  Perfons  inclin  d  to 
Melancholy,  which  happily  may  be  increas'd 
t>y  a  fortunate  Coneourfe  of  the  Stars,  I  eafily 
grant  that  Melancholick  Perfons  are  not  only 
$v%vovei?*s9  but  likewife  that  they  excel  others 
in  the  Prediction  of  future  Things.  But  here 
we  fpeak  of  another  kind  of  Divination,  whed 
Ignorant  Perfons,  without  Conje&ures  and§ 
Obfervation  of  Events,  bring  fecret  Thing* 
to  light,  Prophefie  of  thofe  future  Things 
which  are  neither  known  to  themfelves,  nor 
others ;  nay,  when  they  come  to  themfelves, 
they  know  not  that  any  fuclt  thing  was  done 
by  theni.  Thefe  things,  he  fays,  he  judges 
could  no  way  arife  from  an  Humour,  efpeci- 
ally  exceeding  the  Bounds  of  Nature. 

He  concludes  therefore,  That  the  Devil  is 
the  Author  of  all  thefe  things,  tho5  not  alone, 
but  join  d  with  the  Melancholick  Humour, 
which  he  exagitates  at  his  pleafure,  and  eaufeS 
certain  Operations,  which  that  Humour  had 
not  been  able  to  produce  by  its  own  force. 

Since  we  are  upon  this  Point  of  Ignorant 
Peoples  fpeaking  unknown  Languages,  I  fhall 
give  you  one  particular  Inftance  of  it,  taken 
from  a  Letter  lent  by  the  late  Lord  Lauderdale 
to  Mr.  Baxter  ;  which  Letter  was  priiited 
Anno  1 691.  in  Mr.  Baxters  Historical  Dlfcourfe  of 
Apparitions  and  TVitches.  He  there  writes,  a- 
mong  other  things,  as  follows : 

c  I  fhall  here  tell  you  of  a  real  PoflTeffion  near 
/  the  place  where  I  was  born.  About  thirty 
c  Years  ago3  when  I  was  a  Boy  at  School; 
*  there  was  a  poor  Woman  generally  believd 

tef 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  38; 

to  be  really  poflefi'd  :    She  liv'd    near  the 
Town  of  John 

msy  1  her,  n  knowa 

by  1  is  Works  to  he  a  Learn  \  and  I 

know  him  to  be  Honeft  Man)  was 

periwaded  fhc  was  po  I  have  heard 

him  many  times  fpeak  with  my  rather  about 
it,  and  both  of  them  concluded  it  a  real  Pof- 
feflion.  Mr.  Weems  vitited  her  often j  and 
being  cenvine'd  of  the  truth  of  the  thing, 
he,  with  fome  neighbour  Minifters,  apply'd 
themfelves  to  the  King  s  Privy-Council  for 
a  Warrant  to  keep  Days  of  Humiliation  for 
her  j  but  the  Bifhops  being  then  in  Power, 
would  not  allow  any  Fafts  to  be  kept.  I 
will  not  trouble  you  with  many  Circum- 
ftances ;  one  I  (hall  only  tell  you,  which,  I 
think,  will  evince  a  real  Poffeflion.  Tha 
report  being  fpread  in  the  Country,  a  Knight 
by  the  Name  of  Forbes,  who  liv'd  mxh&Nortk 
of  Scotland,  being  come  to  Edtvborough,  meet- 
ing there  with  a  Minifter  of  the  North,  and 
both  of  them  defirous  to  fee  the  Woman,  the 
Northern  Minifter  invited  the  Knight  to  my 
Father's  Houfe  (which  was  within  ten  or 
twelve  Miles  of  the  Woman )  whither  they 
came,  and  next  Morning  went  to  fee  the: 
Woman.  They  found  her  a  poor  Ignorant 
Creature,  and  feeing  nothing  extraordinary^ 
the  Minifter  fays  in  Latin  to  the  Knight,  Non- 
dum  (ludivlmus  Sfirltum  loquentem ;  prefently 
a  Voice  comes  out  of  the  Womans  Mouth, 
Audls  Icauentem ,  audit  loejmntem.  This  put 
the  Minifter  into  fome  amazement  (which 
I  think  made  him  not  mind  his  own  L 
he  took  off  his  Hat,  and  i 
feccatcrls :  The  Voice  prefently,  out  of  the 

Woman's 


i  84  4h  Account  of  Genii, 

*  Woman's  Mouth/aid,  Dicpeccatricts,  DUpecca» 
c  tricis  '  whereupon  both  of  them  came  out  of 
c  the  Houfe  fully  fatisfiedj  took  Horfe  im- 

*  mediately,and  returned  to  my  Father's  Houfe, 
'.  *  at  Tbirkftane  Cafile  in  Lauderdale,  where  they 

*  related  this  Paffage.    This  I  do  exa&ly  re- 

*  member.    Many  more  Particulars  might  be 

*  cot  in  that  Country,  but  this  Latin  Criticifm, 
'  in  a  moft  Illiterate  Ignorant  Woman,  where 
4  there  was  no  pretence  to  difpoffeffing,  is  Evi- 

*  dence  enough,  I  think.  So  far  the  Lord 
fcatiderdak*  ''      t 

This  leads  us  to  connder  another  Alfertidn 
of  Dr.  Bekker's,  where  he  fays,  that  all  the 
Poifeffions  mention'd  in  the  Scriptures,  were 
but  incurable  Difeafes  that  tormented  Men; 
the  Devil  having  nothing  to  do  in  them,  and 
of  which  Chrift  curd  many  Perfons  by  his 

As  to  ttisGuiielmui ^errfjPhyficianof  Toloufe, 
Printed  a  Book  there,  ^»».162;.  concerning 
the  Difeafes  and  DifeaYd  cur'd  by  Chrift.  In 
the  third  Part  of  this  Book,  he  enquires,  how 
the  Devil  becomes  the  external  Caufe  of  many 

Difeafes.  ■■       ,  ,,    ■    •  , 

He  there  tells  us,  that  thofe  Perfons  whom 
Chrift  cur'd,  were  fuch  as  the  Interpreters  of 
the  Scriptures  call  Ewrgumens,  or  fuch  as  were 
poffeft  with  an  Evil  Spirit,  concerning  whom 
it's  a  Crime  to  doubt :  Nay,  he  fays,  thofe 
ftrive  and  contend  againft  all  Truth ,  Faith, 
Experience,  and  the  Authority  of  moil  Wife 
and  Pious  Men,  who  obftinately  deny  thofe 
Enertumens,  and  Perfons  obfeft  and  poffeit  with 
the  Devil ;  and  fet  nought  by^  of  the  vexatious 
Power  the  Devil  has  in  moving  natural  Cau- 
fes,  and  if  the  obfeft  do  any  thing  exceffivelj 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  385 

violent  or  ftupendious,  belie  be.  an  i 

fcribe  it  to  Melancholy  , 
in  the  Brain,  or  the  whole  1 
bring  it  (o  to  pals,  that  by  underftandiiij , 
undcrftand  nothing,  who  c 
er  of  Demons,  accufc  all  ancient  Writers,  ;in.l 
all  the  Fathers  of  the  Chriftlan  Church, 
Negligence  he   fhould  rather  chcofe  to  imi- 
tate, than  the   unaccountable   Diligence  of 
thofe  Men. 

To  diftinguifh  Perfons  poflcfl,  from  thofc 
infefted  with  a  melancholick  Knthufiafm,  he 
fays,  the  learned  Phyfician  wo 

Signs,  which  are  moft  certain  Marks  of  a  de- 
moniacal feizure.     Firft,  if  a  Ruftick  or  Idcot 
fpeaks  Greek  or  Latin:  Secondly,  if  he  p 
diets  future  Things.    Now   it  is  not  to  bs 
doubted,  but  thefe  things  have  been  often  ob- 
ferv'd  in  melancholick  Perfons  by  L- 
nius  and  others.     Riohmus  brings  Reaibns  for^nU^ 
it,    and  an  Inftance  in  Vbihretus  of  Sp:Ltt;3fer?  l' 
who  being  infefted  with  Worms,  fell  into  a  ( 
new  kind  of  Madnefs-  fo  that  in  his  Difeafe, 
he  fpake  very  well  the  German  Twgue.   J 
in  his  ScrHtininm  iHgtniorum,  tells  us  of  a  Wo- 
man feiz'd  with  a  Frenzy  in  a  great  Fever, 
who  fpake  Latin,  arid   predicted  many  things 
as  a  Prophet.     She  predicted  to 
who  let  her  Bloody  that  he  would  die  wit; 
a  Month,  and  that  his  Wife  would  after  Marry 
a  Neighbour  Smith,  which  fell  out  according-^ 
ly.  Pfellus  alfo  tells  us  of  a  Woman  who  being 
ill  after  Child-bearing,  fpake  in  the  Armenia* 
Tongue  with  a  certain  Armenian  Vhyfician,  tho' 
(he  had  never  feen  an  Armenian  before,  and 
knew  nothing  but  her  Chamber  and  DiftafFe. 

Cc  Ha 


to*  . 


386  An  Account  of  Genii, 

He  thinks  every  Man  knows  it  to  be  a  great 
and  difficult  Task  to  diftinguifh  melancholick 
Perfons  from  fuch  as  are  poflfeft :  No  Man  as 
far  as  he  knows,  having  as  yet,  given  us  true 
Marks  of  it.  He  fays,  therefore,  that  a  Maa 
muft  infpecft  the  Nature,  Manners,  Humours, 
and  Difpofition  of  the  Difeas'd.  What  he  does 
befide  the  ufual  Nature  of  the  Difeafe,  and  of 
the  Nature  of  its  Symptoms ;  as  to  cry  out 
violently,  to  be  vehemently  agitated  and  tor- 
turd,  to  contract,  wreft,  or  extend  his  Limbs 
without  a  manifeft  Convalfion,  to  be  Delirious 
without  a  Frenzy ,to  fpeak  prodigious  Things, 
and  ufe  an  unufual  Tongue.  In  ftiort,  to  do 
or  fiiffer  thofe  things  which  are  very  unufual 
in  Difeafes. 

Thefe  ( things  being  difcover'd,  as  far  as  a 
Phyfician  may,  he  mull  explain  how  the  De- 
vil becomes  the  caufe  of  Difeafes,  how  he  ads 
with  natural  Caufes,  entangles  the  Body  in 
Diftempers,  ftirs  up  Symptoms  with  fuch  B» 
normity,  that  it  may  be  juftly  doubted  whe- 
ther it  be  a  monftrous  Difeafe,  or  a  fevere 
Damon.  And  he  concludes  with  the  unani^ 
mous  Affercion  of  Divines  and  Phyficians, 
that  it's  done  by  the  Devil's  managing  of  the 
Humours  at  his  Pleafure  in  thofe  that  are  left 
to  him,  whereby  he  can  caufe  an  Epilepfie, 
Palfie,  and  the  like  Difeafes,  as  alfo  Blindneft^ 
Deafnefs,  &c. 

IF  any  one  wonders  why  he  awakens  and 
ftirs  up  Fits  of  Difeafes  according  to  the 
Motion  and  Quarters  of  the  Moon,  he  fays, 
it's  becaufe  at  that  time  the  Humours  being 
-  .encreas'd  by  the  Motion  and  Influence  of 
ehe  Moon,  are  more  conveniently  agitated. 

And 


tr  Familiar  Spirits.  ^  g^ 

And  in  his  StbCb.of  his  fa id  Third  ?my treat- 
ing, concerning  the  Differ^ 
from  a  divine  Exfi  I   that  which  pro- 

ceeds from  the  Devil,  lie  fays,  a  divine  / 

/,///*  is  a  facred  nipt  of  the  Mind,  in  which 
God,  by  a  Condefcent  prefents  himfeli 
humane  Creature,  not  by  the  means 
Difeafe ,    or   other    preternatural    morbifi 
Caufe  ;  the  Do&rine  of  Divir  tgJ  that 

God  infinuates  himfelf  into  our  Minds  by  a 
Rapt,  and  then  fhews  us  by  a  divine  Repre- 
fentation  thofc  Things  he  pleafes  we  fhall  fee. 
Therefore  it  is  really  God  who  forcibly  draws 
Man  to  him  by  an  Exjhjic,  no  natural  Caufe, 
nor  the  Mind  fpontaneoufly  mov'd  j  for  as 
the  Sun  is  not  feen  without  the  Sun,  fo  nei- 
ther can  God  be  known  without  God. 

If  you  had  feen  the  Prophets,  or  others 
rapt  in  Exftacies,  you  would  have  been  apt  to 
fay  they  were  fallen  into  anApople&ick  or  Epi- 
leptick  Seifure,  for  they  remaind  immovable ; 
their  Eyes  open,  and  fixt  towards  Heav'n; 
their  Faces  pale,  either  Handing  upright,  or 
being  on  their  Knees ;  till  being  filfd  with  ths 
light  of  Celeftial  Vifions ,  and  faturated  with 
a  feaft  of  holy  Thoughts,  they  return  d  to 
themfelves.  But  it's  eafie  to  diftinguiffi  theft 
from  Epileptical  Perfons,  and  we  fhall  fhew 
that  extatical  Perfons,  and  fuch  as  are  rapt  by 
a  D*n7cny  are  not  Epileptical. 

Chriflian  Divines  and  Phyficians,  agree  thaf 
Damons  ftir  up  Raptures  and  Exftafiesin  Men. 
binding  or  looting  the  exterior  Senfes,  and 
that,  either  flopping  the  Pores  of  the  Brain, 
that  the  Spirits  do  not  pafs  forth,  as  it's  don? 
naturally  by  Sleep,  or  by  recalling  the  fenfn 
tive  Spirits  from  the  outward  Senfes  to  the  in- 


^88  An  Account  of  Genii, 

ward  Organs,  which  he  there  retains  j  fo  ther 
Devil  renders  Women  Witches  exftatical  and 
Magicians,  who  while  they  lie  faft  afleep  in 
one  place,  being  deceiv'd,  they  think  they 
have  been  in  various  places,  ana  done  many 
things. 

That  thefe  Exftafies  are  not  Epileptick  Sei- 
fures,  it  appears  from  Bodin  in  his  Theatre  of 
univerfal  Nature ,  where  lie  fays,  That  thofe 
that  are  rapt  by  the  Devil,  feel  neither  Stripes,. 
nor  Cuttings,nor  no  wrefting  of  their  Limbs, 
nor  burning  Torches,  nor  the  burning  of  a 
red  hot  Iron.    Nay,  nor  is  the  beat  of  the 
Pulfe,  nor  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  perceiv'd 
in  them,  but  afterwards  returning  to  them- 
felves,    they    feel  moft  bitter  Pains  of  the 
Wounds  receiv'd,  and  tell  of  things  that  were 
done  at  600  Miles  diftance,  and  affirm  them- 
ielves  to   have    feen  them    done.      So  far 
Bodin. 

An  Exftafie  therefore  is  an  Abolifhment  of 
Senfe  and  Motion,  and  not  a  Depravation  of 
it,  as  in  an  Epileptick  Seifure ;  for  Perfons  in 
an  Exfiajit  lie  whoiiy  immoveable,  in  an  Epi- 
leptick Fit  they  sire  moft  violently  agitated. 
And,  as  Bvdln  fays-,  Demoniacal  Exftattcks 
breath  forth  an  horrid  ftink  :  Epileptick^foam 
at  the  Mouth,  and  their  Seed  and  Excrements 
pafs  from  them  thro'  a  violent  Agitation  of 
the  Mulcles ;  and  infinite  Evils  which  De- 
moniacks  commit  in  their  Raptures,  fhew  th&t 
they  were  not  agitated  with  a  Convulfion,  but 
gave  themfelves  too  much  to  the  Devils  Cove- 
nants.   Nor  need  I  fay  much  concerning  the 
difference  betwixt  a  Madnefsy  2l  Syncope,  and  a 
Stupor  caus'd  by  narcotick  Medicines,  and  an 
Exfiajie.    For  as  Bodin  rightly  argues,  a  Mad 

Mai* 


or  familiar  Spirits.  389 

Man  is  always  agitated  without  ceafing,  and 
a -Man  rapt  ill  an  Exjtsfie  lies  immoveable, 
deftitute  of  all  Senle  and  Morion  of  all  his 
Pans,  and  rather  like  a  \l:m  lLi/  d  with  an 
Apoplexv.  A  Syncope  is  a  fudden  failing  of 
all  the  Strength;  and  foon  ends  in  Death,  or  a 
Recover}';  an  Ex  lafie  lafts  a  long  time  without 
the  lofs  of  a  Man's  Strength-  A  Stupor  caus'd 
by  narcotick  Medicines,  takes  away  Senfe,  not 
Motion,  for  otherwife  Motion  being  abo- 
lifh'd  together  with  Senfe,  Death  would  be 
at  Hand,  therefore  a  Stupor  is  not  Exfiafie.  So 
far  Dr.  Ader. 

To  this  I  may  add,  what  Sennertus  writes  of  Inft-  meJo 
the  Demoniacal  Sopor  of  Witches,  who  think  '' 2'2^' 
they  are  carried  through  the  Air,  Dance,  Feaft, 
have  Copulation  with  the  Devil,  and  do  other 
things  in  their  fleep,  and  afterwards  believe 
the  fame  things  waking.    Now,  he  fays,  whe- 
ther they    are   really  fo  carried  in  the  Air, 
&c.  or  being  in  a  profound  fleep,  only  dream 
they   are  fo  carried,  and  perfift  in  that  O- 
pinion  after  they  are  awake,  thefe  Fads  or 
Dreams  cannot  be  natural,  for  it  cannot  be 
that  there  fhould  be  fo  gre^t  an  Agreement  in 
Dreams  of  Perfons,  differing  in  Place,  Tem- 
perament, Age,  Sex,  and  Studies ;  that  in  one 
Night,  and  at  the  fame  Hour  they   fhould 
Dream  of  one  fuch  Meeting,  and  fhould  clear- 
ly agree  of  the  Place,  Number  and  Quality 
of  the  Perfons,  and  the  like  Circumftancc^. 
But  fuch  Dream$  are  fuggefted  from  a  fupo 
natural  Caufe,   v%x^   from  the  Devil  to  his 
Confederates,  God  permitting  it.     Whence 
alfo  to  thole  Witches  ferioufly  converted,  ani 
refufmg  to  be  longer  prefenc  atthofe  Meetings,. 
fuch  Dreams  no  longer  happen  •  which  is  a 

C  c  3  Mark 


*§o  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Mark  that  they  proceeded  not  before  from  & 
natural  Caufe. 

Schottusy  in  his  Book  De  Mirabilihus  Energu- 
Hfhtotuniy  gives  us  fome  figns  for  knowing  Da~ 
wcnitchy  and  firft  he  fays,  A  revealing  of  oc- 
cult things,  which  furpafs  the  natural  Know- 
ledge of  the  Revealers,  is  a  probable  fign  of  a 
PoiTeffion,  unlefs  we  may  rationally  prefume 
it  to  be  from  God,  or  a  good  Angel :  And  this^ 
becaufe,  fince  that  revealing  muft  neceifarily 
be  fuggefted  from  fome  Mind  or  Spirit,  and 
it  is  not  from  the  private  Spirit  of  the  Man, 
fince  it  furpaffes  his  natural  Knowledge,  nor 
from  God,  or  a  good  Spirit,  as  it's  prudently 
fuppos'd ;  of  neceffity  it  mull  proceed  from 
an  Evil  Spirit.  He  fays,  it's  a  probable  fign, 
nor  certain,  fince  that  revealing  may  be  caus'd 
by  Damons  not  poffefling  a  Perfon,  as  it  ap- 
pears by  many  Hiftorfes.  But  if  there  are  o- 
ther  ilgns  it's  a  Prefumption  that  the  revealing 
in  the  faid  Circumftances,  is  from  a  Demo- 
niacal PoiTeffion. 

Secondly ,  He  fays,  a  Skill  in,  and  fpeaking 
of  unknown  Tongues  which  the  Speaker  ne- 
ver learnt3  is  alfo  a  probable  Sign  of  a  Pof- 
feffion, if  it  may  not  otherwife  be  rationally 
preflim'd  that  it  is  from  God  or  a  good  Angel, 
becaufe  it  cannot  naturally  be,  that  a  Perfon 
ignorant  of  a  Tongue,  mould  fpeak  it,  fince 
we  learn  not  foreign  Tongues  but  with  great 
Labour.  The  fame  is  to  be  underftood  of  the 
Knowledge  of  Reading,  Writing,  Singing,  and 
pf.'the  Knowledge  of  other  Sciences,  if  a  Per- 
fon had  never  learnt  them.  Levinm  Ltmnim 
therefore  lies  under  aMiftake,where  he  tells  us, 
that  melancholick  Perfons,  and  fuch  as  are  in 
• .  frenzie,  thro5  a  fervent  ebullition  of  the  Hu- 
mours 


br  Familiar  Spirit*.  391 

mours,  and  a  vehement  agi  ration  of  th 
rits,  ma;  wuious  Lanj  Ire 

ttus  the 

fets  forth  many  other  Signs  of  D*mmiacks3 
tho'  not  fo  certain  as  die  former  :  and  he  fets 
forth  alfo  the  Signs  giv'n  by  Voctims  and  others 
pf  them,  for  which  I  refer  you  to  his  Hook. 

This,  I  think,  is  enough  in  anfwer  to  Dr. 
her's  Algernon,  that  the  Devil  has  nothing 
to  do  in  Difeafes. 

As  for  the  Cavils  of  many  Writers  againft 
the  poflibllity  of  a  covenanting  Witch,  I  am 
throughly  convincd,that  if  an  Apparition  pre- 
fects itfelf  to  any  Perfon,  as  many  have  to 
my  felf;  if  that  Perfon  be  fallen  from  God, 
and  funk  into  defpair,  thro'  the  Miferies  of 
human  Life,  having  not  that  Chriftian  Ar- 
mour on  which  St.  Paul  fpeaks  of,  he  may 
make  a  Covenant  with  him,  as  well  as  with  a 
Man,  and,  if  they  fay  there  can  be  no  Cove- 
nant with  a  Spirit,  how  comes  it  that  there 
has  has  been  a  Covenant  betwixt  God  and 
Man? 

There  is  one  Point  of  Dr.  Bekkers  Do&rine, 
which  remains  to  be  anfwerd,  where  he  fays, 
if  we  think  to  fright  People  with  Spectres,  to 
teach  them  fo  much  the  more  to  love  God,  it's 
a  miferable  thing  in  Chriftianity,  that  People 
muft  be  brought  to  God  by  a  fervile  Fear,  in- 
ftead  of  Lore. 

Now  this  feems  not  to  me  fo  extraordinary 
a  Leffon  in  Divinity,  for,  as  we  know  the 
Love  of  God  to  be  the  confumm.ition  of  Wit 
dom,  fo  the  Fear  of  God  U  ginning  of 

it;  and  I  think  a  fervile  Fear  ftill  neceflary  to 
the  generality  of  Mankind  ;  for  Parents  have 
Rods  to?  their  Children,  Millers  for  their 
C  c  4  Sch 


jc?!  An  Account  of  Genii, 

Scholar*,  Princes  for  their  Subjects ;  and  tho* 
all  thrqe  would  perfuade  thofe  under  them  to 
do  what  they  are  enjoyn'd  for  Love,  yet  fuch 
generally  is  therelu&ancy  of  humane  Nature, 
from  clcing  what  is  enjoyn'd  it,thro'  an  exorbi- 
tancy of  our  Paffiens,  that  till  thefe  are  broken 
by  a  Cnriftian  or  Philofophical  Training,  or 
we  are  come  to  a  clearness  of  Judgment,  by 
a  long  Practice  and  Experience  in  the  Affairs 
of  humane  Life,  Love  alone  will  not  do  ;  and 
the  fervile  Fear  of  thofe  Rods  mull  be  upheld  •> 
2nd  the  Scriptures  teach  us  that  we  muft  be 
content  with  the  Bond  Woman  for  a  while, 
till  we  may  deferve  to  Marry  the  Free  Wo- 
man, 

Thus,   I  think,  I  have  fufficiently  anfwer'd 
what  has  been  Hated  from  Dr.  Bekker.     But 
there  is  cne  thing  remains  for  me  to  take  no- 
tice of  in  him.     In  his  fourth  Volume  he  has 
taken  upon  him  to  examine  the  Proofs  that 
are  brought  from  Experience  for  theExiftence 
and  Operations  of  Damons,  and  to  refute  them. 
I  have  intimated  before  how  groundlefly  he 
has  there  reje&ed  the  Demons  of  Tthvorth  and 
Mafcon ;  and  here  I  fhall  obferve  how  he  re- 
jects what  is  {aid  of  the  Piper  at  Hamelim  He 
tells  us,thathis  Matter  Scbookius  ,hzs  refuted  that 
Story  in  his  little  Book  in  Latin,  Entituled, 
&$uia  Hamiknjn?  6F  wjipfe  Reafons  he  leaves 
the  Reader  to  judge, 'and  adds  many  Sug- 
£,eftions  of  his  own  againfl  it. 
Part.  4.         New,  Frcn?m  annus,  in  his  third  Book  of  Magi- 
sec.  t.c.  7;  czi  EJcinatiov,  lifter  having  given  us  the  Rela- 
Depr4er-  don  of  this  %iperf  as  it's  let  down  by  Kircher, 
D$m,c.t,6.  rn(J  Schottus  .    an<j  after  having  told  us,  that 
Wlerm  fays,  This  .Story  is  entred  in  the  pub- 
lick  Records  of  the  Town ,  and  Painted  in 

the' 


or  Familiar  Spirits.  ?  p  } 

theChurch  Windows,  of  which  himfelf  was  an 
Witncfs ,  and  that  the  Magiftrate  there 
was  wont  to  the  publick  »m  the 

If  Car  of  the  goil  Children,  to- 

gether v.  ith  the  Year  of  Chrift;  and  that  its 
ohL  wax  to  this  Day  in  Mark  of  the 

the  Sound  of  a  Timbrel  is  never  ad- 
mit: that  Street,  by  which  the  Boys 
went  forth,  if  any  Bride  hap'ly  be  led  forth 
waybill  fhebe  gone  forth; nor  is  dancing 
p  Knitted  there.  I  lay,  after  having  fet  forth 
this,  he  lavs,  That  Martin  Scbockm  ftrongly 
endeavoured  in  a  peculiar  little  Book,  to  rank 
this  ftory  among  fabulous  Relations,  but  Tbto. 
Kircbmeierus  egregioufly  fhammed  all  his  effort, 
in  a  peculiar  Difputation  at  IVitteberg  >  Anno 
1671. 

Now,  Dr.  Bekker,  has  not  been  fo  Candid 
as  to  take  notice  of  this  in  Fromyncinnus ,  as  he 
ought  to  have  done  \  he  having  read  Frowman^ 
nus,  as  it  appears  by  his  quoting  him  ^  in  his 
^rh  Volume^  c.  2. 

I  could  add  much  more  againft  T)r.Bekier3 
but  this  fhall  fuffice  at  prefent. 

And  now,  before  I  make  an  end  ,  in  re- 
gard that  in  the  front  of  my  Book,  I  have  pro- 
mis'd  fome  Account  of  my  particular  Expe- 
rience as  to  a  ienfible  Perception  of  Spirits, 
perhaps  it  may  be  expected  from  me,  that  I 
-fhoulc  let  forth  flme  more  particulars,  than  I 
ll^:ve  yet  done  concerning  it.  As  to  this,  I 
frail  only  fay,  that  in  regard  I  do  not  urge  my 
own  Experience,  as  Argumentative,  for  prov- 
ing the  exiilencv  of  Spirits  ,  and  their 
Operations,  I  think  it  may  he  looked  upon  as 
3  thing  of  more  Guqofity  than  Ufe  to  enlarge 
i;pon  it  3  though  I  fhall  add  the  following 
gtoit.  J 


394  An  Account  of  Genii,' 

I  declare  then,  with  all  the  Sincerity  of  i 
Chriftian,  that  it  never  fo  much  as  entred  in- 
to my  Thoughts  to  ufe  any  practice  for  raiting, 
or  calling  Spirits  ,  as  fome  Men  have  done  ; 
and  tha:  when  they  came  ,  it  was  altogether 
a  furprize  to  me.  At  their  fir  ft  coming  they 
did  not  appear  to  me,  nor  come  into  my 
Chamber^  but  kept  at  my  Chamber  Windows, 
and  in  a  Court  adjoyning  to  one  of  my  Cham- 
ber Windows,  and  in  a  Garden  adjoyning  to 
another  Window.  They  called  to  me ,  fung, 
play'd  on  Mufick  ,  rung  Bells ,  fometimes 
crowed  like  Cocks,  &c  and  I  have  great 
Reafon  to  believe  thefe  to  be  all  good  Spirits, 
for  I  found  nothing  in  them  tending  to  ill ; 
their  drift  in  comings  as  far  as  I  could  per- 
ceive, being  only  td  compofe  my  Mind,  and 
to  bring  it  to  its  higheft  Purity  j  they  ufed 
no  Threats  to  me,  but  the  furprize  kept  al- 
ways a  Terror  upon  me,  and  they  continued 
with  me  about  two  Months. 

Their  fecond  coming  to  me  was  fome  Years 
after,  when  at  firft  there  came  Five,  as  I  have 
fet  forth  in  my  Fourth  Chapter  ;  and  prefent-? 
ly  after  there  came  Hundreds,  and  I  faw  fome 
of  them  Dance  in  a  Ring  in  my  Garden,  ancf 
Sing  ,  holding  Hands  round,  not  facing  each 
other,  but  their  Backs  turned 'to  the  inner 
part  of  the  Circle,  I  found  thefe  of  a  pro- 
mifcuous  Nature,  fome  good,  and  fome  bad, 
as  among  Men ;  for  fome  of  them  would 
now  and  then  Curfe  and  Swear,  and  talk 
ioofely  ,  and  others  would  reprehend  them 
*  for  it.  Yet  none  of  thefe  ever  perfwaded  me 
to  any  ill  thing  j  but  all  would  dilfwade  me 
from  drinking  too  freely  ,  and  any  other  ir- 
regularity $  and  if  at  any  time  I  was  upon 

going 


Or  Fdtmlidr  Spirit*.  $95 

going  to  any  Neighbouring  Town,they  would 
tell  mc  they  would  go  with  me,  which  I 
found  tl  ould  there  call 

my  Curtain,  by  my  Be  is  they  ufually 

did  at  my  Houle,  and  talk  to  me. 

Befide  thele  two  great  Vifitations,  they  have 
Come  to  me  now  and  then  for  fome  Years, and 
fomerimes  have  ftay'd  with  me  a  Week,  fomc- 
times  two  or  three  Days  ;  and  all  along  from 
their  firft  coming,  they  have  very  often  fug- 
gefted  things  to  me  in  my  Dreams,  as  now 
and  then  they  do  {till.  At  their  firft  coming 
ird  no  name  of  any  of  them  mentioned, 
as  I  did  at  their  fecond  poming.  I  had  a  per- 
ception of  them  by  four  of  my  Senfes,  for  I 
{aw  them,  heard  them,  and  three  of  them  had 
a  dark  fmoak  coming  out  of  their  Mouths, 
which  feemed  fomewhat  offenfive  to  theSmell, 
it  being  like  the  fmoak  of  a  Lamp ;  and  three 
of  them  bid  me  take  them  by  the  Hand,  which 
I  did,  but  it  yielded  to  my  touch,  fo  that  I 
could  not  find  any  fenfible  refiftency  in  it ; 
neither  could  I  perceive  any  coldnefs  in  them^ 
as  it's  faid  fome  Apparitions  have  had.  I  did  not 
ask  them  many  curious  Queftions ,  as  I  find 
many  Men  think  I  fliould,and,as  they  fay,they 
would  have  done  ;  but  I  always  kept  me  on 
my  guard,  and  ftill  required  them  to  be  gone, 
and  would  not  enter  into  fuch  Familiarily 
with  them.  Indeed  I  ask'd  them  once,  what 
Creatures  they  were,  and  they  told  me,  they 
were  an  Order  of  Creatures  fuperior  to  Man- 
kind, and  could  Influence  our  Thoughts,  and 
that  their  Habitation  was  in  the  Air  ;  I  ask'd 
them  alfo  feveral  things  relating  to  my  own . 
concerns  in  this  World  ,  and  I  found  fome- 
times  both  in  theif  Anfwcrs,    and  in  what 

they 


l$6  An  Account  of  Genii, 

they  iuggefted  in  my  Dreams ,  things  very 
furprizing  to  me.  One  of  them  lay  down  up- 
on my  Bed  by  me,  every  Night,  for  a  confi- 
derable  time,  and  pretended  great  kindnefs  to 
me,  and  if  fome  others  at  any  time  would 
threaten  me,  th^t  Spirit  told  me  ,  they  fhould 
<lo  me  no  hurt. 

If  you  ask  me,  whether  I  really  think  thefe 
Apparitions  to  be  Spirits ,  or  only  an  efFed  of 
Melancholy,,  I  can  only  fay  ,  what  St.  Paul 
faid  of  the  Nature  of  his  Rapture,  God  knows, 
I  know  not,  but  they  appear'd  to  me  Real. 

Tandlerus ,  in  his  Dijfertation  concerning  Melan- 
€holy>  tells  us ,  That  the  afFe&  of  Melancholy 
chiefly  happens  to  Perfons  from  the  Fortieth 
to  the  Sixtieth  Year  of  their  Age,  and  that  it's 
contracted  chiefly  in  the  Summer  ^nd  Autumn, 
and  comes  to  an  Head  in  the  Spring  ;  and  I 
muft  own  that  I  was  above  Forty  Years  of  Age, 
before  any  thing  in  this  kind  happen  d  to  me, 
but  it  was  about  Chrlfimas  ,  that  the  Appariti- 
ons came  to  me,  both  times. 

As  for  Melancholy  >  I  know  not  whether 
my  Temperament  may  have  fome  allay  of  it, 
but  I  think,  I  carry  more  of  a  Sanguine.  In- 
deed., there  was  this,  that  might  help  to  exalt 
the  other.  When  they  firft  came  to  me,  I  was 
juftlipon  a  recovery  from  an  intermittent  Fe- 
ver, which  had  held  me  above  twelve  Months; 
and  I  confefs  at  that  tjme  I  was  unfortunately 
involved,  in  an  unnatural  Suit  in  Law,  with 
*  a  too  near  Relation ,  which  might  fomewhat 
difcempofe  my  Mind  ;  and  at  the  Spirits  fe- 
cond  coming,  that  fuit  in  Law  was  continued, 
and  I  cannot  fay,  but  at  that  time  I  might  have 
been  fomewhat  affe&ed  by  that  faying  of  the 
Wifelylan,  Vrov.  2j\  Si  Ded^s  tcvjm  >  w.litui 

Z  .  Vldtr 


cr  Familiar  Spirit-.  397 

vhhbunt  extrane.isy  nempe  ,   viftonn  ,  &  wktabiUi 

term  explains  it;    but  \t\De  SpcFI. 
if  fuch  am  occafion  fhould  caufe  them  CO  ** u  €*  4" 

D  with  mc  above  three  Months. 
I  could  add  many  more  particulars  of  what 
pah  ad  my  iolf,  for  in- 

deed I  kept  a  Journal  of  it  for  fome  Years, 
well  for  what  pafs'd  in  my  Dreams,  as  other- 
wife;  but  I  fhall  forbear  to  trouble  the  Rea- 
der farther,  only  adding,   that  as  thefe  Vifita- 
tions  of  Spirits,  gave  me  an  occafion  to  confi- 
der  how  far  Humane  Reafon  could  bear,  as 
to  a  making  out  of  the  Exiftence  of  Spirits, 
and  their  Operations ,  fo  I   muft  declare  ,    I 
firmly  believe,  that  as  the  whole  vifible  World 
has  proceeded  from  the  invifible  World,  which 
will  hold  good  even  according  to  the  Epicure- 
an Dodtrine )  fo  ,  that  Spirits  both  good  and 
bad  are  concern  d  in  the  Adminiftration  of  ir, 
as  Agents  fubordinate  to  the  firft  Caufe  ;  and 
this  I  adhere  to  as  well  by  nAfodium  of  Reafon, 
as  that  of  Faith,  in  whicn,   I  think,  we  are  all 
bound  to  acquiefce.      And  it  appears  plain  e- 
nough  to  me,  that  thofe  that  will  not  fo  do, 
will  but  lofe  themfelves  in  a  vertiginous  Doxo- 
mania,  and  never  center,  in  any  lolid  Truth. 


A 


^8  "Jn  Jccomt  of  Geniii 

A 

POSTSCRIPT. 


HAving  !  lately  had  the  Honour  to  hear  a 
Relation  of  an  Apparition,  from  the 
Lord  Bifhop  of  Gloucefter,  and  it  being  too 
late  for  me  to  infert  it  in  its  proper  place> 
in  this  Book ;  I  give  it  you  here,  by  way  of 
Poftfcript;  as  follows. 

c  Sir  Charles  Lee,  by  his  firft  Lady,  had  only 
€  one  Daughter,  of  which  lhe  died  in  Child- 
c  Birth  ;  and  when  (he  was  Dead,  her  Sifter, 

*  the  Lady   Everard  ,     defir'd    to  have    the 

*  Education  of  the  Child  j  and  lhe  was  by 
c  her  very  well  Educated,   till  lhe  was  Marri- 

*  ageable ;  and  a  Match  was  concluded  for 

*  her,  with  Sir  V/tlliam  Ferkins ,  but  was  then 
c  prevented  in  an  extraordinary  manner.  Up- 
c  on  a  Thurfday  Night,  flie,  thinking  lhe  faw  a 

*  Light  in  her  Chamber,  after  lhe  was  in  Bed, 
c  knock'd  for  her  Maid ,  who  prefently  came 
'  to  her  $  and  lhe  ask'd,  why  lhe  left  a  Candle 
c  burning  in  her  Chamber  ?  The  Maid  laid 
€  lhe  left  none,  and  there  was  none,  but  what! 

*  lhe  brought  with  her  at  that  time.  Then  lhe 
r  faid  it  was  the  Fire ;  but  that  her  Maid  told 

*  her  was  quite  out  j  and  faid,  lhe  believ'd  it 
c  was  only  a  Dream ,  whereupon  lhe  laid  it 
c  might  be  fo,  and  composed  her  felf  again  to 
c  fleep;  but  about  two  of  the  Clock  lhe  was 
c  awaken  d  again  ,  and  few  th$  Apparition  of 


or  FatnMat  Spirits*  599 

*  a  little  Woman,bctwecn  her  Curtain  and  her 

*  Pillow  ,    who  told  her  (he  w.ii>  her  Moth, 
that  flic  was  Hap:  I  chat  bv  T\\  Jve  of 

lock,  that  1 1  fhould  be  withJ 

whereupon  (he   knok'd  a.  her  \1 

I  tor  her  Clothes  ,  and  vvlun  flic  ' 
dxefs'd,  went  into  her  Clofet,  and  came  not 
out  again  till  Nine  ;  and  then  brought  out 
with  her  a  Letter  fealed  to  her  Father,  brought 
it  to  her  Aunt,  the  Lady  Everard  ,  told  her 
what  had  happen  d,  and  delir'd,  that  affoon 
as  fhe  was  Dead,  it  might  be  fent  to  him;  but 
the  Lady  thought  fhe  was  fuddenly  fall'n 
Mad  ;  and  thereupon  fent  prefently  away 
to  Chelmsford,  for  a  Phyfician  and  Surgeon, 
who  both  came  immediately,  but  the  Phyft- 
cian  could  difcern  no  Indication  of  what  the 
Lady  imagin'd ,  or  of  any  Indifpofition  of 
her  Body,  notwithftanding  the  Lady  would 
needs  have  her  let  Blood,  which  was  done  ac- 
cordingly ;  and  when  theYoung  Woman  had 
patiently  let  them  do  what  they  would  with 
her  fhe  defir'd  that  theChaplain  might  be  cal- 
led to  read  Prayers ;  and  when  Prayers  were 
ended,  fhe  took  her  Gittar  and  Vfalm  £^£,and 
fate  down  upon  a  Chair  without  Arms ,  and 
play'd  and  fung  fo  melodioufly  and  admi- 
rably ,  that  her  Mufick-Mafter  ,  who  \ 
then  there, admired  at  it;  and  near  the  ftroke 
of  Twelve,  fhe  rofe,  and  fate  her  felf  down 
in  a  great  Chair  with  Arms ,  and  prefently 
fetching  a  ftrong  Breathing  or  two,  imme- 
diately Expired  >  and  was  10  fuddenly  cold, 

as  much  wondred  at  by  the  Phyfici 
and  Surgeon.     She  dyed  at  ti 
three  Miles  from  ;    aul  the  I 


4oo     '  An  Account  of  Genii, 

€  f er  was  fent  to  Sir  Charles,  at  his  Houfc  u 
€  Warwickshire ;  but  he  was  fb  afflicted  with 
€  the  Death  of  his  Daughter  >  that  he  came 
€  not  till  fhe  was  Buried  ,•  but  when  he  came, 
c  caus'd  her  to  be  taken  up,  and  to  be  buryed 
f  by  her  Mother  at  Edminton  3  as  fhe  defir'd  in 
c  her  Letter.  This  was  about  the  Year  i66z 
€  0x6%.  And  this  Relation  the  Lord  Bifhop 
of  Gloucefter,  had  from  Sir  Charles  Lee  him- 
felf. 


FINIS. 


