Tyrocinium Chymicum (Jean Béguin, 1669)
==========================================================
The 1669 English Tyrocinium Chymicum; Béguin's 1610 textbook in English dress. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_tyrocinium-chymicum-_bguin-jean_1669).

6 M4 Fa 8 4h * < l ". r'Y ng ISO EVEN þ Bo $*
» ” . x - FIT. » abs 5” ks, a ” - _ be - 4 » 4 |
TTROCINIVUM CHYMICUM:
go
4 | "RY
=
o
f
OR,


| [Chymica Eſlays,


Acquired from


” The Fountain of Nature,


AND


eM anual Experience,


-


—_— m—


y Fohn Begwinus Almoner to the moſt
Chriſtian King of France.


"THE Y
Author's Dedication, ?


I Dedicate, offer up, and be- *
queath, This W ork, ſuch » ?
as it 15, as alſo my ſelf, |
and all that is called -
mine, Tothe —
only W ife E
GOD,
Author of all Geod : To
whom be all Praiſe, Vir.
ue, and Power, afcri=
bed,for ever and ever,


AMEN.


A3


< } 4 \
ad | + %


C3.


eEnch; 10 Hig)
' - K-31 2 <


! RA»


; "FD
#4 %& 7 —_
=

n by


\ A , SL


-
Lic
p
$5.
oy


Iſt, you mult Learn Digeſtions,
Diftillations, Sublimations, Re-

_ verberations, Extrattions, Solu-
tions, Coagulations, Fermentations ,
and Fixations; and you muſt alfa
know what Inſtruments are required
for uſe in this Work ; as Glaſſes, Cy-
curbits, Circulatory Veſſels, Veſſels of

| Hermes , Earthen Veſſels, Balneums
Wind Fornaces, Fornaces of Reverbe-
ration, and other ſuch like: as alſo a
Marble, Mortars, Coals, 6c. So may

you at length proceed in the Work of \

Alchimy, and Medicine.


vw


po
wY %
i » »,
© Ip
a
iq
B '
© 3; 5,8


\ 8.
*Y% = Y


Pn Pa? ty” Cr. _


"2 met
« 4
we
n . '
aid


But as long as you ſhall by Phantaz
fic. and Opinion adhere to feignad
Books, you will be apt for, and Prede-
Aion! co none of theſe, + |


Epigramma Authorys ad Benevolum


Lefiorem.


Luiſquss es, O Leftor, noitroth parce Labort, '
ue ſunt difla mado, difla'fucre pris: * ©


Et quecung; meo paruo ſunt (cripta Libells,
ht mea, now meaſunt, pc tus, non ina ſunt.


= l GVO


DSSOSES:STSLHS
PESTS ESESDSEDY
T0 "PIES


Ez A D ER


T becomes every man, about to tranſcribe, or
render the Works of another in his own na-
tive Tongue, neither to add any thing of bis
own, ner io omit of the Amthor's ;, leaft in fo
deing, he ſhould main the ſame by abſiratting, or
render them monſtrons by impertinent additions]
Wherefore, avoiding theſe extreams, 1 offer this
Zittle work, (not 2orgeonſfly adorned with paint=
. Ings of Rhetorick, but plarply cloat hed in an En-
gliſh Habit) to the Searchers into the wondrous
Myſterys of Nature, by them to be viewed, and
reviewed, to be approved, or condemned(if any
thing heret may juitly be cenſured) 45 they ſhall
think fit. Tet, I would not have any Man 10
perſwade himſelf, that I preſent This Tyrocini-
UM 45 4 Guide to the moſt Experienced, but ra-
ther as a neceffary auxiliary to Pupils, and ſnc#
4s are deſirons to enter upon the Praxis of this
Laudable Science, but hitherto, perhaps for want
of Expert knowledge of the Latin Tongut, 07 14-
ther n«t finding experienced Maſters, could not


"# *
pS4, k » a 4%


- rs


Mnderflend how, or where to begin, For ſuch
 pnly, this Book was written by 1he Authdr, aud to
the ſame endit i new tranſlated, Therefore i
, you find benefit by the peraſal hereof, extol not 1


"4" "oat ww


<A uthor, nor commend the Tranſlator, but praiſe
God, who is the Giver of all good Gifts, and by
whom all Sciences were communicated to the
Children of Adam, |


AASTELLLLLSS


#
,


TIROCINIUMCHTMICUM
In three Books,


= _ I PROS.


— — —  — — —_—


BOOK I.


— — ——


———_——— —_——..—_ — — m————_—_—_—__——_—


CHAP. I;
Tonching the definition of Alchymy,


S\Hymiſtry 1s

_ 7>1 the Art of Whar Alcbymy is,
SES diſlolvigg na- |

SEBz2Y tural mixed bodies, and of coagulating
tae ſame waen diflolyed, and of reducing them jnto
ſalubrious, ſafe, and grateful Medicameats.

Chymia 1s. 2 Greek IF
word ; the Latines ren- The Ecymolagy of the word
der it an Art making Chymie.

Liquor, or diſſolving; _

taings ſolid into Liquor : 1t is likewiſe called war”

£f£9xw, becauſe Chymiſtry teacherth, to diſlolye
(that which is moſt difficult) and to coagulate. |
. If any one call it Alchimy, He, in the Arabian


manner declares che excellency thereof.


PR. bo ..


-
C1


Tyrocinium Chymicum : Or, Book I,

If the $ Spagyr ick Art, he ſhews 1ts principal O:-
fices, viz. ovyrgiow and godentow ; that is to ſay,
Conjun&ion and Separation.

It the Hermetick Art, hz demonſtrates Its Au-
thor, and Antiquity.
Tithe Diſtillatory SC:CNCC ne ſthews its Atoo-
Fity and Fur tion, CYOS) F331
 Bitkince all Diſciplines are either Theorical, or
Practical ; Chymiſtry not acquieſcing in the know-
ledge and contemplation of mixt bodies, as a natu-
ral Science ; but having regard Td *gyov, or To
Texyucx (that 15),to the work or buſineſs, viz, to
Magiſterys, Tin&twes , Quinteſlences, and ſuch
Like ; unto it, is worthily granted a place among
practical Arts and Diſciplmes': althouga happily
ſome may de found, who, being contented with
the Theory only, accidentally, either for -Want of

[utable Matters, or impeded dy other more weighty
pulinefles, apply not themſelves to the moſt plea-
[2nt labours mn the practical part tnereof requi-
Ted,

Oljett. The Ovyjection of thes Art is, that the
b ody i ts mixt and concrete ; but wherein it is moye-
avle is not inſpe&ed, forthis is tne part of natural
Cot 1:deration, viz. to obſerve how far a body is
d.flolvable and coagulavle. Bodies are eitheir 1im-
perfectly mixt, © as Dey, Hail, Sow ; or perfealy
maxt, as Plants, Fruits, Metals, Stones Trecss
and Animals of every kind, 'Whence it 1s mani-
{eR, now evregiou{ly they are deceived, who, hear-
wo-the name "of an Alchymitt preſently conclude,
tar Man 1mploys himſelf in nothing elſe; than the
tranfmucation or Metamorphoſing of Metals, and
mecitates or no- nther thing chan the wonderfuf
Myitery ot tie Pailoſophicks Stone 3 Whereas,
Tis


Book I. Chymical fs ayes. 3
" The intention of this Artiſt, is ro prepare molt
ſweer, molt wholſome, and moſt ſafe Medicaments-
And herein 1t-1s that our Art is diſtingiſh2d from
the vulgar Pharmacopea, which alſo confets Medi-
cines, lafe indeed, and wholſome, but leſs grateful
co the diſeaſed. For as to (iyeetneſs, or pleaſure
in taking, it maſt needs
be granted, ttar the ck Chymical Medicines are help«
will ſooner tak2 Con- ful the rulgar,
ſerve of Roſes, with
which 4 grains of Mercury, working by ſeidge, only
are commixed,than many drams ofDjacatholicon:and
will more willingly take one only »of the bleſſed
Pills of Quercetanwe, or two Pills of his Panchyma-
oogon Eleftuary, than 7o, or x5, wichout them, of
v1lded and ferid Pills, or four grains of Mineral |
Bez.oar, of the moſt famons Dr. Hartmannws, or
eight grains of Diaphoretick Antimony of Crollima,
than any other Sudorifick potion : And much ra-
raer a little of the Cream or Magiſtery of Tartar,
tian an agoniftick dravghe of Apozeme or Syrup of
any Magiſtrale , ladorzouſly confeted according
to a deſcription of I knuw not how many foot
lone.

Yet in a ſenſe the Potions and Veflels of vulgac
"Medicaments, do in odoar far exceed che Chymi-
cal ; namely, when the Sick, only hearing of them
before they rake then in cheir hands, with the nauſe-
ous imagination of their taſte and odour, being not
provoked with any magnetick force, &UG Ki uaTw,
purge upward, anda downward, which hitherto by
CPR Medicaments could not be perform-
£9.

They ſay, Spagyrick Artificers glory in the
fweetneſs of their Remedies, but Medicines pre» |


_
w hs P


—_—


| "©

- : | |
Py. M9 PSF. -

. , bs ſy _


4 Tyrocinium Chymicam: Or, BookT,
«pared in the ſhops of Apothecarys, have obtained
the praiſe of ſalubrity and ſafeneſs of Curatjon,
For, ſay they, your Remedies are not more whole -
ſome and more ſafe than ours, being not enongh (a=
[n>r;ous orſafe : fance yours for the moſt part are
venomous and plainly repugnant to human2 Na-
tre, as being Metallick and taken from Minerals ;
and generally are more ſharp, more corrofive, and
more hor than is conyenient, and alſo very ſtrong-
ly ſmell of the fire, Theſe indeed are forcible
weapons, and are ready to caſt down the ſtrong-
kold of Chymiſts, if they be not dexterouſly ener-
vated with the Buckler of Reaſon and Experience. |
It can [ſcarcely be denyed, but that mcſt of our Me-
WCINCS ACe ben from our of che family of Minerals
and Metals. But if the
Chymical __ are not Ancient and famons
Venomous and repugnant ©. Phyacians did not onl
-- --rrna alchough Mc te them, but crude on
unprepared , as in the
preſcriptions of Galen, Dioſcorides, and in the Anti=
dotory of Nichelas of Myrepſicum, and others is to
this day to be ſeen, and ſome molt famous Pnylici-
ans of late time, as Kondeletirs uſed crude Mercury
in P1{ls of Barbareſſay for expelling tne Neapolitan
diſeaſe : Crato the molt fortunate Phyſician of three |
Ceſar uſed Cinnabary for removing the Vertigo ; and |
others have uſed Antimony, 2s Cardanw, Fulinms, A-
lexandrints and Mathiolus : Vitrigl was uſed by
Geſnerms, Crocus Marrs for the Jaundies, by Falle-
pins; and for all afteQts of the Ligats, Sulpiur hatn
generally been by them uſed : Way then ſhould ir}
nor Fe lawfal for us to transfer the ſame taings
rightly prepared, and perfectly freed from all ve-
nomous malignity to-+medicinall uſe? ry
, U2CE


(
l


has - « =
I"
”


v » . 5 PL
b © id
CY


300K 1.  Chymical Eſſays. | 5 |
fince we have ſeen thoſe, who, with vulgar Medjg
caments of the Apothecarys, could not recover 2
" perfect ſtate of Health; yer ac the perſwafion of


Ws the lame Mrſochymiſts have removed themſelves to -
- | Mecallick Baths, or Mineral fountains through the
\- | continued uſe of which, they have been perfe&ly
eh cured. Whence we indeed may rightly conje-
1d  Rure, that in Minerals and Metzallicks of this kind,
I, there are concluded a certain fixed Balſom, and


le moſt potent Spirits, no: odnoxious to corruption.
_ The ſame alſo in the uſe of Chyrurgical Medica-
To ments 1s conſpicuous for of their Remedys is
'C ſcarce any of great virtue, unleſs with it {ome
e- } Metal o: Mineral be commixed. But far be it,
als & that the ſame crude & unprepared(accorcing to the
he Cuſtom of the Ancient,and ſome of the Phyſicians of
us Þ late times) ſhould be by us thought fit to be ree
ly I received inwardly into the body.

nd The profitable muſt

he be ſeparated from the The true Correfion of Ma»
ti- © unproficable; the ve- lignant Medicines,

co | nom from the ſalutary

i. & Mummy; and the Kernel ard Marrow uncaſed
wy from Rindes, Shells, Husks, and Feces. So at
ran © 1-0 gh from thence may Remedies be taken apt for
ee } £© Cre of moſt deplorable diſeaſes,quickly,ſately,
nd | and p'caſantly, if they be adhibited by learned, ex-
A- I p<rts and circumſpet Phyſicians, and according te
by or Rules of Therapeia, The Viper, 3 ;
#- I Þeaft moſt venomous, being rightly prepared, 35S

ith *2< Babs of Treacle, that univerſal 4{exipharmacen, ,
ic I *pproved by the Experience of fo many Ages. S0!
vie ſee daily, that from vulgar Serpents, they now
commonly prepare a moſt certain preventionary
and curative Medicine againt venoms of every
B 3 | kind»


P: PSY WF. +


<>; "> Hind 14 E


kind. Likewiſe the Sea-Dragon, which the French
«call Lavive, hath in his back a Bone, which being


Jrocininm " micum : IT," SOOK dy.


taken out, thence is made a moſt delicate food.
In the ſame manner alſo things dug out of the
Earth, may plainly be reduced to that Nature of
Mediocrity, the whole being reſolved into diſtinct
parts, and the malignant and mortiferous qualities
removed ; that molt certainly, thoſe, who rightly
uſe ſuch, legitimately prepared, admit not a mertal
enemy, but a friendly Gueſt, not a poyſonous ve-
nome, but an Alexapharmacon , and Antidote againſt
all diſeaſes into the penetrales of their life. For if
the venemoſity of Metals and Minerals depend up-
on their form ; who ſees not, if theſe by Chymical
Artifice be reſolved into their three -principlzs,
that their deadly and deſtinAive qualities are re-
moved ? Andif you ſhall conceive the malignity
ro de eſtabliſhed in any of the undivided parts, you
will ſo much the eaftier underſtand, that when the
whole js divid:d into parts, that may be ſegreg2-
ted. And in this manner 1s the correction 0; mor-
tiferoas medicaments ; which, how ſafe, and ſalu-
drious it 15, might be proved by infinite Examples,
if we tnought -1t were not ſufficiently knoivn al-
ready,

Let therefore Miſochymiſts forbear to a>nor th2
uſeof Minerals and Metals, to be exhidited inter.
nally into the humane body ; and unadviſecly to
#2arI know not what, iNiad\g TEV nardy, thence
f0 proceed; but ler them rather learn. of Chymilts
lhe true way of ſubduing the malignity of Reme-
dies , which venerable Antiquity uſed (as Anti-
mony, Mercury, both kinds of Helliebore, all the
Species of Tubymalus, Pytyyſa, Elaterium, Colnquin=
tjae, Eupouriium, Thaptia, Seummony, Thyme'e 1, the
$9 | L:z:re


— ed Lb


-


if


he JE


"Book T. Chymical Eſſays: ”
Lazxre and Armenian Stone, Scoria of Braſs, Sandar
rack » &c.) which is done by the Antimony of the
heterogeneal body, into its proper parts ; dut not
by the wonted addition of Maſtick, Dragacanth,
Spike, Cinnamon, or ſuch like. For he that en-
deavours ſo to diffipate, and infringe the venomous
qualities of Simples, is not unlike to fooliſh and
12norant Cooks, who, when Carps are to de ſcaled,
and boweled, contend'that if the enoler or bag of
the gall ſhall happen to de broke, it is not to be
waſhed out, or ſegregated, but witn Honey or Su-
oarto be corrected, and its evil favour 10 remo-
ved 2: or :fthey be to prepare'the mteſtines of Ani=
mals for mans food, ſhall fooliſhly judge that the
ſordid and filthy excrements are not to be - waſhed
away, but that they are to boiled as they are, with
the addition of Amber, or odoriferous Oils poured
upon them. |

Spagyrick Remedies ſeem not to be wholeſome
and ſafe, becauſe they are tharp and corroſive, and
by the violence of fire rendred more Coftick, and
pecauſe they ſmell of the fire : bur if they be (or
whule they are) ſharp and corrofive, they are not to
be received into the body. Good G OD! how
oreata quantity of Medicaments ought to be caſt
out from the vulgar Pharmacopuly's? How great 1s
the number of them to be expunged from taeir An-
tidctiry's? And how many Condiments are to be
removed from their Kitch:ns? Cantherides by Galen
are numbred among dangerous Medicines, wich
by erohien kill 5; and they are to be but ſparingly
taken; and unto theſe he grants it 1s behovetul
they ſhould be commixed, To7s YidovTet/£ouoy, and
with D;ureticks inftead of a Venicle. How cor-
rotive Virriol is,is palpably known to all; and not=

B 4 withſtanding


' Fyroeinium Chymicum: Ot, Book.
withſtanding into Treacle the moſt commendable
Antidote, 1t 1s received. Garlick, Onions, Si-
nape, and Nſfturcium, how ſharp are theſe 2 yet
arc we not aftraid daily to uſe them in our Ban-
quets. 23
The jnices of Lemmons and Citrons diflove tae
moſt firm bodies of Pearls and Corralsz yet in
the Cardiack paſſion, and in extream imbecility, and
decay of ftrength, a more ready and excellent re-
medy, is not vulgarly given. Therefore tne Acri-
mony and Coltick force of Caymical Remedies 1s
not to be forced, eſpecially, ſince many are out-
wardly corroding, which inwardly cannot exerciſe
their force, not only by reaſon of greater repugnan-
cy of the inteſtines, and the vegetate (lrengrh of tne
native heat ; but alſo by reaſon of the noxious nu-
mors reſiding inthe Stomach. As we devour not
whole handfuls of Salt, nor uſe we certain poungs
of it 1n droths, but, it may be, we diflolve ot it one
pugil ; and a little Vinegar and Spice we are wont
£0 uſe for ſeaſoning our meats z ſo when neceſſicy
compeis,ſpagyrick Phyſicians to the uſing of ſharp
Medicaments, tuey exhibit ſome drops, or one
grain or two, not alone, but mixed with appropri-
ate Liquors. Yea, the moſt ſharp may be ſo well
| 'Þ odulcorated, as they may
hymical Medici 2 TEES .

| -= ogg by —_— Fara depokite all their acri-
faarpnels comradted by fire. mOony z winch 1 Agua


ortts, and Aqua Regus 18


clearly evinced, if with them Salt of Tartar be
commuixed.


Now as to:ching the Contagion of fire, which is
by them odjected, it is a thing ſo vain and frivo-
Jo's, as needs no refutation. Galen himſelf in the
$0.Clap. dr Theriaca ad Pijon:m, exprelly writeth,
| tlat


”
"= *


Book 1.


: Chymical Eſſays. 9
that the fice doth meliorate many things » and
ſometimes diſcovers the hidden narure of things,
and ſome things alſo it renders apt for uſe, ac-
cording to our intention. Whence alſo the ſame
Element by Crrero, 1s not undeſervedly honoured
with the Title of Mafter of Arts, likewiſe Galen
ſubjects _ and biting Minerals to the Examen
of fire, that they may be rendred more gentle, He
eſtzems * Chbalcites burnt,
better than not burnt, * Req Virol.

Balanus Atyrepſica z aCe

cording to Meſne, provokes vomiting, and alſo cau-
ſeth dezetions by the inferiour parts; bur being
burnt, and the nauſeous humidity thereof removed,
the only force of expelling humours by Seidge re-
mains. So ſ1blimate Mercury, which 1s moſt ſharp,
adiding the violence of fire with Antimonys 1s re-
duced to a molt gentle, and moſt wholſome Al-
exipharmacon. Likewiſe Iron, when calcined into
Crocus Marts, with fire of reverberation ſuftaineth
thz excreameſt near of flames,yet they on it impreſs
no acrimony to hinder the uſe thereof from being
moſt profitavle, as it is moſt frequent in Hemor-
7h 1gia*:, and ather Fluxes. On the contrary, how
oreat ſharpneſs do the Water and Oil of Cinnamon
acquire in a Balnewn of vapour only ? And inthe
{ime,now much is Wine made more acid ? Whence
1s this? Can you underſtand the Reaſon? You
may, if yo2 can comprehend why the Sun hardens
clay, and ſoftens wax

and tne ſame makes lin= Whence is the acrimony of
nen white, hut blackens Chymical Medicaments,

tae face. You are there-

tore ceceived, if you think Spirit of Vitrio! _
Lats


zo Tyrocinium Chymicum : Or, Book IT, *
eras acrimony from external heat: and ſo if you
judge that Oil of Salt from the fire of Reverderati-
on 15 infe&ed with the ſame ; for if Salts iyere not
inſited and mixed in theſe, you by th greateſt vio-
lence of fire, could never be able to inure ſuch a
ſharpneſs. And contrarywiſe, ſhould you uſe the
moſt moderate heat that couldbein ſome things,
yet you ſhall undonbtedly render them more
(harp by reaſon of the force of preſent Salts,
Moreover for the Em-
Chymical Remedies ſmell pyreuma of Cnymacal
not of the fire. Medicines, it 1s not of
ſich moment, as under
that name they ſhould ſeem violent and dangerous
to pratical Payficians : for if ſucha thing de in-
herent in thoſe Medicamenty, it took its beginning
either from a moderate or Rrong heat. If fron
that, and therefore Chymical Remedies are cenſu-
red for obnoxious; then can neither our Meats, or
Drinks, or vulgar Medicaments de ſafe and whol-
ſome z lince, 11 preparing them, oftentimes a
oreater degre2of fire 1s required than forSpagyrick
Remedies, which 13 maniteſt in the making of Bzer
or Ale, where the Mault is farſt with Rrong fire
dryed, afterward boiled wita greater, And alſo in
ſome Rheniſh Wines, which by reaſon of their
wholſomnels, are uſed by th2 Northern people in
almoſt all diſeaſes, inſtead ofa Remedy g and yet
to a true maturity, ch2y cannot de bronght, but by
the Denefir of Elementary fice; alſo in broiled fiſh,
and (moak dry2d, roaſted, and boiled fleſh, with
any other ſuch like,
The EmPyreuma how it may Bat if from tas, Ig,
be correted. from violent fire, yet
ih:nce cannot any thing
PE of


SS. WM. & _ XX... S.. ... A425 4: Ft


>


=
.


>-JvQ e7


Jook 1. (hymical Eſſays. IT
of peril happen to the fick, fince either with abluti-
on or digeſtion it may de corrected ;; as is ſeen in
aſhes, wiich water being poured on them, depo-
ſite the notes of their calidity received from the
fire in a Lixiviaem. Yea, adlution often repea-
ced, renders ſome purging Metallicks and Mine-
rals Chymically prepared, inefhcacious for exhauſt=
ing .depraved humours. How by decoction all
things are made ſweet is known, yet tnere ſeemed
ro be need of inducing an Enlample to prove the
ſame. If by an Empyrenma, you (hall happen thus
to underſtand z that when either the potential
heat, which 1s latent in the mixtare, as ic were un-
der coals, is produced into a& by violent fire, and
ſo freed trom all impeciment, exerciſeth more po-
tent force; or when the heat, which therein was
d:ſperſed, is united by the benefit of fire ; for this
cauſe, neither an Ewpyreamay nor too much heat 1s
tobe feared; fince1tis the office of a Phyſician
rightly to uſe hot things of this kind, as alſs others
[leſs hot] which if imprudently adhibited , may
unavoidadly infer detriment to the ſick, But Mi-
ſocaymualts ceaſe not to urge us grievouſly, whalſt
they pretend our Medicaments a8g-wprofitadle,
becauſe thy are decay- att+:
ed, and take their begin- Preparation renders nor Chy®
| A mical Medicamegts unp:ofi-
ning from periſhed and , 1.
corrupted mixt things,
and are deſtitute of primogeneal humudity, as they
ſay. Now if the bodies of mixt.things be not to
be diſlulved, or (to uſe their odious terms) not to
D2e deſtroyed ; Way do they trouvle che Harmony
of that mixtion 2 Why do they prepare infuſions,
deco&tions, and Syrups with violent hire? Why uſe
they aſlations? Why parchings ? Why ciftillati-
ons Pp


X : Pa. .
b o Tow 7 * V : F 5 oC, £_.,
RE ed © TR WEITENSY
a is Wie LA £
i.
P -.
z


'rz Tyrociniam Chymicum : Or, Book T,


ons?Why Diegridium, & not Scammony whole? Why
Trechas of Albandal, & not C Re it ſelf? Why
in extream imbecillity of ttrength,when che ſick are
ready to expire, preſume they to nouriſh them with
a deſtroyed Capon, Yize with the diſtilled water
thereof, where certainly

X Koors wits. all che * Temperament
and mixture of the

whole periſheth > Is it becauſe in th1s part they
would imitate Nature? Who conveys not food
undigefted from the Stomach,nor crude, or while it
1s whole, for nouriſhing the parts ; but deſtroyed,
that is, ſeparated from the unprofitable and more
groſs parts, and in the ſhop of the Liver reduced,as
1t were, toa Quinceſlence, they ſay (if you pleaſe
to hear it) chat if ſacking Infants be Purgec with
their Mothers Milk, having Rubarb infuſed in ic,
which is often uſed for healtheſake 3 the Concord,
Temperament, and Harmony of the whole Rubach
Iqueezed in the Mothers Milk, 1s given to the Chil-
dren, but will the form of his mixture paſſing
from its own ſubſtance into another, and again
cranſlaced from this into anocher, & ſuffering many
mutations, remain whole and intire, and ſo exclude
the depraved hamours from out of the body > Per-
haps hence it is, that ſome M-ſochymiſts abhor the
uſe of Cheeſe, and al(o Butter, not from any natural
antipathy ; but becauſe, by reaſon of the deſtroyed
concord of the Milk, and the aboliſhed form and
temperament thereof, they fear theſe, and ſuch like
are unfit for nouriſhing tte DoGy. Again, while theſe
| call Cnymical Reme-
Chymicf) Remedies are ner C1eS, dead bodies nor
dead Carcalcs, Carcaſes, and Mm
them to bz deſpoliated

ci


—_


| Book __ Chymical Eſſays.


x3
of primogeneal humidity z they partly contrary
themſelves, and partly ſpeak 1ncon(entaneous to
truth. For if they be ſo vile and inefficacious, why
do they elſewhere afirm them to a& more potent
Iy, than the mediocrityof humane temperament
permits? Moreoveris it not neceſlary,that as well
Animals as Vegetables, ſhould be deprived of that
life whereby they live, taat 1s, are nouriſhed grows
and encreaſe, that they may be rendred apt for the
fo0d, and uſe of man? For even the barbarous Sg.
tbians, although they feed on fleth, either crude or
heated by huating with the \{wiit courhng of Hor-
ſes, yet will they not take the beaſts alive into
chieir Mouths, and tear their fleſh, and car it, So
alſo it 1s expedient, that Plants, Spronts, and Fruits
ſhould die, that they may give forth vital actions in
1e hamane body z tat 15, they muſt be taken from
th2ir Native Soil or Root, leatt thence they ſhould +
{till attraR aliment for conſerving their lite, that
taey may be made apt Remedies tor conſerving the
acalta of men, aild expelling their diſeaſes. And in
like manner Herbs. and other ſuch things {0 mort;-
hed, eſpecially, if a legitimate preparation of
them precede, appily and ſafely operate, if in-
vardly taken into tie bedy, And (as dy experie
ence, the moſt certain Judge of Verity, I (hall e-
vince) the life of Vegetables 1s not deſtroyed by
Cnymical Operations, nor the primogeneal humi-
City of mixt bodies by them conſumed, Tt 1s cer-
tain, and very often proved, that Salts of Herds,
eſpecially hot, if ſeminated in a certain manner, as
is unto us known, do produce other herds of their
oun Species. Not to mention thoſe (tupendious
and pertinent exainples produced by Qunercera-
ns; » Cnapter 23. In bis Anliyer to Anony-
wy; for th? verity of Hermetick Medicine,


SPEER ma aaateo———_—_—
E
-_


14 Tyrocinium Chymicum : Or, Book T,
* In Ardaennazand many
* The Forreit of Arden in other deſert, barren, and
France. dry places, hat the Huſ-
band: men in Summer
might have ſomewhat to reap, they ct down their
Brambles, B room, and Bryers, which they burn on
an heap, and lcatter the aſhes here, and there, all
over the fields, chat the plowed Earth by the Salt
extracted from them by the benefit of the falling
thowers may be fatned, and' afteriyard from Seed
caſt theremnto, produce oo0d and defiravle Corn,
For the Salt of athes of this kir d, performs the of-
fice of dung, becauſe fields could never be 1mpin-
ouate, tet tney were (trewed with the Urines and
| Salt of brute Animals.”
" red a am wap Fat- YetT will not flatly de-
$z3 2s Hrar Wit- How.
nefſech In Synpebagy, lib. x. BE but that ſome Iving
Queſt.the 9th, | things, and ſuch as are
Rot as yet dead, ma
ſometimes rightly be adnibited, as a Cock deplu-
mate (about the breec! 1) for extrating the Venome
from peltiferous Carduncles. Anda young whelp
externally applyed co cierith a cold and weak Sto-
mach by its benign and temperate heat, In like
manner I deny no!, but that things whole may ſome-
times exceed thoſe that are broke, ciflolved, or al-
tered, Alſo they con-
Chymical Mecdicaments ime feſg themſelves to uſe


preſs nor a depraved diſpoliti= ;
on on the pri incipal Members ſome things no leſs de


of the Body. ſtroyed , than the Chy-

miſts do. There remains
naw one ſcruple, which yery much troubles tne
m:nuds of many, and they have long been held in ſuſ-
p=nce tnereabout, ſo as they could not conſent to
the aſe of Hermetick Medicarents ; and it 1s thiy,
that


Book I. Chymical Eſſays. r5
that they eſpecially, 1f they be Metallick or Mine.
ral, diſhpate the native heat and Spirits ſ1dgealy,
and leave in the principal parts polluted Reliques,
a malignant ferment, and a depraved d\:&%51w [or]
d:ſpofition 3 whence ſome dy accident are cured,
and a little after ſuffering a relapſe, are untimely
hurried out of* this life.

Bur Remedies Spagyrically prepared, undeſer-
vedly (ufter this Reproach , ſince it ſich a thing by
the ufe of them ſhould chance to happen, it is not
ſo much to be imputed to the Remedies, as to the
Artificers that prepared them, or to the Pliyſicians
thatexhibited them. Por it is very well known
hoy greac a number there are, wao 'unworthily ap-
proaci to this moſt novle Art, and having learned,
or ſ1ppoſedly found the uſe of this Science from
Books only, and not from thzir «vToiax, or pro-
per experience, unadviſedly prepare S:ibium or Hy-
dr:rpyry, and fo prepared, are not afraid to exhivit
Tn myardly, either for conſerving tn? health of
Man, or for reftoring tne ſame when decayed.
With ſuch precipicates of Chymiſts, it 15 10 wonder
rf they that uſe them de precipirted into tie Grave,
If ſome improvident and prodigal of their own
health follow after their Mercurys of life, they
follow not life, but death, whica tney ſometimes
dny ata very great rate,

Then the blame of ſo grievois accidents, doti
not ſeldom redound to thoſe alſo who adminiſter
the ſaid Medicaments, ſome of whom never ſaw
the legitimate uſe of them z otters of rnem are
plainly unlearned,ſtupid, and ignorant of tie waole
method of Galez and Hyppecrates : $!c2 are like to
Jews #dd Patricides, whoſe Religion is no other
t2an after the manner of Ti1eyes, to ſpore t2em-
ſely23


16 TyrociniumChymicam: Or, BookI,

ſelves in others ruine. For like reaſon, the ſame *\
, - 3s ſometimes written of vulgar Medicines, and ſuch

as are of moſt potent virtues, as the Scammoneate,
Helleborate, and fuch like 3 when by unskilful A-
pothecarys they are ſiniſtrozſly prepared, or by the

- Expert, dextero:ſly conſected , but by Empyricks
prepoſterouſly uſed,althongh the ſame Medicaments
may be of excellent uſe, if well prepared, and me-
todically adhibited,

There 1s no reaſon therefore , that learned and
prudent Phyſicians ſhould abſtain any longer from
the uſe of Chymical Remedies, fince, if they be
confe&ted by expert Artiſts (among whom in
France, Nicholas Bonne 1s famo!'s, ine Apothecary of
the moſt iHuſtrions Due of Bullion 11 Arce Sedanen-

| fi, who hath a ſhop compleatly furniſhed with molt
choice Remedies, as well Galenical as Spagyrical,
eſpecially Treacles, »0:ththe common and eflenſi«
fied, according to the Rulzs of Qaercetanus, molt
exquiſitely'and faithfully prepared ;) all malignity,
if any be in their nature,is removed by the benefic
of Vulcan ; ſo as it is umpollidle, if tazy be metho=
dically uſed, taat they (ſhould either deſtroy the na-
tive heat and Spirits, (the individual guards of the
Soul) or infer on the principal parts a deprayed
diſpofition.

And thus hitherto is ſhowng, how under a falſe
pretext Chymical Remedies are as it were dange-
rous, unprofictadle, and peſtiferots: and ſo the
Cities right in the Re-puolique of Medicine 1s de-
nyed,

Now, that they are more whollome , and more
ſafe than the vulgar, 1s to He proved z which indeed
by wiat hath been already ſaid, is ſufficiently mani-
teſted ;


_—


Book I. Chymical Eſſays. 19
feſted ; nevertheleſs, that all

things may be the better judg- I NS:
ed ot, ſome few things to back . ws Ws: —_
our aſſertion ſeem to be need- fp than the vulgar,
fil. Remedies prepared by the |
Spagyrick Art, are therefore more ſalubrious, an
more ſafe than the vulgar, or the ſame after the
common and vulgar manner prepared ; becauſe in
them .che pure is ſeparated from the impure ,
te Maas from the malignity , the
Corporeal from thz Spiritual, and the unprofitable
from the commod1ous ; and ſo with their bulkinels
they oppreſs not the Stomach, nor do they delay or
defer their Operations, bur immediately begin t0
aſſault the Diſeaſes, and ſpeedily compel them t»
forſake their ftrong-holds in humane hodies. S9
Beer that hath ſ: fhciendly purged, 1s better and
more wholſome, than what hath not pirged. Wane
cleanſed from its Tartar, is more ſate!y 4r:ink,than
Wine newly preft from the Grape, So fuod, tie
Excrements ſecluded by :.arure after many Codti-
ons nouriſh all the members of our bodies. Sooner
doth the water or Balſom of Cinnamon . in ſwoun=
ings refreſh the Spirits, than the Cinnamon whole.
Eikewiſe fome drops of O1l of Aniſe are more ef-
ficacious, than whole Ounces of the ſame urprepa-
red. Bat the yulgar mind deſpiſeth all preparati-
ons, and had rather nſe things whole, than diflol-
ved to theit principles z wherefore he adhibits
Medicings partly not ſufficient or convenient ;
whence it often happens, thac the ſick having de-
youred the nexio11s,excrementirious, and venomous
parts together, with the ſalubrious and profitable,
the Diſeaſe being overcome, they are ſoon after at-
fiicted with ſymproms more grieyous , and more.
gangero!s thanthe diſeaſe it ſelf, C More-


«a> - SiG
ah $hatne®, 2h 2s ABS ot - uh.


_—_


as Tyrocinium Chynicum : Or, Book I, h


Moreover, who knows not that Chymical wa-
ters retain the intire odaurzand taſte of Vegetables,
but the vulgar waters are no other than unprofitable
phlegm, and waters ealily putreſying ; and thoſe
will Cure many years, but theſe ſcarcely a Moneth
ortwo. And as the vulgar waters of Pharmco-
poly*s acquire an extream maligniry from the Lea-
den veſſels ; fo their decoftions in Copper veſlels
2reno leſs contaminated , which are ſo much, the
worſe alſo, becauſe in their preparation, the more
fable and better parts vaniſh into Air, and a little
after, throngh mouldineſs contracted, they are cor-
rupted and rendred unprofitable.

Alſo their Reftoratives and Cordials, which are
prepared of Corals and Pearls reduced to powder,
and ſifted, as alſo of foliate Gold z wit other vu-
tue do they manifeſt in, the humane boy, than the
incruſting of the Ventricle, and otherwiſe ren-
dring it more langwſhed , and unapt to perform
its office > Whereas, on the contrary, Quinteſlen-
ces of Chymiſts and Magiſterys by them confeCted,
as alſo TinAures of Gold made without Corrofives,
eaſily d.ſfolved in any Liquor ; theſe ſo diſſolved,
being admicrted into the body, renew decayed
{trevgth, and reſtore to priſtine vigour. Alſo vul-
22r Medicaments in Chronical diſeaſes, ſeldom

roduce the defired effes z being only taken from

egetadles, with which they are. unable totally tv
extirpate , and pluck up the ſetled Reots of con-
tumacious aftets, But Chymical Remedies, eſpe-
cially thoſe prepared of Metals and Minerals,being
of more porent force, and of great efficacy, do
throvghly cure Diſtempers vulgarly ancureable, as
the epilepſie, leprofia,quartane fever gout, Drophiee,


T7. | WIVKOS , THXEWS. iy IP&\Gs, that is, plea-


ſantly,


\
"M


| Mm Cy 0 W


+ a 0 (a a |


. as:


| —


_


— ©...


Chymical  Zf ayer, I9
ſantly, ſpeedily, and ſafely. We therefore thonoht
what we have done, not impertinent to our PUF-
poſe ; namely, in the Frontiſe-piece of aur Book
ro define Chymiſtry, and demonſtrate it ro an


Art of preparing the moſt grateful, ſalubrious and
ſafe medicaments.


CHAP. II.


of Soluiton in Genere,


{Yes Soluton is tgya-

Civ,or an Operation where- What Solution is.
10 the patural guxt body by ſe-

paration of the Hetrogeneal parts, is deduced in-
to is own three Principles, viz. Mercury, '$ut-
phur, and Salt, of which by Nature it was at firſt
made, | *

As Ariſtotle of the Natural body hath truly tated
three principles, viz. Matter, Form, and Priyati-
on; although they be rather Ngetick, than truly
hypoſtatick , and as Galen the
four Elements, viz, Fire, Air, The three Chymical
Water, & Earth, for principles, principles.
although they be remote, yet
are theynot wholly by kim unpropetly cited : ſo the
Chymiſtthe intelligent Arcificer afrms tnere are 3
ſenfible, and moſt near principles of ſenfiþle dodies,
tz, Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt: and in this part
follows Arifocle, of the third Heaven, Text G1,
Which ;place Peter Remus in the Acroamatick.
Schools, doth over ſtrenuouſly oppoſe againſt the
above alledged principles of the Phyloſopher z
and aſter him Kragins doth vehemently ona |

oo C 3 L Ee


OO


Tyrocinium Chymicuwm : Or, Book I.
the Peripateticks. Bur by
Whar by them is to Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, it
be undcrſtood. is not to be underſtood that
Minerals of this kind can by

the benefit of Chymical reſolution, be extracted
from mixt and concrete bodies z I mean, ſuch as
are vulgarly ſold by Merchants. Yet it ſufhiceth,
that they are ſuch, eſpecially being in the family of
Vegetables, and Animals, which are analogous ,
and have affinity with Minerals, and do fo far differ
among themſelves in Efſence, Property , and Acti-
ons as they are in their kind | more or leſs] Mi-


neral.


20


Mercury is that Acid y per-
Mercury. meable, penetrable, X&rhercal,
and moſt pure Liquor, whence
1s all nutrition, ſenſe, morion, virtues, colours, and
the retardation of over haſty age. It 1s made of che
Element of Air, and Water : and indeed to the
fir(i, as far as it is altered by approaching hea: yit va-
niſhes intoair ; but as to tae other, ſo far as it'is
e flicultly bounded in its own proper limits, it is
ealily contained in another Terminuw

Sulphur is a ſweet , oleagi-
Sulphur; nous, and yiſcid Balſom, con-
ſervins the native heat of the
parts , the inſtrument of all vegetation, increaſe,
© ant] tranſmntation, and the fountain, and original of
a! odours grateful and ingratefal. Ir is atſimilated
to fire, by reaſon of the flame which it eafily con-
ceives, asall other refinous and oleaginous things.
And this peculiar property
The property of Sul- 1t hath, viz. a power of paci-
phur: tying and conglutinating - Cx»
trcam COArarys. . = >

| _ For


SOOR - 1s. CC” Wwe | Di

For as you can never make tenacious Luting of
water and ſand, nnleſs with them you commix
Calx, or other glutmous matter : ſo neither can
volatile Mercury, and fixed Salt be tenaciouſly uni«
ted into one ſubſtance, unleſs by the hond and copu-
lation of Sulphur, which participates of either prin-
ciple. It contemperates the dryneſs of Salt, and
Liquidity of Mercury, by its own viſcoſny ; the
denſity of Salt, and the permeadility of Mercury
by its own ſoft fluidneſs, and the ditterneſs of Salt,
and ſharpneſs of Mercury, by its own ſweet-
neſs.

Salt is a dry body, ſaline, and
defending mixt things from pu- = Salt,
trefation, 15 endowed with
wonderful faculties of diflolving, coagulating,
cleanſing, and evacuating; and from it 1s every
ſolidity, determination, taſte, and other infinite
virtues. It 1s analogious to the Earthg not as it is
cold and dry, but as it is an Element firm,fixed, and
the (ubje& of generation of all bodies.

Bur the ſaid principles , to
ſpeak properly, are neither bo- Chymical Princi-
dies, becauſe they are plainly P!<* pRay _
Spiritual, by reaſon of the in- mn ag TMR
flux of celeſtial Seeds, with **
which they are impregnaced ; nor Spirits, becauſe
corporeal, but they participate of either nature z
and have been inſignized by Phyloſophers with va-
rious names, or at the leaſt unto them they have al-
laded theſe, as by tne following Table will aps
pear,


—


SALT.


» MX


b ——


SALT. \SULPHUOR,MERCURY.|


$ -

Common Salt. \Sait-pettr. Salt armoniack,
npleaſant,& bit-\Snect. Acid.

| Body. (ter.\Sowl. Spirit-

| Matter, Form. Mdea.

Patients Agent. nformant, br m0-
Art. N ature. Intelligence (vent,
Senſe. judgment. Intellett,
Material. Spiritual. Glorious, |


"IIS Ny ———


Moreover, every Mixt body may be, and by Us is
reſolved into theſe three principles (ſo according
to che Pythagoreans,every thing , and all things are
terminated 4n three) fixed in the ſacred Ternary.
Althogh this might be proved by weighty reaſons,
yet ocular and eyident -inſpe&tion doth far exceed
all theſe. Therefore, by examples taken from the
yarions kind of mixt things, we ſhall, for the bene-
fit of young Beginners , delucidace every thing.
We will firſt begin with green Woods, which if you
burn, thete will come forth a certain Waterineſs,
which is plamly unapt for taking flame yz and if ga-
thered when converted into fume, it 1s reſolved ea»
fily into water (and by the ſame reaſon, to ſeck
drink from a flame is not impoſſible) and this is
called Mercury : then there goes forth an olcagi=
nous ſubſtance eaſily inflamable, which reſolved in-
to rs, if taken, will paſs into Oul, and that is
called Sulphur : at length adry andterreſirial ſub-
ſtance remains, which from che aſhes, by the bene.
fit of water js extracted, and in the humid and cold
it is diflolved, dat 3n heat congealed, and it obtains
& name of Salt. So Milk contains a Sulphureoug


( Cp pow”


a — UP EEE IS


a. <>
Jook 1. COfnicdl Efgr. 3;
butezry ſabſtance, then Mercurial Whey, and x
length faline Cheeſe, or Curds. In Eges, the
Whie exhibits Mercury, the Yolk Sulphur, the
Skins and Shells Salt. Jn like manner from Linſeed
we draw Oil dy exprefſion ; Water by ſeparation
from the Oil ; and Salt from the remaining feces,
by extration. By like reaſon from Clovesa moſt
famous Mercuril water, a moſt excellent Sulphn.
reous Oil,” and from the feces a Salt is extracted.
So Nitre is divided into aquoſiry, fatneſs, and
Salt. No otherwiſe of Sea Salt do we produce
Mercury yAuwTimgov , that is, bitter-ſweet ;
Sweet Chryſtals plainly of 4 Sulphureous nacure ;
and at length a moſt fixed Salt. Of Antimony a
Regulus is made, which is the Mercury thereof ;
then a Red Sulphur conceiving flame z and ar
lengtha Salt, which is vomitive. And thus may
you of all other things judge the ſame.

But you are chiefly to note,
that none ofthe aforeſaid prin- No principle is
Cip!escan-be found fimple, and plainly fimyle.
alone , that doth not par-
ticipate with the other. For Mercury contains
a Sulphureous and ſaline ſubſtance ; Sulphur. a Salt
and Mercurial ſubſtance : And Salt an oleaginons
and Mercurial ſubſtance,

It is alſo to be obſerved, that |
in the Spagyrick dve5ore4954, mat Bs he wee
or ſeparation of parts after ſo- nor... ps
lution, beſide che former pre-
cited three principles truly ative, there are
two other ſubſtances, which by Chymiſts are not
admitred into the number of principles, becauſe
they are only as it were che Shells or Coverings of
the ſaid principles, and are deſtitute of all Hyppo-
C 4 Cratici:


- -_


-


: ”
«- # .
«4 , FS.


a hae 's Or, I

|  cratick * virtues One of
Y AUVGuct. which is dry, a ſandy Earth or
: lifeleſs aſhes , and it is called
damnate Earth, and Caput-mortuwrms, endewed with
noother virtne then, than drying and emplaſtick,
and it is eaſily converted into Glaſs. The other is


ſavoury phlegm ,” which only moiſtens, withot
any other * Energy or Medic1-
Y 'Evtgyoac, nal aRtjvity.


——
———


CHAP. F2$;
Of Calcingtion,


Here are two kinds of Solution, viz. Calci-
; o& nation and Extraction. |
Calcination 1s the - Solution
Calcipation. of the muxt body into a Calx.

DS It is defined by Geber ; that
pulyeriſation of a thing 18 made by fire, thro2gh
privation of the humidity, Conſolidating the parts.
By Calx Chymiſts underſtand every moſt ſabtile

powder made by ablation of the

Calx of Chymiſts, Afoperfluous humidity, eſpecially
from Minerals. But when the

powder or Calx is plainly rendred impalpable, and
molt ſubtle as to ſenſe, like the fineſt Flower,then
do they call it * Alcohol z the

* Read Alcohol. ſame appellation they properly
BE -; give to the moſt ſubtile Spirit

of wine, re&tifyed by often repeated d:ſtillations
which then they call A/cots! of

Alcob-{ of wine, Wine.


humid, and accidentally airy, viz, infipid and un- }-


Le |


Zook Eſſays,  *%
Calcination is made by Corroſion or Tgniti-
on.
Corrohon 1s a Calcination of the body by things
corroſive. This is done divers ways, bat eſpecial-
ly by four, viz. by Amalgamation, Precipitation,
Stratification, and Fumigation.

Amalgamation 1s the corrofi-
on of a Metal by Mercury. And Amalgamaton,
this is done when a Metal filed
ſmall, or beat out into very thin plates, is com-
mixed with eignt parts of Mercury, or eight times
its own weight of F, that it maybe a Maſgsevery
where like unto it (and be as one body) for diffol-
ving the unity of that Metal : for the Hydrargyry
being evaporated oyer a fire, the Metal is left like
unto a thin Calx.

Precipitation 1s a corroſion
by ſtrong and corrofhve Wa- Precipitation.
ters, and that is done when
bodies are emerged in corrofive Liquor, anl afcer-
ward being corroded or diſſolved, either by ab-
ſtraction of the Water, or ſome other way, they are
repercufled into a Calx.

Stratification 1s a corrohon
by corroſive powders. Strarifheation,

It is thus made, viz. when a
crucible or other convenient Earthen veſlel is fill-
ed with thin plates of Metal and corrclive powders,
making $, S.S. or lay upon lay, thus; firſt put
ſqme of the corroſive powder in the bottom of the
crucible, then lay in the thin plates of the Merallick
body, upon wiich ſtrew more of the powder, then
again lay in more of the plates, and ſo go on
till che veflel be full. Afterward put coals round
adQut; or give it fire of Reverberation, nc
tne


26 Tyrociniuw |
the fice leiſurely, as the matter requires. Tt is alſg
called -. Cementation , of af-
finity co which is — Commix-
tion » wherein the body to be
Commixtion. corroded is mixed with corro-
five powders, and by the adhibi-
tion of fire is reduced to a Calx.

Fumigation is a corrohen of
Metal by ſhajpe fume or va-
Pour. |

This is done divers ways. In general let it ſuf-
fice to know, that a Mertallick body reduced into
thin plates, and to be calcined by fume, muſt be
ſuſpended either over eAqua forts, Vinegar, or the
vapour of melced Lead, or Mercury, or ſuch hike
ſharp things ; as vulgarly they are wont to prepare


Ceruſe.


Cementarion-


Fumigation.


Ignition is calcinatron by


Igair'00, Bobs: =. | |
And it is either CinefaRion


or Reyerberatzon-
. Cinefaction 3s ignition ,
Cinefa&ion, wherein Vegetable and Animal
bodies are reduced to aſhes by


violent fice.
Reverberation 1s alſo igniti -
Reycrberation. on, wherein bodys by fire of
| flame in a furnace of Reverbe-

ration, are calcined.

Hereunto alſo appertains -
Deficcation of the Deſiccation of the native hu-
native humidity, midity, as is wonr to be in Salt,
Vitriol, Allom, and ſuch like,


CHAP,


| JJ 08! " TIL; 1 . | 27 -

; \
; CHAP. IV.
Of Extrattlon,


Xtra&ion 15 a Kind of Reſo-

lution, wherein the More Extrattion general-
ſudtile parts are ſeparated from Jy conſidered.
che more groſs.

And is twofold, either generally, or ſpecially, ſg
called :

Generally, ſo called, is made duplicitly, as well
by aſcenſion and deſcenſion, as dy an interme-

um.

And that iseither dry er humid : the dry is Sab-
l;jmation, the other is called diſtillation.

Sublimation is an extraction
of tne more ſubtile dry parts, Sublimatida,
by fire elevated alcft, and ad-
hering to the yeflel,

It is made, when the matter to be ſublimed is
aptly prepared, as it ought to be, viz. either by
waſhing, or by caltination, parching, coEtingy, or
tae like , and afterward either alone , or with 0-
ther matter permixt, put into an Urinal with 2
Spherick, or large and broad bottom, ſo as half part
0i the veſſel only may be filled, and that placed in
an alude] [or pan] over a furnace quite above the
fire, and unto the veſſel a Blind-head Luted on with -
good Luting, in the Head muſt be a hole direRly
over the muddle of th2 inferior veſlel, that the hu- |


mid Spirits may exhale through the hole, Then


muſt fixe be gradually adhibited, and when all the

hamidity hath expired (which may be proved by 2

p.cce of glaſs,or a ſmooth plate of Icon,when pply-
: -


4 p > & = - * 4 G 3 -


Tyrocinium
ed to the hole, if not at all tained with the breath-
ing ) the hole of the Alembeck cloſed with Liting,
and the fire in:ended for forcing the Spirits up-
wards.

Therefore, according to Geber, Sublimation is
the elevacion of a dry marter by fire, with adherene
cy to th2 fides of the veſſel ; how madly are diſtil-
lation and calcination confounded, and waters
which are diſtilled, faid to be ſublimed. More-
over it is obſervable, that this Chymical Operation
is not 4 new invention, but 1t was alſo known to the
ancients, For ſo Cadmia or Braſs-oar was here.
tofore prepared, witneſs Galen, and Dioſcorides ; and
likewiſe Powpholyx and'Spcdiamy by the ſame teſti-
mony. |
Diſtillation is an extraction
Diſtillation. of the hamid parts, extenuate

and elevate into fume by heat.

What Ariſtole ſaith,lib. 4. of Meteors ; wiuaTal
4 TExvy Thy voy, that is, Art imitates natare, is
verified in this valgar Operation of pratical Chy-
miftry, For as vapours by the Solar rays are drawn
up from the Earto into the middle Region of Air,
and there condenſed by the coldneſs of that Celeſti-
al Sphere, fall down again upon the Earth in ſhow-
erss So the Chymical Artificer, from things
exhaleable and vapouradle, by the miniſtry of fire,
wit ſeparation of the thin Spirits from the more
orols parts, and elevation of: them unto the cold
concavene(s of thz head, extras their efſence in
form of Liquor, Likewiſe in the humane body

. * exnalations from the inferior
Y *AvceIvjutxTet5, parts are carryed upward into

the Airy Region of rhe Micro-
coſm, as intq an Alemaecky and by the coldneſs.
tN2res


Book I, ' Chymical Eſſays, 29
thereof, are condenſed into a phlegmatick and mu-
coſe Excrement, whence afterward 1s made a con»
tinued diſtillation and deflu&tion thereof into the
S Noftrils, Pallate, or other parts of the body. Hence
» |  itis, that in dreſſing of Meats we cloſe or Pots
with covers, that what vapours are converted into
S water, may after exhalation be reverred into their
, own Original. So, when we would keep any pre-


— ——_———————_—_—_ -
"Hs if


F”.


1 3 pared meats warm, or being cold, heat them, we
- cover the diſhes, in which they are with others ;
- whereby the vapours arifing from them by theic
. cold, incraflate Antiperiftaſis, fall down again in
- drops.
Alſo Diſtillation, with reſpe& to the diverſiy
n .of veſſels wherein it is made (not ro mention many
e other differences) 1s either right or oblique. Ic is
made by Alembeck, or per Yejicam, or elſe by Re-
U cort; eſpecially in things containing the more con-
Ss ti1macious ſpirits. /
- Hereco appertains ReQtification and Co20-
bation,
k Rectification is a repeated
j- diſtillation of Liquors, for thzzxr ReRiktarion,
J greater purification and extfla- h
D tion, yet this is alſo ſometimes performed by Dr-
2 geltzon.
Ee Cohovation is a reiteration 4
d of diſtillations, wherein the Li- Cohobation.
n quor diſtilled is reverted upon 54
y its own feces, and again thence diſtilled.” But this
Ir 15 done with the feces firſt ground, and leiſurely
'0 ambibed with the humour, that they may de mace-
= rated.
ſs Extraction generally ſo called, which is made


by Deſcention, is ewofold , vis. either hot or
cold. Tae


/


9”


30 Tyrocinmum Chymicam: Or, BookI, *
The hot 1s that wherein the -
Diſtillarion by d:- ſudtcile parts are ſeparated from
ſcenſiog hor. the groſs by deſcenſion , with
the mediation of fire. Whence
it is alſo called diſtillation by deſcent, and is uſed
in making of Pitch; when from che heap of Clefts of
the Pitch-tree piled cogether, and cloſed from any
breathing places by fre kindled within , Pitch
floweth out ; as 1s to be ſeen in Pliny and Iathio-
Ins » who have exactly deſcribed this Operati-
ON»
The cold is that, which by
Eold diſtillation by deſcent without fire makes fe-
deſcent. paration of the” ſubtile parts
from the groſs.
And it 1 either Filtration or Deliquines.
Filtration is, when the
Filration, aqueous humours by a Separa-
tory or brown-paper wrapt up
round, like (or put into) a Tunnel or Hyppoerates
Sleeve, Linnen Cloath, or ſome ſuch thing!, is
ſtrained, leaving in the filter or veſſel, the more
orols parts.
| Deliquiam is » when 1mpure
De quinem, Calxes, Salts, and ſuch like Li-
quadles, either per ſe ave put
upon a Mardle or Glaſs Table inclined ; or inclu-
ded in a bag are ſuſpended ; chat moiſtning by the
humid Air, they may let go their pure juice. Yet
ſometimes 1t {0 is, as per deliquinms, there is no ſe-
paration of parts made; as when Salts purified, or
ſuch like areplaced in a cold Cellar or other moiſt
place, and by external humidity, which eaſily en-
ters into them,deſcend andfall into a ſubjacent yeſ-
fel in Liquor.
| Ex


22 - - YE" 00S DE EL


Book I. Chymical Eſſays. =”

ExtraRion which 1s made by an intermedium, is
when the more pure pars of Liquids or dry things
moiſt2ned, are ſeparaced from the impure withut
diſtillayon and ſublimation.

Of this there are tnree kinds, vis. Digeſtion,
PutrefaRion, and Circulation,

Digeſtion is, when things
wich digeſtive heat, refembling Digeſtion,
the heat of naiural digeſtion 1n
the Stomach are cocted or ripened,

For as the Stomach by its own moderate heat di-
geſteth crude meats received, and by cocting tranſe
mures it into Chyle ; that, the feces being ſeclu.
d2d and thruſt outinto the Inteſtines, from that
ſu>ſtance dy tne Liyer an extraction of the more
benign 2nd more pure parts, may be made; ſo alſo


* by like temperate heat of any other thing, digeſtion


ſeparates the ſubtile from the groſs; what are
tick it breaks and attenuates , cos the crude,
mit.1gates andedulcorates the unſavoury;z and ſo
eladorates all things, that from things digeſted, a
more plentiful Harveſt of eflence is aliyays to be
expected,

The adminiftration thereof, is Learnedly deſcri-
ded dy Libavins in this manner. The matter to be
digeſted is included in a veſſel like unto the Sto-
mach, every where firmly cloſed z unleſs-when with
digeſtion evaporation is conjoyned, as for correCti=
on of an Empyreuma or in coagalation, and (t:ch
like; for then aſmall hole in tne cover or mouth
of the veſſel is lefc, and a juſt tyqme obſerved, - that
none of the ſubſtance periſh. Whether jt he meer
Juice or Liquor, the matter is plain : but in Mi-
nutal of Herbs, and ſuch like, exher the proper
J:16e 15 to be left, or ſome analog91s h1mour from


[*
oy
”
ith-
WW
\ a” _
=—_ - .\*
" S- "Os
= CLIPS. -


»”e


- £2
ſometimes alſo in Iiquors of civers kinds 4 as
when Oils are digeſtzd with Spirit of Wine, &c.
where is a proneneſs to putrefaction, and in adding
the Menſtruum, cars enovgh can hardly be taken
(for putrefaCtion mutt nor be made when we wou!d
digelt a thirg. although digeſtion may be the way to
it) then $alt is to be added z and the veſſel ſo fit-
ted, muſt be placed ina digeſtory furnace of com-

etent heat, and there permitted to (tand unto the
defired end; which is diverſe, by reaſon of the mul-
tiplicite ule of dicveltion. As for example: Green
Herbs moiltned with their own juice, trom. whic',
by di(t;[larion their Eflence 1s to be extracted, are
macerated three days ; but the dry moiſtned with
Spirit of wine ſeven days. Seeds and Aromaticks
half a Moneti : Roots tor a Moneth if they be dry :
Minerals for a philoſophick
A Philoſophick Mo» moneth, which 1s forty days or
neth, longer, accorcing.to firmneſs,
and the hadility of the Menſtrue

wm. Some are twice macerated, ſprinkled with
Greek-wine, as {cmet:imes Aromaticks, waich, be.
ing moiſtned, are digeſtzdto a dryneſs ; afterward
pulveriſate, are the ſecond time macerated by im.
bid1tion, So ſulidity and rarity alſo have their dif-
ference of time, Diſtilled Waters ſet in digeſtion
to the Sin, are rectifyed in half a Moneth, the veſ-
ſel being firmly cloſed, and two parts of the veſſel
ful, and the enird empty 3; and ſometimes 4 third
pare of che glals 1s ſec in ſand, which in cold things
Archicers command to he done, but with oreat


cation. Yet hot waters and Oils are rectifyed in'


cold ſand, alfo a taird part of the yeſlel buryed in


Tyracinium'Chymicum: Or, Book I.
without is tobe added, which notwithſtanding is .


It,


Book T. Chymical Eſſays.
it, Oc. in 2 * moiſt Cell:r for |
4 moneth ; likewiſe che other * Yapdor muſty,
humgar to be added, miſt be

ſuch as may he'p diceſtion witnout corruption of
the ſubſtance.

And here if the humour he alienate, it is ſepara-
red by th2 aforeſaid hole ; dirt otnerwife, and 1:
be familiar, or elſe alteraoie to tie nature of the
digeſted,it 's left. In Denſe th:: gs it is more (harp,
and ſometimes corroſive , 4s V megar, Spirit of
wine, (trong win?, &c. In othe -s gentle 128 diſtilled
Rain-water, Rule-water, &@c. ſometimes O.! of the
ſame kind, In tie interim, wiat are of another
N:ture, and dy digeſtion reC<UCzore ſenarated,

Bat digeſtion is NOt on! Ly accoimpanyed with di-
Rilations or ex: ractions, out alſo with reQufication,
coagilation, fixation, edalcoration of Calxes pre-
pared dy Anu. Fir:ts 5 and 15 (alle: Maceration :
becauſe it alſo hath pIyer of
penetrating , of Opening tT NMacerat.cn,

Cc mpactne(s of things, and<f
ſeparating impurities.

PurretaRtion i is, When a Mixt
body through natural pucrid- PurrefaRicn,
neſs, by humour overcoming
dryneſs and external heat operatins mor? ſtrong
than internaly, 1s reſolved to an Eflence, apt to e
extracted and ſegr2cated from its he rrovencal
parts.

The way of performing it 18 inns + What 15 to
be putrefied, muſt ve duly pr _ and ſo putints
a Cucurdit of glaſs, if it either bedry or abound,
not with humidity (y Mcient for putrefact.on, 2
certain Jxyuce , [thit is, Vehicle} or Menſtruum
(ſo generally from the r.onerh of pitrefact.on, C»
velY


33


yery Liquor iscalled,which is uſed for extration of
things, it it either be of its own kind, or to it analo-
ous , of a Water) convenicat mult de poured 9n,
which by its own exceſs may take away the dryneſs
of the mixt bogey, open the mixture , draw the out-
ooing Eflence to it (elf, and conſerve it intire and
uncorrupt, untill it be all extraRted : and leaſt the
hear with its own humidity ſhould expire, the veſlel
muR he ſealed with Hermes Seal : afterward in
Horſe-dune , or hike heat, zt muſt de conſerved,
2nd thar heat continued to tae end of the time pre=-
fhxed,
The property of Patrefaction
The property of pus 18, tO CUanNge »ota the colours,
erefation, o.0Uurs, and taſts of things, and
neir old nature aeing deſtroy-
ed, tO generate a new.
Circulation 15 of a Liquor
Circulation. 6 cepurated from Elements in a
Pelican, by various. Circumvo-
Intations or Rotations, by which the impurities ſet-
ling downward are removed, and ſo it is converted
or exalted to a more excellent State,

Ic 1s thus performed : Tae Liquor to be exalted,
is included in a Pelican or Circulatory veſlel, four
or five parts tiereot remaining empty ; and fo xt is
placed in Ba/nexm, or Dung, as deep as the Liquor
rileth within the Glaſs, or a little lower, ſo as the
2periour empty parts of the vefl21 may ſtand in the
cold Air ; that from the bottom and the ſides, an
atten!zation may be mate by neat ; but from the
upper parts Coagulation dy could z and fo the ſajd
veſie! muſt be kept in moderate and continued
het, :ntill the Artit come to his defired end, and
tne [ces totzlly refhide in the Dottome

In


4 Tyrcinium Chymicum : Or, Book j,


Book I, ' Chymical Eſſays. 37
In this place it ſeems not improper to annex |
Fermentation ; although ſome
times by it 18 not made "fo con- Fermentation.
ſpicuous a ſegregation of the (2-

[ubrious, from the more orols parts z as (rather) 3
diſpohtion forextracting tae moſt nobke Eſſence.

Yet it 1s the Exaltation of a thing 1n ſubſtance,
dy which, m_—_ mediating, the Agent heat
prevails, and turns the Patient mnto its ” own Nas
ture,

Moreover, wiat are fermented, are either Lis
quid or Solid. Wanatare T.,in1id, are ſuch ſmply,
as Water and Wine, or thick and ſoft, as honey
and * Sapa.

Liquids w1ca are fimply Wine boiled ro a
ſuch, if chey be alſo hot, per je conliſtency.
are fermentes, as Wine , Perry,

& $S:der.But what are cold ? as thc expreſt jzmees of

cold things, have need of tie addition of ſum? 0-

taer external, as feces of Wine, dregs of Beeryor.

Ale, St, or any like acicneſs, for accelerating E-

dullition and fermentation. - The thick and ſofr

may 5e in tne following manner fermented. For
example : To ten por nd of honey adde fifty poand
of waterz Let them ftand in

moderate heat for one day na- Hydrome.

tural, then with gentle hre doal

the whole, and ſcum it ; leta third part ext: - or

while the Liquor is hot prin a 'new-laid-2gg,

which, if it ſhall float aboye the Liguor, 18a fien of
perfect decoetion, Tien the Liquor removed from
the fire muſt be ſtrazn2d hot through a double

Cloath, and in 2 ({utavle Veſſel placed in the Sun z

trodrams of Salt of Tartar, or common Salt being
adced, or $3 of any aciditv pit in» And fot maſt


Da -- | boil,


--


_


36 Tyrocinium Chymicom: Or, Book]
boil or ferment for forty days or thereadout , unr1/!
the Liquor be clear, and have an odour like W:r-
Then muſt the veſſel be cloſed, and the Hy«- 1,
reſerved in a Cellar for ule,

What are ſolid and hard, as Seeds, Wheat, F-
nel, Aniſe, Juniper-berrys, Aromaticks, &c. m.'t
be bruiſed; and water be poured on them, ai.d
their proper Salt,'or what is to them analogous , or
ſome acidity or feces of Beeror Wine; ſoas toa
hogs»head of the matter to de fermented, a pint of
feces be added.

But what are moſt hard, as Stones, muſt firſt be
calcined, and afterward fermented , as inthe fol-
Jowing Treatiſe, touching Corals and Lead,ſhall be
ſpoken.

Extraction ſpecially fo call-

ExtaQtien ſpecially ed,is when from the mixt body,
ſo-called. the more ſubtle, and more noy
ble parts drawn but by any

Mewfirunm , are extracted from the Element:ry
oroſneſs remaining in the bottom ; and by diſtilla-
t10n or evaporation are coagulated to the confiſten=
ey of Syrup or Spa, Tt is thus made : When a
matter having Tincture 1s infuſed in a convenient
Me»ſtruum, and the veſſel cloſe ſhut, placed in di-
geſtion: Afterward the coloured enſtruumyby in-
clnation ſeparated ; and other freth JMenſtrunm
poured on, and the veſſel cloſed, again ſet to digeſt,
and the ſame ladour ſo oft repeated, as till the
Menſtrunm be no more tinged, Taen are all the e-


vacuarions filtred, circulated, and coagnlated with


rae Menſtrumm, to an vleaginous contiſtency, or
elle ſometimes to a dryneſs, according to the na-
rare of the maiter, or as the intended uſe ſhall re-


QQIITCH


CHAP,


Chymical Eſſgs. 37
CHAP. V.
Of Coagnlation,


3004 L


Etherto we nave ſpoke of Solution, and im
Species,now follows Coagulation,

Coagulation is another of the
principalOperations of theSpa- Coagulacien,
oyrick Science z wherein ſoft

and Liquid things are forced by privation of hnmſ{-
dity, from a thin and fluid conſiſtency into a ſolid.

This, altho!gn it almoſt inſeparably adhere to
the Species of Solution, as Precipitation, Amalga-
mation, Subdlimation, Diſtillation, &c. Yet is it
pec larly.

Firſt, by exhalation, wherein the humour expi-
res from the coagulable matter,

Secondly, by decoRtion, wherein Liquid things
are ccCted to a certain ſolid conſiſtency,

Thirdly, by Congelation, as in Cellars, when
Chryſtals by cold are produced,

Fourthly, by Fixation, wherein things volatile
and flying the fire, are taught by uſe co remain fixed
therem 5 which ;s done either by addition of a fix-
ed Medicine, or dy mixtuces or ſublimations ,
Cements, and ſuch like, according to the nature of
tne matter,


"as Tyrciniam Chymicum : Or, --Book I. ©
CHAP. VI.
Of Lutation,


p Owv for order ſake, it is expedient we ſhonld
ſpeak'of Furnaces, Veſſels, and various Chy-
mical Uurenſils, as alſo their divers Regimens of
fire. Bit theſe are rather learned by ocular inſpe-
Rion, than by precepts and rules. Therefore for
brevity ſake, we ſhall omit them, and only ſpeak a
few things touching the Lutaments and Conglutina-
on of Sapjene Artificers.


For building Furnaces.


Take fat Earth, of what colcur ſoever it be, and
mix, and work ut ty<etier with ſand, Horſe-dung,
and Salt-water.


F oy Coating Retorts,


(Although 1 am not wont to Coat either Glaſs or
Earthen Retorts, whether T ciſtiil by ſand, or by
7 faked fire, or by a cloſe Reverheratory, or by
fre 'of ſupprefſion. ) Take Potrers-clay,Horſe-dung
wafht arid dry'd, flavr of Tiles, and Scales of Tron,
mix, and work theſe ſtrongly together with com-
mon jvater,


Luting of Saprexce for cloſing in the moſ
Subiile Spirits, s

Make Liting of Calx-viv:,and the white of Eges
reduced to water, and ſpeedily apply the ſame, be-
Calle it eahly drys. Fir


Chymical Ef ayes. |


For conſolidating crackt and broken Glaſſes.


Take Bole-armenack, Minium, Ceruſe, of each
equal parts, reduce them to a molt ſuhtile powder,
and temper it wita Linſeed Ol1l, or liqud Var-
niſh.


For Luting Glaſſes tozether,


T unto this day have with good ſucceſs uſed Hoggs
or Ox-dladders, for luting an Alembeck with ts
C:curdit, as well in diſtillation of waters, as of
ſharp and penetrating Spirits,


For Luting the neſe of the Alembeck with
| the Reciprept,


Take of Wax 5j. Roſin, Colophony, of each 3j.
melt them together in an earthen pan ; unto theſe
adde a little Oil Olive, ſtirring them with a ſtick,
that the waole may be incorparated 3 then remo-
ving the pan from the fire, work tne whole well
together with your nands.


For Luting Retorts with their Receivers, in dir
ftillation of ſharp Spirits,


The Luting for coating Retorts work togetner
with Salt water, 2r mix it with Colophoay pulye-
riſate, and apply it moiſt,


The End of the Firſt Botks


D 4 | TYTRO-


. -- + 47
ITTLITELELTEIITICIOIESS. s A
Ee 000 on Dong ng ESD OD
TTYROCINIUMCHIYMICUM:


O R,


CHYMICAL ESSATS.


_ — ————


CC t—_— ———_ I _—_C_C


Book the Second.


———
———_—
o—_——_ nn, ig rmo—o—_—


——— ——————


He former Book treats

Proemium. of Solution and Coagu-
lation in general ; how

in the following Books

we intend t » treat of the effeAs of theſe Operati-
ons. Although jn Specie, how the companelſs of
all m:xc bodies are co be opened, ought to be de-
clared ;z the ſame we ſhould have endeavoured to
perform,had w2 undercaken to write an entire Sy-
ttem, and not a /yrxiniom of Chymiſtry. There are
eft-&s, or, as by ſome they are called, Chymical
Sp2c1ies of S2lution and Coagulation, which are Ci-
ener 11.quid, or ſofr, or hard. To the liquid may be
referr'd, tae various kinds of Aqua forts, Spirits,
Vinegar, Oils, and L'qu'd TinRares, extrated
from Flowers, Hers, Roots, Rinds, Sz2ds, Woeds,
&c. To in fot Balſams, various Extracte, ſoft Tin-


py hs
CLUES o


-


"42 Tyrocintum Ch micwm : Or, 300 I.
Qtires. Tothe Hard, Salts, Flores, Magiſterys
Calxes, dry TinQtures of Crocss,


A— =


EE re.


CHAP. I


Before we come to ſpeak of the forms of Liquors
to be prepared, which are, for the moſt part,
maae by diſtillation; certatn general Rules
ſeem needſul to be inſerted, of which this «s


—


The Fiſt.


Eflels in waich diftiflation

1s made, mult not ne of
Lead. Forthzy inte& Liquors
with a malignant quality,render
them yomitive, change tneir native talte,and ſome-
times themſelves are corroded by ſharp vapours
expiting from the matter to be diſtilled. And it
Galen, and other wiſe Payficians, condemned the
waters which flow tirough Leaden Pipes, dy reaſon
of the malignity (much infelting the internal parts)
waich they thence contract. Waat may be judged of
waters diſtilled in Leaden Veſſels ? Since itis of-
ten maniſeſt (eſpecially when diſtilled Liquors of
this kind have {tood unmoved for certain days) that
Ceraſe of L2ad raſed off in diſtillation from the
Leaden Alemoeck, 15 found in the yortom of tae
veſſel; eſpeciafly if to prove the ſame, you ſhall
pour 1n a drop or two of Spirit of Virriol.

And what 1s ſaid of L2aden veſſels, for like rea-
lon muſt be underſt5od of Tin, B:a's, and” Irgn
unleſs duftillation be wade 1n a Bra's Veſtca,wihere
what are diftilies ſoon flow v.it, ] ce


Rules neceflary fo;
the Doftring of di-
Nillation,


-


; *: v* ; "7" "IE *
fk Bous 4Ais . Ci micd 4s.


43
. The Second.


Glaſſes, by how much the higher they be, ſo much
the better are they, For ſo one diſtillation is better
chin three reRifications, Let the Cucurbits | or
Glaſs bodys] for the mot part be two Cubits high.


The Third,


In every ditftillation, veſſels muſt not be two
full; you will more ſafely operate, if Cucurbits
be filled but one fourth part, Retorts about half ;
but the Braſs Veſica may de three parts full, and
21t one remaining empty.


The Fonrth,


Things flatuſent, as Wax, Rofin, and the [ike ; as
alſo thoſe which ea.ily boil, mult be put re diftil in
a leſs quantity, and in greater veſſels, and indeed
muſt 5e mixed with Salt, Sand, or ſuch like.


The Fifth,


Diſtillation by a Ba/neym 1s proper for taings
not too {trongly compacted, Yet in Herbs,eſpeci-
ally- tnoſe thar are tor, as in Worm-wood , Sages
Roſemary, &c. great heed mult be taken, that we
aſe not too gentle hear, leaſt we dray out not {0
much of the eflence, as of the unprofitable phlegm.
But4in Letrice, Endive, and ſuch like of a more thin
ſubſtance, amoderate heat muſt be adhibited ; and
ſ{»merimes a Baln of dew [or vapoar only] which

neitacr


WO "I occvdns Chjeres : Or er
neither impreſſeth an Empyrexma, nor diſſipaces the |
more thin airy parts,may be ſuffcient.


The Sixth,


Diſtillation by Aſhes or Sand, agrees with things
ofa more ſolid confiltency, as Seeds, Woods,
- Roots, &e.
| The Seventh.


By a Braſs Veſica, things thin are not only di-
filled, but others alſo which are more firmly com-
paced ; yet in their MMenſtrams firſt macerated,


The Eighth,


Diſtillation by Retort, doth not only exrra&t the
more weighty Spirits of Minerals, but alſo things
more ſoft, as Woods, Seeds, Roots, Gums, Rofins,
&c. Waters, and Oils.


\


The Ninth.


| Whenfreſh and juicy Herbs are toe diftilled,
eney muſt be bruited, and the juice expreſſed, and
ehen by heat of Baln. diftilled in a high Cucurbiz.


The Tenth.


Herbs either of thzic own nature dry, or dryed by
time, mult be bruiſed and moiſtned with common
water, or their own proper water, May-dew, Or
Wine. And of the Aenſtrnyum; maſt be fo great a
quantity, as may be ſufficient for maceration ; but
at more de poured on, the wa9le quintity mult nat


þ:


Bok 11. Chymical Eſſays; as
be abſtraſed. Maceration being made according
to diſcretion, diſtillation muſt be made by a Baln.
or if you (hall diſtil per Vencam, add to every one
pound of herbs, fix pound of water, and diftil accor-


ding to Alt.
The Eleventh.


In the ſame manner per Velicam, whatſoever is

 Aromatick, whether Roots, or Rinds, Woods,

Seeds, or Leaves, or Flowers are diſtilled, and Oil
and water come forth together.


The Twelfth.


There are ſome which require a vehement fire;
yer ſuch muſt not de too violently urged, leaſt; in ſv
doing, their nature be wiolly corrupred.


The Thirteenth.


Great care muſt de taken, thatthe Lutmg wheres
with the diftillatory veflels are conglutinated, do
no where admit of expiration, leaſt tne liquor be
defiled with an extraneous quality ; eſpecially waen
a more viclent hire is to be adiibited.


The Fonrteenth,


Tne diſtillation of things Acid, hath this proper-
ty, thar the more 12nvvdle part always comes fora
firſt, and the more noble laſt, Wherefore in ReCti-
ficacion of them, what firſt comes forth is to be (c-
paraied, as palegm.


The


46 Tyrocinium Chymicum : Or, ' BookIf |


The Fifteenth.


If waters ſmell of an Empyreama, or ſhall be ve.
ry much contaminated with a certain flery heat dis
ſperſed through their leaſt parts 3 that is corrected
if the Glaſſes containing chem, be ſet ina cold
and moift place.


The Sixteenth.


When Liquors diſtilled pzr B, Af. are to be
reified by Inſolation ; the Glafles wherein they
are put mult be but half full , or three parrs filled
at moſt ; and the Membranes, wita which they arc
wont to be covered, mult be pricked with a needle ;
that through thoſe Spiracles, the unprofitable
Hegm may exhale.

The Seventeenth.


Diſtillation muſt ſo long be continned, as untill
the Liquor come forth withoat any ſavour of the
oF
matter impoſed.


—— — —— —— —— —


CHAP. IL


Of Waters from Flowers, Heirls, Roots, Rinds,
Seeds, Woods,


Water of Roſes,


His 1s prepared divers ways, Some take of $||
' & Roſesa convenient quantity,and theſe digeſted
-teee days in Baln, they dittil with the vaporr of hot
water, ;
| Ochers.


"Book Il. | Clymical Eſſays; P 4”


$ +


Others, without precedirg digeſtion draw fort!
a water from taem put in'o an Alembeck. Others
alſo diftil taem by alhes ; where chere 15 need of the
oreatelt Caution and circamipection, leaſt the di-
{tilled Liquor ve infected with an Empyreama, And
there are others, wo for licie of gain, more than
intending the health ut Men, take the Roſes whole
as they are gatnercd, wita a great quantity of water,
and diſti]l them by a Braſs Yeſhica : and from tairty
poun1 of Rolex, they extract a hundred pound of
ſaleadle watery having an indifterent good odour,
Others diftil tne flowers bruiſed by gentle heart of
Bain. without any Aenſtraum, or at mot, only ſo
much as will ſerve to muiſten tzem : and for the
more expeditious procuring of a cooling virtue, in
one diſtillation they firſt moitten rem, either with
common wa'er, or old Roſe-water;z or elſe for
enduring a fragrant and comiorting virtne , they
uſe more infahons 11 diſtilled water, Which way,
we follow in preparing itz only diſtinguiſhing be-
tween tne white, and the fl2th coloured. For from
them, that the greater cooling virtue may be 05-
tained; we beat them in a Marole Mortar, having
fictt moiſtned them with a little Rain ater, then
with a Preſs, expreſs the juice, and ſodiftil ic, Tac
fleſh coloared, druiſed, without any moiſtning, are
put znto a grearglals veſlel fetin a Cellar ; and af-
ter three days, the juice 1s expreft and diſtilled.
This 1s tne molt fragrant water, and will keep the
iragraucy of its 040ur many years. Some upon the
prellings of theſe, pour clean and pare water, and fo
macerated for eight days, toey diſtil ir either in
Baln. or a dtals Velica ; and this water ſo d ſtifled
In virtue and efhcacy, 1s not inferior © the come
mon vendile Roſt-water.

Burns


voi


On Threciniawlnsren: Or i


Burnine Water of Roſes,


| As from all other things, eſpecially ſuch as 2-e
Alimentoſe, as flagrant and fragrant water, by the
denefic of fermentation, may be extracted ; ſo alſy
from Roſes, which, by common cenſure are cold.

Take Roſes gathered in a ſerene time, when they
are wholly deſtitute of any dewy moiſture ; beat
theſe moſt accurately, and put them in a glals Cu-
curbit, which afterward being firmly cloſed, place
10 a Cellar. As (on as the Matter (eems to\ ſmell
of any acidity, take of the (ſame bruiſed flowers,
waat quantity you pleaſe, and thence diſtil a Liquor
per Baln, the water thence extracted, pour upon ano-
ther part of the Roſes; and again diſt1l it after the
ſame manner , proceeding until all the quancity of
termented Roſes hath paſſed by Alemveck ; the fe-
ces, Which are wont to remain in the bottom, being
every time ſeparated. Afﬀteriyard, all the water
drawn from the Roſes, diſtil by Baln. and abſtra&t
adout a twelfth part atleaſt, and it if you pleaſe
reAifie. So will you have a moſt grateful, and moſt
odoriferous water 3 and which will as readily take
flame, as Spirit of wine.


Water of Succory,


Take of the Herbs, and Roots of Succcry gather-
ed in the middle of Afay, twelve pound, bruiſe
them, or cut them very ſmall, pour on them of
common water tiventy pound, and having macera-
ted them three days; by a Veſica diſtil at leaft
eight polind,


Fen-


4 *


PR Chymic: Eſſays: 49


Fennel Water.


Re. Of Fennel- ſeEds groſly beaten four pound,
of common water twenty four pound, add of $alc
of Tartar or common Salt Z'j, macerate: theſe in
a hot place. Afterward diftil them by a Braſs Veſ-
Cay ith its Refrigeratory;z So the water with the
Oil will paſs our together, which from it muſt be
ſeparated. Wes |

Cinnamen Water,


Rc. Of the beſt Cinnamon groſly bruiſed ; on
which pour of Roſe-water, and of Waite-wine, of
each three pound, macerace them in heat congruous
ro the heat of dung ; then make diſtillation per Baln.
ſeparating che firſt water, which is the beſt; and
alſo receiving the ſecond apart; and ſo likewiſe the
thard. The ſecond may be uſed inſtead of a Afen-
ſiraus for maceration. The taird 1s unprofitable
phlegm.


Acid Water bf Oak, Funiper, G ualacum,
and Box, |


Re. The ſawings of Oak, or ſmall ſplinters, or
ſhavings of Juniper and Guatacum, or ſhavings of
Box : diſtil them in a Retort unto a dryneſs : af-
terward leparate the Oil from the water through a
brown paper. ReQike the water in ſand upon Col-
cothar, or Sea-Salt, or its own proper aſhes : then
dy diſtillatzon ſeparate thz phlegm from the acid
Liquor : Laſtly, reſerve a third part ofthe moſt
pure Liquor, or there about. Ir is uſeful in diffol=,

E ving
H


:
of. i =


>< I-06 ws —— v299keþ. ppb Biggs uf ,
® A p /+ þ s S; s 5 s © 3 %


'ving Corals and Pearls, and in extraing their
TinRures,


Compounded Water of Cinnamon.


Macerate and diſtil Cinnamon, as avove ; add-
mg the Roots of Ditrany of Crete, Angelica, of
eac?Zij. Inthis water diflolve as much white Su-
ear, as yOu can, and digeſt the whole for one day
nacural : afterward ſegregate the ſuperfluous water
by diftillation ; then adde of Agua vite reAifyed
33- and diligently mix th?m. It is of admuravle
virtue in the Peſt, and in a difficule Birth.


© ———m— - | — Inn


——


CHAP. 111.
Of ſundry kixas of Aqua fortis,


Trong Waters, which are alſo called Cauſtick,

Chryſulcz,Separatory,and Stygian Waters, are
confeed by violent fire, of Atramentum, Sutori«
um, Salt Nitre, Salt-armoniack, Stibinm,ſublimate |
Mercury, Allom, Cinnabar, &c. Of which, that
which obtains the greateſt cauſtick, and corroſive
force of all, is called «Aqua Stygia ; but that whicn
diflolves gold, Aqua Regia.


Common Aqua fortis,


; Re. Vitriol dryed two pound, Salt-petec puri-
fed one pound, grind them together, and mix
them 5 then put them into a Retort very well
coated ; which place 1n a Furnace of Reververati-
ON, and applying a capacious Receiver, diftil- by hire

Or a-


- - * %
# 4 ; Vx.


z \


ick,
are
"Ii *


Iate


that
hve
Hin


i Book Mn.


Chymical Eſſays. 5k
oradually augmented, for twenty four hours, When
white and cloudy Spirits are diſſipated in the Reci-
pient, the diſtiLJaczon is ended; after which ſuffer
all ro cool by degrees. The water taken out, clari-
fie with Silver in this manner : take a fourth part
of the Liquor diſtilled, in which projeR of pure
filver 3j-and diflolve the ſame ever a fire ;ponr out
the Solution on the other three parts, and they will
wax milky z let che water ſettle, and pour off the
clear. If you would have it be Aqua Regia in
F111j. of this common water, diffolve Zj. of Salt
Armoniack, or common Salt dryed; and with it
you may diflolve gold.


A perpetual Aqua fortis, aud the way of
making Cinnabar, |


Diſſolve Mercury in Aqua forts, add of Sulphur
an equal part ; diftil theſe by Retort, and you wilt
have a water more potenc than before, and in the
neck of the Recort Cinnabar,


Philoſopbick Water, or Aqua Regia,


Re. Of Salt Nitre purified, and Salt armoniacks
of each $ij, grind, and mix them well together ;
and ina large Retort, with a capactous Received
annexed, the junRures gently lutedz make dftillati«
on 1n aſhes, contintiyg the fire until all the fumes
with great violence be come forthz and no-more
drops will fall from the Retort. Then take our the
Retorrt while it ig hot, and put in the ſame quantity
of the aboveſaid matter, and mix it with the Capme<
morinum, Ciftilling it as above.


E 2


*-
"S.*


it Thorium Chmicam:Or, Book.


CHAP. IV.
of Spirits.


 Pirits participate partly of water, and parcly of
firez and as they are more aqueous, or more


oleaginous ; ſo are they called either water or Oll,
Yet ſuch, as are extracted from Minerals ,
are for the moſt part callzd Oils.

Among the Spurits of Animals, the ſpirit of hu-
mane bloud excels ; of Vegetables, ſpirit of Wine ;
and of Minerals, ſpirit of Vitriol. |


Spirit of Wink.


Digeſt Rich wine in dung, or like heat, in Circu-
latory veſſels of an equal Iargeneſs for eight or ten
days; afterward the veſſels cooled, pour ic out into
high Cucurbits, on which ſet Alembecks, with Re-
cipients annexed, the junCtures being firmly cloſed
with Hogs or Ox»dladders, make - diſtillation in
Baln, according to Art. Firſt the ſpirit comes

forth, which keep apart by

. Spitic, changing the Receivers ; then
urge the phlegm till the feces

remain thick like l1quid honey. The ſame feces di-
ſil by Retort , adminiftring fire gradually, and you
ſhall receive a fat Oil. Then

- Oil from the Capat-mortuum, by re-
| | verting the phlegm upon it, and

by digeſting, filtring, and coagulating, you may ex-
. tract a Salt. If you dehire the
Salr, ſpirit of wine more excellent,

| re&bifie it by often repeated di-


Sg V #7 "*


- l -" "a go —


Boo


IT. Chymical Eſſay
Sperit of Tartar.


Re. Of pare white Tartar fve pound, put it in
a glais Retort, to whicn, when placed in athes with
2 large Receiver annexed, adminiſter fire gradual-
ly ; firkt the ſpirit comes forth, afterward tne Oul g
both which mult de reEtifyed by addition of Salt of
Tartar, and afteryard ſeparated each from other.

It 18 a famous aperitivez; wherefore in retenti-
| on of the Menitrues, the Paralyhe, Jaundies , and
| ſuch like attects, it 1s wonderfully efhicacious, It is
F alſo uſed in the Drophe, with other hydragoge wa=-
|| ters, In the Leprohe, Indian diſeaſe, Pleurihe,
and Quinſey, 1t 1s alſo exhidited. The doſe from
Bj. to Ji}. in convenient Liquors.


Spirtt of Turpentine.


Re. Of clear Turpentine , what quantity you
pleaſe; put jt into a Braſs Vehica (with its Refri-
geratory) almoſt filled with water, So a ſpirit is

draiyvn forth, whick will ſwim above the water ,
and hy B, AZ. it may be re&ifyed. Its uſe in Medi-

Cine 15 manifold. The Cough, Phtifick 1t cures
peſtilential venoms it refiſts ; it clears the ſto-

mach of ſordid and viſcous (toppages : it maketh
Urine ſweet as a Violet 3 it expels the Stonz, and
gravel, and heals the Strangury , and Ulcers of the
dladder : it opens, and comforts che nervous parts z

heats the Spermatick veſſels, and excites Venus z
diffolves coagalated blo1d, purifies the womb, and

in ſaffocation of the Matrix 15 exceeding profitable.
Externally in contuſions, it is of admirable uſe,and
exceeding denelicial.
| E 3 Spirit


Wy b 2 4 & 4
<, WW | ;
% , T4*-


Spirit of Sulphur,


Under a Glaſs Campane place an earthen veſſel
with Sulphar, which ſet on fire. The inferiour veſ-
ſel muſt be ſo fitted to the Campane ; that tne aſ-
cending fumes may not ſuffocate the flame, bur
carryed freely upward into the head, may there de
condenſed into Liquor, and ſo fall into a veſle!
apt to receive the ſame. From one pound of Sul-
phur, may you have Z), of ſpirit, of ſo great ethca-
CY, as Leonardas Fieravant (aid he cold never (ufli-
ciently admire the vertue thereof, inwardly exh101-
ted into the body. It may be given with appropri-
ate waters 2r Syrups to 4. 5. or 6. drops. And be
mixed with Elect 1aries and Pills, as well m hot as
cold diſtempers.' Externally alſo it 1s profitavl> for
deaſbation of the Teeth : for Ulcers in Lues- veneres
of the jaws; Warts and Fiſtula's of tne Fundament,

and all other members. It :s
KaTarenoTuas. Allo called Oil, but improper-


ly.
Spirit of Vitrzol.


There are three kinds of Vitriol ; ths Green,
White, and Bley, participating of tne nature of
Salts, Alloms, and Sulphurs, ſome more, and ſome
Jes. The firſt indeed participates more of Salt, the
lxcond of Allom, and the third of Salphur ; anc
they conſiſt of an aqueous, earthy , and middle
nature, the 2queous and earthy, as Ripley witnefl-t;:
1 his Pupil of Alchimy, cannot be (ſeparated frum
ter extremities, bnt by the mediation of Merc::-
ry 3 WAIC?, as Geber affirms, retains what is of 1s


4 :


KL: 8


3ook 11.  Chymical Eff ayes.
own nature, rezeQing and expoſing to the fire, wha!
is not ſo. The middle perſpicuous ſibſtance exal-
ted by ſublimation, into a Snow-like candor, oc-
caltly in it ſelf contains a ſulphurious ſeed, moſt
Red, lik2 a ſmall worm. Whence in Turb ic as (aid,
Philoſophers have admired, that a redneſs ſhould be
exiftant in ſo great waiteneſs. Of this Sulphur Ge-
bar thus ſpeakethz in cap. 28. Sunm, By the molt
high GOD, that thing illuminates ani reRifies all
bodies, becauſe it 1s Allom, and Tin&ure. This is
that Aqwa vice, the dry water wich wetteth not the
hands, the congealed water, tie animate Salt;
'f touching which Kaymund Lully after Alphidims ſaith,
| ſalt is no other than fire,nor fire any other than ſul-
"4 phur, nor ſulphar other than Argent=vize, reduced
into that precao!s,cei2{tial, incorruptible ſubſtance,
which we call ou #5: , Wahence one to the Let-
| rers FIT#/OL 7 27 this alludes. Fijitands
| Interiora Terre +! ficando, Invenies Occultum Lapi-
dem V eram Medicina : that 1, viſiting the interi-
ur parts of the earth, by r2Aifyine you may find
the occule ſtone, tie true Medicine,
þ © Moreover, among Artiſts it is controverted,
whether among the various kinds of Vitriol, either
that of Cyprus, the Romane, or Hungarick, be the
detrer, 21d more noble. Tne Cyprian and Ro-
mane may well enough be ſuſpe&zd, becaaſe they
are for tne moſt part adulterate and ſophiſticate,
being various, viz. of divers colours, forms, and
virtues. And the Hungarick, ſ:chas by French and
German Merchants is brought unto us, 1s a certain
blew, peripicuous, and ſometimes a greenuth Vi-
triol, which they ſell for gemune, and as bronght
from Pannonia, but they lic impudently. For when
I wich great trayc! went to thoſe parts, with inten-
' 23> Y E 4


EET


© A Tz % i
—_— : :


tion 4


# ppt "BOX
{ = ry r % a - .
1 S +
= . þ | * [


ion to g0 into the Mines of Gold and Silver, that
En ek es I might by * proper experience
E FavTolic. have more perfe& notice of
F | Metals and Minerals; the Il-
Juftrious and no-le Lord of Bloenſtain, general Pre-
fe of the Mines, of that Kingdom of Hungary,
through his a>oandant cour.elie and humanity, did
certainly afhrm to me, that there were two kinds
of Vitriol there ; whereof one was white, and very
aluminoſe, of which they make Cnryſale-waters
but the other blew, and far more excellent; ye
the Minera of this, althouth much better [than the
; other, was not ditg ; becauſe no Merchants judged |
W It worth their time, to buy ſ1ch Vatriol, and tranſ-
port uf to other Lands, Ire |
ſame is hikewiſe afirmed of Ans


__


Ungarick Antimcny
genuine » 1s {eldum


drought inco other £1MONY, Which 1s found in a- |
b: Regions. boundance in the Gold Mines.
+ hs That Vitriol, of right, and * |.


deſarvedly, ought to be cenſured moſt excellent,
which dy the benefic ef water is made of YVenw, and
thence extracted, as is mentioned hear-after. To
this, the blew aforeſaid is ſomewhac igferiour z for
thiscontains 11 it (e!f more of Sol ; tranſmutes more
of Mars into Fen ; and Inger ſuſtains the Examen
of fire, betore it gives forth 1's lait ſpirits, from |
what place ſoever it is brought, Il-
A - Therefure of th's Vitciol Re. tivelve pound, cal-
IA Cine it in an earthen veſſel with moderace fire, un-
vl all vs humidity recede. The veſſel cooled, re-
dute the Maſs, which will be abot ſeven pound) to
powcer very fine, and wich one pond or there-
avouts of the ſame Tell [where it was calcined |
pulveriſare, pur it into a Retort firmly coated;
wich muſt be ſo large, as at Icaſt a third part there-


i. OJ


w—


_—y wn 3 _—_— :
=x. Y | —_ I)... |
OO 4 C, 5 | oy


.
of may be empty. Then place it in a Reverberato-
ry furnace y apply a large Recipient , with a ſhort
neck likewiſe coated, and diligently cloTe the jun-
Are of the Retort with the Reegerver, with Salt
Luting. Then a5ove tne Retorr place a broad co-
ver of earth of one foor high, and quadrangularly
perforate in the tep [or upper part] being made
exactly to cloſe the mouth of the furnace, of what
form ſoever it be, waether ſquare or round, exaQtly
tirted in altitude convenient, and to cloſe or (hat in
the mouth of the furnace equally on every fide; that
the vacant place bertieen the Retort and the cover
may be filled with coals. Which being done, make
a quadrangular draught with four pieces of Tile, a-
bove the ſquare hole of the cover, that the lame by
help of ſica'a rehcle, may, when time ſerves,more
freely afcend. The Qritice of the draught, as alſo
the furnace door and aſh hole, muſt be ſo cloſed, as
for the firſt four hours, the coals in the farnace may
but j:utk durn, without aeing extinguiſhed 3 by whicn
che Retort being leiſurely and fucceffively heared,
then for the fo:lowing four hours, the heat may. by
encreaſed, by gradually, and by little and little e-
very hour opening the holes above and delox, until
the flame begin to break out in the ſaperiour party
andthe Retorc wax hot all over, the aſh hole and
draught being altogether open,and no way ſtopped;
the hire muſt 5c inrended ergnteen or twenty hoursy
untill all the ſpirits ve come forth. After two days,
moilten the Salt Luting, wherewith the Retort and
Rec :;p1cnt were joynec, with a wet cloath ke2pt on
for an nour, becauſe it will be ſo very hard, as witi-
out moiltning it cannot be removed witholt en-
dangering tne Glafl2s ; then may you ſafely cake off
t:e Receiver. Which ocing done,by diſtillation in


is (4


\F\. at


4 ©
FP 4
. pn þ


F *
. = .
rO ny
C1 4
d


Baln, >


ny


b
2 20


4 in | m : Or, Zool IT,
Bal. or a gentle heat in aſhes, ſeparate the phlegm
from the ſpirit. There are ſome, who after ſeva-
ration of the phlegm, do reRifie the ſpiric in ſand
npon Corals veaten (mall.

This ſpirit, m1 burning Fevers mixt with appro»
priate waters, convemently cools; it quenches
rairlt, refilts the putrefaction of humours z it ope-
rates dy Urine and Sweat, conſumes phlegm, breaks
tough and vilcous homours, reftores languiſhed ap-
petite, and excellently tingeth juices of Roles, V10-
lets, and ocher flowers.


1 ” —_ : py


Spirit of Nitre,


Nitre -or Salr-peter muſt be mixed with three
parts of common Bolxs, and diſtilled by Retorr, tae
pace of ten or twelve hours. Of one pound of Salt-
peter, you may have a pound of Spirit, if you rigat-
ly operate.

This Spirit 1s the true Balſamick fire of nature,
and in th? Cnolick, Pleurike, .and Quinſey, is
yery denthcial.


Burning Syirt of Saturn.


Caix of Saturn or M:nium, is infaſed in diſtilled
Vinegar, or elſe the phlegm thereof : afterward it
isdigeſted for one day nacural, being often ſtirred,
that zt Chryltallize not in the bottom of the veſſel,
the Menſtrymmn is poiwred off, and other Menſtrumm
poured on, until all the Salrneſs be abſtracted. The
evacuations are hjtred, and two parts or thereabout
vapoured aways the third remaining part ſet in a
cold place to Cnrylitallize ; the Cryſtals are fſe-
parates, and a:flulved um freih Vinega: ; filtred,


, 4 oy W.-
" w . 4 "®; «4 "oe
- Py 4G * of - | FI ad a” bh, > 44


"Paok 11. © Chy 1 Eſſays. |
and often as above coagulated, untill they be ſuffici-
ently impregnated witi the Salt of Vinegar, Armo-»
niack , as with proper ferment. They are di-
geſted tor a Moneth with ſuch heat in Baln. as they
may continually be re{olved, like Oil into Liquor.
Afrerward they are diſtilled by Retorc in ſand, obe
ſerving degrees of fire, into a large capacious Re-
ceiver annexed ; Which if not very exactly lited on
with th2 Retort, ſo great a fragrancy (filling the
whole Laboratory) will be loſt, as I doubt nor but
if the odours of all odorate Vegeradles were gathe-
red together , and maxed, it would far exceed
them. After diſtillation, when all 1s cooled, you
will find a Capurt-mortuun very black, and ofno va-
'Iue. From the Liquor come forth you ſhall ſepa-
rate a yellow Oil ſupernatant z andan Oil Red
as bloud ſetling to the bottom. The phlegm by
reiterated diſtillations, deing ſeparated from the
burning water, yo1 ſhall kezp the moſt fragrant ſpi-
rit of Saturn, as a moſt precious Balſom for yarious
diſeaſes, profitably to be exhidited, as well inter-
nally,as externally.

Moreover, a fragrant Spirit of this kind may hy
Caymical Art de extracted, not from Saturn only,
but alſo from all other Metals, by mediation of-thar
viſcoas Mineral water, which, by the benefit of
Vulcan only, without the addition of any extraneons
thing, in a moſt ſhort ſpace oftime is prepared.
Of which Rbcdianes, in the Treatiſe of three words,
{aitf, That fumous, aqueous, and aduthve Spirit, is
changed into a moſt noble body, and flies not any
more from the fire, but flows like O:l, &c. For 1t
receives all the qualities of that Mera!, with which,
by tn2 indaſtry of a prudent Artificery it is mixed,
35 4!ſh the 0404r, colour, and taſte, with conſerva-


+>
l *


.
4
: Ns % 4 \
" - » 3. - -


»
wits. 4 R : #4


= 4 & ,
4 Jo "8 tz0N "oo


*
"#
.'


\ 6 Tyrociniza Chymicurs : Or, ' Book
tion of its vegetate faculty. And as Rhajs ſaith :
As it is changed, it changetn., Wohence it is appa-
rent, how baſely, ignorant , vulgar Miſochymiſts
are, who atridute, odours, talts, and other medici-
nal virtues to vegetables only , and eſteem Metal.
licks as deſtruRtive to the hamane body, and wor-
thy co.be ſhunned, more than a Dog or Snake.


_—


JI CAA


CHAP. Y:
of Vintgare


Diſtilled Vinegar,


Inzzar without digeſtion, is diſtilled in thz

ſame manner, as Spirit of Wine : only that the
phlegm, as in all other ſharp things, comes forth
firſt, and the ſpirit laſt. Oil, and Salt, by like rea-
ſan as is ſaid in Wine, are thence extracted.


Vinegar Alkaliſate,


Upon Vinegar diſtilled to the confiftency of Li-
quid honey, pour ſo muca common water, as may
ſtand above 1t fix, (even, or eight inches, digelt it in
Balneuw for two days: then ſet it in a coldplace co
Chryltalize. Remove from them the water by 1n-
Clination, and pour on other uncl all the oleaginy
recede. Th:n mult th2 Cryſtals be often diſſolve
m doiling water, and coagulated in a cold place,
that they may be rencred a!together tranſparent,
and on chem poured vin2g1r four times diltilledzand
purged from a!l its palegn, lo as to one pound of
Cirylals, be added tor poand of Vinegar. Which
being


TY


i. #0. 4 atk


Book IT. Chymical Eſſays, ©

being done the whole muſt de diſtilled by Retort im
ſand, 2dminiſtrine toward the end, a fire ſafficient-
ly trong. The diſtiſlation finiſhed, calcine the fe
ces, and extra a hxed Salt ; then retihe the vine-
gar with its efſential animate Salt, diſtilling it with
2 ftrong fire from the fixed Salt, and repouring,
what is diſtilled off, upon the remaining Salt, unti{
all the Salt ſhall have paſſed by Alembeck. Then


twice diſtil this vinegar impregnated with this its .


own Salt in a boiling Baln. that being done, keep
the vinegar, thus rendred moſt potent, for calcining
tie moſt hard bodies of Stones and Chryſtals.


—


_ ee  InS GE I een OO


CHAP. VI.
of Oils,


FA Il expreſt from Olives, is moſt properly ſo

called, becaule it participates of every exceed-

Ing quality z bur others are only fimilitudinarily ſo
named.

All Oils are between an airy and fiery nature 2
and by how muci the more ſharp they are, ſo much
the more fiery; and the loſs ſharp are ſaid to be, the
more thereal and airy.


Oil of the Tolks of Eggs.


Fry the Yolks broke in a Frymg-pan, with tem-


perate heats until they wax Red, and ſend forth


Oll ; keeping them continually moving witha ſtick,
that they burn not.. Then expreſs the Oil hot, and
with a great quantity of diftilied water, digeſt it foc


a Moneth i Baln, Some take the Yolks f9 iryeds
þ ,


5
P * +


=


» "FN


os
e . bd 4 « S- - = 4
Y - " | & . - 5 ” OT. 4 -
SS . GEE. : ; . , « : < PR e I
: be A i if P 4 «9 A k X p :


”


"0+ Tyricinium Chymicum : Or, Book In.
and inclofing them in cloath moiſtned Oil of


ſweer Almonds, preſs out the Ol with: with a
Preſs.
Mathiolus writing to Dioſcorides, commends this
Oll as uſeful for cleanſing , and removing rough-
neſs of the Skin, and clefts of the lips, hands, and
feet ; and againſt dylours of Ulcers, of the joints,
and all nervous places. It is likewiſe profitable in
ſcaldings or burnings by fire, and in membranes of
the Brain,malignant Ulcers ut cicatriſeth,and gene-
rates hairs. |
Oil of Saze,

Take a great quantity of Sage, ana ſer it in the
ſhade two or three weeks; afterward diſtil it dy a
Refrigeratory, and receive the water (which you
may re&the) and th2 Oil. Waich 1s proficable in
all diſeaſes of the Nerves: m the Paralyhe, Apo-
plexy, Conyulhon, and ſuch like.


Otl ef Wax.


Melt wax with a gentle fire, and let it ſtand ſo
long melted, as till from it no more bubles riſe.
Then removing it from the*fire, mix it with double
its own weight of Salt decrepitate, and diſtil it by
Retort zvith gen'le heat. From one pound of wax,
yuu may extra Zxij. of Oil,

It reſolves,atrenyates, penetrates, mollifies, and
diſcuſſesz wherefore it 1s profitable in hard im-
polthums, and cold tumors. Itheals chops in the
paps of womens breaſts, and mitigates the dolours
of th?zm, Alſo it conſolidates freth wonrds,if there-
with they be twice a day anointed. It is beneficial
f dns, if mixed wits oil of eggs, *


of 2


a '
Ot
.
.
_ Pa
PE


_—— — = |W—_—  ——


@ @0> 1}


= — — ——


Oo


Dymicat Eſſays,


oil of Turpentine.


Re. Thethick ſubſtince remaining aſter difti1!a-
tion of ſpirit of Turpenrine, and diftil it pey ſe, by
Retort in aſhes. So when the ol! js wats - Co.
lophony will refide in the bottom of the Retort.
If you ſhall digeſt it afterward in Baln. as is ſaid of
the O1l of yolks of eggs, all its empyrenwa will be
removed,

.It heats, ſoftens, diſcufleth, opens, purges, and
externally may be uſed inſtead of true Balſom, in all
wounds ; malignant, fetid, and incurable Ulcers, as
Fiſtula's, the Wolf, and ſuch 1;ke running ſoars ; im
the Parotides fractures, and contractures, tc.
But it doth not always zey /e, if uſed alone, prove fo
beneficial, as waen 1t 45 conveniently mixed with
otner appropriates for curing the affects,


Oil of Cloves.


Ri, Of Cloves grofly beaten four pond, of foun=
tain water forty pound, macerate them in a hot
place, as long as ſhall de convenient, adde of Tars
ear Fiz. afterward diſtil ic by a 5raſs Veſica with its
Refrigeratory, and you will nave Jv11y. of oil. In
the ſame manner, Mace, Pepper, and the Seeds
of Aniſe, and Coriander, @c. may be diftill-
ed.

[t helps in cold diſeaſes of the Stomach, Liver,
Heart, and tae Di«rrbea from a cold caule ; it difli-
pates melancially ſpirits, and clarifies the groſs.
Externally it heals green wounds and performs the
ofhce of true Balſom. |

Ou


64 Tyrociniuim Chymicam: Or, Book


Oil of Sugar.


B.. Of white Sugar grofly beatzn Zu j. Aqua
vice, Zviij. Ser fire of the Agua vice 1n a filver or
earthen diſh glazed, into which caft the Sugar, con-
tinually ſtirring ic with a Spatula, umil the flame
ceaſe ; then add of Roſe-water Fj, mix chem,

It corroborates, and by experience certainly
helps thoſe that labour with a cough cauſed 5y cold-
neſs of the Lungs.


Oil of Tartar,


This oil, beſide te way above delivered in pre-
paring the ſpirit thereof, 1s alſo made per deliquinys ,
dy putting Tartar calcined to a
This oilis an admj- Whiteneſs in a Cellar, or other
rable Remedy in the moſt place, until it be reſolved
Meaſels, all Wicers, jnto oily which muſt afterward
elpecially venereal, ye filtred. Alſo it may be pre-
in the Tinea, Scab, Fer |
ind Warts, Tt makes Pared : It Tartar, after calcina-
the face ſmooth, and tion be diflolved in common
the skin ſoft, water, filtred and coagulared ;


and the coagulate placed in a
cold moiſt place, until it be reſolved.


Oil of Amber,


Digeſt a pound of Amber beaten in on? pound of
waite wine. Then adde a handful of prepared Salt,
aittil it by Retort, obſerving degrees of tire, By
diſti]Iation twice reQifie it with Salt only.

This oil was once called Sacred, by reaſon of the
admirable virwes it hath, being as well exhidited


”
l
=
| .
-
& 0
- : "Ix.
- J " ry
-
N %
z +


per ſe, as mixt with others ; in the Epilepſiz, Appoe
plexy, Melancholly, Cramp, Vertigo , Peſt, Scone,
cold defluxions of the Head , Palpitations of the
Heart, deliquiums of the mind, difficulty of breuh-
ings, dificulty of qa. water , difhcult Birth,
Strangulations of the womd, retention of the Men-
ſes, whice flux of the Matrix, Worms, and Fe-


Wes. :;
A compounded Oil for the Hemicranta.


R. Of Rue one handful, boil it in one pound of
o1] Olive, in anew earthen pot for half an hour.
Then pour 1t it into a Retort, and tv it adde of Ve-
nice Turpentine $x1j. of Colophony Ji. diftil it
in ſand ; the clear water, which comes fort! ficſt,
deing of little value ſeparate. Afterward graqdual-
ſy encreafing the firs, the oil will come forth, which
receive apart,

In the time of the Fit, heat a littfe of-it over 3

re, and with..Cotcron mioiſtned in ir, anoint the

ore-head and Temples,and the dolourous part alſo,
ordering the Patient to g0 to ded,


A compounded Oil for the Womb,


Re, Of the powder of Rue, a little dryed, one

und Caſtor, Zij. Olibanam, Myrrn, of each Fi11j,

1 of Linum Z pound, digeſt them four days in

drſe dung, or like heat z afterward difti] rhem by
tort 3n a cloſe Reverderatory. With this Liquor
dint the Womb morning and eyening-


cum : Or, Book


rocininm Ch


Small pieces of Tiles or Flints (like Beans)
make Red hot in a Crucible, waich, ſo fiery hot, caſt
into old oil Ohlve cloſe the veſſel, and leave it for
a night, Afcerward diſtil the ſmall Stones wita the
01] by Retort. ReCtifie the oil by diſtilling 1t the
ſecond, and third time with prepared Salt.


Oil of Snlphar,


R. Of Sulptur beaten one pound , Calx-vive
* >vund Mercurial Salt $1:13j, mixthem, and dyftil by
Retort, For wounds and Ulcers, ut 15 very pro-
htadle,
Ot of Salt,


' Salt confiits of divers parts z

The nacure of Salr, earthy , aqueoas, and hery. Its
conſiſtency and ſolidity,is from

earth, its Liquability from water , and its biting
property from hre. It :s ſharp,

* T\uavameG. Fouter-ſweet, cutting, ſubtle,
penetrative, pure, fragrant, 1n-

compultible, and preſerves other bodys from cor-
ryption z perſpicaous, as air, by rexerated diftilla-
tions ; difloluble in hamid, and Liquable 1n fire hke
Metals, And it is as the Soul 4n the body, accor-
ding-to Pliny, who after the Stoicks, ſaith, Salt 38
91ven to Swines fleth, being as it were dead 1n its
own nature, inſtead of a Soal, For this, in manner
of 1erment, ,where it hath power of penetration,
converts the body, with which it 1s mixed into its
o.v1 nature, 5y conſuming the humour odnoxious to
PUEIC=


V..


od N


1 y


{7


i


Book IT. Chymical Eſſays. 67
putrefaftion. Raymund Lylly calls the alſuginons
Liquor, diſperſed rhrough the whole body , Urinal
humour : Paracelſuws, Mummy. |

There are divers ways invente by Artiſts, of
extraQing the oil of ſpiric of Salt. Some diſtil Sale
decrepitare per ſe,without addition of any external
thing. Bur fince ſalt js of eafie fution;z and when
Cy-united 1n one, it retains the moſt contumacious
ſpirits : after diſtillation for twenty four hours, all
being cooled, they break the Retort, grind tie
Maſs of ſalt, and pat it in a new Retort with tae di-
ſtlled Liquor; and this they repeat (9 often, as till
the whole ſalt be refolved into oil, whic? in the
eighth or ninth diſtillation is wont ro be, This O-
peration 1s too tredivus. O.hers diffolve calcine]
falc in a Cellar, or with Rain-wacer, and impaſte it
with Potters Clay ſifted, and thence make ſmal
valls or pellets, which when dryed, they pur into a
Retort, and ſo extract the ſpirit.

But I am wont thus to prepare i”. . I take of Sea
ſalt calcined, two pound, and I mix it with fix
pound of flour of Tiles , Red Earn, or common
Bolus : all which [ put into a firm and large Retort,
19 asat leaſta third part may rema'n empty; and
applying a capacions Recipien', ,nto which I firt


Pour one pound of diftilled watery then do I keep


It Giftilling for thirty hours, obſerving the ſame
degrees of tire mentioned in diſtillation of ſpirit of
Vitriol. After (ſeparation of tie water aud


Pilegm, I receive Fxx, at leaſt of moſt ſharp 0 1,


Aich mult be re&iiyed. It is endued with moit po-
ent virtues; waether-itbe uſed internally or exter-
ally. It renova:es the whole Man, and preſerves
rom all diſeafes; ifit he uſed m r ca Wine, or
#744 vite, M:xt with ſalt of Wormwood,” and ta-
F 28 Ken


ITE


. - 00 Re 6 +


68 Tyrocinium Chymicum : Or, Book IT,
ken eitier in Wine or water of Wormwood, it
expels the Drophie. It Cures the Epilephie z Jaun-
dies, Fevers, Stone, and Maiv-worms. By anoint-
0g it heals Members disjoynted, contracted, pa-
ralytick, and apoſtemated. Alſo it mitigates do-
Jours of the Gout, if mixed with oil of Turpentine, |
or of Wax, or Camomil. Alſo it calcines all Me-
tals, Stones, yea, Glaſs it ſelf; the moſt perfect
work of Art. |


Another way.


Diſſulve common ſalt in humidper ſe,filter it ſo of-
ten, as till nv feces be leftzthen ſet it in horſe dung
for tio Moneihs , afterward with moſt ſtropg fire
di{t1l it, and ſepagate che phlegm from the unctuour, |
ſalſug nous Liquor by B, M4. Whatſoever is moſt
obnox10us to Corruption if imbibed with this Li-
quor, it remains incorrupt for many Ages. It is
believed, that that body of a moſt beautiful Woe
man was embalmed with this Liquor ; which, as
Raybatl V olateranrs relates, in the time of Pope A-
Jexander the V1. was found about 117. years be-
fore, or thereadouts, in an ancient Sepulcher near
Ajlban4, lo intite, and wholly free from any cor-
ruption, as if the Liſe had but that hour expired.
Whereas, by the Sculpture upon the Marble Fomb,
It was witneſſed to have lain there buryed above
I 300.years,


Oil of Vitrisl, |


Diflolve the beſt Vitriol in common water ; the
= Solution digeſt by gentle heat of Baln. afterward
E-, h'ter its, ard by vapour of Biln. in a Glaſs veſſel,
fe ab{tr;& the water ill itcontradt a Skinnygeſs, Tnen
ſet


it
un=
nt-
p4a-
dO-
nes
Me-
fect


 of-
ung

DD
hre


noſt
te 1s


N 0.


; be-
near
cor-


red. |


ove


flel,
T nen


II.


| Chymical Efſoys. 69
ſer the veflel in a cold place to produce perſpicuous
Chryſfals z which removed, the remaining wateCL
evaporate until it contract a new skin , and pro-
duce new Chryſtals in a cold place, All which ſe-
parated, diſſolve, digeſt, and filter; and in a cold
place again ſet ro Chryſtallizez and as above, ſepa-
rate, repeating the ſame labour rhe third time, un-
til the Vitriol be freed from all Heterogeneal ter-
reſtrizty. Tis Vitriol put into an high Cucurbit,
and in Baln. abſtract the | 2a to a dryneſs, rever-
ting the humid fo ofc upon 1ts own carthy as till the
dry ſhall have 1m5ibel all the humid. The Maſs
take olt,an1 grind to a ſubtil powder, which put in-
to,a irm Retort, with an eighth part of its own
weight of Spirit of wine perteR[y re&ified, and
obſerving degrees of fire for three days, diftil off all
th2 Spirits. The veſſel being cooled, what ſhall be
in the Receiver, mix with other two pound of Col-
cothar, as above prepared ; and again for three
days diſtil it, They in an high Cucurdit ſeparate
the ſpirit of wine by Baln. afterivard diftil the ſpirit
of Vitriol by aſhes, In which ſpirit, if you (hall
diſlulve Corals or Pearls, you will have a true An-
tepileptick. The Oil, Red like blond, which ad-
heres to the bottom, you may retifhie by Retort in
ſand, or by digeſtion only, and ſeparate the cartny
feces ſerling to the botrom from the oil. Its uſe 1s
rather in Metallicks, than in Medicine.


Oil of Antimony.


Re. Of crude Antimony and Sugar candid, of
eac) Fj. of calcined Allom Fj. grind and mix
taem rogether, difti] chem by Recore with a very

F 3 modes-


Jo Tyrociniom Chymicum: Or, Book II.
moderate fire. So will you have a Red oil, moſt apr
for caring Ulcers. ;


© DT —


CHAP. VIL
Of Liquid Tindtures.


Y the word Tinctures, Chymiſts do not under-
Bis as the vulgar think, timple colours ſepara.
red or exalted from a mixt body z but eflential co-
lours of things, and ſuch asare inherent mn the for-
mal qualities, extraeted from the concrete body,
Waerefore Tinctures are ſyumerimes called oils,
ſometimes ſpirits, and ſometimes Quinteſlence.


Tiniture of ary Roſes,


Put $j. of Roſes cryed in the ſhadegin four pound
of warm wat?2r, unto waich adde Zij. or therea50ut
of ſpuit of Vitrivl or Sulphur. In three or fuur
ours the water will de deeply coloured, waich muſt
ve filtreds Jn which if you diſſolve Zx15 of Sugar,
you will have a true Reirigerative of the Liver.


Tintfure of Violets,


Bruiſe tne Flowers, and macerate tnem in their
proper water, or in oil of Sugar above deſcribed ;
afterward expreſs tnem; tae expreſſion ſtrain until
Tin&ture anſwer your defice. Or.

Put the flowers to the noſe of an Alembeck, that
tne proper diſtilled water gliding through them,
may ao{tra& tne Tiutare with them,


CHAP.


Book, —Chymical ſays...


CHAP. VIIT.,
Of Balſoms,


or rms yh are no other than Compotnds
ed oils, and 5y the addition of otzer INgs rene
dred more thick. Tney conhift almoſt of a triplicit
Liquor, viz. ſpirituo Sy Or aqueous, oleaginous),
and thick like honey. With which ſometimes, as
the nature of the matter requires, Muskz Amber,
Civer, Cc. are \yont to be added.


Balſom of Cinnamon,


Tis 1s compounded of the Tinctare extracted 5y
ſpirit of wine,and inſpiflate with o1l,and ſalt of the
lame as alſo wuh white wax diflolved,and wel waſh-
ed 1n Roſe water from all its acrimonys Which gives
a convenient conſiſtency, Or it is mage of Deer
ſuet, or ſuet of a Wether well cleari{ed and waſh-
ed, every of them pr ſe 3 or one of taem may be
mixed with the 2%, and afterwar1 v:i** the extraft
oil, and Salt be reduced to a j. it c. couliftency? $3
are prepared Balioms of Clove 's, Juniper, Sage,
Roſemary, Aniſe, and ſuch like z which ag well for
external anointing, as internal uſe, 338 moſt <fhia-
CiQUs, ,


Balſum of Sulphar,


Re. Of flowers of Sulphur F j. 04 of Turpentine
Z 113. mix them, and ina Glaſs placed in ſand, gent-
ly boil it for to e ſpace of e19ht huurs, until 1i a2 as.
Red as bloud. Tien puir npon it commun water,
and dy Alembeck Uiftil ott che ſapeift ons oul with


[ne


F 4


2 Tyrocinium Chymicum: Or, Book:
the water. In the bottom, the Balſom of Sulphur
will remain; from which you may extract a Tin-
Qure with ſpirit of wine, and coagulare it, which is
oven in water of Hyſop, or Syrp of Liquoriſh,
ro thoſe that are afflited wich the Cough of the
Lungs.

* Balſom of Saturn.


D:Ril away two parts of ' Vinegar, impregnated
with the ſalt of Sacurn, that only a third parti may
remain. Then cake of oil of Roſes Fi11j. of the im-
pregnated Vin2gar Fv1!1j. Oi this pour drop by
drop upon oil, mixing them continually togerher in
a braſs Mortar, until it be like Unguent. Waich
helps in Inflammations, and hot Gonts. If the
ſame Vinegar impregnated wit: tae ſalt of Sa:urn,
ſhall be mixed with an equal part of common wa-
rer, and applyed hot with double Linnen Clnaths,
upon contufions, in what part of the body ſoever, it
preſently aflwageth all dolor.


_ O—_


be Ser: 2. mmmomm— nd


b—


CHAP. Fx:
of Extras,


PÞxtacts, ſpecially ſo called, are prepared of the
R:i/mal and Vegetable kid, by the benefit of
accommodated Diflolvents or Menftraums, ſuch are
ſpirit of wine, of Juniper, Whey of Milk, Hydro-
mel-vinoſe, wacer of redclemt Apples, fumitory,and
tne like, or waters of the ſame things,from whence
you intend to prepare the Extracts. From Anis- ..
By mals, Fleſh, Mumy, the Liver , Spleen, Linge,
| Tetticles, and hke parts, are choſen : Whence ex-
cracks


- ER 2


a 4 yg
Wy” q 4


BookIT.,  Chymicdl Eſſays. 77
tracts of Cranium are famous, for the Epilepſic ; of
Ox-ſpleen, for provoking the Menſes ; of the Li-
ver ofa Calf, for the Dropſie, and hepatick Flux
of the L'ngs of a Fox, for the Aſthma and like
diſeaſes. From Vegetables , various extracts are
made ; as from Herbs, Flowers, NO FO
Berrys, Rinds, Woods, Aromaticks , Seeds, and
Fruits; as is manifeſt in Quercetanm his laſt
Chapter, df reſtoring the Pharmacrpe: of Dogma»
LiCKs.

Moreover, for preparing purging extraQts ;
many have hitherto uſed ſpirit of wine, for a diflol-
vent; which becauſe it doth much infringe their
Cathartick force, is not to be promiſcuouſly uſed in
all, It may ſometimes be uſed, as in extract of Hel-
lebore, Coloquintida, and Scamony z but in others, di=
ſtilled waters muſt be ſubſtituted z as in Rubarb,
water of Endive 1s moſt commodious; in Leaves
of Oriental Sena, water of reds/ent apples, of Fumi-
tory, and Fennel : in Agarick, water of Cinnamon z
and ſo in others, others. Now, could ſuch an A-
qu4vite, deprived of its Salt armoniack, be o5tain-
ed, as Darioiu (and after him Jobn duV aly PhyſiCi-
an of Iſſoldunen, likewiſe Panos in his Treatiſe- of
the true preparation of Chymical Medicaments, in
the Magiſtery of Tartar) teacheth, a more excellenc
co'11d not be defired for preparing extracts of eve-
ry kind. Although Dn. Mayaud, a Man in the
Ciymical Art long experienced, and my very good
friend, did with m2, according to preſcript of the
adove-named DoRors, attempt to prepare ſuch a
AMenſtrunm ; yet in this operation , we ſome:imes
loſt doth the o1l, and our labo2r. Whence a Man
may conje& we, that when the good Pann, in the
adove cited Magiſtery of Tar:ar, d.d admonith and


<4,
” a.


.
: in - bh:
= -f
*
+AU a>
F 4 of
4


74 Tyrocinizm Chymicaw : Or, Book If
invite others to reverence G OD, and render
him thanks for ſo rare a Secret ; he himſelfdid not
enougn fear God,or render him praiſe, when he con-
ſecrated ſuch a Magiſtery torPoſterity,


Extraft of Sena.


Macerate the Leaves of Sena twenty four hours,
zn a {ufhcient quantity of diſtilled water of redolent
Apples; what is tinged, poured off, and filter ;
the Leaves being firſt fkrongly expreft, In the
mean while, from the feces extraRt a ſalt according
to Art, and commix 1t with the extract, which diſtil
with gentle heat of Baln, until but two parts re-
main ;z Or ina glaſs Balon, exhale the ſuperfluous
bomorzÞy vapour of an fot Baln. to the confiftency
of an extract, Note, the extraftion of Tin&ue
from the ſame Leaves of Sena, mult not be the ſes


cond time repeated, leaſt the extra admitced into
te body, Cxcite griev0s torments,


— ————


Extrat7 of Rubarb,


Freſh Rubard cut very (mal, digeſt in water of
Endive, Or other odoriferous water, until it be c0-
loured z what 1s tinged pour off, and repour on
freſh water ſo ofr, as until it will no more be tin-
oed, The evacuations hiter, circulate, and difhl
off the Menſtruum to the conhency of an extract,
by heac of Baln. the ſale from tne feces being ir


added, as mn tne former preparation,


DP 1n-


' Chymical Eſſays.


P ancbymagegen.


Re. Pulp of Cologuiniida, Hermadaflil,,
Black Heliebore, Twrbith,
_ Dia ridium, of each Fife. Aparick :
Leaves of oriental Sena Ziiij. Aloes of each
Choice Kbhei, Fin,


$Js


- Species of Diarrbedon Abbatss, Fj,

Make an extract with water of Cinamon, accor-
- ding to Art, adding the lalt from the feces. Doſe
from Jj- to 3/\,

- For the Quartane,

: Re. Alves Fin,

1 Myrrh,

Roots of Gentiany

Round Ariſtolochy) of exch 31,

d |


-- Oriental Sffron, 3/5.
. Of the three kinds of Sawnder; of each 3j.
Coltsfoot 3 j. Leaves of Sena cleanſed Zjſs.
Tae beſt Mithridate Z/s.


Paiveriſate what are to oe pulveriſed, and make
a Maſs with Syrup of Scol-pendriums of which make
an extract wit) water of Cardaxs benediftus, adding
the ſalt of the feces, Doſe, From Yj. to 3/s. the
day defore tae coming of the fit in tne morning
wit.) $1.of water of the extract.


Germain Treacle.


Freſh and ripe grains of Juniper are deaten in
i Mardle Mortar z to eyery one pound of wiici,
tour


96 Tyroct Chymicuw : Or, Book IT.
four pound of diftilled Rain-water is poured, and
for three days they are digeſted ina hot place; af-
rerwards ftrained through a cloath, and ſtrongly ex-
preſt ; the trained Liquor filtred, and ex1al24 to
th canfiſtency of an extra. Dale 59. Ic 1s given
in the Cholick, Stone, fuffycation of the Matrix,
ſuppreſſion of the Menles, cold defluxions, and in
the Dropſie. It is alſo a ſpecifick Preſeryatiye a-
eainſt the Peſt, and all contagious air.


Landanum, or Nunes.
Quovs Homerico preſt antins.


A Narcotick extract is called Laudanwm, that is

to ſay, a Laudidle Medicine

Some call it Nepen- viz. by reaſon of the famous ef.

ther, fects thereof, which we very of-

ten find in the moſt grieyous

diſeaſes, and dolourg, For Hemer witneſleth , that

the Remedy of Hellen was infignized with ſuch a

name, whereby all languifhings of the heart, and

fickneſſee, are driven away, and pleaſant chearful-

nels, and joy is induced. ws

» Tincture of Henhane, extracted according

© art, with ſpirit of wine, made ſharp with ſpirtc
of Vi riol or SulphurZ j,


Extract of Opium, extracted as above, Zj,
-, Extract of Oriental Saffron,  j.
\


Mix theſe, and ſet them in a warm place for fif-
teen days, gaily fiirring them. The days expired,
draw off the ſpirit of wine by Baln. to the maſs re-
M13"1ng in the bottom z adde extract of Caſtor zij.


The


a 4


Book 11  Chymical Efſas, 7


The Tincture extracted, from Fij. of Diamber,
by ſpiritof Juniper Wine in a vaporoas Baln.
zogether with the Diſlolyent,


Let theſe and indigeſtion for a Moneth, ſtirring
them often, until all che ſtrong odour vaniſh. Then
add
Tincture of Corals,
Perlucid Amber prepared of each 3j,
Bone of the Stags=heart J/;.
Tincture of Gold, 3/;,


Firſt beat what are to be beaten, then mix all
theſe in a Marble Mortar, and add


Oil of Amber,

Of Mace,

Of Cinnamon, of each Jj.

Extract of Musk 3/5. but this in Women muſt
be omitted ; Put altogether mixed in a temperate
place, that the Maſs may be dryed, of it thence ea-
fly to form pills. Doſe from one grain to four,


C—


CHAP. X
of ſoft Tinttares,


Lehough Tinctures of this kind, by reaſon of
the operations they perform, and the conſe
Gency they have, may worthily de numbred with
extracts z yet becauſe by Authors, they were en-
doiwed with the Title of tinctures 3 I thought it not
amiſs to aſſign them a peculiar Chapter. -

Tinflure


n$ Tyrocinium Chymicum : Or, Book I.


Tinure of Honey,


Mix honey with very clean ſand, that jt may de
made a mals z then on jt pour ſo much ſpiric of
wine, as may ſtand adove it two fingers ; digeſt jr
for five or fix hours ; the coloured ſpiric pour off,
and pour on other, until it be no more coloured.


3» The cinged ſpirit filter and coagulate. It helps the
Pchifick in a wonderful manner. :
Tinfure of Saffron,
\


Tais tincture 15 made with ſpirit of winez which
mult ſo often be ponred on, as till all the tincture
be extracted, and a wiitiſh earth remain. 'The
tincture mult be filtred, and the ſpirzc of wine with
oentle heat of Baln. e>ſtracted. (Ic hath various and
egregious faculties : and eſpecially it wonderfully
recreates and reſtores tne ſpirits in ſyounings, if
one only drop of it be exhibited in a little broach
or Wine. ;

_-- - TinFure of Sugar,


Re. Of white Sugar pulveriſate one pound, put
rin a Cucurdit, or otner convenient veſlel,vick z
ſpoonfuls of diſtilled Vinegar, digelt it in hot aſhes
F> for fix hours, Then pour on of Aquavite, ſo much
as \vill Rand adove it two fingers ; digelt it until it
de coloured; afterward the tinged ivater pour off,
and pour on other often, vntil it b2 no more co-
Joured. Then remove the Men/tr mes per Bain, and
the tincture or Red eſſence will remain 17 the dot-
tom , which muſt 5e circulated witnCordial waiers.
Ic is profitavle in the Syncopen, and d-/iquiums of the
"Vx 11nd,


»
” *


” P * - 4 * "— =
"9 WOT + «CE #6 ,


"Book 11, Chymical Ef. T9
mind, being exhibited with water of Cinnamon and
Roſes.


Tinflure of Sulphur.


Melt Salt of Tartar in one veſſel , and flowers of
Sulphur in another 5 aftedward mix them toge-
*rher, then ſufter them to cool. Afterward grind
the maſs; on whicn pour ſo much ſpirit of wine, as
will ſtand aboutit four fingers. Dizeſt it, until it
be tinged with a mcſt Red colour ; ſeparate the
Menftrunm by Baln. This tinCture js the true Bal-
ſom of the Lungs.


Tind ure of Coral,,


Diflolve 3 j. of Corals in one pound of jaice of
Lemons; digeſt it for eaght days, then filter the $9-
Jution : in this tinfture difloſve of white Sugar
Sviij. Then digeſt it by evaporating to the cunſi-
ſtency of a Syrup, ;

Dole one ſpoonful in every Hepatick fl, Dy-
ſentery, and flx of bloud.


Another way,


R. Of Coral beaten ſmal, what quantity you
will, infuſe it in acid water, eitner of Oak, of of
Juniper, Ga4izcamy or Box rectified ; (as we have
caught in the Chapter of diſtilled waters) that tne
Menſtruum may Rand-above the Caral three or four
hogers. Then place itto digeſt jn horſe-dung, or
lixe heat for eight days. What thall be diflolved
pour off, and pour on other acid water ;z digeſt
and pour it oft (o often, as until the Corals be whol-
ly ciflolvet ; the diflulutions filter, and aiftil to a


dry- E TY ne


Tyrocinium Chymicum : Or, Book If,
dryneſs. To the matter remaining in the bottom,
pour thebeſt ſpirit of wine. That will in eight days
be tinged like bloud, being (et in digeſtion : then
ſeparace the tinged Liquor from the feces ; repour
on other ſpirit, digeſt, and pour ir off, until you
ſhall have extracted all the tincture. Then filter the
tinged ſpirit, and coagulate it to the conliſtency of a
-Sycup. If you will, you may circulate it with Cor-
dial water, or add Sugar diflolyed in Roſe-water,


and reduce it into a ſyrup.


Another way.


Corals are calcined with a like quantity of ſul-
phur, and che tinRare extraRted with diſtilled Vi-
negar, by digeſtion for five or fix days.


Otherwiſe,


Corals beaten, are calcined with a like quantity
of Salt-peter, for one hour in a fire ſo moderate,as
the Nitce may notmelt, Afterward they are put
hot into a veſſel, and ſpirit of wine is poured upon
them, and with it they are digeſted for twenty four
hours. The tinged ſpirit is poured off, and other
ſpirit repoured on, until it Gall have extracted all
the tincture,


hy; T-_ ' Ears


ys CHAP. XL:

n 4 5

ir Of Calcination of . ( ommon Salt, Salt-peter, Vis

20 trisl, the Stone of the Spunge, Chryſtal, and

he  Maxrchaſite of Silver,

Ef

- Calcinatton of common Salt.

- b | * E
Ut common Salt in a crucibſe, or other earthen |
v-ſlel, filling ir full almoſtro- the top ; then

place the veſſel covered between living coals, n= '

'v til it be very hot all over, and che Salt ceaſe crack-

i= ling. Afterward diflolve it in common water, fil-

ter the Solution, and coagulate ifin a new glaſs
diſh.
Calcination of Salt- peter, or Mintral Cryital, or

ty of Lapis Pruvells. .

as EE |

ut D.flolve Salt-peter in common water, and filter

'nN it through brown paper, that it may be pvrged from

ur all its impurities, Then in a glaſs veſlel boil ity and »

er ſcum it often before, it be coagulated. When coa-

[1 gulate, and dry, grind it, and in a clean earthen yeſ-


ſel placed in burning coals, liquefie whe Salt, To |
every pound of melted Salt, injeQ Fj. of flowers of:
Sulphur z yet not altogether at one time, but at ſun- |
dry timeg,until all the fatneſs be conſ:med in flame.”
Bc the lame muſt Rudiouſly be ayoided. This S$9-
lution, Filtration, Decoction, Deſpumation, Coa- .
gulation, Eliquation, and D2flagration of the Salt,
Pp being thrice repeated : th2 Salt ig ſufficiently _
pared for medicinal uſe, [ERR 67 OY
PR G | al


x
=


» Re


$ +


a i. ET, AL Km : Or, "Y
# © Of this Salt 3{s. diſſolved in water of Roſes, or
, Endive, 1s a principal Arcanxzs in the Prunelly, or

ſoar throat, = eargled; for it takes away all

uncleanneſs of the mouth, and taroat. And if a lit-
tle of that water be ſwallowed, it aflwageth all in-
ternal heat, and is an admiradle cooler of the hearr.

It abateth the Cough, if taken with ſpirit of Wine :

with water of Hyſop, it removes obfiructions both

cf the Lungs, and Liver. Shortneſs of breath, it
* cures. Hoarſnels it helps, and reftores loſt ſpeech,
if ſs. thereof be taken in a morning faſting, with
the yolk of an Egge moderately boiled. Moreover
it 15 uſeful in all diſeaſes, both internal, and exter-


— —


C—_ CCS in on nn


nal, as John Tholdexs in his Haſograpiy,and Bernard
Penuusy, m tis book of tre true preparation of
Chimical Medicaments amply teach.


Calcination of Vitriol,


Dry Vitriol to a whiteneſs, in an earthen veſſel,
not glazed , with moderate fire : afterward en-
creaie the fire for a quarter of an hour, that the Vi-
[rzol may wax red; then is it called Colcothar.


Calcination of the Spunge Stone.


F Heat the Stone of the Spunge red hot ofcen,and as |
| often extinguiſhit jn diſtilled Vinegar, until it be
reſolved into a Calx, Its uſe in Calcination is for
extracting tincture.


| Caicination of Ch of al.


« Chryſtal cc verberated for (ix hours ina Crucible,
reduce to a jubtilz powder z and mix it with-an
equal


Book IT, Chymical Eſſays. $3
equal quantity of Salt-perer : and again reverbe-
rare it witha vehement fire for eighteen hours. Ponr
it out while in flux, into clear water z and what re-
mains undiflolved, dry, and reduce to an Alcrhw..
Then with the ſame water boil it, until it be thick-
ned like a Poultisz after which, lay the Spiſſiude
upon piecey of glaſs, to dry in heatzand again reduce
itto an Alcobol: and if you will, ſetit in a cold
humid place co be reſolved. If any thing ſhall re-
main ſtill undiflolved, reiterats the Calcination
with Nitre, and the other [abours, as above, that it
may de Soluble,

Doſe, three or four drops, with a like quantity
of oil of Juniper : Againſt the Stone of the Reins


and bladder.


Another way.

' Make clear and pondrous Chryſlal red hot often,
and as oft exſtinguthit in diftilled Vinegar, unt:l
with che leaſt touca it may be reduced to powder.
Then mix ic with a like quantity of Salt-peter, and
reverberate it- for eighteen hours. Then by many
adlutions , extract 2, fixed Salt-peter, dry it, and


reduce into an Alcehol. It is profitable in the


* Stone, Falling fickneſs, Dyſentery, and Sterile
8,


Breaſts. If any one would forthe atoreſaid affect,
more ſubtiliate this impalpable powder; let him di»
geſt it twenty four hours in ſpirit of Wine , and by
Retore diftil it, What ſhall remain fixed, muſt be
reverberated as above ; and fo often digeſted and
diſtilled, as uncil che greater part ſhall aſcend with
the ſpirit of Wine, Then the ſpiit of wine bemg


ſeparated by diſtillation, what remains in the bot-
A W G A om


$4 Tyra


com of the veſſel, muſt be ſet int a moiſt place,that it
may be diſſolved mto a water or oil.


, Calcination of Marchaſite of Silver,


#:ijnouth or Marchajite muſt de diflolved in wa-
ter made of Salts, unto a (ulptareous and Stiptick
et:arneſs. The ſolution being clear, pour upon it

tne * eflence of all h-

* Nocteus, quid emngs ; {9 in 2

moment ir will be pre-

cipited info an Alcohol, mott white like ſnow,

which muſt ve freed from all acrimony, and dry-
ed. Tis ole 15 for remoying vices of the sKin.


ec. —_— On


O_o A—


CHAP. XII.


Of the Various Calcization of Antimony,
( alcination of Antimony,


R. Of choice Stibium fonr pound, of ſalt pre-
paredHve pound, Theſe pulveriſed, mix. And in a
veil. ] of earthwith a broad-bottom placed over a
farnace of Reververation, (till them together, for
tne ſpace of five or fix hours, until the fume ceaſe,


and- the Stibinm be made white, and ſomewhat


yellow ; (diligently .beware of Liquefa&ion, and
Ne noxious fume,) Afterward grind-it to powder,
from ** nichy by affufion of hot water, and alſo of
col often, the ſalt muſt be extraſted ; whica drys
ea and pulveriſed, ſublime per ſe in a proper veſſel
for ten or twerwe; hours, Hay ns gathered the


Hores,orind t3& Cale. imoriummyandreverberate it'to
| JETS »


3 -
»  .-


um C wicaw: Or, Book II,


roalted Applz, or conſerve of Roſes,


Book 11. ' Chymical Eſſays. $5

a redneſs in a monet"s ſpace,the veſſel being ſo cla-
ſed, by reaſon oi the aſhes, as the fire may not be
impeded from due operation. Aﬀer calcination,
draw forth the tinctare with radicate Vinegar 3 and
further elaborate it dy filtration, ſeparation of the
menſtruum,and circulation with Cordial water.


Anther Calcination of Stibium, and Emdtick
Powder, or Mercurins Vite.


Re. Of Antimony pulveriſed, Zi.
Mercury ſub[1mate, Zvi.

Mix taem together, and diftil them in aſh2s »y a
glaſs Recort, unto wiich annex a Receprory halt
full of water, Afterward adminiſtzr fire gradually,
until ag 1mmole Liquor, like butter, adhere to the
neck of the Retort, which with a liv2 coal, exter-
nally applyed, caule to reſulve, and it will. be pre-
cipited info the water in 4 white powder, .

Tnen leiſurely give fire of Cuppreiſhio:1, until a
red L'quor come forth z which beginning to ap-
pear, remave tre R2ceiver, and apply anocher pre-
ſently 3 and intead rthe-fice for an hour or two, unc!'!
tie Mercury joyned with the ſublimate ſulphur of
Antimony, be ſ1blimed to the neck of the Retort
into Cinnavar, The precipitate powder dig2it for
one night, and ſeparate the water |'(impregnated
with ſpirit of Vitriol) from the ſublimuce , and
keep it for diflolving Corals and Pearls. Ten ppon
th2 precipitace powder, nour other water ofren,
until all its Acramony be removed ; afterward wath
1t with Cordial water, and dry it with molt gentle
beat. Doſe, in ſtrong conſtitutions, is four or five
grains, bat in the weak, two or three grains in a


Ie


G3


4 ©
o


Ve


36 Tyreciniom Chywicam: Or, Book


It is beneficial in the Peſt 3 diſeaſes of the Head,
Fevers, Laet-venerea, Leprofie, Drophe, and in
Ulcers. But in exhiditi-
Cautions in exhibiring of on hereof, thoſe fingu-
Antimony to be obſerved. lar Cautions delivered
by Crollize in his Baſilica
Chymica, are to be obſerved ; th2 firſt whereof is ;
That inthe uſe of Antimony, care be taken, that no
conſtipations be, cholick dolours, nor one of tae
principal Members hurr.
The ſecond ; nor that in thoſe, to whom Anti-
mony 18 given, a vein be cut either before or after
taking it. |

The thard ; that it be not exhibzced to cholerick
perſons, nor ſuch as difticultly vomit, and who have
otherwiſe but little firength ; bur unto thoſe, who
are prone to vomit, having a ſirong ſtomaci ; a
large and wide throac, and who are otherwiſe ac-
cuſtomed with eaſe to vomit, and in whom the fick-
ly matter eaſily comes upward,

The foarcth ; wh:re vomiting is needful, that a
little peaſe broth cently boiled, or fat broth of Hens,
or warm beer be cxh bired,and that certain times if
need be ; that the ſick may th2 more eaſily vomit,
and the ation of the medicine be accelebrated.


Liver of Antimony, or Crocus of Metals,

B.. Of crude Antimony one pound, of Salt-
peter, Z«1j.

Mx theſe in an Iron mortar, where having firſt
ground them well with a live coal, ſet fire to the
mixture; and it will preſently be Liverof Anti-
many. Afterward ſeparate the Saſt peter. Doſe,
from twelve to twenty grains, in »nfulion of white
Wine,


\ _
l
—_


_—


Book 1I. Chymical Zf. ages. 27
| wine, water of Cardans Benediftus, or other conve-
. | | nient Liguors z ſpecially in Peftlential Fevyers,


Another Calcination of Stibium, working only by
the inferionr parts,


each one pound, theſe ground together, and well

mixed , reverderate in 2 well luted crucible for
ewelve hours, encreaſing the fire to it by degrees.
The veſlel cooled, waſh the matter ſo oft with
| Azqnadulcs,as until all the acrimony be removed,
then dry andgrindi:. Doſe, from twenty five, to
| thirty five grains. |
Regulus of Antimony,


7 Re. Choice Antimony, and ſale decrepitate, of


We Re. Of Antimony, Salt-peter, and Tartar, of
4 ceachone pound, mix theſe pulyeriſed well toge-
| ther, then (eta crucible in the fire, that it may be

hot, Which deing done, inje& a ſpoonful of the
powder, and preſently cloſe the veſſel uncil the
fame ceaſe z then removing the cover, inje& more
of the powders, and cloſe it again, ſo doing till all
the powders be in ; after which, give fire of fuſion,
| and hakethe crucidle, that the Regulus may ſettle»
\ to the bottom. The crucible cooled, ſeparate the

| Kegulu: from the feces, and keep it, ,


And from the Feces, 4 Sulphuraurate Dtaphare-
tick, may in this manner be made. |


| K. The feces of the Regulus, as above prepared,
| andreduce them toa Lexiviam by digeſtion or &-
| bulition, then filter ic kot throngh brown paper.
To this Lexiviam when cold, add a little diſtilled
Vinegar, and you will find the Crocas edulcorated


% - —J a — A "
% "nd : wt <>
- : .


» | " _—_
» BI -- "uo . = _- L


G 4 | _ -


$$ Tyrocinlum Clymicam: Or, Book.


by many ablutions: Which dry,and keep apart.It wil
be an admirable ſudorifick and mandificative of the
bloud, moſt apt for expelling many diſeales. Doſe
from J/5- to J)j.


$-qnbuy Cag9: Marti Stellate.


KR. Of Horſe nails 3 pound, Antimony one
pound, make the Mars hut in a crucible, then add
the Antimony beaten, and cover it, giving hire of
ſuhon; afterward inject at times Fj. of Nitre ;
and laſtly, pour all oc 1nto a Con?. Again pour
the Regnlns into the crucible, and add Fj. of Nitre at
times, as above. Repeat this Labour hve or fix
times, until you have Kegu/us Adarcu Stelfate,


Diaphoretick Antimony.


BR. Of Antimony, and Salt-peter, of each one
pound, mix them, being pulveriſate together ; then
jet a crucible 1n the fie, that it may be hot 3 when
hot, 1cje& Z j. or thereabout of this mixtion, and
preſently cover th2 crucible, until the fume and
noe ceaſe, Afterward .nje& more of the powder,
and cloſe the veſſel as above, this do continually
until all cha mixcure be pur in, then adminiſter fire
ot L quefaGtion for a quarterof an hour, Which be-
mg dune, and the veflel cold, take out the matter
ard grind ic, m1313g 1t as above, with an equal
quantity of Salt-pe:er, caicine it 1n the ſame man-
ner as deicre. The matter afterwards being ground
and ed!corared with adjutions, reverberate in an
earthen veſſel cloſed, for the ſpace of twenty four
hours, until it be made a candid powder, ot wh:ch
the Dole is fifteen grains, |


aither ©


Chymical Eſſays.


* Another,


Re. Of che venenate ſc:'m of the two Dragons
| once rectifyed, $111). On which, when reſolved in
heat, pour ſpirit of Ballamick ſalt, F.i1j, from this
mixture, diſt] away tbe Liquor in ſand to a dryneſs.
The earti take 9utz and when very well ground, on
3t repuur its own diftiltl2d Liquor, with Zj. of freſh.
Baliamick ſpirit, and diſt] as 5eſore.

Afterward to the powder ground as before, a-
24in pour on the diſtilled Liquor anew , adding 0-
ther Fig. of ſpirit ; and proceed again as at firſt.
Thendeliver the dry and ground matter to be exa-
mined by Y ulcan,for twenty four hours, continual-
ly irring it with a clean iron Inſtrument. At length
from it often abſtract the Alcohol of wine, that a can-
| did dry powder may remain. It is of ſingular uſe m
| all peſtiſential gets, and malignant Fevers gene-
| rally infeſtivg. :


—
——_— ——


CHAP. XIII.
Of Calcination, and preparation of Mercury,


Mey is a Mineral body, compounded. of
ſudtile ſulptureous earth and water ſRrongly

commixed. Theerthy ſubſtance thereof muſt de

purged from ns groſs ſulphureous terreſtreity, and

its watery ſubſtance, frum the ſuperfluous humid1'y

1n it contained. Mercury is two-fold, natural a”

artificial,

The natural, active, Natural Mc: cucy,
and well purifyed mn


_—


=


mar:


© oe UN nm -
FY ea. ea ,


0
— &. a
*£ be


go ” Tyrocininm Chymickim : Or, Book IT]


Almagro near Calatrava, in the Kingdom of C aſtile,
zs found living, per ſe, lowing gand coagulate' into
cinnabar which 1s extra&ed by force of fire. This
molt ancient MHinera, Pliny calls the continent of
eter nal Liquor.

Like unto this is found in /dria, a Village of the
County of Goritz in Slavonia, But the Spaniſh ex-
cels in goodneſs, although [:rjia be more ferrile.
But there is one thing remarkable, and worthy of
admiration, viz, that although the bordering
Towns and people of /dria, are almoſt eyery year
aMicted with a Peſtiferous Lve:, yet: from this evil
they ſometimes are wont to be wholly free, which
(I going to that place abut eight years ſince) was
confirmed to me by the people, thata certain man
of a very great age had obſerved it ſo in himſelf, and
had received like Information from his Ancettors.
From whence, as well as from other innumerable
examples, it 1s fou1d tha: Mercury is an Alexiphar-
»4con againſt all corruption, and putrefation. Al-
ſo no leſs ſtupendious, and nigh to a prodigy, 1s that
which I there noted : There was a decrepit Old
man, who, having ſp2nt the whole time of his Life
Nn preparing cinnabar, did perpecually tremble ;
and he did fo dealbate gold coin, by compreſſing it
m his hand, as the native colour thereof did wholly
diſappear.

There js alſo other Mercury found in the Moun-
tain called Gimnavoda, fix miles diſtant from Cra-
covia 1N Poland, berween Tarnava, Ribie » and Stre-
leizky, which at certain times of the year breaks oat
on the ſuperficies of the earth, eſpecially in the Au-
tumnal quarter, Yet abo'lt the Fealt of Jobn Bap-
tift, ] there gathered many grains like Peaſe in the
roots of green tings. Buc this Mzrcury 1s very a-
- queaus,


a


[


_ =


]


» PP «+ gp — TIF!


queous, and far inferiour to thatof Sclavenia,as well
as to the Spaniſh. The natural is alſo found in ma-
ny other places, and ſometimes in Gold and Silver
Mines.

The Artificial, and its Artificial Mercury,
way of preparing is ſuf-
ficiently known to Artiſts, viz. by reſuficative ſalts,
as well from middle Minerals as Metals, Yet in
this City, I have known many credible perſons, and
of great Authority and Dignity, who afhrm, they
have extracted living Mercury, not from Minerals
only, but from humane bloud, firſt calcined, and
from Plants alſo.

That Mercury 1s the
beſt, which if a dram ofit The ſign of the goodneſs of
be put intoa very clean Mercury.

Suver ſpoon, and that

ſet over a fire, ſhall after Cyaporation leave a yel-
low or white ſpot. But what thall blacken the
ſpoon before it can be adhibued to medicinal uſe,
muſt chus de purged,

Re. Of Mercury, and of diſtilled Vinegar, of
each one pound, put them in a ſtrong veſlel with an
handful of prepared ſalt, ſtir them very well toge-
ther for a quarter of an hour, that they may be
mixed, and the Vinegar receive the blackneſs of
Mercury to it ſelf, Then pour out the Vinegar with
the Mercury into a glaſs-bdaſon,and ſo often waſh ic I
with warm water, as until all the blackneſs and fal- +J
ſatore be ſeparated from jt. When it is dryed,put it
in the former veſſel with Vinegar and ſalt as adove,
repeating the former Labour three or four times,
and at laſt paſs it through a 8kin. Batthis 1s a vul-
garand imperfe& purgation 5- a more perfect fol-


lows.
Re. Mer-,_.
. WE: 2,


=Y
* <4


$


Tees.
. 4% «


*


. Ls 0. 0
%


y” Tyrocemwnurm Chymicym : Or, Book If,
"Re. Mercury precipitate, cinabariſate, or ſabli-
mate 3 mix 1t with two parts of 1's on weight of
calcined Tarcaar, or Calx-vive, diſtil it by a glaſs
Retort in fire of ſuppreſſion, or in a cloſe Reverbe;
ratory, applying a large Receiver half fall of wa-
ter. So you will have Mercury purified berter than
n the precedent manner.

Yet the moſt perfe& way of purifying Mercury,
than which a betrer cannot be given, is the Amalga-
mation thereof with perie& bodies z diſtilling it
certain times by Retort, every time removing the
earthy, ſulphureous, and ferent feces, and a new a-
5+ tzand at length paſſing it throngh a
$kin,


A Whyte Precipitate,


Mercury is diſſolved in Aguz fortts, and by aff1-
fon of ſalt water precipited inco a white powder.
The diflolvent is by inclination (eparated, and the
precipitate, by many ablurions, with digeſtion freed
from all its (altneſs and acrimony. Then is it dry-@
ed and waſhed with Ryſe water, and again dry-
ed, Doſe internally, from eight grains tv ten,
chiefly in Venereal diſtempers, Ir pargeth only by
the inferiour parts. |


= =
A Red Prempiate,
After diſſolution of Merciry in Aga fortes, eva-
orate it toa dryneſs with violent fire, and to the


ottom of the veſſel 2 Red precipitate powder wall
adhere ; eſpecially fit f5r venereal Ulcers.


Pre-


s ok I.
Precipitate Mercury, From the bet, the beft
6s made.


ee i mee


' Be. Of Mercury purifyed Fiuij, On which pour 4
ort of ſulphur rectifyed Zvuz. digeſt ir for two
7 days in ſand, then by Rerort diſtil it, three times
cohobating, laſtly with violent fire, that the Retort
may be Red hot. Which being done, take out the
white maſs, and grind it; and with not water waſh
it often, until you ſee the precipitate turned to a
| moſt yellow powder, upon which, burn ſpirit of
wine thrice. $0 may it be ſecurely given into the
body. Doſe, from three or four grains, to fix, in
purging Extrafts, conſerve of Roſes, or ſugar of
Roſes. It helps in inhirmities canſed by putrefacti-
on of humours, and in deploradle diſeaſes. It pu-
r:fies the bloud in the Gout, Droplie, and in all
continued Fevers, it 1s a principal Arcanum.


* Another Calcination, and Precipitation of
Mercury.


Mercury diftilled from Sel, or Luna, and purifye .
ed as above, either per ſe, or withan eighth part of
Sol, or Luna, preeipitace into a Red powder, in
, this manner,
Re. Aſmall veſſel with along neck, in which put
- Z111j, of Mercury; place the veſſel upon an Iron
© plate ina fornace of ſand ,admimniſtring a continued
1 hre, for the ſpace of fourcy days, The neck of the
veſlel muſt ſtand above the ſand fix or e32he thumbs
dreadth z and for the firſt ren or twelve days, the
Mercury that thall aſcend to the neck of the veſflel,


as maſt be certain times 4 day, every day- thruſt down


-
'F
» «a
, oo
by
; 4 "


F . ©%


=
%


1 - -
by.4 ny


94 Tyrociniom Chymicam : Or, Book IT.

and precipited to the, fiery bottom, with an Iron
Road, having a Linnen cloa.h bound to the end of it,
as Geber teacheth. This way of precipituing Mercu-
ry, is not-the method of the modern, but ancient

» Philoſophers. The days being expired, if any crude
Mercury be found in the bottom, 1t muſt be ſepara-

ted from the Red powder, which hath wonderfal

faculties in medicine. For 1t 1s a molt excellent

Cathartick jn the Leprofie, ſo kindly looſning the

belly, as it may ſafely be given to Chifdren, and

Women with child : tharp bumours it mitigates ;

it purgeth our phlegm, and amends che hot and dry

conſtitution of the bowels. Doſe fix grains,


Another.


Diffolve Mercury in Agua forts, and precipitate
it according to Art, by exhalation of all its humidi-
ty,that the precipitate may be Red. When pulveri-
ſate,pur it int9a (trong veſlel, pouring on it ſo much
Vinegar three times diſtilled as will ftand above it
five fingers ; place the veffel in ſand, adminiſtring
fire, that the vinegar may gently boil for the ſpace
of fix hours, and the precipitate be wholly diſ-
ſolved. |

Filter the ſolution, and upon it pour Liquor im- -
pregnated with the ſoul of the world ; and preſent-=
ly the Mercury will de ſeparated from the Diflol..
vent, which muſt be waſht and dryed, and ſo reſer-.
ved for uſe. Daſe, from four grains to five. |


CTIA. 95
's Precipitation of Mercuzy in 4 moments


Put the Red pulveriſate macter in a crucible, ex-
poſing it to a violent fire for four honrs ſpace, until
4t do in a manner begin to vitrifie, and adhere eo
the ſides of the crucible, Then remove it from the
fire, and when cold, grind it to a ſubtile powder,
and put it intoa gla's veſſel, pouring Aqua Regs
reaifyed upon it ; then ſet it in digeſtion tor twen-
ty four hours, which time elapſed , by inclination
evacuate the tinged water ; and povr on Other wa-
rer, repeating the ſame Labour ſo oft, as until it
ſhall have extracted all the Tincture. The eyacua-
tions diſtil to an Oleaginy, Of chis oil Re, Fj, and
pou ic upon Ji11j. of crude Mercury, and fo it wall


e precipited ina moment. Nor will the oil ad. *


here to the Mercury,if it be diſtilled off with Rrong
fire. After exhalation of the oil, ſome of the Mer-
cury Will be ſublimed, bur the greacer part will re-
main fixed, Its uſe is in augmentation of Sols and
moſt red vitrification.


A Diaphoretick Precipitate,


Diſſolve Mercury diſtilled from Sol, or Lana,
and purged, as above in Aqua forts, which in @ veſ-
ſel with a long heck, and proportionace Alembeck
annexed, abſtract by fire of the third degree with
double cohobation, that the Mercury may be made
Red; which muſt afterwards be edulcorated by 'cal«
cining in a crucible, placed in the fire, continually
movang it with an Iron rod for a quarter of an hotr
or thereabout : or elſe with the following water.


x "I 0" Sy


RN h
" * $4.5 wha * 1 CY * 4 p
. p ” « :
: :


Re. Of diſtilled vinegar two pound, of the phlegm.


: ” ,
my o
p k
Mo” 4


F. yrocihium Chymicum : Or, "Book I "ts
of Allom * pound, of reverberated Calx of Egg-
ſhels 5 di{til chem together to a dryneſs. Of this
water Re. three pound;ot the aforeſaid precipitate:
Mercury, one pound; mix and digeft therh for one
day natural, afterward diſtil them by Alimbeck, :--
with three cobobations, toward the end encreafing --
the fire, thit the marter may be well dryed ; which
circalate {or one day natural with ſpirit of wine.
Then ſeparate the ſpirit by diſtillation 3 and again
circalate and di{til ic. Repeating the ſame lavout
the fourth crime.

This is the true preparation of precipitate Mer-
cury, for expelling ifinite diſeaſes, and?eſpecial'y
Lnes V enerea, wherher it be internally taken (for fo
elaborated it only provokes ſwear) or externally
applyed with Butter cr ary other medicament.


A Diaphoretuck Precipttate of Cinnabar.


Re. Of vulgar cinnabar Zj. Of prepared ſalt $15.
Grind and mix theſe together, and in a convenient
veſſel, pour on them of oil of ſulphur made per Cam-
pane Fi). digeſt theſe three days in aſhes, after-
ward by violent fire, cauſe all the humidity to eva-

orate. In the bottoma waite maſs will remain,
which mutt he edulcorated by frequent ablution.
Doſe, from fx grains to ten, chiefly in venereal. di-
Rempers. Ic 1s given with conſerye of Roſes,' and
- three or four ounces of decoRion of Sarſeparillas


Diaphereisck Mt: cary of Venus,


Re. O: filings of Copper, Zj. Of Merc'iry mete-


oriſate 3 j- |
. Mers


\P...


Mecrcurial- ſalt, Fijſs, Pur theſe ground and+ ,
mixed together in a ttrong veſſel, which place jn |
ſand, and adminiſter fire until all 5e melted, as
wax. Then take the veſſel hot as jt is, and put it in
cold [ water ] that it may break in ſunder, and the
greeniſh Mercury flow out, which, when dryzd,
par into a {mal Retort, with ſpirit of ſulphur or Vis
triol, and in aſhes ſet it in digeſtion for ore day na-'
tural. Which being done, diftil it in fand, twice
cohobating it; then waſh it twice, or thrice, and
the laſt eime with cordial water. \ |

It isa moſt excellent Diaphoretick B22oardick
Remedy againſt the Peſt; if two hours after the
firſt afſault of the diſeaſe, it be taken in Liquor, it
peeſerves from deata. Doſe one, or two grains in
appropriate water.


- - >» wa) > . % 6 ll. p 7 4 - a : :
pw % 2 F 4 0 F + -- RP ” . , 4 by
<#4 ” 6 od kv þ- : y wo 'y 3;
0 4A -—
4 p y i g + i .


————


CHAP. XIV.


Of Calcination of Saturn, and Fapiter.


Ince as Geber ſaith, ſolution of bodigs 15 im-
pohidle, the compoſition being unknſſtn : de-
ore we come to calcinations of Metals, to ſpeak
omewhat touching the natures of them, will be in
is place yery ſuitable. «+
Rigntly did Hermes, the Father of Phyloſophers
anderſtand, when he ſaid 3 That which 1s ſuperiour,
$38 that which is inferiour, For by the ſame reaſon
nature doth producePlants,and other Veg=tables
e ſuperficies of the earth; (g dothſh? in ſubter-,
nean places generate metals, though more flouly. =
if a longer ſpace'of time, of the humid untuons 2
pour of Argentvive , and ſulphur yitriolate dy,. *»


=- P

2 - - 7 +7 L .
4 ; —_ "—- vF 4 =
Ns * %# +» 4 s.... bang — 4 LARS Rn & th.


=#

wm
vx
z*th
- .
—_


-
1% < \


© Re


- by = S


-
as l Ds
w,


fd ee re ator wetted IC a
185 Own heat (containing properties an it ſelf) des
cocting Mercury, Whence Hydrargyry is {aid to bg,,


4 j#


ne dond Aka


*"'2


9 theſe are repreſented the four Elements, which,”
are the remote matter of all natural bodies. For,
Mercury, as Feminine cold, and humid, holds the
pre perty of water, and air ; and ſulphur, as maſcu-
ine, bot, and dry, bears che repreſentation of Fare
agg Earth, If any ſball affirm, that as well of the
vapour as juicyneſs [found in Mines] the matcer of
metals conlifts, I will not gainſay it. For when I,
the laſt Summer, in Hungaria, deſcended into the
Silver Mine in Schemnitz, , about fikccen hundred
Cubits deep; 1 Learved of the Miners, (who, by
reaſon of the exceeding heat of the Mine, did work
without any cloaths, not having ſo much as a ſhire
upon their naked bodies) that Mineral vapours did . -
frequently ariſe from the center of the earth, and
extinguiſh theirbehts, and themſelves alſo, if they *
» did not make haſte away : and that, ſome time af-
ter, when they entred the Pit, they ſhould find thoſe
damps or vapours coagulared into a maſs to the
hdes of the wall 3 which with a gentle touch, would
be fluid, as oil. Whence it may ſafely be inferred,
that toe vapour is the more remote matter of Me-
fal, bat the ſulphureous and mercurial juice , the
more near matcer of the ſame, Alſo I have at pre-
ſent with me, mineral Stones (from the ſame
: Mine, ard oihers) whicheither che vapour, or ſuch
b_ 2N unctuous humid mineral juice bata penetrated z
| and m {ome of them is plainly to be ſeen, a crude
matter, not ſufficiently cocted ;z in others modes
raie:y cocte.. from one pound of wiich,zvj.0f pure :*
(yver may be taken, and about Iſs, of Gold. In o«
-. lfers1$ matter periectly decoded, ſo as the filver ,
"B&H 7 1s


ne


»
©", ®. . 4 . _
S <4 you %*% - 4 a4 4g 4


4 Þ-, 72 * 2


o
.


the Mother of merals, and ſulphur the Father. And: *


þ


-


]


| at Eat
"i : Ef , * 4
V2. 4% So P44 | <=y -


”


WA - /- Sax] %-'Þ A 49
be, LAS. Wo ods of +. *
* ”
$ 8 9 y ”


AY: viſible on the fupesficies; and real hoot-,
ings of pure gold may be behefd, - Alchough thegs
” be ſome, who, by reaſon of certain [frivolaus rea®
# ſons, deny ey and ſulphur to be the matter of
"metal ; yet Phyloſophers, who haye experience in
5 metals, believe che ſame, and that ſuch- a. matter is
# found in all Mines and veins of. the earth, do with
one conſent wicneſs. With whoſe opinion , the.
judgment of all Miners, - Melters, and tryers :of
Meals agaee. Likewiſe PhyGiciang .know, that all
diſeaſes of ſuch as labour in Mines, ariſe from the
admiſſion of crude, ſuiphureous, and mercurial ſpi-
rits into the body : aud that merals in external af-
fes, perform the lame that Mercury doth. Yea,
that all mecals, with no great ladour, may be  redu-
ced into, Argentvive, and Argentvive 1nco all metals,


' $ well known to Payloſophers.


-
3


Calcination of $4turn.


.
Melt Lead in a veſfel of earth or Iron, ant parge
it from its Scoria's. Then encreaſe the fire, that it
' may de red hot in the veſſel, continually ſtirring it
with an Iron ſpatula; until it be reduced to a Ca{x, |
which if fred, and afterward longer reyerberatedy, |
will de Minium. if


Calcination of Fuptter,


R, Engliſh Tin, not ſophifticate (which you
may know , by its , weight and malleation) four,
pound, melt it in a pot with a flat bottom, and. .
purge it from its Scoria's. Then inject a lhictle falg®:
Armoniack 5 and encreating the fire t3] the pot bs, /


red hot, caſt n one pound and half of prepaied ſalty!


=—_
d.4 4 e$'#* 4 a #
p = .


+. F


- .
-Y »
ue
WV. -


*
af


o hd
© * = 4
">,


"as
+ Sa "M8, *-F"


v6 Tyrocinlam Chywicum : Or, Book1I.
ſolong ſtirring it with an Tron ſparula, as until it be
reducedto n Calx; which afterward, by violent
fire muſt be reduced to a body, and ſeparated from
the impure and blackned ſalt.

Again mix it with one pound of prepared falt,
ind calcine it as aboye, Wath the Calx from ell its
ſaltneſs, and reverberate it for eight days, that it
may be turned to an Alcobo/ : From which, by af-
fuſion of 4/kaliſate vinegar, a ſalt is extrated, die
geſtion for certain days being adhibited, and the
matter afterward faltred and coagulated.


Otherwiſe,


Tayiter may alſo be calcined, as Satern, without
any addition of ſalt, Or elſe they yaay be calcined
in a wooden Bowl well coated wit if they
be firſt melted in a crucible, andf ence pour-
ed into the ſaid wooden veſlel, and there be ſtirred
about very ſwiftly


Drapheretick Jupiter,


B:, Of Engliſh Tin filed, or as above calcined
either in a veſlel of wood, or earth not glazed, Fij.
Of Mercury ſublimed F1'j. Mix them, and by Re-
rcet diftil them in fire of ſand, applying a Receiver
half full of water 3 and when it begins to diſtil, give
a moderate fire of po until all che Liquor


ſhall be diſtilled, and precipited into the water.
But what ſhall be (nblimed to the neck of the Re.
tort, ſcrape off, and digeſt it with what is diſtilled
for one night, The water impregnated with ſpirit
of vitrio!, ſeparate and keep it for uſe : but dry the.
Cax 3 of waich the doſe is from-four grains to ts


tw ; .


CHAP. XV.
of Calcination of Mars, 41nd Y enss. ot


Calcination of Mars,


Re. Offilings of Steel by Ventilation and Ablu-
tion, wy em cleanſed from filth two pound, of
prepared ſalt three pound, mix them,and in a pot
for one day natural reverberate them, Then take
out the maſs, and grind it, afterward diffolve it in
hot water, 2nd wath it ſo often as until itbe freed
from all ſaltneſs and terreftreity. Which being
done by grinding and fifting, reduce it to a ſubtile
powder. Then again reverberate it, for eight or
reg days,until-the ſuperficies be converted to a moſt
red Crocs, arid +1tmpalpable 3 which removed, re-
verberate che remaimung part ſo oft, and ſo long, as
till it be all reduced to a Crocus.

Note, That the veſlel containing the Limacure,
muſt have a cover, that no coals or aſhes may fall
mto the Crocus, yet the cover mult be ſo placed, as
between it and the veſlel, the flame may have free
accels.

Another way.


Crocus Marti is alſo prepared by putting ſmal '$
plates of Steel red hot, and ſparkling into rolls of ©
ſulphur, by che force of which they melt, and fall 5
down in ſmal grains, into a ſubjaceit veſſel half full.
of cold water, or vinegar, Dry the grams, and
2rind th2m to a moſt ſubtile powder, and if you
will, you may reverberate them to a {rom in the
{pace of fix or eight hours. |

N7"INl £8 0. It.


_—_


: . Lo C - F.&
W — oo HORRII—
*Y Z
«ht» oo


3903 Jroct nigh” '& 7 #2 Or, Book


Ir hath'virtue of expelling, opening, and atte-
nuating 3 which filings of Steet ao acquire, being
reduced to a muſt pure Alcobel, by the benefic of fime

N ple Water. -& /
Otherwiſe.


Diſſolve $j. of filings of Iron in Zviij. of Agua
f 7145 and diftit off the Aqua forte by Alembick” in
ſand. So you will have Zjſ#. of moſt red Crocs,


Otherwi ſe.


Reverberate. filings of Jdars, with a like
quantity of beaten ſulphrr, for four or five ours,
Je bath an aperitive virtue 3 but it will have a_grea-
ter, if it be calcined for half an; hour, or thereabout
with double its own wesght of ſulphur beaten ſmal.


Another Calcination of Mars.


Digeſt filings of Iron or Steel in vinegar thrice
diſtilled, until it be coloured. Pour off what is tin-
ged, and poltr on ocher freſh vinegar ſo often, as un-
nilit ſhall have extracted all the TinAure, Filter

 thEevacuations, and diſtil them, and in the botrom

- will remain a red powder, which muſt be reverbera-
ted for one day natural into an impalpable Crocus.
Ithath virtue of conſtringing.


Otheratſe,


Creens Hartis is allo made with oil of ſalpaur
thus, Pour oil of ſulphur and ſpirit of wine, of
each an equal part into an Iron ſpoon, and by gen=:
tle heat evaperate it, till the humidity be w_—
med :


T4 .
les --


Book II, © Chymical Eſſays.
red: afterward if it ſettle. for certain days, you
will find a*moſt ſubtle powder, which keep. na
2 Phial firmly cloſed ; that no air may enter, be-
cauſe it will reſolve if expoſed co the air.

If ſome grains of this be given in brogh, or other
convenient Liquor, it will be a true Reſtorative of
the Livery helping 1n all difeaſes thence ariſing, as
th: Drepſie, and ſuch like,


Calcination of Venus,


Venus is diſſolved in Aqus forts, and by affalion of
warm water, \vich a ſmal piece of Iron or Nlver,
ic 15 precipired co the bottom of the veſſel. Or elſe
plates of Copper are reverderated in a Potters' for-
nace into burnt braſs, waich with eafie contrition
js reduced toa Ca/x. Or {mal plategare pur into
a crucible, with an equal part of ſulphur beaten
ſmal ; making S. S. S. that 1s, lay upon lay, and
ſo reverberated into As uſtuw.


CHAP. XVI.
Of Calcination of Luna, and Sol,


Calcination of Luna.


Iflolve Luna in eAqua forts, and dy affu1on cf

ſale water, pre@pit it into a bright Calx (to
the bottom of the veſſel) which by frequent pour-
ing on of common water, muſt be edulcorated, and
then dryed, Re. Of this Ca[x Fj. -of prepared ſalt,
Sij. of Salt-armoniack ' $ij. Mix theſe well in a
glaſs moxtar, and reyerberate the mixture, for eight
H 4


\ NH
I
" p; = _— bl


103


"104 "TYognum. mica; Or, - Bo 0”

days. Afce rward extraft a tmRure with ſpirit of |
wine Alkaliſate,and circulate it, It 1s profitable in
Meanja, and other diſeaſes of the Brain, |


Calcination of Sql,


Make Arhalgamation of Sol, by purifyed cement,
wath fix parts of Mercury, as follows. R. A chin
plate of gold, and cut it into exceeding ſmal pieces;
which put into a crucible placed in ſuch an heat, as
the gold may only be redhorg then in another
crucible make your Mercury hot, and preſently
por it'out upon the gold, and mix them with a
ſtick, that they may be incorporated, Then cool
it, and having admirably well waſhed the maſs, paſs
it through a skin, and preſs out the (iiperfl 101s
Mercury, that the maſs may remain conveniently
hard, which muſt be long ground, with double its
weight of prepared ſalt ina glaſs mortar, ſo as no-
thing of the Amalgama appear. Put-all this in-
to a ſtrong crucidle, covered, and luted, only a lit-
tle hole left in the Luting, and reverberate it for
one day natural ; taking great heed, that the' 2old
melt not. This. being done, you will find vour
old calcined, but the Mercury and alt vanithed.
Then a new amaigimate your gold, and paſs it
through a skin as above; and mix it with double.
its wezght of ſn[phurv:ve, grinding them very well
togetrer. Aﬀrer which, put che mixture into an
earthen glazed pan, pour ng on it the beſt ſpirit of
wine, unto which ſet fire, that | may burn' upon ir.
After the deflagration of which, and of the \1lphar,
you will find the gold ſpungeous, and mich acte-
puated, eſpecially, if the ſame proceſs be twice or
thrice repeated. Sore grind the Amalgatha with
, * flowers


.


flowers of ſulphur, and having pur it if 2 crucible
phited in burning coals, they continually tic ie
with an Iron rod, antil the Mercury fly away in
fume.

But before gold can be calcined: with Philoſo.
phick calcination, it muſt be cemented, as is ſaid
either with vulgar, or Kegale cement. , The vulgar
cement, is thus made. CY

Re. Of flour of Tiles, Fvvj. Salt! prepared,


1). h
White vitriol F j. Salt-peter, and e£rgo, of
each F/,

Tne Kegale cement, which delongs only to moſt

pure gold, is thus made.

Re, Of flour of Tiles, four parts. Salt-armoni-
ack, Salt-gem, and comman (alt prepared, of
each one part, Theſe commixed and united,
muſt be moiſtned with Urine, pri

Some make thin plates of gold red hot before

they are compounded, and ſuffer them to cool ; that
if any defilement adhere to the ſuperficies, it may
he conſumed, and leave more free acceſs, and ad-
mittance for impreſſi2n co the ſharpneſs of the
medicines. All being duly prepared, ſprinkle the
powder equally in the cementatory pot, that it may
be a finger chick. Then pur in your thin plates; of
eold moiſtned with urine in ſuch order, and ſo &
qually placed, as one may not touch the other z
jeaſt body cohering to body, the matter be burnt,
and by encreaſe of heat, the edges be melted toge-=
ther. Having diſpoſed the firſt lay of plates in or-
der as above, then on them ſprinkle of the medi-
cine a2ain, the thickneſs of one finger, and fo pro-


ceed to lay in mote plates, ang gavier them ; ſo do-
ing, even tothe brim of cie gf which mutt be fill-


\


4 << 4


"WE
n 4%.


ES. a


oo — Chymical Efſay, og”


x06 Tyrocinium Chymicans : Or,. Book Il.
ed with the powder, the ſame thickneſs as was, in
the bottom, viz. the thickneſs of a finger tranſ-
yerfed, Laſtly, put on the cover, without any ſpis
racle, if for vulgar cement : but if for. the &egale,
the cover mult have a ſmal hole, The fire muſt be
adminiſtred to it for twenty four hours, ſa as the
pot may be always red. The work ended, cleanſe
the places with an Hares foot from the powders ad-
bering, and waſhthem in win?, and dry them.

The moſt perfeRt cement of.all, is that which
follows : Melt gold with doudvle its weight of moſt
pitre Copper, reduce them to plates or leaves, as
thin as paper ; which cement for forty or fifty hours
m a ſtrong fire; making lay upon lay, as in Repale
rement 1s faid with flour of Tiles, common le,
Coleothar, /E£rupo, and alittle ſalt armoniack, mjx-
ed with trong vinegar,” In this Examen, all the


4 vaniſheth, the incombuſtible ſulphur, and


Tin&ure thereof remaining in the ſubſtance of the
gold ; according as Gebey, in Chap. 18. of forna-
ets, witneflethz who ſaith, that from Copper a
moſt clean, tinging, and fixed ſiIphur is extracted.


Mctallick Bexoardich.


:>Difſolye of moſt pure gold in Philoſophick wa- .
ter iz. to which add drop by drop of gummoſe Li-

_ quor ſeven times reQifyed $j. In mixing theſe will
be'great ebulition. Place tue veſſel upon hot aſhes
for three or four ours. Then precipitate the matter
m common, water, and ivaſh it often; Laſtly with
cordial ryater,and then dry it. And you jill have a
ſtone of wonderful virtue : of whic ſix grains C- |
orepiouſly provokes ſwear. E TS IRONS:


— |
CE \
- , bw [9 b C =
FEA "IR : p 3 $7 - * ct
G > 3 4 - 4 po y . = - n
« : + #4 = p TY a


ddd — KA ] —_— —_— — ”


NA H, Cc - SY Of. 107 IF:
; .


Cerannocryſen Diaphoretick,


Difſolve moſt pure Sol in pageich water,
and digeſt it for one night in ſand. Then pour up-
on it oul of Tartar drop by drop, until the ebulition
ceaſe, and the Calx of gold be precipited to the
bottom 3 which muſt be edulcorated with many ad-
lutions, and with moſt gentle fice dryed, Doſe three
or folir grains.

Of this Diaphoretick, another more excellent
may be prepared in this manner.

Be Of this Cerannocryſon. five or fix grains, and
putit in a ſmal filver veſſel, and on it pour the bet


| re&ifyed ſpirit of wine, waich ſet on fire, and harig


a Chryſtaline glaſs with a ſufficiently large Orifice
over it. As ſoon as the ſpirit of wine ceaſeth to
burn, the Ceraunccryſon performs its office, and a
certain Earthy part will be ſublimed to the fides of
the-glaſs. Repeat this Labour four or five times,
and waſh the glaſs with ſpirit of wine, that tne Calx
may ſertle to the bottom,which muſt be dryed.Doſe
One Or tWO grains. WH


108 Thcinium Chymicow : Or, Book I.


CHAP. XVII.
Of Salts.


The way of extrafing eſſential Salts from Herbs,
. without calcination.


Re. A Great quantity of Cardans benediftns, bruiſe
it in a ſtone or wooden mortar , afterward
ma large veſſel, with a great quantity of water boil
It, until half be conſumed ; then ſtrongly expreſs
I, and ſtrein the expreſſion. The Colature 12216
boil to the thickneſs of Liquid honey. This juice 0
Carduns benedifias put into a glaſs veſſel, and ſet it in
a cold place for certain days; & in the bottom of the
veſlel,a chriſtaline ſalt angular,like ſalt gem,will be
ated. From which pour off the juice, waſh ic
with water of Cardux:s benedifins, and when dryed,
diligently keep it. For it is a moſt excellent Re-
medy in che Peſt; if two grains more or leſs be ex-
hibited in ſpirit of Carduw benedifine , they abnn-
dantly provoke ſweat, By the ſame reaſon, and in
. ike manner a ſalc may be extraſted from other
herds, which ſhall in virtue far exceed that which
xs made of the athes of herbs.


Effential Salt, Cream, or Chryſtals of
T artar. |


Re.. White Tartar of Montiſpelienſity which 48 the.
deR,, reduce it to powder, andin a large braſs or
won Kettfe boil it wich a great quantity of water,

b- anti] half che water be conſumed. Then remove ut
: rom the fire, and if yoa will paſs it through Hyp-


L.2
= Y 7
-” 7
*


pocrares fleeve or 2 Linnen clozth,into +firm earthen =
veſſel. When it is cold, pour off the water by in-
clination : and the Salt adhering to the fides of the
veſſel, by frequent affuſion of water gather ; being
ſeparated from the feces,

And again as above, boil it, waſh it, ſeparate it
from the feces, and dry it. Then reduce it to pow-
der ; of which the Doſe is $j. in a little broth, or
appropriate medicine. Ir hath virtue of breaking
ehick and tartarous humours, and of ofiening ob=
ſtruted paſſages.


Salt, or Aſkali of Imperatory.


Calcine the herb dryed to a whiteneſs, extra&
the Salt with diſtilled water of the ſame herb, oc
elſe with common water digeſting it for one night.
Afterward pour off the water by inclination, ta-
king heed you diſturd not the feces. Ponr on other
water the ſecond and third time, digeſting and e=-
vacutting, without diſturbing the feces as before.
Then filter and coagulate che three evacuations y0-
gether, 1f the coagulum be not ſufficiently white,
calcine in a crucible to a redneſs, taking heed it
melt not, then reſolve, filter, and coagulate it.

Thus is Salt extraRted from all herbs; but in
ſuch calcination, the volatile or eſſential ſalt pg»
riſheth ; and the elemental ſalt only remains,


Salt of Tartare


Strew or ſpread Tartar in an earthen unglazed
veſſel, with a flat botrom, the thickneſs of one fin.
ger. Afterward reverderate it to a whiteneſs, for
the ſpace of fire or fix hours, with a fire ſo moderate


_-
.


%. FY _
FT «<
CF .


2; yr0cmmin "Chymvicams - C 2 Book ;
to prevent fuſion, that the veſſe] may be but juſt
Red. |

The Tartar thns calcined to a whiteneſs, pour
out into common water, digeſt it, then filter and
coagulate, |


Salt of (orals, |


This is done by digeſting Corals beaten ſmal, in
vinegar thrice diſtilled for one night. Afterward
the ſolutioryis filtred, and the vinegar evaporated
to a dryneſs. So the ſalt of Corals remains in the
bottom of the veſlzl.


£4


Its virtues are excellent ; for it cleanſeth the | :
blod throughout the whole body, reſtores the pri. |?
ſine vigour of health 3 Fluxes of the Womb, and
Belly, and Hemroides it Rops;z It ſtrengthens the Y.
heart, and ſtomach ; removes obſtructions of the |I©
bowels, and diſſolves congealed bloud. It is pro» o
fitable in the Dropfie,Convulfions,Paralyſie,Stones [5
Saftocation of the Matrix, if exhibited with water
convenient againſt preter-natural affects. Doſey E
from ten grains, to Jj. or Yij, with reſpe& to age, "
and tie yvehemency of the diſeaſe. A

Salt of Colcothar,

The Colcothar is puc into Rain water, and the
falt by digeſtion for one day or night comes forth |
into the ſame, 1s flered, and ceagulated. Ifthe re- If:
maining redneſs be five or fix times again calcined, p
and the ſaltneſsevery time waſhed our ; it at length I
will be ſiveet, and 1s called *ſweetnels of vitril, r


Which will be the greater, if the Colcothar be pre-
pared of vitriol of Venwe, and it js a preſent Reme» Ft
dy an malignant Ulcers. |

% V om4-


—_—


bs F < y - : w yl E by 8 a
4 : - _ b.04 \
L Fa ” 4 J » m % p 450 A 4 : - k 4 "»
"2 >»


F omatiye Vitriol,


Diſlolve white Vitriol in common water, filter
and coagulate itz repeat the ſame Labour the ſe-
cond time : After which, diflolye it in Roſg wa-
ter and coagulate,


Otherwiſe.


Diſlolve white Vitriol in diſtilled water,filter xt,

& in 4 glaſs veſſel exhale the water,until it contra
a skinnyneſs. Then ſet the veſſel in a cold place, thar
it may be CryBallized. The CryRals ſeparated, the
remaining humour evaporate, and again (et to Cry-
Rallize as above ; and this Labour repeat tae ſecond
time. Thirdly,diflolve the Chryſtals in Roſe water,
and as before exhale and Cryſtallize ; thea wita
gentle fire dry the Cryſtals.

Doſe from Jj. to 3/5. in a draught of Wine or
Beer, or with Conſerve of Roſes. Ic happily ope-
rates.in Fevers, Aﬀ=&as of the Ventricle, Catharrs,
Maw-worms, Peſt, &c. |


Salt, or Fitriol of Mars.


Re. Spirit of vitriol, or oil of ſulphur per Campa-
ne, although not reifyed Fj. With this mix Zi. of:
common water. Unto this mixtion, add Zj. of fi
lings of Iron ; all which, in acloſe veſſel, place in
hot ales, that it may boil very gently, for the ſpace
of fix hours. Afterward permit it to cool; and in
he, veſſel you will find vitriol generated green and
plendid; which is diſſolved un hea?, and in cold
oagulated.

Salt,


44 £<
* % ,
"FILL


yoremam Chymicum : Or, Book II:


Salt, w Fitriol of Vinms.


| Reduce calcined Copper, or ſcales of Copper to
a ſubtile powder, which digeſt in diſtilled yinegar
for one day natural. The tinged vinegar by incli-
nation pour off, and repour on other, fo often as
til it be no more tinged. The evacuations filter and
evaporate, or diftil off three parts z what remains
in the bottom of the veſlel, ſet in a cold place; and
ſo a green, obſcure, ſhining y.triol, will be gene-
rated.”
Otherwiſe. :
Plates of Copper, witha like quantity of ſul-
phur beaten, as is ſaid in calcination of Yenw, are
reduced toa ſnbtile powder ; and in an earthen pot
wit the beaten ſulphuryare calcined;dy a continued
Kirrzag the mixtion with a rod of Copper, til all the
ſalphur be burnt. The Calx again 1s ground, and
with an eighth part of its own weight of ſulphur bea-
ten (mal, calcined, Then is it again ground, as be-
fore, and projeR into hot water, being often ſtirred
with a ſtick or Copper rod, until the Calx be ſetled
to the hottom, and the water wax cold 5 which be-
ing filtred, is evaporated to a fourth part,and put jn
a cold place to produce Azure Cryſtals, or eiſe by
evaporation coagnlated,


l be =. | "4 > Þ A
. b


chymical Eſſays, ©


Salt of Satwrn,


Zook II.


Put the Calx of Saturn, or Minium, in diſtilled
vinegargpr the palegm thereof; digeſt ic for one
day natural, ofcen' ſtirring it: then evacuate the
Menſtruum by inclination, and pour on other until
all the Saltneſs of Saturn be abfiraged. Filter the
evacuations, and in athes or ſand coagulate them.”
If vinegar be the thacd time diſtilled trom Salt of
Saturn, with cohodationgs;z and afterward ſpirit of
Wine be poured on, and thrice cohobated : - the
Salt acquires ſo admiradle a virtue in healing di-
vers Diſeaſesz as if fix grams be given in white
Wine in the Peſt, it cures the fick in ewenty four
hours. In. the Drophe three grains are given an
white Wine four days together. In the Cholick fix
orains with whitewine. In the Leprofie alſo fix
orains, in water of Fumytory, concinually for eigh=
teen days together, This Sugar inwardly taken,
by its coldneſs, doth alſo extinguiſh Venereal Luſt;
and is therefore profitable for thoſe who are de yo-
ted to a (fingle and Virgin Life, Externally uſed, it
wonderoully operates in malignant Ulcers, Corro-
five, and,Cancrous ; Cancer, Woolf, and ſ:ch like,
Alſo it i$a mot excellent Remedy. againſt putrid-
ne(s of the mouth, and Ring-\vorms, Blaſtings, In»
flammations, Tumors, and red Pimples of the
face, if applyed with convenient Oils or Waters,


ww -
FS
PP


up Tyrrinium Chywitem : Or, Book I, ©


CHAP. XVII.


of Flowers,
-
Flowers of Btnz01n,


Rind Benzojn, and put it into a round pot)

I which cloſe with a douvle brown paper, wrapt
up in manner of Hyppocrates ſleeve ; and adminiſter
fire apt for ſabJimation, gathering the ſnow like |
flores often. ,

Theſe in the Aſthma, and all diſeaſes of the
Lungs, are very pfofitable. Dole Iſs. in conve-
ment Liquors or Syrups. It 1s alſo a principal Re-
medy, for bunches, and rednels of the face.


Flowers of Sulphur.


Theſe are prepared, by mixing equal parts of
Salphur and Colcothar perfectly rubifyed and dry-
ed; and ſo mixed by ſubliming, as ſhall be Lenght
in ſublimation of Antimony ; (but this operation is
performed in the ſpace of eight hours, nor is ſo
much fire required, as in pron They muſt -
the ſecond time be ſublimed with Sigar candid a-
lone, that they may be more efficacious jn the Aſth.
ma, and other affects of the Lungs. Alſo this pre-
p2ration of flowers, is made by mixing one pound
of the'flowers of ſtlphur, with one pound and £ of
flour of Tiles, Or by adding to one pound of ſul-
phur, of Colcothax, and (alt decrepitate, of each 7.
a po1nd, Orelfe per ſe, they are ſublimed withour
any 2tner addition, |


2 Theſe 7


_-


2;
: _-
: Gus 0 * F p #2
p Fl _—, uu
w


Theſe flowers do Pay reſt putrefaction;
and therefore in the Peſt, the weight of 3. either
1n { ardans beneditin, Treacle, or Syrap ot Citron,
or elſe in water of Aliſa, is profitably uſed, as
welHor Preſervation, as Curation. They alſo'pre-
ſerve from Fevers,and Epilepfie. In Lars Feneran,
chey provoke ſweat : In all diſeaſes needing exfice
cation, they help; and are very beneficial in all Af-
fects of the Lights, the Aſthma, the Cough, as
well of long continuance, as what is newly taken ;
Cacarrhs flowing to the breaſt, Pfeurifie, Cholick,
Impoſthums, and PutrefaRions of the body. =


* Flowers of Antimony,


' _ Choice Stibium reduced ro a ſubtile powder, and
þut inco an eartnen pot, with a blind head ſuper-po-
ted, in the rop of which maſt be an hole, for ex-
hating the humid ſpirits, and a moyeable ſtoppel


firted to the hole z muſt be ſablimed according to |,
Art; adminiſtring fire gradually for ten or twelve |
hours, for receiving white flores ;* but for Citrine |


-


twenty four hours, and for the red flores, thurty
hours, continuing, and encreafing the hre,


Sublimate Mercury. "8


Re, Meng purged with prepared Salt and Vi-
negary and paſſed through a skin, Vitriol rubifyed.
Prepared Salt , of each one potthd, Salt Nnce


ifj- | _

: Grind and mix them together in 4 fone Mor-
tac, with a little Vinegar, ſo long as until the Mer-
cury nv more appear Living. All being well mix»

' - ed, put int6a cucurdit Luted z wich an Alembick,
I z


b.» 4 Ee <* .0


pgs... 4.6 TY
—_—- :


— LY we <a _


, by 4 Ad oo "0" 4 Es 2. i T 3.4 = ;
- ; ” * s > hs, *., : , . y þ 4
. - f ” 4 | £ a_—_— - .
| | ; bs 'S$}


h 4

aving x
"4 ws a os «

” Fe Eh _


FY t
-
%


- . b . 4
& ” FX $5
- 5
«” -
: ||


. Theſecond and third time ſublinung as aboye, and


=
= o
FS OY. ae”
F
N 7 '


[16 © Tyrocinium Chymicum : Or, Book IT;
having a ſhort neck annexed, with Recipient ad-
joyned ; adminiftring fire by degrees artificially,
for eight or ten honrs.. ;Tve Aqua forts, which firſt
comes forth keep. For'the ſecond ſublimation, to
one pound of ſublimate, add of Salt prepared Jxij.
and of Vitriol Fiiiz. If the third time, ſublime it
with ſalt only.


A ſweet Sublimate.


- R. Of Mercury purged as above, $vj.
Mercury ſublimate, Sviy.


Grind and mix them together with one found, of
Colcothar, well and perfealy rudifyed. Then ſub-
lime the mixturefrom a convenient veſſel, placed
in ſand for the ſpace of five or fix hours. The ſecond
time, ſublime ic with Z pound of Colcothar. The
third time, per ſe only. Inſtead of Colcothar, pre-
pared Salt may be uſed, if any one be ſo minded.
The ſublimations ended, reduce the maſs into a ſub-
tile powder, which waſh with Roſe water, and dry
ic, Doſe, from twenty grains,'to thirty in Les Ve-
nerede

Otherwiſe,


Re. Of Mercury ſublimate, Zvj,
Silver foliate, $1.


By grinding mix theſe together, and ſublime
them in ſand. The veſſel cooled, ſeparate the yo-
latile part ; and grind what is fixed, and Cryſtaline ;
and mix it withthe feces refiding in the bottom.


Wb


1
.
-


fe = i US an” {ELSE +> 4: - ya
Book IT. Chymlcdl Efſoys; wt

in the end waſhing the ſublimace when dryed, keep

it for uſe, Doſe, from fix grains, to eight or

ten, Ir purgeth- gently,


Manna of Merenry.


Diflolve Mercury in Aqua fortis. Afterward pre-
Cipic it in Sea water z and from a Cucurbit placed
in ſand, diſtil it, toward the end. encreafing the fire,
that the Mercury may be ſublimed'to the ſides of
the veſſel. The veſſe1 cooled , and the feces reſfi-
ding in the bottom of the veſlal, removed, gather
the ſubl;mate apart. And again in the ſame water
diflolve and diſtil it, as above. So will you have
the Celeſtial Eagle, more white than ſnow, the uſe
whereof is chiefly inn Venereal diftempers. Doſe,
from ten to fifteen grains. |

Tc purgeth only by the inferiour parts.


—


a


C H A P. ; I } 3
of Magifterys.


Magiſtery 1s, when the mixt body 1s ſo prepa- | 51
Acre by Chymical artifice without extraction ; |
asall its homogeneal partzere preſerved, and de- |
ducedto a mere noble degree, either of ſubſtance or |
quality, the exteriours of impurity being ſeyr2* |
cated.


4 > fe 2.294 0 : - 4 e '. , | "2
| $4 » : / , ; of Or, »'4q dk
8 Fs * - 4 ' q bs


 Magiftery of Tartar,


Re. Oil of Tartar, made of the reſolved and pu-

rifyed Salt, Fuij, Spirit of Vatriol 1.
"which inſtil upon the Oil of Tartar, into a large
glaſs, drop b frop; and it will be a moſt wiute
Coagulum. The ſupernatant humidity remove by
ceatle heat , unto thedryneſs of ſalt : upon whica
diftil ſpirit of wine three or four times. And fo you
will have a white fixed Viitriolate Tarcar,

Its uſe is in all obſtruftions of the bowels z in
the Stone, Nephritick dolour, Jaundies, retention
of the Menſes, melancholy, bardneſs of the Spleen,
Fevers, and the D:opie, ut conveniently adhiwited.
' Doſe, from J/:, to 9j. ;


Maziftery of Pearls, and Corals.


Diflolye Corals or Pearts beaten ſmal, in water
made very ſharp with ſpirit of vitriol, Digeſt it
for one night, and upon the Solution, firſt filtred,
mzect oil of Tartar drop by drop, til it be like milk.
Then pour vpon it common water, and digeſt it 5
and (o it will be precipited in bright powder to the
bottom of the veſſel. The water muſt be ſeparated,
and other poured 6n thrgg or four times, until all
the Acrimony be ſeparated. Then dry the powder»
and keep it for uſe,


| METBarI's 11 temperament, and virtue, do yery
much emulace Gold ; and therefore do comfort the
vital Tpirits of the heart; and remove palpitation
of the heart, deliquiums of the mindzand Vertigo's-
And ought deſervedly to be mixed with all Cordi-
4] medicaments. They excite /enxs, refit melan-


_ choly, a


J x :
F F- A - — # =»
i Ko *% 0" = «<
z : | P FIT I" » .
"2. 3 WOT, > : . i :


4 498.


choly, dealbate_the Teeth, comfort the Mem
and corroborate the young in the womb. They dry
up all depraved humours in the body ; and pre-
ſerve all parts of the humane body from? corruption.
The virtues of Corals, are ſpoken of in the Salt of


them.


eMariſtery, Milk, Cream, or Butter 0
agiſtery, Solphur. 2 f


R!, Of flowers of Sulphur, J;j. X
Salt of Tartar, Z1i1j.


Mix them, and pour upon them of common wa-
ter three pound, digeſt all in ſand for one day na-
tural 3 with ſuch heac, as goward the: end the water
may almoſt boil : afterward filrer it hot through
brown paper, and upon it pour a ſufhcient quantity
of diſtilled vinegar ; ſo the milky Cream of ſulphur
will by little and little ſettle to the bottom. Sepa»
rate the Diſſolvent by inclination and: with free
quent ablutions edulcorate it, Laſtly, digeſt it wictt
Cordial water, and dry it, And thus will you have
a moſt white Milk, or Cream of ſulphur : Which,
is the Balſom of the primogeneal humidity. Ie
comforts the natural vigour, purifies the dloud,
Diſeaſes of the L'ngs, as the Aſthma, Cough, and
Pryfick jt cares. In drying up Catarrhs, in remo=+
ving windineſſes of the Stomach ; in the Sciaticas
and Gont, it is commended as exceeding profara-
ble. It alſo is an egregious preſervative from the .
Apoplexy, Peſt, Leprofie, and Convulfions' of the
Nerves. In Heaick Fevers, by comforting it pro
firg. Somuch only of the powder, being mixed with
ſpecifick waters, as par 6 ſuicient for wg 64
7 Y 4


=
"»

% ay
_ -

% Ll l *

”% - FS


%
_ "3
»


_ - ME -
VP < _


OSA AETIES ous,”


—_
TS


hem with a white colour, One ſpoonful is given in
the morning, and before exhibition , accurately
mixed with the humid vehicle.


Otherwiſe,


Tt is alſo made, by mixing ſulphur beaten, with
clean ſand or glals beaten (mal, of each equal parts:
and by diftilling by Retort-in a moderate fire, ap-

lying a Recipient containing aUiſtilled vinegar.
And to the diſtilled fabſtance of the ſulphur will be
0; 2g znato a white powder, which dry, and
eep for uſe. |

This Ant:date Prince 4araic uſed againſt the

Peſt.
Otherpiſe,


Milk of ſulphur is likewiſe made, by mixing fal-
phur and ſand with Aqua vite, and diſtilling it in
athes by Retorr, It 1s good againſt malignant Ul-
cers, venereal Cancers, Mealels, Warts, &c.


Es...


—


———.. —_
—


CHAP. XX. |
of ſolid Tinttures, and Panacea's;


Tineture of Antimoy.


Ake a Lexivium of aſhexof Haits-eaſe, Calx-
| vive, and common alhes, of each a like quan-
tity. In which diflolve Liver of Antimony, digeſ-
3Dg tin ſuch an heat of ſand for one night, as it may
almoſt dui]. Separate the TinRure, and filter it. [
And, 1f you pleaſe, by vinegar, precipit it into 2

gepe powder, and by many ablutions edulcorate
2 P ana.


= BÞ a; 4
- ©. "Bs. 8%. G %


Cbum: * SE


Panac a4 of Viral.


Diflolve blew vitriol in hot diſtilled Rain water,
which, being the third time filtred, by gentle heat
of Baln, evaporate to 2 sKkinnyneſs, Then pour the
remaining Liquor hoc into a Leaden veſſel, in which
you mult firit place imal ſticks cranſverſed. And ſo
leave it in acold place for three days, that it may
produce green Cryſtals, which ſeparate, evaporate
the remainingLiquor,and pur again jato the ſame
veſſel to be Cryltallizedz repeating the ſame La-
m_ {9 oft, as untu all che Liquor ſhall be Cryſtal»
lized,

Tois vitriol of the colour of an Emrauld,by theſe
Solutions, and Coagulations , perfe&ly purifyed,
reduce to & powder very ſubtile z which in heat,
not exceeding the heat of Sol in the Summer ſeaſon,
dry in the ſpace of five or fix days, until wichin,and
without, it appear candid. Then diſſolve it in di-
tilled water, filter it, what is undiflolvible, calt
away z Coagulate it in a Leaden veſſel, and dry it to
2 whiteneſs in gentle hear, as aboye, Repeating this
operation unto the third time, or until in diflolutt-
on, nothing remain undiAafyed. This candid vi-
triol put into a firm veſle}, ſealed with Hermes
Seal : which ſoplace in gentle fire of aſhes, as the
heat may not exceed the Summers heat. The teath
day, it will wax yellow; the twentieth day, it will
be reduced to an Alcohdl, and be moſt red like btoud,
Break the veſlel, and pur it into an high cucurbit,
and upon it pour vinegar thrice diſtilled, ſo much
as may ſtand adove it, at leaſt fonr fingers, Apply a
blind head, and digeſt ic in a warm Baln. for four


2”
> A


- MN - ” . P
. : Y 4 [5 = uk | k jo *
F * \  _- v L * rr 1 : 4 . w__ v4 ju
"EX + 44 : : » :
n - "y Y |
___ — OO _
4 x
"= &
R »


days, eyery day ſtirring it with a clean wooden ſpa+


3 / d Sp. þ -
Fg


tula. The veſſel cooled, what is tinged pour off, and
pour on other vinegar, digeſting, ſtirring, and eva-
cuating it as above ; repeating the ſame Labour,
til the vinegar ſhall attraſt no more .TinRare.
tets., |

The tinged vinegar by gentle heat of Baſn. diſtil
ta dryneſs. In the botcom will remain a Red
powder, which alſo the third time in the ſame vine-
gar, diflolye, digeſt, evacuate, diftil, and dry, Then
put .your maſt Red powder into a Retort, with a
large Receiver annexed, adminiſtring fire gradual-
Iy. Firſt the ſpirit comes forth yellow , afterward
, Moſt red : continue the fire in that degree,until the
$  dpirits appear white. Then ceaſe diſtilling, and
& I: cool the veſſelzin the bottom of which, you will
x find a perſpicuqus, pure, and moſt bright earth;
- Which, wita the a5ove ſaid ſpirits, imbibe by little

and litcle, digefting, and imbibing, until che ſpirit

and ſoul be reftored to their proper body.

Then coR this. bleſied earti ina veſſel Herme-
tically (cealed, and placed fn heat of Athansr,for for-
ty days, until it be fixed.

- Doſe, from three grains to five, eſpecially in de-
' plorate diſcaſes.


_ 4 Sulay Diapbpretick Panacaa, Stomachus Stru-


X thiens of Paracelſus.


$7;
£ . Re. Of Phyloſopiick warer, one pound.
Mercury ſublimate, Fj.


$4 Mix them, and in this water diflolve only ſo
bp much Mercury as can well »e d flolvec&in it. The
&lolution lowly proceeds, therefore is there whe?
Va, ; 0


\ . 4 + ©'Þ s
a a” = _ 1
4801 IN nee thn s TIO. -
= - 3 = Þ iS . FE F, bs , Vo" 1S 2 wy ”
I * o 4 .


-
4,


6c; a oe BG. a 7s IR j PR—_
"." 99 = . _ - 2 k. © 3
4 ' * Ly » - . © {4
.


bh, What (ball remain in the bottom, rejeR as uſe-


4


—


of digeſtion, Ta the ſolution, add of Gummaſe Li-

quor Jij. mix and diſtil themy and that diſtillation
- reiteratetwice or thrice,until after the diſtillation;
' no feces be remaining, Y,
In all theſe diſtilJations, ſublimate Mercury af, /9 ®-
_ © cends, which every timg re-put into the water. Lp |
With this water, the Quinteflence of Metals, s


FY N T7 -


Dn.
A bu » x


Minerals, and Marcaſhites is extraRted, & MI
Spirit of Wine Tartariſate, Ap go


DiRil the dryed feces of wine, afcer the manner
as Aqua fortss is diſtilled, The water andoil. ſepg-
parate, and keep. In the mean while, calcine the
feces to a whiteneſs, which, with the above ſaid oil,”
imbibe ; and as before, diftil and calcine z repeat- A
ing this Labour ſo often, as until che oil be alear as $4
water, and ſweet, not ſavouring of aduſtion. So
you will have a Tartariſate Quanteflence , which to fo
removes all corroſtneſs from Metals, £54

| *


:
. :
_
, ON

. -

--
m
%


Sublimation of Sol.


Re. Of Sol purged with Antimony, and cut into
very thin plates, or inſt2ad tnereof
Of foliate Sol, Fij.
Of Stomachne Struthionssy 311).


D:ſſolve and diſtil by Alembick with Rrong fire
toward the end, even to ſublimation, cnat the glais
may be red hot. The veflel cooled, cohobate, and:
diftl it thrice, every time ſeparating what ſhall-be
ſubl;imed. The fourth time diſtil away the phlegm
genty, and anew pour on other Fiiiz. and do as dee: /
fare, until the whole water be conſumed, and all


oy


13 of


o -_
| = of © 424 + 7
: "3. oy * * " . ”
& «.* A, -
1 Þ.. A.


—LL——————_—


#0 \ 4 bs <i 'F A. oo f 2 _ oh £4 4 . by
* & "5 g P on . 5 Gr 4
"I ,


i". þa
F . -_-
ov


OT » 4 "\.


| ps Ch wa "Y -v Or, . _ ! ,
the body ſhall be ſublimed, unto the whiteneſs of
the exalted Eagle; that is, of fublimate Mercury.


- BR "40


Thenpraiſe GO'D. Again repofit the whole.


ſablimate with the phlegm, diftilling away the
phlegm, without aſcenſion of the ſpirir.
'


Merturius Vite,


This is made, as in the Archidoves of Paracelſus ith
the Book of Secrets, with one partof Antimony, and
one part (or according to others, two parts) of
ſublimate Mercury. Afrerward it is reQifyed, and
diffolyed upon a Marble or Table of glaſs ; then it


. 3s congealed, by diſtilling away the phlegm, and a
. little of the acidneſs; until drops falling in the


phlegm, begin to be precipited, Then the Recep-
eory 1s removed, and another applyed, and diſtilla-
tion urged with moderate fire. This Labour . muſt
be four times repeated ; #nd the fourth time it will
be a clear and white maſs.


The Conjunttion of ſublimate Sol, and Mer-
curins Vita,


Re. Of Sol ſublimate,or the oil of the ſame afore-
{ajd, withour phlegm one part.
Of CHercurins Vite clarifyed two parts.


Mix them together, and with gentle fire diſtil
the ſpirit, What ſhall remain coagulated, diſlolve
upon a Marble. Repeating the Solution, and Coa-
oulation the third time. Then upon this matter pour
two parts of the Tartariſate Quinteflence, diſtilling
x by Alembick to a dryneſs. Repour on other, and
difil it, doing this ſo often, as until the effence


#/ * a 8
» : 4 g 4
: I


7


(hall "S ;:
n - - 4


C wa _— > -vy l n
4 SAP... A % SPE i, _ ;
F |


3, L wo b * j
: —_— = WwYW ' Y | « vv
44 CE - ! HS 1 ww
$3.8). = - 2


| ſhall be diRtilled off ſweet, as when firſt poured on.
W hich being done, upon one parc of this medicine
pour four parts of ſpirit of wine without phlegm ;
digeſting it until the ſpiric be conſumed. $0 you
| will have the perfeet conjunRion of Sol, and Aer
curius Vite. The Doſe of which is four drops in
f white Wine, It is exceeding profitable in deſpe-
ſ rac diſeaſes,and 1n thoſe wherofthe cauſe is occult,


The End of the Seconti Book.


TTROCINIUM CHYMICUM:
OR, .
CHYMICAL ESSATS.


es ns tt AA — ——


Book the Third.


—_—_—_—_D—


CC
—_—


CHAP. :


of Nuinteſſence.


Of the Quinieſſence of humane Blogd,


HE denomination of Quinteflence , 1s
varionſly taken, Sometimes it fignifies
any Chymical Species, which hath. put off |
the Elementary grofſeneſs of matter, and
corpulent feces : and is oppoſed toa Magiſtery, in
which almoſt the whole bulk of its ſubRance re»
mains, only it 1s exalted, and purifyed. Sometimes
alſo, as we here take it, it denotes an £#thereal,
Celeſtial, and moſt ſubtile ſubſtance; taken from
the three principles of any mixt bady diſſolved,
freed by various Chymical Operations from their
Elementary, Senfible, Corruptible , and Mortal
: QUT» , -.-.


" _ f


. 3


PII ie - 4 ia ae as.
zook 11T. ymical Eſſays, 9 =»
quality, and coagulated either into one fpiritual
- þody, ora corporeal ſpirit. It 1s by ſome called
Medicine, KT" ifoxhv 3 that is, by reaſon of its e-
minency. By others Elixir, by reaſon of thoſe fa
mous virtues, it exerciſeth in preſeryation of the k,
humane body, from ſundry diſeaſes. By others, | |
Heaven, for a double reaſon ; Firſt, becauſe, as 2
Heaven confifts not of the four Elements, hurt is
made of a certain X:hereal matter, and as it were
a fift Element z and is not obnoxious to corrupti-
on ; ſo alſo the true Quinteſlence is ſeparated from
all feces of Elements, and although it be not plain-
ly incorruptidle, yet it is rednced to that ſuoti-
lity, tenuity, and ſpiritual amplicity, that it ſeems
to contain in it ſelf nothing of heterogen2ity, by
which it ſhould be corrupted. Second!y, becauſe,
as Heaven powerfully acts on theſe ſublunary things,
contributing Life to all, and conſerving them : ſo
alſo this Quinteſſence conſerves the healch of the
humane body, prolongs youth, retards Age, and
expelleth every diſeaſe.
The Quinteflence of humane bloud, is in this
manner prepared. Re. A great quantity of the
bloud of ſound men in the flower of cheir Age, Pur
it in Circulatory veſlels of a convenient magnitude,
which place in B. AC. continually boiling until the
Dragon ſhall have devoured his own tail. The veſlels
cooled, take out thematrer, which will be like Li-
ver, and cut it to pieces very ſmal. And in high
Cucurbits, with the ſame heat of Baln. by diſtilla-
tion ſeparate the aqueous element or phlegm. The
diſtilled Liquor repour upon its earth, and (et it in
the former circulatory veſſels, in a boiling Baln. for
ten days as before. Repeating the ſame proceſs five
times z and the laſt time keep all the diſtilled
ple,


$ *


'—-


@s
- a.
v
9. Om LM
t of Fs
5


\ YOCtninm Cby TCum * Or, 2OC x, x1 þ


phlegm. The veſſels being cooled, take out the


matters and put it into a large Retort, zpplying as
t


capacious Receiver; in aſhes diſtil off the air by
fire gradually encreaſed, The fmal and thin clouds
in the recipient diſſolving, intend the fire ſo, as the
Element of fire mayalſo come forth in form of Red
or Purple oil. Toward the end a little Salt armoni-
ack will ſublime it ſelf. The veſſels being cold, ſe-
parate the air or ſpirit from the fire or oil; either by
gentle diſtillation in Bain. or by a Separatory. The
lpirit with the Salt armoniack, again pour upon the
feces, digeſt them for three days, then 5y a new Re-
rort diftil off the ſpirit, toward the end giving fire
apt for ſu5Limation, that the whole ſpiritual ſalt, or
at leaſt the greater part thereof may be ſublimed,
and mixed with the ſpirit in the Receptory. Agam
pour new ſpirit upon the feces, digeſt and diſtil as
adove 3 ſo often, as uncil the earth be deprived of
ics ſoul ; which you ſhall know, if when put upon 2
burning plate, it tame not. *

Note, That before the ſpirit be animated, at muſt
be ſeven times reQifyed, eyery time ſeparating the
phlegm arid feces : arid part thereof reſerved for
prong the diflolyent, as afterward ſhall be ſp0#
CN

Calcine the black blacker than black in a revere
beratory fornace with moderate fire, in a veſſeTeve-
ry where cloſed, for the ſpace of five days, until the
dfackneſs be turned to a yellowiſh wiiteneſs,and ſo
ito a red colour. Then will the earth be apt for re-
cerving its animate ſpirit. Digeſt it by Baln. as lon
as ſhall be ſufhcient, afcerward by gentle diftillation


ſeparate the infipid humidity. Waich being done; '


revert upon the eartha nintii part of its animate


ſpirit, digeſt and diftil as before, Tan give it the , 7


>»
0


-—- WS.
F


5 3 $6 F


23 - S [ Ee "EM T3 ;
\ eighth part of che animate ſpirit ; afterward the ſe-
venth, the ſixth,the fifth,the fourth part; ſo long witk
the fourth part imbibing it as til-the earth be encrex>
ſed to douvle of its own we1gir, before imbibitiorr.
And this is what Avicen ſaith, know, that the earth
muſt be nouriſhed , firſt with a little of its own
watery and afterward with more, ag is ſeen in edu-
cation of Infants. Therefore often grind the carth,
and leiſurely imbi® the ſame, from eight days to
eight days. Decoct it, and afterward moderately
calcine it in fire. And let not this Labour ſeem te-
dious to thee, in ſo many reiterations ; for the earth
brings not forth fruit, without frequent moiſtnings.
Yet be wary leaſt you coo haſtily imbibe the earch,
but do it leiſurely, by little, and a little, and with
long contrition afcec the earth is dryed. Wherefore
in this the weight 1s diligently to be obſerved, viz.
leaſt too much dryneſs or ſuperfluous hurudity cor-
-rupt the york. And much co it by aflation, as by
imbibing the diflolution requires, Thus far Avicen.
Whence alſo Geber ſaith : There'ore from the ml -
tiplicit reiteration of imbibition and afſation, the
oreater part of its aqueouſneſs is taken away; and
the refidue by ſublimation is removed,

Pur the aforeſaid earth into an high cucuroit, has»
ving an Alembick, and receiver annexed ; the jun-
Qures being very firmly cloſed, ſo as nothing may
reſpire ; give to it fire of aſhes for the ſpace of thrze
days, until the clean and white fume aſcend, and
cleave to the ſides of the cucurbit like Talck. This
is that which + Clangor
Baccine (aith , therefore A Phyloſophil book ſo called,
as much as you can ſub- |
tiliate that body, and co& it with clean Mercury ;


and when the body (hill haye dra'wn, and concluded
| K in


_— Po Sl


5n itſelf ſome part of the Mercury ; ſubtiliate it
with as quick and ſtrong hre as you can, until it ſhall
aſcend m the likeneſs ot powder moſt white as ſnow,
adhering to the ſides, of the veffet. Bur the aſhes re-
mainirg inthe button, 1s the feces, and vituperate
Scria to be'calt away,having nothing of life m tt.
Of the aforeſaid Meteorifate Mercury Re. Fj.
M:x it with Sviz. of the rectifyed ſpirit not animate.
Digeft it for ewo dayes in Bfitn. then ſtil it by
aints ; afterward by Baln. with repeated cc hobat1-
ons, untilno feces be I<ft, Then circulate it for
forty days. Its uſe 1s for extrafting TivQares of
Me. als, and ſtones. Of the fame Mercurv and its
c1l, 1s made an Elixir for expelli 1g the'mol} deſpe-
rate diſeaſes ; in this manner. RK. Of this Metcu-
ry Zj. unto which add an eighth parc of its own
weignt, of its prop2r oll re&ifyed; decoR them in
hea of Athanor for eight days 7 aiterward :yith a fixt
pait, and then with a ftit part, reiterating the former
I:buur ſo often, as unti] tie matter became thick as
ſyrup, and by decoetion will be ro further hardned.
Afrer this dig ſt it forty days, and 1t will he a moſt
red ſtone ; of which th: Doſe is one grain or two in
appropriate Liquor.


SH


_—


——_———


—


CHAP. 11.
Of the Qujniifſence of Wine,


[ Circu'atety veſlels ofa jnft'magnitnde, digeſt a
200d quantity of rich wine in horſe dung for a mu-
ner, Then im hgh cucurbits diftjl off che ſyiritzin
BE. M. which afcerward re&ifie ſeven times, each
eime ſeparacing-4ll its phlegmatick humour,” Dif l-
ling ir icy as in the ſeven times, from forty pound of

wine,


ook III. Chymical Eſſays. 131
ine, you may ſeparate one pound mor? ſpiritual
dan the other (for what is diftifled between the ſpi-
it and the phlegm, is Aqus ardens.) Keep the ſpi-
tina glaſs veſſel (of ſich 2 magnitude as it may he
If full) firmly cloſed) that noth'ng may reſpire mn
cold place. In the mean while dittil tie remain-
ins phlegm to the conſiſtency of Liquid honey.
aac 1s diſtilled off revert upon the feces; and
again by gencle heat of Baln. dray off three parts.
Then take ou the cucurbit, and ſet it in a cold
Place, that che matter may Cryſtalize ; the Cryſtals
Wwaihed from all fil!h, ſo often diflolve and coavu-
late, as until they refemble the Ice of moſt pure wa»
ter. Now, if youdeſire by force of Art, to have a
fat and combuſtible oil from wine,diftil che p I:zm,
ſeparated from the Cryſtals in Baln. unto the thicks
nels of Liquid honey : afterward in a retort placed
in ſand, force It with ſtrong fire, Firſt comes forth
a water mixed \vith yellow oil, then a red o:l ; Lait-
ly Rofin, x | | |
Unto ihe Cryſtals beateg very (mal, pour the ſpi-
pit adove reſerve; digzit them in Baln. for three
days, afterwarddiſtil off the ſpirit in ſand : repeat-
ang the {ame proceſs ſo often, as until the ſpiric be
rfectly impregnated wich its proper ſoul, and the
ody made fo very dry, as if put upon a glowing
ate, it will yield no fame. Then on the body,
x(t calcined according to Arc, revert an eighth
tot ats own weight of the animate ſpirit, digeſt
dditt\[ it as defore, then give it a ſixth part of the
diret ; aiterivard a fifr, and then a fourth, fo often
dntinung the 1m)>1tion with a fourta party 45 un +.
the greater part of the body pat upan a burning
ate, thall vaniſh into air. Then is fulfi!lzd thac


ich Mcrienws ſaith : This alſo it behoves thee ta.
K 2 knows...


132 Tyrocinium Chymicuw : Or, Book 11] -Be


: know, that the ſoul ſoon hath ingreſs into its ow
body, which with another body, cat by no means
be conjuyned. Having this ſign, cover the veſſel,
and to it placed in aſhes, adminiſter fire for the


ſpace oftwo days, until the vegetable ſulphur ad-|
here to the ſides of the veſſel like Talck. Of thig'


ſulphur Re. $j. Of the pure ſpirit F 115. Mix and di
'gelt chem tor one day natural, then diſtil them in
aſhes, cohobating often, until the whule body ſhal
. :aſcend. After which, twice d:ſtil jt in a boiling
_Baln. and circulate it for ſixty days. And having ſe-
'parated the Hyp:ft4ſis (which will adhere abour the
botcom of the Pellican) Keep the Qa1nteflence of
wine for curing infinite diſeaſes, to be uſed both ins
tervally and externally.
_ Alſo this Quinteflence of wine may be perfeted
11 a ſhorter ſpace of time. Yea when I d.d this, in
tie preſence and fight of certain of my diſciples, in
the ſpace of five weeks ] finiſhed it: and with th
ſame extracted a moſt red TinAure of Gold. For,
25 Geber wuneſleth, there are many ways to the ace

complithing one efte&, and one mtent : But

In this place, I can never ufficieatly a.lmire,
why French and Germane wine Circulated, have not
taac admirable odour, which Baptiſta Porta attributes


to Neepilitin wine, in theſe words.-—Then openf


the muath of the veſſel, and if ſuch an admirable
fragrancy flac out, as with it nothing may be come
pared ; know that you are come to th2 defired end.
But it the 0.0ur or colour anſwer not, cloſe the veſ-
ſel avainz and re-place it to be circulated, until
yo"! thall have the aforeſaid fign. Nor 1s the Italian
[p1rit of wine endued with ſuch an odour, as Rubens
fe(tihzs. For he in the ſecond Chap. of the ſecond:
Sect. vn of iis book of ciſtillation, in this manner


_—_—


Write


ms -, +» © = = Loca”


Book IT). Chymical Eſfeys. t33 |
wriceth, I wonld that good Man, ' and moſt excels
ns} len Phyſician, Enſtachins Sanfto Severinas, had now
el,] lived. Forhe (not to ſpeak of my own mn
hef could have evinced, by his experience moſtd1li-
d-| gently acquired, that Aqua ardens, if circulated, not
ig) only for a moneth, bur for two or three moneths ;
iJ yea for a whole year, as Razmund preſcribes, can
in{ never be deduced to that ſweetneſs of odour, but
rather will be found more hot, and be rendred
more acid; as vio ſo will, may eafily provez and
reaſon ic ſelf by ov>ſervation of the fire and mation,
perſwades thz ſame. Bur R+3mund did not urider-
Rand, or intend that of ſimple and pure Agua ardeng,
as ſom? of late have thought ; but of that, in which
the metallick body was diſſolved. For in the ſe.
cond Canon of the firſt dook, ne thus writeth ; Bur
this Quinteſſ=nce ſo circulated and reRifyed, will
not poſleſs ſuch an odour, unleſs the body be difil-
led in it. Whence it appears, that Porta drew not
ſuch a Quinte-nce of wine from his Labour in the
fire,bue from the writings of Lally, and Tobn de Ry-
peſciſa, evilly underſtoos,


, Y
_ w<eno oa


CHAP. IT.
of Quintefcence of Corals,


Icſt a great quantity of moſt ſharp vinegar, muſt
be diſtilled with ſeparation of the phlegm, for
this work wholly unprofitable. Diſtilling it nine
times upon the former feces, until you ſhall have
about a hundred pound of vinegar moſt perfeRtly
reQifyed per Biln. Alſo you mult have thirty pound
of red Corals, reduced to a molt ſudrile powder ;
likewiſe many large veſle!s win long necks, in e- 4
very


134 Tyrocimium Chymicum : Or, Book Ut,


oa. ina. he. AO ors.


very of which one pound of Corals muſt be put, un«
to them pouring on of yinegar leiſurely, and ar
times, to prevent ebulition, ſu much as may ſtand
above them four or five fingers : then they muſt
with the vinegar be digeſted in Bala. for one day
natural, or until the vinegar wax ſweet, and be in»
veſted with a yellow colour. Which berg done,
pour cff the Menſtrunm, and repour on freſh; re-
peating the ſame Lavoury ti] what 1s diflolvible he
difſolved. Put the evacuations in high cucurbics,
and abſtrat the Menſtraum ty hear of Blan. then.to
every one pound of the (alt, pour $1j, of vinegar,
and diſtil ic ; which being done, again ad $111), atter
Zvj. and (o leiſurely, and ar timesnouriſh.ng it,and
at length dimunithing the infunons from ounce to

unce, until the vinegar be diſtilled off as tharp as
it was when firſt poared an. All the infipid diſti]-


Ted phlegm, mult be kept, And the ſalts impreg-


nated with the ſalt armoniack of vinegar, mult be
fermented in yapour of an hot Baln. and there lefe
until a ttcong odour and black coloanr appear, which
are the ſhgn4 of true putrefation. When theſe ſigns
ſhall appear, puc the reſolved ſalts 'vaile warm into
retorts; becauſe in cold, they will preſently be
congealed : and dy a vaporous B, or aſhes, ſeparate


the phlegm, until wiite yapoars ur fumes ſhall be .


ſeen roariſe, Then ceaſe the diſtillation there, and
continue it by ſand in a cloſe Reverderatory, uncil
all the ſpirits ſhall de come forth, and an oil red as
bloud ſhall 1fue out drop by drop, Reſerve the fe-
ces for the uſe hereafter mentioned. All the dyftil-
led Liquor being molt vdorate, and like A4u4 ardens
eahily conceiving flame, pur into hign cucardi's,and
dy gentle he1t ot Bin, ſeparate from tae palegm 3
and in a cold place in glaſſes well cloſed, keep
them


: 0 % =” »p þ >


SOC * Chymical Eſſays. -
them. Afterward encreaſe the fire, and urge the
phlegm, which ſeparaced from the ojl, alſo ter by
tor uſe. In the mean wiule calcine the adove reſer-
ved feces in fire of eAthanor, for the ſpace of five
days in a veilel very firmly cloſed, as Geber in the
gOtn. Cnap. of the firſt Book, &c, in the following
words teacheth. Tie way of calcination of ſpirits 185
that 'nto them being nigh to fixation, fire be ſuc-
ceſtvely adminiſtied, and encreaſed by degrees,taat
they flv not 1::nt:l they come to be able to abide the
orcatelt fire z and the veffe] containing them, muft


be of glaſs, round in the bottom, and indifferent
thick, and well cloſed, that it melt not. And, as
Lally ſaith, leaſt inflammation be cauſed. Or ac-
cording to Aiphidias, leaſt the ſpirics vaniſhinto air,
and what 1s ſought after, be not obtained. Aftere
ward tae veſſel being open, give fire to it by de»
grees, that the black teces may be made of an Aih
colo'1r. From which a ſalt with the former reierved


VL WT wb RR. SY. XD £2 AE IKE 6 ,


pniegm, muſt be extracted, which filter and coagu-
late. Afterward diflolve the ſame ſalt in the lates
[reſerved phlegm, until it be pure; then with mode-
rate fire & it. Of this Salt Rx. 15. digeſt it in Baln-
ventle heat of Baln-


for three days. Afterward, by g

diftil off the unſavoury water, which keep apart-
Renterare the ſame operaticn, until the ſalt (hall
1th its proper ſalt armoniack be impregnated, and
augmented to double the weight it was before, Or
omew hat more ; or until the ſpirit ſhall be diftil-
ed oft from the lalt, as ſharp and as ſtrong as when

nrſt poured on. Then put the ſalt in a convenient
eſte] ro be ſublimed in athes for two days ſpace,
dminiſtring fire by degrees. So the matter will be
dlimed to the fides of the veſle!, moſt white like


ow -this 1s Called the trie {3lt armoniack of Pny-


y | ,


OPaers, Of
dex xf


LS ho


r
=.


=>30Ot ms falt zrmoniack take Fj. Of the re&ifyed
>" ſpirit Fitij. Mix them together, and digeſt them fey


4.1


che whole Milk ſhall aſcend with the ſpirit. Thi
triune matter muſt be circulated until the exaltaizon
ſhall anſwer your defire.


twodays. Afterward diſtil with cohobations, until6<


l


4
1
y *
L


»


« Thus you will have the Quinteſſence of Corals ; a T


Celeftial Subſtance, free from ail earthy feces: the
Vegetable and Mineral Mercury ; the moſt ſolid
Philoſophick KEY, opening what bodies you
will, for preparing them into Medicines of admi-
rable virtues ; being only known ta all erne Phy-
loſophers.


— wm er ereeeonmrngy_— —_ -


PSISSEDEZ SEATED
EOSDVEDLD SS: 2eVE


The TABLE of the Precedent Work.


Page __ Of Pitrid Page
Of the Spunge Stone
2s 46 ned I Of Cryſt 4/ 22
A Alcshil defined 24 Of Siſver Alarchaſie
Amalgamation 25 | Of Antinwmy $4,85 ,87
1144 torife, and tbe ®:; Of Mercary 89g
50 Of Saturn
| B Or Fupiter 99
| Aiſoms Of Mars 108
B O* Cinnamon Of LV enus 103
of © Sulphur 71 Of Lana ib.
ff Or Saturn 72 Of &Y, 104
Yeu irdich merallick, 106 | Crow; of Metals $6
S | Corroſion 25
Hymica! Medicines | Cementation
| | m-:/l ;.c.;ng 3 | C anef tion 26
Im!7:\; mit 4 depraved|Cobobtaiien 29
Fl c/o: Is |Corcyl ain 34
0. * 44 41th the Un 0.47 D
15 I/tillation 28
| ST. 8 D by Deſcent
(I: 141140 24 by De-{14141um 20
A710 Dicc/t 1 H JT
+ O' orion Salt Dis;h Pecicu
o U' S lt Peter Aniim'ny 8$
tf © Mineral Criſtal $1 ( navar 96
my L1:15 Pyanclla | C er. V;.CrY,070 I of


| = gf


| | . Pag A
| YE of Venus ; Of Pearl;
| Fapiter he. Of Corals
| Of Tartar
| er tpreune kon correft-| Of Sulpbur
; ed I © : -. -*
| E xirattion 37 | [is of Eggs (+
Extritts Of Sage
O; Sena ( » Wi.ix <
| Ot Ruybarb 74| Of T wrpentin-
| E -a:tich pomder 85 O'Cleves 6;
| Efer:aal Salts Or I ar: av per deliquivn
G: Herls | _O!7 Amber Nl
| 0 1.4774) IO8 | for the Hemicranta
; F i *or the Womb Sq
| F 2110 421000 26 O* Tues
| F.cuer, | OO >n phur
| O: nN-ngvin Of 8: th
| O; Su!phar 114] Of Firm: 63
Of Antim un) 15 Of. iniimny 6)
| | P
| Htino for Glaſſes 39 7 La thre Print
| | Lnting of Sapience J&' leftined, and d:m'n
| L u2:danunm 76 ſtr :red 20,21,232,33
| Civern; Antmony 86  Precititation 2)
| : M Pare't Action
| Aceration JI P, nam Ke /)
| Al:nſlr wn why +
| called 33,3 /int Pu
| AMercurins vi 85,1 24 +0 (0 Huwint B{ 1


Mercury precipued 93 C&


F The TO "32>


J
7i Of Wine 135
| Afann ti Aft. ry 117 ()* Cor al: I 3:
Magiſters | :
Reva


'
| SEVER


—


z
-
—
—


_— A , © © Re


— — ©—— — Bs


—_ I. ')])YVY TH


———_—_ —


—


— <A.


Page


R
Everhbers. ion 26
Reftification 29

Rules for diſtillation 42

Keomlns of Antimony 87
Kipnlus of : ſtellais $8
OT 19
Stratific aticn 25

\4l/1114tton 27

*»/ [14te F I1S

Sul lime Ol 133

DIYIE; F

O' uh ine 03


Of Wine Tartariſate 133
Of Tartar


O* T urfentine $3
My on Sulphur |
| Of Vuridt 5 4
; Or Nure
| Of Stun ov
Ek
(): T xwtar 109
| O: Cir als
| Or Colcarhar Itc
0 "" I1?


Ty Liquie [
Of dry Ro, '#)


]


The © Table.
|


P
» Of Violets hs
Treacle of Germany 75
Soft Tintiares
Of Honey
Of Saffron
Of Sugar $
Of Sulphur :
Solid Tinflares
Of Antimony 120
Of Vitriol I21
V
Inegar diſtilled and
Alka'"iſate 60
V emative V icriol
Viriol of Mars rt
V itriol of V enus I12
wW


Alters

\V Of Refers
Of Succory
Of Cinimun
O!? Fennel

Of Oak
Of box

Of Juniper

Of Gnas-icum Þ,


4$
49


!
'
4
;
|
'


|


z


Boks ſold by Thomas Paſſenger af the three
Bibles on London Bridge.


Arkham': Maſter Piece. 4:0.
Dad on the Commandments.
Acicemy of Complements
| Pichard on Sandtification.
Tae Spiracual Antidote, by Mr. 7 bo Doolutell.
The Wiſe Virgingor a Narcative of the Life of Iſa»
tba Haitfield,
The Book of Palmeſtry and Phifhognomy 1n «tv.
Tae Book of Knowledge in three parts, containing *
Aſtrology, Phylick, and Husbandry, f:ll of wa-
riety, both for Profit and Pleaſure,
The H ſtory of Yalentine and Orſon in 4:9.
417e Peritent Prodigal, or a eracio's Reprodk to
Phaciſazcal Saints.


l
