The Life of Saladin (Behâ ed-Dîn, 1897)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan (lifesaladin00condgoog) (https://archive.org/details/lifesaladin00condgoog).
Behâ ed-Dîn Ibn Shaddâd’s contemporary Life of Saladin (12th c.) — the intimate portrait of Salah ed-Din by his closest companion and biographer. Palestine Exploration Fund edition (1897).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE LIFE


OF


S A L A D I N .


//


BY


. •♦


BEHA EDDIN

(1137—1193 A.D.).


I \ '


/


PUBLISHED BY THk

COMMITTEE OF THE PALESTINE EXPLORATION FUND,

34. HANOVER SQUARE, LONDON.


t ,■


7^


'SALAD I N';


OR,


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF

(SALAH ED-DIN).

(1 1 37— 1 193 A.D.)


COMI>OSRI> RV THE LEARNED

IMAM, grand KADI of the MOSLEMS,
BEHA ED UlN ABU EL-MEHASAN YOsUF,

IhN k\Kl. IRN TemIm. generally KNOWN BY THE SURNAME OF IRN ShRDDAI).

KAdi of the fortifiri) City of Aleppo.


WITH THE rBRMISSION Ol-

CDC (Icbalif ) aom1lUln^er of tbc yattbfuL


iTcf ^*^ '*'*c ^>* ipnvfrt. anb alairfe hhn f »ritUM f^r hi* mtin^-pfaicr itnh ll^o^r '


■jz.n'.'u^


c


T 5.^


» I <-.


1 • ^


^


/ X


r

V


s

JUL 231838


kLBRAKi>


w .» ' ,


CONTENTS.


CHAraW i>AGB

Preface ..... xi

Introduction . . xiii

Preface ....... i

PART I.

BIRTH OF SALAH EDDIN, HIS GOOD QUALITIES, HIS CHARACIBR,

AND NATURAL DISPOSITION.

I. What I have observed of Salih ed-Din's attachment to
the principles of religion, and his respect for every part
of. the holy law .....

II. His love of justice .....

III. Some instances of his generosity .

IV. His valour and intrepidity — ^may God hallow his soul !
V. Of his zeal in fighting in God's cause

VI. Of his patience, and of his trust in the mercy of God
VII. Instances of his kindness and tolerance
VIII. His care to be polite ....

PART II.


5

14
t8
20

23
27
33
.^8


IN WHICH ARE SET FORTH THE CHANGES OF FORTUNE EXPERI-
ENCED BY THE SULTAN, AND THE HISTORY OF HIS CON-
QUESTS.

I. His first campaign in Egypt, in which he sen cd under

his uncle, Asad ed-Din (ShirkOh) .46

II. Second expedition into Egypt called the^event of el-

Babein ....... 49

III. Asad ed»l)in's third expedition into Egypt, and conquest

of that country • S <


iv CONTENTS.


CHAPTER PACK

IV. Death of Asad ed-Dfn. The chief authority

devolves upon the Sultan (Saldh ed-Dfn) . -55

V. The expedition of the Franks against Damietta,

which may God preserve ! . . -56

VI. Relates how he met his father . '59

VII. Death of el-'Adid . . . . . 6i

VIII. First expedition undertaken by the Sultan out of

Egypt ...... 62

IX. Death of Nejm ed-Din (Aydb), the Sultan's father . 63
X. Death of Ntir ed-Din Mahmiid, son of Zenghi—

may the mercy of God be upon him ! . -65

XI. Treachery of el-Kenz at Aswin in the year 570

(A.D. 1174^1175) . . . . .65

XII. The Franks attack the defences of Alexandria —

may God protect it ! . . .66

XIII. The Sultan goes into Syria and takes possession of

Damascus . . . . . -67

XIV. Seif ed-Din sends his brother ^Izz ed-Din to oppose

the Sultan . . . . > 70

XV. Seif ed-Din himself sets out against the Sultan 71

XVI. Defeat sustained at Ramla . . . ' 7S

XVII. The Sultan returns into Syria . . -77

XVIII. Death of el-Melek es-Sileh. 'Izz ed-Din enters

Aleppo . . . . . -79

XIX. 'Izz ed-Din exchanges (Aleppo) for the territory of

his brother, 'Im&d ed-Din Zenghi . .80

XX. The Sultan returns from Egypt .81

XXI. The Sultan appears (once more) before Mosul 83

XXII. The action taken by Shah-Armen, Prince of Kheldt 84

XXIII. The Sultan returns to Syria . . .86

XXIV. Expedition to 'Ain JilQt . . .88
XXV. He undertakes an expedition against el-Kerak 91

XXVI. He gives the city of Aleppo to his brother, elMelek

el-*Adel . . . . . .92

XXVII. Our deputation arrives at the Sultan's Court . 94

XXVIII. The Sultan's second expedition against el-Kerak 95

XXIX. The Sultan's second expedition against Mosul 98

XXX. Death of Shah-Armen, Prince of Khelit .100

XXXI. The people of Mosul make peace with the Sultan 102

XXXII. The Sultan returns to Syria .... 103

XXXIII. El-Melek el-'Adel goes into Egypt, and el-Melek

ez-Ziher returns to Aleppo . . . .104

XXXIV. The Sultan makes preparations for an expedition

against el-Kerak . . .108


CONTENTS.


CNAPTEK

XXXV.

XXXVI.

XXXVII.

XXXVI II.

XXXIX.

XL.

XLI.

XLII.

XLIII.

XLIV.

XLV.

XLVI.

XLVII.

XLV 1 1 1.

XLIX


sea-coast, and


Account of the battle of Hattin, an auspicious day

for the faithful
Taking of the Holy City (el-Kuds esh-Sherff)
His attempt on Tyre .
Destruction of the fleet
He lays siege to Kaukab
He enters the lands of the upper

takes Laodicea, Jebela, and other cities
Capture of Jebela and Laodicea
Capture of Sahyftn
Capture of Bek^s
Capture of Burzia
Capture of Derbes&k
Capture of Baghrds
Capture of Sifed
Capture of Kaukab

The Sultan marches against Shakif Amiin. This

expedition immediately preceded the events at

/\cre ..•••••

L. The Franks collect their troops to march upon Acre

LL The skirmish in which Aibek el-Akhresh testified

(for the &ith) .....

LI I. A second skirmish, in which a number of Moslem

foot*soldiers earn martyrdom

LI II. The Sultan makes all speed to reach Acre. His

motive
LIV. Another skirmish
LV. The Lord of Shakif is made prisoner. Cause of his

arrest ....

LVI. The war at Acre
LVII. The Moslems break through to Acre
LVI 1 1. The army withdraws to Tell el-'Aiidtya
LIX. Battle between the Arabs and the enemy
LX. The great battle of Acre
LXI. We receive tidings concerning the King of the

Germans .....
LXI I. Skirmish on the sands by the river-bank at Acre
LXIIL Death of Doctor 'Aisa
LXIV. Surrender of esh-Shaktf
LXV, An anecdote .....
LXVI. Arrival of the Khalifs ambassador .
LXVII. Of the good fortune granted to el-Melek ez-Z4her,
the Soltan*s son


PAGB

no
ii8
1 20
121
122

125
129
130
132
133
135
136

i3«
139


141

143

144
145

147
148

150
1S4

159
161

162

170

172

^73
174
175

175

178


VI


CONTENTS,


CHAPTER

LXVIII.

LXIX.

LXX.

LXXI.

LXXII.

LXXI 1 1.

LXXIV.

LXXV.

LXXVI.

LXXVII.
LXXVI 1 1.


LXXIX.

LXXX.

LXXXI.


LXXXII.
LXXXI IL
LXXXIV.

LXXXV.

LXXXVI.

LXXXVII.

LXXXVI II.

LXXXIX.
XC.

XCI.
XCIL

XCIIL

XCIV.

XCV.

XCVL

XCVIL

xcvin.


Arrival of Mm&d ed-Din Zenghi, Prince of Sinjir,

and of several other chieftains . •

Arrival of the Moslem fleet at Acre
Tidings of the King of the Germans
Contents of a letter received from the Armenian

Catholicos .....

The troops march towards the frontier to meet the

King of the Germans ....
Account of the King of the Germans continued
The battle fought by el-'Adel
Arrival of Count Henry ....
A letter is received from Constantinople— may God

grant us the conquest of that city I
Burning of the enemy's mangonels .
Stratagem, by means of which a large ship from

Beirdt succeeded in making her way into the

harbour ......

Account of 'Aisa the swimmer

Firing of the mangonels . . . .

Account of the movements of the King of the

Germans continued. Stratagem employed by

the Marquis ....

Ships arrive from Egypt
The Franks besiege the Fly-tower .
Junction between the Germans and the enemy's

army .....

The ram and other machines of war are burnt
Adventure of Mo'ezz ed-Din
'I mid ed-Din requests leave to depart
The enemy leave their camp and go as far as the

spring head ....

Fight at the ambush

The return of the army after the Holy War
The Sultan relieves the garrison of the city
Several ships belonging to the enemy are cap

tured .....

Death of the son of the King of the Germans
Asad ed- Din's expedition
Other events in this year
Arrival of Moslem troops and of the King of

France .....
A strange occurrence of good omen
Account of the King of England


PAGS

i8o

i8i

182

185

189
191

193
197

198
202


204
205
206


207
209
210

212
215
219
222

223
229
232

233

235
236

237
238

240
241
242


CONTENTS, vii


CHArrSK PACK

XC IX. Account of the child .... 244

C. The Sultan removes to the hill of el-'Ay&diya 245

CI. The city is reduced to the direst straits . 247

CI I. Arrival of the King of England . . 248

cm. A Moslem vessel sunk — ^third sign of the approach-
ing fdl of the city .... 249

CIV. A huge moving tower is set on fire . . .250

CV. Various occurrences . • 231

CVl. The Marquis (Conrad of Montferrat) takes flight

to Tyre ...... 254

CVII. Arrival of the latest contingents for the Moslem

army ...... 254

CVII I. The Franks send an ambassador to the Sultan . 256
CIX. The besiegers make a furious attack on the city,

and reduce it to the last extremity .258

ex. The city is reduced to the last extremity, and the

garrison open negotiations with the Franks . 261
CXI. We receive letters from the city . 264

CXI I. Treaty concluded by the besieged, by which their

lives are preser\'ed .... 266

CXI 1 1. The enemy takes possession of Acre . 267

CXIV. An encounter takes place during the interval . 269

CXV. Arrival of Ibn B&r!k (from Acre) . . 270

CXVI. Massacre of the Moslems in Acre — may God have

mercy upon them ! . . .372

CXV 1 1. The enemy march upon Ascalon, along the shore

of the Western Sea -274

CXVI 1 1. A light takes place . . .285

CXIX. The enemy sends to communicate with us that

same day • . .... 287

CXX. ElMelek el'Adel's interview with the King of

England . .288

CXX I. The battle of Arsitf, which was a blow to all

Moslem hearts ..... 289

CXXI I. The Sultan sets out for Ramla . 300

CXXIIL Arrival of an ambassador from the Marquis . 502

CXXIV. El-Melek el-*Adel visits Jerusalem . . -305

CXXV. Intelligence received from the outpost stationed
before Acre — ^account of the doings of some
Arab thieves who used to get into the enemy's
camp ...••. 306
CXXVL El-Melek el-'Adel sends a message to the King of

England ...... 307


vin


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER

CXXVII.

CXXVIII.

CXXIX.

cxxx.

CXXXI.

CXXXII.

CXXXIII.

CXXXIV.

cxxxv.

CXXXVI.

CXXXVII.

CXXXVI 1 1.

CXXXIX.

CXL.

CXLI.

CXLII.
CXLI 1 1.
CXLIV.

CXLV.
CXLVI.

CXLVIL
CXLVIIL

CXLIX.

CL.

CLI.

CLII.


PACK

Shlrk{ih ibn Bakhel, the Kurd, makes his escape

from Acre, where he was kept a prisoner . 309

£1-Melek el-^Adel sends me on a mission to the

Sultan, attended by several Emirs . .310

A messenger takes el-'Adel's answer to the King of

England's proposal . . .312

The Franks come out from Jaffa . . •313

Death of el-Melek el-MozafTer Taki ed-Dtn . 314

A despatch arrives from Baghdad . • S'S

The Lord of Sidon comes on an embassy from

the Marquis . . . . .317

Ambush where Aiydz el-Mehrini testifies (for the

faith) ...... 318

EI-Melek's interview with the King of England . 320
The King of England's message to the Sultan . 321
The Lord of Sidon is received by the Sultan . 321

An ambassador arrives from the King of England 322
A council is held as to whether it will be better to

treat with the King of England or the Marquis 323
The Sultan encamps on Tell el-Jezer . •325

Departure of el-Melek el-'Adel . . 328

Departure of the Marquis's ambassador . . 329

Seifed-Din el- MeshtCib recovers his freedom . 330
Return of the ambassador from (the Lord of) Tyre 332
Assassination of the Marquis . . . 332

Conclusion of the business of el-Melek el-MansOr,

and what happened to him . . . 333

Arrival of the Greek ambassador . • 334

El-Melek el-'Adel and the country beyond the

Euphrates . . . . . 335

The Franks seize ed-DAr(in . 337

The Franks march upon Mejdel Ydba . . 337

Skirmish in (on the outskirts of) Tyre . . 338

Arrival of Moslem troops to take part in the Holy

War . . . . . .339

CLI 1 1. The enemy makes preparations to advance against

Jerusalem ..... 340

CLIV. The enemy halts at Beit-NOba . . .341

CLV. The caravan from Egypt is captured . . 342

CLVI. Recall of el-Melek el- Afdal . -347

CLVII. The enemy withdraw into iheir own territory ;

cause of their retreat .... 347
CLVI 1 1. Count Henry sends an ambassador . . 353


CONTENTS. ix


CHAI^BK PACR

CLIX. The Franks send their ambassador once more to

negotiate a peace ....
CLX. The Frank ambassador returns for the third time
CLXI. The ambassador returns
CLXII. The Sultan's expedition
CLXIII. Siege of Jaflfa ....

CLXIV. Capture of Jaffa ; events in that city
CLXV. How the citadel remained in the enemy's hands
CLX VI. Fresh negotiations concerning peace
CLX VI I. (New) forces arrive ....
CLXVIII. Arrival of el-Melek el-MansCir, son of Taki ed-Din
CLXIX. The Sultan goes to Ramla .
CLXX. The King agrees to give up Ascalon
CLXXI. Peace is concluded ....
CLXXII. Demolition of Ascalon
CLXX 1 1 1. Return of the Moslem armies to their homes
CLX XIV. Arrival of an ambassador from Baghdad .
CLXXV. £1-Melek ez-Z4her sets out on his return to his own

dominions, but the Sultan is anxious about him 392
CLXX VI. The Sultan leaves Jerusalem
CLXXVII. The Sultan returns to Damascus .
CLXXVI II. Arrival of el-Melek el-'Adel
CLXXIX. The Sultan goes out to meet the Hij
CLXXX The Sultan's illness .
CLXXXI. El-Afdal receives the oaths of allegiance
CLXXX 1 1. Death of the Sultan—may God have mercy upon

him, and sanctify his soul ! . . . 405


354
356
358
360

361

364
368

371
376

377

378
380

384
387
389
390


393
396
397
398
400

403


MAPS, ETC.


Western Palestine, i 187, showing the Latin Fiefs End of book
Battlefield of Hattin ----- page wt.
Syria in the Middle Ages, after Arab Geographers „ 144
Plan of Acre (a.d. 1291) - - - - , 210

Plain of Acre and Vicinity - - ,256


PREFACE.


The present volume closes the series of translations issued
by the Palestine Pilgrims' Text Society, and I am glad to
take this" opportunity of conveying the thanks of the
Committee to those gentlemen who have so kindly and
readily given their assistance in translating, annotating,
and editing the works. Without the cordial assistance
of those gentlemen it would not have been possible to
carry out the original programme of the Society, and place
within the reach of English readers the more important
of the records which the early and mediaeval pilgrims have
left of their pilgrimages to Jerusalem and the Holy Land.
The Committee and the Society are also deeply indebted
to the Hon. Secretary and Treasurer, who has done so
much to further the interests of the work.


C W. Wilson.


May, 1897.


INTRODUCTION.


The author of the Life of Salih ed-Din (Saladin), Aba
el-Mehisan Ydsuf ibn-Rifl ibn-Temfm el-Asadi, is better
known by his surname, Beh^ ed-D!n (Bohadin), ' lustre of
religion.' He was brought up by his maternal uncles, the
Reni Sheddid, whence he is often called Ibn Shedd&d,
and he became a l^ist of the Sh^fite sect, a noted tradl-
tionist, and the K&di of Aleppo. He was bom on March 5,
1 145, at Mosul, and there learnt the Kur&n under the
celebrated hafis (traditionist) Abd Bekr Yahya Ibn
S*adQn of Cordova. Towards the end of 11 70 he went to
Baghdad and acted as assistant master in the Niz&miya
College. In 11 74 he returned to Mosul and became pro-
fessor in the college founded by Kemal ed-Din Aba el-FadI
Muhammad.

In 1 188 Behd ed-Din made the pilgrimage to Mecca,
and afterwards that to Jerusalem and Hebron. He then
went to Damascus, and whilst he was staying there SaUh
ed-Dln, who had heard of his arrival, sent for him. He
visited the Sultan, who was then besieging Kaukab, and
was offered, but refused, the chief professorship at the
College of Men&zil el-Izz at Old Cairo. Afterwards, when
the Sultan was encamped on the plain before Hisn el-
Akrad (Castle of the Kurds), he paid him another visit.


xiv INTRODUCTION.


and on this occasion presented him with a book on the
merit of waging war against the infidels. Later he entered
the service of Sal^h ed-Dtn, and was appointed Kadi el-
Askar (K^di of the Army), and hakim (magistrate with
full executive power) of Jerusalem. He accompanied
Sal&h ed-Din during his later campaigns, and, on the
Sultan's death, went to Aleppo to establish harmony
amongst his sons. Ez-Z&her, the Prince of Aleppo, sent
him to his brother el-Aziz, who ruled at Cairo, and on his
return made him K&di of Aleppo.

Behi ed-D!n was also adminstrator of the Wakfs, Vizir,
and privy counsellor to ez-Z^her. He reorganized the
colleges at Aleppo, and provided them with good teachers ;
and, out of the ikta (State revenue) granted to him, he
founded a college and mosque near the Irak Gate, opposite
the College of NOr ed-Din. Close to the college he also
founded a school for teaching the 'Traditions' of the
Prophet. When ez-Ziher died he was succeeded by his
son el-Melek el-Aziz Abu el-Muzaflfer Muhammad, who,
being still a child, remained under the care of the eunuch
Shibib ed-PIn Aba Said Toghrul, an Armenian by birth,
who acted as his atabeg (guardian) and administered the
Principality under Behi ed-Din.

The fame of Beh^ ed-Din attracted many visitors to
Aleppo, and legists especially were always warmly wel-
comed. In his old age the learned K&di taught the
' Traditions ' in his own house, to which he had added a
sheltered alcove where he sat winter and summer. After
the Friday prayers people went to his house to hear him
repeat the 'Traditions,' and to enjoy his conversation,
which was agreeable, and chiefly turned on literature.
Ibn Khallikin gives a touching picture of his failing
strength in his later years. As he frequently had a bad
cough he rarely left his alcove, and in winter he always


INTRODUCTION. xv


had beside him a large brasier of charcoal. He constantly
wore a coat lined with furs of Bort&s (north of the
Caspian) and a number of tunics, and sat on a very soft
cushion placed on a pile of carpets. Old age had made
him ' as weak as a little bird just hatched/ and his legs
' had so little flesh on them that they were like thin sticks.'
It was with the greatest pain and difficulty that he was
able to move in order to say his prayers. Except in the
height of summer he never prayed in the mosque, and
even then, when with extreme difficulty he stood up to
pray, he was always ready to fall.

In November, 1 231, at the advanced age of eighty-six,
he was sent to Egypt to bring back the daughter of
el-Melek el-K&mil, who had been betrothed to eUAzfz.
He returned in June, 1232, to find that Toghrul had been
dismissed, and that el-Aziz had taken the management of
affiurs into his own hands. A younger generation had
grown up, and Behi ed-D!n was no longer consulted on
questions of state. The old Kidi gradually became so
feeble that he could not recc^nise his friends, and, on
November 8, 1234, he died, in his ninetieth year, leaving
his house as a Khangah (monastery) to the SOfis.

Sal4h ed-Din (Saladin) was the son of AyAb, and
grandson of ShAdi, a Raw&diya Kurd of the great Had&niya
tribe. He was thus of Kurd descent. Several of his
bravest warriors and most trusted counsellors were Kurds,
and during his reign, and that of his brother el-'Adel,
Kurds ruled in Armenia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Palestine,
Egypt, and Arabia.

SbAdi lived near Tovin, apparently at the village of
AjdlnakAn, where Ayfib is said to have been born. After
the birth of his two sons, AyClb and Shirk&h, he left the
Armenian plateau, and proceeded first to Baghdad and
then to Tekrit, where he settled, and afterwards died.


xvi INTRODUCTION.


His sons entered the service of Muj4hid ed-Dln Bihrfiz, a
Greek slave, who governed the province of Irak for the
SeljOk Sultan MasOd, and had been granted Tekrft as an
appanage. Bihrfiz appointed Ayfib Governor of Tekrit^
and here SalAh ed-Din was born. The action of AyOb
in assisting Zenghi to cross the Tigris, when he was
marching on Baghdad, greatly displeased BihrOz, and
some time afterwards the two brothers were expelled from
the city. They at once entered the service of Zenghi,
then Lord of Mosul, and, on the capture of Ba'albek,
AyOb was appointed Governor of that place.

After the murder of Zenghi, Ayfib was attacked by the
Seljfik, Mujir ed-Din Abek, who then ruled at Damascus,
and not receiving any support from Mosul, surrendered,
and became one of the chief Emirs of Damascus, On
Zenghi's death Shirkdh entered the service of his son,
Nflr ed-Din, then Lord of Aleppo, who made hiip com-
mander of the army, and gave him Emessa and other cities
as an appanage. When NOr ed-Dtn took Damascus he
attached Ay fib and Sal&h ed-Din to his person, and the
latter remained in attendance, learning much from his
over-lord, until he accompanied his uncle, Shirkfih, on his
first expedition to Egypt. The further history of Salah
ed-Din is fully related by his biographer, and the accom-
panying genealogical tables will explain the relationship
of the most important personages mentioned in the
narrative.

The translation, originally made from the French edition
published in the ' Recueil des histor. d. Croisades, auteurs
Arabes, iii., 1-393/ has been carefully revised and compared
with the edition of Schultens by Lieut.-Colonel Conder,
R.E., and in several passages, especially those relating to
the death of Salah ed-Din, the rendering has been very
materially altered. The notes with the initial W are by


INTRODUCTION. xvii


the Editor ; all other notes are by Lieut.-Colonel Conder,
R.E., who has very kindly revised all the proofs, and thrown
light on many doubtful points.

The biographical notices in the notes are principally
from Ibn Khallik&n's Biographical Dictionary, translated
by Baron MacGuckin de Slane for the Oriental Transla-
tion Fund.

C W. W.


xvin


INTRODUCTION.


NO "T
•S *^

9-0
<8


00


o


j9

CO


^J5

•t O

4> O

a s

^ o
O


•T3 Ctf

C 0)
0)


o


U3 O
C O


<


<eTj

CO

C

a

I


e g

So ^


J3 C g

^- -^ 00


4:3

CO

a

•§£
73 «^


_rt«


pC IT3 CO
CO g CJ

c «* w

<ci "* rt

i: c a
j^ o'-'oo
O'd " .

«« c ^

ISO

CO


u

4^

Q Eo^

73^ M S


'^ 4-i

CO^ eo ^


-23 bo

CO

CO


c^


9-0 S

^^ o


1^


o


E


a

(A


E

0)


CO


l-H

•8


>^


IS


^^^"


«M


• fm


S


-2


CO


WhJ


•c


ji


C3


tn


pq


00


jrf


M


<C3


-d


S to

4> M

He


Sc)5


s
(2


CO

e


•s

a

8

•§


<5 ^ 'c^u- •- S


•c


*5 55 fc-


.5 •*

o tc


■SI


M


W


<5-a


3j

.ja

CO


CO

M

l4
4>

-3.

9

73

O

t

M
<


INTRODUCTION,


XIX


o


l4


O

M


N


0)


t3


— -5*


• *\


o


ro


4>


r«


s


M


•


N4


»


^


j^ <W li^

«^ C "
CO .S _•

0) o o
-i o


^■^


2


g^-o


?^


d


15 -o *^


Pi

X Ov


Lor
(b. n


^


c/; -d


ab — »


:j t^


us 1*5


<:> M


•


> -


►r ti 0?


•


*s ^ o>


a:£.


^fe =


H


-t:^ .


— ^ o ..


Mel
Itan
172


• s ^


W««ri


< 1


••


•5 c«


•
•0


-^Q


• M


Wu.


^4


T3


«>•


s-s


»«


a^


JO


<3


•


IT)


**


c


cu


c«


>s


1


0)


Um


.Atf


V


C


V


3


s


9


1


C/}


M


S

.8.


c
2 2 ;2


1 1„ •*


.2 o\


O c

"a


V


2


XX


INTRODUCTION,


1-3
GO


ON


o

S3


3

o


•— ' S5


S^


o
2


Q'O'6

s


C/3


O


T) ^3 nd
o


s

e
Q rt

^ TJ ^

4> Ji "^

'53
IS


<S c o-oN

C/3 (U M


1^


o<


>»4

C •< 00
CO


o


OS


c
Q

";g o ..s


M


S3
S
O

.C/3 fi

c/J o


C/3 ^

c ::)
c o •^


us

J3
C/3

6
o

c
Q


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN yOSUF


PREFACE.

In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate !

Praise be to God, who has given us Isl&m, who has led us
to a faith so exalted, and who, in His mercy, has granted
us our Prophet (Muhammad) to intercede for us. Praise
be to Him, who has ordered the lives of past generations
for the instruction of thinking men, and has allowed the
vicissitudes of this life to be a sure proof of the instability
of all created things. By this means He desires to prevent
the favourite of fortune from suffering himself to be led
astray by prosperity, and to preserve from despair the man
who has become a plaything in the hands of adversity.

I bear witness that there is but one God, and there is
none like Him. This is a faith which heals souls perishing
with thirst (for the trilth). I also testify that Muhammad
is His servant and messenger, he who has opened the
doors of right living to those who use the keys of submis-
sion and resignation. May God shed blessings unending
open him and his family, as long as this world endures.

Let us pass to our subject, and write of that Prince strong
to aid (il-MiUk en'NAsr)^ who re-established the doctrine of
the true faith, struck to earth the worshippers of the Cross,

I


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. J


and raised the standard of justice and benevolence; he
who was the prosperity {Saldh) of the world and of the
faith (ed'Dtn\ the Sultan of Isl&m and of the Moslems, the
warrior who delivered the Holy City from the hands of the
polytheists, the servant {KMditn) of the two Sanctuaries.
(Mecca and Jerusalem), Abu el-Mozaffer Yiisuf, son of
Ay Ob, and grandson of Shidhi. May God shed on his tomb
the dew of His approval, and allow him to taste, in the
abode of mercy, all the sweetness of the faith. Having
seen the goodly days of the reign of our Lord the Sultan^
it was possible for me to believe certain traditions of the
men of olden time that are commonly considered im-
probable and fictitious, and to accept as true, anecdotes
of noble and benevolent men. I was able to credit what
is told us of the lives of brave warriors, because I had
witnessed the noble deeds of certain Memluks, deeds of
which the truth has been called in question. With my
own eyes I had seen men who fought in God's cause dis-
play a hardihood in the midst of danger which would
surpass belief. I myself had seen wonderful deeds which
heart and brain could hardly conceive ; actions so mar-
vellous that the tongue would be powerless to picture them,
and the hand to describe them on paper. Nevertheless,
these deeds are of such a nature that he who knows them
cannot keep them concealed, and he who has witnessed
them feels compelled to pass on to others a narrative of the
wonders he has seen.

Overwhelmed by the favours of Salah ed-Din, honoured
by his friendship and attached to his service, I felt obliged,
both by gratitude and duty, to relate to the world all that
I knew and all that I had learnt of his noble character and
his heroic actions. But I have thought it right to confine
myself to those things which I have seen with my own
eyes, and to such information from others as appeared to.


\VH/.T BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


be of indisputable authority. Although this be but a part
of the whole, a little gathered from much, this part will be
sufficient to enable all to judge of the rest, just as after the
appearance of dawn the rays of light announce the ap-
proach of the sun.

I have called this work * What befell Sultan YClsuf/ and
have divided it into two parts. The first deals with his birth
and youth, his noble character, his sweet disposition, and
those natural qualities which so distinguished him, and
which are so acceptable in the sight of God's law. In the
second part I shall describe, in chronological order, the
vicissitudes of his life, his wars, and his conquests, to the
hour of his death. May God have mercy on him !

I pray that God may preserve me from the errors to
which tongue and pen are liable, and hinder my spirit from
taking a path wherein my foot must stumble. God will
suffice me : He is the best of all guardians.


I -2


PART I.

Birth of Salah ed-DIn, his Good Qualities, his
Character, and Natural Disposition.

I LEARN from the lips of certain persons worthy of cre-
dence, who had made inquiries concerning the date of the
birth of Saidh ed-Dtn, in order to construct the horoscope
of this prince according to the rules of astrology, that he
was born in the course of the year 532 (a.d. 1137-1138), in
the citadel of Tekrit, where his father, Ayiib, son of
Shddhi, discharged his duties as Governor. AyCib was an
honourable, generous, and good man. He was born at
Dovin.^ Circumstances afterwards obliged him to leave
Tekrit^^ and he betook himself to Mosul^ taking his son
with him. Here he remained until his son had grown
up. Ayiib and his brother, Asad ed-Din ShtrkOh, were
held in high esteem by the Atabeg Zenghi (Prince of
Mosul). Proceeding afterwards into Syria, AyClb obtained
the government of B'albek, and dwelt for some time in that
place. His son, who had accompanied him, entered upon
his first service under his direction. Brought up in his

' Dovin {Toviriy Armenian Devin) near Erivan in Trans- Caucasia.

> Tekrit^ the ancient Birihay is situated on the right bank of
the Tigris, between Mosul and Baghdad. The events to which our
author here alludes are related by Ibn el-Athir in his * History of the
Atabegs of Mosul.'


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 5


father's bosom, and nourished on the lofty principles which
his father set before him, he soon showed signs of the good
fortune which was always to accompany him, and gave
evidence of a spirit born to command. El-Melek el-'Adel
NOr ed-Din MahmOd, son of Zenghi, bestowed upon him
advancement, and, as a mark of his confidence and high
esteem, attached him to his service, and admitted him to the
number of his friends. The higher Sal&h ed-Dtn rose in
degree, the more apparent became qualities which entitled
him to a still more exalted rank. This state of things
continued until his uncle, Asad ed-Din ShirkOh, started
upon the Egyptian expedition. Later, in a more suitable
place, we will give a detailed account of this expedition,
with all particulars.


CHAPTER I.

WliAT I HAVE OBSERVED OF SALAH ED-D1n'S ATTACH-
MENT TO THE PRINCIPLES OF RELIGION, AND HIS
RESPECT FOR EVERY PART OF THE HOLY LAW.

I N our collection of authentic traditions stands the follow-
ing saying of the Holy Prophet : ' Isl&m is built upon five
columns : confession of the unity of God, the regular per-
formance of prayer, payment of the tenth (tithe) in charity,
the fast of the month Ramadin, and pilgrimage to the
Holy House of God (Mecca).'

Sal4h ed*Dfn — may God be merciful to him! — truly
believed in the doctrines of the faith, and often recited
prayers in praise of God. He had accepted the dogmas
of religion upon demonstrable proofs, the result of his
conversations with the most learned doctors and the most
eminent jurisconsults. In these arguments he acquired


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


knowledge that enabled him to speak to the purpose when
a discussion took place in his presence, although he did
not employ the technical language of the lawyers. These
conversations confirmed him in a true faith, which remained
undisturbed by any doubt, and, in his case, prevented the
arrow of speculation from overshooting the mark, and
striking at last on' doubt and infidelity.

The learned doctor Kotb ed-Din^ en-NisabOri* had com-
posed an exposition of Isl^m {aktda) for the benefit of this
prince, containing all that was necessary for him to know.
As he was much pleased with this treatise, he made his
younger sons learn it by heart, so that good doctrine
might be established in their souls from their tenderest
years. I have myself seen him take this book and read
it aloud to his children, after they had committed its
contents to memory.

As to prayer, he was always regular in his attendance at
the public service (on Fridays), and he said one day that
for several years he had never failed in this duty. When
he was ill, he used to send for the Imam alone, and forcing
himself to keep on his feet, would recite the Friday

' Abu el Ma'ali Mas'ud Ibn Muhammad, surnamed Kotb ed-Din,
* pivot of the faith,' was bom in the district of Nishapitr, He studied
law at Nishap{ir and Merv, and was a professor in the college founded
by Niir ed-Din at Aleppo. He prepared for Sal Ah ed-Din an akida^
or exposition of Islim, which contained all necessary information on
religious matters. He died at Damascus in a.d. 1183 (Ibn Khallikan,
III. 35O.-W.

* Nisabikr (Nishapdr) was, according to tradition, founded by
Shahp{ir (Sapor) ; and, under the Sassanians, one of the three holiest
fire-temples stood near it. Under the Moslems it contained a large
Arab element, and became the capital and most important town of
Khorasin. Its gardens and fruits were famous, and it was called
the * Little Damascus.' Many students were attracted by its col-
leges, which had a high reputation. It was the birthplace of Omar
Khayyim, the celebrated astronomer-poet of Persia, who died in
A.D. 1 1 23. — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


prayers.^ He recited the usual prayers regularly, and, if
he woke during the night, said a prayer. If he did not
wake, he used to pray before the morning prayer. As
long as consciousness lasted, he never failed to say his
prayers. I saw him perform this duty regularly during
his last illness, and he discontinued it only during the
three days in which his mind was wandering. When he
was travelling, he used to get down from his horse at the
appointed hours* to pray. '^^ ' "/

Let us speak of his tenth in charity. The sum of money
he left at his death was not large enough to be submitted
to this tax ; his private charities had absorbed everything.
He who had possessed such abundant wealth lefLin his
treasury, when he died, but seven-and-forty N^sri dirhems,
and a single Tyrian gold piece.' He left neither goods,
nor house, nor real estate, neither garden, nor village, nor
cultivated land, nor any other species of property.

Let us pass to the fast of the month Ramadan. Several

" Attendance at the Friday prayers {Sa/d/ el-Jun^a) is regarded by
Moslems as a Jars duty, that is, as one commanded from God in the
Kurin. The prayers take the place of the ordinary mid-day service,
and differ from it only in the omission of four raifas^ and the
addition of a Khutbdy or sermon, preached by the KkAtiby who is
generally the Imdm. The usual prayers, recited by Sal^ ed-Din,
were the five daily services, and perhaps also the three voluntary
services. The prayer during the night was probably a service of two
raifas. Each service consists of a certain number of obligatory and
voluntary ral^as ; it may be said in public or in private, but when said
in a mosque it must be preceded by the azdn^ or call to prayers, and
the ikdma^ a repetition of the az&n, concluding with the words ' Prayer
has conunenced.' The raf^a is an act of worship, consisting of the
recitation of verses from the Kur&n, sentences of praise offered to
God, and acts of ritual, including the prostrations. — W.

* The appointed hours are (i) from dawn to sunrise ; (2) when the
sun has begun to decline ; (3) midway between 2 and 4 ; (4) a few
minutes after sunset ; and (5) when the night has closed in. — W.

^ The Tyrian dinar (Greek denarion) was so called because it was
struck at Tyre. The NAsri dirhem (Greek drachme) was a silver coin,
probably inscribed with the name of el-Melek en-N«W Salih ed-D!n«


8 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


of these fasts remained to be fulfilled, as he had not
observed them in consequence of his frequent illnesses.
It was the duty of el-K&di el-FAdeU to keep an account of
the number of these days. The prince — may God have
mercy on him ! — was in the last year of his life, and was
dwelling at Jerusalem, when he began to make reparation
for the fasts he had omitted. He then fasted for a period
exceeding the ordinary month, for he had still a fast of
two Ramad^ns to keep, which he had been prevented from
observing by constant disorders of the body, and the con-
tinual cares of the Holy War. Fasting did not suit his
health ; but thus, by the inspiration of God, he undertook
to repair his omissions during that year. It fell to me to
keep account of the days, for the Kidi was absent. It
was useless for his physician to disapprove of what he was
doing. The prince would not listen to him, and said, ' I
do not know what may happen.' It seems as though God
had inspired Salih ed-Dtn to save his responsibility by
paying his debt, and so he continued to fast until the days
were wholly accomplished.

Let us now speak of the pilgrimage. He always in-
tended to perform it, and, above all, in the last year of
his life. He had made up his mind, and given orders
for the necessary preparations to be made. We had
collected provisions for the journey, and all was ready
for the start, when he decided to postpone the pilgrimage
till the following year on account of want of time and

' Abu 'All Abd er-Rahtm el-Lakhmi el-'Askalini, generally known
as el-K&di el-Fddd, ' the talented K&di,' was vizir of Salih ed-Din, by
whom he was treated with the highest favour. He was sumamed
el-Misri, because he lived in Egypt, and el-Beis&ni because his father
was Kildi of Beisdn, He was famous as a letter-writer, and was also
a poet. Born at Ascalon (a.d. i 135), he died in Egypt (a.d. 1200),
after having been vizir to Saldh ed-Dtn, el-Melek eI-*Aziz, and el>Melek
el-Mans{ir (Ibn Khallikan, ii. in).— W.


4
\


3—^^i-Z^ S'ii^^jiy^ 1 1'i*! •J', -'*


>»


Uck cf ZD^oex SwrE^eirt •■:r zee x i*:> ri>*i rar«> F;^:
God d ^c/ced as H^ id oocrec Wliit I b^ivc ^^lA^ed c:*
that scb'-sct s & t^ ^^ k^^rw^ t2 all tbe wcrlc*


and he nsed to ar^-x v^th tbe Inriirru This mas luJ
to be master o^ aZ laz-wisd^ connected with the text
of the Kurir,. and to knzT the bock by heart* When
the priaoe passed the n:^t :a the alcove* ^of h:s tent\
be used to charge the aum on guard to read him two«
three, or focr secticns.* Wheti he gave public audience**
he would have frocn ose to twenty verses, and sometime*
more, read by men accustomed to do so« One day he
passed a little bo> who was reading the KurAn ver\* weU
at his father's side, and was so pleased that he had the
boy called, and gave him some of the food set aside for
his own special use. Also he granted to him and his
father part of the produce of a certain field. His heart
was humUe, and full of compassion : tears came readily
into his cyes ^~~ When hie was listening to the reading
of the Kur&n, his heart melted, and tears generally
flowed down his cheeks. He was very fond of listening
to the recital of traditions' when the narrator could trace
each tradition that he related to its source, and when he
was learned in such lore. If one of the doctors visited
the cotirt, he received him personally, and made those
of his sons who happened to be present as well as the

« The word ^ury, rendered * alcove/ usually signities * a tower.' 1 \ ere
It appears to mean a small room, built of wood, which contained a
bed. and opened into the tent.

' The text of the Kurin is divided into thirty sections (Jth, or
ti/fr,i}, so that a pious man, taking one section a day, can recite the
nbole Kurdn in the month of Ramadan.

i The Traditions {Haditk) contain the record of alt that Muhammad
did and said. They form an important part of Moslem theoloKy» and
occupy a place second only to the Kurin. — \V.


lo WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

memlOks on duty, listen to the traditions recited. He
would order all those who were present to be seated
during the narration, as a sign of respect. If any of the
doctors of traditionary lore were such characters as do
not frequent the gates of Sultans, and are unwilling to
present themselves in such places, Salih ed-Din would go
himself to seek them out and listen to them. When he
was at Alexandria, he often visited Hdfiz el-Isfahini,^ and

s

learnt from him a great number of traditions. He himself
was fond of reading traditions, so he used to make me
come into his private chamber, and there, surrounded by
books of traditions which he had had collected, he would
begin to read ; and whenever he came to a tradition
containing an instructive passage, he was so touched that
the tears came into his eyes.

He 'showed the greatest zeal in his observance of the
precepts of religion, openly maintaining his belief in the
resurrection of the bodies of the just in Paradise, and of
the wicked in Hell. He believed steadfastly in all the
teaching of the Divine Law, accepting its doctrines with
an open heart. He detested philosophers, heretics,^
materialists, and all adversaries of orthodox religion. He
even ordered his son el-Melek ez-ZAher, Prince of Aleppo —
may God exalt his supporters ! — to put to death a young
man named Suhraverdi.^ He had been accused of not

' This Hdfiz el-Isfahini does not appear to be otherwise known.— W.

a The Arabic text has el-Mu^attila (Mu'tazila, *lhe Separatists').
This word, in scholastic theology, is applied to a sect who rejected
the idea of eternal attributes, saying that eternity was the formal
attribute of the essence of God. The Mu*attilites were the free-
thinkers of Islim, and were regarded by the orthodox as heretics,
and tainted with atheism.

3 Abu el-FutOh Yahya Ibn Habash es-Suhraverdi was bom at
Suhraverdi, a village in Persian Irak, and was one of the most
learned men of his age. He had studied at Mar^gha in Azerbijan,
and was said by some to be a fire-worshipper {sendik\ and by others


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. ii


recognising the ordinances of the law, and of paying no
regard to the doctrines of the faith. Ez-Z4her,^ having
sent this man to prison, reported what had passed to his
father, and at Sal&h ed-D!n's command had him executed,
and his body hung upon a cross for several days,
f Having perfect trust in God, he looked upon Him as
his great support, and turned ever to Him. I will give
an instance of this which I myself witnessed. The
Franks — may God confound them! — had pitched their
camp at Beit-NOba,^ a place situated about a day's journ ey
from Jerusale m. The Sultan occupied this city, after
having surrounded the enemy with out-posts^ and sent out
men to spy and watch all their movements. He received
constant news of the Franks, and of their fixed determina-
tion to come up to the Holy City and lay siege to it. As
this struck great terror among the Moslems, he called his
emirs together, informed them of the calamity which
threatened the faithful, and submitted to them whether it
was right to remain in the city. They appeared, one and
all. of good courage» but their real sentiments were very
different from those which they expressed. They declared
unanimously that the Sultan's presence in Jerusalem would
be of no advantage, and might, indeed, endanger IslSm ;
that they themselves would remain there, while he went
out with a body of men to surround the Franks, as had


to be an infidel and acquainted with magic. He was really a very
advanced Sufi, and so an abomination to SaUh ed-Din. He was
strangled in the castle at Aleppo, in a.d. 1191, at the early age of
thirty-eight (Ibn KhallikAn, iv. 153).- -W.

' Abu el-Fath Gh^zi Abu Mansur el-Melek ez-Zaher (;hiAth ed-Din
was fond of learning and generous to poets. He was resolute, animated
by a lolty spirit, skilled in the administration of affairs, and intent on
the difiiision of justice. He was bom in 1173, made Governor of
Aleppo in 1187, and died in 12 16 (Ibn Khallikan, ii. 443). — W.

' Bn'/ NHha^ called bv the Franks Betenoble, 12 miles N.W. of
jcnttalem, immediately N. of Ajalon, at the foot of the mountains.


r

J-


12 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


been done at Acre. At the head of this army, he was to
keep the enemy narrowly hemmed in, and cut off their
supplies of provisions ; meanwhile, they would hold the
city and repel attacks. The council having broken up,
the Sultan forthwith determined to hold the city, know-
ing full well that otherwise no one would remain there.
After the emirs had left to return to their houses, a
messenger came from them to the Sultan to inform him
that they would not remain in Jerusalem, unless he left
at their head either his brother el-Melek el-*Adel, or one
of his own sons. He felt that this communication meant
that they did not intend to remain in the city, and
his heart was sorely oppressed, and he knew not what to
decide. On this same night, which was the eve of Friday,
I was on duty in his chamber, having to stay there from
evening until dawn. It was in the rainy season, and with
us two there was no third but God. We made plans, and
discussed the consequences of each plan ; but at last I grew
concerned for him, seeing him so overwhelmed with despair,
and I began to fear for his health. So I begged him to lie
down on his bed, and sleep a little if possible. He replied :

* You must be sleepy, too,' then he rose (to withdraw).
Passing into my house, I busied myself with some private
affairs until dawn, when the summons to prayer sounded.
As I usually said the morning-prayer with him, I went into
his chamber, where I found him washing. * I have not
slept a single moment,' he said. I replied that I knew it.

* How ?' he asked. I answered, * Because I have not slept
myself, not having had the time.* We then said our
prayers, after which we sat down to what we had to do.
At last I said : ' I have an idea that, I believe, is a good
one, please God !' * What is it ^ he asked. I replied :

* Support is from God, turn to Him and trust in His good-
ness, and you will be delivered out of this affliction.'


^ X ^^^T^TT" -T^f^' _i T,_ '^^.■ " '^ ^ ^"'^••^'.^'ir*'


>^ifc


■^ >;ir^ i


dispatch arritcd in -a':^ zz. Izz ei-Z.n Jurd.a:.' i»bo mx*
ihea in cociziacd of the iJ,vk:zzsi g^^^ ir.:Vr=:ec u> xhJit
a great distcrbance reined a=:::2^5t the Frir.ks ; thjit
their men had this day cc-nted their hordes arvi be-


* The Prophet is aad-ti-jcillr 5::r posed ro hi\^ ascecded ttv«i th«
Cxvc in the S^ikrak, or boly •rock .n the K^bbet es-SakhiJih. I ^e
•onJ Aksa stands for the »b.;:»;e crii^o^ure of ihe Harazn CNh-Sh^rX

• Tbe iUiIjb, or ' call lo prayer," :5 e,^»en by the Mueiiin a; the r.me v^
pabuc prayer. When the prayers are sa:ii in a moj^ue they vvmmenv^
wTth the iJkdmtA, a repetition of the axaa, with the adduion of the iik\^N
* Krayer has commenced.* For r.iJt j; see p. 7. — W.

> 'Is ed-Din Jtiidik was a freednian of Nur ed-Pin, who aiVom>
panied Shirkuh to Egypt. He and SaUh ed-Din kiUeil ShAwai, the
vuir of the Fatimite Khalif of £g>'pt ; and he was aAcrwanls one of
Sallh-ed Din's emin.— \V.


14 IVHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


taken themselves to the plain ;^ that they had halted
there until noon, and then all at once returned to their
camp. Early on Saturday a second dispatch arrived with
the same news. During the day a spy came in and reported
that discord was rampant amongst the Franks, the king
of France having declared that they must absolutely lay
siege to Jerusalem, whilst the king of England and his
supporters were unwilling to risk the Christian cause by
throwing their troops into a mountainous country, where
their water-supply would be entirely cut off, for the Sultan
had destroyed all the wells round the city. Also that their
chiefs had gone out (from the camp) to hold a council in
their usual manner, for it is their custom, when it is a
question of war, to take counsel together on horseback.
Also that they had agreed to refer the point to the con-
sideration of ten persons whom they had chosen from
amongst themselves, and to abide by their decision. On
Monday morning a messenger came to announce that the
enemy had struck their camp, and were marching towards
Ramla.^ This was an instance of the Sultan's great trust
in God. I myself was a witness of it.


CHAPTER II.

HIS LOVE OF JUSTICE.

Abu Bekr^ — God be gracious to him ! — records that the
Holy Prophet said : * A just governor is the shadow of God
upon earth. He who serves God faithfully himself and for
others, God will place under the shadow of His throne on

* The plain of Ajalon.

* See p. 295.

3 The first Khalifa, or successor of Muhammad.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 15


that day when no other will remain except that shadow ;
but he who seeks to deceive God in matters which concern
himself or other men, God will deprive of all hope on the
day of resurrection. To the just governor, for the good
work he has done day by day. He will assign a reward
equal to that of sixty true-hearted men who each have
worked for their own salvation.* Our Sultan — may the
mercy of God rest upon him ! — was just, merciful, com-
passionate, and ready to aid the weak against the strong.
Kvery Monday and Thursday he sat in public to ad-
minister justice, and on these occasions jurisconsults,
k&dis, and men learned in the law were present. Every
one who had a grievance was admitted — great and small,
aged women and feeble men. He sat thus, not only when
he was in the city, but even when he was travelling ; and
he always received with his own hand the petitions that
were presented to him, and did his utmost to put an end
to every form of oppression that was reported. Everyday
he made a packet of these documents, and opened the
doors of justice (to the complainants) ; he never sent away
those who came to complain of their wrongs or to demand
redress. Every day, either during the daytime or in the
ni;:ht. he spent an hour with his secretary, and wrote on
each petition, in the terms which God suggested to him, an
answer to its prayer.

Whenever a petitioner applied to him, he would stop to
listen, to receive his complaint, and to inquire into the
rights of the matter. I myself saw a man of Damascus,
named Ibn-Zoheir, deliver a complaint against Taki
ed-Din, the Sultan*s nephew, demanding justice. Although
Taki ed-Dtn was high in the affection and esteem of his
uncle, the Sultan would not spare him in a matter where
justice was at stake, and caused him to appear before the
tribunal.


i6 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Here is an anecdote still more remarkable than the fore-
going, which likewise shows his great sense of justice. I
was one day presiding in the tribunal in the Holy City of
Jerusalem, when I saw a fine old man enter who usually
went by the name of 'Omar el-Kheldti. He was a merchant
and native of Kheldt^ This man placed in my hands a
certified memorandum, and begged me to read its contents.
I asked him who was his adversary, and he replied: *My
affair is with the Sultan ; this is the seat of justice, and I
have heard that here you make no distinction of persons.'
* Why,' I said, * do you bring a suit against him ?* He
replied : ' I had a memlOk named Sonkor el-Kheliti, who
remained in my possession until his death. At that time
he had several large sums of money in hand, all of which
belonged to me. He died, leaving these sums : the Sultan
took possession of them, and I lay claim to them as my
property.' I then asked him why he had delayed so long
before making his claim, and he replied : ' One does not
forfeit one's rights by delaying to claim them, and here I
have a certified document proving that the slave remained
in my possession until his death.' I took the paper, and
having read it through, saw it contained a description of
Sonkor el-Kheliti, with a note that his master had bought
him of such an one, a merchant of Arjish^ (in Armenia), on
a certain day of a certain month in a certain year ; I found
also that the memliik had remained in his master's
possession until a certain year, when he had escaped by
flight, and that the witnesses named in the document had
never understood that the man had ceased to be the

^ AkhlcU^ on the shore of Lake Van. See p. 84.

2 Arjishy the Byzantine Arses^ was taken by the Seljftks in 1071,
and by a prince of the house of Sal^ ed-Din in 1207. It was on the
north shore of Lake Van, and was submerged by a sudden rise of the
waters of the lake about fifty years ago.— W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 17

property of his master in any manner whatever. The
instrument was in legal form — nothing was wanting.
Wondering very much at this affair, I said to the man : ' It
b not meet to adjudge a claim in the absence of the party
sued ; I will inform the Sultan, and will let you know what
he says in this matter.' The man appreciated my remark,
and withdrew. On the same day, having occasion to pre-
sent myself before the Sultan, I acquainted him with the
business. He thought the claim utterly absurd, and asked
if I had examined the written document. I replied that it
had been taken to Damascus, and laid before the k^di
there, who had examined it officially, and appended a
certificate to that effect, which was witnessed by the signa-
tures of various well-known persons. 'Very well,' he
cried, ' we will let the man appear, and I will defend myself
against him, and conform to all the regulations prescribed
by law.' Some time afterwards, sitting with him in private,
I told him that this man came constantly to speak to me,
and that it was absolutely necessary to give him a hearing.
He replied : * Appoint an attorney to act in my name, and
then receive the depositions of witnesses ; do not open the
document until the man appears here.' I did according to
his command, then, when the plaintiff appeared, the Sultan
ordered him to draw near and to be seated in front of him.
I was by the side of the prince. He then left the couch on
which he was sitting, and placing himself by the side of
the man, called upon him to state his case. He accord-
ingly set forth his claim in the ips^nner related above, and
the Sultan replied in these words : ' This Sonkor was a
memluk of mine ; he never ceased to be my property till
the time when I gave him his freedom ; he is dead, and his
heirs have entered upon the inheritance he left.' Then the
man answered and said : ' I hold in my hand an instru-
ment that will prove the truth of what I state. Please to

2


i8 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

open it, that its contents may be known.' I opened the
document, and found that it bore out the statements of the
complainant. The Sultan, having informed himself of the
date of the paper, replied : * I have witnesses to prove that
at the said date Sonkor was in my possession and at
Cairo; the year previous I had bought him with eight
others, and he remained in my possession till he received
his freedom.' He then summoned several of his chief
military officers, who bore witness that the facts were in
accordance with the statements of the Sultan, and declared
that the date he had given was exact. The plaintiff was
confounded, and I said to the Sultan : ' My lord ! the man
has done this only that he may obtain mercy at my lord's
hands, being in your presence ; and it will not be meet to
let him depart disappointed.' ' Ah !' said the Sultan,
' that is quite another matter.' He then ordered a robe of
honour to be given to the man, and a sum of money, of
which I have forgotten the amount, but which was ample
to cover his expenses. Observe the rare and admirable
qualities shown by the Sultan in this matter, his conde-
scension, his submission to the regulations prescribed by
law, the putting aside of his pride, and the generosity he
displayed at a time when he might justly have inflicted a
punishment.


CHAPTER HI.

SOME INSTANCES OF HIS GENEROSITY.

Our Holy Prophet says : ' When the generous man
stumbles, God takes him by the hand.' Among our
traditions (Hadith) are several which relate to generosity.
This quality of the Sultan's character — may God hallow
his soul! — is too well known to need setting forth in


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 19


writing, and too patent to require notice. Nevertheless, I
will just allude to it, and mention that he who had pos-
sessed such abundance of riches, left in his treasury, at his
death, but forty-seven N&sri dirhems, and one Tyrian gold
piece^ the weight of which I do not know. Yet he had
given away whole provinces. When he took the city of
Amid/ he bestowed it upon the son of Kara Arsldn,^ who
had asked him for it. I was present on one occasion at
Jerusalem, when he received a great number of deputa-
tions, just as he was departing for Damascus, and had
not sufficient money in the treasury to make presents to
the delegates. I continually reminded him of this, until
at last he sold one of his farms to the public treasury {deit
el-mdl), in order that he might distribute the price of it
among them. This was done with our help, and in the
end there remained not a single dirhem. He gave just as
liberally when he was in straits as when he was in the
enjoyment of plenty. His treasurers were always careful
to conceal from him certain sums of money, as a provision
for unforeseen contingencies ; for they knew that if he saw
them he would spend them at once. I once heard him
say, in the course of conversation about one of the tradi-
tions : ' It may be that there is someone in the world who
esteems money of as little value as the dust of the earth/
He was apparently alluding to himself. He always gave
more than they expected to those who asked. I never
heard htm say : ' We have already given to him.' He
made numerous presents ; to those who had already re-
ceived gifts he gave again, and with as much pleasure as
though he had not given them anything before. He

• Diarbtkr, Sec p. 85.

' Thi« was Nur ed-I)in Mahmud Jebu, the Ortoktd prince of Hisn
Kd/a \ 1 167- 1 1 83). He was the son of Fakhr ed-Dm Kara ArslAn, and
great-grandson of Sokm^n, son of Ortolc— \V.

2—2


20 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


always acted with great generosity, giving more on a
second occasion than the recipient had obtained before.
This was so well known that people were always trying to
make opportunities for getting money from him. I never
once heard him say : ' I have already given to you several
times; how often shall I have to give to you again?' Most
of the replies to these requests were written at my dicta-
tion, and sometimes with my own hand. I was often
ashamed at the greed shown by those who asked ; but I
never hesitated to approach the Sultan in their behalf,
knowing how generous and kind-hearted he was. No one
ever entered his service without receiving from him such gifts
as rendered it unnecessary for him ever to court another's
generosity. To enumerate his gifts, and to describe their
varied forms, would be a task impossible to fulfil in any
satisfactory way. In a conversation on this subject, I
once heard the chief of t he Div^n declare : ' We ke pt an
account of the number of horses he gave away in the
plai n of Acre alon e, and it mmmf-pH up tn _tfin thousand.'^.
Those who have witnessed the multitude of his gifts will
think but little of this. Great God, Thou it was who didst
inspire his generosity, Thou, the most generous among
the generous ! Shower upon him Thy mercy and Thy
favour, oh, Thou most merciful of those who show
mercy !

CHAPTER IV.

HIS VALOUR AND INTREPIDITY — MAY GOD HALLOW

HIS soul!

The Holy Prophet is reported to have said : ' God loves
bravery, even (if displayed) only in killing a serpent.' The

' He gave horses to the horsemen of his army who had lost their
own.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 21


Sultan was bravest among the brave ; he was distinguished
by his energy of soul, his vigour of character, and his
intrepidity. I have seen him take up his position im-
mediately in front of a large body of Franks, who were
every moment being increased and relieved, and the sight
(of this danger) only strengthened his courage and nerve.
One evening there came up more than seventy of the
enemy's ships ; it took me the whole of the time between
the 'Asr prayer^ and the prayer at sunset to count them ;
but their appearance only served to inspirit him anew.
On another occasion, at the commencement of the rainy
season, he gave leave to his troops, and remained himself*
attended by very few men^ in the face of a strong force of
the enemy. On the day when peace was concluded,
Bili^n, son of B&riz&n,^ ond of the chief princes of the
coast, was seated before the Sultan, and I inquired of him
what was the number of their troops. I received this
answer through the interpreter : * When the Lord of
Sidon * (another of their chiefs, and one of the most in-
telligent among them) ' and I left Tyre to join our army
(at the siege of Acre), and when we sighted them from
the top of the hill, we tried to guess as nearly as we
could the number of those engaged. The Lord of Sidon
said there were five hundred thousand ; I said six hundred
thousand.' I then asked him how many they had lost,
and he replied : ' Nearly a hundred thousand on the field
of battle ; but God alone knows the number of those who
have died from sickness, or who have been drowned.* And
of all this multitude but a very* small number ever
returned to their native land.

* AccordinK to tradition, the *j4sr prayers can be said from the time
when the shadow of a person is the len^^th of his own stature, till the
son assumes a yellow appearance. The Mai^hrib prayers commence
a few moments after sunset.

' BaJian I. of Ibelin ( VebnoM)^ on the coast*


I

(


I

22 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


When we were close upon the enemy, the Sultan iiAsisted
on making a reconnai ssance round their army once or
twice every day. In the height of the figh ting he u sed
to pass between the two lines of battle, accompanied by a
young page, who led his horse. He would make his way
in front of his own troops from the right wing to the left,
intent on the marshalling of his battalions, calling them
up to the front, and stationing them in positions which
he deemed advantageous to command the enemy or to
approach them. On one occasion, whilst standing between
the two armies, he ordered that some traditions should


be read to him. It is a fact. I told him that traditions


could be read in all important places, but that there was
no instance of its having been done between two armies.
I added that if his Highness would like such a thing
told of him, it would be fine. He listened to this. A
volume was brought, and someone who was present, and
had studied the book, read to him from it. Meanwhile, we
remained on horseback, sometimes walking up and down,
sometimes standing still, but all the while on the ground
between the two armies.

I never heard him express any anxiety as to the numbers
or force of the enemy. Whilst occupied with his own
thoughts and with the affairs of government, he would
listen to all sorts of plans, and discuss their (probable)
results without any excitement, and without losing his
composure. When the Moslem army was routed in the


great battle in the plain of Acre, and even the troops in
the centre had taken to flight after throwing away their
p ry t drums and standards, he maintained the position he had
taken up, having only a handful of men to support him.
At last he managed to reach some rising ground, and there
rallied his men. His reproaches made them so deeply
ashamed that they returned with him to the fight. The


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 23

victory eventually lay with the Moslems, and the enemy
had more than seven thousand men killed, both horse
and foot The Sultan continued to fight, but at last, seeing
the strength of the enemy and the weakness of the
Moslems^ he listened to the proposals of. his adversaries,
and consented to a truce. The fact was, that they were
very much exhausted, and had suffered greater loss than
we. But they expected the arrival of reinforcements,
while we had none to hope for. Thus it was for our
advantage to conclude an armistice. This was recog-
nised when Fate revealed what she had in her bosom
for us. At this period the Sultan was very frequently ill,
and suffered terrible pain ; but he, nevertheless, kept the
field throughout Each army could see the fires of the
other ; we heard the sound of their bells^ (N&kAs), and
they heard our call to prayer. This state of things lasted
for some time, and all ended for the best May God hallow
the soul of this prince and shed light upon his tomb !


CHAPTER V.

OF HIS ZEAL IN FIGHTING IN GOD'S CAUSE.

God Almighty said (Kurin xxix. 69) : ' Those who fight
strenuously for Us we will surely guide in Our way, for,
verily, God is with those who do well.' There are
numerous texts in the Book exhorting us to fight for the
faith. And, of a truth, the Sultan entertained an ardent
passion for the Holy War ; his mind was always filled with
it. Therefore one might swear, in absolute security and

I The AtU^s is a thin oblong piece of wood, which is beaten by a
flexible rod. It is still used by the Christians in many places in
Asiatic Turkey to summon the people to worship. — ^W.


24 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


without risk of perjury, that from the time when he first
issued forth to fight the infidel, he spent not a single piece
of gold or silver except for the carrying on of the Holy
War^ or for distribution among his troops. With him to
wage war in G6d's name was a veritable passion ; his
whole heart was filled with it, and he gave body and soul
to the cause. He spoke of nothing else ; all his thoughts
were of instruments of war ; his soldiers monopolised every
idea. He showed all deference to those who talked of the
Holy War and who encouraged the people to take part in
it. His desire to fight in God's cause forced him to leave
his family, his children, his native land, the place of his
abode, and all else in his land. Leaving all these earthly
enjoyments, he contented himself with dwelling beneath
the shadow of a tent, shaken to the right hand and to the
left by the breath of every wind. On^ night, when he was
in the plain of Acre, it happened, in a very high wind, that
his tent fell up on him, and had he not been in the alco ve,^
he would have lost his life. But this tended only to
Increase nis passion, to strengthen his purpose^ and con-
firm his resolution. Anyone anxious to ingratiate himself
with the Sultan had only to encourage him in his passion
for the Holy War and to narrate to him stories connected
with it. Therefore, a number of treatises upon this subject
were composed for his use, and I myself wrote a work, on
his account, on the Holy War, and the rules and precepts
to be observed therein. I incorporated in this work all the
verses of the Kur&n bearing upon the subject, all the tradi-
tions which refer to it, and an explanation of all the rare
words. His Highness valued this treatise so highly, that

» The Jihdd^ or religious war with unbelievers, is an incumbent
religious duty, established in the Kuran, and in the Traditions as a
Divine institution. — Hughes, * Dictionary of Islam.'

= See p. 9


WHAT BEFELL SLLTAS YiSlF. 25


he taught the whole of its contents to his son, el-Melek
cl-AfdeL

Whilst on this subject, I will relate what I heard told.
In the month of Zu el-K'ada, in the year 5 84 (December,
I t88-January, 1 189), he took the fortress of Kaukab,^ and
gave his troops permission to return home immediately.
El-Melek el-'Adel- set out upon his return to Egypt at the
head of the contingent furnished by that country, and his
brother, the Sultan, accompanied him as far as Jerusalem,
so that he might bid him good-bye in that city, and be
present at * the Feast of Sacrifice/^ We travelled with
him. After having attended the prayers at this festival,
he conceived the idea of going to Ascalon with the
Egyptian troops, and, after parting with them, of returning
by the coast road, so as to inspect the coast lands as far as
Acre, and restore order as he passed. We tried to make
him give up this project, representing that after the depar-
ture of the troops he would have but a very small number
of men with him, whilst the Franks were assembled at
Tyre, and that he would thus be running great risk. The

' Kaukab el-Hawa Bclvoir), 6\ miles S. of Tiberias ; a fortress of
the Knights* Hospitallers, built in 1182.

' Abu Bekr Muhammad el-MeIek el-'Adel Seif ed-Din was brother
of SalAh ed-Din, and went with htm, under his uncle Shirki^h, to
Egypt. Under Sal4h ed-Uin he was Viceroy of Egypt, Governor of
Aleppo (i 183- 1 186;, of Kerak, and of other provinces. In 1200 he
deposed el-Mansur, the grandson of Salah ed-I)in, and made himself
master of Egypt In 1202 he obtained possession of Aleppo and
Syria and, later, of Mesopotamia, Khelat (1207-1208, and Yemen
M2 1 5- 12 16'. He was bom at Damascus in 1145, and died near the
»afnc town in 1218, after dividing his great empire amongst his sons
< IbD Khallikan, iii. 235).— W.

5 The ^Id el-Azha^ * feast of sacrifice/ known in Turkey and Ejjypt
as BairAm^ is celebrated on the tenth day of Zu el-Hijja, the last
iDOoth of the Moslem year. It was instituted by Muhammad in the
second year of the Hijra, and is the ^reat central festival of Islam.
The sacrifice forms part of the rites of the pilgrimage to Mecca.— \V.


26 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Sultan paid no attention to our remonstrances, but pro-
ceeded to Ascalon, where he took leave of his brother and
the Egyptian army. We departed with him to the coast,
being at that time on duty about his person, and took the
road towards Acre. The rain fell, the sea was tossed to
and fro, and the waves were like mountains^ as the Most
High has said (in the Kurin, xi. 44). This was the
first time that I had ever seen the sea, and such was
the impression it made upon me that if anyone had said,
' Go but one mile upon the sea, and I will make you
master of the world/ I should have refused to go. I
looked upon those who go to sea to earn a few pieces of
gold or silver as mad, and I endorsed the opinion of the
doctors who have declared that one cannot accept the
evidence of a man who is travelling on the ocean. Such
were the thoughts that came into my mind at the sight of
the terrible restlessness of the sea and the size of its waves.
While I gave myself up to these reflections, the Sultan
turned to me and said : * Would you like me to tell you
something ?' ' Very much,' I replied. * Well,' he safd,
* when by God's help not a Frank is left on this coast,
I mean to divide my territories, and to charge (my
successors) with my last commands ; then, having taken
leave of them, I will sail on this sea to its islands in
pursuit of them, until there shall not remain upon the face
of this earth one unbeliever in God, or I will die in the
attempt/ These words made all the deeper impression
upon me because they were so utterly opposed to what I
myself had just been feeling, and I said : 'My lord, there
is no man in this world braver than you, nor any man more
firmly resolved to maintain the true Faith.' * Why do you
say that ?' he said. I answered : ' As to bravery, I see
that your Highness is not infected with the dread which
the sea inspires in others ; and as to your zeal for the true


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 27


Faith, I see that your Highness is not content with driving
the enemies of God from one particular place, but that you
would purify the whole earth from the presence of the
infidel. Will you now allow me to tell you what was
passing through my own mind ?' He commanded me to
do so, and I described to him the feelings I had experienced.
Then I added : * The intention of your Highness is excel-
lent indeed. Embark your troops, and let them depart ;
but you, who are the piHar and the bulwark of Islim, must
not thus expose yourself and risk your life/ He replied :

* What, I ask you, is the most glorious of deaths ?* * To
die/ I answered, * in the way of God.* 'Then,' he replied,

• I strive for the door of the most glorious of deaths.*
What noble sentiments ! How pure, how brave, how full
of courage was his soul ! Great God ! Thou knowest he
lavished his strength in defence of Thy Faith, and that he
did all to deserve Thy mercy. Then be merciful unto
him, Thou who art merciful above all others !


CHAPTER VI.

OF HIS PATIENCE, AND OF HIS TRUST IN THE MERCY

OF GOD.

Gon Almighty has said : * To those who then fought
strenuously (to maintain the cause of God), and were
patient, verily, thy Lord after that will be forgiving and
merciful' (Kur&n xvi. in). I have seen our Sultan, in
the plain of Acre, in great suffering from a sickness that
had come upon him ; an eruption of pustules appeared
all over hb body, from his waist to his knees, and this
prevented him from sitting up. He was obliged to sit
leaning on one side when he was in his tent, and he could


28 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

not sit at table. Therefore he had all the dishes which
had been prepared for him distributed among the people
who were there. In spite of that, he repaired to his war-
tent close to the enemy. After having drawn up his army,
in order of battle, on the right wing, on the left, and in
the centre, he remained on horseback from early morning
until after mid-day prayer,^ engaged in surveying the
battalions, and again from the third hour of the afternoon
until sunset. During the whole time he bore most patiently
the great pain caused by the throbbing of the tumours. I
was astounded at this, but he kept ftp ^^y*"gj * ^hp pain
leaves me when I am o n horseback, and only retu rns when
I dismount. ' What a proof of God's fa vour !

Whilst we were at el-KharrOba,'^ after the Sultan had
been obliged to leave Tell el-Hajl (the hill of partridges)
on account of illness, the Franks received news of his
departure, and sallied (from their camp) in the hope of
striking a blow at the Moslems. It was the day on which
they usually took their horses to the watering-place. They
marched on as far as the wells {el-Abdr), which lay a day's
journey away, and at the foot of Tell (el-Hajl). The Sultan
sent his baggage back in the direction of Nazareth, and
allowed 'Imdd ed-Din,^ Lord of Sinjdr, to accompany it,
for this prince also was ill. The Sultan himself maintained
his position. The next day, seeing that the enemy were

* The mid-day prayer, Saldt es-Zuhr, is said when the sun has
begun to decline. — W.

" KharrAba or Kharniiba (* carob-trees ') was apparently on the road
from Nazareth at the mouth of IVddy el-Melek. Tell el-Hajl seems
to be near the Tellel-Ajjlil noticed later (p. 176), about 10 miles N.
of Kharruba, and 2 or 3 miles E. of Acre.

3 'Imdd cd-Din, son of Kotb ed-Din, Lord of Mosul, was made
Lord of Sinjar^ the ancient Singara^ by his uncle, the celebrated
NClr ed-Din, about 1170, and died there in 1197. He was in posses-
sion of Aleppo when it was taken by Saldh ed-Din.—W.


T'?^


1J.L.


,^ X.m ^-^i"^


— *■ -«■ r —


^ ■ ■ 1 — .


« ^
■^ > ^


\ ^.:


lif::


*»»■ *


• • ■«


wlw had send E^rpc , and h;> cnvlc. el-Mc'cV el Vv'\', \S\ S »
br'Xbcrs death uiyc he became .-I;j/-^, • jjvwiniMn i\* h x i\0|^'»o\\,
e! Nfelek el-Mansur ; but when cl-\\dcl took |xMi>rxxu\u \M I >;\pi. h\
»a5 ^rven Sometsit iSamosau , where he dictl m t *;%« «\>;«^) m >v.%« >
<Ibn Khallikan, ii. 353 .~\V.
* The Belus River, S. of Acre.


30 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


occupied, and to remain all night under arms. He himself
withdrew to the rear with us, who were on duty, and had
his tent pitched on the summit of the hill. His physician
and I passed the night in ministering to him. His sleep,
which was often broken, lasted till daybreak. At the sound
of the trumpet he mounted his horse, and drew up his
troops with a view of surrounding the enemy. Their army
then commenced to retire, towards the camp, from the west
bank of the river, and the Moslems pressed close upon them
during the whole of that day. The Sultan sent forward
those of his sons who were with him, putting his trust (in
God) — namely, el-Melek el-Afdal and el-Melek ez-Z^her.
One after another he sent all the members of his suite to
the fight, until at last he had no one with him but his
physician, myself, the inspector of military stores and
equipment, and the young pages who bore the banners
and standards — not a soul beside. Anyone seeing these
standards from afar would have thought that a great
number of people were drawn up beneath them. The
enemy continued their march in spite of their losses. Every
time a man was killed, they buried him at once, and they
carried off their wounded so that no one might know the
extent of their loss. We watched every movement of their
retreat, and perceived that they were sorely harassed before
they reached the bridge^ and made a stand. Each time
they halted the Moslems drew off, for as soon as the Franks
formed line, and stood shoulder to shoulder, they were
able to resist all attacks with vigour and effect. Until the
evening, and as long as his troops were engaged with the
enemy, the Sultan kept the saddle. He gave orders that
this night should be passed like the last. We again took
up our former positions, and occupied them until morning.
This day our troops began to annoy the enemy as they

» The bridge over the Belus, 3^ miles S.E. of Acre, north of Uaiik.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAX YUSUF, 31


had done on the previous day, and forced them to continue
their march, much harassed by fighting, and the loss of
men. On nearing the camp, they received reinforcements
that enabled them to reach it in safety.

What patience we here see displayed ! what self-control
this man exerted, trusting the mercy of God ! O God, it
was Thou who didst arouse in him this patience and this
trust ! Do not refuse him his reward. Thou who art merciful
above all !

I was present on the day when he received the news of
the death of his son Ism'ail, a young man just in the flower
of his youth. He read the contents of the letter, but said
nothing about it to anyone. We learnt the loss he had
sustained through another channel. His face had given
no sign whilst he rea d the despa tch, but we had seen the
tears in his eyes.

Une night, whilst we were under the walls of Safed,^ a
fortified city to which he was laying siege, I heard him
say : ' We will not sleep to-night until they have planted
five mangonels/ and at each mangonel he stationed work-
men sufficient to put it together. We spent the night with
him most pleasantly, enjoying a charming conversation,
whilst all the time messengers kept arriving, one after
another, to report the progress made in the construction of
these engines. By morning the work was finished, and
nothing remained but to lay the ' Khanazir.'^ Throughout

* S&fed^ in Upper (lalilee, above the Sea of Galilee ; a fortress of
the Knights' Hospitallers. It was considered impregnable.

• This word, the plural of Khanzir^ * pig/ apparently applies to
some part of the mangonel-— possibly the lever. ' Mangonel * was a
generic term applied to all the smaller machines for throwing darts
fquaiTcls) or stones. These machines acted by means of a great
weight fastened to the short arm of a lever, which, being let fall, raised
the end of the long arm with a great velocity. Other parts of the
mangonel were the wheel iJuUb) for winding the rope attached to the


32 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


the night, which was very long, the cold and the rain were
grievous.

I was present when he received the news of the death
of his nephew, Taki ed-Din. We were encamped at the
time with a detachment of light cavalry in the neighbour-
hood of Ramleh, opposite to the Franks. Their troops
were stationed at Yaz(ir,^ and so near to us that they
could have reached us by a short gallop. He summoned
el-Melek el-'Adel, 'Alim ed-Din Suleiman Ibn Jinder,
Sibek ed-Din Ibn ed-Daya, and 'Izz ed-Din Ibn el-
Mokaddem : then he commanded all the people in his tent
to withdraw a bow-shot off. He then drew out the letter
and read it, weeping so much that those who were present
wept with him, without knowing the cause of his sorrow.
Then, his voice choked with tears, he announced to them
that Taki ed-Din was dead. His lamentations, and those
of all around, had commenced afresh when I recovered
my presence of mind, and uttered these words : ' Ask
God's forgiveness for allowing yourselves thus to give
way ; behold where you are, and in what you are engaged,
Cease your weeping, and turn your thoughts to something
else.' The Sultan replied by begging forgiveness of God
again and again. He then enjoined us to say nothing
on this subject to any person. Then, having called for
a little rose-water, he bathed his eyes, and ordered a meal
to be served, of which we were all to partake. No one
knew anything of what had occurred until the enemy had
withdrawn in the direction of Jaffa. We subsequently
retired again to Natriin,^ where we had left our baggage.

long end of the lever to raise the weight ; the pulley {bekra) through
which the rope passed ; and the trigger (keffa) for releasing the long
end of the lever. It has been proposed to rtaA jendztr^ the popular
form of zendjir^ * chains,' for khandzir. — W.

' Yaziir is 3J miles S.E. of Jaffa, 8 miles N.W. of Ramleh.

» NatrUn^ now LatrUn^ 9' miles S.E. of Ramleh, on the Jerusalem
road, called by the Franks ' Toron of the Knights.'


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 33

The Sultan was tenderly attached to his young children,
yet he deliberately left them, and was content to lead a
hard, painful life, although it was in his power to act
otherwise. He trusted in God to maintain the war against
the infidels. Great God ! he forsook all to please Thee 1
Oh, deign to grant him Thy grace and Thy mercy !


CHAPTER Vn.

INSTANCES OF HIS KINDNESS AND TOLERANCE.

God Most High has said : * And as for those who pardon
men, God loves the kind' (Kurin iii. 128). Our Sultan
was most indulgent to all who were at fault, and very
rarely did he show anger. I was on duty, in the presence,
at Merj 'Ayfin^ some time before the Franks attacked
Acre — may God enable us to conquer it ! It was his
custom to ride out each day at the hour appointed for
mounting on horseback ; afterwards, when he dismounted,
he had dinner served, and ate with all his suite. Then
he retired to a specially-reserved tent, where he took a
siesta. On awaking, he used to say his prayers, and
remain alone with me for some time. He then read some
passages from a collection of traditions, or a treatise on
law. With my assistance he even read a work by Soleim
cr^RAzi,^ wherein the doctor epitomises the four component

' Afffy 'Aydfif 'meadow of springs.' A plain 9 miles N.W. of
Baniis, £. of Shaktf AmOn (Belfort).

* Abuel*Fath Soleim er-Rizi was bom at Rat (Rhey ^zncxtnt Rhagae\
near Tehran, the birthplace of Harfin er-Rashfd, and one of the great
cities of the Seljiik sovereigns. He was noted for his learning and
pfiety, and, besides works on Moslem law, wrote an explanation of
obscure terms in the traditions. He settled at Tyre, and was drowned
in the Red Sea whilst returning from the pilgrimage (105$), when he
over 80 years of age (Ibn Khallikan, i. 584). — W.

3


34 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


sections of the science of jurisprudence. One day, having
returned at the usual hour, he presided at the meal which
he had ordered to be prepared, and was about to retire
when he was informed that the hour of prayer was at
hand. He returned to hfs seat, saying : * We will say
the prayer, and lie down afterwards.' Then he entered
into conversation, although he looked very weary. He
had already dismissed all those who were not on duty.
Shortly afterwards an old memlflk, for whom he enter-
tained great esteem, entered the tent, and presented a
petition on behalf of the volunteers who were fighting for
the faith. The Sultan replied : ' I am tired ; let me have
it later.' Instead of obeying, the man opened the petition
for the Sultan to read, holding it so close to him that
it almost touched his face. His master, seeing the name
which stood at the head of the petition, remarked that
this man was justly entitled to a favourable hearing. The
memlCi k said : * Then let my master write his ap proval
on the petition.' The Sultan answered : * There is no
inkstand here.' The pnnce was sitting just at the entrance
to the tent, which was a large one. No one, therefore,
could pass in, but we could see the inkstand inside. ' It
is there, within the tent,' replied the meml(ik, as though
requesting his master to fetch the inkstand himself. The
Sultan turned, and, seeing the object he sought, cried :
' By God ! he )b right.' Then, leaning upon his left arm,
he stretched out his right, reached the inkstand, and put
it in front of him. Whilst he was notifying his approval
on the petition, I remarked to him : ' God said to His
Holy Prophet : TAou art of a grand nature (Kur^n Ixviii. 4),
and I cannot but think your Highness is possessed of the
same nature as the Prophet.' He answered : ' It is not
worth speaking of; I have satisfied a petitioner, and that
is ample reward.' If such a thing had occurred to the


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 35

best of common folk, it would have angered him. Where
is there another man who would answer one under his
authority with such gentleness 7 Here, indeed, were kind-
ness and gentleness carried to their utmost limits, af$d
God wastes not the hire of those who do well (Kur&n

ix. I2l).

It sometimes happened that the cushion on which he
was seated would be trampled under foot, so great was the
crowd of suppliants presenting their petitions ; but he was
never disturbed by it. One day, when I was on duty, the
mule I rode started off, terrified at some camels, and he
forced me against the Sultan with such violence that I
hurt his thigh ; but he only smiled — may God be merciful
to him ! On another occasion — on a rainy, windy day — I
rode into Jerusalem before him on my mule, and it was so
muddy that, as she splashed along, the mud was spattered
even over him, and his clothes were quite spoilt. But he
only laughed, and seeing that I wanted to get behind him ,
he would not suffer me to do so.

The^people who came to implore his help or to complain
to him of injustice sometimes addressed him in the most
unseemly manner, but he always listened smiling, and
attended to their requests. Here is an instance, the like
of which it would be difficult to find on record : The
brother of the king of the Franks^ was marching on Jaffa,
for our troops had withdrawn from the vicinity of the
enemy and returned to en-NatrQn. From this place (o

' Probably Henry of Champagne is here intended. He marched
from Acre to relieve Jaffa in 1192. He married Isabel, half-sister of
Sibylt wife of King Guy, and was in this sense his brother He had,
however, been then made King of Jerusalem, Guy of Lusignan having
been given Cyprus. King Richard had left Jaffa when SalAh ed-Din
attacked it, but rettuned from Haifa by sea, and, landing August i,
1192, defeated SaUh ed- Din's forces outside the walls. Henry of
Champagne arrived later. See chap, cixvi., Part II.

3—2


36 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Jaffa is two long or three ordinary marches for an army.^
The Sultan ordered his troops to march in the direction of
Csesarea, hoping to fall in with reinforcements expected by
the Franks, and to take any advantage possible. The
Franks in Jaffa had notice of this manoeuvre, and the
king of England, who was there with a large force,
embarked the greater portion of it, and sent it by sea to
Caesarea, fearing lest some mischance should befall the
reinforcements. He himself remained at Jaffa, knowing
that the Sultan and his army had withdrawn. When the
Sultan reached the neighbourhood of Cxsarea, he found
that the reinforcements had entered that place and were
safe, so that he could do nothing. He therefore resumed
his march the same evening just as night began to close
in, pushed on until daybreak, and appeared unexpectedly
before Jaffa. The king of England was encamped outside
the walls of the city, and had only seventeen knights with
him and about three hundred foot-soldiers. At the first
alarm this accursed man mounted his horse, for he was
brave and fearless, and possessed excellent judgment in all
military matters. Instead of retiring into the city, he
maintained his position in face of the Moslem troops (who
surrounded him on all sides except towards the sea^ and
drew up his own men in order of battle. The Sultan,
anxious to make the most of the opportunity, gave the
order to charge ; but one of the emirs,^ a Kurd by birth,
addressed him at that moment with the greatest rudeness,
in anger at the smallness of his share of booty. The
Sultan turned his rein and hastened away like a man in

' LairUn is only 20 miles from Jaffa, but as Sal&h ed-Dtn advanced
to the 'Auja to intercept Henry of Champagne, his total march^ from
LatH^n to Jaffa, was 30 miles. Boha ed-Din seems to reckon 10 miles
a long march.

" This was el-Jenih. Sec p. 375.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 37


wrath, for he saw very clearly that his troops would do
no good that day. Leaving them there, he ordered the
tent which had been pitched for him to be struck, and his
soldiers were withdrawn from their position. They felt
certain that the Sultan that same day would crucify a
great number. His son, el-Melek ez-Z4her, told me that
he was so afraid on this occasion that he did not dare to
come into his father's sight, although he had charged the
enemy and pushed forward until he had received the
countermanding order. The Sultan, he said, continued
bis retreat, and did not halt until he reached YSlzHt^
having been marching almost the whole of the day. Here
a small tent was pitched for him, in which he rested. The
troops also encamped in the places where they had halted
before, and bivouacked under slight shelter,* as is usual in
such cases. There was not one of the emirs but trembled
for himself, expecting to suffer a severe punishment or
reprimand at the hands of the Sultan. The prince added :
' I had not the courage to enter his tent until he called for
me. When I went in, I saw that he had just received a
quantity of fruit that had been sent to him from Damascus.
*' Send for the emirs," he said, '* let them come and taste."
These words removed my anxiety, and I went to summon
the emirs. They entered trembling, but he received them
with smiles and so graciously that they were reassured and
set at their ease. And when they left his presence they
were ready to march as though nothing had happened.
What true gentleness of heart ! There is nothing like it
in these days, and the history of former kings does not
afford us any similar instance.

* He only retreated 3^ miles.

' SawtiwMat^ plural from Sawdni^ 'a doth.'


38 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER VIII.

HIS CARE TO BE POLITE.

The Holy Prophet said : ' I have been sent to make mani-
fest in all their beauty the noble qualities of the soul/
When any man gave his hand to the Prophet he clasped
it until the other withdrew it And so, too, our Sultan
was very noble of heart ; his face expressed kindliness, his
modesty was great, and his politeness perfect. No visitor
ever came to him without being given to eat, and receiving
what he desired. He greeted everyone, even infidels, politely.
For instance, after the conclusion of peace in the month of
ShawAl, in the ye^r 588 (October to November, A,D. 1192^,
he left Jerusalem to journey to Damascus, and whilst he
was on his way he saw the Prince of Antioch, who had
come up unexpectedly, and was standing at the entrance
of his tent. This prince had come to ask something from
him, and the Sultan gave him back el-'Amk,^ which terri-
tory he had acquired in the year 584 (a.d. ii 88-1 189), at
the time of the conquest of the coast-lands. So, too, I was
present at Nazareth when the Sultan received the visit of
the Lord of Sidon ; he showed him every mark of respect,
treated him with honour, and admitted him to his own
table. He even proposed to him that he should embrace
Islelm, set before him some of the beauties of our religion,
and urged him to adopt it.

He always gave a kind reception to sheikhs, to all
learned and gifted men, and to the various influential

* The great plain of el-^Amk was known in ancient times as the
Plain of Antioch. It lies N.E. of the city, and is the widening out of
the valley of the Kara Su. It was^the scene of Aurelian's victory over
Zenobia (a.d. 273), and within its limits js the Lake of Antioch. — ^W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF. 39

persons who came to see him. He enjoined us to present
to him every notable sheikh passing through the camp, so
that he might exercise bis generosity. In the year 584
(A.D. 1 1 88- 1 189) there came a man, who united to great
leamii^ the practices of a Sdd.^ He was an important
personage, whose father was Lord of Tdriz.^ He had re-
nounced his father's rank to give himself up to study and
the practice of good works. He had just performed the
pilgrimage {/fdj) and visited Jerusalem ; then, having in-
spected that city, and having seen there works of the
Sultan, he conceived the wish to see him. He arrived in
the camp, and entered my tent unannounced. I made
haste to bid him welcome, and asked what motive had
brought him thither. He answered that the sight of the
wonderful and beautiful works of the Sultan had inspired
him with the desire to see him. I reported this to the
Sultan the same night, and he ordered the man to be pre-
sented to him. He learnt from his lips a tradition concern*
ing the t^rophet, and listened to a discourse pronounced by
his visitor, who exhorted him to practice good works.
This man passed the night with me in my tent, and after
morning prayer took his leave. I remarked to him that
it would be very unseemly to depart without bidding the

' A SAfi is a man who professes the mystic principles of the
TtuawTtw/, or SQUism. The principal occupation of a SdJH, whilst in
the body, is meditation on the Unity of God, the remembrance of
God*s names, and progressive advancement in the journey of life, so
as to attain unification with God. Human life is likened to a journey,
and the seeker after God to a traveller. The first stage of the

* traveller ' is * service,' that is, to serve God as the first step towards a
knowledge of Him. The last stage is death, which is regarded as

* extinction,' or total absorption into the Deity. The great object of
the SdTi mystic is to lose his own identity. Having effected this, per-
fection is attained. — Hughes, ' Dictionary of Isl&m.'

' TSriSy or Tavriz, the modem Tabriz, the capital of Azerbijan in
Persia.— W.


40 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Sultan farewell, but he would not yield to my remon-
strances, and carried out his original purpose. ' I have
accomplished my desire,* said he, 'with regard to the
prince; my only object in coming here was to visit
and see him ;' and he departed forthwith. Some days
afterwards the Sultan inquired after him, and I told him
what had occurred. He was much vexed that I had not
informed him of the visitor's departure. * What !* cried he,
'am I to receive the visit of a man like that and let him
depart with no experience of my liberality ?* He expressed
such strong disapproval of my conduct, that I wrote to
Mohi ed-D!n,^ Kddi of Damascus, charging him to seek the
man out and give him a letter I enclosed, which was written
with my own hand. In this note I informed the holy man
of the Sultan's displeasure on learning that he had left
without seeing him again, and I begged him, in the name
of our friendship, to return. He arrived when I was least
thinking of him, and I conducted him at once to the
Sultan, who received him graciously, kept him* for several
days, and sent him away laden with gifts — a robe of
honour, a suitable riding-animal, and a great number of
garments for distribution amongst the members of his
family, and his disciples and neighbours. He gave hinti
also money for the expenses of his journey. Ever after-
wards the man displayed the keenest gratitude to the
Sultan, and offered up the most sincere prayers for the
preservation of his life.

I was present one day when a Frank prisoner was

' Abii el-Maili Muhammad Mohi ed-Din, generally known as Ibn
ez-Zaki, was a descendant of the Khalif Othman, and a member of the
tribe of the Koreish. He was well versed in law, literature, and the
sciences, and was highly esteemed by Salih ed-Din. He was selected
to pronounce the Khutba at the first Friday prayer after the capture
of Jerusalem. He died in 1202. His father, surnamed Zaki ed-Dtn,
was also Kidi of Damascus (Ibn Khallikan, ii. 633}. — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 41

brought before him. This man was in such a state of ex-
citement that his terror was visible in every feature. The
interpreter asked him the cause of his fear, and God put
the following answer in the mouth of the unfortunate
fellow : * Before I saw his face I was greatly afraid, but *
now that I am in the presence (of the prince) and can see
him, I am certain that he will do me no harm.' The
Sultan, moved by these words, gave him his life, and sent
him away free.

I was attending the prince on one of the expeditions he
used to make on the flanks of the enemy, when one of the
scouts brought up a woman, rending her garments, weep-
ing and beating her breast without ceasing. * This woman,'
the soldier said, * came out from among the Franks, and
asked to be taken to the Sultan ; so I brought her here.'
The Sultan asked her, through his interpreter, what was
the matter, and she replied : ' Some Moslem thieves got
into my tent last night and carried off my child, a little
girl. All night long I have never ceased begging for help,
and our princes advised me to appeal to the King of the
Moslems. " He is very merciful," they said. " We will allow
you to go out to seek him and ask for your daughter."
Therefore they permitted me to pass through the lines, and
in you lies my only hope of finding my child/ The Sultan
was moved by her distress ; tears came into his eyes, and,
acting from the generosity of his heart, he sent a messenger
to the market-place of the camp, to seek her little one
and bring her away, after repaying her purchaser the price
he had given. It was early morning when her case was
heard, and in less than an hour the horseman returned,
bearing the little girl on his shoulder. As soon as the
mother caught sight of her, she threw herself on the
ground, rolling her face in the dust, and weeping so
violently that it drew tears from all who saw her. She


42 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

raised her eyes to heaven, and uttered words which we did
not understand. We gave her back her daughter, and she
was mounted to return to the enemy's army.

The Sultan was very averse to the infliction of corporal
punishment on his servants, even when they cheated him
beyond endurance. On one occasion two purses filled with
Egyptian gold-pieces had been lodged in the treasury ;
these were stolen, and two purses full of copper coins left
in their place. All he did was to dismiss the people em-
ployed in that department from his service.

In the year 583 (a.d. 1187), at the battle of Hattin — a
famous day's fight of which, please God, we shall speak in
its proper placed — Prince Arn^t (Renaud de Chatillon),
Lord of el-Kerak,* and the king of the Franks of the sea-
coast, were both taken prisoners, and the Sultan com-
manded them to be brought before him. This accursed
Arndt was a great infidel, and a very strong man. On one
occasion, when there was a truce between the Moslems and
the Franks, he treacherously attacked and carried off a
caravan that passed through his territory, coming from
Egypt. He seized these people, put them to torture, and
put some of them in grain-pits (mefamtr), and imprisoned
some in narrow cells. When they objected that there was
a truce between the two peoples, he replied : ' Ask your

* Renaud de Chatillon came to Palestine in 1148 with Louis VII. of
France. He became ruler of Antioch next year, having married Con-
stance, the heiress of Bohemund II., and widow of Raymond of Poitou.
He was taken prisoner by Manuel Comnenos at Malmistra, November
23, 1 160, and by Niir ed-Dln,on August 12, 1 163. He remained prisoner
fourteen years at Aleppo, and on his release married the widow of
Humphrey of Toron, and so acquired the great fief of Oultre Jour dan,
including the castles of Kerak and Shobek (Montreal), commanding
the Hij Road to Mecca. He was a bitter enemy of the Moslems,
and marched on Medina in 11 82- 11 83, escaping with difficulty back
to Kerak. He seized a Moslem caravan from Mecca, near Shdbek, in
1 187, during a truce with Salih ed-Din. — See * Jacques de Vitry,' p. 99.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 43

Muhammad to deliver you.' The Sultan, to whom these
words were reported, took an oath to slay the infidel with
his own hand, if God should ever place him in his power.
The day of the battle of Hatttn God delivered this man
into the hands of the Sultan, and he resolved at once to
skiy him, that he might fulfil his oath. He commanded
him to be brought before him, together with the king.
The latter complained of thirst, and the Sultan ordered a
cup of sherbet to be given him. The king, having drunk
some of it, handed the cup to Arnit, whereupon the Sultan
said to the interpreter : * Say to the king, " It is you who give
him drink, but I give him neither to drink nor to eat." ' By
these words he wished it to be understood that honour for-
bade him to harm any man who had tasted his hospitality.
He then struck him on the neck^ with his own hand, to
fulfil the vow he had made. After this, when he had taken
Acre, he delivered all the prisoners, to the number of about
four thousand, from their wretched durance, and sent them
back to their own country and their homes, giving each of
them a sum of money for the expenses of his journey.
This is what I have been told by many persons, for I was
not present myself when it took place.

The Sultan was of a sociable disposition, of a sweet
temper, and delightful to talk with. He was well
acquainted with the pedigrees of the old Arabs, and with
the details of their battles ; be knew all their adventures ;
be had the pedigrees of their horses at his fingers' ends,
and was master of all curious and strange lore. Thus in
conversation with him people always heard things which
they could never have learned from others. In company,
he put everyone at their ease. He comforted those who
were in trouble, questioned those who were ill on the nature
of their malady, on the treatment they had adopted, on

' He wau then beheaded by the slaves. See p. ii5>


44 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


their diet, and on the changes they experienced in their
system. He insisted strictly upon due seemliness in con-
versation, never suffering anyone to be spoken of except
with respect ; he would talk with none but persons of good
conversation, lest his ears should be offended ; having his
tongue under perfect control, he never gave way to abusive
language ; he could also control his pen, and never made
use of cutting words in writing to a Moslem. He was
most strict in the fulfilment of his promises.

When an orphan was brought before him, he always
exclaimed: 'May the mercy of God be upon the two
(parents) who have left this child behind them !' Then he
would lavish comfort upon him, and allow him the same
emoluments that his father had enjoyed. If the orphan
had an experienced and trustworthy person amongst his
relations he would charge him with the care of the boy ;
if not, he would deduct, from the father's emoluments,
sufficient for the orphan's maintenance, and then place him
with some person who superintended his education and
bringing-up. He never saw an old man without showing
him the kindest marks of respect and good-will, and making
him some present. And all these noble qualities remained
undimmed in his heart until God recalled him to Himself,
and removed him to the throne of His mercy, to the
abode of His grace.

This is but a meagre sketch of his lofty disposition and
of his noble character. My aim has been to be concise,
and to avoid prolixity lest I should weary my readers. I
have mentioned nothing that I have not witnessed, adding
thereto information obtained from credible authorities
which I have myself tested. What I have here told is but
a part of that which I was able to observe whilst in the
Sultan's service, and is little indeed in comparison with all
that could be told by his life-long friends, and those who


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 45

have grown old in his service. But what I have given will
convince an intelligent reader of the grandeur and purity
of the prince's character and feelings.

Now, having brought to a close the first part of my
work, I will pass to the second, in which I shall treat of
the changes of fortune experienced by the Sultan, and of
his battles and conquests. May God hallow his soul and
shed the light of His mercy upon his tomb I


I


PART II.

In which are set forth the Changes of Fortune
Experienced by the Sultan, and the History
of his Conquests.


CHAPTER L

his first campaign in EGYPT, IN WHICH HE SERVED
UNDER HIS UNCLE, ASAD ED-d1n (SHIRKCh).

A CERTAIN man, named ed-Darghim, rebelled against
Sh^wer,^ Vizier of the Egyptians, with the view of
depriving him of the viziership. Sh&wer collected a great
number of men to oppose him, but could not overcome
him, even with the support of this army. He was driven
out of Cairo by his adversary, and his eldest son, Tai,
perished in thd revolution. Dargh4m then assumed the

» Abft ShujA Shiwer es-S*idi, the Arab Governor of Upper Egypt,
killed the vizier of el-'Adid the Fatimite Khalif of Egypt, and took
possession of the vizierate. He was driven from office by AbCt
el-Ashbdl Darghdm, the prefect of the palace, and fled for protection
to Nilr ed-Din, the Lord of Syria. He returned to Egypt with Shirkdh
and his troops, and in the battle that ensued, Darghim was killed
(1164). Shiwer then became vizier, but on the occasion of Sh^rk^h's
third expedition to Egypt, he was killed (1168) by Saldh ed-Dm and
'Izz ed-Din Jurdtk (Ibn Khallikan, i. 608).— W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 47


viztership. It was the custom when anyone successfully
raised the standard of revolt against a vizier (of the
Fatioiite khalifs) to submit to the victor, and establish him
with full authority in the office for which he had fought.
Indeed, the whole power of the government lay in the
vizier's army, and the vizier had the title of Sultan. They
(the Khalifs) took care not to look into matters too
closely, and had followed this policy from the first es-
tablishment of their . dominion. Shdwer, thus defeated
and driven from Cairo, set out at once for Syria, and
presenting himself at the court of NCir ed-Din,^ ibn Zenghi,
asked for troops to fight his enemies. NOr ed-Dfn ordered
Asad ed-D!n^ to proceed to the strong city of Misr,^ and
when there to maintain the rights of the man who had
asked his assistance, and to inquire into the condition and

* Abd el-Klsim Mahmdd el-Melek el-'Adel Nilr ed-Din was son of
Im&d ed-Dtn Zenghi. On the death of his father (1146) he took pos-
session of Aleppo, whilst his brother occupied Mosul. In iiS4 he
took Damascus, Hamath, Baalbek, and Membij ; and by 11 64 he had
gained possession of Hirim, 'Az^z, and Biniis. In 1173 he took
.Mar'ash and Behesne. He sent Shirk^h and SalAh ed-Din to Egypt
three times, and his name was struck on coins and pronounced in the
Kkuiba (Friday sermon) in Egypt when Sal&h ed-Din was his Viceroy
in that country. He was an enlightened prince, and was respected
by both Christians and Moslems. He died in 1174, aged 56 (Ibn
Khallikan, til 338).~W.

' AbO el-H4rith Shirkuh el-Melek el-Mans{^r Asad ed-Din was uncle
of Sal4h ed-Dfn. He was sent to Egypt by N{^r ed-Din in 1 163- 1 164,
and returned to Damascus in 1164 after defeating DarghAm, and
restoring Shdwer to the vizierate. In 1 167 he again went to Egypt,
and fought the celebrated battle of el-BAbein, He entered Egypt for
the third time in ti68, and, when ShAwer was killed, became vizier to
the Khalif, el-'Adid. He died at Cairo in 1 169, and was succeeded by
SaUh ed-Din, who had accompanied him in all his expeditions (Ibn
KhaUikan, L 636).-W.

} <.l//fr, or Jfdjr, as it is usually pronounced, is used both of old
Cairo and of Egypt generally. Misr el-MahrAsah probably refers to
Caira


48 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

resources of the country. This took place in the year 558
(A.D. 1 163). Asad ed-Din at once commenced prepara-
tions for the campaign, and when he set out for Egypt,
took his nephew (Sai&h ed-Din) with him. The latter
went against his inclination, but his uncle required him to
command the army and assist him with advice. They
arrived at Misr, with Sh4wer, on the second day of the
month Jomada II. (May 8) of the above year. Their
arrival caused a great sensation, and struck terror into
the inhabitants. Shiwer, supported (by Asad ed-D!n),
triumphed over his rival, and was re-established in office.
(Asad ed-Din) enforced the acceptance of a treaty on his own
terms, and, having re-established (Shclwer's) authority, and
collected exact information as to the condition and resources
of the country, set out on his return (to Syria). The hope
of making himself master of Egypt had taken root in his
heart, for he saw that it was a land wanting in men (worthy
of the name), and that the direction of public affairs was
left to chance and imbecile management He commenced
his march to Syria on the 7th of Zu el-Hijja of the above
year (November 6, 1164). He had come to no decision,
and settled no question without first consulting Salih
ed-Dtn, so much did he think of the felicity and good
fortune that seemed to follow him, and so highly did he
esteem his nephew's good judgment and the success that
attended all his undertakings. On his return to Syria, he
gave himself up to making his plans and meditating on the
means he might employ to justify his visiting Egypt again.
His thoughts were entirely occupied with this project, and
until the year 562 (a.d. 1166) he continued to discuss it,
and to lay the ground-work of his plans, with (his
sovereign) el-Melek el-'Adel NCir ed-Din ibn Zenghi.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 49


CHAPTER II.

SECOND EXPEDITION INTO EGYPT, CALLED THE EVENT

OF EL-BABEIN.i

ASAD ED-DIn used very often to speak publicly about
his plans with regard to Egypt Shiwer heard of them,
and, fearing lest the country should fall into the hands
of the Turks,^ and knowing full well that Asad ed-Din
would most certainly invade the land and take possession
of it, he wrote to the Franks and made an agreement
with them. By this treaty they undertook to enter Egypt,

■ In January, 1167, Nfir ed-Din sent Asad ed-Din Shirk^ih a second
time to Egypt, with orders to take possession of the country. Sh&wer,
the vizier of the Khalif, hearing of Ni^r ed-Din's preparations, con-
cluded a treaty with Amalric (Amaury), King of Jerusalem, luider
which the Franks were to assist the Khalif with an army. ShirkOh
marched by the H^ddi el-Ghtisdl^ and, whilst crossing the desert, was
caught in a violent storm. He lost many men, and, after abandoning
baggage and provisions, his army arrived in a crippled state before
Atfih^ on the right bank of the Nile above Cairo. The Franks, whose
policy it was to lengthen the war, remained near Cairo, and gave
Shirkuh's men time to recruit At last they attacked Shtrkfih, and
forced his entrenchments, but did not follow up their victory. ShirkOh
commenced his retreat to Syria, but, suddenly retracing his steps, fell
upon the combined force of Franks and Egyptians whilst it was
encamped at el-Bdbein^ near Tdira^ about six miles south of Cairo.
He gained a complete victory — often referred to afterwards as the
* day,' or ' event,* of el-B&bein— and all Egypt fell into his hands. He
afterwards evacuated the country in consequence of a treaty with the
Franks ; but in the following year (i 168) he returned and permanently
occupied Egypt

The omission of any mention of the battle in this chapter is remark-
able. Possibly the author was unwilling to enlarge upon a victory in
which his hero only played a subordinate part.— W.

' Nur ed*Din*s father, Imad ed-Din Zenghi was one of the most
eminent emirs under the Selj(ik Turks ; and Nur ed-Din was regarded
as a Turk by the Arabs in Egypt— W.

4


so WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

which was placed in their hands without reserve, and
to give every assistance to the vizier, who would thus be
enabled to crush his enemies, and relieve himself of all
apprehension. Asad ed-Din and NOr ed-Din became very
anxious when they heard this news, for they were afraid
that if the infidels once occupied Misr, they would take
possession of the whole country. Asad ed-Dtn began his
preparations for a campaign ; NClr ed-Din furnished him
with troops, and constrained Sal&h ed-Dfn, against his wish,
to accompany his uncle. They commenced their march
on the I2th of the month Rabi'a I., in the year 562
(January 6, A.D. 1167), and entered Egyptian territory
at the very same time as the Franks. Shdwer and all the
Egyptians with him joined the Franks to give battle to
Asad cd-Din. Many skirmishes and battles took place
between the two armies ; then the Franks and Asad ed-
Din both left Egypt. What decided the Franks to leave
was the news that Ndr ed-Din had invaded their territory
at the head of his forces, and taken El-Muneitera.^ Fearmg
for their possessions (in Syria), they left Egypt. Asad ed-
Din made up his mind to return on account of the small-
ness of his army compared with the combined forces of the
Franks and Egyptians, and on account of the fatigues they
had undergone, and the dangers they had encountered.
He did not retire until he had treated with the Franks for
the evacuation of the country. It was towards the end of
the (Moslem) year that he started for Syria. His ardent
desire to make himself master of Egypt was now
strengthened by the fear that the Franks would occupy
that country. He knew that they had informed them-
selves, as he had done, of the condition of Egypt, and were
as conversant as he was with all that related to it. He
waited, therefore, in Syria, full of unrest, his mind torn by

» el-Muneiiera^ *the little watch-tower.' Sec p. 51, n. 2.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN" YUSUF. 51


ambition, confident that Fate was leading him towards
something (the possession of Egypt) which was reserved
for another.^


CHAPTER III.

ASAD ED-DfN*S THIRD EXPEDITION INTO EGYPT, AND

CONQUEST OF THAT COUNTRY.

In the month of Rejeb (April-May, A.D. 1167), after Asad
ed-Din had departed (for Egypt), Ndr ed-Dtn took the
castle of el-Muneitera; and demolished the fortress of
AkAf in the Berriya.* In the month of Ramadin (June-
July), he met his brother Kotb ed-Din* (Prince of Mosul),
and Zein ed-Din* (Prince of Arbela) at Hamah,* with a
view of invading the enemy's territory. Having pene-
trated into the regions occupied by the Franks, they

' In 1 167 King Amaury of Jerusalem was allied with the Fatimite
Khalif of Egypt ; but, after his marriage with Maria, grand-niece of
Manuel Comnenos, he agreed with the Greek Emperor to attempt
the conquest of Egypt. The Knights Hospitallers assisted, but the
Templars refused to break the treaty with Egypt Bilbeis was taken,
No\*ember 3, 1167, but King Amaury retreated on hearing that N(ir
ed-Din had again sent Shirki^h to Egypt with a large force.

* The Birriya^ ^ outer land,' or * desert,' was a term applied to the
region between Damascus and Emesa. el-Muneitera near Tripoli,
according to Y&kOt, was a fortress in Syria. Akdf'x^ not known.

) Kotb ed- Din Maudud, el-'Araj, ' the lame,* son of Zenghi, succeeded
hi^ brother, Seif ed-I^tn (ihAzi, as Lord of Mosul in 1149, and died in
117a He is noted as having imprisoned his vizier, the celebrated
Jemikl ed-Dtn (Ihn Khallikan, iii. 4S8).— W.

« Zein ed-Din 'Ali Kuchuk was a Turkoman who had gained posses-
sion of Arbela (now Erbtl^ about 52 miles from Mosul on the road to
Baghdad) and other towns in that part of the country. He retained
Arbela^ and gave the other towns he had taken to the sons of Kotb
ed Din, the Lord of Mosul. Zein ed-Din was remarkable for his great
strength and courage Hbn Khallikan, ii. 535). — W.

-' Hamahf the ancient //.iwiiM, in the Orontes valley.

4—2


52 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


demolished the castle of Hiinin,^ in the month of Shaw41
(July- August) of the same year. In the month of Zu
el-'Kada (August-September), Asad ed-Din returned from
Egypt. The cause of this (the third expedition into Egypt)
was the action of the Franks, whom may God confound !
They assembled their footmen and horsemen, and marched
on Egypt, thus breaking all the promises they had made
to the Egyptians and Asad ed-Din when they agreed to
the treaty of peace; and this they did in the hope of
obtaining possession of Egypt. On receiving this news,
Nur ed-Din and Asad ed-Din felt that they could no
longer remain inactive, and they began to organize a fresh
expedition to that country. NQr ed-Din contributed his
share in money and men, but he did not take part in it
personally, being afraid that the Franks would invade his
own dominions, and also because he had just received from
Mosul news of a most important event — the death of Zein
ed-Din 'Ali,* the son of Bektikin, who had died in the
month of Zu el-Hijja, in the year 563 (September-October,
A.D. 1 168). This chief had granted to the Atabeg Kotb
ed-Din^ all the strongholds he possessed, with the excep-
tion of Arbela,* a city which the Atabeg Zenghi had
bestowed upon him. Therefore, Nur ed-Din turned his
ambition in this direction, and allowed the army to depart
(for Egypt). Asad ed-Din, for his part, contributed to the
strength of the army by his own presence, by supplies of
money, and by taking with him his brothers, the people of
his household, and the men whom he kept as retainers.

' Hiinin, in Upper Galilee, 9 miles S.W. of B&nias.
» See p. 51.

3 Kotb ed-Din (sec p. 51) was Atabeg or * guardian ' to a son of one
of the Seljuk Sultans.

4 Arbela (ErbU) gave its name to the battle in which Darius was
defeated by Alexander. It is now a Turkish military post, and an
important road-centre. — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 53

The Sultan (Salah ed-Din) said to me one day : ' Of all
men, I was the one who least wished to accompany the
expedition, and it was not of my own accord that I went
with my uncle.' Such is the meaning of the words of the
Most High : * Peradventure that ye hate a thing while it is
good /or you' {Kurknil 21s). When ShAwer learnt that
the Franks were marching upon Egypt with the purpose
t Cwe have set forth), he sent to ask Asad ed-Din for im«
mediate assistance. Asad ed-Din set out in all haste, and
arrived at Misr in the course of the month of Rabi'a I.,
564 (December, 1168 — ^January, 1169). In the month of
1 Moharrem (October) of this year, NCir ed-Din obtained
j possession of the fortress of J'aber* from Ibn Milek, whom
he had taken prisoner, in exchange for SerAj,* the B4b
Btza*a/and EUMelQha. In the same month died YarCik, a
chief whose name is preserved in that of the village of el*
Yarakiya.* When the Franks learnt that Asad ed-Din
had come into Egypt, they made a treaty with the govern-
ment of that country, turned back, and were obliged to
I desist. Asad ed-Din remained there, and was visited fre-

I quently by Shawer. This minister had promised to in-

demnify him for the expenses of the expedition, but he

I * KaUh fciber^ or Dusar (ancient Dausaria), on the left bank of the

Euphrates, N. of Rakka^ and about i mile from the river. It was
taken by the SeljCik Suhan Melik Shah. Zenghi, the founder of the
Zenghid Dynasty of Mosul, was murdered by his eunuchs whilst
besieging it. — ^W.

' SeHkj^ the Serug of Gen. xi. 20, lies between Harr&n and the
Euphrates.

3 Bab^ or Bap^ is about 20 miles from Aleppo, on the road to
Membij. In a mosque on the hill above it are shown the tombs of
Stbi Haskil (Ezekiel) and 'Akil, a brother of the Khalif 'Ali. Bisifa
is about a mile further on, and is apparently on an ancient site. — W.

« El' Yardklya was a large quarter lying outside Aleppo, in which
YAiikk, one of the Turkoman Emirs of N6r ed-Din, built a palace and
lived.


54 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


gave him nothing. Then the claws of the Lion of the Faith
(Asad ed-Din) fastened themselves upon Egypt. He knew
that if the Franks found a favourable opportunity, they
would take possession of the country ; he felt that constant
expeditions to drive them out would be unwise ; he saw
clearly that Shawer was playing, now with him, now with
the Franks ; and he was convinced that, so long as the
vizier remained, he would be unable to possess himself of
Egypt. He therefore resolved to have him arrested on
one of his visits. For all except Asad ed-Din used to
visit Shdwer, and do him homage, but Shdwer himself paid
visits to Asad ed-Din. On these occasions he used to come
on horseback, with drums, trumpets, and banners, accord-
ing to the custom of the viziers of that country, but none
of the officers dared lay a hand upon him. It was Salah
ed-Din himself who arrested him, and in this wise : Sh&wer
had set out to visit them, and (SaUh ed-Din), having
mounted his horse, went to meet him. He then rode by
his side, and as they were going along, he seized him by
the collar, and commanded his men to fall upon the
vizier's retinue, who took to flight, and were stripped and
plundered by the soldiers. Shdwer was led a prisoner to
a tent set apart. Very soon the Egyptians sent a eunuch
of the palace, bearing a written message, in which they
demanded the head of the prisoner. Shawer was beheaded,
and his head sent to them. The Egyptians then sent a
vizier's robe to Asad ed-Din, who put it upon him, and
betook himself to the citadel, where he was accepted, and
established as vizier. In this the Egyptians were acting
in accordance with their custom of bestowing the vizier-
ship on the man who conquered his adversary. Asad ed-
Din's nomination took place on the seventeenth of the
month Rabi'a II., 564 (January 18, A.D. 1169). From that
time Asad ed-Din exercised supreme authority, and en-


\


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 55


trusted the general management of affairs to Sal&h ed-Din,
on account of his great abilities, and the wide knowledge,
good judgment, and administrative talents he displayed.


CHAPTER IV. .

DEATH OF ASAD ED-D!N. THE CHIEF AUTHORITY DE-
VOLVES UPON THE SULTAN (SALAH ED-DIN).

AsAD ED-DtN was a very hearty eater, and was so fond
of rich dishes that he frequently suffered from surfeit and
indigestion. He used to recover, after suffering great pain ;
but, when he was attacked by severe illness, it induced
inflammation of the throat, of which he died. This took
place on the 22nd of Jomada II. in the above year (March 23,
A.D. 1169). After his death Sal&h ed-Din was invested
with supreme authority. The Sultan soon had the satis-
faction of seeing his government respected, and order
established on all sides. He spent money lavishly, won
all hearts, and brought everyone into obedience to his rule.
In recognition of the blessings which God had vouchsafed
to him, h e gave up w ine and the pleasures of the world,
and devoted himself to serious business and to work* He
never abandoned the course he then adopted ; he showed
an industry which increased day by day until God sum-
moned htm to appear before His mercy. I have heard
him 5ay, ' When God allowed me to obtain possession of
Egypt with so little trouble, I understood that He purposed
to grant me the conquest of the Sdhel} for He Himself

' L'oder the word Stihti^ ' plain/ the author refers to those countries
on the Syrian coast which were then occupied by the Franks. Arab
htstonans often employ the word as a name for Palestine and Phoenicia.
Henceforth this word i& rendered coast.


56 WHA T BEFELL S ULTA N YUS UF.

implanted the thought in my mind.' Therefore, directly
his authority was firmly established, he began to send
expeditions into the territories of the Franks, in the dis-
trict round el-Kerak and esh-Sh6bek.^ The clouds of his
munificence and liberality poured down their waters so
copiously that there has never been recorded in history
munificence such as he displayed when he was a vizier,
responsible to the Egyptian government. He took great
pains to establish the true faith {sunna) more firmly (in
Egypt),2 by aid of the ^ulema, jurists, dervishes, and fakirs.
People came to visit him from every side, and flocked to
his court from all parts. He never disappointed the hopes
of a visitor, nor allowed him to depart with empty hands.

As soon as Ndlr ed-Din heard that Salih ed-Din was
established as Sultan, he took away the city of Emesa*
from the officers whom Asad ed-Din had left in charge.
This occurred in the month of Rejeb, in the year 564
(April, A.D. 1 1 69).


CHAPTER V.

THE EXPEDITION OF THE FRANKS AGAINST DAMIETTA,

WHICH MAY GOD PRESERVE!

When the Franks heard what had happened to the
true believers and to their own armies, and saw the

^ Keraky on the precipice E. of the Dead Sea, was a strong castle
built by King Fulk about 1 140. ShSbek^ N. of Petra, called Montreal
by Franks, was built in 11 16 by Baldwin I.

" Sal4h ed-Dtn was a Sunn! Moslem of the Shafai sect. The
Fatimite Khalifs of Egypt were Shi'ah Moslems not recognising the
Khalif of Baghdad.

3 Emesa^ now HomSy on the right of the Orontes, between B'albek
and Hamath in Syria.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 57

Sultan (Salih ed-Dtn) establishing his authority in Egypt
upon a firm basis, they were convinced that he would
obtain possession of their dominions, would lay waste
their dwelling-places, and wipe away all traces of their
rule. Therefore they joined themselves with the Greeks,
intending to invade the land of Egypt, and gain possession
of it. They determined to commence by an attack upon
Ddmietta, as the master of that place would command
both land and sea ; and, if they could occupy it, the city
would serve as a depdt and place of retreat. They brought
with them mangonels, movable towers, arbalists, besieging
engines,* and other machines.^ The Franks in Syria, when
they heard this news, took heart of grace, and surprised
the Moslems in the fortress of 'Akkdr,^ which they suc-
ceeded in taking, and made the governor prisoner. This
man was one of Udr ed-Din*s memlQks; his name was
Khotlokh, the standard-bearer. This took place in the
month of Rabra II. of the same year (January, 1169).
In the month of Rejeb (April) occurred the death of eU
*Im&di, an old follower of NQr ed-Din and his grand
chamberlain. He was then lord of B'albek and of Tadmor
(Palmyra).

' For mangonels see p. 31. The movable towers, or * belfreys,' were
brought in pieces, which were framed together. They were then
pushed across the ditch of the fortress, which was filled up with hurdles
and fascines to facilitate their passage. The towers protected the
* besieging engines ' with which the walls were battered, and the mining
operations. The besieged made every effort to bum or overthrow
them. The arbalists (Fr. arba/^ty Lat. arcus baiistarius)^ or cross-
bows, are supposed to have been introduced into France by the first
Crusaders, and into the English army by Richard I. ihey killed
pomt-blank at 40-60 yards, and with elevation at 1 20- 160 yards. — W.

* Manuel Comnenos sent 150 galleys to aid King Amaury at
Damietta. The town was not taken, and a treaty with SalAh ed-Din
was signed in December, 1 1 70.

I *Akkdr^ on the Lebanon, N.E. of Tripoli.


58 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


When N{ir ed-Din learnt that the Franks had taken the
field and sat down before the walls of Damietta, he resolved
to distract their attention ; therefore in the month of Sh'abin
of this year (565, April-May, a.d. 1170), he blockaded the
fortress of el-Kerak ; then, hearing that the Franks of the
coast were marching upon him, he raised the siege and
advanced to meet them ; but they did not give him time
to come up. After this he received news of the death of
Mejed ed-Dtn Ibn ed-Daya,^ at Aleppo, in the month of
Ramadan 565 (May-June, a.d. 1170). The event touched
him nearly, for this officer was the chief of his rulers.
Therefore he set out to return to Syria. On arriving at
'Ashtera,^ he learnt that on the 12th of Shaw^l this year a
great earthquake had taken place at Aleppo and destroyed
a great part of the country. He then set out for Aleppo,
and heard that his brother Kotb ed-D!n^ had just died at
Mosul. This event occurred on the 22nd of Zu el-Hijja of
the above year (6 September, a.d. i 170). He received these
tidings at Tell-B4sher,* and the same night he started for

Mosul.

Sultan Salih ed-Dtn, understanding that the enemy
meant to attack Damietta with all the forces at their
command, threw into that city footmen and horsemen of
well-known courage, provisions for the garrison, engines
of war and arms, and, indeed, everything that might enable
it to hold out. He promised the troops whom he stationed

* He was Governor of Aleppo, and one of the ed-Daya family from
India.

a ^AshUra is the present Tell ^Ashterah (Ashtaroth Camaim) in
Bashan, on the road from Kerak to Damascus. See p. 109.

3 Kotb ed-Din MaudM, son of Zenghi. See p. 51.

4 Tell Bdsher^ about two days' journey N. of Aleppo, is now Saiasi
KaUhy a large mound with ruins near the village of Tulbashar. It is
thc^ Turbessel of the Crusaders, and the] place to which Jocelyn II.
removed when Zenghi took Edessa in 11 44. — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 59


there to bring them reinforcements and appliances of war,
and to repulse the enemy if they took up a position
threatening the city. The number of his gifts and presents
(on this occasion) was immense, but he was at that time a
vizier exercising absolute authority, whose commands were
implicitly obeyed. The Franks, having encamped against
Damietta at the date we have given above^ made a vigorous
assault on that place, but whilst engaged with the garrison
on one side, they had to sustain the onslaught of the
cavalry which the Sultan hurled against them on the
other. God gave the victory to the Moslems through the
instrumentality of the Sultan, and in consequence of his
well-chosen measures for the reinforcement of the garrison.
The Franks, seeing ihe failure of their plans and the
triumph of the true faith over the unbelievers, thought it
prudent to withdraw from danger and save themselves
alive ; so they departed, disappointed in their expecta-
tions and full of regret for having incurred so much useless
expense. Our people set fire to their mangonels, plundered
all their warlike stores, and inflicted great loss of men upon
them. Thanks to the goodness of God and to His assist-
ance, the city was saved, the sword of their violence
was shattered, and the Sultan's authority was firmly re-
established.


CHAPTER VI.

RELATES HOW HE MET HIS FATHER.

He then went to meet his father, that his happiness might
be complete in the pleasure of seeing him, and wishing
in this to imitate his namesake, the prophet Joseph. It
was in the course of the month of Jornada II., in the year
565 (February-March, A.O. II70), that his father, Ncjm


4l


60 ' WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

ed-Dtn Ay{ib,^ came to join him. Urged by the respect

he had always felt for his father, he ofTered to yield up

to him all the power he had acquired ; but Aydb replied :

' My dear son, remember that God would not have chosen ^

thee to occupy this position had He not judged thee !

capable of filling it. When good fortune is sent us, we i

must not alter its destination.' Then the Sultan bestowed

upon him the management of all the treasure of the realm.

Sal^h ed-Din continued to exercise absolute authority as <<

vizier until the death of el-'Adid Abu Muhammad 'Abd-

AUah,^ the last of the Egyptian khalifs.

In the month of Moharrem 566 (September-October,
A.D., 1 170) Nur cd-Din took the city of Er-Rakka,^ and
afterwards, towards the end of the same month, he captured

Nisibin.* He took Sinj^r^ in the month of Rabi'a H.

i

» Abft esh-Shukr Ayiib el-Melck el-Afdal Ncjm cd-Din was the son
of Shidi, the Governor of Tekrit^ on the Tigris. He succeeded his
father as governor, but afterwards took service with Zenghi, Lord of
Mosul, who made him Governor of Ralbek^ where he founded a con-
vent of Stifis. He was next Governor of Damascus for Nflr ed-Din,
and defended it against the Franks in 1148. He finally died at Cairo
from a fall from his horse (11 73). — W. 1

« Shortly before the death of el-'Adid, who was Fatimite (Shi*ite)
Khalif from 1160 to 1171, N6r ed-Din, who was a Sunni Moslem, and
attached to the interests of the 'Abbassides, instructed Salih ed-Din '

to restore the name of the 'Abbasside Khalif, el-Mostadi, in the Friday
sermon {khotba\ and depose the Shi'ite Khalif. — W.

3 Rakka, on the left bank of the Euphrates, at the junction of the ^
Belik with that river, is about eleven hours below Meskineh^ the head

of steam navigation. Rakka is on the site of Nicephorium^ and nearly
opposite to it, on the right bank, was Thapsacus. Here Cyrus forded
the Euphrates, and Alexander crossed the river in pursuit of Darius. — W.

4 Nisibin, ancient Nisibis^ is near the point where the Jaghjagha Su
{Mygdonius) leaves the mountains. It was a famous town and fortress,
and was at one period (B.C. 149 — a.d. 14), the residence of the Armenian
kings. Trajan derived his title * Parthicus ' from its capture.— W.

5 Sinjar {Singara) on the Nahr Thathar, which rises in Jebel
Sinjar, is on the road from Deir to Mosul, and about 63 miles west


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 6i

(December, 1 170; January, 1 171), and then marched towards
Mosul, with no hostile intention, however. Having crossed
the river (the Tigris) with his troops at the ford of Beled,
he encamped upon the Tell facing Mosul, which is called
the Castle^ (EUHisn). Then he sent a message to his
nephew, Seif ed-Din Ghclzi,^ prince of that city, informing
him of his friendly intentions. He concluded a treaty of
peace with him, and on the 13th of the month of Jomada L
(January 22, A,D. 1171), made his entry into Mosul,
confirmed his nephew in the government of that city,
and gave him his daughter in marriage. To his other
nephew, 'Imid ed-Din,^ he gave the city of SinjAr, Then,
leaving Mosul, he set out on his return to Syria, and
entered Aleppo in the month of Sh'abdn (April-May)
of the same year.


CHAPTER VII.

DEATH OF EL-'ADID.

El-'Adid died on Monday, the loth of Moharrem, 567
(September 13, A.D. 1171). A short time before his death,
Salih ed«Din, whose authority was by this time firmly
established, had ordered the khotba to be read in the name

of the latter place. It was a strong border fortress of the Romans,
and beneath its walls was fought a memorable battle between Con-
flanttas and Sapor. It was stormed by the Persians during the reign
orjalian.~W.

' The mound of Kuyunjik {Nineveh).

* Seif ed-Din GbAzi succeeded his father, Kotb ed-I)!n, as Lord of
Mosul in 117a He submitted to his uncle, N{ir ed-Din, and was
coofimied in his government He took the side of his cousin, es-
hiieh. Lord of Aleppo, and was defeated by SalAh ed-Din. lie died
la ii8o(lbn Kballikan}.— W.

i See pp. 38, 71.


62 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

of the Abbaside Khalif, el-Mostadi,^ and nothing occurred
to disturb the order that prevailed throughout the country.
All the treasures of money in the palace he expended and
disposed of as presents. On each occasion, when God
opened unto him the treasure-house of any prince, he gave
the contents up as spoil, keeping nothing for himself.

He then commenced preparations for an expedition
into the enemy's territory, organizing it with the greatest
forethought. NOr ed-Din, for his part, had resolved to
make war (on the Franks), and had invited his nephew,
the Prince of Mosul, to give him his support. This prince
arrived with his army, and served under his uncle. The
expedition terminated in the capture of 'Arka,* which took
place in Moharrem, 567 (September-October, A.D. 1171).


CHAPTER Vni.

FIRST EXPEDITION UNDERTAKEN BY THE SULTAN OUT

OF EGYPT.

For a long while he had devoted all his strength to the
promotion of justice, and to the scattering of benefits and
boons upon the nation. In the year 568 (A.D. 1172-1173),

« El-Mostadi was Khalif from 1170 to n8o. The Khotba (Khutba)
is the sermon delivered on Fridays at the time of mid* day prayer. It
must be in Arabic, and must include prayers for Muhammad, the
Companions, the reigning Khalif, and the Sovereign. Hence the
mention of a man's name in the khotba is a sign of his assumption of
sovereignty. — VV.

3 ^Arka was about 12 miles north of Tripoli, and some 6 miles from
the coast. It commanded the great coast-road, which ran between it
and the sea, and the road up the valley of the Eleutherus to Emesa
(Horns), The site, on a rocky hill, still bears the name 'Arka. Its
capture secured to the Moslems access- to the coast, and facilitated
operations against the Christians. — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 63


he inarched at the head of his army upon el-Kerak and
eoh-Shdbek, having made up his mind to begin with those
places, because they were nearest to Egypt, and lay on
the road to that country. They thus prevented travellers
from resorting thither. No caravan could pass through
that district unless the Sultan marched out and escorted
it in person. His object, therefore, was to make the
road freer and more easy, to put the two countries^ into
communication, so that travellers might come and go
without hindrance. He set out to lay siege to these places
in the year 568, and engaged in many skirmishes with
the Franks. He returned to Egypt without having gained
any advantage in this expedition. Nevertheless, a recom-
pense for undertaking it remained to him in God's hands.
Nikr ed>D!n took Mar^ash^ in the month of Zu el-K ada of
this year (June-July, A.D. 1 173), and overthrew BehnesA*
the month following.


CHAPTER IX.

DKATH OK NEJM ED-D!N (AVCTB); THE SULTAN'S FATHER.

On his return from this expedition, before he reached
Misr, the Sukan received news that his father, Nejm ed-
Dia, was no more. He was sorely grieved not to have
t>cen with him in his last moments. Nejm ed-Din died

* Syria and Egypt.

' AfartuA, near the foot of the Taurus, N. of Aleppo. It was a place
of great importance during the border warfare between the Arabs and
the Byzantines.

3 Brhn^sd^ or Bthtsnd (B€$ne\ is about two days' journey N.E. of
*AsntJh^ on the road from Afar^ash to ^umeistUy on the Euphrates.
The castle was regarded as impregnable until taken by 1 iinur m


64 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


from a fall from his horse ; he was very fond of galloping
at full speed, and playing dirda} At such a rate did be
go that those who saw him used to say : ' That man is
sure to die from a fall from bis horse.' He died at Misr
in the year 568 (A.D. 1172-1173).

In the year 569 (A.D. 1173-1174) the Sultan saw the
strength of his army, and the great number as well as
the courage of his brethren. He also heard that a certain
man named *Abd en-Nebi Ibn Mehdi had made himself
master of Yemen and of the strongholds of that country,
and that he had the kliotba^ preached in his own name,
declaring that his empire would stretch over all the earth,
and that he was destined to obtain supreme power. The
Sultan was counselled to send his eldest brother, Shems
ed-Daula el-Melek el-Mu'azzem TCirdn Shah,^ against this
man, a noble and lofty-minded prince, greatly distinguished
by the fine qualities of his disposition. I have heard the
Sultan praise his brother's noble disposition and fine
qualities, ' in which he excels me,' he used to say. T(ir^n
Shah set out for Yemen in the month of Rejeb, 569
(February, A.D. 1 174), and it was at his hands that God
granted us the conquest of that country. He killed the
heretic (Khdrejt) who had established himself there, made
himself master of the greater part of the country, and
bestowed gifts and presents upon a great number of
people.

' Dirc^a is a second name for Jet tcL The word means the cubit,
fore-arm, and among some tribes the fore part of a spear between the
point and the fist holding it. — W.

= See p. 62.

3 Turin Shah, who was at one time Governor of Damascus, made
an expedition against Nubia in 1172-1173. He died at Alexandria
in 1 1 80. — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 65


CHAPTER X.

DEATH OF NCr ED-D1n MAHMOd, SON OF ZENGHI —
MAY THE MERCY OF GOD BE UPON HIM !

Like Asad cd-Din, NUr ed-Din^ died of an affection of the
throat which his physicians were unable to cure. His death
took place on Wednesday, the nth of Shaw&l, 569 (May 15,
A.D. 1 174), in the castle of Damascus. He was succeeded
by his son, el-Melek es-S&leh Ism'ail.^ Sal&h ed-Din gave
me the following account : ' We had received information
that Niir ed>Din had declared his intention of coming to
attack us in Egypt, and some of our council were of opinion
that we ought to throw off the mask, declare ourselves in
revolt, and openly break with him. They said : '* We will
take the field against his army in battle array, and will
drive him back from hence, if what we hear he is planning
ever comes to pass." I was the only one who opposed this
idea, saying : " We must not even think of such things."
The discussion continued among us until we received
tidings of his death.'


CHAPTER XI.

TREACHERY OF EL-KENZ* AT ASWAN IN THE YEAR 570

,A.D. II74-II75).

This EI-Kenz had been a general in the service of the
Egyptian Government. He managed to escape, and estab-

• Sec p. 47.

* El-Melek es-Sdleh'ImAd ed-Din Ism*ail was only eleven years old
when he succeeded his father. He died at Aleppo in ti8i when not
quite nineteen, nominating his cousin, 'Izz ed-Din, son of Kotb ed-DSn,
as his successor. — W.

I According to some readings, el-KituL

5


66 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


lished himself at Asw&n/ where he set to work to organize
a conspiracy. He gathered together the negroes, and made
them believe that he was going to make himself master of
the country and reinstate the Egyptian Government. These
people were possessed by the spirit of faction which charac-
terizes all Egyptians, and which reduces acts such as this
man contemplated to the merest trifles in their eyes. When
he had assembled together a great number of people and a
host of negroes, he marched towards Ktis^ and the depen-
dent districts round it. The Sultan, informed of his move-
ments, sent against the insurgents a strong, well-armed
force, selected from men who, having tasted the sweetness
of Egypt, were afraid it might be taken from them. At
their head he placed his brother, eUMelek el-'Adel Seif ed-
Din, who marched out to meet the enemy, defeated them in
a pitched battle, and killed a great number. Thus the evil
was rooted out and the revolt extinguished. This took
place on the 7th of the month Safer, in the year 570 (Sep-
tember 7, A.D. 1 174). By this means the foundations of
the Sultan's authority were greatly strengthened and re*
newed — may God be praised !


CHAPTER Xn.

THE FRANKS ATTACK THE DEFENCES OF ALEXANDRIA —

MAY GOD PROTECT IT!

The Franks, hearing of the revolution in Egypt and of the
change of government that had taken place, conceived the

» Assudn at the foot of the first cataract of the Nile.

« /Cusy or ICos, is on the right bank of the Nile, a little above Koptos,
a town which it supplanted as the emporium of the Arabian trade.
Kos itself afterwards gave place to Keneh^ as Myos-Hormos and
Philoteras-portus, on the Red Sea, gave place to Kosseir, — ^W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 67

hope of conquering the country, and despatched a fully-
equipped army by sea. Their fleet was composed of galleys
(sAdni), of transports {tartda), of great ships {botsa}), and
other vessels, to the number of six hundred. On the 7th
of the month Safer, of this year (September 7, 1174), they
took up their position before this frontier city. The Sultan
sent a body of troops to relieve the place, and was so
active in his opposition that the enemy, paralysed by the
terror which God had placed in their hearts, were unable
to resist him ; they departed with disappointed hopes, and
having wasted all the money they had expended. They
had closely besieged the city, and assaulted it with all
their forces for three days, but God protected it. When
they perceived that the Sultan was marching against them,
they hastily abandoned their mangonels and other engines ;
then the people of the city lost no time in sallying out to
take possession of these machines, and set them on fire.
This was a momentous event, aild one of the greatest
mercies ever granted (by God) to the Moslems.


CHAPTER XIII.

THE SULTAN GOES INTO SYRIA AND TAKES POSSESSION

OF DAMASCUS.

At his death NQr ed-Din left a son, el-Melek es-SAleh
Ism^ail, who at this time was at Damascus. The castle of
Aleppo was occupied by Shems ed-Din *Ali Ibn ed-Daya

* The word bctsa^ in the plural botes^ is used by some Arab historians
to denote a ship of great size. El-Makrizl mentions a botsa vi)\\c\i
held 1,500 men. Quatrem^re shows the meaning of this word, and
of the words tarida and shitni very clearly in his extract from el-
Makriii's *Soluk,* published under the title of * Histoire des Sultans
Mamlooks.*

5—2


68 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

and by Shadhbakht^ 'Ali (Ibn ed-Daya), who for his part

was laying ambitious plans. El-Melek es-Sileh, having

left Damascus, set out for Aleppo, and arrived outside that

city on the 2nd of Moharrem (August 3, A.D. 1174). He

was accompanied by ScLbek ed-Dtn.^ Bedr ed-Din sallied

out from the town to receive him and arrested Sibek ed-

Din.^ Having effected an entrance into the citadel, el-

Melek es-S41eh arrested Shems ed-Din (Ibn ed-Daya), and

Hasan, his brother, and committed them all three to

prison. On this same day, Ibn el-Khashdb Abu el-Fadl

lost his life in a tumult that took place in the city of

Aleppo. It is said that he was killed the day before the

arrest of the two sons of ed-Daya, for it was they who

committed this murder.

The Sultan, having assured himself of the truth of the

report of Niir ed-Din's death, and knowing that the

son of that prince was a young man unequal to the

*
^ When Ndr ed-Din died, the emirs at Damascus appointed Gumish-

tikin S'ad ed-Din, Emir of Mosul, the guardian of his young son, es-
Saleh, and sent him and the prince to Aleppo. That town was then
torn by factions, part of the people being Fatimite {ShPite) and part
Abbaside {Sunni), Shems ed-Din, who had been one of Niir ed-
Din's principal emirs, was governor, but his authority was confined
to the citadel, where he lived with his brother, Jemil ed-Din Shadh-
bakht The city was held by another brother, Bedr ed-Din Ibn ed-
Daya. The emirs were jealous of each other, and continually plotting
to get the sole government of the city, and to become guardian of the
young prince. In one of the tumults, Abd el-Fadl Ibn el-KhashUb,
who was Kadi and head of the Shi'ite party, was killed. When
Gumishtikin arrived with es-Sileh, he imprisoned the brothers ed-
Daya, and restored order. The ed-Dayas were natives of India, and
freed men of NCir ed-Din (*Zobda el-Haleb,' a history of Aleppo, by
Kemil ed-Din).— W.

' This is a mistake. The author should have written S^ad ed-Din,
the title given to Emir Gumishtikin.

3 This is another mistake. Emir Bedr ed-Din sallied out from the
town to meet S'ad ed-Din, and was arrested by him (KemM ed-Din's
* Zobda ').


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 69


cares^and responsibilities of sovereignty, and to the task
of driving the enemies of God from the land, made pre-
parations for an expedition to Syria, the root (or base) of
all the lands of Isl&m. He set out with a strong body of
troops, after leaving a sufficient force in Egypt to protect
that country, maintain order, and uphold the authority of
the government^ and he was accompanied by many of his
kinsmen and retainers. As he had sent letters to the
emirs and people of Syria, the supporters of el-Melek
es-Sileh were divided and had no settled plans. Each
man distrusted his neighbour, and some were arrested by
their colleagues. This inspired great terror among the
others, and estranged the hearts of his people from the
young prince. The state of affairs forced Shems ed-D!n
Ibn el-Mokaddem^ to write to the Sultan, who hastened
his march, with a view of demanding that el-Melek es-S&leh
should be given up to him. He would then take upon
himself the education of that prince, the administration of
government, and the re-establishment of order. There
was no resistance on his arrival at Damascus, and the city
was delivered up to him on Tuesday, the 30th of the
month Rabi'a H., in the year 570 (November 27, A.D. 1 174).
He also obtained possession of the castle. The first house
he entered was that which had belonged to his father.
The people of the city assembled to see him and to receive
him with expressions of joy. He distributed large sums
of money that day, and showed the people of Damascus
that he was as pleased to see them as they were to have

him in their city. He then took up his quarters in the

*
' Shems ed-l)ln Ibn el-Mokaddem, who had been appointed

guardtan of es-SAleh, became alamied at the ambitious schemes of

Gumtshtikin at Aleppo, and sided with SaUh ed-D!n, to whom he

surrendered Damascus. He was killed at Mount *Ar^fAt in a scuffle

that arose out of a dispute about precedence with the chief of the

pilgrim caravan from Irak. — W.


70 . WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

castle and thus established his authority in the city. He
set out shortly afterwards for Aleppo. On reaching
Emesa, he took up a position against that city, and
captured it in the month Jornada I. (December), in the
year 570. Without pausing to besiege the castle of that
place he pushed on, and on Friday, the 30th of the same
month, halted for the first time at Aleppo.


CHAPTER XIV.

SEIF ED-DlN SENDS HIS BROTHER 'iZZ ED-DiN^ TO

OPPOSE THE SULTAN.

Seif ED-DIn, Prince of Mosul, learning what had taken
place, saw that a man had appeared who was to be feared,
and was mighty and full of mastery. Fearing that, if the
Sultan met with no opposition, he would over-run the
country, establish his authority over it, and obtain supreme
power, he equipped a great number of men, and entrusted the
command of this powerful army to his brother, 'Izz ed-Din
Mas'Od. The troops set out to oppose the Sultan with a
view of giving him battle, and driving him out of the land.
Sal^h ed-Din, informed of their plans, left Aleppo on the
1st of Rejeb of this year (January 26, A.D. 1175), and
retreated in the direction of Hamah. On reaching Emesa,
he laid siege to the castle, and captured it. Izz ed-Din
came to Aleppo, and, after joining the garrison of that
city to his own army, renewed his march at the head of

» Aba el-Fath AbQ el-Muzaffer *Izz ed-Din, in the lifetime of his
brother, commanded the troops, and was defeated by Salih ed-Din
in 1 175. His cousin, es-Saleh, made him his heir, and he reached
Aleppo in December, 1 181. A few months later he exchanged Aleppo
with his brother, 'I mid ed-Din, for Sinjary etc. He succeeded Seif
ed-Din as Lord of Mosul in 1180, and died in 1193. — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 71


an immense multitude. The Sultan, knowing that these
troops were on the march, set out to meet them, and fell
in with them at the Horns of Hamah} He wished, if
possible, to persuade their leaders to make peace, and
entered into correspondence with them ; but in this he was
unsuccessful. They preferred to risk a battle in the hope
of attaining their chief object, and the fulfilment of their
wishes. But the decision (of God) is other than the will
(of man) ; the battle took place, and God granted that the
troops (of Mosul) were utterly routed. Many of them were
taken prisoners, but the Sultan afterwards gave them their
liberty. This took place on the 19th of Ramad&n, 570
(April 13, A.D. 1175). After this victory, the Sultan en-
camped before Aleppo for the second time, and its in-
habitants were obliged to cede him el-M'aarra' and Kefr
T&b' as the price of peace. He also took (the fortress of)
B4rin^ towards the end of the year.


CHAPTER XV.

SEIF ED-DIN himself SETS OUT AGAINST THE SULTAN.

The day on which this battle was fought, Seif ed-D!n was
besieging his brother, *Im&d ed-Din,^ in Sinj&r. He was

' Heights near the gorge of the Orontes at Haxnath in N. Syria.

* El-M^aarra en-Nu'mdny so called from one of the companions of
the Prophet who died there, is about eight hours from If amah on the
road from that place to Aleppo. It was first taken by the Crusaden
in November, 1098, and plundered and destroyed by Bohemund in
1099L The village is still noted for its pistachios, olives, etc — W.

i AV/r 7<fA was a small town between M'aarra and Aleppo.

4 liiirin was a small town about one day's march S. of Hamah^
and near er-Hafamya {Raphama). It had a castle, built by the
Crusaders about 1090.— W.

s See pp. 28, 81.


72 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


determined to wrest the city from him, and oblige him to
renew his allegiance ; for this prince maintained friendly
relations with the Sultan, and thought that would suffice
to protect him. Seif ed-Dtn beset the place very closely,
brought mangonels to play upon it, and made a great
breach in the walls. He was on the point of taking it,
when he heard the result of the battle. Fearing that his
brother would hear of this event, and be encouraged to
continue his resistance, he made proposals for peace, which
were accepted. Immediately after this, he set out for
Nisiba, where he exerted himself to assemble his troops,
and pay them. He then marched towards the Euphrates,
which he crossed near el-Bira,^ Having encamped on the
Syrian bank, he sent messengers to Gumishtikin and el-
Melek es-S^leh, proposing the terms of a treaty on which
he could join them. Gumishtikin came to his camp, and
entered into negotiations which were interrupted and
renewed so many times that Seif ed-Din was often on the
point of returning home. At last it was agreed that he
should have an interview with el-Melek es-S&leh, and he
set out for Aleppo. When he approached the city, the
young prince went out in person to welcome him, and the
meeting took place near the fortress. Seif ed-Din embraced
him, took him in his arms, and wept. Then he sent him
back to the fortress, and encamped close to the sprint*'
called el-Mob4raka (' blessed '), where he remained for
some time» and where the Aleppo garrison came every day
to pay him respect. He N-isited the fortress, attended by
a company of his horsemen, and took a meal there {/tl.,
eat bread there). After this he struck his camp, and


* E''Fir.ts in modern Arabic, B:r: in Turkish, BinyiJt {^AfKxm^.t
sfwc^.tX at one of the most important crossings of the Eaphiatcs
N^ of Aleppo.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 73


repaired to Tell es-SultAn/ accompanied by the troops
from Diarbekr, and a great number of people.

Whilst the Sultan was awaiting the arrival of the troops
he had summoned from Egypt, the others (the supporters
of el-Melek es-S&leh) made no good use of their time
either in action or in making arrangements, little suspect-
ing that their negligence would be fatal. The army having
arrived from Egypt, the Sultan resumed his march, and
reached the Horns of Hamah. The others, when they
heard that the troops had come, sent out their spies and
secret emissaries, through whom they learnt that the Sultan
had pushed forward with a small escort to the Turkoman*s
Well, and that the rest of the army was dispersed in different
directions to water the horses. Had it been God's will to
give them the victory, they would have marched upon the
Sultan that very moment ; * tut if God decrees^ it was to
be* (Kur&n viii. 43). Therefore they gave the Sultan and
his troops time to water their horses, to concentrate, and
prepare for battle, and on the following morning they
took up their position to fight. It was on the morning of
Thursday, the loth of ShawAl, 571 (April 22, a.d. 1176),
that the two armies encountered one another. Then
followed a fierce conflict, in which the right wing of Seif
ed^Dln's army, commanded by Muzaffer ed-D!n^ (KukbQri;,

' About a day's inarch from Aleppo, on the road to Hamah.

' Abu Said Kukburi el-Melek el-Mu'azzam Mozaflfer ed-l)in suc-
ceeded his father as Lord of Arbela in 1 168. He was then only four-
teen, and was imprisoned by bis Atabeg, Mujdhid ed-Din Kdimaz,
who placed his younger brother, Zein ed-Dtn, on the throne. Kukbdri,
after visiting Baghdad, entered the service of Seif cd- Din, who gave
bhn Harrdn as a fieC He afterwards took service with Salah ed-Din,
who gave him Edessa and SumeisAt, and whose sister he married.
He fought in most of Salah ed- Din's battles, and displayed great
bravery, especially at Hattin. On the death of his brother, 1 190, he
succeeded him at Arbela, and was noted for his charitable works.


74 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

son of Zein ed-Din, overthrew the Sultan's left flank.
Sal^h ed-Din then charged in person, put the enemy to
flight, and made prisoners a great number of their chief
officers, and Fakhr ed-Din 'Abd el-Mesih (the vizier). He
restored the important persons to liberty. Seif ed-Din
returned to Aleppo, took the money which he had left
there, and crossed the Euphrates on his return to his
own country. The Sultan refrained from pursuing those
who had escaped. He spent the rest of the day in the
enemy's camp, where he found all their baggage just as
they had left it ; their cooking utensils, their provisions,
their stables full of horses — all had been left. He dis-
tributed the horses and provisions amongst his officers and
men, and gave Seif ed-Dtn's tent to 'Izz ed-Din FerrQkh-
Shah, nephew of that prince. Then, having sat down
before Membej,^ he received the capitulation of that place
towards the end of the same month ; after that he marched
upon the Castle of 'Az^z,^ and laid siege to it on the 4th
of the month of Zu el-K'ada, 571 (May 15, A.D. 1176).
It was here that the Ism'ailiya^ tried to assassinate him ;
but God preserved him from their treachery, and gave the
assassins into his power. This occurrence did not daunt
his determination ; he remained before the place until he
took it on the 14th of Zu el-Hijja (June 24). He arrived

He brought water by an aqueduct to Jebel 'Arifit, and built fountains
there for the Mecca pilgrims (Ibn Khaliikan, ii. 535). — W.

* Membej (Bambyce), between Aleppo and Btr.

= ^Azdz is to the N.W. of Aleppo, near the road to Killis, in a
fertile district.

3 The Ism'ailiya or Assassins {Haskshdshtn^ * hemp-smokers *),
organized by Hasan el-Homeiri in 1090 at Alamdt in Irak, had
established themselves in the N. Lebanon by the middle of the twelfth
century. The lower initiates were bound to carry out the Sheikh's
orders against Moslem or Christian alike. The mystical teaching of
the sect, tracing back to Ism'ail, the sixth Imim, had reached Syria as
early as the ninth century.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 7S


before Aleppo on the i6th of the same month, and, having
encamped there for some time, took his final departure.
One of the daughters of Nilr ed-Din, quite a young girl,
was sent to him by the Government of Aleppo to ask for
the Castle of 'Az^z as a gift at his hands ; this request he
granted. Towards the close of the same month, his brother,
Shems ed-Daula^ (TArdn Shah), arrived at Damascus on
his return from Yemen. He remained there some time,
and then returned to Egypt. He died at Alexandria on
the 1st of Safer, 576 (June 27, 1180 A.D.). The Sultan also
returned to Egypt to ascertain the condition of the country,
and support those whom he had left in authority. It was
in the month of Rabi'a I., 572 (September to October,
A.D. 1 176), that he set out for Egypt, leaving his brother,
Shems ed-Daula, as his lieutenant in Damascus. Having
spent some time in Egypt, restoring order in the administra-
tion of affairs, remedying defects in the government, and
recruiting his army, he began his preparations for an
invasion of the territories of the Franks, determined to
penetrate to the sea-coast. He came into collision with
the Franks at Ramla, whither they had advanced to meet
him, early in the month of Jornada I., 573 (the end of
October, A.D. 1177).


CHAPTER XVL

DEFEAT SUSTAINED AT KAMLA.

Prince ArnAt (Renaud de Chatillon), the leader of the
Franks, had been ransomed at Aleppo, where he had been
detained a prisoner since the time of NAr ed-Din. This
day (i>., that of Ramla) the Moslems sustained a severe
defeat. This is the explanation the Sultan gave of the

' See p. 64.


76 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

cause.of the disaster. Our troops had been drawn up in
order of battle, and the enemy was advancing, when some of
our people thought we ought to change the position of our
flanks,^ so as to gain the protection of a well-known Tell in
the country of Ramla,* in our rear. Whilst our men were
executing this movement, the Franks charged, and, by
God's permission, put them to rout As there was no
stronghold at hand to which they could retreat, the
Moslems fled in the direction of Egypt, and, losing their
way, were scattered far and wide. The enemy took a
great number of prisoners, amongst whom was *Aisa,' the
jurist. This was a great reverse, but God repaired our
loss by the advantage we gained in the famous battle of
Hattin.

Let us turn to el-Melek es-S^leh. This prince's affairs
having fallen into disorder, he had Gumishtikin, who
was really governor of the whole country, arrested, and
commanded him to give up the castle of H^rim.* On his
refusal to do so, he put him to death. The Franks, hear-
ing that the minister was dead, laid siege to H^rim, in the
hope of taking it. This took place in the month of
Jomada II., in the year 573 (November - December,
1 177 A.D.). The garrison, attacked on one hand by the
Franks, and threatened on the other by el-Melek es-S41eh*s

^ The original is not clear. According to one translation, it means
that the right and left wings should interchange their positions. — W.

2 This defeat of Sal4h ed-Din occurred at Gezer {Tell Jezer)^ 5 miles
S.E. of Ramleh, on November 25, 1 177. See Rohricht's * Regesta Regni
Hierosolymitani,' No. 264.

3 It was through the exertions of this man, who was both lawyer
and warrior, that Salih ed-Din was able to rally round him the emirs
of Ndr ed-Din*s army, when the Fatimite Khalif appointed him his
first minister, and honoured him with the title of Sultan.

4 Hdrim was an important border castle (called Harcnc by the
Franks) E. of the Orontes, and E. of Antioch. Near it Niir ed-Din
defeated the Franks in 1163.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 77


army 9 surrendered the place to es-Sdleh during the last
ten days of the month of Ramadan (the middle of March,
1 178 A.D.). Upon this the Franks withdrew into their
own territories, and es-ScLleh returned to Aleppo. Dis-
sension still reigned all round him, for several of his nobles
had shown a leaning towards the Sultan. On the loth of
Moharrem, 576 (June 6, a.d. 1180), he sent a body of
troops against 'Izz ed-Din Kilij,^ who had revolted at
Tell-Khilid.* After this he received tidings of the death
of his cousin, Seif ed-D!n Gh&zi, Prince of Mosul, who died
on the 3rd of Safer (June 29) this year. On the 5th of the
same month 'Izz ed-D!n Mas'tid succeeded his brother Seif
ed-D!n upon the throne. Shems ed-Daula (THr&n Shah,
brother of Sal&h ed-Din) died the same year at Alex-
andria.


CHAPTER XVII.

THE SULTAN RETURNS INTO SYRIA.

On his return to Egypt after his defeat, SaUh ed-Din re-
mained there whilst be remodelled his army ; then, hearing
of the grievous condition of Syria, he made up his mind to
return thither to give battle to the infidels. At this time
an ambassador came from Kilij Arsl&n^ (Prince of Iconium)
to negotiate a treaty of peace and alliance with him, and
to complain of the Armenians. He at once determined

> 'Izz ed-Din Kilfj had been one of NCir ed-Din*s emirs. He held
in fee the fortress and lands of TV// Kh&lid^ in the province of Aleppo.
• Tell Kkditdyf^s a castle about twelve miles N.W. of Membtj^
y Izz ed-Dtn Kilij Arslin II., the Seljuk Sultan of R{im, whose
capital was at Iconium {Konia). 'Izz ed-Din «idded largely to the
Selj&k Empire of R(im, but in 1188 divided it between his ten sons,
and abdicated.— W.


78 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


to invade the country of Ibn L&6n,^ and support Kilfj
Arsl^n. When he came to Kara-hissAr,^ he encamped
there and effected a junction with the troops from Aleppo,
who had been sent to put themselves under his orders.
Indeed, one of the conditions of the treaty of peace con-
cluded with Aleppo was that he should be furnished with
troops whenever he required them for any expedition.
This contingent joined him on the banks of the Nahr eU
Azrak* (the blue river), which flows between Behnesi and
Hisn MansQr.* Having crossed this river, he advanced to
Nahr el- As wad* (the black river), which forms the
boundary of the territories of Ibn L^n, where he cap-
tured the fortress® . . . from (the Armenians), and razed it
to the ground. After this the enemy surrendered a
number of prisoners to him as the price of peace, upon
which the Sultan decided to withdraw. Kilij Arslin pro-


' Ibn Lion was Rhupen II. (i 174- 1 185), the grandson of Levon I.
(Leo), the * Thakavor' or Baron of Lesser Annenia. He waged war
successfully against Byzantines, Selji^ks, and Arabs, and largely ex-
tended the kingdom. He was treacherously captured by Bohemund,
of Antioch, and abdicated in favour of his brother, Leo II., 'the
great/— W.

3 Kara-hissdr is the name of a large meadow [tnerj) or plain to the
N. of Aleppo. — W.

3 The Nahr ef-Azrak is the present Geuk Su^ which falls into the
Euphrates below Sumeisdt.

4 Hisn Mansi^r is possibly the modem Adiaman^ the chief town
of the Hisn MansCir Kaza.

5 The Nahr el-Aswad is the Kara Su^ which flows between the
Giaour Dagh and the Kurt Dagh to the Lake of Antioch.

^ The name of the fortress is omitted in the original, and the Arabic
sentence is left incomplete. The course of this campaign cannot
be clearly followed. It is difficult to understand why Saldh ed-Din
should have passed Aleppo, and gone so far north as the Geuk
Su before being joined by the .\leppo contingent. The fortress
he took was apparently near the Kara Su, and perhaps near the
Baghche Pass.— W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 79


posed that he should grant peace to all the Orientals.^
Sal&h ed-D!a consented to this, and on the loth of the
month Jornada I., in the year 576 (October 2, a.d. 1180),
he swore to observe the terms of this treaty, in which
Kilij Arsl^n was included, as well as the inhabitants of
Mosul and Diarbekr. This compact was signed on the
banks of the Senja,* a tributary of the Euphrates. The
Sultan then returned to Damascus, and thence into Egypt.


CHAPTER XVIII.

DEATH OF EL-MELEK ES-SALEH. 'IZZ ED-D1n ENTERS

ALEPPO.

In the year 577 (1181-1182 A.D.) el-Melek es-S41eh suffered
from a sharp attack of colic. He fell ill on the 9th of
Rejeb (November 18, A.D. 1 181), and on the 13th of the
same month his condition became so serious that the gates
of the fortress were closed. He then summoned his chief
emirs, one by one, and Qiade them swear to receive 'Izz
cd-Din, Prince of Mosul, as their lord. On the 25th of the
same month (December) he breathed his last. His death
created a profound impression on the minds of his sub-
jects. Directly he was dead a messenger was despatched
post-haste to carry the tidings to 'Izz ed-Din Mas'fld, son
of Kotb ed-D2n,' and to inform him that the deceased
Prince had bequeathed the principality to him, making all

' Under the name Oricniais^ Kilij Arsldn. included the Princes of
Mosul, of the Provinces of Mesopotamia, and of Diiirbckr.

* It has been supposed that the Senja was the same as the Aahr
ei-Asrak or Geuk Su, but it is probably the river Stijur, which falls
into the Euphrates below JerAblus. — \V.

i See p. 70.


8o WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


the people swear to receive him as their lord. 'Izz
ed-Din set forth at once and rode in haste, fearing lest
the Sultan should occupy the city before him. The first of
his emirs to enter Aleppo were Mozaflfer ed-Din, son of
Zein ed-Din,^ and the Lord of Sartij. With them came an
officer to administer the oath of allegiance to all the emirs
in the city. They arrived on the 3rd of Sh'ab&n (Decem-
ber 12, A.D. 1 181). On the loth of the same month 'Izz
ed-Din entered Aleppo, went up into the fortress, and took
possession of the treasures and stores which had been
lodged there. On the Sth of Shaw&l (February 11,
A.D. 1 181), of the same year, he married the mother of
el-Melek es-S41eh.


CHAPTER XIX.

'izz ED-DIN exchanges [ALEPPO] FOR THE TERRITORY
OF HIS BROTHER, 'IMAd ED-D1n ZENGHI.

'Izz ED-DtN remained in the fortress of Aleppo until the
I Sth of Shawcll, but he recognised that it would be im-
possible for him to keep both Mosul and Syria. He was
afraid of the Sultan^ and overwhelmed by the extravagant
demands of the emirs, who persisted in asking for in-
creased allowances, which his limited means prevented
him from granting. Moj&hed ed-Din Kiim&z^ also^ his

« See p. 73-

^ Abu Mansur Kiimiz Mojihed ed-Din was a eunuch, and en-
franchised slave of Zein ed-Din All, Lord of Arbela (p. 52). In 1 164
he was entrusted with the management of affairs at Arbela. In 1 175
he removed to Mosul, and became vizier to Seif ed-Din Ghazi, and
afterwards to his brother, 'Izz ed-Din. He was noted for the excel-
lence of his administration, and for his justice. He died in 1 199 (Ibn
Khallikan, ii. 510). — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 81


chief minister, was in a very uncomfortable position, for he
was not accustomed to the unseemly ways of the Syrian
emirs. Therefore 'Izz ed-Dtn left the castle of Aleppo,
and repaired to er-Rakka, leaving his son and Mozaflfer
ed-Din (Kukbilri) behind. On his arrival at er-Rakka he
met his brother 'Im&d ed-Din, as had been arranged.
They determined upon exchanging Aleppo for Sinj&r, and
*Izz ed-Din ratified this arrangement with his oath. This
came to pass upon the 13th of Shaw&l (February 27,
1 182). One agent was sent to Aleppo to take possession
of the city on behalf of 'Im&d ed-Din, whilst another was
despatched by 'Izz ed-D!n to receive the city of Sinjdr.
On the 13th of Moharrem, 578 (May 19, a.d. 1182), Im^d
ed-Din made his entry into the fortress of Aleppo.


CHAPTER XX.

THE SULTAN RETURNS FROM EGYPT.

After peace had been concluded, through the intervention
of Kilij-Arsl&n, the Sultan set out once more for Egypt,
leaving his nephew 'Izz ed-Din Ferrfikh Shah as Governor
of Damascus. It was in Egypt that he received news of
the death of el-Melek es-S41eh, and this decided him to
return to Syria, to protect that country against the
attempts of the Franks. Very shortly afterwards he was
informed of the death of FerrOkh Shah, which occurred in
the month of Rcjeb, 577 (November-December, 1181).
This event confirmed him in his resolution to pass over
into Syria. Having set out from Misr, he arrived at
Damascus on the 17th of Safer (June 22, 1182), and at
once commenced preparations for an expedition against
the Franks. On his march from Egypt this time he had
crossed through their territories, boldly and not peacefully.

6


82 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

He marched at once upon Beirut and laid siege to that place,
but without success, for the Franks collected their troops
and forced him to retire. On his return to Damascus
he learnt that an embassy from Mosul had reached the
Franks, and was stirring them up to make war upon
him. He concluded from this that the people of Mosul
had broken their oaths, and he determined to visit that
country, so as to unite all the forces of Isl^m in a common
feeling of hostility against the enemies of God. He had
commenced his preparations when 'Im^d ed-Din heard
of them, and sent to Mosul to warn the government,
and to beg them to send troops as quickly as pos-
sible. The Sultan set out on his march, and appeared
before Aleppo on the i8th of the month Jomada I.,
where he remained for three days. On the 2ist of the
same month he resumed his march in the direction of the
Euphrates. He had already made terms with Mozaffer ed-
Dtn, who was at this time holding the city of Harr&n,^ and
who was in fear of an attack from the government of
Mosul. He was still more afraid of the designs of Mojihed
ed-Din (K&imdz), and he joined the Sultan, as a means of
protection. He crossed the Euphrates, and" urged the
Sultan to invade the country (Upper Mesopotamia), repre-
senting that the conquest of that district would be an easy
matter. Sal&h ed-Din crossed the Euphrates and took the
cities of er-Roha^ (Edessa), er-Rakka, Nisiba, and SarQj.

» Harrdtiy * the city of Nahor,' is about 24 miles S.S.E. of Edessa, on
the Belik^ a tributary of the Euphrates, and in the N. of Mesopotamia.

a Er-Rbha^ the Armenian name of Edessa, comes from Callirrhoe^
one of the classical names of the town. It was further corrupted by
the Turks to Urfa or Orfa, Edessa is built on two hills, between
which flows a small stream, and there are still many remains of the
old wall and castle. During the first Crusade the town was taken by
Baldwin (1097), who called himself Count of Edessa. In 1144 it was
captured from Jocelyn II. by the Atabeg Zenghi, Lord of Mosul. It
was in the hands of his grandson, 'Izz ed-Din, when taken by Saldh
ed-Din.— W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 83


He placed a commission {Shihna) over the province of
KhabCir,^ and divided it into military fiefs.


CHAPTER XXI.

THE SULTAN APPEARS (ONCE MORE) BEFORE MOSUL.

This time he arrived before Mosul on Thursday, the i ith
of Rejeb, 578 (November 10, 1182 A.D.). As I was then
in this city, I had been sent a few days before to Baghdad
to solicit the assistance of the Khalif. I went down the
Tigris so quickly that I reached Baghdad in the space of
two days and two hours. All I could obtain from the
government of Baghdad was that they would send a
despatch to the Sheikh of Sheikhs (chief of the 'Ulema),
who was then with the Sultan as an accredited ambassador
from the Khalif In this letter he was commanded to have
an interview with the Sultan, and to endeavour to bring
about an arrangement between him and the people of MosuK
The latter nad already sent an ambassador to ask help
from Pehlev^n (Prince of AzerbijAn).* The answer they

' The province of Khab/lr included the district lying between the
Euphrates and the river Khabdr, the Biblical Aram Naharaim^ and
the classical Osrhocne, It is a very fertile district, and supported
many important towns, but is now abandoned to nomads. In the
time of SalAh ed-Uin it still retained much of its ancient fertility.— W.

' Shems ed*Din Pehlevftn, Lord of Azerbij^n, Arran, and Persian
Irak, was the son of Shems ed-Din Ildukuz, the Atabeg to the ScIjDlc
Saltan. Arslan Shah, who died in 1174. Pehlev&n died in 1186.
Azerbijdn is a province in N.W. Persia, which corresponds to the
ancient AlrofkUene, It is separated from Russia by the Araxes.
and Its principal towns are Tabriz, Urmia, Khoi, Dilman, etc. It is
cme of the most fertile provinces of Persia, and is noted for its excellent
friiit-W.

6 — 2


84 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

received from him contained conditions which would have
been more oppressive than war with the Sultan. Sal&h ed-
Din remained at Mosul for several days ; then he saw that
no advantage could be gained by besieging so great a city
in this manner, and that if he would take it, he must get
possession of the castle and country around, and that he
would be weakened by the long delay. He therefore
struck his camp, and, on the i6th of Sh'abin (Decem-
ber 15, 1 182), took up his position against Sinj^r, which was
occupied by Sheref ed-Din, son of Kotb ed-Din, with a
certain number of men. He pressed this city so closely
that, on the 2nd of the month Ramadan, he carried it by
assault Sheref ed-Din evacuated it unarmed, and he and
his men were furnished with an escort to conduct them to
Mosul. The Sultan gave SinjAr to his nephew, Taki ed-
Din, and departed for Nisiba.


CHAPTER XXII.

THE ACTION TAKEN BY SHAH-ARMEN, PRINCE OF

KHELaT.

The government of Mosul had summoned Shah Armen^
to their assistance, and thrown themselves into the arms of
that prince ; he therefore resolved to set out from Kheldt,*

* Shah Armen Nisr ed-Din Muhammad, who reigned fifty-seven
years at Khel^t (11 28-1 185), was grandson of Sokmin el-Kutbi.
Sokmdn, who was an old slave of the Selj(ik prince of Azerbijdn, seized
Khel&t, Manazgerd, Arjish, and the districts round them, and pro-
claimed himself king, with the Persian title, Shak Armen, * King of
the Armenians.' This title was borne by his successors. — W.

^ Kheldt^ now Akhldi^ is near the north-west comer of Lake Van.
There are several old mosques and richly-ornamented octagonal tombs,
dating from the Seljiik period. It was at one time besieged by a


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 8?


to bring them relief. He pitched his camp at Harzem,^
and dispatched a messenger to 'Izz ed-Din, Prince of
Mosul, to inform him of his arrival. The latter left the
city on the 25th of Shawdl, and set out to meet him. On
his arrival he found the Lord of Mardfn^ was with Shah-
Armen. A body . of troops belonging to the army
quartered in Aleppo also came to join them. Their
object in meeting was to march against the Sultan's forces.
Shah-Armen sent Bektimor^ to Sal^h ed-Din to negotiate
a treaty of peace, through the intervention of the Sheikh
of Sheikhs, but this step was unproductive of any result.
Then, when he heard the Sultan was advancing upon them,
he retreated into his own country, 'Izz ed-Din set out to
return to his own dominions, and the coalition was dis-
solved. Sal&h ed-Dfn then marched against Amid,^ and
captured that city after a siege of eight days. This took
place during the first ten days of Moharrem, 579 (April-
May, A.D. 1183). He gave Amid to NAr ed-Din, son of
Kara-Arsl4n, and to Ibn Nik^n^ he granted all the money

Byzantine force commanded by an adventurer, bearing the name of
Russel Baliol.— W.

* Ibn el-Athir mentions Harzem several times in his ' Kamel ' as a
place in the neighbourhood of Mardtn.

* Mardin has always played an important jNUt in the history of the
district. It is buih on the side of a conical hill, the houses rising tier
above tier, and is extremely picturesque. The town lies on the direct
road from Oria to Mosul. The Lord of Mardtn referred to was Kotb
ed-Din el*GhAzi, one of the Ortokid dynasty, who died in 1184. — W.

) Bektimor, who was a slave of the father of Sokmin Shah-Armen,
seized the throne on SokmAn^s death in 11 85. — W.

4 Amid iAmtda) is the modem Diarbckr, situated on the right bank
of the Tigris. It is still an important town, and the capital of a vilAyet.
The town is surrounded by walls of basalt, and it has seveial old
mosques and churches. — W.

' Ibn Nik;)n was chief minister of Nur ed-Din Mahmud, son of
Kara Arslan, Lord of Amid, and exercised absolute authority in the
city. Sal.\h ed-Din restored the city to the Ortokid prince.


86 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

and portable property in the city. He then returned to
Syria, directing his march on Aleppo. In the interval
'Imdd ed-D!n had sallied out, and dismantled the fortresses
of ^AzSlz and Kefr Litha ;^ this last he had taken from the
emir Bekmish, on the 22nd of the month Jomada I., when
he had gone over to the Sultan. He also laid unsuccessful
siege to the fortress of Tell B&sher, which belonged to
Dolderim el-Yar(iki, who had ranged himself on the side
of Salih ed-Din. Meanwhile, the Franks took advantage
of the conflicts which had taken place between the (Moslem)
troops to make inroads into the country, but God drove
them out. 'Im&d cd-Din, having repaired the fortress of
el-Kerzein,2 returned to Aleppo.


CHAPTER XXni.

THE SULTAN RETURNS TO SYRIA.

The Sultan returned to Syria and commenced operations
by an attack on Tell Kh&led, which he took by storm. This
took place on the 22nd of Moharrem, 579 (May 17, A.o.
1 183). He then marched upon Aleppo, and took up a
position against it on the 26th of the same month. He
first encamped on the Meidin el- Akhdar (* green plain '),
and called in a number of troops from all parts, after which
he employed all his forces in storming the city. 'Imid
ed-Din, wearied beyond endurance by the insolent demands
of his emirs, felt that he could not make a satisfactory

^ IC/f/r Ldtha was about a day's journey from Aleppo, in the district
of Azaz.

^ Kerzein lies near Rakka, about eight miles to the south of el-Bira
(Birejik).


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 87

resistance ; he therefore requested Hoss&m ed-Din^ to
approach the Sultan in his behalf, and persuade Sal&h
ed-Din to grant him the territory he had formerly held in
exchange for the government of Aleppo. This arrange-
ment was concluded quite unknown to the people or the
garrison of the city. When matters had been settled in
this wise, and the news was made public, the soldiers
demanded an explanation of 'Im&d ed-Dtn. He replied
that it was true, and recommended them to make terms
for themselves. They deputed 'Izz ed-Din Jurdik en-Nftri
(one of NClr ed-Dtn's memlClks) and Zein ed-Dfn> to
n^otiate a treaty with the Sultan for themselves and the
people of Aleppo. These ambassadors had an interview
with the Sultan, which lasted until nightfall, and obtained
terms for the garrison and inhabitants which Sal&h ed-Dtn
swore to observe. This was on the 17th of Safer (June 1 1,
A.D. 1 183). The garrison then came forth from the city
to place themselves at the disposal of the Sultan, who
remained in his camp in the Meidin el-Akhdar ('green
plain '), and with them came the chief men of the city.
The Sultan clothed them with robes of honour, and set all
minds at rest. 'imAd ed-Din remained in the fortress to
settle his affairs, and to pack up his treasure and other
property. Meanwhile, the Sultan dwelt in his camp in the
Meidin el-Akhdar; and there, on the 23rd of Safer, his
brother Tftj el-Molfik died from a wound he had received.
The Sultan was sorely afflicted by this loss, and sat in his
tent that day to receive the public condolences of his
officers. *Imftd ed-Din also came the same day, to partici-
pate in the Sultan's grief, and to wait on him. The Sultan
settled various matters with him, lodged him in his own

■ Hossiim ed-[)in was governor of the fortress of Aleppo.
' In Kem&l ed-Uin*s * Zobda* this man is called Halek. Zein ed-
Din was his Arabic name.


88 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

tent, and gave him (splendid) gifts and several fine horses ;
he also clothed with robes of honour a great number of
chiefs who came in the suite of his guest. 'I mad ed-DJn
set out the same day for Kara-hissdr^ on his way to
Sinj&r. The Sultan was filled with joy at the success of
his plans, and he went up to the castle, where Hoss&m
ed-Din Domdn set a magnificent banquet before him.
This officer had remained to collect the various things
which *Im4d ed-Din had left behind. Soldiers were sent
by the Sultan to take possession of Hirim, and as the
governor of that place made difficulties in order to create
delay, the garrison sent to the Sultan and obtained a treaty
ratified by his oath. Sal&h ed-Din then set out for H&rim,
and arrived there on the 29th of Safer. Having taken
possession of the city, he remained there for two days to
reoi^anize the government ; he appointed Ibrahim Ibn
Sherwa governor, and then returned to Aleppo, arriving
there on the 3rd of the month Rabfa I. His troops were
granted leave to return to their homes, whilst he remained
at Aleppo to reorganize the government, and preside over
the affairs of the city.


CHAPTER XXIV.

EXPEDITION TO 'AIN JALOt.

The Sultan did not stay long in Aleppo. On the 22nd of
the month Rabi'a II., in the year 579 (August 14, A.D. 1183),
he set out for Damascus, preparatory to making an expedi-
tion into the infidels territories. He called his troops
together, proceeding on his march whilst they followed

' See p. 78.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 89

hiin« He did not halt at Hamah, but advanced by forced
marches, taking no provisions with him, until the 3rd of
the month Jornada I. (August 24), when he reached
Damascus. Here he passed some days making prepara-
tions, and on the 27th of the same month he pitched his
camp by the Wooden Bridge, where he had ordered his
troops to meet him. He halted here nine days, and then,
on the 8th of Jomada II. (September 28), marched to el-
Faw&r,^ where he made his final arrangements before enter-
ing the enemy's country. From this place he pushed on
to el-Kuseir,* where he spent the night. Quite early the
next morning he reached the ford (over the Jordan), and,
having crossed the river, marched as far as el-Beis&n.'
Its inhabitants had abandoned their dwellings, leaving
behind all the property they could not easily carry, and
the fruits of their harvest. The soldiers were allowed to
pillage the place, and they burnt everything they could
not take with them. The Sultan continued his march to
el-J&lQt,^ a prosperous village, near which there is a spring
Cain), and here he pitched his camp. He had sent for-
ward a body of Nfiri memlflks (who had formerly belonged
to Kdr ed-Din), commanded by *Izz ed-Din Jurdik and
J4wcli, a memltkk (who had served) Asad ed-Din, to
ascertain the whereabouts and movements of the Franks.
These men fell in unexpectedly with contingents from el-
Kerak and esh-Sh6bek, on their way to reinforce the
enemy. Our people attacked them, killed a great number,

* El-FttuHir^ *the bubbling spring.' Possibly the present village
Fuara, 13 miles E. of Jordan, at the head of Wadi Ekseir.

* Ei'Kuseir^ 'the little fort.* The name survives in Wddy Ekseir
falling into the Jordan on the £., about 8 miles N. of Beisdn.

3 Brisdn (Bethshean), 3 miles W. of the Jordan, near the mouth of
the Valley of Jezreel.

« Now 'Ain Jtiidd^ * Goliath's Spring,* in the Valley of Jezreel, a
mile S.£. of Jezreel. It has a large pool of water.


90 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

and made more than a hundred prisoners; then they
returned, without having lost a single Moslem, except a
man namedJBehrim esh-Sh&wdsh. Towards the end of
the day — the loth of Jomada II. (September 30, A.D.
1 183) — the Sultan received news of the defeat of the
Franks.'^His army showed their delight, and became
firmly persuaded that they were destined to obtain victory
and success. On Saturday, the i ith of the same month,
the Sultan was informed that the Franks had quitted
SeffOria, where they had mustered their forces, and were
marching on el-F(ila,^ a well-known village. As he meant
to pit his forces against theirs in the field, he drew up his
ranks in order of battle — right wing, left wing, and centre
— and marched to meet them. The enemy advanced on
the Moslems, and they came face to face (lit, eye to eye).
The Sultan sent out the vanguard, composed of five
hundred picked men, to attack them, and they made a
great slaughter, and * the enemy killed some. The Franks
kept their ranks close, and their infantry protected their
knights, and they neither charged nor stopped, but con-
tinued their march to the spring we mentioned above, and
there camped. The Sultan halted opposite to them, and
endeavoured to provoke them to quit their position and do
battle by sending out skirmishing parties. Nevertheless,
they remained where they were, seeing that the Moslems
were in great force. As the Sultan could not draw them
from their position, he resolved to retire, hoping that they
would pursue him, and give him an opportunity of fighting
a pitched battle. He therefore marched in the direction
of et-T6r (Mount Tabor) on the 17th of ihe same month,

* El'Fxileh^ * the bean,' called La F^ve by the Franks, was a small
fort 3J miles N. of Jezreel. The outposts of the Franks were at
Tubania i^Ain TuiyaUn), a mile N.E. of 'Ain JdlCid, and 5 miles S.E.
of FCileh.— * William of Tyre,' xxii. 27.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 91


and took up a position at the foot of the mountain,
watching for a favourable moment to attack them as
soon as they began to move. The Franks started at
dawn, and retreated. He pursued them, and tried in
vain to provoke them to fight by a constant shower of
arrows, and he continued to follow their march until they
halted at el-F(ila, going back to their own country. The
Moslems, seeing this, came to the Sultan, and advised htm
to retire, because their supplies were running very short.
Besides, he had inflicted severe loss upon the enemy,
both in killed and in the prisoners he had taken ; and had
destroyed several of their villages, such as 'Aferbela, the
stronghold of Beis&n^ and Zer'ain.^ He therefore retired,
victorious and triumphant, and halted at el-Faw&r, where
he gave leave to such of his men as wished to return to
their homes. He then marched back to Damascus, which
he entered on Thursday, the 24th of the same month. The
citizens testified the greatest delight at his return. What
lofty ambition dwelt in his soul ! Even the capture and
occupation of Aleppo did not deter him from undertaking
another expedition ! His object in all his conquests was
to enlarge his resources for carrying on the Holy War.
May God grant him a splendid reward in the next life,
even as, by His mercy. He allowed him to perform so
many meritorious actions in this !


CHAPTER XXV.

HE UNDERTAKES AN EXPEDITION AGAINST EL-KERAK.

The Sultan remained at Damascus until the 3rd of
Rejeb. 579 (October 22. ad. i 183), and went out several

* Ztf'ain is Jezreel *A/trb(la (Forbelet of the Franks) ib un-
known.


92 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

times towards el-Kerak. He had summoned his brother,
el Melek el-'Adel, who was at that time in Egypt, to join
him at el-Kerak. As soon as he heard his brother had set
out, he left (Damascus), and went to meet him, which he
did quite close to el-Kerak. A great number of merchants
and other people had tra^^elled with el-'Adel, who arrived
on the 4th of Sh'abAn (November 22, A.D. 1183). The
Franks had received information that el-Melek el-'Adel
had taken the field, and they marched their men and
knights towards el-Kerak to defend that place. When
the Sultan heard that the army of the Franks was strong
in number, he grew apprehensive of their marching in the
direction of Egypt; and therefore he sent his nephew,
el Melek el-MozaflFer Taki ed-Dtn, into that country. This
occurred on the iSth of Sh'abaln. On the i6th of the
same month the Franks encamped at el-Kerak, and the
Sultan, after vigorously assaulting the place, was obliged
to retire. It was here that Sheref ed-Din Barghdsh (who
had been one of Ndr ed- Din's meml(iks) testified (to the
faith) by death.


CHAPTER XXVI.

HE GIVES THE CITY OF ALEPPO TO HIS BROTHER, EL-
MELEK el-'Adel.

After the arrival of the Franks at el-Kerak, the Sultan
abandoned the hope of taking that stronghold, and retired
towards Damascus with his brother, el-Melek el-'Adel.
He arrived on the 24th of Sh'aban, and on the 2nd of
Ramadan (December 19, 1183), he granted the Govern-
ment of Aleppo to el-'Adel, who had remained with him.
At that time his son, el-Melek ez-Ziher, was in Aleppo,


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 93


with Seif ed-Din Yazkflj, the regent, and Ibn el-'Amid.^
EUMelek ez-Zaher was his favourite son, on account of
the fine character with which God had endowed him.
Exalted ambition, clear judgment, lofty intelligence, an
upright spirit and a virtuous life — all the gifts which lead
to pre-eminence were united in his person, and he showed
his father untiring affection and obedience. Nevertheless,
his father took the Government of Aleppo out of his
hands, because he believed certain advantages would accrue
from such a measure. The prince quitted Aleppo with
YazkOj as soon as el-Melek el-'Adel arrived, and both went
to attend the Sultan. On the 28th of Shawil (February 13,
C184), they arrived at Damascus. Ez-Z&her remained
with his father, and obeyed him and submitted unto him
in all things. Nevertheless, he concealed in his heart a
discontent that did not escape the Sultan's observation.

This same month I came to the Sultan as a member
of a deputation sent by the Government of Mosul. We
had previously applied to Khalif en-Nisr ed-D!n lUah, then
at Baghdad, and had persuaded him to allow the Sheikh
of Sheikhs, Bedr ed-Din, to accompany us, to act as
ambassador and mediator. He was a most worthy man,
highly respected not only at the KhahT's court, but through-
out the country. The Sultan held this doctor in such
esteem that during his stay at the court he went to visit
him almost every day.

* Ibn e!-'Amid (Naseh ed*Din ed-Dimashki) was head of the
executive government, both civil and military ((iivtin\ at Aleppo.


94 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER XXVII.

OUR DEPUTATION ARRIVES AT THE SULTAN'S COURT.

The Sheikh had visited Mosul on his way, and from thence
had travelled with the K^di Mohi ed-Din, son of Kemal
ed-Din, who had been a friend from the days of his boyhood.
I, too, was a member of the deputation. We continued
our journey, and on our. arrival at Damascus the Sultan
came out to meet us, to welcome the Sheikh and the
others of us who were of his company. After the inter-
view, which took place some distance from Damascus,
we made our entry into the city on Saturday, the nth
of Zu el-K'ada (February 25, 1 184). The Sultan accorded
us the most gracious and gratifying reception, and we
spent several days in negotiations and attempts to make
a final arrangement. But peace was not made on this
occasion, and we departed to return to Mosul. The Sultan
accompanied us as far as el-Kuseir/ where he bade the
Sheikh farewell, and Bedr ed-Din that day made one last
endeavour to effect a settlement. But his attempt failed
in consequence of an objection raised by Mohi ed-Din.
The Sultan stipulated that the Lord of Arbela and the
Lord of el-Jezira* should be free to choose his rule or. that
of Mosul, but the Kidi declared they must sign the treaty
(of peace). This condition put a stop to the negotiations,
and we started on our journey on the 7th of Zu el-Hijja
(March 22). During our visit the Sultan commissioned
the Sheikh to offer me all the posts which Behd ed-

' El-fCuseir^ a ruined village with a tower, nine miles N.E. of
Damascus.
* This is the city and principality oljezirat Ibn ^Omar.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 95


Dimashki^ had held in Misr. I refused his offer, fearing
lest the ill-success of our negotiations should be attributed
to me. From that time the Sultan had an opinion in his
noble mind of myself of which I knew nothing until after
I had entered his service. Sal&h ed-Din remained at
Damascus, and continued to receive the ambassadors who
were sent to him from all parts. One came from Sinjdr
Shah,' Lord of el-Jezira, on whose behalf he swore faith
with the Sultan. The plenipotentiary of the Lord of
Arbela did the same» and took his departure with the
other ambassadors. On the 4th of Zu el-Hijja (March 19),
el-Melek el-'Adel arrived from Aleppo to visit his brother
the Sultan, and after being present at the Feast (of the
Sacrifice),^ on the loth of Zu el-Hijja, he returned once
more to Aleppo.


CHAPTER XXVin.

THE SULT.VN'S SECOND EXPEDITION AGAINST EL-KERAK.

The Sultan had sent out messengers in all directions to
collect troops. The first chief who came to join his stan-
dard was Nur ed-Din, son of KaraJArsl^n, and Prince of
Hisn Keifa. He arrived at Aleppo on the i8th of the
month of Safer (May 31, 1184), and was received with the
highest honours by el-Melek el-'Adel. This prince took
him into the fortress, where he entertained him most agree-

' El-BehA ed-Dimashki was principal professor in MenAzel el-*Izz
College, in Old Cairo, and held the office of Khiitcb^ or chief preacher,
in the same city.

* This was Uie Aube; prince, Mo'ezz ed-Din, son of Seif ed*Din
Ghlzi, and Prince of Jezirat Ibn 'Omar.

) Zu ii-Hijja is the month of the Hdjy and the sacrifice is one of
the ceremonies at Mecca.


96 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

ably, and on the 26th of the same month set out with him
for Damascus. The Sultan had been ill for several days,
and God then restored him to health. As soon as he
heard that the son of Kara Arslan was approaching, he
hastened to meet him, for he was most generous in paying
every honour to all men. They met in the Buk'aat 'Ain
el-Jisr on the 9th of the month of Rabi'a I. (June 20, 1 184).
He then returned to Damascus, in advance of the son of
Kara Arslin and of el-Melek el-'Adel, and set about
making preparations for another expedition. On the 15th
of that same month he left Damascus and took up his
position at the Wooden Bridge.^ On the 24th el-'Adel
arrived at Damascus with the son of Kara Arslin, and
after sojourning there some days, set out with him to join
the Sultan. The latter had just left R4s eI-M&^ on his
way towards el-Kerak, and halted for several days close to
that stronghold to await the arrival of el-MeIek el-Moz-
affer* from Egypt. This prince joined the Sultan on the
19th of Rabi'a II. (July 30), and brought with him the
household and treasures of el-Melek el-'Adel, all of which the
Sultan despatched to that prince, and commanded him and
the other leaders to join him forthwith at el-Kerak. All
the detachments arrived in close succession, so that by the
4th of Jomada I. (August 13) the fortress was completely
invested. As soon as the contingents from Egypt, from
Syria, and from el-Jezira — the latter commanded by the
son of Kara Arslan — had effected a junction, the mangonels
were set up to batter the place. When the Franks received
news of what had taken place, they set out with their

» Probably the bridge of cl-Kesweh, nine or ten miles S.W. of
Damascus.

3 Rks el-Mi lies between es-Sanemein and Shemesktn, on the road
from Damascus to Mecca. It is now called /Ce/r el-Md,

3 This was the title of Taki ed-Din 'Omar, Salih ed-Din*s nephew.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 97

knights and footmen to the relief of el-Kerak. This for-
tress was a source of great annoyance to the Moslems, for
it so effectually commanded the road to Egypt that cara-
vans could not travel without a strong military escort.
The Sultan was resolved to put an end to this state of
things and open the road to Egypt. When he heard that
the Franks had come out, he prepared to meet them,
ordering his men back to the heights of el-Kerak, and
sending the baggage (away) into the country, that his
troops should not be hampered in fighting. Then he
marched against the enemy. As the Franks had halted
at el-Waleh/ he took up a position opposite to them, close
to a village called Hesbin, but afterwards marched on to a
place called Nrain ; the F*ranks remained in their position
at el-Waleh until the 26th of Jornada I. (September 4,
1 184), when they moved their camp nearer to el-Kerak.
A detachment of the Moslem army hung on their march,
annoying their rear, till the end of that day. As soon
as the Sultan saw that the Franks were bent on el-Kerak,
he sent his army into the countries lying on the coast»
which were left entirely unprotected in the absence of
the troops. They carried Nablus by storm, and pillaged
the city, but did not succeed in taking the castle. Then
they captured J&nin (Jenin), and returned to join the
Sultan at Rks el-Mi with the prisoners they had taken,
pillaging, burning, and sacking the country that they had
passed through.- Salah ed-Din entered Damascus in
triumph on Saturday, the 7th of Jornada II. (Septcm-

' 'I*he Franks, sallying from Kerak, defended the pass of It^tiifi
lia/rA, about 20 miles N. of the castle. SalAh ed-Din, at HcsMh
( HeshbonK was about 15 miles to the N.£.,and at M*atM (Beth Meon)
about 10 miles N. of this position.

' SalAh ed- Din's army probably crossed the Jordan E. of Xdfi/t/s
, Shechem ), and marching N. by/f/i/zi (/in Gannim) would lecrobs
S. of the Sea of («alilec near Beistln,

7


98 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

ber 1 5), supported on either side by el-Melek el-'Adel, and
by Hdr ed-Din, son of Kara Arsldn. The latter he over-
whelmed with honours and with tokens of his good-will
and esteem. This month an ambassador arrived from the
Khalif, bringing robes of honour for the Sultan, for his
brother (el-Melek el-'Adel), and for the son of Asad ed-Din,^
and invested them therewith. On the 14th of the same
month the Sultan clad the son of Kara Arsl^n in the robe
he had received from the Khalif, and gave him leave to
depart ; he also dismissed the troops. About the same
time messengers came from KukbClri, son of Zein ed-Din,
to ask the support of the Sultan. They brought news that
the Mosul army, assisted by the troops of Kizil (Prince
of Hamaddn), under the command of Mojahed ed-Din
K^im^z, had threatened Arbela, and pillaged and burned
in all directions. Kukbilri had defeated them and put
them to flight.


CHAPTER XXIX.

THE SULTAN'S SECOND EXPEDITION AGAINST MOSUL.

On receiving this news the Sultan set out from Damascus
for the country (of which Mosul is the capital), leaving
orders for the army to follow him. He reached Harrdn,
after a meeting with Mozaffer ed-Din (KukbCiri) at el-
Bira^ on the 12th of Moharrem, 581 (April 15, A.D. 1185).
Seif ed-Din Ibn el-Meshtiib, by the Sultan's command, led
the vanguard of the army to Rds el-'Ain.^ On the
22nd of Safer (May 25) the Sultan arrived at HarrSn, and

" Prince Muhammad, son of Asad ed-Din Shirkuh.

a See p. 72.

3 Kds el *Ain, on the Khabfir river, S.E. of Harrin.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 99

on the 26th he had MozafTer ed-Din (Kukbdri), son of
Zein ed-Dtn, arrested for something he had done and for
certain words attributed to him by his ambassador, which
angered the Sultan, though, indeed, he had not thoroughly
investigated the matter.^ The Sultan deprived him of the
governorship of the castles of Harrdn and Edessa, and
kept him in prison to give htm a lesson. Then, on the
first day of the month of Rabi'a I. he clad him with a robe
of honour, and received him once more into favour, restor-
ing to him the castle of Harr&n and the provinces he had
held, together with all the honours and dignities he had
formerly enjoyed. Everything was restored to him ex-
cepting the fortress of Edessa, and this place the Sultan
promised should be given back to him later on. On
the 2nd of the month Rabia' I. Salih ed-D!n came to Rds
el-'Arn, where he received an ambassador from Kilij
ArsUn, who brought tidings that the princes of the Ease
had sworn together to march against him, if he did not
withdraw from Mosul and Mardin, and to do battle with
him should he persist in his designs. This information
determined the Sultan to march towards Doneiser.^ On
the 8th of the month Rabi'a I. he was joined by 'Im&d
ed-Din, son of Kara ArslAn, accompanied by the troops of
NQr ed-Din, his brother, and the lord of Mardin. The
Sultan went out to meet him and received him with great
honours. On the i ith of the same month he left Doneiser
on his way to Mosul, and encamped in a place called el-
IsmaMliyAt, which was near enough to the city to enable


* Accofding to Ibn el-Athfr, in his ' Kamel,' KukbQri had offered
the Sultan the stun of fifty thousand dinars as an inducement to under-
take another expedition against Mosul. He did not fulfil his promise,
and hence the Sultan's displeasure.

' Ponfistr, according to the author of the * Merased el-Ittil^' lies at
the foot of the hill upon which stands the city of Mardin.

7—2


roo WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


him to relieve the detachment engaged in the blockade on
each succeeding day. 'Imdd ed-Din, son of Kara Arslan,
received news at this time of the death of his brother, NClr
ed-Din, and obtained the Sultan's permission to depart, in
the hope of securing the throne thus left vacant.


CHAPTER XXX.

DEATH OF SHAH-ARMEN, PRINCE OF KHELlT.

Shah-Armen, Prince of Khelat, died in the month of
Rabi'a II., in the year 581 (July, a.d. 1185) and was suc-
ceeded by one of his memliiks, named Bektimor, the same
who had come on an embassy to the Sultan at Sinj&r.
His government was just, and conduced to the prosperity
of the people of Kheldt ; he followed the S(ifi^ path, there-
fore his subjects were submissive and devoted to him.
The death of Shah-Armen and succession of Bektimor
roused the ambition of the neighbouring kings, and in-
duced Pehlevdn Ibn YeldokQz to march on Khelat When
Bektimor received news of his approach, he sent an
ambassador to the Sultan, saying that he wished to
surrender Khelat to Salah ed-Din, and to be received
amongst the number of his servants, and that he would
give his Majesty all he should ask. The Sultan thereupon
felt so strong a wish to possess himself of Khelat that he
raised the blockade of Mosul, and marched in the direction
of that city. At the same time he despatched two envoys
to Bektimor, viz., 'Aisa, the jurist, and Ghars ed-Din Kilij,

> The * path ' is a Siifi term for the course of religious training lead-
ing to renunciation of all worldly desires and to union with God. The
Sikfi *path' seems to have been borrowed from the teaching of
Buddhism.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. loi


to negotiate a treaty with him, the terms of which were
to be committed to writing. These ambassadors fell in
with Pehlevin a short distance from the city. Bektimor
had frightened this prince by informing him that he
thought of surrendering his territory to the Sultan, and
Pehlevdn had made terms with him, giving him one of his
daughters in marriage, confirming him in his dominions,
and restoring his country to him. Bektimor therefore
made excuses to the Sultan's ambassadors, and they had
to depart without effecting anything. The Sultan had
already sat down before Mi&firekin, besieging it, and
fighting a great fight, and setting up his mangonels against
it. There was a man in Mi&f&rekin named Asad, who left
nothing undone for the defence of the city ; but his en-
deavours could not overcome destiny. The place sur-
rendered to the Sultan on the 29th of Jom&da I. Having
now lost all hope of getting possession of KheUt, Sal&h
ed-Din retired and took up a position before Mosul for the
thiid time, encamping at Kefr Zemm&r, not far from the
city. The heat at that time was excessive. He occupied
this camp for some time, and it was here that he received
a visit from Sinjdr Shah,^ from el-Jezira. He had an
interview with this prince, and then sent him back to his
own city. At Kefr Zemm&r he was attacked by so serious
an illness that it caused him great anxiety, and he set out
for Harr&n. Although his condition was so serious, he
would not allow himself to give way and travel in a litter.
He reached Harr&n very sick, and so exhausted that his
life was despaired of, and a report of his death was circu -
lated abroad. At this juncture his brother arrived from
Aleppo, bringing his own physicians with him.

* See above, p. 95.


I02 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER XXXI.

THE PEOPLE OF MOSUL MAKE PEACE WITH THE SULTAN.

'Izz ED-DiN, the Atabeg Prince of Mosul, had sent me to
the Khalif to entreat his assistance, but the mission was
unsuccessful. He then applied to the Persians, but was
unsuccessful in that quarter also. On my return from
Baghdad, I informed him of the answer I had received,
and he then abandoned all hope of obtaining help and
assistance. When the news of the Sultan's illness was
received in Mosul, we saw that it was an opportunity
that ought not to be neglected, for we knew how readily
that prince lent his ear to an appeal, and how tender-
hearted he was; so I was commanded to go to him,
accompanied by Beh^ ed-Din er-Rebib. To me was en-
trusted the drawing-up of the oath to be sworn. ' Make
every endeavour,' my instructions ran, * to obtain favour-
able conditions quickly.' It was during the first ten days
of the month of Zu el-Hijja (the end of February, 1186),
that we arrived in the Sultan's camp, and there we found
that his life had been despaired of by all. We were
welcomed with all honour, and the Sultan, for the first
time since his convalescence, held a reception at which
we were presented. On the day of 'Arafa (9th of Zu el-
Hijja)^ we obtained for the government of Mosul all the
district that lies between the two rivers, which he had
taken from Sinjir Shah. He and his brother el-Melek el-
'Adel swore the oath that I administered to them, which was
couched in strong terms. The Sultan observed the condi-

' The day of ^ Arafa is that when the Mecca pilgrims visit Mount
Arafat.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 103

tions of this peace till the hour of his death — may God
hallow his soul 1 — and he never once broke them. When
we came to him at Harr&n, he had already begun to grow
stronger. At this place he received tidings of the death
of (his cousin) son of Asad ed-Din (that is to say, of Mu-
hammad, son of Asad ed-Din Shirkuh), prince of Emesa.
He breathed his last on the day of 'Arafa (9th of Zu el-
Hijja, March 3, a.d. 1186). El-Melek el-'Adel held a
reception on this occasion to receive expressions of public
condolence. At this period a conflict was being waged
between the Turkomans and the Kurds, which resulted in
great loss of life.^ During this month, also, we heard of
the death of Pehlev^n, son of Yeldokflz, who passed away
on the last day of the month of Zu el-Hijja (February 23,
1186).


CHAPTER XXXII.

THE SULTAN RETURNS TO SYRIA.

When the Sultan found that his recovery was assured,
he set out for Aleppo, which he reached on the 14th of
Moharrem, 582 (April 6, 1186). The delight of the people
at seeing him again in their midst, and in good health,
made it a memorable day. He remained there for four
days, and then started for Damascus. At Tell es-Sultin'
he met Asad ed-Din Shirkuh, who had come out to
meet him with his sister, and a numerous following. He

* This struggle was prolonged through several years, and Upper
Mesopotamia, Diarbekr, Khelat« Syra, AzerbijAn, and other countries,
were c^eluged with blood. Mojahed ed-Din KAimiz at last succeeded
in bringing about a reconciliation between the two nations (Ibn el-
Athtr's ' KameV under the year A.H. 581).

* Tell es-SultAn is about halfway between Aleppo and Hamah.


104 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

brought with him a great number of presents (for the
Sultan). That prince granted him the government of
Emesa/ and spent several days in that city to transfer the
paternal heritage ; then he marched to Damascus, which
he entered on the 2nd of Rabi'a I. (May 23). Never
were such rejoicings seen as on that day. During this
month numerous encounters took place between the
Turkomans and the Kurds, in the district of Nisiba and
elsewhere. A great number were killed on both sides.
The Sultan, hearing that M'oin ed-Din had revolted at
er-Rawend&n,2 sent a written order to the army at Aleppo
to besiege that place. On the 2nd of Jomada I. (July 21,
1 186), M'oin ed-Din came from er-Rawend^n to join the
Sultan's train, after surrendering that place to 'Alem ed-
Din Suleiman. On the 17th of the same month el-Melek
el-Afdal arrived at Damascus. He had never visited Syria
until that'time.


CHAPTER XXXni.

EL-MELEK EL-'AdEL GOES INTO EGYPT, AND EL-MELEK

EZ-ZAhER returns to ALEPPO.

The Sultan deemed it necessary to send el-Melek el-'Adel
into Egypt, because that prince was more familiar with
the condition and circumstances of that country than was
el-Melek el-Mozaffer (Taki ed-Din). He used to hold
long conversations with him on this subject during his
illness at Harrin, which was a great pleasure to el-'Adel,

* The government of Emesa was entrusted to Muhammad, son of
Shfrkuh, and might naturally descend to Muhammad's son.

» Er-Rawenddn (Ravendal of the Franks) was a fortress on the
Nahr*AJrtn^ about two days* journey N.W. of Aleppo. ^


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 105

who was deeply attached to Egypt. When the Sultan's
health was re-established, and after his return to Damas-
cusy he despatched a courier to el-'Adel to summon him
to that city. On the 24th of Rabi'a I. (June 14, 1186),
cl-'Adel set out from Aleppo with a small escort, and pro-
ceeded by rapid marches to Damascus. There he remained
in attendance upon the Sultan, and was admitted to several
conferences and interviews with him. By the beginning of
Jomada I. the main parts of the business were settled, and
it was decided that el-'Adel should return to Egypt and
surrender Aleppo to the Sultan. El-'Adel sent certain
of his friends to Aleppo to fetch his family. El-Melek
ez-Z&her — may God protect him !^ — was at this time with
his father the Sultan, together with his brother el-Melek
el-'Aziz. The Sultan had made it a condition of el-Melek
el-*Aders return to Egypt, that that prince should act as
atabe^ (or guardian) to el-Melek el-' Aziz. He entrusted
the young prince to el-'Adel, who was to undertake his
education. The government of Aleppo was given to el-
Melek ez-Zsiher.

El-'Adel himself told me : ' When this arrangement had
been concluded, I went to pay my respects to el-Melek
el-' Aziz and el-Melek ez-Z&her. I found them together,
and sat down between them, saying to el-Melek el-' Aziz :
" My lord, the Sultan has commanded me to enter your
service, and to set out with you for Egypt. I know that
there are a great number of wicked people, some of whom
will come to you, and will abuse me, and counsel you not
to trust me. If you intend to listen to them, tell me now,
so that I may not go with you (into Egypt)." He replied :

■ This phrase in Arabic is never used except in speaking of a
reigning prince, and at the time when our author was writing el-Melek
ez-ZAher was Lord of Aleppo, and of the northern parts of Syria.

* Atabei^^ Turkish from Ata^ 'father,' and beg Mord'~a guardian.


io6 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

'* I shall not listen to them ; how could I do so ?" I then
turned to el-Melek ez-Z4her, and said : " I know quite well
that your brother might listen to men who devise mischief,
and that, if he did cause me that grief, I could not rely
upon anyone bift you." He answered : " Bless you ! all
will go well." ' A short time afterwards the Sultan sent
his son el-Melek ez-Zaher to Aleppo with the title of
Sultan, because he knew that this city was the basis (the
foundation) and the seat of his whole power. It was on
this account that he had made such great efforts to get
possession of it. Once he had established his supremacy
there, he relaxed his watch over the countries to the east-
ward (Upper Mesopotamia, Mosul, and Khelit), contenting
himself with their assurances of loyalty, and promises of
support in the Holy War. He entrusted this city to his
son, being confident in his tact, decision, and watchfulness,
and in the strength and nobility of his character. El-Melek
ez-Z4her set out for Aleppo, accompanied by Hoss&m
ed-Dtn Bishira, who was to act as shihna (governor of the
city), and 'Aisa Ibn Belashu as vali (governor of the district).
At 'Ain el-Mob&reka (* Holy Spring *), he was received by
the inhabitants of Aleppo, who had come forth to welcome
him. This was at day-break, on the 9th of Jomada II.,
582 (August 27, 1 186). Towards mid-day he went up to
the castle, whilst the city gave itself up to manifestations
of delight. He extended the wing of his justice over
them, and rained down his bounty upon them. We will
return to el-Melek el-'Aziz and el-Melek el-'Adel. When
the Sultan had decided on the privileges and honours they
were respectively to enjoy, he wrote to el-Melek el-Moz4ffer,
informing him that el-Melek el-' Aziz was setting out for
Egypt accompanied by his uncle, and commanding him to
return to Syria. This prince was so aggrieved by these
instructions that he could not conceal his dissatisfaction.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 107


and he formed a plan of going over to the nomad Arabs of
Barka.^ The chief officers of state reproved him loudly for
thinking of such a thing, and represented to him that such
a step would ruin him for ever with his uncle the Sultan,
* and God alone knows/ they said, * what would be the
consequence/ He recognised the wisdom of this advice,
and sent an answer to the Sultan signifying his obedience.
When he had handed the province over to his successor,
he set out to present himself before the Sultan, who, on
his side, came as far as Merj es-Soffer^ to receive him.
Their meeting took place on the 23rd of Sh'ab&n that year
(November 8, 1 186). The Sultan showed great satisfaction
at seeing him, and gave him the city of Hamah (as an
appanage). El-MozafTer betook himself to that place. On
the 26th of the month of Ramaddn (December io),el-Melek
ez-Zdher married one of the daughters of el-Melek
el-'Adel, to whom he had been betrothed. The marriage
of el-Melek cl-Afdel with the daughter of NLsr ed-Din
(Muhammad), son of Asad ed-Din (ShirkOh), took place in
the month of Shawdl (December to January, 1 1 86-1 187).

' He proposed to go and join Karakush, one of SalAh ed- Din's
generals, who had taken Harka in Cyrenaica, and, with the assistance
of the nomad Arabs of that country and Mauretania, was carrying on
a successful war of conquest in Tripolitania and Tunisia. Some slight
mformation about Karakiish .may be found in the second volume of
liaron de Slane's translation, entitled ' Histoire des Berbers.'

' Meij es-Soflfer lay in the Haurftn, about thirty -eight geographical
miles S.W. of Damascus.


io8 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE SULTAN MAKES PREPARATIONS FOR AN
EXPEDITION AGAINST EL-KERAK.

At the beginning of the month of Moharrem, 583 (March,
A,D. 1 187), the Sultan resolved to march against el-Kerak,
and sent to Aleppo for the troops of that city. He left
Damascus on the 15th of the same month, and encamped
in the district of Kuneitera,^ awaiting the arrival of the
armies from Egypt and Syria. As each body of troops
arrived, he ordered them to send out detachments into the
countries on the coast to ravage and pillage wherever they
went. This order was obeyed. He remained in the country
round el-Kerak until the arrival of the caravan of Syrian
pilgrims on their return from Mecca, whom his presence
protected from the attacks of the enemy. Another caravan,
coming from Egypt, brought all the people of el-Melek
el-Mozaffer's household, and all the household-goods that
he had left in that country. The army from Aleppo was
delayed for some time, for they were watching the Franks
in Armenia, the country of Ibn Laon. It happened that
the king of the Franks had died, and bequeathed the chief
power to his nephew.^ El-Melek el-Mozaffer was at that
time at Hamah. When the Sultan heard this news, he
ordered the troops at Aleppo to invade the enemy's terri-

« Kuneitera^ in the N. of the Haur^n, between Damascus and
Binias.

3 This is not quite exact. Baldwin IV. had died in 1185, and the
child, Baldwin V., son of Sibyl, sister of Baldwin IV., died September,
1 1 86. Salah ed-Din took advantage of the dissensions between the
party of Sibyl, who married Guy of Lusignan, and the party of Isabel,
first married to the steprson of Renaud of Chatillon.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 109

tory, so as to damp the zeal which animated the Franks.
EI-MozafTer led the troops from Aleppo to Hdrim, and
there took up his quarters, to sh^w the enemy that that
part (of Syria) was not neglected. The Sultan (having left
el-Kerak) returned to Syria, and on the 17th of Rabi'a I.
(May 27, 1 187) set up his camp at 'Ashtera.^ Here he
was joined by his son, el-Melek el-Afdel, and by MozafTer
ed-Din, son of Zein ed-Din, and the rest of the army.
The Sultan had instructed el-Melek el-Mozafler to conclude
a treaty with the Franks, which should secure the neigh-
bourhood of Aleppo from being disturbed. In this way
he thought he should be free from any anxiety, and could
give his whole attention to the enemy on the coast El-
MozafTer made peace (with the people of Antioch) during
the last ten days of Rabi'a I. (beginning of June), and then
marched towards Hamah to join the Sultan, and take part
in the projected expedition. He set out with all the
troops from the East that he could collect — that is to
say, with detachments from Mosul, under Mas*Ad Ibn ez«
Z'afer^ni, and from Mardin. The Sultan went out to
meet them about the middle of Rabi'a II., and received
them with great honours. He reviewed his troops shortly
afterwards at Tell Tesil,- preparatory to the expedition
upon which they were starting, and ordered the leaders of
the flanks and the centre to take up their positions.

> The water supply S. of TV// "A shier ah is more abundant than else-
where in the Haur^, and the position served as a base equally against
Kerak or Galilee.

» TesU, about 5 miles S.W. of NiUvn^ and N.W. of Tell 'Ashterah,
in the Jaulan, £. of the Sea of Galilee.


no WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER XXXV.

ACCOUNT OF THE BATTLE OF HATTIN, AN AUSPICIOUS

DAY FOR THE FAITHFUL.

The Sultan believed that it was his duty, above all things,
to devote his whole strength to fulfil the command we have
received to war against the infidels, in recognition of God's
mercy in establishing his dominion, in making him master
of so many lands, and granting him the obedience and
devotion of his people. Therefore he sent an order to
all his troops to join him at 'Ashtera. When he had
mustered and reviewed them, as we have narrated above,
he made his dispositions, and marched full speed upon the
enemy's territory — may God confound their hopes ! — on the
17th of the month Rabi'a II. (June 26, 1187). He used
always to attack the enemy on a Friday, at the hour of
prayer, believing that the prayers that the preachers
were offering from their pulpits at that time would bring
him good luck, because their petitions that day were
generally granted. At this hour, then, he began his
march,^ holding his army in readiness to fight. He heard
that the Franks, having received intelligence of his muster-
ing of troops, had assembled in the plain of $eff{iria,^
in the territory of Acre, and meant to come out and meet

* Melek el-Afdal, advancing by the bridges S. of the Sea of Galilee,
towards Tabor and Nazareth, encountered the Templars and Hospi-
tallers coming from Fiileh. In the ensuing fight the Grand Master of
the Hospital and the Marshal of the Temple were killed. A general
advance was then ordered by Salih ed-Din. This happened near Kefr
Kenna on May i. See 'Jacques de Vitry,' p. 100.

2 SeffHrieh is 3^ miles N. of Nazareth. The springs where the
camp was fixed are 1 mile S. of the village. Hattin was 10 miles to
theE.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. iii


him and give him battle. He therefore took up a position
close to the Sea of Tiberias, hard by a village ca lled es-Sen -
n&bra.^ He next encamped on the top of the hill that lies
to the west of Tiberias. There he remained ready for
battle, thinking that the Franks would advance and attack
him as soon as they had ascertained his movements;
but they did not stir from their position. It was on Wed-
nesday, the 2ist of this same month (June 30, 1187), that
the Sultan pitched his camp there. Seeing that the enemy
were not moving, he left his infantry drawn up opposite
the enemy and went down to Tiberias with a troop of light
cavalry. He attacked that city and carried it by assault
within an hour, devoting it to slaughter, burning, and
sacking. All that were left of the inhabitants were taken
prisoner. The castle alone held out* When the enemy
heard the fate of Tiberias, they were forced to break
through their policy of inaction, to satisfy this call upon
their honour, and they set out for Tiberias forthwith to
drive the invaders back. The pickets of the Moslem
army discerned their movement, and sent an express to
inform the Sultan. When he received this message he
detached a sufficient force to blockade the castle, and then
rejoined the army with his suite. The two armies met on
the summit of the hill to the west of Tiberias. This was
on the evening of Thursday, the 22nd of the same month.
Darkness separated the combatants, who passed the night \
under arms in order of battle, until the following day,
Friday, the 23rd (July 2, 1187). Then the warriors of/

* Now fS'Srnndbra (Sinnabris), a ruin W. of Jordan, at the S. end of
the S«a of (>alilee. Saldh ed-Din crossed by they/Vr^'j-5/V/(/ bridge,
called also Jisr es-Senndbra, His niarch to liattin, on the phiteau
W. of Tiberias, ^^as about 9 miles N.W. His base might have been
thnatened from Fiileh and Beisan. The advance from ScfTurieh to
H;ttin was fatal, on account of want of water.

The fortress was held by the wife of Raymond of Tiipoli.
/


112 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

both armies mounted their steeds and charged their oppo-
nents ; the soldiers in the vanguard discharged their arrows ; j
and the infantry came into action and fought furiously.
This took place in the territory belonging to a village
called LCibia.^ The Franks saw they must bite the dust,
and came on as though driven to certain death ; before
them lay disaster and ruin, and they were convinced that .
the next day would find them numbered amongst the 1
dead.^ The fight raged obstinately ; every horseman
hurled himself against his opponent until victory was
secured, and destruction fell upon the infidels. Night with
its blackness put an end to the battle. Terrible encounters
took place that day ; never in the history of the generations \
that have gone have such feats of arms been told. The
night had been spent under arms, each side thinking every
moment that they would be attacked. The Moslems,
knowing that behind them lay the Jordan, and in front the
territory of the enemy, felt that God alone was able to
save them. God, having granted His aid to the Moslems, (
gave them success, and sent them victory according to His 1
decree. Their infantry charged from all sides ; the centre
came on like one man, uttering a mighty cry ; God filled
the hearts of the infidels with terror (for He has said), * Due
from Us it was to help the believers ' (Kurin xxx. 46). The
count (Raymond of Tripoli), the most intelligent man of
that race ,and famous for his keenness of perception, seeing
signs of the catastrophe impending over his brothers in
religion, was not prevented by thoughts of honour from
taking measures for his personal safety. He fled in the
beginning of the action, before the fighting had become
serious, and set out in the direction of Tyre. Se^^eral

* LUbia was 9 miles £. of Seffiirieh, and 2 miles S.W. of HaV'tin.
The village is supplied only by rain-water cisterns.
2 Literally^ amongst those who visit the tombs.


1


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 113


Moslems started in pursuit of him, but he succeeded in
evading them ; true beh'cvers had nothing thereafter to
fear from his cunning.^ The upholders of Isl^m surrounded
the upholders of infidelity and impiety on every side,
overwhelming them with arrows and harassing them with
their swords. One body of the enemy took to flight, but
they were pursued by the Moslem warriors, and not one of
the fugitives escaped. Another band climbed Hattin hill,
so called from the name of a village, near which is the
tomb of the holy patriarch Shu'aib (Jethro).* The Moslems
hemmed them in, and lighted fires all round them, so that,
tortured by thirst and reduced to the last extremity, they
gave themselves up to escape death. Their leaders were
taken captive, and the rest were killed or made prisoners.
Among the leaders who surrendered were King Geoffre) ,*
the King's brother,* Prince Arnit (Renaud de ChAtillon),
Lord of el-Kerak, and of esh-Shobek, the son of el-Honfcri
(Honfroi de Toron), the son of the Lord of Tiberias (Ray-
mond of Tripoli), the chief of the Templars,. the Lord t»f
Jibeil,* and the chief of the Hospitallers. The others who

'He was killed soon after by the Assassins.

» The tomb of AV^j^ Shu'aib (Jethro) is still shown on the hill VV. of
the village of Hatpin.

J Throughout his work our author makes the mistake of calling
King (iuy, A7/y Geoffrey.

« Ibn el-Athir also, in his ' Kamel,' says that the king's brother was
amongst the prisoners. We read in Imad ed-Din^s ' Fatl? el-Kossi ' :
*They brought before the Sultan King (Juy, his brother Geoflrey,
Hugh, Lord of Jiljcil, Honfroi, Prince Arnat, Lord of el-Kerak, ct< .'
According to the account of Kaoul Coggeshale, who was present at
the battle, the king^s brother was amongst those taken prisoner, and
from the continuator of William of Tyre we learn that Aimaury, the
kmg's brother and constable of Jerusalem, was one of the piisoncr^
made that day. He afterwards became King of Cyprus in succession
to <iuy. See * Jacques de V'itry,' p. 107, where Geoffrey is noticed ai
the siege of Acre.

3 His name was Hugh HI. de TEmbriaco.

8


114 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


were missing had met their death ; and as to the common

people, some were killed and others taken captive. Of

their whole army none remained alive, except the prisoners. i

More than one of their chief leaders accepted captivity to

save his life. . A man, whom I believe to be reliable, told

me that he saw one soldier in the Haurin leading more

than thirty prisoners, tied together with a tent cord. He

had taken them all himself, so great had been the panic 1

caused by their defeat.

We will here narrate the fate of those leaders who
escaped with their lives. The count, who had fled,
reached Tripoli, and was there, by the grace of God,
carried off by pleurisy. The Hospitallers and Templars 1

the Sultan resolved to execute, and he spared not a single
one. Salah ed-Din had sworn to put Prince Arnfit to
death if he ever fell into his hands, and the reason he took
that oath is this : A caravan coming from Egypt, and
taking advantage of the truce, went quite close to esh-
Sh6bek, where the prince then happened to be. Thinking
there was nothing to fear, they halted in the neighbourhood
of the place ; but this man set upon them, in defiance of
his oath, and killed (a number) of them. The travellers in
vain besought him for mercy in the name of God, telling
him there was a treaty of peace between him and the
Moslems. He only answered by insulting the Holy Prophet.
When the Sultan heard what he had done, he was com-
pelled by the Faith and by his determination to protect his
people to swear to take this man's life whenever he should
fall into his power. After God had granted him this
victory, he stayed at the entrance of his tent (for the tent
itself was not yet set up), and there he sat to receive
his soldiers, who came to win his approval of their
services, bringing the prisoners they had made and the
leaders they had found. As soon as the tent was pitched


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 115

the Sultan went to sit within, full of joy and gratitude for
the favour which God had just granted him. He then
commanded King Geoffrey, and his brother, and Prince
Am&t (Renaud) to be brought. He gave a bowl of sherbet
made with iced rose*water to the King, who was suffering
severely from thirst. Geoffrey drank part of it, and then
offered the bowl to Prince Arndt. The Sultan said to the
interpreter : * Tell the King that it is he, and not I, who is
giving this man to drink.' He had adopted |the admirable
and generous custom of the Arabs, who grant life to the
captive who has eaten or drunk of their viands. He then
ordered his men to take them to a place prepared for their
reception, and, after they had eaten, he summoned them
again to his presence. He had only a few servants at that
time in his tent. He seated the King at the entrance, then
summoned the prince, and reminded him of what he had
said, adding : ' Behold, I will support Muhammad against
thee!*^ He then called upon him to embrace Islam, and,
on his refusal, drew his sabre and struck] him a blow which
severed his arm from the shoulder. Those who were
present quickly despatched the prisoner.fand God hurled
his soul into hell. The corpse was dragged out and thrown
down at the entrance of the tent. When the King saw the
way in which his fellow -captive had been treated, he
thought he was to be the second victim ; but the Sultan
had him brought into the tent and calmed 'his fears. ' It is
not the wont of kings/ said he, ' to kill kings ; but that man
had transgressed all bounds, and therefore did I treat him
thus/ The conquerors spent that nightjin rejoicings;
every voice chanted praise to God, and on all sides rose
cries of 'A//aA Aidilr!' ('God is mostj great !') and *La
iVa/ia iT Allah r (* There is no other god but God !') till

• Sec p. 43.

8-2


I


ii6 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

dawn. On Sunday, the 2Sth of Rabi'a II. (July 4, 1187),
the Sultan went down to Tiberias, and the fortress of that
place was surrendered to him in the afternoon of the same {

day. He remained there until Tuesday, and then marched
upon Acre, He arrived before that place on Wednesday,
the last day of Rabi'a II. (July 8). On the following day,
the first of Jomada I., he began the assault and took the
city. He set free more than four thousand captives who
had been detained there, and took possession of all the
treasure, stores, and merchandise in the place, of which
there were enormous quantities, for this city was a great
centre of commerce. The troops were sent out in detach-
ments to overrun the coast, taking the fortresses, castles, *
and strongholds. Niblus fell into their hands, as well as
Haifa, Caesarea, Seffiiria, and Nazareth, for all these places
had been left defenceless by reason of the death or captivity
of their protectors. The Sultan made arrangements for
the government of Acre, and gave his soldiers a share of
the booty and prisoners. He then marched in the direction
of Tibnin,^ and sat down before that place on Sunday, the
1 2th of Jomada I. (July 20). As this was a very strong
fortress, he set up his mangonels, and by frequent assaults
reduced the place to the last extremity. The garrison was
composed of men of tried valour and very zealous for their
faith, therefore they held out with wonderful endurance;
but God came to the Sultan's assistance, and he carried the
place by storm on the i8th of the month, and led the sur-
vivors of the garrison into captivity. From this place he
marched upon Sidon, which he captured on the day after
his arrival. As soon as he had organized a regular govern-
ment, he set out for Beiriit, and took up a position to

« Tibntn (Toron), in Upper Galilee, 17 miles S.W. of Biniis. The
castle was built in 1 107 by Hugh of St Omer, Lord of Tiberias. See
* Jacques de Vitry,' p. 18.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 117


attack that place on the 22nd of the same month. He set
up his mangonels, storming the city several times, and
maintaining the attack without any cessation until the
29th, when he succeeded in capturing it. Whilst he was
occupied before Beiriit, a detachment of his army had taken
Jibeil.^ Having completed the conquest of this district, he
judged it expedient to march against Ascalon. He had
made an attempt upon Tyre, but renounced it because his
men were scattered through the districts on the coast, each
soldier engaged in pillaging on his own account, and
the army was growing weary of ceaseless fighting and
continual war. Besides, all the Franks of the coast had
collected in Tyre, therefore he thought it best to march
against Ascalon, a city which he believed would be easy to
take. On the 26th of Jomada II. (September 2) he en-
camped before the city, having taken on his march a
number of places, such as er«-Ramla, Yebna, and ed-Darun.'
He set up his mangonels against Ascalon, and, after a
vigorous assault, succeeded in taking it on the last day of
the same month. He remained encamped outside the city
whilst detachments of his troops took Ghazza, Beit Jibrin,
and en-NatrQn,' which places surrendered without a blow.
Thirty-five years had passed since the taking of Ascalon
by the Franks ; they had captured the city on the 27th of
Jomada II., in the year 548 (September 19, a.d. 1153).*

» y/M/ ' (;ebal), N. of Beirut. This march cut the communication
by land between Tyre and Tripoli.

' E(/ DaHin is Darum now Deir el-BelAh, S. of Gaza, built about
A.f» 1 1 70.

IWit Jibr\n ((libclin), 18 miles E. of Ascalon, was fortified by King
Fulk in 1 1 34. For Xttrun, see p. 32.

« The final assault on the city appears to have been really on
Aujjusi :i, 1153.


Ii8 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

TAKING OF THE HOLY CITY (EL-KUDS ESH-SHERtp).

Having taken Ascalon and the districts round Jerusalem
(el Kuds), the Sultan devoted all his energies to prepara-
tions for an expedition against the city. He called to-
gether the various detachments of his arn^y that were
scattered through the coast-districts, and returned glutted
with pillage and rapine ; and then marched upon Jerusalem,
strong in the hope that God would uphold and direct him.
He was anxious to make the most of his opportunities now
that the door of success had been opened to him, following
the advice bf the Holy Prophet, who said : * He to whom
the door of success has been opened must take his oppor-
tunity and enter in, for he knows not when the door may
be shut upon him.' It was on Sunday, the 15th of the
month of Rejeb in the year 583 (September 20, 1187
A.D.), that he took up his position to the west of the city.
The place was teeming with soldiers, both horse and foot,
and their numbers, according to the best accounts, exceeded
sixty thousand, without reckoning women and children.
The Sultan shifted his position to the north of the city,
thinking this would be best, and directed his mangonels
against the walls. Being very strong in bowmen^ he
pressed the place so closely by constant assaults and
skirmishes that his miners were able to make a breach in
one of the northern angles of the wall overlooking the
Widi Jehennum.^ The enemies of God saw they were
menaced by a disaster which they could not escape, and

» IVdi/i el'Jehennum is the Moslem name for the Kidron Valley, E.
of Jerusalem.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 119

by divers signs it was revealed to them that the city would
fall into the hands of the Moslems. Their hearts were filled
with dread when they thought of their bravest warriors
slain or taken captive, their strongholds destroyed or
captured by the Moslems. Expecting to suffer the same
fate as their brothers, and to die by the same sword that
had cut them down, they adopted the only alternative, and
asked for a treaty, that their lives might be spared. After
messengers had several times passed backwards and for-
wards between the two parties, a treaty was concluded,
and the Sultan was put in possession of Jerusalem on
Friday, the 27th of Rejeb (October 2, 1187), on the
anniversary of the night of the ascension (of the Holy
Prophet into heaven), an event which is foreshadowed in
the glorious Kurdn (xvii. i).^ What a wonderful coinci-
dence ! God allowed the Moslems to take the city as a
celebration of the anniversary of their Holy Prophet's
midnight journey. Truly this is a sign that this deed was
pleasing to Almighty God ; and this mighty conquest was
a testimony (for the Faith) to a multitude of people —
learned men, dervishes, and fakirs — who were brought
thither by the news of the Sultan's victories and successes
in the lands on the coast, and by the report that he was
going to undertake an expedition against Jerusalem.
Therefore all men learned (in the law) came to join the
Sultan, both from Egypt and from Syria ; there was not a
single well-known doctor but came to the camp. Every
voice was raised in shouts, calling upon God, and proclaim-
ing His unity and power. On the very day of the capitula-

> The Kurin says nothing of the legend of Muhammad's translation
from Mecca to Jerusalem. The passage cited speaks of the prophet*s
going to the 'distant sanctuary' {El-Haram el-Aksd), The whole
tradition of the night journey and ascent from the Sakhra to heaven
U late, and Beha ed-Dtn therefore says only that it is ' foreshadowed '
m the altusion cited.


I20 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


tion Friday's prayer was solemnized in the city, and the
khdtib delivered the sermon,^ The huge cross that rose
from the dome of the Sakhra was thrown down. In this
manner, by means of the Sultan, God accorded a magnifi-
cent triumph to Islam. The chief condition stipulated by
the treaty was that each man should pay ten Tyrian dinars
as his ransom ; each woman five ; children, both boys and
girls, were to pay only one dinar each. Every one who
paid this ransom was to receive his freedom. God in His
mercy delivered the Moslem prisoners who were in
captivity in the city to the number of more than three
thousand. The Sultan took possession of the whole of the
booty, and distributed it amongst his emirs and soldiers.
He also assigned a portion to the jurists, doctors of law,
dervishes, and other people who had come to the camp.
By his orders, all those who had paid their ransom were
conducted to their place of refuge — that is to say, to the
city of Tyre. I have been told that when the Sultan left
Jerusalem he retained nothing whatever out of all these
treasures, and yet they amounted to nearly two hundred
and twenty thousand dinars. He left the city on Friday,
the 25th of Sh'abdn (October 30).


CHAPTER XXXVII.

HIS ATTEMPT ON TYRE.

The Sultan, having established his supremacy upon a firm
basis both in Jerusalem and on the coast, resolved to
march against Tyre, for he knew that if he delayed in this
undertaking, it would be very difficult to carry it to a

'* Ibn Khallikdn (ii. 634) has preserved this sermon for us.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. r2i


successful issue. He repaired first to Acre, where he
stopped to inspect the city, and then set out for Tyre on
Friday, the 5th of Ramaddn (November 8, 1187). When
he came within sight of that city he pitched his camp,
pending the arrival of his instruments of war. As soon as he
had determined on undertaking this expedition, he had sent
to his son el-Melek ez-Z&her, commanding him to join him.
He had left that prince at Aleppo to protect that part of
Syrii whilst he himself was engaged in the conquest of the
countries on the coast. Ez-Zaher reached the camp on the
18th of Ramadan, and his arrival gave his father the
greatest satisfaction. As soon as the mangonels, moveable
towers, mantelets, and other instruments of war had been
brought in, the Sultan took up his position before the city
on the 22nd of the month, and after completely surround-
ing it, began a brisk attack. The Egyptian fleet, which he
had summoned to his assistance, blockaded the city by sea,
whilst his army hemmed it in on the land side. His
brother, el-Melek el-*Adel, whom he had left behind in
Jerusalem to settle aifairs, received a command to join him,
and reached the camp on the 5th of Shawal (December S\
A body of troops, which the Sultan had detached to lay
siege to Hunin, received the surrender of that place on the
23rd of the same month.


CHAPTER XXXVHI.

DESTRUCTION OF THE FLEET.

The fleet was commanded by a certain man named el-Faris
Bedran, a brave and clever sailor. 'Abd el-Mohsen, the
High Admiral/ had instructed the ships to be watchful and

■ ^rf-/f fl'Bahreittt in Arabic, 'chief of the two seas *— that is to say,
of the Mediterranean and the Red Sea.


122 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


vigilant, that the enemy might not find any opportunity of
doing them harm ; but they neglected this advice, and
omitted to keep a good watch during the night. Therefore
the infidel fleet came out of the harbour of Tyre, fell upon
them unawares, took five of their ships with two captains,
and killed a great number of Moslem sailors. This took
place on the 27th of the month of Shawil (December 30).
The Sultan was much cast down by this occurrence, and
as it was now the beginning of winter, and torrents of rain
were falling, the troops were unable to fight any longer.
He summoned his emirs to a council of war, and they
advised him to strike camp, so as to give the soldiers
a little rest, and to make preparations for renewing the
siege later on.

He followed their advice and retired, dismounting his
mangonels, and taking them with him. He ordered all
that could not be transported to be burnt. He took
his departure on the 2nd of the month of Zu el-K'ada
in the same year (January 3, 1 188). He then dismissed
the different bands that formed his army, and gave per-
mission to the detachments to return to their respective
homes. He himself with his own particular troops took
up his quarters in Acre, and remained there until the year
584 (beginning of March, 1188 A.D.).


CHAPTER XXXIX.

HE LAYS SIEGE TO KAUKAB.

In the beginning of that year he turned his attention
to the fortresses which still remained in the hands of
the Franks, and thought it would be best to get posses-


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 123

sion of these in order to discourage the garrison at Tyre.
During the first ten days of the month of Moharrem
(March 2-12) he encamped before Kaukab.^ He began
with this stronghold, because the troops he had stationed
there, to prevent succours from being thrown in, had allowed
themselves to be surprised by the Franks in a night attack.
The Sultan set out from Acre with his own troops only,
and sat down before the place ; he had given leave to
the rest of his army. His brother, el-'Adel, had returned
to Egypt, and his son, Ez-Z^her, to Aleppo. On the
march they suffered severely from the cold and snow,
but making it a point of honour to avenge his men, he
encamped before the fortress, and kept up a smart attack
for some time. It was at this place that I had the honour
of being presented to him. In the year 583 I had per-
formed the pilgrimage to Mecca, and was on the spot
when Ibn el-Mokaddem was mortally wounded at 'Ar&fat,
the very day that the pilgrims visit that hill. It occurred
in consequence of a difference that arose between him and
Tastikin, the leader of the pilgrimage, on the subject of
his right to beat cymbals and drums, which Tastikin would
not allow him to do. Ibn el-Mokaddem was one of the
chief emirs of Syria, and had distinguished himself by
his honourable deeds, and the number of his campaigns ;
therefore God had decreed that he should be wounded at
'Arafa on the day of *Arafa ; that he should be carried,
wounded as he was, to Mena ; that he should die in that
place on Thursday, the day of the great feast ; that his
funeral oration should be pronounced that same evening
in the mosque of eUKhaif, and that he should be buried
in el-M'ala.- He could have had no happier fate. This

■ Kaukab (Bel voir), see p. 25.

' The allusions are to the rites of the Haj, including the visit of
pilgrims to Mount 'Ar4fat, the Valley of Mena, etc., close to Mecca.


124 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


occurrence touched the Sultan deeply. On my return
from the pilgrimage I took the road to Syria, intending
to go to Jerusalem, and visit both (the shrine oO the
Holy Prophet (the Sakhra), and (that oO the patriarch
Abraham — peace be upon him! — (at Hebron). I left
Damascus, and set out for Jerusalem. When the Sultan
heard of my arrival, he thought I had come on an embassy
from the government of Mosul. He summoned me to
his presence, and received me with every mark of con-
sideration. After I had taken leave of him, and was
about to proceed to Jerusalem, I received a command
through one of his officers to wait upon him again on
my return from that city. I thought he wished to give
me some important message for the Mosul government,
and I arrived, on my return from Jerusalem, on the
very day that he raised the siege of Kaukab. He saw
that it would be necessary to employ a great number of
troops to reduce this place, for it was very strong, most
amply provisioned, and garrisoned by determined men
whom, so far, the war had spared. He entered Damascus
on the 6th of Rabi'a I. (May 5, ii88), the very day that
I arrived there on my return from Jerusalem. He had
been absent sixteen months from Damascus. On the
fifth day after his arrival, he heard that the Franks had
marched upon Jibeil with a view of surprising that place.
As soon as he received this news, he lost not a moment,
but left the city forthwith, and marched towards Jibeil,
sending out in all directions to summon his troops. When
the Franks heard he had taken the field, they gave up
their attempt. At this time the Sultan received a message,
saying that 'Imid ed-Din (Zenghi, son of Maudild, Prince
of Mosul), and Mozaffer ed-Din (KukbClri) had just arrived
at Aleppo with troops from Mosul, to place themselves
under his orders, and take part in the Holy War. He


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YVSUF. 125


then marched towards the fortress of the Kurds/ on his
way to the upper sea-coast (the maritime districts of Upper
Syria).


CHAPTER XL.

HE ENTERS THE LANDS OF THE UPPER SEA-COAST, AND
TAKES LAODICEA,2 JEBELA, AND OTHER CITIES.

On the first day of the month Rabi'a II. (May 30, 1188),
he took up his position on a hill facing the fortress of the
Kurds, and dispatched couriers to el-Melek ez-Zaher, and
el-MeIek el-Mozaflfer, commanding them to join their
forces, and take up a position at Tizin,^ to cover the
districts round Antioch. The troops from the eastern
provinces mustered in the place where the Sultan was
encamped, and put themselves under his command. It
was here that I came upon him, just as I was setting out
on my journey to Mosul. When I presented myself before
him^ he seemed very glad to see me again, and gave me
the most gracious reception. During my stay in Damascus
I had compiled a treatise on the Holy War, in which I
had inserted all the laws and customs in any way con-
nected with it. I presented this book to him, and he
accepted it with pleasure, and made it a frequent study.
I kept asking for permission to depart, but he always
put me ofT, and meanwhile summoned me constantly
to his presence. He even commended me in public, and
spoke very favourably of me, as I have been told by people

♦

* //ifsft el'Akrdd, ' castle of the Kurds * (called by the Franks Crac),
on the slope of Lebanon, half-way from Emesa to Tripoli, a castle of
the Knights Hospitallers.

' Read : And takes Antartus.

J Tixin lies about 30 geographical miles N.E. uf Antioch.


126 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

who were present. He remained encamped on the same
spot during the whole of the month Rabi'a II. (June),
and during the course of that month marched to the
fortress of the Kurds, and blockaded it for a day to
reconnoitre the ground. He thought he had not time
to besiege the place, and as the troops he had called out
had now mustered round his standard, he sent two ex-
peditions into the districts round Tripoli. • They were
ordered to pillage, and to ascertain the military strength
of the country, and he proposed to apply the spoils to
the maintenance of his army. Towards the close of this
same month he issued the following order : 'We are going
to enter the districts on the coast ; provisions are scarce
there, and as the enemy will meet us on their own ground,
they will surround us on every side. Therefore you will
have to provide yourselves with sufficient food for one
month.* He then instructed 'Aisa the jurist to inform
me that he did not intend to allow me to return to Mosul.
Since God had filled my heart with a great affection for
the prince from the moment I first saw him, and because
I had observed his devotion to the Holy War, I consented
to remain. It was on the first day of the month Jomada I.,
in the year 584 (June 28, 1188 A.D.), that I entered his
service, and on the same day he marched into the coast-
lands.

All that I have narrated thus far is founded on what I
have been told by trustworthy persons, who were present
at the occurrences they described. Henceforth I shall write
nothing but what I myself have witnessed, or have gleaned
from people worthy of credit, whose words seemed to me
as deserving of belief as the testimony of my own eyes.
May God in His mercy assist us !

On Friday, the 4th of Jomada I., the Sultan drew up
his troops in order of battle, and marched against the


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 127


enemy. Each part of the army had a special position
assigned to it : the right wing, under 'I mad ed-Din Zenghi,
led the van ; the centre followed ; then came the left wing^
under Mozafler ed-Din, son of Zein ed-Din. The baggage
was placed in the centre, and advanced with the army.
When we reached the appointed place^ we halted, and
passed the night in the enemy's country. On resuming
his march, the Sultan next halted at El-'Orima (* the little
sand-dune'), but made no hostile demonstration; and on
the 6th of the same month (July 3), he arrived before
Antarsus (Tortosa). He had not intended to stop here,
Jebela^ being the object of his march ; but as Antarsus
appeared to be easy of capture, he resolved to attack it.
He recalled the right wing, and ordered it to take up a
position on the shore (on one side of the city), and the left
wing he stationed on the shore on the other side. He
himself took up a position between the two, so that the
army completely surrounded the place by land, both flanks
resting on the sea. The city of Antarsus was built close to
the sea, and was protected by two strong towers almost
like castles. The Sultan rode up close to the city and
gave the order to begin the assault. The troops ran to
arms (literally^ donned the breastplate of war), and stormed
the place so vigorously that the garrison were soon at their
last gasp. Before they had finished pitching the tents the
Moslems had scaled the walls and carried the place by
storm. The conquerors seized everything in the city, both
men and goods, and evacuated it, carrying off many cap-
tives and great riches. The servants, whose duty it was to
pitch the tents, left their work and joined in the pillage.
The Sultan had said : ' To-night, please God, we will sup
in Antarsus ;* and his words came to pasi. He returned

» Jtbtla, or JeMI, N. of Tortosa.


128 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


to his tent rejoicing, and we presented ourselves before
him to congratulate him on his success. Then, according
to his custom, he ordered a meal to be served, of which
everyone partook; afterwards he laid siege to the two
towers. Mozaffer ed-Din, to whom he committed the
reduction of one of the forts, attacked it without ceasing
until he had laid it in ruins, and taken the garrison captive.
The Sultan ordered the walls to be razed, and assigned to
each of his emirs the task of throwing down a certain
portion of the earthworks. Whilst they were thus occupied,
the troops began to besiege the other tower, which was
very strong, as it was built in an inaccessible place, and its
walls were constructed of solid masonry ; it was garrisoned
by all the knights and footmen belonging to the city ; round
it ran a ditch full of water, and it was furnished with huge
arbalists^ that wounded people at a great distance, whilst
the Moslems had no means of injuring (their opponents).
Therefore the Sultan saw that he v/ould have to postpone
the attack, and turn his attention to more important
matters. He occupied himself with the destruction of the
city until it was utterly demolished. The church, held in
such great reverence by the Christians, and visited by
pilgrims even from distant lands, was razed to the ground.
The Sultan ordered the rest of the city to be set on fire,
and all its buildings were devoured by the flames. Whilst
they were engaged in this work, the conquerors shouted
strenuously, glorifying the one and only God. The Sultan
remained here to complete the destruction of the city until
the 14th day of the month, and then marched upon Jebela.
On the road he met his son el-Melek ez-Zaher, whom he
had summoned from Tizin, and who brought with him all
the troops that had been stationed in that district.

* See p. 57.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 129


CHAPTER XLI.

CAPTURE OF JEBELA AND LAODICEA.

The Sultan arrived before Jebela on the i8th of the month
Jornada I., and he had scarcely drawn up his army before
he obtained possession of the town. There happened to be
Moslem residents there with a k&di to settle their disputes,
and to him the government of the city had been entrusted*
This official offered no resistance to the Sultan, but the
castle held out. The Sultan made one onset against the
place in order to furnish the garrison with a pretext for
surrendering, and on the 19th of the month (July 16, 11 88)
the castle capitulated. He remained at Jebela until the
23rd, when he set out for Laodicea, and took up a position
before that place on the following day. This is a beautiful
city, very pleasing to the eye, as is well known ; it possesses
a celebrated harbour, and two castles, lying side by side, on
a hill overlooking the town. The Sultan at once invested
both the city and the castles, but did not place his troops
between the hill and the city. Then followed a sharp
attack, our men assaulting the city furiously, whilst cries
and shouts filled the air on every side. This continued
until the end of the day, which was the 24th of the month,
and the city was taken, though the castles still held out.
The booty was enormous, for it was a commercial city, and
full of treasure and merchandise. The fall of night parted
the combatants. On Friday morning the attack on the
castles was resumed, and a breach made on the north.
They made this breach sixty cubits deep and four wide, as
I have been told. Then they climbed the hill, and, getting
close to the wall, began a brisk assault. The struggle

9


I30 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


raged continuously, and either side threw stones at their
opponents with their hands. When the garrisons saw the
ferocity with which our men were attacking them, and how
close they had approached, they offered to surrender. This
was on Friday, the 2Sth of the month. The Sultan granted
the request of the besieged, and allowed the kidi of Jebela
to go to them and draw up the treaty. He never refused
to grant terms when an enemy wished to surrender. The
besiegers then returned to their tents, worn out with fatigue.
Very early the following day, Saturday, the k&di was sent
to the besieged, and helped them to arrange the conditions
of their treaty. It provided that they should be permitted
to go free with their families and their belongings, but they
were to leave to the victors all their stores of corn, their
military treasure, arms, horses, and instruments of war.
Still they were allowed a sufficient number of beasts to
carry them to a place of safety. As day drew to a close,
the victorious banner of Islam floated over the wall of the
stronghold. We remained there until the 27th of the
month.


CHAPTER XLII.

CAPTURE OF SAHYCN.

When the Sultan departed from Loadicea, he marched
upon SahyOn, on the 29th of Jornada I. surrounded the
place with his army and set up six mangonels to play on
the walls. SahyOn^ is a very inaccessible fortress, built on
the steep slope of a mountain. It is protected by wide
ravines of fearful depth ; but on one side its only defence

< Sahyiin^ called Saone by the Franksi a strong castle on a hill S.£.
of and in sight of Latakia, a fortress of the Knights Hospitallers.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 131


is an artificial trench about sixty cubits deep cut out of the
rock. This fortress has three lines of ramparts, one round
the precincts, another protecting the castle itself, and a
third round the keep. On the summit of the keep rose a
lofty turret, which I noticed had fallen to the ground when
the Moslems drew near. Our soldiers hailed this as a good
omen and felt certain of victory. The fortress was attacked
very smartly from all sides at once, and el-Melek ez-Z&her,
Lord of Aleppo, brought his mangonel into play. He had
set it up opposite the stronghold, quite close to the wall,
but on the other side of the ravine {Wadi). The stones
hurled from this engine always reached their mark. The
prince continued to play upon the place till he had made a
breach in the wall large enough to enable the soldiers to
climb the rampart On Friday morning, the second day
of the month Jomada II., the Sultan gave the command
to assault, charging the men who had the management of
the mangonels to shoot without ceasing. Then there arose
mighty cries and a terrible noise, whilst our men shouted
the tahlil and the takbir.^ An hour afterwards the Moslems
had scaled the wall and burst into the courtyard. I saw
our men seize the pots and eat the food that had just been
cooked, without leaving off fighting. The people in the
courtyard fled into the keep, leaving everything behind
them, and all they abandoned was promptly given up to
pillage. The besiegers surrounded the walls of the keep,
and the garrison, thinking they would be annihilated, asked
for quarter. As soon as this was reported to the Sultan, he
granted their prayer and allowed them to depart with their
household goods, but demanded a ransom of ten pieces of
gold from each man, and five pieces from each woman ; the

* The takiU is the expression LA ildhdlil ^ Allah <M, * there is no
deity but God'; the takbtr the expression AllAhu akbdr^ 'God is
most great.'— W.

9-2


132 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

children were to pay two. Then he took possession of the
fortress, and remained there whilst his troops took several
others, such as El-'Aid, Fiha, Bl&tanis^ (Platanus), etc.
These castles and little forts were surrendered to (the
Sultan's) deputies.


CHAPTER XLIII.

CAPTURE OF BEKiS.

a

He then set forth upon his march, and on the 6th of
Jornada H. we arrived at Bekds, a strong fortress built on
one bank of the Orontes, from the foot of which springs a
little brook. The army encamped close to the river, and
the Sultan with a small body of men went up nearer to the
stronghold. It lies on a lofty hill commanding the Orontes.
His army invested it on all sides, battering it with their
mangonels ; and they pressed it so close, that on the 9th
of the month, by the grace of God, they carried it by
storm. All those of the garrison who had not been killed
in the assault were led into captivity, and the contents of
the place given up to pillage. Close to Bek&s there was a
smaller subordinate fort, which was reached by means of a
bridge. It is called Esh Shoghr.^ It was very difficult of
access, for there was no road up to it. The Sultan ordered

^ The castle of Bldtanisy or Baldtunus {Mansio PlcUanu5\ was close
to the coast, near Jebel el-Akra (Mons Casius), and was regarded as
impregnable. It was said to be connected with a small port by a
tunnel, through which a man could ride. Platanus was 40 m.p. from
Laodicea'on the road to Daphne (Beit el-Md), near Antioch. — W.

3 Esh'Shoghr and Bekds were two castles on heights about a bow-
shot apart, and separated by a fosse-like ravine. They were on the
direct road from Latakia to Aleppo, and not far from the bridge of
Kashfahin across the Orontes. The ruins of the two castles, now
called A*. el-HarAn and K. es-Sultdny may still be seen at Esh-Shughr^
a considerable Moslem village on the Orontes. — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 133


his mangonels to play upon it from all sides, and as the
garrison had no hope of succour they asked for terms.
This was on the 1 3th of the same month. They obtained
a respite of three days in order that they might obtain
permission to surrender from the government of Antioch,
and then they delivered the castle to the Sultan. His
banner was unfurled on the keep on Friday, the i6th' of the
month. Sal&h-ed-Din then rejoined the baggage-train and
despatched his son, el-Melek ez-Z&her, against the fortress
of Serm&niya.^ Ez-Z&her attacked the place very smartly
and reduced it to such extremities that he succeeded in
taking it on Friday, the 23rd of the same month. Since
the capture of Jebela, of Serm&niya, and of other places
in the coast lands took place, in each instance on a Friday,
it was evident that God had heard the prayers of the Moslem
preachers and looked with favour upon the Sultan's under-
takings, because a good deed accomplished on that day
received a double reward. This series of conquests, each
effected on the Friday of successive weeks, is a thing so
extraordinary that its parallel has never been recorded in
history.

CHAPTER XLIV.

CAPTURE OF BURZIA.

The Sultan, attended by an escort of light cavalry, then
marched to Burzia,' a very strong and almost inaccessible

* Strmdmyoy or Sermin^ is about a day's journey S. of Alq)po 00
the road to Hatma. It was noted for its perfumed soap and cotton
stufff. The water supply is from rain collected in cistemi, many of
which are very ancient.— W.

* Burzia^ or Bunikya^ lay to the N.W. of Afdmia (Apamea, now
Kai*at tl'Mudik) and on the opposite side of the marshy valley of the
Orontes. It was about a day's march S. of tsk^Shugkr^ and was so
strong that its impregnability passed into a proverb.— >W.


134 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

fortress. It was built on the crags of a high mountain,
and was proverbial in all Frank and Moslem lands. Valleys
surrounded it on all sides, and their depth was more than
five hundred and seventy cubits. The Sultan*s intention
to besiege this place was strengthened after he had seen
it; he ordered the baggage-train forward, and posted it,
with the rest of the army, at the foot of the mountain
on which the stronghold was built. This was on the
24th of the month. On the 25th, very early, he ascended
the mountain at a great pace, followed by his soldiers,
his mangonels, and instruments of war. Having surrounded
the castle, he attacked it from all sides, and played upon
the walls with the mangonels, both night and day, with-
out ceasing. On the 27th of the month he divided his
troops into three sections,' each of which was to fight in
turn for a certain time every day and then rest. In this
way he contrived that there should be no interruption
whatever in the attack. 'Imdd ed-Dtn, Prince of Sinj^r,
led the division first on duty ; they fought with all their
'strength until the time came for their relief, and the
people returned and whetted their teeth for battle. The
Sultan took command of the second division himself, and
riding out several paces called upon his men. They
rushed forward like one man with great shouts, and ran
up to the wall from all sides. In less than an hour they
had scaled it, and burst into the castle, which they carried
by storm. The garrison asked permission to surrender,
but they had already fallen into the hands of the victors.
Their faith was of no avail to them when they saw our
violence (Kur^n xl. 85). All that the place contained
was given up to pillage, and the men who were taken
were led into captivity. A great number of pebple had
taken refuge there. Burzia was one of their most celebrated
fortresses. Our troops returned to their tents laden with


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 135


booty, and the Sultan rejoined the baggage-train, over-
come with joy and delight. The governor of the fortress,
a person of importance amongst the Franks, and seventeen
members of his family, were brought before the Sultan,
The Sultan took compassion upon them, and, having
granted them their freedom, sent them away to the Lord
of Antioch, to whom they were related. He endeavoured
by this means to conciliate that prince.


CHAPTER XLV.

CAPTURE OF DERBESAK.

Sal AH ED-DiN next marched to the Iron Bridge,^ where
he remained several days, and then set out for DerbesAk.'
It was on Friday, the i8th of the month of Rejeb (Sep-
tember 12, II 88), that he arrived before that fortress,
which lies close to Antioch. He attacked it stoutly with
his mangonels, keeping up a very strict blockade. He
undermined one of the towers with such success that it
gave way. The besieged stationed men at the breach
to prevent an entrance, and their warriors stood in the
gap itself to hinder our men from gaining that position.
I saw them myself, and noticed that every time one of
them was killed another stepped forward and took his place.
They stood as motionless as the wall itself, with absolutely
no protection. Seeing full well the extremity to which
they were reduced, they asked permission to capitulate,

* /ssr il-HoAd^ ' ihe iron bridge' over the Orontes E. of Antioch.

* Dtrhtsdk was a village with springs and gardens and a lofty castle.
It lay on the W. side of the Valley of the Kan Su or Nakrel-Aswad^
and a little to the N. of the eastern entrance to the BeiUn Pass over
the Giaottr Ddj^A.^y/.


136 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

and obtained leave to retire to Antioch. One of the
conditions of the treaty was that they should carry nothing
with them when they left the fortress, excepting the
clothes they wore. The Moslem standard was set up on
the castle on the 22nd of Rejeb. On the following day
the Sultan departed, having given the place (as a fieO
to Suleiman Ibn Jender.


CHAPTER XLVL

CAPTURE OF BAGHRAS.

Baghras,^ a Strong castle lying nearer to Antioch than
Derbes^k, was well provisioned and garrisoned by a large
force. The army encamped in the neighbouring plain,
and several detachments of light-armed soldiers were sent
forward to invest the place. We were at the same time
obliged to detach an advanced guard in the direction of
Antioch to protect us against an attack, lest the people
of that city should fall upon us unawares. This detach-
ment was pushed so close to the gates of Antioch that
nothing could leave the city without its knowledge. I
had gone with them, and remained several days to see
the city and visit the tomb of Hablb en Nejj&r, a holy
man who lies buried there, Baghr^s was subjected to
such a smart attack that the garrison surrendered, with
the permission of the government of Antioch, and on
the 2nd of Sh'abdti (September 26) the Moslem banner
floated from the turrets. The evening of the same day

* Baghrds (ancient Pagrae) was a fostress of great importance, as
it lay about half-way between Antioch and Alexandretta (Skander^n\
and commanded the entrance to the Beil4n Pass. The ruins of the
castle are still called Kal^at Baghrds* — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 137


the Sultan returned to camp, and there he received a
message from the people of Antioch asking for peace.
The Sultan, taking into consideration the fatigues and
hardships that the army had imdergone, and being worried
by the reiterated demands of 'Im^d ed-Din, Lord of
Stnjir, who persisted in his desire to return home, con-
cluded a treaty of peace with Antioch — in which the
other cities occupied by the Franks were not included —
on condition that the Moslems kept prisoner in that
city were set at liberty. This peace was to last seven
months, and at the end of that time the city was to be
delivered into the Sultan's hands unless it had in the
meantime received assistance from outside. The Sultan
then departed for Damascus, and at the request of his
son, el-Melek ez-Z^her, took Aleppo on his way, arriv-
ing there on the nth of Sh*ab&n. He lodged in the
castle for three days, and his son entertained him with
the greatest magnificence. Every soldier received some
present at the hands of the young prince, who was so
liberal, that to spare his revenues the Sultan left for
Damascus. His nephew, el-MeIek el-Mozaflfer Taki ed-
Din, came out to meet him, and conducted him to the
castle of Hamah, where a magnificent repast was set before
him, and he listened to the Silfis who were presented to him.
The Sultan remained one night there, and gave the cities
of Jebela and Laodicea to his host. Then he resumed
bis journey, taking the road that runs through B'albek,
and halting for a day in the plain near that city. There
he took a bath, after which he departed for Damascus,
and reached that city a few days before the beginning
of the month of Ramadan. He did not think it right
(in this month set apart for fasting) to neglect the duty
of fighting the infidels; he considered he was bound to
do this whenever he could, and, above all, since there still


138 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

remained several fortresses untaken near the Haur&n, which
threatened that district. Among these were S&fed and
Kaukab. Therefore, although he was observing the fast,
he thought it necessary to turn his attention to those two
places, and to get possession of them.


CHAPTER XLVII.

CAPTURE OF SIFED.

On one of the early days of the month of RamadAn (end
of October), the Sultan set out from Damascus on his way
to S4fed.^ He was not deterred by the thought that he
was leaving his family, his children, and his home during a
month when everyone, no matter where he may be, is
anxious to return to the bosom of his family, and for that
purpose will even undertake a long journey. It is true that
the Sultan submitted to this privation in order to obtain a
glorious reward, — Thy favour (oh, God !). S&fed is a very
inaccessible fortress, the ground all round being broken up
by (deep) ravines. The army invested the place, and
placed its mangonels in position. This was in the month
of Ramad&n ; rain was falling in torrents, and the ground
became a swamp ; but this did not affect the Sultan's
determination. As I was then on duty, I spent a night in
his tent. He had just been marking out the positions on
which five mangonels were to be erected, and he said : ' I
shall not go to sleep until all have been set up.' He had
allotted a certain number of workmen to each mangonel,
and his messengers went backwards and forwards con-
tinuously to see what they were doing, and report their

* See p. 31.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 139


prepress to the Sultan. This went on until daybreak. By
that time the work was finished, and nothing remained
but to fix the khanztrs^ to the mangonels. I took this
opportunity of quoting to him the welUknown tradition
recorded in genuine collections, saying that the promise of
this tradition would be fulfilled in his case. The text
runs : TAe Holy Prophet said: There are two eyes that t/te
fire of hell will never touch : the eye that has kept watch in
the service of God^ and the eye that has wept in fear of Him.
The attack on S&fed was maintained without interruption
until the place surrendered. The capitulation took place
on the 14th of Shaw&l (December 6, 11 88). During the
course of the month of Ramad&n the Sultan obtained
possession of eUKerak, the officers in command surrender-
ing the fortress in order that their lord' might be set at
liberty. He had been taken captive at Hattin.


CHAPTER XLVni.

CAPTURE OF KAUKAB.

The Sultan then marched towards Kaukab, encamped on
the mountain plateau, and surrounded the fortress with
light-armed troops. He pressed so close to the place that
the arrows and bolts of the besieged passed over the
spot he occupied. The wall built of stones and clay
afforded perfect protection to those behind it ; so that no
one could appear at the entrance of his tent without putting
on his armour. Rain fell without ceasing, and the mud
was so thick that it was almost impossible to get about
either on foot or on horseback. We suffered terribly from

* See note, p» J'* ' Humphrey IV. of Toron.


I40 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

the violence of the wind and the heaviness of the rain, as
well as from the proximity of the enemy, who from their
position necessarily commanded our camp, killing and
wounding a great number of our men. The Sultan being
determined to accomplish the taking of the castle, so con-
ducted his operations as to enable the miners to effect
a breach in the wall. The enemy — may their hopes be
ever confounded ! — saw that they would be taken, and
asked for terms. The Sultan granted them the favour they
begged, and took possession of the place on the 15th of
Zu el-K'ada (January 5, 1 189). The baggage, which had
been on the plateau, was transported, on account of the
mud and the wind, into the Gh6r.^ During the remainder
of this month his brother, el-Melek el-'Adel, had several
interviews with him on private matters. At the beginning
of the month of Zu el-Hijja (January 21, 1189) he dis-
missed the troops he had called together, and set out for
Jerusalem with his brother that he might bid el-Melek
farewell, and visit the Holy Places in that city. His
brother was to start from that place on his return te
Egypt. They arrived at Jerusalem on Friday, the 8th of
Zu el-Hijja, and were present at public prayer in the Dome
of the glorious Rock (Kubbet es Sakhrat esh Shertfa). On
the day of the great feast,^ which was a Sunday, they
worshipped there again. On the nth of this month the
Sultan left for Ascalon, to look into the condition of that
city, and he spent several days there re-establishing
order in every department, and arranging everything on
a satisfactory basis. He then set out for Acre, taking
the road through the coast lands, with the view of
inspecting the cities he should pass through, and rein-
forcing them with men and supplies. He arrived at Acre,

« The Valley of the Jordan.

^ The 'tdu el-Azha, ' the Feast of Sacrifice,' is celebrated on the
tenth day of Zu el-Hijja.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.^ 141

and spent the greater part of the month of Moharrem of
the year 585 (February-March, 1189) in that city. He left
Behi ed-Din Karakdsh^ as governor there, charging him to
repair the fortifications, and to give unremitting attention
to that business. He left Hoss&m ed-Din Bish&ra with
him. Then, having set out for Damascus, he entered that
city on the ist of Safer in the year 585 (March 21, 11 89).


CHAPTER XLIX.

THE SULTAN MARCHES AGAINST SHAKIF ARNCN. THIS
EXPEDITION IMMEDIATELY PRECEDED THE EVENTS
AT ACRE.

The Sultan remained in Damascus till the month Rabi'a I.
(April 19, 1 189), when he received a message from Khalif
en*N&sr li-Din lUah, who had appointed his son to succeed
him, and therefore sent an injunction, commanding that
his name should be inserted in the khotba. The Sultan
carried out this order, and then determined to march
against Shakif Amdn, a very strong fortress in the neigh-
bourhood of B«^ni<b. He left Damascus on the 3rd of the
aforesaid month, and came to a halt in the meadow (merj)
of FelOs {or KalQs). On Saturday morning he set out
from thence and marched to the meadow of Bei^hOth,'
where he remained until the nth of the month to await
his troops. Detachments arrived one after another. He

■ Bchi ed-Din Karakiish, a eunuch, was a freedman of Shirkiih, on
wboie death he assisted 'Aisa (p. 173) to make Sal&h ed*Din vizir.
Salih ed-Din made him his lieutenant in Egypt, and he built the
citadel, and the walls enclosing old and new Cairo (Ibn Khallikan,
ii. 520).— W.

■ Afery il'FtlAs^ * meadow of coin * ; Merj el-Berghikth^ * meadow of
the flea,* places on the & of Mount Hermon.


142 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

then set out for B«Lni«Ls, from which place he marched to
the Merj 'AyOn ; he arrived and pitched his camp there on
the 17th. This plain lies so close to Shakff-Arndn^ that
the Sultan used to ride out with us every day to inspect it.
Meanwhile reinforcements and supplies arrived in the camp
from all sides. The Lord of Shakif,^ knowing. that these
preparations certainly betokened his ruin, decided to come
to an arrangement with the Sultan which would relieve him
from danger. He came down from his fortress and pre-
sented himself at the entrance to the Sultan's tent before
we had heard of his arrival. The Sultan had him admitted
and received him with great respect and with every mark
of honour. This man held high rank amongst the Franks,
and was distinguished for his keen intellect. He knew
Arabic, and was able to speak it ; he also possessed some
knowledge of history. I had heard that he had a Moslem
in his suite, whose duty it was to read to him and expound.
His manners were truly charming. He presented himself
before the Sultan, ate with him, and then, in a private
interview, declared that he was his servant (memldk), and
that he would surrender the place to him without giving
him the trouble to fight. As a condition, he stipulated
that an asylum should be provided for him at Damascus,
for he could no longer dwell amongst the Franks, and that
a certain income should be granted him in the same city
as a provision for himself and his family. He added that
he would wish to be permitted to remain where he was,
and that in the course of three months, beginning from the
day on which he was speaking, he would present himself
in due course and wait upon the Sultan ; he needed this

I Shaklf Arnikfiy a strong Templar fortress built before 1179 (Bel-
fort ; see Burchard, p. 13) on the N. bank of the Leontes, 10^ miles
N.W. of B&niis. Merj ^Ay^n is the open valley to its E.

^ Renaud of Sidon.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 143


time to remove his family and dependents from Tyre.
The Sultan consented to all his proposals, and from that
time received frequent visits from him. He argued with
us on the subject of our religion, and we reasoned with
him in order to show him the vanity of his beliefs. He
talked very well, and expressed himself with great modera-
tion and courtesy.

In the month Rabi'a I. (April -May) we received
tidings of the capture of esh-Sh6bek. This place had
been blockaded for a whole year by a strong body of
troops sent thither by the Sultan, and the garrison capitu-
fated when all their provisions were expended.


CHAPTER L.

THE FRANKS COLLECT THEIR TROOPS TO MARCH UPON

ACRE.

The Sultan had promised to set the king (of Jerusalem)
at liberty on his ceding Ascalon to him, and as the
king had caused his officers to surrender this place and
demanded to be released, the Sultan suffered him to
depart from Antars(is,^ where he had been kept prisoner.
At that time we were encamped near the castle of the
Kurds. Amongst the conditions he imposed upon the
king, was that he should never again draw sword against
him, and should always consider himself the servant
(memlOk) and bondsman of his liberator. The king —
God curse him! — broke his word, and collected a body
of troops, with which he marched to Tyre. As he was
unable to gain admittance into this city, he encamped

' Anuradus, Tortosa, the modern Tart$is.


144 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

#

outside the walls, and entered into negotiations with the
marquis (of Montferrat)/ who happened to be there at the
time. The marquis — a man accurst of God — was an im-
portant personage, distinguished by his good judgment,
the energy and decision of his character and his religious
zeal. He replied to the king : ' I am only the lieutenant
of the kings beyond the seas, and they have not authorized
me to give the city up to you.' After prolonged nego-
tiations an arrangement was made to form an alliance
against the Moslems, and with the object of uniting the
troops of Tyre with those of the other cities occupied by
the Franks. The king's army was to remain outside the
gate of Tyre.


CHAPTER LI.

THE SKIRMISH IN WHICH AIBEK EL-AKHRESH
TESTIFIED (FOR THE FAITH).

On Monday, the 17th of Jomada I. in the aforesaid year
(July 3, 1 189), the Sultan received news from the advanced
guard that the Franks had just crossed the bridge which
lies on the boundary between the territories of Tyre and
Sidon.2 It was in the territory of this latter place that we
found them. The Sultan mounted his steed, and the
j&wtish^ called (to arms). The cavalry mounted so as

* Conrad, of Montferrat, married Isabel, half-sister of Sibyl, wife of
King Guy, who became heiress, in 11 89, of the kingdom of Jerusalem,
and Conrad was declared king in 1192, but assassinated at Tyre on
April 28 of that year. The English chroniclers speak badly of him, as
he opposed the policy of King Richard I. See pp. 303, 317.

a The bridge over the Kasimtyeh or Leontes river between Tyre
and Sidon.

3 This seems to be the Turkish ChaUsh^ a term now used for a
sergeant or non-commissioned officer.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 145

to join the advanced guard, but when they got up, the
affair was at an end. This is what had taken place.
When a numerous body of the Franks had crossed the
bridge, the Moslem advanced guard rushed upon them
and assailed them vigorously, killing a great number,
wounding twice as many, and driving others into the
stream, where they were drowned. Thus did God come
to the assistance of Islam and the Moslems. None of the
latter were killed, excepting one of the Sultan's memldks
called Aibek el-Akhresh, who had the good fortune to
receive a martyr's death. He was very brave and daring,
and an experienced soldier. His horse was killed under
him, and he then set his back against a rock, and fought until
his quiver was empty ; then he defended himself with his
sword, and killed several of the enemy ; but he succumbed
at last, overwhelmed by numbers. The Sultan was much
grieved by the loss of so brave a servant. After this he
set oat once more with an escort of light cavalry, and
repaired to the camp which had been pitched by his orders
close to this place.


CHAPTER LII.

A SECOND SKIRMISH, IN WHICH A NUMBER OF MOSLEM
FOOT SOLDIERS EARN MARTYRDOM.

The Sultan remained in this camp, and on the 19th (of
Jornada I.) he rode out to inspect the enemy's position
according to his custom. A number of footmen, volunteers,
and servants followed his escort, and, in spite of his express
orders and the blows he commanded to be given them,
they refused to return. He feared lest something should
happen to them, because the place for which they were

10


146 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

making was very difficult to cross, and afforded no pro-
tection whatever for men on foot. These men rushed
towards the bridge and discharged arrows at the enemy»
whilst a number of them crossed over it. Then followed a
furious struggle, for a company of the Franks had surrounded
them before they perceived their position. The enemy,
feeling sure there was no ambuscade to be feared behind
this venturesome body, charged them like one man, without
the Sultan's knowledge. He was far from the scene of the
combat, and had no army with him, for he had not gone
out that day with troops in battle array ; he had only
ridden forth to reconnoitre, as was his daily custom.
Seeing by a cloud of dust that a fight was going forward,
he sent the troops he had with him to bring back those
rash men. This detachment saw that the action had
become very serious, and that, as the Franks were now
superior in numbers, they had everything to apprehend.
The enemy gained a complete victory over these footmen,
and a fierce combat then took place between them and the
detachment. A number of foot soldiers were killed, and
others taken prisoner. The number of those who found
martyrdom on the field of battle was altogether one hundred
and eighty. The Franks on their side had many killed and
drowned. Amongst their dead was the leader of the
Germans, an important personage with them. In the
number of the Moslem martyrs, whose names could be
ascertained, was Ibn el-Bessdru, a fine young fellow of
great courage. His father, reckoning him for God's cause,
shed not a single tear. So I have been told by several
who were there. Of all the battles at which I was pre-
sent, there was none in which the Franks obtained more
advantage. Never had they killed so many Moslems, nor
in so short a time.


^ WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 147

r ,


CHAPTER LIII.

THE SULTAN MAKES ALL SPEED TO REACH ACRE.

HIS MOTIVE.

The Sultan, after this extraordinary blow had fallen upon
the Moslems, called his emirs together, and consulted them
on the subject. It was decided that they should cross the
bridge and throw themselves upon the Franks, and should
not cease the slaughter until they were all exterminated.
The enemy had just left Tyre and taken up their position
close to the bridge, which lies a little more than a parasang
(to the north) of that city. The Sultan, having determined
to attack them, mounted his horse on the morning of
Thursday, the 17th of Jomada L,^ and set forth, followed
by his troops, and also by volunteers, and all the camp
followers. When the force in rear came up, it met the
advanced guard in front returning with their tents. When
these men were questioned as to why they had left their
position, they replied that the Franks had withdrawn to
Tyre, either to seek protection within the walls of that
city, or to intrench themselves in the neighbouring plain.
' When we heard this,' said they, ' we turned back, for we
knew that an advanced guard was no longer necessary
there.' When the Sultan received this news, he determined
to go to Acre to inspect those portions of the fortifications
which he had ordered to be rebuilt, and to hasten the com-
pletion of that undertaking. On his arrival at Acre he
re-established order, and commanded that the ramparts
should be repaired in the most solid fashion. Then, having

* This date docs not agree with the one last given. Our author
probably intended to write the 27tb.

10—2


148 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

charged the garrison to use the utmost vigilance, and keep
the strictest watch, he returned to the army, which had mean-
while remained encartiped in the Merj 'Ayftn, and there he
awaited the expiration of the time he had granted to the
Lord of esh-Shakif— that man accurst of God.


CHAPTER LIV.

ANOTHER SKIRMISH.

On Saturday, the 6th of Jomada II. (July 22, 1189), the
Sultan received information that a detachment of foot-
soldiers from the enemy's army had become bolder, and
was going to the hill of Tibnln to cut firewood. As the
disaster which the Moslem infantry had lately sustained
was still on his mind, he determined to lay an ambush into
which he hoped these Franks would fall. He knew that a
body of knights was coming out behind this detachment
to protect them, and he laid a snare to catch them both.
He commanded the garrison at Tibnin to send out a
small body of troops to attack the footmen, and retire
to a place he pointed out as soon as they saw the
enemy's cavalry coming down upon them. This was
to take place on the morning of Monday, the 8th of
Jomada II. He also commanded the garrison at Acre
to pursue the enemy, and raid their camp, if they should
turn out to succour their comrades. Very early on Mon-
day he rode out with his bodyguard, all lightly armed,
without either baggage or tents, and repaired to the spot
he had pointed out to the people of Tibnin as that to
which they were to direct their flight. He continued his
march until he had passed Tibnin. and then divided his


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN" YUSUF. 149

troops into eight sections, taking from each of these
sections about twenty horsemen well mounted and of
tried valour. He ordered this picked body to show them-
selves to the enemy so as to attract their attention, then
to discharge a few arrows among them, and to flee pre-
cipitately towards his place of ambush. They did so, and
they saw before them almost all the forces of the Franks.
For they had received information of what was going
forward, and had marched out, and were advancing in
order of battle under their king. A terrible fight ensued
between this army and the Moslem detachment, which, too
proud to retreat before the Franks, was urged by a feeling
of honour to disobey the Sultan's commands, and to close
with the body of the enemy, in spite of their own small
numbers. The fight raged till the close of the day ; it was
Monday, and not one of the Moslems returned to the camp
with tidings of what had occurred. The Sultan did not
hear of the encounter until it was almost ended, and, as
night was at hand, he sent out a few detachments, know-
ing that it was too late for a pitched battle, and that
the opportunity for surprising the enemy had gone by.
The Franks, when they saw the first reinforcements appear,
were seized with terror, and retreated. Both sides had
fought furiously. I learnt from one of those who was
present (for I myself was not there) that the Franks had
more than ten men killed, and the Moslems six, two of
whom belonged to the advanced guard, and four to the
Arab auxiliaries. One of the latter was the emir Zimel,
a fine young fellow of good character, and chief of his
tribe. His horse being killed under him, his cousin gave
him his, and this likewise was killed. He was made
prisoner, with three of his kinsmen. When the Franks
saw the Moslem reinforcements arrive, they killed their
prisoners, lest they should be carried off. There were a


ISO WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

great number of wounded on both sides, both men and
horses. A very singular thing happened in this encounter :
one of the Sultan's memlAks was riddled with wounds,
and fell amongst the dead, where he remained all night,
drenched in his own blood. On Tuesday morning his
comrades noticed that he was missing, and, as they could
not find him, they informed the Sultan. He gave orders
for a fresh search to be made, and he was found lying
among the heap of the slain in the state we have described.
He was carried into the camp, and so well nursed that
God restored him to health. On Wednesday, the 4th of
the month, the Sultan returned to camp.


CHAPTER LV.

THE LORD OF SHAKIf IS MADE PRISONER. CAUSE OF

HIS ARREST,

After this a report spread through the army that the
Lord of esh-Shakif had asked for a delay only to deceive
us, and was not acting uprightly. Several things showed
that he was only seeking to gain time, such was his eager-
ness to procure supplies for his castle and to strengthen
the gates. The Sultan thought it necessary to take up a
position on the mountain plateau that he might observe
the place more closely, and prevent the introduction of any
succours or provisions. He gave out as a pretext that he
was anxious to escape the great heat which then prevailed,
and the unhealthy air of the Merj. It was the 12th of
that month, and at the beginning of the second quarter of
the (preceding) night, he went up to the mountain, and
scarcely had day dawned when the Lord of esh-Shaklf
perceived the Moslem camp pitched quite close at hand.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 151

A portion of the army remained in the Merj as before.
Seeing the troops so near him, and knowing that the
respite which had been granted him would expire towards
the end of Jornada 11. — that is to say, within a few days —
he flattered himself that if he visited the Sultan he could
cajole him into allowing a prolongation of the time. He
imagined, from what he had seen of the Sultan's character
and of his courtesy^ that this favour would be granted
him. He therefore went to pay his respects, and offered
to give up the place, adding that the fatal day would soon
arrive, and that it was a matter of indifference to him
whether the Sultan should be put in possession to-day or
to-morrow. He also pretended that several of the mem-
bers of his family had not yet left Tyre, and that they
would do so in a few days. He spent the day in the
Sultan's presence and returned to the castle towards night-
fall. The Sultan did not let him see what he felt, but
received him just as before, for he was anxious to fulfil the
obligation which the respite imposed upon him. A few
days afterwards, when the term was just at an end, the
Christian came down once more from his castle, and, having
been granted a private interview with the Sultan, asked
him to prolong the respite for a further period of nine
months, in order to make it a complete year. The Sultan
knew by this that the man meant to deceive him, but,
fearing to provoke him by a refusal, he postponed giving
an answer until another day. 'We will reflect on the
matter/ he said ; * we will take the advice of our council,
and let you know our decision.' He then ordered a tent to
be pitched for him by the side of his own, and, whilst he
continued to treat him with the greatest honour, he had this
tent watcheil quite unknown to its occupant Discussions
on this subject and messages between the parties occupied
all the time until the expiration of the respite. The Sultan


152 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


then demanded the surrender of the place, saying to him
openly : ' You always meant to deceive us ; you have re-
paired your fortress and introduced fresh supplies.' The
qther denied the fact, and then arranged with the Sultan
that each of them should appoint a trustworthy person,
and that the two agents should repair to the castle to
receive its surrender and ascertain on the spot whether it
had lately been repaired or not. When they presented them-
selves before the fortress, the garrison refused to comply with
their demand, and the envoys remarked that the gate in the
walls had lately been repaired. Orders were forthwith issued
for a strict guard to be kept over the (chief deceiver), and
he was now openly watched, and forbidden to enter the
Sultan's presence. He was informed : * The term of the
respite is at an end ; you must absolutely deliver up the
place.' Once more he tried to play upon their credulity,
and could not be made to give a definite answer ; then he
sent his confidential servant with a message to the people
in the castle, charging them to surrender the place. But
they declared most resolutely that they would not obey.
* We are the Master's servants/ they said, * and not yours. '^
A guard was then pkced upon the castle to prevent any-
one going in or coming forth. On the i8th of Jomada II.
the Christian acknowledged that the respite had expired,
and said that he would go himself to the castle and see
that it was delivered up. He mounted his mule and set
out with several of our officers. On his arrival at esh-
Shakif he commanded his people to surrender the place,
but they refused to do so. A priest then came out and
conversed with him in their language, after which he
returned into the castle, and from that moment those who
were within maintained a still stouter resistance. It was

* The defenders meant the Master of the Templars. The Knights
were forbidden ever to retreat without superior orders.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 153


thought that the chief had charged the priest to encourage
them in their refusal. He spent the remainder of the day
in sending messages to the people in the castle, and, as
they paid no manner of heed, he was brought back to the
camp. That same night he was sent to the castle of
Bdniis,^ there to be kept a prisoner. The army surrounded
esh-Shak!f, and efiectually blockaded it. The lord of the
castle remained at B&nias until the 6th of Rejeb. The
Sultan was very wroth with this man, who had caused him
and his whole army to waste three months, during which
time they had done nothing at all. The prisoner was
brought back to the camp, and on the night of his return
terrible threats were used to make him yield, but with-
out effect. On the following day, the 8th of Rejeb,
the Sultan had his tents carried up to the plateau, and
ordered them to be pitched on a spot from which he could
command the castle better than from the position he had
just left, and which was also still further raised above
the exhalations of the plain, that were already beginning
to affect his health. After these things had taken place,
we were informed that the Franks of Tyre, together with
those in the army of the king, were marching towards
en-New4kir on their way to Acre. We also heard that a
body of Franks had disembarked at IskanderQna,* and
established themselves there, after losing a few men in a
skirmish with the Moslem infantry.

' The castle (AWW fsSubeibek) on the hill £. of Bdnids, taken by
Nur ed-Din from the Franks in 1164.

* hkandirHna is 8 miles S. of Tyre, the older Alexandroschene, and
Scandalion of the Franks. En-Nawdkir (plural of en-NakArah^ * the
cutting*) is the Ladder of Tyre, 6 miles S. of the preceding, and 12
miles N. of Acre.


1/

154 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER LVI.

THE WAR AT ACRE.

When the Sultan heard that the Franks were marching
upon Acre/ he felt the greatest anxiety ; but he did not
think it expedient to hasten his departure, for this
manoeuvre was in all probability only a feint to induce
him to remove from esh-ShakJf. He therefore remained

•

where he was, awaiting the course of events. On the
evening of the I2th of Rejeb (August 26, 1189), a courier
came in with the tidings that the Franks were on the
march, and had just halted at 'Ain Bassa, whilst they had
thrown their advanced guard forward as far as ez-Ztb.^
This news appeared to him so serious that he wrote to all
the neighbouring governors, commanding them to come
with their troops to the place where his army was en-
camped. And he despatched other letters to them almost
immediately, even more urgent than the first, and ordered
that the baggage should start that very night. By the
morning of the next day, the 13th of Rejeb, he was on his
way to Acre, taking the road through Tiberias,^ because
there was no other in that district practicable for an army.
He ordered a small detachment, however, to take the
Tibnfn road, that they might watch .the enemy's move-
ments more closely, and send him information at regular

' This force was the army of King Guy, aided by the ships sent by
King William of Sicily, the former marching from Tyre, the latter
landing at Scandalion.

3 *Ain Bassa, the spring S. of el-Bassah (Basse Poulaine of the
Franks), 12 miles N. of Acre, 2 miles from the sea. Ez-Ztb (Achzib,
or Ecdippa), 10 miles N. of Acre on the shore.

3 Sal^h ed-Din marched down the Jordan Valley from Belfort.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 155


intervals. We marched as far as el-HQla/ where we
arrived at mid-day ; there we halted an hour, and set out
again, marching all through the night. On the following
morning, the 14th of the month, we reached a place called
Minya.^ There we heard that the Franks had taken up
their position before Acre on Monday, the 13th (August 27).
The Sultan sent the Lord of esh-Shakif to Damascus, after
upbraiding him most bitterly for his perfidy. He then set
out for the plain of SefTQria, attended by a small escort, to
meet the detachment that had been sent round by way of
Tibnin with orders to await him there.^ He had given
instructions that the baggage also was to meet him at that
place. He continued to push forward until, at el-Khar-
rQba,^ he could overlook the enemy. He then sent a
detachment forward to Acre, which succeeded in getting
into the city without the knowledge of the enemy. He
kept on sending detachments, one after another, until the
city was filled with men and provisions of all kinds. Then
he drew up his army in order of battle, by right wing, left
wing, and centre, and set out for el-KharrQba, which he
reached on the 15th. He proceeded thence to Tell Kis&n,^
which lies at the entrance to the plain of Acre, and here
his troops encamped in their appointed order. The ex-
treme left of the left flank rested on the bank of the Nahr
eUHalu,^ whilst the extreme right of the right flank was
encamped close to the hill (fe//) of el-*Aiadiya.' The

» The HtiUh lake, or Waters of Mcrom.

* Khdn Minyeh^ on the N.W. shore of the Sea of Galilee, on the
road to Tiberias.

) The road from Tibntn (Toron) over the mountains to SeffArieh
led probably along the watershed to SAfed, and thence SAV\
< El'Kharriiba^ see p. 28.
s Tell KUAn lies 5) miles S.E. of Acre.

* Sahr tl' Hitlu^ * sweet river,* is the Helus flowing to the sea S. of
Acre.

' El'AiyiuUyth is 5 miles E. of Acre, N. of the Delus.


156 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Moslem army surrounded the enemy, and occupied all the
roads that led to their camp. Their numbers were in-
creased by the continual arrival of fresh reinforcements.
An advanced guard was always stationed close up to the
enemy, and the marksmen harassed them by maintaining
a constant discharge. The Franks were blockaded in the
camp on every side, so that no one could come forth with-
out being killed or wounded. They were encamped on
one side of Acre, and the king's tent was pitched on Tell
el-Mosalltytn^ ('the hill of those who pray '), a hill which
rises close to the gate of the city. They had two thousand
horsemen, and thirty thousand footmen.* I have never
met anyone who estimated their numbers at less than this,
whilst many, on the other hand, held they were still
stronger, and they constantly received reinforcements by
sea. Skirmishes occurred very frequently between their
army and our advanced guard, and were obstinately dis-
puted. The Moslems were most anxious to push on and
attack the enemy, but the Sultan kept them in hand.
Contingents from the different Moslem provinces kept on
arriving, as well as princes and emirs from the different
districts. The first to appear was Mozaffer ed-Dtn, the
great emir, son of Zein ed-D!n, and after him came el-
Melek el-MozafTer, Lord of Hamah. This was the position

of affairs when Hossam ed-Din Sonkor el-Akhlati died of

• • •

a flux. His loss was a source of great grief to the Moslems,
for he was distinguished both for his bravery and his piety.
The numbers of the Franks kept on increasing, until at

' Tel/ el'Mosalliytn^ now called Tell el-Fokhkhdr^ a large sandy
hillock a mile £. of Acre.

« Jeoffrey dc Vinsauf (1. xxv.) makes King Guy's army number

-^ 9,000 men, with 50 Pisan galleys. The Danes and Prisons who joined

him numbered 12,000. An English and Flemish fleet arriving in

October, 11 90, increased this force before the arrival of the French

and English armies.


J


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 157

last they were sufficiently strong to blockade the city,
and prevent anyone from going in or coming out. The
investment of Acre was completed on Thursday, the last
day of the month of Rejeb. The Sultan recognised the
gravity of the situation, and grew anxious ; he endeavoured
to devise a means of breaking a way through them, in
order to introduce supplies and reii^forcements into the
besieged city. He summoned his emirs and councillors of
State to consider his plan, which was to close up round
the enemy and hem them in. It was resolved at the
council to attack the Franks with all our strength and to
overwhelm them, in order to effect a passage. On the
morning of Friday, the ist of the month of Sh'ab&n, 585
(September 14, 1189), he began to move his army, which
marched in order of battle, by right wing, left wing, and
centre, and when they came to close quarters with the
enemy, they rushed on them furiously. The attack was
commenced after the hour of Friday's prayer, in order that
we might benefit by the supplications of the preachers
from their pulpits. Several terrible charges were made,
and the battle raged, with many vicissitudes of fortune,
until night closed in and separated the combatants. Both
sides spent the night under arms, as each army expected
to be attacked by the other.


CHAPTER LVII.

THE MOSLEMS BREAK THROUGH TO ACRE,

During the morning of Saturday the troops were held in
readiness to fight, and the Sultan sent a detachment of
picked men towards the shore on the north side of the
city. The enemy's camp did not extend as far as that,


N \vi


158 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN WSUF,

but the unoccupied space was held by platoons of light
cavalry. Our soldiers charged and routed them, and killed
a great number. Those who escaped death fled to their
camp, and the Moslems pursued them right up to the
entrance. Thus a passage was opened to the city, and
its walls were freed from the enemy from the tower gate
called Kal'at el-Mel^k^ as far as the gate rebuilt by Kara-
kCish, which bears his name. Now that the road was
thrown open, provision merchants went in with their wares,
and a single man or woman could pass in safety ; for the
Moslem advanced guard was posted between the road and
the enemy's camp, completely blockading the latter. This
same day the Sultan went into Acre and walked on the
wall, from w^hence he could see the enemy's camp pitched
at the foot of the ramparts. The Moslems gave them-
selves up to rejoicing, seeing that God had come to their
aid. The garrison, led by the Sultan, made a sortie, and
the Franks were thus surrounded by the Moslems on every
side. This manoeuvre was executed after the noon-day
prayer. Then the Moslems ceased fighting, that they
might water their horses and take a little rest ; permission
to desist had been granted them on condition that they
should return to the fight directly they had refreshed
themselves a little. However, as there was but a short
time before them, and they were worn out with fatigue,
they did not return to their posts that day, and lay down
thinking that on the morrow, Sunday, they would attack
the enemy in such a way as would bring on a general
action. The Franks, on their side, remained in the shelter


» KaPat el'Melek^ * King's Castle.* On Marino Sanuto's map of
Acre the 'King's New Tower' is immediately west of the 'Cursed
Tower,' which was at the N.E. angle of the old walls. Mount
Musard, the N. quarter of Acre in the thirteenth century, did not
exist in Saidh ed-Dtn's time.


^


/


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 159


of their camp, and not a single man was to be seen. On
Sunday morning, the 3rd of Sh'ab&n (September 16, 1189),
the army prepared for the . fight, and, surrounding the
enemy, resolved to storm their camp. The emirs and the
greater part of the men were ordered to dismount, so that
they might fight the Franks at their very tents. All the
arrangements had been made, when some of the emirs
advised that the attack should be postponed until the
morning of Monday, the 4th of Sh'ab&n, and that the
foot soldiers should be thrown into Acre so as to make a
sortie from the city with the garrison ; then they were to
attack the enemy in the rear, whilst the Moslems outside
were to mount and rush from all sides with one accord
against the camp. The Sultan led the army in person,
and took an active part in the battle ; wherever the fight
was keenest he was to the fore. Indeed, his eagerness and
anxiety throughout was like that of a mother robbed of
her infant. I have been told by one of his body-physicians,
that from the Friday to the Sunday he ate hardly any-
thing, his mind was so preoccupied. The plan of attack
was carried out, but the enemy maintained a stout
resistance in their camp. The battle raged until Friday
the 8th of Sh'abdn ; it was a market in which everyone
sold his life to gain a great profit (Paradise) ; it was a sky
raining down a shower, every drop of which was the head
of a chief or a leader.


CHAPTER LVIII.

THE ARMY WITHDRAWS TO TELL EL-'AIAIIfVA.

On the 8th of Shabin (September 21, 1 189) the enemy left
their camp in a body-^infantry and cavalry — formed in


i6o WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


line on the top of the hill, and began to march quite
quietly, and without the least hurry. They advanced
within the outer ring formed by their foot soldiers, which
surrounded them like a wall, and came on until they
reached the tents of our advanced guard. When the
Moslems perceived the enemy advancing upon them, their
warriors called out to one another, the heavy cavalry pre-
pared to charge, and the Sultan cried to the Moslem
soldiers: On for Islam! The horse soldiers sprang to their
saddles, the foot soldiers were as eager as the cavalry, the
young warrior as resolute as the veteran ; they hurled
themselves like one man on the enemy, and drove them
backwards. The infidels rallied, and a close sword fight
ensued ; those who escaped with their lives were wounded ;
those who were killed were left where they fell; the
wounded stumbled over the dead, and each man
thought only for himself. Those of the enemy who
escaped from the massacre fled to their camp, and
would not fight for several days. Indeed, they sought
only to avoid death, and to keep themselves out of danger.
Now that the road to Acre was clear, the Moslems went
to and fro, and I also went into the city. I climbed to the
top of the wall, as everyone did, and from thence I hurled
at the enemy the object nearest to my hand. Fighting
was kept up night and day between the two sides until the
nth of Sh'ab&n (September 24). Then, with a view of
extending the circle in which the Franks were enclosed,
and thus enticing them out of their camp to a place where
they might all be massacred, the Sultan ordered the
baggage to be removed to Tell el-'Aiadiya, a hill opposite
to Tell el-Mosalliyin, from which watch could be kept both
over Acre and over the enemy's camp. It was at el-*Aiidtya
that Hossam ed-Din, one of our chief warriors, died. He
was buried at the foot of the hill. I delivered the funeral


/


niiAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSl'F. i6i


prayer over his body, together with several other doctors
of law. This ceremony took place during the night pre-
ceding the 15th of Sh*ab4n.


CHAPTER LIX.

BATTLK HETWKEN THE ARABS AND THE ENEMY.

We received information that a party had left the enemy's
camp to forage on the banks of the river. The Sultan
posted a detachment of Arabs in ambush to surprise them.
He chose Arabs because they are so swift of movement on
horseback, and because he trusted them. The detachment
of Franks had left the camp, and were not expecting any
attack, when the Arabs fell upon them, killing a great
number and taking many prisoners. When the soldiers
brought the heads to the Sultan, he gave them robes of
honour and rewarded them liberally. This was on the
i6th of the month. In the evening of the same day a
furious fight took place between the enemy and the
garrison, and a great number were killed on both sides.
Hostilities were kept up for a long time, and not a day
passed but some were killed, wounded and made captive.
The soldiers of both sides grew so accustomed to meeting
that sometimes a Moslem and a Frank would leave off
fighting in order to have a conversation ; sometimes the
two parties would mingle together, singing and dancing^
so intimate had they become, and afterwards they would
begin fighting again. One day, wearying of this constant
warfare, the soldiers of both sides said to one another:
' How long are the men to fight without allowing the boys
their share in the pleasure ? Let us arrange a fight between
two parties of young fellows, the one from your side, the

1 1


162 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

other from ours.' Boys were fetched from the city to
contend with the Prankish youths. The two bands fought
furiously, and one of the young Moslems seized a young
infidel, raised him in the air, and threw him to the ground,
making him prisoner. A Frank ransomed the prisoner for
two gold pieces. * He is your prisoner/ he said to the
victor; therefore he took the two gold pieces as his ransom.
This is a strange occurrence such as very seldom happens.
A ship arrived laden with horses for the Franks; one of
these animals leapt into the sea and swam to the harbour
of the city, despite their efforts to alter his direction, and
he fell into the hands of the Moslems.


CHAPTER LX.

THE GREAT BATTLE OF ACRE.

On Wednesday, the 21st of the month (October 4, 1189),.
an unusual degree of movement was observed to be taking
place in the Frank army ; cavalry and infantry, veterans
and recruits, were drawn up in line outside the camp,
formed in a centre with right and left flanks. Their king
was in the centre, and in front of him were borne the
Gospels, protected under a canopy of satin, held up at the
four corners by four men. The right wing of the Franks
extended the whole length of the Moslem left ; while their
left, in like manner, was drawn up exactly gpposite our
right. They occupied the ridge of the hills, their righc
resting on the river, their left on the sea. The Sultan
ordered his heralds to proclaim through the ranks of the
Moslems : * O Islam and ttie artny of the servants of the One
GodY The soldiers sprang to their saddles, determined to
purchase paradise with their lives, and they remained


l/


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 163

motionless in front of their tents. Their right wing
stretched to the sea, and their left rested on the river,
just as with the Frank army.^ The Sultan had made
his troops encamp in order of battle, the right wing, the
left, and the centre drawn up separately, so that in case of
an alarm no manceuvring would be necessary to form up in
their appointed places. He himself took up his position in
the centre ; his son, el-Melek el-Afdal, was in the right
centre ; and next to him his son, el-Melek ez-Z&fer, brother
of el-Afdal ; then came the Mosul troops under Zdher ed-
Din Ibn el-Bolenkeri ; then the troops from Diarbekr,
commanded bv Kotb ed-Din, son of NOr ed-Din and Lord
of Hisn (Keifa) ; next came Hoss&m ed-Din Ibn Lajfn,
Lord of N&blus ; then Kiim&z en-Nejmi, the Taw&shi
(eunuch)^ who was stationed at the extreme end of the right
flank with a great number of men. The other end of the
right wing, which rested on the sea, included the army of
el-Melek el-Mozafler Taki ed-Din and his own personal
troops. On the left wing, in the part nearest the centre,
Seif ed-Din 'Ali el-MeshtOb came first, a great prince and
chieftain of the Kurdish people ; then Emir Mojelli, with
the Mehr&n and Hekkar (Kurdish tribes) contingents ;
next Moj&hed ed-Din Berenkash at the head of the troops
from Sinj&r and a party of memlOks ; then Mozaffer ed-
Din, son of Zein ed-Din, with his personal troops and the
army under his command. On the extreme left of the left
wing were the chief officers of Asad*s body of memlOks
(formed by Asad ed-Din Shirkuh) — to wit, Seif ed-Din
Yazkoj. Arsl&n Bogha, and many another of Asad's old
*warriorSy whose bravery has passed into a proverb ; Doctor

< The Franks had built earthworks, cutting off Acre from the land
side, but Salah ed-D!n's line of battle is remarkable. As at Hattin, he
again was almost facing his line of retreat to eUKharrCba. The
defeat of his left imperilled his right, thrown far W. to the N. of Acre.

II— 2


\


/
n/


164 WHAT BEFELL SULTAX YUSUF.


'Aisa and his personal followers were in the centre, which
was under that chiefs command. The Sultan went through
the ranks in person, spurring his men to the fight, encour-
aging them to go down to the field of battle, and urging
them to believe that the religion favoured by God would
gain the victory. The enemy continued to advance and
the Moslems kept moving to meet them until the fourth
hour after sunrise. Then the left wing of the Franks
rushed on against our right, and el-Melek el-Mozaffer sent
his vanguard to meet them. Thereupon followed a fight
with varying fortune, until el-Melek, who occupied the
extreme right of the right wing on the sea-shore, seeing
the great number of his opponents, made a backward
movement ; he hoped by this means to entice them far
enough from their main army to enable him to give them
a decisive defeat. The Sultan, seeing this movement,
thought the prince was unable to maintain his position,
and sent several battalions from the centre to his support.
The enemy's left wing then drew back and came to a stand
on the top of a hill overlooking the sea. When the enemy
perceived that those battalions had been withdrawn from
the centre, they took advantage of the consequent weak-
ness of that part of our line and charged the right flank of
the centre, both infantry and cavalry rushing on together
like one man. I myself saw the infantry advancing, keeping
pace with the knights, who did not outstrip them, and for a
while were even left behind. The stress of this charge fell
on the Diarbekr troops, who were unprepared to withstand
an attack ; therefore they gave way before the enemy and
fled in confusion. The panic spread until the greater part
of the right wing retreated in disorder. The Franks
pursued the fugitives right up to el-'Aiadiya,^ and sur-
rounded that hill, whilst one body of their soldiers climbed

' The Franks thus cut off Sal^h ed-Din's right.


\y


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF. 165

up to the Sultan's tent and killed one of his water-carriers
there. During the day Ism'ail el-Mokabbts, and Ibn Rew&ha
also, won a martyr's death. The left wing maintained its
position, for the enemy's charge did not affect it. During
all this time the Sultan was going from battalion to bat-
talion encouraging the men, promising them magnificent
rewards, and urging them to continue the fight for God.
' On !' he cried, ' for Isl&m !' He had only five of his suite
left, but he continued to go from battalion to battalion, from
rank to rank ; then he withdrew to the foot of the hill on
which his tents were pitched. The fugitives continued
their flight as far as el-FakhwILna,^ crossing the bridge at
Tiberias, and some of them went as far as Damascus.
The enemy's cavalry pursued them as far as el-*Aiad!ya ;
then, seeing that they had reached the top of the hill, they
left them there and returned to their army. On their way
they fell in with a band of servants, mule-drivers, and
grooms, who had taken to flight on the baggage-mules, and
they killed several of these men ; when they reached the
entrance to the market-place, they made a further slaughter,
but suffered considerable loss themselves, for there were a
i;reat number of men there and all well armed. The
Franks who had gone up to the Sultan*s tents found abso-
lutely nothing there, but they killed the three mentioned
above. Then, seeing that the left wing of the Moslem
army maintained its position, they saw we were not com-
pletely discomfited, and they came down from the hill to
rejoin their main army. The Sultan remained at the foot \
of the hill, attended by only a few men, and tried to rally I

* The bridge S. of the Sea of Galilee {/isres SiiiJ) is intended.
Fakh7i.'ihta appears to be for Kahwdna (by the dots of the Arabic
bein^; too far apart over the first two letters), namely, the region
iramctliaicly K. of the bridge. This agrees with the flight to Ftk
(ApSek) on the K. «i(le of the Sea of (laltlee


1/

i66 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

his soldiers and hurl them once more against the enemy.
The men whom he had succeeded in collecting were
eager to attack the Franks who were coming down from
the hill ; but the Sultan commanded them to remain
where they were until the enemy had turned their
backs upon them on their way to rejoin their main body.
Then he shouted his war-cry, and his men rushed on
the band, laying several of them low. The rest of the
Moslem soldiers, seeing that these men would be an easy
prey, rushed up in great numbers and pursued them until
they had regained the main body. When the latter
saw their fellow -soldiers in flight before a great force
of Moslems, they imagined that the whole division
which had charged had been cut to pieces, and that
none but these fugitives had been able to escape.
Thinking that they too would be destroyed, they fled on
all sides, and our left wing pressed down on them ; el-
Melek el-Mozafier came up at the same moment with the
troops that had formed the right wing. Our men assumed
the offensive once more, coming up from all sides and
cheering one another on. God rebuked Satan, and caused
the true faith to triumph. Our warriors did not cease kill-
ing and cutting down, striking and wounding until those
fugitives who escaped had reached their main body, i The
Moslems attacked the camp, but were driven back by
several battalions which had been stationed there for that
purpose by the enemy, and who now came out to meet
them. The soldiers were worn out with fatigue and bathed
in sweat. The hour of the 'Asr prayer^ had just sounded
when our men drew off* and returned to their tents, uttering
shouts of joy as they marched over the plain, covered with
dead and drenched with blood. The Sultan returned to

I * Sec p. 21.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 167

his tent and received his officers, who came to report the
names of their missing comrades. One hundred and fifty
unknown youths were stated to have fallen ; among the
well-known warriors who earned a martyr's death was
Z&her ed-Din, brother of Doctor 'Aisa. I watched the
doctor whilst he was receiving the condolences of his
friends ; he heard them with a smile, saying he did not
need them. * To-day/ said he, ' is a day of rejoicing and
not of mourning.' Z&her ed-Din had fallen from his horse ;
those who were near him had placed him in his saddle
again, and several of his relations lost their lives in de-
fending him. Emir Mojelli also met his death that day.
These were the Moslems who were killed ; the confounded
enemy's loss, on the other hand, was estimated at seven
thousand men ; but I saw them carrying the bodies down
to throw them into the river, and I do not think the
number could have been so great. At the time the
Moslems were fleeing in confusion the servants, who had
been left in the camp, seeing the tents were abandoned and
that there was no one to hinder them, began to rifle and
pillage. It was left, indeed, quite unprotected, one division
of the army having fled, and the other being fully occupied
in fighting. Therefore the servants, thinking the army had
been utterly defeated and that the enemy would seize what-
ever was in the camp, laid hands on all they could find,
and carried off great stores of money, clothes and arms.
This was a much greater disaster than defeat. As soon as
tlie Sultan returned to camp and saw the consequences
of the panic and the pillage, he took prompi measures to
remedy this misfortune. He first of all wrote letters and
sent men out to bring back the fugitives and to pursue the
deserters; These messengers overtook them at the ascent
of Fik^ and stopped their flight by shouting, ' Back to the

* FU (Apbek;, tee note, p. 165.


i68 WHAT BEFELE SULTAN YUSUR


/.


charge ! To the rescue of the Moslems !' and they suc-
ceeded by this means in bringing them back to the camp.
The Sultan ordered all that they had stolen to be taken
away from the camp-servants and deposited in front of
his tent ; everything was placed there, even down to the
coverlets and saddle-bags. He then seated himself, whilst
we formed a circle round him, and invited those who
\ could recognise their property to swear to it, and to take
. . their goods away. All this while he displayed the greatest
resolution arid good humour, with unruffled serenity and a
discrimination that^as never at fault; his trust in God
never faltered, nor did he waver in his determination to
uphold God's religion. The enemy, for their part, returned
to camp, having lost their bravest men and leaving their
most valiant chiefs on the field. The Sultan sent a number
of carts from Acre to take up the bodies of the Franks
who had fallen, and cast them into the river. I have
been informed by one of the men who superintended this
operation that the number of dead belonging to the enemy's
left wing amounted to four thousand one hundred odd ; but
he had been unable to reckon the number of dead on the
right wing and in the centre, because another man had
been entrusted with the task of carrying these bodies to
the river. The remnant of the enemy shut themselves up
in their camp and confined themselves to the defensive,
paying no heed to the Moslem troops. Numbers had
taken to flight in the panic ; only those who were known
by name returned to the camp, because they dreaded
punishment ; ' but the others fled straight on. I was
present when the Sultan had all that was stolen collected
and returned to the rightful owners ; this was on Friday,
the 23rd of Sh'aban ; the gathering was like a close-
thronged market, where justice was the only merchan-
dize; never had so great a multitude been collected


/


I
1/


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF. 169

together. When the tumult following on the battle had
subsided, the Sultan ordered the baggage-train back as far
as el-Kharr{iba, fearing that the effluvia from the heaps of
dead might injure the health of the troops. This place lay
near to the field of battle, but further off than the ground
they had been occupying. The Sultan*s tent was pitched
close to the baggage, .and he commanded the advanced
guard to occupy the ground where the camp had stood
the day before. This was on the 29th of the montli.
On the following day the Sultan summoned his emirs
and councillors, I being of the number; he commanded
their attention, and spoke as follows: 'In the name of
God ! Praise be to God ! May the blessing of God rest
upon His messenger! The enemies of God and of our
race invaded our land and trampled the soil of Islam
under their feet ; but already we bee a foreshadowing of
the triumph with which we shall overcome them, if it be
God's will. There remain but a small number of our
enemies ; now is the time to utterly exterminate them. I
take God to witness that that is now our duty. You know
that the only reinforcements we can expect are those that
eUMelek el-' Adel is now bringing us. There is the enemy ;
if we leave them in peace, and they remain there till the
sea is open for ships, they will receive large reinforcements.
The opinion I hold, and which seems to me decidedly the
best, is that we should attack them forthwith, but let each
of you say what he thinks.* This speech was delivered
on the I ^th Teshrin of the solar year (October 13). The
council uas divided in opinion, and an animated discussion
ensued ; it wa^ finally determined to withdraw the army as
far as el-Kharruba. * The troops will remain there/ they
said. • for >cvcral days, to give the men time to recover,
for they arc worn out by the weight of their arms. This
will enable them to recover their strenjjth and to give their


170 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


horses rest. They have been fifty days under arms and in
the saddle ; the horses, too, have had their share of fighting
and are tired out. After they have had a little rest their
spirits will revive ; el-Melek en-N4sr will come to our help
both with advice and by action ; we shall be able to fetch
back the deserters and collect the foot -soldiers again, to
lead against the enemy's infantry.' The Sultan at this
time was suffering from a serious indisposition, brought on
by the anxiety which oppressed him, and also by the weight
of his armour, which he had now worn for a long time ;
therefore he was persuaded, in the end, to adopt this
counsel. On the 3rd of Ramad&n the rest of the troops
joined the baggage. The Sultan followed them the same
night, and remained there, nursing himself and collecting
his troops, whilst he awaited the coming of his brother,
el-Melek el-'Adel, who arrived on the loth of the month.


CHAPTER LXI.

W'E RECEIVE TIDINGS GONCERNING THE KING OF THE

GERMANS.

•

At the beginning of the month of Ramadan, 585 (October,
1189 A.D.), the Sultan received letters from Aleppo, from
his son el-Melek ez-Z&her — may God increase his glory!
In these he announced, as an unquestionable fact, that the
king of the Germans^ was marching on Constantinople at
the head of an immense army, with a view of invading the
territories of the Moslems. This news made the Sultan
exceedingly anxious, and he thought it his duty to summon

^ The Emperor Frederic Barbarossa had been drowned in June
1 189, in the Geuk Su on his march to Seleucia from Laranda.


u


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 171


everyone to the Holy War, and to inform the Khalif of
what was g^oing forward. He entrusted this mission to
me, and commanded me to repair to the Lords of Sinjar,
of Jezirat Ibn 'Omar, of Mosul, and of Arbela, calling
upon each of them to come in person at the head of his
troops to give battle to the infidel. He also charged me
to repair to Baghdad, and carry this news to the Khalif, in
order to induce him to come to our assistance. The throne
of the Khalifate was then occupied by en*Ndsr li-D!n
Illah Abu el*'Abb&s Ahmed, son of el*Mos\adi bi-Amr
Utah. I set out upon this embassy on the nth of the
month of RamadcLn, and by God's grace was permitted to
see them all, to deliver the message with which I had
been entrusted, and to receive from their own lips their
assurance of eflfectual help. The first to march was 'Im&d
ed*D!n Zenghi, Lord of Sinj&r, who started with his
troops before the end of the year. His cousin Sinj&r
Shah, Lord of Jezirat Ibn 'Omar, marched in person at
the head of his army. The Lord of Mosul sent his son,
'Ali ed-Din Khorrem Shah, and the Lord of Arbela also
set out on the march with his troops. On my arrival at
Baghdad, I presented myself at the Khalifs divan, and
informed him of the object of my visit, in accordance with
my instructions, and he made me most liberal promises.
On Thursday, the 5th of Rabi'a L, in the year 586
(April 12, 1 190), I returned to the Sultan's service, arriving
before any of the troops that were on the march, and
informed him of the satisfactory replies that the princes
had given, and of their preparations to join him. This
news afforded him the greatest satisfaction.


v


172 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


CHAPTER LXII.

SKIRMISH ON THE SANDS BY THE RIVER-BANK AT

ACRE.

In the month of Safer (March — April) this year the Sultan
left the camp on a hunting expedition, his mind being
perfectly easy, for the troops were encamped at some
distance from the enemy. He went further than he had
intended in the eagerness of the chase, and the Franks,
informed that the Moslems were not keeping a strict
watch, thought that this would be a good opportunity to
surprise them. They collected their forces, and came
out ; but el Melek el-'Adel perceived their intention, and
called to arms. Our men sprang into the saddle, and
rushed on the enemy from all sides, engaging them in a
hand-to-hand fight, so that many lives were lost. Some
few also were wounded, but the Moslems lost no one of
consequence except Arghish, one of the Sultan's memlQks.
This officer, distinguished for his piety and valour, had the
good fortune to earn a martyr's death. When the Sultan
heard what was happening, he left the chase, and returned
to his army; but he found that it was all finished, both sides
having returned to their respective camps. The enemy
withdrew, after an unsuccessful attempt, with considerable
loss. Praise be to God ! He is the author of all mercy.
I was not present at this skirmish, being at that time on
my travels. The battles I have previously described I saw
as closely as a man of my profession could see them ; with
regard to the others, I have had them described to me
in so much detail that it is as if I had witnessed their
various developments. A curious thing happened in this
last skirmish : a certain man named Kara Sonkor, one of


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSLF. 173


the Sultan's memluks, and a brave soldier, had killed
several of the enemy, and the comrades of the dead men
set a snare for him. Some of them hid, whilst others went
out and showed themselves. The memlDk rushed on in
pursuit of them, but they threw themselves on him from
all sides, and made him prisoner. One of these men
seized him by the hair, and another prepared to cut off
his head with his sabre. The blow struck the arm of the
man who was holding the memliik, and severed his hand
from the. wrist ; the captive escaped, and succeeded in
rejoining his comrades in safety. The Franks ran after
him, but could not overtake him. * God drove back the
misbelievers in their rage ; they gat no advantage ' (Kuran,
xxxiii. 25).

CHAPTER LXIII.

DM ATI I OF DOCTOR 'AISA.^

I HEARD of this occurrence by public report, because I
was not on the spot at the time. He used to suffer from
periodic attacks of asthma, and then he was seized with a
flux, which weakened him very much, and to which he
finally succumbed. Throughout his illness he retained his
power of will and intellect. He was a generous, brave
man. and lived a virtuous life. His zeal for the Moslem
cause was unflagging. He passed away on Tuesday, the
9th of Zu cl-K'ada, 5S5 (December 20, 1189}, just as day
was dawning.

* Abu Muhammad *Aisa eMiakk/iri, surnamed Dia ed-l>in, was a
Kurd who had studied law at Aleppo. He was a lawyer {fakihsy and
was lm.'im to Shirkuh, with whom he went to Ei^ypt. With the
assistance of Heha ed-I)in K<irakush,he conducted the intrigue which
raised Sal Ah ed-Din to the post of vi/ir on Sh'rkuh's death. Sal.Vh
cdl>in was grateful, and placed implicit coutidence m him as a
counsellor Ibn Khallikan. li. 430.— \V.


174 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER LXIV.

SURRENDER OF ESH-SHAKIF.

On Sunday, the 15th of the month Rabi'a i. (April 22,
ii94f), the Franks, who composed the garrison of esh-
Shakif, saw that nothing could save them from the fate
God had appointed, and that their heads would be cut off,
if the place were carried by storm. They therefore offered
to capitulate. Several meetings took place to discuss the
terms of the treaty ; but as they knew their lord was
undergoing a very severe punishment, they consented to
surrender the fortress on condition that he should be set at
liberty, and that all those who were within should be allowed
to go free. They were, nevertheless, obliged to leave behind
all the treasures and supplies that had been accumulated
in the castle. The Lord of Sidon^ repaired to Tyre,
accompanied by all the Franks who had been with him in
esh-Shakif. (The Sultan saw how important a thing the
possession (of Acre) was in the eyes of the Franks from all
parts, and how their attention was always fixed on that
city ; he therefore took advantage of the winter season,
when ships cannot travel on the sea, to throw such
quantities of provisions and stores, of engines of war, and
of soldiers into the place as, under God, to ensure its perfect
safety. He also sent to Egypt to command his lieutenants
to equip a fleet sufficient to carry a great number of people.
He then set out for Acre, and entered the city with great
display, to the chagrin of the enemy. After this he dis-
missed his troops, that they might rest until the end of the
winter and regain their strength, and he himself remained
in the face of the enemy with a very small body of men. At

^ Renaud of Sidon, Lord of esh-Shakif.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 175


this time the ground between the two armies was covered
with mud so deep that they were unable to get at one
another.


CHAPTER LXV.

AN ANECDOTE.

When the Sultan received tidings that the Franks intended
to march on Acre, he summoned his emirs and councillors
together to consult them as to what course he should
pursue. He was at this time in the Merj 'Ay(i(i. He
was of opinion that it would be best to attack the enemy
and prevent them from establishing themselves in front of
the city, * for/ said he, ' in that case, their infantry would
protect them like a wall ; they would intrench themselves
behind it so that we could not get at them, and then the
city might be taken.' The council was not of his opinion.
' Let them take up their position/ they said, * and collect
their troops together ; we will cut them to pieces in one
day.' Events proved that the Sultan was right. I heard
his words myself, and was witness of what happened.
This is what is meant by the word of the Holy Prophet :
* Among my people there are some who can decide and
speak, and 'Omar is one of them.'


CHAPTER LXVI.

ARRIVAL OF THE KHAL1F*S AMIJASSADOK.

The Sultan neglected no opportunity of introducing sup-
plies and stores, arms and troops into Acre ; then, when
the fighting season recommenced with the close of winter,


\


176 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


which opened the sea once more to traffic, he sent into all
the neighbouring countries, commanding them to dispatch
their contingents forthwith. After receiving the first of
these reinforcements, the Moslem army marched nearer to
the enemy, and encamped on Tell Kisan. This took place
on the i8th of Rabi'a I. in the year 586 (April 25, 1190).
He drew up his troops in a right wing, left wing and centre,
and stationed his son el-Melek el-Afdal in that part of
the right wing nearest the centre. The contingents and
auxiliaries kept on coming in, one after another. An
ambassador arrived from Baghdad on a mission from the
Khalif, He was a young man belonging tc one of the
families descended from Muhajnmad. He brought with
him a body of experts, skilled in throwing naphtha, as well
as two loads of that inflammable substance. He also bore a
warrant from the Khalif, authorizing the Sultan to borrow
the sum of twenty thousand gold pieces from the merchants
as a contribution to the expenses of the Holy War, in
payment of which he was to draw bills on the August
Divan (the Court of Baghdad). The Sultan accepted all
that the ambassador brought with him, but refused to make
use of this warrant, lest it should oppress the provinces over
which he ruled. This same day he heard that the Franks
were on the point of attacking the city, and had invested
it closely ; he therefore mounted his horse and marched
against them, to divert their attention from the city by an
attack on his part. The fight that ensued was stubbornly
maintained until night separated the combatants. Both
sides returned to their own camps. The Sultan, seeing
that, though the Moslem army was now in full force, his
camp was a long way from the enemy, felt that the city
might easily be taken by storm ; he therefore removed the
army and all the baggage to Tell el-'AjjCil.^ This was

' TV// ePAjjul, W. of el-'Aiyadiya.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 177


effected on the 25th of the same month. During the
rnqming of that day a man swam out from the city
bringing letters, which said that the enemy had filled up
part of the moat, and seemed determined to storm the
place. The Sultan thereupon sent further messages to the
reinforcements that had not yet arrived, ui^ing them to
hurry forward ; then he drew up his troops in order of
battle, and marched nearer to the enemy so as to with-
draw their attention from the city by occupying them in
another direction. At dawn on Friday, the 27th of the
month Rabi'a I. in the year 586 (May 4, 1 190), el-Melek
ez-Z&her Ghi&th ed-Din Ghizi, Lord of Aleppo, with only
a small escort, came in in hot haste to see the Sultan, his
father. He had left his troops encamped at some distance.
The next day, when he had paid his respects to the Sultan
and satisfied his longing to see him once more, he returned
to his army and brought it in to the camp. These troops
were so well equipped and armed that the sight of them
filled the hearts of the Sultan's army with joy. They
passed in review before the Sultan, who had ridden out to
meet them on the plain. He forthwith led them quite
close to the enemy, that the sight of such numbers of the
soldiers of God, so well equipped, might inspire their
hearts with terror, and fill them with apprehension.
Towards the close of the same day Mozaffer ed-Din, son
of Zein ed-Din, attended by only a few followers, paid a
flying visit to the camp to pay his respects to the Sultan.
He set out again at once to rejoin his troops, and led
them into the camp on the following Sunday. The Sultan
reviewed these troops, and halted with them in sight of the
enemy, then he sent them to take up their appointed
position. Each time reinforcements came in, he made a
point of reviewing them, and marching them dose to the
enemy ; then he used to lead them back to the camp, and

12


\


/ J

178 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YVSUF. \

give them a meal, and, as all these soldiers were strangers
to him, he would load them with presents in order to win
their affection. After this, they would withdraw, over-
whelmed with marks of his favour, and encamp in the
place he allotted to them.


CHAPTER LXVII.

OF THE GOOD FORTUNE GRANTED TO EL-MELEK
EZ-ZAHER, THE SULTAN'S SON.


I


The enemy had erected three towers, built of wood and >

iron, and had covered them with hides soaked in vinegar,

to prevent their being set on fire by the combustibles hurled

at them by the besieged. These towers were as huge as .

mountains ; we could see them from the place where we

were; they commanded the city walls. They were set on

wheels, and could each, according to report, accommodate '

more than five hundred men ; their roofs were broad, and

were constructed to carry one mangonel on each. The

sight of these engines created a profound impression on ^

the Moslems ; they inspired them with a terror that defies

description, and they gave up all hope of being able to

save the city. All was ready, and the besiegers had only

to wheel these towers close up to the walls, when the |

Sultan, who had been reflecting on the best means of i

setting them on fire, called together his throwers of

naphtha, and promised them rewards in money and gifts

if they could successfully accomplish this. They tried to

do it, but in vain, in spite of all their skill. Amongst those

who were looking on there was a certain young man, a 1

native of Damascus, and a caldron-maker by profession.

He said that he knew a way of setting the towers on fire,


fc


' WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 179

and that if they would send him into the city and furnish
him with certain materials which he specified, he would
undertake to do it. He was given the materials he asked
for, and, thus equipped, went into the city. He then
boiled these substances in naphtha and placed them in
copper pots, each of which was thus full of fire. On the
very day that el-Melck ez-Ziher, Lord of Aleppo, the
Sultan*s son, came into the camp, this man hurled one of
the pots of fire against one of the towers, and the erection
took fire immediately and became a mass of flames. The
Moslems raised great shouts in praise of the one true
God (the taklil and the takbir), and almost lost their senses
in the exuberance of their joy. Whilst we were watching
and rejoicing at this first conflagration, the man threw a
second pot at another tower, and directly it was struck it
^ burst forth into flames like the first. Then a great tumult

arose in both armies, and their shouts mounted to the
skies. Barely an hour after this he struck the third tower
with another pot and set that also on fire. I cannot
describe the delight with which our whole army watched
its burning. The Sultan mounted his horse towards the
end of the day, and the troops did the same in the order in
which they were drawn up, by right wing, left wing, and
centre. They advanced close to the Franks, hoping to entice
them from their camp and engage them in battle ; but they
would not stir from their tents, and night coming on pre-
vented the two armies from joining in battle. Our people
attributed this (the destruction of the towers) to the arrival
of el-MeIek ez-Zaher and to the good fortune granted
him ; his father rejoiced to have a son so distinguished,
and firmly believed that what had happened was the result
of the good fortune that always smiles on a virtuous heart.
Kvery day the Sultan rode out in sight of the enemy, in
the hope of persuading them to come out and fic^ht, but

13—2


i8o WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


they kept close in their camp. Meanwhile, reinforcements
kept on arriving in the Moslem quarters.


CHAPTER LXVIII.

ARRIVAL OF 'IMID ED-DIn ZENGHI, PRINCE OF SINJAR,
AND OF SEVERAL OTHER CHIEFTAINS.

On the 23rd of the month Rabi'a II. (May 30, 1190)
Prince 'Im&d ed-D!n Zenghi, son of Maudtid and Lord
of Sinjir, came into the camp with great pomp and dis-
play, followed by an army splendidly equipped in every
particular. The Sultan received him with every honour,
and drew up his troops in line of battle so as to go out
and meet him. The k&dis and (government) secretaries
were the first from our army to appear before the prince ;
then came the Sultan's sons, and, finally, the Sultan him-
self, who at once led his guest to a spot in full view of the
enemy, and, after halting there some time, brought him
back to the camp and welcomed him to his own tent. He
set a magnificent banquet before him, and presented him
with a number of rare and curious things that surpass my
powers of description. He had a cushion placed only for
him by the side of his own, and a satin cloth laid on the
ground of the tent for him to walk upon. Then he ordered
a tent to be pitched for him on the extreme left of the left
wing, close to the river. On the 7th of the following
month, Sinjir Shah. Lord of Jezirat Ibn 'Omar, son of
Seif ed-Din Gh&zi Ibn Maud(id Ibn Zenghi, came into the
camp. He came at the head of a fine army, splendidly
equipped. The Sultan received him with the greatest
honour, welcomed him in his tent, and then had one


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. i8i


pitched for him next to the quarters occupied by his uncle,
*Im&d ed-D!n. On the 9th of the same month arrived
'AI& ed-D!n Khorrem Shah, son of Mas'Cid, Prince of
Mosul ; he represented his father, whose troops he brought
to the Sultan. Salah ed-D!n showed the greatest joy
when he heard of his approach, and rode out a consider-
able distance to meet him. He made him dismount, and
led him into his own tent, where he gave him a magnificent
present ; then he commanded a tent to be pitched for him
between those occupied by his own sons, el-Melek el-Afdal
and el-Melek ez-Z&her.


CHAPTER LXIX.

ARRIVAL OF THE MOSLEM FLEET AT ACRE.

The same day (June 12), at noon, we sighted a great
number of sail out at sea. The Sultan was expecting the
arrival of the fleet from Egypt, for he had given orders that
it should be equipped and sent to him. He therefore
mounted, with such of his officers as were on duty, and
drew up his troops in battle array with the view of attacking
the enemy and preventing their operating against the fleet.
The Franks, on their side, prepared to oppose it, and made
their ships ready to send out against the Moslem fleet, which
they saw approaching. They were determined to prevent
its coming into the harbour. When their fleet had put
out to sea, the Sultan attacked them on the land side, and
our people marched down to the beach to encourage the
Moslem fleet and succour the crews. The two squadrons
met at sea, whilst the two armies were flghting on shore ;
the fire of war was kindled, its flames burst forth ; a furious
engagement took place between the two fleets, which


i82 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


ended in the defeat of the enemy. One of the enemy's
galleys was captured, and its crew massacred, and we also
took a ship that came from Constantinople. Our victorious
fleet entered the harbour, bringing with it a number of
coasting-boats laden with provisions and supplies of all
kinds. The arrival of these was a great relief to the people
in the city, and completely restored their confidence, for
the close blockade which they had suffered had reduced
them to the greatest extremity. Outside the city the
battle between the two armies raged until nightfall,
when either side returned to its own camp. The enemy
suffered great loss in killed and wounded, for they had to
fight in three several places. The people in the city had
made a vigorous attack on them to prevent their opposing
the Moslem fleet, the two fleets had engaged one another,
and the Moslem army had fought them on the land* side,
and in each instance we had carried off the victory. After
these events, during the last ten days of the month
Jomada I., Zein ed-Din, Lord of Arbela, arrived in the
camp with a large body of troops splendidly equipped.
This chieftain's name was YClsuf Ibn 'AH Ibn Bektiktn.
The Sultan received him with great honour, and enter-
tained him in his tent with magnificent ^hospitality ; then
he had a tent erected for him close to that of Mozaffer
ed-Dtn (so that the two brothers might be together).


CHAPTER LXX.

TIDINGS OF THE KING OF THE GERMANS.

After this we received continual reports of the move-
ments of the king of the Germans, who had just entered


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 183


the dominions of Kilfj Arslan.^ We heard that a great
number of Turkomans had gone out to meet him, to
prevent his crossing the river* ; but that, having no leader
to direct their operations, and seeing an immense army
drawn up against them, they found it impossible to ac-
complish their purpose. Kilfj Arsl&n pretended to oppose
the king, whilst, in reality, he was on good terms with him.
Therefore, as soon as the king had entered his territory, he
openly showed the sentiments he had previously cherished
in secret, and became a partner in his plans, giving him
hostages which the king was to keep until Kilfj Arsl&n's
guides had conducted the German army into the dominions
of Ibn Laon.* The troops suffered greatly on the march ;
their provisions were exhausted, an4 they lost the chief
part of their baggage animals. Therefore they were forced
to abandon a great quantity of baggage, and a number of
cuirasses, helmets, and arms, for want of transport. It
is said that they burnt a great number of things of
this kind, lest they should fall into the hands of the
Moslems. They marched on in this sorry plight until
they came to a city called Tarsus^ ; then they halted on


' This was 'Izz ed-Din, KiUj Arsl&n II., who had just divided his
empire between his ten sons. The actual ruler at Konia (Iconium)
during the march of Barbarossa was Kotb ed-Din Meiek Shah II. —
W.

* Prob ibiy the M aeander is intended.

3 See note, p. 78. Geoflrey de Vinsauf (i. I4-I7) says that Kilij
ArsUn was treacherous in his dealings and an enemy of the
Christians.

« Tarsus was in the territory of the King of Armenia (Leo II.).
There is a confusion here between the fever caught by Alexander
when bathing in the C)dnus and the death by drowning of Barbarossa.
Tiie Emperor Frederic Barbarossa (here called king of the Germans)
was drowned in thr Calycadnus {Geuk Su) whilst on the march from
Laranda {Kaniman) to Seleucia {Sete/kc). (See Jacques de \'itry,
p. Ill, P.P r. translation.)


V


i84 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


the bank of a river, and made ready to cross. The king
suddenly determined to swim across, and, although the
water was very cold, he jumped in, worn out as he was by
the fatigues and anxieties he had undergone. The conse-*
quence was an illness to which he finally succumbed.
When he realized the gravity of his condition, he delegated
his authority to the son who had accompanied him on the
expedition. After his death his officers resolved to steep^
his body in vinegar, and carry his bones to JerusalemJmji_ '
casket, in order that they might receive burial in that city.
His son was installed in his stead, in spite of some slight
opposition, for most of his officers inclined towards the
eldest son of the king, who succeeded his father in his
dominions^; but the^ younger son, being on the spot, ob-
tained command of the army. Knowing the reverses they
had suffered, and the havoc that famine and death had
made in their ranks since the king's death, Ibn Laon
held back and did not join them^ ; in the first place he
could not tell how things would turn out, and in the
second they were Franks, whilst he was an Armenian.
Therefore he shut himself up in one of his strongholds in
order to get out of their way.

' Henry VI. succeeded as emperor. Frederic, duke of Suabia,
was with his father in Cilicia.

^ This is contrary to the Frank accounts, which represent Leo II.
and the Armenians as receiving the army hospitably after Barbarossa's
death. In 1198 Leo was crowned king at Tarsus by the archbishop
of Mayence. — W.


WHAT BEhELL SULTAN YUSUF. 185


CHAPTER LXXI.

, CONTENTS OF A LETTER RECEIVED FROM THE ARMENIAN

CATHOLICOS.

The Sultan, meanwhile, had received a letter from the
•Catholicos.* that is to say, from the chief of the Armenians,
rfirhn was Lord of Kal'at er-ROm,^ a stronghold on the
banks of the Euphrates. The following is a translation of
this dispatch : ' With most cordial good wishes, the
Cathoh'cos sends the following particulars for the informa-
tion of our lord and master, the Sultan strong to help,
who has reunited the faithful, who bears aloft the banner
of justice and benevolence, who is the prosperity {Sa/dh) of
the world and of the Faith (ed-Dtn), Sultan of Isl^m and
of the Moslems— may God prolong his prosperity, magnify
his glory, preserve his life, confirm him for ever in good
fortune, and lead him to the goal of all his desires ! I
write concerning the king of the Germans and those things
he has done since his appearance. When he left his own
dominions he forced his way through the territory of the
Hungarians, and obliged their king to acknowledge his
supremacy. He carried off from him by force such money

* The word is written /Ctitoj^hikos ; from the Armenian Gatfioughif^os
((ireck Ko^oXix^t). The Caiholicos was the head of the Armenian
Church. In 10^35 the Catholicos, in consequence of the state of Ar-
menia, resided in Lesser Armenia; and until 1441 the Catholicoi
resided at, and exercised their jurisdiction from, several diflerent
towns in Cilicia and Northern Syria. Hrhomgla {KaVai er-Mm)
was purchased by the Catholicos, Gregory III., from the son of
Jocelyn, count of Edessa, in 11 50, and it was the residence of the
Cathohcoi till 1298.— \V.

' Kai\u rr-R^m^ the Turkish Rum Kaleh, N. of Bir, is built on a
cliff at the junction of the Merziman Chri with the Euphrates.


i86 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


and men as he thought fit ; then he entered the country of
the chief of the Greeks, took and pillaged several of his
cities, and established himself therein after driving the in-
habitants out. He forced the king of the Greeks^ to
come and do him homage ; he took away the king's son
and brother as hostages, as well as about forty of the
prince's most confidential friends. He also exacted from*
him a contribution of fifty quintals of gold, and as many
of silver, as well as silken stuffs to an immense amount.
He seized all his ships to transport his army from that
coast (that of the Hellespont), bringing the hostages with
him and retaining them until he had entered Kilij Arslan's
dominions. He continued his march, and for three days
the Awaj Turkomans maintained a friendly intercourse
with him, supplying him with sheep, calves, horses, and
other necessaries. Then they saw their opportunity to
attack him, and troops came up from all sides and joined
their forces ; then they fell upon the king and hung upon
his march for three and thirty days. When he neared
Iconium, Kotb ed-Din,*^ son of Killj Arslan, collected his
troops together and marched upon him. A great battle
ensued in which the king took the prince prisoner, and
completely routed the army of Iconium. Then he ad-
vanced until he came within sight of that city. The
Moslems came out in great numbers to oppose him, but he*
repulsed them and forced his way into the city, where he
massacred a great number of Moslems and Persians, re-
maining there for five days. Kilij Arslin sued for peace,
which the king granted, and received from him twenty

' Isaac Angelos, who acceded as emperor of Byzantium after the
revolution in 1185, was an enemy of the Latins, who were massacred
in Constantinople in 1 183.

' Melek Shah II. Kotb ed-Din was the son to whom Kilij Arsldn II.
had given Konia. See p. 183.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 187

hostages of the nobility of the land. When he set out
once more on his march, he followed Kilij Arslin's advice
and took the road leading to TarsOs and el-Missisa* ; but
before entering that country he sent a messenger forward
with a letter, announcing who he was and what he pur-
posed doing ; he also gave an account of what had hap-
pened on his way thither, declaring that he was determined
to march through their land — if not as their friend, then as
a foe.* This occasioned the sending of H&tem,* the
memlAk, with instructions to grant the passage the king
had demanded. This officer was accompanied by several
persons of high rank, and bore the answer to the (king's)
letter. According to their instructions, they were to en-
deavour to persuade the king to return to Kilij Arsl&n's
dominions. When admitted into the great king's presence,
they gave the answer into his hands, at the same time in-
forming him that the chief object of their mission was to
persuade him to depart. Then the king collected all his
troops together, and took up his position on the bank of a
river. After he had eaten and slept, he was seized with
a desire to bathe in the cool water, which he accordingly
did. But, by the ordinance of God, when he came out of
the water, he was seized with serious illness, occasioned by
the chill of his bath, and, after languishing several days, he


' J//»x/f, the ancient Mopsucstiay stood on both banks of the
JihUn (ancient Pyramus), and occupied an important position on
the great road from the Cillcian to the Syrian (jates. It fre-
quently changed hands during the wars between the Christians and
Moilcins.— \V.

' Tne greater portion of Cilicia was at this period in the hands of
Leo H.. king of Lesser Armenia. The Sultans of RAm did not then
posv ss any place on the coast.— W.

Potsibly Haithon^ a common Armenian name. Amongst those
«eni to meet and compliment the (German emperor was S. Narses of
Lampron. — W.


1 88 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


died.^ Ibn Laon was on his way to visit the king when
he met his own messengers, who directly after this occur-
rence (the king's death) had promptly left the (German)
camp. When he learnt from them what had just taken
place, he threw himself into one of his strongholds and
kept close within its walls. The king's son had been
named by his father to replace him, when he first set out
to invade these countries, and, in spite of certain difficulties
that were raised, he succeeded in establishing himself.
When he heard of the flight of Ibn Laon*s ambassadors,
he sent after them and brought them back. Then he ad-
dressed them as follows : " My father was an old man, and
nothing would have induced him to come to this country,
but the desire of performing the pilgrimage to Jerusalem.
I, who have suffered so much on this journey, am now
master. Therefore, unless Ibn Laon obeys me, I shall invade
his dominions." On this Ibn Laon saw that he would be
obliged to yield and visit the king in person, for he was
at the head of an immense army ; he had lately reviewed
them, and found that there were forty-two thousand horse-
men, equipped with all sorts of arms, and an innumerable
company of foot-soldiers. It was a multitude of men of
divers nations and strange to look upon ; they were strict
in the performance of their duty, and kept under the
severest discipline. Anyone who disgraced himself was
slaughtered like a sheep. One of their chiefs had ill-
treated a servant by beating him unmercifully, and a
meeting of priests was called to try him. It was an offence
punished by death, and he was unanimously condemned
by his judges. A great number of people interceded with

^ According to S. Narses, the emperor was carried away by the
rapidity of the river 5^/(f/'(Calycadnus) and drowned. According to
some accounts, the accident occurred on the march from Laranda ;
according to others at Selefke, — W.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 189


the king in his behalf, but the prince was inflexible, and
the chief paid the penalty of death. These people deny
themselves every enjoyment. If one of them indulges in
any pleasure, he is avoided by his fellows and reprimanded.
This is all in consequence of the grief they feel at the state
of the Holy City. I have been credibly informed that for
a long while some of them vowed to wear no clothing at
all, and were clad in nothing but their mail ; this, however,
was forbidden by their leaders. The patience with which
they bear suffering, hardship, and fatigue is carried to a
marvellous length. Your humble servant {literally memliik),
sends you this account of the state of affairs. When any-
thing fresh occurs, God willing, he will send you intelli-
gence thereof. This is the letter of the Catholicos.* This
word means vicar. The name of the writer of this letter
was Bar Krikur Ben B&siL^


CHAPTER LXXn.

THE TROOPS MARCH TOWARDS THE FRONTIER TO
MEET THE KING OF THE GERMANS.

When the Sultan knew for certain that the king of the
Germans had entered the territory of Ibn Laon, and that
he was advancing on the Moslem dominions, he called the
emirs and councillors of his Empire together, to hear their
opinion on the course that he should pursue. They all
agreed in advising that part of the army should be sent
into the districts bordering on the enemy's line of march,
whilst the Sultan should remain with the rest of his army

* Parsrs^h^ or Basil, bishop of Ani, was the son of Gregory, who
was nephew of Basil I. He belonged to the Arsacid family, and was
Catholicos at Kiim KaUh (1 1801 rv^).-~\V.


I90 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

to oppose the enemy encamped (at Acre). The first of
the emirs to set forth was Nasr ed-Din, son of Taki ed-
Din, and Lord of Manbej.^ After him went 'Izz ed-Dln
Ibn el-Mokaddem, Lord of Kefr Tdb, Barin, and other
places. Mejed ed-Din, Lord of B albek, followed him, and
then went S&bek ed-Din, Lord of Sheizer.^ The Yariikidi
Kurds belonging to the army from Aleppo went next, and
afterwards the troops from Hamah. El-Melek el-Afdal,
the Sultan's son, also set out, followed by Bedr ed-Din,
Governor {shihnd) of Damascus. After them went el-
Melek ez-ZAher, the Sultan's son ; he was sent to Aleppo
to keep a watch on the enemy's march, to gather informa-
tion, and to protect the districts all round. Next went
el-Melek el-Mozaffer (Taki ed-Din, the Sultan's nephew
and Lord of Hamah), charged to protect the districts
round his city and to keep a watch on the Germans as
they marched past that place. This prince was the last
to depart ; he set out on the night preceding Saturday,
the 9th of Jomada I. 586 (June 14, 1190). The with-
drawal of these troops very much weakened the right
wing, which had furnished the greater part of them ; the
Sultan therefore commanded el-Melek el-'Adel to transfer
himself to the extreme right of the right flank, and occupy
the position left vacant by Taki ed-Din. 'Im&d ed-Din
was posted on the extreme left of the left wing. An
epidemic broke out in the army about this time, and
Mozaffer ed-Din, Lord of Harrdn, sickened of it, but
recovered ; it was next the turn of el-Melek ez-Z4fer, but
he also recovered. A great number of people, chiefs and
others, were seized with it ; but, thanks be to God, the

' Afembej. See p. 74.

3 Sheizer is Caesarea, immediately S. of Apamea, on the Orontes,
and otherwise called Larissa. See Jacques de Vitry, p. 24, P.P.T.
translation.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 191


illness took a very slight form. The same epidemic also
appeared among the enemy, but with them was both
more wide-spread and more severe, and occasioned great
mortality. The Sultan maintained his position and kept
watch over the enemy's movements.


CHAPTER LXXIII.

ACCOUNT OF THE KING OF THE GERMANS CONTINUED.

The king's son had replaced his father, but he was seized
with a serious illness, which forced him to halt in the
country of Ibn Laon. He retained with him five-and-
twenty knights and forty Templars {Ddwta), sending the
rest of the army forward to occupy the road to Antioch.
As his forces were very numerous, he divided them into
three divisions. The first, under a count of high rank
among them, was marching close to the castle of Baghras,
when the garrison of that place, though numbering but a
few men, succeeded in carrying off two hundred of his
soldiers by force and strategy. They then sent word that
the enemy was much exhausted, that they were suffering
from sickness, that they had but few horses and beasts
of burden, and that their stores and supplies were almost
entirely expended. The lieutenants, posted by the Sultan
in the different cities of Syria, were informed of this state
of things, and dispatched troops to find out what the
enemy were doing. These men fell in with a large body
(of Germans), who had left their camp on a foraging
expedition ; they attacked them smartly, inflicting a loss
of upwards of five hundred men in killed and captives.
That, at any rate, was the report made by our correspon-


192 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


dents in their dispatches. A second messenger came from
the Cathoh'cos, and was received by the Sultan ; in this
interview, at which I was present, he informed us that,
though the Germans were very strong in numbers, they
were in a very weak condition, for they had hardly any
horses or supplies, and the chief part of their baggage was
being carried by asses. ' I took up my position,' said he,
* on a bridge they had to cross, to get a good view of them,
and I saw a great number of men march past, almost all
without cuirasses or lances. I asked them the reason of
this, and they replied, "We have been spending several
days in an unhealthy plain ; our provisions were exhausted
as well as our wood, and we have been obliged to burn a
great part of our stores. We have also suffered great
losses by death. We have been obliged to kill and eat
our horses, and burn our lances and stores for want of
wood." ' The count who commanded their advanced guard
died when they reached Antioch. We learnt that Ibn
Laon, hearing of the exhausted condition of their army,
was filled with the hope of gaining some advantage thereby,
and, knowing that the king was ill, and had retained but
very few men with him, he contemplated spoiling him of
his treasures. The Prince of Antioch, too, we were told,
hearing of this, went out to meet the king of the Germans
and bring him into the city, with the view of appropriating
these same treasures himself, if the king happened to die
in the city. News kept coming in concerning the enemy,
and we heard that the epidemic was rife among them, and
weakening them more and more. After this el-Melek el-
'Adel fought a battle with the enemy on the sea-shore.


WhAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 193


CHAPTER LXXIV.

THE BATTLE F0U(;HT BY EL-'ADEL.

On Wednesday, the 20th of Jornada II. (July 25, 1190;,
the enemy heard that several bodies had been detached
from our army, and that the right wing had been much
weakened by the departure of the troops belonging to the
various districts through which the enemy (the Germans)
proposed to march. They (the Franks) therefore resolved
to come out (from their entrenchments), and fall upon that
wing whilst they were not expecting an attack. But they
became the sport of the vain hopes they had entertained.
The hour of noon had just passed when they issued forth,
deploying by right wing, left wing and centre, and then
rushing forward. As they were in strong force, they thought
that the right wing, where el-Melek el-'Adel was encamped,
would be unable to withstand them. When our people
saw them coming out in order of battle, they called to
arms, and rushed out of their tents as a lion springs from
his lair. The Sultan sprang to his horse, crying : ' On
for Isl&m !' Our horsemen leapt into their saddles, and
the battalions formed without delay. The Sultan had just
left his tent when I saw him ; he had only a few officers
with htm. Some of the men had not yet mounted their
horses when he came galloping up, as anxious as a mother
who has lost her only son. He ordered his drum to be
beaten, and his emirs replied by ordering theirs to be
sounded from the different positions where they were
posted. Everyone was now in the saddle; but by this
time the Franks had hurled themselves on the right wing,
and pushed on as far as el-Melek cl-'Adel's tent. They

«3


194 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

seized everything that they found in the tents and market-
place, killing and pillaging right and left. They reached
the store>tent, and carried off part of the liquors that were
kept there. When el-Melek el-'Adel was informed of what
was taking place, he came out of his tent and mounted
his horse, commanding those of the right wing who were
near him to do the same. His order was obeyed by
Kaimaz en-Nejmi the eunuch (tawdshi), and by other
champions (lions) of Islim as brave as himself. He held
himself in readiaess, watching for an opportunity of sur-
prising the enemy, and he was not long in finding it. The
Franks, carried away by their cupidity, were engaged in
pillaging the camp, and loading themselves with furniture,
fruit, and provisions.^ When he saw them thus fully
occupied, he commanded his men to charge, and he him-
self rushed forward, followed by all the soldiers of the right
wing who were on the spot. The whole of the right wing
was already engaged, when the Mosul troops, who had
been summoned afterwards, hurled themselves on the
Franks like lions springing on their prey. God delivered
the enemy into their hands. They were completely routed,
and fled headlong back to their camp, whilst the sword
of God did execution upon them, separating their souls
from their bodies, and severing their heads from their
shoulders. The Sultan seeing, by the dust of battle that
arose, what was going on in his brother's camp, his heart
burning with zeal and brotherly love, and alarmed at the peril
of his kindred, flew eagerly to help the cause of God's Faith.
And the criers cried to the people : ** On for Islim, ye
champions of the one God ! The enemy of God is given
into our hands. He has dared in his greediness to enter
your camp." His memlCiks, his friends, and his special guard

^ This agrees with De Vinsauf 's account. The Franks were suffer-
ing from starvation.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 195


(halka) responded to his appeal ; the Mosul army, under
'A14 ed-Din, son of 'Izz ed-Din, came up to join him, and
afterwards the Egyptian army, led by Sonkor el-Halebi.
Other bands came in one after another, each brave warrior
answering his comrades' call. The Sultan took up his
position in the centre, fearing lest it should occur to the
enemy to attack him there, as they knew that part of the
army had been weakened by the withdrawal of great numbers
of troops. As detachments kept coming up one after
another, the fight was maintained without interruption,
and scarcely an hour had passed before we saw our enemies
prostrate as though they were palm-trees thrown down
(Kurin Ixix. 7). The whole ground between el-MeIek
el-'Adel's camp and that of the enemy, a distance of a
parasang, or perhaps a little more, was covered with bodies.
\'ery few of their people escaped Mounted on my mule,
I passed through a sea of blood, and tried to count the
number of dead, but there were so many that I could
not reckon them.^ I noticed the bodies of two women.
Someone told me that he had seen four women engaged
in the fight, two of whom were taken prisoners. The
number of men made captive that day was very incon-
siderable, for the Sultan had commanded his troops to
spare none who should fall into their hands. The alarm
did not reach the left wing until the battle was at an end,
so great a distance was there between their camp and the
scene of the fight. This battle took place between the
Zuhr and *Asr (between the mid-day and afternoon prayers).
So great was the defeat of the enemy, that some of the
Moslems who pursued them are said to have penetrated
right into their camp. The Sultan, seeing that fortune

' A letter by the chaplaio of Baldwin, Archbithop of Canterbury,
reckons the Christian loss on July 35, 1 190, at 4.000 men. See ArchePs
' Crusade of Richard I.,' p. 18.

13-2


196 [VHAT BEFEIL SULTAN YUSUF.


had favoured him, called his men back from the pursuit.
During this battle the Moslems lost only ten men, and
these were all people of no rank. When the soldiers of
God, who were stationed in Acre, saw what had befallen
the enemy, they sallied out and attacked their camp. A
desperate fight ensued, the Moslems carrying off the victory.
They burst into their camp, pillaged their tents, and
carried off several women, together with a quantity of
furniture, and even the pots in which they were then
cooking their food. A letter from the city informed us
of this victory. It was, indeed, a bitter day for the infidels.
Different authorities are not agreed as to the number of
their dead ; some say eight thousand, others seven. I
myself saw five rows of bodies, beginning from el-'Adels
camp, and running right up to that of the enemy. I met
an intelligent man, one of our soldiers, who was going up
and down the lines counting the dead, and I asked him
how many he had counted. He replied : ' So far there
are four thousand and sixty odd ' He had counted two
lines, and was engaged on the third, but in those that

remained to be computed the dead lay still more thickly.
This Wednesday witnessed the most brilliant triumph that
Islam could possibly obtain. On the following day, the
2 1st (July 26), at the hour of the 'Asr prayer, a courier
from Aleppo arrived on a dromedary, having accomplished
the journey in five days. The despatch he brought in-
formed us that a strong force of the enemy, being part of
those who had come from the north, had made an in-
cursion into Moslem territory with a view of pillaging all
they might find, and that the troops in Aleppo had taken
the field and cut off their retreat, so that but very few
of these (freebooters) had effected their escape. This news
arrived immediately after the battle (of Acre). It was
announced to the sound of music, and to the great joy


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 197


of the Moslems, who were filled with delight at the thought
of one splendid victory after another. Towards the close
of the same day K&imiz el-Harrani came in from the out-
post and informed us that the enemy, finding themselves
terribly exhausted, had expressed a wish that the Sultan
should send them a representative, empowered to confer
with them on the subject of a treaty of peace. From that
time the enemy of God remained with broken wings, until
there arrived a count called Count Heri.^


CHAPTER LXXV.

ARRIVAL OF COUNT HENRY.

This count was one of the greatest princes among the
Franks. He came by sea, with a number of ships laden
with money and supplies, victuals and arms, and great
numbers of men. His presence inspired the besiegers with
courage, gave new strength to their hearts, and they even
indulged the hope of surprising the Moslem army by a
night attack. They spoke so openly of this project, that
the strangers who were allowed to visit their camp got
wind of it, as well as the (Sultan*s) spies. Therefore the
Sultan called his emirs and councillors together, and con-
sulted them as to what should be done. After discussing
several plans, they finally decided to enlarge the circle and
to withdraw further from the city, with a view of enticing
the besiegers to come out of their camp, and then, when
they had got some distance from it, God would deliver them
into the hands of the Moslems. This decision pleased the
Sultan, for God had decreed that it should find favour in

* Henry of Troyes, count of Champagne.


198 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


his sight. He therefore set out for Mount Kharrtiba
with all his army. This was on the 27th of Jornada II.
(August I). In the position they had just quitted he left
only about one thousand horsemen as an advanced guard ;
these men kept watch each in his turn. We con-
tinually received letters from Acre, and sent answers
back to the city ; these were carried by pigeons, by men
swimming, or by lightly-built boats that put off at night
and entered the harbour unknown to the besiegers. We
received constant tidings also of the movements of the
enemy, who were advancing from the north ; they were in
great want of both horses and supplies, and were suffering
severely from mortality and sickness. The whole army
had succeeded in reaching Antioch, but had been unable,
to provide themselves with horses. We also heard that our
fellow-soldiers in Aleppo were employed in seizing any of
the enemy's troops that came out for grass or wood, and
were carrying off every individual who even showed himself
outside the camp.


CHAPTER LXXVI.

A LETTER IS RECEIVED FROM CONSTANTINOPLE -MAY
GOD GRANT US THE CONQUEST OF THAT CITY !

The Sultan kept up a correspondence with the king of
Constantinople, each prince sending letters and ambassa-
dors to the other. In the month of Rejeb, 585 (August-
September, 1189), whilst the Sultan was encamped on the
plain of Merj 'Ayfln, a messenger arrived from the king
bringing a (favourable) answer to a request that he had
made through his ambassador. The Sultan was desirous of
obtaining permission to have the khotba said in due form in
the mosque at Constantinople, now that the preliminaries


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 199

(of a treaty with the king) had been arranged. He had
therefore dispatched an ambassador to provide for the cele-
bration of the khotba in that mosque, and this man had
been most honourably received and cordially welcomed by
the king. In the ship in which he had performed the
journey he had taken a preacher with his pulpit, a band of
muezzins (to call to prayer) and several readers (whose
duty it was to chant the Kurftn). The day they entered
Constantinople was a great day among the days of IsUm ;
great numbers of merchants and travellers were present.
The preacher ascended his pulpit, and, surrounded by all
the Moslems and merchants who were staying in the city,
he delivered the Moslem invocation {khotba) in the name of
the Abasside khalif Our ambassador then returned, ac-
companied by the (Greek) ambassador, who was sent to
inform us that the matter had been arranged in accordance
with the Sultan's wishes. The Greek stayed with us some
time. I was present when he came before the Sultan,
attended by an interpreter, to deliver the message with
which he was charged. He was the finest of old men, and
wore the dress peculiar to his rank. He brought a certi-
ficate (credentials), and a letter sealed with gold. He
stayed with us for some time, and then died. When he
received news of his death, the king of Constantinople
dispatched another ambassador to conclude the mission.
This envoy brought a letter about the matter under con-
sideration. We will describe this document^ and give a
copy of the translation. It was written in wide lines, but
narrower than in the writing of Baghdad. The translation
on both back and front was in the second section^ ; between

' Documents are extant, emanating from the Byzantine Chancery,
in which a Latin translation is appended underneath the Greek text.
In the document described by Beh4 ed-Din the text was accompanied
by a translation into Arabic


200 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


the two the seal had been affixed. This seal was of gold,
and had been stamped with a portrait of the King just as
wax is impressed with a seal ; it weighed fifteen dinars.^
The two sections of the letter ran as follows : * From
AisikiCls (Isaac) the King, servant of the Messiah, crowned
by the grace of God, ever glorious and victorious AfghakAs
(imperial), ruling in the name of God, the invincible con-
queror, the autocrat of the Greeks, Angelos, to His Excel-
lency the Sultan of Egypt, Sal4h ed-Din, sincere affection
and friendship. The letter written by Your Excellency* to
My Empire^ has been safely received. We have perused
it, and have been informed thereby of the death of our
ambassador. This has occasioned us great grief, more
especially because he died in a strange land, leaving un-
finished the business with which My Empire had charged
him, and on which he was to confer with Your Excellency.
Your Excellency doubtless intends sending us an ambas-
sador to inform our Empire of the decision that has been
made relative to the business with the arrangement of which
we charged our late ambassador. The property he has left,
or which may be recovered after his death, must be sent
to My Empire, that it may be given to his children and
relatives. I cannot believe that Your Excellency will
give ear to malicious reports of the march of the Germans
through my dominions ; it is not surprising that my
enemies should propagate lies to serve their own ends.
If you wish to know the truth, I will tell you. They suffered
themselves more hardship and fatigue than they inflicted

' This would make it worth about j£6 los.

* The Greek equivalent would be t^ox^"^^-

3 In official documents issued from the Byzantine Chancery, the prince
refers to himself under the phrases pouriKela jmu or to iifUrepov x/»^o«f
rendered in the Latin translations as imperium meum or nostrum
imperium (Wescher).


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 201


on my peasant population. Their losses in money^ horses
and men were considerable ; they lost a great number of
soldiers, and it was with great difficulty that they escaped
my brave troops. They were so exhausted that they cannot
reach your dominions ; and even if they should succeed in
reaching them, they could be of no assistance to their
fellows, nor could they inflict any injury on Your Excel-
lency. Considering these things, I am much astonished
that you have forgotten our former (good) relations, and
that you have not communicated any of your plans and
projects to My Empire. It seems to My Empire, that the
only result of my friendship with you has been to draw
down upon me the hatred of the Franks and of all their
kind. Your Excellency must fulfil the intention, announced
in your letter, of sending me an ambassador to inform
me of the decision in the business upon which I have
corresponded with you for a long time past. Let this be
done as soon as possible. I pray that the coming of the
Germans, of which you have heard so many reports, may
not weigh heavily on your hearts ; the plans and purposes
they entertain will work their own confusion. Written in
the year 1 501.'* When the Sultan heard the contents of this
letter, he received the ambassador with every mark of
honour, and assigned him a lodging suitable to his rank.
He was an old man of noble carriage, and very accom-
plished, for he knew Arabic, Greek, and the Prankish
(tongues).

Some time after this the Franks renewed the siege of
Acre with fresh energy, and pressed the city very close.
They had been reinforced by the arrival of Count Henry-
with ten thousand warriors. Other reinforcements reached

* The )ear 1301 of the Alexandrian era corresponds with the year
3^3 o( the Hejira ( a.I). i ii>v .
» Sec pp. 33, 197.


202 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

them by sea, and revived their drooping courage; therefore,
they made a furious attack on the city.


CHAPTER LXXVII.

BURNING OF THE ENEMY'S MANGONELS.

The enemy, feeling themselves strong — strong again on
account of the reinforcements that continued to come in,
set their hearts with renewed determination on winning the
city. They brought up their mangonels and placed them
in position on all sides, playing on the walls both day and
night, for as soon as the men on duty were weary, fresh ones
were sent to relieve them : thus a constant shower of stones
was kept up without intermission. This was in the month of
Rejeb (August, 1190). The people in the city, being thus
hard pressed by the enemy, gave free rein to that pride of
religion which Isldm alone could have inspired. Their
leaders at that time were, first, the governor specially
appointed for the defence of the city, and, secondly, the
commandant of the garrison. The former of these officers
was the great emir Beh^ ed-Dtn Kardk^ish, the latter the
great isfahsaldr (general in chief) and emir Hossdm ed-
Din Abu el-Heija. Hoss^m was distinguished both
for his munificence and valour ; he was of high rank
amongst his own people (the Kurds), and the plans he
formed bore witness to the stoutness of his heart. These
leaders agreed on the advisability of a general sortie,
taking advantage of the enemy's carelessness to fall upon
them when least expected. The gates of the city were
thrown open, and the besieged rushed out simultaneously
on every side, penetrating into the very midst of the enemy
before they were aware of their approach. The Moslems


iVHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSLF. 203


charged the infidels, who, seeing their camp invaded, did
not think of guarding and protecting their mangonels, and
the pyrotechnists were therefore enabled to use their imple-
ments with good effect. Before an hour had passed those
engines had been set on fire and completely burnt to the
ground. In this engagement seventy of the enemy's
cavalry were killed, and a number of prisoners taken.
One of their leaders happened to be among the latter;
the soldier who took him prisoner was not aware of his
rank, and it was not until after the battle, when the]Franks
inquired whether their countryman were alive or dead, that
he knew he had captured one of their chief men. When
he learned who his prisoner was, fearing lest he should be
carried off by force, he lost no time in dispatching him.
The Franks offered a large sum of money as the price of
his body, and persisted in their demand with the greatest
importunity until at last the body was thrown down to
them (from the wall). When they saw him dead, they
threw themselves on the ground and covered their heads
with dust This occurrence damped their ardour. They
never let us know the name of the chief they had lost.
From this time forth the Moslems lost all fear of the
enemy and the Arabs got into the habit of going in and
out of their camp to pilfer and steal, killing and taking
prisoner those they met The count had had a great
mangonel built, on which he expended fifteen hundred
gold pieces, according to information we received from the
spies and people who were allowed to visit the enemy's
camp. This engine, which was quite ready to be brought
up to the walls, had escaped burning in the sortie, because
it was at some distance from the city, beyond the furthest
point our men touched. But, on the night preceding the
15th of Sh'abAn (September 17) some pyrotechnists and
soldiers sallied out of the city, and laid their plans so well


204 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

that they succeeded in getting up to the mangonel, and
setting it on fire. At sight of the conflagration a great
cry went up from both armies, and the enemy seemed
paralyzed by the disaster ; as the fire broke out at a
distance from the city, they thought they were being
attacked from all sides. By this means God increased the
strength of the Moslems very notably. The flames from
the great mangonel caught another smaller one that was
standing close by, and destroyed it as well.


CHAPTER LXXVIII.

STRATAGEM, BY MEANS OF WHICH A LARGE SHIP FROM
BEIR0T SUCCEEDED IN MAKING HER WAY INTO THE
HARBOUR.!

The Franks — may God confound them ! — had blockaded
the harbour of Acre to prevent Moslem ships from en-
tering. A great famine therefore reigned in the city ; so
some Moslems embarked in a large ship at Beiriit, load-
ing it with four hundred sacks of corn and a quantity of
cheeses, onions, sheep and other victuals. They dressed
themselves like Franks, and shaved off their beards that
they might look more like the enemy ; they even put pigs
on the bridge of the ship, so that they could be plainly
seen, and set up crosses in conspicuous places. They then
made towards the city, as though they had come a long
voyage, and ran into the midst of the enemy's ships, when
several sloops and galleys came up alongside. The cr^ws
of these boats said to them : * You seem to be making for
the city,' for they took them for their fellow-countrymen.

' This chapter is wanting in the Oxford manuscript.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 205


The others replied : * Do you mean that you have not
taken it?' * No/ they answered, 'not yet.* *Very well/
said the disguised Moslems ; ' we will make for the army
(of the Franks) ; but there is another ship close behind us,
coming on with the same wind ; you must warn them not
to enter the harbour.* There really was a Frank ship
behind them, that was steering towards the enemy's camp.
The people in the boats looked in the direction indicated,
and, seeing a ship, they made towards her to warn her of
the danger. The Moslem ship, being thus free to proceed,
took advantage of a favourable breeze and entered the
harbour in safety ; praise be to God therefore ! Its arrival
caused the greatest rejoicing in the city, for the inhabitants
were beginning to feel the approach of famine. This took
place during the last ten days of the month of Rcjeb (end
of August and beginning of September).


CHAPTER LXXIX.

ACCOUNT OF 'AISA THE SWIMMER.

A VERY curious and noteworthy thing occurred during this
siege ; a Moslem, named 'A^isa, used constantly to swim to
the city, taking letters and money, which were tied round
his loins. He used to go by night, taking advantage of
the carelessness of the enemy, sometimes diving under
their ships and coming up on the other side. On one
particular night he had put on his girdle — which hclJ three
purses, containing a thousand pieces of gold and a packet
of letters for the army — and started swimming for the city
with his burden ; but he met with an accident, and lost his
life. For some time we did not know what had happened
to him, for the bird, which he used to let fly to tell us when


2o6 WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSLF,

he reached the city, did not arrive. By this we knew that
the man must have perished. Some days afterwards some
people who happened to be on the shore inside the city,
found the body of a drowned man that had been cast up
on the beach by the waves. They examined it, and found
that it was 'Aisa, the swimmer. Tied round his loins they
found the money and the letters, the latter having been en-
closed in oiled silk. The gold had been sent to pay the
troops. Never before have we heard of a dead man de-
livering a message entrusted to his care. This also took
place during the last ten days of the month of Rejeb.


J:


CHAPTER LXXX.

FIRING OF THE MANGONELS.

The enemy had brought several lai^e mangonels into play
on the walls of the city, and the stones hurled by these
engines were not without their effect on the ramparts.
Fear was felt lest the wall should give way. They there-
fore took two large arrows, such as are shot from a great
arbalist/ and making their heads red-hot, aimed them at
one of the mangonels. They stuck in it and set it on fire.
The enemy tried in vain to extinguish the flames, which
were fanned by the violence of the wind. They caught
the other mangonel, and it also was soon in a blaze. The
heat was so intense that no one dared come near to stop
the spreading of the flames. This was a great day for the
Moslems ; they gave themselves up to rejoicing, whilst the
infidels were occupied in meditating on the ill-success of
their efforts.

» Cross-bow. See p. 57.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 207


CHAPTER LXXXI.

ACCOUNT OF THE MOVEMENTS OF THE KING OF THE GER-
MANS CONTINUED. STRATAGEM EMPLOYED BY THE
MARQUIS.

The king of the Germans, having once set foot in Antioch,
seized that city out of the hands of its lord. He first began
to make his power felt by forcing that chief to execute his
commands ; then he took possession of the castle by
stratagem and treachery/and deposited his treasures there.
On the 25th of the month of Rejcb Ke set out for Acre, at
the head of his army and followers, and, passing through
Laodicea, came to Tripoli. The marquis, Lord of Tyre,
one of the wiliest and most influential of all the princes of
the Franks, left the place where they were encamped and
came to meet him. It was chiefly through the instrument-
ality of the marquis that foreign nations were stirred up to
come and fight us. He had had a great picture painted,
representing the city of Jerusalem ; you could see the
Komdma} the goal of their pilgrimage, a building they
hold in the greatest reverence, for in it is the chapel of
the tomb in which they assert that the Messiah was laid
after His crucifixion. This tomb is the chief object of
their pilgrimages, and they believe that a light descends
upon it every year on the occasion of one of their feasts.
In this picture a Moslem horseman was represented as
trampling the tomb of the Messiah under his horse's hoofs,
whilst his beast was desecrating the monument with his
urine. The marquis had this picture carried beyond the
sea, and shown in all the market-places and wherever a

* The Church of the Resurrection is called in Arabic ei-Kidma.
The Moslems, to show their contempt, call it tl-Komdma^ * dung.'


2o8 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


number of men met together. Priests, clad in hair-cloth,
with their heads uncovered, carried it with mourning and
groans : and by the picture he wrought on their hearts, for
this is the root of their religion ; and how many thereby
became pilgrims God only knows. Among the number
was the king of the Germans and his army. The marquis,
as he had been the principal in exciting him to this war,
went forth to meet him, to keep up his courage, and to
help him on the way. He took him by the coast-road, in
order to avoid being attacked by the Moslems, who would
have swarmed up in all directions had he tried to pass
through the districts of Aleppo and Hamah ; in those
parts the word of truth (the religious zeal of the Moslems)
would have risen up against him on every side. He would,
moreover, have been in danger of being attacked by our
leaders. El-Melek el-Mozaffer, Lord of Hamah, marched
against him at the head of a large body of troops that
he had collected. He came up with the Germans, and
his vanguard attacked them on both flanks. Had el-Melek
ez-Zdher, Prince of Aleppo, come up in time with his
army, the fate of the Germans would have been sealed :
but /or every periofL there is a book (Kurdn xiii. 38). Ac-
counts do not agree as to the number of men in the German
army, but I learned from the letters of one of our military
correspondents that he computed them at five thousand,
horse and foot together ; and according to all reports this
army was two hundred thousand strong when it first
took the field. When the Germans set out from Laodicea
on their march to Jebela, they left about sixty horses
behind, so broken down by fatigue and want of food that
they were nothing but skin and bones. They continued
their march, closely followed up by the Moslems^ who
harassed them by pilfering their goods, and killing and
carrying off their men. This state of things continued


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 209


until they reached Tripoli. The Sultan received tidings of
their approach on Tuesday, the 8th of Sh'abin, 586 (Sep-
tember 10, 1 190), quite early in the morning. He heard
the news with great calmness, and did not stir from the
position he had taken up, refusing to divert his attention
from the matter he had in hand. He had to guard and
protect the city of Acre ; to keep watch on the movements
of the besiegers ; to send out small parties to attack them
unawares, and harass them night and day without a
moment's respite. He displayed the greatest confidence
in God throughout, looking to Him alone for support, and
cheerfully busied himself in providing for the wants of his
soldiers, and loading with gifts the various ^a^'/rj, doctors
of law, heads of religious communities, *u/ema, and men of
letters who came to visit him. The news (of the coming
of the Germans) had made a great impression on me^ but
when I went into the Sultan's tent and saw his serenity
and resolution I breathed more freely, and felt convinced
that under him Islcim and its supporters would win a
glorious triumph.


CHAPTER LXXXn.

SHIPS ARRIVE FROM EGVPT.

DUKINO the second ten days of the month of Sh*abftn
(middle of September), BehA ed-Din Karakfish, at that
time governor of Acre, and Hoss^m ed-Din Lulu, the
chamberlain and commander of the fleet, wrote to the
Sultan informing him that there were barely sufficierit
provisions in the city to last till the 15th of Sh'abAn.
They added that they had kept this from the knowledge of
the garrison, lest they should become despondent. But
the Sultan had already sent to Cairo, ordering them to fit

14


2IO WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


out three ships and dispatch them to Acre, laden with
victuals, provisions, and corn, and all that a besieged city
would stand in need of; these supplies were to be sufficient
to last the besieged throughout the winter. The three
vessels sailed from Egypt, put out to sea, and reached
Acre on the evening preceding the isth of Sh'ab^n. When
they arrived there was not enough food in the city for the
following day. The enemy's fleet came out to attack them
whilst the Moslem army was drawn up on the beach,
calling aloud upon God, the indivisible and Almighty.
The soldiers bared their heads whilst they supplicated
God, beseeching Him to save the ships and allow them to
enter the harbour. The Sultan stood on the beach, like
a parent robbed of a child, witnessing the struggle, and
imploring the help of his Lord, and the tempest of anxiety
in his heart was beyond words. The fight raged round
the Egyptian ships, which were attacked on all sides ; but,
thanks to the protection of God, there was a strong breeze,
and they entered the harbour safe and sound in the midst
of the furious shouts of the one side and the acclamations
of the other. The garrison received them with great joy,
and began to unload their cargoes ; and it was a very
happy night in the city. ' It was in the afternoon of Mon-
day, the 14th of Sh'aban, that the ships arrived.


CHAPTER LXXXni.

THE FRANKS BESIEGE THE FLYTOWER.

On the 22nd of Sh'ab^n the enemy fitted out a great
number of boats to lay siege to the Fly-Tower,^ which is

' T/ie Tower of Flies is shown on Marino Sanuto's map of Acre, at
the crnd of the western mole in the harbour, S. of the city.


CimnsAeeif sirt proLomyM.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 211

built on a rock at the entrance to the harbour, and is
surrounded on all sides by the sea. It protects the
harbour ; every vessel (coming in) that gets past the
tower is safe from attack by an enemy. The besiegers
were anxious to get possession of it in order to make them-
selves masters of the port, when they could effectually close
it against (Moslem) vessels, and prevent provisions entering
the city. With this view they fixed turrets on the top
of the masts of their ships and filled them with faggots,
intending to sail close up to the Fly-Tower, and^ as soon
as they came alongside, to set the wooden towers on
fire, and hurl them on to the terrace of the Fly-Tower ;
they would then take possession of it after they had
killed the garrison. One boat was filled with combustibles
to throw on the tower as soon as it should have caught
fire. The besiegers filled another ship with wood and
similar materials^ with a view of sending it into the midst
of the Moslem vessels in the harbour, and then setting
it on fire, so as to burn them and the provisions with
which they were laden. A third ship was covered in with
a roof (Kabu) to protect the soldiers, who were drawn up
utulcrneath, against arrows and projectiles hurled from the
engines of war. These men, as soon as they had set (the
tower) on fire were, according to their instructions, to
withdraw under the roof, so as to be sheltered from our
missiles. They dispatched the aforesaid (the first) vessel
towards the tov/er, in great hopes, for the wind was
favourable. Then tlicy s^ct fire to the fire-ship which was
to go among thj Mo:>Iem vessels, and also to the tower
that was to consume the defenders of the Fly-Tower ; they
were throwing some more naphtha on it, when, by the
grace of God, the wimi changed and upset their plans.
They then tried to extinguish the flames on ti)e ship they
had set on fire, but in vain, and all the i.odless crew

14—2


212 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


perished. The fire-ship dispatched against the Moslem
vessels had caught fire ; but our comrades leapt on board
and took possession of it. The crew of the ship that had
been roofed in hesitated, were seized with fear and attempted
to turn about ; a dispute ensued on the subject, and in the
scuffle and confusion the ship capsized ; as no one could
get out from underneath the roof, every one on board
perished. These events were unmistakable signs of the
will of God, and great wonders upholding God's religion;
and it was a day of testimony.


CHAPTER LXXXIV.

JUN'CTION BETWEEN THE GERMANS AND THE

ENEMY'S ARMY.

We will now continue our narrative of the king of the
Germans. He halted in Tripoli to allow his troops time
to rest and recover their strength, and sent on to Acre to
announce that he would soon join the besiegers. They did
not receive this intelligence with great joy, now that the
marquis, Lord of Tyre, had become the king's chief
counsellor and confidential adviser; for King Geoffrey,^
who, thanks to his army, was supreme in the districts on
the coast, and whose decision was always final in their
councils, saw very clearly that the German's arrival would
deprive him of his authority. During the last ten days of
the month of Sh'ab&n he (Frederick, duke of Swabia,
chief of the German army) had some ships fitted out, and
collected others from all parts, for he saw that unless they

' Beha ed-D!n always makes the mistake of writing * Geoffrey ' for
' Guy.'


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 213


went by sea they would most certainly be lost, as our men
held all the passes through which he would have to march.
Then, having embarked with all his men, horses, and
supplies, he set out to join the Prankish army. Hardly
had he started before a furious wind sprang up, and his
fleet was almost swallowed up in the waves that broke over
them in all directions. Three cargo-vessels were lost, and
the remainder returned to port to await a more favour-
able wind. After the lapse of a few days they put out
once more with a favourable breeze, and succeeded in
making Tyre. The marquis and the king remained there,
sending all that remaineid of their troops to join the army
that was encamped before Acre. On the 6th of Ramadin
(October 7), the king of the Germans^ embarked alone with
a few followers, and arrived in the camp of the Franks
the same day towards sunset. We were informed of what
took place by the spies, and people who were allowed to
visit the camp. His arrival produced a great eflect both
on besiegers and besieged. Being anxious to signalize his
presence by some feat of arms, he made a speech to the
Franks a few days after his arrival, reproaching them for
having remained still so long, and representing how much
better it would be to meet the Moslems in the open field.
When they showed him the dangers of such a course, he
declared they must absolutely make a sortie and attack
the Moslem advanced guard, 'just to test it/ he said, 'to
try its strength and see what they can do.' Thereupon he
rode out to attack the guard, and the greater number of the
Franks followed him. They crossed the plain lying
between the hill they occupied and that of el-'Ai&diya,
where the advanced guard was drawn up. The different


* Frederick of Suabia was not king of the Germans, but brother of
the Emperor Henry VI.


214 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

divisions of our army occupied this position in turn, and
that day it was the turn of the Sultan's halka. When they
saw the enemy advancing, they waited facing them, and
made them taste death in the conflict. As soon as the
Sultan heard what was taking place, he mounted his horse
and rode to the hill of KtsAn, followed by a great number
of Moslems. When the enemy saw this movement, they
withdrew, having had several men killed and a great
number wounded, and they returned to their camp about
sunset. Night separated the combatants. We had two
killed and a great many wounded. But the enemy of
God was baffled. After this, the king of the Germans
turned his attention to attacking the city, and took care
that the blockade was maintained very strictly. He had
some extraordinary engines made, of a most peculiar con-
struction, the terrible aspect of which made the garrison
fear for the safety of the city. Amongst these new
inventions was a great machine, covered with iron plates
and mounted on wheels, that would accommodate a great
number of soldiers. It was furnished with a huge head
with a strong iron neck which was to butt against the walls.
It was called a ram. It required a great many men to
move it, and was to strike the walls with great force and
such impetus that they would give way before it. Another
of their machines was in the form of a roof, made to cover
a number of men ; it had an elongated head like the
share of a plough. The first of these machines would
destroy a tower by its mere weight, the other by its
combined weight and pointed form. This one was called
a cat. As to the mantelets and huge ladders they made,
they could not be counted. They also had a great ship,
which carried a tower provided with a drawbridge, which,
when they came close up to a wall, could be let down by
some peculiar mechanism, thus forming a way by means


WAAT befell sultan YUSUF. 215


of which soldiers could be introduced into the place
attacked. They intended to bring this machine alongside
the Fly-Tower and get possession thereof.


CHAPTER LXXXV.

THE RAM AND OTHER MACHINES OF WAR ARE BURNT.

When the enemy had completed these machines, they
began to bring them up to the city, which they intended
to attack on all sides at once. The garrison displayed
undiminished resolution ; as they were fighting in God's
cause, they determined to make a desperate resistance.
On Monday, the 3rd of Ramad&n of the above year
(October 4) the Syrian troops, splendidly equipped, well
disciplined, and excellently armed, came into the camp
under the leadership of el-Melek ez-Ziher, the Sultan's son,
and Prince of Aleppo. This prince was accompanied by
S&bek cd-Din, Lord of Sheizer, and Mejed ed-Din, Lord
of B'albek. The Sultan, although his health was not good,
and he was suffering from an attack of bilious fever,
mounted his horse and went out to meet them. This day
was like a feast-day in more respects than one. The
enemy marched close up to the city in great multitudes ;
the inhabitants, the garrison, and the Moslem leaders most
renowned for the wisdom of their counsel, allowed them to
draw near; then — when they had plunged the claws of
their cupidity into the city, dragged their engines of war
right up to the walls, and lowered a number of men into
the ditches — then^ and not till then, they hurled down
upon them bolts from their arbalists, stones from their
mangonels, arrows from their bows, and various com-
bustibles ; then they sallied out in a body, throwing open


2i6 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


the gates, prepared to lay down their lives for God. They
rushed upon the enemy from all sides, and fell upon the
people in the ditches unawares. God filled the hearts of
our enemies with terror, they fled pell-mell to the pro-
tection of their camp, for they had lost a great number of
killed and wounded, and many of those who had gone
down into the ditches had lost their lives. The Moslems,
seeing that the besiegers had given themselves up to panic
and flight, ran up to their ram and succeeded in setting it
on fire by throwing naphtha and flaming brands on it.
Then there rose mighty shouts of the takbtr and the
tahltL The conflagration of the ram raged so fiercely
that it spread to the cat, which was burnt to the ground.
The Moslems attached chains to the ram, furnished at the
ends with iron hooks, and dragged it, all flaming as it was,
right into the city. It was built of enormoi: beams.
They threw water over it, and in a few days it became
quite cool. I have been told that the iron used in the
construction of this machine weighed one hundred Syrian
quintals, each quintal weighing one hundred rati} One
Syrian rail is equal to four and a half Baghdad rati. The
head of the machine was brought to the Sultan and laid
before him. I saw it and moved it myself; it was in form
like the great axle of a mill-stone. I should think this
machine would have destroyed anything it was brought to
bear against. This was a glorious day for Islim. The
enemy, baulked of their expectations, dragged back all the
machines that were left, and made no further movement.
The Sultan was filled with joy at the coming of his son,
el-Melek ez-Z&her, for he regarded his presence as the
certain forerunner of good fortune. Indeed, this was the
second time that el-Melek's arrival had coincided with the
winning of a battle. On Wednesday, the 15th of Rama-

' The ordinary rati weighs twelve ounces (Troy weight).


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSL'F. 217


din, our comrades sallied out (of the harbour) of the city
with several galleys and made an unexpected attack on
the ship that had been got ready to storm and take the
Fly-Tower. They threw bottles full of naphtha into it,
the ship caught fire, and the flames rose to a great height.
This occurrence grieved the king of the Germans very
much, and caused him the greatest vexation. On Thurs-
day, the 1 6th, a carrier-pigeon brought us a letter from
Aleppo, in which was enclosed another from Hamah. In
the letter we were informed that the prince, Lord of
Antioch, had gone out at the head of his troops on an ex-
pedition against the Moslem villages that lay nearest to
his city. The officers and troops in the service of el-Mclek
ez-Zaher were watching his movements, and had laid
several ambushes, which were unknown to the enemy until
they fell into them and were put to the sword ; they had
killed seventy-five (of the Christians) and taken a number
of prisoners. The prince himself had taken refuge in a
place called Shiha, from whence he had escaped to his own
city. During the second ten days of this month two ships
that were coming to the enemy, laden with men, women,
and children, and a great quantity of corn and sheep, went
aground in a storm of wind. They both fell into the
hands of the Moslems. The enemy had just seized one of
our ships that was bringing men and money to Acre, but
the taking of these two ships counteracted the bad im-
pression produced on our men by the loss of our vessel, and
amply compensated for the mischance. From that time
we used continually to receive news from the spies and
people whom the enemy allowed in the camp, and we were
informed by them that the besiegers intended to come out
and fight a pitched battle with the Moslem army. The
Sultan was ill just then, suffering from a bilious fever ; he
therefore thought it best to move his army back as far as


2i8 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


the hills of Shefr'am.^ He repaired thither himself on the
19th of Ramadan and took up his position on the summit
of the hill, and the troops encamped on the tops of the
tells to avoid the mud and prepare for settling into winter '
quarters. The same day Zein ed-Din YQsuf, son of Zein
ed-Din ('All), and Lord of Arbela, being very ill from two
successive fevers, asked leave to return to his own country.
Not obtaining this, he solicited and received permission to
go to Nazareth. There he spent several days nursing him-
self; but his illness grew worse and worse, and he died on
the night preceding Tuesday, the 28th of Ramadan
(October 25, 1190). His brother, Mozaffer ed-Din KAkbftri,
was present when he died. Everyone deplored the prince's
fate, dying so young and so far from home. The Sultan
granted Mozaffer ed-Din the government of Arbela, and
received in exchange Harrin, Edessa, SomeYsat, el-
Muezzer, and the districts dependent on those cities ; but
he gave him also the city of Sheherzfir. Having confirmed !

these arrangements by oath, he summoned el-Melek el-
MozafTer Taki ed-Din 'Omar, son of his brother Shah-
anshah (Prince of Princes), to take the position Mozaffer
ed-Din had occupied, and to fill the vacancy that his '

departure would occasion. Mozaffer ed-Din remained in
the camp until Taki ed-Din arrived. On the 3rd of
Shaw&l (November 3) Taki ed-Din came, bringing with
him Mo'ezz ed-Din.

^ Sheff^amy now She/a 'Afnr, on the road to Nazareth, 10 miles
S.E. of Acre.


i


WHAT BEFELL SULTAX YUSUF, 219


CHAPTER LXXXVI.

ADVENTURE OF MO'EZZ ED-DfK.

Mo'EZZ ED-Df N, surnamed Sinjdr Shah (King of Sinjdr);
was the son of Seif ed-Din GhkrA, son of MaudOd and
grandson of Zenghi. At the time of which we are speak-
ing, he was prince of Jezirat Ibn 'Omar. We have already
recorded the date of his arrival lo take part in the Holy
War. Fatigued, tired-out, and overdone by the length of
his stay, he several times sent messengers and letters to
the Sultan, begging permission to return home. The
Sultan declined granting him leave on the ground that
though he was constantly receiving messengers from the
Franks, who were now anxious to obtain terms of peace,
he could not diminish his forces before he knew for certain
whether there would be war or pe^cc. The prince, never-
theless, continued to press his request for leave, and on the
day of the breaking of the fast in the year 586 (November i,
1 190), he appeared at dawn at the entrance of the Sultan's
tent, and demanded admittance. The Sultan declined to
receive him on account of an illness from which he was
suffering, and which had upset his health ; but MoVzz
ed-Din persisted in his demand, until at last he was suffered
tp enter. He presented himself respectfully before the
Sultan, and earnestly requested leave to depart. The
Sultan answered him by pointing out once more the
reasons of his refusal, adding : ' At a time such as this it
is my duty to collect troops rather than to dismiss them.'
The prince then knelt to kiss his hand in the manner of a
man who is taking farewell, and left the tent at once. He
went straight back to his troops, and commanded them to


\


v/


220 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

abandon their cooking-pots and the food they contained,
and to strike their tents and follow him. When the Sultan
was informed of the foolhardy step he had taken, he gave
orders that a letter should be written to the runaway prince
in the following terms : * On several occasions you craved
my protection and told me the fear you entertained of
several members of your family, who, you said, were pre-
pared to attack your person and take the city out of your
hands. I granted your petition, and gave you both shelter
and support. Since then you have laid hands on the goods
of your subjects ; you have spilt their blood, and brought
disgrace upon them. Several times I sent to you. warning
you to desist from such a course, but you paid no heed to
my commands. Afterwards, when this war arose — on the
rr^sults of which the future of our religion so largely depends
— you came here with the army, on my invitation, as you
yourself know, and as all the people know. After remain-
ing here some time, you grew restless, made a commotion,
and took your departure full of discontent, without waiting
to see the result of our war against the enemy. Now, you
may do as you will ; look out for another protector, and
defend yourself as best you can against those who may
attack you. I shall concern myself no further on your
account.' A courier was dispatched with this letter on a
dromedary, and overtook the runaway close to Tiberias.
The prince acquainted himself with the contents of the
missive, but took no heed of their import, and continued
on his way. El-Melek el-Mozaffer Taki ed-Din, who had
been summoned to replace Mozaffer ed-Din, whose de-
parture we recorded above, met the prince on a hill called
the 'Akaba of Fik,^ and seeing how he was hastening along,
and that for some reason pr Other he seemed not best

* The 'AJtada/t (or * Ascent ') o/ Fik was the road to the heights
£. of the Sea of Galilee.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF. 221


pleased, he asked him what was the matter. The prince
told him what had occurred, complaining that the Sultan
had given him neither a robe of honour nor permission to
depart. From this el-Melek el-Mozaffer saw at once that
the prince had come away without the Sultan's leave, and
even against his commands. He therefore said to him :
* The best thing you can do is to return to your duty in
the camp, and wait until the Sultan will listen to you.
You are but a young man, and have not reflected on the
consequences of your action.' The prince replied : * I can-
not go back;* whereupon Taki ed-Din said ; *Go back, or
I shall make you ; there will be no peace of mind if you
go oft' in this fashion.' The prince persisted in his deter-
mination, and answered cl-Mozaffer very rudely ; where-
upon the latter said : * Back you go, willing or not' Now,
Taki ed-Din was a very resolute character, ready for any
emergency, and afraid of no man. Therefore the prince
returned with him, knowing full well that, unless he did so
of his own accord, he would be stopped and taken by
force. When they approached the camp, el-Melck el-'Adel
went out to meet Taki ed-Din, to show him honour, and,
as we were in his train, we saw that Taki ed-Din had
brought Mo'czz ed-Din with him. The two princes (el-
'Adel and Taki cd-Din) repaired to the Sultan's tent, and
obtained pardon for cl-Mp'ezz. That prince was so fearful
for his safety, that he sought and obtained leave to pitch
his tent close to Taki ed-Din, remaining in that positioiv
until the time of his departure.


222 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


\,


CHAPTER LXXXVII.

'IMaD ED-DlN REQUESTS LEAVE TO DEPART.

'IiMaD ed-D!N, uncle of the above young prince, made
continual applications for permission to return home, com-
plaining of the severity of the winter, for which he had
been able to make no preparations. The Sultan assigned
as an objection that negotiations for peace were pending
with the enemy, and that, if matters turned out as he
expected, he had decided, with the advice of his council^
that 'Imad ed-Din ought to be present at the ratification
of the treaty. The prince then demanded winter tents,
;but did not succeed in getting them ; the money he
petitioned for was also refused. Messages were continu-
ally sent backwards and forwards on this subject between
the Sultan and the prince, the Sultan always finding good
reasons to justify his position. I myself took a part in
these negotiations. 'Im&d ed-Din*s determination to depart
was so firmly fixed that it baffles description ; whilst the
Sultan's resolution was equally strong to detain the prince
until the result of the negotiations with the Franks should
be known. This being the state of things, *Im&d ed-Din
went so far as to send a formal request to the Sultan,
written in his own hand, asking permission to depart. A
certain bitterness was noticeable under the courteous terms
of this letter. The Sultan wrote the following words on
the back of the petition with his own royal hand : ' I should
like to know what advantage it would be to you to lose
the support of a man like me.' After 'Imad ed-Din had
received this answer, he refrained from making any further
. applications.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 223


CHAPTER LXXXVIII.

THE ENEMY LEAVE THEIR CAMP AND GO AS FAR AS

THE SPRING HEAD.

We were constantly kept informed as to the enemy ; they
were suffering severely from scarcity of food, for famine
prevailed throughout their territories, and had now invaded
their camp. The scarcity reached such a height that at
Antioch the price of a sack of corn rose to ninety-six
Tyrian dinars. But this only strengthened the obstinate
resolution of the besiegers. Nevertheless, the uncertainty
of their position and their sufferings from want of food,
. which grew worse from day to day, caused a great many
to desert to us, so as to escape the pangs of h«mger. The
rest, encouraged by an idea that the Sultan's illness kept
him to his bed, left camp with their horse and foot, well
supplied with provisions and materials for encamping.
This was on Mond.iy, the nth of Shawfil (November 11,
1 190). They made for the wells sunk by the Moslems
below Tell 'Ajjul, when they were encamped on the hill.
They carried with them a supply of barley sufficient for
four days. When the Sultan was informed that they had
sallied forth, he ordered the advanced guard to retreat
before them as far as Tell Kisan. At this time they were
drawn up on the hill of cl-\Aiadiya. The enemy halted
close to the wclls^ about four o'clock that day, and passed
the night there. Throughout the ni<^ht our advanced ^uard
maintained a strict watch round their encampment. At
<lawn the next morning the Sultan received news from the
^uard that the enemy was preparing to mount ; but he

» Tne re are still wells at Tt// k'l-iuin.


22 4 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


had already given orders, early in the night, for the bag-
gage to withdraw to Nazareth and to el-Keimun.^ The
baggage was sent back, but our troops did not stir from
their position, and I was amongst those who remained
with the Sultan. He then drew up his army in order of
battle, arranging them by right wifig, left wing, and
centre ; after which he mounted his charger, and, at the
call of the herald {Shdwish) they mounted. The army
proceeded to march as far as a teil in the hills of el-
Kharruba, where we halted. The right wing marched on
until its right flank rested on the mountain ; then the left
wing began moving and advanced until its extreme left
reached the river,- close to the seashore. The leaders of
the right wing were el-Melek el-Afdal, Lord of Damascus,
the Sultan's son ; cl-Melek ez-Zaher, Lord of Aleppo,
another of the Sultan's sons ; el-Melek ez-Zafer, Lord of
Bosra, the Sultan's son ; 'Al^ ed-Din Khorrem Shah, son
of 'Izz ed-Din, Lord of Mosul ; and his brother, el-Melek
el-'Adel,^ who occupied the extreme right of this wing.
Then came Hoss^m ed-Din Ibn Lajin; and next KaimSz en-
Nejmi, the eunuch ; 'Izz ed-Din Jordik (who had been one of
NQr ed-Din*s memliiks); Hoss^m ed-Din Bishara, Lord of
Banias ; Bedr ed-Din Dolderim, Lord of Tell-Bdsher ; and a
number of other emirs. The left wing was commanded by
^Im^d ed-Din Zenghi, Lord of Sinjar ; and his nephew,
Mo'ezz ed-Din, Lord of Jezirat Ibn 'Omar; and the
extreme left was under the command of his nephew,
el-Melek el-Mozaffer Taki ed-Din. 'Im^d ed-Din Zenghi,

' El'Kcimftn (Jokneam of O.T., called Caimont by the Franks) was
below Carmel by the Kishon, i8 miles S. of Acre.

» Apparently the south branch of the Belus at ^Ayfitt d-Bass, in
front of the Franks and on their left flank.

3 El-Melek el-'Adel Niir ed-Din Arslin Shah, the emir named
above, was son of 'Izz ed-Din Mas'ud, and, consequently, brother of
Aid ed-Dia Khorrem Shah.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 225

who was too ill to be at his post, had gone back with
the baggage; but his troops remained with the army.
On the left wing might be seen Seif ed-Din 'Ali Ibn
Ahmed el-MeshtOb at the head of the troops (furnished
by the Kurdish tribes) of Mihr^ni and Hekk^r ; with him
were Khoshterin, and several other Kurdish emirs. The
Sultan's /ki/ka (or guard) occupied the centre. By the
Sultan*s orders, each body of troops detached a company
of marksmen to join the advanced guard and surround
the enemy. He concealed several battalions behind the
hills, hoping they would be able to find an opportunity of
surprising the Franks. The enemy's troops continued to
advance, though they were entirely surrounded by our
marksmen ; they followed the east bank of the river until
they came to the spring head.* There they wheeled, and
crossing to the west bank, came to a halt on rising ground,
where they pitched their tents. Their camp stretched
lengthwise from the hill to the river bank. During this
day's march they had had a great many wounded, and lost
a considerable number of killed. Whenever one of their
men was wounded, they took him up and carried him with
them, and they buried their dead as they marched, so that
we might not know the extent of their losses. They came to
a halt in the afternoon of Tuesday. Our troops then quitted
them, and returned to take up advantageous positions for
purposes of resistance and defence. The Sultan gave
orders for the left wing to face the enemy with their flank
resting on the sea-shore, whilst the right wing was drawn up
facing the river, their extreme right resting on the east

» fiVts ei'Md (*thc spring bead'), now Wyun el-IUns (* springs of
the twmmp ';t immediately K. of Tell Kurd;\neh, 6 miles S. of Acre.
According to De Vinsauf, Geoffrey, brother of King Guy, made this
expedition in order to meet a convoy landed at Haifa, which he brought
back safely to Acre, forcing the bridge mentioned below.

"3


236 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


bank.^ Meanwhile, our marksmen harassed the enemy with
an uninterrupted shower of arrows. The whole night was
passed in this manner. The Sultan, attended by us of his
suite, went to the top of Mount KharrOba, and took up his
quarters in a small tent ; his attendants camped all round
in tents as small as his, and in full view of the enemv.
News of the enemy came in every hour until morning
broke; and the next day, being Wednesday, the 13th of
Shaw^l (November 13, 1190), he was informed that they
were preparing to mount. He lost no time, therefore, in
getting into the saddle, drew up his troops, and advanced
to the hills of el-KharrOba that lay nearest the enem>\
whence he could observe all their movements. Although
he was suffering from illness, and his body was very weak,
his heart was as resolute as ever. He then sent an order
to his troops to attack, to hem the enemy in closely, and to
charge them from all sides ; the reserves were ordered to
keep close at hand — not too near, and not too far off —
to support those who were engaged. This state of things
lasted until noon, when the enemy prepared to leave the
west bank of the river,^ and cross to the other side to
return to their camp ; they were thereupon smartly attacked
on all sides, except in the direction of the river. A fierce
fight ensued, in which they suffered heavy losses, burying
their dead, and carrying off their wounded, as is their
custom. The standard of the Franks, on a staff as tall as

' The Moslem position thus extended N.£. and S.W., S. of the
Franks and N. of the Kishon, their base being at Shefa 'Amr — a
retreat of three miles from their former line near Tell Keis^n. The
right flank was near ^Aydn el-Bass,

2 The Franks marched along the plain E. of the Nahr N'amein, or
S. affluent of the Belus River, towards Tell Kurddneh. Beha ed-Din
does not mention the convoy, but the Moslem left must have been
broken, and the attack now made was from the £. and N., to prevent
the retreat of the Franks by the D'a{ik bridge.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 227

a minaret, was set up on a cart drawn by mules ; it had a
white ground with red spots ; the top of the (stafT) was
surmounted by a cross. The Franks defended it zealously,
even at the cost of their lives. Their foot-soldiers formed
an outer ring like a wall to cover their cavalry, and they
used their arbalists and bows with such skill that no one
could get near, or single out their horsemen. Meanwhile,
the Moslems never ceased beating their drums, sounding
their trumpets, and proclaiming with a loud voice the unity
and power of God. The Sultan continually reinforced the
detachments of marksmen from the reserves and the troops
he had with him, so that at last he was left with but very
few. The enemy continued to advance until past mid-day,
when they reached the head of D'ailik bridge.^ Their troops
were then parched with thirst, worn out with fatigue, and
riddled with wounds, and, moreover, they had suflfered
terribly from the heat. The Moslems exhibited the greatest
valour this day, and the soldiers of the Aa/ia (the guard)
particularly distinguished themselves. This body had had
a great many men wounded ; amongst the number was
*Aiaz- et-Tawil (the long man), who had displayed the
greatest bravery in the fight ; Seif ed-Din Yazk6j had
received several wounds ; there were a great number of
wounded among the memlOks and in the Aa/ka, Our men
continued to press the enemy closely until past mid-day,
when they reached D'aOk bridge and crossed it, cutting it
down as soon as they had gone over, to prevent the Moslems
following them. The Sultan withdrew once more to the
hill (U//) of el-KharrQba, which was guarded by a detach-
ment of troops, and reports were constantly brought in to
him of the movements of the enemy. During the night

* This bridge. N. of /Ar//>6, crossed the £. afHucnt of the Belus (now
lt'(tt/i //,// ////), 3^ miles S.E. of Acre.

* Some editions have KtUtir et'Tnu'ti,

15—2


228 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

he decided to attack the remainder of the enemy. He
therefore wrote to the people in the city informing them of
his plan, and commanding them to make a sortie on their
side as soon as he should begin the attack. As he received
no reply to his letter, he abandoned the idea. On Thursday
morning, the 14th, as soon as the Sultan heard that the
enemy were preparing to move, he mounted his horse, and
drew up his battalions in their appointed order, command-
ing that no one should commence fighting until the signal
was given. He feared an unexpected attack from the
enemy's troops, who had advanced close to his camp. He
posted his battalions on the east bank of the river that
they might be in readiness to advance on the enemy, and
pursue them to their camp. Amongst the leaders of the
Franks on this expedition were Count Henry and the
marquis. The son of the king of the Germans had remained
in the camp with a strong body of troops. As soon as the
enemy reached their camp, the battalions which had been
left behind, and were fresh and eager for the fight, sallied
out, and attacked the Moslem advanced guard. In the
combat that ensued the enemy suffered heavily in killed
and wounded. The Moslems lost five men, and the Franks
lost a man of high rank amongst them. He rode a great
charger, covered with a hammer-cloth of chain-mail that
reached down to its hoofs, and he was apparelled in most
extraordinary fashion. When the fight (jliterally, the war)
was finished, his countrymen sent to ask his body at the
Sultan's hands. The body was given to them ; but the
head, which they were anxious to have as well, could not
be found. The Sultan returned to his camp, and ordered
the baggage forward from the place to which it had been
sent. Both sides took up their respective positions once
more. 'Im^d ed-D!n also returned, having got rid of his
fever. The Sultan was still very ill, and his recovery was


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 229


hindered by his vexation at the escape of the Franks who
had made the sortie. He had not been able to take an
active part in the encounters, and all the while I myself
witnessed the tears of vexation he shed. I was present,
too, when he sent out his sons, one after another, to take
part in the battle, and eng^age in the fight. I was there
when someone said in his presence that the air of the plain
of Acre had been made unhealthy by the great number of
dead left by either side on the field. When he heard these ,
words, he quoted the following verse, applying it to himself,
' Kill me and Malek ; kill Malek with me.'^ By this he
meant that he would be content to die, provided the enemies
of God perished with him. This reply created a deep
impression throughout the Moslem army.


CHAPTER LXXXIX.

FIGHT AT THE AMBUSH.

On the 22nd of the month of Shawal the Sultan, being
minded to lay an ambush for the enemy, chose from his
army a number of well-armed, brave, and resolute soldiers,
who were all good horsemen. He ordered them to repair
by night to the foot of a U// that lies to the north of

^ In the battle of the Camel, which took place in the year 36 of the
Hejia, between the followers of Khalif 'Ali and those of 'Aisha,
Muhammad's widow, MAIek el-Ashter, one of 'All's most devoted
friends, attacked 'Abd Allah Ibn ez-Zobeir, and wounded him in the
head. The wounded man clutched at his adversary, and fell to the
ground with him. They struggled together for some time, and Ibn
ez /obeir called out to his soldiers, in the words of an old poet, to kill
Malek at any cost, even if they had to kill him at the ^ame time.
The combatants were separated by their respective friends. — Ibn
el-Athir i ' Kdmel/ vol. iii., p. 206.


230 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

Acre, not far from the enemy's camp, and there to conceal
themselves. This was the position El Melek el-'Adel had
held in the fight that bears his name. A few of their
number were instructed to show themselves to the enemy
and to advance in the direction of their camp ; then, as
soon as they had drawn them out, they were to take to
flight and rejoin their comrades. During the night these
men repaired to the teU and hid themselves. On the
following day, which was Saturday, the 23rd of the ^ame
month (November 23), as soon as the sun had risen, a few
of their number, mounted on good horses, made their way
towards the camp, discharging arrows at the Franks. The
enemy, provoked by this unceasing shower of darts, came
out to avenge themselves to the number of two hundred
knights, armed at all points, mounted on horses splendidly
caparisoned. There was not a single foot-soldier among
them. They advanced towards their assailants, expecting
to make short work of such a small company. When our
men saw them advancing they began to retreat towards
the ambush, fighting as they went. As soon as the Franks
had reached the spot, the soldiers who were in ambush
raised a mighty shout and rushed upon them, like lions
springing on their prey. The Franks at first stood firm
and fought bravely, then they turned their backs and
began to retreat ; but the Moslems, having them in their
power, attacked them so furiously that they stretched
several of them dead upon the ground, took a great
number of prisoners, and obtained possession of their
horses and arms. When the news of this success reached
the Moslem army, cries of the ia/i/tl and the takbtr {There
is but one God! God is almighty!) rose on every side.
The Sultan mounted and went to meet the brave men
who had fought for the faith. I was on duty at that time
and went with him. We went as far as the hill {tell) of


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 231


Kissln,^ where we met the foremost of the band, and the
Sultan halted there to await the others. Everyone con-
gratulated these brave warriors, and thanked them for
their successful enterprise. The Sultan reviewed the
prisoners, and ascertained their rank and position.
Amongst them was the leader of the body of troops
that the French king had sent out to the assistance of
the besiegers ; the king's treasurer was also among the
prisoners. The Sultan returned to the camp filled with
joy, and ordered the prisoners to be brought before him.
He also commanded the herald to proclaim that all those
who had taken captives should bring them in person
before him. He received all who had high rank amongst
their countrymen, and who were held in good esteem by
them, with every mark of respect, and clad them in robes
of honour. He gave a furred robe of the first class to the
leader of the King of France's troops; and on all the
others, without exception, he bestowed a Jerkh fur, for
they were sufTcring greatly from the cold, which was at that
time very severe. He ordered a banquet to be spread
before them, of which they all partook, and commanded
a tent to be pitched for them close to his own. He
constantly showed them marks of great kindness, and
sometimes invited their leader to his table. By his orders
they were supplied with horses to carry them to Damascus,
and they were treated with the greatest respect. They
received permission to write to their friends, and to send
to the (besiegers') camp for their clothes and any other
things they might need. They availed themselves of this
privilege, and departed for Damascus.

1 TV// /Ctstin is i) miles E. of D*auk, and 5^ miles S.E. of Acre.


232 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER XC.

THE RETURN OF THE ARMY AFTER THE HOLY WAR.

Winter had now come on, and the sea was tossed by
storms ; it was therefore certain thaf the enemy would not
engage in a pitched battle ; we knew also that the heavy
rains would prevent their making any progress in the
siege of the city. Therefore the Sultan permitted his
troops to return to their respective countries, to rest
and give their horses time to recover before the season
arrived to recommence fighting. The first of the chiefs
to depart was 'ImsLd ed-Dtn Zenghi, Lord of Sinjar, with
whose impatience to obtain leave we have already
acquainted the reader. He set out on the 15th of the
month of Shawdl (November 15, 1190). He was followed
on the same day by his nephew Sinjar Shah, Lord of
Jezirat Ibn 'Omar. They had both received from the
Sultan more marks of favour, such as robes of honour,
rich presents, and curiosities, than that prince had ever
bestowed on any other chief. 'Ali ed-Din, son of the
Lord of Mosul, set out on the ist of the month of
Zu el-K*ada (November 30) laden with honours, precious
gifts, and rare and curious things. El-Melek el-Mozafier
Taki ed-Dln and el-Melek ez-Zaher postponed their de-
parture until the following year, 587 of the Hejira
(1191 A.D.); the latter set out on the 9th of Moharrem
(February 6), and el-Melek el-Mozaffer started from the
camp on the 3rd of Safer (March 2). There then remained
with the Sultan but a very few emirs and his especial /la/ka
(guard). In the month of Zu el-K*ada, the previous year,
the Sultan had received a visit from Zulf Endaz.^ He

* Some copies read Zulfetdar,


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 233

treated him with great honour, and gave him entertainment
suitable to his rank ; the day he arrived he had a splendid
banquet set before him, and conversed with him in the
most friendly fashion. The object of this man's visit was
to obtain a decree for his reinstatement in property he had
formerly held in the provinces of Nisiba and Khabiir,
and of which he had been wrongfully deprived. The Sultan
signed an order for their restoration, clad him with a robe
of honour, and treated him with every mark of good-wilK
Zulf Endaz left us filled with joy and full of gratitude for
the Sultan's goodness.


CHAPTER XCI.

THE SULTAN RELIEVES THE GARRLSON OK THE CITY.

The sea had now become very tempestuous, and the be-
siegers, being thereby prevented from employing their ships
against the city, beached all that were left of their galleys.
The Sultan then devoted his attention to introducing a
fresh garrison into Acre, and stocking the city with pro-
visions and supplies, with money and stores of war. He
also took measures for the relief of the officers, who were
worn out by their long imprisonment in the city, and
made loud complaints of their sufferings and fatigue, for
they had been obliged to watch night after night, and had
fought night and day without cessation. He appointed
Kmir Scif ed-Din *Ali el-Meshtub head of the new
garrison ; and that officer entered the city on the i6th of
Moharrem in the year 587 (February 13, II91). On the
same day the retiring commandant, Emir Hossam ed-Din
Abu el-Heija, with his comrades and all the other officers,
left the castle, as Seif ed-Din was entering the city at the


234 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


head of a large body of officers and men. By the Sultan's
orders every man who went into the city had to take with
him a year's provisions. El-Melek el-'Adel repaired to Haifa^
with his troops ; this place is on the seashore, and he sent
ships thence to Acre laden with supplies. He remained
there to enlist volunteers for the garrison at Acre, and to
guard the victuals and supplies destined for that place
from any attack by the enemy. Seven ships laden with
corn, provisions and money, which h^d been fitted out a
long time since in Egypt by the Sultan's orders, had gone
to Acre on the 2nd of the month of Zu el-Hijja in the
previous year (December 31). One of these ships had
struck on a rock close to the harbour, and the whole of
the garrison had gone down to the seashore to endeavour
to save her cargo. The enemy took advantage of this
opportunity to make a sharp assault on the city from the
land side. They came close up to the walls, and began
scaling them with a single ladder. The people of the city
ran up at once and killed a number of their men, forcing
them to give up their enterprise and retreat. The ships
we have just mentioned were so tossed by the wind and
waves that they struck one upon another, and were all
lost, with the cargoes they had brought, and, it is said, not
less than sixty men. These ships contained a great
quantity of corn that would have been sufficient to pro-
vision the city for a whole year. This disaster was a great
blow to the spirits of the Moslems, and a bitter vexation
to the Sultan. This was the first omen of the coming fall
of the city. On the night preceding Sunday, the 7th of
Zu el-Hijja (January 5, 1191) a large part of the wall of
the city fell on the outworks and destroyed them also for
some distance ; this was the second omen of the fall of the

' On the south of the bay of Acre, 9 miles from that city.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 235


city. Encouraged by this accident, the enemy poured
towards the breach in great multitudes ; but the garrison,
full of courage, resisted them most effectually, standing in
the breach like a living rampart. All the masons, artificers
and workmen in the city were collected together at once,
and whilst they laboured to close the breach and rebuild
the wall, they were protected against the enemy by a body
of archers and mangonel-men. In the course of a few
nights the work wa^ completed, and the wall was better
built than it had been in the first instance.


CHAPTER XCIL

SFA'ERAL SHIPS BELONGING TO THE ENEMY ARE

CAPTURED.

A GREAT number of deserters had come over to us, driven
by want of food to leave the Frank camp. These men
said to the Sultan : ' If you will supply us with ships and
smaller craft, we will protect you against the enemy by
sea, and we will share our booty in equal parts with the
Moslems.' The Sultan gave them a bark (barkth) a small
kind of vessel, in which they embarked ; they then fell in
with some merchantmen, whose cargoes consisted chiefly
of ingots of silver and silversmiths* work for the enemy's
camp. They boarded these ships and succeeded in
capturing them after a sharp fight On the 13th of
Zu el-Hijja (January 11, 1191) of the aforesaid year, they
brought the rich booty and the prisoners they had taken
to the Sultan. I was present when they were admitted,
and remarked amongst the articles they had brought a
tabic of silver, on which was (a casket inlaid with ?) the
same metal. The Sultan left them the whole, reserving


236 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


nothing for himself. The Moslems rejoiced to see how
God had inflicted a defeat on the enemy by means of their
own men.


CHAPTER XCIII.

DEATH OF THE SON OF THE KING OF THE GERMANS.

The winter season, which was attended with incessant
rain and frequent changes of temperature, made the plain
exceedingly unhealthy and caused heavy mortality amongs^
the Franks. In addition to this, scarcity of food grew
greater every day, and the sea, on which they depended
for supplies of provisions from all parts, was now im-
passable. Every day from one to two hundred people
died in the camp ; the number of deaths was even
greater if some reports speak true. The son of the king
of the Germans fell grievously sick, and this, combined
with an internal complaint from which he was suffering,
carried him off. He died on the 22nd of Zu el-Hijja, 586
(January 20, 1191). The Franks mourned greatly for
him, and lighted for themselves great fires in all directions,
to the number of two or three in each tent. This gave the
whole camp the appearance of being on fire. The joy
displayed by the Moslems, when they heard of the prince's
death, was as great as the grief evinced by the Franks.
The enemy also lost another of their leaders, named Count
Balfat.^ Count Henry also fell sick, and at one time lay
at death's door. On the 24th of the same month we
captured two of their barks, whose crews numbered more

^ Schultens considers Balidt to stand for * Thibault.* The Oxford
MS. reads BanidL It is perhaps possible that Kundbaliat may
stand for * Canterbury ': for Baldwin, Archbishop of Canterbury, fought
as a soldier at Acre, and died about this time in the camp.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 237

than fifty men, and on the 25th we took a large bark,
which, amongst other things, contained a surcoat (or robe)
covered with pearl embroidery, belonging to the wardrobe
of the king (of the Germans ?). I heard that his nephew,
his sister's son, was on board this bark, and was taken
prisoner.


CHAPTER XCIV.

ASAD EDDIN'S EXPEDITION.

The name of the Asad ed-Din, who is the subject of this
chapter, was Shirkuh ; he was son of Nasr ed-Din Muham-
mad, and grandson of Asad ed-Din ShirkQh senior. He
held the principality of Emesa. The Sultan had given
him instructions to keep strict watch over the Franks in
Tripoli, and to provide for the safety of the Moslems who
dwelt in that part of the country. He received information
that the people of Tripoli had sent all their droves (horses,
oxen, and baggage-animals) to grass in the plain close to
the city ; he therefore laid his plans, and set out with his
troops to carry these animals ofT. He left the city quite
unknown to the enemy, fell on their droves, and took four
hundred horses and one hundred oxen. About forty of
these horses died, but the remainder were brought back
in good condition. He returned home without having lost
a single man. The Sultan received his letter announcing
his success on the 4th of Safer, 587 (March 3, 1 191). The
previous night one of the enemy's ships had been driven
ashore by the wind, and our people, seeing its plight, went
down and took prisoners the whole of the crew, which
was a large one.


238 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER XCV.

OTHER EVENTS IN THIS YEAR.

On the night preceding the first day of the month Rabi'a I.
(March 29), the Moslems in Acre made a sortie, killed a
great number of the besiegers, and carried off about a
dozen women from their camp. On the 3rd of the same
month, the advanced guard, which was that day composed
of troops from the Sultan's halka, was furiously attacked
by a strong body of the enemy. The besiegers had several
men killed, one of whom was said to be of high rank.
The Moslems lost only one man, named Karakush, a ser-
vant in the Sultan's service, who had distinguished himself
by his valour on more than one occasion. The Sultan was
informed that a detachment of the enemy's army frequently
took advantage of our distance from their camp to leave
their quarters and disperse over the plain ; on the 9th of
the month, therefore, he himself selected a considerable
number of men from the ranks of the Moslem army, whom
he put under the command of his brother, el-Melek el-'Adel,
with instructions to take up his position in ambush behind
a /£?//, close to the scene of the action that bears that prince's
name. The Sultan concealed himself also behind Tell el-
'Aiadiya, taking with him several of the princes of his
family — to wit, el-Melek el-Mozaffer Taki ed-Din, Nasr
ed-Din Muhammad (Taki ed-Din's son), el-Melek el-Afdal
(the Sultan's son), and the young princes (his) sons — to
wit, el-Melek el- Ashref Muhammad, el-Melek el-Mo'azzem
TOran-Shah, and el-Melek es-Saleh Ism'ail. Amongst the
men of the turban (doctors of law) that accompanied him
were el-Kadi el-Fadel and the officers of the Chancery ; I
myself was of the party. A few of our warriors, mounted


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSLF. 239


on good horses, advanced towards the enemy and dis-
charged a flight of arrows at them, so as to entice them
out into the plain ; but they would not leave their camp,
having probably received information from some traitor of
the real object of this manoeuvre. Nevertheless, this day
did not pass without furnishing us with some cause for
rejoicing ; for forty-five Franks, who had been taken pri-
soner at BeirCit, were brought in to the Sultan. On this
occasion I witnessed the great tenderness of his heart,
beyond anything ever seen. Amongst the prisoners was a
very aged man who had lost all his teeth, and who could .
hardly move at all. The Sultan asked him through his ^
interpreter why, being so old, he had come to this country",
and how far off his home lay. He replied : * My home is
several months' journey away ; I only came to this country
to make a pilgrimage to the Church of the Resurrection *
(el-Komama), The Sultan was so touched by this answer
that he restored the old man to liberty, and supplied him
with a horse to carry him to the enemy's camp. The
Sultan's younger sons asked his permission to kill these
prisoners, which he forbade them to do. As they had
made their request through me, I begged him to tell me
the reason of his refusal, and he replied : ' They shall not
become accustomed in their youth to the shedding of
blood and lau^h at it, for they as yet know no difference
between a Moslem and an infidel.' Observe the princes
humanity, his wisdom and moderation ! Kl-Meiek el 'Adel,
having given up all hope of enticing the enemy out into the
plain, returned to the camp that same evening.


240 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER XCVI.

ARRIVAL OF MOSLEM TROOPS AND OF THE KING OF

FRANCE.

The sea now became navigable once more> the weather
cleared, and the time drew near for the arrival of reinforce-
ments to both armies, to enable them to carry on the war.
The first to join us was 'Alem ed-Din Suleiman Ibn Jender,
an emir in el-Melek ez-Zdher's service. He was an old
man, and enjoyed a wide-spread fame^ having made his
mark by the wisdom of his counsels and the bravery he
had displayed on many a field. The Sultan thought very
highly of this chief, who was one of his old companions in
arms. The next to arrive was Mejed ed-Din, son of 'Izz
ed-Din FerrOkh Shah, and Lord of B'albek. Other bodies
of Moslem troops came in one after another from different
parts of the country. The enemy, on their side, took every
opportunity of informing our advanced guard and the
people who visited their camp that they were expecting
the King of France to arrive very shortly. This monarch
held very high rank amongst the Christians ; he com-
manded the respect of their most powerful princes ; all the
besiegers* forces would have to put themselves under his
orders as soon as he arrived, and his authority would be
universally acknowledged. This king arrived at last with
six ships laden with provisions and as many horses as he
had considered it necessary to bring. He was accomppinied
by his principal officers. His arrival took place on Satur-
day, the 23rd of Rabi'a I., of the above year (April 20,
A.D. 1 191).


4-
/


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 241


CHAPTER XCVIL

A STRANGE OCCURRENCE OF GOOD OMEN.

The king had brought with him a large white falcon
(///., kite), of enormous size and a rare species ; I had never
seen one so beautiful. The king set great store by the
bird, and was very fond of it. This falcon one day escaped
from his hand and took flight, and instead of returning at
his master's repeated calls, flew off, and perched on the
wall of Acre. Our people took it and sent it to the
Sultan. The flight of the bird to the Moslems gave rise to
great rejoicing, and its capture seemed to them to augur
well. The Franks offered a thousand din&rs as the price
of its ransom, but we did not even send them an answer.
After this arrived Count (Philip) of Flanders, a prince of
high rank among them, and of great renown. It was he
who laid siege to Hamah and Hirim the year (we were
defeated) at Ramla. On the 12th of Rabi'a II., we were
informed by letter from Antioch that a body of deserters
from the Franks, who had been put in possession of several
barks, with the view of despoiling the Christians by sea,
had landed in the island of Cyprus on a certain feast*day.
A great number of the inhabitants were in the church,
which was close to the sea-shore. The pirates took part in
their service, and then threw themselves upon the congre-
gation, taking them all prisoners — the women as well as
the men — and dragging the priest also along with them.
They put them on board their boats and carried them to
Laodicea. They had taken great store of treasure and
twenty-seven women. They say that each of the men
engaged in the adventure received four thousand pieces of
silver, current money, as his share of the plunder. A

16


242 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

short time after this, on the 17th of the month Rabi'a II.,
Bedr ed-Din, shihna (or governor) of Damascus, came into
the camp. Our men fell upon the flock of sheep belonging
to the enemy, and carried off twenty of them ; their horse
and foot came out after them, but did not recover any of
their property.


CHAPTER XCVIII.

ACCOUNT OF THE KING OF ENGLAND.

The king of England was very powerful, very brave, and
full of resolution. He had distinguished himself in many
a battle, and displayed the greatest boldness in all his
campaigns. As regards his kingdom and rank, he was
inferior to the king of France, but he outstripped him in
wealth, in valour, and in fame as a soldier. It was reported
of him that on his arrival in Cyprus he made up his mind
not to proceed any further until he had taken the island
and reduced it to submission. He therefore disembarked
and commenced hostilities, whilst the prince of the island
collected a great number of people together to oppose the
invader, and made a desperate defence of his dominions.^
The king of England then asked help from the Franks at
Acre, and King Geoffrey (sicf sent him his brother at the
head of a hundred and sixty knights. Meanwhile, the
Franks remained under the walls of Acre, awaiting the
result of the war between the two parties. On the last day
of the month Rabi'a II. we received a letter from Beir(^t
informing us. of the capture of five transports belonging to

' King Richard I. defeated Isaac Comnenos (who called himself
Emperor of Cyprus, and who was a nephew of Theodore, wife of
Baldwin III.) on May 6, 1191.

' De Vinsauf says that King Guy himself came to assist in the
conquest of Cyprus.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 243


the kinpr of England's fleet, laden with men and women,
provisions and wood, machines of war and other things,
besides about forty horses. This was a great piece of good
fortune for the Moslems, and the cause of much rejoicing.
On the 4th of Jornada I. the enemy attacked the city and
put seven mangonels in position. Letters came in from
Acre beseeching us in the most urgent manner to send
them help, and begging us to so occupy the enemy that
they should be forced to discontinue the assault. The
Sultan therefore informed his troops that he had decided
to advance closer to the enemy, and to invest their camp
more completely. The following day, in pursuance of this
determination, he drew up his troops in their appointed
order and sent out spies to ascertain the enemy's exact
position, and to see if they had posted men in hiding in
their trenches. They returned with the information that
the trenches were quite empty. Upon this he set out with
a few of his friends and memlAks in the direction of the
enemy's trenches, and climbed a hill called Tell el-FodAl,^
that lay close to their camp, and from the top of which he
could see all that was going on there. He could plainly
distinguish which mangonels were at work and which were
lying idle. He then returned to our camp. I had at-
tended him (on this ride). The next morning some thieves
brought him a child, three months old, that they had stolen
from its mother.

' One of the hillocks in the plain E. of Acre.


16—2


244 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER XCIX.

ACCOUNT OF THE CHILD.'

The Moslems kept a number of thieves whose business it
was to carry off people from the enemy's camp. On one
of their nightly expeditions they seized a little nursling of
three months, and brought it to the Sultan's tent, the rule
being that they should bring all they had taken to the
prince, who gave it back at once into their hands. When
the child's mother found that her child had disappeared,
she spent the whole night in weeping and lamentations,
and in seeking assistance. When the princes of the Franks
heard what had happened, they said to the woman : ' The
Sultan is very compassionate ; we will give you permission
to leave the camp and repair to him, to ask for your
child ; he is certain to give it back to you/ She there-
upon left the camp and went up to the (Moslem) ad-
vanced guard, to whom she told her story. They brought
her to the Sultan, who was on horseback and attended by
his suite, of whom I was one. She threw herself on her
face upon the ground and began weeping and lamenting.
When the Sultan heard the cause of her grief he was
affected even to tears, and commanded the child to be
brought. When he was told that it had been sold in the
market, he commanded that the purchaser should be re-
imbursed the price he had paid, and the child taken away
from him. He remained where he was until the child was
brought, and then gave it back to the poor mother, who
pressed it to her breast whilst the tears ran down her
cheeks. It was such an affecting sight that all who wit-

^ Our author has already given us this account on p. 41.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 245


nessed it were moved to tears. Then, by the Sultan's
command, she and her child were put on a mare and taken
back to the enemy's camp. Here is another instance of the
tenderness he felt for the whole of the human race. Great
God, who madest him merciful, grant him an ample share
of Thy mercy out of Thy greatness and loving-kindness I
Even his enemies bore witness to his kindness and tender*
ness of heart, as the following verse testifies :

' For goodness even rivals prize,
And who the just man's right denies ?*

Z&her ed-Din Ibn el-Bolenkeri, one of the chief emirs of
Mosul, came to the camp this same day. He had left the
service of the princes of that city and wished to enter the
Saltan's army. Very soon after SalcLh ed-Din's return to
the camp he heard that the enemy had renewed their
assault on Acre. He therefore set out on horseback for
the city, but found that the fight was over before he came
up, for night intervening had separated the combatants.


CHAPTER C.

THE SULTAN REMOVES TO THE HILL OF EL'AYAdIya

On the morning of Tuesday, the 9th of the month
Jornada I. (June 4), the Sultan beard that the Franks had
set up their mangonels and were pressing the city very
hard ; he therefore commanded the herald (J&wlsh) to call
(to arms). He then mounted his horse, and advanced
towards el-KharrQba at the head of his infantry and
cavalry, the latter having lost as little time as he in getting
into their saddles. Then be reinforced the advanced guard
by a detachment of troops that be sent forward. As the


246 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

besiegers would not come out of their camp, but continued
their assault on the city, he rushed on their camp, which
was thus completely hemmed in, and fought a hand to
hand combat. The attack was continued till past mid-day,
when the enemy, abandoning their hope of carrying the
city, suspended operations in that direction and returned
to their camp. The Sultan sought shelter from the sun in
a small tent that was pitched for him close at hand, and,
after saying the mid-day prayer, he rested there for the
space of an hour. He had previously sent reinforcements
to the advanced guard, and ordered his troops back to the
camp to get a little rest. I was then on duty. Whilst we
were recovering from our fatigue, a messenger came in
from the advanced guard to report that as soon as the enemy
saw that the Sultan had withdrawn, they had recommenced
their assault of the city even more furiously than before.
The Sultan dispatched an order recalling his troops,
bidding them advance, regiment by regiment, to the
quarter on which the enemy had collected their forces,
and remain there under arms for the night. He remained
on the spot himself to share their toils. Towards the end
of the day, which was Tuesday, I took my departure from
his tent and returned to the camp, my turn of duty being
over. The Sultan spent the night with his troops, who re-
mained drawn up in order of battle. During the night one
detachment was posted close to the enemy's trenches, to
keep them from leaving their camp. On the following
morning, which was Wednesday^ the lOth of the month
(June 5), the Sultan removed to a position facing the
enemy, on Tell el-'Ay&d!ya, and took up his quarters in
a little tent that had been pitched as a shelter for him.
Throughout the day he maintained a steady and un-
interrupted attack on the besiegers, so as to keep their
hands full, and prevent their acting against the city, and


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 247


he went incessantly from rank to rank, urging them to
fight bravely in God's cause, and assuring them of ultimate
success. When the enemy saw the fury of his attack, they
grew apprehensive for the safety of their camp ; and, to
prevent its being carried by assault, they suspended
hostilities against the city, and provided for the defence of
the trenches and tents. Upon this the Sultan returned to
the camp he had established on Tell el-'Ay&dfya, leaving
detachments behind to keep watch over the enemy's
trenches, and report to him from hour to hour whatever
might happen.

CHAPTER CI.

THE CITY IS REDUCED TO THE DIREST STRAITS.

We had already been informed of the enei^ with which
the enemy carried on the assault and endeavoured to fill
up the ditches. They even threw the bodies of their dead
horses into the moat, and went so far as to cast their own
dead in. All these things came to our knowledge by
means of letters, which we constantly received from our
co-religionists in the city. These people had been divided
into four sections : the first used to go down into the moat
and cut to pieces the bodies of the animals that had been
thrown in, in order that they might thus be the more easily
carried away ; the second division carried off the pieces
and cast them into the sea ; the third maintained a con-
stant discharge upon the enemy to protect the two first
sections and enable them to perform their tasks ; the fourth
worked the mangonels and provided for the defence of the
walls. The garrison were so worn out with exertion and
fatigue that they sent incessant complaints to the Sultan.
Indeed, they suflered more than any other body of troops


248 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

has ever done, and no amount of courage was 'of any avail.
Nevertheless they bore up with considerable patience, and
God is with the patient. Meanwhile the Sultan never
ceased attacking the enemy. He fought them continually
night and day, either in person, or by means of his officers
and sons, with the view of distracting their attention and
preventing them from prosecuting the siege. But the
besiegers' mangonels were brought to bear on 'Ain el-
Bakar ;^ stones from these engines fell on the city night
and day, and the damage sustained by the (great) tower^
was plainly visible. Whenever the enemy were making
preparations to renew their assault on the city, the Sultan
pressed right up to their trenches on the other side. At
last one of the Franks came out of their camp and looked
about for someone to speak to. The Sultan was informed
of this, and m^de answer : * Tell them, if they have any-
thing to ask, to send us one of their men ; we have nothing,
for our partj to ask at their hands, and nothing whatever
to do with them.' The two sides were still engaged in
fighting when the king of England arrived.


1


CHAPTER CII.

ARRIVAL OF THE KING OF ENGLAND.

The king of England arrived in the Frank camp on
Saturday, the 13th of the month Jomada I. (June 8, 1 191),
after having conquered the island of Cyprus, and having
succeeded against its lord. The news of his coming spread
great terror. He brought five-and -twenty galleys with him,

' ^Ain el'Bakar means ^ the ox-pool.' It was probably inside the
city.
« The 'Cursed Tower* at the N.E, corner of the outer wall of Acre.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 249


filled with men, arms and stores. The Franks were filled
with so great a joy at his arrival that they lit huge and
terrible fires that night in their camp — a sure sign of the
important support he had brought them. Their leaders had
oftentimes boasted to us that he would come, and held his
arrival as a menace over our heads; and now, according
to the people who frequented their camp, they expected,
the very moment he landed, to see him fulfil their dearest
wish of pushing forward with the siege of the city. This
prince, indeed^ was justly distinguished for his good judg-
ment and wide experience, for his extreme daring and
insatiable ambition. Therefore^ when the Moslems heard
of his arrival, they were filled with terror and alarm. The
Sultan, nevertheless, received the news undisturbed, for he
counted upon God*s favour and protection, and manifested
the purity of his motives in warring against the Franks.


CHAPTER cm.

A MOSLEM VESSEL SUNK— THIRD SIGN OF THE
APPROACHING FALL OF THE CITY.

On the i6th a great ship, bringing engines of war, arms,
provisions, and a large body of troops from BeirOt, was
approaching the city. She had been equipped by the
Sultan's orders at BeirAt, and had sailed from that place
with a great number of soldiers on board, and instructions
to run the blockade and make the harbour of Acre. The
soldiers on board numbered six hundred and fifty. The
king of England fell in with this vessel,^ and sent his

* According to De Vinsauf this ship was captured while the English
were 00 the way (rom Tyre to Acre, which would be before June 8.
The month is not named in this chapter.


2SO WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


galleys to attack her. They surrounded her, I have been
told, to the number of forty, and a desperate encounter
ensued. Providence ordained that the wind should falK
The enemy lost a number of men in this fight. The crew
of our vessel were overmatched by the superior force of the
enemy, and seeing that there was no chance of anything
but defeat, the captain, Y'akQb, a native of Aleppo, and a
brave and experienced soldier, said, ' By God 1 we will die
with honour, nor shall they get anything from this ship !'
and he stove in the sides of his ship ; everything on board
— men, engines of war, provisions, etc., all sank into the
waves, and nothing fell into the hands of the enemy. The
Moslems were overwhelmed by the news of this catas-
trophe, but the Sultan heard the tidings with perfect resig-
nation to God's will and with exemplary calm, and God
wastes not the hire of those who do well (Kur^n ix. 121).


CHAPTER CIV.

A HUGE MOVING TOWER IS SET ON FIRE.

The enemy had built an enormous tower, four stories
high ; the first story was constructed of wood, the second
of lead, the third of iron, and the fourth of copper. It
stood higher than the wall of the city, and held men at
arms. They had brought this tower up to within about
five cubits of the ramparts, as far as we could judge from
our position; then the besieged began to throw naphtha
on it, and continued to do so without ceasing night and
day, until, by God's grace, the engine was set on fire.
This success compensated for the loss of the ship from
Beirut which occurred the same day.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 251


CHAPTER CV.

VARIOUS OCCURRENCES.

On Friday, the 19th of this month, the enemy made a
vigorous assault on the city, and attacked it at close
quarters ; but the garrison had previously arranged with
the Sultan to beat a drum when the enemy attacked
them, and they now beat it. The Sultan's drum replied,
and the army got to horse and rushed down on the camp,
attacking the enemy in the rear. A number of Moslems
leapt into the trenches, rushed into the tents, and carried
off the cooking-pots and what was in them. Part of the
booty taken in the camp was brought to the Sultan and
laid before him in my presence. They feasted their
swords (with the blood of the infidels) until the enemy
became aware that their camp had been invaded. They
then desisted from their attack on the city and faced
about to give battle to our army. A new battle began
in this quarter, which raged till noon, when both sides
returned to their respective camps, equally worn out by
fatigue and the heat. On Monday the 23rd the drum
sounded the alarm once more from the city, and the
Sultan*s answered it as before. In the combat that
ensued the enemy bent all their fury on the city, thinking
we should not dare to attack them in their camp ; but the
Moslem troops promptly undeceived them. They made
their way once more right into the tents and carried off
great spoil The besiegers were roused by the alarm-calls
and came back to oppose our men, great numbers of whom
they found within the trenches and walls of the camp. A
desperate encounter followed, in which two Moslems


252 WHAT^ BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

were killed and many wounded. A very remarkable thing
occurred this day. An old man, a native of Mazander&n,
and a person of some consequence, had arrived this very
morning to take part in the Holy War, and, finding that a
fight was going on, he obtained the Sultan's leave to join
the men engaged ; he made a furious charge against the
enemy and fell a martyr at once. When the Franks found
that the Moslems had penetrated within their trenches and
walls, they were filled with fury, their cavalry sprang to
horse, and, accompanied by the foot-soldiers, rushed from
their trenches and charged the Moslems like one man.
Our troops stood firm, and did not stir from their position ;
then both sides engaged in a desperate fight. When the
enemy saw the calm bravery displayed by the Moslems,
they took advantage of an interval to obtain the Sultan's
permission to send him an envoy. This messenger went
first to el-Melek el-'Adel, and got him and el-Melek
el-Afdel to accompany him to the prince. He then
delivered his message, which was to express the king
of England's desire for an interview with the Sultan.
The Sultan, without a moment's hesitation, made answer
in the following terms : ' It is not customary for kings to
meet, unless they have previously laid the foundations of
a treaty ; for after they have spoken together and given
one another the tokens of mutual confidence that are
natural in such circumstances, it is not seemly for them to
make war upon one another. It is therefore absolutely
essential that the preliminaries should be arranged first of
all, and that a trustworthy interpreter should act as our
intermediary to explain to each of us what the other says.
As soon as the preliminaries are settled, the interview,
please God, shall take place.' On Saturday, the 28th of
the month, the enemy's cavalry and infantry sallied out of
the camp and attacked that division of our army which


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 253


was encamped on the shore to the north of the city. As
soon as the Sultan was informed of this movement, he
sprang into the saddle, his troops followed him, and a fight
ensued between the two armies. Bedawin and Kurds were
killed on our side, whilst the enemy suffered great loss.
One prisoner in full armour, on horseback, was brought
before the Sultan. The battle raged till night fell and
separated the combatants. On Sunday, the 29th, a strong
party of the enemy's foot advanced along the bank of the
Nahr el-Halu, where they fell in with a detachment of our
advanced guard. A smart encounter ensued, in which the
enemy took a Moslem prisoner, put him to death, and
burned his body. The Moslems on their side did the
same with a Frank prisoner. I myself saw the light of
the two piles that were burning at the same time. We
constantly received news from the people in the city ; they
besought us to occupy the enemy's attention, and com-
plained of being obliged to fight both night and day.
They told us they were utterly exhausted, being forced to
be on the walls without any rest, to oppose the attacks of
the enemy, which had been incessant since the arrival of
the king of England. After this that prince fell sick of
an illness of which he nearly died ; the king of France
also was suffering from a wound, but this only increased
the arrogance and obstinacy of the besiegers.

The sister of the king of England had two servants
who were secretly Moslems, whom she had taken into her
service in Sicily ; her husband had been king of that
island,^ and on his death her brother, passing through
Sicily, took her with him and escorted her to the army.
Her two servants fled to the Moslem army. The Sultan

' Joan, sister of Richard I., marrird WilliAin of Sicily in 1 177. He
Hied in injo. Sicily contained a large Moslem population under its
Nomian Kings.


254 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

gave them a most kindly welcome, and loaded them with
marks of his favour.


CHAPTER CVL

THE MARQUIS (CONRAD OF MONTFERRAT) TAKES FLIGHT

TO TYRE.

The marquis was afraid that if he remained (where he was)
he would be seized, and his city given to the ex-king, who
had been taken prisoner by the Sultan, to compensate
him for the captivity he had suffered whilst upholding
the Messiah's religion with his sword. Feeling sure that
this was the course things would take, he fled to Tyre on
Monday, the 30th Jomada I. Priests were sent to bring
him back, but he would not listen to them, and set out'
by ship for that city. His departure was a great loss to
the Franks, for he was distinguished for his good judgment,
experience, and valour.


CHAPTER CVIL

ARRIVAL OF THE LATEST CONTINGENTS FOR THE

MOSLEM ARMY.

On the 30th of the month Jomada I. the contingent from
Sinjar reached the camp, under Mojdhed ed-Din Berenkash,
a religious and well-informed man, very zealous for the
war. The Sultan went out to meet him and do him
honour ; he received him in his own tent and loaded him
with tokens of esteem, after which he assigned him a posi-
tion in the left wing of the army. The arrival of this chief
gave him the greatest satisfaction. After this there came
in a strong detachment from the Egyptian army under


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 25s


A'lem ed-Din Korji Seif ed-Dln Sonkor, the dewdddr
(Secretary of State), and a number of others of high rank.
Then came 'A1& ed-Dtn^ prince of Mosul, at the head of
the troops from that city* The Sultan bade him welcome
at eUKharrtiba, and received him with the greatest honour.
This contingent remained at that place until the following
morning, which was the 2nd of Jomada II. ; their leader
then paraded his troops in front of the enemy, and the
Sultan reviewed them. 'A14 ed-D!n was lodged first of all
in the Sultan's tent ; Sal^h ed-Dfn sent him the most
magnificent presents, and furnished him with most sump-
tuous appointments suited to the rank of so great a prince.
He then gave him a position in the right wing of the
army. On the 3rd of the same month a second detach-
ment came in from Egypt. The Franks were at this time
so much concerned at the increasing gravity of the king
of England's illness that they even discontinued for a
while their attacks on the city. This was a mercy decreed
by God, for the besieged garrison were in a most exhausted
condition and reduced to their last gasp, as the mangonels
had beaten down the walls to no higher than a man's
height. Meanwhile the Arab thieves (in the Sultan's pay)
used to steal into the besiegers' camp and carry off their
goods. They used even to make prisoners without striking
a blow, and this was the method they used : they would
enter a man's tent whilst he was asleep, and having placed
a dagger at his throat, would wake him up and make him
understand by signs that if he said a word they would dis-
patch him at once ; then they Vrould carry him out of the
camp and bring him to our army. The prisoner did not
dare to open his mouth. This they succeeded in doing on
several occasions. When the contingents from all parts
had come in, one by one, the Moslem army was brought
up to its full strength.


256 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


CHAPTER CVIII.

THE FRANKS SEND AN AMBASSADOR TO THE SULTAN.

I RELATED above that an ambassador had been sent by
the king of England to solicit an interview with the Sultan>
and that the Sultan had excused himself. Some time
afterwards the same messenger arrived bringing the very
same message. He first had an interview with el-Melek
el-'Adel, and that prince communicated his message to the
Sultan. It was decided that the king should have per-
mission to come out (of his camp), and that the meeting
should take place on the plain, surrounded by the armies,
and that an interpreter should accompany the two
sovereigns. The messenger returned with the answer, and
it was some days before he came to the camp again, on
account of the illness from which (his master) was suffering.
After this a report spread about that the (Frank) princes
had presented themselves in a body (before the king),, and
expressed strong disapproval of his proposed interview, on
the ground that it would imperil the Christian cause.
Nevertheless, very soon afterwards the same messenger
came (to us) once more, with the following message : ' Do
not believe the reports that have been spread as to the
cause of my enforced delay : I am answerable to myself
alone for what I may do : I am master of my own
actions, and no one has 'any authority over me. But,
during the last few days, I have been prevented from doing
anything at all by sickness ; that alone has caused the
delay. It is the custom of kings, when they happen to be
near one another, to send each other mutual presents and
gifts. Now I have in my possession a gift worthy of


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 257


the Sultan's acceptance, and I ask permission to send it
to him.' El-Melek el-'Adel replied as follows : * He may
send this present provided he will accept a gift of equal
value from us.' The messenger agreed to this condi-
tion, and added : ' Our present might be of falcons from
beyond the sea, but just now they are weak, and it would
be a good thing if you could send us a few birds and fowls ;
we would give them to our falcons, and they would revive,
so that we could bring them to you.' El-Melek el-'Adel,
who knew full well what tone to take with them, replied
jokingly : ' I suppose the king wants some fowls and
chickens for his own use, and this is the means he adopts
to procure them.' The conversation went on for some
time, and at last the messenger asked : ' What do you want
at our hands ? Have you anything to say ? Speak, so
that we may know what it is.' El-Melek made answer :
' It was not we who made advances to you : you came to
us ; if you have anything to say, it is for you to speak and
tell us your views ; we are prepared to listen.' The inter-
view then came to an end, and we had no further commu-
nications until the 6th of Jornada II., when the king of
England's ambassador came to visit the Sultan, bringing
with him a Moglirabi Moslem, whom they had kept in cap-
tivity for a long time. The Sultan, to whom this man was
given as a present, received him with the utmost kindness
and with many tokens of goodwill. The envoy received
a robe of honour and returned to his master. The object of
these frequent visits from the ambassador was to ascertain
the state of our spirits, and to learn whether we were
inclined to resist or give way ; we, on our side, were
induced to receive the enemy's messages by the very same
motive that prompted them.


»7


2S8 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER CIX.

THE BESIEGERS MAKE A FURIOUS ATTACK ON THE CITY,
AND REDUCE IT TO THE LAST EXTREMITY.

The enemy continued their assaults on the city» and
played on the walls incessantly with their mangonels, until
all the stonework and structure of the walls was ruined.
The people of the city were worn out by fatigue and long
watching, for there was but a handful of them, and it was
pnly with difficulty that they were able to bear up against
the multitude of their adversaries and the continuous work.
Numbers of them passed several nights in succession with-
out closing their eyes, taking no rest night or day, whilst the
besiegers, who hemmed them in, were in great force, and
could relieve each other in their attack on the city. The
garrison had been obliged to divide their reduced num-
bers, so as to provide for the protection of the walls
and ditches, to work the mangonels, and to furnish crews
for the ships and galleys. When the enemy were informed
of this melancholy state of affairs, and of the extent
to which the fortifications had suffered, they began to
assault the city on all sides ; their battalions relieved each
other without interruption, fresh men advancing to the
.fight whilst the others rested. On the 7th of the month
they renewed the attack with the greatest fury, bringing
all their forces, both infantry and cavalry, to bear on the
walls of the city. They took the precaution of manning
the walls that protected their trenches, and they kept
troops there night and day. As soon as the Sultan knew
what was going forward (he was informed of the state of
things both by the report of eye-witnesses and by the


i


i


i


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 259


rolling of the drum, the signal agreed upon between the
garrison and himself), he mounted his horse, and, followed
by his army, rushed down upon the enemy. A desperate
encounter took place that day between the two armies ;
the Sultan, as restless as a mother weeping for her lost
child, darted hither and thither, and rode from battalion
to battalion, urging on his men to fight for God. I have
been told that cl-Melek ei-'Adel charged the enemy in
person twice that day. The Sultan, with his eyes 'full of
tearsy went from battalion to battalion, crying : ' On for
Islam r The more he gazed towards the city and saw the
ordeal the inhabitants were passing through, and their
terrible sufferings, the more often he charged with renewed
vigour and encouraged his troops to fight That day
he took absolutely nothing to eat, and drank nothing
but a few cupfuls of a (certain) drink which his physician
advised him to take. I was not present at this battle,
being confined to my tent at el-*Aiadiya by an attack
of sickness, but I watched all that was going on from
that place. When night fell the Sultan returned to tlie
camp, after the last evening prayer. He was worn out
with fatigue, and a prey to melancholy and vexation. He
slept, but his sleep was nut quiet. At daybreak he
ordered the drum to beat. At this summons the troops
came in from all sides and formed into squadrons, ready
to return to the work of the previous day. That same day
we received a letter from the city containing the following
statement : ' We are so utterly reduced and exhausted
that we have no choice but to surrender the city. If
to-morrow, the 8th, you do not effect anything for our
rescue, we shall offer to capitulate, and make no condition
but that we receive our lives.* This was the most distressing
news the Moslems could receive. The blow struck them to
the heart, for all the forces of the coast, of Jerusalem,

17 — 2


26o WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Damascus, Aleppo, and Egypt, and the other Moslem
countries, had been collected together at Acre. Moreover
the city was held by the most renowned emirs in the army,
the bravest champions of Isl&m, such as Seif ed-Din 'AH
eUMeshtOb and Behd ed-Din KardkOsh, who had com-
manded the citadel from the very commencement of the
siege. The Sultan, struck by a blow the like of which he
had never before experienced, suflfered so terribly that
fears were entertained for his health. Nevertheless, he
prayed to God without ceasing, and besought His aid,
showing the most wonderful calmness and resignation,
coupled with a determination to carry on the Holy War,
and God does not waste the hire of those wlio do well
(KurAn ix. 121).

Thinking that it would be best to storm the enemy's
camp and force his way in, he summoned all his troops
to arms ; his warriors sprang to the saddle ; the cavalry
came together as well as the infantry; but this day our
plan did not succeed. In truth the enemy's foot presented
a front like a solid wall ; behind the shelter of their ram-
parts they defended themselves with their arms, their
arbalists and arrows. Some (of our men) forced their
way across the trenches, but their opponents fought
fiercely, and they could not dislodge them from their posi-
tions. One of the Moslems, who had leapt the trenches,
reported that he had seen a man, a Frank of enormous
stature, who, all alone on the top of the parapet, was
holding the Moslems at bay by his own unaided strength ;
his comrades stood on either side and handed him stones,
which he hurled at our men as they advanced to the scarp.
* This man,' said he, * had been struck by more than fifty
arrows and stones, but nothing distracted him from his
work. He kept on fighting and driving back the men
who were coming on, until at last he was burnt alive by


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 261


a bottle of naphtha, hurled at him by one of our pyro-
technists.* One very intelligent old man, belonging to the
mercenaries, was amongst those who forced their way into
the enemy's trenches that day. ' Behind their rampart,'
he told me, * was a woman, wrapped in a green me/Mta
(a kind of mantle), who kept on shooting arrows from a
wooden bow, with which she wounded several of our men.
She was at last overpowered by numbers ; we killed her,
and brought the bow she had been using to the Sultan,
who was greatly astonished/ The battle raged throughout
the day and was only terminated by the fall of night.


CHAPTER ex.

THE CITY IS REDUCED TO THE LAST EXTREMITY, AND THE
GARRISON OPEN NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE FRANKS.

The desperate assault to which the enemy had subjected
the city, and the enormous multitude of troops that attacked
it on every side with constant relief from their comrades,
had so undermined the strength of the garrison by the
loss of horse and foot-soldiers, that the courage of the
besieged sank to the lowest ebb. They saw immediate
death before them : they felt that they could not make a
lengthened resistance now that the enemy had established
themselves in the ditches, and occupied the outer wall.
They had undermined it, and filled the hollow with com-
bustibles, to which they had set fire, and thus destroyed
the curtain of the outwork.' The enemy had then forced
their way through the gap, but with a loss of more than a
hundred and fifty men in killed and prisoners. Amongst

* Acre was defended by double walls on the £•


262 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


the number were six officers, one of whom cried out : * Do
not kill me, and I will make the Franks withdraw ;' but a
Kurd, who was close by, rushed on him, and slew him.
The five others met the same fate. The following day the
Franks cried out (to our people) to save the lives of the six
officers, promising in return to spare the lives of all the
garrison; but they replied that it was too late. This
occasioned the besiegers great grief, and for three days
they made no further attack on the city. We also heard
that Self ed-Din el-MeshtOb went in person to see the
French king, the leader of the besiegers, to offer to capitu-
late, and that he addressed him as follows : ' We have
taken cities from you, and even when we carried them by
storm, we have been accustomed to grant terms to the
vanquished, and we have had them taken to the places in
which they wished to take refuge, treating them with all
kindness. We, then, will surrender the city to you if you
will grant us terms.' To which the king made answer :

* Those you took were our servants and slaves ; you
are likewise our slaves. I will see what I shall do.' We
were informed that el-Meshtiib then took a haughty tone,
and made a long speech, saying, amongst other things :

* We will rather kill ourselves than surrender the city, and
not one of us shall die before fifty of your greatest have
fallen.' Then he withdrew, and returned to the city with
the news he brought. Some of the besieged were so terrified
by the king's answer that they seized a vessel, and sailed
during the night of the 8th to 9th, and came out to join
the Moslem army. The most important of these men were
Ibn el-J4wali, 'Izz ed-Din Arsel, and Sonkor el-Washdki.
The two latter, on their arrival in the camp, feared the
Sultan's wrath, and hid themselves so effectually that
they could not be found. However, they succeeded in
taking Ibn el-J&wali, and he was put into prison {Zered-


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF. 263


khana)} On the following day the Sultan mounted his horse,
intending to take the enemy unawares, and commanded his
men to take spades and other tools to fill up the trenches ;
but the troops did not support him — they disappointed his
expectations, and retreated. They cried out to him : * You
will destroy all Isl&m, and there is no good in that !' That
same day three envoys arrived from the king of England,
and asked the Sultan for som^ fruit and snow. They
added that, on the following day, the chief of the Hospitallers
was coming to discuss the feasibility of a peace. The
Sultan, instead of bein^ angry, gave them an honourable
reception, and allowed them to walk about in the market-
place that had been established close to the camp. They
departed the same evening, and returned to their quarters.
The same day the Sultan commanded S&rem ed-Din
K&imaz en-Nejmi to charge the enemy's trenches at the
head of his men. Several emirs of the Kurds, amongst
whom was eUJen&h, the brother of el-Meshtiib, joined
Kaim&z with the men under their command. As soon as
they reached the walls before the trenches, K&im4z planted
his standard in the earth, and defended it for a great part
of the day. In the thick of the fight, 'Izz ed-Dtn Jurdik
(en-Nfiri) came up with his troops ; they all dismounted,
and took an active part in the engagement On Friday,
the loth of the month Jomada II. Q\x\y 5). the enemy
remained quietly in their camp, and the Moslem army was
drawn up in a circle round them. Our brave fellows spent
the night on horseback, and fully armed, hoping that their
comrades in Acre would second them by attacking some
part of the enemy's camp, and that they might force their

I According to el-Makrizi,the maa who was committed to the State
prifon of /.erfd-khdrnt, *the storehouse of breastplates,* did not re-
main there long ; he was soon either killed or set at liberty. — S. de
Sacy's ChrtstoBHathit' Artthf, 2nd edition, voL ii., p. 179.


264 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

way in from both sides, giving one another mutual support.
This was the plan they had formed, and were determined
to carry out at whatever cost ; but it was absolutely im-
possible for the besieged to e<Tect a sortie that night, for
one of their servants had deserted to the enemy, and
betrayed the garrison's design. The Franks therefore
maintained a strict watch over the city, and guarded, with
unrelaxed attention, against every movement of the garrison.
On this same Friday, three envoys from the Frank camp
had an interview with el-Melek el-'Adel, but returned, after
an hour's talk, without having settled anything. The close
of day found the whole Moslem army drawn up on the
plain under arms ; in this manner they passed the night.
On Saturday, the entire force of the Franks began to
make ready for battle, and the great commotion going on
in every part of their camp led us to believe that they meant
to take the field against us. Whilst the troops were getting
into line, about forty men were seen coming out of the
gate from which a flag was flying, and they called out to a
party of memliiks : * Send but to us el-'Adel ez-Zcbed^ni,
the Sultan's freed man, and Governor of Sidon !' When
this man went up to them, they entered into a discussion
on the subject of the evacuation of Acre by the garrison ;
but they were so exacting in their demands that the
Saturday passed without anything being concluded.


CHAPTER CXI.

WE RECEIVE LETTERS FROM THE CITY.

On Sunday, the 12th of the month, letters came, saying:
* We have sworn to die together ; we will fight until we fall,
and will not yield the city while there is breath in our


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 265


bodies. You. on your side, must do all you can to occupy
the enemy and prevent their attacking us. Since we are
resolved, be sure that you do not humble yourselves before
the enemy, or show yourselves fainthearted. Our minds are
made up/ The man who swam out to us with these letters
told us that the Franks attributed the great noise they had
heard during the night to the introduction of a strong
body of troops into Acre, and believed them to be still
in the city. ' Therefore/ said the man, ' a Frank came
out below the wall and called to one of the men on the
top, saying : " I beseech you, by the truth of your religion,
to tell me how many men were thrown into the city last
night,'' that is to say, on the night preceding the Saturday.
For there had been a great noise during the night, which
had roused both the armies without any apparent cause.
The man who was questioned replied that they were a
thousand horse-soldiers.' * Nay,* answered the Frank, ' not
so many as that, I saw them myself; they were clad in
green.'^ The arrival of the contingents (from the different
Moslem districts) that had come in one after another
enabled us to divert the enemy's attention from their
attack on the city — which was now on the point of falling
— for the space of several days. Breaches had been made
in many places in the walls, but the besieged had built a
wall behind them, from the top of which they maintained
a brave struggle. On Tuesday, the 14th of the month,
S&bek ed-Din, Prince of Sheizer, came into the camp, and
on Wednesday, the 15th, Bedr ed-Din Dolderim also
arrived, at the head of a large body of Turkomans, that
he had hired with money furnished by the Sultan. On
Thursday, the idth, Asad ed-Din Shtrktih arrived. The

' lieba ed-Din quotes Fiank evidence to show that the dead
Martyrs of Isllm (whose colour is green) were 6ghting for the
farrison. The mysterious noise appears to have been an earthquake.


266 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Franks remained immovable; they would neither make
peace nor accept the capitulation of the garrison, except
on the condition that all the prisoners in the hands of the
Moslems should be set at liberty, and that all the cities of
the districts on the coast should be given up to them. A
proposal was made to surrender the city and all it con-
tained, with the exception of the inhabitants, but this they
rejected. The cross of the crucifixion was then offered to
them, in addition to the former terms, but they persisted in
their demands, and showed the greatest arrogance. Thus
all the subtlety of our diplomacy was thrown away upon
them ; they used all their skill (in these negotiations) ; but
God a/so was skilful, for God is the best of the skilful
(Kurin iii. 47).


CHAPTER CXII.

TREATY CONCLUDED BY THE BESIEGED, BY WHICH THEIR

LIVES ARE PRESERVED.

On Friday, the 17th of Jomada II., the man swam out
from the city with letters. These informed us that the
garrison were reduced to the last extremity, and were too
weak to defend the breach, which was now very large ;
they saw Death himself looming before them, and feared
that everyone would be put to the sword if the city were
carried by storm. They had therefore concluded a treaty
of peace, by which the city with all that it contained — its
engines of war, stores and ships — was to be surrendered to
the Franks, who were to receive, in addition, two hundred
thousand gold pieces (dinars), and five hundred prisoners
not of rank, together with one hundred of the principal
captives to be named by the Franks; the besieged had also
promised to give up the cross of the crucifixion. As soon


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 267


as these conditions were accepted the Moslems were to
leave the city in safety, taking their money and personal
property with them, and their wives and children were to
be allowed to accompany them. The Franks had, more-
over, stipulated for the payment of four thousand gold-
pieces to the marquis, because this treaty had been brought
about through his mediation.


CHAPTER CXIII.

THE ENEMY TAKES POSSESSION OF ACRE.

When the Sultan had learnt the contents of the letters
from the city, he expressed the greatest displeasure. The
news made the profoundest impression upon him, and he
summoned his councillors together, to inform them of it,
and consult with them upon the course to be adopted. They
were divided in opinion, and he did not adopt either of the
plans they suggested. Full of anxiety, he determined to
send the man back to the city that night, with a. letter
declaring his formal disapproval of a treaty containing
such conditions. He was still in this state (of anxiety),
when, all of a sudden, the Moslems saw the banners of the
infidels floating from the walls of the city, with crosses and
the distinctive pennons (of their leaders), whilst fires were
lighted on the ramparts. This was on Friday, the 17th of
Jornada H., in the year 587 (July 12, 1191 A.D.), in the
middle of the day. The Franks with one accord raised a
mighty shout, whilst the Moslems were overwhelmed by this
dreadful blow, and the hearts of the believers in one God
overflowed with grief. The people thought then of the
word of wisdom, * We come forth from God, and to Him
we must return,' and they made the camp ring with their


268 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


vociferations, groans, and lamentations. The grief of each
heart was according to its belief, and every man was
afflicted by this evil according to the measure of his faith
and zeal. And it burst upon them that the treaty between the
people of the city and the Franks was upheld. The marquis
entered the city with the king's standards, and planted
them that very Friday in the place of the banners of Islam ;
he planted one on the castle, one on the minaret of the
mosque, a third on the Templars* Tower, and a fourth on the
Slaughter-Tower.^ The Moslems were all ordered to one
particular quarter of the city. At that time I happened to
be on duty in the Sultan's tent, and, seeing him struck
down with grief like a mother who has lost her child, I
offered him all the consolations that are usual in such a
case, begging him to think of the future fate of the (other)
cities of the coast, and of Jerusalem itself, and to turn his
attention to delivering the Moslem captives in Acre. This
was during the night preceding Saturday, the i8th of
the month. He finally decided to leave the place where
he was encamped, since there was no longer any reason
for hemming in the enemy ; he therefore dispatched
the baggage by night to the position he had previously
occupied at Shefr'am. He himself remained where he was
with a small body of horse, to keep a watch on the enemy's
movements and over the fate of the inhabitants. All that
night, until morning dawned, our troops were moving off ;
but the Sultan still nourished the hope that, by the grace
of God, the Franks, rendered incautious by their success,
would come out and attack him. Then he would have an

' The castle was on the N. wall of Acre, near the centre. The
mosque was the Church of St. John, near the centre of the city. The
Templars' fortress was by the sea, on the S.W. of the city. The Tower
of Slaughter is probably the * Bloody Tower ' at the N.E. comer of
the inner wall.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 269

opportunity for rushing down upon them and avenging
all the wrong they had done him, leaving it in God's
hands to decide to whom He should give the victory.
The Franks, however, made no movement, they were
occupied in taking possession of Acre, and in establishing
themselves in the city. He remained in the same place until
daybreak on the 19th, when he rempved to the baggage
(that is, to Shefr'am). That day three (Franks) came out
(of the city), accompanied by Ak(^sh, the chamberlain, a
very well-informed man, who came to speak on behalf of
his colleague Beh& ed-Din KarakQsh. They came for
instructions regarding the money and prisoners which had
been stipulated for in the treaty of peace. They were
honourably received, and stayed the night, and on the 21st
of the month they departed for Damascus, still on busi-
ness relating to the prisoners. The Sultan also sent an
ambassador to the Franks, to obtain information as to
late occurrences, and also to ascertain what period of time
would be allowed him to carry out the terms of the treaty,
which was to be the basis of the truce.


CHAPTER CXIV.

AN ENCOUNTER TAKES PLACE DURIN(; THE INTERVAU

On the last day of the aforesaid month the Franks came
out, and, following the sea-shore to the north of the city,
spread out in a long line, with their horse and foot drawn
up in order of battle. The Sultan was informed of this
manoeuvre by the advanced guard, and, ordering the drum
to be sounded, he mounted his horse, and sent considerable
reinforcements to the guard in front He himself remained
behind, to give the Moslem troops time to mount and


270 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


assemble. The reinforcements had not reached the ad-
vanced guard before they became engaged in a furious
encounter with the enemy. As soon as they received the
reinforcements, they charged straight ahead, forced the
division of the enemy that was in front of them back, and
threw the cavalry into confusion ; the cavalry then aban-
doned the infantry, and took to flight. The runaways
thought that there must be troops in ambush in rear of the
advanced guard; they therefore rushed headlong back to
their camp, whilst our guard fell on their foot, killed about
fifty men, and followed the others in hot pursuit right up
to their trenches. That same day the envoys of the
Franks, who had gone to Damascus to inquire into the
condition of the Christian prisoners there, took away with
with them four of the chief men. During the evening the
men arrived who had been commissioned by the Sultan to
prepare a statement of the Moslem prisoners detained in
Acre. The two sides kept on sending messengers to one
another until the ninth day of the following month.


CHAPTER CXV.

ARRIVAL OF IBN BARIk (FROM ACRE),

That same day Hossam ed-Din Hosein Ibn B^rik el-
MehrS^ni came out (from Acre) with two of the king of
England's officers. He announced that the king of France
had taken his departure for Tyre, and that they had come
to discuss the matter of the prisoners, and to see the cross
of the crucifixion, if it happened to be in the Moslem
camp, or to know if it had been sent to Baghdad. It was
shown to them, and when they saw it they displayed the
most profound reverence, prostrating themselves on the


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF. 271

ground till their faces were covered with dust, and humili-
ating themselves in adoration. They informed us that the
princes of the Franks had accepted the proposal made by
the Sultan, which was that he should deliver into their
hands what was stipulated by the treaty, at three periods^
of a month each. After this the Sultan despatched a mes-
senger to Tyre with magnificent presents, and great store
of perfumes and beautiful apparel, as an offering to the
king of the French. On the morning of the 10th of Rejeb,
Ibn Barik and his companions returned to the English
king, and the Sultan, with his personal friends and the
troops of his guard {Aa/ka), betook himself to the U//
close to Shefr am. The rest of the troops established them-
selves as best they could in a spot which was only divided
by the valley from the Sultan*s previous camping-ground.
Messengers went constantly to and fro between the two
armies^ engaged in trying to lay the foundations of a per-
manent treaty of peace. This continued until we had
procured the sum of money and number of prisoners we
had undertaken to give up to the Franks at the expiration
of the first period, in accordance with their demands ; viz. :
that we should give them the cross of the crucifixion, one
hundred thousand pieces of gold {dinars), and sixteen
hundred prisoners. Commissioners employed by the
Franks to examine the instalment we had in readiness
for them, reported that we had fulfilled the conditions
imposed except with regard to the prisoners whom they
had specially named, and who had not all been brought
together. They therefore let the negotiations drag on till
the first period had expired. On that day, which was the
18th of Rejeb, they sent to demand what was due to them,
and the Sultan returned the following answer : ' You must

' Our author here uses the word /trm^ fortim in the plural, evidently
the French word (crme^ which was emplo)ed in the treaty of peace.


272 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


choose either one of two things : either send our comrades
back to us and accept the instalment due for this period,
and we will give you hostages for the performance of the
conditions imposed for the periods still to come ; or receive
the instalment we are sending you to-day, and send us
hostages to be retained until our comrades who are now
your prisoners are returned to us.* The envoys replied :
' We will do neither ; send us the instalment that is now
due, and accept our solemn oath that your comrades shall
be sent back.' The Sultan rejected this proposal, for he
knew that if he were to give them the money, the cross,
and the prisoners whilst our men were still detained by
the Franks, there would be no guarantee whatever against
an act of treachery on the part of the enemy, which would
strike a great blow at Isl&m.


CHAPTER CXVI.

MASSACRE OF THE MOSLEMS IN ACRE— MAY GOD HAVE

MERCY UPON THEM !

When the king of England saw that the Sultan was
making some delay in the fulfilment of the above-mentioned
conditions, he acted treacherously with regard to the
Moslem prisoners. He had promised to spare their lives
if they surrendered the city, adding that if the Sultan sent
him what had been agreed upon, he would give them their
liberty, with permission to take their wives and children
with them and to carry away all their moveable property ;
if the Sultan did not fulfil the conditions, they were to
become slaves. The king broke the solemn promises he had
made them, openly showed the intentions he had hitherto
concealed, and carried out what he had purposed to do as


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 273


soon as he had received the money and the Frank
prisoners. That is what the people of his nation said
afterwards.^ About four o'clock in the afternoon of
Tuesday, the 27th of Rejeb, he rode out with the whole of
the Frank army — infantry, cavalry, and Turcopoles (that
is, light-armed soldiers) — and advanced as far as the
wells at the foot of Tell el-'A'y4diya, to which place he
had already sent forward his tents. As soon as the Franks
reached the middle of the plain between this U// and that
of Kis&n, which was occupied by the Sultan's advanced
guard, they brought out the Moslem prisoners, whom
God had pre-ordained to martyrdom that day, to the
number of more than three thousand, all tied together with
ropes. The Franks rushed upon them all at once and
slaughtered them in cold blood with sword and lance.
The advanced guard had previously informed the Sultan
that the enemy had got to horse, and he sent them some
reinforcements, but they did not arrive until the massacre
had been accomplished. As soon as the Moslems saw
what they were doing to the prisoners, they rushed down
on the Franks, and a certain number were killed and
wounded on both sides in the action that took place,
and lasted until night separated the combatants. The
following morning our people went out to see what had
happened, and found all the Moslems who had been
martyred for their faith stretched on the ground; they
were able to recognise some of them. This was a terrible
grief to them. The enemy had only spared the prisooers of
note and such as were strong enough to labour. Various
motives have been assigned for this massacre. According
to some, the prisoners were killed to avenge the deaths of

' !)e Vinsauf sayi (iv. 4) that the prisoners were killed to avenge
those sUin by Nf oslems during the siege, and at the expiration of the
term granted for giving up the cross and the Christian prisoners.

18


274 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

those slain previously by the Moslems ; others say that the
king of England, having made up his mind to try and
take Ascalon, did not think it prudent to leave so many
prisoners behind in Acre. God knows what his reason
really, was.


CHAPTER CXVII.

THE ENEMY MARCH UPON ASCALON, ALONG THE SHORE

OF THE WESTERN SEA.

On the 29th of Rejeb the Franks all mounted their horses,
and packed the tents they had struck on the backs of their
beasts of burden ; then they crossed the river and en-
camped on the west bank, close to the road leading to
Ascalon. Whilst this division showed their intention to
march along the sea-shore, the king of England sent
the rest of his men back to Acre, where he had repaired
the breaches and made the fortifications strong again.
The army that had set out on this fresh expedition in-
cluded a great number of notable men, and was led by the
king of England in person. At daybreak on the 1st of
Sh'aban the enemy lit their fires, as was always their
custom when they were breaking up their camp. The
Sultan was informed by the advanced guard that the
Franks were preparing to move, and he at once ordered
that the baggage should be loaded up while the people
waited ; and the people did so. Many of the people and
of the merchants from the markets lost quantities of their
goods and merchandize on this occasion, for they had not
enough horses and beasts of burden to carry all they
possessed. Any one man could carry enough for his
needs for a month, but each of these merchants had such
quantities of wares that he would have been obliged


WHAT BEFELL SULTAX YUSUF. 275


to make several journeys to move them all. On this
occasion it was impossible for anyone to remain behind, on
account of the proximity of the Franks, who, now that they
were occupying Acre, were very strong. It was quite light
by the time the enemy's army began their march. They
marched in several separate divisions, each capable of
providing for its own defence, and followed the line of the
sea-shore. The Sultan sent reinforcements to the advanced
guard, and despatched a large part of his troops against
the enemy. A desperate encounter took place, and el-
Melek el-Afdal, the Sultan's son, sent back to tell his
father that he had cut off one division of the enemy in such
a way as to prevent its receiving any support from the
others, and that his men had attacked it so smartly
that it had been obliged to retire in the direction of
the camp. * If we had been in full force,' he added, ' we
should have taken them all prisoners.' The Sultan forth-
with sent out a strong detachment of his troops, going
with them himself as far as the sands. On our way (for I
was with him) we met el -Melek el-'Adel, the Sultan's
brother, and learnt from him that the division in question
had managed to effect a junction with the one ahead of
it, and that the chief part of the enemy's forces had
crossed the Haifa river,^ and then halted to allow the
rear divisions to come up. He added that it was
useless to follow them up, and that we should only tire
the men and lose our arrows to no purpose. When the
Sultan had convinced himself of the correctness of this
view, he desisted from the pursuit, and sent a detachment
back to the baggage-train to help the stragglers to join
those in front, and to protect them against marauders
and attacks by the enemy. He himself set out for


< The Kishon, N. of Haila.

18


276 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

el-Keim{in,^ where he arrived the same day, as eveninf:
began to close in. The outer part of his tent only was set
up for him, a long piece of cloth being hung all round it
to form a wall. He then sent to summon his principal
officers, and gave them to eat, after which he consulted
them as to what should be done. As I was on duty, I
was present at this meeting.

Second halt — At this council it was decided that the
army should march the following morning. A line of
troops had already been posted round the Franks to keep
watch over their movements during the night. Early
in the morning of the 2nd of Sh'abdn the Sultan sent the
baggage forward, remaining where he was until he received
information of the enemy's movements. As none came
in, he set out, as soon as it was fully light, to follow the
baggage, and made a halt for some time at a village called
es-Sabbighin,2 in the hope of receiving information regard-
ing the Franks. Suleimin Ibn Jender was now occupying
the ground on which the Sultan had halted on the previous
day, and had left Emir Jordik encamped close to the enemy.
A number of troops, who came in one after another,
spent the night there. As the Sultan received no in-
telligence of any kind, he set out and overtook the
baggage at a place called 'Ayfin el-Asawlr.^ On our
arrival there we noticed several tents, and when he learnt
that they belonged to el-Melek el-'Adel, he went up to
them and spent an hour with that prince; after that he
repaired to his own tent There was absolutely no bread

" Tell KeimHn (ancient Jokneam) called Caymont by the Franks,
£. of Carmel, 12 miles S.E. of Haifa.

a Now Subbarin^ 8 miles S.W. from Tell Keim{in, on Carmel, over-
looking the plain of Sharon.

3 Springs at Tell el-Asawir, 6 miles S. of Subbarin, on the E. edge
of the plain of Sharon.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 277


at all in this halting-place, and provisions rose to such a
price that one piece of silver was paid for a quarter of a
measure of barley, and two pieces of silver for a pound of
biscuit. The Sultan remained there till mid-day, when he
mounted his horse and rode on to el-Mell^ha,^ where the
enemy would be obliged to make their next halt after
leaving Haifa. He went on in advance to ascertain if the
ground would lend itself to a pitched battle, and rode all
over the lands of Caesarea right up to the spot where the
woods b^an. He returned to the camp verj- tired, shortly
after the hour of evening prayer. I asked him if he had
received any news of the enemy, and he replied : ' I have
heard that up to this evening, the 2nd of Sh'abdn, they
have not left Haifa ; we will wait here till we get news, and
then determine what it will be best to do/ He spent the
night on Tell ez-Zelzela,^ and remained there during the
morning in the hope of receiving intelligence of the
enemy's movements.

The herald (/dwisk) then proclaimed that there was to
be a review, and the troops mounted and formed in order
of battle. The morning was far advanced before the
Sultan took any rest, having first breakfasted and received
some of his emirs. He consulted them as to what he
should do, and then went to the celebration of mid-day
prayer ; after that he held a reception in his tent until the
hour of evening prayer, and made compensation to such
as had lost their horses and other property ; these sums
varied from one hundred gold pieces to one hundred and
fifty, sometimes more, sometimes less. I have never seen
anyone do things so liberally, and seem so pleased in

I Apparently Khurbei MtUhahy 1 1 miles S. of Haifa, near the shore,
2| miles S. of Dustrey (DiitrictX where the first halt was made by
King Richard't army after leaving Haifa. SaUlh ed-Din would have
thus ridden 35 miles on this day.

« Tfii tZ'Ztlsela C Earthquake Hill') was apparently Tell elAsawir.


278 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


being able to make presents. As evening drew in that
day they decided to dispatch the baggage forthwith to
Mejdel Ydba.^

Third ftalt, — The Sultan remained where he was with a
small body of light cavalry, and did not set out till the
following morning, the 4th of the month. He mounted
and rode to the source of the river that flows down to
Caesarea,^ where he made a halt. Here we had to pay
four pieces of silver for a ra^l (pound of twelve ounces) of
biscuit, and two pieces and a half for a quarter of a
measure of barley ; bread could not be obtained at any
price. The Sultan went to his tent and took a light meal^
then, after mid-day, having said his prayer, he mounted
and rode out along the road that the enemy would have
to follow, to search for a suitable site for a pitched battle.
He did not return until after the hour of the ^asr (after-
noon prayer). After that he held an audience for an hour,
took a little rest, and mounted his horse once more. He
gave the order for resuming our march, and had his tent
struck, and when evening fell the tents of the whole army
had been struck.

Fourth halt, — ^The army marched towards a hill that lay
behind the hill we had just left. Whilst we were there
they brought two Franks to the Sultan who had been made
prisoners by the advanced guard. He had them beheaded
on the spot, and the soldiers cut their bodies to pieces to
satisfy their thirst for revenge. He spent the night in this
place and remained there throughout the morning of the
following day, for he had not yet received any intelligence
as to the march of the enemy. As the want of provisions
and forage was very keenly felt by the troops, he sent

' Mejdel Ydba is 28 miles S. of Tell el-Asawir, and 12 miles E.N.E.
of Jaffa.
2 The Crocodile River {Nahr ez-Zerka)^ N. of Caesarea.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 279

an order to the baggage to come up that night. Then,
at his usual time, he rode out in the direction of the
enemy, and covering Cxsarea. He returned to the camp
about noon. We had just heard that the enemy had
not yet left el-Mell&ha. Two other Frank prisoners were
brought before the Sultan, who had been captured on the
flanks of the enemy's army. They were put to death in
the most cruel manner, for the Sultan was terribly wroth
at the massacre of the prisoners from Acre. He then took
a moment's rest, and gave audience after the midday
prayer. I was in his presence when they brought in a
Frank knight, evidently a person of consequence, whose
dress indicated the high rank that he held among the
enemy. An interpreter was called that we might question
him concerning them, and we asked him what was the
price of provisions with them. He replied that, on the day
they first left Acre, a man could satisfy his hunger for six
groats {Kerdtts)^ but that prices had gone on rising until
the same quantity now cost eight groats. He was then
asked why the army remained such a long time in each
halting-place, and he replied that it was because they were
awaiting the arrival of the fleet, which was to bring men
and supplies. When he was questioned as to the loss they
had sustained in killed and wounded on the day they set
out, he replied that it had been great. When asked what
number of horses had been killed that day, he made
answer, ' About four hundred.' The Sultan then commanded
that his head should be cut off*, but forbade his body to be
mutilated. The prisoner asked what the Sultan had said,
and it was explained to him, whereupon he changed
colour and said : * But I will give you one of the captives
in Acre.' The Sultan replied : ' God's mercy, but it must
be an emir.' * I cannot get an emir set at liberty/ answered
the Frank. The interest shown in htm by all present, and


28o WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


his fine figure, all spoke in his favour. And, indeed, I
never saw a man so well made, with such elegant hands
and feet, and such a distinguished bearing. The Sultan
therefore postponed the execution of his commands, had
him put in chains, and reproached him with the treachery
of his fellow-countrymen and the massacre of the prisoners.
He acknowledged that it was an abominable act, but said
that it was the king alone who had decreed and com-
manded it to be done. After the *asr, the Sultan rode out
according to his custom, and on his return ordered that the
prisoner should be put to death. Two other prisoners
were then brought in before him, whom he likewise
ordered to be put to death. He spent .the night in this
place, and at daybreak the next morning heard that the
Franks were marching on Caesarea, and that their vanguard
was near the city ; he therefore thought it best to with-
draw from the enemy's road and take up another
position.

Fi/itA halt, — He removed with his troops to a place close
to the tell we had been occupying, and, after having the
tents pitched, set out to examine the district through which
the enemy would have to pass, hoping to find a suitable
site for a pitched battle. He returned towards mid-day,
and called his brother el-Melek el-'Adel, and 'Alem ed-
Din Suleim&n Ibn Jender, to consult them as to what
was to be done. He then snatched a few moments' rest,
and when the call to the zohr (mid-day) prayer was cried,
he attended its celebration. After this he mounted and
set out in quest of news of the enemy. Two Franks
who were brought before him were put to death by his
orders ; and two others, brought in shortly afterwards,
suffered the same fate. Towards the close of the day
he had two others killed, who were brought before him
later on. On returning from his ride, he was present at


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 281


the celebration of the tnaghrib^ prayer, and then held an
audience according to his custom. Afterwards he sum-
moned his brother el-Melek el-'Adel, and sending every-
one else away, remained closeted with him in conversation
until a very late hour. On the following day, the herald
announced that there would be a review, but of the guard
(halka) only. The Sultan rode out in the direction of the
enemy, and halted on (one) of the tells rising above
Csesarea, which city the enemy had entered on Friday,
the 6th of Sh'abAn. He showed himself there during the
morning, then halted and gave his officers a repast. He
then got into the saddle again and visited his brother;
after the mid-day prayer he rested for a short while and
then held an audience. At this audience they brought in
fourteen Frank prisoners, and a woman of the same race,
who was the daughter of the knight mentioned before.
She had a Moslem woman with her whom she kept a
prisoner. The Sultan ordered the Moslem woman to be
set at liberty, and sent the others to prison. They had
been brought from BeirAt, where they had been taken with
a number of others in a ship. They were all put to death
on Saturday, the 7th of Sh*abdn. The Sultan maintained
his position, keeping constant watch for an opportunity of
attacking the enemy's forces on the march.

Sixth luUt. — On the morning of the 8th the Sultan rode
out according to his custom, and on his return received
news from his brother that the enemy were preparing
to move. The battalions^ had maintained their several
positions round Caesarea during the night. He then ordered
food, and the people ate. After this a second messenger
came in to announce that the enemy had commenced their

' Seep. 31.

' We use the words ' battalions * and * squadrons * indiscriminately
to translate aH^ in the plural.


282 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


inarch, whereupon the Sultan ordered his drum to beat, and
mounted at the head of his cavalry. He then set out, and
I accompanied him close up to the army of the Franks,
when he formed his troops in line round the enemy, and
gave the signal for battle. The marksmen were posted
in front, and the arrows shot by both sides fell thick as
rain. The enemy had already formed in order of battle ;
the infantry, drawn up in front of the cavalry, stood firm
as a wall, and every foot-soldier wore a vest of thick felt^
and a coat of mail so dense and strong that our arrows
made no impression on them. They shot at us with
their great arbalists, wounding the Moslem horses and
their riders. I saw some (of the Frank foot- soldiers)
with from one to ten arrows sticking in them, and still
advancing at their ordinary pace without leaving the
ranks. Their infantry was divided into two divisions, one
of which was posted in front of the cavalry ; the other
was not called upon to fight, and took its ease as it
advanced along the shore. When the division that was
engaged was fatigued and the men were exhausted by
their wounds, it was relieved by the other division, and
went off to rest. The cavalry was in the centre, and did
not quit its position except when it was ordered to
charge. It was drawn up in three divisions. In the
first, which formed the van-guard, rode Geoffrey [sic)
the ex-king, followed by all the troops of the sea-coast
countries which had remained faithful to him ; the kings
of England and France^ rode in the centre, and the
sons of the Lady of Tiberias' were in the rear-guard with
a detachment (of Hospitallers). In the centre of their
army was a cart, on which was fixed a tower as high as

' See p. 367. This was called the gambison or pourpoint.

' The King of France was not with the army.

3 The wife of Raymond of Tripoli, who held the castle of Tiberias.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 283


a minaret, and from this floated the standard of the
people. This was the disposition of their forces, accord-
ing to my own observation, and to information given me
by some of the Frank prisoners and the merchants who
frequented their camp. Their troops continued to advance
in the order we have just described, all the while main-
taining a steady fight.^ The Moslems discharged arrows
at them from all sides to annoy them, and force them
to charge ; but in this they were unsuccessful. These
men exercised wonderful self-control ; they went on their
way without any hurry, whilst their ships followed their
line of march along the coast, and in this manner they
reached their halting - place.^ They never made long
marches, because they were obliged to spare the foot-
soldiers, for those of them who were not engaged in
fighting used to carry the baggage and tents, as they
had so few beasts of burden. One cannot help admiring
the patience displayed by these people, who bore the most
wearing fatigue without having any participation in the
management of affairs, or deriving any personal advant-
age. They fixed their camp on the bank of the river
furthest from Caesarea.

Sex/enth halt. — ^At daybreak, on the 9th, the Sultan was
informed that the enemy was already in the saddle, and
ready to march. He therefore mounted his horse, drew
up his squadrons, and sent his marksmen to the front
Whilst he was marching to the attack, the marksmen
surrounded they enem on all sides, and kept up a constant
discharge of arrows, but without making any impression
on them. The three divisions in which the army was
drawn up, as we have described above, commenced their

I Litwallr, while the market of war was well thronged
' This camp was on the Nahr ei-Me/Jir^ 3 miles S. of Cxsarea,
called the ' Dead River' by De Mnsauf.


284 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

marcfay and if one of them proved unable to resist us, the
nearest division came up to its support They assisted one
another mutually, whilst the Moslems surrounded them on
three sides, and attacked them with the greatest energy.
The Sultan busied himself in bringing his battalions
forward, and I saw him ride between the marksmen of
the two armies, with the enemy's arrows flying over
his head, attended only by two youths who were each
leading a horse. He hurried from one squadron to another,
encouraging them to advance, and commanding them to
press on and come to close quarters with the enemy. With
the roll of the drums and the bray of the trumpets were
mingled cries of the fa/t/tl and the faJkdir (There is but
one God I God is great I). But the enemy stood firm
without moving or turning aside. The Moslems charged
the Franks several times, but they had a number of men
and horses wounded by missiles from the arbalists, and
by the arrows discharged against them by the infantry.
We kept on surrounding them, attacking them and charging
them, until they reached a river called Nahr el-Keisab^
where they pitched their camp. This was at mid-day,
and the heat was overpowering. Our troops drew off and
discontinued the attack, knowing that they could not hope
to gain any advantage over the enemy when they were
once encamped. That day Isl&m lost one of its bravest
champions, a man named Ai&z, surnamed el-Tawtl, ' the
long man,' one of the Sultan's memlCiks. He had been
fighting, and had killed several of the bravest of the
enemy's horsemen, who had left the ranks and engaged

^ This stream, now called Nahr hkanderHneh^ is 5 miles S. of the
Dead River, and is called by De Vinsauf the 'Salt River'; it is
marshy and reedy. The Franks reached it on September 2, and
remained there till after the 5th, which agrees with the present account
of the Nahr el-Kasab or * reedy river.'


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 285


in single combat in the space between the two armies.
Ai4z had had several encounters of this sort with them,
and after awhile the Franks avoided him. But he kept
on measuring his strength with them until at last his
horse fell under him, and he testified (for the faith) on
the field of battle. The Moslems were terribly grieved
at his death. He was buried on a UU above el-Birka,^
which is a place where the waters of a great many streams
flow together. The Sultan ordered his baggage to halt
in el-Birka, and when the hour of the *asr had passed,
he had a meal served for his men, and gave them an
hour's rest. He then set out along the Nahr el-Kasab,
and halted again somewhat higher up the river, watering
there whilst the enemy watered lower down at a very little
distance from the place where we were.^ At this halting-
place the price of a quart of barley had risen to four
dirhems (pieces of silver), but we found plenty of bread
at half a dirhem a pound. The Sultan remained there,
waiting until the Franks should resume their march, and
he could attack them again ; but as they spent the night
in their camp, we also remained where we were.


CHAPTER CXVin.

A FIGHT TAKES PLACE.

A DIVISION of the Moslem army which had been detached
to watch the enemy's movements fell in with a body of

* El-Birka ii the 'pool' oriwamp in the lower patt of the Nahr
el-Kasab. On the sand-hills immediately S.W. is the ruined monu-
ment called Afrjtihed Shdkhah^ ' the place where chiefs fought in the
Holy War.' This is possibly the site of the tomb of Aiaz.

* Sal Ah ed- Din's camp was some to miles £. of that of Richard
near the head of the Nahr el-Kasab.


286 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

our adversaries that had also come out to reconnoitre.
As soon as our men could get near the Franks they
rushed on them and attacked them furiously. The enemy
lost a considerable number in the encounter, but as they
were reinforced by another body of Franks, who had seen
what was going on and had run up to their support, they
held their ground and kept on fighting. The Moslems lost
two men^ and took three prisoners, whom they brought to
the Sultan. When questioned by him, these men stated that
the king of England had been informed by two Bedawin,
who had visited him at Acre, that the Moslem army
was very small, and that it was their information which
had induced him to take the field. They added : ' Yester-
day evening — they referred to the evening of Monday —
when he saw the Moslems fight so obstinately, and observed
the number of their squadrons (taking also into consideration
that he had nearly a thousand wounded, and that several
of our men had been killed), he was obliged to remain
to-day encamped in the same place to rest his troops.
Then, when he thought of the battle which had just been
fought, and the host of Moslems he had to fight, he sent
for the Bedawtn and had them beheaded.' During all that
day, which was Tuesday, the loth of Sh'abdn (September 3,
1 191) we maintained our position, because the enemy had
not left theirs.

Eighth halt, — Towards noon that same day the Sultan
made up his mind to march out in front of the enemy.
Our mea moved off to the roll of the drum, and made
their way into the wood of Arsflf, with orders to halt at a
tdl in its midst, close to a village called Deir er-Raheb.^

I Our author takes pleasure in minimising the losses of the Moslems.

* Deir er-Rdheby * Monk's monastery,' is probably the present Deir
Asftn^ a ruin in the woodland region S. of the Nahr IskanderQneh,
7 miles £. of the camp at Nahr el-F^lik.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 287


Night surprised them, and the troops lost their way among
the thickets, so the Sultan was obliged to remain there till
Wednesday morning, the nth of the month, to reassemble
them. He then rode out to look for an advantageous site
for a battle. He remained all that day in the position he
had taken up, and was informed that the enemy had
remained on the banks of the Nahr el-Kasab, to await the
reinforcements that were to be sent them from Acre, in
eight great ships. The Moslem outposts picketed round
the Frank army kept us well supplied with intelligence,
and had an encounter with the enemy's foragers in which
several were killed on both sides.


CHAPTER CXIX.

THE ENEMY SENDS TO COMMUNICATE WITH US THAT

SAME DAY.

T]i£ enemy informed our advanced guard that they wished
to communicate with us, and begged that some one might
be sent to confer with them. Therefore 'Alem ed-Din
Suleiman Ibn Jender, who was in charge of the guard that
day, sent a man out to know what they had to say. He
learnt that they wished to confer with el-Melek el-'Adel.
With the Sultan's permission, that prince went out to the
advanced guard and passed the night with them, having an
interview with the envoys. Their proposal, in brief, was as
follows : ' The war between us has been maintained for a
long time, and a number of brave warriors have fallen on
both sides. We ourselves only came out to help the
Franks of the coast districts ; make peace with them, and
let the two armies return each to its own country/ During


288 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

the morning of Thursday, the 12th of the month,^ the
Sultan sent a letter to his brother, saying : * Try to protract
the negotiations with the Franks and keep them where
they are until we receive the Turkoman reinforcements we
are expecting.' Indeed, at that moment they were very
close at hand.


CHAPTER CXX.

EL-MELEK EL-'AdEL\S INTERVIEW WITH THE KING OF

ENGLAND.

When the king of England learnt that el-Melek el-*Adel
had come to the outposts, he sent to him to ask for an
interview. El-'Adel consented, and the two princes met,
each attended by a magnificent cortege. The son of
Honferi,^ a man of high rank in the countries on the coast,
acted as their interpreter. I had an opportunity of seeing
this young man on the day when peace was concluded ; he
was, in truth, a fine young fellow, but his beard was shaved
after the manner of his nation. The King of England
opened the conversation by expressing his desire for the
conclusion of peace, and el-'Adel replied : * If you wish to
obtain peace and desire me to act as your agent with the
Sultan, you must tell me the conditions you have in view.'
• The basis of the treaty,' said the king, ' must be this :
You must return all our territory to us and withdraw into
your own country.' El-'Adel replied with scorn, and a dis-
cussion ensued, which resulted in their each withdrawing
to his own camp. When the Sultan saw that the enemy
was on the move, he dispatched his baggage, but remained

' The Franks were still halting at the Salt River on September 5.
> Humphrey of Toron, one of the chief barons of the kingdom of
Jerusalem.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 289


where he was himself to draw up his troops in order
of battle. The small baggage had already started, and
was on the point of overtaking the heavy, when the Sultan
sent an order for its return ; but as night had now closed
in, the people were in great confusion all that night
The Sultan then sent for his brother to know what had
passed between him and the king, and had a private con-
versation with him. This was on the night preceding
Friday, the 1 3th of the month. The enemy resumed their
march and encamped in another place called el-Birka} from
which they could see the sea. During the morning of
Friday the Sultan went out to get news of the Franks.
On his ride they brought him two men who had been
taken prisoners by the advanced guard, and he ordered

«

their heads to be struck off. When he had ascertained that
the enemy would not leave their camp that day, he dis-
mounted, and had a talk with his brother on the unwilling-
ness of the Franks to move, and discussed the measures
that should be taken. He spent the night in the same
halting-place.

CHAPTER CXXI.

THE BATTLE OK ARsOF, WHICH WAS A BLOW TO ALL

MOSLEM HEARTS.

On Saturday, the 14th of Sh*abAn (September 7, 1191),
the Sultan was informed that the enemy were marching on
Arsikf. He mounted forthwith, and drew up his troops in
order of battle, being resolved to come to close quarters

^ liirket Ramaddn^ here intended, is a swampy lake, drained by a
cutting in the rocks, on the course of the Sahr el-FAUk^ or * River of
th.' cleft,* called Rochttiullit by De Vintauf. It is 9 miles S. of the
Salt River, and was reached by the Franks on September 6 — a
Friday. Arsuf «-a« a fortress on the shore Ave miles further S.

19


290 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


with the enemy that day. The marksmen drawn from
each battalion went out in advance, and rained a shower of
arrows on the enemy, who were approaching the thickets and
gardens of Arsdf. The Moslem troops harassed them on
every side, some advancing, led by the Sultan in person,
others remaining in position to cover them in case of
retreat They charged the enemy furiously ; the fire of
war burst from the marksmen, and killed and wounded.
The enemy were obliged to hurry forward to try and reach
the place where they were to halt and encamp, and they
then found that they were in a most galling position, and
that we had them at our mercy. The Sultan rode from the
right wing to the left, urging his men to fight for the Faith.
I several times saw him, attended by only two pages, who
were each leading a horse ; I met his brother also with no
greater a following, and they could both see the enemy's
arrows falling to right and left of them. The enemy's
progress was forced to become slower and slower, and the
Moslems were flattering themselves that it would prove an
easy victory, when the first ranks of the enemy's foot
reached the wood and the gardens of ArsQf. Then the
enemy's cavalry formed in one body, and, knowing that
nothing but a supreme effort could save them, they resolved
to charge. I myself saw their knights gathered together
in the midst of a protecting circle of infantry ; they put
their lances in rest, uttered a mighty war-cry, and the ranks
of infantry parted to allow them to pass ; then they rushed
out, and charged in all directions.^ One division hurled

^ The charge was begun by the Hospitallers in rear, and gradually
involved all the cavalry. According to De Vinsauf (IV., 9-25),
Richard had 100,000 men in five divisions. The Templars led the
van ; the Angevins and Bretons came next ; then King Guy's forces
and those of Poitou ; then the Normans and English round the
standard on its truck ; and lastly the Hospitallers. A flanking party
on the left (east) was led by Henry of Champagne.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 291

itself on our right wing, another on our left, and a
third on our centre^ throwing our whole force into con-
fusion. I was in the centre, and when that body fled in
the wildest disorder, it occurred to me that I might take
refuge in the left wing, which was the nearest to me. But
when I came up with it, I found that it, too, was
struck with panic, and had taken to its heels even quicker
than the other. Then I turned to the right wing; but
when I reached it, I found it in still greater confusion
than the left. I then turned to the position occupied,
according to custom, by the Sultan's squadron, which was
always a rallying-point for the others. I'there found only
seventeen men ; but the standards were still flying, and the
drum continued to beat. When the Sultan saw the dire
discomfiture of the Moslems, he returned to his squadron,
and found but very few men. He stopped here, and,
perceiving that the whole neighbourhood was filled with
fugitives, he ordered the drums to beat without ceasing,
and had all whom he saw escaping brought to him. But,
in truth, he could not stop the people in their flight ;
when the enemy charged, they gave way, and when he
drew rein for fear of an ambush, they also came to a stand,
and did battle with him. During the second charge, they
fought even while they fled, and halted as soon as their
pursuers stopped ; and in the third, in which the enemy
reached the top of the hillocks and rising ground that
happened to be in his way, they fled once more, but,
seeing him draw up, they also came to a stand. All those
who saw that the Sultan's squadron was still at its post,
and who heard the drum beating, were ashamed to go on,
and, dreading the consequences if they continued their
flight, they came up, and joined that body of troops. A
number of soldiers had now rallied in the centre, and the
enemy, who had reached the top of the hillocks {U//s),

19—2


292 WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF.

halted, and turned to face their ranks. The Sultan, for
his part, occupied the centre of his squadron, and displayed
such energy in rallying the fugitives that he finally suc-
ceeded in collecting the whole of his army together again.
The enemy, fearing that some ambush was concealed
in the woods, retired towards . their halting-place, and
the Sultan regained some rising ground close to the edge
of the wood, and there drew up his troops ; having no tent
to take shelter in, he stood in the shadow of a piece of
cloth. I stood beside him, endeavouring to console him ;
but he would not listen to me — he was so overwhelmed by
the events of the day : however, he took a little food that
we offered him. He remained in this position, awaiting
the return of the horses that had been taken to water at
some considerable distance, and while we were thus drawn
up, he had the wounded brought to him to comfort them,
and to see that their wounds were dressed. He gave his
own horses to those who had lost theirs. There were a
great number of killed and wounded this day on both sides.
Amongst the leaders who stood firm, the chief were el-Melek
el-*Adel, Kdimdz en-Nejmi the eunuch, and el-Melek el-
Afdal, the Sultan's son. El-Afdal charged so furiously
that a tumour he had in the face burst, and his face was
drenched with blood ; but he suffered it with remarkable
patience. The squadron from Mosul displayed the greatest
bravery, and won the Sultan's thanks for its leader, 'Ala
ed-Din. Our people sought for their comrades, and found
many a one who had died a martyr on the battle-field.
The bodies of persons of note were found, especially that
of M{isek, the grand emir (of the Kurds), a chief renowned
for his bravery ; that of Kdim^z el-'Adeli, who was also
celebrated ; and that of LighOsh, a brave officer, whose
death was a cause of great grief to the Sultan. We had a
large number of men and horses wounded, and the enemy


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 295

on their side had a great many casualties. We took only
one prisoner, who was brought to the Sultan, and beheaded
by his command. We also captured four horses from them.
The Sultan then ordered the baggage forward (to the river)
el-*AOja,^ and I obtained his permission to follow it, and
to precede him to the place he had appointed for our en-
campment. I left him seated, waiting until all his troops
were collected, and till intelligence came in regarding the
enemy, who were encamped close to ArsOf.

Ninth halt. — I set out after the mid-day prayer, and
when I reached the crossing, saw the baggage-train drawn
up on the further bank of the 'Auja in a beautiful spot
covered with grass. The Sultan reached the camp towards
the close of the same day, and whilst the soldiers were
crowding together at the head of the bridge,^ he took up
a position on a hill commanding the river; then, instead
of coming to the camp, he sent his herald to proclaim that
the troops were to cross the river again and come to the
place where he was standing. God alone knows the depth
of grief which filled his heart after this battle ; our men
were all wounded, some in their bodies, some in their spirits.
On (Sunday) the 15th of Sh'abin, the Sultan ordered
the drum to be beaten, and mounted his horse ; then,
followed by the whole army, he retraced his steps of the
previous day, and advanced towards the enemy. When
be drew near ArsCif, he drew up his squadrons in order
of battle, hoping to draw the Franks from their position,
and to get an opportunity of attacking them. But they
made no movement that day, being worn out with fatigue

< The 'Auja flows into the sea N. of Jaffa ; the camp (near Mejdel
YAba) was 10 miles S.£. from the battlefield.

* This bridge {Jisr tl-AbAbneh\ was S. of the camping ground,
which was near Mejdel Y;\ba. The Moslems appear to have been
dying beyond the camp.


294 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


and suffering severely from their wounds.^ He stood facing
them until evening came on, when he withdrew to the camp-
ing-place of the previous night. The next morning, the
i6th day of the month, he again ordered the drum to
be beaten, and rode out at the head of his troops in
the direction of the enemy. On his way he heard that
they were on the march to Jaifa ; he then advanced close
to them, drew up his troops in order of battle, and sent
his marksmen forward. The Moslem army completely
surrounded the enemy, and discharged such a shower of
arrows that one could hardly see the sky, for they were
attacking them with all the fury of hatred. The Sultan
hoped by this means to provoke them to charge, that his
men might have an opportunity of attacking them, leaving
it in God's hands to give the victory to whom He would.
But the Franks would not charge ; they restrained them-
selves, keeping always behind the infantry, and continued
to advance in their usual order of march. Proceeding in
this manner, they came to the 'AOja, on the upper banks
of which river we were encamped, while they took up a
position further down the stream. Some of their troops
crossed to the west bank,^ the others remaining on the east.
When our men saw that they were preparing to encamp,
they withdrew, and the Sultan returned to the baggage, and
when he reached his tent took food. They then brought
him four Franks and a woman, who had been taken prisoner
by the Arabs, and he ordered them to be kept in strict
confinement. He spent the remainder of the day writing
to the provinces, commanding them to dispatch the con-
tingents still to come. They brought him information

^ Sunday, September 8, 1191, was the feast of the Nativity of the
Virgin. The Franks, according to De Vinsauf, were giving thanks
for their victory in the Church of Ars^f.

^ The ^A^ja runs nearly N. and S. in the central part of its course.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 295

(that same day) that the enemy had lost great numbers
of their horses in the action at ArsQf, for the Arabs who
had gone over the battle>field had counted more than
a hundred chargers. He then dispatched the loads to
Ramla, and I preceded them on their march to that place.
He himself spent the night in the place where we had
been encamped.

7V«/A halt.— On the 17th of the month, as soon as he
had said the morning prayer, he set out for Ramla^ with
the light baggage. Two Franks were brought to him,
whom he ordered to be beheaded. A messenger sent back
by the advanced guard brought him news that the Franks
were marching from Jaffa; he then advanced as far as
Kamla, where two more Franks were brought before him.
When these prisoners were questioned as to the enemy's
movements, they stated that their countrymen would pro-
bably remain in Jaffa for some days, for they intended
to put the city into a good state of defence, and furnish
it with plentiful supplies of men and provisions. He there-
fore called the members of bis council together, and asked
their opinion whether it would be better to destroy the
city of Ascalon, or to leave it as it was. They decided
unanimously that a division of the army under eUMeIek
el-'Adel should remain behind, to keep a strict watch over
the enemy's movements, and make constant reports thereon
to the Sultan, whilst the Sultan himself should set out
for Ascalon, and destroy it before it fell into the hands
of the Franks. For the enemy, as soon as they had
massacred the garrison, would probably make that city
the basis of their operations in an attack on Jerusalem,
and thus cut off all communication with Egypt The
Sultan wished to prevent this, and, knowing that it would

> Ramlik is 12 miles from Mejdel Yaba, where the camp o( SaUh
e<i-Din was fixed.


296 }VHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


be impossible for the Moslems to hold the city, with the
remembrance of Acre and the fate of its garrison fresh
in their minds, and being convinced, moreover, that his
soldiers would be afraid to shut themselves up in the city,
he declared that he intended to embody all the forces at
his disposal in the army under his command, and then
concentrate his attention on the defence of Jerusalem. It
was therefore decreed that Ascalon should be destroyed.
So, as soon as night began to fall, he dispatched all the
heavy baggage and commanded his son, el-MeIek el-Afdal,
to set forth at midnight and follow it. He himself started
on the Wednesday morning, and I went with him.

Eleventh Italt. — About mid-day on Wednesday, the i8th
of Sh'abin, the Sultan reached Yebna,^ where he gave his
people time to rest, and then marched into the territory
of the city of Ascalon. His tent had already been pitched
at some distance from the city, and he spent the night
there, though he slept very little, for the thought of being
obliged to destroy the city filled his mind. I had left
him after midnight, but at daybreak he summoned me
to him again, and began to discuss his plans with me.
He then sent for his son, el-Melek el-Afdal, to consult
him on the subject, and they talked together for a long
while. He said to me, whilst I was on duty in his tent:
* I take God to witness I would rather lose all my
children than cast down a single stone from the walls, but
God wills it ; it is necessary for the Moslem cause, there-
fore I am obliged to carry it through.' He sought counsel
with God, and God made him see that it was necessary
to destroy the city since the Moslems were unable to
protect it He therefore sent for 'Alem ed-Din Kaisar,
the governor, one of his chief memli^ks, and a man of good

> Yebnah (ancient ya/nwiVt), called Ibelin by the Franks, was 9 miles
S.W. of Ramleh, and 12 miles S. of Jaffa, near the shore.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 297


judgment, who commanded that all the workmen in the
town should be gathered together. I myself saw (that
officer) walking up and down the market-place, and going
from tent to tent to hire workmen. He assigned a certain
portion of the ramparts to each group of labourers ; the
task of destroying a curtain and tower was also given to
each emir and company of soldiers. When these people
entered the city there ^ose a great sound of mourning and
lamentation, for it was pleasant to look upon and delightful
to the senses ; its walls were strong, its buildings beautiful,
and it occupied a most charming situation. The inhabitants
were overwhelmed by the news that their city was to be
destroyed, and that they would have to give up their
homes ; they uttered loud lamentations, and began at
once to sell everything they could not carry away with
them, giving for one piece of silver what was really worth
ten, and even selling ten hens for one dirhem. Great
distress reigned in the city ; the inhabitants repaired to
the camp with their wives and children to sell their house-
hold goods. Some of them set out for Egypt, some for
Syria ; numbers were obliged to depart on foot, having no
money with which to hire beasts to carry them. This was
a horrible time during which terrible things occurred.
The Sultan, assisted by his son eUMelek el-Afdal,
spent his time in getting workmen together and en-
couraging them to work well, for he was very apprehensive
that if the Franks heard what he was doing, they would
come up and prevent him from carrying out his intention.
The troops, worn out by fatigue, both of mind and body,
spent that night in their tents. The same night a mes-
senger came from el-Melek el-'Adel, informing the Sultan
that that prince had had an interview on the subject of
peace with ambassadors from the Franks, and that he
i)ad aUo conversed on the same subject with the son of


298 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

Honferi, who had come to visit him, and asked him to
surrender to the Franks all the cities of the districts on
the coast. The Sultan — whose troops were worn out and
weary of such constant fighting and warfare, besides being
broken down by neediness — felt inclined to accept this
proposal, and wrote to el-*Adel to enter into negotiations
on the subject, granting him full powers to make such
terms as should seem best to him. On the 20th of Sh'ab^n
the Sultan busied himself from early morning in urging
forward the work of demolition, and putting more work-
men on the walls. As an encouragement to them he gave
them all the corn that had been stored there, and which he
saw it would be impossible to carry away ; moreover, time
pressed, and he feared an attack from the Franks. By his
orders they set fire to all the houses and other buildings
in the city, and the inhabitants were obliged to sacrifice
whatever property they had still remaining, as they had
no means of taking it away. We constantly received in-
telligence of the enemy's movements ; they were now very
hard at work repairing (the fortifications of) Jaffa. We
were informed by a letter from el-Melek el-*Adel that the
enemy did not know we were engaged in demolishing the
city (of Ascalon). * We are delaying matters as much as
we can with these people/ the prince added, * and we will
prolong the negotiations to give you time to destroy the
city.' By the Sultan's orders all the towers were filled
with wood, and then set on fire. On the morning of the
2 1st he left the camp on horseback to urge the labourers
on in their work ; he kept them well occupied in their task
of destruction, and visited them periodically to see that
they were at work; he was therefore very soon so ill
that for two days he was unable either to ride or take
any food. Every moment news of the enemy came in
with tidings of encounters with them — sometimes sue-


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 299


cessful, sometimes disastrous — for there were continual
engagements in the short space between them and our
advanced guard. (Meanwhile) he kept pressing forward
the demolition of the city, and brought the camp
closer to the walls, which enabled the servants, the
camel and ass-drivers, and all the other camp-followers to
take part in the work. Therefore the walls were soon
partially demolished^ although they were most solidly
built, being from nine to ten cubits thick — the thickness
varying with the position. One of the stonemasons in-
formed the Sultan in my hearing that (the wall oQ one of
the towers which he was then undermining was as thick as
a lance is long. Demolition and fire laid the city low
during the whole of the month of Sh*ab^n. Towards the
end of the month a letter came from Jurdik, saying that the
enemy had begun to make expeditions from Jaffa, and to
overrun the neighbouring districts. This news inspired the
Sultan with the hope of being able to punish the invaders.
He resolved to advance upon them and take them by
surprise, leaving the miners at Ascalon with a body of
cavalry to protect them ; but he afterwards thought it
best to postpone his departure until after they had burnt
down the ' Hospitallers' Tower,' a building that com*
mandod the sea, and was as strong as a castle. I had
been in the tower, and gone all over it ; it was so solidly
built that the workmen*s picks made no impression on it
whatever, and they were obliged to set it on fire to make
the stones more friable before the labourers attacked it
Mith their tools. On the 1st of Ramadan the Sultan gave
this task into the hands of his son el-Melek el-Afdal and
his officers. I watched them carrying up the wood to set
the tower on fire. It burnt for two days and nights. The
Sultan did not ride out that day, in order to spare himself,
and I, too, was seized with an indisposition that prevented


300 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


my attending him throughout the day. In spite of the
important matters he had on his mind, he sent three times
during the day to inquire how I was.


CHAPTER CXXII.

THE SULTAN SETS OUT FOR RAMLA.

The Sultan started at midnight on the 2nd of Ramadan,
in order to avoid the heat of the day, and spare himself as
much as possible. He reached Yebna towards mid-day,
and dismounted, to rest in his brother (el-'Adel's) tent, and
also to obtain information regarding the enemy from him.
He remained there an hour, and then rode off to his own
tent, where he spent the night. On the following day, the
3rd, he set out very early for Ramla, arriving at that place
about noon. There he took up his position with the heavy
baggage in a way that showed he intended to remain for
some time. He then drew up his troops in order of battle,
by right wing, left wing, and centre ; after which he gave
the people a meal, and then rested for a short while.
Between the afternoon and the four o'clock prayer he
visited Lydda,^ and, observing that the church in that
place was a very fine building, he ordered that it should
be destroyed, as well as the castle of Ramla. That same
day several troops of workmen began the work of demo-
lition. All the straw and corn stored in the Government
granaries here was given up to the people. The in-
habitants were obliged to emigrate to other centres of
population, and very few people remained in the place.
The labourers worked until the evening, when the

* SalsLh ed-Din destroyed all the castles on the plain, or near the
foot of the hills, according to De Vinsauf.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YVSVF. 301

Sultan returned to his tent. The following day, the
4th of Ramadan, he set the people to work again in
both places, and left them under the direction of super-
intendents, who were instructed to make them push on
with the task in hand. He visited the works every even-
ing, and had a meal served after the maghreb prayer ; then,
when everyone had broken their fast,^ they returned each
one to his own tent. The idea of visiting Jerusalem
then occurred to the Sultan, and he set out secretly with
a small following to ascertain the condition of the city,
charging his brother el-Melek el-'Adel to take his place at
the head of the army, and to press forward with the work
of destruction. He started at night-fall for Beit-NOba,^
where he halted until the following day. As soon as
morning-prayer had been said, he set out for the Holy
City (el-Kuds) which he reached on the 5th of the month.
The remainder of the day he spent in examining the con-
dition of the city — its fortifications and garrison, the state
of its supplies, the efficiency of its war-stores, etc. That
same day the servants of K&im&z the eunuch brought him
two Christians they had stopped, with letters from the
governor {Wali) to the Sultan. These letters, written
but a few days before, stated the needs of the city as
to com, military stores, and garrison. The Sultan read
them, and ordered all concerned to be beheaded. He
carried on his examination of the city until the 8th of the
month, on which day he took his departure at noon,
leaving orders that the fortifications should be repaired ;
he spent the night at Beit-Nuba, and started in the morn-
ing to return to the army. That same day M'oin cJ-Din
Kaisar Shah, Lord of Malatia, son of Ktlij Arslan, came
to beg the Sultan's support against his father and brothers,

■ Iking RamadAn* the fast wa» only broken at sunset.
- See p. 1 1.


302 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


who were trying to take the city from him. El-Melek
el-'Adel went out from Lydda to welcome him, and gave
him the most honourable reception. They pitched our
visitor's tent close to Lydda. That same day the enemy's
foragers scattered over the plain, and were attacked by our
advanced guard. As soon as the enemy were informed of
this, they sent a detachment of cavalry to their support,
which was likewise attacked by the guard. One of the
prisoners stated that the king of England had ridden out
with this detachment, and that a Moslem was about to
pierce him with his lance, when a Frank threw himself in
between, and received the blow, which caused his death ;
he himself (the king) was wounded.^ That, at least, is
what we were told, but God alone knows the truth. On
the 9th of Ramadcln the Saltan rejoined the army, and
was received by all with great demonstrations of joy.
When Kilij Arslin's son came before him, he dismounted
to receive him, treated him with every mark of honour,
and welcomed him in his own tent. He pressed forward
the work of demolition he had ordered with unrelaxed
energy. Meanwhile, intelligence of the enemy came in
very frequently. There had been several engagements
between the Franks and the advanced guard, and the
Arabs had stolen numbers of their horses and mules.


CHAPTER CXXni.

ARRIVAL OF AN AMBASSADOR FROM THE MARQUIS.

In the meantime an ambassador was sent by the marquis
to state that he would make peace with the Moslems on

» King Richard was hacking when he fell into this ambush.— De
Vinsauf, v. 31.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 303


condition that they gave up to him the cities of Sidon and
BeirOt Under those circumstances he undertook to make
an open rupture with the Franks, to lay siege to Acre, and
take it from them, provided that the Sultan would ratify
the proposed conditions beforehand. The Sultan sent
el-'Adl en-Ncjeb (the courier), who bore a reply accepting
the marquis*s proposals. He was very anxious to make
the marquis break with the Franks, for he was a man
greatly to be feared, and accursed. The marquis, on his
side, saw that the Franks intended to deprive him of the
city of Tyre ; he had therefore shut himself up in that
place, which was strongly fortified. El-*Adel set forth on
the 1 2th of Ramadin, accompanied by an ambassador from
the Sultan ; the ofler made by the marquis was to be
accepted on condition that he should first openly declare
war against the Franks by making an attack on Acre, and
that, as soon as that city was taken, he should release the
(Moslem) prisoners detained there, as well as those in
captivity in Tyre ; then, and not till then, would the Sultan
give him the two cities he had asked for. During the
evening of the same day the ambassador, sent by the king
of England to confer with el-Melek el-'Adel concerning
the treaty of peace, was brought before that prince. On
the 1 3th of Ramad&n the Sultan thought it necessary to
withdraw to the neighbouring hills with his troops, so as to
send the baggage-animals out to collect forage : for Ramla,
where we were quartered, was too close to the Franks for
us to risk sending them out, lest they should be carried off.
He therefore left that place and took up a position on a
hill adjoining that of en-Natrun,^ taking with him the
heavy ba^'^age and the whole of the troops, excepting, of
course, the advanced guard. This manoeuvre was carried
out after the demolition of Ramla and Lydda. As soon as

• Sec p. 52.


304 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


he had taken up his position, he went all round en-Natritn
— a castle celebrated for its strength and massiveness —
and forthwith gave an order for its demolition, on which
they set to work at once. Messages were frequently sent
between el-Melek el-'Adel and the king of England. The
king's ambassadors declared that their master had the
greatest confidence in el-Melek el-'Adel, and trusted him
implicitly in the matter of arranging the terms of peace.
After this ten persons chosen by the Franks brought him
such satisfactory messages, that he at once communicated
them in writing to the Sultan. This occurred on the
17th of the month. Among the news they brought was
intelligence of the death of the king of France, which had
taken place at Antioch in consequence of an illness with
which he had been seized. They also informed us that
the king of England had returned to Acre, having obtained
certain intelligence that the marquis had entered into
correspondence with the Sultan, broken all his promises to
the king, and undertaken to advance upon Acre. The
king, therefore, had hastened back to that city, to break
off these negotiations, and get back the marquis's allegi-
ance to the cause. After this the Sultan rode out to
the advanced guard, and, meeting his brother at Lydda,
questioned him on the news he had received. In the
evening, about the hour of the 'asr prayer, he returned to
the camp, and two Franks were brought before him who
had fallen into the hands of the advanced guard. These
men confirmed the news of the death of the king of
France, and the departure of the king of England for
Acre.^

^ The king of France, who was ill, had left Palestine on August i.
Richard's visit to Acre was with the intention of coming to terms
with the French, who supported the claims of Conrad of Montferrat
as king of Jerusalem. Philip died in 1223 A.D.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF. 305


CHAPTER CXXIV.

ELMELEK EL-'ADEL VISITS JERUSALEM.

As it seemed necessary to make an inspection of the Holy
City and the state of its fortifications, el-Melek el-'Adel
was commanded to repair to that place. This was on the
29th of the month ; he had just left the advanced guard,
having heard that the leaders of the Franks had withdrawn
from our neighbourhood, and he started on his journey
immediately. That same day a letter was received from
el-Melek el-Mozaflfer Taki ed-Din, announcing the death
of Kizil, son of Aildekez, and king of Persia; his own
people had attacked and assassinated him. It was said
that the murder had been committed at the instigation of
his wife, who had joined the faction of Sultan Toghril.
This occurrence, which took place during the first third of
the month of Sh'ab&n that year, gave rise to great dis-
turbances in the different provinces of Persia. El-'Adel
returned from Jerusalem on the 21st of Ramaddn. The
same day a letter arrived from the August and Prophetic
Court (that is to say, from the Khalif's Chancery) refer-
ring to el*Melek eI*Mozaflcr*s expedition against Khelat,
and expressing the greatest interest in Bcktimor. They
interceded also on behalf of Hasan Ibn-Kafj^k, kept
prisoner at Arbela by Mozaflfer ed-Din, son of Zein ed-Din,
and begged the Sultan to give orders that he should be set
at liberty. They likewise requested that el-K4di el-F&del
might be sent to the Khalifs Court to settle various ques-
tions and make divers arrangements. This letter was sent
to el- Kadi el-Fadel for his information, with instructions
that he should write to Taki ed-Din.


20


3o6 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER CXXV.

INTELLIGENCE RECEIVED FROM THE OUTPOST STATIONED
BEFORE ACRE— ACCOUNT OF THE DOINGS OF SOME
ARAB THIEVES WHO USED TO GET INTO THE ENEMY'S
CAMP.

On the 22nd of the month of Ramad&n some of our

«

thieves brought the Sultan a mare and mule that they
had carried oflF from the enemy's camp, into which they
had made their way. The Sultan had hired three hundred
Arab brigands, who used to get into the enemy's camp
and steal their money and horses; they also carried off
living men. They proceeded as follows ; one of them
would enter the tent of some Frank whilst'he was asleep,
and awake him by planting his dagger at his throat.
When the sleeping man saw the robber armed with the
dagger, he did not dare to say a word, and would suffer
them to carry him out of bounds of the camp. A few of
them who had called out had had their throats cut on the
spot ; others, finding themselves in the same circumstances,
had not said a word, preferring* captivity to death. This
state of things continued until peace was concluded. The
same day a messenger came in from the advanced guard
with the news that a body of troops had left Acre and
marched out on the plain; the guard had attacked them and
taken twenty of them prisoners ; these prisoners had con-
firmed the report of the king of England's return to Acre,
and stated that he was ill ; the garrison of Acre, they added,
was very weak, provisions were getting scarce, and there
was no money. That same day a large fleet, said to have
come from Acre, and bringing the king of England,^

> King Richard brought French and other forces to Jaffa, which
jneantime was being rebuilt.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 307


anchored alongside the enemy's camp, and disembarked a
great number of troops, who, according to one report, were
to garrison Ascalon ; according to another, were to be led
against Jerusalem. On the 24th of the month the pri-
soners we noticed above arrived from ez-Z!b,^ and their
presence in the camp was a source of great joy to the
Moslems. The same day an ambassador arrived who had
been despatched by Kizil shortly before his death ; whilst
another came on behalf of his nephew, Ainij. During the
evening a messenger came from the king of England
bringing a horse as a present from that prince to el-Melek
el-'Adel, in return for the gifts he had received at his
hands. We also received tidings that day of the death of
Hossim ed-Dfn (Muhammad Ibn 'Omar Ibn) Laj!n, son of
one of the Sultan's sisters ; he had died at Damascus in
consequence of an illness that had attacked him very sud-
denly. The Sultan was much grieved at this loss. That
same day he received a dispatch from SILma (the com-
manding officer), saying that the prince (of Antioch) had
made an inroad into the districts of Jebela and Laodicea,
that his troops had been routed and he himself obliged to
seek shelter in his city after having lost a great number of
men, and utterly failed in his undertaking.


CHAPTER CXXVL

EL-MELEK EL-'ADEL SENDS A MESSAGE TO THE KING OF

ENGLAND.

On the 26th of Ramaddn el-Melek eU'Adel, who was then
on duty in command of the advanced guard, was invited
by the king of England to send a messenger to him.
El-Melek sent him es-Sanf'a Ibn en-Nahh&l» a fine young
' The Biblical Achiib, 8} miles N. of Acre.


3D8 what befell SULTAN YUSUF.


fellow, who acted as his secretary. The interview took
place at Yazdr/ whither the prince had gone with a large
detachment of the infantry, which was then scattered over
the plain. They spent a considerable time talking of the
peace, and the king uttered these words : * I will keep the
promise I have given to my friend and brother/ referring
by these terms to el-Melek el-'Adel : he then sent the
same messenger back to him with the proposals he had to
make to us. He also wrote and forwarded by the same
messenger a letter for the Sultan, couched in the following
terms : ' You are to greet him, and say that both the Mos-
lems and the Franks are reduced to the last extremity ;
their cities are destroyed, and the resources of both sides
in men and stores brought to nought. And since right
has been done in this matter, we need speak only of
Jerusalem, of the cross, and of the land in question. As to
Jerusalem, we are fully resolved never to give it up, even
though we had but one man left ; touching the land, you
must restore it to us as far as the other side of Jordan ; and
lastly, as regards the cross — to you it is nothing but a piece
of wood, but it is very precious in our eyes, and if the
Sultan will graciously give it into our hands, we will make
peace and breathe again after continual weariness.' When
the Sultan had read the contents of this letter, he called
his councillors together to consult them on the answer that
should be made. Afterwards he wrote thus : ' Jerusalem
belongs to us just as much as to you, and is more precious
in our eyes than in yours, for it was the place of our
Prophet's journey, and the place where the angels gathered.
Therefore, do not imagine that we shall give the city up to
you, or that we shall suffer ourselves to be persuaded in
the matter. As regards the land, it belonged originally to
us, and you came to attack us ; if you succeeded in getting

1 See p. 32.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 309

possession of it, it was only because you came unexpectedly
and on account of the weakness of the Moslems who then
held it ; as long as the war lasts God will not suffer you to
raise one single stone upon another in this country. Lastly,
as concerns the cross, its possession is a great advantage to
us, and we cannot give it up except we could thereby gain
some advantage to IsllLm.' This was the answer that the
messenger took back to the king of England.


CHAPTER CXXVIL

SHiRKlH IBN BAKHEL, THE KURD, MAKES HIS ESCAPE
FROM ACRE, WHERE HE WAS KEPT A PRISONER.

During the last days of the month of Ramadan, Shlrkfth
Ibn Bakhcl, one of the emirs imprisoned in Acre, came
into the camp. He had been successful in concealing a
cord under his pillow, and emir Hasan Ibn B^rik had
hid« rn another in the privy. They had made arrange*
me- 5 to escape together, and got out of the window of
the rivy and let themselves down from the top of the
first all by means of their ropes. Shirkiih climbed over
the Outer wall and succeeded in getting clear without
accident ; but Ibn Barik, who was following him, had the
misfortune to fall, the cord giving way under his weight.
Shirk(ih found him, stunned by his fall, and spoke to him,
but could get no answer; he then shook him, in the
hope of reviving him and taking him with him, but all his
efforts were in vain. Then, seeing that if he stayed with
his comrade they would both be taken, he left him, and,
in spite of his fetters, ran till he came to the hill of el-
'Aiailiya. The sun was just beginning to rise, so he hid
himself there, and remained concealed until the day was


310 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

well advanced. By that time he had managed to break off
his fetters; so he set out once more and succeeded, under
the protection of God, in reaching our camp. He pre-
sented himself before the Sultan, and informed him,
amongst other things, that emir Seif ed-Din el-MeshtCib
was being kept in very close confinement, and that he had
undertaken to pay a heavy ransom in horses, mules, and
precious things of all kinds. He said also that the king^
of England had been to Acre and taken away with hioi
all that belonged to him — servants, memluks and portable
property, leaving nothing whatever behind. He added
that the farmers (Fellahin) on the mountiains were supply-
ing him with provisions. He also stated that Toghrtl, one
of the Sultan's chief memluks and his sword-bearer, had
made his escape before him.


CHAPTER CXXVni.

EL-MELEK EL-'AdEL SENDS ME ON A MISSION TO THE
SULTAN, ATTENDED BY SEVERAL EMIRS.

On the 29th of Ramadftn el-Melek el-'Adel sent to
summon me, with 'Alem ed-Dln Suleiman Ibn-Jender,
S^bek ed-Dtn Lord of Sheizer, 'Izz ed-Din Ibn el-
Mokaddem, and Hoss&m ed-Din BishlLra. He informed
us of the proposition made by the king of England to his
messenger, which was as follows : that el-Melek el-'Adel
should marry the prince's sister, whom he had brought
with him from Sicily, on his way to Palestine, after the
death of her husband^ king of that island ; she was to live
in Jerusalem,^ and her brother would give up to him those

' The English chroniclers say nothing of this extraordinary pro-
posaL It was not regarded as serious by either side, if indeed it was
ever proposed. See pp. 325, 326.


IV HAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 311


cities of the Sdhel (coast) which belonged to him, to wit.
Acre, Jaffa and Ascalon and their dependencies ; the
Sultan, on his side, was to grant eUMelek el-*Adel all the
cities he possessed in the S&hel, and proclaim him king of
those districts. El-'Adel was to ret«i(i ail the cities and
fiefs he then held ; the cross of the crucifixion was to be
given back to the Franks; the villages and strongholds
belonging to the Templars and Hospitallers were to be
theirs. All the Moslem and Frank prisoners were to
be set at liberty^ and the king of England was to take
ship and return to his own country. The king suggested
that matters could be very well settled in this way. When
eU'Adel knew this, he acted on it, and he summoned us,
and instructed us to lay the message he had received before
the Sultan. I was to act as spokesman of the embassy
and inform the Sultan of the interview with the king. If
he approved of the arrangement, and thought it would be
advantageous to the Moslems, I was to take my colleagues
to witness that the Sultan had given his consent and appro-
bation ; and if he rejected the proposal, now that the
negotiations for peace had assumed a definite shape, I was
in like manner to call upon them to bear witness to his
refusal. We presented ourselves before the Sultan, and I
spoke, setting forth . all that had taken place at our inter-
view ; then I read (el-Melek el-'Adel's) letter in the presence
of my above-named colleagues. He consented to the pro-
posals on the spot, for he knew very well that the king of
England would not carry them out, and that it was nothing
but trickery and mocking on his part. He gave his formal
consent at my request, saying * Yes ' three several times, and
calling all who were present to witness his promise. When
we had obtained his consent, we returned to el-Melek el*
'Adel, and informed him of what had taken place. My
colleagues stated that I had several times warned the


312 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

Sultan that I should call witnesses to his assent, and that
he had not hesitated to give his entire approval. The
proposals, therefore, could be accepted with his full con-
sent.


CHAPTER CXXIX.

A MESSENGER TAKES EL-*AdEUS ANSWER TO THE KING

OF ENGLAND'S PROPOSAL.

On the 2nd Shaw^l (October 24) Ibn en-Nahhil was sent
to the enemy's camp on the part of the Sultan and el-
Meiek el-'Adel. As soon as the king heard of his arrival
he sent to tell him that the princess had been greatly
enraged when she heard of the projected marriage, and
that she had formally refused her consent, declaring she
would never give herself to a Moslem. Her brother added :
' If el-Melek el-'Adel will consent to become a Christian,
we will celebrate the marriage.* By this means he left a
door open ifor further negotiations. When el-'Adel received
this message, he wrote to his brother informing him of the
position of affairs. On the 5 th of Shawil we heard that
the Moslem fleet had captured several ships from the
Christians, one of which was known as being (covered over)
and carried more than five hundred men. They were all
killed, with the exception of four important personages.
This news gave us the greatest pleasure, and was pro-
claimed to the sound of music. On the 6th of Shawil the
Sultan called his chief emirs and councillors together to
consult on the measures to be adopted in case the enemy
■should take the field ; for repeated messages had arrived,
stating that the Franks had arranged to come out and
attack the Moslem army. They thought it best to main-


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 313


tain their position and begin by sending away the heavy
baggage, which would leave them prepared to meet the
Franks in case of an attack on their part During the
evening of the same day two deserters from the Franks
came in to the camp and informed us that the enemy in-
tended to come out, to the number of more than ten
thousand horse ; but they did not know what direction the
army was to take. According to a Moslem prisoner, who
had managed to make his escape, they were going to march
first upon Ramla, and decide upon their further move-
ments when there. When the Sultan had satisfied himself
of the truth of this information, he commanded the herald
to proclaim that the troops were to take their light arms
and set out with the standards, for he had made up his
mind to maintain his position in face of the enemy if they
came out ; then, on the 7th of the month, he advanced,
and encamped south of Ramla church,^ where he spent the
night.


CHAPTER CXXX.

THE FRANKS COME OUT FROM JAFFA.

In the morning of the 8th of Shawil our troops formed in
order of battle, and cl-Melek eU'Adel, who had been ap-
pointed to the command of the advanced guard, went
forward to join that body, with all the volunteers who
offered to go with him. Amongst them was a body of
men who had come from Asia Minor (cr-Rilm) with a view
of taking part in the Holy War. As soon as cUMelck's
detachment approached the enemy's camp the Sultans
memluks, relying on their courage, their excellent horses,

• The church of St. Mary, Ramleh, now a mosque.


314 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

and their being so used to fighting the Franks, rushed for-
ward and discharged a flight of arrows at the enemy. The
volunteers from Asia Minor, led astray by the rashness of
the memhiks, followed their example. The Franks, angry
and irritated by the close attack, rode from within the
camp and charged on them like one man, uttering a mighty
shout. Those only of our men escaped who were borne
out of danger by their horses, or who were predestined to
save their lives by the swiftness of their own limbs. The
enemy took a great number prisoner, and on their side had
three men killed. The Franks then removed their tents
to YSLziir, and the Sultan that night was at their halting-
place till dawn.


CHAPTER CXXXI.

DEATH OF EL-MELEK EL-MOZAFFER TAKI ED-DfN.

On the nth of the month the Sultan set out in the direc-
tion of the enemy, and, after having examined their position,
returned to charge me to tell eUMelek el-'Adel that he
wished to see him, together with 'Alem ed-Din Suleiman
Ibn Jender, Sabek ed-Din Ibn ed-D4ya, and 'Izz ed-Dtn
Ibn el-Mokaddem. When they came into his presence he
ordered a servant to send everyone away excepting those
emirs and myself, and to cause everyone to withdraw from
the vicinity of his tent. He then drew a letter from his
cloak, the seal being broken ; when he read it, we saw the
tears flow down his cheeks. Then he gave way to his grief
and wept and lamented until we wept also, though we
knew not why. When he told us that this letter was to
inform him of the death of el-Melek el-Mozaffer, we all
began once more to groan and weep. I then spoke to


IVHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 315


him, and bade him remember Almighty God, and submit
to what had been determined and preordained. He
replied : ' I ask pardon of God '; we are HiSy and to Him
we return (Kurin ii. 151). 'We must keep this news
secret, lest the enemy learn it whilst they are close upon
us.' He then ordered a meal to be served for all who were
present, and after partaking of it we withdrew. Taki ed-
Dtn had died on his return from Khelat to Mi&flLrekfn.
His body was taken to that city, and later on was trans-
ferred to a mausoleum within a college, now very well
known, that was founded in his honour, close to Hamah.
I myself have visited his tomb. His death took place on
Friday, the 19th of Ramad&n, 587 (October 10, 1191).


CHAPTER CXXXII.

A DESPATCH ARRIVES FROM BAGHDAD.

On the 12th of Shawdl the Sultan received a letter from

his officers at Damascus, enclosing a despatch from

Baghdad, sent from the August and Prophetic Court. It

contained observations on three several matters: first, it

expressed disapprobation of the conduct of el-Melek

eUMozafier (Taki ed-Din) in marching against Bektimor,

disavowing his action so strongly that it was formally

stated the KhaliPs Divc^n would not salute that prince;

secondly, it disapproved of the conduct of Mozaflfer

ed'DIn, son of Zein ed-D!n, in keeping Hasan Ibn Kafj4k

in captivity, and commanded that the prisoner should be

put in possession of el*Kerkh&ni.^ This is what had

* Behl ed-Dfn's Kerkh&ni, or Kerkhtot, is probably identical with
the Kerkhini of the author oi the * Merlscd eMtttlA,* and of Ibn el-
Atbir (* Kamel,' vol jcii. of Tornberg*s edition). It lies £. of the Tigris,
and is apparently Kirkuk^ the chief town of the Shehritor Sanjak, and
an important Turkish military station.


3i6 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

happened with regard to Ibn Kafjak : he had marched
against the city of Urumiah^ with Sultan Toghril, who had
visited him with the view of obtaining assistance after his
flight from Persia. He had first assisted the Sultan, and
given him his sister in marriage, and then^ in the hope of
being made that prince's atabeg (guardian), and governor
of the country as such, he had marched upon Urumiah.and
was reported to have put all its male population to the
sword, and carried off its women and children into
slavery. He used to make his headquarters in the strong-
hold of el-Kerkhini, and from thence he issued forth to
way-lay caravans and ravage the country round. Sultan
Toghril, seeing that Ibn Kafjdk was growing formidable,
left him, and returned to his own country, whilst his former
protector continued his depredations. Mozaffer ed-Din,
Lord of Arbela, succeeded in gaining the man's confidence,
enticed him into his city, treated him as a confidential
friend, and then made him prisoner. When Ibn Kafjak
found that MozaiTer ed-Din had seized his dominions, he
wrote to inform the Khalifs Divin, hoping to earn the
Khalifs goodwill and favour by imploring his intervention.
In the third place, the despatch commanded that el-Kadi
el-F&del should be sent to Baghdad as an ambassador to
settle the preliminaries of certain agreements, and to be
informed by the Div&n on certain points. The Sultan
sent an answer in the following terms : ' In the first place,
we gave no instructions in the matter of which you com-
plain. The prince crossed the river with a view of raising
troops for the Holy War, and returning forthwith ; but as
circumstances obliged him to remain some time, we sent,
commanding him to return; in the second place, you had
been informed as to Ibn Kafj&k's character and his depre-
dations, and instructions had been sent to Mozaffer

' Urumiah^ W. of Lake Urumiah in Kurdistan.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 317


ed-Din to take him with him into Syria, where he was to
assign him a fief, in order that his whole energies might be
absorbed in the Holy War ; in the third place, el-KAdi
el-Fadel cannot possibly go to you ; he is almost always an
invalid, and is not strong enough to undertake the journey
to Ir4k/ This was the purport of his answer.


CHAPTER CXXXHI.

THE LORD OF SIDON COMES ON AN EMBASSY FROM

THE MARQUIS.

On the 13th of Shawil we were informed that the Lord of
Sidon^ had arrived as an ambassador from the marquis,
Lord of Tyre. We had already had frequent discussions
with him, which resulted in his declaring that they wished
to break with the Franks, and join us against them. The
cause of this defection was a quarrel that had arisen
between the marquis and the other princes of the Franks,
concerning a marriage which he had contracted with the
wife of King Geoffreys- brother. This marriage was

* This was Renaud, Lord of Sidon, who, after having escaped from
the defeat at Tiberias, and then played upon Sah\h ed-Din*s credulity
in the matter of surrendering the castle of Shakif (see above, pp. 150-
133)1 had been made prisoner by the Sultan, and sent to Damascus.
Having subsequently recovered his freedom, he joined the faction of
Conrad, Marquis of Montferraf.

' Isabel, second wife of Conrad of Montferrat, and daughter of
King Amaury of Jerusalem, by Maria, grandniece of the Kmperor
Manuel Comnenos, of Constantinople, was related to the first wife of
Conrad — also a Greek princess. The marriage was thus within pro-
hibited degrees; and, in addition, Humphrey of Toron, stepson of
Renaud of Cbatillon, and first husband of Isabel, was still alive, and
the question of the divorce was controverted. These were the causes
of scandal. Hut Ikha ed-I)tn is wrong, not only as to the king's
name iCteoffrcy for Guy), but as to the relationship. Isabel was half-
sister of King Guy's wife, not wiie of his brother.


3ig WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

declared a scandal on religious grounds, and was the cause
of great dissensions. The marquis, apprehensive for his
personal safety, took advantage of night to escape to Sidon,
taking his wife with him. He then addressed himself to
the Sultan, and endeavoured to obtain the support of that
prince. The marquis's rupture with the Franks was a good
thing for the Moslems, for the enemy lost in him their
most energetic leader, their most experienced warrior, and
their cleverest counsellor. When the Sultan was informed
of the arrival of his ambassador, he commanded that he
should have a most magnificent reception. A tent was
pitched for him within a canvas enclosure, furnished with
cushions and carpets fit for kings and great men. By the
Sultan's orders, he was invited to dismount where the
baggage was drawn up, so that he might rest a little before
the interview.


CHAPTER CXXXIV.

AMBUSH WHERE AIYAz EL-MEHRAnI TESTIFIES (FOR

THE FAITH).

On the i6th of Shaw&l the Sultan ordered his bodyguard
to conceal themselves in the hollows of the valleys round,
and to take command of a number of Arabs. As soon as
they had taken up their position, the Arabs, according to
their custom, began to keep watch on the enemy, who used
to come out to forage and get wood near their encamp-
ment, so as to seize the best opportunity of attacking
them. When the foraging-party of the enemy came up,
the Arabs began to shoot furiously at it. They defended
themselves, and the enemy, hearing their cries of alarm,
sent out a detachment of cavalry to charge the Arabs
who gave way, and retreated in the direction of the am-


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 319


buscade. The enemy followed them, thinking that they
could soon overtake them, when all of a sudden the
Moslem foot and horse rushed from their hiding-place,
with a mighty shout. It was now the turn of the Franks
to retreat, and they fled back towards their camp. Their
countrymen, as soon as they heard the Moslems had
charged, sent a large body of troops to the scene of the
action. The fight began anew ; the fight became serious,
and both sides suffered heavy losses. The enemy had a
number of men wounded ; we also took several prisoners
and a quantity of horses. Thanks to the measures taken
by the Sultan, this action terminated (fortunately for us) :
he foresaw what would happen, and had commanded Akhar
Aslcm, Self ed-Din Yizkoj, and several other officers on
whom he could rely, to take up a position in rear of,
and supporting the Moslems. * If you see the troops in
ambush are getting the worst of it,' he said, ' show your-
selves.' When the emirs saw the superior strength of the
enemy's forces, they ordered their foot and horse forward.
As soon as the Franks saw the Moslem battalions bearing
down on them, they turned back, and made for their camp,
our men rushing after them in hot pursuit. The fight was
over a little before mid-day. I attended the Sultan that
morning when he rode out to get news of the battle, and
we met the first of the soldiers who were returning from it.
They proved to be the whole of the Arabs, who had left
the field before the action was finished, bringing with them
five horses they had taken. Meanwhile, the .scouts and
messengers had kept us constantly informed of uhat
was going on : the enemy had upwards of sixty men
killed ; a certain number of the Moslems had been
wounded, and AiAz el-Mehr^ni, a warrior renowned for his
valour, had fallen on the field, covered with wounds ; a
young man in el-Gheidi*s service, named jAwali, had met


320 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


with the same fate ; they had taken prisoner two impor-
tant knights of the Franks, and two deserters came over
from them, bringing their horses and arms. The Sultan
returned to his tent, and gave the horses to those who had
lost their own, and ordered that the greatest care should
be taken of the wounded. Towards the end of the day,
el-Melek el-'Adel received a message from the king of
England, complaining of the ambush, and begging for an
interview with him.


CHAPTER CXXXV.

EL-MELEK'S INTERVIEW WITH THE KING OF ENGLAND.

On the i8th of Shawal, el-Melek el-'Adel joined the ad-
vanced guard, where a large tent was erected to receive
him. He had brought with him all sorts of dainties and
delicacies, various kinds of drinks, and beautiful gifts and
presents fit for one prince to offer to another. When he
made presents of this kind, no one could outdo him in
magnificence. When the king of England came to visit
him in his tent, he met with the most honourable reception
at his hands ; then the king took him to his quarters, and
had a repast served, consisting of such dishes peculiar to
his country as he thought would be most agreeable to his
palate. El-'Adel partook of them, and the king and his
suite ate of the dishes provided ' by el-'Adel. Their inter-
view lasted during the greater part of the day, and they
parted from one another with mutual assurances of perfect
goodwill and sincere affection.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 321


CHAPTER CXXXVI.

THE KING OF ENGLAND'S MESSAGE TO THE SULTAN.

That same day the king of England asked el-Melek el-
'Adel to procure an interview for him with the Sultan.
When a message was brought to Salah ed-Din upon the
subject, he consulted his advisers as to the answer that
he should make. None of the various opinions expressed
coincided with that held by the Sultan, who couched his
reply in the following terms : ' It would be a disgrace for
kings to strive with one another after they had met.
Let the question at issue between them be arranged first.
Only after matters have been settled would it be fitting for
them to have an interview, and talk over serious business.
Besides, I do not understand your tongue any more than
you understand mine ; therefore we should require an inter-
preter whom we could both trust to act as our go-between.
As soon as some definite arrangement has been concluded,
we will have an interview and lay the foundation for a
sincere friendship between the two nations.' The king of
England much admired this reply, and saw that he could
only accomplish the object he had in view by conforming
to the wishes of the Sultan.


CHAPTER CXXXVI I.

the lord ok SIDOX IS RECEIVED BY THE SULTAN.

On the 19th of Shawal the Sultan held a reception, and
ordered the Lord of Sidon to be brought before him that
lie might converse with him, and be informed of the

21


322 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

•• —

object of his mission. I 'was present when the ambassador
and his suite were introduced. The Sultan accorded
him a most honourable reception, addressed a few
words to his followers, and then ordered a magnificent
banquet to be served for them. After this he remained
alone with them. They asked the Sultan to conclude a
treaty with the marquis. Lord of Tyre ; several influential
leaders among the Franks had lately joined his faction,
such as the Lord of Sidon, and other well-known chiefs.
We have already given an account of his affairs. The
' Sultan replied that he was very willing to conclude peace
with him, but only on condition that he should openly and
actively oppose the Franks from beyond the seas. He
would be induced to take this step by the fears he enter-
tained, and by their attitude towards him in the matter of
his marriage. The Sultan promised to accept this treaty^
but only on conditions calculated to sow disunion among
the Franks, and ensure that the efforts of one faction
would neutralize those of the other.


CHAPTER CXXXVHL

AN AMBASSADOR ARRIVES FROM THE KING OF ENGLAND.

In the evening of that same day, the son of Honferi, one
of the greatest among princes and princes* sons of the
Franks, came to the Sultan's camp with a message from
the king of England. In his suite was a man said t;p be a
hundred and twenty years old. The king's message ran as
follows : ' I like your sincerity, and desire your friendship.
You said that you would give your brother all the districts
on the sea-coast, and I am anxious that you should judge
between him and Aie in the division of the land. But we


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 323


must absolutely have part of the city of Jerusalem (el-
Kuds esh-Sherif ). It is my wish that you should divide
(the land) in such a way that your brother shall be acquitted
of all blame by the Moslems, and that I shall incur no
reproach from the Franks/ The Sultan answered this
message at once with promises of compliance, and im-
mediately dismissed the ambassador, whose message had
made a profound impression upon him. Directly they had
departed, he sent after the deputation to speak to them
on the subject of the prisoners, a business to be settled
separately. They replied that, if peace were made, it would
embrace all ; if not, there could be no question of the
prisoners. The Sultan*s object was to prevent the con-
elusion of the peace. At the close of the audience, when
the envoys had withdrawn, the Sultan turned to me, and
said : Mf we make peace with those people, there is
nothing to protect us against their treachery. If I were
to die, it might be difficult to get an army together such as
this, and (meanwhile) the enemy would have waxed strong.
The best thing to do is to persevere in the Holy War until
we have either driven them all from the coast, or we our-
selves die in the attempt.* That was his own opinion, but
he was over-persuaded to conclude peace.


CHAPTER CXXXIX.

A COUNCIL IS HELD AS TO WHETHER IT WILL BE BETTER
TO TREAT WITH THE KING OF ENGLAND OR THE

MARQIIS.

Ok the nth of ShawdU the Sultan had summoned his
emirs and coupcillors of state to lay before them the
marquis's proposals, which he was much inclined to afcept.

• The narrative reverts from 19th to 1 ith Shaw&l (November 4).

21 — 2


324 IV HAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF.


It was a question of allowing him to take possession of
Sidon, on condition that he would openly break with the
Franks, and join us in actively opposing them. The Sultan
then set forth the proposals made by the king of England
as the basis of a treaty. He asked for a certain number
of towns in the coast- districts, which he specified by name,
while he gave up the hill-country to the Moslems, or else
that the towns should be held half and half by either side ;
in either case, the Christians were to be allowed to have
priests in the monasteries and churches of the Holy City.
The king gave us the choice of these two proposals, and
the council was to consider which should be adopted. He
then submitted to the emirs the conditions of the treaty of
peace desired by the king, and the terms of the treaty the
marquis was desirous of concluding, inviting them to give
their opinions on the subject, and to consider which were
to be preferred — the king's proposals or those of the mar-
quis. He also charged them to determine which of the
two proposals suggested by the king should be chosen.
The council declared that, if peace were to be made, an
arrangement should be concluded with th^ king : for an
honest alliance between Moslems and the Franks (of Syria)
could hardly be counted on, and they must expect to be
betrayed by them. The meeting then broke up, and the
subject of the peace was continually discussed. Messengers
kept on passing to and fro until the preliminaries of the
treaty were finally arranged. The principal condition was
that the king should ofier his sister in marriage to el-Melek
el-'Adel, on condition that the pair should be put in pos-
session of all the cities of the coast-districts held by either
Moslems or Christians ; the latter were to be given to the
princess in the name of her brother the kin^, the former to
be granted to el-'Adel in the Sultan's name. In his last
message (to el- Adel), the king expressed himself as follows


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 325

on this point: 'AH the Christians cry out against me
for thinking of marrying my sister to a* Moslem without
having obtained permission from the pope, who is the head
of our religion. I am therefore sending an ambassador to
him, and I shall have an answer in six months. If he gives
his consent, the arrangement will be carried out ; if not, I
will give you my brother's daughter to wife, for which we
should not require the pope's permission.' In the mean-
time hostilities were kept up, for a state of war seemed to
have become a necessity. The Lord of Sidon rode out
sometimes with el-'Adel, and they would go up a hill to
survey the disposition of the forces of the Franks. When-
ever the enemy saw them together, they made fresh efforts
to get the peace signed, for they were in the greatest dread
lest the marquis should conclude a peace with the Moslems,
and thus rend asunder the chief bond of strength of the
Franks. Things remained in this condition until the 15th
of Shawil.

CHAPTER CXL.

THE SULTAN ENCAMPS ON TELL ELJEZER.

On the following Friday the Sultan rose with the intention
of removing the camp. He called his councillors together,
and asked them what reply should be made to the proposals
of the enemy ; he submitted to the meeting the various
propositions that had been made, and informed them fully
as to the motives which governed the Franks in their
offers. He then introduced the envoys from the Franks
who had come from abroad, the son of Honferi acting as
their interpreter. He arranged with them that two com-
missioners should accompany them on their return — one to
represent himself, the other to represent el-Melek el-'Adel,
who was the person most interested in this business. The


326 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

message from the Franks stated, £imong other things, that
if the pope approved of the matrimonial aUiance, the
arrangement would be carried out ; * if not, we will give
the daughter of the king's brother to el-Melek el-'Adel in
marriage. She is a virgin, and although, according to our
religion, the pope's consent is necessary for the marriage
of a king's daughter who is a widow, such is not the case
with an unmarried princess; the family may dispose of
the maiden's hand as they please.'^ To this answer was
made as follows : ' If the marriage is permissible, let the
arrangement we have made be carried out, for we will not
break our engagements ; if, however, it is impossible, you
need not select another woman for us.' This statement
brought the meeting to an end. The envoys then repaired
to el-Melek el-'Adel's tents to await the ambassador the
Sultan was to send to the king, who was engaged in pre-
paring for his mission. Some time afterwards a messenger
came from the advanced guard, bringing news that a large
body of foot had left the city, and scattered over the plain
without any apparent hostile intentions. The Sultan had
gone to Tell Jezer,^ and everyone packed up and followed
him. The hour of noon had hardly passed before the
army was established in its new camp. As soon as the
Franks heard that the Sultan had changed his position,
they beat a retreat. After making a halt on this hill, the
Sultan set out in the direction of Jerusalem, and the Franks
began to march back to their own territory.^ Wintry
weather now set in, and rain fell in torrents ; the Sultan

■ A second marriage would require an indulgence. King Richard
had no grown-up nieces in 1 192.

^ Gezer. See p. 76.

3 The retreat from Beit N(iba began early in January, 1 192. Richard
was then busy rebuilding Ascalon, which he reached January 30, and
be then went to Acre. Beha ed-Din does not describe the rebuilding
of Ascalon.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 327


therefore set out for the Holy City, and dismissed his
troops. We spent the winter in Jerusalem. The enemy
retired into their own territory, the king of England
returning to Acre, where he remained some time, having
left a garrison in Jaffa. He sent us a message at this time,
saying : ' I am anxious to have an interview with el-Melek
el-'Adel to discuss a matter that would be equally advan-
tageous for both sides, for I hear that the Sultan has en-
trusted the business of negotiating peace to my brother^
eUMelek el.*Adel.* But it was thought that el-'Adel ought
to go and collect the troops we were then keeping in
the Gh6r, Kaukab, and other places in that part of the
country, and that therefore he should send to the king,
saying : ' We have had a great many interviews without
any good result to either side. It is useless for us to meet
if the conference you now propose is to be like its pre-
decessors, and unless you show me that there is a likelihood
of a speedy settlement of the question.' It was also arranged
that el-'Adel should conclude peace if he found it possible
to do so, and if not, that he should prolong the negotia-
tions so as to allow our provincial contingents time to join
the army. El-Melek el-'Adel then desired that a document
should be drawn up and delivered to him, stating the
utmost limits of the concessions he would be empowered
to make in order to come to a final settlement. The
provisions of this document required that the different
cities and districts should be divided equally, and held
half-and-half by either side ; that if the king insisted on
the possession of BeirOt, a condition should be made that
the citadel was to be demolished, and not rebuilt, and the
same for el-Keimfin (or el-K&iOn) if they wished to build
on the rocks ( W^ara) ; that the cross of the crucifixion
should be restored to them \ that they should have their
own priests in the Komama (Church of the Resurrection) ;


328 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

and that they should be allowed to make pilgrimages
thither, but unarmed. We were induced to make such
concessions by the state of our troops, worn out by the
fatigues of continual war, harassed by want of money, and
pining at their long absence from their homes, although
there were some among them who followed the Sultan
without thinking of asking for leave of absence.

CHAPTER CXLI.

DEPARTURE OF EL-MELEK EL-'ADEL.

El-'Adel set out from Jerusalem in the afternoon of Friday,
the 4th of Rabi'a L, 588 (March 20, 1192). On his way he
wrote to us from Kis&n, saying that (the son of) Honferi
and Abu Bekr, the chamberlain, had come to meet him
with a message from the king of England. The king sent
to say : * We consent to the division of the country. Each
side shall keep what they now hold, and if one side has
more than the half that is their just share, they shall give
the other side a proper concession. The Holy City to
belong to us, but the Sakhra shall be reserved for you.'
Such were the contents of the letter. The Sultan laid it
before his emirs, and one of them, Abu el-Heija, declared
that it was a very satisfactory proposal. This opinion
seemed to the others to coincide exactly with el-Melek
el-'Adel's, and they thought the arrangement would be a
good one. An answer in this sense was dispatched to
el-'Adel. On the i ith of Rabi'a I., Abu Bekr, the chamber-
lain, one of el-Melek el-'Adel's suite, came to inform us
that the king of England had left Acre for Jaffa,^ and ths^t

' King Richard went to Acre to see the Marquis of Montferrat,
who met him at Casale Imbert. The king returned to Ascalon on
Tuesday before Easter. The advice of the Templars and Hospitallers
was that Ascalon should be rebuilt before Jerusalem was attacked.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 329


el-Melek el-'Adel saw no necessity for any further inter-
views with the king unless there were any fresh condition
to be discussed. The chamberlain added that he himself
had had several interviews with the king, with the result
that that prince had relinquished some of his demands,
and consented that the Sakhra should be given up to us,
that the citadel should remain in our hands, and that the
rest should be equally divided (between the Franks and
the Moslems) ; that any Frank specially mentioned should
not reside there, and, finally, that the villages in the districts
belonging to the Holy City, as well as the whole of the
city itself, should be equally divided. On the i6th of the
month Rabi*a I., el-Melek el-*Adel arrived on his return
from the Ghdr, and was received by the Sultan, to whom
he gave all the information we have set forth above.
Towards the close of the same day, a messenger came in
to say that the Franks had attacked the camp of some
Arabs near ed-Ddrun,^ and had carried off several men, as
well as about a thousand of their sheep. The Sultan was
much annoyed at this news, and sent a detachment of
troops against the marauders, but they did not succeed in
coming up with them.


CHAPTER CXLH.

DEPAKTUkE OF THE MARQUlS'S AMBASSADOR.


YCsUF, the Lx>rd of Sidon's page, had come, on behalf of
the marquis, to negotiate a treaty of peace, and the Sultan
had given his consent, but only on the following con-

* Dtlrun, or Varum (see p. 117), was the only fortreu in the plains
not destroyed by SaUh ed-Din. It was taken by King Richard after four
days, according to De V'insauf.


330 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


ditions : After the ratification of the treaty, the marquis
was to break with his countrymen and make open war
upon them ; he was to be allowed to retain all the land he
might capture from the Franks by his own unaided efforts,
while all we ourselves might take was, in like manner, to
belong to us ; the people of any city we might take by a
combination of our forces were to be given to the marquis,
while we were to have the Moslem prisoners and the
treasure that happened to be in the captured cities ; the
marquis was to set at liberty all the Moslem prisoners in
his dominions ; if the king of England were to grant him
the government of the country, by any arrangement that
might be made between them, peace was to be maintained
on the terms of the treaty concluded between us and the
king of England, the city of Ascalon and the districts be-
yond not being included ; the plains were to belong to the
marquis, and what we then occupied to be ours, and that
which lay between to be halved.^ The envoy took his
departure as soon as he had received a statement of these
conditions. On Monday, the 28th of Rabi'a I., Asad
ed-Din,' son of Muhammad, and grandson of the (great)
Shirkfih, came into the camp with an escort of light
cavalry, having pushed on in advance of the contingent he
was bringing.

CHAPTER CXLIII.

SEIF ED-DlN EL-MESHTOB RECOVERS HIS FREEDOM.

It was on Thursday, the ist of Jomada II., that this emir
arrived in the Holy City. The Sultan, who happened to
be with his brother, el-Melek el-'Adel, and caught sight of
el-Mesht6b quite unexpectedly, was greatly delighted to

' The country in the low hills was the debateable land.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSVF. 331


see him, and rose up to embrace him. He then had the
room cleared, and entered into conversation with him,
talking of what the enemy was doing, and of their opinion
of the peace, in the course of which he learnt that the king
of England said nothing on the subject. That same day
the Sultan sent a dispatch to his son, el-Melek el-Afdal,
bidding him cross the Euphrates and take possession of
the provinces occupied by el-MeIek eUMansfir, son of el-
Melek el-Mozafler (Taki ed-DIn). That prince, fearing
the Sultan on his own account, had declared himself in
open rebellion ; but he trusted in el-Melek el-'Adel, and
besought him to intercede on his behalf. This made a
very bad impression on the Sultan*s mind ; he was greatly
incensed at such proceedings among members of his own
family, for he had never suspected any of his family, nor
had he required proof of their fealty. This was the reason
why the king of England put off the conclusion of peace,
for the discord that had broken out (in the Sultan's family)
seemed likely to give him a distaste for the war, and would
force htm to accept whatever conditions he himself might
choose to impose. The Sultan therefore commanded el-
Melek el-Afdal to enter the country (of the rebellious
prince), and wrote to el-Melek ez-Z4her, Prince of Aleppo,
to go, if necessary, to the assistance of his brother (el-
Afdal), and to lend him a strong detachment of troops.
EI-Afdal took his departure laden with honours, and on
his arrival in Aleppo received the most cordial welcome at
the hands of his brother, ez-Z&her. He set a splendid
banquet before him, and made him presents of great value.


332 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, j


I


CHAPTER CXLIV.

RETURN OF THE AMBASSADOR FROM (THE LORD OF)

TYRE.

On the 6th of Rabi'a II., 588 (April 21, 1192), the
ambassador Ytisuf returned to resume negotiations on
behalf of the marquis. * An arrangement/ he said, *is on
the point of being concluded between him (the marquis)
and the Franks ; if this comes off shortly, the Franks will
take ship for their own country ; therefore, if you delay
any longer, you may look upon all the negotiations on the
subject of peace as though they had never taken place,'
The Sultan was very anxious with regard to what was
going on in the East, and was apprehensive lest (el-Melek
el-Mans6r), son of Taki ed-Din, should make an alliance
with Bektimor, which would have precluded all possibility
of carrying on the Holy War. This made him desirous of
closing with the marquis's proposals, for he thought that a
treaty with him would be an advantage. He therefore
ordered an agreement to be drawn up, embodying the con-
ditions set forth above, which answer he delivered to the
envoy Y6suf, who took his departure on the 9th of the
same month.

CHAPTER CXLV.

ASSASSINATION OF THE MARQUIS.

On the i6th of the month Rabi'a 11. (May i, 1192) we
received a dispatch from our envoy accredited to the
marquis, announcing that that prince had just been
assassinated, and his soul hurled by God into hell-fire. It


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSLF. 333


came about in the following manner :^ On Tuesday, the
13th of the month, he had dined with the bishop, and left
his house with a very small escort. Two of his servants
then rushed on him, and kept on stabbing him with their
daggers until life left the body. They were at once
arrested and questioned, when they declared they had been
suborned by the king of England. Two of the marquis's
officers then assumed the command in chief, and provided
for the protection of the citadel, until information of the
occurrence could reach the Christian princes. Matters
were then arranged, and order was restored in the city.


CHAPTER CXLVI.

conxxusion of the business of el-melek el-
mansCr,^ and what happened to him.

When this prince was informed of the Sultan's displeasure,
he sent a messenger to el-Melek el-'Adel, beseeching him
to speak in his favour, and to ask that he should receive
either the cities of Harrin, Edessa, and Someisat, or, fail-
ing that, the cities of Hamah, Manbej, Salemiya,' and
Ma*arra, and also that he should be appointed guardian to

' The bishop of Beauvait, grandson of Louis \'I. of France, was
then in Tyre. According to De Vinsauf (v. 6-31), the murderers
acknowled j^ed that they were Assassins, aaing by order of the Sheikh
of the Mountain. Emoul (289, 290) says that Conrad had previously
pillaged a ship belonging to this sect at Tyre. The French suspected
King Richard. A letter from the Sheikh, absolving him, and said to
be written in 1 193 to the duke of Austria, is believed to be a forgery.
^Kohricht, AV^^i/a /fej^, HitrosoL^ No. 715.

' Muhammad el-Melek el-Mansfir N\Ur ed-Din was the grandson of
Shahanshah, the elder brother of SaUh ed*Din. He died in 1221.

> SttJttmhii is placed by Abu eUFeda two days from Hamah, in the
desert to the e^st.


334 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


his younger brothers. EI-*Adel made several applications
to the Sultan (in support of these requests), but obtained
no concession from him. The Sultan gave way at last to
the representations of all his emirs, who constantly inter-
ceded on the prince s behalf, and he felt ashamed of his
obstinacy; then, yielding to his natural generosity, he
swore to fulfil a deed by which he made over to el-Mansilr
the cities of Harr^n, Edessa, and Someisit. This deed
provided that the young prince should be put in possession
of the places he had solicited as soon as he should cross
the Euphrates (and leave Syria) ; he was to have the
wardship of his brothers, and to give up (to the Sultan) all
he then held (in Syria). El-Melek el-*Adel undertook to
be responsible for the due performance of the appointed
conditions, and asked the Sultan to append his sign-
manual (to the deed). The Sultan refused, and he in-
sisted. Then the Sultan tore the document into little
pieces. This occurred on the 29th of Rabi'a II., and put
an end to the negotiations. The business had been
arranged through my intervention. The Sultan was in-
censed at the thought that one of his children's children
(that is to say, his great nephew) should have dared to
make such a demand.


CHAPTER CXLVII.

ARRIVAL OF THE GREEK AMBASSADOR.

On the ist of Jomada I. an ambassador came from Con-
stantinople the Great, and was received with the greatest
honour. On the 3rd of the month he was introduced into
the presence, and delivered his message. He asked,
among other things, that the cross of the crucifixion
should be given to him ; secondly, that the Church of the


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 335


Resurrection and all the other churches in the Holy City
should be made over to priests of his party ; thirdly, that
an alliance, offensive and defensive, should be concluded
between the two peoples. He also asked the Sultan's co-
operation in an expedition against the island of Cyprus.
He stayed with us for two days, and took his departure,
accompanied by Ibn eUBezziz the Egyptian, who had
been appointed our ambassador. A negative answer was
returned to every one of his demands. It is said that the
King of the Georgians offered two hundred thousand gold
pieces [dinars] to obtain possession of the cross, and that
his proposal was refused.


CHAPTER CXLVni.

EL-MELEK EL-'ADEL AND THE COUNTRY BEYOND THE

EUPHRATES.

After el*Melek eUAfdal had set out for that country, el-
Mclek el-'Adel succeeded in softening the Sultan's heart
and obtaining pardon for the son of Takt ed-Dtn. This he
eflccted only after numerous interviews on the subject.
Then the Sultan instructed me to go and ascertain the
opinion of the emirs in eUAfdal's service upon the
matter in hand. That prince called them all into his
presence, and I informed the meeting of the motive with
which the Sultan had sent me to them. Emir Hossikm
ed-Din Abu eUHeija then spoke, and made answer in the
following terms : * We are the servants and slaves of the
Sultan. It may be that the young man, being afraid, will
form an alliance with another. It would be quite im-
possible for us to carry on two wars at the same time, one
against Moslems, and the other against the infidels ; if the


336 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


Sultan wishes us to fight the Moslems, he must let us
make peace with the infidels ; then we will cross the
Euphrates and fight, but it must be under his leadership.
If, on the other hand, he wishes us to keep on the Holy
War, let him pardon the Moslems and grant them peace.'
All present applauded this answer. The Sultan then re-
lented, ordered a fresh deed to be drawn up, which he con-
firmed by oath and sent to the son of Taki ed-Din, append-
ing his sign-manual to the document. El-'Adel then
asked of the Sultan those provinces (of Syria) which had
still remained in the possession of Taki ed-Din's son after
his assertion of independence. Negotiations, in which I
acted as go-between, then opened between the two sides
as to what the Sultan should receive in return for the
provinces he was to give up. It was finally arranged that
he (el-Melek el-'Adel) should receive the provinces he
asked for, and should make over (to the Sultan) his
possessions in Syria near the Euphrates. The castles of
el-Kerak, esh-Sh6bek, and es-Salt, the district of el-BelkV
and the appanages held by the prince in Egypt were to be
excepted, but he was to give up el-Jiza^ to the Sultan. He
was, besides, to furnish the Sultan with sixteen thousand
sacks of corn annually, to be sent from es-Salt and the
Belka to Jerusalem ; the crops of the current year he was
to retain, except those in the districts beyond the
Euphrates, which were to belong to the Sultan, ^al^h
ed-Din signed this agreement, and on the 8th of the
month Jomada I. (el-'Adel) set out to conclude the busi-
ness with Taki ed-Din's son, and to set that prince's mind
at rest.

« The Belka, or * empty land,' was the country beyond Jordan, in
Gilead and Moab. Es-Salt (the Saltus Hieraticus) is the capital of
Gilead, S. of the River Jabbok.

= Gisehy S. of Cairo.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 337


CHAPTER CXLIX.

THE FRANKS SEIZE ED-DARON.

The Franks — may God confound them ! — seeing that the
Sultan had sent his troops away, went up and attacked
ed-DArun, in the hope of taking it. The governor of this
place was 'Alem ed-Din Kaisar, and it was then held by
his lieutenants. On the 9th of Jomada I. (May 24, 1 192)
the enemy s infantry and cavalry began to storm the place
smartly. Sappers belonging to Aleppo and attached to
the outpost on guard before Acre had been suborned by
the king of England, and they now succeeded in driving
a mine under the fortress and setting it on fire. Upon
this the garrison asked for an armistice to allow them time
to communicate with the Sultan, but the enemy disregarded
them, and attacked the place furiously until they carried it
by storm. Those of the garrison whom God had pre-
ordained to martyrdom there met their death, the rest
were made prisoners. God*s bidding is a decreed decree!
(Kuran xxxiii. 38.)

CHAPTER CL.

the franks march urox mejdel vau.v.

After having taken the necessary steps and established a
garrison of picked men in ed-Darun, the Franks marched
off and halted at a place called eM.le^i,^ close to the
mountains of el-Khalil (Hebron). They arrived there on
the 14th. They spent the day there, and then, having

■ Till tl'Hi^t^ the ancient iMihish^ is 14 miles S.£. of Ascaloo, and
24 miles N.E. of Darum, at the foot of the Hebron hills.

22


358 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


made their preparations, they marched in the direction of
a stronghold called Mejdel Yaba.^ They made their ap-
pearance before that place lightly-armed, for they had left
their tents at el-Hesi. The garrison left by the Sultan in
Mejdel Y^ba came out and engaged the enemy, and in the
furious fight that followed they killed a count of great
renown among the Franks. The Moslems lost only one
man ; he had dismounted to pick up his lance, and was
trying to remount his horse, which was very restive, when
the Franks swooped down on him and killed him. The
enemy then returned to their camp, which they reached
the same evening, having failed to execute their design —
God be praised !


CHAPTER CLI.

SKIRMISH IN (ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF) TYRE.

On the i6th of Jomada I. we received a dispatch from
Emir Hossdm ed-Din Bishara, informing us that the
garrison left in Tyre, and consisting of one hundred horse-
men, had been reinforced by about fifty men from Acre,
after which they had made an incursion into Moslem
territory in search of booty. The detachment of troops
left to guard that part of the country had fallen upon the
invaders and killed fifteen of them, without losing a single
one of their number. The enemy's plans had been
frustrated, and they had been obliged to retreat.

^ Mejdel Vdda is 40 miles N. of Tell el-Hesi. The stronghold may
be the castle of Mirabel, at R4s el-'Ain, 2 miles W. of the village,
which, however, had been dismantled by Saldh ed-Din.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 339


CHAPTER CLII.

ARRIVAL OF MOSLEM TROOPS TO TAKE PART IN THE

HOLY WAR.

Seeing that the enemy's troops had begun to over-run
the open country, the Sultan sent out on all sides to
summon his own soldiers back. The first of the leaders
to arrive was Bedr ed-Din Dolderim, who brought with
him a great number of Turkomans. The Sultan went out
to meet him, and received him with every mark of honour.
Then, on the 17th of the month of Jomada I., *Izz ed-Dln
Ibn el-Mokaddem came in, with a fine army and well*
appointed engines of war, whereat the Sultan was greatly
pleased. The enemy left el-Hesi, and encamped at the
place where the road divides^ leading in one direction to
Ascalon, in the other to Beit-Jibrin,^ and several strong-
holds belonging to the Moslems. When the Sultan was
informed of this, he gave an order for the army to advance
in the direction of the Franks. Abu el-Heija (nick-named)
the Fat, Bedr ed-Din Dolderim and Ibn el-Mokaddem, set
out one after another at the head of their troops ; but the
prince himself, who was suffering from illness, remained
behind in Jerusalem. As soon as the confounded enemy
perceived that the Moslem army was advancing, they
retreated as speedily as they could without striking a blow.
Letters from our emirs subsequently informed us that^the
Franks were marching upon Ascalon.

> BeitJiMn is it miles N.E. of Tell cl-Hesi. It was fortified by
King Fulk in 1134 a.d.


22— a


340 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER CLIIL

THE ENEMY MAKES PREPARATIONS TO ADVANCE AGAINST

JERUSALEM.

On Saturday, the 23rd of Jornada I., a courier came from
the army, bringing news that the enemy had come out with
their cavalry, infantry, and a large number of followers,
and had encamped on Tell es-Safia.^ The Sultan im-
mediately despatched a messenger to the Moslem army,
warning them to keep a good look out, and summoning
the emirs forthwith to Jerusalem to hold a council of war,
and decide what was to be done. On the 26th of Jomada I.
the Franks left Tell es-S&fia, and took up their position
to the north of en-NatrCln. A body of Moslem Arabs,
who had been on a pillaging e^J^dition in the neigh-
bourhood of Jaffa, had halted for the night to divide
the spoil, when they were attacked by the enemy's
troops whom they did not know to be on the march.
They were all taken prisoners, excepting six men, who
ran to carry the news to the Sultan. According to the
reports of our spies and watchmen, the enemy were
waiting at en-Natrun for provisions and engines of war,
which they would need during the siege. As soon as they
had received all that was necessary, they were to advance
upon Jerusalem. On Wednesday an envoy arrived from
the Franks, accompanied by a former servant of el-
MeshtQb*s, whom they had kept with them ; he came
on a mission with regard to KarakQsh and the peace.

» Teii es'Sdfi is 7^ miles N.W. of Beit JibriD, and was the Blanche
Guarde of the Franks, built by King Fulk in 1144, but dismantled by
Salih ed-Din. En-NatrUn is 11 miles to the N.E. from Tell es-S&fi,
on the Jerusalem road. See p. 32.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 341


CHAPTER CLIV.

THE ENEMY HALTS AT BEIT-NCbA,

Ox Wednesday, the 27th of Rabi'a I.,^ the Franks left
en-NatrAn, and moved their camp to Beit-NAba, (a village)
in the plain, a day's journey from the Holy City. On
receiving this news, the Sultan called his emirs together,
and took counsel with them as to what should be done.
It was decided that each emir should be entrusted with
the defence of a certain portion of the walls ; and that the
Sultan should command the rest of the troops, who were
to be lightly armed, in their engagements with the enemy.
Each division of the garrison, knowing the part of the
walls it was to defend, was to hold itself in readiness
to receive the encn.^ . In case of need these troops
were to make sorties, but otherwise they were to remain
at their posts. Proclamations containing instructions
were dispatched to all the emirs. The road from Jaffa
to the enemy's camp was constantly crowded with
convoys of provisions for the Franks, and the Sultan
commanded the advanced guard to take every oppor-
tunity of attacking them. Bedr ed-Din Dolderim, who
was lat that time) on duty at the head of the advanced
guard, posted a goodly number of picked men in ambush
on either side of this road. A detachment of the
enemy's cavalry, acting as escort to a convoy of pro-
visions, charged the men in ambush, thinking they had to
do with a small body of Moslems only. A desperate
conflict ensued, in which (he enemy was worsted, having
thirty men killed and a number taken prisoner. The

' The ston- goes back to April 13.


342 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


latter were taken to Jerusalem, and entered the city on the
19th of Jornada I., where their arrival created a profound
sensation. This blow disconcerted the enemy, whilst it
gave fresh courage to the advanced guard, inspiring them
even to charge the whole Frank army, and to take up
a position close to the enemy's camp. As the convoys
continued to come in, a detachment of our men, with
a strong force of Arabs, was sent out to lay an ambush.
A convoy, escorted by a large body of soldiers, came
along, and the Arabs advanced to stop it. They were
attacked by the cavalry of the escort, and gave way,
retreating towards the spot where the Moslems were
concealed. The latter, who were Turks, rushed from
their ambush and hurled themselves on the enemy, killing
several men, and making a number of prisoners. They
themselves had a good number wounded. This encounter
took place on the 3rd of Jornada II.


CHAPTER CLV.

THE CARAVAN FROM EGYPT IS CAPTURED.

The Sultan had commanded the Egyptian army to begin
its march, and to keep a constant look-out as soon as
it neared the enemy. These troops halted at Bilbeis
for several days, until the convoys were collected. The
whole train then set out for Syria, never suspecting
that Arab miscreants were keeping the enemy informed
of its movements. When (the king of England) received
certain information that the caravan was close at hand,
he commanded his army to keep a good look-out and
to hold itself in readiness, while a thousand horsemen
set out, each of whom took a foot-soldier in front of


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 343


him. In this way it (the army) came to Tell es-S4fia,
where it spent the night; and he proceeded to es-Sana,
where he ordered a good number (of foot-soldiers) to
be taken* on the horses of the cavalry, and advanced
as far as the water east of el-Iiesi.* The Sultan, who
had received intelligence of the enemy's movements,
sent to warn the caravan. Those who were sent on
this service were Akher Aslem, Altonba el**Adli, and
other eminent officers. They had instructions to take
the caravan through the desert, and to avoid the neigh-
bourhood of the Franks, for an encounter was t^ be
dreaded above all things. They brought the caravan
by the road which they had just followed, thinkin^^
that there was nothing to fear, as they had performed
the journey in safety. They were also anxious to take
the shortest road. When they came to the water called
el-Khuweilfa,- everyone was allowed to disperse in order
to water the beasts. The enemy, who were then posted
at the spring head of el-Hesi, were informed of this
by the Arabs. They lost not a moment in setting out,
and surprised the caravan a little before dawn. Feiek
ed-Din, el-MeIek el-'AdeKs own brother, who was in
command of the Egyptian troops, had been advised by
Kmir Aslem to set out during the night, and gain the
top of the mountains by a quick march ; but he had not
followed the suggestion, fearing lest the caravan should
get scattered in a night-march. He had given orders

* King Richard broui^ht supplies from Ascalon. According to De
Viosauf, he himself slept at GaJatia {JeltHyeh)^ 6 miles W. of Tell es-
S.\h. There is a stream at Tell el- Hesi, which is 12 miles S.W. of
Tell esSaft.

* El'KMyuu'tifah^ called the ' Round Cistern * by De Vinsauf (v. 4)t
h.is rottnd masonry wells like those at Beersheba. It lies at the foot
of the Hebron hills« it miles N. of Beersheba, and 14 miles S.K. of
Tell el-Hesi.


344 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,

that no one was to start until the following morning.
We were told that when this was reported to the king
of England he did not believe it ; but he mounted, and
set out with the Arabs and a small escort. When he
came up to the caravan, he disguised himself as an Arab,
and went all round it. When he saw that quiet reigned
in their camp, and that everyone was fast asleep, he
returned, and ordered his troops into the saddle. At
daybreak he took the great caravan unawares, falling
on it with his infantry and cavalry. Those among them
(Egyptian troops) who passed for brave men were glad
to owe their lives to the swiftness of their horses. All the
people fled towards the caravan, closely pursued by the
enemy, who, when they saw the caravan, turned back to
attack it from their fight with the escort. This caravan
had originally been divided into three parts, the first of
which, under the escort of a detachment of Arabs and
el-Melek el-'Adel's troops, had taken the road by el-
Kerak ; the second, also escorted by Arabs, had taken
the road leading through the desert ; the third was the
one seized by the enemy. Camels, bales, everything
belonging to the travellers, and the travellers them-
selves, were carried off by the enemy. This was a most
disgraceful event ; it was long since Isl^m had sustained
so serious a disaster. There were (nevertheless) several
chiefs of great renown — such as Khoshtekin el-Jeraji,
Felek ed-Din, and the sons of el-Jaweli — with the
Egyptian army on this occasion. According to one
report we received the enemy had about one hundred
horsemen killed ; according to another account they lost
only ten men. No one of importance on the Moslem side
was killed, excepting Ydsuf, the chamberlain, and the
younger son of el-J&weli, A baggage train belonging to
the Sultan, in the charge of Aibek el-'Azizi, was so bravely


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 345


defended by that officer, that it escaped the general
disaster. This advanced him very greatly in the prince's
favour. The people were scattered in the desert, throwing
away all the valuables they had, and he was fortunate who
managed to escape with his life. The enemy collected
all they could find — horses, mules, camels, property of all
sorts, and everything that had any value — and forced the
camel-drivers, the muleteers and grooms, to go with their
respective beasts. The king set out to rejoin his army,
laden with spoil ; he halted at el-Khuweilfa to take water,
and then made his way to el-Hesi. I have been told by
one of those he took prisoner that that night a report was
spread amongst the Franks that the Sultan's army was
advancing, and that they thereupon took to flight, abandon-
ing their booty ; but as soon as they found it was a false
alarm, they returned to their spoils. However, during their
absence, a number of the Moslem prisoners had succeeded
in making their escape, the man in question being among
the number. I asked him what number of camels and
horses he thought the enemy had taken, and he replied :
' About three thousand camels, and about the same number
of horses. As to the prisoners, there were five hundred
of them.' This disastrous occurrence took place on the
morning of Tuesday, the nth of Jomada 11. In the
evening of that day I was seated in the Sultan's tent,
when one of the young memlOks attached to the stables
came in, and informed him of what had just happened
Never was the Sultan more grieved or rendered more
anxious. I tried to calm and comfort him, but he would
hardly listen to me. This is what occurred. Akher
A.slem had advised that the caravan should be taken
up to the top of the hills; but his advice was not
taken. He himself went up into the mountains with his
colleagues, and was there at the time the caravan was


346 WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF.


surprised. The enemy did not suspect his being there,
and not a single one of them appeared in the place
where he was. The Frank cavalry pursued the Moslems
in their headlong flight, while their foot-soldiers were en-
gaged in collecting the property our men had abandoned.
The Master of the Horse, seeing the cavalry of the Franks
at a distance from their foot, came down with the horsemen
he had with him, and fell on the foot-soldiers unawares,
killing several of them, and carrying off some of the
baggage animals. The mule ridden by the messenger
himself (who brought the news to the Sultan) was part
of the booty. The enemy then marched back to the
camping-place (of the main body of their army), which
they reached on Friday, the i6th of Jomada II., a day
of great rejoicing among them. After that they moved
their tents back again to the plain of Beit-Nuba, and then
came to the serious determination of marching on Jerusalem.
Their spirits were raised by having taken such store of
treasure, such numbers of camels and other baggage
animals, as to enable them to transport their various
supplies. They posted a detachment of troops close to
Lydda, to protect the road by which their convoys were
to travel, and they sent Count Henry to bring in all the
soldiers then in Tyre, Tripoli, and Acre. When the Sultan
saw that they were preparing to march upon Jerusalem,
he apportioned the defence of the walls among his emirs,
and bade them get everything ready to withstand a
siege. He also took care to pollute all the water near
the Holy City, to stop up the springs, destroy the cisterns,
and fill up the wells ; and this he did so energetically
and with such thoroughness that in all the neighbour-
hood there was not left a drop of water fit to drink. One
must bear in mind that it is no use to sink wells for
drinking-water anywhere near Jerusalem, for this great


IV HAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 347


mountain is of the hardest rock. The Sultan also sent
to all the provinces, commanding that troops should be
forwarded to him.

CHAPTER CLVI.

RECALL OF EL-MELEK EL-AFDAL.

When el-Melek el-Afdal received the Sultan's commands
to return (see Chapter CXLIIL), he had just reached
Aleppo. He started at once, heart-broken and inwardly
vexed at the message, and came to Damascus. There he
stayed, indulging his feelings of discontent by not returning
to duty. The news with regard to the Franks having now
become very serious, the Sultan sent a messenger to
summon him. El-Afdal could delay no longer, and set
out with the troops he had brought with him from the
East (the districts round the Euphrates), reaching
(Jerusalem) on Thursday, the 19th of Jornada H. The
Sultan went out to meet him, and dismounted at el-
*Azeriya^ to receive him, and to gratify his wounded
feelings by this mark of honour. El-Afdal then took up
his position on the ridges near Jerusalem to watch the
enemy, having under his command the Sultan s son, el-
Melek ez-Zafer, and Kotb ed-Din.


CHAPTER CLVII.

the enemy withdraw into their own TERRITORY;

CAUSE OK THEIR RETREAT.

On the night preceding Thursday, the 19th of Jomada II.,
the Sultan summoned his emirs to him. Abu el-Heija

* Ei'^Azfriyth^ ' Place of the Laiar- house/ is Bethany, on Olivet,
one mile £. of Jerusalem.


348 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


the Fat, who could hardly move, and was obliged to sit in
a chair in the Sultan's tent, came to the council, as did
also el-Mesht<ib, the officers who had formerly served
under Asad ed-Din (Shirkfih), and all the other leaders.
The Sultan then commanded me to address them, en-
couraging them to continue the Holy War, and I spoke to
them such words as God suffered me to call to mind on
that subject. I said among other things : * When the
Prophet — pray God for him ! — was suffering great tribula-
tion, his comrades swore to fight for him to the death.
That is an example which it behoves us, above all others,
to imitate. Then let us meet together at the Sakhra and
swear to stand by one another to the death. Perhaps the
sincerity of our purpose will obtain for us the boon of
seeing the enemy driven back.' All who were present
applauded my suggestion, and promised to put it into
practice. The Sultan remained for some time without
speaking, in the attitude of a man who is reflecting, and
everyone respected his silence^ ; then he spoke in the
following terms : * Praise be to God and a blessing on His
Messenger ! You to-day are the army and the support of
Islim. Remember that the blood of the Moslems, their
treasures and their children, are under your protection,
and that there are none besides yourselves among Moslems
who can stand up against this enemy. If you give way —
which may God forbid ! — they will roll up this land like the
rolling up of a scroll (Kurin xxi. 104), and you will be
' answerable, for it was you who undertook to defend it ;
you have received money from the public treasury, and on
you alone depends the safety of Moslems throughout the
land. I wish you well.' Seif ed-Din el-Meshtub then
spoke, saying : ' My lord, we are your servants and slaves.

' Lit., * and the people were as still as if a bird was on their heads.'


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS Yi'SUF. 349

You have been gracious to us, and made us great, and
might/i and rich; we have nothing but our necks, and
they are in your hands. By God ! not one among us will
turn back from helping you till we die.' All who were
present gave utterance to the same sentiment, and their
oath reassured the Sultan's mind and solaced his heart.
He then ordered the usual meal to be served, after which
the officers withdrew. The close of that Thursday saw
everyone hard at work and preparations in full swing. In
the evening we went to the Sultan*s tent as usual on duty,
and sat up with him part of the night, but he was not as
cheerful as usual. We said the night prayer together,
which was the signal for everyone to withdraw, and I was
leaving with the rest, when he called me back. I remained
standing before him, and he asked me if I had heard
the latest news. I replied that I had not. He then
said : ' I have had a communication from Abu eUHeija
'the Fat' to-day, reporting that many of the memluks
had como to him, and that we had been censured for our
decision respecting the siege, and proposing to shut our-
selves up in the city. They said that no advantage could
result from such a course, and that if we shut ourselves up
in the citadel we should meet the same fate as the garrison
of Acre, whilst in the meantime all the Moslem land would
fall into the hands of the enemy ; that it would be better
to risk a pitched battle ; then, if God grants us the
victory, we should be masters of all they now hold ; that
if not, we should lose the Holy City, but we should save
the army ; and that our forces used to be able to protect
Isl&m without having possession of the Holy City.' Now
the Sultan had an aflfection for Jerusalem that almost sur-
passes imagination ; this message therefore was a great
grief to him. I spent the whole night with him, and it
was one of those that we spent in the path of God. The


350 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

message which had been sent to him contained the follow-
ing passage : * If you wish us to remain in the Holy City,
you must stay with us, or else leave some member of your
family in command ; for the Kurds will not obey the
Turks, and the Turks in like manner will never obey the
Kurds.' It was therefore determined that the Sultan
should leave his (great-nephew), Mejed ed-Din, son of
Ferrfikh-Shah, and Lord of B'albek, in Jerusalem. He
had at first proposed to shut himself up in the city, but
was obliged to give up this idea on account of the great
danger that the cause of Isl&m would thereby run. I
fpund him still watching at dawn ; it gave me great con-
cern to see him, and I begged him to take an hour's rest. I
had hardly left him before I heard the muezzin calling
to prayer, and I had barely time to wash, for day was
already beginning to break. As I used sometimes to say
the morning prayer with the Sultan, I repaired once more
to him, and found him washing again. When we had
performed the prayer together, I said : • I have an idea ;
have I permission to tell you what is in my mind ?' He
gave me leave. *Your Highness,' I said, *is weighed
down with anxiety, your soul is overburdened with care,
you can hardly bear up. Earthly means are useless ; you
can only turn to God Almighty. To-day is Friday, the
most blessed day in the week, the day when prayer is
most heard, and we are here in the most blessed of places.
Let the Sultan perform ablution, and then distribute alms
in secret, so that no one knows from whence they come ;
then say a prayer of two reka between the azan and the
ikdma, beseeching your Lord under your breath, and con-
fiding all your anxieties, confessing your own inability to
carry out what you have undertaken. It may be that God
will take compassion on you and will grant your prayer.'
Now the Sultan held a sincere belief in all the doctrines of


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 351

the faith, and practised absolute submission to all the pre-
cepts of God's law. I then left his presence. Afterwards,
at the time of prayer in the mosque, I prayed at his side
in the Aksa, and he said two r€^a, and bowed himself,
praying in a low voice ; his tears rolled down on to his
prayer-carpet. Then the congregation withdrew. During
the evening of the same day we were on duty with him as
usual, and behold ! he received a dispatch from Jurdtk,
who was at that time in command of the advanced guard.
It contained the following words : * The whole of the
enemy's forces came out on horseback and took up their
position on the top of the te//, after which they returned
to their camp. We have sent out spies to ascertain what
is going on.* On the Saturday morning another despatch
arrived, which ran as follows : 'Our spy has returned, and
brings intelligence that discord is rife among the enemy;
one party is anxious to push on to the Holy City,
the others wish to return to their own territory. The
French insist upon advancing on Jerusalem^ : ** We left
our own country," they say, •' only for the sake of the
Holy City, and we will not return until we have taken it."
To this the king of England replies : " All the springs in
the neighbourhood of the city have been polluted, so that
there is not a drop of water to be had ; where, then, shall
we find water ?" They said : " We will drink the stream
of Tcku*a,- which is about a parasang from Jerusalem.'*
*• How could we water there ?" said he. " We will divide
the army into two sections," they replied ; ''one will ride

* According to De Vinsauf, Richard alone was anxious to reach
Jerusalem, and the French were not.

' TfJtiytt (Tekoah of the Old Tesument) is 10 miles S. of Jerusalem.
The water intended was perhaps that of the aqueduct, which has its
head W. of Teku'a, and which may have been available near Beth*
lehem.


352 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


out to the watering-place, while the other will remain close
up to the city to carry on the siege, and we will go to
water once each day." To this the English king made
answer : " As soon as one division of the army has gone to
the watering-place with their beasts, the garrison will sally
out from the city and attack the troops that remain, and
destroy all Christendom." They finally determined to
elect three hundred from among the chief men, who in
their turn were to elect twelve, who were to choose out
three of their number to finally decide the question. They
spent the night awaiting the decision of the three.'^

On the morning of the following day, the 2ist of
Jomada II., they broke up their camp in consequence of
the decision that was given, by which they had undertaken
to abide. They took the road to Ramla, that is to say, re-
treated in the direction whence they had come ; but their
troops, armed from head to foot, occupied the position
until the whole of the baggage had been removed. When
the Sultan heard from several different quarters that the
enemy had returned to Ramla, he rode out at the head of
his troops, and everyone gave way to the greatest rejoicing.
Still, as he knew the enemy had secured a number of
camels and other baggage-animals, he grew apprehensive
for Egypt, for the king of England had been plainly
inclined to invade that country on several former occa-
sions.

» The Franks retreated from Beit Nuba on July 6, 1192, by advice
of a council consisting of five Frenchmen, five Templars, five Hos-
pitallers, and five nobles of the kingdom of Jerusalem. The policy
recommended was an attack on Egypt, as Salih ed-Din feared.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 353


CHAPTER CLVIII.

COUNT HENRY SENDS AN AMBASSADOR.

The Sultan, relieved from anxiety by the enemy's retreat,
ordered to be brought before him the ambassador of Count
Henry, who sent saying, ' The king of England has given
me all the land on the coast, and it is now in my hands.
Now give me back my other lands, and I will make peace
with you and be as one of your children/ These words
put the Sultan into such a rage, that he meditated using
violence to the ambassador. He commanded him to
rise. But he said, ' Wait and listen to this : the Count is
anxious to know how much of the country that is now in
your hands you will give him?' The Sultan replied by
reprimanding the ambassador, and commanded that he
should be led away. On the 23rd of Jomada H. he sent
for him, and addressed him as follows : ' All negotiations
between us must be restricted to Tyre and Acre, and
must proceed on the basis of the conditions accepted by
the marquis.' After this H&ji YOsuf S&hib el-MeshtOb
came from the Frank camp ; he stated that he had been
sent by the king of England as well as by Count Henr>%
and that the king, when the council had left, had addressed
him as follows : ' Tell your lord you and I can go on no
longer, and the best thing for us to do is to put an end to
the shedding of blood. But do not think it is because I
am weak ; it is for our common good. Act as mediator
between the Sultan and me, and do not be deceived by the
manoeuvre of withdrawing my camp; the ram backs for
butting/ The king had sent two men with the H&ji
(Pilgrim) who listened to el-Meshtiib's words.
The ostensible object of this embassy was to negotiate

23


354 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

for the liberty of Beha ed-Din Kar^kfish, but the real
motive underlying this was the arrangement of a treaty of
peace. The Hdji informed us that the Franks had left
Ramla on their way to Jaffa, and that they were too
exhausted to undertake any enterprise whatever. El-
MeshtCib had been summoned from Ndblus to hear this
message, and the following was the answer : * We will make
peace with Count Henry as Lord of Acre,^ since that city
has been granted to him ; but, as to the rest of the land,
he must let us (make our arrangements) with the king of
England.' The Sultan had stationed a detachment of
troops close to Acre, to prevent the enemy from making
incursions on the country round. But on the 22nd of the
month a body of men left the city to over-run the neigh-
bouring districts. This manoeuvre did not escape the
watchfulness of the Moslems ; they planted ambushes in
several places, and succeeded in killing and taking prisoner
a goodly number of the marauders.


CHAPTER CLIX.

THE FRANKS SEND THEIR AMBASSADOR ONCE MORE TO

NEGOTIATE A PEACE.

On Friday, the 26th of the month, the ambassador from
the Franks returned, conducted by H^ji Y6suf, who was
charged with the message in presence of their Lord, and it

' Acre was part of the royal domain. The rest of the lands, in the
fiefs of Cssarea, Jaffa, and Ascalon, conquered by King Richard,
were, to a great extent, the property of the Templars and Hospitallers,
who only, obeyed the Pope. Henry of Champagne had married
Isabel, heiress of the kingdom, on the death of the marquis, and was
acknowledged king of Jerusalem in place of Guy of Lusignan, by
French, English, and Syrians alike.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 355


was ' The king of England says, I am anxious to deserve
your friendship and goodwill ; I have no desire to be a
Pharaoh to rule over this land, and I do not suppose you
wish to be so either. It is not right for you to allow all
the Moslems to perish, nor for me to suffer all our Franks
to be killed. Now« there is Count Henry, my sister's son/
whom I have put in possession of all these districts ; I
commend him and all his troops to you. If you invite
him to accompany you on an expedition to the East, he
will be willing.* The king said further : ' On many occa-
sions monks who have been turned out have petitioned
you for churches, and you have never shown yourself
niggardly, and now I beg you to give me a church. I
promise to renounce all that was unpleasing to you in my
former negotiations with el-Melek el-'Adcl, and to relinquish
all idea of it. Will you not, then, give me a barren spot,
and the ruin of its shrine ?'^ After this message had been
delivered, the Sultan summoned his councillors together
and asked them what reply should be sent. They one
and all advised him to be compliant and to conclude peace,
for the Moslems were worn out with fatigue and anxiety,
as well as overwhelmed with the burden of their needs.
It was therefore determined that an answer should be sent
in the following terms : * Since you trust us with such
trust, and as one good turn deserves another, the Sultan will
treat your sister's son like one of his own sons, of which
you shall shortly receive proof. He grants you the largest
of all the churches — the Church of the Resurrection
(Komdma)^ and he will share the rest of the country with

* Henry of Champagne was the son of the eldest daughter of
Louis VII. of France by Eleanor of Guienne, mother of Richard I.,
through her second marriage with Henry 11. of England. He was
thus the son of Richard*s half-sister, and nephew of Philip of France.

' King Richard meant the rained site of Calvary.

23—2


356 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

you ; the cities of the coast-districts, which you now hold,
shall remain in your possession ; the strongholds we occupy
in the hill country shall continue in our hands, and the
country lying between the mountains and the coast-districts
shall be shared equally between us ; Ascalon and the
places beyond that city shall be demolished, and belong
neither to you nor to us. If you are desirous of a grant of
some of its villages you shall have them. What has been
most bitter has been the decision as to Ascalon.' On the
28th of the month, which was the day after his arrival, the
ambassador took his departure, perfectly satisfied. After
he had returned, we heard that the Franks were marching
towards Ascalon, on their way to Egypt We also received
an ambassador from Kotb ed-Din, son of Kiltj-Arslin, who
brought the following message from his master : • The
pope is marching on Constantinople at the head of an
immense multitude; God Almighty alone knows how
many they may be' — here the ambassador added that
he had killed twelve horsemen on his way — * send me some
one,' the prince continued, * to whom I may give up my
kingdom, for I am not strong enough to defend it.* The
Sultan did not believe the statements of this message, and
did not trouble himself about it.


CHAPTER CLX.

THE FRANK AMBASSADOR RETURNS FOR THE THIRD

TIME.

On the 29th of the month Hfiji YOsuf Sahib eUMesbtiib
came to us, accompanied by Geoffrey, the ambassador from
the king of England,^ and said : ' The king thanks the

* This Geoffrey was perhaps the brother of King Guy.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 357


Sultan for his kindness, and says : ** I beg your permission
to lodge twenty of my soldiers in the citadel at Jerusalem,
and that the Christians and Franks dwelling in that city
may not suffer any ill-treatment. As to the rest of the
land, the plains and lowlands will be ours ; the hill-country
will be yours." ' The ambassador informed us that, of his
own accord and of good will to us, the king had given up
all claim to the Holy City, excepting only the right of
pilgrimage thither, but that he had said it was not on
account of his being weak. The ambassador spent all
Monday with us, which was the last day of the month.
We further learnt from him that everyone (in the Frank
camp) was anxious for peace, and that the king was abso-
lutely obliged to return to his own country. On this occa-
sion he had brought the Sultan a present, consisting of
a couple of falcons. The Sultan called all his emirs
together to consult them as to the answer that should
be sent to this message. They decided to inform the
ambassador that they could grant the king no rights in
Jerusalem excepting that of pilgrimage. Then, when the
ambassador demanded that pilgrims should not be subject
tt) any tax, they made it clear that they agreed with
him on that point. As regards Ascalon and the places
beyond, he was told that they must absolutely be de-
molished ;^ and when he observed that the king had spent
large sums of money upon repairing the fortifications, el*
MeshtOb said to the Sultan : ' Let him have the corn-lands
and villages as an indemnity for his losses,* to which the
Sultan gave his consent ; but he demanded that ed-D&rfin
and other places should be demolished, the territory belong-
ing to the cities destroyed to be shared equally between
the two sides. As touching the other cities and their
dependencies, they agreed to assign all those between Jaffa
* Ascalon having been rebuilt by King Richard.


3S8 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


and Tyre to the Franks, adding; * In every instance, when
we cannot agree as to the possession of a village, we will
divide it in half.' This was the answer sent to the king's
message. The ambassador took his departure on Tuesday,
the 1st of the month of Rejeb, taking Hdji Yiisuf with
him. He had made a request that someone should be sent
with him, to swear to the ratification of the treaty of peace,
as S9on as its preliminaries were settled ; but the Sultan
refused, saying that he would send someone as soon as tlie
treaty was definitely concluded. He loaded the ambassador
with rich presents for the Franks in return for those they
had s<snt him, for no one could outstrip him in the matter
of presents ; his heart was so large, and his generosity bO
great.


CHAPTER CLXI.

THE AMBASSADOR RETURNS.

At a late hour of the night preceding the 3rd of Rejeb,
H^ji YQsuf and the king's ambassador returned. The
former was received that night, and gave the Sultan his
news, and on the morning of Thursday, the 3rd, the
ambassador was introduced into the Sultan's presence.
He delivered to the Sultan this message : * The king begs
you to allow him to keep those three places^ as they are,
and not to demolish them ; of what importance can they
be in the eyes of so powerful a prince .^ The king is
forced to persist in his request by the obstinacy of the
Franks, who refuse to consent to their being given up.
He has abandoned all claim to Jerusalem, and will not
insist on keeping either monks or priests there, except
only in the Church of the Resurrection. Therefore, if you

* The three places were Ascalon, Dir^n, and Gaza.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 359

will give him the cities in question, peace can be made on
every point. The Franks will keep all they now possess
from DirOn to Antioch, and you will retain all that is in
your hands ; in this way everything can be settled, and
the king will be enabled to depart If peace is not con-
cluded, the Franks will not suffer him to go, and he could
not withstand them.' See the cunning of this accursed
man ! To obtain his own ends, he would employ first
force, and then smooth-speaking ; and, although he knew
he was obliged to depart, he maintained the same line of
conduct. God alone could protect the Moslems against
his wiles ; we never had among our enemies a man more
crafty or bolder than he. When the Sultan received this
message, he summoned his emirs and councillors together
to discuss the answer that he should make, and this was what
they finally decided : * As regards the people of Antioch,
we are already engaged in negotiations with them direct
concerning that city. Our ambassadors are now there,
and if they return with a satisfactory answer, we shall
include that place in the peace ; otherwise, it will not be
included. Touching the cities the king wishes to possess,
it is not a matter of great moment to us, but the Moslems
will never consent to give them up. As regards the fortifica-
tions of Ascalon, let the king accept Lydda, a city in the
plain, to indemnify him for the expenses he has been at.'
The ambassador was dismissed on the morning of Friday,
the 4th of Rejeb. On the following day, the Sultan's son,
el-MeIek ez-Z&her, prince of Aleppo, came to visit his
father. The Sultan was very fond of htm, and showed a
marked preference for this son, for he saw in him all the
signs of a man favoured by fortune, and gifted with great
talents, together with a great capacity for administering
affairs. He therefore went out to meet him, and met him
near el-'AzerIa, for the young prince was coming up from


36o WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

the valley of the Jordan. When he saw him, he dismounted
to do him honour; took him into his arms, and kissed his
forehead ; then he assigned him the house of the Hos-
pitallers^ for his lodging. On the 7th of the month H^ji
YCisuf came back alone, and informed us that the king had
said to him : ' We cannot possibly allow a single stone to
be thrown down from the fortifications of Ascalon ; we
cannot suffer such a thing to be said of us in this country.
As to the boundaries of the country, they are well defined,
and admit of no debate.' In consequence of this informa-
tion, the Sultan set preparations on foot for an expedition
against the enemy to convince them by this energetic step
that he was determined to continue the struggle.


CHAPTER CLXn.

THE SULTAN'S EXPEDITION.

The Sultan was informed that the Franks had taken the
field and were marching on BeirCit ; on the loth of Rejeb
he therefore left Jerusalem, and made a halt at a place
called el-Jib.2 On the morning of the following day, the
nth of the month, el-Melek el-'Adel arrived in the Holy
City from the country near the Euphrates. He visited the
Sakhra, and offered prayer there, after which he set out to
rejoin the Sultan. That Prince had already left el-Jib, and
was then at Beit-NOba, from which place he had sent to
Jerusalem to summon his troops. I rejoined the Sultan
at Beit NOba, for I had not been with him the evening he
made preparations for his departure. On Sunday, the
13th of Rejeb, he set out for Ramla, and came to a halt a

» The Muristdn^ or Hospital of St. John.

3 El'Jib (Gibeon) is 5^ miles N.W. of Jerusalem.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 361

little before mid-day on the Tells between that city and
Lydda; there he spent the remainder* of the day. The
next morning, very early, the light armed troops rode to
YAzfir and Beit*Jibrin, threatening Jaffa, and then returned
to the previous halting-place, where he had spent the rest
of the day. He called a meeting of his councillors, and
with their unanimous advice, resolved to lay siege to Jaffa.


CHAPTER CLXIII.

SIEGE OF JAFFA.

During the morning of Tuesday, the 15th of Rejeb, the
Sultan started on his march for Jaffa, and encamped there
a little before noon the same day. His army was drawn
up in three divisions, the right and left wings resting on
the sea ; the Sultan himself was in the centre. The right
wing was commanded by el-Melek ez-Z&her, the left by
el-Melek el-'Adel; the rest of the troops were placed
between the two wings. On the i6th of the month the
army began to attack the city, which they thought would
fall an easy prey. The Sultan drew up his troops in order
of battle, and ordered the mangonels to be brought forward,
and to be set up in position facing the weakest part of the
walls, which happened to be on the side of the east gate ;
he then sent his miners forward to effect a breach in the
wall. Then a great clamour was raised, and mighty
shouts ; a smart attack was begun, and the miners com-
menced a mine to the north of the east gate towards
an angle of the curtain. This portion of the wall had
been destroyed by the Moslems in the former siege, but
the Franks had rebuilt it. The miners took possession of
the mine they had sunk, and everyone thought the city


362 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

Would be taken that very day. The king of England had
just left Acre and was going to Beiriit, and it was the hews
of his movements that had induced the Sultan to lay siege
to Jaffa. An obstinate struggle was maintained until the
end of the day, the enemy displaying a hardy valour and
a determined resistance that discouraged the besiegers.
Meanwhile, the miners were just finishing their mine,
when the besieged found means to destroy it in several
places ; and the miners were obliged to make what haste
they could in escaping. When the Moslem troops saw
that it would be a matter of difficulty to capture the city,
and that the attacking forces would have to be greatly
increased before they could hope for success, they began
to relax their efforts. Then the Sultan formed a resolu-
tion worthy of himself, and commanded that the mine
should be carried through the rest of the curtain from
the tower to the gate, and that the mangonels should
be brought to bear on that part of the wall that was
already undermined. A third of the night hsudi gone
before he returned to the camp, which was on a te//
facing the city, and at a little distance from it. By the
following morning two mangonels had been set up, and
during the day they succeeded in mounting a third. The
Sultan rose, determined to storm the city ; but he observed
great want of energy in the ranks, for they thought the
mangonels that were being set up could not possibly
produce any effect for several days to come. The Sultan,
seeing his men irresolute and but little disposed to sup-
port him, was obliged to drive them forward and force
them to fight. The siege waxed hot and the garrison
suffered greatly. As soon as our men saw that the city
must fall they one and all lost every other feeling but a
longing to get possession of it. The besiegers, however,
had many wounded, both by arrows and by the missiles


iVHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 363


shot from the arbalists. When the besieged saw the situa-
tion in which they were placed, they sent two ambassadors
to the Sultan to negotiate' for peace. One of the ambas-
sadors was a (native) Christian, the other a Frank. He
consented to receive the surrender of the city on the same
terms, and with a stipulation for the same contribution, as
had been imposed on the Holy City. They accepted these
conditions, but asked for an armistice until Saturday, the
19th of Rejeb,^ saying, if they had not received succours
by that time, they would carry out the terms of the treaty.
The Sultan refused to wait and the ambassador took his
departure. The besieged made a second attempt to obtain
a respite, but with the same result. When the Moslems
saw the envoys going backwards and forwards, they lost
the eagerness that had inspired them, and fought half-
heartedly, growing more listless than usual. But at this
juncture the miners finished their mine, and were com-
manded by the Sultan to fill it with combustibles ; these
were set on fire, with the result that half the curtain was
brought down. The enemy had found out beforehand
where the fire would break out, and they had collected a
great heap of wood behind that point, to which they set
fire the moment the wall gave way, thus precluding any
attempt to effect an entrance through the breach. The
Sultan conducted the attack on the besieged with the
greatest conceivable energy; but what fine soldiers they
were! how brave and how courageous! In spite of all
they had suflfcred, they did not barricade the gate, but
came out to fight incessantly. Our men maintained a
desperate struggle with them, till night intervened and put
an end to the fighting. It was useless to light fires in the
mines that had been sunk under the walls that were still
standing, for wc could not take the place that day. The

I King Richard landed on August i, just at the expiry of this truce.


364 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

Sultan was very much vexed, and, torn by conflicting
thoughts, he regretted not having accepted the conditional
surrender. He spent that night in the camp, and deter-
mined to increase the number of mangonels to five ; these
were playing on the curtain, now weakened by the mines,
by fire, and by the operations on their side.


CHAPTER CLXIV.

CAPTURE OF JAFFA; EVENTS IN THAT CITY.

By the morning of Friday, the i8th of Rejeb, the man-
gonels had been set up, and a great quantity of stones
collected (to be hurled from these engines) ; these had to
be brought from the ravines and other places at some
distance, for there was no stone anywhere near the city.
They were brought into play on that part of the wall that
had been undermined ; the Sultan himself, as well as his son
el-Melek ez-Z&her, took an active part in the attack, whilst
el-Melek el-'Adel, at the head of the troops of the left
wing, attacked the city on the opposite side. El-'Adel was
ill at the time. Then a mighty shout was raised, the
drums sounded, the trumpets blared, the mangonels hurled
their stones, and the enemy saw nothing but disaster
threatening them on every side. The miners were actively
engaged in setting fire to the mines, and the day had
hardly reached its second hour, when the wall fell with
a fall like the end of all things. At the cry, heard by all
the people, that the curtain had fallen, there was none,
however small his faith, who did not fly to the assault,
and the heart of every one of the enemy trembled. They
rushed on ; none flinched ; all were determined ; all were
consumed with longing for the most glorious and noble of


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 365


deaths. A cloud of dust and smoke arose from the fallen
wall, that darkened the heavens and hid the light of day,
and none dared to enter the breach and face the fire.
But when the cloud dispersed, and disclosed the wall of
halberds and lances replacing the one that had just fallen,
and closing the breach so effectually that even the eye
could not penetrate within, then indeed we beheld a
terrifying sight — the spectacle of the enemy's unwavering
constancy, as they stood undaunted, unflinching, self-
controlled in every movement I myself saw two men
standing on the path of the rampart driving back those
who were trying to climb through the breach. One was
knocked down by a stone from a mangonel, and fell back-
ward inside ; his comrade took his place at once, regard-
less that he was exposing himself to the same fate, which
overtook him in the twinkling of an eye, and so that none
but the quickest sight could have distinguished one from
the other. When the enemy saw how it must end, they
sent two ambassadors to the Sultan to ask for their lives.
He made answer : ' Knight shall be exchanged for
(Moslem) horseman, Turkopole for light-armed soldier,
foot-soldier for foot-soldier. The old people shall pay the
ransom paid by those at Jerusalem.' When the envoys
saw that the fight in the breach was raging hotter than
the fiercest furnace, they asked the Sultan to put a stop to
it| in order that they might return to the city. * I cannot
prevent the Moslems from continuing the fight,* he said.
* Return to your own people, and tell them to retreat into
the citadel and surrender the city to the Moslems, for
nothing will prevent them from making their way in.'
The envoys returned with this answer, and the enemy
withdrew into the citadel of Jaffa, losing some on the way,
who were killed by mistake. Our men made their way
into the city, sword in hand, and took a great quantity of


366 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

spoil ; stores of fine stuffs, abundance of corn, furniture.
and even the remains of the booty taken from the caravan
from Egypt — all fell into their hands. The armistice was
accepted on the conditions laid down by the Sultan.
During the afternoon of Friday — always an auspicious day
— the Sultan received a letter from Kdim&z en-Najmi, who
was stationed close to Acre to protect the adjoining districts
from the sorties of the garrison ; this officer stated that the
news of the siege of Jaffa had caused the King of England
to abandon his project of going to Beirut, and that he had
decided to come to the aid of the besieged city. On
receipt of this news the Sultan resolved to bring matters to
a speedy conclusion by insisting on the surrender of the
citadel by men who could hope for no relief, for the fall of
the place seemed imminent. Moreover, it was a long time
since our troops had taken any booty, or won any ad-
vantage over the enemy ; they were therefore most eager
to take the place by storm. I was amongst the number
who pointed out the necessity of forcing the enemy to
evacuate the citadel, in order that we might occupy that
fortress before the enemy received reinforcements. This
also was the Sultan's wish ; but his troops^ worn out by
fatigue, by their wounds, by the heat and the smoke from
the fire, could hardly move^ and were but little disposed to
carry out his commands. Still, he never ceased urging
them on till a late hour of the night ; then, seeing thai
they were really too weary to do anything more, he
mounted and rode ofT to his tent, which had been pitched
close to the baggage. Those of his officers who were on
duty joined him there, and I afterwards went to lie down
in my tent, but I could not sleep, my mind was so
oppressed with dread. At daybreak we heard the sound
of the Frank trumpets, and heard that succours had come
in to them. The Sultan sent for me at once, and said :


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 367


* The succours have come, it is true, by sea, but there is a
strong enough force of Moslem troops on the beach to
prevent their landing. This is what we must do : Go and
find el-Melek ez-Z&her, and tell him to take up a position
in front of the south-east gate (of the city) ; you must
make your way into the citadel with a few picked men,
and bring out the garrison ; you will take possession of the
treasures and arms that are there, making an inventory of
them, which you will write with your own hand ; this
document you will send to eUMelek ez-Zaher, who will be
outside the city, and will forward it to me.' He then gave
me 'Izz ed-Dln Jurdik, 'Alem ed-^Din Kaisar, and Derbdsel-
Mehr&ni, as colleagues to help me in this undertaking. I
set out forthwith, taking Shems ed-Din, the treasurer, with
me. When I reached the position occupied by el-Melek
ez-Zaher, I found him with the advanced guard on a teU
near the sea. He was sleeping in his coat of mail {yelba)^
wrapped in his wadded tunic,^ and armed at all points for
the fight. May God not leave unrewarded the good deeds
of all these warriors who toiled in the cause of Isl&m ! I
awoke htm, and he got up, still half asleep, and mounted
his horse. We rode together to the place where he was to
take up his position by the Sultan's instructions, and on
the way he made me explain to him the object of my
mission. After that I entered the city of JafTa with my
men ; we made our way to the citadel and delivered the
order to the Franks to evacuate the place. They made
answer that they would obey, and began to make their
preparations for departure.

* Our author calls this sort of protective garment by the Persian
name kazA^^hend. Geoffrey de Vinsauf tells us that the gazegtms
was a iorica consuia. See the collection by Gale and Fells, voL ii.,
p. 407. Also M. de Wailly'i VilUhardouin^ notes, p. 40. On p. 39 of
that work the tame garment is called i^amboison, Henry de Valen*
cienoes writes gazy^an.


368 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


CHAPTER CLXV.

HOW THE CITADEL REMAINED IN THE ENEMY'S

HANDS.

Just as they were on the point of going, 'Izz ed-Din
remarked that we ought not to allow them to depart until
we had withdrawn the people from the city; otherwi.se,
they would probably rush on the Franks, and take all they
had. In truth, our troops were eager to pillage the city.
Jordik then set out to beat our men off; but as they were
no longer under control, and were scattered about in different
places, he was unable to get them all away. Still, in spite
of my remonstrances, he kept on struggling with their
obstinacy until at last it was broad daylight. Seeing how
time was going, I said to him : ' The succours will get in,
and the best thing we can do is to effect the evacuation of
the citadel at once ; that was the Sultan's chief object.'
When he saw why I was so impatient, he gave in to what
I wanted. We took up our position * at the gate of the
citadel next to that where el-Melek ez-Z&her was stationed,
and we got forty-nine men, with their horses and wives, to
leave the fortress, and go. But at this juncture, those who
were left took courage, and hardened their hearts to oppose
us. Those who had gone out had thought that there were
only a few ships come to their relief, and that these would
not be able to give them any assistance. They did not
know that the king of England was there with all his
men ; and as they saw the hour of noon approach without
any attempt being made to land, they feared that their
comrades on the ships dared not venture, and that they
themselves would therefore be taken and put to death.
That is the reason why some of them left the citadel.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 369


But when the rescuing fleet drew nearer, and they could
see that it consisted of five-and-thirty vessels, those who were
left behind took new heart of grace, and, by unmistakable
signs, made it very evident that they meant to renew
hostilities* One of them came out to tell me that they
had changed their minds; they donned their cuirasses once
more, and seized their shields, and were now manning the
walls that had only just been rebuilt, and which were stand-
ing unfinished without battlements or parapets. Seeing
the turn things were taking, I left the hillock on which I
had taken my position, and which was quite close to the
gate of the citadel, and went to 'Izz ed-Din Jurdik, who
was posted further down the hill with the men under his
command. I put this officer on his guard, telling him that
the besieged had changed their minds. A few moments
afterwards I was outside the city talking to el-Melek ez-
Z&her, when the besieged mounted, and sallied out of the
citadel ; they charged down in a body on our men» and
drove them out of the city. The fugitives crowded together
so closely in the gateway that some of them only narrowly
escaped with their lives. A great number of camp followers
had stopped in some of the churches — what they were
doing there is not known ; the Franks rushed in and killed
some of them, taking others prisoners. El-Melek ez-Z4her
had sent me to inform his father of what was going forward,
and as soon as the Sultan heard the news, he commanded
the herald to sound the call to arms. The drums beat the
charge, our soldiers ran up from all sides to take part in
the fight, rushed into the city, and drove the enemy back
into the citadel. When the besieged found some delay
was taking place in landing the succours, they thought
death was inevitable ; so they sent their patriarch and the
chatelain, with any number to guard them, to bear their
excuses to the Sultan, and beg that a truce might be

24


370 WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF.


granted them on the same terms as before. These envoys
were obliged to make their way through the hottest of the
fight in order to reach our camp. The delay in the dis-
embarkation of the succours was occasioned by the appear-
ance of the city ; Moslem standards were floating in every
quarter, and they were afraid that the citadel had already
been taken. The noise of the waves, the yells of the com-
batants, and the shouts of the ta/t/U and the takbtr {There
is but one God! God is great !\ prevented those on board
from hearing their own countrymen's calls. A furious
attack was made on the garrison, and when they saw that
in spite of the strength of the rescuing fleet, they hesitated
to eflect a landing, they felt convinced that those on board
believed the citadel to be already taken. The fleet con-
sisted of more than fifty vessels, among which were fifteen
swift galleys, the king being on board of one of the galleya
At this point one of the besieged committed himself into
the keeping of the Messiah, and jumped from the citadel
on to the pier ; he came down unhurt, for it was sandy.
He then ran to the edge of the water, and got into a galley
which put out for him ; this put him on board the king's
galley, and to him the man explained how things stood.
As soon as the king heard that the citadel was still holding
out, he made all speed for the shore, and his galley — which
was painted red, its deck being covered with a red awning,
and flying a red flag — was the first to land the men on
board. In less than an hour all the galleys had landed
their men under my very eyes. They then charged the
Moslems, scattering them in all directions, and driving
them out of the harbour. As I was on horseback, I started
ofl" at a gallop to tell the Sultan. I found him engaged
with the two envoys, pen in hand, just about to write,
giving them grace. I whispered to him what had happened ;
then, without writing anything, he turned to them, and


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF, 371


began to talk to divert their attention. A few moments
afterwards some of the Moslems came up, flying before the
enemy ; he at once called to his troops to mount, had the
envoys arrested, and ordered the baggage and the supplies
to be transported to Yaz(ir. The troops set out on their
march, abandoning an enormous number of bales in which
was packed the booty taken at Jaffa, and which they had
no means of carrying away. The heavy baggage was sent
off, and the Sultan remained where he was, spending the
night there with a detachment of light cavalry. The king
of England came right up to the position the Sultan had
occupied during the attack on the city ; and, as the garrison
had come out by his orders to join him, he found himself
at the head of a large body of troops. Many of our mem-
16ks were with them, and he had several interviews with
them.


CHAPTER CLXVI.

FRESH NEGOTIATIONS CONCERNING PEACE,

Abu Bekr, the chamberlain in el-MeIek el-'Adel's service,
then received an invitation to visit (the king). Aibek, a
follower of eUMeIek el-' Aziz, Sonkor, one of el-Meshtiib's
followers, and several others were with him. He found
several memlfiks of high rank,^ who were treated with
great cordiality by the king, and whom he often sum-
moned to his presence. He found also several of our
emirs there, such as Bedr ed-Din Dolderim, and others.
When all had met together in his presence, he spoke half
seriously and half in joke, and, among other things, he
said : * This Sultan is mighty, and there is none greater
or mightier than him in this land of Islim. Why, then,

■ Beha ed-Din omits to say that they were prisoners.

24 — 2


372 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


did he make off at my first appearance? By God! I
was not even armed or ready to fight ; I am still wearing
only the shoes I wore on board. Why, then, did you
retreat ?' And again he said : ' Great and good God I I
should have thought he could not have taken Jaffa in two
months, and yet he made himself master of it in two
days !' He then turned to Abu Bekr, and addressed him
as follows : * Greet the Sultan from me, and tell him that I
beseech him, in God's name, to grant me the peace I ask
at his hands ; this state of things must be put a stop to ;
my own country beyond the seas is being ruined. There
is no advantage either to you or me in sufTering the present
condition of things to continue.' The envoys then took
their leave, and Abu Bekr came before the Sultan to
inform him of what the king had said. This was on the
evening of Saturday, the 19th of Rejeb. Then, when the
Sultan had taken the advice of his council of state, he
commanded that an answer should be written to the king,
couched in the following terms : ' You began by asking for
peace on certain terms, and at that time the question of
Jaffa and Ascalon formed the main point at issue; Jaffa
now is in ruins ; you can have the country from Tyre to
Csesarea.' Abu Bekr took this answer back to the king,
and returned accompanied by an envoy from the Franks,
who came to the Sultan to say : ' The king sends you this
answer : Among the Franks it is customary for a man to
whom a city has been granted to become the ally and
servant of the giver ; if, therefore, you give me these two
cities, Jaffa and Ascalon, the troops I leave there will be
always at your service, and, if you have any need of me, I
will hasten to come to you and be at your service, and you
know that I can serve you/ To this the Sultan returned
the following answer : ' Since you trust with such trust in
me, I propose that we share the two cities.. Jaffa and


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 373


what is beyond it shall be yours, whilst Ascalon and what
is beyond it shall be mine.' The two envoys returned, and
the Sultan went to join the baggage at Ydzur, where the
camp had been pitched. He then resolved to demolish
that place as well as Beit-Dajan,^ and left his miners there
for that purpose under the protection of the advanced
guard. He came to Ramla on Sunday, the 30th of Rejeb,
and there received a visit from the Frank ambassador,
who came in company with Abu Bekr, the chamberlain.
By the Sultan's orders the ambassador was received with
great honour. He was charged to deliver the king's thanks
for the concession of Jaffa, and to renew his request for
the possession of Ascalon. He added that, if peace were
concluded within six days, the king would have no occa-
sion to spend the winter in Syria, and would return to his
own country. Without a moment's hesitation the Sultan
returned the following answer : ' It is absolutely impossible
for us to give up Ascalon, and in any case the king will be
obliged to spend the winter here. He knows full well that,
if he departs, all the country he has conquered will fall
into our hands without fail ; that will most certainly
happen, please God, even if he remains. If he can
manage to spend the winter here, far from his people, and
two months' journey from his native land, whilst he is still
in the vigour of his youth and at an age that is usually
devoted to pleasure, how much easier is it for me to remain
here not only during the winter, but during the summer
also ? I am in the heart of my own country, surrounded
by my household and by my children, and able to get all I
want. Moreover, I am an old man now, 1 have no longer
any desire for the pleasures of this world ; I have had my
fill of them, and have renounced them for ever. The

> /y^/V VfJ'tn it 6 miles S.£. of Jaffa, y'd::t}r 3^.


374 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


soldiers who serve me in the winter are succeeded by
others in the summer. And, above all, I believe that I am
furthering God's cause in acting as I do. I will not cease
therefrom until God grants victory to whom He will/
After having received this answer, the ambassador asked
and obtained permission to visit el-Melek el-*Adel. He
travelled to his tent, which was in rear, because he was ill,
at a place called Mar Samwil,^ and the envoy had many
persons with him. Soon after this the Sultan received
intelligence that an army of the enemy had set out from
Acre in order to succour the city of Jaffa ; he therefore
called his councillors together, and, with their unanimous
advice, determined to oppose the enemy, and whilst the
rest withdrew with the baggage to the mountains, the light-
armed troops were to march against the Franks, and to
avail themselves of any opportunity that might offer,
otherwise they were to return ; this would be better than
to give the Franks time to collect their forces, when our
men would have to retreat towards the mountains, looking
as if they fled, whereas now they would appear to be the
attacking party. It was on the evening of Monday, the 2ist
of Rejeb, that the Sultan issued the order for the baggage to
be transported to the mountains. On the following morn*
ing he set out with a small escort for the 'Auja, and had
come to a halt on the banks of that river when intelligence
was brought him that the enemy's forces had entered
Caesarea. This put a stop to any idea of surprising that
army; but he learnt that the king of England was
stationed outside Jaffa with a very small body of men, his
camp consisting of nothing but a few tents ; he therefore
determined to seize this opportunity of surprising that
camp, and thus realizing, at any rate, part of his plan. In

" Nedi Samwii (Montjoie of the Franks) js 4J miles N.W. of
Jerusalem.


IVHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF. 375


pursuit of this design, he set out as soon as night began
to close in; preceded by a few Arabs, who acted as
guides, he marched all through the night, and reached the
vicinity of the camp early in the morning. When he saw
that it consisted of only about a dozen tents, he entertain^^d
a strong hope of capturing it as it stood, and charged
headlong down on the enemy. But the Franks displayed
such hardihood in the face of death that our troops lost
heart at their sturdy resistance, and were obliged to draw
off, and to content themselves with completely surrounding
the camp, though at some little distance. By the will of
God I was not present at this fight, being kept behind
with the baggage by an attack of illness from which I was
suffering; but I learnt from a man who was there that,
according to the largest computation, they had but seven-
teen horsemen, while, according to the lowest reckoning,
they numbered but nine; their infantry was under a
thousand ; other accounts say three hundred ; and others,
«^g<iin, give a larger number. The Sultan was greatly
chagrined at what had happened, and went from squadron
to squadron making them the most liberal promises if they
would return to the charge ; but no one responded to his
appeal exceptmg his son, el-Melek ez-Z&her, who was pre-
paring to rush on to the enemy when he was held back by
his father. I have been told that on this occasion el-
Meshtiib's brother, eUJenah, said to the Sultan : ' Send for
your servants who beat the people on the day we took
Jaffa, and who took away the booty from them.' It must
be noted that the terms granted on the surrender of Jaffa
had been a cause of great annoyance throughout the army,
for it had deprived them of the opportunity of pillage.
When the Sultan saw the temper of his men, he realized
that he could not remain in face of this handful of Franks
and do nothing, for that would have been a grievous blow


37^ WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


to his reputation. I have been assured by men who were
there, that on that day the king of England, lance in
hand, rode along the whole length of our army from right
to left, and not one of our soldiers left the ranks to attack
him. The Sultan was wroth thereat, and left the battle-
field in anger for Y^zOr, where he came to a halt on
Wednesday, the 23rd of Rejeb. Our troops spent the
night where they were, acting as advanced guard. On
Thursday morning the Sultan rode on and took up his
position at en-Natrdn, summoning the army to come to
him there. Towards the close of the day, which was
Thursday, the 24th of Rejeb, we advanced to that place
and spent the night encamped there. The following day
he set out to visit his brother, el-Melek el-*Adel, who was
still ill ; then he repaired to Jerusalem, and celebrated
Friday prayer in that city. He also inspected the various
works in hand there, and gave instructions as to the way
in which they were to be carried out. After that "he took
his departure from the city and returned to the camp at
cn-Natrfln, where he spent the night.


CHAPTER CLXVII.
(new) forces arrive.

The first of the chiefs to arrive was 'Ala ed-Din, son of
the Atabegy Lord of Mosul, who joined us about noon on
Saturday, the 26th of Rejeb. The Sultan rode out a con-
siderable way to meet him, welcomed him with every mark
of honour, and brought him back to his own tent, where he
had made splendid preparations for his reception. After
the prince had received a handsome present, he withdrew
to his tent. That same day the king (of England's)


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 377


ambassador, accompanied by Abu Bekr, the chamberlain,
set out on his return to Jaffa, bearing a letter with which
el-Melek el-'Adel had entrusted him for the king. Very
soon afterwards Abu Bekr returned, and presented himself
before the Sultan, saying : ' The king would not suffer me
to enter Jaffa, but came out of the city to see me, and
these are the words he used : ** How long am I to go on
making advances to the Sultan that he will not accept ? I
was anxious above all things to be able to return to my
own country, but now the winter is here, and the rain
has begun. I have therefore decided to remain here, so
that question no longer remains to be decided between
us.** * On Thursday, the 9th of Sh'ab&n, the Egyptian
troops came in, and the Sultan set out from en-NatrOn to
meet them ; they followed (his son), el-Melek el-Moweiyed
Mas'dd. With them were Mejed ed-Din Helderi, Seif
ed-Din Yazkoj, and all the Asadiyeh (those who had been
Asad ed-Din Shirk&h*s memlAks). They arrived in
splendid array, the flags and banners flying ; it was a day
of rejoicing. The Sultan received them, in the first place,
in his own tent, and spread a banquet before them, after
which he sent them to the positions appointed for them.


CHAPTER CLXVni.

ARRIVAL OF EL-MELEK EL MANSUR, SON OF TAKI

ED-DIN.

This prince had taken possession of the cities that had
been promised to him, and on Saturday, the nth of
Sh'aban, he came to M&r Samwil, where eUM^lek el-*Adel
was at the time, and dismounted to visit him. The same
day el-'Adel wrote to the Sultan, informing him of the


378 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

arrival of his kinsman, and begging him to be lenient to
the youth, and to give him an honourable reception. El-
Melek ez-Z&her, on his side, as soon as he heard of el-
Melek el-Mans&r's arrival, obtained permission to go out
and meet him, and to visit el-'Adel to make inquiries con-
cerning his health. He found el-MansAr encamped at
Beit Ntlba ; he dismounted in front of his tent, expressing
the greatest joy at their meeting. This occurred on the
Sunday. He made him come with him, and, attended by
light troops, they came to the Sultan's tent, where I was
on duty at the time. When the Sultan saw el-Mans(ir, he
advanced to meet him and folded him in his arms. Tears
came into his eyes, and all who were present wept in
sympathy. He then put the young prince completely at
his ease by addressing him in the most kindly tones,
asking him how he had fared on his journey. After this
he gave him permission to withdraw, and sent him to
spend the night in the tent of his own son, el-Melek ez-
Zaher. The next morning, Monday (el-Manstir) returned
to his troops, who received him with colours flying. The
fine appearance of these men gave the Sultan the greatest
pleasure, and that same day — Monday, the 13th of
Sh'ab&n — he assigned them a position near to Ramla, close
to the vanguard of our army.


CHAPTER CLXIX.

THE SULTAN GOES TO RAMLA.

When the troops had all come in, the Sultan called his
emirs together and addressed them as follows : ' The King
of England is very ill, and it is certain that the French
will embark very shortly and return to their own country.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 379


Now that they have exhausted all their resources, the
enemy are weighed down by the mighty hand of God. I
am therefore of opinion that we ought to march against
Jaflfa and take that city by surprise, if we can get a favour-
able opportunity ; if not, we will march by night and fall
upon Ascalon ; and then, if our courage does not fail us,
we will carry our purpose through.* The plan was ap-
proved by the council. He therefore gave an order to 'Izz
ed-Dtn Jordfk, and Jem&I ed-Din Farej, and several other
emirs, to march upon Jaffa during the night of Thursday,
the 16th of Sh'ab&n. There they were to take up their
position as though they were acting as an advanced guard ,
and to send out spies to ascertain the effective force of the
garrison in infantry and cavalry. Meanwhile the king
constantly sent messengers to the Sultan for fruit and
snow, for all the while he was ill he had a great longing
for pears and peaches. The Sultan always sent him some,
hoping by means of these frequent messages to obtain the
information of which he stood in need. In this way he
managed to ascertain that there were three hundred
knights in the city, according to the highest computation,
or two hundred reckoning them at the lowest numbers re-
ported ; he also learnt that Count Henry was using every
endeavour to persuade the French to remain with the
king, but that they were one and all determined to cross
the seas. He heard, moreover, that they were neglecting
the walls of the city, centring all their attention on getting
the fortifications of the citadel into good order, and the
king of England had expressed a wish to see Abu Bekr
the chamberlain, with whom he had become very intimate.
As soon as he had received trustworthy confirmation of
this news, he marched on the Thursday morning to Ramla.
and encamped in that place about noon the same day.
He then received the following message from the detach-


38o WHAT BEFALL SULTAN YUSUF.

ment of troops sent forward to over-run the country:
* We made an expedition against Jaffa, and they sent only
about three hundred knights against us, the greater part of
whom were riding on mules.' The Sultan sent them an
order to remain where they were. Very shortly after this
Abu Bekr the chamberlain came to the camp, bringing
with him a messenger from the king, sent to thank the
Sultan for his kindness in sending him fruits and snow.
Abu Bekr related that on one occasion, when he happened
to be alone with the king, he had said to him : ' Beg my
brother el-Melek el-'Adel to consider what means can be
used to induce the Sultan to make peace, and ask him to
request that the city of Ascalon may be given to me. I
will take my departure, leaving him here, and with a very
small force he will get the remainder of their territory out
of the hands of the Franks. My only object is to retain
the position I hold amongst the Franks. If the Sultan
will not forego his pretensions to Ascalon, then let (el-
'Adel) procure me an indemnity for the sums I have laid
out in repairing its fortifications.' When the Sultan re-
ceived this message, he sent the chamberlain and the
messenger to el-Melek el-'Adel, and he privately instructed
a confidential servant to go to el-'Adel and tell him : *' If
they will give up Ascalon, conclude the treaty of peace, for
our troops are worn out by the length of the campaign,
and have spent all their resources.' It was on Friday, the
17th of Sh'aban, that they departed.


CHAPTER CLXX.

THE KING AGREES TO GIVE UP ASCALON.

After sunset on the evening of Friday, the 17th of
Sh'ab&n, a letter came from Bedr ed-Dtn Dolderim, who


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 381


was then with the advanced guard, saying : ' Five men —
one of whom, called Huit,^ is of high rank in the king's
service — have come to us from the city, and have expressed
a desire for an interview with us. Shall we hear what they
have to say, or not ?' The Sultan sent them permission,
and at the hour of the last night prayer Bedr ed-Din him-
self came to the camp to inform us that the king agreed to
give up Ascalon, that he surrendered his claim to compensa-
tion on that score» and that he had a most hearty desire
for peace. The Sultan ordered this message to be repeated
to him, and then sent a plenipotentiary to the king to take
his hand on this matter. He was to say : * Now that the
Sultan has collected all his forces together, I cannot take
back any message to him, until I have obtained an assurance
from you that you will keep your word.' Bedr ed*Din
took his leave after receiving these instructions, and wrote
an account of what was going forward to el-Melek el-'Adel.
On Saturday, the i8th of Sh'ab^n, we received the follow-
ing dispatch from Bedr ed-Din : ' I have received the king's
promise {literally, hzxid) through. the plenipotentiary; the
boundaries of our respective territories are to be those
established in the former agreement with el-Melek el-'Adel'
The Sultan*s ministers (literally, diw4n), when summoned
to a council, decided that the city of Jaffa and its depen-
dencies should be made over to the king, with the excep-
tion of Ramla, Lydda, Yebna, and Mejdel Yuba ; Cxsarea
also, with its dependencies, was to be his, as well as Arsuf,
Haifa, and Acre and their dependencies, with the exception
of Nazareth and Seffikrieh. This decision was recorded in
writing. The Sultan sent a letter in answer to Bedr edr
Din s dispatch, and Torontai set out to carry it to the
emir in company with the king's ambassador. That envoy

* Perhaps Hudt is for ' Howard/


382 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


arrived in the afternoon of Saturday to conclude the peace
with Bedr ed-Din, and he said to the ambassador : ' These
are the boundaries fixed to your territory. If you accept
peace on the terms, well and good. I will give you my
hand upon our promises. Let the king send a man (to
the Sultan) empowered to swear (in his name), and let
this be done the day after to-morrow. Otherwise, we shall
believe you are only temporizing to gain time, and we
shall break off all negotiations.* After they had come to
an agreement as to the terms, they set out together on the
Sunday morning. The hour of the last prayer on that
Sunday, the i8th of Sh'aban, had gone by, when they came
to the Sultan to announce that Torontai and the king's
ambassador had returned. Only Torontai received per-
mission to come into the Sultan's presence. He stated
that, when the king was informed of the tenor of the
written resolution of the council, he called out that he had
never given up the compensation (he claimed), whereupon
the men who had been sent to Dolderim declared to the
king that he had given it up without a doubt. * If I did,'
the king had said, * I will not break my word. Tell the
Sultan from me that it is well ; that I accept the treaty,
but trust myself to his generosity, and know that, if he
does anything further in my favour, it is to his kindness
I shall owe the boon.' Torontai went that night to bring
the king's ambassadors, who waited until the Monday
morning before they were admitted to the Sultan's presence.
They then stated what had been agreed upon by their
prince, after which they withdrew to their own tents. The
Sultan held a council at which a final decision was taken
and the preliminaries of the arrangement settled. Emir
Bedr ed-Din Dolderim then set out for eUMelek el-'Adel's
tent, taking the king's ambassadors with him^ with the
intention of asking that Ramla might be granted in addi-


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 383


tion. He returned after the last evening prayer on Monday,
and a convention was then drawn up, by the terms of which
peace was to be made for three years, commencing from
the date of the document, that is to say, from Wednesday
the 22nd of Sh'abftn, 588 (September 2, 1 192), and Ramla
and Lydda were to be made over to the Franks. El-'Adel
was then dispatched with the following instructions : ' If
you can induce (the king) to be contented with only one
of those cities, or to agree to share them equally (with us),
do so, and do not enter upon the question of the posses-
sion of the hill-country.' The Sultan thought it desirable
to make peace, because his troops had suHered a great
deal, and all their funds were exhausted ; he knew also
that they were very anxious to return to their homes, and
did not forget the unwillingness they had shown before
Jaffa, when he had ordered them to advance to the attack,
and they had refused to move. Reflecting, therefore, that
if he came to need them, he might find they had gone off",
he felt obliged to give them sufficient time to rest, and to
forget the state to which they were now reduced. He was
also anxious to set about the re-organizing of the country,
and to furnish the Holy City with all the war«stores he
could command, and to obtain time to put her defences in
good order. One of the clauses of the treaty provided that
Ascalon should be demolished, and that our soldiers should
co-operate with theirs in razing the walls ; for they were
afraid that, if we received the city as it stood, we should
neglect to demolish its defences. El-'Adel set out to
negotiate on this basis, and demanded that all Moslem
countries should be included in the treaty ; the Franks, on
their side, obtained a promise that the Lord of Antioch
and Tripoli should be included in the truce, besides the
treaty of peace which we had made with him. These pre-
liminaries arranged, the ambassadors took their departure.


384 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


having received an intimation that they would have to
make up their minds either for peace or for war. For we
were afraid that these negotiations were h'ke the former
ones — nothing but a means employed by the king to gain
time ; and by this time we were well acquainted with his
methods. That same day an ambassador came from Seif
ed-Din Bektimor, Lord of Kheldt, with a message that his
master put himself at the Sultan's disposal, offered his
support, and promised to send him troops. An ambassador
also came from the Georgians, with instructions relative to
the places of pilgrimage maintained by that people in
Jerusalem, which they were anxious to keep in good
order. They complained that they had been dispossessed,
and begged the Sultan to have compassion on them, and
order that the places in question might be restored to
those in charge of them. The Lord of ErzerCim also sent
in his submission to the Sultan, with offers of service.


CHAPTER CLXXI.

PEACE IS CONCLUDED.

On el-'Adel's arrival (at Jaffa) they made him halt at a
tent outside the city. The king was informed of his
coming, and, although he was very ill, he had him brought
before him with the others. When el-'Adel put into his
hands the draft, he said : ' I am not strong enough to
read it ; but I solemnly declare that I will make peace,
and here is my hand.' The ambassadors then met
together with Count Henry and the son of Birezin
(Balian H. of Ibelin), and the other members of the
council, and informed them of the provisions of the treaty.
All the conditions were accepted, even that regarding the


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 38s

equal division of Ramla and Lydda, and it was decided
that it should be confirmed by oath on the Wednesday
morning. For the Franks said they were unable to swear
to it on the spot, because they had eaten (that day), and
it was their custom never to take an oath except fasting.
El-*Adel sent a courier to the Sultan with the news* On
Wednesday, the 22nd of the month Sh'abtin, the members
of the embassy were summoned into the king's presence,
and he gave them his hand, while they, on their side,
pledged themselves to him ; he excused himself from
taking an oath, saying that kings never did so,^ and the
Sultan accepted this declaration. All who were present
then took the oath with Count Henry, son of the king's
sister, who was to succeed him in the Sahel, and with
Baliun, son of Barezan, Lord of Tiberias. The Hospi-
tallers, Templars, and all the leaders of the Franks gave
in their adhesion. In the evening of that same day the
Sultan's envoys set out to return to their master, and
arrived in the camp about the time of the la<t evening
prayer, accompanied by the son of Honfcri, the son of
Barezan, and several other chiefs. The Frank envoys
were received with great honour, and were lodged in a
tent pitched for that purpose, and befitting their rank.
EI-'Adel then presented himself before the Sultan, and
informed him of all that had taken place. On the morning
of the following day, the 23rd of Sh'aban, the king's
ambassador was introduced to the Sultan, and, taking his
royal hand, declared that he accepted peace on the pro-
posed conditions. He and his colleagues then asked that
an oiith to observe the treaty should be taken by el-MeIck
el-*Adc!, el MeIck el-Afcja), el Mclck cz-Zaher. 'Ali Ibn
Ahmed el-Mcshtub, Bedr cd-Din Dolderim, el Mckk

■ St. Louis was in like manner excused from an oath when taken
prisoner in Hgypt

25


386 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

el-Mansilr, and all the other leaders, such as Ibn el-
Mokaddem and the Prince of Sheizer, whose dominions
bordered on those of the Franks. The Sultan promised
to send a commissioner with them to the last-named
leaders to receive their oath. He also swore (peace) with
the Lord of Antioch and Tripoli, stipulating, however,
that his oath should be null and void unless that prince
would give a like pledge to the Moslems, otherwise he
should not be included in the treaty. He then ordered a
proclamation to be made in the camp and in the market-
places, to announce that peace was made throughout the
land, that free passage was to be allowed to Christians
through Moslem territory, and that the Moslems were at
liberty to go into the dominions of the Christians. It was
also proclaimed that the Hajj roiad (to Mekka) was now
open from Syria, and he resolved himself to make the
pilgrimage. I was present at the council when he so
decided. After this he ordered a hundred miners to be
sent to Ascalon to demolish the walls of the city ; he put
them under the command of an emir of high rank, who
received instructions to see that the Franks were with-
drawn. A detachment of Franks was to accompany the
miners, and to remain on the spot until the fortifications
had been entirely destroyed, for the Christians were
afraid that the Moslems would leave the place standing.
It was a day of rejoicing; God alone knows the boundless
joy of both peoples. It was known, however, that the
Sultan had not made peace altogether of his own free will.
With regard to this, he said to me in one of our con-
ersations : ' I am afraid of making peace, and I do not
Know what may happen to me. The enemy will increase
their forces, and then they will come out of the lands we
are leaving in their possession, and recapture those we
have taken from them. You will see that each one of


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 387


them will make a fortress on some hill-top; I cannot
draw backi but the Moslems will be destroyed by this
agreement.' So he spoke, and what he said afterwards
came to pass^; but he saw that at that juncture it would
be advantageous to make peace, for the troops had lost
heart and were abetting one another in disobedience.
God saw that peace must be for our good, because the
Sultan's death occurred shortly after the ratification of the
treaty ; had he died in the midst of the struggle he had
carried on, ls\km would have been in the greatest danger.
It was therefore by the special providence of God, and in
accordance with his usual felicity, that the Sultan was
enabled to conclude the peace himself.


CHAPTER CLXXII.

DEMOLITION OF ASCALOX.

On the 25th of the month Sh'aban the Sultan commanded
'Alcm cd-Din Kaisar to set out for Ascalon with a body of
miners and masons to demolish that city. It had been
agreed that the king should send people from Jafla to
accompany this officer, to watch the progress of the work
of demolition and to see to the evacuation of the place
by the Franks who were there. The following day
they prepared to set to work immediately on their
arrival ; but the garrison prevented them, saying that the
king owed them arrears of pay, and that they would nut
leave the city until the money was in their hands. ' Let
him pay us/ they said, * and we will leave the city ;
or, if you like, pay us yourselves.' But an officer came,

' From about 1218 A.i>. onwards the Franks erected several new
caatles. In 1229 the Emperor Frederic II. entered Jerusalem as
king.

2S-2


388 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

bearing a commission from the king to force them to
evacuate the place. It was the 27th of Sh'aban when the
work was begun, and it was carried on without any inter-
ruption. He (the king) had written to his people to take
their share in the work of demolition, and the razing of a
certain portion of the walls was assigned to each side.
* When you have demolished it/ the order ran, 'you will
have leave to depart' On the 29th of the month the
Sultan set out for en-Natrfin, and the two armies mingled
one with another. A company of Moslems repaired to
Jaffa to buy goods in that city, and a number of Franks
(literally of the enemy) went up to Jerusalem to perform
the pilgrimage. The Sultan opened the way for them
{literally the door) ; he even sent guards with them to
protect them on their way, and to accompany them on
their return to Jaffa. These pilgrimages became very fre-
quent, and were promoted by the Sultan, because he knew
that the Franks would make haste to depart home as soon
as they had visited the holy places, whereby the Moslems
would be delivered from their presence, which was always
a source of danger. The king (of England) was much
vexed to see so great a number of pilgrims ; he sent to ask
the Sultan to put what hindrance he could in their way»
only allowing those to pass who presented some symbol to
be agreed upon or a passport issued in his name.^ The
Franks were very indignant at this, and it only made them
the more eager to perform the pilgrimage. Day after day
crowds of people came in — chiefs, people of lower rank,
and princes in disguise. The Sultan then began to give
honourable entertainment to such of the pilgrims as he

' Richard sent to Salah ed-Din, asking him not to allow any pilgrim
to go to Jerusalem without a passport from himself, and he took care
not to give a passport to any Frenchmen, to punish them for having
refused to assist him at Jaffa. — Geoffrey de Vinsauf.


II


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 389


chose ; he received them at table, and entered into familiar
conversation with them, taking care to let them know that
he should thereby incur the reproaches of the king. He
used then to give them permission to continue their
pilgrimage, declaring he took no notice of the prohibition
he had received. He sent the following message to the
king to excuse himself on this score : * There are men here
who have come from afar to visit the holy places, and our
law forbids us to hinder them.' Very soon after this the
king's illness became so serious that a report was circulated
of his death. He nevertheless set out for Acre on the
night preceding the 29th of the month, accompanied by
Count Henry and all the rest of the enemy, leaving only
the sick and old in JafTa.


CHAPTER CLXXHI.

RETURN OF THE MOSLEM ARMIES TO THEIR HOMES.

As soon as this business was settled and the treaty con-
cluded, the Sultan gave his troops permission to depart.
The first of the contingents to set out was that from
Arbela; they started on their march on the ist of the
month of RamaUan. The following day saw the departure
of the contingent furnished by the cities of Mosul, Sinj&r,
and Hisn Keifa. The Sultan had announced his pilgrim-
age (to Mekka), and he now turned all his thoughts to
carrying out what he had undertaken. It was I who had
suggested the idea to him the day that peace was con-
cluded. My words made a deep impression on him ; he
issued an order that everyone in the army who decided to
undertake the pilgrimage was to have his name put down,
being anxious to ascertain by that means the number of
people likely to accompany us. Lists were drawn up of


390 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF


everything that would be required for the journey — to wit,
utensils, clothing, provisions, and other things. These
documents were sent into the country in order that every-
thing that was necessary might be prepared. After the
Sultan had dismissed his troops, and had heard that the
enemy had set out preparatory to their return home, he
determined to repair to Jerusalem to make every arrange-
ment for the work of its restoration, and to examine its
condition, as well as to make preparations for his pilgrim-
age. He set out from en-Natrtin on Sunday, the 4th of
Ramadan, and went first to Mar Samwil to visit el-Melek
el- Ad el. But that prince was no longer there ; he had
just returned to Jerusalem, and I was with him, having
been sent with a message from the Sultan, together with
Bedr ed-Din Dolderim and el-*Adel. For some time el-
Melek el-'Adel had been obliged to live apart from his
brother on account of his illness, but he was now quite
convalescent. When we informed the prince that the
Sultan was (going) to M&r Samwil to visit him, he made a
great effort of will, and came with us to meet the Sultan,
whom we met just as we reached Mar SamwiI, and before
he had dismounted. El-'Adel went forward to him, got
down from his horse, kissed the ground, and then re-
mounted. The Sultan told him to come* near, and asked
him about his health. They then rode together to
Jerusalem, where they arrived towards the end of the same
day.

CHAPTER CLXXIV.

ARRIVAL OF AN AMBASSADOR FROM BAGHDAD.

On Friday, the 23rd of the month Ramadan, el Melek
el-'Adel received the Sultan's permission to go to el-Kerak
after having assisted at the public prayer that day. He


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 391


was to inspect that fortress, and then make the best of
his way to the country to the east (of the Euphrates),
where he was to take upon him the government which had
been entrusted to him by the Sultan. He had just bidden
his brother farewell, and was encamped at el-*Azeriya, when
he was informed that an ambassador from Baghdad had
come to see him. He therefore sent a courier to the
Sultan to inform him of this, saying he was going to receive
the ambassador with a view of ascertaining the object of
his mission. On Saturday, the 24th, he came to visit the
Sultan, and told him that the ambassador came from
Ibn en-Xafedh, who had been made assistant of the Vizier
of Baghdad. He came to deliver a letter from his master
to el-'Adcl, begging him to use his influence with the
Sultan and persuade him to show respect to the Khalif^
and urging him to act as mediator between the Sultan
and the KhaliPs Divan. The same messenger brought a
reprimand to the Sultan for having delayed to send envoys
to the threshold of the Khalifate, and was instructed to
require him to send el-Kadi cl-Facjel to the Khalifs Di\&n»
to conclude certain negotiations of the Sultan with the
Div&n which hitherto had led to nothing. (On this
occasion) the Dtv&n made the most splendid promises
to el-Melek eU'Adel, that in case he should be successful
the service he would thereby render to the Divftn would
thenceforward give him the greatest influence, with other
considerations of a like nature. When eU'Adel spoke to
the Sultan on the subject, he showed no disposition to
send an ambassador to receive the orders of the Div&n, or
to suffer it to appear that the Khalifs interference had any
influence with him at all. The discussion was interrupted
and resumed more than once ; they had several conversa-
tions, more or less lengthy, on the subject, until at last
the Sultan decided to dispatch ed-DiA csh-SheherzOri


392 WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF.


(to Baghdad).* As soon as el-' Add had arranged this
business, he returned to his camp at el-'Azariya, and made
known the Sultan's answer, — that he had consented to send
an ambassador to the Khalif s Divan. On the (following)
Monday he set out for el Kerak, and on Tuesday, the
26th of Ramadan, ed-Dia started for Baghdad.


CHAPTER CLXXV.

EL-MELEK EZ-ZAHER SETS OUT ON HIS RETURN TO HIS
OWN DOMINIONS, BUT THE SULTAN IS ANXIOUS ABOUT
HIM.

On the morning of the 27th, el-Melek ez-Zaher — may his
glory increase ! — set out, after going to the Sakhra to say
his prayers and implore the favour of God. He rode out
and I rode in attendance, when he turned to me, saying :
' I have just recollected something I must speak to the
Sultan about.' He sent forthwith to ask permission to
come into his father's presence, and as soon as the per-
mission was granted took me with him into the audience-
chamber. Everyone else withdrew, after which the Sultan
addressed him as follows : ' I commend you to God
Almighty. He is the source of all good. Do the will of
God, for that is the way of peace. Beware of bloodshed ;
trust not in that, for spilt blood never sleeps. Seek to
gain the hearts of thy subjects, and watch over all their
interests, for thou art only appointed by God and by me
to look after their good ; endeavour to gain the hearts of
thy emirs, thy ministers, and thy nobles. I have become
great as I am because I have won the hearts of men by
gentleness and kindness. Never nourish ill-feeling against
any man, for death spares none. Be prudent in thy

' Did ed-Din esh-SheherzDri (EUK^sem Ibn Yahya) was appointed
Kadi of Damascus about the year 572 (a.d. i 176-1 177).


WHAT BEFELL SULTAS YUSUF, 393

dealings with other men, for (God) will not pardon unless
they forgive you ; but as to that which is between God
and thyself. He will pardon the penitent, for He is gracious.'
He added other injunctions, but this is all I could re-
member after wc had left the Sultan*s presence, for a great
part of the night had gone and dawn had bc;;un to appear
before we left the audience-chamber. He finally gave us
leave to withdraw, and rose from his seat to bid the prince
farewell ; he dismissed him with a kiss on the cheek, and,
placing his hand on his son's head, committed him to the
care of God. The prince went to sleep in the wooden
alcove belonging to the Sultan; and we remained with him
until daybreak. Ez-Zuher then started on his journey,
and I rode with him some way before bidding him
farewell; he then continued on his road under God's
protection. Very shortly afterwards el-Melck el-Afdal
dispatched his baggage, but the business he was trans-
acting with the Sultan through me detained him till the
4th of the month of Shawal. He set out on his journey
that evening, towards the middle of the night, after having
suflTered a reprimand from the Sultan. Instead of follow-
ing the road through the valley of the Jordan, he started
across country with a lightly-armed escort.


CHAPTER CLXXVI.

THE SULTAN LKAVES JERUSALEM.

lllE Sultan was occupied during his stay in Jerusalem in
granting fiefs, in dismissing his troops, and making pre-
parations for his journey into Egypt His intention as to
the pilgrimage was interrupted, so the most important of
profitable things was lost to him. He spent his time in
this way until he heard for certain that the ship had sailed


394 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF,


on which the king of England had embarked, on his
return to his own country ; this was on the first day of the
month of Shawal (October lo, 1 192). He then determined
to ride through the districts on the coast with a small
escort, with a view of inspecting the maritime fortresses,
and reaching Damascus by way of Banias. He proposed
to remain only a few days in that city, returning thence to
Jerusalem, preparatory to starting for Egypt. He meant
to examine into the condition of that country, to make the
necessary arrangements for its government, and to take
various measures of public utility. According to his com-
mand I was to remain in the Holy City until his return, to
superintend the erection of a hospital he had ordered to be
built, and to press forward the completion of a college, the
foundations of which he had laid. He left Jerusalem on
Thursday, the 6th of Shawal, and I rode with him to bid
him farewell, which I meant to do first at el-Bira,^ where
he halted for dinner ; he continued his journey to Nablus,
and I went part of the way with him. He halted for the
night, and then started for that city, where he arrived about
mid- day on Friday, the 7th of Sha\^d.l. A crowd of people
came out to meet him, to complain of el-Meshtiib and the
oppressive way in which he governed them. He resolved
to inquire into the matter, and therefore remained at
Nablus until the afternoon of Saturday, when he set out for
Sebastieh,* to examine into the state of that city. He
then took the road to Kaukab, where he arrived on Mon-
day, the 10th of the month. He made an inspection of
the fortress, and ordered the necessary repairs. Behi ed-
Din Karak{ish, who had recovered his freedom, came to
pay his respects to the Sultan on Tuesday, the iith of
Shawal. His coming gave the Sultan the greatest pleasure,.

' Bfre/i^ Sh miles N. of Jerusalem.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 395


and, indeed, he had many titles to his prince s favour, and
had rendered great service to the cause of Islam. He
obtained his sanction to go to Damascus to procure the
money necessary for his ransom, which was fixed, as I have
been told, but God knows, at two hundred thousand (gold
pieces ?). When the Sultan was at Beir6t, he received a
visit from the prince, Lord of Antioch, who came to
salute him and to ask a favour. He gave him an honour-
able reception, and entertained him hospitably, grant-
ing him the territory of el-'Amk^ — corn lands, the crop
bringing in an annual return of iifttcn thousand gold
pieces (dinars) annually. El-Mcshtub had been left at
Jerusalem with the other emirs who had remained there,
but the government of the city had not been entrusted to
him ; 'Izz ed-Din Jurdik exercised authority as governor,
having been appointed by the Sultan on that Prince's
return to the city after the conclusion of peace. Before
appointing him to that post, the Sultan had employed me
to ascertain the opinion of eUMelck el-'Adel, el-MeIek el-
Afdal, and eUMeIek ez-Zaher upon the bubject. Jurdik
was, moreover, elected as governor by the voice of all
religious and just men, because he was dependable in
character, and protected all honest men. One Friday, at
the Sakhra, in accordance with the Sultan*s commands, I
installed Jurdik in his office. After the conclusion of
public prayer I invested that emir with his new dignity,
ui'ging him very specially to do his duty faithfully, and
acquainting him with the high esteem in which he was held
by the Sultan. He acquitted himself of the duties of his
position in the most praiseworthy , manner. £1-Meshtilb
remained in the city in company with the other emirs, and
died there on Sunday, the 23rd of Shawill (November i,

» See p. 38.


396 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


A.D. 1 192). Prayers were said over his body in the
Mesjed el-Aksa,^ and he was buried in his own house.


CHAPTER CLXXVII.

THE SULTAN RETURNS TO DAMASCUS.

The Sultan inspected all the strongholds he possessed in
the Sahel (Western Palestine), and ordered the necessary
repairs to be carried out ; he then turned his attention to
the condition of the troops composing their garrisons, and
filled each one of the fortresses with infantry and cavalry.
On the morning of Wednesday, the 26th of Shaw&l, he
entered Damascus, and there he found el-Melek el-Afdal,
el-Melek ez-Zaher, el-Melek ez-Zafer, and his younger
children. He preferred this city as a place of abode to
any other. On the Thursday morning, the 27th of the
month, he held a public reception, to which everyone was
allowed to come and satisfy their thirst to see him. People
of all classes were admitted, and poets recited poems in his
praise: 'that he spread the wings of Justice over all, and
rained down boons on his people from the clouds of his
munificence and kindness.' For he held audiences at ap-
pointed times at which he gave ear to the complaints of
the oppressed. On Monday, the first day of the month
of Zu eUK'ada, el-Melek el-Afdal gave a great dinner
to el-Melek ez-Zaher, who had come to Damascus on
hearing that the Sultan intended to stay in that city. He
had stayed there in the hope of having the pleasure of
seeing his father once more ; it seemed as though his noble
heart had a presentiment that his father's death was at
hand. In the course of the evening he returned several
times to bid him farewell. In the banquet that el-Afdal

' The Haram enclosure.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 397


gave his brother, he displayed a magnificence and good
taste worthy of his fine character. He intended it as a
token of gratitude for the splendid reception ez-Zaher had
given him on his visit to Aleppo. The great officers of
State, both civil and ecclesiastical (literally, the lords of
this world and the sons of that which is hereafter), were
present at this assembly. The Sultan also went, at el-
Afdal's invitation, to gladden his heart. So at least I have
been told.

CHAPTER CLXXVHI.

ARRIVAL OF EL-MELKK KL-'ADEL.

El-Melek EL-'Adel had been to inspect the fortress of
el-Kcrak and to give orders for the improvements he con-
sidered necessar>', after which he set out on his return to
his dominions on the Euphrates, and on Wednesday, the
17th of the month of Zu el-K'ada, he entered the territory
of Damascus. The Sultan went out to meet him, and
remained hunting in the districts between Ghabaghob^ and
el-Kisweh till he came, and they set out together for
Damascus, and entered the city on the evening of Sunday,
the 2 1 St of the month. The Sultan stayed at Damascus,
hunting in company with his brother and sons, amusing
himself in the country of Damascus and in the haunts of
the gazelle. It seemed to afford him the rest of mind that
his continual fatigues — working by day aad watching by
night — had rendered absolutely necessary for him ; but he
did not think that he was then bidding farewell to his
children and the scenes of his pleasures in the chase. The
pressure of business and the number of projects in hand
prevented him from thinking of revij>iting Egypt. I was
btill in Jerusalem when I received a letter summoning me

' This place is :ibuut iv nuirs S. of Dain.ucus.*


398 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


to rejoin him. Rain was falling in torrents, and the roads
were so deep in mud that I was nineteen days in accomplish-
ing the journey. I set out from Jerusalem on Friday, the
23rd of Moharrem, 589, and did not reach Damascus till
Tuesday, the 12th of Safer, just as the first pilgrims were
nearing the city, which the Sultan had reached in the after-
noon of Monday, the nth of Safer, so my appearance was
delayed. In the northern ante-chamber the emirs and
high functionaries were thronging round el-Melek el-Afdal,
awaiting audience of the Sultan. But when he heard I
was there, he ordered that I should be admitted before all
the others to a private interview with him, and he rose
from his seat to greet me. Never before had his face
expressed such satisfaction at the sight of me ; his eyes
filled with tears, and he folded me in his arms. May God
have mercy upon him !


CHAPTER CLXXIX.

THE SULTAN GOES OUT TO MEET THE HAJ.

On Wednesday, the 13th of the month of Safer, he sent to
summon me, and when I went to him, asked me who was
in the antechamber. I replied that el-Melek el-Afdal was
sitting there, waiting to be permitted to pay him his
respects, together with a crowd of emirs and people, who
had come for the same purpose ; but he sent Jemal ed-Din
Ikbal to inform them that he could not receive them. The
next morning he sent for me again early, and I found him
sitting in a summer-house (Soffa) in the garden, surrounded
by his younger children. He asked if there uere anyone
waiting for him, and when he heard that some envoys had
come from the Franks, and were waitirvg to be admitted,
together with his emirs and chief officers, he commanded


WHAT BEFELL SULTAX YUSUF. 399


that the ambassadors should be introduced into his presence.
One of his young children, Emir Abu Bekr, of whom he
was very fond, and with whom he was playing, happened
to be there. As soon as he saw these men, with their
shaven chins, their close-cropped hair and strange garments,
he was frightened and began to cry. The Sultan made
his excuses to the ambassadors, and dismissed them with-
out hearing the message they had brought He then said
to me, speaking in his usual kindly way: ' It is a busy day.*
Then he added : * Bring us whatever you have ready.' They
brought him rice cooked in milk and other light refresh-
ments, and he ate of them, but without much appetite as
it seemed to me. He had latterly omitted holding his
receptions, and excused himself, saying it was a great
trouble to him to move ; indeed, he was suffering from
indigestion, lassitude, and weakness.^ When wc had
finished our meal, he asked me if I had heard anything
of the Haj. I made answer : ' I met some of the travellers
on the road ; if there were not so much mud they would
have been here to-day ; but they will come in to-morrow.'
He then said : * Wc will go out, please God, to meet
them ;' and he gave an order that their road should be
cleared of the water, for it was very rainy that year and
there were streams of water in the roads. After this I
withdrew, noticing that he no longer had the good spirits
I knew so well. On the Friday morning early he set out
on horseback. I followed shortly with the pack animals,
and came up just as he met the Haj. Among the pilgrims
were S;*ibck cd-Din and Karala el-Yaruki, and the respect
for these Sheikhs was very great. El-Melek el-AMal then
came out to join him, and took me aside to speak to me.
At that moment I noticed that the Sultan was not wearing

' .-Ml symptoms of typhoid ftver.


40D WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


his kazaghand} without which he never went riding. It
was a magnificent sight that day, for the inhabitants of the
ciry came out in crowds to meet and to look at the Sultan.
I could not control myself any longer, and hastened up to
him, telling him he had forgotten his kazaghand. He
seemed like a man waking out of a dream, and asked for
the garment, but the master of the wardrobe could not be
found. It appeared to me very serious. I said to myself;
* The Sultan is asking for something he never used to be
without, and he cannot get it !' This filled my heart
with apprehension, and I considered it as a bad omen. I
then turned to him and asked if there were not another
way, less crowded with people, by which he could return
to the city. He replied that there was, and turned into
a path between the gardens, leading in the direction of
el-Muneib*a.^ We followed him, but I was heavy at heart,
for I feared very much for his health. When we came to
the castle, he entered by crossing the bridge as usual, but
this was the last time he rode over it.


CHAPTER CLXXX.

THE sultan's illness.

On the Friday evening the Sultan suffered from extreme
lassitude, and a little before midnight he had an attack of
bilious fever, which was internal rather than external. On
Saturday morning, the i6th of Safer, 589 (21st of February,
A.D. 1 193). he was in a ^t.xy low state in consequence of
the fever, although it was suppressed. I went to visit him

» See above, p. 367.

' El-MuneiVa means * the little spring.' The place that bears this
name lies in the GhCita of Damascus.


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 401


with el-K&di cl-F^del, and we entered his room at the
same time as el-Melek el-Afdal, his sod. We had a long
conversation with him ; he complained at first of the bad
night he had had, but after that he seemed to take pleasure
in talking to us. This lasted till noon, when we withdrew,
leaving our hearts with him. He told us to go and par-
take of the meal in attendance on el-Melek el-Afdal. £1-
Kadi el-Fudel was not accustomed to that, and he there-
fore returned (home) ; I, for my part, went into the great
southern hall, and found the table laid, and el-Afdal seated
in his father's place. As I could not endure this sight, I
withdrew without sitting down to table ; and several
others, seeing his son seated in his place, held it as an
omen of ill, and shed tears at the sight. From that time
the Sultan's illness grew more and more serious, and we
never omitted visiting him both morning and evening.
£1-Kiidi el-Fadel and I used to go into the sick-room
several times a day, whenever a lull in the pain he
suffered allowed him to receive our visits. It was in his
head that he suffered most. One of the things from which
we augured that his life would be taken was the absence of
his chief physician, who knew his constitution better than
anyone, having always attended him, both in the city and
on his journeys. On the fourth day of his illness the other
physicians thought it necessary to bleed him, and from
that moment he grew seriously worse, and the humours of
the body began to cease their flow. His condition was
aggravated by the predominance of this dryness, and he
was reduced to the last degree of weakness. On the sixth
day we got him to sit up, propping him up at the back
with a pillow ; we then brought him a cup of lukewarm
water to drink, which was to act as an emollient after the
medicine he had taken. He tasted it and found it too
hot ; another cup was brought him which he thought too

26


402 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


cold, but still he did not get vexed or angry, but only-
said : ' O God, perhaps there is no one who can make the
water of the right temperature T El-Fadel and I left him
with the tears streaming from our eyes, and he said to me :
* What a great soul the Moslems will lose ! By God, any
other man in his place would have thrown the cup at the
head of the man who brought it T During the sixth,
seventh, and eighth days the illness increased, and then his
mind began to wander. On the ninth day he fell into a
stupor, and was unable to take the draught that was
brought to him. The whole city was in commotion, and
the merchants, being afraid, began to carry away their
goods out of the bazaars ; it is impossible to give any idea
of the sorrow and trouble with which one and all were
oppressed. Every evening el-K4di el-F^del and I used to
sit up for the first third of the night together, and then we
would go to the gate of the palace ; and if we found means,
we took a look at him and withdrew at once, and if not,
we still learned how he was. When we came out we used
to find the people waiting to gather from the expression of
our faces what was the Sultan's state. On the tenth day of
his illness they treated him twice with a clyster, which gave
him some relief. After that it gave the greatest delight to
all to hear that he had drunk some barley-water. That
night, as usual, we waited some hours, and then we went
to the palace, where we found Jemal ed-Daula Ikbal. On
our asking as to the health (of the Sultan), he went in and
sent us word from el-Melek el-Mo*azzem Turan Shah —
God increase his power ! — that perspiration was visible in
both legs. We gave thanks to God for this news, and
begged him to feel the rest of the body, and to let us know
of any perspiration elsewhere. He did as we asked him
and came back to us, saying the perspiration was profuse.
We then departed with lightened hearts. On the follow-


/


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF, 403

ing day, which was Tuesday, the eleventh day of the
illness and the 26th of the month of Safer, we went to the
gate to ask for news. They told us that the perspiration
was so profuse that it had gone right through the mattress
and the mats, and the moisture could be seen on the floor ;
and as the dryness of the body had increased to such a
degree, the doctors were astonished at his strength.


CHAPTER CLXXXI.

EL-AFDAL RECEIVES THE OATHS OK ALLEGL^XE.

When el-Melek el-Afdal saw his father's condition, and
all men realized that there was no hope of his recovery,
he made all haste to secure the oaths of allegiance of the
people. He held a reception for that purpose in the
Red wan palace, so called because Red wan (one of the
former princes of Aleppo) had resided there. He then
summoned the Kmlis and instructed them to draft a brief
form of oath, promising fidelity to the Sultan as long as he
lived, and after his death to cl> Afdal. The prince excused
himself to the people on the ground that the Sultan's ill-
ness was most critical, and that one could not tell what
might happen, and that it was necessary to provide for
any event after the manner of princes. The first he called
upon to swear was S'ad ed-Din Mas'ud, brother of Bedr
ed-Din Maudud and Shi/tna (or j^overnor of Damascus) ;
he took the oath without any hesitation and quite uncon*
ditionally. Nasr cd-Uin, j;ovcrnor of Sahyun (near
Laodicca), then came forward and took the oath, but
made it a condition that the fortress he commanded should
be his. Sabek ed-Din, Lord of Shcizcr, also swore, but
not by the itrij)Ie» divorce; 'for,' said he, * 1 have never


2'» Z


404 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


taken an oath that contained such a condition.* Khosh-
terin Kosein (emir of the) Hakkari (Kurds) swore next ;
then came NAsherawan ez-Zerzari (another Kurdish emir),
who, however, made it a condition that he should be
granted a suitable fief. 'Alkan and Milkan (two other
Kurdish emirs) also took the required oath. A banquet
was then served of which the whole assembly partook, and
after the *asr (prayer) the ceremony of the taking of the
oath was resumed. Maimtln el-Kasri — God be merciful to
him ! — and Shems ed-Din (Sonkor) the elder swore, but
conditionally; the)' exacted a promise that they should
never be called upon to draw sword against any of el-
Afdal's brothers : ' In any other case,' said Maimun, * I
will answer with my head.' Sonkor began by refusing to
take the oath ; afterwards he said : ' I will swear allegiance
to you in my capacity as governor of en-Natr(in, and on the
condition that that place shall remain mine.' Then S&ma
came forward and said : ' Why should I swear ? I have
no fief.' They then talked to him awhile, and he swore
as the others had done, but on condition of receiving an
adequate fief. Sonkor, the Scarred (el-Meshtub), swore,
but conditionally upon his receiving the grant of a satis-
factory fief. Aibek el-Aftas — God have mercy on him ! —
took the oath with the proviso that he should get what he
wanted, but he omitted the (triple) divorce clause. Hoss&m
ed-Din Bishara, the superior officer of all the above emirs,
also took the oath. None of the Egyptian emirs were
present at this ceremony, nor, indeed, had they been re-
quired. The others had only been required to take the
oath with a view of maintaining order, and possibly the
formula of their oath is not well known. The text of
the oath was as* follows: * C/ause i. From this moment
forth, with single aim .and 'unflinching purpose, I vow my
allegiance to el-Meleken-Nasr (Salah ed-Din) as long as he


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 405

lives, and I will never relax my efforts to uphold his
government, consecrating to his service my life and wealth,
my sword and my men ; I will obey his commands and
conform to his will. Afterwards I will keep the same faith
with his son, el-Afdal *Ali, and the heirs of that prince.
I take God to witness that I will obey him and uphold his
government and land, consecrating to his service my life
and wealth, my sword and my men ; I will observe his
commands and prohibitions, and I swear that my private
resolutions correspond with my oath. I call upon God to
•be witness of my words/*


CHAPTER CLXXXII.

DEATH OF THE SULTAN— MAY GOD HAVE MERCY UPON

HIM, AND SANCTIFY HIS SOUL !

The eve of Wednesday, the 27th of Safer, in the year 589,
was the twelfth night of the illness. He grew worse,
and his strength failed ; and from the first there was
no hope. He remained sometimes with us, and some-
times wandering; but that night they sent for me, as
well as el-Kidi el-F4del and Ibn ez-Zeki,« and it was
not the usual time for our being present. El-Melek
eUAfdal wished us to spend the night with him, but the
kadi objected, because people used to wait for us on our
return from the castle, and he feared that if we did not
make our appearance, an alarm might spread through the

I Our author omits the second clause containing the penalties
afached, and which must have run somewhat as follows : * If 1 break
my oath, I swear that by that fact alone my wives arc divorced,
my slaves set free, and I must go, barefoot, on the pilgrimage to
Mecca,* etc.

' See p. 4a


1


4o6 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


City, and they might begin pillaging. He therefore thought
it best for us to leave. El-Afdal then decided to summon

•

Abu J'afer, tmdm of the Kell&sa, and a man of known
rectitude, in order that he might be at hand in the castle
if God should call the sick man to Himself that night.
But he lived on, half attending to him, and half wandering,
while the confession of faith and of God Almighty was
repeated to him. The k^di and I took our departure,
both ready to have laid down our lives . for his. He
remained all night in the state of one going to God, and
Sheikh Abu J'afer read to him passages from the Kurin,*
and reminded him of God Almighty. Since the ninth
day of the fever the Sultan had been wandering, and his
brain was clear only at intervals. The sheikh afterwards
assured us thus : ' I was reciting the Divine Word to him
— He is the God than whom there is no otfier God ; who
knows the unseen and the visible (lix. 22), and I heard
him say — God have mercy on him — " // is true V* And
this at the time of his passing away, and it was a sign
of God's favour to him. God be thanked for that !' Tlie
Sultan died after the hour of morning prayer, on Wednesday,
the 27th of Safer, in the year 589 (March 4, 1193 A.D.).
El-Kadi el-F&del had hastened back to the castle before
dawn at the time of his passing away, and I went too,
but he was dead, and had entered into God's favour, and
the place of His goodness and grace. I was told that
while Sheikh Abu J'afer was reading from the Divine
Word — There is no God but He! in Him do I trust
(ix. 130), the sick man smiled, his face grew radiant,
and he went in peace to his Lord. Never since Isl^m
and the Moslems lost the (four) first khalifs, never, from
that time, had the faith and the faithful suffered a blow
such as that they received on the day of the Sultan's
death. The castle, the city, the whole world, were thereby


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF. 407


plunged into grief, of which God alone could fathom the
intensity. I had often heavd people say they would lay
down their own lives for that of someone very dear to
them, but I thought it was only a manner of speaking,
from which a good deal must be deducted in reality ; but
I swear before God, and I am sure that had we been
asked that day, * Who will redeem the Sultan's life ?' there
were several of us who would have replied by offering his
own. EKMelek el-Afdal then held a reception in the
north hall, to receive the condolences of his officers ; but
he placed a guard at the entrance to the castle, and only
admitted emirs of high rank, and doctors of law {fiterally^
* men of the turban '). It was, indeed, a melancholy (lay ;
everyone was so entirely given up to sorrow and anxiety,
to tears and lamentations, that they thought of nothing
else. No poet was admitted to the audience chamber to
recite elegies ; no preacher appeared to exhort the people.
The Sultan's children went out into the streets to excite
the compassion of the public, and the sorrow of the piteous
sight almost killed all who saw them. This went on till
the mid-day prayer ; they were meanwhile busy in washing
the body, and putting it in its shroud. We were obliged
to borrow money to purchase everything necessary for the
funeral, even down to things that cost but a halfpenny,
such as the straw to be mixed with the clay (to make
the bricks).* Ed-DQl'ai, the jurist, was charged with the
task of washing the body. They asked me to superintend
this operation, but I was not strong enough to bear it. When
mid-day prayer was over, the bier was brought forth, covered
with a piece of striped cloth. El-Kadi el-Fadel had provided
this, and the garments necessary to cover the corpse, and
he had been careful to select such as were proper and

* It is welUknown that the tombs of people of high rank are lined
with sun-baked bricks.


408 WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.

suitable. When the crowd saw the bier, they raised cries
of sorrow, and the air resounded with their waitings. They
were so distracted by their grief, that instead of regular
prayer the people could only exclaim. The Kadi Mohi
ed-Din Ibn ez-Zeki was the first to say the regular prayer.
The body was then brought round to the palace in the
garden, where the Sultan had lived during his illness, and
it was buried in the west Sq^a (or summer-house). It
was a little before the hour of the 'asr prayer when the
Sultan was committed to the grave. May God sanctify
his soul, and shed light upon his tomb ! During the day
his son el - Melek ez - Zafer went out into the city to
console the people, and to calm the minds of the inhabit
tants, but the people were too much taken up with weeping
to think of pillaging or making any disturbance. Everyone
was heartbroken. All eyes were filled with tears, and
there were very few who did not weep. After this everyone
went home with death in their very souls, and no one
appeared again (in the streets) throughout the night We
alone went to visit and to recite passages from the Kuran
over the grave, and renewed our grief. El-Melek el-Afdal
spent the whole of the day writing to his uncle (el-Melek
el-' Adel) and his brothers, informing them of the sad event,
and offering them his consolation. The next day he held
a public reception to receive the condolences of the people,
and threw open the gate of the city to the doctors of law
and the 'ulema. Sermons were delivered, but no poet
recited any elegy, and shortly after mid-day the assembly
broke up. The people went to the tomb in crowds from
morning till night, reciting passages from the Kuran, and
imploring God's blessing on him. El-Melek el-Afdal spent
the remainder of the day dictating dispatches to be sent
to his brothers and his uncle.

* So passed those years and men, and seem,
Both years and men, to be a dream.'


WHAT BEFELL SULFA iW YUSUF, 409


Beha ed-Din Abu el-Mehasan YQsuf, ibn Rafi, ibn
Temfm, kadi, lawyer, imam and grand kadi, with the per-
mission of the (khah'O Commander of the Faithful, adds :
It was my plan to gather together information regarding
el-Melek en-Nasr (the prince strong to aid) Abu el-
Mozaflfer Yiisuf, son of AyQb, and I have ended my
collection at the day of his death — may God have mercy
upon him! My object has been to earn the favour of
God, and to urge men to pray for him, and to remember
what is cood.


INDEX.


Abd feL MOHSEN, ihe High Ad-
miral, 121
Abu Bekr, the Chamberlain, 371-

373, 377^ 379* 380
Abu el Fatti Ghazi Abu MansCir

el Melelc ez Zaher Ghiath ed

Din, Saladin's son, elsewhere

called £z Zaher, 1 1
Abu el Futuh Yahya Ibn H abash

es Suhraverdi, 10
Abu el Heja, the Fat, 233, 347,

349
Abu J'afer, imam of the Kelldsa,

406

Abu al Maali Mohammed M6bL
ed Din, 40

Achzib, 154, 307

Acre, 25, 28, 35, 141, 147, 148;
the plain of, 20, 27 ; battle in
the plain of, 22 ; taken by the
Saracens, 116; siege of by
Christians, 154 s^^,y taken by
Christians, 266, 267 ; Henry of
Ch^impagne, Lord o(, 354

Adiaman, 7S

El Adid, 61

El Adl en Nejeb, the Courier, 303

Afamia (Apamea), 133

El Afdal el Melck, Lord of
Damascus, Saladin's son and
successor, 163, 176, 181, 190,

224, 347, 385, 393, 395-407
Aferbela, 91

El Aiioiya, 155, 160, 164, 165,

176, 213, 223, 245-247, 259, 273,

309
Ai^z et Tawil, the long man, 227

Aibek el Aftai, 404


Aibek el Azizi, 344

El 'Aid, 132

Aildekiz, King of Persia, 305

Ainai, 307

'Ain el Bakar, 248

'Ain Bassa. 154

'Ain Jalud (Goliath's spring), 89

'Ain el Mobdraka, 72

Aintib, 63

Ain Tub'aun, 90

Aisa the jurist, 76, 100, 126, 167

173
Aisa the swimmer, 205, 206

Ajalon, II ; plain of, 14

Ajjul, Tell, 28, 223

Akabah of Fik, 220

Akaf, fortress of, 5 1

Akhar, 57

Akher Aslem, 341, 345

Aksa, the mosque, 13, 351, 396

'Al^ ed Din Khorrem Shah, son

of Izz ed Din, Lord of Mosul,

181, 224, 232, 376
AlamOt in Irak, 74
Alem ed Din Kaisar, 567
Aleppo, 25, 42, 53, 58, 61, 65, ef

saep.
Alexandria, 10, 66, 67, 75, 77, etc.
Alexandrnschene, 153
All Ibn Ahmed el Meshtub, 385
AUonba el Adli, 341
Amalric or Amaury, King of

Jerusalem, 49, 51, 57 ; Guy dc

Lusignan's brother, Constable

of Jerusalem, 113
Amida, Diarbekir, 19, 85
el *Anik, plain of Antioch, 38^

395


ISDEX.


411


Anastasis, church of the, at Jeru-
salem, 239, 328, 335, 338, 355,

358
Am, Catholicos of, 189
Amaradus, 125, 127
Antarsus, 125, 127, 143
An'ioch, 143, 383 : plain of, 38,

395 ; lake of, 78 : lord of, 395
Apimea. 133, 190; Zeugma, 72
Aphek, 165, 167
Aram Naharaim, 83
Ararat, Mount, 69
Araxes, river, 83
Arbalists, 57, 128, 206, 215, etc.
Arbela, 51, 52, 80, 98; Lord of,

51,73,94, 171, 182,218
Arjish in Armenia, on the north

shore of Lak" Van. 16
'Arka, north of Tripoli, 62
Armenia, Lesser, 78
Ama», Prince (Renaud de ChAtil-

lon), 75, 113, 115
Arses (Arjish), 16
Arslan Bogha, 163
Arsuf, 286, 289, 290, 293-295, 381
Asad ed Din (Skirkoh), 4, 5, 47-

56. 89, 163, 348, 377 ; junior,

237, 265
A^alo", 25, 26, 140, 143, 295-

300, 326. 339, 356. 383 ; taken

by Saladin, 117; dismantled,

387
A»nem, Emir, 343

Ashtaroth CaniHun, ^8
'Asbtera, 58, 109, 110
Assassination ol Conrad of Mont-

ferrat, 332
As-a*sin», the, 74, 113, 333
As«van (Assouan), 66
Atabej!, 105
Attih, 49
Atropatenr, 83
•Auja, nver, 293, 294, 374
Aurelian, 38

Ayub, SiUdin'< father, 4
*Ayun el Assa^ir, 276
'A>im el Ba<s, 224, 225, 226
Ax.u, CAMle, 74, 75, 86
Aierbtjan, 39. 83. 103
el Aiefi)a, 347, 35*>. 39«

Baatber, 4. 47. 57» »37 : Lord of,

240
Bdb. or Bap, 53


el Babein, battle of, 47, 4^

Baghche Pass, 78

Ba^^hdad, 83. 171 ; the Khalif of,
329-337, 391 » 392 ; the writing
of, 199 ; despatch from, 315

Baghras, castle, 136, 191

Bairam, feast of, 25 '

Baldwin, Archbishop of Canter-
bury, 195

Baldwin IV. and V. of Jerusalem,
108

Balian L of Ibelin, 21

Balian IL of Ibelin, 384

Bambyce (Membij), 74

BaniAs, 47, 141, 142, 153, 394

Barbarossa, the Kmpeior Frede*
rick, 170, 1 82, 185

Bareian, Lord of Tiberias, 385

HArin, 71

Barka (Cyrene), nomad Arabs of,
107

Bar Krikur Ben Basil, 189

Basil, Archbishop of Ani, 189

Basse Poulaine (*Ain Ba»»a), 154

Battering-ram, 214, 216

Bcauvais, Bishop of, 233

Bedr ed Din Dolderim, Lord of
Tell el Ba-her, 224, 265, 339,

34N 371. 3^. 381, 382, 3^5.

390, 403
Ben a ed Din Abu el Mrh^san

Yu^uf Ibn Raffi, Ibn Temim,

the historian. 409
Beha ed Din Karukash, 141, 209,

269, 354* 394
Behesne. 47

BchnefA (Besne), 63, 74
Behrani e»t) Shai*(i>ti, 90
Beilan pasf, 136
Beirut, 82, 204. 250, 327, 395 •»

taken by Saladin, 117
Beisan, 89, 91, 97
Beit Jibrin, 339, 361 ; taken by

Saracens, 117
Beit Nuba, it, 301, 326, 341, 34^,

360, 378
Bekas taken by Saladin, 132,

»33
Bektimor. Lord nf Khctat, 85,

'CO, 305. 3 » 5. 384
Br led, ford ot the Tigris, 61
Bclfort, 141, 142. 154, 174
Betfreys, or movable towers, 57
el iielka, 336


412


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Belus, liver, 29, 155, 224, 226
Belvoir (Kaukab el Hawa), 25 ;

siege of, 122-124 ; taken by

Saladin, 138, 139
Berriya (La Berne), 51
iiesne, 63
Betenoble, 11

Bethany, 347. See el Azeriya
Bethlehem, 351
Bilbeis, 51
Bir, 72
Biren, 394
Birejk, 86
el Birka, 285
Birket-Ramodan, 289
Birtha, 285
BizA'a, 53

Blanche Garde, 340
Blitanis, 132

Bohemond I. of Antiocb, 71
Hohemond II., 42
liosra, Lord of, 224
Botba, a great ship, 67
Burj\ 9
Burzia, 133-135

Caesarea, 36, 281,283,381 ; taken

by Saladin, 1 16
C^imont, 224
Cairo, 46
Calvary, 355

Calycadnus (Geuk Su), 183, 188
Camel, battle of tne, 229
Canterbury, Archbishop of, 236
Capitulation of Acre, 266
Capitulation of Jerusalem, 118
Caravan from Egypt captured by

Richard I., 343'
Casale Imberti, 328
Cat, sipge engine so-called, 214
Catholicos of the Armenians, 185
Caymon, or Caymont, 224, 276,

327
Champagne, Henry, Count of,

35, 197, 290, 353-356, 379
Chatillon, Renaud de, 42, 75,

113-115
Cistern, the round, 341
Coggeshale, Raoul, 1 1 3
Comnenos, Manuel, 42
Conrad of Tyre, Marquis of Mont-

ferrat, 144, 207, 212, 254, 267,

304* 3'7i 328-330» 332 ; assas-
bination of, 333


Constance, heiress of Bohemond

II. of Antioch, 42
Constantinople, 334
Crac des chevaliers, 125, 126
Cross, Holy, 270, 271, 308, 309,

311.327,334
Crusaders muster at Acre, 156

Cursed tower at Acre, 248

Cyprus, 35, 241, 242, 355

Cyrene, 107

Damascus, 38, 47, 65, 68, etc. ;
Kadi of, 40 ; Little Damascus,
6 ; a man of Damascus, 1 5

Damietta, 57-59

Daphne, 132

Dargham, 46

D^run, or Darum, 328, 357, 359 ;
taken by Saladin, 117 ; taken
by the Franks under Richard I^

337
D'auk bridge, 226, 227

Dausaria, 53

Deir, 60

Deir el Belih (Darum), 117

Deir er Riheb, 286

Derbas el Mehrani, 367

Derbesak, 135

ed Did esh Sheher-Z(iri, 391

Diarbekr, 19, 73, 79, 85, 103

Dinar, Tynan, 7

Dira'a, a game, 64

Dirhem, 7

Dolderim, Bedred Din el Yaruki,

Lord of Tell el Basher, 86, 224,

339* 341
Doneiser, 99

Dovin, 4

ed Dulai, 407

Ecdippa, 154

Edessa, 73, 82, 99, 218, 333, 334 ;
Jocelyn of, 185

Egypt, 47,^^ -f^^A

Eleanor of Guienne, mother of

Richard I., 355

Eleutherus, river, 62

Emesa, 56, 62, 104 ; siege of, 70 ;
prince of, 103

England, Richard I., King of,
arrives before Acre, 248 ; takes
a great ship, 249, 250; sends
ambassadors to Saladin, 256 ;
asks Saladin for fruit and


INDEX.


413


snow, 263 ; massacres prisoners
afier the fall of Acre, 272, 273 ; ,
marches upon Jerusalem, 274- |
302 ; returns to Acre, 304, 306;
negotiates with el Melek el
Adel, 311, 320, 321 ; sends an
embassy to Saladin, 322 ; offers
his sister in marriage to el
Melek el Adel, 324, 326; is
accused of procuring the assas-
sination of Conrad of Mont-
ferrat, 333 ; prepares to march
upon Jerusalem, 340 ; captures
the caravan from Egypt, 342-
346; retreats 351,352; negoti-
ates with Saladin, 354, 360 ;
relieves Jaffa, 368, 370 ; rides
along the whole Saracen army,
376 ; falls ill, 378 ; is supplied
with fruit and snow by Saladin,
379 ; makes peace, 384 ; tries
to prevent Franks going to
Jerusalem as pilgrims, 388 ;
sails away, 393, 394

Erzeroum, Lord of, 384

£sh Shakif (Belfort), 142, 148,
154 ; the Lord of, 148, 150-155;
surrender of, 174

Esh Shogr, 133

Euphrates, 53, 334

el Fakhw&na, 165

Kakhr ed Din Abd el Mesih (the

Vizier), 74
Falcon, a white, belonging to the

King of France, 241 ; Richard

I/s falcons, 257
el Fawar, 8<;, 91
Feltk ed Din, 341, 343, 344
Felus Merj el, 141
La Fcve, </>
Fiha, 132

Fik [Aphck •, the ascent to, 320
Flanders, I*hilip, Count of, 241
Fleet, Saladm's, destroyed at

Tyre, 121, 122
Fl) -lower at Acre, siege of the,

2IO-2I2, 215, 217

Forbelef, 91

France, King of, 14. 240, 253
Frederick, Duke of Swabia, 312
Frederick (Kmperor Barbarossa),

ro, 182, i«5
Frederick IL, Emperor, 387


Fuleh, 90, 1 10

Fulke 1., King of Jerusalem, 56,

339

Galatin (Jelediyeh), 341
Gambison, or pourpoint, worn by

Crusaders, 282
Gamboison, 367
Gaza, 358
Geoffrey de Vinsauf, iZ^^ 283,

284, 289, 290, 294, 300. 329, 341,

351,361,307,388
Geotfrey de Lusignan, King Guy's

brother, 113, 225, 356, 357
Georj^ians, 384
Germans, leader of the, 146; King

of the, 182, 183, 212, 213 ; son

of the King died before Acre,

236. 237
Geuk Su, river, 78, 170
(}ezer, battle ar, 76
Ghabagheh, 397
Ghazza, taken by the Saracens,

117
Giaour D4gh, 135

Gibeon (el Jib), 360
Gumishtikin, 68, 69. 72, 76
Guy de Lusignan, King of Jeru-
salem, taken prisoner by Sala-
din at Hattin, 113 ; regains his
liberty, 143 ; btrsieges Acre,

153, iS4t iS^t is jealous of
the Germans, 212; rode with
King Richard on his march,
282 ; fought at Ar*fif, 290 ; lieha
ed Din makes mistakes about
I him, 317 ; Henry of Cham-

fagne acknowledged King of
erusalem in his stead, 354

Haifa, Richard L landed at, 35 ;
Saladin took it, 116 ; el Melek
el Adel sent ships to Acre from,
234 ; Franks cross the river at,
275 ; ceded by Saladin, 381

Haji Yiisuf Sahib el Mashlub.

353-3<'^
Hajj road, the, 386

Hamadan, Prince of, 98

Hamah ''Hamath) taken by Nur
ed Din, 47 ; Nur ed Din met
his brother, Kotbed Din 'Prince
of Mosul), there in 1167, 51 ;
Izz ed Din defeated at the


414


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


'Horns' of, by Saladin, 71;
Saladin did not halt there on
his way to 'Ain Jilud, 89 ; the
Lord of, 190 ; besieged by
Count Philip of Flanders, 241 ;
mausoleum and college founded
there in honour of its Lord, El
Melek el Mozaffer Taki ed
Din, 315
Harenc, 76. See H&rim
H&rim, 76, 109, 241
Harrin, near SerCij, 53 ; Self ed
Din gave it to Mozatfer ed Din
(Kukbfiri) as a gift, 73 ; * the
city of Nahor,' 82 ; Saladin at,
98 ; deprives MozafTer ed Din
(Kukbdri) of the castle of, 99 ;
Saladin all but died there, 102 ;
recovered, 103 ; MozafTer ed
Din Lord of, 190 ; the Sultan
gave him the government of
Arbela, and took Harrin, etc.,
in exchange, 218 ; el Melek el
MansOr asked for it, 333 ; Sala-
din refused it to him, 334
Harfin er Rashid,hisbirthplace,33
Harzem, near Mardin, 85
Hassan Ibn Barik, 309
Hattin, battle of, i lo-i 1 5 ; Renaud
deChatillonand King Guy taken
prisoners, 42, 43 ; Mozaffer ed
Din (Kukb{iri) fought there, 73;
description of the battle, i loi 14
Hebron, 337

Henry, Count, of Champagne,
marched upon Jaffa, 35 ; arrived
at Acre with a great force, 197 ;
at the battle of ArsAf, 290;
gathered soldiers for the attack
of 'Jerusalem, 346 ; tried to
keep the French Crusaders in
Palestine, 379 ; one of the
Council which made peace with
Saladin, 384, 385
Henry VL, Emperor, 184, 213
Henry II. ot England, 355
Hekkar, Kurds from, 225
Hesban (Heshbon), 97
Hesi, Tell el, 337, 34i, 345
el Hisn (Nineveh), 61
Hisn Keifa, 389
Hisn Mansur, 78
Holy Cross, 270, 271, 308, 309,


Holy Sepulchre, church of the,
I 239, 328, 335
H0U15, 56, 62. See Emesa
Horns of Hamah, 71, 73
Hosn el Akrad (Crac), 125, 126
Hospital of St. John at Jerusalem,

360
Hospitallers, Knights, their for-
tress of Sifed, 31 ; they fought
with Amaury I. in Egypt, 51 ;
their Grand Master slain at
Hattin, 1 10 ; their chief taken
prisoner, 113 ; all prisoners put
to death by Saladin, 114 ; their
chitf negotiates, 263 ; accom-
panied Coeur de Lion's march
from Acre, 282 ; charged at
Arsuf, 290 ; their great tower
at Ascalon, 299 ; advised the
rebuilding of Ascalon before
attacking Jerusalem, 328; owned
a great part of the coast of
Palestine, 354 ; gave their con-
sent to the peace with Saladin,

3S5
HossAm ed Din, a warrior slain

at el Aifidiya, 160
Hnssftm ed Din Abu el Hija, a

Kurdish emir, in command at

Acre, 202. See Abu el Heja
Hossd,m ed Din Bishara, Lord of

Banias, 141, 224, 404
Hoss^m ed Din Ibn LajQn, Lord

of Nablus, 163, 224
Hossam ed Din Lulu, Chamber-
lain and Commander of the

fleet at Acre, 209
Hossim ed Din Sonkor el 'Alkh-

liti, 156
Hours, the appointed, for prayer

according to the Mohammedan

religion, 7, 21
Huit (Howard), 381
Hugh, Lord of Jibcil, 113
Huleh,lake(watersof Merom), 115
Humphrey of Toron, 42, 113, 139,

288, 317
Hunin, in Upper Galilee, 52

Ibelin (Yebnah), the Lord of, 21,

.334, 385
Ibn Laon, 78, 183, 184, 188-192

Ibn el Mokaddem, 339, 386

Ibn ez Zeki, 40, 405, 408


INDEX.


415


Ibrahim Ibn Sherwa, Governor of ,

Hdrim, 88
Iconiuin, 77, 183, 186
I mad ed Dia, Lord of Sinjar and

Aleppo, 28, 71, 81, 86-58, 180,

190, 222, 224, 228
I mad ed Din, son of Kara Arsl&n,

99» «oo
Iron bridge, 13$
Isaac Angelus of Constantinople,

186, 200
Isabel, daughter of Amaury I.,
heiress of the kingdom of Jeru-
salem, 317, 354
Iskanderuna, 153
Ism'ailiya, the assassins, 74
Isma'iliyat, place called, 99
Izz ed Din, Atabeg Prince of

Mosul, 102
Izz ed Din Femikh Shah, 74, 81
Izz ed Din Jurdik, 13, 87, 89, 224,

367-369, 379» 39S
Izz ed Din Kilij, 77

Izz ed Din Mas'Qd, brother of

Seif ed Din, Prince of Mosul,

70, 77, 224

J'aber, on the Euphrates, 53

Jaffa, Salad in inarched to, 32 ;
Henry of Champagne threa*
tened, 35 ; is two or three long
marches from Natrun, 36 ; ■
Franks marched to, 294, ^95 ; '
made expeditions from, 299 ;
King Richard brought forces to,
from Acre, and rebuilt it, 306 ;
Arabs taken prisoners near it,
340 ; Saladin's siege of, 361
fy^.y its walls beaten down,
365 ; King Richard relieves it,
367-371 ; granted to the Franks,
37'^ 373; Saladin attacked King
Richard at, 374-3/6 ; Saracens
march upon» 379 ; Saladin gave
it up to the Franks, 381 ; peace
signed there, 3.S4, 385

JaKhj.igha Su, 60

el jAiiit, 89

JaulAn, the, 109

Jaweh, a mcmluk who bad served
Shirknh, 89

Jebel el Akra, 132

Jebcla, 1:5, 128, 137, 307

Jebel Sinjar, f*)


Jelediyeh, six miles W. of Tell es

Safi, 341
Jemal ed Daula Ikbal, 402
Jemal ed Din Farei, 379
Jenin (£n Gannim), 97
Jer&blus, on the Euphrates, 79
Jerid, 64

Jethro's tomb, 113
Jezirat Ibn Omar, 94-96, 10 1, 180,

224
Jezreel, 90, 91
el Jib, 360
Jibeil, 113, 117, 124
Jihum, 187
Jisr el Abd.bneh, 293
Jisr el HadiJ, 135
Jisr es Senndba, in
Jisr es Sidd, 1 1 1
Joan, sister of Richard I., 253
Jocelyn II. of Edessa, 82, 185
Jokneam, 224, 276, 327

K&di el F&del, 8, 391, 401, 402

Kadi Mohi ed Din Ibn ez Zeki.
See Ibn ez Zeki

Kahwana, 165

Kaimas en Nejmi, el Tawashi,
163, 366

Kal'at Baghras. See Baghras

KaPat el Ha run, 132

Kal'at el Hosn. See Crac des
Chevaliers

Kal'at el MeIek at Acre, 1 38

K.il'at el Mudik, 133

Kal'at er Rum, on tne Euphrates,
185

Kal'at es Subeibeh, 1 53

Kal'at es Sultan, 132

Kaleh J'aber, 53

Kalus, Merj cl, 141

Kara Arslan, 8)

Kara Hissar, 78, 88

Karakush, one ot Saladin*s gene-
rals, 107

Kara I a el YArukli, 399

Kara Su, 3^:, 78, 135

Kasimiyeh (Lcontes) river, 144

Kaukab el Hawa (Belvoir), de*
scription, 25 ; held out after
the battle ot llattin, 138 ; sie^e
r>f, 122-124 : takjn by Saladin,
^yh M'5 ; i;arrisoned by Sara-
cens, 327 ; Saladin inspected
it. 3'^


4i6


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Kazighend, Persian word for *mail
shirty 367 ; Saladin*s, 400

Kefr Kenna, 1 10

Kefr Latha, 86

Kefr Tab, 7 1

Kefr Zimmdr, loi

el Keim<ki, 224, 276, 327

Kellasa, the, 406

Ken eh, 66

Kerak, Meiek el Adel, governor
of, 25 ; Renaud de Cbitillon,
Lord of, 42 ; description of, 56 ;
blockaded by Nur ed Din, 58 ;
Saladin made an abortive ex-
pedition against, 92 ; a second
expedition by Saladin, 95-97 ;
third expedition, 108; its Prince,
Renaud, taken at Hattin, 113 ;
surrendered to gain his liberty,
1 39 ; given to el Melek el Adel,
336 ; the road by, 344 ; Melek
el Adel sent there, 390 ; in-
spected the fortress, 397

Kerkhani, 315

el Kerz, the traitor, 65

Kerzein, 86

KhabCir, province of, 83

Khalif, the, 305, 391

Khanazir. See Khanzir

Khan Minych, 155

Khanzir, part of a mangonel, 31,

32, 139
Kharruba, or Khamuba, 28, 155,

169, 224, 226, 227, 245
Khelut (Akhlat on the shore of

Lake Van), 16, 84, ico, 103,

106,315
Khostekin el Jeraji, 344
Khosterin Kosein, leader of the

Hakhari Kurds, 225, 404
Khurbet Mdlhah, 277
el Khuweilfa (round cistern), 341,

343, 345
Kilij Arslan II., Sultan- of Roum,

77-79» 81, 183, 186, 187, 301, 302
King of England. See England,

King of
King of France (Philip II.), 240,

241, 253, 270; (Louis VI.),

333; (Louis VII.), 355
King of Jerusalem. See Guy de

Lusignan
King of Persia, 305
Kirkuk, 315


Ki^an, Tell, 214, 223, 231, 273

Kishon, brook, 226, 275

el Kisweh, 397

Konia (Iconiura), 77, 183, 186

Koptos, on the Nile, 66

Kosseir, 66

Kotb ed Din en Nisaburi, a

learned doctor, 6
Kotb ed Din, son of Nur ed Din,

and Prince of Mosul, 51, 70,

79, 163 (?)
Kotb ed Dio, son of Kilij Arslao,

356
Kul'al et Melek, at .Acre, 158
Kumeitera, 108
KQs, on the Nile, 66
el Kuseir, 89, 94
Kuyunjik (Nineveh), 61

Lachish, 337

Ladder of Tyre, the, 153

Laodicea, 125, 129, 130, 137, 207,

241
Larissa ( Caesar ea near Apamea.

on the Orontes), 190
Larranda, 171, 188
Latrun. See Nairfin
Leo II. of Armenia the Lesser,

184, 187
Leontes river, 144
Ligh{ish, a brave officer, 292
Louis VI., King of France, 333
Louis VIII., King of France, 355
Lubia, 112
Lusignan, 35. See Guy and

Geoffrey de
Lydda, 300, 302, 303, 346, 359,

381, 382

Ma'arra, en Nu'mdn, 71, 333
Maeander, 183
Mail shirt, 367
Maimdn el Kosri, 404
Malatia, Lord of, 301
Malmistra, 42
Manazgerd, 29
Manbij. See Membij
Mangonels, 57, 59, 67, 72, 96,

1 16-122, 130, 138, 139, 202-204,

206, 215, 243-249, 255. 288,361,

362 ; description of, 31
Mansio Platanus, 132
el Mansur, el Melek, 377, 378,

386


INDEX,


4J7


Manuel Comnenos, Emperor of
Constantinople, 42, 51, 57, 317

Maragha in Azerbijan, 10

Mar'ash, 47, 63

Mardio, 85, 99, 109

Maria, grand-niece of Manuel
Comnenos, 51

Marquis of Montferrat, Conrad,
144, 207, 228, 254, 267, 301,

302, 328-333. 353
Mdr SamwJI, 374, yjj, 390

Massacre of Moslems at Acre,

272
MasOd, Prince of Mosul, 181
MaudCid, 180, 219
Meidan el Akhdar, 86, 87
Mejahed Sheikhah, 285
Mejdel Y4ba, 278, 293, 338, 381
Mejed ed Din, Ibn ed Daya, 58
Mejed ed Din, son of Ferrukh

Shah, and Lord of Baalbec,

350
Mejed ed Din Hetderi, 377

Melasgerd, 29

el Melek el Add, Saladin's brother,

passim
el Melek el AfdaL See Afdal
el Melek el MozaflTer, Lord of

Hamah, 208. See MozaflTer
el Melek es Saleh, 67-79. See

Saleh
el Mell&ha, 277, 279
Membej, 47, 53, 74, 77, 190, 333
Meij 'Ayan, 33, 148, 150, 175
Merj el BerghQth, on Mount Her-

mon, 141
Merj el Felus, on Mount Hermon,

141
Merj es SofTer, 107
Merziman Chai, 18$
el Meshtftb, 348, 371, 394f 39S
Metamir, grain -pits, 42
MiAfarekin, loi
Mihrant, Kurds from, 22$
Minya(Khan Minyeh), 155
Mirabel, 338
Misr, 47, 48, 64
Misiis, 187

el Mo'azzem TurAn Shah, 402
el MobAraka, the blessed spring,

72, 106
Mo'ezz ed Din, sumamed Stnjar

Shah, Lord of Jezirat Ibn Omar,

219, 224


M'oin ed Din Kaisar Shah, Lord

of Malatia, son of Kilij Arslan,

301, 302
Moj&hed ed Din Berenkash, 163
Mojelli, Emir, 163, 167
Mons Casius, 132
Montferrat, Marquis of, 144. See

Conrad and Marquis
Montjoie, 374, 390
Montreal, 56 ; fall of, 143. See

Shobek
Mopsuestia, 187
Mosul, 28, 51, 60-62, 77^ 79, 84,

94,98-102, 171,255,292
Mount Tabor, 90
el Mowefyed Marud. el Melek, 377
Mozaffer ed Din (KAkbOri), son

of Zain ed Din Ali, created

Lord of Arbela on his brother's

death, 73, 81, 218
Mozaffer, el Melek, Taki ed Din,

Lord of Hamah, 163, 190, 208,

220, 305, 314
Muzaffer ed Din, son of Zein ed

Din, 80, 156, 163, 177, 190
el Muezzer, city of, 218
el Muneiba, 400
el Muneitera, 50, 51
Muristan, the, 360
Musard, Mount, 158
My OS Hormos, 66
Mygdooius, 60

Nftblus, taken by the Saracens,
97, 116 ; Lord of, 163

Nahr el As wad, 78, 135

Nahr el Azrak, 78

Nahr el FAlik, 286, 289

Nahr el Halu, 115

Nahr Iskanderuneb, 284

Nahr el Kasab, 284, 285, 287

Nahr el Mefjir, 283

Nahr N'amein, 226

Nahr Th'athar, 60

Naira, 109

Nakus, the, 23

Nasr ed Din, son of Taki ed Din,
190

en Nasr ed Din lUah Abu el
Abbas Abmud, Kbalif of Bagh-
dad, 171

Nasri dirhem, 7

Natrikn, 32, 35. 36, 303, 340. 341,
376. 390

27


4i8


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Nazareth, 28, 38, no, 1 16, 224, 381

Nebi Samwtl, 374, 377, 390

NebiShu'aib, 113

en New&kir, 153

Nicephorium, 60

Nisabur, 6

Nishapur, district, 6

Nisiba, 72, 82, 104

Nisibin, 60

Nur ed Din Ibn Zenghi, 47, 50,

60, 61, 64
Nusherawan ez Zerzani, a Kurdish

Emir, 404

Old man of the mountain, 333

Omar Khavyam, 6

Orfa, 82. See Edessa

el Orima, 127

Ortokid dynasty, 3, 19, 85

Osrhoene, 83

Oultre Jourdan, 42

Palmyra, 57

Peace, treaty of, between the

Franks and Saladin, 385
Pehlevan, 83, 100, loi, 103
Persia, King of, 305
Philip, Count oif Flanders, 241
Pbiloteras portus, 66
Platanus, 132
Prayers, Friday, among Moslems,

7. See also 13
Py ramus, 187

er Rafamiya (Raphanera), 71
Rakka, on the Euphrates, 60, 81
Ram, battering, 214-216
Ramlah, 14, 75, 117, 295, 300,

313, 381, 382
Raoul Coggeshale, 113
Ras el *Ain (Mirabel), 98, 338
Ras el Ma, 57, 225
Rati, weight, 216, 278
Ravendal (ir Rawendftn), 104
Rawenddn, 104

Raymond of Tripoli, 111-113, 282
Redwan palace, 403
Renaud de Chfttillon, 42, 75, 113*

"5.317
Rhagae, ancient name of Rhey, 33

Rhey, near Teheran, 33

Rhupon IL, Baron of Lesser

Armenia, 78

Richard I. See England, King of


Roche Taillie, 289

er Roha, 82

Round cistern, 341, 343, 348

Rum Kaleh, 185, 189

es Sabb&ghin, 276

Sabek ed Din, Lord of Sbeiser,

190, 399» 403
S'ad ed Din (Gumishtikin), 68

S'ad ed Din M&s'Ad, 403

Safed, note on, 31 ; taken by

Saladin, 138, 139
Safi, Tell es, 341
S&hel, the, 55
Sahyiin, 130
Sajur, river, 79
Salasi Kuleh, 58
Salemiya, 333

Salt, fortress beyond Jordan, 336
Salt river, 284, 288, 289
Saltus Hieraticus, the capital of

Gilead, 336
Samosata, 29, 73
Saone, a fortress of the Hos*

pitallers, taken by Saladin, 130-

132
Saruj, 82
ScandalioD, 153
Sefftiria, no
Seffurieb, 281
Seif ed Din Ati Ibn Ahmed el

Mesh tub, leader of the Kurds

from Mihrani and Hakk&r, 225
Seif ed Din Bektimor, Lord of

Khel&t, 384
Seif ed Dm Ghazi Ibn MaudOd

Ibn Zenghi, 180
Seif ed Din, Lord of Mosul, 61,

70-72, 74 ; his death, 77 ; his

son, 180, 219
Seif ed Din Ali el Meshtub, 260,

348, 394, 395
Seif ed Din Yazkoj, 163, 227, 377
Selef, river, 188
Selefke, 188
Seleucia, 170
Sein'a, river, 79
es Sennabra, 11 1
Sepulchre, the Church of the Holy,

'39i 335. 338. See Anastasis
Serag, 53

Seraj (Serug, Gen. xi. 20), 53
SermSniya, 133
Sermin, 133


INDEX,


419


Shadhbakht All, 68

Shahanshah, 218

Shakif AroCkn, 141, 142, 150-155,

I74»3i7
Sb&ni, galleys, 67

Sharon, Plain of, 176

Shaw«n, 46, 47, 53 ; his death, 54

Shechem, 97

Shefr'am, 218

Shefr 'Amr, 326

Sheherzur, city, 218

Sheizer, 190, 386

Sbems ed Daula (T(ir&n Shah), 75

Shems ed Din Ibnel Mokaddam,

69

Shems ed D!n (Senkor), 404
Shems ed Din, t'he Treasurer, 367
Sheref ed Dio, son of Kotb ed

Din, 84
Shihor, 207
Shirkoh, Asad ed Din, 4, 5, 13,

49, 103, 377
Shirl(uh Ibn I^akher, the Kurd,

309
Shobek (Montreal), 56, 63, 89,

113, 114; capitulated to Sala-

(lin, 143 ; granted to el Melek

el Add, 336

Esh Shugr, 132

Sicily, 310 ; Kin? William of, 154

Sidon, taken by Salad in, 116; the

Lord of, 174, 321 » 325. 329
Siege of Acre, 143-182, 201-206,

209-279
Siege of Alexandria, 66, 67
Siege of Damietta, 56-59
Singara (Sinjar), 60, 61
Sinjar, 60, 61, 70, 81, 84 ; troops

from, 163 ; the Lord of, 28,

171, 224
Sinjar Shah, Lord of Jezirat Ibn

Omar, 102, 171, 180
Sinnabris in
Soleim er Kazi, 33
Someisat, 218, 333. 334
Sonkor the Scarred (el Meshtub),

404
Sonkor (Shems ed Dtn), 404
Subbarin, 276
Sufi. 39

Suhraverdi. 10, 39
Sumeisat (Samosata), 63, 73
Swabia, Duke of, 212
Syria, 35, et sarp.


Tabor, Mount, 90, no

Tabriz, 39, 83

Tadmor, 57

Taj el Moiak, 87

Taki ed Din, Saladin's nephew,
15, 190, 218, 219, 305 ; his
death, 314 ; his son, 377

Tarida, transports, 67

Tarsus, 183, 184

Tekrtt, 4, 60

Tekua, 351

Tell el 'AlAdiya, 155, 160, 245,
247, 259, 273

Tell ^I Ajjul, 38, 176, 223

Tel! el Asawir, 276-278

Tell Ashterah, 58, 109, 1 10

Tell Basher, 58, 86, 224

Tell el Fodfll, 243

Tell el Fokhkh&r, 1 56

Tell el Hajl, 28

Tell el Hesy, 337, 345

Tell Jezer, 325, 326

Tell Keimftn, 276

Tell KhAled, 77

Tell Kisan, 155, 214, 233, 231,

273
Tell Kurd&neh, 226

Telle! Mosalliyin, 156

Tell es Safia, 340, 341

Tell es Suh&o, 103

Tell Tesil, 109

Tell ez Zelzcla, 277

Templars. Knights, 51, no, n4,

115, 191, 290,328,354,385

Temple, Marshal of the, 1 10

Tesil, 109

Thapsacus, 60

Tiberias, ni. n6, 154, 220; the
Lady of, 283 ; the Lord of, 384

Tibntn (Toron), n6, 155; skir-
mish at, 148, 149

Timflr, 63

Tizin, 125, 128

Togrtl, Sultan, 316

et Tor (Mount Tabor), 90

Toron, n6, 155; skirmish at,
148, 149; Humphrey of, 42,
n3, 388, 317; Toron of the
Knights, 33

Torontai, 381, 382

Tortosa, 137, 143

Tower of Flies, at Acre, 210-313,
215. 217

Towers at Acre, 368

2^ — 2


420


WHAT BEFELL SULTAN YUSUF.


Tripoli, 1 14, 209, 237, 283 ; Lord
of, 114, 386

Tubania, 90

T{ira, six miles S. of Cairo, 49

Turbessel (Tell Basher), 58

Turcopoles, 273

Turkoman's well, 73

Turks, 49

Tyre, Franks assemble at, 25 ;
abortive siege of by Saladin,
I20-I22 ; King Guy marches
to, 144 ; Conrad of. 212, 213,
267, 332 ; his murder, 333

Tyrian dinar, 7

Urumiah, 316

Vinsauf, Geoffrey de, 156, 183,
225, 273, 283, 284, 290, 300, 328,

341,351,367,388
Vitry, Jacques de, 110

W&dy el Ghaz&l, 49

Wady HalzOn, 227

Wady Jehennum, 118

Wady Waleh, 97

el Waleh (Wady Waleh), 97

White falcon, belonging to the

King of France, 241
William, King of Sicily, 253
Wooden bridge, near Damascus,

89,96


el Yarukiya, 53

YftzOr, 32, 137, 314, 361, 371. 373
Yebnah (Ibelin), 21 ; taken by
the Saracens, 117; Saladin
halted there, 296 ; not restored
at the peace, 381
Yemen, 64, 75

ez Zafer, el Melek, Lord of Bosra,

Saladin's son, 224, 347, 396,

408
Z4her ed Din, brother of Doctor

'Aisa, 167
Z&her ed Din Ibn el Bolenkeri,

163
ez Z&her, Saladin's son, Prince of

Aleppo, II, 170, 190, 208,224,

359, 361, 364, 367, 369, 375,
378, 385, 392, 393, 395-397
Zein ed Din, Aii Kuchuk, Lord of

Arbela, his son, 51, 74; his son

and his slave, Abu Manser, 80 ;

his son, 177; his arrival a( Acre,

182 ; his death, 218
Zenghi, Imad ed Din, 5, 47, 49,

60 ; his grandson, 219
Zenobia, 38
Zer'ain (Jezreel), 91
Zered Rhana, 263
Zeugma, 72
ez Zib (Achzib or Ecdippa), 1 54,

307
Zulf Endaz, 232, 233


THE END.


BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD.


OF THB


^destine |!ilgrims' Ced


In 13 Voiumes, itith an Index, royal Svo., bound in cloth, with nwnerous
Mapt and Illustrations. Price for the complete set, £10 10*., to he
chta/ined only of Mr, George Armstrong, Acting Secretary, Falestine
Ewploration Fund, 24, Hanover Square,


This Society was establislicd for the translation and publication, with explanatory notes,
of the various descriptions and accounts of Palestine and the Holy Places, and of the
topographical references in ancient and mediicval literature, from the earliest times to
thr periiHl of the Crusades or later. These accounts are written in Greek, Latin,
Arabic, old French, and old German, in the curious records of pilgrimages which
br^in with the unknown Pilgrim of Bordeaux, and follow in almost unbroken line to
the present day. After twelre years of work, the programme originally laid down by
the founders has been substantially carried out.

The wliule of tlie pilgrims* texts enumerated in the original prospectus have been
u(-<H>uuted for and issued to members. The pri<»e of the whole Library of tliirteen
Tolumes, complete with index, is fixed at Ten Guineas.

Arrunt!eiiient« have tlierefore been ma<le with the Committee of the Palestine
EYpl«>ratum Fund for the winding up of the Society on the following terms and
cotttlitions :—

(1) That any member who wislies to complete the Library of Pilgrims nuiy do so,

provided he writes to Mr. George Armstrong, Acting decrctary of the
Fale»tine Kxploration Fund, and paying iho difTorence between his subscrip-
tion and Ten Guineas.

(2) At the end of 1N95 the copies that remained were taken over by the

Palestine Kxploration Fund.

(3) The stereos will be destroyed and no further copies will be printed. The

edition is, tlierefore, very small and it is believed that the value of the books
will impidly go up.


Th* folhnring is a brief account nf th*' Library, now comphttd : —

VoLmi I.

a. *'THB CHTTBCHB8 OF OOKSTANTIinS AT JEBUSAIiEX/*

Pp. 1 as. With illustrations.

Thi* work t*ffntaina irAn>isii(«ni bj the Rev. .T. II. Bernard, D.D., Frllow of Trinilj* CoUsse,
iMiMtn, ivivti LuM-hiut (Ufe of CoiuisnUno and ths Rsrlj rilgnms. Msjor-Oeaeral 8ir Chsrirs
Wi.-or.. K.C.B, n.C.L.., hM ontnliuted s Prrfacr. Yn»tvvun llajriar Levtji, KS.A . has written
an IntHKluction snd ExpiAiuUory NoU**. A rttfbt undrntU.ndtOK of ibe irroap of buildings eractsd
bf C<>rittantirieov«r the XvAf planii u iodi«penaAbIe to the siutlv of the ■tt^ccl. Professor UA/ter
l>r«u turii*h«*i % rrstur^cioD whicl^ If scccpced, «ill be found to clear the ground and remove
all tae diScultics.

6. '* THB BORDBATTX PIIiaiUK." A.D. S33. Translated from the original

Latin by AcBRiY Stkwart, M.A., lat« Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and

annotated by Sir C. WiLSOsr. Pp. 1~6H, with maps.

This \trf tnterrtUnc liinrrarr U the earbesi record of a pll|rriaia«e eatant. It shows, flrst of all.
the route fullowed by the pll»'Tlin» fniin Oaol; n«xt« it marks the later lefeods and trvduiona
by the fact of tbrtr abM>nr«: thirdly, it lajrs down the sites of the sacred place* as they were

K>lDUd out to the |it)«;Tims <>f the fourth century. A nup shows the route of the pilirrlms acroaa
aredoa^ ao4 Asia Minor Into Sjrta. Bcstdes the nous there are appendices on the Pool 4»f
Bt t h cwd a. Che site of Zion. kc

(6m>


LIBRARY OF THE PALESTINE PILGRIMS' TEXT SOCIETY- (<-o/i<.j


7. "pCHE PILGBIMAGE OF ST. SILVIA OF AaUITANTA." a.d. Ss'

Translated by the Rev. J. H. Beenabd. Annotated bj Sir Charles Wilsu-
Pp. 1-150, -with map and illustrations.

This document was discovered In 1883 by Signor Gamarrini, Libramn at ArezKO. in T(uc.«n;
It is extremely doubtful whether the pilj^rlm really was SiWia, for reafion.<i which th» leam*
translator points out ; but the narrative irself is undoubtedly thai of the fuarth centurj-, and it .
only s^nd in interest to that of " The Bordeaux Piljrrim."

5. "THE LETTER OF PAUIiA AND EUSTOCHIUM TO MAKCEULA."

A.D. 36] . Translated from the original Latin by Aubrey Stewart. Annotaied by
Sir Charles Wilson. Pp. 1-16.

c. << THE PILGBIMAGE OF THE HOLT PAULA. BT ST. JE&02CE."

A.D. 382. Translated from the original Latin by Aubbrf Stewart. Annotated l»j
Sir Charles Wilson. Pp. 1-16, with map.

Volume XL

a. ** THE EPIT02CE OF ST. ETJCHEBIUS ABOUT CEBTAIN HOLT

PLACES," A.D. 4^1-0, and the " Breviary, or Short Description of Jerusalem." Tran*-

lated from the original Latin by Aubrey Stewart. Annotated by Sir Chakle-

Wilson. Pp. 1-23.

Eucherius was Bishop of Lyon?, a.d. -434-450. The "Epitome" was probably written down from
the description of travellers. The " Breviary " is a description of Jerusalem about the year 630.

fi. " THEODOSITJS." a.d. 530. Translated from the original Latin by tli-
Rev. J. 11. Bernard, D.D,, Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin. Annotated by Sir
Charles Wilson. Pp. 1-20.

Nothing is known about the author of this tract. The dat« of hit work is some time in the
first half of the sixth century. He is one of the most interesting of our pilgrims.

7. " THE BXTILDINOS OF JTJSTINIAN BY PBOCOPIUS." A.D. 500.
Translated from the original Greek by Aubrey Stewart. Annotated by Sir Charll-s
Wilson and Professor Haytbr Lewis. Pp. 1-178, with maps and illuefcrations.

This most remarkable history of the buildings crocted by Justinian has nevtr before been tran^latofi
into English. It is now presented with numerous architectural plans and drawio^^s, and with notes
by Hayter Lewis, F.S.A., late Professor of Architecture at University College.

5. "THE HOLT PLACES VISITED BY ANTONINUS MABTYB."

A.D. 660-570. Translated from the original Latin by Iubrey Stewart. Annotated

by Sir Charles Wilson. Pp. 1-44, with a map.

Like the Bordeaux Pilgrim, Antoninus has left behind him an Itinerary of an actual journey, with
interesting particulars of tlie legends attached to the holy places.

Volume III.

a, "THE PILGBIMAGE OF ABCTJLPUS." Circa A.D. 670. Translat^fd

from the original Latin and annotated by the Bev. Jahes Rosb Macpherson.

Pp. 1-64, with illustrations.

The history of this work, which is mentioned by Bede, is very curious. Arculfaa was Bishop
of one of the French dioceses; he went on pilgrimage, and nn hi^ return got safely as far as Rome,
where he took ship for the port nearest his home, probably Bordeaux. But a storm which aro^ie
drove the ship so far out of her course that it was cast away on the western coast of Scotland, and
Arculfus found himself the guest of Adnmnan, Abbot of the monastery in lona. Here he reLited his
adventures and described the holy places. Adamnan took down his descriptions and had them
carefully rewritten and copied. The work includes a rough drawing of the Holy Sopttlchre.

fi. " THE VENEBABLE BEDE ON THE HOLY PLACES." Pp. 27.

This work was composed as a kind of compendium of previous vrriters on tb« same subject.

7. "THE HOD(EPOBICON OP ST. WILLIBALD." Cirra A.D. 754. Trans-
lated from the original Latin by the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop op Clipton.
Followed by the " ITINEBABY OF ST. WILLIBALD." Pp. 1-58, with two map*.

Willibald was the first English pilgrim to the Holy Land of whom any account has come down tti .
us. He was the son of one Richard, rtx Anglorv.m^ but of which petty kingdom is not known. Hjn
mother, Winna, was a connection of Ina, Kiog of Wessex. This Ilichard— St. Eicbard— was buried
at Lucca, where his tomb was visible in 1645. Winna was also sister of Wynfrith, known as
ijt. Boniface, Apostle of Germany.


Palestine Exploration fund.


1


<
<

<
<
<


k/>/\/V


• \ •*
