Balthasar Bekker, The World Bewitch'd (1695)
===============================================
Balthasar Bekker (1634-1698). The World Bewitch'd; or, An Examination of the Common Opinions concerning Spirits — the great Cartesian assault on belief in demonic action, in four books; the 1695 London English translation of De Betoverde Weereld (1691). Text: 1695 first English edition. Raw OCR via Internet Archive; print artifacts removed. Public Domain.

ae teen et ere me Cone ye mean #2 Me

mn is

ar Meme

ah

Ce id ts se RE TT É ar
est wire a x à r a g Re)
Se: Hpi jenn ; 4 ae One
" : be Mont Se ped gta RE MED 1e Cis net ENT oa hacen bes, wack a ENT NCL

Se
ieee a

hae

AM BAEK LOST

TAR

AS AOR ALi UAB

4 Ay
ye

eT

aes 0 tds

ULE EO TERETE Ee LOT ne eee OO eee ee ts A2

WGahinscsasiaianisdnaateintini isnt dik saa tet a at ikon tlt shea ON bot c ELA GER en = assed

ME ene nce de En Sn ee ae

5 Mae as Me a UES otal op ARE Pe OT =

jee

BAC

ein By

St a ee

LE peer ins ~ -
~ Soe nae I ey wg yg naga pe em a a a a ag ENE gage
a Ex = se SE”, ue me. TA Se RES are eer oreo PPT EN ee ee Eu

ae EE

en ee S

ya a YT se “ere Ih ge

Je he Le ees he sens

Die er Oi pn Bn pe,

REA LE,

World Bewi

| re Examination ore the Common Opinions

CONCERNING

SPIRITS:

i a Nature, Power, Adminiftra-

tion, and Operations.

AM

AS ALES 0, h

H

The Efle’s Men are able to produce
by their Communication.

are i eran Sn

Divided into IN Parts.
B V bi

Barruazar Bex er, DD.
and Pattor at hr,

ns es

V { > 1: I.

dde ee rm rer HS ae ee :

(Tranflsted froma French Copy, ais of |
| and Jubfcribed by the Aather’s own Hane

ee eres) te ee

sets

eo np ee honte

Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick. -Lane, 1695.

pra nn!

ne

DS GA ACTE SES

4 poco pence uN NE REE TT

= # = a ae un A
Vs es re pt fe us wae =

É Se
EN Sy ae

ele iE ee

Bo Pea si oN Ris OM oe

LI

Mr. Feyo Fobn Winter,
Doctor of Phyfick;
Formerly Burgermafter and Coun-

fellor of State in the City of
Leeuwarden; As alfo Deputy

to the States of Friefeland ;
And Elder of the Wallocn
Church in the fame Town.

Moft Honoured Coufin,

Am bound to you fince a long. time
with Juch particular Obligations, and
my Duty ties me to! you-mith fuch Strict
Bards, that there ts no Man in the
World, befides the own Brothers of my
: bt ae Dear

The Dedication.

Dear Sponfe, but 1 ought to prefer you
before him. I have dedicated to them
she two first Books of the World
Bewitch’d, and amongst all my Friends,
whofe Names I intend to prefix to each
part of the French Tranflation, I have
made choice of you for this, that is, the
first of all, and going to be publifh'd.

Tes above thirty years fince I have the
Honour to be acquainted with you, and
about fifteen, fince I am allied to you
by your Marriage with the Lady Hen-.
detre Fullénia, the wearest Coufir of
my Spoufe, both from Father ana Mother's

fide. + IFs likewife very near twenty years,
fince I was fo happy as to fee you a Mem-
ber of the first College of the States of
Friefland, 0” whofe divettion the good
or bad fuccefs of my Affairs depended at
shat time. When occafion hax offer d it
(elf, T receiv'a from you Teftimonies of
a juft favour and an ingenious diftinctie’
on. Tour Marriage tied more ftridtly
the Bands of the Friendjhip you had for
me, and I bave had the pleajure to fee
it lasting to this day. Tow gave me lake=*
ly an obliging proof of it, when you were
pléas d to prefent from me to his Highnefs,

Prisce

| The ‘Dedication.
| Prince Henry. Cafimir of Naflau, Zx-
| reditary Governor. of our common Conn-
| try, ec. my Friefland’s Divinity; which
| À had taken the liberty to dedicate to him.
for I was not ina capacity of prefenting
tt my felt ; becanfe the great Employments
of his Elighnefs calling him at every mo-
ment to different parts of his Govern-
ment, Lcould not be fure fo much us an
hour of the place, where I weight weet
| with him. This cireumftance procur'd
| ene the Flonour of receiving by the next
| Poft a. Letter from that Prince, contain-
| tng very exprefs Marks of bis Affection ;
| ta which he alle declar’d, that. my Dedi-
| cation had not been unpleafant to. him.
| Bat have till another reafon that in-
[gages meito. prefent.you with the Tranfla-
tion of this Work, with which yon fend
(very much pleas'd. Is your particular
| Concern in the Affairs of the Churches,
|. 4a whofe Tongue.*tis written, and in gê=
| neral in all. thofe. of our, Foly Religion :
To this. you. énceffantly apply your self
| with a Zeal worthy of Imitation and Ad-
 miration,difcharging ftill inthe Walloon
2 À Church of your City, the Honourable Fun-
; | Atomof Elders which you have formerly
j 4 | dif-

D A OTR

= eae su ae Me La a epee = SEM | ET SES
ne re ee ee a À STE _— : r
a LP PET SF int . SER a iy Et STE eee te LO, ea [aS PR ON ©

The Dedication.
difchared many times, as well “as 11
the Church: of. your Mother Tongue.
Farther, I thought fit to canfe this Trea
sife to be Tranflated my [elf left forme
others fhould undertake it; having been À
advis'd, that. the Tranflation of itshad \\W

been begun. in ‘this Town, and elfembere, (lu

without my knowledge ; mich however vis |
happend, but fince : the: late Synod of |
North-Holland; the. proceedings sthat |
were made againft me, having only been ||

of ufe.to excite the curiefity. of the pab- [lin i
lick, as to this matter... And therefore l | it

have prevented the defiens of thofe, who | |
intended: to make this Tranflation, and \\in.
provided atthe fame time, left. any fhonld is
appear under my name, without my confent, \
and my revifing of it; as L-may affert |
that I have.done this, It comes from Ni
a Frenchman, who has carefully apply a un
himf-lf to the ftudy. of our Tongue, and | ip
frems. to: mento underftand his arm ve- Nil
ry well. For tho. I, am \not sconver- Vy
font with it fo far, as to have Tranfla- Wu
ted my own Book my felfz yet I think Wh
that 1 aneable to judge, that I fhould |
not haver better fucceeded, nor moreex+ A
prefly. have.wender’d my own Thoughts, "

if]

| The Dedication. ;
| af Tchad been in acapacity of underta*
w, M king it. Befides, this Tranflation being
ne aloft. verbal; becanfe the: quality sof the
| Work required it; Tt is fo “ynuch the
hen Wamone. dificult, and worthy that, its de-
fects: fhould be overlook’ d.:L think. at
| leaftthat novother shag will:be perceiv-
bed; betwixt itand the Original, but that of.
bf the; Longue; no: real change having been
| made inites Town that \feueral matters
lof Fact have been added, and inferted
nel divers places of this Book ; but. no-
Wei thing has been left ont, fo that the Rea-
ilo der hall have: no cccafion - of complain
wht ing of his Loffes; but rather of being
hull) glad of the new advantages that ac-
dot crue to him. I allo have added after
the. Preface, an Abridgement of the
whole Work, as a preliminary, that gives
i) aigeneral view and notion of-it,,4nclu-
ding.inm. {ubftance, the Contents of the
af three: laf? Books, that are to be fuccef-
omy fively Lranflated ; the fecond being alrea-
Nay far advanced. I only earnefily wilh,
| that you may be as well [atisfied with my
wi Dedication, as Lam withthis Tranflati-
on. So that all that I have to do, is to
ying command you, and-all. your Friends and
a : Relations,

The Dedication.
Relations, to the Grace of God, which
EF heartily beg of you all. Butleft any
French Copy,..of a wy of thefe Four Books,
fhould be publifhd under my name, bee
fides, thofethat are printed tm this Towns
far Péter Rotterdam, :#4e frff of which

is dedicated to you 3 £ declare thas DT |

own no other, but fuch as are {ubfcribed
by me, as this ts, wherein J afjure you
with my own Edand, that £ am,

Moft Honoured Coufin;

Your moft Obedient,
And Obliged Servant.

Was a Bieated in rage SY pg
the Original, B, Berger
Amfterdam, Fuly 18,

| Whole WORK in General,
AND THE
Firft Book in particular.

publifhing, needed’ an Introduction, methinks
! that I may’not'only have the! fame Opinion of
| this ; but even that l'cannot forbear it, Two par-
| ticular Reafons oblige me:r0 it, one of which con:
| cerns the eircumftances of what happened during
the impreffion of thiswork, and the other, has re=
: Q lation to it'scontents, - Both thefe Reafons has fome-
| thing extraordinary; but the latter efpecially appears
ftill more ftrange, becaufe of the former; and
| therefore I intend to give the Reader fome expla-

nation upon both,

| Having form’d a defign to write upon the mat-
| ter treated of in this Book, I begun Eight Years
} ago in my Preface to the Book of Comers, to give
fome hints of what I intend to explain. here mora
| Particularly. I had chofen for the fubject of my
| publick Sermons, the Prophecy of Daniel, when
| I was come tothe rith v. of the 2 Chapter, in
| Which the Magicians confefs, they were not capable
| Por]. . b of

| I F ever any Author thought the Treatife he was

PREFACE.

of expounding the King's Dreams ; I drew from
“hat Declaration, fuch. inferences, as evidently
fhow’d what muft be believed concerning the extent
_of knowledge, afcribed to the Devils afterwards
judging ir-convenient.to examine his power, and
whether it extends as far as is ordinarily faid 5 the
frft occafion I had of afcending the Pulpit, I took
my Text on Exodus Chap. 8. y. 18th, and examin-
ed why the Magicians could not as eafily produce
Lice, as Frogs and Serpents. The late Sieur de Tami~
xinga, Lord of ~Bellemgweer, a learned and pious
Gentleman, heard my Sermon, and lik’d it extream-
ly 5 thinking that if what I had propofed, were
printed, it would obtain the approbation of under-
-ftanding perfons,. and inform the ignorant. He ex-
horted me himfelf feveral times to print that dif
courfe, and imployed other perfons to defire me. to
do it; but I was fo taken up with other bufinefs,as 7
may be judged by the Books I have publifhed, and
by the affiftance I-have afforded my friends in the
Edition of theirs, that I could not anfwer his expecta-
‘tion fo foon, tho L-never abfolutely denyed to do it.
Since that time, I preached twice again on the fame
- matter, on occafion of the Witch of -Endor, whom
Saul went to confult, and of the Dev* who torment-
ed Fob, many perfons prefsd it hard upon me, to
publifh my Opinion on this fubject. In 1689, asi
was explaining in the Hofpital Church, the rgth #
and following veries of the 5th Chap. to the Galati- J
ans, 1 fearched deeper into this matter, expounding |
the Greek word paguantie, which the French and |
Dutch interpreters have rranflated Poifoning, andthe §) ¢
Englifh, Witchcraft. But as À could not comprife in |
a Sermon, whatever was to be faid upon this fub- J
ject, I referr'd my hearers to a faller inftruction, |
in a larger volum that 1.was going to publifh. I.
have given an account why it was not undertaken
: before, J

PREPAC E.
before; and now I fhall inforin the Reader, why ir
has been fo long in the Prefs.

Going, from Francker to Loen, where: I was
cad to be’ a Minifter, 1 promifed my Book-
feller H. Nauta, that to keep our old acquain-
tance, I would give him to print the firft Treatife
I thould compole in Holand 5; almoft as foon as I was
- .€ome thither; there appeared a Cometiin the Years

1680; and 1681,; which gave me occafion to write
a Book, Intituled; An-Exaniination of Comets, which
Ipur outin 1683.: But as the Bookfeller defired
the Book might be fomewhat larger, and I found it
inconvenient to take care of a long impreflion be-
yond Sea ; Lobligéd him to continue it for that time :
promifing him, that, if he ever re-printed the
fame Treatife, I would either : increafe it, or add
{ome other toit, I had no -occafion to keep to the
firft promife, no body having faid ‘or written any
thing againft it, that required a more particular ex-
* plication. . And therefore I thought ‘fit to hold my
Second promife, by'adding to my Examination of
Comets, another tract upon a matter fomewhat re-
lating to it; and on: which I had medirated a long
time. To that end, I compofed an Examination of
Magick, and Witchcraft, that contained very near
as-many fheets as that of Comets; and I caufed in
Autumn laft, a new Edition tobe made of the
latter, on purpofe to joyn- it to this new Treatife,
But having fometimes efpecially in November 27th
1689, publickly confuted, in the Pulpit, the com-
mon Opinion; two daysafter, a Book was deliver=
ed me coming from England, where it was Printed,
and Intituled, A Relation of the di covery of fome
Witchcrafts, in which very many particular things
were faid to be contained. -I thought by the read-
ing of “it, that it would quickly be tranflated into
our Tongue, to fatisfy a cutiofity of People, And

2 as

-asiny Opinionsare
-down in that Book, | perceived irmight breed pre-
judices againft what 1 had fo freely and openly de-
-clared
able to deftroy afterwards ; becaufe of the appa-
‘rent ftrength of the proofs brought forth in that

directly oppofice to what is laid

in the Pulpit, and fuch as I fhould fcarce be

work ; for that Reafon, [ rather chofe to tranflate
it my felf, than to leave it to another, adding fome
remarks, fit to open the Eyes of the Reader, by
difcovering the grounds on which fuch relations are
laid ; chat he might not thereby be in danger of be-
ing confirmed in the vulgar error; but that he might
make ufe of thefe Annotations, until my compleat
work concerning Magick and Witchcraft were prin-
red, which was to be, according to my expectation,
in the following Months. But befides the inconve-
niencies of the Weather in Winter, and the diftance
of the place where 1t was printed, 74. beyond Sea,
vogether with the Book of Mr. 4infworth, for which
the fame prefs was imployed, caufed a great deal of
delay ; during that time, I had leafure te review
my Treatife of Mag’ck, and to increafe it fo, that
st became much larger, than that of Comets; be-
fides, the tranflation and publifhing of the Englith
Book, procured me letters from feveral learned Men,
and afforded matter to many Converfations, as well
with thofe that were of my Opinion, as with thofe
that were contrary toit. Thus having had occafion
to fearch deeper into this fubje@, to give new ex-
planations of my Opinion, and to confirm them by
“new Reafons; this works went on always increafing,
and the order and:difpofition of it was fo far chang-
ed; that from a fall Book it became a bulky Vo-
tumn. Inthe mean while, the impreffion that was
made at Leenwarden, feem’d to me, not only flow;
but alfo very inconvenient, by Reafon of the faults

of the Prefs3 of which À could not fo well purge
ifs

oy ie es

se

ee A me

PRE -

ter

PREFACE:

| 3 it, burthat the firft Book is fill full of een: I re=-

folved therefore to print the Second part at Amfter-
dam. Some time: paft,-before that could fucceed 5:
however, without any inconveniency to the Book;
for the Reafons-juft now alledged. The caufe of
this flownefs being unknown, fome were not afraid:
to: publifh, thar I had loft courage, and durft not
attempt to enterthe Lifts with the Devil : thofer
Rumours, the queftions that were continually pur.
tome, and the writings that were fent me, when
my ‘Treatife was juft coming out, obliged: me to
publifh the two frft Books, in which I mentioned:
fomething of the two laft, that they might the bet-
ter pleafe the Reader. Befides I hop'd, God would:
give me the Grace to-make.an end of the whole
work, and to add what the Readers:might think.
wanting or convenient. But it could not be per=
formed before the end of: 1690; as I: inrended-it;'-
and the Bookfellér defired it, for his own Intereft  :
for the Froft rhat:came in on a fudden, retarded the :
execution of it’; it being flor poffible to fend the~
Three laft fheets- to Leenwarden, and to get from:
thence thofe that were printed there, by reafon of:
the Ice thar put a ftop to Navigation; fo that E-
could have no Copy to prefent my friends with. -
I hoped ftill however that it might be:done, burthe :
Froft: continuing, my : Book- thus imperfect’ was -
publifht, and came without my knowledge; into :
the hands of many People in Friezeland. It was’
therefore only feen by: piece-meal,and without cohe-
rency, which gave occafionto fome of the Readers,’
and others that had heard: of it, publickly to pafs ~
heard judgments ‘upon'it;: ever fome intended, as
I am informed; to make me-explain my felf more
precifely, had Enot done it in the Book it felf. For:
at laft, when they read it intire and in order, they
all agreed, J ‘had given alt the explications thar
b'3 could.

PREFACE.

could be witht, either as to the Reafons that had
moved mé to write it; or as to to the {cope [ pro-
pofed to my felf,; which appears in the Preface, and
in the firft’ Chapter of the Bock 5 or as to the ne-
ceffity and ufefulnefs of its publifhing, which 1
have fhown in the fame Chapter, and the laft but
one. They were juft the places that were wanting;
for which Reafon I wrote to the Bookfeller of
Leenwarden, and forbad him to give out any Copy
of this Book; until the whole was complear. - Be-
fides, during the Froft, | had time to add two Chap-
ters toithe end of the Second Book, and to enlarge
the:Preface, in order-to' inform ‘the Reader of my
Opinions, and the purity of my intentions, which
has not proved altogether fruitlefs; for I have heard
that moft of :thofe, thathave read the Preface and
the work afterwards; have been fatisfied, as they
have told cne another and my felf ; whereas thofe
that had taken upon them tocriticife-it,had read but
fome loofe parcels of it, or:had not read it at ail, or
perhaps had not fo much as :vouchfafed to read it.
Things remained a while in that ftate,every one
enquiring after the Reafon that hindered the
publifhing of my Book, and how it happened that
Thad none my felf, fince it had been fold in: Frzeze-
land for fome time. : The Thaw cames at laft, and
many. Perfons arrived with Ne ws of the Edition
of my Book, but brought no Copies along with
them, fave fome privately; ‘and as ftolen goods ;
then every body « wondered; :a: Book fhould have
been put out, in thefe Provinces, and:it  fhould not
be found in Holland, where the Author lived ; and
ot only my Brother Paftors fhould not have feen. it,
but I fhould fay, I had none my elf to prefent them
with. At laft L'received 26 Copiesof it from Leeu-
warden, but-had fcarce oné for my felf ; my friends

_came.and took themaway themfelves, as they were

fowed ;

—

SI I EE 2 ae FS

PREFACE.

fowéd ; and moft‘of thofe that ask'd: for them, -
could not get ’em, unlefs they came juft when they
were fow'd up. So greedy Men are of Novelties:
elpecially when they can hardly get ’em.

Nitimur in vetitum, femper cupimufq3 negata.*

So much we love, and feek what 5 deny d.
However it be; the Book could not be expofed to ©
Sale before the 11th day of March. A long time
after I had fent the laft Sheets to Leeuwarden, to
Mr. Nauta, Bookfeller, who had had the Book pet-
fed in his hands for a long time, A Bookfeller ~
ask’d 50 Copies from.him, and thought toreceive —
them fpeedily, but had none fent to him. In the
mean while, I find my felf much perplext. [was -
défir'd, during two Months,;-by my beft Friends, ~
to. communicate this Work to them, which they ©
had never feen, and had: heard commended; for
this reafon I wrote to Mr. Nauta, I would take ail :
the Copies upon me 3 and-pay them at fuch reafon-
able rates, that he would be farisfied with its he ~
need but to fend them to me without delay, with *
the firft Veffel. Then I-thoughr to confuit with ©
my Friends, whether I fhould fell the two Firft ©
Books , that had already appear’d imperfect in :
Frieftand, and elfewhete; or whether I fhould keep”
them until the whole Work was-finifhed. The firft
feem'd to be the beft Advice, to avoid the fufpicion,

~ that I durft not publifh my Book, or that 1 was ”

forced to fupprefs it, becaufe-of many things that —
were fpread abroad to difcredit. it 3 however, the
laft counfel fuited better with my-inclinations~ T°
conceived that a Work that: was’ at firft bur a fmal |
Treatife, thd it had fince been much enlarged,would ~
be more favourably received, and prove of greater
ufe, if it were given compleat at the fame time to ~
the: publick ; that the defign and cohering of it —
b 4° might ~

a SS rere: Sr CRE

PREFACE.
might be better feen, its Doétrines be more ea fily
comprehended, and the happy effects it was able
to produce be more plainly perceived, which is
chiefly done by the laft Part. But as the caufes
‘before alledged, had already once {mother’d rifts
defign, fo they did it again this time 3 for percei-
ving by the Letters of Mr. Nanta, it was impoflible
‘40 agree with him, as to the price, and that it
was unlikely he fhould ever doit, Iwas at laft
forced to give up the Book to him, that [: might
{with the Bleffing of God, ) purfue my defign. So
having altogether broken with that Bookfeller, I
have agreed fome Months fince, with another of this
City, Mr. Daniel Vanden Dalen, to put divers Prefles
going upon it, and re-print the whole Work, revi-
fed and corrected, that I might inceflantly. publifh
all the four Parts, one after another, in the form
in which the Reader now fees them. For as

ro the 750 Copies which Mr. Nauta had printed of |

the two Firft Books, and are moft of them ftuli
upon his hands ; they being an inconfiderble num-
ber, that could not go very far, and the hafty Edi-
tion of the Book, being as yet imperfect, feem d to
give room to a new Edition, that the Publick
might be more fpeedily fatisfied, I therefore here
prefent theReader with theFirft Book,enlarged with
a new Chapter, that I thought neceflaryto add at
the end. Thope, with the Bleffing of God, that
the three others fhall fucceffively appear every
Month; and I perfuade my felf,that the reading of
the Firft Parts, will-excite fome Curiofities for the
later ; and that altogether may invite the Reader
to a ferious confideration upon the Contents, and
capacitate him to judge more foundly of this mat-
ter than he did, while this Treatife appear’d:
but in part, and cenfufedly. This is what I had to
fay, as to this Edition, that was made in fuch an
sa extraordinary

pe —

PREFACE.

extraordinary manner, and publifh’d without my:
knowledge.
I come now to-treat of my fcope, and what has :
obliged me to embrace the Opinions I affert in this -
Book. In all my Studies J was always: inclin’d,
not to reft upon probabilities, but to:fearch into the :
whole matter, and to get a clear and diftinét know- -
ledge of what I fhould know. Befides, many ftrange~
things had-happen’d tome in Friefland, vpn the
firft Writings | had publifhd, and experience had
affured me, how little one ought to relye upon the -
Judgment of Men, efpecially when what they are
accuftomed to teach,~is call'd in queftion.. For is -
it not wonderful that my Book upon the Cate- -
chifm fhouid have been unanimoufly condemn’d in :
Friefland, tho armongft above 200 Minifters, who =
confented to that: Judgment, none could alledge :
fo much as one folid Reafon againft it; and :
that afterwards it fhould have been twice-usani- -
moufly approved of, without. any change; as to’ »
the Doctrine and the controverted Points, having.’
been made in it? This has confirm’d me in this -
perfuafon, that a true Chriftian, efpecialiy à Doctor
of Divinity, ought groundedly himfelf to enquire’
into things, without refting upon the Judgment of" :
others, that he may obtain a full certainty of the
object. of his Faith, and the matter of his Precepts.
Since that time Lrefolved only to follow the Holy
Scripture, and Reafon, in fuch things in which it
ought to fupply: the filence of the Sacred Writings,
and to aflure my felf by thofe two means, of what
I was to believe, and to teach others, without ra-
king :the trouble of following the fteps of other
Men; ‘never putting Pen to Paper, but to write up-
on thofe fubjects, the importance of which I was
convinced of, or had not been fufficientlÿ explain’d
and examin’d. I have therefore endeavour'd to: :
bi5 3 frée +

PREFACE.
free, asmuchas poffible, our Holy Doctrine from
fuch-errors, as moft-Men appear to'me to be ta-
ken with; or at leaft, to fet in order, fuch things
“whic I conceive to be confufed ; Whether I was
rhe &rft that difcover’d it, or whether i needed on-
ly to promote what had been begun by others.
There are other Reafons that have engag’d me in
that defign. For having {worn in the Univerfity of
Franeker, faithfully to maintain the pure Dotirine of
the Reformed Church, and defend it both by words and
writings, in all neceffary occafions ; 1 may now {ay :
with Prudentius; and as it becomes my Age.

Per guinqnennia jam decem,
Ni fallor fuimus : feptimus infuper
Annum cardo rotat, dum fruimur fole velubil.
Vicinum fenio jam Deus applicat.
Quid nos utile tants {patio tempore egimus ©

-Fwo fcore years are paft, the third 5 running,
Since the Sun's light & upon me [lining 3
Old Age comes on, What bave I been dog ?

Bur it would be too long to enter into particu-
lars, I fhall only fay that I intend to imploy the relt
of my Life; firft, to the Duties and Functions of
my. Miniftry, which the circumftances and largene(s
of this Town make more painful than in other
places; and than to make an exact enquiry after
whatever is falfly believed in the World, and the

Erroneous Opinicnsthat are entertained without amy ~ |

other ground then that they are every day told and
heard of. For my moft earneft defire is, to fee
Men become more wife and honeft than they are,
though very few fincerely intend it, or at leaft do
their Endeavours to attain-to that perfeétions moft
part chcofing rather to believe, and todo, what is

commen-

rticu |
erek

NS af
ene
other

PREFACE.

commonly believed and done, than to be at the *

trouble of freeing themfelves from Errors, In the
mean while; what paft in Freifeland, when my firtt
Book appear’d abroad, ought to have taught me,
how dangerous it is to write upon fuch matters 3
there being neither favour nor profit to be expected *
for fuch Authors as rid themfelves from all preju- :
dices; and having no regard, either for the Credit
or Power of the Faction, whole Sentiments they re ”
ject, refolve to follow only what the Scripture’
teaches, or Réafon dictates to them, and to embrace

no Opinions, but fuch as are founded upon thofe ~

two Grounds.” Perhaps after my Death the ufeful-
nefs of this Undertaking will be known; and tha’
I dare not hope’ thar it will be ‘done in my Life *”
times yet 1 publifh it my felf, to learn the Judg=*
mént of the publick, to defend my Works, and ta
enlarge or correct them,‘ according to the Light
may acquire a-new, or that fhall be communicated
tome. Fof methinks, Iam moré able to do it, and
to be Interpreter of my own Words and Thoughts,
than thofé that may afterwards adopt my. Opinions,
and have fome regard for my Mémory.

As for the reft, though my MEET and fcope
may be plainly perceived by the firft Chapter; yet
I thall add, that no Men in the World are more re-
mote trom’ any — Atheiftical Sentiments, more per-
fuaded of the Divinity of the Holy Writ, and more
difpofed to render to God the Honour and Reve-

rence due to him, than chofe, whoas I am, are Ops

pofed to the common Opinion of the Power and
Vertue of the Devil. Whoever fhall read this Book
with attention, and without partiality, will un-
doubtedly be perfuaded of it ; atleaft, 1 mean, that
there. is enough to fatisfie thofe that abfolurely re-
ject the Principles of Defcartes, concerhing the ufe

of Reafon ; and at the fame time fuch as give too
much

PREPAC E.
much extent to thofe Principles; and that thofe two
Parties will equally approve of the manner in which
I diftinguifh Spirits from Bodies, and both from
God, without however eftablifhing any. thing as to
their Operations that cannot be proved by plain and
neceflary Inferences. So that I powerfully confute
the foolith Errors of Spinofa, who confounds God
and Nature together. I believe not that there is
any Author, who has more folidly eftablifht the in-
finite difference that there is betwixt God and. the
Crearure, and the inconfiftency of the Properties of
Bodies with thofe of Spirits, then I do here; as
was neceflary to be done to lay a firm foundation to

this. work, that is wholly grounded upon that Prin. -

ciple, at leaft as to thofe things that are the object
of the Light of Reafon.  Befdes, I have this inter-
nal fatisfation, that I confirm by an evident proof
the Doctrine of our Churches, that tends ftill to
diminith the Honour paid to the Creatures, in order
to increafe that which is due to God. This Book
wirnefles for me that I fet up the Glory, Power, and
Wifdom of the Soveraign Mafter of the World, as
much as they had been taken from him, to be
communicated to the Devil. I banifh from the
Univerfe that abominable Creature to chain him
in Hell, that ef, our Supream King, may more
powerfully and fecurely reign. Though-his Em-
pire that is to endnre to the laft day, is likewife to
fabGt in the midft of his Enemies, that are here up-
on Earth, that is amongft the People of the Devil,
ot fach in whom Sin keeps ftill imprinted the Image
of the Devil, With thar intention I am not afraid
to explain in my fecond Book feveral paffages of the
Hi ly Writ in another Senfe,than they have hitherto
been taken: But if by the publifhing of fuch new
explications, one aimed not at the Honour of God,
and only fought to impait and ftain the Reputation

of

EE BL Los ec:

Scr sp = mo

Pe ee od

cys Ss  e+

PREFACE.
of thofe that are of contrary Opinion, he fhould®
take more to heart his own Credit than the Glory.
of God. As for me, who have formerly been in
Opinions contrary to thofe I {peak of, and which .
are full held by the greateft part. of Men ; I will
ingly propofe my prefent Sentiments, but only with
a fincere intention of glorifying God, . and bringing .

Truth to Light. I think not therefore to be blame-
able for nor fticking to the vulgar explications, I.

had formerly follow’d, and preferring before them.
thofe of fome Perfons, who have not done what I
now fuppofe ro be obliged todo. Yer I am not
alone in thefe Opinions ; for they are agreeable to

_thofe of many others, fome of whom have appear’d

in the World even afrecme. And though they have
produced and afferred in Writing thofe new Inter-
pretations and Tranflations of the Bible, but by way
of Exercifes, and so fhew what fubtilty and parts
they acquir'd in their Youth, by the alteration of

fuch Expofitions as had learned Men for their Au-

thors ; yet as for me, methinks that in my old Age
I ought to make ufe of my own Eyes, and to {peak
with liberty. - As for the reft, if there are amongft
us, who, to multiply the proofs of our Opinion,and
diminifh thofe of the contrary Party, ftretch the
Holy Scripture too far, that’s their own fault, and
not ours. We prefume to be provided with better:

Arms, to defend the Fundamental Truths of the

Church. But it muft be obferv'd as a general fault,

that the reading of the Bible is undertaken with a

Mind full of its own prejudices, or thofe of its Ma-
fters 5 and that’tis generally explain'd according to
thofe Notions, without any other Reafon or Ground

bur tharof chance, or of fome cafes that have occa-

fioned the choice of {uch parts as is then followed.
I take the Vail from thofe prejudices,and thew what
Method is to be obferv’d to undertake the explica-

tion

PREFACE.

tion of the Holy Writ, without any prevention. For”
[hold it for certain, thar none would have explain'd
‘fuch paflages of the faid Writings as I here treat of,
fo as they are ufually Interpreted, had he not been
imbu’d with a prejudice of the great and extraordi-
nary power of the Devil, or had he not intended to
confute fome particular Errors. 1 ‘have alteady
proofs of ir ;~ for feveral learn’d and pious Perforis
have very much approv’d of my Method of examih-
ing thofe Texts, and the fearching into their Sénfe';
and having treated in my’ Sermoris of the chief
Points of this fubject, 1am inform’d thar many Peo-
ple thew a great impatience to fee my Writings up-
on it. I have frequently been in Converfations,
where the moft important matters,  efpecially thofe
that are contain’d in my fecond and third Book,were
difeu(s'd; ‘and they feem’d partly fatisf'd with my
Explications, and in hopes-of being fully convinced
by thofe they expected from me : [refer my felf to
their Judgment,to know whether their expectation
has been deceived or fulfill’d ; being perfuaded that
if they do not agree to fome particulars,yet they will
approve of my intention, and contribute their ut-
moft, that the greateft part of the things I propofe
may be receiv’d and relifh'd. If I were fo caprici-
ous as to difturb my’ felf on account of what may
be-faid and believ'd of my defgnand to make more
of the nutiiber than of the quality of the Readers, I
fhould undergo great hardihips: For I doubt not
but moft Men, having little meditated upon this
matrer, will think that [ commit a great Sin in pub-
lifhing this Treatife ; not however in reference to
the firft Book, where I only relate the various Opi-
nions of the feveral Nations from very credible Au-
thors, without declaring my own Sentiments,or con-
futing thofe of others. Neither do I believe that
the two laft parts will be found fault with, butonly

the

PREFACE.

the fecond, where the moft important Doctrines are
difcuisd, will raife fome difficulty, and not pleafe
every one. It will efpecially feem. ftrange, that I
make fo little account of the Devil, and endue him
with {uch an inconfiderable Power. For matters
have been carried fo far, that fome Men think ita
piece of Piety to afcribe many Miraculous Effects to
the Devil, and to hold for rath and impious People
thofe that cannot believe, that he does what is teft;-
fied by thoufands of Witneffes.If any contradict their
Opinion,heis taken for an Atheift, that is, fuch as de-
nies the Exiftence of one God,tho’ he is only guilty of
the Crime of not believing two,viz.a good and a bad.
But thofe that are of your Mind, deferve themfelves
to be called Ditheifis, or fuchas believe two Gods: [as
the Arians ] got the name of Tritheifts, becaufe they
believ'd three Gods [ of different nature. } If any de
fire to put a new name upon me, in reference to m

Opinions, I willingly yield to that of Monotheifts, that
is, who believes but one God,and one Saviour Fefus
Chrift ; upon whofe words I wholly truft, where he
fays, Fear not them who kills the Body, but fear him
who can deffroy both Soul and Body, Mat. to. 28,
I fear him much lefs, who has no power either over
Body or Soul, and trouble not more my head with
the judgments of thofe thar plead his caufe,and take
his part. If he be a God, let him defend by Caufe ;
Jet him affault, whilft I am pulling down his Altars.
Judg-6. 13. Bathe name of the Lord the God of hofts,
Fencounter that Goliah 3 let’s fee who will lend him

A: à helping hand! If any think to have reafons {o

ftrong as to confute my Opinion, I defise him to
propound them, with as much foftnefs, as Tam fa-
vourably difpos’d to hear them ; but at the fame
time I intreat Him to fpare to himfelf and to

me, an unprofitable labour, and to wait till he have

read the whole work, from the beginning to the
| end,

PREFACE.

end, before he makes his objections. By thofe means
he fhall perfectly know whether thofe particular

and private places which he has read, and with

which he had not been fatisfy.d, have afterwards
been explain’d, and made worthier of his approba-
tion, by the concatenation of the whole Treatife,
and the reafons contain d in it: For it would be
troublefome to view and examine again, all the
places of my Anfwers I would quote. So that it
muft nor be take ill, if I give none to thofe
that fhall follow another Method, and would
make me wafte with them jthe time that can be

better fpent.

Revis'd, enlarg’d, and given to the Printer, -
March 16.
Ma) 26.

Auguft 1.

I may affure here, that nothing has ben taken off,

from what is contain’d in the Edition of Leeuwar--

den. It’s true, fomething has been added in fome
places, for the better underftanding of the matter 5
as may be feen at the end of the Original, where
a whole Chapter has been added, in which, the laft
Chapter of the Fricfland Edition is comprizd. Ic
feeming to me it was convenient to inlarge a little
more in that place ; more exactly to fhew the nie
and defign of the fearch I make in this Firft Book,
after the varions opinions of all Nations, and better
to difcover the foundation of thofe prejudices, that
have fo long kept us from examining the true ftate
of the matters contain’d in the following Parts.

Many other additions have been made to the French

Tranflation, which it is not. needful. precifely to
mark. The curious may compare the Tranflarion
with the Original.

AN

} AA
der

} Cleh
{tel
| ter
Nit,
jag
bi

AN

| ABRIDGMENT

OF THE
Whole Work:

What bath been the defign of the

Author, and what is his: Me-
thod. |

he | S the two firft Books of this work that I
| publifhed at firft, have been differently. re-
ceived, for Reafons alledg’d in the Preface ;

ie’ Tr will not be amifs to reprefent to the Reader, what

has been properly my defign in thefe four Books,
, Wchat l'have Intituled, The World Bewitch’d, nor to
few what foundation 1 built upon, and what way J
take to find out the truth.For alth6 J exprefs my {elf
A Clearly enough in the beginning of the work, and in

Qu, the Preface to the firft part ; I know neverthelefs,
x (that is not fufficient to deftroy the prejudice where-

pwith, the learned themfelves appear more biaffed

tin than the Vulgar; which I fhould never-have thought;

‘Dut ic feems at prefent, Ihave found out the a
| OR,

An Abridgment of the whole Work.

fon, which is, that the moft part of thofe which do*
not put themfelves to the trouble to pafs through all
the Degrees of the Schools, afpire to Sciences and
fublime knowledge, but for their particular plea-
{ure ; they are the People that love liberty, and to
whom it matters not,who isthe Mafter that inftructs
them, provided that they may learn fomething 5 or
if they are greedy of rarities, they have not fo much
refpect to the mode, nor to that which is New or
Antient, as tothe beauty of the matter, and to that
of the work. On the.contrary;.it is with thofe
who pafs through the Schools, as with thofe who
live in Shops, where every one has nis way, every
Mafter has his Method in the work he‘makes. In
# one Town they make the fame things after one
fafhion, and in another, after another ; when, one
is taken up with the mode, he often rejects) what is
pleafing, without any other . Reafon, then becaufe
jt is not as ‘commonly ufed in the World... Aad we
have a ftrangenefs for all novelties, fo long as they
have not the common vogue ; althô otherwife, we
might approve them, and have them cheap enough;
but as foon as Cuftom has introduced them, one be-
gins to.feek them- out, and to be difgufted at the
‘former. Sciences are fubject to the fame inconveni-
encies,.. Thofe that we fend to the Schools, conti-
nue ‘in the road which has been mark'd out to them.
for their exercifes ; they endeavour to form them- |
felves upon the model of thofe which have moft |
reputation, or of thofe who are the neareft to their |;
firft prejudices ; fo rhis is difapproving the part they
have taken; not tobe apt to-take any, and to pre- |
ferve our own liberty,and thus. we expofe our-felves | 0
very much ; but one runs a greater risk, if will-
ing to afcend higher, and fearch things in théir
Fountains, it happens ac. laft, that we find our felves
out. of the ordinary Road,-and that .we are
obliged

‘An Abridgment to the whole Work.

obliged to take another. Hinc ille lachyme, From
thence proceeds all diforders.
The common Opinion of the Devil, of his know-

* | ledge, power, and Operations, and of People which .

ate accufed'of having ‘commerce with him, began
by little and little to become very fufpirious by the
help of natural light, which I have common with

| others, which was ftrengthened and purified by the

Scripture; fo after I had well examined it, I was
in doubr, whether I ought to maintain it any long-

| er, or’abandon it, not only by Reafon of the truth,
| but alfo becaufe-of the Piety. which it feem d to

contradict : My Confcience it felf compel’d me to

| it ; for I was obliged to anfwer thofe that ask'd me,

and to take care of my Conduct, becaufe of the
difpofition I faw the People in. It was the Duty of

(| my charge, and every Day occafions offer’d them-
| felves, my pain. increafed every. moment, by the
| continual neceffity I found my {elf .in, to {peak and
| act as others did; or to oppofe the publick with
words or actions, which agree,not with my Cha-

racter,which is to be complaifant, and to agree with
all the World,.as much ‘as’ is, poffible.  Befdes I
found not as. yet foundation enough ro act after an
other manner, which made.me at.,firft relolve to

«|| make an exact -fearch, after ‘the Original. of this

common and-general Opinion, to know. whether it
was founded upon truth... But becaufe I make this

| examination, priore and not 4 pofteridre, as they
in the Schools, I have propofed the ftate of the
| Queftion, but.at the,end of the firit Book ; where
-| I difcovered in the 22th-Chapter,how many, of, the

Opinions,which I have related ; (which.are all thofe

-| that ever were in the World upon this {ubject,)
| The Proteftants. have at. laft got together, and

| formed thofe which they retain to this Day. In the

we ae
alge! |

23th Chapter I compare them with the Deen:

An Abridgment of the whole Work.
of other Nations; and in the 24th Chapter, I fhew

by what means they have been introduced amongft

us ; and what keeps us fo ftrongly tyed to them:

So in the firft Book, I examine what is’ the rife of
the Opinion concerning the Devil, and in the fol-

lowing Books, I difcover what fentiments we ought:
to have of him.

An Abridgement of the Firft Book.

uy N the Firft Book I run over ‘alt the World,
to find whence this Opinion has its Original.

And for this purpofe I have omitted neither time |
nor place.. Fobférve that the fubject ought to be:
examin’d in two Refpects ; In refpect of the Devil, :

to find what is his Knowledge and Power ; and in

refpect of Men, to fee what they learn ‘and effect

by his means. But becaufe thefe things are preter-
natural; or are:fo- thought: to be, and that by
confequence they are known only to: God, I have

judg’d it neceflary, to know what are the Opinions :

of Men concerning the Divinity, and Spirits in ge«
neral, either good or bad, and'of‘human Souls fe-
parated from their Bodies by death, ‘which are alfo
Spirits : 1 make a feareh of all thefe things; Firft,

in the Books‘of the Ancients, arid afterwards in the |
Moderns of all Religions, and amongft all Nations,
diftinguifhing them into Pagans, Fews, Mahometans!

and Chriftians, in reference to the prefent ftate of

the World.. I begin with the Ancient Pagans, which |

are for che moft part Greeks or Romans, known to
us by. Greek and Latin Books they have left us:
which I treat of in the 2d, 3d; and' 4th Chapters 5
for there are very few Hiftories of other Countries
and other People, which are-come to our know-

ledge. There you fee what they believe touching:

Gods,-and Spirits, which are neither Gods nor hu-

matt}

an |
death
fo att
| yond
| Spin
alien
| Peur
| Chap
| then
| Amer
À how
{gens
Lot
late
the G
LA
| hic
4 ther
Re

2] Auth

| Med
À alo
| and
| Kron
the(e
Giang
the e
EUR

ji Ti
A te]
| then

An Abridgement of the whole Work.
x Wtnan, Souls 3 and as to the eftate of the Souls after
ot | death : You read there alfo what means they uled
n: (tO attain that knowledge, and 16 operate things be-
yond the power’ of-Nature, by the means of thofe
a Spirits, fuch as they believe them to be. J come
st | atterwards down to our time, and examine all the
| Pagans in the World ; firft in-Earope, in the 6th,
| Chapter 3 afier in Afias in the 7thand 8th Chapters3
| then in: Africa; in the gth Chapter and ar laft in
America; in the toth Chapter 5. which gives me occa-
| fiom to demonftratein the 11th’ Chapier,that the Pa- -
i:gans as well Ancientias Modern, have had a noti-
j on of che Divinity, that is all powerful, but that
{| they have aflociated to him, inferior Gods. That
| the Greeks have often called them. Demons,and like-
4, wile Gods, ds moft of. the Pagans: do at this Day 3
) which Demons, or inferior Gods, have every one
)) their fhare inthe Adminiftration of ‘the Univerfe,
directing the affairs of Men under the name and
{Authority of the Saveraign God, and being as
.  Mediatorsbetween him and Men : They. converfe
| | alfo wirhthele laft, who can, by their means, know
oy and effect things above the power of Nature. This
‘til ‘knowledge gives fome the name of Diviners, and
ith thefe Operations caufe others to be. called Magi-

nthe

sg 24 the caule-of, are axtributed to thefe Demons or
Mal inferior Gods,

| The Souls of the Dead ate allo ranked amongft
i), the Demons, and according as they have behay'd
themielves well or iH‘upon Earth, the good or evil
M which happens to Men, is attributed to one or the
A other. - Itisthat which has given occafion to diftin=
| guifh the inferior Gods, into good and bad.

HN «After the Pagans;which know neither the true God
nor Religion; J treat of thofe which have the Holy
if Scripture

tu)

G
à

‘An Abridgment of the whole Work.
Scripture among them, of whom the firft are the | il
Jews, having known God a long time before all the | tit!
others, and received. his Word'in the writings of | Der
the Old Teftament, where they have learned, that | th
in-truth the Souls of Men are immortal, but that 1. |
there are no Demons, or inferior Gods, {uch as the the:
Pagans fancy. That God alone by himfelf rules | Mim
the Univerfe, and that none can have know- | ii
ledge or produce effects beyond the ftrength of na- | et

ture, for that belongs to God only. I obferve far- | lu

ther, that Judaifm in the {tate into. which it is in- | ee
fenfibly fallen, fince the coming of Chrift, and as | dg
it is at this Day, is very much mixed with Paga-| Ch
nifm. or at Jeaft very much infected. with it 5 | all
whence proceeds the practices of _Divinations and | site
Sorcery, that are in fafhion amongft the Jews,Chap- | ‘ten
ter the 13th. |
After that I reprefent, that the Mahometans who | th
acknowledge but one God, and created Angels | Yo
good and bad, and the Devil as chief of them. } gb,
That the Mahometans, I:fay, who have admitted | {or
che Books of the New Teftament, and reverence Je-} it
fas Chrift as a great Prophet, have neverthelefs} ()
mixed in all their Opinions, a great many of thofe} in
of the Pagans, which they have for the moft part} aj
received, and that they are no lefs inclined to Dir} th
vinations and Witchcraft, Chapter the 14th. | ne
After the Jews and the Mahometans, who keep} x
à kind of mean between the Pagans and the Chrifti-| |
ans ; Ipafs to thefe laft, and diftinguifh them ac-| th;
cording to the time, before. Popery, under Popery,l by)
and fince Popery. By this means I fhow, that the} 0
primitive Chriftians fince the Apoftles, have infen-f ke
fibly introduced amongit them, many Opinions off tm
Paganifin and Judailin, which have been increafing § ty
under Popery. till they attained to. the heigheft} qs
“pitch, and that they hac a {cribed to the Angels, theg r,
oulsh

An Abridement of the whole Work.

Souls of the deceafed, efpecially to the Devil, all
‘the Miracles which the Pagans attributed to the
Demons, the Devils, and inferior Gods, Chapter
the 15th to the 21.

In the mean while, I take notice, that among
the Ancient Chriftians, there arofe a Sect called the
Manichees, which had admitted in particular a great
many Pagan Opinions, and made the Devil almoft
equal to God. And I fhow, thar their Opinions
have infenfibly been propagated, in Chriftianiry,
even to our times; after that I cometo thefe laft
| Ages, and to the Doctrines of the  Proteftant
Churches, among which I rank all thofe that are
call’d The Reformed, that is, all thofe that are fepa-
| rated from Popery ; upon which I remark, that the
| taore We are remote from Paganifm, either’ for
time or place, there’s the lefs credit given to all
thofe things which refpect the Devil and his
Power. Neverthelefs I fhow, thar part of our Peo-

hem, ple, not having comprehended enough, what are the

| foundations of the Proteftant DoGtine, nor in what
| it differs from Popery, are taken with the common
| Opinion of Devils, to whom as well asto Men, that
have Communication with him, they attribute more
_ eafily fo many marvelous effects, and fo much above
the power of nature, then others do, who have
more meditated and reflected upon thofe Doctrines
and variations. Chap’er the 22th and 23.
Laftly having compared all thefe Opinions toge-
| ther, 1 conclude that the common Opinion which
has been in requeft amongft us to this day, had it’s
Original from Paganifm, not that the meer ule of
Reafon fhoùld produce fuch thoughts, but on the
| contrary, the ill ufe that ig made of it. It is be-

aig, caufe we fuffer our felvesto be feduced, ‘and blind-

ed by a faife appearance of Piety, without having
| recour{e to the light of the Scripture, that we fall

into

nt - . sn ee ne Mig .— * Z x -
er LE 28,5 Se En SVP LIT, ¥ - “i z

PREFACE.
‘fall into fuch Extravagancies, with which we are

pleafed, and love to continue in them. I prove that
thefe are thoughts that never were infpired to the

‘Chriftians by the Holy Scripture, by reafon that |

thofe who read it lefs, and underftand it lefs, give
‘more Credit to thefe fort of things, and becaufe all
the World is already prevented before they read it,
and meditate upon it. | i

For by thefe Reafons I endeavour to bring the
Reader to confider, whether the. Scripture gives oc-
cafion to believe all thofe things that are ordinarily

faid upon that fubje@, or to believe them fo as they |

are faid; or whether fuch Sentiments have not taken
root in us from our tender Youth, and been con-
firmed by Cuftom. At beft, I have a very ftrong
prefumption for that Reafoning, that when we be-
lieve before-hand, that fuch a thing is, there is a
great difpofition to turn our Reafon, and the. Ex-
-preffions of the Scriprure to that fide, and to be=
lieve that the inclination we have of it comes from
Reafon, and even the Holy Writ leading us thither-
to. Moreover, we receive the firft Interpretations,
and the Commentaries upon the Scripture, from the
hands of thofe antient Doctors, touching which I
prove, Chap. 15. that they have been all prejudiced;
fome more, others lefs, in favour of many Pagan

Doctrines and Opinions, which have unawares given 4

occafion to that Senfe in which the Scripture has
been expounded by them. ‘Thefe are the Contents
of the 24th Chapters, and the conclufion of the firft
Book.

An liluftration upou the three laft Books in general.
It feems to me that for all thefe Reafons it is ex

fie to conceive, that this firft patc of my Treatife is
not fo unprofitable as fome imagine. They will

that’ §

Body with all its Members.

An Abridement of the whole Work.

gatd be had only to the fecond Book, and
ati fhouid not be infifted upon, becaufe it
nfiits but in Hfftorical rarrations, which con-
clude nothing. But as far as I am capable to give
a reaion {or the ftructure of my own building ; I
fay the Second Book is founded upon the Firft, ac-
cording to the proofs J am perfwaded I have law-
fully drawn by good confequences, Chapter 14. For
if it. were otherwife, I had reafon to be furprized ;
that of fo many,who exclaim againft mySecond Book,
paffing my Firft, none has taken notice of my error
in this point, and declared it to me, very few ha-
ving done fo much as reflected upon it. But in vain
they attack the Second, if they admit. the Firft.
They in no wife fee the end I aim ar, nor the or-
der I have followed, as ought to be done, in an
exact fearch after the Truth. - But they undertake
to confure my Second Book, becaufe it offers a lar-
ger field to their cenfures, by different things ex-
pounded in an oppofite Senfe to that of the literal;
like rhofe ignorant Difputants, who let flip the an-
tecedent Propofitions, and deny the confequence that
is neceffarily drawn from it. Ihave reafon to
complain for paffing an over-hafty. judgment upon
the halfe of my Work, without ftaying till it ap-
peared intire, and they have feen the following
Part, and the Connexion 3 no circumftance of time
required that precipitation, for I had nor loft a mo-
ment to publifh the two laft Parts, had they not
hinder’d it by the difturbances they-have given me.
I believe not that the whole extent of a project, or
its œconomy, may be perfectly feen, while ’tis but
halfe done. So”ris but at prefent that fome judge-
ment may be pait upon this work, fince it begins
but now to appear altogether, and to be a perfect

The

An Abridgment of the whole Work.
The Second Book and the Third, confift in the
fearch after Truth, and what of certainty may be
had, as to the Sentiments that have been up-
on this fubject of Spirits, and Men who have
communication with them, that is, with evil Spirts.
T examine in the Second Book, what concerns Spi-
rits; and in the Third, what concerns thefe wicked
People, who feek to deal with them, according
ro the divifion that I have propofed in the begin-
ning of the Firft Book, Chap. -1. Sett. 8. As to
the Fourth, I fhall fay hereafter, what connection
it has with the former, and its ufefulneds.
Touching the method I take, tomake, by de-
grees and in order, this Search after Truth 3 1f what-
ever I have written upon this fubject, be attentive-
ly confider’d, you will undoubtedly know the in=
juftice of thofe who impute to me, that I offer

chiefly new Propofitions of my own head ; that 14
take the greateft trouble imaginable to wreft the |} i

Scripture, and my reafonings to accommodate
them toit; or that I-make ufe of Reafonas of a Rule

with which I would meafure Scripture, and adapt }

it_to the fame. On the contrary, it is impoflible
not to fee, that I never had as yet the leaft thought

of building upon fuch a foundation; but that. I)

have run through all the World, and all times, to
difcover where Men. may have found the founda-
tions of thefe Opinions, which I have. undertaken
to find out. For when one has attaind to that
knowledge, he is in a condition to judge folidly,
whether thofe Opinions or Practices are grounded
upos good or bad Reafons. I declare then, that

I have not examined all the divers Opinions of the fj ny,

Pagans, Yews, Mahcmetans and Chrifiians, as well |

Ancient as Modern, nor their Doctrines and Practi-

ces,with an intent to give explanations of them, nor |
to main ain them, or confute them, but only tolil

confider

we |
act

, Not .
y 1

(lot

Wis

Li
M

An Abridgement of the whole Work.

-confider them in themfelves, and to expofe them as

they are, without making any Judgment, or pro-
ducing any proofs to fupport or deftroy them;
which is ‘an extraordinary labour that none would
ever undertake, unlefs carry’d by the defire of truth.
So far I lay no foundation. I that am a Chriftian
and a Proteftant, and have no defire to become ei-
ther Papift, Jew, or Pagan. If T found nothing fo-

id in the fearch 1. make, I confent that they conti-

nue to fay and believe concerning Spirits-in gene-
ral, and Devils in particular, all that is wont to be
faid, and all that can be imagined.

But altho’, I have not as yet found the botrom I
feek, and thar neither Popery, Judaifm, nor Paga-
nifm confidered in themfelves, having there withal
to furnifh me, I have notwithftanding a folid foun-
dation, which is common to me with thofe People:
And I have further another particular, which I have

i} incommon but with part of them: The firft is rea-

fon, which is the Hght of all men in general,when
itis found pure in them, and neither perplexed, nor
obfcured by prejudices or paffions. The other foun-
dation upon which I reft, is, the Scripture infpire-
ed by God, which is equally pure in it felf; And
and to the reading of which we ought alfo to ap-
ply our felves, as if one had never. read them 5 that
is to fay, with an entire difingagement of all hu-
mane prejudices; and from thofe.that may proceed

from the verfions of the Hebrew and the Greek,
jh which are the original languages in which it has
M been. written ; he muft meditate upon it, without a-
| ny regard to the interpretation which havé been

made by all forts of Doctors, either Ancient of
Modern.

Lhele two foundations are not Subordinate one
to the other, but fubfift ecually together. Pz/o the
Jew, loving very much to search allegorical Senf.s

Gr ja

‘ere a SON OR

nn EL NCIS

An Abridgment of the whole Work.

in Scripture, and not approving what St. Paul wrote
upon the fubject cf Sarah and Agar, Galatians, Ch.
4. v. 2. has been the firft that has applied to
the Scripture. and to reafon the diftintion of Mi-
ftrefs and Servant; faying, that you muft thereby
underftand, that Philofophy and humane underftand-
ing ought to be fabmitred to the holy writ. This
application is become fo familiar to Divinés, that
it has been received as an undeniable maxime, fince
Philo took a fancy to propofe it.

It is however a truth, that reafon ought to pre-
cede Scripture, becaufe the latter prefuppofes the
former; 1 underftand found reafon, to which the
Scripture‘ought to prefent it felf, and make it felf
known as divine ; after that, Reafon comes to the
help of Scripture, teaching us things wherein Scrip-
ture is filent, and the Scripture likewife ‘comes to
afiit reafon, difcovering to us things which are a-
bove it, and above the reach of our underftanding.
We muft neverthelefs confefs, that the Scripture is
above reafon, notas miftrefs, for they have every
one their particular Empire and Direétion: But as
being more noble and excellent ; becaufe it is in this
God manifefts to us, things which no humane un-
derftanding ever could comprehend,1 Corinthians 2.9.
notwithftanding it happens fometimes that they meet
both in the fame way, where they lodge together
in the fame houfe, and by confequence they often
end one another the helping hand, but rhey doit

freely, althé “with this difference, that reafon as an,

inferi our, alwayes fhows a great refpect for
the Holy writ. When therefore ‘tis faid a Chriitian
ought to fubimit his underftanding to the word of
God ; it muft be underftood,. the underftanding
fuch as it is inthe Eftate ef corruption, obfcure by
the Clouds that furround it, and infected by the
ftains that difägure it. And fuch it is in refpect of

things

te

OO

rt +A Se ar mn

—

Se ee ee

An Abridgment of the whole Work.

things which are above our reach, which are only
manifefted to us in the word of God ; and which
we are obliged to believe as Scriprure difcovers
them, althô we comprehend them not. But it does
not follow from thence, that we ought to believe
thofe things, {uch as men teach us by their expofiti-
ons, or even by their tranflations, without a great
certainty that they are faithful. So then the word of
God confidered as itis originally ,andin it felf,and pro-
ceeding from God without any refpect to the inter-
pretations that have been made by men; and rear
fon not fuch as is born with us, and when it is per-
plex'd with prejudices, and blinded with pañions,
but reafon purified by the fame Spirit which has in-
fpired the Scriptures ; the Scripture I fay and rea-
fon, are the two only lawful and true grounds of
the knowledge we can acquire, as well in things
Natural as Spiritual.

But there is yet another diftinction tobe made
upon this Subject, that is, that reafon js the ground
and rule of our knowledge in natural things, fince
the Holy writ never treats of them purpofely to
inftruct us, and difcover them to us, and that it
fpeaks of them -only as of fubjects; the nature
of whichis known to us as much as is neceffa-
ry to make a good ufe of them, as well in civil mat-
ters as in Spiritual. In what concerns our Salvation,
the word of God is the only ground of our Faith,
and the rule of our Life without being in the pow-
er of our reafon, to add, to take from, or to change
any thing in it, thd it ought to be employed on this
occafion, in two manners; the firft isto try the
Scriptures that are faid to be divine, in making ufe
of the knowledge that Men have naturally of God,
to know whether the Scriptures prefent to them,
fuchCharacters of truth as are agreeable to that no-
~ tion, The fecond.is, to comprehend by the fenfe.

C3 of:

/#°

‘An Abridgement of the whole Work.

of the word contained inthem, the doctrines there
propofed for our Salvatiou.

Further we muft be perfuaded, that Scripture
and Reafon dre mutually helping, to one another, in
{uch matters as are of their Jurifdiction; for if the
Scripture {peaks not fometimes naturally of things
naural; Neverthelefs as it never propofes any thing
falfe, tisthe part of reafon to inftructus, after what
iv anner theHolywrit muftbe underftood in thefe pla-
ces, according as the matter required 5 as P/alm 19.
rouching the defcription of the courfe of the Sun, and
in many other like places. Or if there be any thing in
mature,that our proper experiencehas not fufficiently
difcover’d to us to paf a fafe Judgment,and that we
obliged to rely upon the Credit of others, who
erhapsare not much more knowing than ourfelves :
Scripture may alfo in this occafion afford us
{ome light; As’in what is faid of the Rain, In the
Evening and the Morning in Fudea, Feremiah 6. 24,
the little rain that falls in chat Country in the time
of Harveft, and the few ftorms that are feen there,
2 Sam. 12. 17. of the violence of the Eaft wind
upon the coaft of Afia and Paleftine'in the Medite-
tanean Sea, P/alm 48.8. and the like. But that
which is moft confiderable is, that the Scripture it
felf inftructs us of fome certain natural things, to
whichthe reach of reafon fhould never attain, they
are fo much above it. Such is the beginning of the
World, efpecially that of Man, by the immediate
creation of God out of nothing. And fuch is the o-
riginal of the darknefsand corruption in which rea-
fon and underftanding is plunged, as they may per-
ceive by the help of fuch found and pure remained
Fight, as is in them.

Thefe are the general Principles I prefuppofe,
which [ believe to be fuch, that there is no Body, in
what particular Senfe he may be, that will conteft
them

TU
ine

An Abridement of the whole Work.

them. Upon which I come to examine what is true
in all the relations I have faithfully made in my firft
Book, and which are the Sentiments, or the ordi-
nary Difcourfes of all Men upon that fubject. But
it is manifeft, that I have nor made to my felf any
| particular Principles ; and much lefs put Reafon and
| Philofophy above Scripture : Even the contrary will
be feen as clear as the Noon-Day, if you take the
trouble to read my Writings with atrention, and

_} without Prejudice : For I obferve as to this refpect,

| as well as in reference to Comets, (in which
| Treatife I have followed the fame order, of which
Jam amafed it has not been perceived) the Que-
| ftion ought to be difcufs’d of one fide with relation
| to Nature, and on the other with reference to Ho-
ly Writ ; and therefore I begin with Reafon,which
Gs inferiour to the two others, to fearch ‘into Na-
| ture as in the loweft School, what it teaches moft
| pure touching God and Spirits, and particularly the
| Devil. For fince the Pagans have prefumed'to fay
fo.many things of the Demons, thar they had not
learned of the Scripture, of which they had no know-
ledge, it feems to me that I am not in the wreng
to examine what there was that was grounded up-
on Reafon ; and of what Opinions it feems to be the
principle, or what are thofe that are derived from
another fourfe. But as what I could difcover by
the deepeft and moft exact fearch I could make in
that loweft School, is yet but inconfiderable 5  af-
cend a degree higher, where I find a Miftrefs f-

periour to this firft, that is; the Scripture, that 1
begin to confult in the 8th Chapter of the fecond.
part. Now 4s in the feven firft Chapters, where À

| walkas in Nature alone, I’ lay afide Scripture to
| try how far human Underftanding may attain by
| its own ftrength; fa I leave reafon behind, as foon
| C4

FS-

yb. An Abridgment to the whole Work.

as I enter into the Sanétuary of the Word of God,
whofe Oracles are infallible.

What I fay here, that I have no longer recourfe
to Reafon ; I underftand it in this Senfe, that I take
ir not as a foundation, or as a rule by which I may
expound the Scriprure ; But I exclude it not as a
means, by which I acquire the underftanding of the
Scripture ; for on the contrary I cannot want it in
this refpedt, were it not for my Reafonand Under-
ftanding in relation to God, I fhould be in the fame
ank with Beafts; but itis not to Beafts that God
fpeaks, but to Men, that is, to rational Creatures.
Keafon may act alone without Scripture, in things
that are of its Jurifdiétion, for Arts and Sciences are
the objects of Reafon: From thence they proceed,
and thereby they are learned,that is, Man ufes his own
light for that purpofe, without having recourfe to
the inftructions of the Word of God,and without hav-
ing occafon for them. But for the things of an higher
Nature, which concern the Will of God, with rela-
zion tothe Salvation of Man,the Scripture is the true
principle and folid foundation upon which our truft
is founded ; although Reafon ought to concur with
ut, to underftand ‘and comprehend under the dire-
cticn of the Spirit of God, the Senfe of the Scrip-
ture. Soin this fecond examination of the fecond
part, where the certainty of the knowledge which
proceeds from Scripture alone ‘is treated of, I am
neverthelefs obliged to employ my Reafon, to the
end it may ferve me to examine what Scripture
contains ; not that it may reach fo far as to.compre-
bend the things themfelves ; burit ought neverthelefs
to comprehend what the Scripture it felf fays, and
that things are fuch as it fays, although I conceive
them nor {uch as they are, 4

But

An Abridement of the whole Work. +7.
But fee here the knot of the difficulty, that is.
that every one crys out, that the Scripture fays fuch
or fuch things, becaufe he conceives that the Scrip-
ture fays them, and when the Scripture may be un-
derftood two ways, we eafily embrace the Senfe
which beft fuites our Notions. If already, without
too much examination, we have fuffer’d our felves
to be prejudiced with Opinions, of which we would
however be better fatisfied, and find fome more par-
ticular inftruction in the Scripture; It is not foughe
with that impartiality and liberty of Mind which
are neceflary ; but we ftill incline towards the pre-
judices. If there is the leaft appearance that we
may,by wrefting the Scripture, adapr it to the Senfe:
we would have it, we never fail ro do all our En-
deavours in order thereto, and afterwards imagine
to have found there fufficient proofs in favour of our
Opinion, becaufe it feems to fay what we defire :
As we fee two Counfellors explain the fame Law,
each for the advantage of his Client ; and that they
never want Reafons on both fides to confute the
contrary Arguments; fo that they appear each to
have the right on his fide ; and that it is very diffi-
cult to extricate what they have fo much perplexed.
But itis faid, that I my felf do what Icondemn
in others; and for me, I maintain that thofe, who
are confcious of their guilt and worthy of cenfure,
caft that imputation upon me, feeing me explain fo
many paflages in another Senfe than that with which-
they are prevented, without any other Reafon thar:
becaufe it is ordinarily received. They are per~
fuaced that this change proceeds in me from the
fame caufe that I difcover in them, See the true:
caule that makes them fay I wreit the Scripture ;
M, not that [ really wreft it, bur rather thar Ikeep'not
as a Slave to their Interpretations. Bur I make,,
fay they, a falfe Suppofition, and after I endeavour
| | oes to

But i

LC SS SLT

Sata wer 2 mare

jar ‘An Abridgement of the whole Work.

to give to the Scripture a Senfe which agrees to

that Suppofition ; That may be, but to know what
iris, you muft examine afrer what manner I make
zhe expofition of the Scripture ; and whether I curn
ie towards my prejudices; and therefore "tis necef-
fary that L explain a little more clearly every one of
the Articles E treat of.

The Principle, they fay, I fuppofe is, that.a Spi-
git cannot at upon a Body, nor upon other imma-
aerial Spirits, That's the burthen of the Song, and
what they make me fay over and over every
where, and is fo confidently publifhed, that even
my Friends can {carce forbear crediting 1t 5 as there
coine every day occafions, which make me know it.
Iv is a prejudice that pañles from hand to hand from
one party to another : Ft infenfibly f preads it felf in
aif the Minds; and in that Difpofition the reading of

sy Book is undertaken: but they feldom read it en-

tire, from one end to the other, as it would be but
juft and neceffary to do ; they only read fome fepa-
rate places, viz. thofe they are referr’d to, and ef-
pecially thofe in which I difpute upon the Operati-
‘ons. of Spirits: For I may boldly fay, that of thofe
that have read my Book with attention, I find bus
very few which hold the fame Difcourfes: On the
contrary, they take quite another party, viz: that of
Ysuth. So that I defie alf thofe that have read it,

to mark fo much as one place where I put as-a Prin- |

ciple of my Opinion touching the Devil, That a Spi~

vit cannot at either upon a Body, or another Spirit.

What isthen the foundation of this noile, which is
fo ftrongly and fo generally, fpread abroad; and
which is the caufe of the great profecution that 1s
made againft me? It is this general prejudice which
proceeds fromthe common Expofitioh of the paflages
of Scripture upon this; that is, That a Spirit, a à
Spirit, and fo-much the more us it hr a Spirit, can

wat bows

À per

inch

| tate
À der
tor
À ther
J and

| Ther

Ah Abridgement of the whole Work: AG:

without Body att upon all forts of Bodies, and-upin
other Spirits. 1 require proofs of this Thefis ; and be-
caufe this demand is unthought of and extraordinary,
and upon which by confequence every one is not-
prepared, my demand is taken for a Negative. Bur’
before I lay my felf that foundation, which ordi=
narily is not call’d in Queftion, I examine firft the
Grounds upon which thefe People themfelves reft:
their Opinion, or upon what they ought to eftablith-
it, according to the Idea they have of Spirits: I fay,
according to the Idea they have of Spirits ; for,whe--
|. ther according to the Principles of. Defcartes, they:
diftinguifh them from Bodies the mote neatly then:
| other Philofophers do, or that they grofly attribute’
| fomething corporeal to them. Thefe two Idea’s*
| neverthelefs proceed as yet equally, from that they
| conceive the Operations of Spirits upon external
| Objects, whether Bodies, or other Spirits, as a pro="
| perty of the Spiritual Nature ; and from that they:
| include them in the notion they have of that. Na--
. | ture: and it is by this means, that inftead of confi-
| dering the Body as an inftrument which is neceflary:
| tothe Operation of Spirits, or at leaft preper to »
| them, they look upon it as an obftacle to theliberty.
| and virtue of the Operations of a Spiritual Nature, .
| Thence comes that every Body crys-our fo. diffe-
| rently againft me, fome faying; that Defcartes’s .
… À Philofophy has fpoiled me, and: that is the fruic:
| which is reaped by his Followers, defiring to: caf :
| upon it the Errors that they accufemeof : Others:
. } who being in the fame prejudice, yet are Cartefians
{at bottom, give out, that I underftand not-the Phi-
| lofophy of Defcartes: But wharever my Learning >
jand Experience be, I intend to bave to do.bæ:
p with fenfible People, and leave the others at fuit
liberty to pafs upon the Doctrine Iteach, fuch Judg= -
ments as they pleafe. |

x

dir

method I have taken. I begin with the diftinction
æfnames, in fixing at firft, what mutt be under-
ood by a Body, and a Spirit, to avoid all equivo-
gations: which I have done in the firft Chapter. 1
{peak of God in the Second, proveing not only,
that the fupream Being which I denote by that
word, is only one, but alfo that there is not the leaft
communion between it and created things; di
zeGtly confuting the Opinion of Spinofa, upon this
abject ; which I pretend to do with more force |
and evidence than any hitherto, becaufe ordinarily |
whey “undertakewro demonftrate by the moft per- |
$e and incomprehenfible Effence of God, theman- |

An Abridement of the whole Work.

An Abridgment of the Second Book.

‘As to what concerns my Second Book fee the

nerand virtue of the Operations of created Spirits, |
which I abfolutely reject, as a way which is ufed |
zo. lead us into error. By confequence I cannot ad- |
mit the arguments which are taken from the nature |
ef God, to demonftrate in what manner acts a |
Spirit which is his creature, and has nothing com}
mon. with him, but the name. After, in the Third |
Œhapter, I prove by arguments drawn from the |
fovereign perfection of God, .that there are none of |
ahofe forts. of Spirits, that the Pagans efteem to be |
Gods and Mediators of Men towards the fupream |
Divinity ; becaufe the Reafons of thofe that ground |
that belief upon the perfection of God, are directly }
eppofite to this pertectton.
We then having taken off the imaginary. Spirits, |

# come to thofe which we certainly know to exifts|
eharis, our Souls that are a part of our felves, and}
which by confequence, are berrer known to us by:
+ QU |

An Abridgment of the whole Work:

our own experience ; this is treated of in the fourth
Chapter, where I preve as much as is poffible their
immortality, and that they fubfift even out of the
body : I employ for this purpofe, Reafon and Scrip-
ture, becaufe they are two ways, that equally con-
duct us to the knowledge of the Soul ; the firft by
experience and by our own Confcioufnefs ; and
the fecond by the particular inftructions God gives -
us of the eftate of the Soul, after this life: but I
quote not the Scripture in this part of my Treatife,
where I examine but what concerns nature only.
Neither do I judge it neceflary to doit afterwards,
becaufe it is a point that a Chriftian looks upon;
as already {ufficiently eftablifhed ; and fuppofes it
when he will engage in a difpute upon this {ubject,
_Befides, I reject as fuperftitions and fables, whatever,
proceeds from the invention of Men, efpecially of
the Heathens,which is the matter of the fifthChapter.
So we come to know with certainty, that {uch a
Spirit, that is the Soul which truly exifts, has a bo-
dy with which it lives, and without which it may
{till live, and to reject all the other Spirits, of whom
the greateft part of the World falfly believe the ex-
iftence. But befides thofe Pagan Opinions, we hear
every day mention made of Angels, not only by
Chriftians, but alfo by Jews and Mahometans. The
Queftion is, Whether Reafon alone is capable to dif-
cover to us, that there are fuch Spirits, deftitute of
a proper and peculiar body? Upon this point Î
fhew inthe fixth Chapter, that our underftanding
without the help of Scripture, cannot penetrate: far-
ther, than to comprehend, thar it is poffible,
bur not certain, that there are Spirits. For this
Reafon, I have not judg’d it neceflary, to examine
the Operations. of thefe Spirits upon bodies, or up-
on the other Spirits; becaufe it feems to me ridiculous
to trouble ques. felf with the examination of the

©Qperations:

: ca

An Abridgement of the whole Work. +

Operations of Creatures, the exiftence of which
is not eftablifhed, as certain. And therefore I have
fpoken in the firft Edition, but by the way in verle,
which is at prefent, the feventh Sect. of the fixth
Chapter.And therefore it is manifeft how wrongfully

many People would perfwade themfelves, that I

have compofed my work. only, To deny the Opera-
tions of Spirits upon bodies, and upon. other Spirits.
And befides, that I ground upon this negative,
all my explications of the paflages of Scripture ;
but that I may avoid this perfecution for the future,
I thought fit to infert in the new Edition that is
made of my Book, a whole Chapter between the
fixth and feventh, fo that rhis new Chapter is at pre-
fent the feventh, and the feventh is the eight,
and fo of the others following. There I pretend
clearly to fhew, that the proofs related upon that
fubject, ftrike not‘at all to the end, and. cannot be
confidered as true proofs; which I mean as to what
concerns nature; and as to what. Human Reafon
may conceive of it felf, as deftitute of help from
the word of God.

After that I come to the word of God, and then
I employ Reafon no more,but keep to the Scripture
only,and Ifearch in it,whar it will teach me, touching
Spirits, which is now the queftion; there I find that un-
der the name of Angels,ir gives us to underftand,fuch
Spirits as are the Minifters of God, toward other
Creatures. But there is nothing difeovered to us,
touching their Effence 5 neither 1s their any thing
in the Hiftory of the Creation, as to their Ori-
ginal, or the manner of their fall; for which Rea-
fun, partof them was from the beginning. rejected
from God ; notwithftanding, the Scripture. puts
thefe two things for certain, which is the {ubject of
the eight and ninth Chapters.

I confider afterwards the properties and-Opera=
tions that ‘the Scripture attributes.to. them, and I en-
deavour

An Abridgemem of the whole Work.

deavour to know, what is their proper nature, their
power upon other Creatures, either fpiritual or cor-
poreal. But the paffages that {peak of thefe things
do not appear to me to have been underftood other-
wife; than thofe that attribute alfo to certain Men,
that is, to Prophets and Apoftles, the works that
they have done in difpenfing the miracles of God.
That which gives me occafion to fay, that as this
difpenfation furpañles the force of thefe to whomit
was entrufted, it cannot make us know what was
their proper nature, whence I take occafion to infer
the fame things touching Angels; this isin the tenth
and eleventh Chapters.

That which could not be difcovered by the means
of. the name, Original, or Operation of thofe
Spirits, I endeavour to learn by the: means of
their orders, of which is made an ample men-
tion, in the twelfth, fifteenth, and nineteenth Chap-
tersof my firft Book. But I draw not any light
from thence, fave that Angels, as well good as bad,
have each their head ; thar the Prince of good An-
gels is called Michael, and that of the bad, named
Diabolus, the Devil ; that is in the two and twenti-
eth Chapter. Spe ad |

Yet I leave it not here; I confider again, that the
Scripture attributes inmany places, fome particular
adminiftration to Angels, I examined to know what
it is, firft as to the good Angels in general, in the
thirteenth Chapter, whom the Scripture often makes
appear, and always for particular revelations to the
faithful, either to work extraordinary miracles, or
execute God’s Judgments upon Men by punifhments,
or by deliverances. But J'conceive not that what is
faid of this: Miniftry, is different from what is re-
lated of that of thofe holy Men, who have been
employed in the works of God and his miraclés,
that they in no wife operated by their own virtues
a. aos by

af

An Alridement of the whole Work.

by confequence I find nothing as yet which may
give me a certain knowledge of the proper Angels,
their power, or their Operations,

Afterwards I come to a more particular exami-
nation of the principle paflages, efpecially of the
manner of fpeaking of thefe three perfons, which
appeared to Abrabam, of the two others that ap-
peared to Lot, Genefis, Chapter the eighteenth and
nineteenth : and in making reflection upon this-Hi-
ftory, and comparing it with other inftructions of
the Holy Scriptures; It feems to me, that I am
in the right to conclude, that thofe Angels, that is
to fay, thofe Meflengers, were Men as they named

themfelves ; not being able in the mean while, to |

determine what muft be underftood by the Angel of
the Face of God, which conducted Ifrael in the
defert, Exod. 23 Chap. and by the Angels, by whom
God gave his Law upon Mount Sinai. I propofe
only my thoughts, and what feems to me may be
underftood by it, bya Cbllation of the paflages of
the Holy writ, which make mention of the man-
ner of that Divine conduct of the Ifraelites, in the
defert, Chap. 15.

I pais farther and examine what is faid in the
Scripture concerning the Angels, with relation to
fome certain Perfons, Nations,and Countries : And
I conclude from thence, that what has ever been
varioufly written upon this fabjeét by particular
Authors, is not founded upon Scripture, becaufe all
the paflages made ufe of to ground thofe Opini-
ons, fpeak but figuratively.

At laft coming to the Devil, and to the reft of
evil Angels, I {ee that this name has been given as
well to ill Men, as to evil Spirits, and even firit to
wicked Men. So I examine in the 17, 18 and 19

Chapters, what may moft conveniently be under- 3

ftood by the Chief of evil Spirits 3. but in making
the

q | re
| lon

{ n4tio
ges
what
‘in th

An Abridgment to the whole Work. 2g.

the examination of all the particular paflages which
are uiually applied to the Devil, I find thar the
name of Satan or Devil, is ufed in fome of thefe
. | paflages, and that of Demon and of. Demonium in
fome others. And that there are feveral denomi-
| nations ordinarily applied to the Devil, which ob-
liges me to double my cares, that I may difcover
l what ought to be underftood by Devil, efpecially
in the Hiftory of the fall of the firftdam, and in
that of the temptation of the fecond. This is the
|} matter of the 20 and the 21ft, Chapters. The other
. | paflages which contain the name of Satan, appear
to me to be different from thefe, of which I trear
lin the 23,24 and 25 Chapters. 1 examine after-
| wards in the 26 to the 30, what are the Demonia,
| and thofe that are called Poffef?. And laftly, in the
| 31ft, Chapter, what muft be underftood in all the
| other paffages, where inftead ofthe. name of Devil,
band of Demons, others quite different are ufed,
{ And therefore as the principal operations attri-
| buted to the Devil in Scripture, confift in the fall of
| the Firft Man, and the affaults he made upon our
| Saviour in the Defart; Thence I take occafion to
examine, Whether thofe Accounts may ferve to
| the Opinion of the power of this evil Spirit, and
} of the power of his operation upon Men? Bur it
| feems to me, that in the narration of Mo/es, touch-
| ing the fall of Man, that happen’d by the difcourfe
' | Of a Serpent, nothing is faid that ought: to carry
”, À me to conclude, that the Devil himfelf can act im-
| mediately upon the Soul and Body of Man. Here I
keep to that difcovery, without going any furcher.
) Thofe that are of another Opinion, find that this
} conclufion is drawn from that Relation, with a full
| evidence, and aske how the fall of Man could hap-
A pen otherwife ; rendring themfelves guilty of the
à fame fault they reproach me with, by pretending
! to

An Abridgment of the whole Work.

to know themfelves, how the thing came to pals, ”

and to be able torender the reafon of it. But he
that judges, ought not to {peak of it {o pofitive-
ly, declaring he knows nothing of it, and finds no-
thing revealed upon that point, he is prefently ac-
cufed of denying the fame thing it felf, and of not
believing the matter of Fact; becaufe he grants he
is not acquainted with the manner of ir. The ce-
lebrared Voetius has however, explained himfelf
upon this fubject very near, as Ido, for in the firft
part of bis Difputes, pag..915. {peaking of the fall of
Man, he fays, upon the Queftion, to know bow, and in
what manner ? it % not poffible to give fo fatufa&ory
an anfwer 3 but it may be feen that there remains flill
fomething which the weaknefs of our underft anding can-
not comprehend, nor likewife how the Devil feduced
Eve.

Examining the temptation of our Lord by the
Devil, Iagree that the Tempter is the evil Spirits
and I believe that the literal Senfe may very well

pafs, fuppofing that it was a wicked Man fo called.

But I thew, that underftanding thefe words of the

evil Spirit, literally ; the quite contrary may be- |

inferr’d from what is ordinarily gather’d from
thence. Thereupon, if I be ask’d how I under-
ftand and explain that narration ? I anfwer, That
I believe that the thing was done in a Vifion. See
how Schultetus fpeaks, who as well as Voerius, has
been a member of the national Synod of Dordrecht:
in his Exercit. Evang. Lib. 11. Chap. 3. the quefti-
on is to know, whether the thing really bappen’'d, or in
a vifion? he anfwers, it was im a vifion, and after

a . ë : |
gives fome reafons, which however I do not judge |

{o {trong as mine. None has right to require from
me, that I fhould precifely explain my felf upon
the pañages of Scripture, and upon others: from
which they fuppofe to draw ftrong proofs in favour
O

of th
quel
give
| of th
| our
del
‘tele

An Abridgement of the whole Work.

| of that Opinion, the truth of which I here call in
| queftion; nor that I fhould declare what fenfe I
give them, efpecially to thofe who mention the fall
* [of the firft Man in Paradife, and the temptation of
out Lord in the Defart. For I have had no other
| defign on this occafion, but to examine whether
| thefe pañlages, urderftood according to the Letter,
* | afford fufficient proof to make us admit the confe-

| quences that are ufually drawn from thence, and
| to eftablifh the common Opinion which is had of
|| the craft-and power of-the Devil to act upon Men.
n | If it were neceflary to proceed farther, and to ex-
} amine all thefe paffages to the bottom, in order to
i! | penetrate their true fenfe, a whole Book {carce fuf-
“| fices. I refufe not however to do it, and hope.to
undertake ir, as foon as the Divine Providence will
| furnifh me with occafion and leifure.
| Tfhew, as to other paflages of the Holy Writ,
; | that they cannot be underftood of evil Spirits, but
| only of ill Men ; and of the works of God, not of
‘fthofe of the Devil; tho without hefitating, thefe
| paffages are ordinarily applyed to the Devil. I
maintain in the 22 Chapter, that it was a Man
which brought David to number the People, Chap.
23. that the paflage, wherein the fight of Michael
againft the Devil,is mention’d, is very obfcure, and
[that there isa great uncertainty in the prefent
Opinions upon that point, as all Divines grant ;
land that by confequence, nothiag can be con-
-I\cluded from them, efpecially if ic be fuppofed, as
m¥fome learned do, that the Devil was but a meer
(Man. I thew in Chap. 24. That the Spirit of Python

ue M that is fpoken of in the 16th Chapter of the ACs of

ithe Apoftles, can no ways be applied to the Devil.
| Neither does the famous Hiftory of Fob, always
jalledged one of the firft, as a proof of his power,
Ibeing well examined in its whole extent, attribute

; to

An Abridgment of the wholeWork.

tohim the leaft part in the evils, which by the | jy
Providence of God, happen’d to that Holy Man. pr
As to the Angel of Satan which tormented Se. Paul, |A
I place him in the fame rank with the fight againft |;
Michael, that is in uncertainty, there being no |}
ground to preteñd to a perfect underitanding of | i, |
this paflage ; and therefore I look upon it as infut- jy
ficient to prove any thing which is the matter of the | 4,
25th Chapter. ite
But as the Poffeft are univerfally alledg'd for a | 4,
certain proof of the great power of the Devil, and |
that we read fo many times in Scripture, that the
evil Spirits have been caft out by our Saviour Fefus |
Chrift, | beftow five Chapters upon examining what-|
is in it. I fee that the term of Déabolus, which |,
we Tranflate Devil, is not found in any of the paf |
fages in which thofe Relations are contained ; bur |
only that of Demon, which I uluftrate in the 26zh |),
Chapter. Inthe 27¢hI thew, that the moft dange=|
rous difeafes, efpecially thofe of the Head, were!
ufually afcribed to Demons, or even call’ d by the;
name of Demons ; and inthe 28¢h, that our Saviour |:
Fefus Chrift, has not changed the ufual way of {peak- |
ing, but made ufe of them according to the cuftom
of “that time 5 neither did he always immediate-|
ly confute all theerrors, in the 29¢h and 30th |
Chapters; fo that the cure of. Demonia, was. not
properly an expulfion of. Devils, but a miraculous
cure of incurable Dileafes. |
I come. after to other paflages. of Scripture, |
where neither the names of Devil, Satan, or Demon|
are made ufe of, but thofe of the Prince of the World,)
Prince of tbe power of the air 5 Prince of this Age, of | D
Lordfhips, Powers, Dominions, and the like; And I] Li
fhew that there is not the leaft caufe to apply them} bn
tothe Devil; but that the Stile of Scripture leads},
us of it felfto underftand by all thefe names a cer-| ‘"
tain order of perfons, _ Having}

An Abridgment of the whole Work.

Having then examined all, I could not conclude,
| that the Scripture, confidered truely and without
| prejudice, attributes tothe Devil this power and
| thefe operations,which the prevention of Commenta-

| tors and Tranflators difcovers in it: I grant it has
| been very troublefom to me to be obliged to take
this party, and to confute and cenfure very famous
| Men and moft approved interpreters : It even feem- -
| ed to me, that I expofed my felf very much becaufe
I know that a more advantageous opinion is had of
thole that are not known, and that a Prophet is
| neither efteemedinhis owntime nor in his ownCoun-
try.For this Reafon I did firft refolve not to meddle
with thofe of Scripture, where I found my felf con-

| ftrain’d to go from the expofitions ordinarily recei-
j ved. But at Jaft, confidering that my work would
{ appear but imperfect, and that they would not fail
Hy} to object thofe famous paflages, to which I fhould
"§ be then obliged to anfwer ; I at laft prevailed with
j my felf to venture in the main Sea, and to fly be-
| fore none that came to attack mes further I do not
| believe that any one can fhew me, that the interpre-

| tations that I make, are founded upon the light of

| reafon and humane underftanding, or upon any o-

| ther particular propofition I fhould have afferted ;

| füuch as this is faid to be, that a Spirit cannot a up-

| on a body, nor upon other Spirits 1 have made ule

of for this effect, but of the ordinary means that

| the knowledge of Languages afford us; fo there
{is no more unjuft accnfation then that which is raif-

ui ed againft me upon this fubject,

} And therefore when [ compare with the analogy

| of thè whole Scripture, with the grounds of our
Divinity, and with the rules of true Piety ; whate-

j ver is ordinarily publifhed concerning the under-
à ftanding of the Devil, his power, his operations, his

À apparitions in divers places in the World, his Domi-

nion

NS |

fall of Man, or {peak of Angels, fome of whom

al

An Abridgement of the whole Work.

nin,’ and the Kingdom which he raifes againft
that of Jefus Chrift; I conclude not only that they
are not grounded upon thefe three principles, but
alfo-being confidered with all the neceflary attenti-
on, they appear contrary to them. In this place |
I begin to enter into difpute, and to draw my con- |
clufion from arguments which the Scripture and
reafon furnifhes me with; having by. the means
heretofore eftablifhed upon thofe two principles,
fearched after the ways how plainly and wirhout
equivocation to underftand the {tate of the queftions
which properly and particularly cocern the Devil. |
Thisis not then the point in queftion, to difpute of
the meaning of thofe paffages which mention the

appeared to Abraham, and others wreftled with Fa-
cob ; or of the tentation of Our Lord Chrift in the
defert ; norof the fenfe of thofe that fay David was
tempted by Satan, and that Fob was tormented by
him, and the like places 5 but the Chief point, the”
{cope of all this fearch, is to know what to believe
concerning the Devil.

Upon this I beftow the five laft Chapters, and in |
the three firft of thefe five,which are the 32th,33th, |
and 34th, I am not afraid of calling Reafon to my
affiftance ; after having fhewn that the Scripture is
filent upon this fubject, for I prefume to have made
appear in the 32th Chapter, that the apparitions of
Evil Spirits are contrary to true Reafon, and that
the Holy Scriprure affords no proofs of it. _After-
wards, in the 33th Chapter, I fhow ,’ that the)
knowledge that the Devil may have, as well of
things Natural as Civil, and above all of things Spi-
ritual, which concern our Salvation, is nothing of:
what is believed. I reft as yet upon the fame)
foundatien of Scripture and Reafon, to prove the |
Empire of the Devil is but a Chimera, and that he Ju

has]

An Abridgement of the whole Work.

has neither fuch a Power, nor fuch an Adminiftra=
tion as is ordinarily afcribed to him, which is con-
tained in the 34th Chaprer. At laft, after having
treated of ll thofe things with all poffible exact-
nefs, I come to the conclufion of my fecond Book,
where I fhew the importance of this examination by
reafon of the great value the yulgar pur upon the
Devil, and his Operations in the World. My Opi-
nion is, that thefe forts of Difcourfes fhake the
Grounds of the Doctrine of our Salvation, and caufe
a great damage to Picty in divers occafions. I de-
| monftrate the firft of thefe things in the 35th
| Chapter, and the fecond in the 36th.

As to the Doctrine, I prove in this place what I
| have afferted in the firft Chapter of my Book, Viz.

«| that the common Opinion concerning the Devil is

tte} Oppofite to the proofs that Febova is God, and chat

À Fefus is the Meffiah, and that the Books of the Pro-
| phets and Apoftles are the Word of God. In whét
| concerns Piety, I fhew, that the Service of God is
ef thereby greatly weakened ; that the Filial fear js

| Devil ; that the efteem that the holy Angels deferve,
if is almoft deftroyed, that the glory and virtue of
y} the miracles of dur Saviour Jefus, are very much
eis) leffened, that the vanity of Man is maintained and

l'increafed ; and that the comfort of the humble is
| cut off, or at leaft, fuffers a great diminution. Thar
| is whatever is contained in my fecond Book.

An Abridgment of the Third Book.

After having thus fimply treated of what con:
i Cerns Spirits; and particularly the Devil, according
to the knowledge that found Reafoa can furnith us
1 ae eS x | ‘ ir]
| With,

D.

sf

Gi.

{ very much diminifhed by that they have of the :

An Abridzment of the whole Work:

with, according to that which may be draw: from
the word of God; whére Reafon ceafes 3 À pate iti
following the order and divifion eftablifhed in «ty
fr Book,) to thofe Men, who, according to the

common fentiment, have communication with Spi-
rits, efpecially with the Devil. The fame order to
which I have kept in my fecond Book, 1s alfo ob-
ferved in this ; for in the eight firft Chapters, 1 make
an exact fcrutiny of ‘all which ‘may contribute to
clear the fubject I treat of, and afterwards in the

feven laft, 1 thew what light the inquiry has afford= |

ed me, and how far one can rely upon what Ihave
difcovered.

I propofe at firft the true ftate of the queftion, |
fhewing that the query is not, Whether Magick is:

poffible, for I grant it; but whether there is a Ma-
gick, which by the virtue of agreement made be-
rween Men and the Devil, may difcover hidden

things, predict thofe that are to come, and produce”
This is difcuft |

effects above the force of nature.

in the firft Chapter.
Following the diftinction that I have already

heretofore many times fer down, I make in the firft’!
and fecond Chapters, the fearch required, and that |
firft by the light of Reafon ; which I divide it into}
two parts: in the firft, I examine, whether it be’

offible to conceive that Men have any commerce:

with Spirits; that the one and the other may rely
upon mutual help, or that they may act one upon

another, In the fecond past, I examine whetherijahy

| Id

there is Reafon to believe, that there may be ex=)i ter

prefs compacts between them ; thar they may MUA tq

tually contract, and reciprocally perform the cons my
I exprefly deny the} den

dirions of their Covenants.

Grft of thefe, founded upon the Reafons alled ged5 le |

Book 2. chap. 2. and 1 unfold a little more.precifel#ilk

inthe 2 Chapter of this, what is contained in the
firft,}

An Abridgement of the whole Work. 33:

firft, which I defend againft the arguments of Glan-
| vil an Englifh Author, I beftow the third Chapter
| upon confuting thofe compacts of the Magicians
with the Devil, as ridiculous and altogether’ incre-
dible ; and ['anfwer at the fame time, feveral ob:
jections and fhifts of Glamvil, convincing him by
his own Reafons that are fufficient for that purpofe.
I pafs afterwards to the Scripture, as to an upper
School; from the 4th Chapter to the 7th, I under-
à take it over from the beginning to the end, to find
| out with the utmoft exactnefs, what it difcovers to
| us upon this point, and upon all it’s dependencies
| either by it's expreffions, or by the examples it af-
nl) fords us. Than I begin to eftablifh what we may
is believe of it according to Scripture.
| Asan Introduction to this examination, I relate
all the names it gives to that fort of People, to their
M trade and art, and I compare the difference to be
ie found between the tranflations of our own Interpre-
cit} ters, as well as between the tranflation of others,
|| This examination is but general, but afterwards
iy A come to particulars, whether the Scripture {peaks
ift}of, that fort of People, of their trade and arts, fo
as it is ordinarily fuppofed. This I do from the
Ififth Chapter to the 12th, but finding it exprefles
mot it felf as they give out, I examine what fort of
sac People they can be, and what the Scripture really
Hays of them, from the 13 Chap. to the 17th.
I difcufs the firft of thefe, as well by Scripture
asl eafon,and proceed by degrees;fearching, firft,whe-
ther thefe of whom the Scriptute fpeaks,have a par-
si@iticular communication with the Devil; whether they
{make their predictions and enchantments by his un-
jdertaking or by his power ; and ar laft whether
they have between them covenants for that purpofe,
lithe paflages of Scripture which I examine upon
; ol, I, d this

34. ‘An Abridgment of the whole Wor k:

this fubject, are of three forts, fome contain Hifto-

ties of that kind of People, and of their Witch-

crafts which I fhow in the sth 6th and 7th Chapters,
viz. In the 5th all the enchantments of the Egypreans 3
in the 6th, thofe of Bil/a, thofe of the- Priefts of
the Philiftins, and of the Witch of Endor, and many
others, by whom the idolatrous Kings of Irae/ fell
into great Sins, efpecially when they came to the
Court of Babylon ; and in the ath Chapter, the
enchantment of Simon and Elimas, who are called
enchantors ; thofe of. the maid fervant which was
sn the Town of Philsppi, who had a Spirit of Pe
thon, and thofe of the (even Brothers Exorcitts. Af-
rerwatds Icome to the examination of the names,
of words, of. actions, and circumftances, as well
by themfelves as comparing the Dutch tranflations
of the Scripture, with thofe which have been made
in divers Languages, by different Tranflators, and by.
comparing with the texts; the explications which
are given by fo many different interpreters. All the
paflages where thofe things are contained, being ex-
amined very attentively, give caufe to conclude,
that the Magicians of Enchanters have been very
mifcheivous People, whofe Doctrine and morals
ere very much corrupted ; but they do ‘not
farnith any probable argument to-affert, that thefe

People had a particular communication with the

Devil. |
The fecond Order of the pañages of the Holy

Writ upon this fubject, confits of thofe that con-
rain the exprefs Laws; which condemn tHar fort, of
People, and forbid them the exercifé of their Fur
tion 3 which I examine in the 8thand 9th Chap-
ters, But I fiad no other Realons for thofe Prohi-
bitions and the punifhments infli@ed upon them,but
their Idolitry and Cheats, both of ‘which-aré Cri-

minal, and not becoming the People of God. %
€

An Abridgment of the whole Work. — 3%-
“ The third Order confifts in thofe Reafonings and
Proverbial Expreffions, difperfed through the whole
Scripture, that have relation to thofe things, either
to the Perfons thémfelves, or to their ways. Texa-
mine therefore whether nothing can be underftood
in thofe places, whence fome conféquence may be
drawn to illuftrate the fubjeét in hand: Bur having
beftowed the whole tenth Chapter upon it, I find
nothing more than before. :
Now as in the third Chapter, I have examined
by the light of Reafon, whether there is caufe to
believe the poffibility of rhe communication of Men
with the Devil by expref Covenants; I do here the
fame by that of the Holy Hit.  Fot in the two
following Chapters I run it over again, and inGft-
ing upon all the paffages, where the leaf mention
is made of Ailiances, or Compacts, that are not
made with God but againft Him, finfully and with
| an evil defign ; I find not fo much as one that {peaks
| of thofe Agreements made with the Devil, cr any
| thing like it, Upon this.I beftow the 11th Chapter.
| Un'the rath I run over again the whole Scripture
from the beginning to the end; From the Covenant
| of God with Abraham, to our Saviour, and examin-
| 108 whether’ from whatever has been faid upon thar
f  fubject, there is any occafion to infer, that the De-
vil may likewife on his part make his deteftable
| Compacts ; I demonftrate, that the Opinion, which
À fuppoñes fuch Contracts between the Devil and Men,
A by vertue of which they are {aid to have perform’d
4 all their Witchcrafts, can by no means confift with
© | what is contained in the Doctrine of the Holy Scrip-
| fare 3 nor with the Difpenfation of God’s Covenanr,
as well before rhe Law as under the Law,and much
_§ If under the Gofpel. ‘ |

a 2 © Tkus

‘An Abridgment of the whole Work.

Thus I plainly fhew, that the vulgar Opinion: of
Magick, and of its Dependencies, by no means pro-
ceed from the Sacred Writings, but on the contrary
is altogether oppofed to it. Afterwards we mutt
confider what'the Scripture fays concerning: thofe
that practife that Art, and what Teftimony it gives
of their Actions. This I do two ways, in the five
following Chapters. The firft by offering, in the
3th and 14th, the lively Picture which the Holy
Writ gives of thofe Men in feveral places ; and the
fecond by fhowing what Opinion muft be had of
them according to the Character given them.

But expounding to the Reader the force of thofe
things, I make yet this diftinction : That I firft of-
fer the Perfons to his view, that he may know what
might be expected from them ; what their aim may
be; why they were interrogated ; and on what the
great Men and the vulgar beftow their time. . Af-
terwards in the 14th Chapter, I confider them in
themfelves, with their Arts and Crafts, fhowing the
Reafons that moved the People, efpecially the
Kings, even thofe of I/rael, to be infatuated oby
them.

Afterwards ‘ris required to know what Judgment
muft be made of them, according to the Holy Writ,
which I fhow in the three following Chapters. : In
the rsth, I affert, that in whatever they did; they

- fhewed neither real Power nor Virtue 3: that. they

knew nothing of what they ventur’d to forerel; or
to difcovér as very much concealed ; and that: in
reality they effected nothing of what they boafted

nf. or of what they undertook to effects bur thar

h-y applied themfelves to deceive by ourward fem-
Jances, wherein confifted the chief. part of their
Arr. Inthe mean while, as the Holy Scriprure

{gerns, by its Expreffions in fome places, ‘to: efcribe

ee, Ge SS ae

An Abridgment of the whole Work.

a great vertue to Conjurations and Enchantments ;
Texamine imthe 16th Chapter, what is the Senfe of
thofe places, and I conclude that after an attentive
Meditation it will not be found thar it fays upon
that fubjet what it appears at firft to fay.

+ All thefe things being’ thus enquired: into, it re-
mains to fhow wherein properly confifts all the Evil ;
why thofe Men with their Arts, efpecially the I/ra-

-elitesthat hada hand in their Crafts, are fo defamed

in the Bible; why, fince that time they have been
in as great hatred amongft Chriftians, who have
mortally detefted them, and punifhed them with the
urmoft rigour; And laftly, for what Reafon the
Laws lave been fo fevere againft them,: and prohi-

‘red al their Arts, as well under the Old Teftament

asunderthe New. This is the Enquiry of the 17th
Chapter. Ihave hitherto fpoken only of thofe who
pretend to a Converfe with the Devil, and to be
in a Covenant with him; I add in this place a
Chapter, which is the 18th, where I mention thofe
to whom he is an Enemy, whofe Mind is fuppofed

=to betroubled, or their Body to be tormented by

him ; thofe are the poffeft, as they are ordinarily
call'd, but I-enlarge not much upon that fubject,
having already fully clear’d it in my fecond Book,
from the 26th Chapter to the 30th, where it came
to pafs. |

Having thus ended the firft part of my third
Book, I fhow what Judgment muft be made ofall
‘thofe things, which I confider in two Refpects.
Firft, 1 eftablith from the 19th ro the 20th Chap-
ter, what may rationally be thought of it; and in
thé Jaft Chapter, I fhow what is the Duty of a
Chriftian; and how he ought to behave himfelf in

~ fuch occafions. |

d 3 A

9. An Abridgment to the whole Work.

A double judgment may be formed upon this fub-
ject. Firft, concluding that the Vulgar Opinion
is altogether groundlefs and condemnable, as.ap-
pears by the 19th, 20th, and 22th Chapters.
Secondly, By eftablifhing what muft be held of
it. if

Concerning that firft and common Opinion; As
in-the Writings made againft my fecond Book, fome
expreflions of our Liturgy have. been objected, I
fhow in the 19th Chapter, how weak are the
Grounds upon which are founded the principal Do-
ctors, whofe Doctrines are in fhort in Voetius 3. and
that the Proofs they alledge are not taken from the
Senfe of the Holy Writ, well examined and fearcht
into ; but only from the external found of Words,
if { may fo fpeak, upon which we are wont to in-
fit, as well as upon the Idea’s that firft offer them-
felves to us, when we confider them but fuperfici-
ally. ‘To which Ladd, that Liturgies muft be un-
derftood in the Senfe of the Scripture from whence
they are-drawn, and to which they relate in all
whofe places, where "tis {poken of the Temptations
and Seductions of the Devil, Spiritual. Combats,
Witchcraft, Predictions, Enchantments, .and even
in all others where the agreeablenefs of Style, and
the Series of Idea’s has caufed fomething to be ad-
ded that feems to have a relation to it. But more-
over, in the 2oth Chapter, I demonftrate, that the
Errors fpread amongft the vulgar concerning. the
Works of the Devil, and his Adherents, :are abfo-
Jurely oppofite to the fame Liturgies ; even fo -far,
that amongft the Doctors of the Reformed:Church,
none but thole that are of my, Opinion can pretend
‘49 conform in this point to what they fubfcribed
when they took Orders ; which I underftand only
as. to.the Doctrine and Truth, J thow again,in the
é 21th

ét TZ Em. SS

En © = =

An Abridement of the whole Work. 39.
21th Chapter, that this Opinion makes very bold
attempts upon Piety 5 that it diminifhes the venera-
tion due to God, ‘thar it extreamlÿ weakens Faith
and Charity, and that it expofes Chriftianity
to the attacks of the Unfaithful, and that it
caufes great diftractions and prophanations in our
Prayers:

“Laftty, I proceed further and to come to 4 con-
clufion; 1 difcover in the-22th Chapter, what mutt
be believed of all thefe things, and in the 23th I
declare what muft be done.. But as in the 32th
Chapter of the 24 Book, I have treated of apparitions
in general, I {peak here of prefages and predictions
in ‘particular, examining what 1s poflible or not,.as
to thefe things, and to what caufes they muft be
afcribed. Thefe caufes, according to the Proofs I
have related in this place, are natural, but the De-
vil meddles not with them: I propofe my thoughts
in the fatne manner upon the Conjuring up-of
Ghofts, the divinations of the pretended Magici-
ans, and all forts of apparitions and poffeffions,
which are faid to be. caufed by their malice, by Vir- ~
rue of the compacts they have contracted with the
Devil ; and laftly I-thow what fort of Magick. is
practicable in the World and which is not.

I declare in the laf? Chapter but one, what opini-
on mutt be had of thofe men that credit Apparations
and ‘Witcherafts ; And ftick not however to converfe
with thofe that meddle with thofe deteftable Arts ;
And in the daft Chapter, what is our Duty, and how

we are obliged to behave our felves in that refpect.
We muft ‘double our devotion and veneration to-
wards God, our moderation and charity towards
our Neighbours, our modefty in our actions, and
our zeal in the exercifes- of Piery. Such are the.

| Contents of the 3d me

A: Ak

in Abridgement of the whole Work.

An Abridrment of the ath Book.

There would be reafon to believe that this fub-
jet is exhaufted ; but. it . feems experience carrys
it above Reafon 5. and being grounded upon matters
of fact and inftances, it feems that it will not fa-
your us: Our Adverfaries-appeal ro its. Tribunal,
and plead theit caufe with fo many ftrong and ag-
gravating reafons, that it feems they defign to over-
whelm us by their multitude, . This confideration
obliges me to add this 4th Book to the 3 preceding,
and to examine what experience actually : teaches,
that it may be no more: objected, that by my new
Dotirine, I undertake to contradict opinions recei-
ved and eftablifhed through all the World; where
almoft no place:is to be found, but it affords plain
inftance of the operations of the Devil; of which

- À dare even deny the poffibility. I diftinguifh there-

fore thofe Inftances into thofe, that any one may-ga-
ther from his own experience, and into. thofe that
are grounded upon the relation of others ; there's

: no doubt but what one has experienc’d himfelf, mutt

prevail over all the reft. But to omit nothing, I
firft how how far one may truft to his own expe-
rience, and afterwards how far we may rely upon
the teftimony of others. I difmifs the firft of thefe
queftions, in the fir? eleven Chapters; and. he
Second in the 21 following, adding two. others-at
the end as aconclufion of the whole.

J diftinguifh again each of thofe parts into two o-
thers; having thought convenient to groundupon
many examples ; the inftructionS and illuftrations
£ give upon both, that no body may eafily be deceiv’d.
What I eftablifh as to the.-firft part. is Hayes
: rom

An Abridgement of the whole Work.
from the beginning of the 5th Chapter, and the ex-
amples are the matter of. the following Chapter to
the rith: But I could not fo exactly follow the-
fame method in the 2d part, haying thought necef-
fary, or at leaft ufeful, in fome places, to mix with
examples the ituftrations I give ac firft, and with
the ‘illuftrations, the inftances I produce afterwards,

I therefore fhow in the firft_part,that there are few
Men amongft us, that are capable of paffing a folid
Judgment upon that fort of things, and thar befides
that our occafions will not allow either to examitie,
ot to fearch into whatever could be neceffary, to at-
tain to a naked and full knowledge of all the mat-
ters: of Fact. I afcribe the firft of thefe faults,. to
the prejudices with which we are imbued; or to-
the terror with which we are furprized, at the
fight and hearing of what pafles. This is the fub-
ject of the firft Chapter: I demonftrate in the 2d,.
that this caufe alfo proceeds, from that we know
riot fufficiently how far the ftrength of nature may
extend its operations: In the 3d Chaprer I afferr,
that we know not more of the things, the Images:

of which nature’may only fhow us, whenthey are

not real, nor we fo far knowing as to obferve all
the tricks of men; nor of fufficient Authority to
obferve all the circumftances of their Actions: ¥ fay
again, we ate not Skilful’ enough ro penetrate the
Force and Virtue of Arts, which encreafé propor- ~~
tionably to the exercife we make of them, and of -*
the care we take"to cultivate them.and make us =
look upon meer natural accidents as effects of Ma:
gick. “Of thefe Thave alledged many proofs in the:
firft. Chapter ; fiewing afterwards: in the §th,that-
often we ‘want: only the occafion to difcover the”
Myfteries of tite Arrifices ofMen, and the fecréts:
of theoperätions of Rent, Brea,

5: ï

hp. Py
sae
bs ~

‘An Abridemeny of the whole Work.

{ begin in the fame 5th Chapter, to produce fome
inftances of Apparitions, In the 64), I fpeak of the
Poffeft and Bewitched, as far as I am acquainted.
with them, and thereupon I detlare in the ath,what
judgment I make of that famous Parot, which was.
thought to be bewitched, comparing that cafe with.
another known to me from tiny own experience.
From thole bewitchings of the Body, I pals to the
Enchantings of the Soul, and mention in the 87)
Chapter, what I have feen my felf happen to many
pertons in feveral places, efpecially at Franeker. In
the 2th I defctibe a very remarkable Hiftory, which.
happen'd inthe fame Town, and which has been
she greareft occafion of exercifing my felf upon this
fabject. To this I joyn the Impofture of the Wit ch-
craft of Campen that has been lately difcover'd, of
which I have been informed,both by word of mouth
and writing, by underftanding Perfons that were
prefent, ant have themfelves laid open the whole
ntreague,having had a full knowledge of the whole

patter, from the beginning to the end. Wherefore
{ have inferted the Narration, word for word, in
the roth Chapter. In the 116b J relate the Cheat of
abe Urfulin, Nuns of Eoudun in France, whofe Hi
ftory having been lately publifhed, manifeftly dif-
covers the deluGions of the pretended Poffeffion, and
writhat, of the Magick, with which’ they. charged

the innotent Prieft Grandier, whom they caufed te-

be burnt:

The illuftrations have made upon the Firft Part,
make the inftructions I am to give upon the Second,
more eafy. Ibeftow 12 Chapters upon them, fil
following the Rules I have before. propofed, which
to my beft knowledge, are univerfaliy approved of;
@z.. Fo admit as Truth, no Advices, Narrations,
per Teftimonies,, how. confidently foever they py
F L ‘ De

we ee ee

An Abridgment of the whole Work.
be told, before we have examined them with.a
full exactnefs, and made experiments upon all tho/e
cafes and inftances, the truth of which is propofed
to usas undeniable. We
That I may, if poffible,. leave no perplexity, 49,
darknefs in my work ; I make yer a. diftinct
upon this laft point. For I propofe in four Chap-
ters, all the Inftances I have been obliged to infert
in feveral places of my Firft Book, to.facilitate the
underftanding of the things contained in it, begin~

ning with thofe that concern the Ancient Heathens:

that are inthe Third Chapter of that Book, and
in. the Thirteenth of this: | ii
_.. Thofe that relate to the Modern Pagans, in the
6th, 8th, 9¢b and 10th Chapters of the. Firk Book,
are contained here in the 14.
drawn from the Fews and Mabometans are the mat-
ter tof the 1544, and thofe that were afforded me

by the Papifts in the 19th, 20th, and 23/?; of the -

Firft Book, are confuted in the 16th of this. :
_ AfterwardsI run over the whole Univerfe; frars
the 17th to. the 324 Chapter, relating and examining
the moft famous examples, and thofe that arc
thought to be the ftrongeft proofs for the commer
Opinion. J alledge firft in general, thofe that are
moft ordinary and familiar, concerning Apparirions

and Magick. Such are the Apparitions of the -Fuzng, -

that were fo much talked of in our Counrry,. as

the. Fairy of Rofemberg, and the-like,-in the 172)
Chapter... In the 18h I {peak of thofe that pretend:
10, be invulnerable to Sword and Mi fquer-Ball, and:
J prove that all rhe Difcourfes and Narrations made”
upon that fubject, are altogether. falfe.

terwards to examine particular Relations And

Firft, of thofe that can have no particular name, or
properly be called Apparitions, Divination, Witch-

. crate

Thofe that I have.

I come af

Se ee

on Ag ge Le A rm Sen ent ve

An Abridgement of the whole Work.

craft, or Poffeffion; becaufe they are made up of
feveral kinds of Witchery, of which Poffeffion ufes
vo be the Principal. This is the matter of the 194
and 20th Chapters. In the 21/7, 1 pafs to Appariti-
@nS ; in the 22 to Divinations; and-afterwards.to:
Witchcraft, from the 24th to the 32 Chapters.

I retate but Three Inftances of the Firft fort.
The Firft, ts the going out of the Children of Ha-
melon im 1284. . The Second, is the Devil Zechariah,
whom Volfcius mentions in his Hiffory of the Churches
ef Sclavonia, which Inftance I expound in the 19¢h
Chapter, as a Specimen of whatever may be invent-
ed or practisd as to this, The Third is, the ftory
which happen'd Twelve years ago at Bolfward, that
was publifhed with very extraordinary circumftan-
ges : } relate it in the 20th Chapter.

i come afterwards.to fuch Cafes as have a parti-
cular Reference to Apparitions and Witchcraft, or
enchantments, if there be any fuch. Of the Firft
kind, I produce the famous Devil of Mafcon.; And
faving taken off the vail from the Cheat, I-deal ‘in
the fame manner with the Spirit of Tedworth, thar
was lately brought again upon the Stage to frighten
me, The Queftion is, Whether they have fucceed-

ed in that Defign ? of which, the Reader thall:be -

able to-judge by the 21ft Chapter. He will like
wife find in the 22, afull defcription of the Phan-

rafnr that appeared'a year ago at St. Aueberg 3 and: -
F Fe) ,

of another Story which happen’d: the [aft Summer
at Laszanne, contained ina Letter, written with the
hand of a Minifter of that Town,whom they would
touble with it, which I think fufficient to fhew:
what Opinion mult be had of Apparitions and Phan-
pans. Buvas to Divi ration, there occurs the moft
ffaguiar and ingenious Story which l'ever heard,of,
‘bar Rappen’d whilft I was writing. this Freatite ;

andhaving “‘bepun: ar Lyons.a Year ago, is.ftall) m:
a | | force:

. ni ~
ob ir

force to this Day. It concerns a Man, who by the
motion of a Wand, he carryed in his hand, boafts
of difcovering fprings of Water, hidden Gold and
Silver, Robbers and Murtherers. 1 give a fort
account of the different relations made of it, with
the judgments of the learned that are all contrary
to one another, and T examine what may be thought
of it after a ferious confideration, me
But before I fpeak of Magick, 1 examine in the
23 Chapter, {ueh proofs as are drawn from the very

‘confeffion of thofe that are detained Prifoners, as

guilty of that crime; and I demonftrate, that nothing
in the World is lefs worthy of credit, than fuch
confeffions. - Thence I rake occafion to examine the
‘proceedings and enquiries of the Judges that take
notice of it, and fhow their nullity and injuftice.
Afterwards I come to the chief proofs, that
have been alledged for Magick, either far or near,

long ago or lately ; and begin with a cafe which

happened within the walls of our City of Amfter-
dam, in the houfe of the Orphans about the Year
1570, whilft the Inhabitants profeft as yet, the Po-
pith Religion, to which I add another ftory, which:
happened at Hoorn, in-1670, with that of Antoinette
Bourignox, which fhe has related her felf ; all the
arcumftances.of it having happened im her fight at
the Hofpital of lle. In‘ the 24th: Chapter; I fhow
what judgment muft be made of füuch ftories, : In
the 25th I {peak of that Woman of Abbekerk, that
thrice publifht, - fhe was become miraculoufly with
‘Child; and has been held nor long ago every where

“for. a famous Magician, in the Years 1653 and

From that fort of People that are only look’t up-
‘on-as Magicians‘by the Vulgar, I come to thofe that
have been condemnd for fuch; by the {entence of

M Indges; and'by confequence put to Death, I men-

tion

An Abridgement of the whole Work. 45 ;

4b. An Abridgment of the whole Work.
tion not fuch as have been fet down by Schottus,
and fome other Authors, becaufe it would be to no.
purpofe, fince they may be feen in their writings.
J only relate fuch new inftances as are come’ into:
sy knowledge, that I may leave no room to obje-
ction, nor be charged of having paft'by fuch mat-
ters of fact asmight have perplex'd me, and to which
J had nothing to reply. For that Reafon, I firft ex-
amine what happened in our own Country, from
the very time of the Reformation, and mention in
the 26th Chap. the Hiftory of thofe that have been
burnt here for Magick, as one at  Schoonbove, and 4
at Utretoh; as alfo another ftery,; of one that be-
ing acculed of the fame crime, had been condemn’d
to the Rack, by the Court of Holland, and was

acquitted by the fupream Council, This happened

in the Years; 1591, 1592, and 1593. Thence I

go. over to Denmark, and inthe 27th Chapter, I make.

an: examination of that black Art that was faid to be
practifed 80 Years ago, at Kogen in Zealand, a
Province of that Kingdom. - I likewife examine all
the other particular events, worthy to be taken no-

tice of, that happened iw that Country, and were
publifhed feveral times in the Danifh Tongue, and
from that tranflated into Latin and Dutch. To.

which I add a ftory of another unhappy wretch, ex-
ecuted this very Year.
Sweden, and in the 29th Chapter, I relate what is
inferted in the Royal Records, concerning that fa-
paous Magick that began to: appear in 1669, and

again 1n 1670 ; and athird time in 1674, to which :

i add another fenrence delivered to me by a perfon
that faw the execution of it, at Goltaw in Pome-
ranias |
‘TI afterwards mention the Magick practifed in the
PFE of Exgland, the falfehood” of which I ee,
| vere

»
aw

From thence T go:over to:

D CR rr A TRE EN

OG teem LD NC D SCD 7 lo, et ED |

fe D

è =

An Abridgment of the whole Work:
ered my felf, and gave the Hiftory of it to the
Publick, This is the matter of the 30th Chapter.
The 31th contains a judicial. information made at
Harlingen, with a letter written. tc me upon that.
{nbject from Leuwarden, which. contains. feveral

Vv

| other matters of fact concerning ,Magick, happen’d

about the Years 1667, and 1668.. I conclude this.
Chapter with the relation of a cafe that happened

| in the City of. Amflerdam 7 Months ago, which

has been lately communicated to me, the particu-
lars of it having been difcovered whilft 1 was
writing this 4th part.

Some People may {uppofe it ufelefs to add narra-
tions of a lefs confequence, after having fhown the
groundifenefs and _ delufions. of more conf-
derable facts, But Ichought, that in reference
to the Vulgar, it was convenient to add here ano-
ther Chapter, that is the 32th, where I relate the
Story of 4 Child in Friezeland, it was fuppofed to be
bewitch’d, of which:I have had-a: full account by
the letters,of his friends and relations; that by this
{pecimen any one, may judge of all the narrations
of that nature, that are fo much credited ‘by the
common People ; who, take fuch matrers of fact
fot-undemiable effects of Magick. As for. the reft,
fhould I make an enquiry after all the examples that
are reported to prove the Operations of the Devil,
¥ fhould never. compafs my end. . And therefore I
perfwade my felf, that I have alledged a fufficient
aumber of them to fatisfy the Reader, who fhall
not be able to doubt-of their truth; becaufe I have
produced fuch asare moft known, lately. happened,
and in neighbouring places ; or at leaft attended with
one of thole 3 circumftances, and.confequently may
be examined with great conveniency and certainty,
and teltified for the moft part, by living perfons.

hus

LL

An Abridgement of the whole Work...

#Thüs I put an end to this Treatife, and make.my

conclufion, briefly rehearfing all the proofs related:
in the 4 Books, each in it's. place. . Thefe proofs.

fhow that there are no natural Reafons, nor Reve-
lations in the Holy Writ, no certain experiments,

that give us caufe to afcribe to wicked Spirits,@all.

the Operations and effects thar are generally fup-
pofed to proceed from the Devil or from Men, his
Confederates. This is contained in the 33th Chapter,
whereupon it muft be remembred, that what I fay
conceras only the common. Doctrine and Opinion.
Afterwards ‘tis not difficult to fhow, how wrong-
fully {uch a fuperftition is cherifhed and increafed,
inftead of moderating it, or even rooting it out, if
poffible, In the 34th Chapter, I charge witkr
that fault, Clergy. Men and. Divines, more than
Princes and Magiftrates; becaufe the former are
rnore particularly obliged to meditate upon thofe
matters, to watch over the prefervation of the Souls
committed to their care, and to attempt the cure
of a Difeafe that is fo contagious, and feeds upon
the very Bowels.

But becaufe’ris probable, that this undertaking
will but flowly proceed; I will in the mean while
propofe to” the Reader and my felf, the leffon of
the Apoftlein bisfirft Epiftle to Timoth. 4. 7. Rejett
propane, and Old FWives Fables, and exercife thy felf
to Godlinefs.

that obtain my end in moft of thofe that ‘under-

take the Reading of it, with fuitable difpofitions. .

Befides Fhold it for certain, that thofe who take

occafion or pretence from thence, to accufe me-
with error and libertinifm, are Men themfelves that:

have not for the word of God, all the deference

that could. be witht,

1 fhow, in the 35th and laft Chapter,.
that this is what I-chiefly intend in this work, and:

This I demonftrate in parti
cular:

cal
ad
ls
So
| fil

Dithe
D Wi

LA cular, with fo great evidence, that I have already
(A had the fatisfaction to fee that my work produeed

he | Er

An Abridgement of the whole Works 49.

a great fruit, when but one half of it. appeared.
So that I hope by the bleffing of God; it being now
finifhed, 1 fhall gather as plentiful a Harveift, as
the forrows which ir caufed to my Enemies, whilft
I was publifhing it, were aneafy and fmarting.

CR ee ee ee es ee

ta att N

a hel ee Oe

CR EE

PR EE Ce

THE

CONTENTS

OF THE

Firft Volume.

gr en et te

CH A Pool
| O° the Importance, Neceffity, and Ufefulnefs of

|| the Matter, and in what Order it ought to be
Treated of. Pag. Ie’

CHAP. IL

‘That the Opinions of the Heathens, concerning God,
and Spirits, are to be. found in Greek and Latin

Authors, 8

CHAP.

The Contents.
CHAP. Il.

That thofe Opinions are rhe Sourfe and Bafis of the Art)
of Divination. 22

CHA P. IV.
That all the different forts of Witchcraft.that have been

Dh)

‘Bat

Where

in ufe, proceeded from the fame Original, 32 if
CHAP. V. |
That we fee ftill amongf the prefent Pagans, the fer |
Dottrine, 38. iy
itt
CHAP. VI.
That this Conformity muf? be fought, firft, in the re |
mains-of Paganifm in Europe. AT ;
2! ale
CHAP. VIL .
That the fame Sentiments are to be found amongft mi
af the Nations of Afia, 51
CHAP, VII.

Thve the Witcheraft pra&tifed amongft the People, 7

ceeds from the Lame fourfe.
CHAP. TX...

That the Opinions and Prattices of the African.Heathen
“> agree at bottom with the Sentiments and Cuftoms 4)

the other Pagans,
CHAT)

SU |

bg: ;

The Contents.

CHAP. X.

Wat very near the fame Opiniens and Pra&ices, ave te
be found in America. 75

CHAP, XI

Where all the Sentiments and PraGices of fo many
different Heathens, are uféfuky- compared together,

CHAP. XIL

\Woat are the Opinions of the Fews, and Low necefjary
st 8 to examine them, 109

CHAP. XIL

What the Witchcraft anciently pra&ifed, and Rill in
ufe amongft the Fews, proceeds from the fame Ori-
ginal. 115

CHAP, XIV.

What the Dottrine of the Spirits, and the exercife of

Magick, are alfo in requeft amongft the Mahome-
tans, 127

CHAP. XV.

What fome of the Heathen Opinions upon thy fubje®
|) bave, in procefs of time, crept in aimongft the Chri-
fitans, : ; 14e

CH:

The Contents.
CH AP. XVI’
the firft Chriftians ‘derided the Cons]

and others credited and pra®ifed

That fome of
rations of Spirits,
them,

CHAP, XVII.
That it % neceffary-to compare all thofe various Dottrines
and Praëtices of the ews, Mabometans, and Chrifté-

anss and to examine wherein they differ, and in
what they agree together. 168

CHAP. XVHE
That the Doëtrines afcribed to the Manichees, are 4

mixture of all the preceding, and the original of the
Opinions moft common to this day. 176

CHAP, XIX.

That the Opinions and Prattices already mentioned,bave

beem moft or allintrodueed'in Popery; which bas added):

to them new inventions of Men. 182

CHAP. XX.
What 5 the DoStrine of Popery concerning Apparitiens
of Spirits, and-bow they torment. Men, either by
shemfelves, or by the Miniltry of other Men, 197

CHAP. XXL

That feveral means are prattifed againft Attacks, and
she Uufions of the Devil and Magicians, 211

A =

H AP, |:

That
Mt
tha
mel

That

ne À

Â\Lhat neither the Opinions that are received among Us,
|. nor our Practices go ufually fo far 3 and thar 5 for
that reafon, that our Authors are not found to agree fo
well together, upon this Jubjeët, 220

The Contents,

‘CHAP. XXIL

CHAP. XXII

mf
int

That of all thefe Opinions put together, there refait fome
certain propofitions, ên which they differ, and others
in which they agree. 236

CHAP. XXIV.

» That.all that has been related, fhews upon what foun-
hee

dation. the Chraftians in general, and the Proteftants

Hé. 2 particular, fay fuch extraordinary things of tbe
/¥

Devil. 244

ee a em

Sep ARE ae ee

A Phe

World Bewitch'd.

See eee

| VOL. I

| Containing the Opinions of all Nations, from £3e
firfe Ages till the prefent time, concerning God,
Spirits, and their Cuftoms.

ile hooks id hea

lOf the Ini portance, Neceffity, and Ufefulnels of thi
Matter, and in what Order it ought to be treated of.

* Promifed to undertake this Work a long time
ago, and “tis yet longer fince I projected ir

"Tis now at laft come to its perfection ; but
I am afraid to venture too much by the pub-
lifhing of it, my own Experience in feveral
Occafons, and my frequent Converfing with very
Rational Men, together with my particular Study,

have a thoufand times afforded me the eccafion to.

À

Vol, I. B con=

it

Der Le L Le ; É
D et Ph il rt AL Mgr RE imitant mtransiemissionnt

SSL"

sage eet Fee

rs

2 The World Bewitch'd.
.confider, Whether it was poffible, that whatever
‘the Vulgar, and the Learned fay of Devils, and
-whatever they aferibe to them, were true? I would
not have fpar’d fo much time as to fearch into this
‘matter, had not I perceiy’d-that the Opinions of
moft Men, and perhaps of all the World, are only
-grounded upon an unfure and wavering Foundation.
This has moved me impartially to examine feveral
‘things, which my Calling, and common Converfa-
tion offered to me. This examination forced my Mind
to reject many Opinions which I‘had admitted at
firft, -only becaule they were common 5 though
grounded upon infuficient Reafons, as I came by
‘degrees to be fenfible of; fo thar I find that at pre-

fent | know much lefs than I formerly imagined to —
Thishow- 4

.do, efpecially as to the fubjetin hand.
ever, Ï do not fay with a defign to'Cenfure, or De-
ftroy, what others have Written: I only intend to
joyn my Thoughts to theirs for a fuller Inftruction
‘of fach Readers as love Truth, and are enquiring
after it. à
Ses, 2. Lam not afraid to miftake. if J fay, that
whatever belongs to this matter ‘has ‘not been ex-
haufted.. Thofe that have written upon it befere
having been
Stick to their Mind, though they had freed them-
{elves of many others; for I own they have pro-
ceeded fo far as to deftroy moft of the works of the
Devil ; at leaft fo
from Superftition and frivolous Fears: But as for
me, JI would, if it were poflible, altogether over-
+hrow them, and not leave one Stone upon another,
that fhould net be demolifhed. And therefore PH
try whether I can bring my Countrymen to my
Opinion, efpecially thole of my Profeflion, defiring
ehem ro read this Treatife with as little prejudice as
J have written ; and not to
pers

fomewhat retarded by Prejudices,that |

fuffer themfelves to be:

far as twas neceflary to free Men,

The World Bewitch d. y
fuaded by other Reafons, but fuch as proceed from
Natural Light; from a clear Interpretation of the
Holy Scripture, and from certain Experiments. I
have right to require thefe Conditions from the
Reader, fince they cannot be rejected by any Rati-
onal Perfon, that they are a Law co which I fub-
mit my felf, and that the great confequence of the
matter requires them.

Seët. 3. Iam Confident,» and I hope, that the
Reader will more plainly perceive it hereafter,that no
point of the Chriftian Religion is more important
than this 5 and that no certain and fufficient proofs
may be had of all the others, than by rejecting
the Opinion commonly receiv'd amongft the Vulgar,
concerning the Craft and Power of the Devil. Can
it be imagin’d a {mall Marter to know whether the
Devil has a Kingdom upon Earth; and what are
the Limits that feparate his Dominions from that of
God Almighty ? Or is it unferviceable to examine,
whether fuch a curfed and deteftable Creature can
do more wonderful things than God ever did ; and
confequertly, whether the truft we repofe in God,
and the fear we have of the Devil, ought to be
‘equal ? Such Thoughts ought never to enter into a

-Chriftian Heart ; yet they creep into ir unawares ;

at leaft I think fo, and can fcarce doubt of it: for
the more I fearch into this matter.the more it feems
evident te me; that whoever entirely believes al!
that it ufed to be afcrib’d to the Devils and his An-
gels, and all that is commonly faid of them, both
by the Learned and the Vulgar, faving the bottom
of the Doctrine publickly receiv'd and taught ta
our Church ;-he can have no convincing proof that
FESUS is the Meffiah, or that there is but one God :
And if in this Writing I do not make the Reader
very fenfible of it, I grant that ‘I have compofed it
to no purpofe,

B 2 ' Se. 4. But

À The World Bewitch'd.

Se&.4. But if I fucceed, it will at the fame time
plainly appear, that it was altogether neceffary- to
publith this Treatife, becaufe the Vulgar are {till
confirm’d in their Errors by Men of Letters, and of
great Name ; who, being full themfelves of thofe
prejudices, make ufe of their Tongue and Learning
to lead others into the fame Labyrinth, ‘To that
end they wreft feveral Expreffions and Hiftories of
the Holy Scriprures which being not accurately
examined, nor conferr'd with others, give a great
probability to the common Opinion concerning the
Devil; but if taken in the ordinary Senfe, they
prove evidently opposd to other clear Expreffions
concerning the Fundamental Articles of our Faith:
Ir follows, that fuch a Senfe cannot fubfit without
overthrowing the grounds of our Salvation ; that I
can hardly bear, fince a long time the nicety with
which Points of {mall confequence, or at leaft of
little certainty, ufe to be treated of ; fince one can-
not difcufs them without getting into a fufpicion of
entertaining Erroneous Opinions 5 whilft, in the
mean time, we are not yet agreed upon Matters of
the utmoft confequence ; or if we are agreed upon
them, it ’tis without any foundation: And therefore,
Gnce none was ever found fault with for defending
an Article of Faith, or giving out a new Explica-
tion of it; fo 1 perfuade my felf, that 1 do well by
pub.ifhing the Iiluftrations upon a matter, on which
the whole Edifice of our Salvation 1s grounded 5 in
prder, that whoever will carefully and impartially
examine it, may become Wifer and Learneder.

Set, 5. As to what concerns this Book, I will at
rfrft fer down the fubject matter of ir before the

Reader. The defign is to examine to the bottom what.

the. Devil can do, and what he really doth ; thats,
How far his Knowledge extends, either in Natural
or Supernatural Things. Hither as to phe Prefence,

as

a = Ps eal 2 .

The World. Bewitch d. 5

4s it is conceal’d from Men; or-as to the Future,as
it is contingent, or poflible, and not neceflary.
Moreover, what Direction or Power he has to ope-
rate in Nature, what Communication he has with
Men, with the Human Soul, and with all forts of
Bodies? That he fhould tranfmute himielf into
them, or put on their various Forms: That he
fhould act upon the Soul, or upon the Body :
That he fhould direct Thoughts, Words, Actions,
and Geftures: What is his Power over the Beafts
and Fruits of the Earth; Over the Air and
Winds: What his help may contribute to the
Knowledge of Man and his Actions. Herein con-
Gift Auguries, or Soothfaying, Witchcraft, the Art
of Conjuring up Ghofts, and of Divining Dreams,
All which things are methodically (and m the fame
order that is mentioned here) treated of in this
Book.

Set. 6. But becaufe the perfect Knowledge of
them depends upon another, viz. which is the Na-
ture of a Spirit, wherein it confifts, and how its
diftinguithed from that of the Body : (for Devils are
andeniably Spirits, and Man is compofed of a Be-
dy and a Spirit) fo it will be neceflary in this Trea-
tife to proceed farther, and to examine firft the
Nature of Spirits, Good and Bad, and then thar of
Man. Befides, God himfelf being a Spirit, but in-
finite and independent,we ought not to pay our felves
with the conformity of the Name; but by reafon
of the manifeft difference betwixt the Creator and
the Creature, we are obliged more particularly to
examine, how much the increated Spirit differs
from thofe that are created; and amongft thefe
laft, how. much thole thet are immaterial, and
thofe that are united with a Body, differ from
each other.

Sed, 7, Hows

6 The World Bewitch’d.

Se&.7. However, fuch.a difficult piece of work
cannot be undertaken, without knowing the diffe-
rent Opinions and Practices upon this Subject 5 and
without {pecial Confiderations upon them: Now,
whoever fhall reflect upon what is faid and practicd,
as to this matter, through all the World, and with-
all upon the converfe, which Men may have with.
the Spirits, and the Operations that may attend
them, he will undoubtedly defire to be well
informed of all thefe things,that he may diftinguifh
betwixt the Truth and Falfhood of thofe Opinions,
and what is lawful.and unlawful in thofe Practices.
For thele Reafons I-defcribe all the Sentiments- thar
have beeñ receiv’d amengft Men, in all: Ages and
Places. whatfeever, concerning God and the Spirits 5
what means Men have made ufe of to conjure them
up and down ;- and what they may be able to ope-
rate by the help.of thofe Spirits: whence proceeds
a fufficient matter-for a more particular examinati-
on of what found Reafon, and the Holy Scripture
teach us, as to this Point, and what experience tefti-
fies of ir,

Se. 8. To treat of thefe things methodically, E
have divided this Treatife into four Books. In the
firft I propofe the Opinicas.and Cuftoms of all Na-
tiohs, in all Ages, Counrries, and Religions,  con-
cerning the Deity, and the good and bad Spirits. I
fay the Opinions and Cuftoms; for in the matter
we undertake to treat of, we muft take a {pecial
notice of thefe two things; the Knowledge,and the
Action ; Since no Fruit can be perceived from the
Knowledge, but by putting it into Practice. Be-
fides, we fee every where that the Behaviour of
Men, either in the Words or Actions, has a relation
to the Doctrines they have been taught. © For this
Reafon I have again divided in two parts, the exa-
mination of what is contained in the firft Book. In
the

The World Bewitch'd. 7:
the firft part I enquire what Knowledge may be had’
of Spirits,of their Power and Operations,according to:
Reafon and the Holy Scripture 3 which Enquiry is:
the matter ofthe Second Book.. In the other party.
which is che fubject-of the Third Book; I’ examine

thole Sciences that ate faid to be grounded there-

upon.; as Witchcraft, Divination, Conjuring, and:
the like. Moreover, as- Men ufe to have recourfe-
to experience, not only. in things which are not:
difcover’a by Reafon,and of which the Holy Scrip-

ture is filent; but allo efpecially in this Cafe, in
which Reafon, and the Holy Writ, are made to

{peak, according: to the certainty-which we fuppole
to have acquired by Experience: This Confidera-
tion has furnifhed me with the matter of the Fourth’
Book, in which I examine all that Men teftifie
ever to-have experienced in themfelves, or:profefs
to have done, .

Tee World Bewitch'd.

CHAP..IT

Thar the opinions of the Heathens, concerning God,
and Spirits, are to be found in Greek and Latin
Authors. s

Seë, 1. rT Hat we may the better fearch into the
bottom of this matter, it will not me-

thinks, prove unferviceable. Firff, to examine the
various Opinions of other Nations, and then thofe
that are receiv’d amongft us... As to Foreign Na-
tions; we have to confider thofe that are not Chrifti-
ans, and fuch Chriftians, as may be called Spurious,
The:Firft are the Heathens, who never worfhiped
one true God, or the Mahometans, who keep as
the mean betwixt them and us; or the Fews, who.
Warthip one God only. The others are Chrifiians,
whe are extreamly corrupted, and plung’d into
ftrange Errors, both as to the belief, and to their
| Worthip, fuch as thofe of the Reman Communion.
After we have obferv’d the difpofition of all thefe
Nations, fie fhall more eafily examine what is be-
lieved and practifed amongft us. As to the Hea-
2bens, we mutt diftinguifh betwixt the Cuftoms that
were formerly in ufe im thofe Countries, in which
Chriftianity is at prefent eftablifh’d ; and betwixe
thofe that are ftill practifed amongft thofe Nations,
that have not yet been illuminated with the light of°

the Gofpeh We fhall now proceed in that order.

‘Sek, x. Europe, which isnow-moft er all Chrifti-
ans, and thofe parts ef dfiaand Africa, which are.
inthe Turks pofleffion, and of which very near one
half profeffes the Chriftian Faith, were formerly
buryed under the ftightful Darknefs of Paganifm,.
as.

The World Bewitch a. 9

as are ftill moft or all the reft of the World.  For-
merly the Greeks, who inhabited thofe Countries,
that are inthe Grand Seignior’s Dominions, were
the moft famous People in the World, by reafon of
their Learning and Religious Worfhip. Next to them
came the Romans, and moft of the Nations, who
{till keep Communion with the Pope of Rome. For
proportionably as the Romans extended the limits of
their Empire, fo they fubjected the conquer d Na-
tions, to the Worfhip of their Gods, and to their
Religion, fo that their Doctrine and Worfhip {pread
every where, and drew to themfelves an Univerfat
Awe and Veneration. From them therefore we
muft know the Cuftoms of our Forefathers in the
time of. Heathenifm; but we cannot accurately dif
cover what was their Belief concerning Spirits, un-
lefs we know; at leaft in general, their Opinions
and Practices, concerning God and inferiour Dei-
ties,

Se&. 3. But the great difference and Divifions,
that were amongft the Heathens themfelves upon this
Account, leave us extreamly in the Dark, as to the
Opinions that are to be afcribed to them. However,
we may agree upon this, vz. to take that ftupendous
number of differencies for an Uniformity 5 fothat it
may he affirmed, that in all Ages, the Pagans have
Unanimoufly believed, that there is but one Sove-
reign God, the Firft Univerfal caufe of all things;
Gince the Firft Doctors of their moft famous Schools,
and the heads of their principal Sects, have gene-
rally taught this Doctrine to their Difciples. “The
Opinion of Pyhagoras, that Old Father of the Pa-
gan Religion, may be feen in Lattantius, who
writing againft the Heathens, - did doubrlefs not. in-
tend to {pare them 3 however he fays, that Pytha-
|. goras owned one God, an immaterial Spirit diffufed
and extended through all Nature, who gives nah

an

16 The World Bewiich'a.
and Senfe to: all beings. Plato, who has. deferved
the name of Wife, by all the fucceeding Ages; agrees
with him, as to this point, as appears by his dif-
courte to the: Athenians, in his four Books of the
Laws. Gentlemen, fays he, God in whom, according
+0 the Ancient Teftimonies, is the beginning; the. mid-
dle, and the end of all things, penetrates every wheres:
&e. And Ariffotle, his great Difciple, who for
Two Thoufand Years, has been efteemed the Prince
ef Philofophers, plainly fayes in his Firft Book of
Meraphyficks, Chap. the ath. that God zs Eternal end.
perfectly good, fo that the Eternal and Infinite Life con-
fifts in bim. From this éapital point they infer this:
other Belief, that the good and evil, which befal.
Men, proceed from the Firft and Univerfal Deity,
as Plato more largely explains in the forementioned
place. Equity, fays he, Eternally attends lim, which
3s the Avenger of thefe that forfake the Law of God, but
happy is be, vebo fticks to it, and follows it conftantly.
Sef. 4. But how advantageoufly foever they
may {peak of the fupteam Deity, it neverthelefs ap-
pears, that they do not afcribe ro him Independency..
nor the immediate direction of all things ; fince
they divided the Government of the World betwixt

feveral Gods, to each of whom they affigned his F

particular fhare, “Tis very probable that the Car

dees and Perfians, obferving how Human affairs, -
were often here below obnoxious to confiderable

changes, which proceeded from Heaven, took oc
cafion from thence, to contrive two fupream a ge
ties, proceeding from that Firft being ; one of whom
they called Oromasdes, and gave him the direction
of Heaven ; to the other, named Arimantis, they
afcribed that of the Earth. The Romans afterwards

gave them the Greek names, 7%. to the former that

of Fupiter, and tothe latter, that of Pluto, whom

they at Firft look’t upon af the God of the Earth |
nd

——

CD :
2 Ss =
pecs

a. Ze
» et

The World Bewitch'd, 11
And becaufe all the wife held for a certain Truth;
that the Heaveris furpafs the Earth in perfection,
they placed the fupream Deity in Heaven, and the
other Gods under it, each according to his Dignity :
And as they conceived that the Soveraign God could
never ceafe:from being good, fo Fupiter, who had
the Empire of the Heavens, was in great credit
amongft them ; but P/uto, the God of Hell, obtain’d :
but an ill name.

Se&, 5. It is here, methinks, the proper place to’
diftinguith the Doétrines of the Pagans into fuch as
had either Religion, or Nature, for their object:
Inthe latter, they enquired after the Firft and Se-
cond Caufes of all things, of their Motion and
Changes, wihout any reference to Religion.. Thus
came upon the Stage Plate, with his Idea’s, and
Ariftorle with his Intelligencies, | Plato called Ide”s
the principles thatflow from the Divine Nature,
that iubfifts with him, and by which all things fub-
fift; each of them being as an Engraven Image-of

‘him, from whom they all proceed ; fo that they all

pattake of the Nature of their Original, and are
fuch asthe principal, from whence they flow. When
I confer the fentiment of Pythagoras contained in
the words of Socrates, related in the Parimenis, with
what Plutarch fayes in his Firft Book, Chap. the”
roth, of the Opinions of Philofophers; and Laertius
in the Life of the fame Pythagoras, as alfo Cicero, in
the Firft Book of the Ta/eulen Queftions. Fifty
Bight, wherein ke explains the meaning of that
Philofopher, it. feems to me, that nothing can be
better nor more plainly expreffed,concerning this fab
jeCt.As for Ari/tofle hisOpinion was,that there are fub= —
ftances diftinét and {eparate from matter, who put
the Heavens into Motions, fuppofiig Heaven it felf
’aidYop À d'eudr cou, à Body in a continual and reft-
defi motion 5 shat the Stars are of 4m Eternal Nature,
: and

12 The World Bewitch'a

end-that whvt moveth, muft be more durable and pre
cede that which is mcved. Thence he inferr’d, that
there are as many. permanent and immoveable fub-
ftances, This is what he teaches in his Meraphyficks
Book the 14th. cap. 18. And what is called by his
Latin Interpreters, Intedligencies.

Se&..6, But when they proceed to Religion, there
arife ftill among them more confiderable differencies,
which may be plainly perceived in the Book of
Plutarch, Envivaled,, The Opinions of Philofopbers, and
elfewhere in the fame Author, as. alfo in the Book,
which Apuleius, a Platonift, more Ancient than Plu-
starch, has written of the Life of Socrares,. The fum
of what he fays, comes,to.this.; that the Deitie is
‘divided inta Four; as into fome Degrees that def-
cend from high to low, and that. the three laft
Degrees. are again fubdivided into feveral. others,
which. they call Oco!, Aaivoyss,and “Hewes, Gods, De-
anons and Heroes. Plato, fayes Apuleius, has divided
the whole Nature-into three, with relation to Spirits in
gartienlar, believing that there are Gods, Superior, Mid:
dle; and Inferior. Of which. Three farts. of Geds;
it is.convenient to fay fomthing.

Se, 7. As to the Superior or Celeftial Gods, he
yes, that their habitation is in Heaven, that they
are Immaterial and Eternal of their own Nawre ;
Baur that there are fome, which are in fome fort vi-
&bfe in the Stars, though others cannot be perceived:
by corporal Eyes, but only by thofe ef the Under-
fanding.. After he has diftinguifhed thofe Deities:
inte. Sexes, like Mankind, that is, into Gods and:
Goddeffes 3, he mentions thefe 12, viz. Fupiter, A>
goil,, Vulcan, Mars, Neptune, Mercury, who are Six:
Gods;, Funo; Diana, Venus, Ceres, Veftas Minerva:
eho.are as many. Goddeffès. The dignity. of thefe-
€CWetiak Gods, nerwithftanding the liberty. whicit
wie Poets otter. took. to. contrive othes Canes of:

thes:

sy

—
SS

Sas So pet 2 SS”

The World Bewttch'd. 13

them, ’rwas efteem’d too high, thar it fhould allow
them to defcend and converfe with Men, though
they govern’d their affairs; each in his Jurisdiction.
But the fame Plato believes,the Stars are but impro-
perly called Gods, and only in reference tothe Di-
vine. and Immutable conduct, that is obfervable in
them. The names of the fixed Stars, which are
reckon’d amongft the vifible Gods, are contain'd in
this Verfe, |

Arcturum, pluviafque Hyadas, geminosque
Triones ==

But leaving thofe Gods to Plato, of whofe mak-
ing they were,theStars,which are called byIgrorance
Planets,or erring Stars, were alfo accounted amongft
the Gods ; the Sun was called Apollo, and the Moon
Diana, to: which thefe Five were joyned, Saturn, Fu-
piter, Mars, Venus, called alfo the Morning and
Evening Star, and. Mercury, though they appear but
erdinary Stars. Another fource of the Pagan Er-
rors in their Divinity, is. the Conformity, betwixt
the name of fome Stars, and thofe of their invifible
Gods, they believed, that there were Deities in the
Stars, who acted by them, or that-the Stars were
Gods; who having life in themfelves, communicated
it to other Creatures, as it was believed by A/cmen,
whofe Opinion. is related in Clemens Alexandrinus.

Seët. 8. We may ftill perceive fome Remains of
thar Opinion in thenames.of the Days of the Week,
in the Englifh, French, and Durch Tongues, as well
as in Earin, for they ftill name by one of the Seven
Planets that Day, on which they believe them ‘to
have a particular Influence, As Lune Dies, Lundi,
Mindy, Madnday; Martis Dies, Mardi, Duigsday,
an Abbreviation of Dy/Jenday, which is ftill in ufe in
Aaland, and Brabant, Mercury Diés, Mecred!, Wed-

; Dees iy at nefday,

14 The World Bewitch'd.

nefday, Woonfdag, from Wodenfday, the Day of F7%-
den, the name of Mercury amongft the Ancient Gere
mans and Dutch, becaufe he was the God of Mer-
chants, and the Meflenger of the Gods; Fovis Di-
es, Feudi, Thurfday, Donderdag , becaule Fupiter was
efteem’d the God of Thunder; Veneris Dies, Vandredi,
Friday, Viydag, from Freda, the Ancient name of
Venus in the Dutch and Saxon Tongue ; whence it
comes, that the Frifons called that Day Freed, and
whence undoubtedly comes the Dutch word Vryen,
to Court a Woman. Saturni Dies, Sameds, Satur-
day, Saterdag. Solis Dies, Sunday, Sondag, but in
the French Tongue, it has loft it’s Ancient name,
in remembrance of the Refurrection of our Lord,
and is called Dimanche from Dies Dominica.

Sef. 9. Let us proceed from the Gods to the De-
mons, or Spirits of a meaner Order. Thales of Miles
taught, if we believe Plutarch, Koo pov durer
orien, that the PPorld à full of Spirits , namely the
Air, which they inhabit, and the Earth in which
they converfe amongft Men ; the Greek word
tsaiuov, comes from Aaio, I know, as fignifying
one that is very Learned, becaufe they believed that
thofe Demons knew whatever is important to Men,
either for their Happinefs of Mifery, and that they
were as the Mediators of Men towards the Gods.
And ’tis obfervable, that Aa‘w likewife fignifies to
Mediate, fo that the Demons import fo much as Me-
diators. And therefore they have alfo been called
Areata x) dun TN dvSpemwv, the Mediators
and Direftors of Men, and have been placed accord-
ing to the Opinions of the-Heathens, berwixt the
Heavens and the Earth, wiz. in the Air, and con-
fequently betwixt the Gods and Men.

Se&. 10. Though the Opinions were divided, as
to their Nature, yet they agreed in thefe principal

points, thar they were Spirits, that they were Mar

SS

The World Bewitcld. 15

tal, atwNhowever, that they were no Gods, as Plato
writes" in his Timeus, which explaining more at
large in his Convivium, he fays, that the Demons
havea Nature which is the Mene betwixt God and
Men, Udy n dtupovboy uerub0 Er Ses 7e xy Sunze.
But what virtue have they? ‘That of explaining
“and declaring to Men, what things belong to the
“ Gods, which are their Commands, and how Sa-
“ crifices muft be performed ; As alfo, that of of-
# fering to the Gods, what comes. from Men, viz.
“ their Prayers and Sacrifices, fo that they being in
“the middle, comprehend the Nature of both, as
“binding and uniting the whole together.

Seët. 12. As to their Adminiftration, Plato ex-
“plains it thus. “ From them come to us Predicti-
“ong, Auguries, the worfhtp of Sacrifices, Conju-
“€ rations, Orations, and the whole Art of Magick.
“ The Deitiemeddles not with Men, but thofe Spi-
“sits are the Directors of all the communication
“ and converfe of the Gods with us, either -wake-
“ing or fleeping. The Demons therefore being
by their Nature Mediators, betwixt the Gods and
Men, and being befides, Spirits, and almoft Gods,
could not be better called, then Spirits of à middle
Order, in relation to their Natures or Mediating
Gods, iwreference.to their Functions, in how great
confideration thofe Spirits were, and what was the
Sentiment of the Antfents concerning them, may
be learned from St. Chry/offome, Tom. 6. Leff. 66. En-
tituled, Againft thofe that fay, that the Demons direct
the Affairs of Men.

Se@. 12. But, what will be moft ufeful to ob-
ferve, was, that there were Demons of a Superiour,
and others of an Inferior Order ; and that fome

| were efteemed Good, and others Wicked Act pores

dal ds % SE tots Good and favourable 3 whereas the
other were Kanodwgorss, Evil Spirits, or bya
ESA ae more

CRE

—- fe =

”
a a See ee ee Sn serene
DE ee ee ce Us ner”

16 The World Bewitch d.

mote patticular explication of their Qualities,

Kaxol, muoves, supsecl ,vanemi, Wicked, dangerous,

Enemies,Cruel owever,thefeDemons,either good or
bad, were not believed of all Nations, to be of the
{ame Dignity. There were fome, amongft whom,
Acupdviov,imported as much as Deity,and AawonG,
Divine, even in Plato, the Soveraign God is called,
MéysG@- Juluuv, the greateft Demon. However the
general ufe was to diftinguifh the Gods from the
Demons, as has been already obferyed, and as de/-
chines expreffes it in his Clefias, O Earth, Gods, De-
mons, and Men, whoever ye be, that defire to know the
Truth! and therefore Plato, in the place already
quoted, may rightly fay, "Onfés Ju: uovesërer monoi
à} rayndumè cow, shat thofe learned and middle Spi~
yits, are in great numbers and feveral kinds. But
tis not neceflary to fpeak more of it, for perhaps it
would only induce us into feveral errors ; there is
fo much uncertainty in P/ato, and others that have
written upon it, they are fo mnch oppofed againft
one another; and even to themfelves.

Seët. 13. As to the Heroes,they were extraordinary
Men, and fo far above the vulgar, that every where,
efpecially amongft the Romans, they ufed to confe-
crate and deifie them, after their Death; which was
called AmStoncs, a Canonization, Herodian in his
Fourth Book, Chap 2. makes a. particular Defcrip-
tion of that Ceremony, with all the Circumftances
of it, on occafion of the Death -of the Emperor
Severus. Befides we generallyfind in the writing of the
Ancients, that they paraell’d them withthe Demons. s
Phitarch, relates in . his Opinions of the Philofophers,
Chap. 8. Book Firft, That Thales, Plato, and the Stocks
beliew’d, that the Demons were Spiritual fubftances,
and that the Heroes were Souls {eparated from the
Body, which were good or bad, as Men had been

Virtuous or Vitious, this: was efpecially the

Doctrine
f

The World Bewitch'd. 17

of Pythagoras, who in allthings that relate to Re-
tigion has had more Difciples then any of the An-
cient Heathens, and is yet the moft followed by
thofe that are not Chriftians. He teaches that thofe
“ Demons and Heroes brought in Dreams,Difeafes,
“ and Cure to Men, and even to Cattle,and labour-
“ing Beafts; according to the Teftimony of Drogenes
Laertius, confirm’d by Plato, and not contradicted
by Ariftotle. |

Se 14. Apuleius, in the Book formerly quoted,
more particularly demonftrates, that the. powers,
which put the narural paflions of Men into motion,
which govern them, and Lord it over them, as alfo
the Souls feparated from the Body, are called Gods,
and Demons, or Spirits ; ‘that the Soul born with
the Body, dies not however with it; and”that: the
bears the name of Genius, when they are feparated
from each other. This meaning cannot, methinks,

be better exprefs’d, than by naming thofe Souls,

Affociated Spirits, or Spirits peculiar to one fubjett,
fince every Man has one within himfelf. The others,

- that is thofe that are feparated from the Bedy, or

the Souls of the Deceafed, are commonly called
Manes, as though remaining, becaufe they remain
or fubfift after the Body ; for which reafon, I fhall
name:them, Surviving Spirits. However, as to the
Latin word, it feems rather to be derived from
Manis, an Ancient obfolete Term, which fignifies
fine and good ; as immanis imports, as much as Ugly
and Cruel ; becaufe the Manes were ordinarily ta-

ken fer Benevolent Spirits. —.

Seët: Es. Some of this laft fort remained in the
Honfe of the deceafed, to watch over his Succef-
fors, “and were called Lares, or Domeftick Gods ;
but the others errd at fandom, and as Exiles, ac-
cording as they had’ deferved by their wicked Life :
They could caufe but vain Fears to virtuous Per-

fons..

18 The World Bewitch'd,
fons, but to the vitious a juft. Terrour, and all forts:
of Pains: They were called Lares, Night Phantafms,
and Spectra. Diogenes writes, that moft of thofe
things were taught in the School of Plato, as it {till
appears by his Book, Entituled, Phœdo. They had
alfo the name of Lemures,which is fuppofed to come
from Remures, and this from Remus, Brothes. to Re-
mulus, who frightfully imagined to fee the Ghoft of
his Brother Remus, after he had killed him. If thofe
Narrations were true; fach Spirits might be called:
terrifying Spirits. Ovid in the. Fifth Book of the
Fafti plainly fays what muft be underftood by.
that Name,

Mox etiam Lemures animas dixere filentum.

The Soul of the Dead had the Name of Lemures.

Sed. 16. The Lares, or perhaps the Geniues are:

called by Macrobius in his Third Book of the Satur-
nalia, Chap. 4. Penates, that is, Born together, Quafi

penes nos matos: For, as that Author purfues, "sa by.

them that we breath, by them that we have our Body,
and by them that our Soul fubfifts : But’tis better to
call:them Gods, and Governors of Countries, to diftin-.

guifh.them.from-the Lares, who were particular to -
each Family, as they were both diftinguifhed from.

the Geniufes, and look’d upon as taking care of the.
exteriour of Man, as the Geniufes did of the inte-

rior. However it muft be confefs’d, thar there is:

but Confufion and Darknefs to be met with in the
Books of the Heathens, concerning thofe Names, and
their pretended Signification,. they. having not well

known themfelves what they. Worfhipped, as Gods,.

or as Spirits; neither need we take much trouble

in unravelling what they themfelves knew not ; fince -

the memory, both of them, and of their Dzmons,

is long fince extinguifhed upon Earth ; This beige
the

that 0
forts 0
titule

2 Death

mi
| got
| tend

| agreed

| in Ex

have r
| fates,
| proce
| cealed
of the
thele
cane
rane,
bu
mith}
ted)
live y
Which
times
Of Gr
| Suna
| forer
Latked
| lp h

| Ain

De

tf

| gits, were called Genis,, Manes, Penates, or Lemures,

we 3 ee

A —

The World Bewitch’d, 19

phe Lot of the Heathens, and of their Gods, Jere-

miah, cap. 10.
Se&, 17. Whether this laft fort of Gods, or Spi-

it plainly appears that they believed the Immortality
of the Soul ; which Opinion being confounded with

| that of Daemons, gave occafion to: contrive thofe

forts of Spirits. Plato in his Book Of rhe Soul, En-
tituled Phado, induces Socrates, {peaking near his
Death in thefe Words. Above all, the Soul muft be
immortal, and unperifhable, and confequently st muft
go to live, ev dd'eyin invifible places ; Of,as others pre=
tend to infer from the Etymology of the Word, i

| agreeable Places. -Marcilius Ficinus has Tranflated it

in Latin, apud Manes,, by the furviving Spirits, as I
have named them above 3 but a little after he Tran-
flares, apud Inferos, in the Subterraneous Places : which
proceed from that they placed the Soul of the De-
ceafed under the Earth. Cicero, in the firft Book

| of the Tufculan Queftions, Se. 26. fhows both in

thefe Words. WW believe, that the Souls furvive be-

| caufe all our Reafonings lead us to that Opinion. Rea-
| fon ought alfo to teach

us where they ares whence Igno-
vance bas taken occafion to invent fubterraneous places,
becaufe Bodies being put into the Earth, and cover’d

| with Earth, (humo, whence comes humari to be Bu-
|) vied) thereof it has been believed, that the Dead fill

live under the Earth. Now "Adys is the fame word

| which the Interpreters of the New Teftament fome-

times Tranflate by that of Hell, fometimes by that
of Grave ; none of which agrees with the Senfe of
Socrates, ot that of Plato: For at the end of the

| forementioned ;Book, Socrates derides Crito, who

20 The World Bewitch’a,

fhould pals, es paxzeav rivas évdkumoyias, to the af=
fur'd Felicity of the Bleffed: which very much differs
from the Grave or Hell. And therefore ’tis certain,
that Socrates, who {pake fo, believed the Soul to
be Immortal, and that P/ato,-who writ his Words,
was of the fame perfuafion.
Seé?. 18. But there were others, who tho’ they
were of the fame opinion, yet having not acquired
fo much infight into the State of Souls feparated

from their Bodies, invented Tranfmigrations and.

Purifications. The Druids, fo famous amongft the
Ancient Gauls, held together the weruduyears,

or Tranfinigration of Souls, with their Immortali- :

ty ; For they unanimoufly taught, according to the
Teftimony of Cefar, Book 8. Chap. 18. Non interim
re animas fed ab ali poft mortem tranfire ad alios :
Souls die not, but that after Death they pafs from one
‘#0 another. The antient Egyptians were of the fame
Opinion, and Herodotus writes, that they were the
firft who taught the Immortality of the Soul: For,
fays he, their fentiment 5, that the Sonl being depri=
ved of the Body, paffes into another Body, which x then
born 3 and after fle has thus walked through all forts
of Bodies upon Earth, in the Sea, and in the Air, fhe
at laft returns into a human Body. Thence it was
that Pythagoras had his Doctrine, which he broughg
over into Greece,whence it paffed into Italy. Laan-
eius explains the Opinions of that Philifopher in his
Seventh Book de Proemio, Chap. 8. In thefe words;
Pythagoras as foolifhly afferted, that the Souls paffed in-
to other Bodies, from the Bodies of Men into thofe of
Beafis,and from thofe of Beafts into thofe of Men again,

and that his own had formerly been that of Euphor-.

bius. Plato and feveral others have partly followed him,
which we fhall be obliged frequently to mention here-
after,

Set. 1.9.

(el

| menti

Jeads t
Biel
thole
Aether
part 0
Fretna
ble Fe
Wicke
ful Ab

to the

| draws

Name

| @ prec

ment
Bemiog
topeti
Pains
accord
Origine
belles
gives

before
A brett
Lays |
Dre |

4} d } Al

| toon |

Adpears

The World Bewitch d. 21

Seët, 19. But Socrates, as Plato relates in the fore-
| mentioned Treatife, which contains his laft Words,
leads the Souls to fome: places, where they fhall be
Bleffed or Tormented, without Bodies: He fends
| thofe who fhall have done Good into the Upper and
Aetherial Regions, where he believes the moft pure
y | part of this Orb to be, and where the Soul fhall
Al Eternally live without the Body, in an unexprefi-
i) ble Felicity. ‘Whereas he condemns thofe of the
i) Wicked to the Tartarus, which isa deep and fright-
ful Abyf, where they fhall be punifh'd according
to their Deferts. From that Gulf of Torments he
M draws four Rivers, to which he gives as many
1 Names, very fit to exprefs his Notion, v7z. Oceanus,
| a precipirate Torrent; Acheron, a Torrent of Tor-
| ments; Pyriphlegeron, Conflagration ; and Cocytws,
) Bemoaning. ‘Here Sinners, who have not been al-
H together incorrigible, are to be purged with many
Pains and Vexations, more or lefs, longer or fhorter,
| according to their Deferts. There you have the
|) original of Purgatory, or of thar purging Fire, {tll
A believed by the Roman Church. However, Socrates
M gives out, that Narration but for a Chimera: For
bl before he begins it he calls it,uv Gor xzrdy dzew axtow,
| a pretty Fable worth hearing 3 and at the end he
fays: But no Man of Senfe ought to maintain that O-
A | pinion fo, a I have related, though I eftcem it rational
and juft, to how that it goes very near fo, in reference
À to our Souls, and their Habitations 3 fince it plainly
wf appears that the Soul immortal. Thefe Words of
+ E Dying Man, who exhorts thofe that were prefent
| to be at all times ready for Death, perfuade me
a more and more of what I have already faid, that
4 i the Heathens exprefs'd themfelves varioufly upon
“al thefe Matters 5 and that they {peak otherwife, when
M they confider them in reference to Religion; than
| when they conceive them in relation to the enquiry
1 NA After
17h

es

Se SSS. Ss |, ES
ry =

ES re

22 The World Bewitch'd.
after Natural things; but at the fame time they

fhow, that they were not very certain of what they
faid, nor of what they believed.

CHAP. MM.

That thofe Opinions, are the Source and Bafis of the
Art of Divination. |

T HE Opinions of the Heathens concerning
Spirits, being thus explained in fhort, will give

us an eafie underftanding of whatever is read in —

their Books, concerning their Cuftoms and Practi-
fes upon this Subject, and the Arts that arofe from
them; Thefe Arts were directed to two ends, to
which Man is always inclined of himfelf ; that is,
to Know much, and to do much. Divination was
ufed to acquire an unlimited Knowledge, and Ma-
gick, to produce wonderful effects. Our prefent
defign neceflarily requires to fpeak clearly and di-
ftinctly of both. :

Se&. 2. As to the Firft, we find in the Authors,
and in feveral others, that every one was eager to
obtain the favour of the Gods, whether great or
little, and that they earneftly fought to pleafe the
good Spirits, and to turn off the evil. To this end

they built Temples, eftablifh'd Forms of Prayer,

confecrated Priefts, offer’d Sacrifices, infticuted Fe~ |
ftivals and Games of all forts. Befides that, they | |
ufed feveral means to difcover the defigns and in-}
clinations of the Gods, together with the happinets |

and misfortune of Men ; to which they fuppoñed to

attain, either by the Knowledge they might receive | |
from the help of the Demons, the communication | ,

‘of the Penates, of the Remures, by the means of Ora=

cles, |

The World Bewitch'à, 29

cles, Conjurations and Witchcraft, or by the ob-

fervation of the influence of the Stars, the motions
of the Air, the dreams of fleeping Perfons, by con-
juring up Ghofts, by inchantments, for which they

made ufe of ’Carcafles, by Prognofticks drawn from

the days of the year, the hours of the day, or the

‘meeting of Men and Beafts. Whatever was practi-

fed as to this point.amongft the Romans, was cal-

ded Divination, that properly fignifies ax exercife of

things concerning God, of which, Cicero has written a
particular Book. .Polydore -Virgil in his firft Book,

Chap. 24. relates, in what confifted all rhofe Arts.
Wherefore I fhall extract out of that Author, and
‘feveral others, what is neceflary for the under-

ftanding of this matter. |

Seët. 3. There were «wo forts of Divinations
Anciently in ufe amongit the Greeks and the Romans,
the one was rightly called Natural, but the orher

“Artificial ; they held for à Natural Divination, what

ever a particular, free, and voluntary Action of the
Mind of Man, without the help of Reafon, or any

‘Conjecture, or Prognoftick, portended as future,
as it often happens in a Dream, and even without

Sleeping inthe Fits of a raving Fever, thence the

"Goddefles called Furies, had their Name, and twas

believ’d, that fome Priefts, and even the Sybz/, Ery-
threa had begun to utter their Oracles in {uch Pa-
roxy{ms. Jupiter Hamnwn, and Apollo of Delphos,
gave their An{wers in fuch a way, and by fuch fort
ot People, of which their Priefts them {elves boafted.
And as thofe Perfons were efteem’d fincere, and to
at in the courfe of Nature, the vulgar afcribed to
their affected furor, what a long Obfervation and
a frequent experience caufed them to difcover, or to
foretell, upon concealed or future things The
chief and moft famous of thofe divining Arts were
Aftrology, the Art of Harufpices, or foreteling, i
tne

The World bewitch a.

the infpection of the Bowels of fanctified Beatts,
befides Auguries, and cafti
Se&. 4. Aftrology was cal
jeCture drawn from the Stars; fo that
may be named Divines by the Stars,
cation of the Gods with the Stars, of which men-
tion has been made before, the operations of thofe
Celeftial Bodies, and the influences upon the infe-
rior part of the World, and upon Men, and even
upon one another, gave occafion to believe, that
from thence may be drawn conjectures. ufeful for
Mankind ; but I fhall not inlarge upon this point
further ; becaufe I treat of it as far as ‘tis neceflary
in my Examination of Councils, Chap. 8. whe
be feen, what rank is to be given to thofe that are
called Genethliaci, or Planetarii, which we ufually
call Fortane-tellers ; who by the infpection of the
Stars, efpecially of the Planets, in the inftant that
a perfon was born, foretell what inclinations, what
fortune ‘he fhall have, and of what fort of death he
fhall dye ; which Art is not yet abolifh’d in the
World: butbecaufe there will be occafion to fpeak
of it afterwards, I fhall prefent the Reader only,
with a fhort account of the three others.
- Seët. 5. Donatus derives the Word Harufpices,and
Harufpicina, from Haruga a Sacrifice, and Exta En-
trailes, it being the Art of foretelling future things,
by the infpection of the Entrails of Beafts, that were
facrificed to the falfe Geds, as thé thofe Gods had
imprinted fome figns on the Bowels of the Victims
that were offer’d to them.
Cafe‘recited by Apian in his fecond Book of the
Wars of Alexandria, and by Cicero, namely, that no
Heart was found in an Ox, which Fulius Cæfar fa-
crificed,the firft day that he fate on the Golden Seat 5
wherefore the Diviners told him, thar fuch a fit-
ting coutd not prove happy to him,

led by the Greeks, a Con-

To this fort belong the

=~ Oey «<a
Os 2 = - ~~ 4 "
ee = — SS es

s'%e as
cb
ut, TT «

The World bewitchd. 2$

‘Sef. 6. To thofe Arts M. Tullius adds two others,
v13. that of Prodigies, and that of Lightning. Prodt~
gies, Oftenta, comes from Offendendo, to Jhew, to
fignifie, becaufe when fomething extraordinay in
Nature offer d it felf to the fight, they drew prefa-
ges from it ; as it was done, if we believe Herodotus,
in his 74h Book, when a Mare was big with a Hare,
at the time of the invafion of Greece by Xerxes, for
from thence the Divines conjectured, that his pow-
erful Army fhould fye betore the ‘Grecians, as a
Hare before the Hunter. Such accidents were al
fo called Porrenta, Monfira, Prodzgia, Signs and Mon~
fiers. Such alfo were Thunders and Lightnings, Ful-
mina and Fuigura, asVirgil lays,

De celo taëtas memini predicere quercus.
The thunder à Oaks foretold me that event.

_ Anfpicium, Aufpice, and Augurium, Augury ; the
former fo call’d, from viewing. the flight of the
Birds, and the latter from obferving their Song and
Cry, raade the whole imployment of thofe that were
called Aufpices and Augures : they were very famous
amongft the Antient ; for at.Rome, that fort of Di-
vination was preferr'd before all the others ; and
the College of Augures was extreamly reveren-
ced. No Affair of importance was undertaken
without confulting them, to know whether it fhould
fucceed, or not. — That fo much exalted Art obfer-
ved the Birds three ways, in their Flight, in theit
Singing, and their Eating: As to their Flight, they
made their obfervations upon the Præpetes, that is,
on /wift flying Birds; asto the Singing, they drew
their conjectures from Ofcines, or Singing Birds 5:
and as to Eating, they obferved the young Chickens
Amongft the 4#b fort is ranked the cafe of the Em-

' peror Auguftus, from whofe hands an Eagle took a

Vol, I, C piece

26 The World Bewitch'd.

piece of Bread, whilft he was yet a Child, carried
it into the Air, whence foftly coming down, fhe let

it fall ; which gave occafion to the Diviners, to
foretell the happinefs of Auguflins life, if we may
believe Suetonius. To the 2d, way or the Divi-

nation by Singing, this Verfe of Vrge/ may be ap-
plyed,

Sepe fniftra cava predixtt ab ilice ‘Cornix.

i ominous Crow foretold it on an Oak,

For the 3d, fort, they ufed the Tripudia folftima,
svhich were a fort of Skipping and Dancing, du-
ring which, if the Chicken fell upon the Meat, that
was fall’n from his Bill on the ground, called So/xum,
and {watlow’d it greedily, ic was a happy Omen;
whereas, if he let it ftand, an ill fuccefs was to be
feared. Thus was forefeen the defeat of Hofisirus
Mancinus by the Numantines ; becaufe the Chick-
ens had refufed to eat, and were fled from their
Coops.

Seët. 8. Sortilegeum, or Cafting of lots, was a dif-
pofition of fome Letters mixed together, and drawn
at adventure, by the firft Child to be met with 5
thofe Letters were engraven on the Bark of an Oak,
according to the antient Cuftom, and difpofed as

many different ways as was poflible, to fee whether
they fhould render fome Senfe or none. Whence the
good or bad fortune of the Inquirer was inferr’d.
“When Tiberius, fays Suetonius in hy Life,undertook
a journey into Dalmatia, and at Pavia confulted
“the Oracle of Geryon by Lots, he was obliged to
‘make ule of another way; for he was an{wered
«that he fhould caft Golden Dice in the Spring of
“the Fountain Apona; which having done, it was

“the greateft point that appeared to his Eye, which

«is fill to be feen under water at this day.
Set, 9.

The World Bewitch a. 27

Se&. 9. There is yet another way of Divination,
famous, even in the Holy Scripture, wiz. by ex-
pounding of Dreams, I fhall be obliged to {peak
of it more at large another time, becaufe the Ones-
yocritic#, or expounders of Dreams, ate not yet ba-
nifh’d out of the World, and that fome, efpecialty
of the French Court, begin to revive that Art. As
to the Heathens,as often as the Demons,Geniufes and
Larve, medled with their Dreams, it was to offer
them fomething particular, by which, according to
the ufual Rules of their Art, they might know the
good or bad fuccefs of future things.

Se&. 10. Our Anceftorsin the time of Paganifin,
had amongft them a Cuftom of that nature, as Ta-
citus relates, ‘ Divinations, and cafting of Lots
‘fays he, are as much in fafhion amongft them, as
‘any where elfe. They caft their Lots ina very
‘fimple way, for they cut the branch of a Fruit-
‘cree in feveral little Lots, on each of which they
‘make a particular mark, and then Confufedly
“throw them ona piece of white Cloth. There
‘the Prieft, if matters of State are treated of, or
‘ the Father of the Family, when it concerns him,

‘or his houle, looking to the Heavens, lifts up
* thrice each little Lot, and gives the explication of
‘ the marks printed on them; if they diffwade, no
‘ farther con{ultation is made that day ; but if they
‘allow to proceed, they go to the Diviners for
‘an Anfwer. There is yet another particular way
“ of predicting amongft that people, by the means of
‘white Horfes, that were never back’d, and are
“kept together in a Foreft at the Publick Coft. They
‘bunt them, and the Prieft, King or Governor
* fitting on a confecrated. Chariot, oblerves their

‘ Neighing and Foam. There is no. Divination more
efteem.d than this, not only by the People, bur
‘even by the Great Men and the Priefts ; the

C2, Carvers

45 The World Bewitch d.

“Jatter ate look’d upon asthe Minifters of the
‘Gods, and the Great Men as thofe that are nearer

“ and better known to them, |

Sef. 11. But ’tisnot fufficient to have explained
the names of thofe 3 or 4 ways of making the
Heathen Gods fpeak ; fot tho’ they be the chief,
‘yet I find that {everal others have been in ufe, cal-
led by the Greeks, Negromancy, Pyromancy, Aero-
mancy, Hydromancy, Geemarc), and ‘Chiromanoy: the
aft relates to the dead, the zd. to the Fire, the
3d. to the Air, the 4th to the Water, the: 5th to
the Earth, the 6th to the Hands. © Polydore Virgil
gives us a defcription of each of thefe Arts, -in the
23 Chapter of his 1ft- Buok. :

Seët. 12. Necromancy, Of the Divination by dead
Bodies, is inade by fomething perceived-on a Corps,
which gives occafion to the foretelling. The igno~
sance of the Greek Torigue has made fome believe,
that ‘vexsps , which fignifies dead, was ‘derived
from the Latine,as tho’ it had been Negros, from Niger
Black, which miftake caufed Necremancy to be called
the Black Art; which name is ufed ar prefent to fig-
«nike all forts of Witchcraft, Inchantments, and Dia-
Holical IHufions. Under this fort is comprehended
‘Sctomancy, or Divination by the fhadows,in which they
conjured up the Ghofts or Shadows of the dead, to
foretell future things. It would be a great proof of
“the power of this Art, if what Lucan relate in his 6th
Book, «were true, thar a Ghoft conjured up, fore=
told the whole fuccefs of the Battle of Pharfalia.
Sciomancy differed from Necromancy herein, that the
fatter requires Blood, and made the dead Bodies ap-
pear, whereas the other conjured up only Ghofts.

Se&. 13. Pyromancy was, according to Polydore,

“à Divination by Fire, when they fuppofed to know

fomething by the means of Fire, for which purpofe

Obfervacions were made upon Lightnibg ; or

fome

LD TD a OO

The World Bewitch à. Z9
fome other extraordinary Fire. Inftinces of it are
to be read in Livy, and in the Firft Book of Diony-
fius Halicarnafs. where ‘tis related, that the Wife
of. Tarquinius the Ancient, feeing a Flame furround
the Head of Seruivs ‘Tullius, foretold, that he fhould
become King of Rome.

Set. 14. Aeromaney, or. the Divinatson by the
Air, confifted in obferving Tempefts, and extraor-
dinary Clouds 5 as when Pliny relates in his Second
Book, that there Rain’d Iron in Lucania, which in
his Opinion fignified, the Defeat of Craflus, by the
Parthians. He likewife.relates inchis Firft Book of
the Second Punick War, thar their Rained Stones
in Picenium, which he takes for a forerunner of the
Evils, that Hanibal was bringing to Italy, Thofe
Divines are called in the Hebrew: Bible ya UN Fid-
noni, Diviners by the Clouds ; amongft this fort may
be ranck’d the Capnomancy, which confifted in ob-
ferving the motions of the Smoke of Sacrifices.

Seét. 15.  Hydromancy, pr the Divination by Wa-
ter, arofe from fomthing particular, which they fan-
cyed to fee in the Water. Varro relates upon this
accafion, that a Youth faw inthe Water, the Image
of Mercury, who declared to.him, in 150 Vertes; the
whole courfe, and all the events of the War againit
Mithridates ; St. Auftin, inthe 9th Book of the C-
ty of God, fays that Numa Pompilius, the Second
King of the-Romans, was the Inventer of that Art,
and that by the illufion of the Demons, he made ap-
pear upon the Water, the Images of the Gods, ,who
gave him Laws, for governing his People, with
goodnefs and Juftice. |

Se. 16. Geomancy, or the Divination by the Earth,
was made by the Obfervation of the Clefts and
Chafins, of an Earth quake, I could not find ary
particular Defcription of ir, thé I was never fo in-

quifrive after it; but J fuppofe, that to this may be
C3 referrd

igo babeiae Seu side mé  E

Rains *
2 F aera +
TE TS
NS i aA PPT EEE ES

30 The World Bewitch à

referr'd, what is related by Livy, Decad. 1 Book 7.
Sect. 6. concerning Marius Curtius. ‘In the fame
“Year (which was according to the Calculation of
© Calvifius 357 before Chrift; ) eicher by an Earth-
“quake, or fome other ftrange commotion, almoft
“one half of the Market of Rome, was {wallowed
“up. There was a great Depth, and moft frightful
‘ Chafm, which could not be filld, what trouble
* foever was taken for ir, tho People carried Cattle
“thither continually. The Oracles of the Gods
‘ were confulted, and the Diviners anfwer’d, that
“the things in which the principal Strength of the
* Roman People confifted,muft be Confecrated to them
* in that very place, if they defired to eftablith for
“ever, the Republick of Rome. And as they were
‘troubled to know, what was the thing to be Con-
‘fecrated ; a warlike Young Man called Martius
* Curtius derided it, aflerting, that the chief Strengh
‘of the Roman People, confifted in Valour, and an
‘undaunted Courage, to confirm which, he got on
‘ Horfeback, and precipitated himfelf into the
© Abyfs.

Sect. 17.  Chiromancy, or Palmiftry, confiders the
Lines of the Hands, to know the Fortune of Men,
whereupon Fuvenal fays in his 6th Satyr.

=". Frontemque manumque
Prebebit vati,

His Hand and Head, he'd Jbow to the Divine.

Whence appears, that Phyfiognomy, that is, accorde
ing to the Etymology of the word, the Knowledg ‘
of Nature; but by ufe, the Offérvation of a Man’
Shape, muft be comprehended under this fort, for
this Art foretells things by the Looks, the Features
and

ee ees SL Bee oo ae

The World Bewitch'a. 3Ë

and Lineaments of the Face, by which the Genius:
and Humour of Men are to be difcovered.

Se. 18. Now all thefe things are natural, tha
they were abufed to attain to a fupernatural know-
ledge.But Art was made ule of in other means,which
were the works of Mens Hands, that might well
be called a Bewitching Pomp 3 in that ranck was con-
rain’d the Axinomancy, a Witchcraft made with an:
Axe, Hatchet, or the like Tool. The Lecanomancy
another Witchcraft, in which they uled a Caldreu:
full of Water, on- the bottom of which, they fan-
cyed, that the Demons: came to walk. The Catop-
tromancy, a Witchcraft made with Looking-glaffes, ine
which they fuppofed that blindfolded Children faw
what ‘twas defired tobe known. The Keskinomancy,.
in which they ufed a Seive, and a Thoufand other.
Impertinencies,

32 Tee World Bewitch dl
CH AP. aly,

That ak the different forts. of Witcheraft, that have
Leen in ufe, proceeded from the fame Original.

Sect. I] have hitherto treated of thofe Arts, that

to fay properly, are Sciencies, fuppofed
to be acquired feveral ways, by the Communication
with the Gods, or with the Spirits. Now I. fhall
Treat of Magick, which. refers to Action: That
name is now determin’d to that particular practice,
thd it has been given in general to all the other Sci-
encies, of whichI have fpoken in the foregoing
Chapter. . It comes from the Grecians, thd it be not
a Greek word. °Tis univerfally believ’d, that it is
a Perfian word ; now that. Tongue had Anciently
many things common with the Hebrew, as well in
the Stile as in the Etymologie ; But in Hebrew PI
Hagah, fignifies to confider, to refle& and TINO
Mahgeh, thinking Perfon, one who tells Secrets and
Myfieries. 1 have explain’d what the Magi were

in my Commentary upon Daniel, Se 62, where .

the matter required it $ they were at firft honeft
Men, who endeavoured to penetrate into the fecrets
of Nature, by lawfull means, and attained to the-
performance of things above the common Belief, Nam
guod ego apud plurimos lego,Perfarum lingua magus eft,

qui noftra facerdos.for as 1 read in feveral Authors,aMa-

* gusin thePer/ianTongue fignifies aPrieft in ours. Thefe
‘are the words of Apuleius in his Apology,and Plato calls
» Magick, Osav Seenmiar, the Cure of the Gods,
‘and

PT peaks

t=, me des ee

CT pt y

The World Bewitch a 33
“and Porphyrie det dmémne à lays, that Divines and
‘ Phyficians were called by the Perfians, Magi 3 which
“title was given to both in the Countrey. Hefichius
‘likewlfe fays, that a pious Man and well inform’d
‘in the knowledge of Divine things, or a Prieft is
‘ called Magus, Otoabis à @e010yG- w iceÿss and
Cicero de Divinatione, fapientum © doétorum genus
* magorum babebatur in Perfis; amongft the Perfians,
‘the Magi were look’d upon as Wife and learned
Men. |

Seët. 2. "Tis very probable, that when thofe
- Men were got at Court,and is great efteem among ft
the Vulgar, their, Art was not fufficient to keep up
their Reputation ; then they begun to ufe Craft and
Cheats, and even fome of them, abufed that Art fo
far, as to joyn Malice to Deception, and not to
{pare either the Goods, or the Blood of feveral Per-
fons; fo that as on the one fide, the Pagans extream-
ly honoured that fort of People, becaufe of their
Wit and parts.; fo they defpifed them upon another
Account, and had a great hatred for them. Thence
proceeded that fome have Anciently been famous in
the Magick Art, as well for the good, as the bad
ufe they made of it, as Apollonius of Tyanis, whofe
… Life has been written by. Philoftrates, and Elymas,
who refitted St. Paul, AGs, 13. Verfe 8. And the
- Wifemen of Egypt and Babylon, who were called to
expound the Dreams of their Kings. Gen. Chap. 4.
- Verfe 8. And Daniel, Chap. 2. Verfe 4. Even Mofes,
Daniel, the Wifemen of the Eaft, who fought the
King of the Zews newly born; all thofeMen were fa-
mous for Magick, thd Authors fpeak varioufly of
. them, either with or againft them, thergis fo much
difference betwixt the farne Sciences and the fame
Actions, by the good or bad ufe that is made of
them, Neverthelefs, it was properly that Art, to

| C 5 Le which

34 The World Bewitch'a.
which we now give the name of Magick, Agrsppa
of Nettinheim, diftinguithes it in Two forts, one of
which may be called Natural Magick, and the other
Artificial; becaufe the firft having Natural caufes,
produces Natural Effects, but the Second being an
invention of Art, Nature has no fhare in it’s Opera-
tions. I mean that as it is neceflary in all Arts and
Handicrafts, thar Nature fhould fupply the matter
and power of Action, thé the Workman imploys
them thisor that way, only by the rules of his Art.
Tt goes even fo with the Artifts of whom I fpeak,
and not as with a Husbandman, who can only pre-
pare the Ground, caft his Seed upon, or plant a
Tree upon it, bur muft expect the Harveft and
Fruit from Nature it felf, holpen with his Art.
Se. 3.‘ They believe, fays Agrippa, that Nat
‘ral Magickis but the higheft Degree of power, in
‘Natural Sciences; for which Reafon they call it
“the extream and laft perfettion of the knowledge of
‘ Nature 3 faying, that it is the active part of Naru-
“ral Wifdom, which, by the help of Natural pow-
‘ er ufed. in proper time, operates wonderful effects,
“and raifes Admiration. The Moors and Indians
‘ made a fpecial ufe of that Magick, that is, as much
€ as it was able to produce effects, by the power of
© Herbs, Stones, and other things of the fame kind.
© Moreover, fays again Agrippa, for that Reafon,
Natural Magick is that, which penetrates the Vir-
“ tues of all Natural things,and which with a fubtle
¢ difcerning, having exactly fearched into their In-
“ clinations, and.Sympathies, difcovers fo far their
*fecret powers, that by them it produces wonders,
“which amaze Humane underftanding ; not fo much
“by Arteas Nature, to which, as to its Soveraign
€ Art fubmirs it felf, andonly lends her the helping
“ Hand. Thus we can} by Natural ways produce
ripe Fruits before their Seafon, and even infects,

only |

2 D. D eee SR. _ _— Où ee

EE —
———

æ

—

The World Bewitch'd.
only by fuppiying the want of time, by Natural

means unknown to other Men ; as itis done, tho in

a lefs Degree of perfection, by Gardners, each of
whom, ftrives to be the firft in getting early Fruits;
helping Nature by Art, and ftill however by the:
means of Nature her felt. The difference only con-

fifts in this, that a Magus, who wholly gives up

himfelf to his ftudy, penetrates much farther inte
the knowledge of the power of Nature, than the

Vulgar, and even. thofe learned, who care not to:
take that trouble upon them. But as all thefe things

are done without the particular afliftance and con-
courfe of God and the Spirits, they concern not the.
prefent queftion ; however we mention them, that

we may learn to diftinguifh them from the fubject

in Hand, and all it’s dependencies, of which we:
intend to give a clear and undeniable notion.

Sef. 4. We have hitherto fcen the Magick of
the Pagans, included within the bounds of Nature,
Now I defire the Reader to remember what I have
faid in my Commentary upon Daniel, Seët. 26. viz.
That to the Magick antiently in ufe Mathematicks,
Phyfick, and Divinity were ordinarily conjoyned 5
fome giving up themfelves to one of thofe Sciences,
and others to- another, whence proceeded a diffe -
rence of Names, betwixt the Students of Magick ;
fome of whom were called Mathematicians, and
others Phyficians, or by a more odious name, Poi-
foners. The former applyed themfelve chiefly to
perform wonderful things ; and the others to per-
petrate Wickednefs, Amongft their Wonders may
be counted the Wooden Dove of Architas, that fly’d,
and the Statues of Mercury that fpake ; but the im-
ployment of Poifoners was to annoy Men, their
Goods and their Beafts, by many things commonly
unknown. And having learned the Virtues and
Properties of them by their Study, they put them a
tie

36 The World Bewitch'd

ufe in füch a concealed and imperceptible way,
that one could fcatce believe what he faw effected;
and this is,what they really operated. But as to what
they boafted of befides, or perhaps, imagin’d them-
{elves capable of; it was, that by the virtues of
Simples, and fome other Drugs mixed together,
they could transform Men into Beafts, Beafts into
Men, Beafts and Men into other Beafts and Men,
conjure up Ghofts, or raife the Dead out of their
Graves, €c.

Se. 5. Now we muft {peak of Magick meerly
‘Artificial, which may rightly be fo called, becaufe
Nature has no fhare in it; but that is a work of
Art alone, which however prefuppofes Nature 3
one may alfo very firly give the names of Witch-
craft, Conjuration, and Inchanting in general, to
all the various practifes that are made of it ; for
we call Witchcraft whatever is operated by the
power of the Devil, with the communication of
Men, which is never done, without ufing fome
fort of Conjuration, and Inchanting. That Art
which required of its Profeffors a particular way of
living, always confifted in the ufe of fome certain
Signs and Words, that they utter'd or wrote, and
in extraordinary Geftures, in confideration of which,
the Demons were ready at all times.to difcover to
them hidden things 3 and to operate in their behalf,
{npernatural Wonders. This was therefore the
opinion of the Heathens, that befides natural Ma-
gick, they believed themfelves capable of produ-
cing the moft wonderful effects by the power of
Demons, whom they knew how to make comply,
by their Conjurations, to whatever they defired.

Se&. 6. We muft carefully obferve this, becaufe,
natural Magick is not commonly accurately diftin-
guithed from the Artificial, either by the Antients
or by the Moderns ; and that which belongs to one,

1S

The World Bewitch à. 37

is frequently attributed to the other : even thofe that
meddle with it, having committed as many mi-
fakes as the others. ‘For fome of them, fays
© Agrippa, are come to that heighth of Folly, as to
‘ believe, that by the different Concourfe and Af
‘ pects of the Stars, with the interpofition of time
‘and proportions. duely obferved, they may, ina
€ certain inftant, acquire a fenfible Idea of Celeftial
‘things, and a Spirit of Life and Underftanding ;
‘which being Interrogated by them, will give them
‘ Anfwers, and difcover ’em hidden things. On

- the other fide, they afcribe to Nature what is a-
bove her power, which I cannot better expre(s,

than by the very words of Agrippa, who proceeds
thus. ‘I defire you to take notice, that thofe Ma-
‘ gicians, not only rake up into natural things, bur
‘even in a manner remove Nature out of her places
‘which they endeavour to do by Motions, by Num-
‘bers, by Geftures, by Sounds, by Voices, by
‘Congregations, by Lights, by the Inclinations of
© the Mind, and by Words. Thus it was that the Inha-
‘ bitants of P/ili and Mari conjured Serpents,and put
‘them to flight ; thus Orpheus by his finging allay'd
“the Tempefts,for the fake of the Argonauts; Thus, as
* Homer relates, by fome certain words, the blood
* of Ulyffes was ftopp'd. There was a punifhment
‘ ordained by the Law of the 12 Tables, to thofe
-* that fhould ufe fuch fort of Inchantments againft
‘ Corn.
Se&. 7. It muft not feem ftrange tous that things

- ‘fhould be fo; in the Pagans time, for Magick confi-

der'din general, and in it felf, was efteemed, be-
caufe of its depth, and honoured as Divine, taking
the word in the fenfe of the Heathens, and as it
may be attributed to their Deities, which have
been defcribed before. Befides, Magick was reve-
renced, becaufe of Efficacy and Power, beloved for
1t3

= LEE

pes

En Le mien re

TT Ge Re cry Re ds rase Sith siennes:

ep e does

38 The World Bewitch d.

its ferviceablenefs in the good ufe of it, but hated

and detefted, by reafon of its malignity, and the
difturbance it caufed, when it was abufed. The
fame Agrippa will tell us, in the words of Porphyry,
which was the opinion of the moft ingenious Hea-

of IVitchcraft, and of the Magick ef Divine things,
concludes at laft, that it may render theSouls of Men
capable of receiving Spirits and Angels, but—he abfo-
lutely denies, that one may approach God by that Art,

thens upon that fubject. M Wf D he, treating -

CH AP. V.

That we fee [til amongft the prefent Pagans,

the fame Dotirines and Praëfices.

W E have fpoken as much as it was. neceflary
for our fubject, of the Doctrines of the An-
tient Paganifm, which reigned in the Countries we
inhabit. We have alfo fpoken of the Nations, who
introduced moft of thofe Artsand Sciences, of which
we treat, It is now fit to confider the Modern
Heathens, to know how far their Sentiments and
Practifes concerning Spirits can reach, without the
Light of the Holy Scripture, which never fhined
upon them. -It is the’ more neceflary to enter into
that examination, that we fhall fee, withal, the Cu-
{toms of very many Nations, and that the proofs
they fhall furnifh us with, of the uniformity of Opi-
nion, (that which we contend to be amongft the
Heathens) will then be more general and extended,
then fuchas are drawn frem the Writings of thofe
we: have-already fpoken of, of which Chri/tsansty
has taken place 3 fince they inhabited only a fmall
part of the World, and have given usin their Wri-
tings

who
hich
ler
and
the
ined
into
Cur
ols
Dr
+ the
ded,
Hole
put)
all
Wise
ups

The World Bewitch'd.

tings, but a flender account of the other Heathens.
So that all thefe others, the number of which is
far more confiderable, are abfolutely unknown
to us.
Seët. 2, Experience teaches us,that we cannot bet-
ter divide the World, then as into three great
Eflands ; one part of which was known to the anti-
ent Greeks and Romans,though not perfectly : The
fecond part iscome to our knowledge, fince about
two hundred years : The third is yer for the moft
part unknown. The firft is called for that Reafon
the Antient World, divided into Europe, dfia, and
Africa. But in the North of Europe, which conti-
nent is not much greater than one half of the other,
there are ftill many Heathen Inhabitants. In 4/4
the Chriftians are hardly the tenth part of the Peo-
ple, and about the third part of the-reft follow Ma-
homet 3 fo that the greateft number is ftill Pagans,
The Mahometans take up the North of 4frica, and
the Heathens poffefs the two third parts Eaftward :
The half of the third part is filled with Mabome-
tans, and the other half by imperfect Chriftians.
In the new World, called America, or the Weft
Indies, the Southern part is almoft as big as Africa ;
and the Northern, which is not yet fully known, is
perhaps as big as Afia. All that Country is Hea-
then, fave a {mall number of Chriftians, gone thi-
ther from Europe, viz. fome Spaniards, Portuguefe,
Englifh, French and Dutch, who bring over from time
to time fome Heathens, though very few, to Chriftia-
mity 3 at leaft, the Englifh are now very earneft in
it. In the mean while, thofe Esropeans may inform
us of the State of thofe Nations,as to what concerns
their Belief and Religion, of which they Have gots
ten a great knowledge, by the Commerce they have
with them. “Bur as ro the Auftral Country, (which
is known’ only by the Conjeéturés thar’ we can
make

40 The World Bewitch'a.

make upon its Circuit ( their being no Inland Sea)
tis perhaps as big as Europe and <Affa together.
Now that great part, having never been enlightned
by the Doctrine of our Saviour, muft be prefumed
to be ftill altogether Heathen.

Sed. 3. But it will perhaps be faid, to what pur-
pole is all that Narration? I anfwer, that having
fhown the Reader that-three parts of the known
World,.confider’d as divided into five, are ftill Pa-
gan, he cannot but infer, that we are not fufficient-
ly informed of the Cuftoms and Sentiments of the
Heathens concerning Spirits, by the Books of thofe
Nations thar fubfift no more, and who never made
up the tenth part of the Inhabited World: and
therefore we muft not keep there 5 but’tis likewife
fit to examine the Opinions of thofe many Nations,
who are not yet Chriftians, whofe uniformity upon
this queftion, notwithftanding fo many other things,
in which they differ, and with all the great diftance
of the places they Inhabit, which cuts of all man-
ner of Communication betwixt them 5 fo that the
greateft part of the one-never heard fo much as one
word of the other:. That Uniformity, I fay, is an
evident proof of the good, which the common light
of the Underftanding remained in Man after hts
Fall, has preferved in him ; and of the evil which
the general corruption has brought to the fame.
And when we come to the examination of the Sen-
timents of the Chriftians, that will help us to diftin-
guith betwixt thofe general Truths, and thofe im-
pure mixtures of Corruption. For thefe Reafons, I
fhall now fpeak of the Belief and. Practices of the
prefent Heathens. }
$e. 4. But I need not to treat largely of it, for

an entire Volume would not fuffice. Neither do I
intend to write a Hiftory,but only to give Inftances,

in order to fhow what the moft part of the Nations
known

The World Bewitch'd. 41
known to us, think in this matter. ’Tis not conve-
nient to proceed in this enquiry farther, then it’s
requifite to fhow that all thofe People agree toge-
ther, as alfo with the Ancient Nations, thô there is
never fo great a difference intheir Language, Coun-
try and time. The way is already more than half
traced out, by the diligence of Carolinw ; who, in
his Modern. Paganifm, has extracted, out of more
than 50 Authors, whatever the Heathens. of our
time Believe and Practife as to Religion, in all 4f4,
Africa, and part of Europe. "Tis pity he has not
lived long enough, to inform us of the Opinions of
the new World. It would have proved very fer-
viceable to me, for it would have {pared me the
trouble of confulting a great many Writers, whence
I have extracted them.

Se&. 5. In the mean while it will not be ufelefs
to obferve, that all the Authors which Carolinus has
follow’d, and which I am likewife oblig’d to follow,
are Chriftians ; and therefore they have fet down
the Beliefand Worfhip of thofe Heathens, only up-
en the particular Information they received from
the Heathens themfelves, or the things that they
faw them practife, fo that they cannot afford us
füch a clear and: neat knowledge of what they re-
Jate, as is that which may be gathered from the
Writings of the Ancient Heathens, who have them-
felves, in their own Tongue, treated of their own
Affairs. And therefore we cannot relie fo much upon
the defcriptions of the prefent Heathenifm, which
are made by Chriftians who: undoubtedly have but
feen or learned’ part of the Sentiments and Cu-
ftoms of the People they {peak of, and who perhaps,
are not difpofed to make fuch a fimple and natural
relation of them, as could be defired. Now I find
that all thofe Writers are in the fame prejudice,
when they tell us, that there are many Nations who
adore

SEF a Sa
PR PL -

ip sees

cra

—

i ees Lane

42 The World Bewitch'd.

adore the Devil himfelf, vexing themfelves with

grievous pains, and cruel torments, to be his@i—
Martyrs: But the miftake of thofe Authors, feems |
to me to difcover it. felf, for he that has been |
quoted before, fays inthe 7 Chap. of his. rift.. |
Part, pa. 56. That Trigaltius teftifies, that moft of | That t
the Chinefe interrogated the Devil, or Familiar Spi- yi
rits, as they calld them, of which there are many |
among ft them, and that they efteemit rather a Divine, | (yf :
than a Diabolical operation. 1 believe that ‘tis the |
fame with all the other Nations, wo are accufed. elec
dire@ly to adorethe Devil, and am_perfwaded, | hr
that if the thing were ftrictly examined, it would? | 4p ;
be found, that they have nor fo much as a Notions) Thy,
of what we underftand'by the word Devil. Sed
Sed. 6. For ‘’tiseafe to conceive that thofe that | quant
have not the fame knowledge and fentiments of | jy,
God with us, cannot alfo have the fame: Ideas ‘of! La
the Devil, that the Chriflsans have, fince he, that } injs.

knows not God after the manner of the Chriflians, | bys
cannot alfo know the Devil 5 and that is impoffible } y1,.
that any rational Creature fhould know the Devil} yy.
as he is, and adore him. For as to what is faid}:,,,
by the Apofle, concerning the Heathens, that ebey) 1),
offer their facrifices to the Devils, 1 Cor. 10, 20. Tis | tle
not exprefly faid to the Devil, as.to the Chief of the} 5,1
wicked. Angels , no more then in St. Marth.25. 41e] rl
But to him, as the Chief of the Demons, ; of which} 4.
we have formerly fpoken,.. And ’tis obfervable, that}

the Greek word ufed by St. Paul, is not that of De-|
vils but Demons, which isthe name the Heathens} ,
gave toa fort of inferior Gods, as has been already!
faid. After that Obfervation, let us fee what con-}
formity may be found, betwixt the fentiments ol
the Ancient Pagans, and that of the Modern Hea:
then, as to Spirits; we fhall begin with Europe
thence proceed to Afia, and Africa, and at laft, go}; 4
over into America, CHAP] *

with i
his
eens à
been fl
ILE
d'A
Sp
mi
vine,
S thee
cle
jaded
wouldias
Notion

that
ents of

desl
1, that

“ani
pollo
+ Devil
hat 19
iq
£ of thal

D à

ble, th |
of De
tete
alread
hat COO
gens
nn He
h “

{al PA
ci

The World Bewitch'd. 43
AUS PORT Ne AE al
CHA P. -VE

That this Conformity muft be fought, 1ft, in the re-
mains of Paganifm in Europe.

Seët. 1. I T hasbeen already faid, that there are

fome Pagans in the extremity of Europe,
efpecially in the Northern parts, but they are fo
brutifh and wild, that it is eafier to fee what they
do, than to conceive or guefs what they believe.

They are Laplanders and Finlanders, efpecially thofe

Swedifb Dominion, with whom we are beft ac-
quainted, by a defcription drawn from the beft
Authors, which Scheffer has made in his Swedifh
Lapland 3 and therefore I fhall declare as much as I
judge convenient for my defign; Firft, what he
fays of thefe, and afterwards what is added of the
others; yet without giving credit to whatever is
written, of which I {carce believe one halfe to be

ill“ true. ‘This however, is certain, that. thofe People,

tho’ under the Dominion of Chriftian Princes, vz.
thofe of Swedeland, Denmark, and Mufcovy, are as
fond of their Pagan Superftition, and continue as
zealoufly, tho’ fecretly, their antient practifes, as

they have little knowledge of Chriftianizy, and in-

clinarion to embrace our Faith. In the mean while,
Scheffer has made ef late fuch an accurate defcrip-
tion of Lapland, and upon fuch certain information,
that one may, methinks, furely relye upon what he
fays ; and as he frequently intermixes in his Narra-
tions, other Laplanders and Finlanders, it may be
probably inferr’d that he efteems them all very near
alike in Belief and Worfhip: which may be con-

firm’d by this reafon, that what other Writers fay

44 The World Bewitch'a,

of thofe other Nations, is-pretty agreeable with |
what Scheffer relates of Swedifh Lapland. And there- |
fore I hall follow him only, tho’ ought not to fay |
him only, fince his Book contains whatever the
others had written before him, Let us then Firft
{ee, which are the fentiments of thofe Pagans, and a
afterwards we fhall fpeak of their Magick. jae
Se&. 2. The objects of their Worship are divided | Bea
into three forts, as into fo many degrees: the meft |!
fublime are Thor, or Therdoen, which is properly [M
the Thunder 3 Storjunkare or Stourra-palfe, which fig- |"
nifie Holy and Great; and. Bazwe, that is the Sun. | he
The firft has alfo the name of Tiermes, which in the |
Laplandifh Language, is as much as the noife of the 16 ?
Thunder, becaufe that God is believed to be .the |
Mafter of Thunder, and feems therefore to be their [ln
Jupiter. He is alfo named Aijeke, that is, Great \ lin,
Father.- The Laplanders afcribe to him an abfolute | ti
Power. over the-Life and. Death of Men, over their |
Health and Difeafes, and over the wicked De-|
mons, who live on the top of the Rocks, Mountains |
and Lakes. They believe that he reftrains thofe |
Demons, when they vex Men too much; that he
chaftifes them, that he fometimes Thunder-ftrikes |
’em, and puts ’em to. death, .efteeming it to be the |
chief employment-of the Thunder, as the eminent
Latins imagin’d that Fupiter. caft his Thunderbolt |
upon the wicked; and all other Criminals; for
that purpofe they give him a Bow, which they
imagin'd to be the Irs or Rainbow, that he- might |
dart his Arrows, wound and kill all the wicked |
Demons. They callin their Tongue the Irn, Arjeke
dauge, the great Fathers Bow, that is, the: Bow of
the Good and Beneficent God, who preferves them |
as his Children, and defends them againft the In-|
fults of thofe wicked. Demons. They imagine
that God has likewife a Hammer, which)
they |

The World Bewitch d. 45

[they “call Aijewetchera, with which he ftrikes
on the Neck .of the Demons, and breaks their.
| Head. Storjunkare, or Stoxrra-paffe, which fignifies
te the Governor of ‘the Country , 1s. amongft them
i as the Great Pan,-or as Diana, having the Country
i and Woods under his directions ; Fifhes and Birds
are alfo at his difpofal, and all Animals and wild
41 Beafts, acknowledge his Empire, tis by him that
dl they are happy in hunting,and without hisfleave they
rly | Cannot catch any thing. True.it is, that A:jéke or Tier-
ige mes governs Gods, Demons, and Men ; but Storjun-
el Rare, in quality of Vicat of that Go has the conduct
tie | of all thole other things, Barwe that fignifies the Sun,
[as Paiwe does the Day, is adored by them for the
4a) good he does to the Earth,bur they particularly vene-
ie} trate him in Summer time, becaute they always fee

we] him, that he has reftored them his Light, diffipated
ef their Darknefs, brought Heat and expel’d Cold.

vit)  Seét. 3.” The Manes of the Romans, mentioned
ps | before Chap. 2.Set. i5. Are among the Laplanders
sing Inferior Gods, which they call Si#te. Whey erect no
nef Figures to their Honour, and content themfelves
rhe) With offering Sarcifices to them ; we find in no
al Writing, what fentiments they have of the power
sje) OF thofe-Sirte, nor for what reafon, they make
ret} them Offerings. The laft fort of thofe Inferiour
ii Gods, are the F ubles, or Inblaforket, that are a Va-
{rl gabond Crowd, whom they believe to wander in the
dey Air, and through Forefts and Mountains. But I
‘ait, find alfo, no where what good or hurt thofe Spirits,
cee may, in their Opinion procure to Men, only they
ie | believe them Inferior to the Sittes however, they
qf) pay them alfo fome Worthip, behind their Cottage,
jen} at a Bow fhot diftance, which Worthip ends ina
rf fuperftitious Sacrifice. They confecrate to them
i neither Images nor Statues, no more then to the
bic)
hej}

Manes 5 they have likewife no Image of Bawe, or
| the

ele eis

Sotho re.

46 The World Bewitch a.

the Sun, either becaufe he is vifible himfelf, or be*
caufe the moft fecret Science of their Myfteries ac-
counts him but one God, with Tiermes. There is
but Ayeke and Storjunkar, who have Sratues erected
to their Honour, thofe of Aijekeare of Woed, and
thofe of Storjunkare of Stone.

 $cét. 4 * Tis upon thofe Opinions that their Di-
vinations and Witchcraft are grounded, and hereup-
on I can’t but make this obfervation, that by reading
Scheffer, and. compating what he fays of his own,
with what he has collected from other Authors, it
may eafily be perceived, that the Witchcraft of the

Northern Nations extends not fo far asis commonly. |}

reported. Butthen we muft credit what Scheffer |

affures us from his own experience, in the following
words, Chap. 12. Tho the prefent Laplanders do not

Frequently nor publickly exercife Magick, their Anceftors | iy i

Ale
which moft of the modern Laplanders are fPee, and tho

the Country be purified of that fort of Witchcraft, ever 1)
fince the King of Sweden has forbidden, under grievous:

having been more additied to thofe fuperflitions, of

lue Bi
fra
B Alder

from

then

url

| parts

bythe

they

painsito ufe Inchantments : yet there are frilla great nume | |

ber amongft them, who make it their whole frudy and em- |
ployment. - The caufe of it is, that every one of the Lap-|
landers is perfwaded, that Magick is indifpenfably ne-|

ceffary to him, that he may avoid the fnares and infultsi f

of his Enemies. To this he adds, That they kept}
Schools, in which Children are taught that Art, and that]
Parents are often their Tutors in ir. That they ex-|
ercife them in:it, required their affiftance, and arel
prefent at the performance of thofe deteftable pra:
ctices.  Bur what is yet more ftrange, is, what this}
Author farther relates, That the Fathers bequeath, as
an Inheritance to their Children, the wicked Spirits that
were in their Service, that by their help they may over-
come the Demons of other Families, their Enemies. |

Sef, 5 |

B od)

fy) ly

| EUX
Bikey
Bly

Dat
hom

gi

‘up
Ling

wa, |

tt
the
only

fit

Wing |
dy tt |
cfr |
1, if |
nt
, et

sent

te
nes
eLapt
phy tee

infu

¢y lef

nat tit
ey (Xx

pd Atel

le prt
hat
nit i
stl

ef,

Shh

The World Bewitchd, 45
Se. 5: What they pretend to effect, by means

of their Gods and Spirits, is to difcover fome things
by Divination, and to operate fome others by Witch-
craft ; for Divination, they make ufe of a Kannus,
which is like a Drum, and mult be made of a par-
ticular. Wood, and rather of Birch-tree than any
other. There is a Skin, or Membrane, extended upon
the Body of that Drum, wherein the Laplanders draw
fevera! Figures with a red colour made of the Bark of
Alder-tree, bruifed and boyl’d; they beat i+ weeh an In-
| ftrument like 4 Hammer, 6 Inches long, but not bigger
| then the little Finger, not fo much to make a noife, as to
caufe a bundel of Brafs Rings, that lies upon it, to move,
| when that bundie begins to leap up, they obferve the
parts and Figures towards which it moves, and Divine
by the Scituation, Motion, and reft of the bundle, on
the place which Jignifies the defign they bave form’ d.
The manner of this enquiry is not always the fame, for
| they make ufe of feveral, different from one another, by
| thofe means they difcover, what paffes in Foreign Coun-
eryes,bow diftant foever they may be they know the good
| or bad fuccefs of the Affairs they have undertaken,they cure

Difeafes, they find out what Sacrifices and Vieims are
moft pleafant tothe Gods of the Land. Thefe that de-
fire to know the State of their Friends or Enemies, liv-

| ing a Thoufand Miles from that place, have but to go to
a Laplander, who difcovers it this way. He cafts hime
felf upontbe Ground, and becomes like a Dead Man,
and his Face altogether livid. Heremains in that ftate
an hour or two, according as the Country, whence he will
| get News, is more or le/s diftant, and when be awakes,
‘be tells whatever paffes in that Country, 2fpecially as to
what is enquired after. There are yet fome other
particulars, as to that way of Divining, gatherd
from feveral Authors, but it would be too
dong, and even unferviceable, to relate them:

ey Sel, 6}

48 The World bewitch'd.

Se, 6. They have yet other forts of Witchcraft:
The Firft is, a Twifted Cord with feveral knots,
which they -ufe to raife Winds on the Sea, fo they do, as
it were, fell the Winds, and profer them to Merchants,
shat are detain d on their Coafts, by Tempefts and con-
trary Winds, having agreed upon-the price, and receiv'd
zt, they give him a ftring with three Magical Knots, on
which lies this Condition, that as foon as they have un-
tyed the Firft, there riles a frefh and pleafent Gales
when they have loofed the Second, the Wind grows
fironger, but when they have unty'd the Third, there
arifes {uch a Tempeftuous Storm that they are no longer
able to govern their Ship. This fort of 1 rade is uied,
efpecially in Finmarke, amongit the Danith Laplen-
ders, becaufe the Neighborhood of the Sea atford
them -more occafions of it, then any where elle, But
the account that Scheffer gives of their other fosts of
Witchcraft, fhows that he himfelf gives little credit
toit, They have little Magical Darts made of Lead, ve-
ry fhort, being no longer than ones Finger, they dart them
to the remoteft place againjt their Enemies; :f whom
they defire to avenge themfelves ; and by that Witchcraft,
shey fend upon them fuch dangerous Difeafes, with fuch
fharp pains, that for the wiolence of them, they often |
Die within three Days. They bave allo a kind of Flyes \
cal’d Gans, which they let out of thear Ganeske, that
4s a Leaden Purfe : And Daily fend fome of them to
anny and vex their Enemies. But we have not a |

perfect knowledge of whatever they practife on J)

thefe occafions. There are alfo fome Laflanders, |
who for this purpofe, make ufe of a Tyre, which is |
a round Ball, as big as.a Walnut 5 it hasa particular

fhape, as is defcribed in Scheffer’s relation, and it has |
alfo fome motion, They fell this Tyre, and the buy-—
er may fend it upon whomfoever he pleafes, he fhall |
‘be moft cruelly tormented with it,

Sek. 75

The World bewitch d. 49

Se& 7, But enough of the Laplanders, let’s now
fpeak of other Nations. Lirgau fays, that the Wii/d-
Irif adore the Moon, as well for their own prefer-
vation, as for that Of their Flocks, and that they
-direct to her this Prayer amongft others, Leave ws
as Healthfull, as thou finds us. Whence Tinfer, thar
they hold fomething of -the Ancient Paganifn, that
a{cribes a Divine Virtue to the Influence of the Stars.
thd it feems by thisform -of Prayer, that they at-
tribute not to them, a full and Sovereign power,
in the Adminiftration of the World.

Seé. 8. As for the remains of Paganifm among ft
the Samagites, a People fcituated-betwixt Lithuania
and Livonia, we are taught, that they much Wor-
fhip the Sun and Moon, the Fire, the Thunder, the
AGroves, and Trees exceedingly highs which flows
that they gofarther than the wild Irifh, and believe
that there are Demons inthe Air, and upon Earth,
that refide in all thofe objects. ‘But it may be {cen
in -Olaus Magnus, what account they themfelves make
‘Of the Gods of Thunder, and of the Spirits in the
Air. For fays he, they not.only pretend to give fuc-
cors ro their Gods in their quarrels they have with
their Enemies, endeavouring to imitate the Thunder
with the beating of Hammers, but are not afraid
even of Fighting againft them with Arrows and
other Arms, they fhoetrin the Air. There are allo
places in Lithuania, where the Inhabitants adorea
Domeftick God, called Dinstipan, that is, The Di
xettor of the fmoke or Chimneys.

se&. 2, The Tartars Keremiffes, a People ‘ef
Eaftern Mofcovy, believe according to Olearius, that
there are malitious Spirits, whe may at pleafure,
caufe feveral difturbances and ‘vexations to Men in
this Life ; for as to the future, they have no notion
of ir. To prevent thofe pains, or. turn of thote
Spirits, they offer Sacrifices to them, near Rivers,
Vol. I. D ‘they

so | The World Bewitcl'd.

they likewife adore the Sun and Moon, becaufe they
perceive much good is done to the Earth, by their
Operations. But we find nothing confiderable left
in writing, as to their way. of exercifing Ma-
ick.

‘ Se. 10. The Iflanders have more relation to the-
Laplanders and Fuilanders, the greateft knowledge
we have of them, Comes to us from the writings of
Biefkenius, they alfo believe Domeftick Spirits, who
wake them in the Night, to goa Frhing, being per-
fwaded, that if one fhould go thither without the
Advertifement of thefe Spirits, he could not make
a happy Fifhing. The fame Ditmarus Blefkenius,
failing from that Countrey to Portugalin 1633, res
ceived from one Foras a Handkerchief, with three
Knots, to be loofed at Sea, in cafe he wanted Wind,
They ufe to make thefe Knots, foftly muttering fome
words, Befides that they boaft, that from.the place
where they ftand upon the ground, they may caufe
Veffels at Sea, to ftop ortoSail on. But I fhall yet
keep by me for fome time that Handkerchief and
irs Knots, to try hereafter, how they may be un-.
ty'd ; I fhall alfo leave thofe Veffels at Sea, unt I
examine what may ftop or promote their Voyage.
So that having nothing more to do with Europe, we
fhall go over to Afia.

The World Bewitch d.

CHAP. VII.

That the fame Sentiments-are to Le found among? mof?
of the Nations of Afia.

Seé. 1, T H E Inhabitants of :4fa, as far as thar

ck

Continent is known to us, are not fo

at

dull as the Northern Europeans. The Chinefe, Fa-

panders, Sianefe,Peguans,thote Indians that are known
from ancient times, and thofe from the bi eft of

Bengala, furpafs all the reft in civility ai

ty 5 but the Chinefe carry it before all ot!

ons. Let usallow them to explain - their o
timents, and give us an account gt their -practiles.
We ‘fhall hear them unanimoufly grant, Ae te
{peak Prope Ys there is but one Divine Being,whole
virtue extends every where. However, when
they came to-confider the various ‘objects of the
Divine Adminiftration , a his | Sa Effects.
they divided the Government the World, be
twixt two Principal, and ser Inierior Gods, as
the Ancient Heathens, of whom we hay e ipcken,
Sef. 2. Thus the Fapanders have intrufted Chacx
and Amida with the fupream adminiftration of 2
Eungs: and Tanconida , Benjamonda, Homocanda
Zoiola, Pipi and Fifus, with ah Peg eas directi-
ons of the Heavens, whit Aer r the Jat À leads the Souls
of the deceafed. The principle Se& amongf the
Chinefe, is that whic ch follews the Sentiments of Cour
futius, whois efteemed a great Saint amongft them.
That Seé, fays Carobius, in the words of Trizal tis,
acknowledges and adores one only God,believing that
he governs and keeps all things here below, Thev
D2 alfo

52 The World Bewitch'd.

alfo venerate the Spirits, but much lefs than that
Deity ; neither do they afcribe to them fo great a
Power. All thefe People imagine a graduation
from the Great Gods to the Inferior Gods, and
om them to*the Spirits 5 for thefe pretend that
the Soveraign God, has fet over the Heavens Laocon,
that is, the Minifter of the Great God, and upon

the Inferior World Canfas, who has under him
three Spirits, Tanduam, Teiquam, and T/usquam:
the firft of whom has the direction of the Air 5 the
fecond of the Earth, and the third of the Sea.
Amongft the inferior Gods, who are very nume-
rous, they reckon the Inventors of Arts, efpecially
Sichia, Quanina, and Neoma, a God and two God-
deffes. Amongft the Tartars, thofe of Sarmacande,
who border on the Empire of the Great Mogul, are
Mabometans. But amongft the others, particularly
thofe of Niuche, on whom the Empire of Chinazs
now depending.. The Deity is likewife divided
into two; the one is the God of Heaven, and the
other of the Earth; but they make the condition
of the firft, fo high and fublime, that it may be
eafily. perceived, they acknowledge but one God
indeed.

Se. 3. The Peguans believe a Supream Deity,
called Duma, who is Good, but admitalfo ofa 2d,
who is Bad, and for that reafon is accounted to be
the Devil by the Chrifizans. They efteem befides,
that there are a great number of Gods, each of
whom. has bis particular Office; the Chief are
Carco vitas, the, moft ancient of all, on whom the
other depend, Oz/im, the mover of all things, Apalita,
she Leader of the Pilgrims, Fotoce their Interceffor by
Duma, who efpecially prays for the Souls of the
deceafed, that are condemn'd to the darknefs of the
Gulf, in the Heufe of Smoak. > The Siamois acknow-
ledge one God, who inhabits the Heavens, with

| many

mr

re ere meer =

The World Bewitch'd, $3

many other Gods inferior to him, amongft whom
they place the deceafed, who have been their Law-
givers. |
Se&. 4. Amongft the Inhabitants of Fava, in
which Ifland is fruated the City of Batavia, belong-
ing. to the Dutch Eafi-India Company 5 fome be-
lieve the Tranfmigration of Souls. The Crngalois
in the Ifle of Céilon worfhip four Gods, betwixt whom
they believe the Goverment of the World to be di-
vided; and withal, venerate the Souls of the de-
ceafed, whofe Lives have been virtuous ; fo that
both the one and the other, believe the exiftence
of Demons. But thofe of the. Favanois may be
good or bad, whereas thofe of the Cingalois can be
but good. |
Seët. 5: Thofe that inhabit the North of the Cape
Comorin, and reach to the Dominions of the Great
Mogul, tho’ they be much divided in their Senti-
ments ; yet agree in this point, chat there is a Su-
pream Deity, called either Viftenau or Efuara, whos
however Governs the world only by the. Miniftry
of inferior Gods, of whom Brama, who is the Cre-
ator and Director of all things; is the Chief. Some
fay, that all thefethree depend upon Tfechrz, as up-
on the only Sovereign God. But after all, the
difference is not fo much in the thing as in the name.
They all believe that Brama gives to Indre or Deu-
endre a Supream Authority, over 8 principal Di-
tectors of the Superior World, who they place
higher than the Barth, and neverthelefs under Bra-
malocon, which is the abode of Brama. Of thefe
eight, feven receive the Souls of the dying; who
have led a good Life, and the eighth receives that
of the Damned. They. likewife believe that thofe
Gods have been begotten and married after the man-
ner of Men ; that they have fometimes‘appeared
upon Earth, in a bodily fhape, and that Vi/tenan
D:3+ himfelf

$3 The World Bemitch'd,
himfelf has been feen under more than ten Forms
as Rogeri relates to have learned it from the mouth
ofa Bramine.
Seé: 6. Going farther Northward into the King-
doms of Gufuratte or Cambaie, Decan-and Bengale;
fubject to the Great Mogul, you will find above
fouricore Sects, amongft which there are four Prin-
cipal, whereof one called Chevravac, hardly believes
the exiftence of one God: However taken together,
they all-confefs that there is one, who prefides over
all the reft, and on whom they all depend. Even
that Sect, that. will fcarce believe the Exiftence of
Gods worfhip. Tiel’ Tenquer, who is. efteemed.a
general Saint, fhewing thereby. that it is eafier ro
forfake God with the Mouth, than with the Heart.
The Sect-named Samaraet conftitured, under Per-
mifeer their Soveraign s God, three other Gods, each
of whom has a fhare in the Government of the
World. They fay: that Brama has power over all
the Souls, and diftributes them to Men and Beafts,
as he pleafes; that Bafiuna teaches Men the Com-
mandments of Permifeer, and provides. with all
things-in this. life, thofe that. are obedient to him;
and. that. Mass calls.to Judgment before Permifeer,
the Souls feparated from the Bodies, who fends
them according to their deferts, into the Bodies of
Men or Beafts, to be afterwards. with them purifi-
ed of their Fits in a certain. purging Fire. The
‘Gentives-in the Kingdom of Goleonda, believe alfo
ene only God, who-has. been from all: Eternity ;
Buv in procefs of ‘time, has: affociated himfelf to
fome. inferior Gods, chofen from amongft Men ;
which notion is agreeable with the Semidii Indige-
tes, ot Heros of the Ancient Romans:
Seët. 7. Thofe Ancient Perfians who have re-
mained in their Religion, fince Mahometif/m has {et-
led in.their Country, deferve to be:takén notice-.of.

Some.

The World Bewitchd. 55

Some remained in Perfia,and live for the moft part
at Ifpubum, the Capital of that Empire. Orhers have
retired into the Indies, , efpeciaily into the King-
dom of Gufuratte, where they are in great num-
bers. Here you have the belief of the peOple in
the very words of Carolinus,extracted from de Laat,
aremius, and Tisft, They believe tbat there is one
God. prefent every where, who Governs all things at
plealure, without needing the a fiftance of any one 5 the
in the mean time be has feven Minifters by him, almoft
of the fame Dignity with bimfelf, who have each their
articular Office, of which they areaccountable to bim.
be ft. # Hamalda, rhe. Governour of Men. The
ad. # Baman, who has infpettion over the Beafts, and
the Creatures of the Sea. The 3d. # Ardi Beft, mio
preferves Fire, and hinders it from going out. The 4th.
5 Sariuard, on whom Metals and Minerals depend.
The 5th, # Efpendaar, who takes care left the. Earth
fhould be fl d with fiithincfs, and grow wild ; The 6th.
# Arendaar, who has the direttion of the Waters, and
who takes care that they be not foiled with naftine/s:
The laft is Amadaat, who has the infpeétion of the Trees
and Fruits of the Earth, and of Herbs. All thefe
Geds are only Infpefters and Direëlers 3 it being not in
their power to inflitt death upon any thing, ur to give
it a new Life, for they are folely effablifhed to give av
account to the Sovereign God, and to inferm agzainfé
thofe that bave ill ufed, corrupted,or violated te things,
that are under their keeping.

Sect. 8. Befides thofe 7° Minifters, there aïe yet 2
of an inferior Order, each of which bas hy particular
diftri@. ~Sorach # the firft, whofe Office # quickiy to
bring the Souls feparated from the Bodies before their
Fudzes, viz. Mees,Refna and Saros. The 4th. 5 Beram
Carrafedaats, who direfls War at his pleafure.. Toe
5th # the Sun. The 6th, # Anoa, who has dominion
over the Waters. The 7th. 5 Ader, who 5 effablifked

D 4 over

CN

56 Tee World Bewitch'a.

sver Fire., The 8th # Maho, who governs the Moon
The oth. #-Fiera, that 5 the Rains,. roth. Gos governs
and preferves Cattle. 11. Tavarditakes care of the
Sculs wbo are in Heaven. 12th. Aram brings Foy ta
the World, and banifhes Pains and Sorrows from t bence..
13th. Goada rules the Winds, tho’ he be not the Wind
bimfelf. 14th. Dien gives to Nations information and
anderftanding of the Laws, and inclination to keep.
them. 15. Apperfone affords Riches. 16th. Aftaas:
gives Underftanding and Memory. 17th, Affamaan

has the infpettion of Wares. 10. Gimninaat, has the .
condu& of the Earth, 19. Marifipant # the. God of
Gosdnefi, which be communicates to thofe that have re-

cosrfe to him. 20. Armira # the direëtor of Money:
21. Hosm # the Author of the. conception of Women,

sud gives life to their Fruit. 22, 23. Dimnia and
Bafe are eftablifhed to fuccor thofe that-ftand in need.
of them. The three laft, Befadeer, Defemeer and
‘Prefyn, ftand by God to ferve him, and are always rea-

dy to perform bis Orders. Thefe are the Names of
thofe 26 MiniPers; whom the Country men of Perna ber

nour with the. Title of: Geftio, or Saints and whom.

bey believe to bave Authority and Power all the things

abat are under their dire&ion: For which reafon thep-
aife adzre them, trufting that they will be their Inter-

ceffors to God, and obtain from him whatever fhall be

meceffary for their good.

Se&. 9. Having. thus fufficiently fpoken, as to
the Gods, we'll now treat of the Spirits, tho we.
find but little information upon this point in Au-
thors, faving in what concerns China, and. the-Ea/t-
Brdics, on this fide the River Ganges. I only find
rnention made, that the Fapanders, in a place not
farr from Ofacca, venerate a God or Spirit, named
Tiedebaie, left he fhould hurt them, and thar another
God called Goguis, frequently appears to them ina
humane Shape. In the Fown of Micao. They

| CRE worfhip

SSS =

The World Bewitch'd. 57
Worfhip in a Statue of a frightful Figure, another
Spirit, to whom the Chrifiians give the name of
King of the Devils. . There & no Pagod in all Japan,
faith Carolinus, which ts. fo frequented, nor enriched
with fo great Prefence; becaufe thereby they think to re-
deem their fins.

Seët. 10. Martiniw, Kircher, andTrigaltius, three
Jefuits, have written large Hiftories of China, but
very little infifted. upon this matter: However,
confidering what they obferve of the Worfhip of
that People, it may be concluded that they believe
the exiftence of Spirits, as we fhall fhow hereafter.
The Siamefe likewife venerate fome wicked Gods,
though againft the fentiment of many of their Do-
Gtors, under pretence of charging thofe bad Spirits
of fuch evils, ef which they will not make God
the Author. It is faid of the fame Nation,that they
give two Spirits to every Man,one of which makes
them to be good, and the other evil.

Se&. 11. But the greateft knowledge we have of
the Opinions of thofe- Countries comes ftom the
Coaft of Choromandel. Carolinu, who has gatherd
what Rogerius fays of it in many places,fays,Thar they
believe good and bad Spirits, that w, Angels and De-
vels 3 They name the Angels Deuetas, and the Devils
Ratfiafias: They bold that both were begotten by Men $
and that their common Father was Caffiopa, the firft
Bramaine, or Prieft and Legiflator ; The Mother of
the Deuetas was Diti, and that of the Ratfañas was
Aditi 5 both Wives of Caffiopa.

Sec. 12. There are two forts of Deuetas 5 For fuch
Men as 20 after their Deceale into the Happinefs of the
Worlds under the Sun, and above the Earth, are alfo
called Deueras, but thofe places are not for them an
eternal abode, fince after the fucceffion of fome Ages,
they muf come back into the World,and be Birn again.
As to the other Deuetas, who are in great numbers,
D 5 they

SE The World Bewitch d.

they never depart from their Abode. The Sun, Moon:
and Stars.are in that number, they afcribe unto them
beth Soul and Life.

Sect, 134 The Ratfiafias are alfo of two forts, fome
of them.are Wicked Men, who are condemn'd for their
Sins,to.wander in the. World, and to fuffer Hunger
and Thirft, which they cannot fatisfe but by the
Alms that Men hand them: Wherefore they often
appear ina human fhape, to beg fomething from
them, but they. have no. power to hurt them. ~ Be-
fides thefe, there is another fort of Devils, or Rat-
fiafias, properly fo called, becaufe they are the
Children of Aditz, and are very Malitious. They
have power to moleft Men, and even to caufe much
trouble and vexation to the Angels, or Deueras.
‘They may walk eyery where, except fave in the
abode of Brama, and in the Heavens. They are:
deferibed with huge, frightful, and ftinking Bodies ;
they. are faid to be Male and Female, to procreate:
Children, and to be fubject to Death.

Set. 14.  There’s enough concerning the Demons
of the Pagans of Afia; butas moft of thofe Nations:
are. Pythagoveans., and believe the Metempfychofisy
they alfo fupply us with Heroes: For. (fays Bal-
dein, in his Book.of the Idolatry of the Eaft Indies) :
the Modern Heathens believe that Man # happier in
tbts Life than the Beafts, by reafon-that he has a Body,
by which. the Soul may exert ber Operation ; but they
agree not that-a Man more noble than a-Beast ; nor.
that ke has.a Soul more excellent than it bas. And:
when they are gsk’d, why Beafts reafon not, they anfwer,
becaufe - they, have. not Bodies capable of exerting the
qualities of a Soul, as.a Dumb Man who wants a pro-
per Organ ta utter Words, and may be neverthelefs very:
HAfe; or as fome People, who have a great deal of
Knowledge and Learning, but have-no more readinefs
se exprefs themfelves than Children, whe cannot do me |

pn TT

rte

The World Bewitth'd. 59

He that fhall Read this will be lefs furprifed at
what follows.

Se&, 15. Nothing certain can be faid of the Fa-
panders, becaufe the Fefuits, who relate their Opi-
nions, agree not together. It appears however,
that there are amongft that People-three forts of
Opinions concerring human Souls, and their Effence,
The firft is, That the Soul of Man differs not from
that of Beafts. The fecond, That Men havea Soul
of another Nature than that of Beafts, but ftill’
Mortal. The third, That the Soul is Immortal.
They likewife believe the Metemp/ychofis, and that
the Soul going out of the Body is determined to
enter into another Body, either of Man or Beatt, by
the conjunction that is then made of the Sun and
Moon with other Stars.

Sef. 16. The Chinefe are likewife Pythagoreans,
Martinius teftifies it very plainly, as to one of their
Sects, in thefe Words. Chiquiao # a Seët, which
onr People eftcem to be the firft intecduced in China,
after the Birth of our Saviour. They believe the ex-
changes of Souls inwardly and outwardiy. They Honour
Images, and imagine that the Soul after Death paffes in
puniflment of her Sins from ene body into another 5
for which reafon they abftain from whut ever has had’
life: That Narration is confirmed by Trigaltius,

‘who fays, That the Parents are not afraid of killing’

their Children to be difcharged of them, when they
ate incumbred with too many, afferting, that by
thar means they procure them a better Condition 5°
fince inftead of Poverty, they afford them by Death:
the occafon of going into other Bodies, and being
Born again in the Honfe of Richer People, where
they will live more at eafe. The Peguans feem to
have the fame Sentiment by the Relation Piwto,when
by the Tomb of their Rolym, or High-Prieff, they
let 'loofe a great many Birds and Fithes,which they
kept

60 The World Bewitth'a

kept Prifoners, believing them to be as many hu-
man Souls, who will keep company to their Rojm.:
in his way to the other World.

Befides we read in Corolimw, out of Artus, in his
Speculum Mundi, That the Wife Men of China have.
invented three places for thofe that depart ths Life. .
Nachac # 4 place of Torment ; Schuum one of De-
lights, fuch as..the Paradife- of Mahomet and Miba, .
er Nibam, Jignifies an entire privation of being, or a
full Deftruftion of Body and Soul. All the Souls have
their abode in the two firft places, or depart from.thence,
zo go to and fro through the World, and often pafs from.
one Body into another by new Birth, until they deferve
to enter intothe Nibam, that %, to be annibilated..
Le Blanc {peaks of it fomewhat differently, in a Re-
lation extracted from a Francifcan Monk. He fays,
That she Chinefe believe that Men become Gods at laft,
after they have paffed through the Bodies of feveral
Beafts, Birds, and Fifhes 3 and that they imagine that -
rhe Sonls, after the courfe of many Ages, having been-
well purified in Some proper places, and returned fever
ral times. into new Worlds, are at last introduced into
Paradife, caft down to Hell, or reduced to mthing.

Seët. 18. As to the Opinion of the Siamefe in this.
point, we muft leaïn it from the Relation of the
Fefuits in their Journey to Siam, in the years 1685. .
and 1686. becaufe that Book- is the neweft and
much credited. Thus then writes Tachard, p, 297,
298, Edit. Amfteled. Merempfychofis one of the
Fundamental Points: of their Religion, fo that the Life
af Man paffes in continual Tranfmigrations, untill be
be fanélified, and deferves ro be God. They admit of
Spirits, but fuch as are nothing elfe than Souls, who al
ways-inform fome Bodies, until they have attained to
Eisline[s or Deity > Angels are Corporeal, and of diffe
rent Sexes, and confequently may beget Sons and Daugh-
ters. Thofe, Angels are, never SanGified nor DR

ub

file rare ee

The World Bewitch d. 61.

but to them only belongs to watch over the Government
of the World, andthe prefervation of Men. They di-
ftribute them into feven Orders, or Hierarchies 5 fome
of which are more perfect and noble than the others ;
all. which. they place in as-many different Heavens...
Each part of the World has one of thofe Intelligences to
prefide over what % done there. They likewife impart
them to Stars, to the Earth, toCities, Mountains and
Forefts, and even to the Winds and Rain. And be-
caufe they are perfwaded,that thofe Angels examine the -
condutt of Men, and are witneffes of all their attions,
to reward thofe that: are commendable,by vertue. of the
merits of their God 3 Ie ws therefore tothofe Intelligences *
and net to their God , that they nfe to apply themfelves
in their neceffities and miferies, and to thank theme
for the favours they fuppofe to have received from them.

Sect. 19. They acknowledge no other Demons but
the Souls of the wicked, who making their efcape ont of
the Hell, in which they were detained; wander
through the World a certain time, and do as much burt
to Men as they can. Amongft thofe unbappy Spirits,
they rank untimely Births, Women dying in Childbed, ..
thofe that are killed in a Duel, or guilty of fome crime
of that nature.

Seët. 20. The Heathens of Fava believe likewife
Metempfychofis, as well as thofe of Sümatra, the Ma-
labars, and the Inhabitants of the Coaft of Corman-:
del. All the Bewjanes in the hither Eajl-Indies,
agree upon no Article of Religion, better than up-
onthis. Moft\of the Bramines, that are not enga-
ged in any of thefe two Sects Schaaruakka and Pa-
fenda, admit the immortality of human Souls, and
fay-that there are fome, who being feparated from

_ the Bodies become Devils, becaufe of their fins 5

and that the time of their firft punifhment being fi-
nifhed, they muft wander in the Air, and there in-
duce an intolerable Hunger, it being impoffible

for

62 The World Bewitch d.

for them to draw fo muchas the Leaf of an Herb;
or to fupply their wants with any other thing, be-
fides what Men beftow upon them in Charity. I
had mention’d that Opinion, {peaking of the Ratfis
Afidss

Sect. 21.. Ina word, when we gather all the
Obfervations made in this Chapter, and_before it,
to difcover the Opinions of the Heathens ; we find
that, tho’ all their Superftitions be grounded upon
very different Caufes; yet they all tend in the
main to the fame fcope, thatis, to worfhip one
fele Object, as the Supream Dezty, and yet to:
*affociate Spirits to him. I cannot better exprefs that
Though, than by the very words of @arolinus,
which, areas a re-capitulation of what has hitherto
been faid. Some effeem, fays he, that the Souls are
mortal , others eftcem them immortal ; fome eftablifh
rhe tranfmigration of Souls, others are not of that Opi-
nion : and how much differ thofe that affert the Me-
tempfychofis between themfelves ; fome, as thofe of
Java believe, that the Soul goes into the firft Body fhe
meets with 3 others believe that fhe w fent into fuch
or fuch Body, according as fle has merited by the good
or evil fhe has done, which à the Opinion of the Ban-
janes. Some affirm, that the Souls change their abode
but once, others three times, and others teach a vaft
number of Tranfmigrations 3 others make them pas
only into Men, who muft allo be firangers; others:
again fend them into Man and Beafts 3 bue others at
laft make them pafs only in the Females of Men and
Beafts ; which. 1% the imagination of the Thearau-
achs 3 others have yet quite different Opinions. In a’
word, it may be rightly faid upon this Jubjeët, Many
Men many Minds; for there are almoft as ‘many
Opinions as Pexfons.

GHA P?

The World Bewitch’4. 63

CHAP. VIL

That the Witchcraft praëtifed amongst the People, pro-
ceeds from the fame fource.

Sed. 8. A S the name of. Withcraft is. given to.

Whatever is fuppofed to be done by
the help of the Devil; T cannot but judge that ma-
ny perfons are called Sorcerers and Witches, who,
Perhaps are not fo, and that this muft be afcribed.
to the fame prejudice, which I have mentioned.
before, fpeaking of the worthip of Demons. And.
therefore I intend to examine hereafter, what thefe
People really are. It is fufficient to advertife here
before-hand, that allthe. Heathens muft not be. ta-
ken for Magicians, Sorcerers, and Inchanters 3 be-
caule many Writers have called them by. fuch
names, giving them indifferently in their Writings .
to all the He and She Priefts, and to all thofe who.
difcharge any Office, Miniftry, or.employment in
their Religious Worfhip, and in their Sacrifices. But
I-defign to infert in this prefent.Chapter, whatever
18 known to us of their practices,or of their commu.
nications with any of the inferior Gods or Spirits,
good or bad-

Sect. 2. The veneration which that People have:
for the Sun, Moon and Stars, is fufficient to efta-
blith the choice of Days amongft them : whence pro--
ceeds what Peter Vaudenbrook has obferved, fpeaking
of the Benjanes of Narfinga: That 10 happy and
unhappy hours, they Judge of them by the courfe of the»
Stars, which they obferve with great nicety. Trigaltins
ia bi Firf? Book, Chap. 59. /ays, that there 5 no.
Superflition fo. common in China, 4s that of obferving :

the

64 The World Bewitch'd.
the Feaft and Working days, and that they rule the
whole conduct of their Lives, upon the difpofition of
Time. To that end there are Printed every year two
forts of Almanacks made in the Emperor’s name by
his own Aftrologers, which contributes +0 fer off this de-
lufion for a Truth: there 5 marked every day what %
good to be done, or not to be done, and to what hour
muft be deferr d, what offers it felf in the intervals
of the fortunate, or unlucky moments.

Sel. 2. Carolinus has, methinks, made a good
Abridgment of what follows in Trigaltius, which

therefore I intend to make ufe of. There are.

other Books, {ays he, befides thofe that more particularly
_ treat of this matter, and even, there's a fort of Teachers,
which only fubfift from what they get in preforibing hap-
py Days and Hours to the Querifis, thé theyhave but a
{mall reward for it. They are Jo much bewitcht with
thofe predi&tions, that they often deferr an importunate
Affair, or along and dangerous Fourney, #1]! they bave
found out a Day or Hour of good Omen. And thé it
sometimes happens, that at that Day or Hour, there falls
a great Rain, or a contrary Wind blows, yet for all that,
they begin the undertaking or journey im their perfixed
time, flould they only proceed 4 fteps, or dig out byta
Basket full of Earth from the place where they intend to
lay she Foundation of a Houfe. That wasallo the em-
ployment of thofe that were Anciently called Aftro-
logers and Mathematicians, of whom we have {po-
ken before.

Se&. A. They are no lefs fuperftetioufly curtons, in
obferving the time of the Birth, to foretel the condstion
of the whole courfe of ones Life. Thofe calculators of

. ones Nativity, are the fame with the Ancient Geneth-
Haci before mentioned, Chap. 3. Sett.4. There are
many other Diviners, who boaft of foreteling future things
by the Obfervation of the Stars, by the infpettion of the
Face, by the Dreams, by the pofture of the enquirer, D

is

bys 11
wenn
Sel
been

} the (
} Nitio
of Cor
of Chit
Lys,

he don

The World Bewitch d. 65

Ù bis manner of fitting or ftanding, and this fort of Men
I) are in great cfteem amongft the vulgar.

Seë& 5. Rogerius gives a larger account of what has
| been faid, concerning the choice of Days, amongft
À the Chinefe, which is likewife practifed amongft other
| Nations, as efpecially the Inhabitants of the Coatt

| of Coromandel, where they ufe Almanacks, like thofe

| of China; and call them Pansangam. That Author
| fays, That. they are two forts 5 one, that flows whar muft
| be done, and the other, what mujt be laid afide at ever?
| Hour of the. Day of the Week, and what fhall fucceed or
| not. For a Specimen of it, he relates the predictions of
| | Sunday, from Hour to Hour. They reckonin that:
| Country 30 Hours, betwixt the Rifing and. Setting

7 of the Sun.

1. Good for all Affairs of Council and Reafoning:.
2. Undertaking fhall profper.
3, Shall not fucceed.
4. Who meansto get an Advantage, fhall not get
it, but his Enemy.
§. Good for Traaing Profitably.
6. Good for Rejoycing and Undertaking: what-
ever concern Merriment and Science.
7. The Courting of. Women, fhall fucceed at a
pleafure.
8. Trade without gain.
9. As the 6th Hour.
10. No Project happy.
r1.. Phyficks and things taken for Pleafure, will.
not profper.
12. Who afpires after Victory fhall obtain it.
13. Good for buying Cows and other Beafts,
14. Good to take a Servant.
15. Bad to enter into a New houfe, or to go a.
Vifiting.
16. Good to lay the Foundation of Houfes, Vil-
lages or Towns...

66 The World Bewitch'd.
17. Unhappy Journeys. Lg
18. Good to pay Vifits to the Great. pions
19. Good for Ereéting Statues. in the Pagodes, to frat

the Honour of the Gods. [te] d
20. Unhappy for all forts of Undertaking. jit
21. Nothing to be gotten. ite pie
22. Who gives Battle, fhall loofe the Day. [lone bc
23..Good to make Friends, j ‘ Île that
24. Good for Fighting. full D
25. Good for keeping Council. poet
26. Unprofitable Trade. 1° tm

Jarre

27. Who lies with a Woman fhall get her with JM"
Child. | = | Jey W
28. Every Undertaking fall facceed. vi
29. Shall not fucceed. bets 0
30. Good for Planting. pres, |
The Night is likewife diftributed into feveral ue à

Hours, as alf the other Days and Nights of the mi!
Week. LOT

Se&. 6. That Superftition has proceeded {o far |}
as to have ftained an Art very commendable in it ype H
felf, and one of the liberal Arts. For, according J!
to the Relation of Daviti, extracted from Oforius, ff
the Malabars, who ufe to begin their Year with the à Cam
Month of September, have recourfe to Superftitious J
Obfervations, in Order tomarkthe Firft Day and WE
Hour of it. That Day all thofe that are above the ft
Age of 15, cover their Eyes and Face, that fon
they may fee nothing, and caufe themfelves to be! hee
brought into the Pagodes of their Idols, where they | “oul
prefently uncover their Faces, and quickly caft their J Laver
Eyes upon the Firft Object before them. If it hap- 9d
pens to be the Statute of fome Idol, for which they |!
have a particular Veneration, they fancy they fall |
pafs the Year moft happily. LA
Sel 7. Thofe that obferve the cry of Birds,
havea verygreat relation with the Malabars, and| Is
agree|

ML

The Wold Bewitchd. — 67

À agree with them almoft in the fame things; for Ca
Hrolinus {ays after Rogerius, that they obferve what
| fort of Birds lie near them, and to what part, whence
| they draw a favourable or finifter Augury. They
| fay that when a Afh-coloured Crow, whereof there
lare great numbers upon the Coaft, comesto touch
| fome body in flying, it forebodes very ill. vzz. that
he that has been touched or fome of his Friends,
fhall Die within 6 Weeks. Linfchoten gives very
near the fame account of the Decanins, and the Inha-
'} bitants of Gurafatte, faying, that if the Firft Ob-
| ject they fee in the Morning 1s an 4fb-coloured Crow,
| they will not go out of their Houfe for any thing.

| $e&. 8. Davitifays after Mendoze, that the Hea-
thens of thelflands, called by the Spaniards Philip-
| pines, have fome fhe Diviners named Holaoz, whom
sel ‘they honour as Priefts, 7770 converfe daily with the
‘Al Demons, ( at leafh in bis Opinion, ) and that they pub-
“Micky before all the People, make frrange poftures, and
...@ horrid noife, during which, the Spirit of Divination
| feizes upon them, and gives by them anfwer to whatever
Yo is asked.- Tne fame Author adds, that they havea
Fe | particular fort of Divination, in which if they meet

-a Cayman in their way, they return home. Whence
appears, that they efteem that meeting unfortunate,
Se&: 9. Befides that, all forts of prefages are
in credit- amongft thofe Nations, who draw them
from whatever offers it felf to them. If any body
|fneezes before them when they go out, of their

nthe

nt Houfe, they prefently ftep in again, for they efteem
ia ‘ita very bad Omen. Peter Vandenbrock, affirms the

fame of the Inhabitants of Narfinga, and adds, that
fs) when they go out in the Morning, if they meet
bi Pwith fome bad Augury, they. return back, or ftay
4 ‘till a more favourable offers it felf... We read in
ui | Carolinus, which are according to them, good or bad
, À

al

agit | ?

DRE a p> So a
i ae eerie a er eC nen) Er à TEE Ur

Signs, which he has tranfcribed ont. of Tuzsk, and ©
Vandenbrock.

Eire EE Een

PS.

638 The World Bewitch d, |

Vandenbroek. Here they are. Befides fneezing and FTP
flight of Birds, there are feveral others all pregages 3 as at 8
an emptyCart, a Dog who has nothing to Eat, a Buffle, |i
an Afs, a Guilded-he-Goat, an Ape, 4 loosen d Hart, a Perf,
Goldfmith, aCarpenter,.a Barber, a Taylor, à Cotton- jis 4
Merchant, a Farrier, a Weaver, a She-Widow, 40
Dead body, all People coming from a Barying, before |l h
they be wafbed, and having changed their Drefs. “Tis 1 Conjr
alfo an ill Augury to meet with one. that carryes Buster, |behw'
Milk, or brown Sugar, or four things, as Apples and Lem=
mons, or one that carries Fire, and any thing ufed in|—
War. But’tis a good Omen to meet with an Elephant
a Cammel either Loaden or Unloaden, a Horfe better\:
Unloaden than Loaden, a Cow, an Ox, a Buff Loaden|
with Water, for Unloaden it forebodes nothing but Ill) That 0
a He-gcat, a Dog Eating, a Cat on the Right Hand 3) sit
likewife to meet one carrying Meat, Curds or white-Su-| the
gar, a Cock, an Unicorn running firait out in the way,
and a Hundred things of that Nature are efteemed foyicl
fortunate by them, that they boldly purfue their way with!
hopes of a good Fortune, Tereira adds, that they be-|lerer
Lieve it a veryill thing, and even a Sin to Eat before} lle
Sun-[et. their
Se 10. This is what I entended to relate as to thet À
Divination; upon which point, and efpecially. upon
Witchcraft: Iam furprized to find fo little in their
writings of fo many Authors, whom I have confult-Wr of
ed with gteat exactnefs 3 neither do: I remember toi
have learned any thing more particular in the Comfi')j
verfations I have had with Gentlemen that have madefftien
long Journeys into the Eaftern Countryes ; but Mi]
wonder moft of all, that Baldeus, whofe chief fcopet:|.
in his writings, is to treat of the Idolatry of the what
Eaftern Countryes, makes almoft no mention of Eu Le
The only thing I find in him, concerns the Conju |;
ration of Serpents, The Inhabitants, fays he, of th ket

Malabar:

Coaft of Coromandel, and fome of the Cingalele a bte

The World Bewitch a. 69

D Malabars, know how to Enchant Serpents ; fo that by
Usher Songs, they make them Dance, which ts ftrange
| ana wonderful. When they require the Oath of any
i Perfon, they put his Hand in a Pot, where there
Nis a Serpents if be be not wounded, they hold bis
loath to be rruc, but if be be bitten, they bee
| lieve bim Perjur'd. Peirard adds to this, that they
Tif) Conjure the greateft and moft fubtle Snakes not to
| be hurt by them, and Baldeus reports the fame.

CHAP. IX.

That the Opinions and Prattices of the African Heathens,
agree at bottom with the Sentiments and Cuftoms of
the other. Pagans.

| Sed. 1, T HE Heathens of Africa being duller
pi than the others, becaufe the Men of
yy Letters, ate moft or all Mahometans, we can have
Mn Little knowledge of their Opinions, unlefs it be by
) their practices. From them only, we may infer
ast their belief, as to the matter in hand: and tho Tra-
| vellers have left us but few Obfervations, [hall
nt neverthelefs examine them two ways, to know what
fort of Creatures are efteem'd and worfhiped as Di-
| vine, by thofe Nations, and afterwards what forts
of: Divination and Witchcraft are in ufe amongft
them.  Amongft the beft writers, none have given
| more Information than Carolinus, whom therefore I
fhall take for my leader; but add to his Narration,
what I fhall think convenient out of other Authors
in proper places.

Sef. 2. Thofe Africans, that without living un-
A der the Law of Chrift, or that of Mahomet, having
| neverthelefs {ome knowledge of God diftribute the
Deity

Jen ec re ot a RT RTS LT TPE DE icy 4

70 The World Bewitch a.

Deity, amongft feveral Creatures, as do all other
Heathens. They give the firft fhare to the moft
vifible and fhining, as the Celeftial Lamps, which
they look upon as Lights placed in Heaven, by the
Sovereign Creator, fora proof of his Eternal Pow-
er and Deity. The Inhabitants of Damute,a Coun-
try lying very near the Equinoétial Line, thofe that
live under the Dominion of the Great Negus, and
thofe of Balagata in the Kingdom of Monepotapa,
have time out of mind adored the Rifing Sun.

Thofe of the Kingdom of Mongibur, Subjects to the |

Great Negus, render him the fame worfhip, and hold
him for the Creator himfelf. Thofe of Suarim,
capital of the Kingdom of Murat under the fame Em-
pire; have the fame Faith. Butthey fay, according
to the relation of /e Blanc, that Heaven is only for

the Gods, by which they fhow, that they acknow-_
ledge other Gods, who are doubrlefs inferior to, |
and in lefs credit than the Sun. Thofe of Songo,in |

the Kingdom of Congo, look on the Sun and Moon

as Husband and Wife; and as the Firft and Second ],
God. ‘They adore the Earth, as the Mother of all,
things.. They worfhip likewife fome Birds, parti- 1
cular to ‘their Country, and as it feems -what-ever

comes into their fancy.

Se. 3. When thofe of Faloffe in Guinea diflce- |
ver the Moon, they adore her with great Cries, |

eft
they v
col
Là Fel
very Ê
thole.
Lans À
Lis a pa
Some |
Land ot
| Sed
| of th
with
the J
| teaches

They have-the fame Cuftom at Mandimanca in the |
fame Country, where the Moon is named Bariomar,

or the Goddefs of the Night. Daviti fays, that the Ber- |
befeins, in the Kingdoms of Ale and Brocale, worthip |
her at the foot of certain Trees. But other People of |
Guinea, make even of certain Trees and Herbs, |
their Fetiffis or Gods. They worfhip the fpeckled 9 *

Starry-Hern, asa Divine Bird. Amongft the Fithes

they venerate che Tunny as Fetiffos, and put them |

before

M they venture to Fifh, but not to Ear, u

_ ff tained fome lofs, they eafily fufpect, th

“| Verde imagine, that after their De

The World Bewitch'd, 74
| before the Emperadors or Emperor’s Fifhes, which
| ntil they have
à cut off their Sword, which being dry, becomes then

M a Fetiffo too. When it Lightens or Thunders upon
very high Mountains, fear makes them believe, thar
‘} thofe Mountains are likewife Fetifjos. The Lybi-
M ans, divided into 4 Nations, doall agree, that there
| is a particular virtue and even Deity. in Garlick.
| Some Inhabitants of Capo Verde wWorfhip the Moon,
| and others the God, Conculi, becaufe of his Malice.
Seët. 4. Few among them believe the Mortality

} of the Soul, or if they do, their Faith is atrended
“With many doubts, and mix’d with the Opinion of
{the Meremplchofis ; {o far the. Se& of Pythagoras
‘reaches. The Inhabitants of Mongibur in Ethiopia,
make a favourable reception to ftrangers, provided
they be no Chriffians, who they efteem lefs than
| others, The caufe of that kind reception is, that
| they imagine the Souls of their Relations or Friends
y admit pains
t without, any

nl may be paffed into thofe Perfons. The
and punifhment during this Life, bu
| larger explication of it. In Guinea. the Hollanders

4 were told in 1600, that the belief of the Country

| was, that the Souls of the Deceafed came again up-
| on Earth, and that they took from Houfes, what
| they ftood in need of ; fo that when they have fu-

at thofe Spi-
bitants of Capo
ath, they are trans-
and in that State come to

rits have taken it away. The Inha

‘ form’d into white Men,
‘hf dwell upon Earth.
"yh . See. 5. I find no other particular Obfryation on
the fentiments of thofe Nations, and much lefs up-
on their practices. In the mean while, what may
| De learned Of it, fufficiently thows, that they pro-
| ceed from the fame Original with the others; they
have-very near the fame Gods and the fame Oracles,

which

72 The World bewitch'a.
which they get from their Geds by the fame means,
viz. Divination and Witchcraft. In The new Hiftory
of the Abyffines, by Ludolf, may be feen, how the In-
Habitants of the Kingdom of Zendero, have them-
{elves in the Election of a King. He is chofen from
the greateft Men of the Kingdom, who go together in a

Wood, whither they expect the flight of a certain Bird; *

that nearks by his Cry, who is to be their. new Prince 5
As they bave a great Inclination to Witchcraft, the new
Prince gives immediatly a proof of his Proficiency im
that Art; for asfoon as by bis Conjurations, be has No
rice of bis choice, he draws by the fame virtue, Lyons,
Tygers, Vipers, and Dragons about him, and in the
middle of that ftately Pomp, he is received by all the
great ones of bis Kingdom, who goto meet him. This
25 what that Author relates, and the pure Truth in
his Judgment ; but we fhall examine hereafter, what
virtue {uch a Witchcraft may have.

Sef. 6. The Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Baza-
far, on the Eaft of that Benin, are accufed to be the
greateft Magicians in the World, becaufe they boaît
of obtaining Rain, and caufing Thunder and Lighting,
whenever they pleafe, and evem of effecting all
they defire. The Brames in the Kingdom of Loan-
go know how to hinder, by their Inchantments, the
Fruits of the Earth from being taken away by
Thieves, who ate in great numbers among them,
and yet not fo bold as to. touch any thing ; where
there isa Basket witha pair of Goats Horns, Par-
rots Feathers, and other trifles of Nature, becaufe
they are confecrated to their God Magufchi, other-
wife Moquifche, or Mobhtlo, of whom however Da-
iti has no reafon to’believe, that he isthe Devil.

Se&. 7. When thofe of Guinea, meet not with
a happy Fifhing, they compel their Gods with their |

‘Conjurations, to drive Fifi into their Nets, which

is done by the frightful noife of the Fetifferes, who
are

are th
han
have
the bi
Fe
his W
King
patien
| chant
Lan À
| titer
| great
| Athes
ter de
where
fans À
1 wile
| quel
| inp a
| manif
only
| pecia
Sef
either
condi
Die,
they
World
Hen,
Tr
vel
Cala
Dd
if the
til
thm 0
Bl

The World bte PA 73

are their Priefts Wives, or by branches of Trees
hanging about their Neck, fuppoñng thofe Trees to
bave a Divine virtue, ‘as has been obferved ; or by
the beating of Drums, or by fome words «that the
Feriflero, or Prieft mutters, as grumbling againft
his Wife, or by fome Corn, or other’ matters, va-
rioufly Painted, and thrown into the Sea. If the
King happen to have occafion for Money, and im-
patiently defires to know, whether there are Mer-
chants in the way from whom ‘he may hope to ger
an Advantage, the Fetiffero goes with his Wives to
interrogate a Tree thereupon, at firft he makes a
great many poftures, then offers Sacrifices, ules
Afhes, the branch of a Tree cut on purpofe, Wa-
ter drawn fucking from a Beafon into his Mouth,
wherewith he befprinkles the {aid Bah then he
fays fome words to his Wives, upon whom he like-
wife makes afperfion ; afterwards he pronounces the
queftions aloud; then there is heard, without {ee=
ing any thing, a Voice anfwering, which fometimes
manifefts it felf under the fhape of a Dog, but that’s
only practifed fos things that concern this Life, ef
pecially for the Kings protperity.

Se&. 8. But they ufe another fort of Witchraft
either for the King or the Subjects, to obtain a good
Condition in the furure Life. When any body comes £0
Die, they chufe anew Fetifio for that time, whom they
intreat to conduti the Sou! of tbe Deceafed into the other
World. The neareft Relations come toge ee wil a
Hen, ai nd drefs her, then they difbofe all ‘the Periffos or
Idols of the Deceafed upon a Line, bang about them fe-

veral collars of Peas and Beans, adorn them with many
Garlands of green Herbs; and befprinkle them with the
blood of the Hen. That's the Duty of the Men. That
of the Women, confifis in bringing the drefs d Hen in

Oo
iat fee es

a Difh, and placing her in the middle of the Fetiflos,

thnn one of the Men begins bis Conjurations by drinking
Vol, L E and

74 The World Bewitch à.

and throwing a mouthful of Water or palm Wine upon
the Fetiflos. He takes 2 or 3 leaves of thofe Garlands,
which be rakes up, and makes a little round Ball of its
be, puts it between bis 2 Fingers, and many times be-
#wixt bis Feet or.Toes, whence be draws it out, greeting
the Fetiflos as many times; when be has fquezedall the
moyfiure out-of that green Ball upon bis Gods, he makes
another ,.and then another, til all the Garlands be fpent,
then out. of all thefe little Bails, he makes. one, with
which he.rubs his. Face, which ratfes it to the dignity of
a Fetiffo, and.caufes it to be kept as an gecehenk Pi
fervative againft all forts of Evils, and a certain. fuc-
‘cour in the War. Thus they pretend ta bring the Dead
toa quiet State. * 7

Seët. 9. They alfo ufe Birdsin their Divinations,
wiz. The fpeckled Hern, becaufe (lays Carolinus, who
has fupplyed us with the former Narration, ) ##
lows as inuch as an Ox, when it flicks it bill into the
ground. When they undertake to Travel, and hear it
erying, they cxtreamly reyoyce, faying that the Fetitto '
comes to promife them a happy journey. They put Corn
and aVeffel full of Water, near the place where they
have beard the cry, that the Fetiflo may find Meat and
Drink, thence precred that many af thofe Veffels with
Mays, Rice, and other grains, are to be found every
where in the Woods and Fields. But enough of the .
Pagans of Africa, Jet us go over to thofe of Ame |
IC |

The World Bewitch a.

GH AP. X.

That very near the fame Opinions and Praétices, are to
be found in America.

Sed, 16 D HE Chriftians keep under their Domi-
nion the greateft part of what has been
difcovered of the Weftern Continent, which is
known only, fince 200 Years, and commonly called
America ot Weft-Indies. They keep down the pu-
lick Idolatry and Witchcraft of the Inhabitants, as
far as their Authority willextend. But as thofe Na-
tions are Heathens at the bottom, and live to it,
whenever they are at liberty, privatly continuing
their Ancient practices. I fhall therefore {peak of
them, as they are in themfelves, ro fhow their. true
fentiments, and Ancient Cuftoms : for that end, I
fhall make ufe of the neweft Authors, who have
publifhed Relations of the Southern parts of that
Country, whom -Montanus has compiled, and when
I come to the Northern parts, I fhall abound with
Inftructions newer and very much credited.

Set. 2. In Southern America, which is the near-
eft to Africa, Brazile is the firft County to be met
with in the North-Eaft, and Peru overagainit it to
the Weft. The Cannibals, who are Originally of
Southern America, have extended their Idolatry,
through all the Iflands, lying betwixt this and the
Northern part. All the other parts :of the South,
and the middle of the Country, having nor yet been
difcovered Ly the Ewropeuns, and being confequently

| | 2 unknown

76 ‘The World Bewitch'd.
sinknown to us, we an fay nothing of it, let usthen
begin with Brazile.

Ge 3. Thô that Country be the ‘“beft
known of all, yetwe can fay but little upon the mat-
ter, For the Bratilians ( fays Davitt, Peviard, Leri,and
Abbeville, ) bave neither God nor Religion. The Tou-
tinambres however believe the Soul to be Immortal, and
that thofe who bave performed their Duty, that is, ef-

“pecially, who have often beaten their Enemies, go into
the Quaioupia, a place feated behind the Mountains,
where they dance in delightful plains 5 but thofe

“hat have not done it, go to Feropari, a malitious
God, by whom they are to be rormented ; they like-
“wife believe, that chere are Spirits, and it may be
aid, that they have fome knowledge of God, and
that they defign him by the name of Toupan, becaufe
they ufe to call the Thunder Toupanremimogan, that

-4s to fay, the Action of Ged.

Se: à. They have allo their C arvaibes or Diviners,
who frequently foretel the fruitfulnefs or barrennets
of the Year, Rain or Drought, and whatever may
benefic Man upon Earth. Thefe. Caraibes at the

| ame time, are their Surgeons, and boaft of curing
Srmediatly bodily ‘pains, by fucking or blowing,
which they have perfwaded the Vulgar fo well, that

“there is not one even of the ‘eldeft, but he is ready
go obey their Commands. _

Seé. 5. The Tapuzens, othewife Maragnztes, who
-târe divided ‘into 6 or 7 forts, lye farther into the
Countrey. They acknowledy’d two Gods, a Good and

a Bad 3 they pay no worflaip to the Good, becaufe he 5
200d nanird, and never burts any perfon, bur they pray

very ardently to the bad, becaufe be kills thofe that do

not reverence bim. They undertake neither Fourney
nor War before they bave confilted their evil God, which
ws performed with great Ceremonies, ky virtue of which,
they afcribe to themfelves the power of foretelling future

things

pif

tt,
the
al 4
lar

ñ

ail

The World Bewitch'd. TT.
things. Thus found the words of Arnoldus. Monta-
nus, in his defeription. of America, P.373- AS to
their Divinations ; of which there is a very fpeci-
al account in this place, we fhall be more particus
larly informed of it, when we examine them here-
after. | |

Set, 6. Viracocha is the Sovereign God ofthe
Peruvians whole name they explain more at lai ge,
by thofe of Pachacama and Pachayachakik the Crea
tor of Heaven and Earth: for which reafon they. al-
fo name him Ofapa, the Wonderful. according to
their Opinion. He operates .in the Sun, and is
there vilible.. They venerate the Th the

God of the Air. Pathamama 1s rt

e Goddelfs of the

Barth; or the Earth ir felt confider’d as fuch, and
Mumucecha: is the Sea. They likewiüe pay a Re
jigious Honour to the Rainbow, but, efpeciali

Colca. Among the Stars, the Confrellation

chillat , Lyra. the Harp, is the God

Shepherds, and the Conftellation Mächacii
Serpent; preferve them, as |

pents ; and Chiuquichiaciai

Lions, Tygers and Bears. 1

according tothe Relation

That no Creature moves upm Earth, bus atthe fame
rime the Heavens reprefent anotber like ta it; and
that Earthly Creatures are in the keeping of the Hea-
wenly, every one under that which # like to it, wiich
provides for its beft advantages, and prefervestt. Thence,
have proceeded the Names of the Scars, Chacana, Lope-
ratcha: Marmana, Mirima, and feveral others.

Se&. 7. They alfo believe that Fountains; Rivers
Rocks, the tops of Hills, fome Herbs, efpecially.
the root Panpas, that has a ftrange Figure, are as
many Gods; there is almeft nothing thar has an
extraordinary fhape, or a particular virrue 3 but
they place.a Deityin it Comparing all chofé thiegs

£- >]
3 together

78 The World Bewitch'd

together, ‘it appears thar that people atknowlege
Superior and Inferior Gods ; the virtue of the firit
operating by the laft, and that they hold the Ce-
Jeftial Bodies for Gods, becaufe they act upon the
fublunary, which are of a particular and neceflary
ufe to Mankind. Thus the Heathens. endeavour;
each according to his faney, to acknowledge a Dei-
ry in Heaven, and to adore it upon Earth.

Sect. 8. The immortality of the Soul, the punifh-
ment of the wicked, and the rewards of pious Men after
ths Life, are generally believed in Peru, but not the
Refurreciion of the dead, {ays Montants, pag. 307.
However, us ftrange that a People who have fuch
a grofs Religion, and fuch material Gods, fhould
neverthelefs believe that the Soul fubfifts the’ they
hear nothing of it after the dcath of the Body, and
that they could not imagine that the Body which
fubfifts ftill for fome time, before their Eyes,
though without Life, can return ro its firft State;
as Trees, Herbs and Plants, which dye and revive.

Set. 9. The Statues of their Gods, that are of
many ftrange Figures, and forme very frightful, are
ufed to utter Oracles in their Pagedes. Some, fays
Montamu, give their Anfwers, as formetly did the
Diabolical Oracles of Delphos and Dodona 5 he calls
them Diabolical, following the common Opinion,
that the Oracles of the Heathens were not pro-
nounced by God, but by the Devil. But ir may be
feen insthe Book of Anthony Vandale of Oracles,
how little ground that Opinion has: and we fhall
alfo treat of it in its proper place.

Se&. 10. As to their practices, no people is fo
much efteemed in Peru as thofe we call Exorcifts,
Magicians and Diviners, becaufe they difcover pri-
vate Robberies, even fuch as are committed in very
remote Countreys, and foretell good or bad for-
tune, which happens, faith Montarus, by their
converfe

(ive
ciate
obus
tries

Aye 4

felues

du
fhe.
core
that

§
Can
HG,
But
own
jul)

The World Bewitch'd. 70°

converfe with wicked Spirits in dark places. They de-
clared to the Spaniards the victories their Country-men
obtained, er the Battles they loft in the Low Coun-
tries, the very fame day, that they were fought. There
are alfo in Peru, many She-Diviners, wha fhut them-
felves in their Houfes, where they make themfelves
drunk with Chica, mixed with the Herb Vilca, tilt
they fall down on the piace, and when they awake, and
come to themfelves again, they anfwer alt the Queftions
that are propofed to them. |
Se&. 11. The Cannibals who take the Name of
Caraibes, and dwell to the North of Southern Ame-
rica, acknowledge the Sun for their Soveratgn God:
but in the mean while each Boze or Prief? has his
own, which he calls out to bimfelf in the mift fright-
ful Nights, by Songs or inchanted V. erfes, in the midft
of the fmoak of Tobacca: The Devil ( fays Montanusy
but I would rather fay the Spirit) wteers bé Ora-
cles by the means of dead benes, wrap'd up in Cotton.
Thofe Heathens have at all times , bur efpectaliÿ,
in cafe of death, much to endure from the Pia ot
Magicians, (but methinks Montamw had exprels’d
himfelf better, had he faid Priefts, rather then Ma-
gicians.) One of the greareft dilturbances they caufe
is, that when they are confulted, they pertuade
People, that fuch or fuch has eaufed them to inter-
rogate fuch a deceafed ; which ‘incites the’ rieareft
Relations of the deceafed to-avenge themfelves of
thofe, that have difturbed his Reft by that action.
Sef, 12. Montanus adds to this allo, The Carai-
bes follow a moft ftrange Opinion concerning the Sout,
every one believes to have as many Souls’ as beatings of
the heart. ‘The chief of which & [till the Heart it Je,
which after the death goes to Icheiri, or the God that
is particular to him,where he lives in the fame condition
that be has done upon Earth 3 for which reafon they kill
the Servants upon the Tomb of their Mafters, to 20 and
Minifter

oc ZhsAWorld Bewitch d.

a ay a 7 7 rt] 7

Minifler to them in the other World: The other
T i> ° . A . T ; fr

Souls that conjift 58 Beatings ef the Heart have twa forts

of abode. The Maboias. wander in Deferts and Wreods ;

and the Ormiceous keep a.ong the Sea, and overturn
Veffels, . The Seuls of warlike Herces £o into the fortu-
rate Iflands, where the Arouages are their Slaves.
Body Cruel Men go out of this life eternally to wander
in dry Wi:derneffes behind Ligh Mountains, tocarry the

Yoak of the Aronages, a People that was-expell d'out of

its ancient abode, if we believe the account that à
given of their Defiruéticn. From all this ir appears
that this Nation ac <nowledges almoft no other God,
but their own Souls; of which they have very near
the fame Sentiments that the ancient Greeks had of
their Demons and Heroes.

Sec?. 13, Richard Biome, an Englifh' Author, has
publithed of late in his America, a large account of
the Opinions-and Practices of the Carabes, where he
{peaks of the Ife of St Vincent. They have, fays he,
Jome Natural Notion ef à Deity, or Supream Being,but
who too much pleafed with the enjoyment of the Sove-
raign Happinefs, to difturb himfelf with the Wicked
Attions of Men, and whofe Gocdnefs à fo great that be
#5 averfe from avenging himfelf of his Enemies, when
they refufe to pay the Honour due to him : They likewi[e
believe that there are good and bad Spirits, and that the
Gocd are Gods, each of whom has his particular Admi-
firation ; but that the Univerfe was not created by them,
tho every one of them may be the Creator of the C ountry
where he is venerated, and which be governs.

Sect. 14. They never call upon their Gods, bur
to let them come to them, which is done-by the
Miniftry- of the Priefts, and for the 4 following
reafons. Fixfi, to be aveng’d. for fome injury re-
ceived. Secendly, ta be cured of their Difeafes.
Tiirdly, to learn the fuccefs of the War. Fourthly,
to expel the great Devil, or rather the wicked God
Mcepoia,;

Sef

The World Bewitch'd. O1

Mapoia, whom they never adore. Thence may be
inferr’d, that they believe good and bad Spirits: be-
fides, they acknowledge the immortality of the Soul ;
which Opinion is the Original of Demons and He-
rees, fince as they fuppofe, they are the Souls of rhe
Deceafed, which, they call to their affiftance againft

-their Enemies.

Seft.15. Fhe Defcription of their Witchcraft,
is to be found in the fame place after this manner.
When their Priefts call upon many of their Gods
together, they feem to difpute and quarrel with
one another, fo far as to come to blows; fomtimes
they hide themfelves amongft Dead bones, which
they draw. out of Graves, and wrap up in Cotton,
whence they utter their Oracles» They ufe thar
Witchcraft to bewitch their Enemies, for which pur-
pofe, the Witches muft have fomthing that bas be-
long’d to the party to be bewitched : the Spirit feizes
fometimes upon the body of thofe Women, whence
they give formai anfwers to whatever is propofea to

them : They ferve up Meat to thofe Spirits in pla-

ces feparated from the Commerce that is kept with
them. The Boy or Prieft that has bronghr jit, being
gone out, they hear the Difh move, and the Devil
(according to Blome, ) or the God (according to that
People) moves the Jaws, and makes a great noïle,
as if he chewed the Meat, that has been ferved.to
him, thd in the Morning they find that he has not
touched it,

Ses. 16. I fhall yet give a more particular Re-
lation of the Caraibes drawn from the defcriprion
made by dela Borde, who was fent by the French
King, with the Fefu:t Simon, to convert that People,
what he has ia-his Relation fubfervient to our de-
fign, viz. to know their fentiments concerning the
Deity and the Spirits, and to be inform’d of ‘their
practices, is as iollows. Louquo, who was the Firft

E 5 Man,

82 The World Bewitch’ à.

Man, and Caraibe, and confequently the Common-Fa-
ther of all the others, was not made by any, but def-
Cemded from Heaven, here below, where he liv'd very
long. He bad a great Navel, whence he brought out the
Firf? Man, as well as out of his Thigh, making there
én Incifion, There happened many ftories during his
Life, that wold be fhameful andinfamous to be report-
ed; be made little Fifbes from feraps, and little bits
of Manjou, which he thréw into the Seas brit the great
fiom great parcels of the fame Root. He rofe again three
days after his Death, and returned to Heaven. Terreftri-
al Animals are come fince, but they know not whence.
They believe that the Heavens have been from ali Eter-
nity, but not the Earth, nor the Seas that neither of
them was in that fine di[pofition, in which they now are:
their maver and firft acr Louquo, having firft made
the Earth foit, fincoth, without Mountains, but they
know not whence be had the matter of it 3 the Moon
fol owed immediatly, but everfince fie faw the Sun, fhe
got away, and hid her felf for foame,and ever fince fhew-
ed her felf but.at Night they attribute the Eclipfs to
Mapoia rhe wicked Spirit, who endeavours to kill them,
They more eftcem the Mon than the Sun, and for that
Reafon,riule the days Ly the Moon,and not by the Sun,never
frying a Month but a Moon,ner how many days fhall'you be
on your journey bit how many nights, fhallyou fleep abyoad.

Seët. 17. Their Opinion concerning the Demons;-

Inferior Gods and Heroes, may ‘eafily be learned.
They believe that all the’Stars are Caraibes, and that
Racunnon was one of the Firft, whom Louquo made,
he was changed into a great Snake, that had a Man's
Head, and always flood upon a Cabalas, wnich 15 avery
thick, bard, high, and firaight Tree, but he was fince
tranfmuted into a Star. Savacon another Caraibe,
and fince a Star is the Captain of the Hurricanes, and
of Thunder, and ’tis he that caufes great Rains. Acht-
naon, # Caraibe and Star, caufeslittle Rains and great
Winds

The World Bewitch d, 93

Winds: the Star Couromon raifes a Wind, that makes
the Sea ebb and flow. They reckon and mark the Years
by: the Conftellation Chirities, which is by them the
name of the Pleiades. Cavalnia zs the Captain of the
Zemeans.  Limacani is 2 Comet fent by the Captain

of the Zemeans to hurt, when be 15 Angry. Joalouca

or the Rainbow is 4-Zemean too, that makes the Ca-
raibes fick, when he finds no Vittuals. If tt appear

to-them at Sea,they take it as a good Omen, and fay that |
it comes to. accompany them, and procure them a good”

Voyage, but af it appears at Land, they bide themfelves
within their Cottages, fancying that itis a Foreign Len
mean, that bas no Mafter, that is to fay, no Paie 3
and thercfore can do nothing but burt, by his Evil In-
fluencies, and undoubted'y feeks ta kill fome body.

Se. 18. There are feveral other things, of
which they make Zemeans, efpecially fuch as caufe
fome terrour or amazement, as Bats, Which they
name Boulliri, that flie by Night about the Houfes 3
they believe that they keep them, and that fach as kill
shofe Creatures, become Sick, They have 10 many’

forts of Boule Bonum, that is to fay, bad Omens, that ©

I cannot refolve my felf, to relate all their Trifles
and Dreams.

Sef, 10. Their Religions worfhip chiefly confifts
in {uch Divinations and Witchcrafts, as are agreable
to their ftrange notions. Affoon as they fall into @
Difeafe, they fancy themfelves to be bewitch'd, and if
they can catch the Woman they fufpett, they kill or caufe
her to be killed 3 for they commonly affault Women, not

fo freely daring make bold with Meni But before they:

hill ber, they exercifè an unheard of € rueltie uponthe

poor Wretch, their Relations. and Friends go to catch.

her, and canfe her to rakeup the Ground in feveral pla-
ces, untill foe bas found what they fuppofe fre bas bid-
den, and often that mifcrable Aman confeffes an un-
truth to free her {ely from thofe Tortures. When they
bave

84 The World Bewitchd

have gotten that proof of her being a Witch, they
put her to Death in a moft Cruel and Barbarous
manner, related by the Author, whoadds, that the
Caraibes fancy to have feveral other means to pre-
ferve themfelves from Witchcraft ; for Inftance,
ae put in a & eat Gourd, Hairs, or fome bones of their
Deceafed Relations, which they keep in their Carber
Ge fome ViZitchcraft, and~fay that the Ghoft of the
Deceafed Speaks therein, and advertifes them of the
defigns of their Exemies.
Seb 2 o. Divinations are made by the means of
Zemeans, that is to fay, familiar Spirits, Each Pi-
cas or Boie having bis own, and ruling bimfelf by the
advices of his deteffalle Oracles. Thus to know the
event of their Difeafes, they caufe a Piaice to come at
Night, who immediatly orders all the Fire of the Cottage
to be put out, and the fu/peëtèd Perfons to be gone then
be withdraws into a Cerner, where be canfes the Sick
to be bi ought, and having fmoaked'a little Tobacco, Le
bruifes it in bis Hands, “and biows into the Air, fhak-
ing and fnaking his Fi te "Tis faid that the Zeme-
an fails not to come at tbe fmell o of that precious Incenfe
and Perfime, dj the Mir RME of the ne who doubtlefs
zs in a compact with the Devil. There being interrogat-
éd, it anfwers with an audible Voice, and as it were at
4 diftance, to the Queries put to it. Afterwards he
comes near the Sick © Perfon, ftrokes-and gently handles
Several times the afflited part, fil blowing upon it, and
fometimes Mae: or feigning to draw out of it, Thorns,
little parcels of Manioc, 0d, Benes, or little Fifh-
bones, which his Devil fupplyestim with, perfwading the
fick. that it was that which canfed bis pain.He often fucks
the Aking part, and immediatly goes cut of the Cottage
to [pew up, fays he, the Venom. Thus the crazy dy
temper'd is cured, rather by Imagination than reallity 3
*Tis obfervable, that he cures neither Agues nor YPounds,

as thofe of Arrows or a Knife, Not a “word is to be faid
in

SS

The World Bewitch d. 85

in that Diabolical Affembly, nor any noife to Le made,
xo not fo much as to let a Fart, otherwife the Zemean

flies away. The Caraibes believe that all the time the

Piaie goes above, and comes back only, when the Zeme-

ans gone. As a Gratuity, they prefent in their Cor-

tages, without other Ceremony, the Zemean, and the

Piaie #00, for the trouble he has been at $n calling out

the Spirit, fome refrefhment, as fome Ouicou and Caf-

{avies, upon a Matouton, or little Table, having

them there all the Night, if in the Morning they find

st untouch'd, they neverthelefs perfioade themfelves, that

the Zemean has fed upon it, but has only Eaten and .
Drunken the Spiritual part ; whereas if all be confum d,

for which the Prieft never fails to provide as much as

lies in his power ; tis the Zemean that has Eaten je

up. They likewife never make a Feat, but the Zeme-

an has his portion.

Seët, 21. Going over into the Continent of Nor-
thern America, we meet with the Mexicons, the
moft-confiderable People of the Country. Thomas
Gage an Englifhman, who became a White-Fryar in
Spain, and is a judicious and credible Author, faving
in what concerns the fuperftitions of Popery, fays
in the 20th Chap. of his Firft Book; That there re
above Yo0o0 Gods in the Town of Mexico, the chief of
whom were called Vifilopuchli and Tefcatlipuca, A
little after the Author adds, They believed that thofe
two-Idols were two Brothers, that Tefcatlipuca was
the God of Providence, and Vifilopuchli that of the
the War, for which Redfons, they worfbiped and honour-
ed them both above all the others. “He allo mentions
another God, whom they extreamly venerated, ‘he
had fpoken in the foregoing C hapter of Quetavatleé
the God of Light. I know not whether this laft is
Quetfaolecait, whom Montanus calls the Gods of Mer-

chants. ;

Sec.

86 The World Bewitch d.

Set. 22. Going.thence to Guatimale and Amats?-
lum, under the Dominion of Spain. The fame Au”
thor {peaks much of the Magick of the Inhabitants;

-which they have neither forgotten nor forfaken, tho

they make an outward profeffion of Chri/tianity ; to
fhow that they meddle.with Divination, he relates
that they obferve, whether they are the Firft that
{ee the Beatts going before them in their way: That
they likewife obferve the flight of Birds, and whe-

ther they fing out of their feafon, - about their abode: .

they alfo believe, that their Life depends on that of
fome Beafts, which they keep in their Houfes as a
Familiar Spirit, fo far that they are feized with
terror and fhake, whence ‘tis purfued by Hunters ;
and fall into a Swoon, when ’tis caught,

Se, 23. Going over from New-Spaiz into New-
England, we fhall be fufficiently inform’d by the
Relation of Richard Blome, who fays, that the Inha-
bitants of. that Country, thd the duleft and moft
Savage People.in the World, have neverthelefs Gods,
Priefts, and a certain form of worfhip. The Firft
and mot venerated of their Gods, is that who
does them rnoft hurt, whom they call Okea; they:
converfe with him, and he transforms: himfelf into:
their fhape ; they likewife adore whatever they: think
able to caufe them an unavoidable damage, as Wa-.

er, Fire, Thunder, Lightning, great and fmall:
Guns, Horfes, the Hedghog, at whofe fight they:

were mot frighted the Firft ume the Englith brought

one thither.
Swines, and that. they had undoubtedly incens’d:

him. When they defign to make War, themconfulr:
with the Priefts and, Diviners, before they-uridér-!

take it. |
Se. 24. The.fame Author relates almoft the

fame things of New-York, formerly call'd the New-

Netherlands; he efpecially reports the manner of
9 their

They. believe ir to be the God of:

het
whic
but ¥
They
thing
of di
{uch
belie
butt

| Whot

from
Se
of th
| an À
Who |
the P
the §
That
| dia
NY
| be ba
1 that
| piven

=| Fi

| Aro
| bad te
| tt}
1 fidee
at laf
I tips,
bef
R Nen
pur
| ul
A The,
as

The World Bewitch'd. 87

their Inchantments, and difcovers their Cheat, of
which we fhall {peak in the laft. part of this work 3.
but we may put here,what he fays of theMary/anders.
They believe a Soveraign God who has made all
things from all Eternity, and: even Inferior Gods,
of different dignities, to make ufe of their Miniftry,
fuch are the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars ;. they
believe that all things have been formed of Water,
but that Men had their Original from four Children,
whom the Firft Woman in the World conceived
from one-of thefe Gods,

Seët, 25. As to the Souls, they believe that thofe
of the Virtuous are taken up to the Gods, to enjoy
an Eternal happinefs; bur that the Souls of thofe,
who have led a wicked Life, go to burn for ever in
the Popoguffo, or that extremity of the World, where
the Sun fets down. Upon this fubject they recite.
That they perceived a Man to move in his. Grave; 4
day after he had been Buryed, whence at laft he went
out, and came to. Life again, he declared tothem, that
he had been almoft precipitated into the Popogutlo, bur
that one of their Gods had preferved him from it, and
given him leave to return to the World, to warn his
Friends, they fhould beware of that frightful place.
Another being likewife rifen, related, That his Soul
had remain’d alive, whilft his Body was in the Coffin :
that fe was gone into a [pacious place, planted on both
fides with fine Trees cover d with excellent Fruits, that
at laft, fle was come to a place full of Magnificent Build-
ings, where Le had found his Father Deceafed jome time
before, who had enjoyned him to come back, and tell his
Friends what happinefs was prepared for them, if they.
put themfelves in a State of obtaining it, by a Virtu-
ous Life's wrereupon he was come back into the World.
Therice we may ‘plainly perceive the Opinion. of
that People, upon the State of the Soul, feparated

from

88 The World Bewitch'd.

from the Body, and that they are more polite and
enlightened, than thofe mentioned before.

Se. 26. The Inhabitants of Virginia hold alfo
Okea for the fupream God,thé they contes theGod of
the Chriftians to be above him; becaufe the Chrifti-
ans can do more Execution with their Guns, than
they with their Bows and Arrows; for their Reli-
gion,and that of the moft part of the Neighboring Na-
tions is all turned to the War, and to obtain a happy
faccefs of it. A Counfellor of one of their Kings
being in England in King Fames the Firft time, fays,
That Okea often appears in bis Pagode, whereupon 4
Priefts enter into it, uttering Jirange Words, and mak-
ing Geftures aud Poftures no lefs Jurprixing, Thefe call
others again, whom they caufe to come in, after the fame
manner, and the God declares bis Will to them, Upon
this Declaration, they take thcir meafures in all their
Affairs, either journey or any thing elfe. If they defire
to go a Hunting, be prect ely teaches them, where the
Beaft will be found; they receive his Advices with great
fatisfaëtion, and never failto follow them, which often
fucceeds, He appears to them in the fhape of a comly
Indian, and after he bas foewed bimfelf for fome time
to bis 12 Confederates, be goes up into the Air whence
he came.

Seët. 27.The fame Author gives us the fentiments
of the Inhabitants of Carolina, which is part of Flo-

rida, bordering upon Virginia, as we have heard
him before, relating thofe of the Inhabitants of the
Ifland St.Vincent. They likewife hold Okea to be
the Supream God. Good and bad Spirits are look'd
upon to be inferior Gods, and they offer Sacrifices,
to the leaft, as well as tothe greateft Gods... They

alfo believe the Tran/migration of Sous, and when any

body dies, they bay with him fufficient. previfion for
his maintenance, and cll forts of Cloaths for bis ufe,

when he fall be in the Elyfian Fields, which they fan~
cy

f

ty ue
the nal
becaul
and th

INT
| Were

ferei

[Sed :

Pagans,

Bm ee SE

The World Bewitch d. 89

cy to be beyond the Indian Sea. The Author gives
the name of Elyfian Fields to the places he defcribes,
becaule of the Relation he has found betwixt them
and thofe the Greeks have call'd by that name.

$C ER ASP. i XE

Where all the Sentiments and Praëtices of fo many dif:
ferent Heathens, are ufefully compared together.

Seët. 1 Hero, we have but gather’d the various
Opinions of the Antient and Modern
Pagans, and related their Cuftoms without paffing

| any Judgment upon them, neither is it time to do

it asyet ; we muft firft fee of what ufe it may
prove to be informed of all thefe things: to which
end we muft again confider together, what has
been hitherto related, to fee what will be the re-
{ult of it. On the one fide, we find that Nations,
that extreamly differ in the Opinions they have
concerning the Gods and the Spirits x yet on the

_other fide, they wonderfully agree upon the fame
| fubje®. They differ in the Names they give them,

which is not ftrange, the Tongues being fo diffe-
Tent, and all the Nations not afcribing the fame
properties to Spiritual Beings. ‘Thence proceeds a
fecond difference, that they make not their number
equal, nor diftinguifh them in the fame manner,
as to their Dignity and Adminiftration, or as to
their Operations, as it has particularly been fhewn
in the 2 Chap. Se&. 21. concerning the Inhabitants

of Afia. But the difference to be found amongft

them is not material, and muft be accounted as in-
confiderable, comparatively to the conformity that
is

90 The World Bewitch'a.

is betwixt them all, that looks as a work to which
they fhould unanimoufly- have confpired.

Së. 2. Whatever has been hitherto quoted, is
either collected from the Writings of the Pagans,
or taken from what pañles amongft them, and re-
jates partly to their Sentiments, partly to their
Practices. They agree in their Sentiments in two
refpects ; as their underftanding is yet in tome man-
ner illuminated by the natural Light, or as it is
darkned by error. I fhall mark beth thefe con-
formities, and at the fame time, the places: in
which they have been before related, where the
inftances are to be found : becaufe ir would be tco
long and tedious to repeat them every time, and
that I may hope the Reader will take the trouble
to look them over, or being all frefh in his memo-
ry, he will excufe me: from an unneceflary trou-
ble. |

Seét, 3. As to the firft conformity, if-we atten-
tively refle& upon fo many inftances and teftimor
nies as are contained in the 2d, 5th, 6th, 8tb, othand
roth, Chapt. We fhall perceive, that thofe, that are
leaft provided with human Light and Reafon, agree
neverthelefs upon the moft important points, re-

ferring the Reader to: the places where the Inftan- |
All the Heathens therefore, |
whether Ancient or Modern Europeans, <Afiatick, |
Africans, North and South Americans agree in thefe
five principal: points, which are of an undeniable |

ces are fet down.

Truth.

2,37 55 7e C

Se. 259,12, 18. Chap. 10. Seëk, 3, 13°

e is only a firft Being, or a Su-

2. That there are Spirits, who have had a be-|
ginning, and that they are diftinguifhed from hu-|
mane Souls: Chap. 1, Seët. 2, 9, 10, 11. Chap. 7.| hi

3. That

one F
Ch. 2.
to. S¢
Th
dies €
Ch. 7.
Chip. Ie
Ls]
| reward
(is. Ci
pods. à
lof Epi
{ll pro
jin its
| | Seb.
(fre
Vintheir
Hill the
Ihe :
qcorpel
AHeavez
1 Ma
They be

Beet

M

The World Bewitch à, gt

3. That thofe Spirits are either good or bad,
fome Friends and others Enemies. to Mankind:
|Chap.2. Seët. 11,15. Chap: 7. Sect. 9; 10. Chap.
lo. Seét. 5, 13, 14, 27.

14. That humane Souls dye not with their Bo-
dies, Chap. 2. Seë&. 15, 16, 17. Chap. 6. Seét. 3.
oMChap. 7. Seët. 2,3, 5, 6, 12, 20. Chap. 9. Sect. 4,
am Chap. 10. Seët. 8, 12, 14, 22, 25, 27:
tis] 5. That the Good or evil we have done, will be
wr rewarded or punifhed after this Life. Chap. 2 Seét.
18. Chap. 7. Seët. 2,5, 6, 8, 16, 17,18, 19, 20.
Chap. 10. Se&. 3, 12, 25. for if in the Sentiments
of Epicure there appear fomething contrary to this
laft propofition ; I fhall {peak of it, and explain it
in its proper place. |

Se&. 4. But the proof of the obfcurity, that is
-|f{pread over their underftanding, difcovers it {elf
lin their other Opinions: for ‘tis ebfervable, that in
“Hall ‘their Reafonings, even thofe in which they
in | fpeak: the Truth, they muft take ‘two ways by
jad compelling the Divine Majefty to defcend from
nie | Eleaven upon Earth, and by raifing the humblenefs

of Man from the Earth to the Heavens. So that
; te | they have too high an Opinion of the Creature,and
tar |too defpicable of the Creator. That miftake,

\ which proceeds from a confufed Notion of what
belongs to the Divine Nature, and to that of Crea-
| ted Beings, leaves them to grofs errors, and that
lare fource of their Idolatry and Magick. For ‘ris
‘eafie to perceive, that none of thofe practices flow
Sr} from thofe-5 Truths juft now mentiond, but only
sn from a falfe and erroneous Idea, as we fhall fee, if
| we hear in few words, the refult of the preceding
|, e-| obfervations. |
nl Se. 5. Concerning the Divine Effence we fee,
y 1} Firft, that they conceive the Divine Greatnefs and

Excellence, only with relation to their Ideas of the
Tht) Human

92 The World Bewitch'd,

Human Nature, fince they, afcribe to the God®
both Superior and Inferior ; an: Human Original,
Marriages, begetting of Children, Sc. Chap.-7
Sel. 5,6, 17. Chap. 10. Sed. 16,

Second. That they have too vile and: abject
Thoughts of the perfections of God, fancying that
he would tire himfelf, and impair his Glory and
Felicity, if he fhould take in his own hands. the
direction of all things. Chap. 2.Seé. 4. Chap. 10. Sett.
13. For which reafon they have afiociated with him
inferior Gods, as Governors under him, Chap. 2.
Sei. 7..12. Chap. 7. Seé 2, 8, Chap. To: Sa&h. 65) Fai
id; 13. ;

Third. That they fix not Goodnefs.as anecetia~

ry Idea to the Deity ; fince they have almoft all 4

wicked God,as well as a good. Chap. 2. Sed. 4.12
Chap. 7. Set. 3. Chap. 10. Seth, 5. However, with
this difference, that they always place the good a-
bove the bad; thé fome honour them moit, who
fright them moft, as the Tapazans, and the Inhabi-
tants of New England. Chap. 10. Seët. 5. 23.

Fourth. That they eafily confound the Creator
with the Creature. Chap. 4. Se. 7. Chap. 6. Sect.
25/36 Chap. Io. Seti. 6; 75 17; 23,24.

Se. 6. Concerning Spirits, it may be obferved,

Firft, That they make not a fuitable diftinction
betwixt Spiritual and Corporeal fubftances. Chap.24
Se&, 1,6. Whence proceeds, that they have attrie

buted, not only to the Spirits, but allo to the Det}

ty it felf, bodily motions and properties, diverfions

affixed above in the Heavens, in the Air, upon|

Earth, or under ir. Chap. 2. Seët. 14, 16. Chap. 7

Sect. 6. 14,18. Chap. 10. Seët. 12, 25e |

Second. That confidering the Spirits or, Demons)

as inferior -Gods and Minifters of the great]

God, they diftinguifh them into feveral Or-|

ders, as into fo many Degrees; according to the ads

miniftration|

is bet?
Some :
to Me
Chap, 7
poll
the T
other
ken lo
Work
Foy
has vit
as wel
Chip,
Sed}
of the
during
the ar
the Py
into fe
dem (
a§ has
thonly
Atorhe
Wes n
they

ifted

lve

1 de

The World Bewitch a. 93

iminiftration they have ~been been entrufted with,
| Chap. 2. Seët. 6, 14. Chap. 2. Se&. 7, 8, 11, 12
M 13, 18.
OÙ Third. That conceiving not what difference there
Al is betwixt the Soul of Man and that of Beafts ;
| Some are fall’n into that grofs error, as to afcribe
to Men and Beafts, a Soul of the fame Nature.
NH Chap. 7. Sect. 14. Without which, it had been im-
| poffible that the Opinion of Pythagoras, concerning
the Tranfmigration of Souls, into the Bodies of
pa Other Men and Beaits indifferently, fhould have ta-
ken fo deep roots, and have fpread fo far into the
4 World. Chap. 2. Seët. 17. Chap. 7. Seët. 14,155 16,

Fourth. That from the fame fource this Sentiment
has vifibly proceeded, that the Spirits are wandring,
as Well as the Souls of Men after their “death.
Chap. 2. Seth. 15. Chap. 6. Se. 2. Chap. 7. Seth. Po,
20. Chap. 10. Se. 11.

Seë&. 7. What contributes moft to the vilifying

| of the Deity, is, that they deify even Men, either
so during their Life, or after their Death. Witnefs
wag the ancient Grecks and ‘ Romans, who transformed
} the Paffions of Men, and the Motions of the ‘Heart,

| into fo many Gods and’ Goddeffes x" or as the mo-
“dern Cérnibals who are very near of the fame ‘mind,
as has been fhewed, Chap. 2. Seét 14. Chap. 7. Sed.

5, 6. Chap. to. Se&. 14. which however is not com-

M monly usd, but after death, as appears by the
| Apotheofis of the Ancients, Chap. 2. Sed. 13. and
was no where brought to fuch a light, as amongft
the Canmibals, as has been faid, Chap. r0.-'Seé. 12,
16:~That they believe the whole’ race of ‘the Gods
iffied from their Anceftors, and that they them-
felves are of Celeftial Origin : ‘from the fame fpring
is’ derivéd the Sentiment of the ‘ Exiftence of the
D Genis ot Aemeans, that is of helpful- Spirits, the
à defcription

on this.

94 The World Bewitch'd.
defcription of whom may be feen in feveral Au-
thors. |
Se&. 2. It is now eafy to conceive on what
ground are founded. the Divination and Magick of
the Ancients, that are the fame with the predicti-
ons and Witcheraft of the modern Heathens; for, as
to their foretelling or Divination, it is grounded upe |

»

-Firft, Every God has his People, whom he fa-
yours and protects, or his own property 5 for which
Reafon, they put queftions to him, concerning that
which is to happen to his People, and what is to be
done on that occafion.

Second. That every God has hi$ Enemy 3 for which
Reafon, every one looks for help againft the)
Gods of whom he is to. receive damage, and im-
plores the affiftance of fuch Gods, as are efteem'd
to be their moft violent Enemies.

Third. That every Man has his God or particu-

lar Spirit, and therefore every one miftakes his own |

paffions, and whatever comes into his fancy, for di-
vine Infpirations and motions; efpecially when
Dreams fupply him with the occafion of it 5 not
knowing that the employments or accidents that have

being hindered by his prejudices, to make an ex-
act enquiry after their. poffible caufe. à
Fourth. That it is by confounding the Deity with
the Creature, that there have been introduced fo |
many forts of Divinations.and Prognofticks, drawn

preceeded the Dreams, are the Origin of them, or4|\0 ni

WA
ly make
irl,
not onl
good an
one agé
helpot
another
one. Goc
ceived f
Secon
ny fort
‘ti n0
power ¢
Third
whom t
and thu
conten

| mies, 4

Fr:
| and in

| {eem to

Dire

rations

| the bod

| kif Co

Ri

from the. Stars, from the Thunder, from. Birds,

IL

Mountains, Woods, Waters, and from all the things | {ting

in which ’tis believed that fome Deity is difcovera- |
ble. ok cal |
Fifth. That from the belief that the Souls of the
Dead are wandering about their Corps, it was eafy |
zo take occafon to conjure up Ghofts.

Wandyi
Omthi
and
Daeg :
then i

ye |

The World Bewitchd. 95

! Se&. 9. Concerning the Witchcraft, we fhall on~

| ly make the following Confiderations.

Firlt, That it is not ftrange, that diftinguifhing

off] not only created Spirits, bur even the Gods, into
| good and bad they fhouid endeavour to fer thein

Le

e fel

| one againft another, and to defend themfeives by the

help of the good, or of fome of the wicked, againft
another ; or to avenge themlelves by the power of
one God, of the wrong they fuppoie to have re=

chal ceived from another.

Second. That having forged to themfelves fo ma-
ny forts. of Gods and Spirits fuperior and inferior,

À tis no wonder, they fhould believe to deftroy the
hl) Power of the lefs, by the affiftance of the greater.

Third. That having fo bafe thoughts of the Gods,

4 whom they fubject to the fame paffions as Men,

and thus Deify human paffions them (elves, they act

À confequently, by ftirring them up againft their Ene-
wf) mies, as it comes into their fancy,

| the body ufed in

Fourth, That putting fome of their Gods fo low,

4 and in fo great a familiarity with the Spirits, they
à feem to aflume to themfeives, the quality of their

Directors, and to be able to make the Divine Ope-
rations, even in the moft hidden things, dubfervient

| to what uufe they pleafe. Chap. 6. Seé. à.

Secita. There is yet fomthing to be {aid upon
Divination .and Witchcraft together, which partly
concerns the thing it felf, and partly the geftures-of
it. What concerns the thing it

| felf, comes to this. |
Firft, That the Opinion of the Heathens, con-

| cerning the Genii or familiar Spirits, and the Spirits
.N Wandring about Graves, makes ’em believe, that

| fomthing may be operated by the means of Graves,
| and -Carcafles; for which Reafon, they ufe the

qa bones of the Dead in their Witchcraft, and confulr

| them in their Divinations, in hopes of getting an
| am. wer

96 The World bewitch d.

an{wer.from the Gods or Spirits, which operate in
them, or abide near them, Chap. 10. Seti, 11, 15.
Second. That according to this, their belief of the
exiftence of fo many forts of Spirits, whereof moft
part: are wicked Spirits, that walk and wander eve-
ry where; they are always ready in any unfore-

feen difeafe, Mortality, or finifter Accident, to caft 4

the fufpicion upon their Enemies or Envious,
who have bewitch’d them for believing that the in-
ferior Gods ot Spirits act according to the Will of
the: Men to whom they belong, they muft confe-
quently believe, that thofe Men will not fail to
effect reciprocally, the one againft the other, what-
ever the help and power of the Spirits will allow.
Now thofe fufpitions, that will furely move Men
to feek’ by whom they have been bewitch’d or the
caufe, matter, and foundation of Divination, Chap.
to. Set, 8, 16.

Se. 11. As tothe pofturés ufed in Wircheratt. |

Firft, The Corpereal Ideas, which they have of
the Spirits and of the Gods themfelves, move them

doubrlef to ufe fo many outward geftures in their

Conjuration, Chap. 10. Seët 16. Bnt there is ftill
another Reafon of that Cuftom, viz. That the Priefts,
who are Impoftors; make ufe of them to impofe fo
much the eafier upon the fimplicity of the Vulgar.
Second. Confidering how the Opinion of Pytha-

poffible, thar Men fhould place fome Virtue in Eet-

ters and: Nuthbets, by gathering-and difpofing them, |

in fach or fuch a way, and confequently in the Pro
nunciation of fome certain Words ; for the fame Py-
pe has believed, that the Virtüe of the Deity,

influenc’d’the proportion, and Harmony of Num- |

bers. Now the Letters of the Alphabet being em-
ployed to mark the numbers, not only amongft the

Greeks |

Greel
that he
ther’
when
a Wor
or luc
to the
Tn
allo À
elpeci
whok
Char
Seb
molt :
| aswel
fits in
| gion, :
tions,
Chap.
fhoulg
{Upon
ginal

Bi
ces, 1
| their (
dade
| Divin

goras, 1S become almoft Univerfal, ic may be, me- | and in

thinks, conceived at the fame time, how it was}

Brain
(0 tea, 1
the ¢
all
Dad
of \
lenfe
hows
hin,

Mi

The World Bewitch d. 97

Greeks and Hebrews, but by alf the other Nations
that have fome knowledge of Letters, it follows,that
ther’s not one word, but it can makeup a number
whence it may rationally be infere’d,thar fuch or fuch
a word, compofed in fach or fach a manner, of fuch
or {uch or fuch Letters, more or lefs, has according
to their Opinion, more or lefs power in Witchcraft.

Third. Befides the ordinary numbers, they ufe
alfo Names and Characters, as it is {een at this day,
efpecially amongft the Laplanders and Finlanders,
whofe enchanted Drums are {potted with the like
Characters, Chap. 6. Se&. 5.

Seët..12. But I have not yet fpoken of what is
moft important in thefe Conjurations, that are ufed,
as well for Divination, as Witchcraft, which con-
fifts in this, that they are part of the Pagan Reli-
gion, and even make it wholly upamongit fome Na-
tions, efpecially in the 1%/?-Indies, Chap. 9. See. 6.
Chap. to. Seët. 16. And ‘tis almoft impoffible it
fhould be otherwife, fince their whole Religion turns
upon their Opinion. of the Gods, or draws it’s Ori-
ginal from thence.

Firft. “They look by no means upon their practi-
ces, nor the {cope they aim at, as things evil of
their own nature ; but only by the bad ufe that is
made of them, wherefore anciently, the Magi and
Diviners,were tound among the King’s Attendants,
and in the Temples, as are ftill at this day the
Brainines, in the Eaft-Indies, the Fetifftvos in Gnis
nea, the Baivas or Pia in Peru, and the Country of
the Cannibals, &c. and feveral others of the fame
quality, fo that no body is acknowledg’d for Wife,
Doctor, Prieft, Prophet, nor becomes Councellor
of State, unlefs he be Diviner or Magician, in the
fenfe that has been fer down. The Holy Scripture

- fhows the fame in the perfons Fannes, Fanibres, Ba-
| laam, Daniel, and his Companions, of which we
| Vol. I. F have

68 | The World Bewitch'd.

have {aid fomething before, Chap. 4. Se&, 1, 4. And

ir may be obferved in the general inftances that have
been alledg’d, that the Heathens had publick Schools

to teach thofe Arts, that the Priefts efpecially in-

kructeg the People in chat: Miniftry, and trained
chem up from their Youth, which 1s fill practifed
amongit the bruitifü and dull Laplanders,

Second, We fee at the fame time, for what Rea-
fon the entrails of facrificed Beafts, and fome Meat
and dre(s'd Herbs, were imployed in their Witch-
craft and Divinarions.; v/z. becaule an their Opini-
on,. fomething divine was in 'd with them.

Seët. 12. Tis ahercior certain, thar all their
ractices were grounde’ upon a certain knowledge,
and partly upon -vain conjectures, and very great
errors; for to leek the Deity and to fear it, is an
effet oi the «natural knowledge of God, which
Men keep inthe midft of their greateft corruption:
Bur toadaur. fo many forts of Deities, of fuch a
low rank, and fuch a contemptible Nature, and to
ferve him in fo many different, ways, is an effect of
the corruption of the mind; which, let it be. faid
in reference to thole that acknowledge one God, or
Spirit, and who believe the Immortality of the Soul,
to which belicf,theOpinion.of theEpicures is notwhol-
lyoppofite,tho they feem to deny both,or at leaft, to
call them in queftion; for Epicure and his modern
followers, deny not fo much the exiftence of a God
and of Spirits, as they are earneft to perfwade fuch,
as believe both, that-their practices bely their Faith,
and are not agreeable to their principles ; and there-
fore ‘ris impoffible that one fhould be both an Epi-

cure, and à Sorcerer, or a Diviner : And on the con-
trary,notieathen ever endeavoured to contradict the |
Hypothefes of Epicure, without admitting thofe |

Arts and their effects.

Sef,

Sel
yentent
twa W
they fa
|| God he
or ut
or Dern
ther yf
Minife
À) ome, ¢
Human
being |
3} Long an
TMICE, 4
cerning
ed upo
La ap
Spirits,
| nes, »
| God Le
forerar
pen to
j cient +
RUE
| Anim
| Thole
thet hy

than t
J then
| elves
| they ê)
Lt f

es
ry

RL A dt ARMS

The World Bewitch d, 99

Sei. 14.~ For a greater certainty, it will be con-
venient to hear thofe Philofophers fpeak in their
own words. Gajffendus has collected part of what
they fay, Sect. 11. Chap 6. Tis the fame thing that
God fhould govern the World by himgfelf, as Jome affirm,
or as others. affert, by Minifters generally call’d Genii,
or Demons, for when all i's done, things go neverthele/s
their ufual way in great part, as thd there were no Such
Minifters. And thd it were granted, that there are
Jome, they could not be fuch as they are fancyed, viz. of
Human fhape, and converfing with us, I will not [ay that
being for the moft part wicked, they could not lead a
long and happy life, becaufe malignity is joyned to Igno-

‘vance, and tends to ruiw ; That's what they {ay con-

cerning Spirits, let us then {peak of what is practif-
ed upon that Account, They ufe to alledge Divination
as a proof both of Providence and of rhe exiftence of
Spirits, but I look with forrow. upon that Human weak-
nels, which feeks for Oracles, even in Dreams, as thé
God being fet upon Stilts, came by frightful vifions to

| forewarn Men in their deepeft Sleep, of what is to hap-

pen to them ; as tho f rtune and chance were not fuffi-
ezent to produce fuch events, witbout mixing God, not

‘only with the Sun.and Moon, and feveral other hinds of

Annimals, but ao with all forts of Stone and Brafs.
Thofe that fpeak fo, make ir evident, that they ra-
ther have to deny the exiftence of God and Spirits,
than to acknowledge them fuch as the other Hea-
thens believed them, and to be obliged to own them-
felves Sorcerers and Diviners, by granting, that
they exift.So much for Paganilm, ’tis time to pro-
“ceed further, 7

The World Bewitch a.

CH A PX.

shat are the Opinions of the Fews, and how neceffary

it 15 to CXAMAINCÉNEM.

Sets 1. V 7. E have hitherto only confidered Pa-

ganifm, which has no. other tight but
that of Nature ¥ now we fhall enquire, what.thofe
that are illuminated. with the hght. of the Holy
Scripture, believe or practiie upon that account,
In the mean while, it muft be obferved, that they

dre not all of one fenfe, being divided into Fes,
% 4] } i Sahay AA) CEA Waa ee

Malometans, and Chrifizans;. which, différence pro-
cecds from, the inequality of the light they have
received, ormadeufe of ; I fhall begin with thote
that are at greateft diftance from Chritianity, and

CE

confequently. the neareft to Pagani/m. dt feems that
the followers of Muhomet, fhould have thar place:

fo much the more, becaufe we have favourable pre
judices on behalf of the Fews, as having Anciently
been the People of God. Burnotwithftanding what
they have been, they are now fo much degenerated,
that the belief of the Mahometans, may, be {aid to
have more conformiry with ours, then theirs. hath,
both deteft Idolatry, and acknowledge one God,
and take his word for the rule of their Faith. : The
Zews receive only the ‘Old Teftament, but the Ma-
hometans admit allo of the New, adding the Alco-
yan ot Mabomet’s Law, to thofe of Mofes and Chri/t,
in order to correct and perfect them both. The
Jews do almoitthe fame as to the Law of Mofes, by
the Addition-of the Talmud, which-contains the tra-
ditions of the Ancient. Burif the Opinions of both

partyes |

partis
be sour
the ina
| of the :
| that. CP
3 great
wheres

bani
proof |
then on
ther Q
Land the
| cerning
| Fem
| try, th
| theif,
| ed ro

1 acknos

| They
| ts on
1 2d tp

Creaty
} that th
of Br
Cin,

dl

| The World Bewitch d. ror

| . . °
| parties were deeply fearched into, perhaps it would

~ B be found that thofe of the Mabometans favour more
H the infalibiliry. of the Law and Gofpel, than thofe
|| =, ~ ; A + ae
| of the Fews, that of the Law alone. Add to this,

- À that. Chrift is acknowledged by the Mahbometans tor

y | a great Prophet, and honoured in that quality,
| whereas he 1s horribly blafphemed by the Jews.
| For thefe reafons I fay, that the Mabometans are

| | halfe-nearer to us, than the modern Fews. Bur
D Whar need we any farther proof, fince es to this
MEH matter, it is plain that the Fews are leis from Pa-

| ganifm than the Mabometans, as fhall appear by the
if, proof I fhall produce.

roy M - 4
uy Scér. 2. As long as we have had to do with Hea- |
41 thens only, we needed but to make an inquiry after A

pi] their Opinions concerning rheir Gods, the Spirits,
Wit} and the Souls.. But here the Queftion is not con-
wv?) cerning the plurality of Gods, for tho formerly the
Fews - have been extraordinarily inclined to Idola-
À try, they have now fuch a great averfion for Po/y-
les] theifm, ever fince 2300 years, that they are return-
st ed from the Babylonian Captivity, that they will
iy} acknowledge but one Perfon in the Divine Unity.
itt They believe, by the light of the Holy Writ, that
all this only God is Almighty, and fufficient to bimfelf,
0% and to all things, which he has created of nothing |
kif and- governs and maintains alone. Amongft his iz
Gol, Creatures they reckon Angels and Men, and think
Tel chat the laft have a Soul more excellent, than that
Mr of Bruits, tho’ far inferior to the Angelical Pe rfe-
di] tion. Such has been in all times the belief of the
Wik! Jews, and fo farr is more agreeable to the Chrifti-
Tk an Faith, then that of the Mabomerans, as we fhall
y} fay hereafter.
eh Se. 3. But the ftate of the Fewifh Religion,
hott whit the fir Temple food, mit b: well di-
| ftinguithed from chatinto which itis infenfibly
Ea; fall’n

162 The World Bewitch d.

fan. ‘The ews -of-that time were Orthcdox,
fave only thofe who fuffer'd themfelves to be carri-
ed into Idolatry, and undoubtedly they had no
other Opinion of the Angels, Demons, aad Souls
of Men, but what the Holy Writings full teach us;
fo that if we ftill look upon them as different from
us, it is becaufe we confider thofe of latter times,
when their State was in its fall, and Chriftianity in
its growth. But tho’ they be now divided into
two Sects, that of the Carraijim, who only follow
the Holy Writ ; and that of the Rabbanim, who
adhere to the Traditions of their Doctors 3 there
is yet but the latter, which deferves to come into
confideration, the number Of the farmer being al-
together inconfiderable, they being a remainder of
the Sadduces, which are hardly known in Europe,
whereas, the other may be called the pofterity of.
the Pharifees.
 Seét. 4. Tho’ we defign only to infift upon the
latter, yet a more particular difference may be ob-
ferved* betwixt the Ancient Fews, and the Modern.
By the Ancient Fews I underftand here, thofe thar
lived in the time of our Saviour, of his Apoftles,
or alittle after. Phila, who was the Learnedft and
Wifeft, is of an Opinion not far_from that of Plato,
when he faysthat the Stars are animated, and that
they move citcularly by their own intelligence.
Ber Maimon is in that point of. his Sentiment, of
which he has made an abridgement in thefe words.
All the Stars and Celeftial Orbs have a Soul, Knowledge
Underftanding, and a lafting Life, knowing bim by
whofe Word the Univerle was made. Each of thefe
reatures, according to hy Excellency. and Dignity, prai-
fs and glorifies hy Author, following the example of
the Angels: but as they know God, fo they underftand
what they are themfeives, as well as the Angels, wha
however, are above them. Their Knowledge being infe-
rior

yt HO
This 1
Bntital
Seth
mine !
gels ot
and N
who i
f full
med |
fiom |
God,
the fi
prined
But ot
live tf
ad es
Unde
ret
and
thing
Ho
to |
who
to th
i if
Be
Phil
Se
lat
An
b
gel
bee
Ju
Se

The World Bewitch'd. 103

rsor #0 that of the Angels, and fuperior to that of Men
This is to be read in the Book of that Author
Entituled, Of the Grounds of Faith.

Sef. 5. If we come more particularly to exa-

mine their Opinions as to the Spirits, whether An-
gels or Human Souls, we fhall not find the Ancient
and Modern Writers-agree well together. Philo,
who is amongft the former, believes, That the Air
# full of Spirits, the moft perfect of whom never affu-
med Bodies, but go to and fro, afcend and defcend
from Heaven.upon Earth, for the fervice of the Great
God. That there are others, inferior in Dignity to
the firft, who take on Bodies, of which they are de-
prived by death, and into which fome of them-return.
But others being wearied of this life, go up higher, and
live there in peace. - But there are others, the moft pure
and excellent of all, who have a fublime and Divine
Underftanding, defpife Terreftrial and perifhing things,
ave the Minifiers of the Almighty, and as the Ears
and Eyes of the Great God, thofe fee and hear every
thing. The Philofophers call them Genii, and the
Holy Writ. names them moft properly Angels, thar 5
to fay, Meffengers 3 for they are really Mefiengers,
who carry to Children the Orders of their Father, and
to the Father the Prayers, of bw Children : wherefore it
is faid of them, that they afcend and defcend. This
ss. contained in the Book of Dreams written by
Philo,

Se. 6. If you now defire to hear the Fews of the
latter times, and. their Opinions upon the Nature
of Angels ; Vorftius will tell you moft truly, in his
Annotations upon .the Grounds of the Faith, written
by Maimonides, that they donot perfectly agree to-
gether : For fome believe : That thofe Spirits. have
been created of the moft fubtile Elemenis, as Rabbi

uda relates it, in his Book, Entituled Cufri, Chap. 4.
Sect. 4. Others, as the Author of the Book Jezira, hold,

F 4 ds

1014 The World Bewitchd.

as the
proceeded from the Holy Ghok. We find alfo in the

Beck, Chagiga, fol. ra. That by the word of Ged, ad-

minifiring Angels are created every day. But Maimo-
nides {peaks of his own, more wifely upon this fub-

fame Rabbi Juda. alures us, that the Angels
Fr”

ject, and generaily upon all others. The Angels,
fays he, in Chap. 2. Seë. 4 Have an Fffence that fub-
Sifts without Mutter, mot having Bodies, but being

£

Effences, difi incuifhed from one another.

a on this difference of the Angels, in the
opinion of the Fews, 1 think it better to propofe
what has been faid by the fame Author, than to
auote any other; becaufe there is none amongft
them, that may be compar’d to him, either for
Learning or Judgment, as not intending to impute
to them more foolifh Doctrines, than thofe that are
admitted. by their moft authentick Writers. Thus
then Maimenides exprefles this Opinion. When
the Prophets fay, that they bave feen the Angels as a
frre, and with wings, they Speak after the manner of
the Prophets, and by à fimile, defigning only to fhew,
that they are neither corporeal nor heavy. In this fenfe
2415 that God hiwfelf 1 called a Confuming fire, viz.
zinproperly thus, hkewife the paffage muft be underftood,
be makes the Winds bi Angels, or, as it is in fome
Tranflations, The Spirits, for the Hebrew word M7

Ruach, having thole two fignifications of Spirits, and |

of Winds. And therefore the Angels being material
are effentially diftinguifhed betwixt themfelves, as by
degrees, the one being above the other 3 to which the
Author applies thefe words; ‘ For a higher than that
* high,takes notice ofit,and thereare yet higher than
they are. Not that they are placed one above tke other,
as it 55 done amongft Mens but as we ordinarily fay of
two wife perfons, that one 5 wifer than the other, and
that the Caife 5 more excellent than the Fffect.. So
that he pretends that God himfelf has produced

thofe

= «a FOS SO

sc. Gps

LS 2

a LL  ——

The World Bewitch d. 105

t'hofe of the fit Dignity, who have brought for.h
thofe of the fecond, and thefe, thofe of the third,
and fo forth.

Seé. 8. Fewifh Authors ordinarily eftablifh ten
Degrees or Orders; who are diftinguifhed by their
Names, in the fame Maimonides, and, in the Book
Midrafch Berefhjir, defcending from the higheft de~
gree to the loweft. 1. Chayos Hakkodefch. 2. Ofa-
nim. 3 Oralin. 4. Chafmalim. 5. Seraphim.
6. Malachim, or Angels. 7. Elohim. 8. Bene Elo-
him. 9. Cherubim. to. Yichim. The fignification of
moft of the Names, is very uncertain and far fetcht.
However, I fhall tranflare them as briefly as I can,
and as I can beft guefs by the explications they have
given of them. 1. Living Hoiz'y.. 2. Quick. 3. Pow-
erful in ftrength. 4. Flames of Fire. 5. G owing
Sparks. 6. Meffengers. 7. Gods. 8. Sons of God. 9.
Images of the Temple. 10. Men, “Tis believed. that
the firft aréfo called, becaufe they are originally
Holy, in a more excellent manner than Men; and

that by their influence, they are the caufe of the

life of all the Creatures inferior to them, which
God has created by their Miniftry. The name of
Men may have been given to the laft, becaufe “tis
fuppofed that they ufe fometimes to appear by the
order of Godin a human fhape. They only alfc,
faith Maimonides, were thofe who fpcke by the Pro-
phets, and are inthe nearft degree tothe human Kpow-
ledge. | |
Se&. 9. That's the difference which is amongit
them. I fhall yer fet down in the words of the
fame Author; how thofe ten Orders are diftin-
guifhed from God and Men. Ad tlofe Living Beings,
fays he, know the Creatcr in an excellent degree of
knowledge; each in reference to his Order, and not in
relation to his Excellency, For which reafon, the firft
Degree cannot conceive the Creatcr, {uch as be w in

F5 b ime if,

106 The World Bewitch'd

bimfelf, becanfe their Underftanding % too fhort to at-
tain unto bim. However, they approach nearer to him,
than the Beings of an inferior Order, and each of thefe
Orders, unto the 10th, knows the Creator more perfectly
than Men, who are compofed of Master and Form.

Sef. 10. The Cabbalifts, who have traced out
the way to the Magick of the Fews, are not con-
rented with thefe Ten Orders, but divide all the
Creatures into four Circles. The 1ft, is the Cir-
cle of the exhalations, Auilos, called otherwife
Zephiros, Lights, fo much exalted in all ages by the
Zewifh Doctors, who will not have them called
either Creatures or Effences of the Creator, but perfecti-
ons diftin® from him, as Manaffe Ben-Ifrael explains
it more particularly, putting them into parallel with
the Ideas of Plate, and efteeming them to be the
Principles of all things. He counts 10 of this Or-
der, the Crown, the Science, Prudence, Mayefty, Va-
Jour, Beauty, Vittory, Glory, Foundation and Kingdom.
They name the fecond Circle, that of the Creation,
in which are the Angels feparated and diftinct from
all Corporality, and divided into ro Orders, the
names of which are fet down, Sect. 8 . They place
in the third Circle Fetzira, that is, the forms,amongft

which they reckon fuch Angels, as have any coth-.

munication with Bodies. The 4th Circle contains
all the other Creatures named Alchiza or compounded
Beings. :

Seét. 11. If I’ would relate more at large, what-
ever the Fews. have written of the Angels, and the
Opinion of each of their particular Doctors, there
would not be much agreement betwixt what I
fhoul fay, and what has already been faid 3 they
differ fo much from one another. However, here
follow the Thoughts of fome of their Ring-leaders.
They {peak of three forts of Angels, the firit, is al-
together free from Matter, and there are four

ieee De uty Troops

In all

Orbs

| Devi
| di th

on

—- oF

= Te eo eS =
= pal Abe:

SS
A

= vu D ©

The World Bewitch d. 107

Troops of that fort, which have each their Captain,
that ftands at one of the corners of the Throne of
God. Michael is on the Right, Gabrsel on the Left,

Uriel before, and Raphael behind : This we-learn:

from Rabbi Eliezer,in his 4th Chapter. Thofe Names
have a very pregnant Senfe.

God is my Light; Raphael, God is my Phyftian.
They never appear'd to the Eyes of Man, nor in a
human fhape, unlefs in a Vifion, and to the Prophers
only. The good Angels, whom God employs'in the
Adminiftration of the World, are in the fecond
Rank, They have often appeared to the Prophets
in an human fhape ; they dwell above the Cœleftial
Orbs, and are called the Army of Heaven. But the
Devils, or Schediim, that are the wicked Angels, or
as they ufero fpeak, Kacodaimones, the Bad Demons,
of whom mention has been made, Chap. 2. Seët. 12.
have their abode under the Moon, and are the Exe-
cutioners of God’s Wrath and Judgments. Burt as
to this laft fort, we muft more particularly enquire
after the Belief of the ‘Jews.

Sect. 12. They. call the Devils Angels of Deftru-
&ion or Death, Satanim, Satans, or Adverfaries.
Philo, that was Contemporary with the Apoftles,
will beft teach us what they think of it. Thus he
writes in his Book of the Giants. Mofes ufed to call
Angels what the other Philofophers name Genii. Here
he takes the word Geniz in too large a Senfe, or he
confines that of Angels to too {trict a Signification; ac-
cording to that which has been obferved before,
Chap. 2. S..13, 14. They are, purfues that Author,
the Souls that fly into the Air, which none ought to ac-
count a Fable; and therefore it gives a more parti-
cular explication of it. As we ordinarily fay that
there are good and bad Spirits, and good and bad Souls,
it 5 the fame with the Angcls : Some of them are spy
goo

Michael, that is, un-
‘lefs it be God ; Gabriel, God is my Strength ; Uriel,

108 The World Bewitch a.
Sood, and are Meffengers that go to and fro, from God
to Men, and from Men to God, who are unreproachable
and conftant in their excellent Miniftry 3. but on the
contrary, there are others that are Prophane and Exe-
crable, and may well-be call’d Damnable, without
fear of Lying.
Se&.13. The Jews report very differently the
original of Spirits. Masnaffe Ben Ifrael afferts, That
they were produced by God himfelf on the fecond
day of the Creation. Preb. 23. Rabbi Eliezer relates
their fall in thefe words, Chap. 13. The Adminiftring
Angels fay to God eternally Bleffed: O Lord God of the
Univerfe, What Men that thou fhould ft put fuch var
lue upon him ? What à be befides Vanity ? For he can
but fomewhat reafon upon Terreftrial Things. God an-
fwer'd, do you pretend that I only defire to be Exalted
and Glorified by you, here above. I am the fame there
below that I am bere. Whoss it amongft you that can
call all the Creatures by their Names? There was not
one amonglt them that could doit: VYoereupon Adam
rofe and named all the Creatures by their Names, which
the Adminiftiing Angels feeing, faid among themfelves 5
Let us confult tozetber how we fhall do to make Adam
Sin againft his Creator, otherwile he # like to become
eur Mafter: Sammael, who was a. great Prance im
Heaven, {he has been before mentioned;Ch, 12.$.8.)
was prefent at this Council with the Saints of the fat
Order, and the Seraphins of fix Troops. Sammael
chofe foe of the twelve Orders to accompany lim, and
came don below to vifit all the Creatures, whom God,
eternally Bleffed had created. He found none fo cun-
ning and fo proper te deceive, as the: Serpent. The
Author comes afterwards to the Seduction and Fall
of Man, upon which he tells. as many Stories as the
has already done: So was the Seduction of Man the
caufe of the fall of the Devil. Afterwards ‘he re-
Jates how God punithed Adam, Eve, and the Ser-
pent,

lou ya
He cai

4! Senter

| ham te
| woole
| Holin
| had b
| rode 1
| Beat

evi

| Wen
| T he

| rec"
1 this F

The World Bewitch d. 109

pent, and impofed on each of them his proper Pain.
| He cal’ d them all three before him, charged by his
| Sentence. Adam with nine Curfes, and condemn’d
him to Death ; but-he precipitated Sammael, and his
whole Troop from the Heavens, the abode of his
Holinefs: He cut off the Feet of the Serpent, (for it
had before the fhape of a Camel, and Sammael
rode upon him) and he curfed ir above all other
Beafts and living Creatures. That's the Fall of the
Devil, according to the Opinion of the Fews ; for
we muft. not charge this Story upon Ekezer alone:
The Targams, that contain the moft ordinary and
received explications of their beft Doctors, mention
| -this Fable in feveral places,

Sect. 14. They give yet another original to the
Demon, feigning him to be iffued from Lilé ; That's
(faith Manaffe) the Name of the Wife of the Devil ;
who, according to the Opinion of fome, bad been the
Wife of Adam, 74", Lilit. Is a word to be found
in the Holy Scripture, 3. 34,14. which our In-
terpreters tranflate Satyr, the French Lutin, and
the Dutch Duynel ; but we muft hear Rabbi Elifha,
who in his Thisbi has fet up the whole Legend.
Wefmd in fome Writings that for one bunderd and thir-
ty years, auring which Adam abftained from bis Wife,
there came [he Devils to him, who grew big with Child,
and brought forth Devils, Spirits, Hobzoblins, and

light Phantafms. I find again in other places, that
toe Devils bave been brought forth by four. Mothers,
Lilis, Naome, Ogera, and Macholas. 772 Ithewife
readsn the Bock of Ben Syra, Queft. 60. that Nebu-
chadnezar asking ‘him why moft Children died within
theieighth day of their Birth; he anfwerd, becaufe Li-
lis kid them, of which matter there % more largely
treated in the fame place, but I fhall not write more of
it, becaufè I dont credit it. By that Narration may
be feen, how grofs the Fictions of the ae dled

ors

110 The World Bewitch d.

tors are, fince there are Men amongft em, who
cannot believe them, how apt foever that Nation
may be to be impofed-upon.

Se, 15. But, as if thofe four fhe Devils had. not
beén fufficient to People the World with wicked
Spirits, they have invented a third fort from what
is mention’d, Gen. 6. 2. That the Sons of God fecing
the Daughters of Men, that they were fair, took for
Hives Juch as they liked. From very ancient times,
the Jews by thofe.Sons of God underftand the An-
gels. Wherefore Fofephus fays in his firft Book of
the Fewifh Antiquities, Chap. 4. That Jeveral Angels
of God, mixing themfelves with Women, begot a very
infolent Generation. He even knows the Names of
thofe Angels that. were carried to that excefs of
Letchery ; 434 and Azael were the chiefeft amongft
them, being both enamour’d with the Beauty of
Naema, Cain’s Daughter. Thence proceeded the
Giants mention’d in the fame place of the Holy
Writ; who, as we may infer from that Narration,
must have been half Devils, and half Men. 4/fmo-
dee, the wicked Spirit of Sara, Daughter to Ra-
guel, of whom mention is made in the Book of Todzt,
was likewife iffued from that Marriage; but others
affirm him to be Sammael. If it be asked, how Spi-
rits have the faculty of Generating ; Eliezer explains
that difficulty in his 22th Chapter. When they
were thrown down from their Holy abode, their
ftrength and fhape became like to that of Men.

Sef. 16. But not to fill up this Book with Tales,
they had rather imagine, as fome Heathens have
done, Chap, 2. S. 12. that thofe wicked Spirits are
half Angels, and half Men. Whereupon Vorftius in
his Notes upon Rabbi Eliezer, relates the following
words, taken from Rabbi Scheem Toob, in that place
where Rabi Nitron {peaks of Lils. The power of the

Devils, Night Phantafms, and Wicked Spirits, which
we

we |
cone
Opn
as t

Jul

| qd
Le dt

tho

| Do
| Fer

The World Bewitch'd. DIE

we fometimes fee in a human fhape, proceeds from the
concourfe of that Chief of theirs ; and as to their flate,the
Opinion of theLearned %,that they refemble Men as much
as they do Angels; becaufe on the one fide they are not
Such a fubtle fubftance..as thofe of the other Spirits ;
and on the other they are not compofed of fuch a grofs
matter as that of Men. If we defire to know why
thofe curfed Creatures are. called by the Fewi/h
Doctors fometimes Spirits, and fometimes Male and
Female, as tho’ they were Men ; the fame Toob will
tell us in his 5th Chapter, as Vorftiws. relates in the
22th Chapter of Rabi Eliezer, where he fpeaks of a
fecond Order of Spirits confider’d as diftinguifhed
into ten Orders. From. that Order proceeds in the
Univerfe two forts of Spirits of Error, or Sasyrs,
who behave themfelves like Men, who appear to
them in their Dreams in the fhape of handfome Wo-
men, transforming themfelves now into Men, then
Women. : | |
Seët, 17, “Tis now time to learn their Opinion
concerning human Souls, at leaft if they underftand
themfelves diftinétly enough, to inform us of ir:
For it already appears, from what I have quoted
out of Philo, Sect. 12. that the moft Learned do nor
{tick to an accurate diftin@ion betwixt Angels and
Souls; And Fofephus that famous Hi/torian, almott
as ancient as that other Author, fays in his feventh
Book of the Wars of the Zews, Chap. 25. That the
Spirits called Demons are thofe of the worft of Men, who
fall upon the living and kill them, if not hindred from
zt. Thence it appears, that he afcribes fomething
Corporeal to thofe Spirits, fo much the more that
he fancies that they may. be expell’d by the Root
Baaras, or by fome other formerly fhewed by So/o-
mon,as the fame Author intimates in his eighth Book
of the Fewi/h Antiquities: Buy 1 am to make a
large

—T SSE ae

112 The World Bewitch'd.
large mention of that fort of Enchantment, in the
following Chapter.

Sef. 18. The Book, which the learned Hoornbeck
hes written againft the Fews, contains in fhort their
Opinions, as to the Nature and Original of Souls.
Their Opinion (fays he, Pag. 319.) #, that the Souls
were all created together with the Light, the firft day
of the Creation ; and mot only that they were Created
together, but by Couples 5 the Soul of a Man and that
of a Woman ; fo that thereby st may be eafily nnderftood
that Marriages muft be very happy, and attended with
great Sweetnefs and Tranqusllity,wben one marries with
his peculiar Soul, that 5, with that which was created
with ber : Whereas they cannot be but unhappy, and
sun to the puniflomens of Men, when they are bound to
a Body whofe Soul was not created with the Soul of him
that Efpoufes her. We have to firive againft that Un-
bappinefs amil we be vid of it, and that we may be
united by a fecond Marriage to the Soul that was made
oir Partner inthe Creation to lead a happier Life.
Manaffe Ben Yfrael givesa more large account of that
belief in feveral places, as in his Conctliador,Queft. 6.
Pag. 12. In his fecond Book of the Re/urreëtion,
Chap. 13. as alfo in the third Book, Chap. 9. and
in his Treatife de Termino Vite, Sed. 8. pag. 207.
which he more largely confirms after the Jewifh
manner in his third Queftzon.

Sef. 19. As to the State of Souls after Death,
the Metempfychofis of Pythagoras is alfo received a-
mongft the Jews, which Tramfmigration they call
Gilgul, that is to fay, the Revolution of Souls ; for
they imagine that after Death, the Soul wanders
for a-yeat about the Body, whence fhe is gone out,
and goes ftill rambling, till fhe -meets with another
Body, into which fhe may enter to be born again
with it. They fancy that this happens three

times, as it is obferved in the Thisbi, upon the
word

word
Cha
gs 04
| gto th

| David
| that À
| Letter
Mal |
| ri

Nr of
J Sul of
I Sal ac
uid,
A hs Ne
B And i
Bi par
B tte fin
Re
Are
| LA

Seg
| tat th

D zs underftand that

The World Bewitch d. 113

word Gz/gul, in this manner.

into the Bodies of three Children or Men. ‘This they
‘hope in fome manner to confirm from the Book of

| Fob, ch. 23. v.19. according to that they fay, That
N the Soul of the firft Man enter’ d into the Body of King

David, and 5 now to pafs into that of the Meffiah ;
that Myftery being contained in the three Hebrew
Letters of Adam, AR; taking the 8 as the ini-
tial Letter of the name of Adam, the as the
firft of that of David, and the UW as the
| firft of that of Meffiah. Their learned hold, that the
Souls of the wicked pafs into the Bodies of Beafts, each
Soul according to the nature of the Sins fhe has com-
mitted, Thus the Soul of a Man that has debauch'd
his Neighbours Wife, is to enter into a Camel 5
| And therefore,-({ays David) I fhall fing to the Lord,
Ki gamal alaii, ‘oy 70) 15, becaufe be has deliver'd
| me from the Camel 3 as they interpret it, ufing this
| Reafon, that when the Hebrew word 7D}. is pun-
| Ctuated, itis read otherwife, and pronounced Ga-
| maal, which fignifies a Camel.
| Se&. 20. There are fome however who believe
that the Souls of the wicked perifh with their Bo-
dies, Fofephus fays of the Pharifees of his time, thar
| they aflerted che Tranfmigration of the Souls of the
good only, but that they fent thofe of the impious
| to the eternal Torments, in his fecond Book of the
| Wars of the Fews, Chap. 7. The Sadducees,accord-
ing to the Teftimony of the Holy Scripture, be-
lieved neither Refurrection, nor Angels, nor Spirits,
| in Sr. Math. Chap. 22. v. 23. and in the Aës, Ch.
23. v. 8. but now the Fews have invented a great
many Chimera’s, that powerfully confirmed them
| in their Magick, and rhe practice of their Conjura-
| tions ; for, asit has already been faid, the Soul fe-
| parated

LE

ER

The Opinion of the,
| Cabbalifts #, “that every Soul # created thrice; to let
foe introduces her felf Jucceffivety

114 The World Bewiteh'd.

parated from the Body muft wander a whole year-
about her Corps, during which the wicked Spirits
that abide in the Air, and are call’d q5an s2Non,
Malachi Chabbalab, or Devils of Torments, and have
yet feveral other Names,find occafion to make them
reenter into their-Bodies, as they have powerto do,
when they are required to. it- by: Conjurations.
Thence proceeds in their meaning, That the ch
of Endor, called again the Soul of Samuel into his.
Body, becaufe he had not been dead a whole year.
Manaffe Ben Ifrael teaches the fame Doctrine, and
affures us, “tis that of the Ancients, which he has
extracted, efpecially from Gemara Siabba. There
are fome however, who have more rational Opini-

ons, as we fhall-fee in the fecond Book, when we. |
have occafion to examine that inftance,

they

[belie
1 theta

Vite

Aus of
Bitsy

prac

I hap
a tinue

that

Si Neti

A the]
| UT

Gp,
Chap
fever
tha;
Ma
à Lt
tk

The World Bewitch' a.

CHAP. XIIL

That the Witchcraft anciently Praétifed, and ftill in
ufe amongft the Fews, proceeds from the fame Ori-

ginal,

Sef, 1. W E have examined the Opinions of the

Jews upon that matter, as much as
they differ from the holy writ ; for as far as their
belief is confonant to it, we receive and approve of
the fame. Let’s now fee what. they. practife as to
Witchcraft, the Holy Scripture may fully convince
us of the great inclination that People ever had for
its which doubtlefs proceeded. Fix/t, From the
practices they had feen in Egypt, and of which per-
haps they had not abftained, but had feen: the con-
tinuation of them in the Country they inhabited,
that was {urrounded:and intermixed with fo many
Nations addicted to that Art, *Tis for that Reafon
the Law gives them {uch frequent warnings to be-
ware of it, Exodus, 22, 18. Levit. Chap. 18. v. 31.
Cap. 5. v. 27. Deuter. Chap. 13, 85-9, 14: Tfaiah,
Chap. 6. v. 12.20. And that he threatned them fo
feverely, becaufe they could not refolve to forfake
that impious exercife, as may be feen, efpecially in
Manaffeh King of Fudah, 2 Kings, Chap. 27. v. 6.
2.Cron. Chap. 3.v. 6. That Sin became general
in the midft of Drael, or the Kingdom of the ro
Tribes, fo that the Scripeure fays, that They ufed Di-
vinations, and obferved the cry of Birds, 2 Kings,
Chap. 17. v.17. In the Apoftles time, there were
Seven Sons of the fame Father, one of the high Priefts,
who took upon them to be Exorcifts and to. conjure De-
vils, Ags, 19, ¥.13,14, Bur all thefe things made
no

116 The World BewitcP d.

no part of the contents of their Law, and on the
contrary were the effects of their Rebellion, fo that
Fudaifm was not properly anfwerable for them, un-
til they were taught by the Rabbins themielves, and
at laft introduced to make up part of their Religion.
Such are the DoGrines, which I have reprefented
inthe preceeding Chapter, to which the practices
of the prefent Fews, are perfectly agreeable.

Se&.2. The inquifitive Lighfoot, has fhewed by
many proofs that the Fews at their return from
the Babylonian Captivity, havingentirely forlaken.
Idolatry, and finding they were deftitute of Pro-
phets, addicted themfelves by degrees to Witchcraft
and Divination, about the time of our Saviours
coming. The writings of the Ta/mud,that are full of
Jaftructions for that purpofe, and are neverthelefs
in great credit among them, give upon that fubject
a teftimony not advantageous to them, efpecially
fince; in the following times, they ufed the fame
Arts againft Chriftianity. Lightfoot aflures us, That

after the Deftruëtion of their City and Temple, there.

were feveral Impoftors amongf? them, who eagerly ad-
ditted themfelves to Magick, by which they got after-
wards into great reputation, and that the expounding of
Dreams was a pretence they made ufe of, to commit a
vaft number of Deceits and Villanies. We fee, conti-
nues*that learned Author, in the Boek Maarfar She-
mi, fol. 45. Col. 2, 3 That Rabbi, Fofeph, Ben
Calpata, Rabbi Ifinsel, Ben. Fofe, Rabbi Lazarus, and
Akiba, made it their whole bufinefs, many of their
expoundings are related in the place I have quoted
out of Lightfoot, and from feveral things contained
therein, it may be infer’d, that they ‘inftructed

| their Difciples in thofe Arts. In the Book Shabbat;

fol. 3. Col, 2. mention is made of a Phantafm, that
appeared to one of their Bigets, whilft he was me-
ditating the Law, and fol. 8..Col. 2. fol, 14. Col. 3. ail

forts

and

forts 0
Woun
Theft
Colle
| Ligh)
that 0
relate,
Books
Sed
pale
| from
|. Book
| Dur
| gave
under

the U

le w

é

but
have
| root
Vinat
| lignin
1 mel

Lda

Obfery
Was
} mh, :
Whi |
ll]
LITE
thy
OLY,
Ton
Ceed
bref
Jens

aly

The World Bewitch d, 117

forts of Conjurations are treated of, fome to cure
Wounds, others againft the fting of Serpents, againft
Theft, and even againft Enchantments ; this 1 have
Collected from, the: Second part of the works of
Lightfoot, page 147. where many other things of
that nature are to. be found, but not neceffary to
relate, and much defs: to extra out of the own
Books of the Fews. |
Seët. 3. Elowever it will notbe befides the pur-
pofe, to add, whatthe fame Lightfoot has gather'd
from feveral.of their writings, elpecially from the
Book Sanhedrin, concerning their Bathko! or the
Daughter of the Voice, which isthe name the Fews
gave to the Echo, pretending it ws. an Oracle, that
under the Second Temple, fupplyed the want of
the Urim and Thummim, with which the Firft Tem-
ple was honoured. This is known by ail 'that are
but.a, little acquainted with the Jewifh affairs, and
have read fome of their writings, but ‘here: are
proofs that {how they made ufe of Bathkool in Di-
vinations. Rabbi Fochanan and: Rabbi Simeon, de-
figning to-confult Bathkool, togo and fee Rabbi Sa-
muel the Babylonian, they  pa{s'd before the School,
and heard a Boy reading what is contained,
1Sam. Chap. 25. verfe r. Samuel 55 Dead. They
obferv'd that; and found that the Samuel they fought
was Dead. Herefollowsanother ftory, Rabbi Jo-
nah, and Rabbi Jofah, went to vifit Rabbi Acha,
while he lay fick, they faid:let us hear what Bathkool
will Jay; andimmediatls they heard a Voice of a Wo-
man that faidito'ber Neighbor, The Candle goes out,
to which the Neighbor anfwer'd, Pray don’t’ let it go
out, nor.extinguifh the ‘light of Irael, Lightfoot,
Tom 2. p.167:  Itisias fare that thofe words pro-
ceeded from Bathkool, as it is certain, that Elijah is
prefentiat: the Circumcifion of the ‘Children of the
Jews, as ‘tis commonlyibelieved ‘among them and as
‘allthe learned know, Set,

118 The World Bewitth’a.

Sest. 44 But.befides thofe fingularities, we may
take notice that all their Witchcraft is founded up-
on two grounds, ‘the influences of the Stars, and thy
apparitions of Spirits, the reafon of the former
ground. is, that thd they efteem not the Celeftial
lights to be Gods; yet they afcribe to them a par-
ticular virtue, working upon, and influencing Hu-
man Actions, as well external as internal fenfes,
We have already heard Philo and Ben. Maimon up-
on that matter.  *Tis very ufual with them to fay,
The Planets make fuch aone Wife, or Rick, as Bux-
torf relates it in his Lexicon Talmudicum, out of the
Books of the Sabbath, thefe are happy influences or
Conftellations, that are called Mazz4/-toob, but Maz-
zal-ra is a malignant Star, under which one ts born,
or whole virtue influences him all his Life. Buxtorf
{ays again upon the Authority of the fame Book,
That the Planet of the Day of ones Birth, influences him
not, but only that of the Hour. And even, we find in
that Book which is the Genius of every Man, accord-
ing to the Planet under which he’s born, He who
is born under the Sur, will be handfom, free; not
diffembling, but of an unconftant humour. Under
Venus, hell be-rich and letcherous. Under Mercury,
skilful and. of a good memory. Under the Moon,
fickly, and unftedfaft. Under Saturn, unfortunate.
Under Jupiter, jufts and Under Mars, happy.
Which is the fame-with all the other Conftellations.
In the mean while itis commonly faid, That there:ss
no Planet in Urael, becaufe all the Fews feem to be
born under.one Planet, being all of the fame Geni-
us and Conduct; therefore we muft conclude, that
thofe diftinctions .concern only ftrangers, and that
Ifrael has the. skill of foretelling their good and bad
Fortune... However they.are much difturb'd when
the Moon is Eclipfed ; becaufe they take that acci-
‘dent asan ill prefage to them, which is an evident

proof

| “proot¢
Seb.
| covert
leads t
| them a
The me
| athe othe
Ralor
Cony
black
| tf iN
the na

Lato,
found
j vation
| toa
| appear
db
1 to th
Seb
Witch
fui C
1 ofthe
rage

takes
Doreler
dr
DT:
ino
pet
&tot
tt Wh

The World Bewitch d. 1x9
ity @ proof of the unftedfaftnefs of the Fewi/h Nation.

PA Set. 5. Astothe Spirits, Manaffe,-Ben Ifrael, dif-

y J} covering the true ground of the Fewi/h Divinations,

itt leads us to the wicked Spirits, faying, That fome of
lil À: shem are skilful and fhrev'd, and others Foolifla and dull -
ut | The moft skilful, flying from one corner of the World to

Hi tbe other, fometimes learn what is to happen. For this
is, À Reafon he acknowledges page .18. That feveral
ip} Conjure up thofe Spirits, and do wonders'by help of the
iy, M black Art. We read even in fome Cabbalifiical Books,
ut fas in Pirke Chales, and Ratfiel, and in fome others,
| the names of thofe Spirits, and the form of the Conju-
sot M rations ufed for’ that purpofe, There are alfo to be
fis À: found all the -prefages that may be drawn from the
om, J various forts of Apparitions. If thofe Sprits appear
in} | toa Man alone, they forebode nothing good ; if they
wk, | “appear to two perfons together, they prefage nothing
im # ill ; but it never happens, thatthey thew themfelves
din } to three in a company.

yt f  Seë. 6. The ways and means théy'ufe for their
who | - Waircheraft and Divinations, are'to be obferved in
ot f the Ceremenies of their Feafts, and the whole courfe
nder | of their ordinary Life. Every one knows that Mar-
iit), À -riage is the lawful way to beget Children, which
ur, | makes them believe one muft needs know how to
me. | » preferve himfelf in that occafion, from the wicked
pny. | Spirits. There is none but has read the Book of
om | Tobsr, how he-expel'd the Devil 4/fnodee, by the
ei | an{piration of the Angel Raphael, and how they took
wb | « together a Fifh, which as fome fuppofe was a Pike,
Gai || as tothe Heart and Liver, fays Raphael, if the Demon,
‘that | - or wicked Spirit difturbs any Perfon, whether Man or
‘tut | - Woman; he needs but make a perfume before hig, and
jbl | the party fhall be no more vexed, Chap. 6.v. 7. When
sl De was marryed with Sara, he remembred the words
xcs | Of Raphael, and took the Afhes of the perfumes, put
at} the Heart and the Liver of the Fifh thereupon, and made
or | a

720 The World Bewitch'd.
a finoke. with it, which when the Evil Spirit had fmelr, $e
he fled into: the utmoft parts of Egypt, and the Angel fefted
bound him there, Chap. 8. v. 23.

Sei. 7. If that Narration is efteemd Apochry- 4) Voil
phal by: che Proteftants, that of Fofepbns deferves | upa
not a better name, when in the Second Chap. of || inten
the 8th Book, of his Fewifh Antiquities, he deduces — all
the Original of Magick from Solomon, and Jays the "| Germ
foundation of it, upon the wifdom of that King, /| cage
nay he afferts, That God himjelf had infpired bim with | whs,
that Art fo powerful againft Demons, for fays he, He | Won
has made ufe of Witchcraft to expel difeafes, and has | 1
left in bis writings, forms of Conjurations, by which | Cun
the Devils that molejt mankind are Jo far banifbed, that | Pic
they never dare come back again. And that Jort of cure | her {

gs now. in great requeft amongft our Nation. It con- | thn
fitted according to the defcription given of it, inthe } Bock
wie of fome certain) Root, :which they feal’d up, | credit
and put under the Noftrils of the pofleffed. At the | Bus
{fame time they uttered the name of Solomon, and f they
the words.of his Conjuration, and fo was. the De- | Phi
vil forced to flie. He declares to have been'an Eve- | Phar
witnefs himfelf of an operation of this nature, made } Gv
in the prefence of the Emperor Vefpafian and his | hcg
Sons, on the Pesfon of one Elsezer. We will exa~ } aii,
mine in our 4th Book, how the fight of Fofephus | 4A
was then difpofed ; bus in the mean while, we could tothe
with be had explained to us, whether this Root is ff the,
the fame with that hé mentions in the 28th Chap. of § with
the 7th Book of the Fewifh Antiquities, which he: J pra
calls Baaras, becaufe of the place where it grows, | th.
Gnee he alfo afcribes to this laft, the wonderful vir- Lu
tue of expelling Demons ; for according to his re- 9 tin,
lation, ane needs but touch the poffefs d' with it, K wil!
and.the Devilisfotced.to:run away, but of:this more | de
in the 4th Book. dr

| Who!

Set, |

The World Bewitch d. 125

Seé, 8. Here follows how the prefent Fews are mo-
fefted all their Life by the wicked Spirits, and how
they beware of them. When a Child comes into the
World, the terrour of Lilis comes with him, to feize
upon the Spirits of the Parents, becaufe thar Lilis
intends to kill the Boys, within 8 days of their birth,
and the Girls within the 21th. The remedy of the
German Jews, to preferve themfelves from that
danger, is, To draw circular lines with Chalk or Char-
eoles, upon the 4 Walls of the Chamber, wherein the

ames of the three Angels that prefide over
Phyfick, Sensi, Sanfenoi, and Saumangelof, as Lilis
her felf taught them, when fhe hoped to- drown
them all inthe Sea. This is related by Elias in his
Book entituled, Thish, to which he gives no great
credit, as he himfelf witnefles. I cannot omit what
Buxtorf {ays in his Lexicon Talmudicum, concerning
the weapons wherewith they arm themfelves againit
Phantoms. A Vail fpread over the Face, hinders tbe
Phantafm from knowing him that is frighted, but if
God judges that he deferves to be terrified for his fins,
be caufes the vizard to fall down, that the Ghoft may fee
and bite him.

Seé. 9. But what terrour foever the Devil caufes
to them, they neverthelefs believe, that if they take
their opportunity, they may prevent his endeavours
without trouble. To this the choice of days is of
great ufe, and they have fo great a regard for them,
that they do no longer deferve the reproach, thar
was caft upon them, of Not underftanding the figns of
times. The fame Buxtorf, in bis School of the Fews,
will fupply us with a fpecimen of that Cuftom, Arc
the great day of propitiations , they appeafe Sam-
mael With a prefent, for on that only day in t'e
whole Year, he is allowed, by a compact with
Vol, I. ' God,

G22 The World Bewitch'a.

God; to accufe [fel of their trensgreffions. Be-

fides, they believe themfeives 40 cunning as to cheat
the Devil. “The Firff means they ufe for that pur-
pofe, is to -blcw upon the Corn, withall their

ftrength, from morning to nie fincyirg to make

Sammael forget the quality of it, by rhe fright the
& ] y

eaft upon him. ‘The Figs Oy of rx Year is alfo

fir to put another cheat upon him, for as on that
day, God fits in judgment tor the examination of
Sins, they endeavour to hinder their Enemy, from
bringing his accufations againft them, by concealing
From hit the dareof the Day. The tubrilry they
afe in that occafion, is thar they forbear to read,
either the begining or the end of the Law,as® atrmael
fuppoles, that they fhall do thar Day, and thus they
never failte catch him: They alfo abitain as much
as they can. onthe 17th day of the Month Tammus,
that anfwers to our 7z#e, and the oth of the follow
ing Month on which falls their Second faft to go
from hofe, and efpetially avoid to make any jour-
ney of 4 of 5 Miles, or to appear ina Court of
Juftice, becaute that time Is the reign’ of a wicked
‘Spirit call’d Ketelineriri, bitter Deftruttion, a name
drawn from Deut. Chap. 32. v. 24. "Where Mofes
however fpeaks of quite other matters.

Se. 10. The Cabbaia chiefly ufes fuch Witch-
craft, as is made by numbers and Letters, and is
in great requeft among!t the Jews. It even teaches
to apply to ic the facre 1 word of God, and withal
fome fentences and difcourfes, or only fome proper
words and particular names, t0 which the Jews af
cribe a great Virtue ; whether they attribute it to
the power of the apparition ef abfent bodies, or of
ancorporeal fubftances, of whether they prefitme to
eve by that means, ftrange and wonderful things.
Malka Scheva, of the Queen of Sheba, that-went to
vif King Solomon in his glory, has been often con:

| jured

jared
fpr
othet
produ
Chris
are Ge
flop ot
upon !
or {ev
| ate ca
| See
| at n
D they

| God n

| nate
| When
| i’, ai
| Words
| that R
| esa
HG

The World Bewitch d. 123

jured up, as they fancy, and has appearad to the
{uperftitions, In fhort, as to what concerns the
other extraordinary effects, which they boaft to
produce, they are held for great forcerers, even by
Chrifiians, over credulous in this point ; for there
are-Germans, who look upon them as Men, thac can
{top conflagrations, and quench Fire, by throwing
upon it fome bewitch’d things ; that can draw two
or feveral forts of Wine out of the fame Veffel, and
are capable of producing many other wonders.
Seët. 11. To {peak of the other ufes, they make
} of names in Witchcraft, it muft be granted, that
} they make no more difficulty to mix the name of
| God with it, than that of the Devil. The famous
|} name of ptm) that which we ufe to read Febovab,
| when punctuated,is multiplied by theirDoctors,by 12,
| 42, and the 72 Letters, which they-di{pofe and make
words of them, and apply them to Witchcraft. For
that Reafon, they call it Shem Hamphorafh, a name
"| explained or divided, They believe it to have a
great Virtue ; by him Mees kill’d the Egyprian ,
| by him If/rael was preferv’d from the hand of the
deftroying Angel in the Wildernefs; and by him
Fefus Chrif? expel d wicked Spirits. hus they bla
pheme the Second Perfon of the Holy Trinity, not be-
rf ing.able to deny his power. It is eafy to be in-
sf form’d of all thefe things in their own writings, and
iS} by their own confent. The name of the Devil is
| likewife of much force to his great lofs and forrow.
©} That force proceeds from the 4 Hebrew Letters,
| that compofe this name, with the Article perfixed
} to it, wow Haffatan that make up juft the
i} number of 364, that is, of all the days
of the Years but one. Now the Jews pretend,
ig |} that by Reafon of the Virtue of that number 364,
| included in the name of Ha/ffatan, he is deprived of
the right of accufing them during a like number of
tt’) days in the Year, and therefore he has but one re~
| G 2 maining

124 The World Bewitch a.

maining,’ in which he.may do it, fo that if he chance
10 neglect that day, or to be then deceived or puz-
lcd, he may well be forrowful, and the Jews very
glad, all this is grourded upon the paflage of 2a-
charia, Chap. 3. ¥» 2» The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan.
Se. 12. hey alfo pretend to find a great Virtue
inthe reckoning of Letters,and their difgofition into
{everal diferent orders. They write on the forepart
of Houfesand the Walls of Chambers, fome ftrange
Characters of no lefs extraordinary names, which
they ule to give to thofe Angels, that are eftablifhed
over the plague, fuppoñing by that means to be
{ficiently fecure from the burning darts of that
confeming fcourge. The word ys Dariroon is
likewife an infallible prefervative againft the Pefti-
lence, when "tis written 22 Of 23 rimes, that 1s as
many times as there are Letters in their Alphabet,
of which they put one every time before that word,
beginning with the firft Letter, and ending with the
laft. They have likewife excellent remedies againit
Agues, the word \7D"aN chat is made up of Six
t Letters, being written 6 timesin as
7p JAN nany different files, jeaving outa Lez-
Ge ter of every file on the left fide, is, in
P38 their Opinion, an excelient remedy
TAN : : :
a againft the quartan Ague, the ftumbling
** block -of the Phyftians. By this any
N° one may perceive how great Virtue the
Fews afcribe ro Letters, Characters, and Names.
Here you have another Myftery taught in the Book
i Aroda Zara, “Tis dangerous 40 drink. at
ues Night, why ? hecaufe that makes People blind,
ss) but af one be dry and he drinks, what then?
sh here is the remedy. The Hebrew word
1 gyryaey Shebriri, that is,loft fight or fudden
blindnefs, being written as it 1s here in the
J4argent, and hung about the Neck, caufe the blind-
nels

The World Bewitchd. 12%

nof to go off, as much as we fee decreafe the firft
Letters of this word, untill they be altogether va-
nifhed, and theblindnefs gone. Thofe Initructions-
are to be found in the Lexicon Talmudicum of Bux.
torf.

Sef, 13. By this fhort Specimen of their Witch-
crafts, may be feen the Relation that there is, be-
twixt the Practices and’ Doctrines-of their Rabbins;.
contained in the fore-going Chapter, from which,
doubtlefs, thofe practices take their Original.

Firft, Their opinions of the Materiality, as Tmay.
fay, of good and bad Spirits, Chap. 12. Seët. 8. 10,
14,15. was the caufe that they afcribe. to them,
external and vifible fhapes, with effects of the fame:
nature, as they have been defcribed, Seét. 6.8. For
material Caufes at. materially, whereas Spiritual
things are for thofe that are Spiritual. 1 Cor. 2. 13.

Second. It was no hard matter that the ft ange
Thoughts they have of Sammael, Prince of the Le-
vils, and of Lil his Mother, according to fame
Chap.12. Sect. 13, 14, fhould carry them to pra-
ctife Conjurations, by which they hope to put Mo-
ther and Son to flight, or at Jeaft to turn them off.
Se&. 7, 8, 9. Whoever is fo credulous in that point,
is very apt to miftake in all others.

Third. Their great and general efteem for the:
Cabbala , that afcribes fo much power to Letters,
Nantes and Numbers, is the original of all the forts
of Witchcraft, that are performed ‘with Letters,
Numbers and Characters. Sef. 10, 11,12. And "tis
no wonder that a Nation, who has loft the vivifying
Spirit of the Letters of the Holy Writ, fhould now

fo curioufly, and with fo much trouble, feek the
help of thofe Letters deftitute of the Spirit of
Life

G 3 Fourth.

126  TheWorld Bewitch'd.

Fourth, Ir muft be obferved, that being antient-
ly ufed to Propheñes, Vifions, Urim and Thummim,
they now bethought themfelves of the empty found
of Batlecle, and the influences of the Stars, to fup-
ply the want of the advantages they had loft.

Se&. va. When we recollect all thofe things, we
eafily perceive, that thé the Jews are not pattakers
of the Pagans Idolatry 3, yet they have a near Re-
lation to them, as to the Opinions and Cuftoms
they have not drawn from the Holy Scripture.
Nay, they gofarther than the Heathens, and are in
a more Diametrical.cppofition to the Principles of
their own Doctrine, than the Heathens with thofe
of their Religion ; for the ews conceiving plainer
than they do, that there is but one Creator and
Director of all, fuficient to himfelf, and having
fuch a ftrong prejudice againft all the Gods in-

ented by Men, and againft whatever has any
nearnefs to Idolatry. isnot eafie to forgive them
their dependency upon. the Stars; their fear «of
the great Devil Sammael, nor their Faith for the
virtue of Words, Letters, Characters and Num-
bers ; fince the Heathens were obnoxious to thofe
faults, only becaufe they had not a fufficient know-
ledgeof the Supreme Deity, and did. not relye fo
much upon him as they ought to have done : where-
as they trufted too much upon the Creatures,which
they had Deify’d themfelves. However, our a-
mazement will diminifh, if we obferve that. all
shefe Doctrines have been drawn from Paganifm,
and have been received amongft them, only by an
effe& of the natural inclination and eagernefs of
that People, for fuch Fables and Inventions, with-
out confidering, whether. or no they were agreea-
ble to the Rules of the Law. But the utmoft
blindnefs is to perfift in them to. this ve day,
without reflecting upon the State, in which the
Divine

Ditir
on ot
Nati

I def

have
Wire
but 1

Wot
have
to th
telat
hal
ton
meh
fa
tl
kh
ti
fa
Noy
tha
le

The World Bewitchd. 127

Divine Juftice has put them, by an entire deftructi-
n of their Common-wealth,and fcattering of their
Nation amongft the Heathens. In the mean while
I defire the Reader to obferve, that hitherto we
have met with nothing, of whatever is called
Witchcraft, Phantafms, or Diabolical Apparitions,
but it draws its Original. from Hearhenifm.

Je RE
CHAP. XIV.

That the Doétrine of the Spirits, and the: exercife of

Magick, are alfo in, requef? amongfi the Makh:=-

metans.

Sed. 1. E cannot fay many things with great
certainty, concerning the Mahometans,

upon the matter in hand, for we muft learn it, either”

in the Alcoran, that is the Law of Mahomet, or
from the Precepts of, their Doctors, which very
much differ from the Law. As to the <Alcoran, I
would not truft to any but my felf, and therefore
have.read ir, theet by fheer, from the beginning
to the end; but could not gather any particulars,
relating to our fubject, except that litle which I
fhall mention hereafter. Befides, there are come
to my-hands but very few writings of the Maho-
metans : yet | have read fome very credible Chri-
fitan Authors, that treat of their belief, whom I
fhall prefume to make ule of ; becaufe every one
knows, that during their abode amongft thofe Na-
tions, they have examined very impartially and
narrowly, fuch things as they relate. Now there’s
none but knows, that the Doctrine and Worfhip of
that Sect, as they are contained in the Alcoran and

their other Writings, are involved with many Fa-
G 4. bles

| 120 The World Bovitch d.

bles and Fictions, which are generally received as
Truth amongft them, bur explained in a very ratip-
nal fenfe by the Learned, which makes it, that
they are not fo intolerable in thar refpect, as
that they are falfe and groundiefs. And therefore,
Mis but reafonable to ufe this circumfpection, that
knowing that fort ef People ro be Men of fenfe, as
there are many in other Sects, we interpret their
Fables only with relation to that, which is clearly
and fignificantly. exprefs d in ather places, and in
reference to the tendency they feem to have, in
what is related of their other Opinions.

Sect. 2. Ir is alfo reafonable to relate at firft,
what is to be garhered from the 4lcoran, and to
joyn to it afterwards, what other Authors fupply us
with, either as to the Doctrine of the Spirits taught
amongft the Mufulmans , that isthe Faithful, as they
Jove to call themfelves, or as to. their practices in
Witchcraft and Divinations. Bur becaufe rhe Book
of Laws collected after the death of Mahomet by his
Difciples, that are the moît famous Doctors of the
Mufulmans, is not uniform) as to the Order in which
it is tranflated in feveral Languages; for the con-
veniency of the Reader, I defign to follow the di-
vifion obferved by du Ryer, in his French Tranflati-
on, and by le Verrier in his Dutch, who both di-
vide the whole work into: 1 ¥3 Chapters.

Se&, 3. Firft of all, ‘tis amongift them a funda-
mental point, repeated above a hundred’ times-in
the Book of the Law, that God à but One; and hath
720 partner : in which they perfectly agree with the
fews, even in reference to the Holy Trinity, as
has been already mention’d, Chap. 12. Se. 1.
Marmol {ays however, in the firft part of his de-
{cription of Africa, Pag. 128. Edit. Pars. That the
Morabites, a Se& of Mahometan Arabs, hold that the
Heavens, Stars and Elements make up but one God to-

gether

The World Bewitch’ a, 129

£ether. The Saha, another Sect of the Turks, be-
lieve that there is fome Deity in the Sun and Moon,
becaufe of the influence thofe two great Lights
of the Univerfe, have upon fublunary Creatures,
according to the Relation of Ricaut in his defcripti-
on of Turkey, Book 2. Chap. 12. De la Vall in his jour-
ney,Book 4. Chap.7. fays,that amongft the Perfians,
feveral Mzhometans afcribe affifting Forms and In-
telligences to the Sun, Moon and Stars, by which
they are quickned and directed, as our Bodies are
by our Souls,

Seët, 4. In moft, or all the pages of the Alcoran,
mention is made of the Holy Angels, of rhe wicked
Devil, and of the Original of Devils, far more ra-
tionally, than in the Books of the Fews. For they
tnake the Angels immaterial, tho’ they believe that
they appear in a Corporeal fhape, as is to be read in
this paflage of the 5th, Chapter. The Angels, fay
they, are the only conftant and immutable Creatures,
there being no others endued with fuch Properties. Thus
is this paflage quoted by Levinius Varnerius in his
Mifcellanies, who has extracted it from. fome other
Book. But this is a reafoning of the mo% thinking
part and the beft Philofophers amongft them. For
Mahomet himfelf believ’d that the Angels had been
created of fome certain Matter, as he gives us to
know in one of his Fables, to be related anon. He
often {peaks too grofly, and gives.us occafion to
doubt whether he underftands in a proper or figu-
rative Sen{e,. what he fo frequently fays, that the
Angels go to and fro, hear the Law, have Beings,
and even are diftinguifh'd into Males and Females ;
for he believes that diftinétion of Sexes to be found
in every thing ; See his 52, Chap. pa. 594. He no
lefs vilifies the Dignity of Angels, afcribing the
caufe of the fall of fome to their refufal of paying
an extraordinary Honour ‘to Adam, who was wi-

G 5 fer

+ Sa

f A

nt:
ad 4
à
ah |

| M
‘1
il

Le

Sais

(30 The World Bewitch’a

er than they were, and conversd more familiarly
with God. For God taught Adam the Names of all
things, and Adam taught them tothe Angels, Chap.
a. pa. 5. Laftly, the great number of Guardian An-
gels, whom he gives to every Mufulman, evidently
infers, that one of his Difciples was look’d upon by
him of greater worth than feveral Angels.

Sek. 5. Mahomet has very plainly exprefsd, in fe-
veral places of his Book of the Law, his Opinion upon
the Nature and Original of Devils who at the
beginning were created in the rank of the Angels,
whence they fell for their envy. Thus in the 64,
Chap. Pag. 109. he introduces God, {peaking to him.
Ihave created and made thee, I have commanded the
Angels to adore Adam, which they bave done, fave
only the Devil. “This place muft be underftood with
the diftinction, brought by Levinzus Varnerius, out
of a Turkifb Book, Adoration belongs to the Great God
as a Werfbip, but it may belong to others as a mark of
Veneration. Inthat Senfe it 5 that Adam was adored
by the Angels, and Jofeph by bé Father and Brothers,
Mahomet proceeds, relating what God faid to the
Devil. What hinders you from adoring Adam, a I
bave order’'d you? The Devil Anfwer’d, Becaufe I
am Superior to him, fince thou hajt created me out of
Fire, and Man out of Clay. Hereupon I faïd, Go out
of Paradife, ‘+5 mot the abode of the proud ; thou floale
be inthe number of thofe that are cover’d with infamy.
He replyed, Let'me be here till the day of the Refur-
reftion. Why, {aid he, haft thon tempted me? T fhall,
faid he, turn Men from the right way, I fhall hinder
them Ly all means from believing thy Law, and even
let the greateft part fall into ungratefuines. I faid to
him, Go out of Paradife, thou fhalt be rejeëted by al?

the world, and deprived from the effects of my Mercy,

and I foall fill Hell with thofe that flall liften to thee,
and

cand
fo. -

Le,

C2
Es —
=—

ss

pe TS
> oo La mam Ree

The World Bewitch d. 31
ON and follow thee. The fame. Rekation is repeated in
| À ther4, 16, and 37 Chapters. Pag. 293, 381, and
sir. And thd he mentions but one Devil, as the
Chief, he neverthelefs believes.a vaft number of
good and wicked Angels; for in the 74h, Chapter
he fpeaks of thoufands of good Angels, whom God
fent once from Heaven to his affiftance, whilft he
prayed; he likewife mentions the Demons in the
plural number, as Chap. 6. We have created Hell to
punifh Devils and Men.

Seét. 6. His diftinction betwixt the ftate of An-
gels and Devils is not to be rejected in all refpects :
fuch as they are towards God and the Faithful, fuch
he defcribes them to be one towards another:
Chap. 7. Pag. 198. God faid to his Angels, Iwill be ij
with you, confirm the freps of the true faithful. Chap. y
11.278. The Angels tremble in the prefence of God,
Chap. 20. Pag. 360. They are not afhamed to.adore
him. , And again, Chapter 15. Pag. 296. God or-
ders bis Angels to go down, and fends by infpiration

4 so whom he pleafes. This, as he believes, particu-
larly happens fome certain Nights ; Chap, 96. Pag.
2 284. The Angels defcend at night upon Earth, by the
I leave of their Lord; and wifit the true faithful, till the
{ break of the day: Chap. 12..Pag. 290. They will vifit
f the faithful in the Garden of Eden, they will falute

them, and fay, here. 5 the reward of their perfeverance 5
here 5 the Eternal Grace.

Seët. 7. As he holds that the Angels are always
ready to ferve God, ,on behalfe of the Faithfal ; fo
he believed them no leis forward, in performing his
Orders againft the impious.) en, fays he, Chap.
5+ pag. 155.. the wicked are at the point of death, the

i ie ftretch ont their bands-to feize upon their Souls.
it And further, P.172. The Angels of death fhall hill

thofe that blafpheme God and hw Commandments 3
Chap, 7. Pag. 203, 204. Thon haft feen that the An-
gels

132 The World Bewitch d.

gels have put to death the unfaithful, and firicken
them, before and behind, A great power for the
executing of God’s Judgments, is afcribed to them:
for an Angel is fufficient to deftroy all the Inhabi-
rants of the World, as Levinius Varnerims quotes it
out of a Turki Book.

Seët. 8. He forgets not the evils caufed by the
Devil for the feducing of Man. The firft was his
having them banifh’d from Paradife, Chap. 1. Pag:

7. He caufedAdam and hi Wife to fin, and to fal -

from the Grace in which they were, Chap. 2. Pag. 8.
God advertifes Mahomet, that the Devil would make
bim afraid of the unfaithful, Pag. 150. The Devil
will make them forget my Commandments, Pag. 160.
Think upon the day in which I fhall gather all the Peo
ple, and fay to the Devil, O thou Prince of the De-
eils, why haft thou rebelled againft me? Chap. 56.
Pag. 608. For the Devil has pufé ap Man, and made
Lim revolt from the Commandments of God. He feems
even to believe, tharthe malice of the Devil extends
as far as the Stars, with which, he fays, God kas
adorned the Heavens. and which be preferves againjt
the attempss of the Devils, Chap. 40. Pag. 534.

Seët. 9, Suchare his Opinions as.to the Angels
in general ; but as to their particular Miniftry >
Thevenct relates, ‘That the Turks acknowledge
© Guardian Angels, but in far greater number than
‘we do, for, fay they, God has ordained+70 An-
‘ gels for an invifible Guard to each Mufulman, and
‘there happens nothing to any perfon, but they at-
‘rribute it to them. Each has his particular Office,
© one watches over oné Member, and thother over
€ another ; one is fo fubfervient in this, and the
* other in that Affair. Amongft all thofe Angels,

‘there are two who prefide over all the reft, fitting
‘one on the Right, and th'other on the Left hand,

« and being call’ Kerim Kiatib, that is to fay; SE

| ciful

The World Bewitch'd. 139

‘ciful Writers : That on che Right hand keeps ac-
| count of the good Actions, and that on the Left
| Sof thebad. They are fo merciful that they {pare
* { ‘him, if he commits any fin before he falls afleep,
t * hoping he fhall repent, if not, they fet ic down,
“but if he repents, they write, Effig fourillah, God
' | “forgive. They accompany him every where, un-
$ “lefs when he goes to the Neceffary houfe, whither

* they lethim go alone, waiting forhim atthe door,
‘ where they again take poffeffion of him. For that
, { ‘reafon, when the Turks go to that place, they go
t { ‘in with the Left Foot, and when they come out,
ii | “they put the Right Foot foremoft, that the Angel
. | ‘who fets down their good Works, fhould feize
¢ § ‘firftuponthem. Mahomet himfelf confirms that
r | ‘Fable, faying, Chap. 52. Pag. 594. Think, O
6, Man, on the day when thou {hale fee near thee, thy good
à NO Angel on thy Right hand, and thy bad Angel on thy

5 Left, who have noted and written whatever thou haft

is À done.

a Set, 10. ’Tis obfervable, that this Fable has its

ff | Original from the immortality of the Soul, and the
| refurrection of the dead, which the Turks believe,

| and are plainly exprefs’d in the foregoing wordsand

1) elfe-where: as Chap. 12. Pag. 280. The faithfw
ge fFail go into the Garden of Eden : but to the untaith-
| fulhe fays, Pag. 288. Hell the place to which you
w fare deftin'd, Chap. 52. Pag: 594. God takes up the
al  Soxlof Man, as he thinks fit, to fend her into one of
x À the places. Bur firft, the returns into the Body
de, after its burying, to undergo the ftrict examina-

—

tt | tion of two frightful Angels, Munguir and. Guau-
ite | g#7r5 the Fable which Thevenor relates upon their
és, | Account, and thar of the Beafts, is fo grofs, that I
ig |  fhoufd be afhamed to recite it at large,

Se, 114

Peal

134 ‘The World Bewitchd.

Sea. 1x. In-the’mean while ic will not be
unferviceable to our fubject, to give a more parti-
cular inftru@tion ‘of their ‘belief upon the ftate of the
Dead. ’ I will not here {peak of their Carnal Para-
dife, becaufe I treat nor of all the points of the
Mabometan Religion, but only of what concerns the
the Spirits ; they acknowledge that there are ap-
painted two very different places,one for the damned,
and the other for the faved; that is to fay, there
are Men, who have done fo many good works, that
at the very hour they expire, they are admitted into
the happinefs of Paradife ; buc there are others,
who having not a fufficient Faith, are fubjected to
pains for their Sins, until they be all expiated ; after
which they enjoy in Paradife, the {ame felicity with
the others, that are gone in firft, But as to the un-
faithful and wicked,they go to burn forever in Hell,
where there bodies are as often repaired by God, as
they are reduced to Afhes, that their torments may
be Eternal: That’s the fubftance of what Thevenot
writes, Chap. 20 and 31 of his journey, and Ricaut
fays almoft the fame thing, Chap. 2. 6. and T2.

Se. 12. The tranfmigration of Souls from one
body into another, not only of Human Souls, but
likewife of thofe of Beafts, is alfo believed by fome
Mahometans. Ricaut veltifies, Book 2. Ch. 12. That
one of their Sects, called Munafichs, holds that Opi-
nion 3 and takes occaffon from thence to relate how
one Roboroski,a Polander, was dealt with by a Dru-
gift, that was angry with him, becaufe he had kick’d
his Dog, for they believe, That the Souls of Men af-
ter Death, enter into the bodies of fuch Beafis, with
which the Nature and temper of the bodies, that were
animated by thofe Souls, had molt relation ; that the
Soul of a Glutton paffed into the body of a Hog 5 that
of a Letcherous, into that of 4 He-goat ; that of aGe-

nerous perfon, is deftin'd to animate a Horfe, and shes

fall
feveta
his ov
Ejcbr
tem, |
the Al
or the
have
cet
| venly
| à
| tion i
| inmo

“| defer

| calied
| They
) and y
| by th
} retun
À from
I be ts
A nents
| pare
| Lok'd
| Li
EN
l Del
| HA
Deca

The World Bewitch'd. 135

| of a Watchful Man to quicken a Dog. To this he adds,
feveral circumftances, which the curious may {ee in
| his own Book. He likewife afferts that ihe Sect
Efchrakin, that is, illuminated, is likewite Pythago-
| rean, but that it holds not much of the Doctrines of
| the Alcoran, thé moft of it’s followers are the Schicks,
* À or the Preachers and chief Doctors of the Turks, They
, À have more rational Opinions than the others, con-
| cerning the immateriality of Spirits, and the Hea-
N venly happinefs.
| Seé. 13. For the Sabins or Sabs, of whom men-
tion is made before, fcarce believe that the Soul
| immortal.  Delavalle in his 4th Book, Ch. 23,
defcribes fome Perfians that are like them, they are
calied elh elsabquid, that is, People of truth or certainty,
| They conftirute the Effence of the Soul in the mixture ©
| and union of the 4 Elements, as far as I can obferve
| by the explication he gives of their belief. The Soul
} returns te Ged in the fame manner as fhe proceeded
| from him, for fhe proceeds from him, in as much as
| he is the Author of that complication, of the 4 Ele-
| ments, and fhe returns to him, in as much as he
| feparates them. That Sect is very numerous, tho
| look’d upon as Heretical by other Perfians.
Seët. 14. Every one of thofe various Opinions,
is difcoverable, by the practices of it’s followers,
i | Delavalle relates Ch. 17. that the Perfians have 4
| great veneration for the greateft and eldef Trees,
| becaufe they periwade themfelves, that they are
| the abode of the Souls of the bleffed ; for which
Reafon they callthem Pir, that is, An Ancient Man,
| or Scheich, the Eldeft, or Iman, Prief?, fuppofing
that the Souls of the Priefts and Old Men, dwell in
| fuch Trees. There are others, who having learned
| from Pythagoras, to enquire after the Virtue and
| Myftery of numbers, are addicted to all forts of
| Witchcraft, as the Inhabitants of the Coaft of Coro-
mandel,

EEE ren rs Se rs ee
RP eee eg nn

EC iEeS

PEER PP OL

È Pres re

136 The World Bewitch a.

mandel, ‘Ch. 8 Se&. 5. They boaft fays Marmol, Book
2. Chap. 3. pag. 131. That the Celefisal Spirits apr

pear to them, and communicate to them an entire know

ledge of the affairs of this World. They are much fear-
ed and reverenced in Africa, as being great forcerers.
The rule they keep was compofed by one Boni, named by
the Arabs, The Father of Enchantments and Witch-
crafts ; the laft of the three Books he has written 5 call-
ed The fecret of the Divine Attributes; and treats
of the Virtue of 90 Names of God. But ’tis fit to
mention here, a fort of Cabala in great requeft with
part of thofe Nations, and like that of the Jews,
fave that it is not drawn from the Holy writ, for
they name it a natural Science, but fay, that he
muft be an Aftrologer who prefumes to put it in

ule.

Sect. 15. The fame Author adds, That in Great.

Cairo, and the Towns of Barbary, there 15 a vaft num-
ber of People that runs up and down, and pretend to
three forts of Divination; fome divine by the black Art
with Draughts and Figures, fome with a glafsVeffel full
of Water, into which they power a drop of Oyl, that
becomes very thin and clear, wherein they pretend to fee
Troops of Devils marching in order of Battle, fome by
Water, and others by Land; as foon as they frop, Queries
dre put to them, and they anfwer by figns with the Eyes
and Hands. But to that Witchcraft, little Children are
required, for the great ones fee nothing, whereas the others
look into che Oyl, and being asked, ‘whether they fee the
figns which the Devils make, they anfwer yes,which gives

them great credit, and gets them plenty of Money. Lhe,

Catoptromancy of the Ancients was fomthing like that,
Chap. 3. Sect. 10. That fort of People are called in
Mauritania, Moralcimines, that #, Enchanters, be=
caufe they boaft of bewitching the Devils by words.
The third fort of thofe rambling Diviners, are Women,

that make People believe, they converfe. with Devils, \
fome |

Jone
they a
Sulp
| mm
| Herr)
| que
they à
rain
Set
| cest
| and
| fngh
| define
| or Za
| byt by
| did we
file,
in Ba
| Denil
Jo th
| Spirit,
make
they h
Oj
À that by
À éd «
Sel
Luc
| taled|
| the if
a he ty
Hing
Eze
bain
Hp fy

Ties 9

| caut concerning the Turbes.

The World Bewitch'd. 137

Somme of whom are white, and others red or black. When
they are about to Divine, they befmoke themfelves with
Sulphur and other ftinking drugs; after which the De-
mon, as they fay, feizes upon them, and they change
their Voice as tho be fpake by their Mouths; then the en-
guirers approach and ask with great bumblenefs, what
they defire, and having received an Anfwer, go away
leaving a prefent in the Witches Houfe.

Seët. 16. The Bumicils are doubtlefs great force-
cers too, Thefe fight againft the Devils, as they Jay,
and go all bruifed and cover d with blows in a great
fright 3 often at Noon day they counterfert a Skirmifh
before the People, two or three hours long, with Spears
ar Zagaies, until they fall down all laden with blows 5
but having refted a while, they come to themfelves again,
and walk. could not hitherto difcover what rule they

| follow, thé they are held to be Monks. There are others

in Barbary maimed exorcifts, who boaft of expelling
Devils, and when they cannot compafs their end, they

| fay that the party is credulous ; or that it 15 a Celeftial

Spirit. Thefe draw Circles, or write fome Chara&ers, and
make marks on the Hand or Face of the poffeffed 3 then
they befmoke him with ftinking [mels, and make their
Conjuration. They ask the Spirit how he 1s entered into
that body, whence he comes, what hes, how heis call d,

| and at laft order him to be gone,

Sef. 17. I muft yet relate fomthing out of R:*
There isa fort of Dervis

| called Mevelevi,who turn with great skill and fwiftnefs at

the found of the Flute,affirming,that it is by devotion and
the example of their Patron Mevelava, who always
turned inthat manner, without taking in: any nourifh-

| ment during a fortnight, whilft his friend Haraze was

playing on the ‘inftrument 3 atthe end of which, be fell
into an extafie, wherein he ‘received from Heaven, the

| rules of his order, with many wonderful revelations.
| Now his fucceffors, who are inclind to Lazinefs,

and

138 The World Bewitch'd,

and yet cannot be quiet, follow his example in this
manner. Some learn Legerdemains, to amufe People
and apply themfelves to Magick and Conjurations, by the
help of familiar Spirits. From this place, in which
the Author fpeaks of his own Head, it appears that
he acknowledges fome fuch Spirits, and argues about
them according to his Opinion. Afterwards he makes
fome quotations out of Busbeek, that are very perti-
tent to our fubject. a ae
Sect. 18. There is, fays be, in Egypt, 2 Clajier
confecrated to a Saint, called Kederlei 3 the Dervis
that. dwellin it, boaft that by the Virtue of Kederlet
they bewitch Serpents and Vipers, and handle them as
boldly as innocent Beasts... Others are not afraid of the
ftings of Vipers; or Afps, and put them with the Hand
into bags, as we do worms, where they keep thems
Others enchant Snakes by certain words, and make them
ftop on a fudden, when they are creeping on the banks of
the Nile, fome of them pretend that power to be Here-
ditary in their Family, and. to pafs from Father to Sons
and others boaft, that it 1s a gift of God, in reward of
Virtue and Holinef:. I.bave heard fome , Travellers
fay, there are Menin Perfia and the Indies, whom.
our People look’d upon.as great, forcerers, becaufe.
they made Serpents dance and ftand upright in a
box at the found of their Voice, at the winding of
a Pipe, or the playing of fome other Mufical Inftru-
ments This will be matter of examination here-
after. | |
Sef. 19. Whatever has been hitherto faid of the
Mahometans, makes it fufficiently known, that
amongft them,as amongft other Nations, their pra-
étices are anfwerable to their Doctrines.; for if their
Wirchcraft and Exorcifims proceed not all from
their fuperftirions, yet they are not inconfiftent with

them. It is ftrange, that fuchas afcribe a Soul and |

A

Life to the Celeftial Lamps, that. acknowledge the

Stars |

Grats
Myhe
be add
then |
forprl
Ja
waking
ing Up
their

| for th

and c:

| ing in
| virtue

by the
wicked

| 0 com

What {

this
le
the
hich
that
jt
ake
fis

yer
ere
Nh
“the
and
th
them
is of
Heres

Sos

df À

elers
hom
ale
in à

ng of

ru |

here

The World Bewitch à 139

Stars to influence, Human Actions, and fearch for
Myfteries, in numbers, letters and names, fhould
be addicted to Witchcraft and Divinations, and make
them part of their religious worfhip ; neither. is it

furprifing, that not conceiving Angels, as altogether

immaterial, they fhould fancy Apparitions, either
waking or dreaming. Tis yet lefs ftrange, look-
ing upon them, a$ Creatures of a dignity inferior to
their's, fince they eftablifh great numbers of them
for the guard of each Mufulman 5 they thould invite
and call them to their fervice by Witchcraft, confift-
ing in Characters, in which they imagine a fecret
virtue for that purpofe; or if they fhould believe,
by the fame means and Virtue to be able to expel
wicked Angels, their mortal Enemies. But ’tistime

| to come to the Chriftian World, and to examine in

what ftate things are at home,

CHAP.

¥40 The World Bewitch'd.

CHAP. XV.

That fome of the Heathen Opinions upon this fubjett,
have in procefs of time, crept in among{t the Chrifti-
ans,

Sect, I. W E muft not wonder that great part

of the Doctrines above mentioned,
have not yet been banifhed by the light of the Gof
pel. For what Man naturally conceives, is. not al-
ways darknefs, neither is-the illumination which the
Holy writ affords to the underftanding, always effica-
cious; fo that a Chriftian, often better knows what
he ought to know, then he does what he ought to
do. his plainly appears, in that Man is readier to
fearch after the Truth by his reafon, than to putit
in practice by his Virtue. The caufe of it is, that
our natural curiofity that has contributed to the

fallof our firft Parents, has been fince increafed and |

ftrengthned by the effect of the fall it felf ; and
that it drives uson fo much the more to defire to
know: much, as our underftanding is become lefs ca-

pable of true conceptions. But the corruption of |
Man allows him not to make fuch Progreffe. |
And therefore we muft imagine, that whatever is |
practiced amongft fuch or {uch People, efpecially |
as to Religion, always and only proceeds from
their belief and Doctrine. This will quickly be,
known to us, if we take the trouble of confidering |
Chriftianity, fuch as it formerly was, and ftill is at |

Set. |

this prefent,

fal di
of the
uno

Wer
| my
| Seni
l For!
1 has b
| to cha
1 their |
| Opi
that
| out h
| ape
A that b
| thoyg
| to the
| Not, |
been f
hy of
thar (
À Chrit
to pi
Une j

Pata
Cont
con
Fat
tay

The World Bewitch a, r4t

Se, 2 I fhall name-ancient Chriftianity the fix
firft Centuries before the Pope and Mahomet arofe:
However, I fhall not-confider it as it was eftablith’d
by our Lord and his Apoftles, which will be done
|- more-conyeniently hereafter, but with relation to

the fucceflion of times: In the mean while a care-
| ful diftinction muft be made between the Opinions
of the Church, or of the Chief Doctors of her Com-
munion,and the Errors:of thole fhe has condemn’d.
We muft afterwards take notice of what certainty
may be had both of the Practices and particular
| Senfe of thofe that have been branded for Hereticks,
| For we pretend not to impute to Chriftians what
| has been rejected by the generality of them, nor
| to charge the Hereticks with whatever is faid of

uf} their Errours Now, one may, methinks, take for

Opinions generally received in the Church, thofe
that have been taught by their Chief Doctors with-
out being contradicted by the others, as far as it

wt) appears by any Writing, though they muft not for

f that be taken for Articles of Faith. And likewife,
| though the Hereticks fhouid have been charged, as
| to the Doctrine, with fome Opinions they owned
not, yet ‘tis not conceiveable thar they fhould have
§ been falily accufed of A@s of Magick, the poffibi-
| lity of which they did not fo much as believe. After
| that Obfervation let's fee what the -moft famous
| Chriftians of the Primitive times have believed, as
to Spirits and their Operations, and at the fame
M time what they relate of other Sects and People.
Se, 3. Following ftill the fame Order, I fhall
firft {peak of the Angels, and then of the Souls fe-
parated from their Bodies. I fhall pafs by the firft
Century, in which the Apoftles lived, becaufe in my
{econd Book I rake their Writings for the Rule of
Faith, and for the Fountain whence Truth muft be
M drawn, But we muft examine chofe that have fol-
s lowed

Fins GE DEEE

- =o ae —
Len RE en SS DS

(este DE

142. The World Bewitch'd. 142

fowed them from Age to Age,and fee what was their
Opinion upon thofe two Points, without prefuming
it was grounded upon Rule, or Ecclefiaftical Affem-
blies, which appears not. And though thofe two
Points are of the higheft confequence, yet every one
had ftill liberty to expreis his particular Opinions.
However, for other Opinions of lefs confequence,
and I durft almoft fay of nothing, Men have been
dealt with as Hereticks, and the whole Cariftian
World mutt be call’d together to come to a conclu-

An’ “herefore I fhall only make ufe here of
fäch Explications of the chief Doctors, as I have
read my ielf, which I thall endeavour to tranflate

faithfully, and word for word,as much as poifible.
Seét. 4. We fhall firft hear in the fecond Age, Ta‘
tian, Clement, and Fuftin, concerning the Nature of
Angels, Tatian indeed afcribes not a grofs material
Being to the Angels, and yet he feems to attribute
to them fome Corporeal Being. Here are his own
Words that feem very ftrange. Al Demons aré fo
as that indeed they bave nothing Carnal, byt their Com=
potion % Spiritual, and as a Fire and Light. The
Nature of their Bodies can however be penetrated by
none but fuch as are endued with the Spirit of God.
What he adds afterwards is more Confonant to
Reafon, That the Demons are not the Souls of Men.
He believes not however that Souls are fimple
Natures, but that they are compofed of parts.
“Along Tor ay Spo my Tonvuspns 61, xy % MoVouspiise
becaufe he believes they cannot be conceived as Cor-
poreal, without having a Body, and that the mate-
rial part cannot rife without the Soul. Several Do-
étors of that rime fpeak very near the Words, tho’
they explain not themifelves fo openly, fo that they
muft not be look’d upon as very far from that Opi-
nion, as will more plainly appear, when we menti-
en the fall of the Angels. 1
Ses,

= SS

FT sr

Henne
vera
| dun

that

| large
Create
| that 4
À 4 gene
lied
ét
J the ot
Angel
Demo
(ef
M10
We

The World Bewitch'd. 143

Set. 5. Clemens Alexandrinus in his 6th’ Book of
Mifcellanies, fhows, that he holds the, Angels for the
Infpettors of Men, and thofe that infpire Wifdom
0 | anto them, that each Country, avd perhaps each
ne | Man, has his own. A little after he fays, xo
Te) ESV X) MAS VeveuNVTE TOV [y Ac cf @EScnotes,
5 | God has diftributed amongft Angels the Tafpection
1 | and Care of each City and Nation. He (ys al,
n | 4 JO adlyaov à Odie Mvaurs rupéye ros pu
BT Opouévev ere uw The Divine Power diftributes

| good by the means of Angels, whether they be vifible or
"| envifible. Fujftin favours that fuppofed vilibilicy of
® | the Angels, or atleaft he tolerates it, fince he atlerts
‘5 in his 44h Apology, That God entrufted the Angels with
the Condu& of the other human Affairs under the
Ü | Heavens, fome of whom fell off, becaufe of their Con-
al | verfation with Women, from which iffued the Demons
it | Jueovss, pag.mihi44. St. Athanaliws, who was of
ue À:

thefame mind, explains thofe two things more ar
i) large in his Ambaffy. As to the firft,he fays,That God
created the Angels to take care of the Affairs of Men
| that are under their direttion, fo that God takes indeed
la general view of all things, but as to the particular

a | Infpettion,be has left it to the Angels conftituted over them.
| As to the fecond, he {peaks the fame Language with
im } the others, that the love of Women made fome
i} Angels fall into Apoftafie,whence proceeded a fort of
| Demons.

MA SRE. Fuftin’ thatientérs more into particulars,
€ | as to what concerns Demons,declares that he knows

| none that has that Divine Power of preferving, and
Dr rewarding {uch as obey him ; and therefore, thar he
knows none likewife that has the power to avenge
kimfelf upon the Difobedient and Rebels, “This he
| Teaches in his 42th Qweffion, having ‘faid before in
| the 4oth, That a Wicked Spirit that bas been once pos
| pel

EE TR ag a Ne
= LS Ss ce A = SE re gs re A >

——

pofe(sd. In
Fetters, it is
Body of any

wherefore I
member it.

invifible

Dead have
the deceafed,

pell’d cannot torment

“That when a poñefsd feems to

ftrength himfelf,

will be fit to call 1

Se. 7. Irenaeus EXP
concerning the St
he fays, at the en
place God has
in his fecond Apology, p4g-
himfelf more at large, goes 4
common road 3 for

That Men being feized and caf}

It mutt be obferv'd here;
mediately before of
their Bodies, YU
has ufed two different
Souls,and then Manes,
of the latter in his fecon
But in my Opinion, the
in two different
and the beginning
fore afcribe to the
ee undoubtedly. fpeaks
ns. rations upon the living,
| NA attribute to other Spirits Ca
a {peaks of the Heathens.
| Se. 8. Origen,
ftrange Notions
he gives them a

For Writing of the Light,

The World Bewitch d.
whom be bad before
‘Queftion, he fays,
break his Bands and
Demon that does it who has thas
but cannot communicate it to the
Man. This is very particular, and it
it to mind again in another place;
the Reader to obferve and re-

him any more
the aforefaid 42th

the

defire

jains himfelf but cbfcurely
ate of Souls after this Life, when
d of his Book, That they go to an
prepared for them. But Fuftin
mibi 58. explaining
fo more out of the
he affirms, that the Souls of the
fome power ovef the living, faying,
down by the Souls of
sve ordinary calld poffeft and furious.
chat having fpoken im-
human Souls feparated from
though the Latin Interpreter
Words, viz. firft Anime, the
the Ghotts.
d Chapter of this Book,

of the following. He
Soul of the deceaied, of whom he

which the
1’d Demons,for he there

Nature but equal to

which St.

Mention ismade |
S. 14.
fame word cannot be taken

Senfes at the end of ‘one period, |
muft there. |

in his firft period, all the Ope- |
Heathens ufed to |

who lived in the third Age; had |
concerning the Angels; fometimes |
that of Men : |
Fobnin his firft |

Chapa M]

Chap
that 1
i} gel,
| lume
great
going
fon,
and
Creat
D Guds:
the t
After
) the
Cheat
rans
rnfer
mSt
Set
| Men
1 come
À Mai!
UT

À feot A

The World Bewitch'd. 145

Chapter, faysto be our Saviour, he feems to believe
that it was equally communicated to Man and An-
gels, as may be feea more at Jatge in his third Vo-
lume on St..Fohn, . But in another place he makes fo
great a diftinction, betwixt. Angels and Men, that
going from the firft of Creatures endued- with Rea-
fon, to the laft, he puts the Angels as betwixt God
and-Men : For he teaches, on 1 Sam. 28. that the firft
Creatures are thofe which the Holy Writ names
Gods ; The fecond, thofe that we call’d Thrones 3-and
the third, thofe that bear the name of Principalities,
Afterwards he calls in Queftion, Whether Man is
the, laft of rational Creatures, or wherher fuch
Creatures as dwell upon Earth, amongft which. he
franks all the Demons, or at leaft part of them, are
inferiour to Men? that’s his Opinion in his firft Vol.
on St. Fobn.

Sect.9, He again- intimates elfewhere, that as
Men who have had the fear of God in this life be=
come Angels after their Death, as’tis read in St,
Matth. 22. 30.though there it is not properly, they be-
come Angels,but they fhall be like Angels: So that the pre-
fent Angels might formerly have been Men: More~
over, he imagines that Angels and. Men may difpure
which-are more perfect, eftablifhing betwixt the
Nature of thofe two Subjects, the fame différence
which our Saviour puts berween the firft and the

| Taft, St. Matth. 19.30. and’ ch. 20, 16. he afcribes
to Angels, not only the Swl-regency of the World, in
| his tenth Homil. upon Zeremiah, and conftitutes, as
| well as other Doctors, Guardian Angels upon that
Principle ; but he perfuades himfelf that their Vir-
tues and Devotions may increafe, as thofe of Men,
proportionably to thofe of the Perfons they keep,
Afterwards he deftines fome to watch over little
Children, and others over the Adult, grounding
| his Opinionupon St, Mart, ch. 18. 10, where menti-

of. I. H on

een PSN

146 The World Bewitch'à.

on is made of the Angels of little Children that fee
the face of their Heavenly Father.

Sef. 10. Hechas this particular Opinion concern-
ing the Stars, that they may have Light and Intel-
ligence,and though he exprefies not himfelf fo plain-
iy upon that, ‘yet ‘tis a neceflary confequence of his
Principles, for upon the Words in the Hebrews, 2. 9:

“That Chrift:has tafted ‘Death for all: He fays firft,that
Joy that all muft not fimply be underftood all Men,
‘but whatever is capable of Reafon,vmip rayrs Aopne.
‘and -amongft: thofe, noire), Rational Creatures, he
reckonsche Stars a little after, and upon that foun-
_dation he is not afraid of making our Lord, not
only the Redeemer of Men, but alfo of Stars that
have likewile find, becaufe ‘tis faid, the Stars are
st pire in bis fight. Goh 25. 5. he repeates the fame
atthe end-of ‘his 2d Volume upon St. Fobn, denying
However that their Influences fhould hurt Men, not-
sw ithftanding what is read of Lunaticks, Matth. 17.
14, 15. Writing upon Genefis, he likewile rejects
Aftrology, to which he believes that fome Angels
faving forgotten «their Duty, have perfuaded Men
‘to addict themfelves.

Se. 11. Tertullian in his fecond Book againft Mar-
cion, {ays, as tO the original of Devils. He has made
the Angels that are Spirits 5 now, in & much as the
Deuil was made by God, he & an Angel, and belongs to
iis Maker ; but inafmuch as he has not been made by
“God, viz. as a Devil, or a Slanderer, it follows, that
he has made bimfelf fo by forfaking God, and witha
deceiving bimfelf. That Language is fomewhat ob-
feure. — Origen fpeaks not better 5 for in his firft part
aipon St. Fol, he feems to recite a Riddle concern-
ing the Dragon, as having been one of the firft

created by Gad in a Bodily fhape, and before Man.
He ftrains the Words of God to Fob, ch, 40 Y. ; 5
‘or

or he |
Bibles,
(where
fies a §

leader,

| 1 ul

POM,
thar ch

[uma

to the |
beat th
pow ef

I blithes

deceine
Mine

Lord
Health

hae (
that

Uk 4

tla

The World Bewitchd. 147

for he takes them as they are now read in theGreek

Bibles, as though there was thy or that Dragon,

| (whereas the Hebrew Text has Behemoth, that figni-
| fies a great Beaft) Tranflating the Verfe thus, Ths

4s the beginning of what God formed, which be mad:
for a matter of laughter to his Ange!s.

Sect. 12, Tertullian explains himfelf more plainly
as to the knowledge he afcribes to the Devils, when
he in his fifth Book againft Marcion fpeeks thus.
Servants cannot know the Refolutions of their Mafters,

| leader, can much lefs know the defigns of God, whence
LT would willingly take occafion to affert, that the greater
| their Crime has been the more remote they are from the
knowledge of their. Creator. So far only he goes, as
[to the Secrets of God. Bur as to thofe of Men,we
hear the Doctors of that Age giving to the Demons a
power over Bodies and Souls. St. Cyprian efta-

blifhes both, {peaking of Idolatry. Spirits, (fays he)
deceive us 3 they difturb our Life, and our Sleep, infi-
|nuating themfelves into our Bodies, raife terrour in our
inward Thoughts, bruife our Members, impair our
LHealths, and caufe us Difeafes. Tertullian is of the
fame Opinion in his Book of Paffions. . The Malice
of that inveterate Enemy never leaves him quiet, but
4 encreafes bis Rage when be fees Man fully deliver d,
In bis Apologetick, Chap. 20. fhe gives a more parti-
‘cular explication of what he believes as to the
| Affautts made by Demons upon Soul and Body.
| He thinks, That having a very fubtile and thin Efence,
[ee are fo much the apter to aët in an invifible and in=
fenfible manner. He fhows thereby, that be conceives
created Spirits as the thineft and fubtile(t of all Bodies,
and therefore explains bi meaning by thi Comparifon.
As it happens that a flame invifible to ns burns Corn,
cand the Fruits of Trees when they are in flower, or wi-
thers them whilft they bloffom, or corrupts them when
| 15 ne

| and therefore the Rebellious Angels, and the Devil their

148 The World Bewitch'a.

the Elower falls off, and they are formed 3 or a an in~

felled Air communicates tt felf in-a manner unknown

sous, fo the fuggeftions of the Devil, by a fecret con-

tagion, feduce the depraved umderftanding of Man,
Sed. 13. Ovigen believes, that the Souls of Men
exifted together, before they came to animate the
Bodies ; which he eftablifhes upon 54. Matth. Chap.
ro. from Ver. 1, to.16. and in his,6xh, Yo’. upon
St. Fobn,having before propoled in his 5+, Chap. the
‘common Opinion of the Chriftians-of his age, he
afferts, according to the fente he gives to the Holy
Writ, that the Effence of the Soul. muft be diftin-
-guifhed from the Spirit. of Man, and the Spirit of
Man from the Holy Ghoft. He fays, that the Soul
may apply her felf either-to good or evtl, hut that the
Spirit of Man can apply it feif only to evil. In his
19th Chapter, he-declares, on occafion-of the fepa-
sation of the Soul at the point of death, that he be-
lieves fhe is taken out of the Body by fome Spirits,
ordained for that purpofe 3 and that the Spirits who

have that imployment, are of a more noble Nature

than the Soul they fetch. He puts a very ingent- :

ous ferfe upon the Words of our Saviour,in Sr. Luke;
Chap. 10. v.20. and Fohn, Chap. 10.9. 18.

Seët. 14. Tertullian’s meaning, as 10 the ftate of
Souls after this life, to the day of the Refurrection,
is, that they are in a cettain place, known by the
name of Abraham's Bofom,and fituated berwixtHeaven
and Hell, as he writes in his 4th Book, againft Mar-
cion, That there 5 a certain and determined place call d
the Bofom of Abraham. If you ask where that
place lyes, and how long the Souls are to ftay
there; he will anfwer, as to the Firft Queftion,
Sinum dico -Atrabe, regionem, eth non Caleftem, fur
periorem tamen Infers. I .call Abraham's Bofom a
a Region fuperior to Hell, tho’ it properly belongs
mot to Heaven. , As to, the other he will fay, Re

frigerium

pa”
bee

tS,

ho

pre Lf
ant

eof
10n,
the
aven
Mar
ral

that

ay !

re
fon à

, fr
fn À
ngs

fe

The World Bewitch d.
Frigerium prebiturum animabus jufiotum, donec con-
Summatio rerum refurrettionem omnium plenitudine Mer-
cedis expungat. The Latin phrafe is fomewhat ob-
{cure, but it matters not to Tranflate the words
fo much as to give the Senfe, which is, That it will
be a place of refrefloment for the Souls of the Fuft, un-
til the confummation of all things comes and brings on
the Refurreëtion, in which every one fall be obliged to
give account, and then receive a full reward.

Seët, 15. He calls in this place, the Subterrane-
ous places, Inferos, Hell, becaufe he puts the place

of Abode of the Damned, under the Earth, or in:

a great Gulf, contained in the bottom of the Earth,
and believes, that for their punifhment they fhall
go to burn in a material Fire: For about the end
of his Book of Penitency, he calls Hell Thefaurum
Fenn eternt 5 The Treafure of Eternal Fire. Through
the Chimneys of that Fire, come out fometimes
frightful flames during Earthquakes: and immedi-
ately after, he calls that Aby/s of Fire,” Magni. ali-
cujus€S ineftimabilis foci fcintillas miffilia 8 exer-

‘citoria jacula. The fparks of a prodigious great and

unex preffible Fire. St. Cyprian fpeaks fo obfcurely
about the end of ‘his Lerrer, againft Demertrian,
upon that fubject, thar it feems he threatens the
Soul with corporeal punifhments, it being a con-
fequent of the Series of his Reafoning. Hell, fays he,
fhall Eternally burn for the Damned,and the punifbment
of a devouring fire, and moft glooing flames, will neither
fuperfede nor fufpend their Torments 3 there the Sculs
with their Bodies, are deftined to infinite pains. He
feems to mean thereby, thar the Souls and Bodies
fhall have one and the fame fhare ; for otherwife,
he would have-declared, what peculiar fufferings
the Soul is to undergo.

Sei. 16. In the 4th, Age, we fhall firft hear

- $+, Athanafius he alfo believes, that the Angels are

H 3 not

150 FheWorld Bewitch'a.

Tot all of an equal Dignity, of which he gives a
formal explication according to -his meaning, on
the 31ft. Queftion to Antiochus, where having faid
{meching as to the Orders of the Angels, he pro-
ceeds thus.  Becaufe thofe Orders are called Le-
gions and Armies, we mift thereby underftand fuch Or-
ders as are eftablifhed to teach, to defend, provide, ad-
minifter, help, as alfo fuch Orders as receive the Souls,
and remain by them. Now, as the difference betwixt
the Celeftial Orders, % known to us, we muft likewife
know which w their State, and what Knowledge they
have. Ihe Thrones, Cherubims and Seraphims are
taught immediately by God bimfelf, as being the near-
eft to him, and raifed above the others: Thefe teach the
inferior Orders, and thefe again, others that are under
them. The laft of all are the Angels (taking that |
Name ina particular fignification, and determin’d |
to a certain Order of Spirits, diftinguifhed from all |
others ;) and thefe are the Teachers of Men. ‘Tis |
eafie to perceive that St. Athanafius has taken this |
from the Writings of Philo and other Fews, as tis |
related above, Chap. 12. Seé. 4, 5,8, 9,10. But |
whatever it be, St. Athanafius being the Author of |
the Confeffion of Faith, fo much commended in our |
Churches, and quoted in the 9th Article of the Low- |
Dutch Confeffien of Faith, as a pattern of Orthodoxy, —
we cannot but admit what he has written upon the
prefent matter, as the common Opinion approved
of, and received by the Principal Doctors of that |
Age, |
Scét. 17. À grant that fome very exact Criticks |
believe not this work of Queftions to be Athanafius’s : |

but there is nolefs controverfie,as to the true Author |

of the Confcffion afcribed to that Father. How- |

ever, both muft needs be very Antient, and the |

former cannot be of much later Date than the age |
of Athanafius 5, {o.that the proof drawn from thence, |
ta |

On
bid}

por |

Ore

f

x
Ss
Con:
——-

The World Bewitch'd. rer

to fhow what was the Doctrine of that time, is ftilf:
of the fame force. At leaft, none doubrs but Sr.
Bafil contemporary with St. Athanafius, has written

the three Firft Books againft Exnomius, and there-

fore his Teftimony will be admitted with lefs difi-
culty. After St. Athanafius , or fome other, who-

ever he may be,’ has defcended from Ged through:

the feveral degrees of Angels,to Men ; 54. Ba/il comes
to teach us how we are to confider the Holy An--
gels of God in their different Orders and Admini-
ftrations. He fays, at the beginning of hs 3 Book
againft Eunomius, That all the Angels have indeed
the fame name, and are of the fame nature; but that
fome prefide over whole Nations, and others take care of
every faithful perfon. Now, as much as awhole Nation
% to be preferr’d before a fingle Man, fo much 5 the
Dignity of an Angel committed over a-whole Nation,
above that of another Another Angel, who has. only
the keeping of afingle perfon,

Se&, 18. However, St. Auftin, who writ very

near so years after Sr. Bafil, expreffes nor himfelf:

fo freely upon this matter. in his Manual, Chap. 58.
We cannot, fays he, precifely tell what palles amongft

thofe Bleffed Societies abeve, nor what difference there

ts betwixt perfons, &c. And as to the fignification of
thofe four words, in which the Apoftles feem to compre-
hend all the Heavenly Societies, faying either Thrones,
or Dominions, Principalities or Powers, they [hall prove
as they can, what they affert ; for my part I freely con-
fels I know nothing of it. St. Ferom his contemporary,
for they both lived betwixt the 4th, and 54h, Centu-
vy, feems not to be fo referved ; but on the contra-
ry, undertakes to prove what Sr. Athanafius and
St. Bafilhad afferted, whereas Sr. <Auftin feems to
doubt of the Truth of their Opinions ; faying in his
Commentary on the 46th Chapter of Xfaiah. For ma-
ny paffages of the Holy Writ, teach us, that each of us

H 4 has

Sea

152 The World. Bewitch'd,

has bi Angel, efpecially that of Matth. Chap. ver. 10.
Take care left you. defpife one cf thefe little. ones, for
their Angels,&c There are therefore in his Opinion,
Angels for particular perfons.. He likewife names
in his Commentary on the 47th Chapter,----Pag. maha
476. Tom. 5. Angelos pre fides Fudcorum. The An-
gels prefiding over the Fews. Andupon Daniel, Chap. -
7. ver.2. he faith, I hold the four Winds to be. An-
gelical Powers, to whom the principal: Kingdoms have
been-entrufted, according to what w- written, Chap. 32.
ver. 3. where inftead of thefe words, the moft High
eftablifhed the bounds of Nations, according to the
number af the Children of Ifrael, hereads according
to the number of the Angels of God, to ground
his Opinion thereupoa.

Sed. 19. St. Auftin feems fo modeft upon the
difference amongft the Angels, is perhaps too re-
ferved in what follows ; for immediately after what
he fays, he {peaks of the Stars in too dubious a man-
ner, faying, I fee likewife nothing certain upon that
point, whether the Sun, Moon, and other Stars muft be
comprehended in that Society 3 tho fome hold them to
be luminous Bodies without Knowledge and Senfe. He
feems not inclinable to that laft Opinion, but is
more apt to believe that the Stars are a kind of
Angels, or at leaft, of living and underftanding
Creatures, without daring to determine, whether

hey are part of the four Orders, to which, he ap-

plies. the names contained in St. Paul's paflage be-
fore quoted ; whence ‘ris eafy to infer, that he was
taken up with the Intelligences of Ariftotle.

Seët. 20: St. Ferom explains himfelf. openly, as
to the Miniftery of the Angels upon. the: 9th Chap,
of Daniel, Angelorum duplex officium eft aliorum qui
juftis premia tribunnt, aliorum, qui. fingulis prefunt
Cruciatibus. The Angels difcharge 2 forts.of fumétions,
fume are eftablifhed to diftribute rewards ta the jult ;

and

The World Bewttch'd. 153

and others, to infliét punifhments on the (Damned. It
appears by the feries of his difcourfe, and by the
paflage of the Holy Scriprure, at which he aims;
that he equally afcribes thofe 2 things to the good
Angels, according to that Opinion, that there hap-
pens neither good nor evil without the Miniftry of

- the Angels of God, and confequently he attributes

nothing to the Devil.

Sett: 21.  Lattantius fhows what were the Opini-
ons of his time, concerning the Devil, of whom he
makes a very large defcription, in the 7th Book of
his Inftitutions, efpecially Se&, 8. which deferves,
I fhould give the fhort of here. He fays, That God
produced a Spirit altogecher like him that was endued
with the Virtues of his Father.. He feems, that
thereby he fhould underftand or Lord Fefus Chrift.
Afterwards he created another Alterum, zor Alium,
that preferved not the perfeétions of bis Celeftial Origi-
nal, becaufe, according to the meaning of J aan
tius, he envyed that &rdt Spirit, who remained faith-
ful ‘and obedient to God his Father: Wherefore the
latter bears the name of Diabolis, Criminator, Accum
Jer and Slanderer. The Author ftops there and {peaks
no more of it, but Se. 14. He fays, that Ged, for
that Reafon, has granted to the Devil, power over
the Earth, ab initio, from the begining ; but to pre-
vent the Devil from feducing Men, he fent Angels
to defend them, advertifing them withal, not to {tain
themfelves by their Coaverfation with Men,but the
Devil feduced the very Angels fo far, that they
mixt with Women, and were caft down from Hea-
ven to Earth. If it were fo, that old proverb
would be verified, That there would be no Devils, if
tlere were no Landfom Women.

Seé. 22. One thing’s efpecially obfervable, that
Athanafius in his Firft and Second Book againfi the
“rrians, is the firft Author, as far as we know, that

H 5 applies

Sa se ese eh
Sere neha —

£54 The World Bewitch'd
applies tothe fall of the Devi/,that paflage of I/aiah,
Ch. 14.w. 1% How art thou fallen from Heaven, O
Morning Star? which is undoubtedly faid of the
King of Babilon, becaufe of the great figure he
made in the World. Now the Morning Star is
called in Greek dd¢qe@-, and in Latin Lucifer,
which words are ftill to be read in the Greek, and
Hebrew Bibles, whence feveral that have followed
Sz. Athanafius have taken occafion to give the name
of Lucifer tothe Prince of the Devils, which name
he ftill bears. If thofe who underftand not the Latin
Tongue, knew that is the name of the Morning
Star, they would never beftow it upon Belzal, fince
it agrees fo well to our Saviour, who calls himf£lf-
the bright and: Morning Star, Revel. Ch. 22. v. 16.
to which S¢. Peer undoubtedly alludes in his Second
Epiflle, Ch. 1.v. 19. Where he fays, That the Morn-
ing Star muft arife in our Hearts. And our Lord
promifes in another fenfe, to give us The Morning
Star,Revel.2. 28. So that the name of Lucifer is fo far
from being that of the Prince of the Devils, that it
is the moft Chriftian name to be read in the Bible.
Se&. 23. Let’s go back to Laétantius, he fays thar
Monfters were generated from that odious. conjuncti-
on of Angels with Women, that are half Angels,
or rather, Half Demons, or balf. Men, thence he in-
fers, Duo genera demonum, unum calefte, alterum ter-
renium. That there are 2 forts of Demons, one of Ce-
leftial Demons, and another of Terreftrial; by Celeftsal,
he feems to underftand Aerial; but after the word
Terrenum, there follows immediatly, Hz funt immun-
di malorum que geruntur auctores, quorum idem diabo-
lus eft. princeps. Thefe are unclean S$ pivits, Authors
of all the Evil that happens inthe World, the chief of
whom,is the Devil already mentioned. From this paflage:
may be clearly perceived, chat he takes forDemons,
thofe very fame, Spirits whom. the Heathens made
their

The World Bewitch’d.

their Gods, as has been feen Ch. 2. Se. 0 10713,
which ftill confirms more and more what I have:
afferted,.Ch..5. Se. 4, 5+ That the Heathen never
adored Demons,but in as much as they believed them
to be Gods.

Seét 24 The fame Laëtantius tells us, that the
Demons are indeed Spirits, but Spiritus tenues €8 in-
comprebenfibiles, Spirits of a thin fubtle matter, and
imperceptible. This we have heard before from
Origen and Tertullian. We explains himfelf very
Clearly, as to the power he afcribe to their under-
ftanding, faying, That they know many future things,
but that it is not poffible they flould difcover the depths
of the fecrets of God. We have already heard Ter-
tullian confirming this propofition, by his Reafon-
ings, However Laélantius believes, that Divina-
tions by the Contemplation of the Stars, by the In-
{pection of the intrals of Beafts, and by the Obfer-
vation of Birds, of which mention has been made,

Ch. 3. Se&: 4, 5, 7. Are Diabolical In{pirations, and *

therefore holds, that they are ftill capable. of dit

covering to Men many future things,

Se. 25. St. Feromas far as À can conceive, -
conftitutes not the fame difference of places ~
: betwixt. the Spirits.. Yer he believes, Ex Pauli
dittis ad Ephe Cap. 2. ver. 2. © 12. colligt Diabolos in :
aere vagari ac dominari. That from what S, Paul °

writes to the Ephefians may be inferr’d, Thar the De

vils are wander ing in the Air, and reigning there...

And. writing upon the 6th Ch. v. 12. to the Ephe-
fans, he explains more at large, that propofition,
as containing the common: Opinion of the Chriftians
of thar Ages This is the Opinion of all the Do-
ctors; That the Air which as betwixt the Heavens and
the Earth, feparating both from what is cal 4 the Va-

cum, 15 fil'd with powers contrary. to each other. We

imauft yet examine hereafter whence the Principalities,
Powers,

Cote

156 The World Bewitch'd.

Powers, and Dominions of this World, lave received
their powert?, His Opinion upon this laft Queftion is,
that they have it from God himfelf, and that they
exercife it more or lefs, as a lefs and }gteater pain
4s inflicted upon 2 different Criminals, according as
ris refolved to make their life more or-lefs bitter’s
he alfo fuppofes, that the unclean ‘Spirits, as well
as the Holy Angels, are divided into certain Orders 3
which Opinion of his may be feen in his Commentary
onthe 3 Ch. of Habakuk, As Chrift is the bead of the
Church, and of. every particular faithful Man; fois
Belzebub the chief of all the Demons, wbo‘éxercife fo
wiany cruelties inthis World; and each Tréop of Demons
has it's particular Chief, and Captain under him:

Seét. 26. v Lafantius muft yet inform us what
in his Opinion, the Demons were able to Operate,
in reference to Men. We fee Seët. 14. that his Opi-
nion in general, is, That the Corrupted and Contagious
Spirits wander'd through the World, endeavouring to
comfort themfelves under pheir ‘lofs, by procuring the
ruin of Mankind. ~Immediatly after, he explains
in particular, how they hurt Soul and Body, They
attack, Âays he, The Souls by their craft devifes,
and the fnares they lay before them; they feize upon
them by their delufions, and by leading them aftray, they
flick to every private perfon, and. are always at his el-
bow, creeping into every houfe, from dear to door. And
in relation to the bodies, as thofe very Spirits are,
according to him partly corporeal, and partly extra
ordinaiy fabtle, and confequently imperceptible,
They infinuate into Human Bodies, without being per-
ceived, aët privately within. their Bowels, impair their
Health, caife Difeafes, caft: terror into tke mind by

Dreams, overturn ity make tr firay, and force Men by
fuch vexations, to bave récourfe tothem. It feems how-
ever, that he intends to afcribe that power to the
Devil, only over the Heathens; becaule he difputes

| againit

The World Bewitch d.

againft them, and that they were thofe that had re

courfe to the Demons,

as believing them to be Gods 5

for over the Chriftians, the Ancient Fathers attri-
buted not fo much power to them

Sed. 27. We may learn from St. 4
what were the Opinions of his tim
feparated from their Bodies after Death.
Book before quoted,
Souls after theiy
done amongfi Men, as the Holy
{wers, Yes at leaf? as to the Soul; of
as to thofe of Sinners
them fo much up, that they
on any other thing,

anafius,
e, as to the Souls

In the

queftion 32. he asks, Whether the

Separation, have Rnowledge of what à

The 33th Que

Angels have; he an-

the Saints but not

3 for their continual torments fake
have no leafure to think up»

ftion is, What x

the employment of the Souls departed from-their Bodies,

Anfwer, The Soul Separate
ble ÿ doing either good or
little after, Thar the Souls

the Holy Ghof?, praife God, and blefs

of the Living,

Death, the Souls never come to b
of the Deceafed ; which would give
cheats, becaufe wicked Spirits

d from the Body, 5 uncapa?
evil, However he fays a
of the Saints, animated by

him in the Land

He afferts, Que(tion 35. That after

ring

are Souls of the Becez ed, that com

Jemthing to the Living.
this very attentively, for it wi
reflect upon it hereafter.
Sect.28. St. Auftin
mation, for thé he does

ry, yet he confutes it every where
feveral places of his W ritings, that

ed by one of m

in his Book

Y predeceflors, Andrew
of the Apoftafy of the
yet this Father in the €
exprefles himfelf thus, *7;
like may happen af,

mews of the ftate
occafion to many

might feign, that they

e back to difcover

I defire the Reader to obferve
Il be convenient to

gives usa more large infor-
not exprefly reject Purgato-

» 48 appears from
have been quot-
Land{man,
Church of Rome:

oth Chapter of his -Manual,
snot incredible, byt Jomthing
ter this life, and it may reafonabiy

€ enquired whether it 5 Jo; and what proof may be

E. F
brouzhs

158 The World Bewitch'd.

brought for or againft this Opinion, viz. that fome of
the faithful, come fooner or later to the Eternal Felicity,
paffing through a certain purging Fire, in which they
ftay longer or florter, as they are more or lefs enamour’d
with corruptible things; bowever im that number, are
not comprehended thofe of whom ‘i5 fatd, that they fhall
not poffe/s the Kingdom of God, unlefs by a convensent
Repentance, they obtain forgiveness of their Sins.

Se. 29, We come down to the 5th Age,in which
we meet with Iheodoret, who fufficiently explains,
as to our defign, the Opinions of the Doctors of his
time concerning good and bad Angels; for he pro-

ofes to us what he thinks of the Angels, properly
fo call’d, as well in reference to their Nature, as
to their Underftanding and Adminiftration. As to
the firft point he holds, that though they are not
Corporeal, yet they are Circumfcribed, and con-
tained in a certain determinate place 3 as.he aflerts
in his 3d Queftion upon Genefis. The Reafon of this
Opinion is, that he fuppofes every Angel has fome
proper Adminiftration, and is entrufted with the
care either of a Nation, or Perfon ; but he makes.
fill a more particular diftinétion in his 1 oth Expo-
fition upon Daniel, putting a Man under the guard
of a common Angel, and a whole Nation under that’
of an Angel of a Superior Order. As to their Un-
derftanding, he briefly explains his Mind in thefe.
Words. Let none be furprifed at what I affert, as to
the Ignorance of the Heavenly Spirits 3 for they neither
know future, nor other things, it only belonging to the
Divine Nature 3 but as to. Angels, Archangels, and
other Caleftial Spirits, they know no more than what ~ |
they learns; and therefore the Holy Apoftle {peaking of
them in the the third Chapter to the Ephefians, ¥- to.
fays, That to Principalities and Powers, in the
Héaventy Places, &c, See his Commentary-on thé
24th Pfalm |

Sect, 30} |

The World Bewitch’d, 159

Sed. 30. Theodoret {peaks afterwards of the De-
mons in the fame manner, for he holds them not cas
pable of making true Predictions, He fays, upon
Ezekiel, Seét, 8, That the Demons know nothing before
st happens, unlefs it be by gueffing, and yee they venture
to foreteH. He neverthelefs owns, in his tenth Book
of Oracles, that the Spirits have foretold fomething
true, but by the Stars: For, fays he, whatever the
Gods of the Heathens fay, if it happens that they [peak
agreeably to the Concatenation of things, they muft needs
gather that knowledge from the Stars, which undoubteda
by was done by fuch Gods as declared fome things thae
afterwards fell out. *Tis evident, that by Dehins he
underftands in general, wicked Spirits, who caufe
themfelves to be venerated as Gods, and gave falfe
Oracles to keep up their Authority, and the Credit
in which they were amongft the Heathens, That
Opinion was the moft common amongft the Anci-
ents, and is in being even to this day, as we fhall
fhow hereafter.

Sect. 31. The Opinion of that time upon the ori-
ginal of the wicked Race,was, that they iflued from

the Converfation of the Angels with Women. : Seve-

rus Sulpitius relates it not as a particular Belief, or,
as received by fome Doctors only ; but as a Story
credited by all Chriftians 3 for at the beginning of
his Ecclefiaftical Hiftory, he prefumes to affert it
upon the Authority of Fo/ephus, as much as if he had
been prefent. His words are; In that time, that à,
after the Birth of Noah, Mankind multi phing exceed-
ingly, the Angels whofe abode was in Heaven, being
enamour & with the Beauty of young Virgins, plunged
themfelves in unlawful pleafures, forfook the Supream
Region, whofe Inhabitants they were, and ally themfelves
D Marriages with mortal Women, by that unhappy Co-
habitation, and their depraved Morals, they corrupted
Mankind. by degrees 3 and from thence the Giants en

160 The Worla Bewitch d.

aid to be born 5 for the mixture of fuch different na~
tures. miufe needs produce Monfiers,

_ Seë, 32, As to the ftare of Souls feparated from
their Body, the Angels, and wicked Spirits,this Age
affords nothisg but what has been obferved, fpeak-
ing of the foregoiug Centuries. Wherefore we
defcend to Gregory the Great, who in the 7th Cen-
tury joynd his particular Opinions to, the former.
He was Bifhop of Rome, and his Memory is ftill in
great Veneration in thar Church, tho’ he took it very
ill that Fobn the Father, Bifhop of Conftantinople, and
his Contemporary, fhould have prefumed to rake
upon him the Name of Univerfal Bifkop, to which
he believed not that any Bifhop had a right, and
even held it for a Mark of Antichrift. Befides, tis not
without Reafon, that the Roman Church makes {o
much of him‘ For he has takencare to provide her
with many Legends fo fuitable to her Humour and
Palate, and upon which fhe has put fo great a value;
that fhe multiplies them every year. | And indeed,
St. Gregory was not contented ,with the Fables of
Origen, and other Doctors, of which mention has
been made, but he admitted whatever had been
propofed hitherto as Doubts and Queftions, which
he paffed into Determinations and Decrees : And,as
tho’ what had been maintained before had not been
fufficient,he thought fit to add fomerhing of his own:
So that fince his time there were not only 9 Orders
of Angels, but they knew alfo the Degrees of each,
viz. Angels, Archangels, Virtue, Powers, Principalities,
Dominions, Thrones, Cherubims, and Seraphims 5 asis
to be found in-his 34th Homily upon the Gofpels.
The Schcolmen that have followed him fail not to
take much pains to treat of each of thefe Angelical
orders, and to-break their head with them, in whic
I intend not to imitate them. |

Se, 33

a ————— | —_—————

The World Bewitch'd. 26:

Se&, 33. It muft be obferved that.at that time
the curiofity to know whither Souls went after
Death, gave occafion by degrees to invent Purga-
tory 5 the difcovery of which has been fo far finifhed
amongft the Papifts, that they go now thither by
thoufands. Boetius, a Roman Conful, wholived about
63 years before the Pontificate of Gregory, begun, in
his 4th Book, Profa 4. to give fome Notion of that
place, by the Anfwer he makes to the following
Queftion. Does there in your Opinion remain no pu-
nifment for the Soul after her feparation from. the
Body ? To which he Anfwers: Yes doubtlefs, and
even "tis not a flight Pain ; for I hold, that fome
Souls are very feverely punifhed, whereas others are
purified by Grace. . As to Gregory himfelf, who from
a Souldier became Pope, he blows heat and cold
from the fame Mouth, with as much ficklinefs and
levity as the Wind, againft the Cuftom of the Popes,
who ufe to decide fo pofitively and boldly. Upon
the 7th Chapter of Fob, giving advice to a Sinner,
he faith, That there 5 no human Eye (that #% no Grace
of the Redeemer) that cafts looks upon the Soul, after fhe
has laid off the Flefh. And farther-he adds; That
when Holy or. wicked Spirit receives at the pcins of
Death, a Soul departing from her bodily Prifon, fe re-
mains for ever, and without hopes of any Change,..in the
hands of him that has taken ber 3 fo that when fhe’s
once raifed to Glory, fhe can never fall again into Pain
and Torments.s whereas when [he # once caft down into
the Eternal Abyfs,. fhe can never come out of it : Upon
the roth Chapter he fays again; He that  Con-
demned and deliver’d to punifloment by reafon of his
Sins, and. brought to the place of Execution, bas no
longer hopes of Mercy or Forgivenefs. But this Pope
does not always maintain this Thefis ; for he {peaks
thus in the 4th Book of his Dialogues, Chap. 39. Sed
samen de quibufdam levibus culp effe Purgatorius Ignis
cre=

a sh si a ee Saas fee GE ERA, sig
with Sat ee LEE = = à ET PES ES PS aT AS

162 The World Bewitch'd,

credendus ef? : However it muft be believed that there
a à Purging Fire for fome fmall Faults. Upon the
Penitential Pfalms, he explains himfelf more at large.
Poft mortem carnis alii æternx deputantur Jupplicir,
ali ad vitam per ignem tranfeunt Purgations. After
the death of the Body, fome are condemned to endlefs
Torments, and: others go to Life through a purging
Fire,

Eile ANNO TNA AAA SSN Pe REE
CHAP. XVI.

That fome of the firft Chriftians derided the Conju-

‘rations of Spirits, and others credited and prattifed |

theni.

SeG. 1. W E are now to examine, whether

the practice of Divination and |

Witchcraft were in requeft in the firft time of the
Chriftian Church. Both were equally rejected by
thofe that were called Catholicks and Orthodox :

but we muft enquire upon what ground; for it was |
not fo much becaufe they believed ‘em to he de- |
ceiving Arts, the practice of which was impoffible, |

as that they judge ’em unlawful. Befides,they ackow-
ledg’d fo far the efficacy of Conjurations that they
did not at moft reject °em, but came in procefs of
time to admit them in the Ceremony of Bapti/m,
which are, {till calld Exorcifms, generally us’ d
amongft the Papifts, and not entirely abolifhed a-

mongit fome Prozeftants. Tho’ this be not the place |
totreat at largeof this matter, yet it may be pre- |

mifde,that this is their moft ancient Original, as the
hae Writings |

The World Bewitch'a, 162

Writings of fome of their. Doctors plainly teftify.
But let us hear firft, how the Laws of the Firft
Chriftians thunder’d againft thofe that durft meddle
with Exorei{ms and Conjurations.

Seët. 2. Here is the Proclamation of the Empe-
ror Confiantine, inthe 9th Book of the Code, Tit. 8.
Book 5. De Divinatoribus, Let no body prefume to in-
Ferrogate Diviners, or to confult Mathematicians and
Aftrologers. Silence % alfo enjoyn'd to Augurers, and
Fortune-tellers, Caldees, Magicians, and thofe that are
called Sorcerers, becaufe of the bainonfnefs of their crime,

fall not be allowed to undertake or exercife their Art,
The curiofity of thofe that confult Oracles, fhall be re-
preffed. If any obey not our Orders, he foal be punifhe-
ed by the Steel, till he be dead, Given at Milan, Ja-
nuary 25. 337. Here is another Proclamation of
the Emperors Valentinianus, Theodofius and Arcadius.
If any be found guilty of Magick, be fhall be arrefted
add deliver'd to Fuftice, as an enemy of Mankind, &c.
Given at Rome, Aug. 17. 389. The reft may be
feen in thofe Laws, and is fufficiently known to Ci-
vilians. Conftantine, in the beginning of his Reign
in 312. had ordained the pain of Fire for fuch as
fhould be convicted of that Crime, and promifed
a Reward to the Informers, Law the 3d. ‘Tir, 8.
de Malefics comprehendendis & ad publicum pertra=

«| © bendg.

Seët. 3. In the mean while, thofe pains were not
inflicted upon that fort of people {fo much, becaufe,
of their Cheats, as has been already faid ; as efpe-
cially, by reafon of their Crimes, and the hurt they
were believed to procure to Men and Beafts, by
mixing and perturbating the Elements by their
Wircheraft, which made them worthy of the moft
cruel punifhments. This plainly appears by the
6th Law made by Conftantine and Fulian, Anno 357,
There are feveral who are not afraid of confounding the

| Elements

164 The World Bewitch' à.

Elements by Witchcraft, and affaultine the Life: of
Man, who cannot défend himfelf againft them; of
eonjuring up Ghofts and asking their advice, to deft voy
their Enemies by wicked ways, Whence it appears,
a double Power was attributed to Sorcerers and
Inchanters.; Firft, of confounding the Elements 5
and: Secondly, of Conjuring up Ghofts, making them
appear, and difcourfing with them.’ It was there-
fore believed, that the Crime of that People con-
fifted in their converfe with the Spirits, whofe
Power and malice they made ufe of to. torment
other Men. So that’tis no doubt but that Opinion
was then general among the Chriftians, and even
amongft the Mob of the Heathens ; or at leaft of
the greateft part amongft them, who lived and con-
verfed with the Chriftians, fo that either of them
addicting themfelves to that Converfe, whether
they were perfwaded of the Power of Spirits or
not, made themfelves equally guilty, and obnoxi-
ous to the feverity of the Law.

Se. 4. The chief Doctors of that timeteach us
the fame, but 1 fhall quote only a few that will af-
ford us fufficient proofs, I fhall begin with Fu/ten
Martyr, who lived in the 2d. Age, and fhows in his
ad, Apology, that he acknowledged the efficacy and
virtue of the Heathen Witchcraft. In the new
Edition of Colggne Pag. 65. The Predictions themfelves
that are made by the means of the dead, by young in-
nocent Children that fee Objeëts in a mirror ; by the
calling up of the Souls of the deceafed, and by thofe
that are call’d by the Magiczans , Expounders of
Dreams Paredri Affeffores, Afleffors. In fhort, what- |
ever 5 operated by thofe that are skilful in thofe praëti- |
ces, mujt perfwade yo; : fays he to the Heathens, |
that the Souls bave ftill fome Senfe after death. What |
he writes in his Dialogue. againft Tripho abe Few, |
differs not much from that Firftpaffage, 5, Pag. “ : I. |

‘ That

LheWorld Bewitchd, x6 5

‘That the Demons may be overcome by Conju-
‘ rations, in the name of Fefis Chrift,but that no Few
‘ Ga do the fame in the name of any King, Prophet
or Patriarch ; not even perhaps in the name of the
God of <Abrabam, Ifaac and: Facob. ’ He neverthe-
lefS believes, thar the Demons, by means of ‘thar
fort of Diviners, that were called Ventriloqui, gave
real Oracles. .to thofe that Conjur’d them, as may
be gather’d from ‘his 33th Queftion, and from the
An{wet to it.

Sect. 5. Proceeding: farther, whatever is needfuy
for our defign, is to learn the Sentiments of the Fa-
thers, as to the power and efficacy of the Conju-
rations, that were practifed, both by the Heathens
and Chriftians,. Sy. Cyprian, in the 3d, Century,
{ufficiently Declares, that in the Chriftian Religion
Baptifm has power, by the Bleffing of Chri/t, to
expel wicked Spirits, which gives occafion to be-
lieve, that they were poñfefs’d of Men, before their
being caft out by that Holy Sacrament. And in-
deed he writes in his 7th, Letter of the tft Book,
That as Pharaoh, after much refiftance, was at laft
drowned in the water ; fo the Devil is yer now
a-days abufed and tormented by the Exorcifts, whofe
voice 5 indeed only human, but attended by the Virtue
of God. For a little farther he fays, when by the
Saving water we receive the Sanctification of Baptifm,
we may be fire that the power of the Devil % over-
come, and thé perfon confecrated to God, freed by hy
mercy. It happens at the fame time, according to
him, that Scorpions and Serpents cannot abide wa-
ter, fo the infernal Dragon : cannot endure the
Water of Baprifmn, a

Seé. 6. He ‘afcribes, the fame Virtué to the
name of $efis, when in his Sermon upon Baprifin,
Speaks of mercenary Exorcifts , de queftuaris

lexorcifits Obediuit Demones Exorcifir, &e, — © The

Demons

166 The World Bewitch'd.

© Demons obey Exorcifts, faying, we know who is
¢ Chrift,.and who is Paul, and being conjured in
€ the name of that Fe/s, whom Paul Preaches, we
withdraw. It. feems .to St, Cyprian, that things
ought to be fa by the fame reafon that Baptifm was
valid,whether adminiftred by Paulor Fudas: But he
ought to have confidered, that we have not the fame
certainty that thefe Exorcifts fhould have received
their Office from God, as we are fure that he had
eftablifhed Fudas in his Apoftlethip.

Se&. 7. Laëtantius, in the 4th Century, will yet
give us fome inftructions. And Firft, asto Con-
jurations, that we treat now of, he believed that
they have a great efficacy 5 for he writes in his Se-
cond Book, Se&. 15. That the Devils are afraid of
the Fuft that worfhip God, fince being conjured by
them in his Name, they go out of Bodies, and being
compell'd by their words, as by firipes, they not only
acknowlede’d that they are Demons, but allo declare
their Names, that are found to be the fame, under
which they are adored in Temples, So that he belie-
ves that the wicked Spirit, how great a Lyer fo-
ever he is, cannot lye, when by Conjuration be is
forced ‘to fpeak, becaufe the Divine Power con-
ftrains him to fay the Truth for that time.

Se&. 8. Inthe mean while he fticks not to thar,
but agrees with St. Cyprian, that the modern force-
rers were able to enchant’ wicked Spirits, and by
that argument, pretends to prove to Epicure and his
followers, that there are Spirits in the World, and
that Human Souls are immortal. To that end, he
exprefles himfelf in thefe words, Book the 7th, Sett.
13. Certainly if Democritus, Epicure, or Dicearchus,
flood by a Magician, they floould not make bold to main-
tain by their Reafons, that the Soul # Mortal; what
could they anfwer? If the Magician by pronouncing fome
Verfes, cal’d up the Souls from fubserraneous places

making |

| smh
1 foret
lint
| ru
| se
J red
If
Duration
A add
free
| WA
B fore t
fome
B there,
thar ve
and «9
ation
mn tis,
Wicker
formes
Quired
Craft ap
Aicians
Self
bits J

—— —

— =

re

ft |

jure
‘ki |

The World Bewitch d. 167

amaking them appear to Men, fpeak to them, and
foretel future things 3 for sf they fis prefume to peut
in their error, they would be forced to yeild to fuch real
proofs, and fuch vifible effeëts. x

Seë,9.. However, I cannot agree to what is
read in his 2 Book, Seét. 14. That the Art and Power
of Magicians, Magorum , only confifts in the Infpi-
rations they receive fromthe Spirits, that furprize Men,
and deceive their Eyes by Ilufions, hindering them from
Seeing what is, and making them fee what 5 not, when
"tis required from them by Magicians. - He feem’d be-
fore to believe, that the Demons actually produce

fome effects, and’ here he will perfwade us, that.

there is nothing but illufion: whatever it be, even
that very illufion is ftill an Operation of the Demons,
and confequently approve of their exiftence and
action, In the mean while he agrees with himfelf
in this, that he believes forcerers converfe with the
wicked Spirit, and that the Conjurations of the

| former, force the latter to fay and do what is re=
| quired from them; but that all the effects of Witch-
_ craft are tobe afcribed to them, and not tothe Ma-
| gicians.

Seël, 10. Lattantius was perfwaded that bad

| Spirits had a fhare in all thofe Arts, that made up
| the practices of the Ancient Heathens, and of which

mention has been made, Ch. 3. He even believed

| that they were all invented by thofe Spirits, as ap-
| pears by his own words, Book 2. Ch. 16. The things

that chey have invented, viz.TheDemons, are prediétions,
by the Stars, by the infpettion of Vitims, and by the
ery of Birds; thefe are the Oracles and Enchantments

‘ | an ufe, to confult the Dead, by Magick, Magia and all
the other Evils to which Men addi

themfelves, either
Privately or openly. AL thefe things bave. nothing folid
‘mor true im themfelves, but are received for fuch, by the
exedit they borrow from the prefence of their Authors,
who

_ — pi RSC

168 The World Bewitch a. :

who know bow to impofe upon the credulity of Men,
affecting to make a divine power appear before them, of
which however, no profis accrues to. them. 1 might
quote here fome Authors of the two following Cen-
turies, but obferving no change in them that deferves
to be related, and fearing to infift too long upon
this = L come to the bottom of the matter, left 1
fhould weary the Reader with unprofitable trouble.

CHAP. XVIL

That it. 5 neceffary to compare all.thofe various Doëtrines
and Prattices of the Fews, Mahometans, and Chrafti-
ans ; and to examine wherein’ they differ, and in
what they agree together,

$e. 1."THE ith Chapter of this” Book was

| À defigned to compare together, the Opi-
ons and practices of the various Heathens, concern-
ing Spirits, The natural light that remained in our
underftanding , notwithftanding the darknefs in

which it has been involv’d by Sin, has been able, |
without the help of the Holy writ, to difcover, whe- |

that |
the f
DONS à
ciples
Bu k
Webs

D or

| look y
tO whe

ther thofe Opinion and practices, were founded f:.

upon true, of falfe grounds. We have fince heard, |
thofe that acknowledge the Authority of the Hely |
writ, {peak very differently, by which means, the |
light of Reafon may be encreafed, and its cor- |

ruption better’d. Let us now fee what they have

done as to this, and how far their endeavours have | 59 |

attained. To that end, we fhall Firft confider, |

wherein the latter differ from the Heathens, what}

they have retain’d of Paganifm 3 and laftly in what
points they differ from each other ; having always!

The World Bewitch d, *65

, | regard to that difference of Doctrines, and Wor-
Ï | fhip, or Opinions and Practices, that have been fer
t_} down before.
r | Se. 2. Thefe 3 forts of People, Fews, Chrifti-
6 | ans, and Mahomerans, rejecting the plurality of Gods
n | that were believed and adored by the Heathens, and
| | Worthiping one Only God, have overthrown whate
| ever the others had invented, concerning confede-
rate, inferior, and mean Gods, or familiar Spirits,
that were born with Men and outlive them and at
the fame time, have deftroyed whatever Conjurati-
ons and Witchcrafts were grounded upon fuch prin-
ciples, by which Men prefume to acquire fome cer-
tain Knowledge, and produce fome certain effects,
| We have found nothing like, amongft the Fews and
| Mahometans 5 for thé they may have fomthing that
appears like it, yet ‘tis quite different, as we fhall
fhow hereafter. And as to the Chri/tians, we {ee
that they unanimoufly reject all thefe things, and
| look upon them as delufions and impieties ; and as
"co what the laft, together with the Fews and Ma~
| hometans, have retained of the Opinions and practi-
ces of the Heathens, it has been taken from the Phi-
lofophy of this laft Se, and accommodated to the
| Holy Scripture,or gather’d from it by falfe explications,
| This I thall now briefly fhow, concerning the Spi-
rits in general, and the Soul of Man in particular.
| Seé?. 3. As to the Spirits in general. Firft,
That Opinion, that they are partly corporeal, re
ceived of old by the Fews, Ch. 12, Sef 5, 11, to 15
ot | By the Mahometans, Ch. 14. Seët. 4, 5. and by the
lave | Chriftians, Ch. 15.568. 5, 14, 15, 23, 24,31. draws
it’s Original from the Philofophy of the Heathens,
as has been fhown, Ch, 2. Sef. 14, 16. Ch rt:
what | Sect. 6. # ’
» Second. The Opinion that afcribes fome life and
underftanding to the ftars, as to the Sun and Moon;
L | I whether

DR

SR enr ut

RG ee

ee Re. SE

Se nee

70 The World Bewitch d.

«whether it be infignificantly exprefs’d, as among

the Fews, Ch, 12. Seë&. 3, 13. or only darkly as

-amongft the Mahometans ; or propofed as a doubr, |"
‘as it has been by Origen and St. Auffin, amongft ||"
thé Chriftians, Ch. 15. Seét. 11, 19. That Opinion, as
4 fay looks very Heathenifh, and differs not much fi
from the Jntelligencies of Arzftotle, Ch. 2, Sect. 5. roe
Wor fromthe.efteem which the modern Heathens F7
have for thofe celeftial Lamps, of which mention. }™"
has been made, Ch, 6. Sed. 2. Ch 11. Seët, 2. Sed,
Seét..4. We.may allo eafily compare their belief |
touching Human’ Souls... im a
Firft, The Opinion of the-tran{migration of Souls, God

fo common amongit the Heathens, Ch, 2: Sect. 17. us A
is not rejected ‘by +e Fews, but converted into that. Jl)
of the revolution of the Souls. Ch. 12. Seét. 19. Itis Un
publickly taugh {one Mabometans, Ch, 14. Seét. Eekil
12. As ro the Chriitians, ‘tistrue, that they admicic fa
mot, thé fomthing like itbe found in Origen, Ch. 15. Mine
Sc 13. But] mutt fay by the way, that I fee nor bling
how thofe that fill bold, that all Human Souls were J
created together in the beginning, and afterwards [Minc
each in his time, introduced into their bodies, could JM
{olidly confute that Opinion of the.Meremp/ychofis. fou
Secend. The Feivs, Mabometans, and Chriftians, too §* Un
eafily credit the apparitions of Souls, which takes gl an

place amongft the Fews,, becaufe they fuppofe the
Souls to wander for a Year, about the bodies from
which they are feparated, Ch. 12. Seét, 10. Neither

Uv
<an the Mchometans reject that Opinion, fince they hf
hold the Souls to be made up of the Elements, Ch. fl;
34. Seét. 13. and that after their feparation from the fi
body, they fee and hear in Trees, Seë. 14. Asto the 9% {oy
Chriftians, we find Fufiin, one of the Firft, who fays, gle tan
that a feparated Soul may yet operate upon living We,
pesfons, Se. 5., Ail the Opinions that are related fai,
here, are drawn from Philofophy, or mixed with : thin

laf}

Paganifin,

The World Bewitch’d, 17x

bali

: Paganifm. But the Holy Writ , either taken in
be | its true Senfe; or mil-interpreted, has given occafi-
d on to the following , which we fhali mention here-
ml. after.

id Firft, The opinion that the Angels have been

5, | Created from Fire, dir, or the moft fubtile Ele-
es | ments, which the Fews only hint.Chap. 12. Seëk, 15.
iq | but what the Mahometans publickly teach, Chap 14,
Sect. 4. has likewife been received by fome Ci; ifts-
fof | ans, Chap. 15. Seët. 4,5, 24. becaufe hey thoughr
| it confonant to what is faid, Pfal. 104.7. 4. That
ig | God makes Spirits his Angels, and flames of fire
male his Minitters, 2 Kings 2. LT, that Elijah was ta~
at | Ken up into Heaven in a Chariot with fiery horfes,
tis | Chap. 6. 17. That they defended Elifha, and that
Ezekiel, Chap. 1.4, 5. faw the likenefs of four Ani-
‘tit | mals going out of the midft of fires feveral other
a | mifunderftood paflages have contributed to the efta-
| blifhing of that Opinion.
me | Second. The Morning Stars rejoycing together
ifs | When God ceeated the World, Fob 38. 7, gave oc-
cafion to Philo, as has been obferved, Chap. 12. Seé?,
4. to confirm himfelf in that Opinion, that the Stars
sito | 27 Underftanding Beings ; as has been likewife pro-
"1 | Wed as to many other Authors.
the | .. Sect. 6. It likewife appears, that thofe that be
Golf lieve Spirits to be corporeal, ground their Opinion
vie | Upon the Holy Scripture.
1 ' Firft, for having no Idea of other Sons of God,
a | that fell in love with the Daughters of Men, as is
4 the | sueution’d Gen, 6. but of fuch as are diftinguithed
land feparated from Men: And conceiving not the
[true nature of Spiritual Beings, they fancied. that
gp the Angels had begotten thofe Giants, of whom ’tis
Me fpoken in that place ; add to this, that they could
ee not think that thofe Nephilim (which word we
fy Tranflate Gyants ) fhould be other Creatures, be-
al I 2 fides

H72 The World Bewitch'd.

fides fall’n Angels, who for that reafon are called
by that Name, which fignifies as much as Rebels.
We have feen that Opinion received by the Fews,
Chap. 12. Sect. 14. By the Mahometans, Chap. 14.
Sed. 5. and even by tome Chrifiians, Chap, 15. Se.
‘5, 31.

; Second. J gtant that it may be inferr’d from

‘thence, that there are Incubi and Succubi, that is |

Devils, who now in the fhape of Males, then of
Females, lye with Men and Women; that Opi-
mion of the Fews is {till now a days much difperfed

among the Chriftians, as fhall be fhewed hereafter. |

Se&. 7. Such are their Sentiments, as to the na-

ture and fall of the Angels ; but as to their di- J
{tinction into feveral Orders, and the fhare they |
bear: in the Government of the World,-the fame |
differences, or very near, are afcribed to them that |
are attibuted to rhe Heathen Gods and Spirits. |
Chap. ri. Sect. 6. And that Opinion is ftrengthned |

by a mifunderftanding of the Holy Scripture.
7 D

Firft, The Fews explain sthemlelves clearly and|
Jargely upon the different Orders of Angels. Chap.12.

Seët. 4, 7,11. The Mabometans treat of it more con!
fufedly and obfcurely Chap. 14. Sed. 16, 17, 18,25,
32. but the Chrifizans fpeak of it, as tho’ it could}
not be doubted but the Holy Wit underftands {uch!

5, 8. So have the Fews, according to Ph
Se. 5, 12. Neither do the Chriftians difagree from
them. Chap.14. Se&. 25. Suppofing that Opinion 16
be confirmed in the Seripeure, Ephef Chap. 2.2:
chap 6, 42. and by feveral paflagesin the Hi/fory à)
Felt |

Third,

Der
The.

ft
HAM
à |; NS
y

mar
Han

and |

The World Bewitch d. E73

ki | | Third, They agree together again, in that they
th | acknowledge as many Guardian Angels of Men and
m™ | Nations, as the Heathens did their Titular Gods,
ik | The Opinion of the Fews, as to this point, may be
| in fome manner perceived by the quotations that

are fet down Chap. 12. Se&. 4. 10.. That of the
om | Mahometans, 1s more clearly exprefs’d, Chap. 14:
8] Set. 9. But that of the Chriftians {till plainer. Chap.
nf | 15. Set. 6, 17, 18, 29. to which they have apply-
pr] ed the paflages of the Holy Writ already menti--
el | on’d.

fet. J Se&. 8. It goes, even fo,.with their belief of the

ni} Devils; Frrff,we hear the Fews, Chap. 12. Seét.13,16.
| ? ‘
dr} The Mahometans, Chap. 14. See. 5. and the Chri=

they | ffians, Chap. 15. Seét. 21,31. All {peaking ina
ame} manner the fame. Language, as ro their Original
tat) and Fall. The laft commonly quote the Scripture,, i
itis}. Genef. 3. 6. and Iai. 14. 12. to maintain. their 4
fined} Opinions, but they quote it, no lefs adorned.

| with their foolifh fancies, upon the Nature and
rand} Creation of Spirits, than the others do by their far
mal bulous Fales.

| Second. The Opinion of the Fews concerning the
sl malice of the Devils, their Virtue and Power to

| hurt, partly appears, Chap, 12. Se. 12, 15, 18, 20.
{uit And that of the Mabometans feems to be almoft
sil the fame. As to the Thoughts of the Ancient Chri- i
flians, they are explained more at large, Chap. 15, D |:
nine «Sect. 7, 12, 23, 26. In the mean while I find not fe
em that they have afferted any thing contrary to the
#84 Opinion of the others. -
PAL | Sect. 9. It is convenient to fay allo fomething of
si) «= Purgatory, the {pring of a vaft number of Appariti-
on™ onsand Witchcrafts,

I 3 1, Whee

174 The World Bewitch'd.

1, Whether the Fews, Mahometans; and ancient

—.,

Chriftians {peak clearly upon that fubje@, or ob--

fcurely and doubtful ; yet they all agree in eftablifh-
ing a purging Fire, or fome fuch other Pain to be
endured. Such are the Pains which the Devils of
Torments inflict upon the Fews at the time of Giigul,
or the Revolution of Souls, Chap. 12. Se@.20. The
Mahometans are not remote from that Opinion, Ch,
14. S 11. but the Chriftians, Ch. 15. Se. 27, 28,34.
or at leaft, part of them, have blown up that Fire
from under the Afhes, though the others, whofe
number is far greater, have not the leaft inclination
to credit-it.

2. However, thofe that are not altogether remote
from them, reject not wholly the Apparitions of the
Souls feparated from their Bodies, nor their various
Operations, to which ¥u/?in and Ireneus have traced
out the way for them, as we have feen, Ch. 15. S. 7

Sed. to. But neither the Fews nor the Mahome-
zans, catry Exor¢ifms and Conjurations to fo great a
height as the Chriftians ; in the mean while they all
agree in this.

1. That they are powerful upon the Spirits, by
the means of Names, Words, and Signs, that they
have fo much virtue as to force them to anfwer, to
caft them out, or to turn them of. The Practices
of the Fews, Ch. 13. Se. 6. 11. Thole of the Maho-
metans, Ch. 14. Set. 14, 18. and the Declaration of
the Chriftian Writers, Ch. 16. Seé. 5. 10. make it
fufficiently evident that their Opinions are not much
different as to this Point, though the laft bring not
them into Practice.

2. The Reader fhall not find in my Quotations a
very particular explication of Magick, properly fo
call’d, which, as’tis fuppofed, caufes fo many di-
fturbances to Men upon Earth ;-unlefs it be this,

that fince on the one fide, the evils produced by

thofe

The: World Bewitch'd.

thefe wicked Spiriis are granted, and on the other
their obedience to Exorcifts; it is eafe to infer; that

all the damage that Magicians caufe by the help of:

the Devil, mutt likewife be afcribed to them.
Se&. 11. When we compare alDrhefe things to-

ether, we fee the Heathens and Fews delivering:
wt

their Opinions, as: from hand:to hand, to the Ma-
hometans and Chriftians fo that we eafily perceive that
both Fews and Chriftians, have by degrees,and infen-
fibly, received the Opinions of the Heathens, by

whom they were furrounded, amongft whom they:

were mixed, and from whom the Chriftians are
defcended: And that the laft have alfo borrowed
much from the 7ews, who have delivered’ to them
the Sacred Writings, with moft of their particufar
Interpretations, that have been greedily fwallow d
down, and fince increafed to a great’excefs. As to
the Mabometans, whofe Law is a mixture of Hea-

then, Fewifh, and Chriftian Doctrines,and more com-

pofed of what is evil in them all than of what is
good, and therefore ftored with more: Errors than
Truth ; It is not ftrange they fhould have fo much
agreement with thofe of the Nations we fpeak' of.
We may obferve hereafter how all thefe Opinions
have infenfibly been cherifhed and increafed by Po-
per, and have iffued not only for the fame Spring,
but alfo from another, whence Mahomet has drawn
fomething for the making up of his Sy/fem. But as
I have ended the 11th Chapter of this Book with
the Opinion of the Epicures, I think it convenient to
make a particular Chapter of thofe of the Manichees.

I 4 CH AP.

176 LheWorld Bewitch'd.

CHAP. XVI

That the Dotirines afcribed to the Manichees, are 2
mixture of all the preceeding, and the original of the
Opinions moft. common at this day.

Sel TE it were abfolutely requifite to know the Opi-

- “ nions of the ancient Hereticks,at leaft of thofe
that are call’d fo, we would be at the fame Pains as
thofe that endeavour to difcover them : For their
own Books that were then condemned, being loft,
"tis not reafonable blindly to believe whatever their

Adverfaries fay of them, whofe Zeal for the Truth |

was often mixed with human Paffions : So that they
may fometimes impute to their Antagonifts Opini-
ons that were not fo bad as they gave out, either
mifunderftanding or wrefting them. Perhaps Sr.
Afin has increafed the number of Herefies to a
hundred, for fear he fhould diminifh that of feventy
which Epiphanius had before eftablifhed in his Pre-
face;and 57th Chapter of the Herefies. For if Celfus
could mark, in the moft remote Antiquity, and

from the firft times that we have any Knowledge of |

Books, but 100 principal Doctors of Heathenifm,
each of whom made not a particular Sect, but only
followed the footfteps of his Predeceffors ; how can
it be imagin’d that Chriftianity, that has the Word

of God for it’s Rule, fhould have been in much lefs |

time more divided than Paganifm, that was founded
on {uch weak agd uncertain Grounds,

Sed. 2, |

D
belief

Woted
Other |
May h
See
My i
Mt Ay

— ER ——
Fen Se ree SS
SS

The World Bewitch'd,
Sed, 2/ St. Auftin it feems fhould be chiefly con-

fulted, as to the Doctrine of the Manichees, fince

- he himfelf had been infected with their poifon, and

has particularly treated of that matter in his 46 Ch.
of the Herefies; however, I thall doit with great
caution, by the Reafons juft now alledged : befides
that thefe words of his Preface, Ad quod vt!lt Deum,
made him extreamly fufpected ; for he fays, that in
his little Book of Herefies, he fhows a way, Vnde
polit omnes herefis, & que nota eft, que ignota vita~
vz. To avoid all Herefies, whether known or unknown.
For how can one provide himfelf againft what is
unknown, and confequently fignifies nothing ? nay,
{ may boldly fay, that what is unknown cannot be
called Herefy, fince whatever deferves that name,
muft be known; or perhaps St. Auftin’s meaning
muft be underftood in this fenfe; that difcovering
the nature and Genius of fuch Herefies, as are al-
ready known, he has furnifhed us with light, and
Weapons againft thofe that are yet unknown, but
may become manifeft hereafter. However this be-
ing not the place to infift longer upon this Reafon-
ing,we fhall return to our fubject. The fame Father
in his Book againft the Manichees, imputes to them

* fome things, Quantumlibet negent ad fe pertinere.

Thô they deny them ever fo much. Buras he trears nor
diftinctly enough of all their Opinions, efpecially
thofe that belong to our defign, ¥ fhall rather follow
Danaus, who has gathered the chief points of their
belief, as well out of the Book of St. Auftin before
quoted, and the reft of his works, as out of many
other Authors, from whom I fhall Only relate whar

may be fubfervient to our fubjec.
Sec. 3. As to God and the Spirits, they are faid,
Firft, To have eftablithed two principles, con-
trary to ‘each other, one of which was good, and
the Author and Original of all good 3.and the other
| I 5 bad,

178 The World Bewitch d.

bad, the Author of all Evil, andthe Prince of darknefs.
That the firft as they fay, 5 the God that has formed all
things, and that the other 5 Hyle, thar the matter from
æhich all things have been formed, and which # efteem'd
by them to be the Devil. Some diftinguifh the Devil
from the Prince of darknefs, and tranflate not as we
do the laft words of the 44th v. of the 8th Ch. ot St.
John. He is the Father of lies ; but ba Father is a
die, namely the Father of the Devil.
Second. As to the good God, they fay,that bi Effence
# difperfed as by portions, through all the Creatures, and
gnherent to them, which they explain by many wonder-
jul Commentaries. This is what they think of God
and the Devil, in relation to their Effence and Ex-
iftence, what follows concerns their Operations.
_ Sect. 4. Third. The People of darknefs formerly
warr d with the People of light. The good God went
bimfelf to attack the Prince of darknefs, by fome cer-
tain principal Spirits, which he had produced of his
own Effence, who however, being too weak, were taken
Prifoners; but Chrift came to repair that diforder, have
eng been begotten by fome certain firft Man,who bad been
. the promoter of tha War, and had begun it.

Fourth. Thar in the mean while, Chrift himfelf 5
the Serpent that feduced Adam and Eve.

Fifth. That Chrift 5 now fixed amongf? the Stars,
efpecially in the luminous Globe of the Sun, in which. |
fenfe they explain hu Afcenfion to Heaven. |

Sect. 5. Sixth. They believe the Metempfychofis az. |
this manner 3 That the Souls [hall pafs into the bodies of |
fuch a kind of living Creatures, as they have moft loved |
or abufed, during their Life. He that has killed a moufe |
or a fiy, hall pafs in punifhment, into the body of a |
moufe or a fly, the ftate in which he fhall be put after |
death, fhall likewsfe be oppofed to that, in which he was |
during his Life. He that 5 rich fhall be poor, and he À
that is poor fhall be'rich, |

Seventh, |

The World Bewitch d, 179

Seventh. They alfo give two Souls to every Man, one
of which, % always contrary to the other. But enough
of their Doctrines,we leave the reft to Daneus; who
afcribes to them 21 inall, becaufe what he and other
Authors fay, belongs not to our fubject.

Seët. 6. However 1 am not apt to affert, that
they have believed and taught fuch grofs Doctrines,
as are imputed to them, and have been now relat-
ed. : For fuppofing the common Opinion, concern-
ing the Doctrine of the Manichees, that they were
chiefly extracted from the Philofophy of the Perfians,
(fince Manes, their Firft Author, was undoubtedly a
Perfian,) and that they are ftrangely mingled with
the Chriftian Divinity; It is unreafonable to have
the fame Opinion of that People, that we have of
other Nations, who never cultivated the ftudy of
Nature and Human learning ; fuch as thofe we
have met with in the Northern parts of Africa, and
the Southern of America. It may well be,
that the Manichees afcribe to the whole Umiverfe, a
principle like that which is obferved in it’s parts,
viz. The active caufe, and the matter, which Ari-
frotle eftablifhed to be eternal as well as the World ;
and that afterwards, matter confidered as in-
fenfible by a mifinterpretation of the words of Mo-
fes, that fpreads in the beginning, darknefs over the
Abyfs, and the Spirit of God moving over it, fhould
have produced thofe monftrous thoughts, of which
we have given fome inftances.

Seët, 7. Suppofing they have eftablifhed two
principal caufes, one of good and the other of evil ;
but yet, fo as that the Firft is unconteftably fuperi-
or to the Second, as much as light is above dark-
nefs, and the workman above the matter he works
upon ; *tis probable, that they had an Idea of God,
asa Soul infufed through the whole Univerfe, that
confider'd by them as the body, in which that Firft
caufe

180 The World Bewitch'd

caufe continually operates. And asthe contrary mo-
tions of corporeal paffions rife againft the Empire
of Reafon that ought to govern them, fo they might
believe, that the Animal Spirits proceeding from
matter, perpetually rebel againft God, the Fountain
of all Reafon, Whence it would follow, that God
fhould not be more abfolute mafter of the Univerfe,
than Man is of his body; thence has proceeded
that Idea of two different Gods, one good, and the
other bad; the latter being ftill inferior to the for-
mer,who is indeed the workman, but has not an ar-
bitrary Government, there being a power in the
World, fo great, that it is able to refift him.

_ Sec. 8. But whether I have made a juft conje-
ture, or whether the. Manichees had other Opini-
ons, then thofe I imagine 5. it feems neverthelefs,
that I may reafonable fuppofe it, upon this founda-
tion, that no Opinions fo grofs as thofe that are af-
cribed to them ; notonly are not admitted, but not
fo much as moved or propounded, as we fhall fee
very foon in the feries of this work ; becaufe the
principal points of thofe forts of belief with
their dependencies, have a great relation . with
my Second and Third Book, as J hope to
dhow at the end of the Second. And there-
fore whether any one treats of the Devil and
Spirits according to the Holy Scripture; or whe-
ther he only follows his own fenfeand righr, it may
be affured, that all his Reafonings will turn upon

this notion of his; that God and the Devil have

each an Empire, ‘one contrary to the other, and that

thd the Devil be fubject to the power of God ; yet

his’ Empire is more apparent. It is denyed,

that God now works any miracles, but fome are

rafhly afcribed tothe Devil, that furpafs all thofe

that are mentioned in the Holy writ. We ‘believe

that there are Angels, and gather from the Holy .
: Scripture, that they encamp about the faithful, and

the

Ss
—

or

ne

—,
om

nn 2
oO

The World Bewitch’d, ted 7

the Devil likewife is inceflantly active to do them
hurt, if poffible he can; but his abode is in Hell,
However it is very rare to hear any one fay, he has
feen an Angelina vifion, whereas the Devil ap-
pears almoft continually. If any thing has been
either fignified or foretold, we never believe it to
be the Operation of an Angel, butof the Devil :
one is pofleft by him, and another bewitchd ; by
his means, unknown Tongues are {poken, ftrange
things are faid, others no lefs wonderful are per-
form'd, and the moft hidden fecrets  difcoyer’d:
But you will fcarce meet with any that has fo good
Opinion of the power of an Angel; if we have
any Holy thought, or good infpiration, how incon-
fiderable foever it may be , we afcribe it to the
Holy Ghoft, and feem not to believe, that the An-
gels are fo much as capable of contributing to it;
fince it ne’er comes in our mind to think upon them.
But the Devil penetrates the moft fecret thoughts
of Men,-overthrows their beft defigns, and in-
ceflantly excites them to Evil, if they are accufed
and convicted of any crime, the excule is always at
hand, for the Devil has done it,or at leaft has tempt-
ed them fo to do.

Seët, 9. And therefore fince neither the Ancient
Heathens nor the moderns; neither the Jews, the
Mahometans, nor the Firft Chriftians, ever enter-
tained any fuch Opinions; and that ‘tis manifeft,

they have a greater relation with thofe of Manes,

cannot but believe that this Doctrine which be=
gun to {pring up in the Third Century, was imme-
diatly oppofed on all fides by Orthodox Dottors,
but yet fpread very far into 4fia, whence it hav-
ing pañled into Ewrope, it has maintained it felf there
longer then ’tis believed. This will not appear
firange, if we make a ferious reflection upon this,
that Men writing againft errors, often aim " no=
Gung

= on i a
OF Sis AS

« po Le

jC 3 -

— mes ~ oe
LT a 2 me

Bon OS

182 The World Bewitch 'd.

thing elfe, but their own reputation and the glory
of having cOnfuted them, whilft they themfelyes
cherifh thofe errors, and keep them in their bofom,
fo that when they come to examine themfelves
they find at bottom, that they agree with thofe,
whofe evil Doctrines they fancy as heartily to de-
on as they appear outwardly incenfed againft
them.

CHAP. XIX.

That the Opinions and prattices already mentioned, have
been moft or all introduced in Popery, which has ad=
ded tothem new inventions of Men.

Sect, ag Be S now time to approach nearer our

Age, and Firft to confider the Papitts,
and then our felves; for we now know, that the
chief points of the doctrines to be examined, have
Anciently made part of the religion of the Heathens,
Jews, and Mahometans, and even have been admit-
ted by the Firft Chriftians, whofe purity is fo much
commended. Afterwards, it was eafy to obferve in
the laft Chapter where we fpake of the Manichees,
that great part of the Doctrines afcribed to them,
have infenfibly been introduced into the Chriftianity
of latter Ages. But Popery was not fatisfied with
this, and has--invented many new ones, to which
Gregory-the great, that would feem to oppofe Anti-
chriftianity, with which he fuppofed the Eaft to be
infected, has traced outa plain way. For having
himfelf ufurped a great Authority over the Churches
of the Weft, it was no hard matter for him, to let
his own imaginations and vain inftitutions be re-
ceived, and to tranfmit them to his fucceffors, rey

that

The World Bewitch’d, 18 3

that time it became ufual in moft Churches, to be-
lieve whatever Rome taught, and to do whatever
fhe wrote them by. way of command ; ar laft the
changed that cuftom into a right to her, and an
obligation upon the other; neither Scripture nor
right Reafon were confulted, when the determi-
nations and Authority of the Roman B;fhop, upon
Articles of Faith, were only allowed. Thofe de.
terminations were fubftituted inftead of Reafon ;
and when they needed Writings to maintain them,
thofe of the Firft Doctors of the Church were rea-
dy at hand, which gave too fair a pretence : of cre-
diting whatever had been invented ; for how ftrange
foever thofe new Doctrines appeared, yet they were
eafily {wallow’d down, provided they were contain-
ed either in the writings of thofe Doctors, or in
others that were {purious and forged at pleafure, and
falfly afcribed to them, if they were bur declared
authentick by the See of Rome. It happened with
this matter as with all others, in which fome change
in the Worthip and Doctrine, has infenfibly been
made, or fomthing new introduced, which conti-
nued in the Church till the beginning of the latter
Age, when part of the Weft was reformed, and re=
eftablithed in it’s firft ftate.

Seët. 2. We muft now confider two things, vzz,
how far Popery has brou ght, in procefs of time, it’s
unlawful Opinions ; and then how far proceeded
the rejection made by thofe that reformed themfelves
as to the Doctrine and Worfhip.  Forthis rea{on, I
fhall fpeak in this Chapter of what the Papifts- be-
lieved upon the fubject.I treat of, and fhall relate
their Worthip and practices in the following Chap-
ter. I intend not to gather thofe Opinions from the
decrees of the Popes, nor the Canons of their Coun=
cils nnd Synods, as I have not done it, in what I have
related concerning other Religions; but I {hall a

le

> Se Se ee

184 Lhe World Bewitch’d,

lect them from the writings of their principä Au-
thors and Doctors, and from fentiments clearly ex-
prefling them, few of which were ever contradict-
ed or confuted by any private perfon. So that what-
ever I fhall alledge, being generally received for Ar-
ticles of Faith, by thofe of that Communion; they
will have no reafon to complain of, or exclaim
againft this method, fince in the following Chapter,
T fhall fhow, that thofe manifold Opinions afcribed
to them, are confirmed by the proof of a general
practice. But if I was to read over all their Au-
thors to extract their Opinions, it would prove too
long and tedious a task ; and therefore I fhall only
follow one of their writers, who is fallen into my
hands by chance, becaufe he has read all the others,
and extracted from them whatever is fubfervient to
our fubject, having put it in order, without omit-
ting any thing, as tho he had done it on purpofe:
fince therefore, not only he is not of our Commu-
nion, but a Papift, and a Jefuit too, I think the
choice I have made, will net be blamed. ° This Au-
thor is Ga/par Schottus, who is fufficiently known by
the learned writings he has publifhed of late, and
which he is not afraid to expofe to our cenfure, fince
in 1662, he dedicated his Phyfica curiof, to the Elefor
Palatine, Charles Lewx of glorious memory, who
was of our Communion: this Book and another
entituled, Magia Univerfals, or Univerfal Magick,
of which he is likewife the Author I defign to
make ufe of, laying afide all the others that I had
collected, and partly read for that purpofe, for the
glory of being an infatiable reader is not what I
aim at.

_ Sed, 3. Following the fame order, I have before
eftablifhed, and which is almoft agreeable to that
of Schortus. I fhall firft relate the Opinions of the

Doctors of the Church of Rome, concerning ces
an

The World Bewitch'd. 185

and Devils, and afterwards touching human Souls,
either in this Life or after Death. However, I un-
dertake not to make an abftract of, whatever they
fay, but only to illuftrate the matter in hand, in
order to prove what I have aflerted, To that end
f diftinguifh again the Angels into good and bad,
tO examine what concerns either of rhofe two forts.
But firft I fhall fpeak in general of their Original,
Number, Nature, Equalities, and Power. As to their
Original: Upon the Queftion, of what Nature Spi-
rits are, I fhall reject the Opinion commonly re-
ceived by feveral Chriftian Doctors ; That Spirits
are in fome fort Corporeal, becaufe the Council of
Lateran, cap. firmiter, feems to eftablifh, that they
are altogether immaterial ; bus all agree in this,
that they have been created by God, and conftitu-
ted in a ftate of Grace, Phyfic. Cur. Book 1. Paz. 7.
Though this laft expreffion be fomewhat different
from that of our Churches; yet I will not infift

-upon it; but in the following propofition I fhall

obferve what I intend afterwards to make fubfervi-
ent to my defign.

Seët. 5. Thomas Aquinas makes the Angels inny=
merable. Others, following fome ancient Fathers,
eftablifh 99 to one Man. Our Schottus makes their
number amount to 1000, ceo, 000, 000, 4 Thoufand
Thoufand Millions, more of whom are good then bad,
though he undertakes not to determine the number
of each, pag.9, 10. This vaft number of Angels, as
well bad as good, are divided by way of degrees
into {ome certain orders, which are explained in
particular, fomewhat further in that fame Book.

Seét. 6. As tothe power afcribed to good and
bad Angels ; 1, They can neither penetrate the fe-
cret thoughts of one another, nor thofe of Men ;
yet they can much better pierce into futurities then
Men can do by the help of natural Caufes,and know

for

186 The World Bewitch'd.

for inftance, whether the year fhall be fruirful,whe-
ther it will freeze very hard, whether it will Rain
or blow, pag. 12, 13, 14.

2. “Tis obfervable, that he afcribes to them tlie
faculty of moving from one place to another, tho’
it be not done in an inftant, and that of extending
and contracting themfelves locally, pag. 17. 18.

3. He admits the Opinion of Ignatim Erkennefs,
that it is not neceffary an Angel fhould have a Body
to move another Body, pag. 20. €c.

4. That neverthelefs neither Angel nor Devil can
act upon each other, unlefs they meet both in the
fame place, pag. 21.

5. It is the common Opinion, that a Spirit may
affume a Body in fuch a manner as outwardly to be
feen in a Bodily fhape, by a Perfon whofe Eyes are
conveniently difpofed, witheut being perceiv'd by
another near him, tho’ his Eyes be as fit for it as
thofe of the former, pag.24.

6. ‘Tis likewife the common Opinion, that each
Perfon has his particular Angel and Devil, p. 37, 38.

Seët, 7. As to the Holy Angels in particular, the
Opinion of Lombard concerning their Orders and
different Miniftries, has been always much credited
among the Papifts ; They believe that he {peaks ac-
cording to the Scripture, when he conftitutes xine
Orders of them. Angels, Archangels, Principalities,

Powers, Virtues, Dominions, Thrones, Cherubims, and
Seraphims. Lombard aflerts, that Dionyfius the Are- |
opagite has diftinguifhed them fo, but I have fhewed |

before, Chap. 15. Sect, 3. that it is Pope Gregory,

who has eftablifhed that number, tho’ not altogether |
in the fame Order. Thefe nine Orders have been |
fince divided into three times three, the three fupe- |
riour Orders are the Seraphims, Cherubims, and |

Thrones, and fo forth; afcending again, and'reckon-

ing all nine. Lombard explains this thought more |

at

! (tt 4] of

Kor" |

The World Bewitch'd. 187

at jarge, faying, That as the Martyrs are one Order,
and the Apoftles another, and yet one Apoftle % above
another, as one Martyr above another, he reafonably be-
lieve the fame-to be with the Angels.

Se, 8, Asto the wicked Spirits in particular, ‘ts
believed,

1, That they have riot alt been precipitated into
Hell, immediately after their Fall 5. but that partof
them remained rambling without, and fometime
return upon Earth, or abide in the Air, p. 26, 27.

2. That there are fix different places where the
Devils commonly dwell, and ~whence they effect
their Malice and Power, and therefore are called
in relation to thofe places. 1. Iznean, or Superaereal
Devils. 2. Aereal Devils. 3. Terrefirial.. 4. Aquatick.
5. Subterraneous. 6. Thofe that hate the Light. The
Abbot Trithemius, Delrio, and Agrippa,are quoted by
our Author on that account, pag. 28. 31.

3. They are as well as the Angels divided into
feveral Orders: But the Papifts agree not together
upon this matter 5 neither our Author, nor Agrippa,
who has treated at large of this matter, agree to-
gether,nor with others; but after all, I relate here
what is moft generally received ; to which I add,
that the Opinion of Thyleus, who divides the Devils
into three Spiritual Dominions, and nine Q@ires, is
not rejected, pag. 36, 37.

Se. 9. Their Power and Effects have always
been much exalted amongft the Papifts; They hold
for certain, that the wicked Spirits can do great
wonders, either by their Knowledge or Power.
Mira hoc loco vocamus, (fays Schottw) quorum caufas
etiam fapientes ignorant, €5 digna admiratione cenfent,

Jive de eætero natura facultates tranfcendunt, five non.
I give here the name of wonders to thofe Effeëts, the
caufes of which even the Wife are ignorant of,and judge
them worthy Admiration, whether or no they furpafs the

noté | Forces of Nature, pag. 39, 40. "Tis therefore his Opi-

il |

I

nion,

SS ee

188 The World Bewitch'd,

nion, That the Devils can prodice Effeëts that are a-
Love the power of Nature: For though he declares
afterwards, That they produce, but apparently and not
really, fome Effeéts that are peculiar to God only 3 yet
he believes that frequently they really eperate others,
which indeed are not proper to God, but which
neither Men nor the ordinary courfe of Nature are
capable of effecting without the affiftance of thofe
Spirits. To prove this Thefis, he quotes many Po-
pifh Authors, and fhows that they are all of the
fame Opinion. In the mean while he diftinguithes
what the Devils are able to effect of themfelves,
from what they cannot do, but by the means of
Magicians and Witches, Pag. 40. to. §0.

Seé.10. The Confequence he draws from what has
been faid, is, That the Devils operate fome things
by motion, others by the active virtue of Natural
Caufes, and others by Illufion.

1. They alledge.15 forts of their Operations by
their Motion from one place to another, of which
the five firft confift in real Operations, and the nine
laft, in meer Reprefentations. Thofe of the firft
Claffis, are, Firf?, They caufe Fire to defcend from
Heaven, as ’tis related in the firft Chapter of ob.
Second. According to the fame Hiftory, they may
raife Storms and Tempefts. Third. They may
likewife caufe Rain, bring fair weather, make
Winds blow upon the Sea, ftop the courfe of Vef-
fels, and overturn them. Fourth, They may pro-
duce Earthquakes, Fifth. They may tranfport
through the Air, or in fome other manner, the
Bodies of Men, and all other forts of Bodies.

Seët. 11. Our Author afterward relates what-
they operate by motions of meer Reprefentation.

to the internal and external Senfes ;
1. They render vifble things invifible, by fud-
denly {natching them from the fight of Men.
| 2. They

The World Bewitch d. 189

2. They make Statues, and other inanimate Ob-
jects move and walk.

They make them fpeak.

4. They make appear Man and Beaft in their
dead Bodies, as tho’ they were alive.

5. They take upon them Aereal Bodies, and by
that means produce feveral Effects.

6. [hey reprefent the Figure of all forts of mat-
ter, either Gold, Silver, precious Stones, or others.

7. They direct in {uch a manner the Animal Spi-
vits of Men, that they maks appear to them, paft,
prefent and future things in their own fhape, and
perfwade them that they fee, hear, and do things
that are not real.

8. They caufe pineings and violent Difeafes in
human Bodies.

9. By Dreams they prefent to People, fuch. ob-
jects as are abfent and remote, and forewarn them
of future things.

10° [hey produce.in Men the paffionsof Love,
Hatred, Anger and Fury, from Pa. 51. to 54,

Seët, 12. The 2d fort of Diabolical Operations
is no lef{s credited ; it confifting intheadtive virtue
of Natural things ; and therefore ’tis believed, that
_ by the power of the Devil, whether he acts imme-
diately, and by himfelf,or by Wizards and Witches ;
Herbs, Fruits, Waters, and moft other matters
may be mixed in fome fort and degree, and with
the, proportions requifite for it, whereby Food,
Drink, Phyfick, or fome other potion may be made
up,that fhall caufe a great deal of hurt to Man and
Beaft. °Tis alfo believed that all thefe things may
be done by natural ways, but that they are more
ealily, readily, and efficacioufly performed by the
power and craft of the Devil, withour being per-
ceived by the moft skilful Men, who can never do
the like, Pan 55.

Sed.

190 The World Bewitch' à.

Seët, 13. As to the illufions, they muft be under-
ftood in this Senfe, that the Devils indeed do fome
thing, but not whatever they feem to operate. For
‘is not doubted bur the Devil can do whatever is
poffible to be done by natural means and-which
may happen in procefs of time, by the ordinary
courfe of nature, without the cooperation of that
wicked Spirit, as we fhall fay anon, but he has this
power by God's permiflion, to imploy all the forces
of nature, for the producing of what effect he de-
fires ; whence often proceeds, that Men -either by
ignorance, or becaufe fome extraordinary objects
and events come before them, believe things that
are not in being, or periwade themfelves, that the
Devil performs fome certain effects that are not na-
tural, In the mean while it remains conftant and
undoubted, that the Devil has power to do what-
ever has been already mentioned, as alfo whatever
| am going to fay.

Seët, 14. I mean to fpeak of illufions, which
Schottus together with Delrio and Molina declares
to be of Three forts; thofe that are made by the
change of the objects, thofe that are made by the
change of the Air, and thofe that happen by the
change of the Organs of the fenfes.

Firft, Illufons are made by the change of the Ob-
ject, when one thing is fubftituted inftead of ano-
ther, that has been fuddenly and impercepti-
bly -{natched away 3 or when an object is
prefented to the Eyes, in fuch a ftate and
manner as that, it produces a falfe vifion; or
when any object made up of Air, or of fome
other Element, offers it felf to the fight; or laftly
when there appears any thing compofed of different
matters, mingled together ; fo skilfully prepared,
that what exifted before, receives thereby another
form and figure,

Seconds

| Money, p, 116, however Schoreu; fays with reafon,

The World Bewitch'd, 191

Second. The change of the Air is made by thefe
ways, when the Devil hinders, left the object fhould
pafs through the Air, and hit our Eyes; when he
difpofes the Air that is betwixt the object and the
Bye in fuch a manner, that the object appears in
another figure then really it is, when he thickens

the Air to make the object appear greater then it is,

and to hinder it from being {een in other places, but
the place he defigns ; when he moves the Air in
the place through which the obje® is to hit the
Eye, that the object going through that part of the
Air, may alfo be moved, and that it’s figure may
be prefented to the Eye, otherwife then it is; and
laftly, when he mingles and confounds together fe-
veral different figures, in order that in one only
object, there may appear many together, pag.

Third. The Organs of the Senfes are changed,
when they are either transfer’ d from their places
and alter’d ; when their humours and ‘active par-
ticles are corrupted or thickned, or when {uch a
fhining brightnefs paffes before the Eyes, that they
are dazled, fo that it feems, “that a Man raves wak-
Ing, p. 55; 56.

Sect. 15. Asa confequence of all thefe things,
’tis held as an undoubted truth, that the Devil can
perform miraculous effects upon all forts of creatures,
efpecially upon Men, vz,

Fifi, That he can give life to Dead infe@s, and
make them perfect Animals, which however is
againft the meaning of Schoteus, p. 120,

. Second, And confequently, that he can produce
and make appear true Frogs and Serpents as was
done in Egyp¢ in the time Mofes, p. 57, 58. 59.

… Third, That he may difcover and bring to Men,
hidden treafures, and even if occafion ferves, make

that

The World Bewitch'd.

that he is fo ill natur’d, as feldom to do, as to this:
all that isin his power. À

Se&. 16. Concerning Man in particular, ’tis be-
lieved,that unclean Spirits can Copulate in the fhape
of Men with Women, and in the fhape of Women
with Men, fo that as from that communication Chil-
dren may be begotten, pag. 61. to 67.

2. That the Devil, as by a kind of Tranfmuta-
tion, may change Women into the likenefs of Men,
and Men into that of Women, pag. 113.

3. That he transforms Men into the figure of
Wolves, Cats, and other Beafts, pag. 94.

4. That he may ftrengthen the memory of Man, 9?

and enlighten his underftanding, pag. 114.
5. That he may reftore Youth to old Men, and

repair their Faces.

6. That he may poffefs himfelf of the Bedy and

Senfes of a Man, and make him as Exftatick.

7. That he may plunge Men into a deep Sleep,
and make them capable of Fafting whole years,
pag. 104, 107.

8, That he may render Men invulnerable.

9, That he may caufe all forts of Difeafes to
Man, asalfo rid him of them, p. 102.

Se. 17.1 have kept the chief Article for the end 5
that is, That the Devil carries over by night,through
Windows and Chimnies, Magicians, Sorcerers, and
Witches, to the Sabbat, ‘or their Affembling Places
though after all, many Popifh Writers deny it. But
fince it is the common Opinion, on which the very
Judges of Sorcerers partly lay the foundation of
their Sentences, I intend not to put it.on the reckon-
ing of the Papifts in general, though our Author
takes it upon his own, pag. 67. and 80. For I will
not wrong the Papifts fo rauch, as to call it their
own Sentiment, fince there are Men amongft us

that have the fame Opinion, as we fhall hereafter : Hi

Yet

Uncen
à blag

f,]

Yao

The World Bewitched. 193

Yet there is one chat is particular to them, of which
I have been informed of lare by People that have
lived amongft them, and have feen a very frequent
practice of it, I mean the Moniteres. When an

one has fuftained a lofs, or When ‘ris defired to dif-
cover an important Affair, “or even a Trifle, a Mo-
| nitory is obtained from the Bifhop; which isan act
wherein the thing or the fact enquired after is {pe-
cified. This Monitory is publifhed at the end of
Parochial: Maffes, before all the People,zand faftned
to the Doors of Churches, and at the corners of
Streets, and after the expired time, and neceflary
publications, they come to the ceremony of thun-
dringitout. After which it is certain, that three
parts of the People believe and are firmly per-
fuaded, that thofe who knew any thing ofthe mat-
ter, and have nor gone in time to reveal it to the
| Rector, or other Prieft commiffion’d by the Bithop,
_ never fail to fall into the poffeffion of the Devil, to
| whom the Monitory delivers them, after it's being
| thunder’d ous, and that the Devil transforms them
_moft, or all the Nights, into Dogs, Cats, Wolves,
| Goats,and other Animals, which is called to whurry
bas a Wolf, Tf one meet in the night fome Wild-
. | Beaft or a Domeftick ftraying, he fancies to have
| met the Wolf-man, and is ready to {wear it. Some
of the moft thinking and lefs fuperftitious part, at

. | leaft believe, that the Excommunication contained

in thofe Monitories, cuts of from the Communion
of their Church, and delivers tothe Demons thofe
that have not fubmitred to it, by revedling flich
things, as tis Often very convenieht and nfeful to
| Conceal. | à bi
| Se 18. As all thefe things are faid in general
concerning the power of wicked Spiriys à fo cer
is | tain places are affigned to them, where they ufu-

| ally produce their Effects: The co’ mon Opinion
| Vel, I. K 15

194 The World Bewitchd.

as, that there are familiar Spirits, Domeftick, and
Mountanous Devils.

ing

1. The familiar Spirits, Spiritus Familiares, are | iii
thofe who always keep by a Man, even when he calls not \ the
Ser them, whether they do it of their own accord, or | iti
that they bave been hired very cheap for that purpofe, | wli
They ferve him faithfully, at leaft outwardly, whether Vac
er no he calls for them. They fuffer themfelves to be frut | Guld
wip in Rings, Chryftals, Chefts, and the like, and to be With}
carried away whitherfoever one pleafes ; Thefeare the fai)
very words of Schortus, pag. 134. ~ Thofe Demons J were
in Glafs or Rings are according to the common li»
‘Opinion, fhutin or faftned to them with fome cer- fits)
tain ceremonies ufed in that cafe; and not by the Jy,
‘virtue of any Conjurations or Exorcifms, nor by the lu}
power of him thar carries them, as.’tis believed by Fad w
fome ; but they undergo this willingly, or by the Pint
äbfolute order of the Prince of the Devils, whom § 3
they blinciy obey ; -or laftly, ro deceive Men more Mu
eafily. When they are in thofe forts of Prifons,and Jt;
have been carried through feveral places, queftions iy)
are put to them, and fomerimes they are forced to If tie
dpeak. ‘Then they difcover to Men hidden Things, Hine
and foretell thofe that are to come. It is believed, | tar,
that in our days a great and victorious Prince.car- | Winch
ried one-of thefe Spirits with him in his Ring, and | Wt, of
that he loft his fight in a Battle, a little after the fl k
Stone that was in the Ring was broken into two Let
pieces, par. 143. HS run
Sect. 19. Schottus and Dario relate out of Melet sur, | reat
what is ordinarily faid concerning Domeftick. De-| line fi
vils. They withdraw into the moft bidden places of the Ww: tio
Loufe, upon piles of Wood, where they are kept with the ithe
mot delicions Meat, becaufe they carry to their Mafters| hed hy
Corn that they have flolen Jrom other People’s Barns, | Halare
EV hen t]ofé epirits intend to fettlein any Houfe, they to An
snake et known by Leaping up flicks of Woed, or throw : hy

ing |

ve
iff |

| fhould be put to a proof in this curious A

if

The World Bewitch à. 195

eng Dung into Pails of Milk. If the Maller of the
Houfe, taking notice of it, lets alone thofe Sticks and
the Dung in the Milk, or even if be drinks of the Milk
ento which the Dung bas been thrown, the Spirit appears
tohim, and lives with him. Thofe forts of Spirits
are called by the French Gobelins, by the Dutch
Guldelkens, and Kabautermannekens, and by the Eng-
li Hobgoblins.. They appear in the fhape of Men
and Women, -as little as Dwarfs, or fuch as Pigmies
were formerly imagin’d tobe. Schottus, fays, That
it was ufual in former times to fee many of thofe Spi-
rits in Houfes, where they did whatever was neceffary.
They dr effed Horfes, they Swept the Houfe,carried Wood

| and Water, and did all forts of Service, pag. 145. he

did well by faying *twas formerly done, left he

ge
Le aes
Seé?. 20. He has taken from Georgius Agricola, the

_ defcription he makes of Mountanous Devils, faying,
| That they dwell in the Mines under the Meuntains 3

that they are cruel and frightful ; that they make un-
eafie.and perpetually vex thofe that work in the Mines:
Some call them the little Hillanders, Lecaufe they ordi-
nartly appear little, {carce three foot high, with an old

«| wrinckled Face, and in the fame fhape with the Mix
d| wers, clothed with a Waftecoat and Apron. Weverthe-

lefs, he fays, that they are not fo wicked as they

_ love to play Tricks, and to be merrily Roguith, ef

pecially wken they will perfuade that they do the
greateft part of the work in the Mines. Whenall’s

-| done, his Opinion comes at laft to this, that there

K 2 foever

E96 The World Bewitchd,
foever they may do, believing that when it happens
fo they) are forced to it by God, or that they do it |
‘Craftily, todelude Men, Pag. 114. and 149.

Seét. 21. There is ftill more illufions made in |
‘relation to the-fhapes the Devils take on, than in the |
-other occafions above-mention’d. I will not now
{peak of whole Armies that are believed frequently
+0 appear in order of Battle,of which Schorrus treats
at large in the addition to his fecond Book, p. 336. |
‘but .of :thofe rhat are called Hobgoblins and Fairies. |
Formally our People {peak almoft of nothing elie,
| Schottus writes thereupon, p. 339. Delriofays, That |
iq there % a fort of Speëtres that appear as Wi

omen all in |
wvhite, in Woods and Meadows ; Some are feen in Sta- |
bles with Wax Cardles lighted, fome drops ef which |
they let fall upon the Mains of Herfes, combing and |
ewifting them very neatly 3 thole white Women are |
alfo call’d Sybils, and ‘ris faid, that one of em na-|
med Haband, is as the Queen of the others,and com-|
mands them. People ‘believe their Apparitions ro |
be of good Omen ; bur the Doctors lock on {uch |
prefages as old Womens Tales, acknowledging in)
ahe mean while, thatthe thing is true, or at leaft!
nie poflible: And Schortus relating, p. 215. what Cor-|
f nelius of Kenrpen{ays, affures us, that in the ume off

the Emperor’ Loraraus, that is about 830. feveral of
i thofe Fairies were to be found in Fri/eland, where)
14 11 they dwelt in Grotes, or on the tops of Hills and]
ie Mountains, whence they defcended at night,to carry

toveht
and th
‘és
1 D] ut
of Phe
the Pa
the de
under!

Ineak

| Li | away Shepherdsfrom their Flocks, Children from! tel tl

ie “their Cradles, and flip both into their Caverns. fs

1: Wappes
| RUE
at

“CH 4 À

The World Bewitch'd. 197

(30 PNEU tt eee

CHA Pe. 2x

What: 5 the Doëtrine: of Popery concerning Apparitious
of Spirits, and bows they torment Men, either by
themfelves, or by the Miniftry of other Men.

Sect. 1. [ N fpeaking of this laf%t kind of Demons

we are defcended by degrees, even to’

SpcCters and Phantafms.. But Firft, we have ebfer-

ved that there were yet two th! ABS EG treat of, -

touching Spirits; that is, their Apparitions to Men,
and their Operations in the fame. Ie is’ upon this
fubjeét of Apparitions, that there is room to {peak
of Phantafms; which, according to the opinion of
the Papifts, are good and bad A nge ls, or Souls of
the deceafed, which h become viable, or which are
underftood without being feén ; either that they
{peak intelligibly, or that cn - make only fome
found and noife. There is yet this difference in
their Apparitions, that there are fome Souls, which
whether they manifeft themfelves vifibly, or whé-
ther they are only heard, work fome effects, where-

as there are others, that operate nothing. © Sciottis |

freely teaches us many things, which relatés to them,
that is, ~ Firft, in what places Specters chiefly ufed
to appear; Secondly, what Specters and Phantafms
are ; Thirdly what they act ; Fourthly, to whom
they particularly appear ; Fife ly, What means there
are to avoid them, and be rid of them.

Seët. 2. Thofe places where Phantoms appear,
Schottus perfaades himfelf, that there is no place ia
K 3 the

198 The World Bewitch à.

the World bur that may happen.. However, that
there are fome, where it happens more frequently
than ellewhere. As:

I. In Defaris. and in folitary places, he grounds
his opizion upon Scripture, Iai. 33. 14. <Apoc. 18.
2. Tob. 8, 3. Aad confirms it by the confideration
of that which hapned to our Saviour Jefus Chrift
himtelf, Sr Matthew, Chap. 4. St. Luke, Chap. 4.
fc is for this reafon that the good Sr. Anthony was
fo hardly dealt with in the Defart, by all forts of
Hobgoblings and Spirits, Pas. 226,

2. fone were in the humor alfo, to believe a
fart of Water Demons , our Author would ver
often make them ‘appear in Ponds and Marfhes,
Pag. 2279.6 *

3. ff the Pagans have hed, fince a long time,
Gods of the Groves, the Chriflians will not deny
but that there are fuch, for they fay that there are
particular Phantoms in Woods and Meadows,
Pag. 229.

4. When they are to fight any bloody Battle, or
after it has been fought, many Specters have often
been feen in the field of Battle, Paz. 230.

5. Phantafms often appear in- Baths and Stoves,
Pag. 232.

6. Which happens al{o in Fortreffes and Caftles,
Pag. 234.

7- In Mines and Caverns, as it has been faid be-
fore concerning Mountain Gods. Pag. 235.

8. There are feen more Apparitions in places
where Murderers and Thieves haunt, than in other
places. Pag..235.

9. Holy Cloyfters; Churches, and Temples of
God’s Worfhip, are not alfo exempted. Pag. 237.

As for me ,I am, very much perfwaded that there is 2

no place in the World, where there are more De-

lufions and Apparitions made, .or rather, deceitful
Vifions, than in chofe places. 10.

À ru
Ô
D Der
allur
Quk
Du #r
expla
but 0
dinar
Eng
by
they p
them
they {
and ;
rather
4 dy
Levi
ment P
this ¢
they
hime #
Ke ne
and fp
Hep
hfe
than th
leo,
er, he

The World Bewitch’d. 199

10. Soit is no marvel, that the fame happens to
every particular perfon in his Houle. Pag. 238.
Seé.3. If one asks,what it is that appears,or What:

 thefe Fantomes are, you will not fail to be imme-

diately fatisfied. Sometimes they are good Angels

but moft frequently evil Spirits, Souls of the de-

ceafed. However, in this. occafion there is faid
touching Angels. very little, and that very uncer-
tain ; fortaffis etiam Angeli boni ; fometimes perbaps
good Angels, fays Schotus. Pag, 247. But concerning
Demons he affirms very neatly, and with a great
affurance, that they are not all alike wicked. Be-

_caufe Phantafms are diftinguifhed in mites © terricos

Jeu truculentos 3 in good and cruel : that which is found
explained’ in the fame place by thefe words taken
out of Caffien, touching Jome unpure Spirits, a are or-
dinarily called Faunos, Faunes, Kabautermannakens, of
Hobgoblins > it # notorious that they delude Men, as
by way of [port and paftime, fo that in certain. places
they poft themfelves ordinarily in the way, and take

them up, however, without tormenting the pallengerss.

they are contented to laugh at them, and make raillery,
and play them fome pleafant pranks. And they feenv
rather to have a defign totire them, than to give them
any difpleafure. But it 5 alfo known, there are others

| foevil and focruel, that it does not Jatisfie them to tor-

ment People, and cruelly to tear them where they come,

( this ought to be underftood of the poflefed) But

they will attack thofe who pafs by, altko’ ‘at the fame:

time they are a great way off, and horribly treat them.

See one that fays he knows them very well himfelfs

and further, that no body is ignorant of it, he re-
lyes upon his own perfwafion, and does applaud
himfelf for it. Would it not be more mifchievous
than the WAl with a wisp himfelf, that fers upon
pafiéngers ‘to fufpect and confute his belief ? Hows
ever, heis but a little while to be quict, for we
K 4 cannot

GAL Of dots Be DLT 1
200 À be World Bewitch a.
Cannot avoid troubling him, and

4hiad 3 J

Error.
= pe TL re 2 à fe LH 4
Fourth. J ie Souls CG tne

deceafed “are either fav-
ed or damned,

it. is held for certain, thar thofe thar
ate happy, .are often ‘feen to appear to holy Men

tor their good, and thar they appear lil The

F4 EAN + 2 1" BEA 4% +7 st >| » = >
Legends CONT31N lan finite number of examples,
peri Pa : }
Wilich have ;

rom all, forts of Hifto-
re the leaft worthy of

thy Ë
happen in confequence of Covenants, that have been
ple in their life time, thar
is, When two or more have mutually promifed, thar
who fhould die firft, fhould appear to the other, and
come and tell him news of the eflare he was in,
whether in Purgatory or in Heaven. The Author
makes no doubt, bur the thing happens as it is
agreeds 3 buthe dares nor decide, whether fuch an
agreement be lawful, in which cafe he believes, it
mutt be made by a particular in{piration from God,
Pair
Sect. 5. There is no more doubt of the appari-
tions of Souls rhat are damned,and they are ground-
ed upon proofs of the fame certainty, as the former,
Schottus. repotts an example drawn from. Bencing
and Delrio, which appears fo ftrong and. convince-
dhg;that he exprefits himeif thus at the end: It. aa
ory which is confirmed by the belicf Seneraly. given.to
tr it 15° publickly in all Places, by many. Bocks, and by
& great number of letters, and the thing has happened
in the time and place mentioned. Iv is a Queftion to
know, if any thing may not be falfe, or-mixed with
any falliry, becaife it. has been publithed.along time
Withour being’ contradicted, either in word. or

writing ?

work,

wy
felf
be at
in 4
lave
not ¢
may,
Dear «
tioned
êttate
Parad
thole

kep It
f

O mid
Vert the
ito th
Takes

i Hey

writing >but it would be too long to treat upon
this Queftion here, ic will be proper in another
place. However, if this Hiftory be true, it mighr
confirm the fentiments of the Papifts, which fay,
That the Souls of the damned appear here upon
Earth to the living, to prefent to them, in a fright-
ful manner, the torments they {uffer in Hell, to the
end, they may bring them by that, to repent and
leave oft Sinning.

Seé, 6. Our Jefuit is too wife to {peak much himfelf
of Purgatory, he leaves that to others ; he held
neverthelefs with thofe of his Faith, That the Souls
of the deceafed defire often of the Living, the hélp of
their Prayers and good works, and that by confequence,
the Souls in whatfoewer place they may be, expeët thofe
that are entred into Heaven, or into. Hell appear te
Men, p.253. We fee that he will not much trouble
us with Purgatory, and inftead of perplexing him-
felf with a determin’d place, he choofes rather to
be at large, in placeing Souls in loco difpenfationis,
in a place of difpenfation ; fach as the Schoolmen
have forged ir, whofe Opinion, fome of ours find
not condemnable, in what place foever thofe Souls
may be, the Papifts believe:certainly, that they ap-
pear often to Men, ro the ends that have been men
tioned. It is alfo the common Opinion, that the
greateft part of the Souls, are rot thofe that are in
Paradife or in Hell ; but thofe that dwel between
thofe two piaces,or in Purgatory; for frequent jour-
neys from Heaven to Earth would too much difturb
the repofe. of the Souls; thar are there; and ‘Hell
keep’ its Captives too’ clofely confin’d, tole He them
fo much liberty ; and if it ‘be permiréd tie to dis
vert the publick, Ifhall fay, it would bring ro pro-
fit to the Churches Coffers, whofe fire of Purgatory
makes the pot boyl much better, then all the flames
of Hell do, or all the heat of the Celeftial fr.

K 5 Se,

The World Bewitch'd. 201

202 The World Bewitch d.

Seti. 7. If one would know what all thofe fas
toms do in the World, Schottus will not fail to in-
form you, and even to mark with a great deal of
care and exaétnefs, many différent manners, in
which they thew rhemfelves p. 269, €3c.

Firft, They appear to the fight under divers fi-
gures, as well of Men, as of Beatts, or frightful
Monfters.

Second. The Ears are often ftruck without feeing
any thing, and even fometimes in fach an extraor-
dinary manner, that it caufes aftonifhment and fear:
p.271.

Third. The touch has it’s fhare in it, if what the
Author fays be true, Thas they move them fometimes
to'touch Men without doing them any harm, bat at
other times, they puflo them fo, that they drive them
with violsnce, they make them fall down, bruise them
and beat them, that they even trouble them, and tempt
tLem to Letchery. p. 273.

Sed. 8. It is likewife Ineceffary to know’ that
which is written Concerning the figure ‘of bodies, in
which Phantafms appear, he fays, p. 287. That the
Abbot Trithemeus, Thyreus, Delrius, and others,
( whence it:apperrs;that it is the common Opinion, }

relate, Certain figns, by which one may know, if whe-
ther Spirits who prefent themfelves in a corporeal form,
are Angels or Men, good Angels or Devt!s-5 Souls of the
bleffedor damned 5 or Souls which are in Purgatory to
be purified there. However, he affords not a very
ample inftruction upon this point, for the chief mat-
cer chat he fays of it, is, That theSouls of the bleffed
appear with an Air of; contenc and: jay 3 that the
Souls which are in Purgatory have a more dolefat
countenance but chat thofe: of the damned, have
a more frightful afpect with figns of defpair. And
thd it be the common Opinion, that there are al-

ways fome defects,or fomething disfigured in the bo-
dy,

ÿ
itan
{for
| tain
whe
Lt
| Mit
prof
| awe
ng,
A thro

Lung t
mark
Sef
D out 2
À cold:
I Aly

OWn t
ng th
be fo,
tinal.
that hi
À that m
Cod

COnten

dy, in which the Devil prefents himfelf ; notwith-
ftanding, neither our Jefuir, nor Delrius, holds #
for certain; fee that which the firft puts for cer-
tain, and as generally believed, p. 291. Ie is that

when the Devil appears and ‘fpeaks, he always:

{peaks the language of the Country where he’is,
fo that he: muft underftand more languages than
Mithridates ; Or every Devil can appear bur in his
proper Country. But the voice of a Specter is
always perplex'd, trembling, weak, and as mutter-
ing, as thé it were underftood through a Tub, or
through the cheft ofan Earthen Veflel, for fays
Schottus, ‘The Devil can fpeak no better. See accord-
ing to this Author, and thofe of his belief, a good
mark to know him.

Seët. 9. We muft not omit that which is given
out as a thing certain, that a Phantafm feels always
cold when-one touches it, Cardan € Alexander ab
Alexandro, are witnefles, that affirm it, and Cajetan
gives a reafon, that he has learned from the Devil’s
own mouth, who being asked by a Witch concern
ing this fubject, anfwer’d, that the thing muft needs
be fo, and that ir could not be otherwife ; the Car-
dinal explained the words of the Devil ia this fenfe,
that he will not communicate ro a body he takes,
that: moderate heat which is fo agreeable, or'that
God» will) not permit. him. The Witch was

contented with that pofitive anfwer, without putting
the Queftion further. |

Seët, 10. : The Queftion now is to know; who’

they are which ofteneft fee Specters ? our Author
anfwers pertinently to this Queftion, p. 292. an
293. © And -his’ words deferve very. well to be re-
ported, as they are: The Souls which are in Purga-
tory. appear rather to the Faithful then to the Excom-
municated, or to Infidels; and ameng : thefe firft,
they appcar. rather -to their Parents, to their Ale
voi A Me StF

The World Bewitc bd. 29.3"

204 The World Bewitchal

les, and to thofe which belong to thems in any manner
whatfocutr, then they do to Strangers, becaufe that they
hope for fuccor from them, which they cannot hope from
others... The Souls of the. damned Appear particularly ta
thofe-which have been:the caufe of their lofs, and of the
torments they fulfer, .“X be-apparitions of.’ Devils are
made alfo with reference to the ruins of: thafe they
perfecute, and their il will for Mankind; whom
they take pléafure to torment: On the firft refpect,

thole who. are charged with a greater number of.

Sins have mofé:te fuser; in the fecond, the: moft:
VirtuousMien are the more expofed toitheir attacks.
Sedo 1... After-the Specters, lerus come to the
poiledlett, : refering the remedies. againft\ thefe two
accidents, to the following Chapter. That which
happens td the poffeft, gives occafion to know.more
particularly, what the Devil can a, Poffeffiing; fays
Schottus, 1% au. inevitable torment to Man fromthe Den)
vil, which in bis body, who aëts there; and keeps him.
in bes power for dycertain time: p 521. Which be:
unfolds more particularly afterwards, butas there
has been lattly publifhed, an Hiftory of the Devils
of Loudun: and.of, a; poffeffion. very #mons, . faid
to have happened. inthe Town, the ‘circumftances
of which, giyea greandeal of light )wpon’ this point,
we will alledge;thap which wilt be: proper fan chis
fabyect,referring a more ftri@ examination to.ourgth)
Book, which we fhall not-beafraid to do; nothwith-
ftanding the Author appears to be. a Proreftant, be:
eaufe than the moft parr of the ftories£ this Hiftor
contains, are gathered from many Ecclefiattick Boaks,
Wherecthey: are grounded: upon Authentiok publick:
acts 3. and thatthe pofleffion was declaredi)rrue by<a:
decree of theBifhop.In was al{o confirm'dby the blood:
of a Prieft, who. was execitted for a Magician, after
having been condemn'd:by-an aét'made by a fentence
of: Judges Commiffioner: fent by* the: French
King

SE

The World Bewkch à. 205
King, to examine this affair, fee then yet -what
Schottus fays. p. 533. Ce. |

Firft.. That a Man may be poffeft by all forts of
evil Spirits, of what order foever they‘may be, ‘for
it has been faid in the 19th'Ch. Se. 8. That the De-
vils‘are divided into'different orders, and the Hifto-
ry: of the Devils ”of Londur, fhews us, that
one Elizabeth Blancheard, {aid to be poñeft by fix Be-
vils 3 by 4ftaroh and the coal of uncleannefs, by’ the
order of Angels ; by Be/zebub and‘ the Lion of Hel,
of the order of “Archangels ; by Pero and Mirou,
of theorder:of Cherubins. p.255, > eu

Seconds. ‘That all perfons of what Sex; Age, Côn-
dition, or Religion foever they thay bé, whatfo-
ever kind of life they-lead, either good or bad, may
be pofleft’ by Devils.

Third. Althô themoft part are poffeft without
their confent; and-in {pightr’of them, by evil Spi-!
rits, : itis beleved,: fometimes, that there ate fome
which: confent: to it, ‘there’ are thofe totwhom are
attributed Spirits of ‘Pzthon, who divine by ! means
of the Devil. Schottus p. 550. |

Seët: 12: This Author explains ro us more pre=
cifely, in what manner the’ Devil “enters into Men,
and: how ‘he works. ©’ onic a mY Os

Poft.-Granting he can cloath all ferts’ of bodies:
asihé-pleafes, ‘and according ‘48 God permits him,
he*ean/ fometities go and come, entérinto Man, and
come out invifibly, and fometimes, alfo vifibly and
under the figures of fmall Beafts, or infes,as Ants,
Fries, Spiders, or under: thofetittle birds. Thisiis the
commonOpinions of Popifh writers,althoSchortas is Poe
very much for it? p’ 539. But he-is in the wrong, ‘for
hefe’s a proof,-at leaft, as to his inviGble going injand”
coming out, in the Hi/tory ‘of ‘the Devils of Lous"
dun ; where it is faid, that a Devil called Bihemot;'
being gone out to feek anew Covenant, the. euar«
dian

206 The World Bewitch’d.~

dian Angel of the Nun that he poffeft, feized up-
on him and bound him for a Month, under the
Picture of St. Fofeph inthe Church, p. 405. And
that this Religions fancyed, as tho I know not what
fhould have gone out from her head; which remov-
ed from her, as the Devil retired farther ; and after-
wards the Devil himfelf declared, that after having
been tied in his body not to part from. it, he had
at prefent, as well as his companions, the liberty of
coming too and fro. p. 408. |

: Second. Schottus howevever agrees, that evil Spi-
rits give to the poffeft, the faculty of {peaking ftrange
languages that they never learned, and of reyealing
fecrets, which they could not know of :themfelves.
?- 540. Soit is thatthe Nunof Loudun {poke La-
tin the beft he could,affuring that fhe had never learn-
ed it. Hiftory of the Devils of Londun. And. fo it is
that the Demons difcovered to the Jefuir Surin, fe-
cret matters, in histhought or in his-perfon>x#i 273.
or that they Went, to kifs the right, hand of one of
the exorcifts, for that the Duke of Orleance had {fo
defired it, and had declared his defire to another

exorcift. p. 297.Upon which one of them hath wtir..

that the Devils anfwered often to interrogatories,
made to them by the exorcifts, without exprefling
them otherwife thea by the inferior direction of their
thoughts, p. 104. See there the laft-effort of Divi-
nation to divine thoughts hidden,and in no ways-ex-
prefled.

Third. Schottus fays in other places, that the prin-.

cipal operations of the Devil, are made:in the bo-
dy “of the poffeft, and that they art little or nothing

upon the Soul 5, and rhat.for this reafon, they cannot,
make a Man loofe his Faith, nor Hope, nor Chari-;

ty. p. 534. But the Devil Ifzacarum who knew

more of it then our Author, fays, that Bebemert had .
not only vex'd Fob in his body, but that he had alfo’

troubled

t

SS —

The World Bewitch'd. 207

troubled his Soul: and thatit is for this reafon,thae
he finned not in all that he faid : Hiftory of the De-
vils of Loudun. Pag, 374.

Seé.13. See what the Dévil can do, and what he
does very often, according to the opinions of the Ro-
man Catholicks ; be it that he makes ufe of the Mini-
{try of Men in thefe occafions, or that he ufes them
not ; thofe that he imployes in his Miniftry, are
called Sorcerers, Enchanters, and Magicians. Tis
ftedfaftly believed, thar thofe People have given
themfelves to the Devil, and have covenanted with
him, and figned- it with their own Blood ; That
the Devil on his part is obferved to do all they
defire during the courfe of their life, and that the
Magicians on their part give themfelvés to the De-
vil, and put themfelves into his poffeffion all their
days, or for a certain time that they have mutual-
ly agreed together. If you would fee an example
very particular of fuch a contract, you need but
read the Hiftory of the Devils of Loudun, Pag. 271.
but you cannot read it without being amazed. The
Magicians, in confequence of their Covenants, are
to enjoy a great deal of pleafure, which will be
procured to them by the Devil, to do agreat deal
of mifchief to others, and caufe a great deal of
damage to their Cattle, and to their other Goods,
Their pleafure confifts in folemn Affemblies, which
are held inthe night in places the Devil appoints,
and where he appears in all forts of Figures :
there they dance, drink and eat in excefs, and the
Men and Women mix themfelves carnally toge-
ther, and with the Devil himfelf, who for that
purpofe, fometimes transforms himfelf into a Man,
fometimes into a Woman. The Wizards and
Witches are tranfported thro the’ Windows,to places
where they affemble, by virtue of a certain Oint-
ment they anoint themfelves with; they ride

mounted

208 The World Bewitch'd.

mounted upon the Devil, as upon a Horfe, for
he is obliged to ferve them; and for this pur-
pofe he transforms hünfelf into a Goat, or
fome other Animal. ‘ Sometimes there are in
thofe Affemblies, ftrange Sacrifices, for the Hiftory
of the Devils of Loudun writes, Pag.153. That they
force the Devil Leviathan to furrender a Contract
written upon the flefh of the Heart of an Infanr,
taken in a Sabbat,; held at Orleans, and of the Afhes
of a burnt Ho/?. |

Se&. 14: The diforders that they caufe to Men,
are to’ mifchief their perfons, or their Cartle, to
ftir up Tempefts, to fpoil the Corn of the field,
to breed Difputes, to difturb the Society of Men,
by a thoufand means; fome times they do good
with an eye to proper advantage ; for fome Money
they difcover things loft; they declare if one is be-
witch’d, or if not, and by whom it has been ; they
teach what muft be done to cure them that are fo,
or shey cure them themfelves. Of this, Bodin in his
Book, : intituted Demonamania fhall fully ‘inftruct,
the reader,that will take the pains to read him.For
no Authors are more large upon that fubject, than
he and Delrio. In the mean while we will look
into their Sentiments, related by Schotus, more
plainly than in their own Books.

Seët, 15. He defines this unlawful Magick, upon
which fubjeét the Reader will not forget the di-
ftinction heretofore made, Chap. 4. Sect 2. & 7.
A Power by which Man works certain wonders, which
furpafs ordinary Underftanding, which # done, not by
any Art, nor by the force of his proper Faculties, nor by
the-application of natural Caufes, but by the affifi-
ane of tha Devil, by virtue of an agreement made
with him, Mag. Univerfe. Pag. 1. Lib. 1. in Proleg.
Chap. 7. he eftablifhes thefe forts of Covenarts as

certain, diftinguifhing them into two kinds ; thofe
: which

The World Bewitcha. 209
which are made .exprefly with intention, and of
deliberated purpofe 5 And thofe which are tacitely
made, .But.we fhall. hereafter hear Sennertus ex-
plaining, himfelf more. at large upon this: fobject.
However, we find inthe fame place, as well as in
Schotus’s Books this Maxime eftablithed as certain,
Quod Magice hujus vm omni nititur pablo, vel tacito
vel, expreflo cum Demone, ut probat Delrius, &c.
That all the force of thx Magick, depends on an a-
greement made tacitely or exprefly with the Devil, ag
Delrius proves it, &c..

Sef. 16. This Author fays further, That from the
confideration of the ends the Magicians have, viz. to
att marvelous things by the Devils power, chiefly pro-
ceed three forts of Witchcraft ; for they bave fometime's,
no other end but to acquire the Art and Induftry of
producing miraculous effets for their proper advantage
or, pleafure x or that. of others: they fometimes endea~
vour to difcover things to come, or to know things paf?,
and fuch prefent as are fecret and hidden, and cannot be
difcovered by any buman power ; fometimes they have
no other end but to acquire the Power, the Art, and the
Means to hurt Men. This is not the place to tell
what the Papifts believe Magicians are able to-do;
and what in effect they do; becaufe,: in the prece-
ding Chapter, one has feen what is the power that
Popery attributes to the* Devil, who are likewife
capable to effect by the Miniftry of Men, that is to
fay, of Wizards and Witches, according to the con-
ditions of their Leagues, all that they effect them-
felves. Ê

Sett. 17. It will not be, however, befides the pur-
pole, to cite Bodin, who tells you in very precife
terms, the Second Book , Chap. 4. how Men exprefly
make Leagues with the Devil. And I grant that if
it be true, that they are fuch as he fays, I am ob-
liged to hold with him 3 thefe People for the moft

execrable

210 The World Bewitch'd.

execrable. of all Men, fince they renounce God and bi
worfhip, if they are in the Communion of the Church;
or that they abjure their Faith, if they acknowledge
20t the true God, or if they are of fome particular Seët,
and ingaged in Super{titions, which 5 done in an ex-
prefs Covenant, to acknowledge the Devil, and to adore
none but him. He adds a little after, Sometimes the
exprefs Obligation # but verbal, and without any wri-
ting s but Jometimes it 5 allo confirmed by writing.
fpr the Devil refolving to be fire of them who feek him
fre be propofes any Covenant between him and them,
he makes them give a promife in writing ( if they can
write ) and fign it with their own Blood. He adds,
further, that this obligation is made either for two,
years, or for a longer time ; And as if the Devil
feared that thofe that ave wholly obliged to him, fhould
come to retract thy, he is not contented to make them
renounce God in terms very precife 3 but befides, he

wakes an smprefficn upon them,

The World Bewitch'd.
G H A XXI

That feveral means are pratiifed againft Attacks, and
the Illufions of the Devil and Magicians.

Sed, D | Know not whether I muft put the reft I

have to fay upon the account of the Pa=

pifts only, there being but very few of our Profef
fion who do not believe it as they do, as I thall thew
in the next Chapter. I fhall report only in this,
what means Popery affords to avoid all forts of De-
vils and Specters, and todivert them from us. The
Firft means confifts in the refiftance, which is fuffi-
cient againft their Malice. The Second, confifts
in the finding out of thofe that are guilty of thefe
Abominations. And the Third,in the Punifhments that

thefe People are thought to deferve. Schottus thall

furnifh me-with that which I have to fay touching
the firft of thefe means: And I fhall take from other
Writings what I am to relate concerning the fecond

and third, to which I fhall joyn that which may be

> learned by experience.

Seët. 2. Our Author, who warrants that which he
fays, rejeCts divers means, and eftablifhes many
others ; we muft hear him as. well upon thofe
which he rejects, as thofe he eftablifhes. See thefe
he rejects,

1. Malignant Injuries and Outrages never drive

away Spirits, but fome infulring terms that are
| made ufe of in Exorcifins, which have been intro-
| duced into the Church, contribute very much to
expel them, pag. 304,

2, Nei-

212 The World Bewitch' d,

>, Neither Pike nor Sword, nor any other fort
of Arms will oblige them to retire, pg. 305:

3. Neither Fire nor Light that are not Confe-
crated, have any virtue for this purpofe, p. 308.

4. Neither willthey withdraw, though they find
the Doors and Windows open before them, 14308.

5. Lhough ’tis the Opinion of many People, who
are of the Author’s Profeffion, that Spirits may be
driven away by Smoak, by Perfumes, by certain
Herbs, and by Blows with Stones, they hold never-
helels, That no natural Virtue that may be an mate-
rial Subjeëts, can aët direëliy upon Spirits, and that
by confequence there are no fenfile fubjests, fuch as
thofe (as have been juft now mentioned) which may air
ways expel Spirits from the places where they are, nor
drive them far from Men, pag. 308. and 312,

Sef. 3. On the contrary, he holds that the means:
following are abfolutely effective.

1. At firft he ftablithes two, againft which there
is nothing to fay; which are, a ftedfaft Faith, and
an ardent Prayer, p. 214, 215. for they are conform
to the Maxims of Scripture. Tha fort of Devils can-
not be caft ouf but by Prayers and Faftings, S# Matth.

2. But he eftablifhes five others, which are in-
vented purely by Popery.  Firft, The Relicks of
Holy Bodies; or, to fay better, of thofe who are
raken for fach. Secondly, The Sigh of the Crofs.
Thirdly, Holy Water. Fourthly, 4gnus Dei, that
is, the Lamb of God, imprinted upon a little round
figure of Wax, and confecrated' by the Pope. They
have, fays Schoftus, a ready virtue and. efficacious,
virtutem preftantifimam, 10 put the Devil to flight,
p.322 Fifth; Fo pronounce the name of Fefis, and
to call upon the Virgin Mary his Mother, p. 324+
All thefe means are explained, every one in parti-
cular, in the fame place. They are al{o Saige

ut

The World Bewitchy d, 213

but a little more abridged, although in the fame
fenfe, by Fobn Davidi, Jefuit, in his Book Intituled,
the Buckler, printed at Balduc, in the year 1610.
I fhall report his own Words, left the Roman Ca-
tholicks fhould-accufe me of impofing upon them:
‘See what he writes in the roth Chapter. Among ft
the Confecrated things which bave power again? the am-
bufhes of the Enemy, we muft tank thefe here. Holy
Water, which 15 every Sunday confeorated in the Church,
and has its name from that Confècration. The Bap-
tifmal Water that à Confecrated on the Vigils of Rafter
and Whitfuntide. The Holy Water,rhat à called Grè-
gory Water, that the Bifhops confecrate with § alt, Afhes,
and Wine, therewith to confecrate Altars, and for other
Holy Ufes. The Candels that ave wont to be Confecra-
ted upon the Feafts of the Purification, The Branches
Corfecrated on Palm-Sunday ; Every one of thefe operates
its effect in being ufed in the fame manner that they
have been Confecrated, befprinkling with Water, light-
ing of Candles, and putting or planting the Branches in
fome particular place. The Agnus Deïs that are worn
about the Neck, or other places, according to the vene-
ration due to them, being Confecrated by she Pope him-
Self, have alfo a Soveraign virtue to keep the Chriftian
from the Snares, and from all the evil defigns of the
Enemy, or to preferve him by Sea and Land, from Fire
or Water, and all other Perils. The fign of the Crofs
is alfo of a Marvellous ufe on thefe occafions Ste
being the Chriftians Duty to be always ready to make
again all the Temptations the Enemy can give them,
as well within as without. The. Church makes a prof
table ufe of it in all its Confecrations, fn its Bleffings,
an the Adminiftration of the Holy Sacrament 5 but efpe-
‘cially in the Exorcifms of Evil Spirits, and inthe Con-
jurations which are made upon People tormented by
them: «ll which things are prastifed to refift the Wiles
and

214 ‘The World Bewitch'd.

and Mifchiefs of the Devil; and to repulfe bis Attacks,
to weaken bis Force, and deftroy hy Power.

Seé. 4. The Reman Church alone, according to

this Author, has the power to ufe effectually thefe
means, which it-calls Spiritual. For fee what he
fays, Al that which x not efficacious of it felf, nor by
fome natural Virtue, nor by the Inftétution and Power of
God, both which are found in the Sacraments ; nor by
thé Ordinance of the Church, which atts but according
to the Word of God, and by the Virtue he communicates
to her : All that, 1 fay, which à not efficacious by fome
one of thefe means, from which alone the Remedies im.
ployed in any occafion whatfoever can draw their force ;
if one dares undertake to make ufe of thefe things, and
to apply them for Remedies, it 5 an aëtion bafely Super-
féitious and oppoñte to the Will of God and his Word.
Afterwards he begins the 11th Chapter in thefe
Terms, As to the Sacred Word, whofe power affects
the Enemy, the Exorcifms, or the Conjurations which
are ordain d by the Church, have a particular Virtue:
Such ave the Exorcifms that are made ufe of by the
Ritual of Rome, and thofe that are found in the Ma-
nual made for the Archbifhoprick of Malines, feen and
approved by the Dottors of the Univerfities of Lovain.
If one has the curiofity to fee all thefe Doctrines re-
duced into practice, he needs but Read the Hiftory
of the Devils of Loudun, ~ which has been already
cited, where he will fee from one end to the other,
the ufages of the Roman Church concerning Conju-
rations and Exorcifms, which are unknown to all
other Religions, and of which thofe that read them
have caufe to be furprifed.

Seé. 5. See how they proceed to find out the
guilty, and particularly in Germany. I is fufficient
only to have the reputation of being a Sorcerer,
and you are affoon imprifoned, and interrogated 5

if you deny it, you are put tothe Torture, éyen two
or

ort

own
time
the
cry,

|: Gr
| Dew
| told
je Lem
not
1 crit
| ne 4

the]

lieye
| fden
loft

thing

rena

1 meq
1 {on

| cam
| Dei
J take
1 ake
| for to
Mon
| the Ë
| nets, |

thy ty

| Ra
Lo

red in

| ROC
| vids te
À "hich

| ie an
| 2y)

The World Bewitch d, 215

er three times ; if you confefs,

own Sentence, even of Conde

time fince they take fora mar

the Accufed being in the ha

cry, Which proof was found
urate that was burnt at

Devils of Loudun, &c. Pag.

told him, Precipio ut fi fis

I command you to fhed tears

not having done, they rep

crime, that he fhed no te

nor after having Juffered it,

the Exorc

mmers of the Rack 208,

d gave bim others, Pag. 205,

| he was fhaved al over,and fearched to find out theDevil’s
marks upon bis Bedy, Pag. 130. Butnotto be decei-
| ved in the judgment,that thal! be made of the crime,:

or of the innocence of the Accufed ; the Feluit Da-
| vids reports four Principal manners of making proofs,
which is to the Putpofe to mention here. They

ufe a red hot Iron, hoc Water, or cold Water, and
| 2 Ballance. |

Se&,

216 The World Bewitch'd.

Se&. 6.1 find the three firft means in the firft
Book of the defcription of America, of A Mountanus
which appears to be taken from Boxhboornews, thus
they are related: “The Ordallia ( which # the name
given to this way of proof ) was Preached in the Low-
Countries after this manner, when any was accufed for
not being a good Catholick; or of being a Sorcerer, be

fafted three days, in the fight of the Prieft, at the end :

of which, he went to Church, the Prieft cloathed in his
. facredotal Habits,put upon burning Coals near the Altar,
an Iron wedge befprinkled with Holy Water. He Jung
theSong of the threeChildren in the fiery Furnace,he faid

Mas, be put the Hoft in the mouth of the accufed, and”

prayed toGod that it would pleafe him to difcover the crime
of Magick, of which be was fufpetted,-1m Suffering that
his Hand iniwhich be was puting the red bot Tron, might
be burnt, or that be might not receive any hurt, if be
were innocent: Thefe Prayers being finifhed, the accuf-
ed was to go nine fleps in carrying the burning “Iron in
bi Hand, after which the Prieft wrapt up has Hand, and
feal’d the covering that was. put to 15. The third day

he took. off the feal to confider his Hand, whether ip eA

found and without wound, otherwife the unhappy acct ed
had but to refolve to bebirnt alive all covered withPaper;
painted all over with Devils. |

Se. 7. ‘The Ketelvang was, 70 lefs painful,
they. had in the Church a Caldorn full of boyling
EVater, upon which they bad made the molt terri-
ble’ Conjurations, that can be imagin'd, after which,
+0 come to the convittion orto the jujtification of the ac~
cüfed, he was.obliged to put his Arm naked up to the el-
bow, in the boyling Waters ds hot~as ceulà be, "This

ufage muft be very’ Ancient,Añd proceeded from Paga

nifm, according to that which has been remarked
hereupon, touching the Ancients, Chap. 3. Sect. 18.
Ses, 8. We have a little more knowledge of the

proof by cold Water, which has been more com”
mon

I more
| fed L
| fall.
{as |
PA 4
ter.
| phe
| great
[ren
[he ma
1 the me
| Se
| which
Duteb
Jed ing
| Bion
fay
1 fice «|
Hof the
ft int
futell
Aer wri
Boater t
fa lit
lence if
(ef
| ken pu
Not
| la thy
Ars,

| Pints of
Pde,

heir Bog
tin:
D Co,
mel th
4 i | I

The World Bewitch ds 217

more common than the others, and has been practis
fed long ago in the Weft of England, of which we
fhall have occafion to {peak hereafter. Montanus
has made likewife a fhort defcription of it. Is
was alfo cuftomary to make ufe of a proof by cold wa-
ter.in Canals, Brooks and Ditches; the Prieft conjured
the Water, ke tyed the Thumb of the accufed to hrs
| great Toe, one upon another in form of a Crofs, and
| ébrew him in to the water; if he funk to the bottom,
be was declared innocent ; but if be was buoÿ d up om
| the water, he was condemned as guilty,
| Sect. 9. There is as yet a more particular proof,
| which is practifed in Holand, althô, rot upon the
| Dutch themfelves, but upon ftranger, that are weigh-
| ed ina Ballance. The Papi? inhabitants of the
| Bithoprick of Munfter, Cologne, and Paderborne, and
» | Many other more diftant places have made ute,
: I) fince the time of the Emperor Charles, to this day,
| of the publick weights of the Town D'Oudewa-
}fer in this fame Province. It is what I am going
| to tell you more precifely by the contents of a Let-
ter written by one of the Bourgomafters of Oude
| water to a friend of his, and related at the beginning
of a little Book, entituled (Sure means rot to pals [en-
tence of death unjufth. ) The Bourgomafter {ays
| chiefly in his Letter, an{wering to queftions that had
[been putto him: That all thofe that came from that
Country for this purpole, urarimoufly complain'd,
+, WtPat they had been unjuftly accufed of Masick in thetr,
. | Country, and that if they were fo unhappy as not to find.
| proofs of their innccence in the weights of the Town of
[Oudewater, with which it was neceflarily required,
their Bodies fhould be in equal weight, for their jufter.
fication; they ran a darger upon their return of loofing.
their Life and Eftaie: Becaufé the common belief of
that Country #, that thofe, who weigh lefs than the
pweight that  pitagainft them into the other part of the
| < j L | ballance,

218 The World Bewitch d.

balance, ( fuch as agreed upon, as will be prefently feen)
are undoubtedly Sorcerers. The Burgomatter adds, that
the late Secretary Hoy had told him, that in hy time
there wasa certain Inhabitant of the upper Country,
who having bad a difference with one of bis Compans~
ons, be caufed a difcourfe thro’ the Country, that the
other was a Wizard: Some advifed thx pretended Sor-
cercr to go into Holland, and'to be weighed with the
weights of Oudewater, to the end he might take off,
by this means, the calumny. He goes thither, but whe-
ther out of flupidity, imprudence, or fear, or for not
being well informed of what muft be prattifed, be re-
turned into Fis own Comtry without being weighed,
They did not failto aske him whether be bad undergone
thy Tryal, which be could not fhew 3 upon which fufps-
cions being increcfed, it was believed he was found too
dight, and that be was guilty. The difcourfe being come
to the Ears of the Fudge of the place, he gave order to
take bim up 3 but be fled, and, was concealed with a per-
fon to whom had bappen'd very near the like adventure,
“pho advifed himto return to Oudewaters and indeed
they went thither together. The accufed was weighed
in the Scales of the Town, and returning into his Coun-
dry, brought with him, at thes time, all the Certificates
of the proof he had undergone, : And then be . was
xe-eftablifhed into his good Fames and by Eftate that
mas feized ly the Fudge, was reflored to bim,
Scé.10. Upon the fecond Queftion which was made

4 the Burgomafter of Oudewater, he an{wered, That |
Phere to fix d weight for to weigh peaple > but they |

look upon their bulk, and at fight they proportion the
weight to ir. Upon the Third demand,to know where
this practice had taken its Original; He anfwered,

that he could difcover nothing of it. - But that never-|
thelefs,it appeared from all thefe matters of faët, thaty

ihe bai ce of the Town of Oudewater 55 in reputation

in the Country, « has been fhcken of, to produce thisef=

we:

- fall

be wm
Hs
| fay
| gate
gave
of
vere
neg
lick

Aut
uel
the J
lof
| dm
name
Year
welp
learn
a8 y

Se
ine’
| Wit
| Germ
celve
| 19 lat
Ifthe
| indy
| fon,
| they

| et

The World Bewitch'd. 219

fee, fo that there are often perfons that come thither to
be weighed, who have brought particular recommenda-
tions from the Town or Country they lived in, They
fay further, that the Emperor Charles the Fifth
gave this Privilege to'the’ Town of Oxdewater ,
gave becanfe of the faithfulnefs that is made ufe
of upon this: occafion ; and becaufe they had difco-
vered a certain Cheat, which was practifed in the
neighbouring Village. However, it is but a pub-
lick difcourfe, and without certainty.

Sect. 11. I approve very much the judgement the
Author makes of this practice, but ‘tis a thing I
‘ought not to fay here, to the end, not to create in
the Mind of any, prejudice upon the fubject I treat
of. However, this fame Author which has furnifh-
ed me with all this Relation, and has not put his
name but by N. B. 4. fays, That during two
“years that he has lived at Oudewater, they have
weighed many perfons for the fame purpofe. Ihave
learned likewife fince, that this ule ftill continues
as yet, and pretended Sorcerers are there fill.

Sei, 12. There are aeemany things to {ay touch-
ing the punifiment inflicted upon Wizards and
Witches in Popifh Countries, more éfpecially in
Germany. It being undeniable, and generally, re-
ceived, that they déferve to be burned alive sie
is rarely feen that they are treated with lef rigor,
Ifthe number of thofe which have loft their lives
in divers places, and at divers times upon this occas
fion, might be brought together, atid putin Arms,
they would be more than fuficient to deftroy the
enemy of the Chriftian name, and entirely deftrôy
its Empire. We thalf make this examinarion in dur
Third Book, and the review of the proceedings of
the Magicians, to which the fame Treatile of Sure
means, &c. will be of great nie,

L 2 CHAR

The World Bewitch d.

HG AiPe KXIB 08

“tha: neither the Opinions that are received among us
“nor our Praëtices go wfualÿ fo far 3 and that as tor
‘shat reafon, that out Authors are not found to agree fo
well together, upon this fubject. pers ibe

ty

J willat prefent leave, the Papitts, and:pals 10: tke
“À Proreftants, whole Religion and. Doctrine is
more pure. They {fer not themfelves to {ray fo

much as others, about the matter ixhand;for neither

believing Purgatory, nor admitting the invocation

of Angels -and deceafed, Saints, they cannot Jdike-
. wife agree in their Opinions with the. Papifts, con-
cerning apparitions and the operations ofSpirits,more

_efpecially in relation. to thefe two points; and the
-canfequences that. are neceflarily drawn from, thence,
“when they are admitted, . However it muit be ob-
ferved, that the belief and practices of the Luthe-

-yans upon this fubject, come much nearer thofe of
Popery,than the belief of the People of ourCommu-
nion.. It as allo. to. be confidered, that there is
‘among the Proteftants in general, a great, deal of
difference between the common: People and. the

“earned 3 it is true, that there is likewife to be dif-
covered fome. difference between thofe. two kinds
of People, among the Papifts, and even among the
Pagans. There appears no lefs among the Men of

Lertersin puticular, fome holding. the common

belie? znd helping it; others rejecting it, .and others

atleaft taking a kind of a medium. between thofe

two

| and’

two f
| who!

Speû

b burt

nati
we a
find
that

april

| be ne

andt

| ion

Ing |

Sef

| deal
Wire
I leve

bepi

| bavi
| Bar:

he 19

Occaf
4 bi

1 actroi

} andy

he a4
every

The World Bewitch'd. wh

two parties ; fo there are found among us People
who believe almoft all that is faid of Witchcraft and’
Specters. There are others, who deny all moft all,
but the greateft part, partly admit that which is ordi-
narily faid, and partly reject it. That being fuppofed,
we muft ftill underftand with relation to this di-
ftinction, what I have to fay in this work touching
that of the reformed Religion. But however, to
abridge my difcourie rather than extend it, it will
be neceflary, firft to propofe the common Opinion
and the ordinary practice ; and afterwards: the Opi-
pion of People the moft fenfible, and the moft think-
ing part. 3

Seët.: 2. We frequently heat People make a great
deal of difcourfe concerning Apparitions,Phantomes,
Witchcraft, and ‘things ofthat’ nature. : It is be-
lieved in general, that Angels fiave ‘been’ from the
beginning all. created by God; of which one part
having revolted ‘againft him, are become Devils.
But afterwards continuing to {peak of the Devil,
he is fpoken of as fingly as the Enemy of Mankind, |
and chiefly of the faithful, hunting’ continually after
occafions of doing ill. There is evety ‘where had
a high “Opinion of his underftanding; power, and
action; he is conceived,’ or at leaft {poken of as one, :
and yet they make him to be prefent in all places,
he acts-every where; he {pies and ‘fets his Hand to ~
every thing. Til explain this here fomething more
particularly.

: Se&. 3.» They atrribute to hin fuch an extraor-
dinary: knowledge, that ‘tis pretended he under-
ftands better: all the:myfteries of the Gofpel, than
all the moft learned and moft underftanding Divines, —
that he obferves all our thoughts,’ that he mixes -
with and acts upon them, from him proceed appari-
tions, and prefages,by which Men are advifed of fa-
ture things, before they. happen to them, more par- ~

ited L 3 ticularly

| 222 The World Bewitch'd.

ticularly when they are threatned with the death of
fome of their friends, or. fomeiother evil accident.
it is believed further, that a, Divine may declare
where one fhall find-whar is loft, whether-a Man is

ewitchd, and who is the Author of the mifchief,
and, what means there are to deliver him and many
other fuch like things.

Sed, 4... The Opinion of the power of the De-:
vil, has been doubtlefs urged to excefs, for neither
God nor Jefus Chrift have ever done any thing great
or‘marvellous but the People afcribe to the Devil, I
have fhewn before in fome manner, Ch. 18. Seër. 6.
That thofe thoughts proceeded: from the Manichees.
When God permits him he can appear to Men in all
forts of figures, not only: in thofe of good and bad
Men living or Dead, but alfo in-thofe of feveral”
Beatts ; from this.fame principle comes the belief
that is ftill in being, that wicked debauched Peo-
ple transform themfelves.alfo by the power of the
Devil, making ufe of means defigned. for this pur-
pole, into many fhapes of Beafts, as of Wolves, but
particularly into that of Cats, and beingxfo tranf-
figured they pafs though the quarrel of a glafs win-
dow,or the hole of a, Bell, to go in the night to the
Sabat,as I have already. faid.; or rather they ride on
Horfeback upon a ftick up the Chimney,and this be-
lief to this time cannot be rooted out’ among
us,from the mind of thePeople; further it'is imagined,
that thefe fame People may, with the cooperation of
the Devil, ftir up tempefts,fhut the wind up into a
Handkerchief, and let it out when they will, which
however is feldom attributed but to the Laplanders
and to Finlanders, to which the ftories that are
made of their- practices, have given occafion, “fo
great is the credulity of the People, even for the
moft abfurd thing 3. they perfwade themfelves alfo,
that thefe People devoted to the Devil, learn of

hina

—

The World Berwitch'd. ang

him the fecret of making certain oyntments; by
which they make themfelves invulnerable againit
Swords or Mufquets ; and that they obtain likewile.
great many other advantages from their Mafter.
Se&. 5. It is not doubred but leagues are made
between the Devil and Magicians, by which means
all thefe accident happen; People are even perfwad-
ed of the effect of the proofs by Water, into which
the accufed are thrown, and of a great Many other-
like things; above all of the nfefulnels of the advice
the exorcifts give, as that endeavouring to caule the
perfon bewitch’d, to be bleft by him that has done
the mifchief, which is held for an remedy in-
fallible ; if the pretended Sorcerer refufes to doit,
he may be forced toit by blows, and by violencies
Another remedy is to bake fome certain things in
fome certain Pot, for a certain number of hours,
to a certain hour of the Day or Night. The
guilty is forced by this means, to come to the houle,

and confequently make himfelf known, or the be-

witch’d perfon {wallows what has been baked, or
carries fomthing abour his Neck, or hanging upon
his Breaft. In fhort there are a thoufand other things
which would be unprofitable and tedious to re-
late.

Sef. 6. The ufe that is made of all thefe Opini-
ons, and the confequences that are drawn from them,
are to attribute to the infpirations and {follicitations
of the Devil, all rhefe extraordinary events, and al-
moft all the fins that are committed, efpecially, thofe
that are moftenormous. If a fudden tempeft arifes,
and that there is fome* inour company who is not
very much our friend, and is a little fufpected
of being a Witch, we do not fail of imputing to
him this diforder. If any one gives a little Cake,
a Sugar plum, an Apple, or other fruit to a Child,
who comes very fuddainly after to fall into a lan-

L 4 guifhing

224 The World Bewitch'a,
guifhing condition for a long time, he thar hasmad®
this prefent is immediatly fufpeéted of having be-
witched the Child, and the meansare made -ufe of
as we have told you before, as a proof to difcover
the truth; if the Child recovers prefently after
the tryal, it is no more doubted, but that the
difeafe was the effet of Witchcraft, and that
‘the fufpition againft the Magician was well ground-
ed. a

Seéi..7. T have fpoken hitherto of the Opinions
and practices of the common People only, I fhall

now fhow, that which our Doctors. and—our Men -

of letters believe upon this point. There are none
fo’crednlous as the Vulgar ; however there is a
very confiderable difference to be feen in their Opi-
nions, fome believing almoft every thing, and others
almoft nothing atall. Thefe two Opinions fo diffe-
rent, ought to be atrributed to two Scots; ro the one
an IWuftrious King of Great Brittain, which is, Keng
Fames, the Sixth King of Scotland, and Fir ft King
of England of that name; and the other, to.one of
bis Scotch Subjects, a Scot by birth .as by name;
being call’d Reynard Scot; the King held the affir-

mative as to the popular Opinion of Witchcraftand -

Apparition of Spirits, which his fubject had already
confuted. Fohn Wierus who lived in the begining. of
the Reformation made by means of Luther andCalvin,
had from that time publifhed his Opinion upon the
delufion of Spirits,and upon the impoftures of Witch-
es, and he had taken a parc which held in the mid-
dle between thofe two Opinions ; fo King Fames in
his Book of Demonolozy contefted with thefe two Au-
thors, according to his exprefs Declaration in the
P: eface.

Se&. 8, What is moft important in his Book
comes very near to this. In the fixth Chapter .of
the firft Book, there are defcriptions fo exact of

leagues

| leg

teen
nal,
ht
put
tro
the

fA

lever
pery

| op
} this |
- have
1 Wir
1 hes :
| Bock
D Pring
Suey

felve

À Me

that}

port
crie
that
mite
tt a

Lhe World Béwitch a. 225
Ecagues that Magicians make with the Devil, that it
feems as_if the King himfelf had feen the
nal, or that they had been reported in the Council.
In the fourth Chapter of the fecond Book, the King
puts for certain, that evil Spirits may carry Men

through the Air, or afflume divers forms, to vifr.

the Magicians, when they are in Prifon.
feventh Chapter, he’ fays,
pery and Paganifm, there was a grear many more.

In. the

Apparitions ; butthat it was obferved, that fince.

this laft Reformation of the Chriftian Church, there
- have been fewerApparitions, and a great many more,

Wirchcrafts.Concerning the apparitions ot Hobgob-

ins and Phantoms, of which he treats in the Third
Book,’ there are fcarce any kind
Prince ‘gives: not credit, even to Incubuffes and.
Suceubuffes, which are Spirits,who, as Men,mix them-
{elves carnally with Women, and as. Women with
Men. In reference to the poñeit, the King agrees:

that the Popifh Prieft may drive out the Devil; bur.

upon the ‘proofs that he has to convince one of the
crime of Magick,he only faysthere muft be no lefs
than twélve witnefles, amongft which may be ad-
mitted, ‘Infants, infainous People, and even thofe
that are taken to be Magicians,
‘SF. 9. Now althô the learned, as I have al-
ready faid, extol not fo much all rhefe things, nor :
reach them fo exprefly ; and that by confequence, .
they credit not fo much what is ordinarily believed
and faid touching the power and Operations of the
Devil upon Men, and concerning that which they |
effect by the meansof Men 3 We muft however ob-
ferve, that they give fo much extent to his power
and actions, that not only they help not to de ftroy
the general Opinion that is had of him; bur alfo .

| maintain it by different expreffions they make ufe .
of, and by the inftructions they give.

It is what
3" 1S

Origi-.

that in the time of Po-.

to which this —

226 The World Bewitch d.

is feen, efpecially in the works of two Englifh Au-
thors, who explain themfelves more plainly, and
précifely than all others upon this matter,which they
treat from the foundation ; whereas others keep the
fame language only by occafion, and when treat-
ing of other fubjects, they ate obliged to fpeak of
them. The firft of thefe Authors is, liam Gurnal
‘Gn his great Book upon the Ephefians, 6.11. 18.
entituled, The Chriftian in compleat Armour, the firft
Edition is in the Year 1655. And fince there has been
Printed at London in folio in 1679. the fixth Editi-
on, He fays, That the Devil being a [piritual being,
extreamly evil, thefe two confiderations ought to caufe
a great deal of fear to a Chriflian, p. 94. Becaufe he
# a great Prince who furpafJes Man very much in power
and craft, that bis craft 5 obferved by bis marvelous
knowledge, firft,in fpying proper occafions to tempt Men,
p- 36. Secondly, in bu Jubtle and artificial condut, and
in al the vices be nrakes ufe of for this effeët, pe 37-
Thirdly, in the care he takes to make all the preparati-
ons neceffars to attack us to bis advantage, every time
he finds opportunity to do it, p. 43. Fourthly, In the
trouble that he ftirs up in our Confciences, in re-
proaching us with our Sins, and in the artifices that
he ules, and the ambuthes he lays p. 44. As to what
concerns the power and Virtue of the Devil, the
Author holds-in the firft place, That he has power
not only on the Elements and corporeal fenfes, but
alfo upon {pirimial fabftances of the World, and up-
on the Souls of Men, p. 74. Afterwards he declares
what is rhe time and place of his Empire over his
fubjects, viz. the time, in this life, over people of
Darknefs; the place, in the World, fer as much as it
is plung’d into impiety, p. 79.

Se&. 10. The other Englifh Author is Fofeph Gla:-
vill, the title of which Book is Saduci/nus Triumpba-
fxs, Sadacifin defeated, a Book, wherein he imploys

iy | 4

a pre

| Inca

ble;

} and

has b
death

| eftadl

Realo

I force

has b
{appa
À area

Being

| ta Îl
À: dif
| Cos,

A Tin

woune

À Four

Word

ond 7;

Lo fi

OF tbe

thefe

B Certay

The World Bewitch’ 2. 227

a great deal of Learning, to prove that Witchcrafts,
Inchantments, Apparitions, and Phantoms,are poffi-
ble ; and afterwards that they are things practifed,
and which actually happen. The firft Edition of it
has been alfo in Englifh at London in 1661. after the
death of the Author. He pretends, that what he
eftablifhes as a certain Truth, is grounded upon
Reafons and Examples: And I grant, that as to the
force of Reafoning, I do not know any Writer who
has better fucceeded than he has. Here are his
fuppofed Truths ; That among other effects, which
are attributed to Magicians of both Sexes.  Firft,
Being anointed with certain ‘Magical Ointments they
PAS through the Chimney, and are tranfported into very
diftant places. Secondly, That they are turned into
Cats, Hares, and divers other Creatures and Figures.
Thirdly, That they feel in their own Bodies the fame
wounds that are made in the Bodies they berror.
Fourthly , That in muttering certain unin eligible
Words, and in making certain Geftures extraordinary
and ridiculous, theyratfe Tempefts. Fifthly, That they
are fucked by familiar Spiri:s in the moft fecret parts
of their Bodies. ‘The Author believes that the more
thefe things are incredible and ridiculous, the more
certain they are. I fhall examine his Reafons in my
fecond and third Book, and his Inftances*in my laft,
with more exactnefs than what other Authors have
written upon this Subject, for the confiderarion I
have already alledged ; that he carries ir above all:

others, as to the force of his Reafoninge. x
Seët, 11. All that has hitherto been {a d, refpects,
firft, the Devil. and afrerwards Men, that are “bé-
lieved to have Commerce with him, confidéred di
ftinétly and feparately from him. But an‘tnion muft*
be made betwixt them. For which effe&, the
Leagues already mention were invented, Scé? 5. of
this Chapter, and heretofore Chap. 20 Sef. 13.
' Moreover,

228 The World Bewitch'd

Moreover, the Opinions which have been .reported
having pafled from Popery amongft us, .and.been_
admitted by many Doctors of our: Communion ;
yet I know not any who has taken their part fo
much as Daneus, which.is chiefly obferved in two
Points in his Defcriprion of the Leagués, and in the
effects he attributes to Sorcerers and: Witches 5. for
thefe two things are found very amply treated of.in
his little Book, De Sortiaris, Of Witches ; but efpe-
cially the firft is defcribed with more circumftances
than [have read in any Popifh Author. So feeing
this. Doctor has been one of the moft confiderable

among us, and that having lived a little after the.
time Of Calvin and Luther, his Book, which was
written 116 years ago, has not been attacked.-nor
contradicted that I know of by any. Proteftant Writer,
but only by. Schottus; from thence may be. inferrd,
that thefe Doctrines are not unknown to us, nor re-"
jected by the Proteftant Churches. I am going. to
relate in. fhort the contents of this. Authors Wri-
tings. |

Seët. 12. See what he fets down in bis fourth
“Chapter, Nullam non Sortiarum cum Satana fedus iniiffe,
feque ei devoviffe, That there no Sorcerer-but he: bas
made agreement with the Devil, and devoted bimfelf to
bim.: See the defcription he makes of thefe contracts.

Firft, To fecure the Perfon.of the Magician, the De-
vil imprints @,mark, either under the Eye-lidsjor between
the Buttocks, or the Pallat sb the Mouth; that it may
not be perceived. in thofe places. _ The Author. believes

bab there are fonéexempt from carrying it: It 5 for

this Reafinthat the Fudges order the wh ap Body-of thofe
that. are accufed of thy Crime, to be faved, to know the:
place that 5 marked, as I have told yon,

Secondly, The Conditions of. thefe Contraëts ir
‘that they [hall renounce-God,and acknowledge Satan, and
adore bim for their God, and in Recompence he frall

affift

L2

The World Bewitch'd. 229

afi? them, and fhall come to their fuccour as oft as they
apply themfelves to him, which be will never fail to do
normore than the Witches on their part fail to obey all
his Commands,

Thirdly, After the Covenant-has been thus mutually
agreed upon, the-Masician, the morrow after, Sacrifices
to thé Devil, a Dog, a Cat, or a{Hen, that belongs: to

him, by which means the Contrad à confirmed a new,

Fourthly, Afterwards the Devil caufes in proper
time'and place,all the Magicians to affemble where ever
he preferibes ; there he makes every one of them give an
account of the Mifchiefs be bas done by his Power and
Means. |

Fifthly, He fometimes takes the trouble to get them
together, alfuming ‘a human foape for that purpofe, and
making himfelf known to the Magicians onis: At other:
times he imploys fome of them to go and Convene the:
Affembly, fhewing them the time and peace: Thy af-
fembly % not always general, fometimes there are bus a
certain number which be bas chofen to pieafe himfeif.

Sixthly, If there are fome, who through weaknefs of
Body cannot go, be gives them a Stick, or a Horfe, or.
fome-Oyntment to anoint themfelves, by the virtye of
which being become invisible, be tran[ports them through.
the: Air.

‘Seventhly, He appears himfelf as: Mater of the Club,
tn fleape of a Man, or in fome ugly He-Goat, or in
whatever Form be pleafes. |

Eightly, There they repeat their Oaths made to him,
after which they fing and dance in honour of their new
God. 632 Sh

Ninthly, Afterwards he furnifbes them with Jack
tneans as they defire,to do mifchief to fuch as they pleafe.
Be teaches them to make up their Poifins, and promifes
them to: continue bé affiftance to them, and his Service
for their occafions.

ber)

-Tenthly? |

230 The World Bewitch'a.

Tenthly,By virtue of thefe Agreements Satan fails not
to work wonders in favour of hx Magicians,as oft as they
make the fign that he bus tanght them,and ordered them
+0 do, in which fign confifts not the operative and active
faculty, as the Magicians believe, but it refides in the
Devil, who operates when warned by the fign.

Se. 13. “Lhere is already a great deal, but how-
ever there are more things which the Author af-
cribesto the Devil, and which may be gathered and
inferred from divers places of this Book, where they
are exprefsly contained, as:

Firft, That he often appears in human fhape.

Secondly, That he fometimes troubles, and cafts
fuch a Mift over the Senfes of thofe that are inga-
ged with him, that they fancy to have been in cer-
tain places, and to have acted feveral things, though
there is no truth or reality in thefe Imaginations.

Thirdly, But he really carries them through the
Air whither he pleales. .

Fourthly, That by the Miniftry of Wizzatds and
Witches,he-can Poifon Men fecretly from far, with-
out touching them.

Fiftbly, That the Devil, or the Magicians by his
means, may raife Tempèfts, and caufe Rain.

Sixthly, He rejects the Opinion of thofe who be-
lieve the power of the Devil has no longer any effect
upon the Magicians, nor can act in their behalf, as
{oon as they are in the Hands and Power of Juftice 5
on the contrary,he fuppofes,rhat the virtue of Witch-
craft may be exerted even in Prifons; and that of-
rentimes the Devil breaks there the Necks of thofe
who belong tohim: Thefe are Danew’s ‘his Do-
Ctrines.

Se&. 12. Furthermore, the moft common Opini-
on of the Doctors of our Communion, is, That the
Devil does not know things ro come, buronly of

himfelf he forms conjectures; that neverthelefs the
greateft

The World Bewitch'd. 231

greateft part of Divines confult him for their Pre-
dictions. That itis from him they learn what
they difcover to other Men of things prefent, things.
hidden ; as when there has been fomething ftoll’n,
or fome body bewitch'd, they declare the Thief or
Magician. They likewife afcribe to him fome
knowledge of the Thoughts of Men, fince they fan-
cy that he difturbs and feduces them, and that he
incites them to mifchief, For that is ptoperly what
we, underftand when we pray in our Churches for
thofe that are tempted and troubled in their Con=
{ciences. There are no errors produced, there a-
rifes no Herefies in the Church, it is not afflicted
with any perfecution, .but the Devil has contributed
thereto. All the places of Scripture, that {peak of
the Devil, are underftood with relation to the
Ideas : And it is upon thefe interpretations that thefe ’
Opinions are grounded. It is alfo by the fame rea :

lon, that not only the Proteftants, but almoft all
the Chriffian Writers affert, Thar it is not allow’d
to confult the Devil, who is the enemy of God,
and of Men, nor to feek his help: They however
agree, that the Pagan Oracles have not always been

given by the Devil, but that-ofren they have been
the effect of the impoftures of Priefts, which has
{o often appear’d, that ir is impofiible not to know
it.

Seé. 13. The power of the Devil is extreamly
boafted of, for there are very few Doctors who
doubt but he can affume a Body; and poffefs the Bo-
dies of Men, and tranfport and torment them feve-
ral ways, as effectively,..as he had actually the im-
pudence to do*thefe things .to our Saviour Fefus
Chrift himfelf, and to a great many people, of which
the Gofpel teil us that being pofleft by evil Spi-
rits, they were delivered by our Saviour. They
al{> fuppofe, that the opinion of the apparitions of

Specters

232 The World Bewitch'd.

Specters,1s confirmed by Scripture, and chat it was
therDevil (at leaft, according to the opinion of
fome } who appeared under the Figure of Samuel.

They think that it cannot be deny’d, but that he has. -

power over the Air and Winds, over Armies, over
the Goods of Men, their Bodies, and their Lives,
which is proved by the example of what happen’d.
to Fob. And by the effects that the Magicians of
Egypt produc’d ib the time of Myjes, which are as
fo many fure marks of the power of the Devil, ei-
ther to produce Infects, as Frogs and Serpents, and
to make a Tranfinutation of the Elements, either
to reprefent with an inconceivable -readinefs, things
that are to be ferch’d from far, or atleaft, fo to:
dazle the eyes of Men, to fee what is not.

Se&, 14. As tothe means which Magicians, Di-

viners, and Inchanters make ufe of, fcarce.is there.a
perfon of good Senfe, that believes they are effica-

cious of themfelves, but they will have ic to be ef-.
fected by the Devil, who operates all that. thofe..

miferable wretches ‘imagine to act ; and chat the

Covenants made between him and them, oblige.

him to execute that which they require of him 5

provided only;that they make ufe of Signs.and that.
they imploy circumftances deftin'd for that pur-

pofe, fuch ashe hastaught them. It is very pru-
dently obferved, as is believed, that thofe Leagues

are made two ways, which I fhall exprefs in the,

words of Sennertus, taken from his Treatife upon
this Queftion. Whether one may be-render'd invul-
nerable to the point of a Sword,and to Mufquets? where-

he fays, That the Contra&t with the Devil is of two.

hinds, mediate or immediate 3 exprefs or tacite. The
immediate , or exprefs Contraët, 5 when any makes ufe
of means, that be has been immediately furnifhed with
by.the Devil. The mediate or tacite Contraët #, when

one makes ufe of the means, which in truth -have. been
ordain’d

her
y (ipe
} for J
| Lang
D had
| Rudi
alte!
Je

ff

| ing D
J ines,
Mi 0!
Lens

Pr

Lo D
Ad f
| lu
in fe
got

Lhe World Bewitch 4, } 233

ordain'd by the Devil 3 but nt having been Supplyd
bythe Devil bimfelf, comes to him by the band of fame
other perfon ; which 5 direétly contrary to the Law of
God, that forbids us to have other Gods but him: For
he fays a little further, The coment not altogether
excluded from the tacite agreement, becaufe, mbofoever
3 mot as yet deprived of Reafon, as not to avoid the Pre-
cipices of Rocks, or the mouth of à Pit, he cannot but
Jee that fuch Words and Charaëters have not in them-
Selves any virtue; and that by confequence, before ma-
king ufe of them, we are obliged to examin by what
virtue they may produce fuch effets ? for if one negleGs
to do it, it % certain a tacite Contraët with the Devil,
who has promifed to execute all the claufes and conditi-
ons of bis writing in favour of thofe who make ufe of the
Words and Charaëters therein contained, in confequence
of which, be who makes nfe of it, cannot pretend him-
Jeff innocent of the crime of Magick. Such is Sen-
nertuss opinion, and as I may Judge from my own
experience, will not be confuted by our Doctors,
for I bear them generally’ hold {peaking the fame
Language. © Doctor (%erits, a famous Man, who
had very much meditated upon this matter, and had
ftudied it very much, eftablithes all thete things
a little more confufedly, but yet very near upon
the fame foot.

Sect. 15. Ihave fomething to add here concern-
ing Dreams. The common Language of our Di-
vines, is, that there are four forts 5 Natural, Ci-
vil, or {uch as are occañon'd by the preceding
converfation and actions, without Nature or Tem,
| per having any fhare in them ; Laftly, Divine
| or Diabolical. They hold that thefe faft pro-

| ceed from the infpiration of the Devil, who di-
| fturbs the’ imagination of Man, and reprefents to
| him fearful Figures, to difquiet or fright him, or
D totranfpore him De fome time into fome place

where

234 The World Bewitch'd.

where he pleafes: as we have feen before, that he
tranfports the Witches to their feveral meetings.
In confequence of this Doctrine, thereare fome of
opinion, that the Dream that Pilates Wife fuffered
fo much becaufe of Chrift, was a Diabolick Dream.

Se&, 16. But I find not any of thefe Doctors
who have heretofore ever attributed fo little un-
derftanding and Power to the Devil; as to the
knowledge and effects already defcribed, as Reynold
Schot has, before quoted. We have at this time
Anthony Van Dalen, who afcribes no more to him
in his Book of Oracles : thefe two Authors hold that
there is no other efficient caufe of all the things
which are practifed, or which are operated, but
thg impoftures of Men 3 the Devil having no part
in them. I learnalfo, whilft Lam taken up in this
prefent Work, that the moft fenfible among us, at-
tribute but very little power and knowledge to the
Devil : and that there are a great many more than
Iconceived, who, as to the actions of the poffeit
and bewitched are of the fame opinion with Mr.
Daillon, who in a French Book concerning Demons,
maintains all that which is contained in. the Scrip-
ture, touching evil and unclean Spirits, is not other-
wife to be underftood, than of certain Difeafes to
which the Fewsufed to give fuch names, believing,
however that it might happen, evil Spirits medld
with them at the fame time. There’slately come to
my hands very conveniently, a. little Book of Mr.
Orchard's an Englifloman, Preacher in the New-Ne-
therlands, as 1 am told, in which the ancient and
common opinion upon this fubject is confuted, as

being directly oppofite to the Doctrine and belief |

of the Proteftant Churches.

Se, 17. But let us leave off {peaking of thefe
People, becaufe, that of one fide there is no necef-
fity here to handle them and becaufe I intend to do it

; afterwards

| Hons

The World Bewitth'd. 135

aftewards. It is not neceffary to {peak of them here,
becaufe my intention is not to fer down here what
| is not faid of the Devil, and what-is-not attributed
7 to him 5 but my defign isto relate that which is
| {aid of him, and to examine whether it be true or
no. “Tis fufficiént for me to hold the laft Nega-
tive with the Englif Writer, becaufe I am much
averfe from maintaining the opinion which afcribes
fo much power and virtue to Spirits; and efpecially
to the bad. And further, I fhall be obliged to enter
the Lift with Schor,Van Dalen,and many others, who
oppofe the common belief that they had of this
| Power, when J fhall come afterwards to examine
| the reafons and proofs upon. which it is founded.
| However, before I finifh this Firft Part, I fhall re-
hearfe all that has been faid, and compare the Opi-
| nions of Infidels with thofe-of the Chriftians,

556 The World Bowitehia,

CHAP. XXI

That of all thefe Opinions put together, there refult fome
. certain propofitions, in which they differ, and others
in which they agree.

Zz

Seët. am | have from time to time conferr'd the, |

Opinions that I have related, firft thofe
of the Ancient and modern Pagans, in the 11th
Chapter; and afterwards thofe of the Jews, Maho-
metans, and Chriftians of the fix firft Ages, in the
17th Chapter. There remains now to compare
thofe of the Papifts an@ Proteftants, after which
we will confer them all together; to that end, we
muft break off the order that we have kept hither-

toy and begin with the lafts they will farnifh us with |

very certain proof, that there is no Opinion to
which the World is more engag’d, than to that
which is almoft generally every where taught and
received concerning Spirits; for the Proreftants
have retained all that which cannot be look't upon

Cetta

| Ceeds
T atthe

as a pure invention of Popery in particular; and J,

there areeven fome, whofe belief upon this fubject, |
go farther than ‘thofe-of the Papifts. _ The Chrifti- |
ansin general believe all that is not particular to |

the Jews and Pagans ; the Jews and the Mahome- | à g
tans believe all that, according to them, is not in- |!

confiftant with the belief of one only God ; fome |;
will tell me perhaps, that we muft not wonder at it, |

and that naturally it ought tobe fo. This is what a
wef

The World Bewitch'd: 237

‘we have now to examine, and there will beas yer
room to {peak more plainly and fully afterwards.

.. Se@,.2. .. Notwithitanding it is convenient to ad-
vertife the Reader, that relating here the difference
or the..conformity of the Opinions of all Nations,
I mean only. thé Opinions ef the more learned and
are remarked amongft the Do@ers, or who are

taken for wifemen in their Country, and capable
.of inftructing others in matter of Faith and Reli-
-gion. . I intend not to: fpeak of particular Opinions,
| -but of thole generally received, raught, and confirm-

ed by practices ; for as to the common People, either
Papilts, Jews, or Pagans, they know nothing for the
moft part, but alittle by hear-fay.; fo that there is

“| snorelying upon them, and itis {ure without miftake,

one”
ty

| -that for the moft part,what the moft illiterate believe

and practice, is contrary to the fenfe of Divines,
and of all thofe that underftand any thing in the
Holy Scripture. I. will have nothing to do with
them upon this fubje@, having often tryed my felf

| how many follies our own People fay and believe,
| .upon this account, |

_ Sed. 3. . So it is neceflary to. eftablith here as
certain and undoubted, thar every Opinion that pro-

ceeds from Paganifm as from it’s Original, cannot
| atthe fame time be founded_upon the Holy Scrip-
ture. It is true, there never was a Doctor either

Chriftian or Jew, who has not applied fome place

| in Scripture to what he has propofed, but the Que-
tion isto know, whether the applications were juff,
sand whether the Scripture may be expounded in the

fenfe put upon it; for it may be that thefe Doctors

having their imagination fill’d with their own Ideas,

believe in reading, to fee things there which are not

| there, and that their own prejudice .caufes.to be

| found there ; ‘of this the Reader may at firft judge
| himfelf, if he will but mind with attention. what

follows

238 The World Bewitch'd.

follows, where I remark briefly what every Sect
rejects, and what every one admits; and afterwards
what the one have borrowed of others, and what
they have retained to this time.

Se. À, Althô the ProteftantChurches,with one com-
mon confent,deny Purgatory and all the places where
they put Souls, except Paradife and Hell ; thefe two
points, are Opinions of Popery. There has been
fome mention made of them amoneft the primi-
rive Chriftians, neither the Jews nor the Mahome-
tans reject them,and they have been taken fromPaga-
nif, Whofoever rejects them, he imuit reject to-
gether all the Doctrines and practices that ‘are
grounded upon them. For this reafon,

Firft. We do not believe among us, that the
Souls of the Deceafed are never wandering,nor that
they appear to the living, under any figures what-
foever, to obtain help and comfort from them.
~ Second. It is not believed that the Souls of the |
bleffed come back from Heaven upon Earth,nor that |
thofe of the damned come back from Hell. It is
not believed, that either the one or the other ap-
pears to Men, to comfort or afright them 3 and far |
lefS as yet, that the living can make agreements |
‘together, to come back after Death and vifit thofe

they had agreed with, who have furviv'd them. © |
Third. By this reafon, the Dead are never ask’d |
any Queftions, nor any religious worfhip paid to | à
them.
Sef. §. The Virtue of Conjurations is likewile |
unknown among us, either to drive the Souls |
of the deceafed, or to expel evil Spirits, with whom } 4
any fhouid be tormented. No other means is known |:
fafficient for this effect, bur Prayer and fafting,
taught by our Saviour Fefus Chrift, St. Matthew, |
Ch, 17 Ve 21: | | |

D.

The World Bewitch'a, 239

Firft. For this Reafon it is not believed, that
there is any body either Prieft or Exorcift, which
is authorifed to make fuch Conjurations, nor oughe
to meddle with them, althé alike practice was ad-
mitted in the firft time of Chriftianity ;
whether it had fuccefs by the power of God, or it
was the meer effect of the Artifices of Men, and
that it has been a cuftom among the Jews, Maho-
metans and all the Pagans,

Second, Neither is ir believed , words, names,
figns, geftures, and poftures, even tho they were
taken from the Holy Scripture, have any power for

this effect, cither of rhemfelves or inftitution of the
Church ; becaufe the has not received any power
from God, to-give her Authority as to this point,

Third. They Conjure not the Devil in the Bap-
tifin of Children, as the Papifts do ; the Lutherans do
the like, butnot with the fame intent,as the firit,that
is, that the Devil js in the Infant, or that he is
driven out by the Virtue of words, which are pto-
hounced ; for they only retain this Practice, becaufe
of it’s’ antiquity, it being indifferent of it felf, at
leaft fuch is their pretence or éxcufe,

Sed. 6. Now that the Doëtrines of the Proteftants
have been conferr’d with thofe of Popery in par-
ticular ; it remains to fee what difference there is

between ‘the Chriftians in general, and the Inf-
dels.

ans.

Second, Likewife it is not ufual among them,-to
affociate God, or the Spirits to the Stars. As touch-
ing Ged, it was an Opinion purely Pagan ; and

touching

2.40 The World Bewitch'd.

ouching Spirits, it was a Jewifh Opinion; I «know
not whether it may be faid, that the Ancient Chrifti-
anity had not fome tincture of it.

Third. This difference of nature in the Angels,
propofed by the Jews, is not believed any more 5
it draws its Original from Ancient Paganifm, and
is admitted to this day,bythe modernPagans; It’s true,
that the Papifts acknowledge a difference of Order,
but they put. none in the effence of thefe Spirits.
Likewile, thô they make generally appear all forts
of Spirits, neverthelefs the difference is only in
refpect of places, of Perfons, and effects, as we
have fhewn more fully, Ch. 19 Sel. 7. 17. Ch. 204
Se&. 1.2. 3. butit is no way in refpect of their
nature, nor of their Original.

Fourth, There is nota Chriftian, be he Pro-
teftant or Papift, who believes, that Spirits are
truly capable of engendering 3 which is neverthelefs
the common belief of all the Pagans, which is re-
ceived among the Jews, and has not been confuted
{afficiently by the primitive Chriftians, among whom
are found, fome who have exprefly taught it.

See. 7, But the Pagans differ from the Mahome-
tans and Chriftians chiefly in two points.

Firft, That they mix and confound together the
-fupream God with other fuperior and inferior Gods
good and bad ; and alfo the Souls of Men with all
thofe Gods, in fuch a confufed manner, that it is
impoffible to comprehend any thing, and that it 1s
a Labyrinth from whence they cannot extricate
themfeives. On the contrary, the Jews and Maho-
metans agree with the Chriftians, in this point, that
there is one only God, and that all that is befides
him has been created by him.

Second. In that, that not only they make no great
difficulty to deify Men, but that they make al-
f the Gods ‘return to the condition of Men, and

LA

{rh
God;
| Papitt
for th
Lave!
| and to
I {peak
they
falle |
Chrik

J point,

Man |

Sel
on Wh
Which,

I itrans,
usa

Who

air,
Aithol

teftant
Opini

and À
Que Lo

that |

The World Bewitchd.

that they believe there are Men, the ifiue of the
Gods; there are fome of thefe errors, which the
Papifts cannot boaft of being entirely free from ;
for they may reafonably be reproached, that they
have fubftituted their Saintsto thefe imaginary Gods

{peak of Saints as the Pagans do of their Gods ; that
they make them act in the fame manner, thar thete
falfe Deities were fuppofed to act. But pure
Chriftianiry, fuch as has been in all times upon this
point, never make Gods a Man, nor never raifes
Man to the dignity of God. -

Se&, 8, There isnotwithftanding fome point up=

| on which the Proteftants are not agreed, and upon

which, neverthelefs the Papifts, the primitive Chri-
 ftians, the Jews, the Mahometans,- and all the: Pa
gans agree, viz. The Tutelary Gods of the Pagans,
| who were the guardian Angels in the firft Chrifti-

anity.
without conteftation among the Papifts; the Pro-
teftants in general, are not difpofed to receive this
| Opinion; thofe of the profeffion of France, Holland,
and Swifferland, rejeét it; and neverthelefs there

are fome, but very few,that admit it,or ar leaft be~
| lieve,not that there are fufficient reafons ro oppofe it;
we fhall examine afterwards, which is the foundeft
of thefe Opinions. In the mean while we muft
take notice before hand, that what the Papifts reach
upon this fubject, together with fome of other
Chriftians that are not of their Communion, relates
more to the light and knowledge which they fup-

| real help they can expect in their actions, and in
their manner of living; for it is rarely feen, of

I to fay better, it is never feen, that the People

afcribe a confiderable deliverance, or a great ope

L preffion, that befalthem to. an Angel,: either their

| Val L M keeper

t

and to thofe: Demons of the Pagans; That they.

We have lately feen they are admitted:

| pofe that thofe Spirits communicate ro them, than.

22d The World Bewitch'd.

:keeper or their enemy ; but they never fail to af-

-.cribe it immediatly to the providence of God ; or

-3f they €ometimes turn their Eyes to another fide, the
‘Papifts as to their particular refer all the good that
‘happens to them, to the protection of fome great
‘Saint, efpecially to that of the Virgin Mary; but
the Proteftants, left they fhould feem to favour the

belief of the Popifh Saints, would rather fay, if

-occafon ferves, that the Devil was the Author of it,
‘Sc&. 9. There is alfo a difference to be taken

-motice of,-betwixt the Heathens on one ‘fide, the |

‘Jews and the Mahometans on the other, and all the
JChriftians on another ; it is chiefly in the practice

.of Witchcraft and Divination ; which, according to |
«the principles of the firft, is a laudable practice in

“it felf, 4ithô often abufed, as a great many good
“things are; according to the principles of the {econd,
‘jt is only. allow’d and ufeful in many occafions ; and
according to the laft,ir is directly oppofite to Chrifti-
nity. Fhe reafon of it is, that the Pagans hoïd

or Gods, or at leaft for Minifters and Ambaffa- |

dors of the Gods, Spirits, which are lookt upon by ||
aChriftians as unpure Spirits; and that the Jewsand |

the Mahpmetans -caufe to proceed from the Virtue
of the Caballa, and the inflüences of the Stars,

whatever ‘the Chriftians take to be Magick, Witch-

craft, or Enchantments. It istrue, that in the time |
cf Ancient Paganifm, the Mathematicians have
keen put intothe rank of Poifoners, and: that both |
vere treated as perions equally pernic:ous, to whom
jt was forbidden to exercife their art, as being un- |
lawful. ‘But the occafion of thefe prohibitions, |
was otfly founded upon the ill ufe that was made of}
this Art, which had been before not only permitted, |
bur.even much efteem’d. Ar this time the Chrifti- |

ans have no longer any averfion for the name of |.
Mathematician, but that of Poyfoner never ren}

ceived any good daterpretation 5 not that words are

here |

The World Bewitch a. 243

here to be difputed, for ’tis of things that we trear;
and we are to examine them, and not words. Per-
haps there will be occafion to have fome re-
gard to them, in our third Book ; where without
doubt, it will be neceffary to {peak fully of thefe
terms, and of many others.

Se&. 10. Let’s now fee what conformity is found
among all thefe People together, Pagans, Jews,
Mahometans, Chriftians, both Ancient and Modern,
Roman Catholicks, Proteftants and others, They all
confefs,

Firft.,That there are Spirits diftin& from God, and
bodies: for thé fome contrive yet another kind of
Spirits, as we have faid ; it is one of the¥points in
difpute among them, and now weare about to feek
wherein they agree together.

Second. That thetg natures are different, fome
abfolutely fubfifting without body, as Angels; and
others being united to a body, as Souls.

Third. That, however, both are‘fhortal.

Fourth, That of fuch Spirits as are united toa
body;fome are good to Men and others bad.

Fifth, That therefore, Man has reafon to
feek the friendfhip of good Spirits, that is, the An*
gels, and to take all poffible care to divert from
him evil Spirits, which are Devils.

Sixth. Thatan infinite happinefs or mifery at
tends Men after this life. |

Seventh. That likewife of the Souls of the de-
eeafed, fome are bad, and fome good and holy ;
~ tho they feem not to explain themfelves always in
the fame manner, fometimesupon one of the points,
and fometimes upon the other; it is neverthelefs
certain, confidering the bottom of the matter, thar
their fentiments are agreeable; fee then in what
confifts the conformity of the Opinions in ‘genera?
‘of all Nations; ‘and in what they differ; We have

M2 now

¥

Ot
Fi
b

H

pue Me ee

LS Ve

+s SF

Lt aA et en Cee

a NRE SEE OED ==

244 The World Bewitch'd.

now to.examine, what is true or what not, in

-all that has been related; and it is for that purpofe,

I defign my fecond and third Book, according, to
ethe divifion I have eftablifhed before, Chapter the
Airft,, Seët. 8. However we fhall yer fee, what cau-
stions may be drawn from all that has been aid.

CHAP. . XXIV.

“har all that has been related, fhews upon what foun-
dation the Chriftians in general, and the Proteftants
zn particular, fay, Juch extraordinary, things of the
Devil,

Sect, 1. F> Efore I pafs to my fecond Book, where
I thall examine what is purely the truth,

«we muft fearch into.all the quorations and Opinions
that are collected here, after the Original of this
Opinion, fo generaland fo deeply rooted, touching
the great power of the Devil, which we fee, that
call the Chriftians, Proreftants, Romans and-others,
çarry {0 high.at this time ;. there is none who can
deny but feveral things prefent them{elves in thefe
matrations,that all the World eafily perceives and are
«capable to produce fuch Opinions,or to confirm them
änthe minds of Mens neither that Scripture or
Reafon fhould lead Men thereto, But they gather
them from other places, and without examining
swhether they are agreeable to thole two rules, on-
ly worthy of being follow’d ; they. refpect them
meverthelefs becaufe of the credit in which they
have been for.a ‘long time, and of the approbation
that has been ‘given them. Now, I intend to fhow
&rft,thar all that is believed touching the great pow-
erst the Devil, beyond what Scripture and Reafon
manifeftly

The World Bewiicth d. ZAG;
manifeftly teaches us of it, proceeds not from any”
of thefe two fprings, nor takes ivs Original frome
any confequences that may be drawn from them,
and afterwards to difcover what is the true caufe-
of it.

Se&. 2. The truth of this propofition is: eafilye
known as to it’s firft refpect ; becaufe it: 18 known,
that the moft ftupid and thofe that partake leaft of
the lightof Reafon or of knowledge of the Scrip-
ture, are.thofe which give moft credit ro what is
{aid upon thd matter in hand. The common Peo-
ple, Children, and Olid Women, are much more-
perfwaded . of it than others; but the more under=
ftanding one has, the more one is converfant in the -
Holy writ, andthe more experience he has gained
by the converfation of the World, and bythe dife-
rent accidents which have prefented themielves,
efpecially when experience is joyned to thefe two*
firft Conditions, the lefs he will be apt to believe
füch Opinions ; I fay he will be the lefs apt to be-
lieve:them, becaufe it muft be granted, that there
are Péople of a great deal of learning and experi
ence, who not only: receive them, but imploy all
their skill and capacity to confirm them, and caufe
them to be admitted 5 as King Fames the Firft,
. Bodin, Daneus, and many others have done. Bar
I think not that we muft believe what they have:
done, ought to be attributed to the evidence of
reafon, which have perfwaded them, but to their
prejudices, and to: acertam particular inclination,
according to which, every oneturns himfelf toward
fach or fuch an object; according-to his inclination,
It is by the motions of this natural inclination, that’
the underftanding being furprized, takes a difps--
Gtion to follow it; and when ir has once addicted :
it felf thereto, ic makes ufe of all iv s force and light’
to maintain its choice,and*to fhew that truthrand rea-

| M 3 {on

246 The World Bewitch’d,

{én have been his guides to the part he has taken,
which he fancies all other Men by the fame Prin-
ciples are alfo obliged to take: That being fuppo-

ied, it follows, that the Opinion of a very {mall.

number of Writers cannot hinder that what I have
propoled fhoufd be true, as to the whole, or the
greateft part: And it is my advice, which methinks
no body will deny me.

S. 3. It may be objected,as to what concerns Na-
ture,that it cannot be faid,that what was never taught
by the Pagans and Philofophers,who had not the help
of any other Light but that of Nature and Reafon ;
or what they have left in their Writings,was drawn
from any other {pring but Nature ic felf. I grant
it; Bur what have they taught upon this fabject 2
All that we have reported before in the ten
Chapters, that are betwixt the firft and twelfth:
These every one may fee what it is ; what are their
uncertainty and contradictions ; how diffefent and
oppofice among them are their practices. What
foundation can be laid upon a Philofophy, which
has not fought but to accommodate it felf to capri-
gious and prejudiced People ; and which confifts
almoft in nothing elfe but the Tricks of Priefts.
Befides, it is not a pure Philofophy that has been
the original and foundation of Pagan Religions;bur
the Philofophy fuch as it has been comprehended
and underftood by the People ; that is to fay, very
ul in part or in the whole, mixed with preju-
dice and great ignorance. The fear caufed by ex-
traordinary and furprifing objects, and the blind
love every one has for his own Notions,produced in
that perturbation, drive Men to feek the means to
appeafe a power from which. proceed thofe extra-
ordinary objects, and which is the caufe of thofe
evils they are not able to refift. Thefe two Rea-
fons, I fay, carry Mento practife, for that ai all

| arts

| tine

1 was

Se

Le aren
| Phi
| bred
“Toft
1 Scho
read
| tole
alike
| diffe
| conf
1, a the
that
| Hor

eme
Incre

fer
Ina

1 Stor

dent
neve
ke Ne

The World Bewitchid. = 247"

forts of means, although they know them but by
half, or not at all. The greateft part of thole*
who might difcover to them their Miftakes, and”
afford them better Inftructions 3 either will not”
give themfelves the trouble, or choofe rather to~
keep it fecret, and make ufe of the Error of the
People, to the end to acquire more Credit, and to*
be the objects of a greater admiration ; as hereto~
fore the Magi did ; and as at this time the Bramines-
and the Bonzes do: If theré is-any one who had bet~
ter inclinations, he dares not. open his Mouth for
fear of incurring the indignation of the publick 5
As Socrates whole boldnefs coft him his life, which
was taken away by Poifon.

Se. 4. We muft therefore imagine, that there
are not any of thofe that addicted themielves to
Philofophy, who from’ their youth had not been
bred in the Opinions, and exercife- of the Religion
of their Anceftors; So that they owe unto the:
Schools the Prejudices that they had thereby: al-~
ready {wallowed. They found Mafters who were
ho lefs prevented with theirs 5 either that they were
alike to thofe of their Scholars, or that they were ©
differenr. If they were alike, the Difciples were”
confirm’d in thofe prejudices by their Mafters 5 and”
if they were different, they: afforded; them more ~
matter to confound their Underftanding.  Eaftly;,
However it was, their Underftanding could but
remain corrupted, and their ill difpofition but daily
increafe. If this needed a proof, and required lefs
time, it would be no*hard task to prove what I af
fert; fince I may name Pérfons, who may be living
inftances of it : But no body,methinks; will require
from me what I have juft now faid, being too evi-
dent to be call’d in queftion, ~ If there are fome who
never reflected upon it, in relation to the Infidels,
he need but make Confiderations-upon the Chrifti-”

M: .4.: ans ~

248 The World Bewitch d.

éns and himfelf quickly to difcover the Truth. A
blind and brutifh zeal for Religion, or rather for
what is eall’d Religion, ordinarily precedes know-
ledge, without which, however, there is no true
Keligion, nor fincere Piety. The Eyes of our Un-
certtanding are infenfibly ufed to objects, that con-
tinually offer themfelves to them, they turn of their
own accord to that fide, ‘and afterwards, neither
will nor can look upon others; or at leaft if they
perceive others, ‘ms as through the former that
Garken the fight by their continual prefence, and by
the wearine{s caufed by their too much gazing up-
on them; fo that without the help of rhofe com-
forting Spectacles, if I may fo fpeak, the faculty,
‘weakned by want of habir, is no longer able ro en-
dure the Light. Let this be obferved before-hand,
to be ferviceable hereafter.

Seët. 5. And as to the Holy Writ, I think not that
itmay be taken for the caufe of the Opinions Men
have of the Devil. _Thofe Opinions being already
rooted in the mind as deeply as they can be, before
the Holy Bible be ever read ; not to fay, that the
lefs we read it, the more we credit what 1s faid up-
on that account, and the more we are difpofed to
affirm it, Had we notin matter of Religion, Dif-
politions alike to thofe of other Sects, and even to
thofe of the Unfaithful, we would doubtlefs make
a good ufe of the facred Writings, and {peak as
they do. But to our great fhame, moft part of us,
as well as of other Sects, that pretend a Veneration
for the Holy Writ, fearch not in ir after its Senfe,
being fatisfied with the vulgar Interpretations, and
fuch as they have received from others. And thcre-
fore we keep to fuch Explications as we hear in
thofe Churches, in which thofe of our Communion
ufe to gather; -unlefs we will be look’d upon as

fickle headed, and almoft as Apoftates. In vain we
endea-

The World Bewitch d. 249

endeavour to render the Reafon of our Faith 3
that’s not the queftion, that way carries too far
and it would be too great a task to examine all to
the bottom. In fhort, to fpeak truth, we muft
confefs, that if we believe {uch grear and wonderful
things of the Devil, it is not becaufe they are con-
tained in the Holy Scripture,fince we fufpend not our
Judgment till we have confulted it, but becaufe we
are perfuaded before-hand,that it muft be explain’d
and underftood according to the Judgment we have
already pafs'd, by reafon of fome expreffions that
feem to favour the common Relief, that the genera-
lity of Men already have of the Devil.

Sect. 6. If we defire more particularly to exa-
mine how the Notion of thefe things is formed in
Men of Learning, by the means of Learning it felf,
and how it is increafed ; I am ready to declare
what I have obferved for a long time, by the ex-
periments I have made. The firft prejudices of
Man are as ancient as his knowledge, and begin
from his meft tender youth thefe two ways. When
to appeafe the crys of Children, or to calm their
Paffions, they are threatned with the Bugbear,either
by Words or Effects, either by making fome extra-
ordinary Noife, or prefenting to them furprifing
Objects ; Experience has Jong fince taught us, that
thefe Impreffions being the firft, are alfo thofe thar
leave the deepeft tracks in the Brain, and cannot
afterwards_be rooted out but with great trouble ;
when Children being more advanced in years,begin.
to play in the Streets, and to difcourfe with their
Neighbours, they hear almoft at every inftant, the
name of the Devil proñounced, -that is, as a kind
of ornament to the common Converfation : They
hear- Tales told of him under the fpecious title of :
Hiltories, concerning Hobgoblins, Phantafins, and
Witchcraft, Even their Parents, and fome of their

M 5 Mafters,

. at. es
roe ane

ere Pa te St

2 50 The World Bewitch' a.
Mafters, by a deplorable miftake never check their

Children in their Houfe, their Difciples in their

Schools, nor their Apprentices in their Shops, with-

ont mentioning the Devil in their Reproofs, and

enforcing their chiding with it. The Names of

God and Chrift are not half fo much ufed in thofe

occafions, where they would be fo lawful and fer-

viceable ; bucon the contrary they feem to be ba-

nifh'd from the Mouths of moft Men.

Seët. 7. When Youths are put to School,they read
almoft nothing from the loweft to the higheft Forms,
in the Greek aad Latin Books, but what concerns
the Demons and their Effects, as they were fepre-
fented by the Heathens. They are imbu'd with
that Science before they attain to thofe, that relate
to the ufe of this Life, and that are call'd Faculties.
The infernal Gods and Goddefles ; as Pluto, Vulcan,
Proferpine, are known very early, and grown fami-
iar to Youth, before they are fufciently in-
ftructed in the knowledge of the true God. They
greedily imbibe the Epiftles, Poetry, and Hiftories
of the antient Greeks and Romans,where a frequent
mention is made of the vertue of Dreams, Miracles,
Apparitions, Spectres, coming out of Subterraneous
Places, as Caverns, or defcending from high, asthe
Air. . Thofe Relations read with pleafure, are be-
Heved almoft as theGofpel ; or rather are to them in-

ftead the Gofpel. For if Parents are not pious enough
to take care in their Houfes of the inftruction of their
Children, in what concerns Religion, and to have
an Eye upon their information, as to this point in
the Schools; I believe not, that of 25 Books,
which are made ufe of in the Latin Schools to.learn
Sciences, more than one or two, are fit to inculcate
the Grounds of Chriftianity to the tender Youth.
Thofe that go from the Schools to the Univerfities,
carry their heads full of thoufands of Verfes of
Hor ace;

A qi

The World Bewitch'd, 25%
Herace, Ovid, Virgil, and a vaft number of Paffages
and Relations collected from Heathen Authors, both
Greek and Latin, Thofe that return home from
the Univerfities to their Houfes, carry ftill more of
them, but fcarce bring back ten paflages,or perhaps,
fo much as a paflage or a leffon drawn from the
Word of God, for the foundation of their Faith,
gnd matter of their Devotion.

Se&. 8. In the mean while.moft of the young =
Men that go to the Univerfities, newly coming =
from under the Rod, and hardly capable of difcre-
tion, are allowed to make choice of their own
Teacher : Which St, Paul reckons amongft the faults - -
of thefe laft times, 2 Tim. 4.3. They choofe the--
Exercifes they are to make, the Leflons they are to ~
learn, and the Books they are to Read ; which they
do not fo much with an intent of Underftanding =
the Holy Scripture ;; as of informing themfelves of -
the Controverfies amongft the. principal Sects, the
particular Opinions of our Doctors,who are already
but too much divided, and whofe divifions are but ~
too great. Thecurious Youth are more eager to
learn fuch things, than thofe they ought to know.
Carried away by the heat of their Blood, always
ready to take fire and flight, they ardently apply
themfelves, obftinately to defend the part of their -
Mafters; and direc their Studies, efpecially after
the enquiry of fuch Reafons, as may help them to
maintain the Opinions they have embraced, and to =
confuretheir Antagonifts. So that whenever a paf -
fage of the Holy Writ is alledg’d, for, or agamit -
their Sentiments, either in Divinity or Philofophy,
they exert all their ability and fubtilry to wreit it,
or to put upon it, fuch a Senfe as favours the Opi- -
nion with which they are prejudiced. Thus Truth
is not enquired after-for it’s own fake, and Scrip-
tureand Reafon are often alledged, but to fet off

with

252 The World Bewitch’d

With fome likelihood the private Opiniens with
Which we are taken up.

Seét. 9. T hope that what I have juft now faid will
eafily be credited, if attention be given to what
follows. I fay,. that the Character of Philofophy,
fuch as is learned in the Schools, pours it felf upon
all the Interpretations and Tranflations that are of
the Hoty Wric. It was the Opinion of Ariftotle;
that the four Elements ; Earth, Water, Air, and

Fire, were included within one another as by Cir-.

cles, reaching from the Center to the higheft place
ef the Univerfe: So as that the Earth was the
loweft, being mixed with Water in its Superficies,
and the Air above ir furrounding the Terraqueous
Globe. Thefe Propofitions are granted by all. But
that Philofopher allo believes that Fire furrounds
the ‘Air, as the Celeftial Heavens divided into feve-
ral Vaults do Fire’ Thefe Vaults, to which the
Sun, Moon and Stars are faftned, and are of a fub-
tile and incorruptible matter in themfelves,furround
“one another, and turn about us every year, every
month, and every day, by the vertue of fome cer-
tain Spirits, call’ d Affffine Forms. Thofe that hold
that Opinion for probable, are very apt to be per-
fuaded, that the wicked Spirits dwell in the Air’;
becaufe the fuperiour Spheres are too pure for
them. When therefore thofe fort of Men hear St.
Paul mentioning the Prince of the Pewer of the Air:
Ephef, 2. 1. Or the Spiritual Wickednefs in high
. Places, Ch, 6. 12. they doubt not but St. Paul was
of the Opinion of 4riftorle; and that by thefe words
of the Hcly Scripture, the wicked Spirits muft be
underftood. ‘Thus thofe who by reading Plato;
have fill à their heads wich his Demons, fancy thar
tis word is ufed in the Scriprure in a Platonick
Sentc,withont confidering that this Phifofopher lived
20k In the time thatthe Holy Writ was publithed,

The World Bewitch’d. 253

in which the former fignification of thefe Terms
might be chang'd, as it daily happens; and with-
out fo much as examining in what Senfe they were
taken by other Authors, contemporary with the
Sacred Writers 3 whether ’tis probable that other
Authors, whofe Books are loft, underftood ‘em in
the fame Senfe; orlaftly, whether the Jews in
whofe Tongue the Holy Scripture was written, and
who confequently ought to underftand it beft, put
the fame fignification upon them, -

Seët. 10. What I fay of the ill ufe made of Phi-
lofophy as to this Point, muft not appear ftrange,
for it extends to every thing. When Copernicus be-
gan to aflert, by Reafons that feem’d very ftrong
to him, that the Sun is faft and unmoveable, and
that the Terraqueoys Globe moves ; Thofe that held
the Hypothefis of Prolomey, pretended to explode
that Opinion by elear and formal Texts of the Holy
Scripture ; but thofe that maintained it, contrived
Explications to thofe paflages, and wanted not plau-
fible Reafons to fet them off. Thus thofe that af
ter Defcartes, believe Man has an Idea of God in his
Underftanding, found the fame Doctrine in St. Paul,
and underftood in that Senfe, thefe Words of his
Epiftle to the Romans, Ch. 1. 19. That which may be
known of God 5 manifeft in them ; for God has fhewed
zt unto them. Even fome of Defeartes’s Followers
have explained the Hiftory of the Creation in the
firft Chapter of Genefis, according to the principles
of that Philofopher, that is quite contrary to the
right meaning of this Narration,as the Author him-
{elf confeffes in his little Book, Intituled, Cartefius
Mofaifans,

Seét. rt, It is the fame with Divinity, as with
Philofophy. Thofe that are call’d the Fathers of
the Church, that is, her Fir, or chief Doctors in
the Primitive times, the Authority of whom the’

A AWLILD

254 The World Bewitch'a.

Papifts equal to that of the Word of God, having
been at firft imbued wich chat falfe Philofophy, did
not fo much as think upon freeing themfelves of
their prejudices, by a true Interpretation and Tranf-
lation of the Holy Scripture: On the contrary,

they have pout'd their preventionsover, whatever

they have writ; for whether they treated of fuch
Articles of Faith, as were moft controverted 5 or

whether they interpreted paflages of the Holy Writ; .
they have adher’d to - bare fpeculations, and ap-
ply’d them to fubjects quite different from thofe -
the Sacred Writing aimed at. S#:Auftin in the.
4th and 5tb Century, has been fruitful in fpeculati-

ons ; and Origen in the -3d, has furpafs’d all the o-
thers in mifapplications, remote from the. {cope of

the Holy Pen-men, as may-have been obferved by:
what has been alleag’d from them, and feveral”
others concerning Spirits, in the 15th Chapter. _
Their Homilies, that is their Sermons, contain but

few Expofitions of the Holy Scripture, and ftill

fewer Tranflations. "Tis true, that Origen and’

St. Ferom, have taken more pains than the others,

and been alfo more puzled, having tranflated the.

Sacred Writings in thofe Ages, in which the know-
ledge of Tongues was not much look’d after, nor
improvd. In the mean while, what thofe Doctors
hape propoÿd upon many feparate paflages, dif-
pers’d thro’ their Writings, { upon which, inftead of a
{erious examination, they have put the Senfe that was
moft favourable to their private Opinions ) has ever
been received and taught afterwards. Thus ‘tis hap-
pen’d long after, the knowlege of Tongues not be
ing better improv’d, that their Interpretations have
been admitted without contradiction 5.only upon
their own credit, and look'd upon with that vene-
ration that is commonly paid to Antiquity, as tho’

the World, in procefs of: time, was grown younger
than

—

à terw

out
geth
hh th
Man
areb
lolo
heu
beli

| Hea

Pott
nett
ty 1
be j

Local

yey
to {9

the
| tte

thor
fami
fand
alloy

The World Bewitch'd. 28 5

than before. By thefe means it is, that their Do-
Ctrines concerning Spirits, and efpecially the bad,
have infenfibly been bequeathed, as an inheritance
to pofterity.

Seët, 12. Since therefore every one is fo much
taken up with this Sect, and pays fo great a defe-
rerice to thofe that are call'd the eminent Fathers ;
tis no wonder that the Papifts, who above all
others, put a high value upon them, fhould ufe
their Language, and confecrate all their Expreffi-
ons. And ‘is long fince the Proteftants have ob-
ferv'd, that thefe their Adverfaries have founded
the Prayers for the dead, the worthiping of Saints,
and the like Doctrines, upon fome expreflions of
the Fathers, that feem to favour them. When af-
terwards they were compell’d to give fome proof
out of the Holy Scripture, they found the firit, to-
gether with Purgatory, inthe rf? Epiftle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, Chap. 3. 13. That fire fhai try every
Mans work. °Tis almoft the fame with thofe that
are bred amongft the Lutherans ; how great a Phi-
lofopher, and how learned foever any one may be,
he will find no reafon, and much lefs a neceffity,to
believe that Chrift is locally and vifibly afcended to
Heaven, but it will appear to him a neceflary pro-
pofition, that our Lord, after his Refurrection, pe-
netrated thro doors fhut up, and that his Humani-
ty isomnipotentr. How learned foever one may
be in the Tongues, there are however, frequent
occafions, in which it can neither be feen or con-
jectur’d upon what ground, the learned have given
to fome certain words, a fignification that favours
the propofitions they maintain, rather than their
true natural Senfe ; fuch as’tis found in other Au-
thors, and inordinary ufe of a Tongue, that is fo
familiar to them. Of thefe I might recite a thou-
fand proofs if it were neceflary, and time would
allow.me, |

Sect,

256 The World Bewitch'd.

Seët. 13. Befides, as muchas Man has taken
pains to acquire uncertain and corrupted Sciences,
fo much has he been negligent of informing him-
felf in the beft, the fineft, and at the fame time, the
fmalleft part of Sciences, with which he is ordina-
rily lefs acquainted ; for as I have already faid,
the Youth in the Schools run over all the Countries
of the Ancient Heathens, only to make,a booty of
Latin and Greek, before they do fo much as vifit

Chriftianity ; which is only fhewn to them, as at-

a diftance ; they are yet of too tender a conftituti-
on to be loaden with fuch folid meat, and too young
to be mixed with fuch important Affairs; fo that
they are taught almoft nothing of that matter. It is
not, thought convenient for them to know what Soul
and Body are ; wherein: confifts the Effence of the
Soul, or that of the Angels and Devils; and. what
knowledge and operations thofe Spirits are capable
of; and what fhare and adminiftration they take
here below in human Affairs. No light is afforded
to them, that may diffipate the darknefs that has
been fpread over their underftandings in their
youth, nor blot out the impreffions that have been
made upon them as to this point, by the meansal-
ready mention’d ; fo that this darknefs and thefe
impreffions, deftitute of Antidotes, do ftill pene-

trate farther. Even thofe that follow the Princi-.

ples of Defcartes, tho’ they diftinguifh better than
others, the nature Of Soul and Body, as will be
fhown in my Second Book, Chap. 1. Seët, 12, 13, 14.
yet when they come to the operations of fuch Spi-
rits, as are not joyned to a Body; either Angels
or Devils ; and undertake to explain how they can
act upon other Bodies, either of Men, or other
matter 5 they take as much freedom as they can,
and go as far as they can be carried, by the
prejudices they have imbibed with all others,,

| before

The World Bewitch a. 257

before they ftudied Scripture , and Philofophy.

Seét. 14, That which may adorn the Human
Mind with Light, and form its Judgment, is what
is lefs intended to be acquired in Univerfities, tho’
they feem to be the place where fuch a rare thing
fhould be gotten, which moft unhappily affords not
the means to grow rich; I mean Mathematicks,
and that part of natural Philofophy, thar difcovers
the nature and courfe of the Heavens ; not becaufe
they treat of our prefent fubject, but for two other
reafons I fhall add. The firft is, that more cer-
tainty is to be found in Mathematicks, than in all
other Sciences; becaufe they are grounded upon in-
fallible Principles ; foch Students as are ufed to
the certainty of thefe Principles, will not acknow-
ledge for truth,fuch as are not attended with a full
ard entire conviction, and put a little value upon
fuch Sciences, as have not the fame certainty. Bur
the Second Reafon is ftill more particular 3 viz.
That Mathematicks, efpecially that part that treats
of the knowledge of Stars, manifeftly difcovers {e-
veral things, that undeniably fhew the Sacred Wri-
ters accommodated themfelves to the ftile and ca-
pacity of the Vulgar, and fpeak of the Heavens,
Earth, Sun, Moon and Stars, not according to their
ownnature, and as they are inthemfelves; but ac-
cording to the common notions of Men. And there-
fore thofe that are.fomewhat addicted tovthat Sci-
ence, credit not fo eafily the difcourfes of other
Men, and are not fatisfied with probabilites. They
are not difpofed to fill the Air with Spirits, nor to
fix then to Stars, nor to confound Spirits and Stars
together. But the mifchief is, as [ have already
hinted, that few Learned give up themfelvesto that
part of the Sciences, tho’ it is the moft ufeful and
beautiful of all,

Se. 15

258 The World Bewitch'd.

Seët. 15. Allthefe prejudices with which we have
been once filld, which have been rooted in us more
and more, by the ways aheady alleag’d, which
have grown by.the new nourifhment they daily re-
ceived, and which have neither been banifhed, nor
weaken’d by the endeavours ofa better informed
Judgment; all thefe prejudices, I fay, are no
where more fenfible than in the fubject we
treat of. And therefore we have deftin'd this Firft
Book, to eftablifh this Truth, and make it very
plain; to the end, it might be clearly perceived,
that all thofe Opinions concerning the Devils, Di-

vinations, and Witchcraft, draw their firft Original:

from the Heathens, who communicated them to
the Jews, during the Babilonian Captivity, where
they had more converfation with the Philofophers,
than in the Land of Canaan, whilft they liv'd fepa-
rated from all other Nations of the Earth. There
they infenfibly took the tincture of the Heathen
Doctrines and Practices, at leaft, of fuch as feem’d
not directly oppofed to their Law. The firft Chri-
fans fpringing from the middle of the Fews and
Heathens, kept likewife moft part of the fame Do-

ctrines, and intended to gain the Heathens by too-

great and eafie a compliance with their Opinions.
Thus was infenfibly laid the foundation, on which
the eb ædifice of Popery is now founded and
rais’d.

Sect. 16. Another Judgment may be pafs’d upon
that matter, if Popery were put in parallel with
Heathenifm, and not efteem’d the worfe of thefe
two.For why fhould not they be held for Heathen
Legends, what the Pagans have publifhed of their
Miracles, Oracles, Gods, Aërial Spectres, Dreams,
and the like prodigies? That is, why do we not
call em Lies, as we rightly fo name the Roman Le-
gends ? Have we more reafon: to-look upon as fuf-

picious-

pit
infert
A vrite
peri

Wthote
publi

The World Bewitch'd. 259

pitious thofe wonders, the relations of which ar€
inferted almeft in all the Books of the chief Roman
writers, andto look upon them as a branch of fu-
perftition, then to deal in the fame manner with
_thofe of the Heathens? Whence comes it, that we
publickly laugh at (both in our difcourfes and writ-
ings, } the tham miracles of the former, as being
meer delufions and trifles, and that we approve,
both by our werds and our Books, the narrations
that the latter make of the wonders feen amongft
| them,and thatwe quote them as true, thd they be of
| the fame matter and weight withthe others? The
|. antiquity of thofe Authors and of the times. in
which they have written, has it {o much power and
| efficacy ? and muft we more eafly credit ftories,
‘becaufe they are -faid to have happen’d a
long while ago, and in far remote Countries ? But
what’s that to the main point ? Truth fits not it felf
in this manner to the inclinations of Men. Lies
were anciently told as well as they are now, and
| as well in Foreign Countries asin our own.
| Seé.17. It is methinks fufficiently proved, by
all the quotations of this Book, that there are no
) Miracles, Oracles, purging Fires, Apparitions of
| Hobgoblins or Souls, Witchcraft by Letters and
Characters, or choice of Days, either in Judaifm
or Popery ; but they draw their Original from Pa-
ganifm. What Reafon than may a Proteftant have
to reject the fables of the Talmud, and the ftories
of the Popifh writings, as foon as thofe fables and
tales are naturaliz’d by Jews or Papifts; and to
hold them for truths, or at leaft, for probable things,
[as long as Paganifm cherifhes them in it’s bofom ?
| All muft be rejected together, or the whole, whar-
ever it may be, muftbe let alone. Why do we not
| free our felves from all our prejudices, and _affoci-
| ciate Scripture to Reafon, to ground our Reaton-
| ings

ta CR. a

A ee ae

60 The World Bewitel d,

ings only upon them, and to look upon them as the
only pure {pring? What pains gnd trouble has not our
credulity to thofe Heathen tales ceft us?-How ma-
ny learned Divines and Philofopners have puzled
their brains, to afcribe to the Devil thofe Oracles,
which they look not for the effects of Human know-
ledge, and withall, fuch wonders as they could not
believe to be performed by Human power? So -
when it feem’d, that the anfwers that were given
by the falfe Gods, and the effects that were pro-
duced among the Heathens, were too extraordina-
ry, and above the force of nature; ’twas thought :
fit to cut the knor, that could nor be untyed. "Twas
fuppofed that Spirits only could be the Authors of
all thefe things ; a fuitable power and knowledge
was afcribed to them; and at laft the very man-
ner of effecting them was determined ; fuch is the
Original of that fcience, falfly fo call’d, the con-
traditions of which, the Apoftle commands a
Chriftian to avoid, in his 1 Epi/t. to Timothy, Chap.
6.v. 20.

Set, 18. The old Women’s talés,as St.Paul call’s
them in the fame Epi(tle, Chap. 4. v. 7. which the
Popifh writers tell us, and the fables they rehearfe,
would fupply us with abundant matter of me-
ditation, fhould we as much credit them as we do
the others. For what muft not be faid, if, fuppofing
that Human deceits have no fhare in them, we
would examine how the Devil could produce all
the effects that are told in thofe narrations ; we be-
lieve it more convenient to fpare our felves that
trouble, by rejecting, as meer lies, the greateft
part of what comes from that fide. But what Rea-
fon have we to deal otherwife withthe Papifts than
with the Heathens? "Tis becaufe of the particular
hatred we have for Popery, from which we have |
been feparated not long fince, and with which sve |

are

> ES

all 4
be

that)
ct |
Rea |
than

ut!
hare

hp we | sd
ae he

The World Bewitch'd. 261

are m continual War; befides the Reformation of
Doctrine and Worfhip that was made in the Church,
at the beginning of the laft Century, extended not
to thofe Opinions, which were fcarce taken notice
of, and which had taken root even before the decay
of the Church was perceived ; fo that it was only
purified of fuch Errors, the rejection of which was
judged abfolutely neceflary, in conference betwixt
Luther and Calvin. Not long after; when the Re-

. formation was carryed farther,‘{uch points only were

handled, as had fome relation with the former.
“Tis properly for that Reafon, that in thofe publick
writings that are call'd the Liturgy of our Churches,

| -It.was never minded to correct thofe expreflions,
| that had been fo long in
- vils, no controverfy having ever been rais’d, either

ufe as to Spirits and De-

amongit the Chriftians in general, or the Papifts in

particular, Yet I doubt not but it had been done,

had this Article been taken fo much notice of, and

examined with fo much attention as the others were,

or had but one half of the difficulties that are now

propofed, been alledged at that time.

Sed. 19. Moreover, amongft the qualities that

are afcribed to Popery, the picture of which I con-

fefs can fcarce be more unihaply then the Original
it felf; That of Anrichriftianifm was thought very
convenient, as that of Antichrift to fit the Pope
extraordinary well. Immediatly the words of St.
Paul, in his 2 Epiftle to the Theffalonians, Chip, 2.
v. 3.to the 9th. were explained in that fenfe, and it
was thought that the Apoftle had an Eye to Po ery
when he faid, That his coming would be in the tat
of Satan, with all Power, Signs, and Lying Wonders.

| By the explication the Preteftants were difpofed to

joyn together, Satan and Antichrift, that is the De-
vil and the Pope, as two Brothers, and to draw
that confequence, that Popery was the Doctrine of

the

PZ

262 The World Bewitch'd.

the Devil. By which means it was eafy to infinu-
ate, that the Devil intereftes and has his vote inthe
tenets of the Papifts, and that the See Of Rome is
the feat of his Empire.

Sei. 20. Thence proceeds the ftile that is ordi-
narily ufed both in Difcourfes and Books, even as
ro the fmalleft Controverfies, that are raifed about
fome point of Doctrine or Worfhip ; when any fticks
not to the vulgar Opinions, ’tis prefenrly cry’d up,
that the Devil’s let loofe ; and ufes all his violence
and crafty Devices toaffault the Church. “Tis faid
he’s always ready to oppofe all our Motions towards
good, and a thoufand like. People are pleas’d to
hear the Devil fo fer off ; they love the occafion of
cafting upon him all the faults they are guilty of 5
and of applauding themfelves for victory,when they
have overcome fome Temptation which they ima-

gined to have been raifed by the endeavours of that |
We look upon it as a piece of |

powerful Enemy.
Eloquence not only to take God's Name in vain.but

alfo inceffantly to joyn that of the Devil with it.
In a word, the Almighty forms almoft no project,
but immediately the Devil endeavours to deftroy
it; and the moft vitious Men commit fcarce any
Crimes, but they are driven to them by the Devil.

Ses, 21. With all thofe prejudices we undertake
the expounding and tranflating of the Holy Writ 5.

for having never conceived the leaft doubt as to
thefe things,we had never occafion to examine whe-
ther they are really true.But why fhould we take fo
much trouble, is it not far more convenient to be-
lieve what is generally believed, ‘and to {peak as

the otherdo. The enquiry of Truth is an under-)

taking in which little affiftance 1s to be hoped ; and
there are fo many guards on all the ways that lead
to it, that it would prove very hard to break
through, *Tis an ancient Proverb, That ever) one #

The World Bewitch d, 263

not alow'd to go to Corinth. Whoever intends to
overcome fo many difficulties, cannot hope to fuc-
ceed but by his diligence, eagernefs, and earneftnefs.
To this end,I know not a better means than to pro-
ceed to the Interpretation of the Holy Scripture, as
though it had never been interpreted before; to
fearch into all things carefully, to enquire after the
Connection of all the Doctrines contained in it; and
to have recourfe to Interpreters only to borrow fome
light for dark places, but not to follow them astrue
and infallible Guides. This I hope to put in pra-
ctice in my fecond Book, if God gives me life.

Seët. 22. But doubtlefs this advice will prove
ferviceable only to my felf, and fome few Perfons
who fhall perceive its ufefulnefs ; neither have I
reafon to hope that it fhould ever be relifht by the
publick ; Popery being not fo far eradicated out of
the Proreftants Hearts, but that it {prings up again
from time to time in fome places, There isa fault,
of which the vifible Church was never free 3>-that
is, the having too much deference for Authority and
Tradition. For though a great Refpect ought to
be paid to thofe that are eftablifhed as God’s Mini-
{ters in the Church, and that feveral things concern-
ing her external Government, ought to be ruled by
her Directors; yet we mutt nor give up our felves
wholly tothem. There is a great regard to be
had as to this Point, and a Mean tosbe chofen with
much Difcretion ; left to avoid the reproach of Ir-
reverence and Irregularity, we fhould aferibe too
much to the Authority of the Church, and the com-
‘mon Opinion of her chief Doctors: In this Senfe
it is, that one of the moft learned Men of this Age
undertook to affert this Thefis, Papatus eff infepara-
bilis ab Ecclefia ; The Popedom 5 infeparable from the
Church. As for me, who perhaps have more expe-
fience in this matter than any other Perfon in thefe

Por-

264 The World Bewichd.

Provinces ;. I dare not hope this method fhould
change, and even have no Reafon to believe it,
confidering what pafles whil# Iam taken up with
this prefent work.. However, I fhall profecute my
| defign, relying upon the Grace of God, being per-
Ht | fuaded that I write for maintaining the Truth, and
that I cannot forbear to do it, fince I am informed
of it. After all, as I aim at nothing elfe but the
Glory of God, and the defence of the true Faiths M
|) fo I {ee that my labour has not been in vain,but has 4
4 already produced great Fruit. This bears up my |
| Courage, and infpires me with great ardour, toap- ©
By my felf to the compofition of the following |

ooks. |

s

Le comme etre ese th me a ntm EB ns el me sers ETO

WR de IS PE no er et nor la aa ne elle wc a cee crane nm Rm 5 Aie Bee ele sine eS

SF ee a IB D TM Don pm per a

ES ee
aS eee

CS pe ele
i A sate

SED re ee
we Ape “a

ere prem

A

NE:

Sr.

“a eosin en tiaa, ea
Me age ae enact Lalas
Ls AS PME YEE PTT Ernie,

M
amy hae

AOS

À
’

Loe
AY

us

"y:

te

de
rm
Les

- - ; ie ie = Sateen sy
ernie Se meee Sy A te re A Ae br at
“- - =

