THE


ANATOMY  OF  THE  BRAIN,


EXPLAINED  IN  A


SERIES  OF  ENGRAVINGS.


BY

CHARLES  BELL,

FELLOW  OF  THE  ROYAL  COLLEGE  OF  SURGEONS  OF  EDINBURGH.


LONDON:

PRINTED  BY  C.  WHITTINGHAM,  DEAN-STREET,  FETTER-LANE,

FOR  T.  N.  LONGMAN  AND  O.  REES,  PATERNOSTER-ROW,  AND  T.  CADELL,  JUN.

AND  W.  DAVIES,  IN  THE  STRAND.


1802,


-


:1


.


TO


COLONEL  ALEXANDER  DIROM,

OF


MOUNT  ANNAN,

DEPUTY  QUARTER  MASTER  GENERAL  OF  HIS  MAJESTY’S  FORCES  IN  NORTH  BRITAIN,

8Cc.  8(c.


THIS  WORK

IS  RESPECTFULLY  INSCRIBED


BY


THE  AUTHOR


fc  4


r  ,  .  ;  ,


v  •:  .


V


AD  VER  TISEMENT.


IN  the  Brain  the  appearance  is  so  peculiar,  and  so  little
capable  of  illustration  from  other  parts  of  the  body,  the  sur¬
faces  are  so  soft,  and  so  easily  destroyed  by  rude  dissection,
and  it  is  so  difficult  to  follow  an  abstract  description  merely,
that  this  part  of  Anatomy  cannot  be  studied  without  the
help  of  Engravings,

In  proportion  to  the  delicacy  of  the  Brain  is  the  diffi¬
culty  of  investigating  its  parts  and  structure ;  but  to  repre¬
sent  those  evanescent  forms  and  parts  by  drawing,  is  al¬
together  impracticable  by  a  common  artist  unacquainted
with  Anatomy.  If  the  most  celebrated  Anatomists,  even
when  employed  in  representing  the  coarser  parts,  as  Bones
and  Muscles,  have  been  solicitous  to  retain,  during  all
their  lives,  the  same  artists  in  their  service,  that  they  might
profit  by  that  superficial  accuracy  and  slight  degree  of


VI


professional  knowledge  which  men  so  educated  could  ac¬
quire,  what  should  be  necessary  to  an  artist  who  proposes
to  represent  the  Anatomy  of  the  Brain  ?  He  must  be  pos¬
sessed,  not  merely  of  such  superficial  knowledge  as  may
enable  him  to  distinguish,  by  their  characteristics,  the
Muscles  and  Tendons,  the  Arteries  and  Veins;  but  he  must
also  be  well  acquainted  with  the  various  drawings  and  de¬
scriptions  of  authors,  and  understand  the  meaning  of  their
terms;  for  although  his  business,  no  doubt,  is  to  copy  ac¬
curately  from  the  dissected  Brain,  yet  such  previous  know¬
ledge,  and  study  of  the  subject,  give  to  his  representations  a
minuteness  of  intention  which  cannot  otherways  be  attained.

These  twelve  Engravings  form  a  comprehensive  System
of  the  Anatomy  of  the  Brain,  and  while  the  simpler  de¬
scription  of  the  Letter-press  is  continued  uninterrupted  by
any  disquisition,  much  of  the  important  detail  is  thrown
into  the  Notes,  especially  where  any  difficulty  might  occur
in  comprehending  the  Anatomy.  Where  any  explanation
was  necessary,  I  have  in  general  preferred  the  words  of  the
best  authors,  if  they  could  be  quoted  consistently  with  the
natural  explanation;  for  they  at  once  authenticate  and  ex¬
plain  the  meaning  of  terms  which  were  perhaps  casually  used
by  the  older  authors,  and  which  have  since  been  adopted  as
proper  names.


Vll


It  will  be  observed  too,  that  while  the  best  and  most  de¬
scriptive  terms  are  retained  in  the  Text,  there  will  be  found
in  the  Notes  such  synonima  as  may  be  useful  in  reading  va¬
rious  authors,  and  in  clearing  up  much  ambiguity,  pro¬
ceeding  from  the  natural  effect  of  terms  misapplied.

As  I  found  the  Note  upon  the  communication  of  the
Ventricles  running  to  a  great  length,  I  have,  at  the  end,
thrown  together  a  few  observations  upon  this  subject.  I
have  done  this  for  the  same  reason  that  in  my  first  Course
of  Lectures  I  entered  minutely  into  the  explanation  of  this
part  of  Anatomy,  that  I  might  not  be  misunderstood,  or
liable  to  misrepresentation.


*


1


■

V  :  :  '■  fr:  ;rt  aift  rr  o':  .  If


'  '  t  '  ‘  .

•"  .  '•  ’  ■  r  .!»  ifol  >idi  ftrtob  '¥?&$:

:  •  ’  :  ■  •  .  f  fr/fooJ  )  .

'


■  ‘  i


.


.

'


EXPLANATION


OF

PLATE  I.


FROM  this  Plate  much  of  the  general  Anatomy  and  subdivisions
of  the  Brain  may  be  learnt.  It  represents  the  scull-cap  taken  off.
On  the  left  side,  the  Dura  Mater  investing  the  Brain;  while  the  right
hemisphere  of  the  Cerebrum  is  seen  covered  only  by  the  Vascular
Pia  Mater.  The  hemispheres,  which  are  naturally  divided  by  the
Falx,  are  here  separated  a  little,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  look  down
upon  the  Corpus  Callosum,  and  see  the  branches  of  the  Anterior
Artery  of  the  Cerebrum,  and  the  Artery  of  the  Corpus  Callosum.


A.  The  cut  edge  of  the  bone  and  the  Frontal  Sinuses.

b.  The  Integuments  of  the  head  hanging  down.

c.  The  outer  surface  of  the  Dura  Mater,  which  adhered  by  mem¬

braneous  filaments  and  communication  of  vessels  to  the  bone,
investing,  supporting,  and  protecting  the  Brain,  and  guarding
against  the  ready  communication  of  disease  to  the  more  delicate
Pia  Mater.

d.  The  inner  surface  of  the  Dura  Mater,  which  covered  the  right

hemisphere  of  the  Cerebrum,  cut  in  the  direction  of  the  edge
of  the  scull,  and  folded  over  upon  the  left  side.


4


e.  The  Anterior  Branch  of  the  Meningeal  Artery1.

f.  The  Posterior  Branch  of  the  Meningeal  Artery.

g.  G.  The  Meningeal  Veins2.  These  run  on  both  sides  of  the

branches  of  the  Arteries,  and  parallel  with  them  in  all  their  ex¬
tent,  and  in  general,  upon  tearing  up  the  Cranium,  they  mark
sufficiently  from  their  plenitude  the  state  of  the  Brain,  fre¬
quently  deluging  the  whole  surface  of  the  Dura  Mater  with
their  blood.

h.  i.  k.  The  Right  hemisphere  of  the  Cerebrum,  which  is

again  subdivided  into  h,  the  Anterior  Lobe  of  the  Cere¬
brum,  i.  the  Middle  Lobe,  k.  the  Posterior  Lobe,  which
divisions  seem  arbitrary  in  this  view  of  the  Brain;  but  upon
turning  the  base  of  the  Encephalon  up,  as  in  Plate  XI.  we  then
see  the  meaning  of  these  divisions.  Haller,  however,  rather
chooses  to  say,  the  frontal,  the  parietal,  and  occipital  regions.

We  see  the  trunk  of  this  Artery  arising  from  the  Internal  Maxillary  Artery. —
Engravings  of  the  Arteries,  Plate  IV.  fig.  1.  16,  and  fig.  2.  5,  and  in  Plate  XII.
a.  a.  It  is  called  the  Middle  Artery  of  the  Dura  Mater,  or  the  Spinous  Artery.  It
rises  above  the  line  of  the  usual  section  of  the  Cranium,  in  one,  two,  three,  or  four
considerable  branches;  but  frequently  with  one  greater  anterior  branch,  and  a  less
considerable  posterior  one.  Besides  the  Spinous,  or  great  Artery  of  the  Dura  Ma¬
ter,  other  Arteries  are  sent  to  this  membrane ;  anteriorly  from  the  Opthalmic  or
Lacrymal  Arteries,  posteriorly  from  the  Vertebral  and  Occipital  Arteries.  Haller ,
Winslow ,  Vicq.  d'Azyr ,  Ruysch ,  Thes.  Anatom,  v.  tab.  ii.

2-  Meningeal  Veins.  These  are  the  branches  of  the  Meningea  Medea  seu  Spi-
nosa,  “  qua  per  foramen  spinosum  ossis  sphenoidalis  migrat,  et  conjunguntur  cum
“  plexu  pterigoideo  venoso.”  Walter  de  Apoplex.  These,  like  the  Arteries  of  the  Dura
Mater,  belong  properly  to  the  bone,  the  membrane  having  little  vascularity,  and
though  they  ramify  largely  on  the  Dura  Mater,  the  extremities  perforate  the  bone.
“  Reliqui  rami,  quos  figuramonstrat,  sunt  venae  Duroe  Matris,  quae  partim  sanguinem
“  ex  sinu  falciformi  hauriunt,  partim  sanguinem  ex  ossibus  cranii  revehunt,  vel  deni-
“  que  sunt  venae  bibulae  seu  resorbentes  Durae  Matris.”  J.  G.  Walter.


5


We  observe  also  here  the  convolutions  of  the  Brain,  into  the
interstices  of  which  the  Pia  Mater  dips  to  supply  the  deeper
parts,  as  will  be  seen  more  particularly  in  the  next  Plate.

l.  The  Corpus  Callosum3,  which  from  its  deep  situation  is  seen

here  but  indistinctly.

m.  The  Anterior  Artery  of  the  Cerebrum4.  It  is  seen  to

give  off  the  Arteria  Corporis  Callosi,  while  the  continued  trunk,
lying  on  the  flat  surface  of  the  hemisphere,  and  hanging  over
the  Artery  of  the  Corpus  Callosum,  sends  its  branches  arching
over  the  acute  margin  of  the  hemisphere,  and  is  beautifully
distributed  in  the  Pia  Mater.

n.  The  Artery  of  the  Corpus  Callosum5.

o.  o.  Branches  of  the  middle  and  posterior  Arteries  of  the  Cere¬

brum,  which  lie  betwixt  the  convolutions  of  the  Cerebrum;
but  which,  when  they  emerge  upon  the  surface,  do  not  lie  in
the  interstices  of  the  convolutions.  This  we  shall  the  less  won¬
der  at,  when  we  recollect  that  these  convolutions  cannot,  while
retained  within  the  scull,  have  that  convexity  which  their  elas¬
ticity  enables  them  to  assume  when  the  Cranium  is  opened.

3-  Corpus  Callosum,  or  Commissura  magna  Cerebri.  It  will  be  understood,  by
turning  to  the  next  plate,  where  it  is  seen  to  be  the  internal  medullar  centre  of  com¬
munication  betwixt  the  two  hemispheres.  It  is  called  Commissure,  as  those  cords,
which  are  seen  in  the  cavities  of  the  Brain  to  extend  across  the  centre.  It  is  called
Corpus  Callosum  by  the  older  writers;  but  by  Vieussens,  Fornix  vera .

4-  See  Anatomy  of  the  Heart  and  Arteries,  Vol.  II..  p.  309,.  and  Engravings  of  the-
Arteries,  Plate  V.  9,  and  Plate  XII.  of  the  present  Work.

s.  There  is  considerable  variety  in  the  relative  sizes  of  these  branches  of  the  Ante¬
rior  Artery  of  the  Cerebrum.  Sometimes  the  Artery  of  the  Corpus  Callosum  is  the
larger,  and  when  the  Falx,  in  a  regular  demonstration  of  the  Brain,  is  lifted,  and  the-
hemispheres  held  separate,  there  cannot  be  a  more  beautiful  view  than  this  of  the
distribution  of  those  Arteries  of  the  Corpus  Callosum  of  both  sides  lying  parallel  to.
each  other,  and  upon  the  commissure  and  mingling  their  branches,  while  the  con¬
tinued  trunk  hangs  over  them.


6


P.  Some  of  the  larger  veins,  which,  gathering  the  blood  from  the  ex¬
tremities  of  these  Arteries,  go  to  empty  themselves  into  the  great
longitudinal  Sinus.  The  smooth  internal  surface  of  the  Dura
Mater  lies  in  contact  with  the  Tunica  Arachnoides6,  but  with¬
out  adhesion  to  it,  except  at  the  point  where  those  veins  enter
the  Sinus.  There  the  connection  is  strengthened  by  an  adhe¬
sion  of  the  Pia  Mater  to  the  Dura  Mater.  This  adhesion  is  of
a  peculiar  kind,  by  means  of  little  bodies  like  the  cotilidons  of
die  uterine  system  of  animals7.

The  course  of  the  great  longitudinal  Sinus  will  be  well  un¬
derstood  by  turning  to  Plate  X.  of  this  Fasciculus.

6-  The  Tunica  Arachnoides,  transparent,  and  having  little  vascularity,  invests  the
Pia  Mater,  and  does  not  pass  down  betwixt  the  convolutions  of  the  Brain  ;  but
covers  the  general  surface.  It  is  more  easily  separated  from  the  Pia  Mater  in  the
base  of  the  Brain,  “  qua  superiorem  cerebri  partem  involvit  rarissima  si  ulla  dissem-
“  mari  vasa  sanguinea.”  See  Ruysch  Epistola.  tab.  10.

7-  u  Asperitas  Falcis,  per  quam  annecti  solet  lateribus  tenuis  membranae.”  ( Spigel .
tab .  iii.  Cerebri  decimi.)


EXPLANATION


OF


PLATE  II.


,


9


EXPLANATION

OF

PLATE  II.


IN  this  Plate  the  hemispheres  of  the  Cerebrum  are  so  cut  as  to
show  the  Corpus  Callosum,  the  distinction  of  medullary  and  cineri-
tious  substances,  the  manner  in  which  the  Pia  Mater  descends  be¬
twixt  the  convolutions  of  the  Brain,  and  the  Centrum  Ovale.  To  do
this,  we  have  endeavoured  to  divest  the  Brain  entirely  of  the  Dura
Mater;  first,  by  cutting  the  Dura  Mater  round  the  margin  of  the
bone;  and  then  by  separating  the  hemispheres  a  little,  and  freeing  the
Falx  from  its  adhesions  to  the  Crista  Gali  of  the  cethnoid  bone,  and
folding  it  backwards,  it  being  still  left  attached  to  the  Tentorium.
Then  the  level  of  the  Corpus  Callosum  being  observed,  the  incision
is  to  be  made  horizontally,  and  nearly  on  the  same  plane.

a.  The  integuments  of  the  head  laid  down  over  the  ears  and  face.

b.  The  Temporal  Muscle.

c.  The  Circle  of  the  Cranium.

d.  The  Dura  Mater,  which  invested  the  Cerebrum  and  formed

the  Falx,  or  partition  betwixt  the  hemispheres,  thrown  back.  •

B


10


e.  e.  f.  The  Cineritious  Substance,  which  is  seen  like  a  stained
part  of  the  Brain,  as  if  penetrating  a  little  way,  and  following
the  infractuosities  of  the  surface.

g.  The  Medullary  Part  of  the  Brain.  Upon  this  left  side

the  knife  was  not  carried  so  deep,  nor  upon  the  level  of  the
Corpus  Callosum.  The  consequence  of  this  is,  that  the  cen¬
tral  medullary  part  is  completely  surrounded  wfith  the  cortical
or  cineritious  substance,  and  therefore  it  forms  a  distinct  centre
of  medullary  substance,  which  makes  Vicq.  d’Azyr  call  it —
“  Centre  ovale  lateral ,  ou  petit  centre  ovale.”

But  it  will  be  observed,  that  on  the  other  side,  there  being  a
deeper  section  made,  there  remains  no  cineritious  matter  on  the
inner  margin  of  the  hemisphere  ;  so  that  if  the  right  hemi¬
sphere  should  be  cut  to  the  same  level,  the  Corpus  Callosum
would  be  the  centre  of  a  uniform  mass  of  white  medullary  mat¬
ter,  viz.  The  Centrum  Ovale  Vieussenii.

h.  h.  The  Pi  A  Mater  passing  into  the  interstices  of  the  convolu¬

tions  of  the  Brain,  to  support  and  nourish  its  substance.

i.  i.  The  Corpus  Callosum1,  or  Commissura  Magna  Cere¬

bri.  This  is  the  white  body  which  we  see  upon  separating  the
hemispheres,  and  looking  down  into  the  centre  of  the  Brain.
It  forms  a  medullary  arch,  covering  the  two  lateral  ventricles
nearly  in  the  same  way  that  the  Fornix  lies  over  the  third  ven¬
tricle;  or  rather,  perhaps  we  should  say,  in  the  manner  in
which  it  is  said  to  lie.  It  is  firm,  and  we  may  observe  the  ap¬
pearance  of  transverse  lines  passing  from  the  one  hemisphere  to
the  other.

1  “  A  doctiss.  Veslingio  (Syntag.  Anatom.)  Corpus  Callosum  dicitur  quod  in  se-
“  quentibus  veri  fornicis  nomine  donabimus.”  (Vieussens.)


11


k.  The  Longitudinal  Medullary  Lines2  of  the  Corpus  Cal¬
losum,  and  betwixt  these  is  the  Rapha  3,  or  Furrow.

2  i(  Petits  Cordons.”  (Winslow,) — “  Filets  ou  tractus  medullaires  longitudinaux  da
“  corps  calleux.”  (Vicq.  d) Azyr. )

3  Haller,  Gunz,  &,c.

We  observe,  in  this  and  the  succeeding  Plate,  little  spots  of  extravasation  in  the
medullary  matter  from  the  cut  vessels.  Walter  says,  “  Anatomici  credunt  hsec  esse
t(  guttas  sanguinis,  ex  finibus  venarum  et  arteriarum  transscissarum  manentes;  at-
<£  tamen  me  multa,  eaque  feliciter  instituta  experimenta  convicerunt,  hsec  minime
{ 1  esse  arterias,  sed  tantum  venas,  ex  quibus  substantia  medullari  transscissa  sangui-
“  nis  fluit.”  These  vessels  in  a  congestion  of  the  Brain  becoming  more  numerous,
and  being  filled  with  a  dark-coloured  blood,  give  a  dark  or  brownish  colour  to  the
medullary  substance.


;  ■  >

i  i i  i  j fit  ■  ■  b-  •  iMu

.  *

•  '  •  '  '  •  •  •  ;  •

.

-  -


EXPLANATION


OF


PLATE  Ill.


1  *


.


1


.


-


*

•

15


EXPLANATION


OF

PLATE  III .


WE  have  in  this  Plate  a  very  extensive  view  of  the  Ventricles,  or
Cavities  of  the  Brain  ;  but  to  follow  the  appearances  of  the  parts,  as
they  present  themselves  to  us  during  dissection,  we  must  attend,  in
the  first  place,  to  the  left  side  of  the  Brain.  For  here  the  Corpus
Callosum  is  cut  away,  and  a  horizontal  incision  is  made  of  the  cen¬
tral  medullary  part  of  the  Cerebrum,  so  as  to  lay  open  the  lateral
Ventricles.  While  upon  the  right  side  it  is  considerably  more  cut
away,  to  expose  the  whole  extent  of  the  lateral  Ventricle.

PARTS  SEEN  UPON  FIRST  LAYING  OPEN  THE  LATERAL  VENTRICLE.

A.  The  Corpus  Striatum  1  of  the  left  side,  which  forms  a  convex
floor  to  this  part  of  the  highest  level  of  the  lateral  Ventricle.  It
has,  like  the  surface  of  the  Brain,  cineritious  matter  without,
while  the  section  of  it  shows  medullary  strise.
b.  The  Choroid  Plexus 1  2,  leading  anteriorly  to  the  communica¬
tion  of  the  Ventricles  under  the  Fornix,  while  it  will  be  seen
sinking  backwards  into  the  great  inferior  horn  of  the  Ventricle.

1  Corpus  Striatum. — Processus  Lentiformis. — Corps  Canned.  Lieutaud.

2  “  Le  Plexus  Choroitle  se  retrecit,  &  se  plonge  sous  ces  veines,  danslapartie  la
“  plus  elevee  tlu  troisieme  ventricule.”  Mem.  V Acad.  Roy.  1781. — Vicq.  d'Azyr.


16


c.  The  margin  of  the  posterior  Crura  of  the  Fornix.

d.  The  Tenia  Semicircularis  3,  or  Tenia  Striata.  It  will

be  observed  to  be  covered  anteriorly  by  a  layer  of  a  transparent
cineritious  coloured  substance,  viz.  lame  cornce.

e.  The  Anterior  Sinus  4  of  the  lateral  Ventricle,  being  formed

by  the  termination  forwards  of  the  Corpus  Striatum.

Upon  completing  the  section  backwards  we  find  these  parts.

f.  The  Posterior  Sinus  5  of  the  lateral  Ventricle  c,  which  is  a

triangular  cavity,  stretching  in  a  curved  direction  into  the  pos¬
terior  lobe  of  the  Cerebrum.  This  part  of  the  Ventricle  varies
much  in  different  bodies,  and  even  sometimes  the  right  and  left
sides  of  the  same  subject  differ  in  figure  and  direction.

3  Tenia  semicircularis,  limbus  posterior  corporis  striati  Willisii. — Geminum  cen¬
trum  semicirculare  Vieussenii. — Frenula  nova  of  Tarin,  and  (in  his Historia  Cavitatum
Cerebri)  “  Frenula  nova  membranse  cornea;  oculi  ad  instar,  pellucida,  a  parte  ante-
££  riori  thalamorum  opticorum,  juxta  predictum  angulum,  ad  posteriora,  infra  tha-
“  lamos  opticos,  usque  ad  partem  anteriorem  rim®  sinuum  anteriorum  Ventriculorum
££  Cerebri,  sese  extendentia.”  Tab.  1  .fig.  1.  See  also  Haller,  fascic.  vii.  plate  ii.  and
note  f,  and  tab.  iii.  Again,  ££  Elle  est  evidemment  fibreuse,  les  filets  qui  la  com-
££  posent  sont  sur-tout  tres  marques  dans  son  origine,  et  dans  sa  termination.  Vicq.
££  t TAzyr ,  p.  7.  Therefore  he  is  inclined  to  call  it,  bandelletti fibrueuse  du  corps  stria ?,
“  tenia  fibrosa  corporis  striati ,  sive  tenia  striata."

4  “  The  anterior  horn.”  ££  Prolons;ement  anterieux.”

5  ££  Cavite  Digitale.”  Vaunhorn  and  Bartholin. — “  Posterior  Sinus.”  Tarin.
Speaking  of  this  Haller  says,  ££  Quod  ego  incerta  longitudine  breve,  et  iterum  ad
“  duas  uncias  longum  reperi,  tubere  repletum,  quod  ita  videtur  a  pede  hippocampi
“  oriri,  ut  tamen  fossa  qusedam  ab  eo  pede  separatur.  Solet  autem  hoc  tuber  ovale  esse,
“  utcunque  tamen  unica  fine  introrsum  flecti.” — Fascic.  vii.  tab.  ii. — ££  La  division
££  en  forme  d’ancre  de  la  par  tic  posterieure  du  ventricule.”  (Lieutaud.) — This,  the
ancliyroide  of  Morand,  is  not  the  posterior  sinus:  ££  II  occupe  une  petit  espace  entre
££  l’enfoncement  digital  et  le  bord  convexe  de  Thippocampus.”  ( M.  Morand.)

6  “  The  latei’al  or  superior  Ventricle.”  c£  Ventriculi  tricornes.”  ££  Ventriculi
££  Anteriores.”  The  lateral  or  great  Ventricle  by  Steno,  because  indeed  the  third
and  fourth  are  mere  chinks  compared  with  the  extent  of  these.


I


17


g.  The  Cornu  Ammonis,  or  Hippocampus  Major  *7,  in  which
relief  or  convexity  the  posterior  horn  of  the  Ventricle  is  seen  to
terminate,  while  it  is,  at  the  same  time,  continuous  with  the
next  eminence.

if.  h.  The  Colliculus,  or  l’Ergot,  or  Hippocampus  Minor18,
which  is  a  convexity  or  elevation  in  the  floor  of  this  prolonged
part  of  the  Ventricle,  resembling  that  which  descends  into  the
great  inferior,  but  which  is  sometimes  called  the  posterior,  horn
of  the  Ventricle.  Its  surface  consists  of  white  medullary  mat¬
ter  ;  but  when  the  knife  penetrates  this  cortex,  it  is  seen  to  have
cineritious  matter  within.

i.  k.  c.  The  Fornix,  or  Vault  of  Three  Pillars19.  .  It  has
this  name,  not  from  its  relation  to  the  lateral  Ventricles,  but  from
the  manner  in  which  it  covers  the  third  Ventricle.  Posteriorly
at  c.  k.  we  see  it  j‘oining  with  the  back  part  of  the  Corpus  Cal¬
losum,  and  expanding  what  are  called  its  posterior  crura,  into


17  ££  Inequali  et  fluctuosa  figura  predita  est,  quae  hippocampi,  et  mai'ini  canuli
££  effigiem  refert  vel  potius  Bombicini  Vermis  formam  indicat.  (Arantius)  Corn.de
“  Belier.”  Winslow ,  Morand ,  Vicq.  d'Azyr).  But  unlike  the  horn,  it  is  larger  at
the  extremity.  There  may  be  an  obscurity  in  this  name  from  some  of  the  older
writers  using  the  term  to  describe  the  deep  anfractuosity  of  the  Ventricle  itself,  in
which  the  hippocampus  lies,  ££  Cornu  in  modum  aretata.”  ££  Cornu  modo  augus-
“  tata.”  ( Vesalius ,  Bauhun ,  &c.)

18  “  On  peut  done  regarder  comme  une  petit  hippocampe,  et  la  designer  sous  le
££  nom  d’Hippocampus  minor,  par  opposition  avec  l’Hippocampus  major  que  est  la
££  Corne  d’ Ammon.  Cette  nomenclature  m’aparcue  plus  convenable  que  celle  d’un-
££  guis,  de  colliculus,  &c.”  Vicq.  d'Azyr.

is  “  Corpus  instar  Fornicis  seu  Testudinis.”  Vesalius.  u  Fornix  non  tarn  trian-
££  guli,  quam  duorum  cornuum  formam,  aut  (cui  rectius  comparaveris)  y.  literam
££  pythogoricam  referens.”  Spigelius.  “  Triangle  medullaire.  Voute  a  trois  pi-
££  liers.”  Vicq.  d'Azyr.  In  old  authors,  ££  Psaloides,  Coquille.”  ££  Corpus  ca-
“  meratum.”  Turin.

c


18


a  broad  lamina  of  medullary  matter,  which  connects  them  with
the  eminences  g.  h.

l.  The  Sinus,  or  Cavity  of  the  Septum  Lucidum20.  The  remains  of

the  Septum  Lucidum  are  seen  to  form  a  ridge  upon  the  middle
part  of  the  Fornix,  for  it  is  a  partition  which  reaches  down  from
the  Corpus  Callosum  to  the  Fornix,  upon  which  it  seems  to  rest,
and  thus  divides  the  two  lateral  Cavities  or  Ventricles.

It  consists  of  a  double  medullary  lamina21,  and  the  space  be¬
twixt  these  is  called  the  Cavity  of  the  Septum  Lucidum,  in  ge¬
neral  containing  a  serous  fluid.  From  the  varying  descriptions
of  authors  it  must  have  great  diversity  in  size.  Vieussens  and
Winslow  describe  it  as  communicating  with  the  third  Ventricle.
Tarin  says,  that  it  sometimes  opens  into  the  lateral  Ventricle.

m.  The  Thalamus  Nervi  Optici  of  the  right  side.

n.  The  Choroid  Plexus  of  the  right  side  dissected  up  from  its  na¬

tural  seat,  and  part  of  it  cut  away.  Its  further  progress  down¬
wards  into  the  great  inferior  horn  of  the  Ventricles  lies  within
the  circle  of  the  Cornu  Ammonis,  and  where  it  receives  the

lower  and  Anterior  Choroid  Arteries22 .

— *

20  Septum  Lucidum.  Speculum  Lucidum.  Tarin.  Diaphragma. — (Galen  has
used  this  term  in  speaking  of  the  Velum  interpositum) — “  Poro  dextri  et  sinistri  Ven-
“  triculorum  septum  eadem  cum  cerebre  constat  substantia,  sed  in  medio  quod  ad
“  superiora  et  inferiora  attinet,  adeo  est  tenue,  ut  quum  clare  luce  dissectionem
“  administramus  ut  in  altero  tantum  latere  candelam  admoveamus  splendor  ipsius
“  tanquam  per  vitrum  aut  speculalem  lapidem  pellucent.”  Vesalius.  u  On  l’ap-
“  pelle  ainsi  quoique  elle  soit  presque  entierment  opaque.”  Vicq.  cl' Azyr.

21  “  Dont  chacune  est  formee  de  deux  membranes  tres  minces,  l’une  d’une  ex-
“  treme  tenuite  medullaire  et  interne  l’autre  cendree  et  externe.”  Vicq.  d'Ayzr.
The  cavity  of  the  Septum  was  first  observed  by  Sylvius  de  le  Boe.

22  The  Arteries  sent  to  this  inferior  part  of  the  Choroid  Plexus,  are  derived  some¬
times  from  the  trunk  of  the  Carotid  Artery,  after  having  given  off  the  branch  of
communication  with  the  Basilar  Artery,  or  from  the  middle  Artery  of  the  Cerebrum,
that  which  Vicq.  d’Azyr  calls  Artere  Sylvienne ,  because  it  lies  in  the  Fossa  Silvii.


19


o.  The  Inferior  Horn  23  of  the  Lateral  Ventricle,  which

is  to  be  seen  only  by  cutting  the  middle  lobe  of  the  Cerebrum
obliquely;  for  this  part  of  the  Ventricle  lies  very  deep,  and  al¬
most  under  the  anterior  Sinus,  e.

p.  The  termination  of  the  Cornu  Ammonis,  which  is  the  relief  con¬

tinued  down  upon  the  bottom  of  the  great  inferior  horn,  as  we
see  the  eminence  h.  continued  into  the  Processus  Digitalis,  or
posterior  Sinus24.


23  Ventriculi  Hippocampi,  or  Bombicini,  by  Arantius.  This  part  of  the  lateral
Ventricle  being  described  by  several  authors  as  a  separate  Ventricle.

24  The  divisions  and  anfractuosities  of  the  great  or  lateral  Ventricles  being  disco¬
vered  and  described  in  succession  by  different  authors,  the  names  which  at  one  time
had  a  reference  to  the  supposed  shape  or  situation  are  apt  now  to  mislead  us.  The
inferior  horn  is  in  some  books  called  the  posterior  horn.


■  V  ;


■


.


4


-  .

..

,  -  -r  ■


'


EXPLANATION


OF


PLATE  IF.


■  m  '


'


V


*  '  •  *  r  .*


EXPLANATION


OF

PLATE  IF.


IN  this  Plate  the  parts  are  nearly  of  their  natural  size.  It  is  an
enlarged  view  of  what  is  seen  in  the  third  Plate  within  the  lateral
Ventricles,  while  the  Fornix  is  here  lifted  up,  showing  the  attach¬
ment  of  the  Choroid  Plexus,  and  the  Velum  Interpositum  of
Haller.

When  we  have  the  parts  in  the  situation  represented  in  the  last
Plate,  we  shall,  by  following  the  Choroid  Plexus,  b,  forward  to
where  it  leads  under  the  anterior  pillar  of  the  Fornix,  find  the  com¬
munication  of  the  Ventricles.  If  we  direct  our  probe  horizontally,
and  under  the  anterior  pillar  of  the  Fornix,  we  find  it  has  an  easy
passage  into  the  lateral  Ventricle  of  the  other  side;  if  downwards,  we
find  it  descending  into  the  third  Ventricle.  When  we  have  passed
the  probe  betwixt  the  two  lateral  Ventricles,  if  we  lift  up  the  anterior
pillars  of  the  Fornix,  as  in  this  Plate,  we  find  the  probe  lying  in  the
anterior  part  of  the  third  Ventricle,  as  described  by  some  authors,
but  more  properly  in  the  Foramen  Commune  Anterius  b

1  See  after  Plate  X.  Observations  on  the  Communications  of  the  Ventricles.


a.  The  Corpora  Striata.

b.  b.  The  Anterior  Sinus,  or  horn  of  the  lateral  Ventricle.

c.  c.  The  Posterior  Horn,  or  Processus  Digitalis.

d.  d.  The  Tenia  Striata,  or  Centrum  Semicirculare  Ge-

minum  of  Vicussens.

e.  The  Fornix,  cut  from  the  anterior  Crura,  separated  from  the

Velum  Interpositum,  and  held  up.

f.  f.  The  Anterior  Crura  of  the  Fornix,  connected  with

g.  The  Comissura  Cerebri  Anterior  2.

h.  The  Lyra  3,  that  is  simply  the  inferior  surface  of  the  Fornix,

which  in  the  natural  situation  of  the  parts  lies  upon  the  Velum
Interpositum.

i.  i.  The  Corpora  Fimbriata,  which  is  the  edge  of  the  Medullary

Lamina,  and  which  is  extended  from  the  Posterior  Pillars,  or
crura  of  the  Fornix,  and  continued  along  the  Circle  of  the  Cor¬
nua  Ammonis  on  each  side.  This  is  called  also  the  Tenia
Hippocampi.

k.  k.  The  beginning  of  the  Cornua  Ammonis,  or  Hippocampi4.

2  The  Commissura  Naevii  aemula  Vieussens,  tab.  viii.  6.  “  Corda.”  Willesii ,  San¬

torini.  The  Commissures  of  the  Brain  are  four,  chiefly — The  Corpus  Callosum,  or
Commissura  Magna:  this  the  Commissura  Anterior,  situated  under  the  Anterior
Crura  of  the  Fornix  ;  the  Commissura  Posterior  towards  the  back  part  of  the  third
Ventricle,  and  above  the  Iter  ad  quartum  Ventriculum;  and  lastly,  the  Commis¬
sura  Mollis,  or  union  between  the  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum.

3  “  Lyra” — “  Corpus  Psalloides.” — There  may  be  confusion  from  this  appellation,
says  Vicq.  d’Azyr,  because  the  older  writers  used  the  term  Psalloides  for  the  whole
Fornix.  These  lines  on  the  inferior  surface  of  the  Fornix  are  not,  as  Winslow  ima¬
gines,  the  impression  of  the  vessels  of  the  Velum  Interpositum,  they  do  not  answer
to  the  form  of  the  vessels — they  are  regular,  and  resemble  the  transverse  lines  of  the
Corpus  Callosum.  There  is  considerable  variety  in  their  course.

4  The  posterior  Crura  of  the  Fornix,  as  they  go  backwards,  are  called  Hipocami,
and  Bombyces,  by  Arantius,  “  from  whence  I  know,”  says  Ridley,  “  he  had  chiefly
“  observed  this  part  in  brutes.” — “  Hipocampos  appellantur  etiam  Conua  Ammonis,


25


l.  l.  The  Colliculus,  or  Hippocampus  Minor.

m.  m.  The  Velum  Interpositum,  or  Toile  Ciioroidiene  5,

which  is  a  process  of  the  Pia  Mater,  expanded  betwixt  the  For¬
nix  and  third  Ventricle,  and  which  lies  upon,  and  is  attached
to  the  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum.

N.  n.  The  Choroid  Plexus6,  the  connection  of  which  with  the
Velum  is  now  understood.  The  Choroid  Plexus  seems,  upon
the  first  view,  before  the  Fornix  is  lifted,  to  be  a  congeries  of
vessels  unconnected  with  the  floor  of  the  Ventricle;  but  upon
unravelling  and  spreading  it  with  the  probe,  it  is  found  to  be
a  membrane,  and  to  be  continuous  with  the  Pia  Mater,  lining
the  floor  of  the  Ventricle,  and  is,  in  fact,  merely  the  Vascular
Pia  Mater  gathered  together  into  folds.  And,  upon  raising  the
Fornix,  we  find  it  connected  with  the  Velum  Interpositum  as
with  a  mesentery.

Arietis,  Haasius,  p.  18.  Or  we  might  say  with  Ridley,  “  That  part  of  the  Crura
“  Fornicis  which  growing  somewhat  thicker  as  it  turns  off  towards  the  Lateral  Ven-
“  tricles,  runs  over  the  Crura  Medullse  Oblongatae,  which  being  very  prominent  in
“  sheep  and  calves,  helps  to  thrust  it  up  into  such  protuberances  as  the  ancients
“  called  Bombyces,  or  Hippocampi.” — Morand,  however,  says  rightly,  “  that  the
££  Hippocampi  are  continued  from  the  posterior  part  of  the  Corpus  Callosum,  and
“  the  Tenia  Hippocampi  are  properly  the  extremities  of  the  Posterior  Crura  Fornicis.”

“  5  Toile  Vasculaire  Reseau  Choro'idien.  Tela  Choroidea — and  this,  as  well  as
the  Septum  Lucidem,  has  been  called  Diaphragma — improperly  Rete  Mirabile  by
Riolanus  and  some  others — the  Rete  Mirabile  being  the  minute  divisions  of  the  Ca¬
rotid  Artery,  in  some  animals,  as  it  enters  the  brain.

“  6  Ces  deux  plexus  sont  minces  &  formes  d’une  grand  nombre  de  petits  noeuds
££  Vasculaires  ils  aboutissent  aux  Vaisseaux  places  dans  le  sinus  quartus.”  Vicq.
(TAzyr,  Acad.  Roy.  1782. — ££  The  Plexus  Choroides  is  an  aggregate  body  made  up
“  of  arteries,  veins,  membrane,  glands.”  Ridley. — On  the  other  hand,  ££  Portio
££  Plexus  Choridei  qui  nil  nisi  Arteridae  Succosae,  mirum  in  modum  contortae  ser-
<£  pentinoque  modo  reptantes,  glandulesque  ( quibus  destitutin'  dictus  plexus)  repre-
££  sentantes.”  Ruysch.

D


26

o.  p.  p.  Branches  of  the  Vena  Magna  Galeni  7,  which  being
distributed  to  the  Corpora  Striata,  and  paries  of  the  Ventricle*
pass  under  the  Tenia  Striata,  and  run  into  the  Velum  Interposi-
tum,  under  the  Fornix.

Oi,  A  piece  of  cord  waxed,  so  as  to  give  something  of  the  stiffness  of
a  probe.  It  is  introduced  into  the  communication  betwixt  the
•Ventricles,  and  upon  lifting  the  Fornix  is  seen  lying  in  the
tipper  and  fore  part  of  the  third  Ventricle,  or  rather  the  Fo-
'  ramen  Commune  Anterius  8.


7  O  is  placed  upon  the  trunk  of  those  veins,  yet  Haller  says  well,  u  Recte  non
“  venam  solem  sed  ejus  divisionem  vidit  vir  cel:  magnamque  venatn  dixit.”  Hal.
fascie.  vii.  tab.  ii.  They  are  distinguished  into  right  and  left  trunks,  and  do  not
unite  until  they  are  about  to  enter  the  fourth  Sinus.

8  See  the  Observations  on  the  Communication  of  the  Ventricles,  after  Plate  X.


EXPLANATION


OF


PLATE  F.


'  '  .  -  ■


..


/


*


29


EXPLANATION

OF


PLATE  V .


IN  this  Plate  the  Brain  alone  is  represented.  It  shows  the  Cho¬
roid  Plexus,  and  Velum  Interpositum  of  Haller  raised,
the  Fornix  being  taken  away,  and  the  Corpora  Striata;  the
Centrum  Semicirculare  Geminum;  the  Thalami  Nervo¬
rum  Opticorum;  and  the  Pineal  Gland.

a.  The  Corpus  Striatum1  :  The  Brain  being  now  cut  so  far  down

as  to  show  the  intermingling  of  the  cineritious  and  medullary
matter.

b.  b.  The  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum2,  which  were  al¬

most  intirely  covered  by  the  Fornix  and  Choroid  Plexus.

1  In  making  a  superficial  horizontal  section  of  these  eminences,  we  find  the  cine¬
ritious  matter  mixed  with  spots  or  points  of  medullary  substance,  because  we  cut
directly  across  the  direction  of  the  striae  of  medullaiy  matter,  we  must  incline  the
knife  downwards,  and  outwards,  to  show  the  intermixture  of  the  striae  of  medullary
matter,  and  understand  the  meaning  of  the  term.  See  a  laboured  description  of
these  several  sections  in  a  paper  Mem.  de  V Acad.  Roy.  by  Vicq.  (TAzyr.

2  Thalami — Juga  Crurum  Medullae  Oblongatae.  The  description  of  the  situation
of  the  Thalami,  their  union,  and  their  relation  to  the  third  Ventricle,  is  left  very  in¬
tricate  by  authors.  We  see,  that  though  the  Fornix  be  lifted,  we  are  not  in  the  third
Ventricle,  for  the  Velum  is  interposed.  Upon  lifting  the  Velum  we  are  not  in  the


30


c.  The  Tenia  Semicircularis,  or  Tenia  Striata.  See  Note  13.

d.  The  Comissura  Mollis,  or  union  betwixt  the  Thalami  Nervo¬

rum  Opticorum,  which  leaves  upon  the  fore  and  back  part  an
opening  into  the  third  Ventricle.

e.  e.  The  Posterior  Sinus  of  the  lateral  Ventricle.

f.  The  Hippocampus  Minor.

g.  The  Cornu  Ammonis,  or  Hippocampus.

h.  The  Velum  Interpositum,  or  Toile  Choroidienne,  held

up  by  a  ligature  at  the  point  of  union  betwixt  the  two  plexus  of
the  lateral  Ventricle,  and  shewing  the  manner  in  which  they
are  continued  into  a  delicate  plexus,  which  runs  backwards
upon  the  lower  surface  of  the  Velum,  and  which  may  be  ob¬
served  to  split  again,  and  involve  the  Pineal  Gland.

i.  The  Pineal  Gland3;  Connected  with  the  Velum,  surrounded

by  the  branches  of  the  veins,  and  pulled  from  its  seat  by  the
lifting  of  the  Velum.  The  Velum  must  be  completely  raised,
and  held  back  before  the  Pineal  Gland  can  be  seen  in  this
view  of  the  parts.

k.  The  Foramen  Commune  Anterius,  or  Vulva4.

third  Ventricle  because  the  ComissuraMollis  intervenes ;  but  we  only  see  those  foramina
called  Vulva  (Columb.)  and  Anus,  the  meaning  of  which  terms  we  shall  understand
by  looking  upon  the  drawing.  Spme,  however,  have  described  the  third  Ventricle
as  consisting  of  the  Vulva  and  Anus,  and  the  Rima  betwixt  them,  (the  last  being  the
space  under  the  Comissura  Mollis)  See  Ridley ,  p.  124.  And  again,  some  authors
speak  promiscuously  of  the  Anus,  Aqueduct  of  Silvius,  foramen  posterius,  &  iter  ad
quartum  Ventriculum.

3  “  Corpus  turbinatum.” — “  Conarium.”

4  u  Vulva,  scu  foramen  circa  anticam  Ventriculorum  anteriorem  regionem,  juxta
“  fornicis  radices  excavatum.”  Vieussens..  He  adds,  p.  64,  “  Subtus  fornicem  re-
“  condition  ct  juxta  radices  ilius  excavatum  cujus  interventu  predicti  Anteriores
“  Ventriculi  cum  tertiis  communicant.”  “  Rima  ad  infundibulum.”  Ridley.


t


31


l.  The  Anus5.

m.  The  Anterior  Comissure  of  the  Cerebrum.  Upon  separating

gently  the  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum,  we  see  in  a  fresh
subject  the  cohesion  formed  by  the  Comissura  Mollis.  It  is
from  not  having  observed  this  union  that  authors  have  described
this  as  the  third  Ventricle.  In  most  of  our  difficulties  let  us  re¬
turn  to  Vieussens,  and  we  shall  find,  in  a  few  words,  the  simple
truth.  It  is  a  rima,  or  gutter-like  cavity,  under  the  Comissura
Mollis,  upon  the  anterior  part  of  which,  and  under  the  Vulva,
we  see  the  beginning  of  the  Infundibulum,  and  on  the  back
part  the  Iter  ad  quartum  Ventriculum.


5  “  Anus  seu  foramen  alterum  circa  posticam  predictorum  Ventriculorum  regio-
“  nem  juxta  nates  cxcavatum.”  Vieussens.  But  this  foramen  forms  no  communica¬
tion  betwixt  the  Ventricles,  because  the  Velum  is  connected  with  the  Thalami,  and
spreads  over  it  like  a  curtain.  The  anterior  one  forms  the  communication  betwixt
the  lateral  Ventricles,  because  the  Velum  and  Plexus  do  not  extend  so  far  forwards,
and  there  the  Fornix  is  narrow,  and  extends  over  it  like  an  arch.  Consequently
when  you  put  your  probe  under  the  anterior  part  of  the  Fornix,  it  passes  through
the  Foramen  Commune  Anterius.


/


V  C


•  .  -V  -  -


,  ;  ■■


.


■  ■  *

.

-

*


r ■


EXPLANATION


OF


PLATE  VI.


OITA/I  A  j«ixa


35


EXPLANATION


OF

PLATE  VI.


THIS  Plate  explains  the  connection  of  the  Velum  with  the  Pia
Mater  of  the  surface,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  Verne  Galen  i
enter  the  fourth  Sinus1.

a.  a.  The  Corpora  Striata.

b.  b.  Tenia  Striata,  or  Centrum  Semiculare  Geminum.

c.  The  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum,  being  somewhat  se¬

parated.

d.  The  Anterior  Crura  of  the  Fornix.

e.  The  Comissura  Cerebri  Anterior.

f.  The  Posterior  Lobe  of  the  Cerebrum,  and  Posterior  Horn

of  the  Lateral  Ventricle  laid  open.

G.  The  Posterior  Lobe  of  the  Cerebrum  (which  by  the  Sections
demonstrating  the  back  part  of  the  Ventricle,  is  made  very  thin)

1  See  those  Plates,  Vieussens,  tab.  vii.  Ridley,  fig-.  5.  Ilaller,  fascic.  vii.  t.  ii.
Duverney,  tom.  1.  planche  iii.  fig.  i.  Turin ,  tab.  i.  fig.  i.  Vessalius ,  septima  vii.
libri  figura.  Spigelius,  lib.  x.  tab.  vi.  fig.  ii. — Vicq.  iCAzyr.


I


36


raised  from  its  incumbent  situation  upon  the  Tentorium,  and
folded  forwards.

h.  h.  The  cut  edge  of  the  scull-cap.

i.  i.  The  Choroid  Plexus  of  the  lateral  Ventricles.

k.  Their  union  under  the  Fornix.

l.  The  Velum  Interpositum,  or  Vasculosum,  spread  under

the  Fornix,  a  delicate  web  of  membrane  connecting  the  two
plexus.

m.  The  Vena  Galeni  2 3,  entering  the  fourth  Sinus.

n.  That  part  of  the  Falx  held  up  which  is  connected  with,  or  rather

continued  into  the  Tentorium.

o.  The  Fourth  Sinus  3,  formed  in  the  angle  betwixt  the  Falx  and

Tentorium  4.

jp.  The  Fifth  Sinus,  or  Inferior  Longitudinal  Sinus,  running
in  the  edge  of  the  Falx,  and  uniting  with  the  fourth  Sinus.

2  As  was  observed  in  a  preceding  Note.  This  consists  of  two  branches  lying
contiguous.  Towards  the  furthest  extremity  of  the  Velum,  where  it  terminates  un¬
der  the  Fornix,  it  sends  out,  or  rather  is  joined  by  two  veins,  one  running  in  the
Plexus  Choroides,  and  seen,  at  intervals,  tortuous  in  its  duplicatures,  viz.  Vena
Choroidea  ;  the  other  takes  a  course  backwards  upon  the  Corpora  Striata,  and  is
the  Vena  Corporae  Striatse  dext.  et  sinist.  Besides  these  reflected  veins,  branches
of  the  Vena  Galeni  stretch  out  from  under  the  Tenia  Striata,  and  are  distributed
as  is  represented  in  this  Plate,  upon  the  Corpora  Striata,  while  others  come  from  the
roots  of  the  Fornix  and  Hippocampus,  The  state  of  those  veins  is  very  necessary  to
be  observed  in  morbid  dissection.  In  the  course  of  those  veins,  Vicq.  d’Azyr  has  ob¬
served  distinct  and  insulated  little  Plexus,  “  Sur  le  cote  des  Ventricles  lateraux  j’ai
“  quelquefois  observe  de  petit  plexus  Choroides  isoles  qui  accompagnoient  quelque
11  uns  de  ces  rameux  de  veines  de  Galeni.”

3  Sinus  quartus,  or  rectus,  or  internal  Sinus,  by  Ridley,  from  its  situation,  as  it
were,  in  the  centre  of  the  Brain.  Its  cavity  is  so  traversed  by  Lacerti,  that  it  almost
resembles  the  Gall  ducts.

4  It  opens  more  generally  into  the  left  Lateral  Sinus.


37


0^  The  probe  bent,  and  introduced  into  the  termination  of  the  great
Longitudinal  Sinus ;  where  it  is  about  to  form  the  bifurcation
into  the  great  Lateral  Sinuses,  and  is  at  the  same  time  joined  to
the  fourth, — i.  e.  the  union  of  all  those,  or  Torcular  Hierophili.

r.  The  Great  Lateral  Sinus.  We  observe  it  to  be  bound  down

and  strengthened  by  the  transverse  lacerti  of  the  Dura  Mater.

s.  The  Tentorium  Cerebello  Superextensum.


i  i  i  -  '  -

.

'

.

:  /•


EXPLANATION

OF


PLATE  VII.


.


41


EXPLANATION

OF

PLATE  VII.


THIS  Plate  represents  the  simple  section  of  the  Brain,  and  Bones  of
the  Face,  and  from  it  much  of  the  relation  of  the  parts  and  their  gene¬
ral  connection  may  be  understood.  The  Scull  is  cut  a  little  to  the  left
of  the  course  of  the  longitudinal  Sinus,  and  the  incision  of  the  Brain
is  continued  so  as  to  lay  open  the  lateral  Ventricles  without  injuring
the  Septum  Lucidum,  or  Fornix;  to  expose  the  third  Ventricle  also,
and  to  give  a  section  of  the  Pons  Varolii,  and  Arbor  Vitas  ;  in  short,
to  make  a  full  section  of  the  Cerebrum  and  Cerebellum.

j

A.  A.  The  cut  edge  of  the  Cranium.

b.  The  Frontal  Sinus.

c.  The  (Ethmoid  Cells.

d.  The  Antrum  Highmorianum.

e.  The  cuneiform  process  of  the  Occipital  bone,  where  it  goes  forward

to  join  the  Sphenoid  bone.

f.  The  internal  medullary  part  of  the  Cerebrum,  or,  as  seen  in  the  for¬

mer  sections,  the  Centrum  Ovale  of  Vieussens  h .

1  We  again  see  the  manner  in  which  the  cortical  or  cineritious  matter  of  the  brain
surrounds  the  internal  medullary  part,  while  in  some  of  the  internal  eminences  the
order  is  reversed,  or  they  are  more  blended.  Upon  turning  to  the  second  Plate  Ave

F


42


g.  The  Cineritious  or  Cortical  Substance  of  the  Cerebrum,

into  which  the  Pia  Mater,  and  some  of  the  turns  of  the  injected
Arteries,  are  seen  to  penetrate.

h.  The  Corpus  Callosum,  sometimes  called  the  Commissura

Magna — we  have  to  observe  its  striated  or  rather  fibrous  appear¬
ance,  and  we  understand  the  manner  in  which  it  covers  the  la¬
teral  Ventricles,  while  there  descends  from  the  middle  part  of  it
the  Septum  Lucidum  dividing  those  Ventricles.

i.  That  part  of  the  lateral  Ventricle  which  lies  above  the  Fornix,  be¬

ing  the  shaded  part,  while  the  letter  i  stands  directly  upon  the
partition  betwixt  the  left  and  right  lateral  Ventricles,  viz.  the
Septum  Lucidum2.

k.  A  vein  stretching  from  the  most  anterior  part  of  the  Velum  Inter-

positum,  and  from  under  the  anterior  Crus  of  the  Fornix,  to
the  fore  part  of  the  lateral  Ventricle  3.

l.  The  Fornix,  and  in  this  view  we  shall  understand  how  this  me¬

dullary  body  forms  a  floor  to  this  upper  part  of  the  lateral  Ven¬
tricle,  while  it  stretches  over  the  third  Ventricle4.

shall  see  the  meaning  of  the  terms  “  Ovale  centrum  guttis  sanguinis  inter punctum.”
Vieussens,  tab.  vi.  This  central  medullary  part,  when  the  cineritious  matter  alone  is
carefully  dissected  off,  appears  as  a  convex  nucleus,  and  which,  at  the  same  time,
covers  the  cavities  of  the  Brain,  and  in  this  way  I  have  sometimes  prepared  the
Brain  for  the  public  demonstration  of  the  Ventricles.

2  The  Septum  Lucidum  thus  passes  down  from  the  Corpus  Callosum  to  the  Fornix  j
yet  nothing  can  be  more  puzzling  to  the  young  student  than  the  description  of  Win¬
slow,  copied  into  the  common  system. — “  The  Fornix  is  really  nothing  but  the  Cor¬
pus  Callosum.” — They  are  continued  into  each  other  upon  the  back  part.

3  Upon  looking  down  upon  the  Ventricles  as  seen  in  Plate  III.  the  Plexus  Choroides
gradually  diminishing  as  it  proceeds  forward,  appears  as  sinking  under  and  turning
round  the  root  of  this  vein.  It  is  coarsely  but  truly  represented  by  Dr.  Monro,  4to.
tab.  i.  Folio,  tab.  iv.

4  See  Note  to  Plate  V.  and  Duverney ,  tom.  i.  plan  i.  la  Vaftte  a  trois  piliers.  We


43


M.  The  Posterior  Crus  of  the  Fornix  5  of  the  left  side  cut  off
where  it  is  about  to  turn  down  into  the  inferior  part  of  the  late¬
ral  Ventricle.  ( Plate  III.  k.  and  c.)

n.  The  Left  Anterior  Crus  of  the  Fornix  5.

o.  The  Right  Anterior  Crus  of  the  Fornix.

p.  The  Anterior  Commissure  of  the  Brain  6.  It  seems  high  com¬

pared  with  the  Crus  of  the  Fornix,  from  the  latter  falling
down.

Oi.  The  Velum  Interpositum  stretching  under  the  Fornix,  and
covering  the  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum.
r.  The  Third  Ventricle,  it  being  observed  that  the  letter  is  op¬
posed  to  the  convex  surface  of  the  Thalami  Nervi  Optici  of  the
right  side,  and  it  cannot  be  misunderstood  that  it  is  the  cavity
betwixt  the  surface  of  this  and  the  left  Thalamus  (which  is
taken  away)  which  forms  the  third  Ventricle;  while  upon  the

see  in  those  sections  how  much  more  naturally  some  old  writers  have  called  the  Cor¬
pus  Callosum  the  Fornix,  than  this  triangular  lamina,  for  this  (although  with  our  best
authors  we  must  still  give  it  the  name  of  Fornix)  has  no  empty  space  under  it,  and
in  no  respect  answers  to  the  idea  of  a  vault,  except  in  the  little  space  under  which
the  Foramen  Commune  Anterius  is,  which  allows  the  communication  betwixt  the
Ventricles;  and  therefore  Vieussens  says,  “  Unde  nobis  nascitur  mirandi  locus,  quod
“  anatomici  omnes,  hunc  cerebri  partem  fornicis  nomine  dignati  fuerint:  cum  nul-
“  lum  ipsi  &  tertii  Ventriculi  lacunari  inane  spatium  interpositum  sit,  &  fornicis  nec
**  situm  nec  figuram  retineat,  nec  usum  prestare  possit.”

5  Though  we  say  the  Fornix  is  a  triangular  medullary  body,  and  use  the  expres¬
sions  of  the  posterior  crura,  and  the  anterior  crus,  still  on  the  fore  part  it  forms  two
crura.  The  manner  of  their  union  with  the  Ventricle  is  truly  represented  in  this
Plate,  while  in  the  Plates  by  Vicq.  d’Azyr,  in  the  Mem.  de  l’Acad.  Roy.  1781  ;  in
Dr.  Monro’s  Nervous  System,  Plate  I. ;  in  Duverney  and  Tarin,  there  is  a  want  of
intention  in  the  shading,  which  makes  those  engravings  intricate,  and  in  several  of
those  Plates  a  competent  knowledge  of  the  subject  is  required  to  understand  what  is
meant.

6  “  Transversus  medullaris”  of  Willis.  “  Funis  transversus  ejusdem  substantiee  et
mollis  cum  nervo  opico.”  Riolamis.  He  was  the  first  who  observed  it.


44


upper  part  of  this  body,  as  it  now  appears  to  us,  the  two  surfaces
are  united  by  the  Commissura  Mollis  leaving  an  opening  on
each  extremity  of  this  adhesion,  viz.  Vulva  and  Anus,  under
the  anterior  of  which  is  the  beginning  of  the  Infundibulum,
and  under  the  posterior  the  Iter  ad  quartum  Ventriculum.

s.  The  beginning  of  the  Infundibulum.

t.  Iter  ad  quartum  Ventriculum7.

x.  The  communication  betwixt  the  lateral  Ventricle  of  the  right  side,
and  the  third  Ventricle.

z.  The  Pineal  Gland8,  lying  enveloped  in  the  Velum,  and  inclin¬
ing  backwards.

1.  The  Commissura  Cerebri  posterior,  which  to  me  appears  as

the  reflected  medullary  substance  of  the  Nates,  and  not  in  any
degree  resembling  in  the  section  the  anterior  one,  nor  a  nervous
cord  9.  The  little  peduncle  connecting  the  Pineal  Gland  will
be  observed,  and  the  little  transverse  medullary  cords  upon  its
base.

2.  The  proper  Pedunculi  of  the  Pineal  Gland,  which  pass  round

upon  the  convex  surface  of  the  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum,
and  join  the  anterior  pillar  of  the  Tornix.  These  two  Pedunculi
are  best  seen  after  separating  the  Velum,  and  looking  down
upon  the  Optic  Thalami.

7  We  do  not  see  the  fourth  Ventricle  in  this  Plate ;  because  the  section  is  too  much
to  the  left  side  of  the  Brain. — For  this  Ventricle,  see  Plate  X.

8  “  A  turbinati  fructus  pini  similitudine.”  Hoff. — “  Corpus  Turbinatum.”  It  con¬
sists  of  a  cineritious  coloured  matter,  while  towards  its  base  it  has  medullary  striae.  It
is  invested  with  the  delicate  Pia  Mater,  and  from  its  place  and  connection  it  still
seems  to  possess  some  important  function.

9  The  Commissura  posterior,  says  Vicq.d’Azyr,  is  not  continued  transverse  into
the  substance  of  the  Cerebrum  by  any  medullary  tracks,  as  Haller  has  represented  in
pi.  iii.  of  fascic.  7. — “  Processus  natibus  antipositus,”  Vieussens.


45


3.  The  Tentorium,  which  is  seen  to  stretch  over  the  Cerebellum,

and  to  support  the  posterior  lobes  of  the  Brain.

4.  The  Pi  a  Mater  continued  in  betwixt  the  Cerebrum  and  Cere¬

bellum,  and  which  connects  the  Nates  and  Testes  to  the  Cere¬
bellum.

5.  The  Nates,  1

„  ^  }  viz.  the  Tubergula  Quadrigemina.

6 .  The  Testes,  J

We  have  to  observe,  that  these  eminences  are  not  within  the  cavi¬
ties  of  the  Brain  ;  but  that  they  may  be  seen  by  separating  the
Brain  and  Cerebellum  from  behind.

7.  The  origin  of  the  fourth  Nerve  of  the  Brain,  or  Troch-

learis.

8.  Section  of  the  Tuber  Annulare,  or  Pons  Varolii,  where  the

appearance  of  the  strise,  or  filaments,  is  accurately  represented  10.

9.  The  Crura  Cerebelli,  and  Arbor  Vit^e;  the  Crura  Cerebelli

being  formed  by  the  union  of  the  branches  of  the  internal  me¬
dullary  part  of  the  Cerebellum,  which  branching  is  called  the
Arbor  Vitje.

10.  The  Medulla  Oblongata,  being  the  upper  part  of  the  spinal

marrow,  as  formed  by  the  union  of  the  Cerebrum  and  Cere¬
bellum,  and  enumerated  commonly  as  one  of  the  three  great
divisions  of  the  Brain.

*  The  Inferior  Lobulus  of  the  Cerebellum.

11.  The  Basilar  Artery,  which  is  formed  by  the  union  of  the

Vertebral  Arteries  n.

i°  <<  Diversis  filamentis  intersect®, ”  Turin. — “  Coupe  de  protuberance  annulaire,
“  ou  est  une  melange  de  substance  de  diverse  nature.”  Vicq.  d'Azyr,

11  See  Engravings  of  the  Arteries ,  PI.  V.  5.  P.  IV.  6,  7.


s)


46


12.  The  Internal  Carotid  Artery,  where  it  is  passing  through

its  foramen  jn  the  sphenoid  bone.

13.  The  Opthalmic  Artery,  derived  from  the  Internal  Carotid

Artery  within  the  Scull.


A


EXPLANATION


OF


PLATE  Fill.


49


EXPLANATION


OF

PLATE  VIII.


THE  two  figures  of  this  Plate  show  more  particularly  the  relation
of  the  Fornix,  the  Communication  of  the  Ventricles,  the
Plexus  Choroides,  and  Velum  Interpositum,  or  Toile  Cho-
roidiene,  by  a  perpendicular  section.

f.  f.  g.  g.  h.  12.  Have  here  the  same  references  as  in  the  last
Plate l.

figure  i.

i.  The  under  surface  of  the  Corpus  Callosum,  where  it  appears
like  a  vault  over  the  lateral  Ventricles.

k.  The  Septum  Lucidum,  or  partition  betwixt  the  upper  part  of  the

lateral  Ventricles.

l.  The  under  surface  of  the  Fornix,  which  is  called  Psalterium,

or  Lyra.  The  Fornix  lies  over  the  third  Ventricle  like  a  vault,
say  the  older  writers,  they  representing  it  as  defending  this  ca-

1  These  two  figures  being  enlarged  views  of  the  parts  of  the  more  general  figure.


G


50


vity  from  the  incumbent  weight  of  the  Brain  ;  but  it  rests  upon
the  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum,  while  there  intervenes  the
Vascular  Velum  ;  and  it  does  not  lie  loose,  but  adheres  to  this
Velum,  while  the  Velum  again  adheres  to  the  Thalami  Nervo¬
rum  Opticorum;  therefore  there  can  be  no  communication  in
all  this  space  betwixt  the  lateral  and  third  Ventricles,  or  betwixt
the  right  and  left  lateral  Ventricles.  The  only  communication
is  at  the  most  anterior  point,  where  there  is  a  free  space  under
the  anterior  Crura  of  the  Fornix.

m.  The  Posterior  Crus  of  the  Fornix  of  the  left  side,  cut  in

making  the  section  2.

n.  The  fore  part  of  the  Fornix.

o.  The  free  space  before  the  union  of  the  Plexus  Choroides,  or  termi¬

nation  of  the  Velum,  and  under  the  anterior  part  of  the  Fornix.

p.  A  Thread  holding  out  the  Plexus  Choroides  of  the  left  Ventricle.

The  Section  of  the  Corpus  Striatum  of  the  left  side,  over
which  the  Plexus  is  represented  hanging.

r.  The  Velum  Interpositum,  adhering  above  to  the  Fornix,  and

below  to  the  Thalamus  Nervi  Optici;  at  the  same  time  the  man¬
ner  of  its  terminating  in  the  Choroid  Plexus  may  be  observed.
The  Plexus  is  separated  for  a  considerable  length,  and  left  only
in  its  natural  attachment  on  the  fore  part.

s.  The  Vein  stretching  from  under  the  anterior  Crus  of  the  Fornix,

and  under  which  is  the  communication  betwixt  the  Ventricles.

FIGURE  II.

IN  this  figure  the  letters  H.  i.  k.  l.  m.  s.  have  the  same  reference
as  in  Fig.  1. — This  figure  is  given  to  illustrate  the  manner  in  which

2  The  point  which  we  see  here,  forms  a  thin  lamina  of  medullary  matter,  which  is
called  the  “  Corpus  fimbriatum” — “  Tenia  hyppocampi.”


51


the  communication  betwixt  the  Ventricles  is  formed,  by  the  abrupt
termination  of  the  Velum  under  the  Fornix.

n.  The  Velum  of  Haller,  stretching  forwards  under  the  Fornix.

o.  A  little  portion  of  the  Choroid  Plexus  of  the  left  Ventricle  left

hanging.

p.  The  termination  of  the  Velum  forwards,  while  we  see,  below,  the

last  tack  of  its  adhesions  to  the  Corpus  Striatum,  and  the  Plexus
as  if  terminating  in  it,  hut  really  uniting  with  that  of  the  other
side  to  form  a  small  Plexus,  which  runs  upon  the  lower  surface
of  the  Velum3.

0^  The  Cavity  of  the  Third  Ventricle,  formed  on  the  two  sides
by  the  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum.
r.  A  Pin  introduced  from  the  opening  under  the  anterior  Crus  of  the
Fornix,  from  the  lateral  Ventricle  of  the  left  side  into  the  third
Ventricle.  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  if  the  Pin  had  been  di¬
rected  more  transversely,  it  would  have  gone  into  the  lateral
Ventricle  of  the  right  side,  from  the  circumstance  of  this  being
a  communication  common  to  all  the  three  Ventricles,  by  the
manner  in  which  the  Fornix  lies  over  this  free  space.
t.  The  Infundibulum.

x.  The  Optic  Nerve  of  the  left  side  remaining;  that  part  of  the

Brain  to  which  it  belongs  having  been  necessarily  taken  away
in  making  the  section.

y.  The  Pituitary  Gland.

z.  The  Internal  Carotid  Artery.


3  See  Plate  V.


-


-

*


-

Y  ~

■


'  •


EXPLANATION


OF


PLATE  IX.


••


.


EXPLANATION


OF

PLATE  IX.


THIS,  like  the  last  Plate,  is  a  partial  view  enlarged  to  the  natural
size,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  represent  the  Nates  and  Testes,  the  Pineal
Gland,  the  Iter  ad  quartum  Ventriculum,  the  fourth
Ventricle,  the  Valvula  Vieussenii,  and  the  Arbor  Vit,e,
more  minutely  by  a  perpendicular  section.

a.  The  Sphenoid  Bone,  where  it  lies  before  the  Pons  Varolii.

b.  The  Third  Ventricle  1.

c.  A  Probe  introduced  into  the  Iter  ad  quartum  Ventriculum  2,

which  we  see  passes  down  before  the  Nates  and  Testes,  Posterior
Comissure,  and  Pineal  Gland.

d.  The  Pineal  Gland.

1  Ventricle  of  the  Thalami  Nervorum  Opticorum — Rima  longa — Ventriculus  Com¬
munis.  il  Ventriculus  tertius  infra  psalterium  excavatus  abeoq;  plexu  Choroideo
“  separatus,  infra  Thalamos  opticos  situs,  nullum  firme  occupat  spatium.”  Massa.
Tar  in.

2  “  Hiatus  ad  canalem  natibus  et  testibus  substratum  ducens.”  Vieusscns.  Aquae
emissaria  aquae-ductus  Silvii. — Iiasias.


56

e.  The  Pedunculi  of  the  Pineal  Gland,  which  stretch  forwards

in  the  Thalamus  Opticus.

f.  The  Comissura  Cerebri  Posterior,  which  we  see  to  be

formed  by  the  medullary  substance  of  the  Nates,  reflected  so  as
to  give,  when  we  look  from  the  cavity  of  the  third  Ventricle,  the
appearance  of  a  medullary  cord  running  across.  We  observe
also  the  manner  in  which  the  Pineal  Gland  is  attached  to  it.

g.  The  Fornix.

H.'The  Velum  Interpositum,  to  which  we  see  the  Pineal  Gland
attached.

i.  The  Vena  Galeni,  which  carries  the  blood  from  those  internal
parts  of  the  Brain  to  the  fourth  Sinus.

k.  The  Nates.

l.  The  Testes  :  or  these  k.  l.  are  called  the  Tuberculi  Quadri-

gemini,  and  we  see  that  those  surfaces  are  without  the  proper
cavities  of  the  Brain,  and  are  involved  in  the  delicate  Pia  Mater,
which  descends  betwixt  them  and  the  Cerebellum.

M.  The  Vascular  Pia  Mater,  which  insinuating  betwixt  the  pos¬
terior  lobes  of  the  Cerebrum  and  the  Cerebellum,  passes  down
betwixt  the  Tuberculi  Quadrigemini,  and  also  insinuating  under
the  Fornix,  is  conveyed  in  form  of  the  Velum  Interpositum  and
Plexus  Choroides,  into  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  Brain;  de¬
monstrating  to  us,  were  it  not  self  evident,  that  the  external  Pia
Mater  and  the  lining  membrane  of  the  Ventricles,  are  the  same
continued  membrane3.

n.  The  Pons  Varolii,  or  Tuber  Annulare.  We  have  also

3  In  the  same  manner  we  see  the  membrane  entering  to  the  inferior  part  of  the  la¬
teral  Ventricle  by  the  side  of  the  Pons  Varolii. — The  membrane  lining  the  Ventricles
was  described  by  Herophilus,  and  other  Greek  physicians;  but  was  brought  into  ques¬
tion  by  the  influence  of  Vcsalius,  who  takes  every  opportunity  of  contradicting  Galen.


57


to  observe  the  mixture  of  the  cineritious  matter  seen  in  this
section.

o.  The  Section  of  the  Medulla  Oblongata,  where  the  same

striae  are  observed  to  he  continued.

p.  The  Cerebellum.

Qi  The  Arbor  Vitje,  or  medullary  part  of  the  Cerebellum,  ramify¬
ing  through  its  substance.

r.  The  Valvula  Vieussenii  4.  It  is  distinctly  seen  here  to  he  a

medullary  Lamina,  continued  from  the  Testes  obliquely  back¬
wards  and  downwards  into  the  Crura  Cerebelli,  or  termination  of
the  Arbor  Vita?,  which  forms  thus  the  back  and  upper  part  of
the  fourth  Ventricle.

s.  The  Fourth  Ventricle  5,  which  is  now  seen  to  he  a  cavity  be-

4  Valvula  Vieussenii.  Valvula  Major.  Willis,  Higmore,  and  Drilincourt  laid
claim  to  the  discovery.  We  see  it  in  this  Plate  to  be  simply  a  medullary  lamina,
stretching  up  from  the  root  of  the  Arbor  Vita?,  or  what  is  properly  the  Pedunculi
Cerebelli,  and  making  the  upper  and  back  part  of  the  fourth  Ventricle.  Upon  mak¬
ing  the  dissection  of  the  Brain  in  the  common  way,  by  horizontal  sections,  and  by
raising  the  Tentorium,  and  cutting  the  Cerebellum,  we  see  two  stronger  medullary
tracts,  and  in  the  middle  of  these  a  delicate  lamina,  partly  medullary,  partly  cineri¬
tious.  These  lateral  portions  are  called  the  Processus  ad  Testes,  or  the  ascending
portion  of  the  Crura,  or  Pedunculi  Cerebelli. — The  misconception  of  Vieussens,  as  to
its  use  of  a  valve,  is  not  understood  by  many  authors  ;  because  they  have  not  attended
to  the  manner  in  which  he  has  dissected  the  Brain.  Pie  has  cut  the  Brain  perpendi¬
cularly,  and  split  it  up  from  before  backwards;  the  consequence  of  which  has  been,
that  the  Medullary  Lamina  has  projected  from  the  Pedunculi  Cerebelli,  and  the  ante¬
rior  edge,  which  must  be  torn  from  the  Testes,  has  fallen  down  like  a  valve  upon  the
upper  part  of  the  fourth  Ventricle.  They  were  assiduous  in  their  attention  to  this
Ventricle,  from  the  idea  that  if  it  was  distended,  it  would  compress  the  origin  of  the
Nerves;  or  that  if  the  fluids  should  escape,  they  would  deluge  and  compress  the
Nerves.  Hoffman ,  Ridley ,  Duverney.

5  The  Ventricle  of  the  Cerebellum — Cisterno  Spirituum  Aurantii — Ab  Herophilo
principalissimus,  a  Burtholino  nobilis,  nuncupatus.

H


58


tvvixt  the  Cerebellum,  the  Pons  Varolii,  and  Crura  Cerebelli,  and
which  is  seen  to  terminate  upon  the  lower  part  by  the  adhesion
of  the  Pia  Mater.

t.  Medullary  Stride,  which  run  up  from  the  Calamus  Scriptorius
obliquely  outwards  6.

x.  The  Calamus  Scriptorius,  which  is  a  sulcus  formed  by  the
posterior  division  of  the  Medulla  Oblongata.

6  They  are  seen  both  in  this  and  the  succeeding  Plate.  They  have  a  great  variety
in  their  place  and  number,  sometimes  there  are  even  three  on  one  side  of  the  Calamus
Scriptorius,  and  two  on  the  other.  See  Vicq.  d'Azyr,  and  Malacarne.  They  are
supposed  to  contribute  to  the  root  of  the  seventh  pair  of  Nerves.


1


EXPLANATION


OF


PLATE  X.


y


!


-


61


EXPLANATION


OF  '


PLATE  X.


IN  th  is  Plate  we  have  a  full  section  of  the  Brain.  Showing  chiefly
the  great  relations  of  the  parts,  the  relative  places  of  the  Ventricles,
and  their  communication,  the  Arteries  of  the  Corpus  Callosum,
and  the  Falx  and  Sinuses.  To  make  those  parts  sufficiently  minute,
it  has  been  necessary  to  draw  them  of  the  full  size.

a.  a.  A.  The  Cranium,  cut  perpendicularly  a  little  to  the  left  of  the

great  longitudinal  Sinus.

b.  b.  The  Falx  formed  by  the  Dura  Mater,  and  descending  betwixt

the  hemispheres  of  the  Cerebrum,  reaching  anteriorly  from  the
Crista  Gali  of  the  Sphenoid  Bone  backwards,  and  deepening  as
it  runs  back,  until  it  is  infixed  or  continued  into  the  Tentorium,
by  which  both  these  partitions  are  kept  true,  and  mutually  de¬
pending  on  each  other.

c.  A  Thread  holding  out  the  cut  edge  of  the  Tentorium  Cere-

belli  Super  extensum.


62


d.  The  cut  Edge  of  the  Tentorium,  which  stretches  nearly  hori¬

zontally  over  the  Cerebellum,  and  supports  the  posterior  Lobe
of  the  Cerebrum.

e.  The  Surface  of  the  right  hemisphere  of  the  Cerebrum,  as  it  ap¬

pears  under  the  Falx,  that  partition  not  descending  quite  to  the
Corpus  Callosum.

f.  The  Section  of  the  Corpus  Callosum.

g.  g.  The  Lower  Surface  of  the  Corpus  Callosum.

h.  The  Septum,  dividing  the  left  lateral  Ventricle  (which  is  here  laid

open,  and  is  of  course  under  shadow)  from  the  right  lateral
Ventricle.

i.  The  Upper  Surface  of  the  Fornix,  where  it  is  forming  the  poste¬

rior  Crus.

k.  The  inferior  Surface  of  the  Fornix,  that  which  is  called

Lyra.

l.  The  anterior  left  Crus  of  the  Fornix,  under  which  is  the

opening  of  the  right  lateral  Ventricle,  which  of  course  forms  a
communication  with  the  left  lateral,  and  the  third  Ventricle,  at
the  same  time.

M.  The  anterior  Comissure  of  the  Brain,  which  is  truly  a  me¬
dullary  body,  running  transversely  and  connecting  the  Hemis¬
pheres.

n.  The  Prominence  made  by  the  termination  of  the  right  anterior

Crus  of  the  Fornix.

o.  The  Opening  of  the  right  lateral  Ventricle  into  what  is  described

by  many  Authors,  as  the  most  anterior  part  of  the  third  Ven¬
tricle  ;  by  others,  as  the  Foramen  Commune  Anterius  ;  which
indeed  conveys  the  most  accurate  idea  of  this  part,  for  it  is  a
space  under  the  Anterior  Crura  of  the  Fornix,  into  which  both
the  lateral  Ventricles  open,  and  which  therefore  makes  a  com-


63


munication  betwixt  them.  By  others,  it  is  called  Vulva,  from
its  appearance  upon  raising  the  Fornix  in  the  usual  manner  of
dissecting  the  Brain.

p.  The  third  Ventricle.  The  remains  of  the  Comissura  Mollis
are  scarcely  to  be  observed  after  the  separation  of  the  Thalami
Nervorum  Opticorum — therefore  it  is  not  represented  in  the
drawing  ;  hut  we  can  understand  that  it  is  the  union  of  the  Tha¬
lami  above  the  letter  P.  and  that  the  space  under  it  is  the  third
Ventricle.  This  is  a  gutter-like  cavity  communicating  or  con¬
tinued  into  that  common  space  under  the  anterior  Crura  of  the
Fornix,  and  at  the  same  time  opening  downwards  into  the  In¬
fundibulum,  and  backwards  by  the  Iter  ad  quartum  Ventri-
culum.

A  Probe,  introduced  from  the  bottom  and  fore  part  of  the  third
Ventricle  into  the  Infundibulum,  and  which  is  here  repre¬
sented  as  reaching  nearly  to  the  surface  of  the  Glandula  Pi-
tuitaria.

r.  The  Glandula  Pituitara,  seated  in  the  Sella  Turcica.

s.  The  Iter  ad  quartum  Ventriculum.

t.  The  Comissura  Posterior,  the  connection  of  which  with  the

Pineal  Gland  is  accurately  represented.

v.  The  Pedunculi  of  the  Pineal  Gland  prolonged  upon  the

Thalamus  Nervi  Optici.

u.  The  Tubercula  Quadrigemina,  or  Nates  and  Testes.

w.  Valvula  Vieussenii.

x.  The  Pineal  Gland.

y.  The  Cavitiy  of  the  Fourth  Ventricle1.

1  In  the  back  part  of  the  fourth  Ventricle,  on  each  side,  we  find  the  little  Plexus

Choroides  of  this  Ventricle,  which  are  formed  by  a  small  branch  from  the  Vertebral

Arteries.


64


z.  The  Calamus  Scriptorius.

a.  a.  The  Cerebellum  in  outline,  lying  deep  in  the  Scull-cap,  and

under  the  Tentorium.

b.  The  Tuber  Annulare,  or  Pons  Varolii.

c.  The  Medulla  Oblongata,  both  of  these  in  outline.

d.  The  Pi  a  Mater,  closing  up  the  lower  part  of  the  fourth  Ven¬

tricle.


ARTERIES ,  VEINS  2,  AND  SINUSES.

1.  The  Internal  Carotid  Artery,  passing  into  the  Cranium  through

the  Sphenoid  bone.

2.  The  Internal  Carotid  within  the  Scull.

3.  The  Anterior  Cerebral  Artery  of  the  right  side.

4.  The  left  Anterior  Artery  of  the  Cerebrum.

5.  The  Continuation  of  the  Right  Cerebral  Artery  on  the  other

side  of  the  Falx,  chiefly.

€).  The  continued  Trunk  of  the  left  Cerebral  Artery.

7.  The  Artery  of  the  Corpus  Callosum,  sent  off  from  the  last
mentioned  Artery,  which  running  along  the  arch  of  the  Cor¬
pus  Callosum,  is  distributed  to  the  loose  texture  of  the  Pia
Mater  3.


2  Walter  makes  this  division  of  the  Veins  of  the  Brain. — Those  distributed  in  the
substance  of  the  Brain  which  become  superficial,  and  empty  themselves  into  the
Sinuses.  And  those  which  coming  from  the  internal  parts  and  Ventricles  form  the
intricate  convolutions  of  the  Plexus,  and  then  unite  into  veins  before  entering  the
Sinuses. — Ds  Apoplexia ,  sect.  54.

3  The  Pia  Mater  is  here  extremely  delicate,  and  the  vessels  in  consequence  very
beautiful. — Vesalius  thought  the  Corpus  Callosum  was  not  invested  with  the  Pia  Ma¬
ter,  like  other  parts  of  the  Brain.


65


8.  8.  8.  8.  The  Longitudinal  Sinus  seen  in  its  whole  length

9.  9.  9.  The  superficial  Veins  of  the  Cerebrum,  entering  the  longi¬

tudinal  Sinus.

10.  The  Lateral  Sinus  of  the  left  side,  where  it  is  opened  by  the

general  section. — Here  then  is  a  union  of  the  great  Sinuses  of
the  Brain  5.

11.  The  Fourth  Sinus,  which  lies  betwixt  the  angle  of  the  union

of  the  Falx  and  Tentorium.

4  Superior,  or  Sagittal  Sinus,  or  third  Sinus.  Ridley.  The  lateral  Sinuses  being  the
first  and  second,  the  ancients  counting  according  to  what  they  thought  to  be  the
course  of  the  blood,  viz.  from  below  upwards.

5  t£  Herophilus  appellavit,  quod  ab  eo  tanquam  torculari  &  cisterna,  sanguis
<c  e  jugularibus  vasis  corrivatus,  in  universum  cerebri  corpus  exprimatur  :  sunt  qui
“  malent  sinuum  quatuor  concursum  torcular  appellate.”  And.  Laurentius,  lib.  x.
cap.  vii.

AvjvoV-  Torcular.  Nomen  est  profectum  primum  ab  Herophilo,  deinde  usurpatum
ab  anatomicis,  quod  designat  locum  quendam  in  capitis  vertice  vacuum,  instar  tor-
cularis  aut  lacuna;,  in  quern  coeuntes  in  vertice  meningis  duplicationes,  sanguinem
quasi  in  cisternam  deducunt,  atque  inde  velut  ab  arce  quadam,  omnibus  subjectis
partibus  rivos  mittunt,  alios  quidem  in  totum  Cerebellum,  alios  vero  in  partem  ante-
riorem,  tanquem  vinum  e  torculari  prementes.  Joan.  Gorraci  Def.  Med.  p.  366. —
Some  say,  “  The  fourth  Sinus,  or  Torcular,”  others  speak  of  the  Longitudinal  Sinus
as  the  Torcular — The  fourth  Sinus  is  too  insignificant  for  us  to  believe  that  the  an¬
cients  could  suppose  the  compression  of  it  to  send  the  blood  through  the  head.  It
is  more  natural  to  suppose,  that  the  large  irregular  cavity  formed  by  the  union  of
the  Sinuses,  according  to  our  best  authors,  should  be  called  the  Torcular  Herophili.
The  idea  was,  that  the  blood  ascended  by  the  Jugular  Veins,  entered  this  cavity,
and  was  so  compressed  by  the  action  of  the  Dura  Mater,  that  as  from  a  Ventricle  it
was  sent  throu<rh  the  other  Sinuses  of  the  Brain.  It  was  conceived  also  that  the  Tor-

O

cular  prepared  the  blood  for  the  Brain,  as  the  right  Auricle  was  supposed  to  prepare
the  blood  for  passing  down  into  the  Liver.  How  can  any  author  be  precise  upon
this  point,  when  these  are  the  words  of  Vesalius,  the  best  commentator  on  Galen;
“  Videtur  namque  Galenus  modo  huic,  modo  illi  parti  Torcularis  nomen  accommo-
(<  dare:  uti  sane  utrumque  Torcular  dici,  nihil  obstat.”


I


66


12.  12.  The  Fifth  Sinus,  or  Inferior  Longitudinal  Sinus,

running  upon  the  edge  of  the  Falx,  or  (taking  the  similitude
from  which  the  word  Falx  is  borrowed)  upon  the  cutting  edge
of  the  sickle.

13.  The  Commencement  of  this  Inferior  Longitudinal  Si¬

nus,  by  small  veins  arising  from  the  Corpus  Callosum,  where
it  forms  some  beautiful  inosculations.

14-.  At  this  place  the  Inferior  Longitudinal  Sinus,  which  can  be
scarcely  considered  in  any  other  light  than  as  a  vein  anterior
to  this,  enters  the  firm  investure  of  the  Dura  Mater,  forming
the  Falx.

15.  16.  17.  Veins  running  beautifully  tortuous  in  the  Falx,  and
forming  frequent  communications  with  the  superior  and  infe¬
rior  Longitudinal  Sinuses.


EXPLANATION


OF


PLATE  XI.


.


EXPLANATION


OF

PLATE  XI.


THIS  Plate  explains  the  Base  of  the  Brain,  and  is  taken  from
Vicq.  d’Azyr.

GENERAL  DIVISION  OF  THE  BRAIN  SEEN  IN  THE  BASE .

a.  a.  The  Anterior  Lobes  of  the  Cerebrum.

b.  b.  The  Middle  Lobes  of  the  Cerebrum.

c.  c.  The  Posterior  Lobes  of  the  Cerebrum.
p.  The  Cerebellum.

e.  The  Medulla  Oblongata,  formed  by  prolongations  of  the

Cerebrum  and  Cerebellum.

f.  The  Pons  Varolii,  or  Tuber  Annulare.

g.  g.  The  Crura  Cerebri  \  white  and  fibrous,  and  formed  by  the

Internal  Medullary  part  of  the  Cerebrum,  continued  into  the
Medulla  Oblongata.

1  Crura,  or  Pedunculi  Cerebri,  processus  Cerebi  ad  pontem  Vai'olii  sen  ad  Medul-
lam  Oblongatam.  The  Pons  Tarini  is  the  Medullary  Matter  lying  in  this  Sulcus,
which  unites  the  Crura  Cerebri.


70


h.  The  Crura  Cerebelli,  prolonged  in  the  same  way  from  the

Cerebellum  into  the  Pons  Varolii,  and  Medulla  Oblongata.

i.  An  Eminence  which  Vicq.  d’Azyr  calls  Lobulus  Medulla  Ob¬

longata.

k.  External  and  Superior  Lobes  of  the  Cerebellum.

l.  A  Sulcus  betwixt  the  Lobes  of  the  Cerebellum,  in  which  a  little

Falx,  resembling  the  Falx  Cerebri  lies.

m.  Foramen  Cacum  Posterius.

n.  The  Fossa  Silvii,  dividing  the  anterior  and  middle  Lobes  of

the  Cerebrum  2.

o.  The  Monticulus  Vesalii.

p.  The  Fossa  of  the  Nervi  Motores  Oculorum,  according  to

Vicq.  d’Azyr.

0^  The  Infundibulum.

r.  The  Eminentia  Candicantes  3.

s.  What  Vicq.  d’Azyr  calls  the  <c  Substance  perforce ,”  which  is  a  me¬

dullary  part,  perforated  with  many  Arteries.

t.  The  Corpora  Pyramidalia.
v.  v.  The  Corpora  Olivaria.

1.  1.  The  First  Pair  of  Nerves,  or  Olfactory  Nerves.

2.  2.  The  Second  Pair  of  Nerves,  or  OpticNe  rves.

3.  3.  The  Third  Pair  of  Nerves,  or  Motores  Oculorum.

4.  4.  The  Fourth  Pair  of  Nerves,  or  Trochleares.

5.  5.  The  Fifth  Pair  of  Nerves,  or  Trigemini.

6.  6.  The  Sixth  Pair  of  Nerves,  the  Abducentes.

2  Fossa  Silvii  Lobum  Anterioreni  a  Posteriore  dividit.  Hasius.  In  this  case  it  is
supposed  that  there  are  only  two  great  Lobes,  while  the  Posterior  Lobe  is  consi¬
dered  as  an  appendix.

3  Corpora  Albicantia — Corpora  Mammalaria  Wilisii — Tubercules  Arrondis — Prio-
rum  Crurum  Fornicis  bulbi  Santorimi.


71


7.  7.  The  Seventh  Pair  of  Nerves,  consisting  of  two  portions.

The  Portio  Mollis,  acaustic  or  auditory  Nerve,  and  the
Portio  Dura,  or  Nervous  Communicans  Faciei.

8.  9.  8.  9.  The  Eighth  Pair  of  Nerves,  8.  8.  being  the  Faseicali

from  which  is  derived  the  Par  Vagum,  and  Glosso-pharingeal
Nerve.  9.  9.  The  Accessory  Nerve  of  Willis.

10.  10.  The  Ninth  Pair,  or  Laryngeal  Nerve.


'  .  V  ..
I  •>  v  i‘;

■

l  •  !


\


■


EXPLANATION

OF

PLATE  XII.


0


K


75


EXPLANATION


OF

PLATE  XII.


THIS  Plate  shews  the  Base  of  the  Cranium,  the  place  of  the  great
Arteries  and  Sinuses,  and  the  exit  of  the  Nerves  from  the  Scull.  By
comparing  it  with  the  last  we  shall  learn  the  relation  of  the  base  of
the  Encephalon  to  the  base  of  the  Scull.

a.  The  Frontal  Sinuses.

b.  b.  The  Cranium.

c.  c.  The  most  elevated  part  of  the  base  of  the  Scull,  formed  by  the

Orbital  Plate  of  the  Frontal  Bones,  upon  which  the  Anterior
Lobes  of  the  Brain,  Plate  XI.  a.  a.  rest.

d.  The  Crista  Galli  of  the  ^Ethmoid  Bone,  upon  which  the  an¬

terior  part  of  the  Falx,  Plate  XI.  b.  b.  takes  firm  origin.

e.  The  dura  Mater  turned  back  a  little  from  its  adhesion  to  the

Frontal  Bone.

F.  F.  The  acute  edge  of  that  part  of  the  Sphenoid  bone  called  the
Wing  of  Ingrassias,  which  enters  into  the  Fossa  Silvii.  ( Plate
XI.  N.  N.)  1

1  And  the  little  process  of  the  Dura  Mater  at  this  place  is  the  Processus  Spheno-
idalis.


7  6


g.  g.  The  Fossa  formed  by  the  Temporal  and  Sphenoid  Bones  for

lodging  the  Middle  Lobe  of  the  Cerebrum.  Plate  XI.  b.

h.  The  Tentorium  upon  which  the  Posterior  Lobe  of  the  Cerebrum,

Plate  XI.  c.  rests.

i.  i.  The  deep  hollow  formed  by  the  Occipital  Bone  for  the  lodg¬

ment  of  the  Cerebellum,  Plate  XI.  i.  d.  k.

ARTERIES.

k.  k.  The  Internal  Carotid  Artery,  rising  by  the  side  of  the

Sella  Turcica.  Upon  the  left  side  the  Artery  is  seen  surrounded
by  the  Cavernous  Sinus,  which  is  laid  open.

l.  l.  The  Middle  Artery  of  the  Cerebrum.

m.  m.  The  Anterior  Artery  of  the  Cerebrum.

n.  The  Branch  of  Communication  betwixt  the  Anterior  Arteries

of  the  Cerebrum,  which  completes  the  Circle  of  Willis  upon  the
fore  part.

o.  The  two  Vertebral  Arteries  when  about  to  unite  to  form  the

Basilar  Artery.

p.  The  Basilar  Artery  laid  back  over  the  remains  of  the  Medulla

Oblongata.

0^.  The  Meningeal  Artery.2

r.  Arteries  to  the  Dura  Mater  derived  from  the  Vertebral  Arteries.

SINUSES.

s.  s.  The  Great  Lateral  Sinuses.  These  are  formed  by  the  di¬

vision  of  the  Great  Longitudinal  Sinus.  They  are  contained

2  We  may  observe  also  some  twigs  coming  out  from  the  cethmoid  and  optlialmic
Arteries  up  to  the  Dura  Mater  upon  the  anterior  Fossa,  which  supports  the  anterior
Lobe  of  the  Brain.


I


77

within  the  root  of  the  Tentorium,  as  the  longitudinal  Sinus  was
in  that  of  the  Falx.

t.  t.  Veins  from  the  surface  of  the  Posterior  Lobe  of  the  Cerebrum,
emptying  themselves  into  the  lateral  Sinuses.

v.  The  termination  of  the  lateral  Sinus  in  the  Foramen  La-

cerum,  common  to  the  temporal  and  occipital  Bones.

w.  w.  x.  The  Superior  Petrous  Sinuses.  On  the  right  side  its

termination  in  the  lateral  Sinus  is  laid  open.

y.  The  Posterior  Occipital  Sinus.  Vicq  D’Azir  says  he  has  not

seen  them  double;  they  appear  to  me  frequently  double,  one
running  on  each  side  of  the  little  Falx  of  the  Cerebellum.3
I  have  found  them  so  enlarged  as  to  take  the  office  of  the
Lateral  Sinuses  in  emptying  the  Great  Longitudinal  Sinus,
while  of  course  the  Lateral  Sinuses  were  proportionably  dimi¬
nished.

z.  A  large  Sinus,  which  in  this  subject  runs  upon  the  anterior

surface  of  the  Petrous  Bone.

a.  Venal  Meninges  medial,  which  empty  themselves  into  the
Opthalmic  or  into  the  Petrous  Sinus.4

3  It  is  called  the  Processus  Falciformis  Cerebelli.  It  is  like  a  miniature  of  the
great  Falx  Cerebri  inverted.

4  Accompanying  the  Arteries  we  see  the  root  of  those  Veins  (the  Meningeal  Veins)
seen  in  the  first  Plate  g.  These  are  the  divisions  of  Walter.  “  Tres  Species  Vena-
u  rum  Durae  Matris,  iliac  quae  frequentissimae  sunt,  ex  interna  substantia  ossium
“  cranii  propullulant  et  in  majores  venas  colliguntur,  et  in  externa  superficie  Durae
“  Matris  ita  procedunt,  ut  tandem  in  sinus  Durae  Matris  apperiantur.  Secunda
“  species  venarum  componit  singulai'em  truncum,  scilicet,  venam  meningeam
“  mediam.  Tertia  species  Duri  Matri  propria  est :  qui  vel  sanguinem  ab  arteria  me-
“  ningea,  ad  nutriendum  Dura  Matrem,  vel  superfluum,  vel  ad  nutriendum  ineptum
<c  recipiunt,  vel  denique  sunt  venae  resorbentes  quae  ex  interna  superficie  Durae  Ma-
u  tris  originem  ducunt.”  Walter  de  Apoplexia,  59.


78

b.  Veins  which  inosculating  with  these  last  run  backwards  into  the

Great  Lateral  Sinuses.

c.  The  Opthalmic  Sinus.

d.  d.  The  Cavernous  Sinus,5  by  the  side  of  which  the  Carotid

Artery  rises,  and  through  which  the  sixth  pair  of  Nerves  passes.
Some  minute  Arteries  will  be  observed  ramifying  on  the  Cells.6

e.  The  Glandula  Pituitaria  seated  in  the  Sella  Turcica.

f.  The  Infundibulum.

g.  g.  The  Circular  Sinus,  which  surrounds  the  gland,  opened.

h.  The  Posterior  Clinoid  Sinus  laid  open.

i.  The  Inferior  Petrous  Sinus  of  the  left  side  laid  open.7
k.  The  Anterior  Occipital  Sinuses.9


5  Sinus  multiformes,  polymorphes, — Receptacula  Sellae  Equinae  lateribus  adja-
centia.  Vieussens.  Into  these  he  conceived  the  fluids  of  the  Pituitary  Gland  to
flow.

6  Arteriae  Sinus  Cavernosi  anter.  et  poster,  from  the  opthalmic  and  its  branches,
the  Laclwymal  and  ./Ethmoidal  Arteries.  Haller  Element.  Physiol.  Yol.  IV.  p.  107.
leones  An.  Fascic.  VII.  de  Ramis  Arteriae  Verteb.

7  Part  of  the  Circular  Sinus,  being  by  some  Authors  called  the  Anterior  Clinoid
Sinus.

8  Postica  in  venas  jugulares  internas  desinunt.  Vieussens.  They  are  often  sepa¬
rated  from  the  lateral  sinus  by  a  process  of  the  bone.  See  Vicq.  d'Azyr.  The  ob¬
lique  Sinus  of  Malacarne,  the  Emissaria  of  Tabarini,  they  sometimes  opening  into
the  Pterigoidean  Plexus  of  Veins.

9  Sinus  occipitales  anteriores  in  superiore  parte  apophyseos  cuniformis  ossis  occi-
pitis  a  sinu  petroso  inferiore  dextra  lateris  ad  alterum  sinum  petrosum  inferiorem.
Iiassius.  But  these  should  be  considered  as  the  little  venous  cells  in  the  Dura
Mater  upon  the  fore  part  of  the  Foramen  Magnum,  and  are  by  some  called  cir¬
cular.

The  Venae  Emissariae  Santorini  are  those  communications  of  the  sinuses  "with
the  external  veins  which  are  independent  of  the  regular  continuations  of  the  sinuses
into  the  great  veins ;  for  example,  the  opthalmic  and  mastoidean  veins,  or  those
little  veins  going  out  through  the  base  of  the  scull,  as  the  Vena  Sodalis  by  the  Fo¬
ramen  Caroticum  are  considered  as  Emissariae,  forming  an  immediate  communication


79


NERVES.

The  same  figures  refer  to  the  same  parts  in  these  two  last  Plates.

1.  The  Cribriform  Plate  of  the  (Ethmoid  Bone  covered  with

the  Dura  Mater,  and  through  which  the  first  pair  of  Nerves
passes  to  the  Nose.

2.  2.  The  Second  Pair,  or  Optic  Nerves.

3.  3.  The  Third  Pair,  or  Motores  Oculorum  of  the  right  side,

about  to  pass  by  the  side  of  the  cavernous  sinus  to  the  muscles
of  the  eye  in  general.

4*.  The  Fourth  Nerve,  or  Trochlearis,  taking  a  circuitous  route
from  the  region  of  the  Nates  and  Testes.  See  Pl.  VII.  7.  It
is  seen  running  into  its  Sheath  in  the  Dura  Mater.

5.  The  Fifth  Pair  of  Nerves,  or  Trigemini.  Upon  the  right

side  the  Nerve  is  seen  passing  into  the  Dura  Mater.  Upon  the
left  it  is  laid  back,  and  here  we  shall  with  difficulty  distinguish
the  transverse  little  web  of  fibres  of  the  Cavernous  Sinus,  from
the  connection  of  the  fifth  pair  with  the  sixth,  or  the  twig  given
off  from  the  sixth  to  descend  by  the  side  of  the  Carotid  Artery
and  form  the  great  Sympathetic.

We  now  see,  however,  on  this  left  side,  what  is  called  the  ganglion  of
the  fifth  pair  before  it  divides  into  the  three  great  Nerves  to  the
Eye,  the  Upper,  and  Lower  Jaw.

6.  The  Sixth  pair  of  Nerves.  On  the  right  side  it  is  in  its  na¬

tural  situation.  On  the  left  we  follow  it  in  its  course  through
the  Cavernous  Sinus,  where,  by  the  side  of  the  Carotid  Artery

betwixt  the  internal  and  external  veins.  So  also  that  vein  which  perforates  the  Os
Bregmatis,  and  those  lesser  veins  passing  out  with  the  nerves,  or  through  the
fissures  or  foramina.


80


it  gives  off  the  twig  which,  forms  the  beginning  of  the  Sympa¬
thetic.

7.  The  Seventh  Pair  of  Nerves.  And  we  observe  the  division

of  the  Portio  Mollis  and  Dura  (the  latter  being  the  most  An¬
terior)  and  a  middle  portion.

8.  8.  9.  10.  The  Eighth  Pair  of  Nerves,  which  on  the  left  side

we  see  subdivided  into  8.  the  par  Vagum, — 10.  the  Glosso-
Pharingeal, — and  9.  the  Spinal  Accessary  of  Willis,  which
is  seen  to  come  from  the  tube  of  the  spinal  marrow  to  join  the
others.

11.  11.  The  Ninth  Pair,  or  Lingual  Nerves.

12.  The  Tenth  Nerve  of  the  Encephalon  or  Suboccipital

Nerves.

13.  Part  of  the  Medulla  Oblongata.


81


OF  THE

COMMUNICATION

OF  THE

VENTRICLES  OF  THE  BRAIN.


I  HAVE  in  the  Plates  endeavoured  to  present  a  clear  idea  of  the
Anatomy  of  the  Ventricles  of  the  Brain,  and  of  the  communication
between  them.  The  existence  of  this  communication  of  the  Ventri¬
cles  with  each  other,  has  been  known  ever  since  the  Anatomy  of  the
Brain  became  an  object  of  attention;  yet  it  has  unaccountably  hap¬
pened  that  pretensions  have  been  made  in  the  present  day  to  the  merit
of  having  discovered  this  communication,  as  if  a  total  ignorance  had
spread  over  the  anatomical  world  of  all  that  our  predecessors  had  ob¬
served  or  written  on  this  subject.  The  Anatomists  both  of  ancient
and  modern  times  have  equally  been  represented  as  ignorant  of  the
communication  between  the  Ventricles,  as  if  their  writings  were  not
in  existence  to  prove  the  extent  of  their  knowledge.

In  a  work  of  this  kind  it  is  incumbent  upon  me  to  take  some
notice  of  a  question  which  has  thus  been  made  to  appear  of  im¬
portance.  It  was  natural  for  me  to  study  this  point,  and  I  shall  state
fairly  the  authorities  upon  which  the  controversy  is  to  be  determined.

L


82.


Dr.  Monro  has  assumed  the  merit  of  discovering  the  communica¬
tions  betwixt  the  Ventricles  of  the  Brain.  What  the  Professors  of  the
Medical  School  of  Edinburgh  have  taken  so  much  pains  to  authenti¬
cate  is  this: — “  So  far  back  as  the  year  1753,  soon  after  I  (Dr.  Monro)
u  began  to  study  Anatomy,  I  discovered  that  the  Lateral  Ventricles
“  of  the  human  Brain  communicated  with  each  other,  and  at  the
“  same  place  with  the  third  Ventricle  of  the  Brain :  and  as  a  pas-
“  sage  from  the  third  Ventricle  to  the  fourth  is  universally  known,
“  it  followed  that  what  are  called  the  four  Ventricles  of  the  Brain  are
“  in  reality  different  parts  of  the  same  cavity.”

It  is  to  be  regretted,  however,  that  Dr.  Monro  has  been  more
anxious  to  bring  together  the  authorities  of  writers  whose  accounts
are  imperfect,  and  from  whose  descriptions  the  ignorance  of  the  older
Anatomists  respecting  these  communications  might  be  inferred,  than
solicitous  to  support  his  opinion  and  observations  by  respectable  au¬
thorities.  With  regard  to  the  opinions  of  cotemporary  teachers,  Dr.
Monro  has  chosen  to  take  the  vague  and  uncertain  reports  of  students,
while  on  the  other  hand  many  have  found  a  difficulty  of  compre¬
hending  the  matter  in  dispute,  and  by  endeavouring  to  discover  some¬
thing  curious  and  new,  instead  of  that  merely  which  Anatomists  had
known  so  long,  the  subject  has  to  them  seemed  to  be  involved  in  unu¬
sual  obscurity.

In  following  out  this  subject  I  shall  first  compare  the  few  passages
which  Dr.  Monro  has  quoted,  correcting  what  I  conceive  to  be  omis¬
sions,  and  afterwards  I  shall  bring  forward  a  few  authorities  to  shew
how  precise  and  clear  the  knowledge  of  the  old  Anatomists  was  on  this
subject.

A  few,  says  Dr.  Monro,  have  mentioned  a  place  under  the  Fornix,
to  which  they  have  given  the  name  of  Anus,  where  they  suppose
the  lateral  Ventricles  to  communicate  with  each  other,  and  at  the


83


same  time  with  the  third;  and  he  quotes  on  his  margin  Vicussens
and  Winslow.  This  is  by  no  means  accurate;  Vieussens  says,  under
the  marginal  title,  “  quid  Vulva  f  Vulva  nihil  aliud  est,  quam  fora-
“  men  circa  anticam  ventriculorum  anteriorum  cerebri  regionem,
“  subtus  fornicem  reconditum,  et  juxta  radices  illius  excavatum;
<l  cujus  interventu  predicti  anteriores  ventriculi  cum  tertio  commu-
“  nicant .”  The  Anus  and  the  Vulva  it  must  be  recollected  are  very
distinct  parts,  and  it  does  not  take  away  from  the  accuracy  of  this  de¬
scription,  that  Vieussens  conceived  the  Anus  likewise  to  form  a  com¬
munication  betwixt  the  Ventricles.  It  is  only  the  latter  of  those  pas¬
sages  which  Dr.  Monro  has  taken  notice  of,  though  the  quotation  I
have  given  immediately  precedes.

Winslow  and  Vieussens  are  by  Dr.  Monro  classed  together  in  the
same  note,  although  Winslow  distinctly  says,  “  The  Infundibulum
“  opens  above  immediately  before  the  Optic  Thalami,  by  the  oval
“  hole  named  Foramen  Commune  Anterius ,  and  consequently  com -
“  municates  with  the  lateral  Ventricles.” — In  another  place,  “  This
“  Canal  opens  forward  into  the  Infundibulum  under  the  Foramen
“  Commune  Anterius ,  by  which  it  likewise  communicates  with  the
“  lateral  Ventricles.”  This  is  as  decided  and  as  true  a  description  of
the  communication  as  that  of  Dr.  Monro  himself:  the  only  difference'
is,  that  Winslow  says  it  is  a  passage  betwixt  the  third  and  the  two
lateral  Ventricles,  while  Dr.  Monro  says  it  is  a  passage  betwixt  the
two  lateral  Ventricles  and  the  third.

Neither  has  Dr.  Monro,  in  the  note  of  page  1 1  of  his  System,  con¬
veyed  the  sense  of  another  very  celebrated  Author.  In  quoting  Hal¬
ler  he  has  these  words,  “  Leniter  tamen  impulso  flatu  non  reperi
“  aerem  a  dextra  cavea  in  sinistram  transiisse,  aut  aquam  in  alterius
“  lateris  ventriculum  missam  agitasse.”  We  might  suppose  from
this  quotation  that  Haller  had  not  observed  the  communication.


84


“  In  dextrum  ventriculum  dicitur  sinister  aperire,  qua  parte  duo
“  plexus  choroidei  conveniunt,  inter  thalamos  opticos,  fornicem  et
“  plexum  choroideum,ut  unicum  ventriculum  esse  dudum  dictum  sit.
“  Sap  ins  flatu.  earn  viam  relegi .”  (Gunz,  Winslow ,  Tarin,  Marchett,
Bartholin.)  Then  follows  the  quotation, “  leniter  tamen  impulsu  flatu,”
&c.  Haller  is  here  shewing  us,  in  the  first  place,  how  many  cele¬
brated  Anatomists  have  mentioned  this  communication,  and  at  the
same  time  his  own  description  is  particularly  accurate  and  distinct;
then  lie  adds,  that  at  the  same  time  from  his  own  experience,  since  it
took  some  force  of  blowing  to  demonstrate  the  communication,  lie
was  inclined  to  believe  that  something  is  ruptured  when  we  blow  so
hard  as  to  make  the  air  rise  in  the  opposite  Ventricle.

Thus  we  see  that  the  present  day  is  the  second  sera  of  this  dispute;
that  it  was  freely  canvassed  formerly ;  and  if  Dr.  Monro  had  been  as
anxious  to  prove  the  point  of  Anatomy,  as  to  establish  his  own  merit
as  a  discoverer,  he  had  only  to  say,  that  he  adhered  to  the  opinion  of
the  best  ancient  and  modern  authors,  as  Vicq.  d’Azyr,  Winslow,
Gunz,  Marchett,  Cowper,  Ridley,  Bartholin,  Vieussens,  Vesalius,
&c.

The  truth  is  that,  as  I  have  already  observed,  the  communication
betwixt  the  Ventricles  was  among  the  first  truths  established  by  the
studies  of  the  older  Physicians.  It  was  upon  this  that  their  doctrines
of  the  formation  of  the  spirits  in  the  Ventricles,  and  their  vaccillating
freely  through  them  and  round  the  Pineal  Gland,  were  founded:
while  in  the  same  degree  it  gave  support  to  the  opinions  of  those
who  supposed  that  the  fluids  of  the  cavities  of  the  Brain  were  drained
off  into  the  Infundibulum;  for  some  alleged  that  the  Infundibulum
conveyed  the  excrementitious  fluids  into  the  nose,  by  the  Pituitary
Gland  ;  others  alleged  that  it  was  conveyed  to  the  palate ;  others  by
the  circular  sinus,  into  the  great  veins.  Accordingly  there  is  scarcely  a


85


book  which  we  can  consult  without  finding  the  circumstance  of  the
universal  communication  betwixt  the  Ventricles  particularly  men¬
tioned.

That  the  absurdities  of  the  old  doctrines  were  intimately  connected
with  this  piece  of  Anatomy  the  following  quotation  may  be  taken  as  a
proof.  It  will  be  recollected  that  surgical  authors,  as  Guidionis  de
Gauliaco,  borrowed  their  description  from  the  received  opinions  of
the  physicians  of  the  day.  44  Cerebrum  secundum  longitudinem
44  habet  tres  ventriculos,  et  unusquisque  venter  habet  duas  partes;  et
44  in  qualibet  parte  organicatur  una  virtus.  In  prima  parte  ventri-
44  culi  anterioris  assignatur  sensus  communis,  in  secunda  imaginativa,
44  in  medio  ventriculo  situatur  cogitativa  et  rationalis,  in  posteriori
44  vero  servativa  et  memorativa.  Et  quod  inter  istos  ventriculos  ante-
44  rior  est  major,  medius  minor,  posterior  mediocris,  et  de  uno  ad  alium
“  sunt  meatus  per  quos  transeunt  spiritus.”  Tract  I.  Guidonis  Doct.
II.  de  Anatom,  p.  14.  See  also  Vesalius,  ad  tit.  Thomaa,  Scoti,  Al¬
berti,  etejus  Chartis  Scriptorum  de  Cerebri  Ventriculis  Opinio,  p.  536.

The  following  quotations  relate  to  the  anatomical  fact.  44  Sub
44  camerato  corpore  (viz.  fornice)  tcrtius  apparet  sinus,  qui  nihil  aliud
44  est  quam  duorum  concursus  et  communis  cavitas,  in  quam  supe-
44  riorum  ventrium  uterque  humiliore  sui  sede  dehiscet.”  Laurentii
Historia  Anatom.

44  In  quibusvis  animalibus,  medio  horum  utriusque  nervi  optici
44  thalamorum,  crura  medulla:  oblongata  paulatim  dehiscent ia  rimam
44  sive  aperturam  relinquunt,  qua  scrositates  ab  una-quaque  cerebri  ejus-
44  que  appendicis  regione  adventantes  suscipiens,  eas  per  infundibulum
44  in  glandulam  pituitariam  dimittit.”  Willis  Cerebri  Anatome,  Cap.
XIII.  Rimo  et  Infundibulum  usus.  See  p.  49.  See  his  anonymous
commentator,  p.  110.  44  In  quibusvis  illorum  omnes  tov  syustpaXoif


86

“  Ventriculi  qualcscunque  fuerint  aperturas  versus  infundibulum  de-
“  hiscentes  habent.

Again,  Verheyn  with  many  others  use  the  term  “  in  Concursu  Ven-
“  triculorum ,”  p.  322.  in  expressing  the  union  or  communication  of
the  Ventricles  in  the  fore  part  of  the  third  Ventricle.

(Ventriculus  Tertius.J  u  Tertius  vulgo  dictus  ventriculus,  vel  rima
“  longa,  est  priorum  concursus,  qui  in  centro  quasi  medullas  cerebri
“  formatur.”  Bartholin  Anat.  p.  493.

“  Sunt  hasc  crassa  viscidaque  (mucum  vulgus  medicorum  appel-
“  lat)  quas  uti  coacerventur  alicubi  sapiens  natura  ventriculos  duos
“  (revera  enim  duo  tantum  sunt)  efformavit,  a  quibus  postea  per  an-
“  teriorem  tertii  ventriculi  meatum  turn  per  pelvim  sensim  ad  glan-
“  dulam  pituitariam  transmittit.”  Spigelius.

If  we  compare  the  figures  of  Vesalius  with  those  of  Dr.  Monro,  we
shall  find  nearly  the  same  explanation.  Vesalius  has,  “  cv.  Meatus  ex
“  commune  cavitate  dextri  et  sinistri  ventriculorum.”  But  it  is  impos¬
sible  for  words  to  be  more  distinct  than  these,  “  nunc  interim  ventri-
“  culorum  sermone  tantum  instituto,  quorum  jam  duos  dextrum  vide-

licet  et  sinistrum  recensuimus,  et  propemodum  etiam  tertium,  qui
“  communis  amborum  est  cavitas ,  binos  a  se  educens  meatus,  quorum
“  unus  ex  humiliori  ipsius  sede,  ubi  acutum  angulum  per  totam  sui
“  longitudinem  vallis  cujusdam  ritu  exprimit,  recta  deorsum  versus
if  cyathum  cerebri  pituitam  excipientem  porrigitur.”  Vesalius,
p.  54 6.  The  preceding  paragraph  is  even  more  particular  than  this.

Directed  by  Haller’s  quotation  of  Cowper  we  find  that  he  speaks
currently  of  the  continued  cavity  of  the  Ventricles,  and  of  blowing
them  up  from  each  other.  See  Cowper,  Appendix  to  the  6th  tab.

The  equal  distension  of  the  Ventricles  of  the  Brain  in  Hydroce¬
phalus  has  been  taken  as  a  proof  of  the  universal  communication  be-


87

twixt  the  Ventricles.  This  has  also  been  long  understood,  and  we
find  Authors  puzzling  themselves  to  discover  the  reason  why  in  some
rare  instances,  seeing  there  was  so  free  a  communication,  the  fluids
were  confined  to  one  Ventricle.  See  Ridley,  p.  59.


f  1^1  I  ■

'

■  .  •


-


M


.

■


'
