Narrative of the Operations and Recent Discoveries in Egypt and Nubia (Belzoni, 1820)
=====================================================================================
Giovanni Battista Belzoni — Narrative of the Operations and Recent Discoveries within the Pyramids, Temples, Tombs, and Excavations, in Egypt and Nubia (London, 1820), public domain. The strongman's tomb-raiding memoir that founded Egyptomania. Scan via Internet Archive (narrativeofopera00belz). Raw OCR, not proofread.

r 


D    D   D 


■; 


£2± 


;.::Vr:i;;;;: 


D 


J 


IBB^H 


Ud 


D 


£^ 


D    D    D 

Z] 


u 


NARRATIVE 


OPERATIONS  AND  RECENT  DISCOVERIES 


IN 


EGYPT  AND  NUBIA. 


LONDON : 

PRINTED    BY  THOMAS    DAVISON,    AVHITEFK1ARS* 


-  .  , 


'iU-rm 


NARRATIVE 


OF    THE 


OPERATIONS  AND  RECENT  DISCOVERIES 


WITHIN    THE 


PYRAMIDS,  TEMPLES,  TOMBS,  AND  EXCAVATIONS, 


IN 


EGYPT  AND  NUBIA; 


AND    OF    A 


JOURNEY  TO  THE  COAST  OF  THE  RED  SEA,  IN  SEARCH  OF 
THE  ANCIENT  BERENICE; 


AND    ANOTHER    TO 


THE  OASIS  OF  JUPITER  AMMON. 


BY  G.  BELZONI. 


LONDON : 
JOHN  MURRAY,  ALBEMARLE-STREET. 

1820. 


f  we  Arts 

J)T 
60 


PREFACE. 


As  I  made  my  discoveries  alone,  I  have  been  anxious  to  write 
my  book  by  myself,  though  in  so  doing,  the  reader  will  consider 
me,  and  with  great  propriety,  guilty  of  temerity ;  but  the  public 
will  perhaps  gain  in  the  fidelity  of  my  narrative,  what  it  loses  in 
elegance.  1  am  not  an  Englishman,  but  I  prefer  that  my  readers 
should  receive  from  myself,  as  well  as  I  am  able  to  describe  them, 
an  account  of  my  proceedings  in  Egypt,  in  Nubia,  on  the  coast, 
of  the  Red  Sea,  and  in  the  Oasis ;  rather  than  run  the  risk 
of  having  my  meaning  misrepresented  by  another.  If  I  am  in- 
telligible, it  is  all  that  I  can  expect.  I  shall  state  nothing  but 
the  plain  matters  of  fact,  as  they  occurred  to  me  in  these 
countries,  in  1815-16-17-18  and  19.  A  description  of  the 
means  I  took  in  making  my  researches,  the  difficulties  I  had  to 
encounter,  and  how  I  overcame  them,  will  give  a  tolerably 
correct  idea  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  people  I  had  to 


vi  PREFACE. 

deal  with.  Perhaps  I  have  spoken  too  much  of  the  obstacles 
thrown  in  my  way,  by  the  jealousy  and  intriguing  spirit  of  my 
adversaries,  without  considering  that  the  public  will  care  little 
about  my  private  quarrels,  which  to  me,  of  course,  appeared  of 
the  greatest  consequence  on  the  spot,  in  these  countries.  But  I 
hope  that  a  little  indulgence  may  be  allowed  to  my  mortified  feel- 
ings, particularly  when  I  reflect  that  it  was  through  them  that  I 
was  compelled  to  leave  Egypt  before  I  had  completed  my  plans. 

I  must  apologise  also  for  the  few  humble  observations  I  have 
ventured  to  give  on  some  historical  points ;  but  I  had  become  so 
familiar  with  the  sight  of  temples,  tombs,  and  pyramids,  that  I 
could  not  help  forming  some  speculation  on  their  origin  and 
construction.  The  scholar  and  learned  traveller  will  smile  at 
my  presumption,  but  do  they  always  agree  themselves  in  their 
opinions  on  matters  of  this  sort,  or  even  on  those  of  much  less 
difficulty  ?  Much  has  been  written  on  Egypt  and  Nubia  by  the 
travellers  of  the  last  century,  by  Denon,  and  the  French  spavans, 
whose  general  account  of  these  countries  has  scarcely  left  any 
thing  unnoticed ;  and  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  to  the  accuracy  of  the 
latter  of  whom  I  can  bear  the  most  ample  testimony.  But 
what  can  I  say  of  the  late  Sheik  Burckhardt,  who  was  so  well 
acquainted  with  the  language  and  manners  of  these  people,  that 


PREFACE.  Vll 

none  of  them  suspected  him  to  be  an  European  ?  His  account 
of  the  tribes  in  these  countries  is  so  minutely  correct,  that  little 
or  nothing'  remains  for  observation  in  modern  Egypt  and  Nubia. 

I  have,  however,  one  more  remark  to  make  on  myself,  which 
I  am  afraid  the  reader  will  think  very  vain :  it  is  this,  that  no 
traveller  had  ever  such  opportunities  of  studying  the  customs  of 
the  natives  as  were  afforded  to  me,  for  none  had  ever  to  deal 
with  them  in  so  peculiar  a  manner.  My  constant  occupation  was 
searching  after  antiquities,  and  this  led  me  in  the  various  trans- 
actions I  had  with  them,  to  observe  the  real  character  of  the 
Turks,  Arabs,  Nubians,  Bedo weens,  and  Ababdy  tribes.  Thus  I 
was  very  differently  circumstanced  from  a  common  traveller,  who 
goes  merely  to  make  his  remarks  on  the  country  and  its  anti- 
quities, instead  of  having  to  persuade  these  ignorant  and  super- 
stitious people  to  undertake  a  hard  task,  in  labours,  with  which 
they  were  previously  totally  unacquainted. 

My  native  place  is  the  city  of  Padua:  I  am  of  a  Roman 
family,  which  had  resided  there  for  many  years.  The  state  and 
troubles  of  Italy  in  1800,  which  are  too  well  known  to  require 
any  comment  from  me,  compelled  me  to  leave  it,  and  from 
that  time  I  have  visited  different  parts  of  Europe,  and  suffered 


via  PREFACE. 

many  vicissitudes.  The  greater  part  of  my  younger  days  I 
passed  in  Rome,  the  former  abode  of  my  ancestors,  where  I 
was  preparing  myself  to  become  a  monk ;  but  the  sudden  entry 
of  the  French  army  into  that  city  altered  the  course  of  my 
education,  and  being  destined  to  travel,  I  have  been  a  wanderer 
ever  since.  My  family  supplied  me  occasionally  with  remit- 
tances ;  but  as  they  were  not  rich,  I  did  not  choose  to  be  a 
burthen  to  them,  and  contrived  to  live  on  my  own  industry, 
and  the  little  knowledge  I  had  acquired  in  various  branches. 
I  turned  my  chief  attention  to  hydraulics,  a  science  that  I  had 
learned  in  Rome,  which  I  found  much  to  my  advantage,  and 
which  was  ultimately  the  very  cause  of  my  going  to  Egypt.  For 
I  had  good  information,  that  a  hydraulic  machine  would  be  of 
great  service  in  that  country,  to  irrigate  the  fields,  which  want 
water  only,  to  make  them  produce  at  any  time  of  the  year. 
But  I  am  rather  anticipating.  In  1 803  I  arrived  in  England,  soon 
after  which  I  married,  and,  after  residing  in  it  nine  years,  I 
formed  the  resolution  of  going  to  the  south  of  Europe.  Taking 
Mrs.  Belzoni  with  me,  I  visited  Portugal,  Spain,  and  Malta, 
from  which  latter  place  we  embarked  for  Egypt,  where  we 
remained  from  1815  to  1819.  Here  I  had  the  good  fortune  to 
be  the  discoverer  of  many  remains  of  antiquity  of  that  primitive 
nation.     I  succeeded  in  opening  one  of  the  two  famous  Pyra- 


PREFACE.  ix 

mids  of  Ghizeh,  as  well  as  several  of  the  tombs  of  the  Kings 
at  Thebes.  Among  the  latter,  that  which  has  been  pronounced 
bv  one  of  the  most  distinguished  scholars  of  the  aire  to  be  the 
tomb  of  Psammuthis,  is  at  this  moment  the  principal,  the  most 
perfect  and  splendid  monument  in  that  country.  The  celebrated 
bust  of  young  Memnon,  which  I  brought  from  Thebes,  is  now 
in  the  British  Museum  ;  and  the  alabaster  sarcophagus,  found  in 
the  tombs  of  the  kings,  is  on  its  way  to  England. 

Near  the  second  cataract  of  the  Nile,  I  opened  the  temple 
of  Ybsambul ;  then  made  a  journey  to  the  coast  of  the  Red  Sea, 
to  the  city  of  Berenice,  and  afterwards  an  excursion  in  the 
western  Elloah,  or  Oasis.  I  now  embarked  for  Europe,  and 
after  an  absence  of  twenty  years,  returned  to  my  native  land, 
and  to  the  bosom  of  my  family;  from  whence  I  proceeded  to 
England. 

On  my  arrival  in  Europe,  I  found  so  many  erroneous 
accounts  had  been  given  to  the  public  of  my  operations  and 
discoveries  in  Egypt,  that  it  appeared  to  be  my  duty  to  publish 
a  plain  statement  of  facts ;  and  should  any  one  call  its  cor- 
rectness in  question,  I  hope  they  will  do  it  openly,  that  I  may 
be  able  to  prove  the  truth  of  my  assertions. 


CONTENTS. 


FIRST  JOURNEY. 


Arrive  at  Alexandria,  1 . 
Description  of  the  plague,  2. 
Departure  for  and  arrival  at  Cairo,  3. 
Visit  the  Pyramids — view  from  the  top,  4. 
Excursion  to  the  Pyramid  of  Dajior — re- 
turn to  Cairo,  5. 
Become  acquainted  with  Mr.  Burckhardt,  6. 
Wounded  by  a  Turk  on  horseback — ob- 
servations on   the   Moors   from   Mecca 
during  my  confinement,  7. 
Presented  to  the  Bashaw — rebellion  of  part 

of  his  army,  8. 
Danger  in  proceeding  to  Cairo— confined 
to  the  house  in  consequence  of  the  re- 
volution— description  of  it,  11. 
Commenced  hydraulic  operations,  12. 
Soubra,  chief  residence  of  the  Bashaw,  13. 
His  manner  of  living,  14. 
He   is   electrified — description    of  Zulfur 

Carcaja,  governor  of  Soubra,  16. 
His  mode  of  curing   diseases — marriage 
ceremonies  and  festivals  of  the  Arabs  in 
Soubra,  17. 
Arabian  play  and  farce,  19. 
Shot  at  by  a  soldier,  20. 
A  young  lady  shot  by  a  soldier,  21. 
Complete  the  water  machine,  22. 
The  English  consul  arrives  in  Cairo,  22. 


Decision  of  the   Bashaw  on  the  hydraulic 
machine— his  frolic   with    it — the  Irish 
lad's  thigh  broke  in  consequence,  23. 
Decided  on  ascending  the  Nile,  24. 
Undertaking  to  remove  the  colossal  bust, 

and  received  instruction,  26. 
Left  Boolak  for  Thebes— saw  Hermopolis 

— arrived  at  Monfaluth,  29. 
Siout,  description  of  it,  31. 
Saw  Gow — a  curious  interview  with  the 

Cacheffof  Acmin,  32. 
Arrival  at  and  description  of  Dendera,  33. 
Arrival  at  Kenneh — arrival  at  and  descrip- 
tion of  Thebes,  37. 
Begin  operations  for  removing  the  bust  of 

young  Memnon,  40. 
First   interview  with  the  CachefF  of  Ele- 
ments— his  objection  against  the  removal, 
41. 
Farther  difficulties  encountered,  42. 
Begin  the  operation  of  removing  it,  43. 
Removed  from  its  original  place  and  put 

upon  a  car,  44. 
Removed  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  Memno- 
nium — delay  in   consequence  of  indis- 
position— works  resumed,  45. 
The  Fellahs  prevented  from  working  by 
order  of  the  CachefF,  46. 

b  2 


XI 1 


CONTENTS. 


Insolence  and  duplicity  of  the  Caimakan, 
47. 

Account  of  a  Turkish  dinner  in  Ramadan 
time,  48. 

Obtain  a  firman  and  again  proceed  in  the 
works,  49. 

Arrival  of  the  great  Colossus  on  the  banks 
of  the  Nile,  50. 

First  visit  to  a  Mummy  Cave,  51. 

Preparations  for  departing  to  the  first 
Cataract  of  the  Nile,  54. 

Visit  to  Khalil  Bey  at  Esne,  55. 

Arrival  at  and  description  of  the  ruins  of 
Edfu,  56. 

Distant  view  of  Assouan — tradition  relating 
to  an  ancient  King,  59- 

Arrive  at  Assouan,  or  first  Cataract,  60. 

Description  of  the  Aga  of  Assouan — de- 
scription of  the  island  of  Elephantine,  61. 

Difficulties  in  obtaining  a  boat  to  proceed  to 
the  second  Cataract,  63. 

Set  off  for  the  isle  of  Philce,  65. 

Continue  the  voyage — alarmed  by  the  na- 
tives, 66.  Continuation  of  the  voyage, 
and  arrival  at  El  Kalabshe,  67. 

Description  of  it,  68.  Arrive  at  Garba 
Dandour — proceed  to  Garba  Merieh — 
arrival  at  Garba  Gyrshe,  and  description 
of  it,  71. 

Arrival  at  and  description  of  Dakke — 
Greek  inscription,  72. 

Arrive  at  Meharraka,  or  Offelina — Greek 
inscription — curious  figures  on  an  ancient 
wall,  73. 

Arrival  at  and  description  cf  Seboua — ar- 
rival at  and  account  of  Korosko,  74. 

Arrival  at  Deir — interview  with  the  Hassan 
Cacheff,  75. 

Leave  Deir— arrive  at  Ibrim,  77. 


Continuation  of  the  voyage,  and  description 
of  the  country,  78. 

Arrive  at  and  description  of  Faras,  and 
the  temple  of  Ybsambul,  79. 

Arrival  at  the  village  of  Ybsambul — in- 
terview with  the  Davoud  Cacheff — de- 
scription of  the  natives,  81 . 

First  introduce  money  into  the  country,  83. 

Further  description  of  the  natives,  84. 

Proceed  towards  the  second  Cataract,  85. 

Arrive  at  Wady  Haifa,  86. 

Excursion  by  land  on  camels  up  the  Ca- 
taract— view  of  it — visit  to  the  isle  of 
Mainarty,  87. 

Frighten  away  the  natives,  88. 

Ascend  the  Nile  against  the  eddies  and 
current — visit  the  Rock  of  Apsir,  89. 

View  of  the  Cataract  from  it — go  on  to  the 
island  of  Gulge,  90. 

Foundation  of  a  Greek  church  on  the  island 
— return  to  Mainarty — leave  it  and  de- 
scend the  Nile — arrive  at  Iskus,  91. 

Interview  with  the  Osseyn  Cacheff,  92. 

Leave  Iskus — return  to  the  village  of 
Ybsambul — description  of  a  small  temple 
opposite  it — endeavour  to  persuade  the 
natives  to  open  the  temple,  93. 

Begin  operations  at  the  temple,  94. 

Difficulties  encountered  from  the  natives, 
95. 

Embarrassment  of  the  Cacheff  in  fixing  the 
price  of  a  sheep,  97. 

He  drinks  wine  for  the  first  time,  98. 

The  natives  come  to  work  in  great  numbers 
— their  ideas  on  the  treasure  to  be  found, 
99. 

Attempt  to  rob  the  boat,  100. 

Causes  for  quitting  the  works  at  the  temple, 
and  leave  Ybsambul,  101. 


CONTENTS. 


xm 


Hailed  and  received  letters  sent  by  a  soldier 
from  Deraou,  102. 

Proceed  to  Cardassy — return  to  the  first 
Cataract — take  possession  of  a  small  obe- 
lisk and  various  other  blocks  of  stone  in 
the  island  of  Philce,  103. 

Return  to  Assouan  —  visit  the  granite 
quarries  in  the  mountains,  105. 

Discover  a  Latin  inscription  on  a  column 
in  the  quarry — the  little  knowledge  they 
have  of  diamonds,  106. 

Prepare  to  depart,  107. 

Observation  on  the  manners  of  the  Arabs, 
108. 

Leave  Assouan  and  arrive  at  Luxor — 
proceedings  taken  to  obtain  a  boat  to 
convey  the  bust  of  Memnon  to  Alexan- 
dria, 109- 

Works  recommenced  in  Carnak,  111. 

Secure  a  boat — beginning  of  discoveries, 
112. 

Count  de  Forbin,  114. 

Description  of  the  place  where  I  first  dis- 
covered the  lion-headed  statues,  115. 

Further  proceedings  in  Carnak,  116. 

Meet  Khalil  Bey  on  the  Nile,  117. 

Conversazione  with  the  Bey  and  his  court, 
118. 


Account  of  a  dinner  with  him,  119- 

Description  of  the  sepulchres  in  Gournou 
and  Medinet  Aboo,  120. 

First  excursion  in  the  valley  of  Beban  el 
Malook — first  discover  the  tomb  of  a 
king,  123. 

Description  of  the  mountains  round  the  val- 
ley— water  descends  from  thedesert,  124. 

Further  difficulties  in  obtaining  a  boat, 
125. 

Curious  incident  by  which  the  boat  was  ob- 
tained, 126. 

Trial  respecting  the  boat,  and  decision  in 
favour  of  the  author,  129. 

Works  recommenced  in  Gournou — embark 
the  colossal  bust  of  Memnon,  131. 

Preparations  for  departing  to  Cairo — Oph- 
thalmia—leave Thebes  for  Cairo,  133. 

Arrival  in  Cairo — leave  Cairo  for  Alexan- 
dria, 134. 

Arrive  in  Rosetta — Bogase — and  in  Alex- 
andria— landed  and  lodged  the  colossal 
head  in  the  Bashaw's  magazine  ready  to 
be  embarked  for  England — farther  pro- 
posal to  ascend  the  Nile,  135. 

Return  to  Cairo — account  of  Captain  Ca- 
billia's  operations  at  the  Pyramids,  136. 


SECOND  JOURNEY. 


Left  Cairo  for  Thebes,  141. 

Stopped  at  Tabeen  and  Boorumbol,  142. 

Description  of  an  Arabian  dance — arrival 
at  Minieh,  143. 

Arrival  at  Eshmounein,  and  sudden  de- 
parture for  Luxor,  1 44. 


A  forced  march  to  Thebes,  145. 
Account  of  Bedoween  horsemen  and  their 

tents,  146. 
Disagreeable   consequences  occasioned  by 

the  interpreter  omitting  to  send  a  letter 

to  the  Defterdar  Bey,  148. 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 


Another  interview  with  the  Cacheff  of  Ele- 
ments— miracles  performed  by  a  Santon, 
150. 
Further  proceedings  in  Luxor,  151. 
Description  of  the  temple  of  Carnak,  152. 
Further  proceedings  in  Thebes,  154. 
Description  of  the  natives,  and  tombs  of 

Gournou,  155. 
Observations  on  the  mode  of  discovery  of 

the  tombs,  158. 
Further  account  of  the  natives — manner  of 
the  Fellahs  making  their  researches,  159. 
Purchase  two  metal  vases  from  a  chief  of 

the  Fellahs,  160. 
Further  operations  and  discovery  of  lion- 
headed  sphinxes  in  Carnak,  162. 
Iron    sickle  discovered  under  one  of  the 

sphinxes,  163. 
Further  knowledge  acquired  on  the  dis- 
covery of  tombs — Herodotus's  descrip- 
tion of  mummies,  165. 
Observations  on  the  various  classes  and  de- 
scriptions of  mummies,  167. 
Of  animal  mummies,  168. 
Of  mummy  priests,  170. 
Mummies  discovered  in  their  original  posi- 
tion, 171- 
Farther  account  of  mummies,  1 72. 
Their  decorations — linen  manufactures — 

enamelling,  gilding  and  other  arts,  173. 
Art  of  painting,  174. 
Sculpture,  175. 
Architecture,  and  knowledge  of  arches  with 

a  key-stone,  176. 
Sculpture,    179. 

Uncover  the  foundation  of  a  temple  in  the 
waste  of  Gournou — curious  manner  in 
discovering  a  tomb,  180. 
Description  of  a   night's  lodging   in   the 
tomb,  181. 


Happiness  of  the  natives  of  Gournou,  182. 

Their  preparations  for  a  wedding,  183. 

Proceedings  in  Carnak — discovery  of  a 
colossal  head — accumulate  various  ar- 
ticles, 184. 

Arrival  of  the  Defterdar  Bey  at  Gatnola, 
and  his  orders — receive  information  from 
the  Sheik  of  Gournou,  185. 

Present  a  letter  from  the  Bashaw  to  the 
Defterdar  Bey,  186. 

The  Bey  visits  Thebes,  187. 

He  visits  Medinet  Aboo,  188. 

His  barbarous  conduct  towards  the  Sheik 
of  Gournou,  189. 

He  ascends  the  Nile,  and  returns  to 
Thebes,  191. 

Interview  with  the  Bey  on  his  return  from 
Deraou,  192. 

Arrival  of  two  of  the  fathers  of  the  Propa- 
ganda at  Thebes,  192. 

Description  of  a  whirlwind,  195. 

Mirage,  196. 

Locusts — deception  of  Defterdar  Bey  in 
issuing  a  firman  for  men  to  work,  197. 

Preparations  for  and  departure  to  the  island 
of  Philce — further  account  of  its  monu- 
ments, 199- 

Preparations    for    Ybsambul  —  arrival    of 

Captains  Irby  and  Mangles,  202. 
Celebration  of  the  birth-day  of  his  Majesty 
George  III. — leave  Philce,  and  arrive  at 
Ybsambul,  203. 
Proceed    to    the    second   Cataract  —  com- 
bination of  the  natives  and  boatmen  to 
extort  money,  204. 
Return  to  Ybsambul — arrival  of  the  Ca- 
cheffs,   Daoud  and    Khalil — displeasure 
of  Khalil — preparations  for  opening  the 
temple,  205. 
Commence  opening  the  temple,  206. 


CONTENTS. 


XV 


Works  stopped  by  the  Ramadan — resolve 

to  work  ourselves,  207. 
Visits  from  strange  Cacheffs,  said  to  be  from 

Ibrim,  208. 
Their  conduct,  209. 
Works  continued — entry  into  the  temple 

— -description  of  the  interior,  811. 
Description  of  the  exterior,  213. 
Leave  Ybsambul,  214. 
Arrive  at  Tomas — return  to  Deir,  215. 
Arrive  at  Almeida — return  to  Kalabshe — 

opposition  of  the  natives  to  our  entering 

the  temple,  216. 
Arrival  at  Hindau,  217. 
Arrival  at  Debod,  and  return  to  Philoe — 

descend  the  cataract  to  Assouan — visit. 

the  granite  quarries  and  the  Latin  in- 
scription, 218. 
Departure   from    Assouan — pass    Edfu — 

landed  at  Elethias — description  of  it,  219. 
Return  to  Luxor,  220. 
Return  to  Erments  to  obtain  a  firman  for 

labourers    to    work    at    Gournou— the 

Cacheff  is  displaced  by  the  Bey,  221. 
Commence  searching  for  the  kings'  tombs, 


Description    of   the   valley   of   Beban   el 

Malook,  224. 
Number  and  description  of  the  tombs,  225. 
Further  discovery  of  tombs,  227. 
Arrival  of  travellers,  228. 
Their  visit  to  a  newly  discovered  tomb,  229- 
Recommence  operations,  and  point  out  the 

spot  where  the  great  tomb  is  found,  230. 
Further  proceedings,  231. 
Enter  the  tomb,  232. 
Further   entrance,    and  description  of  its 

various  apartments,  234. 
Discovery  of  the  sarcophagus  of  alabaster, 

23G. 


Description  of  the  entrance  into  the  tomb 
of  Psammuthis,  237. 

Description  of  the  various  representations 
in  the  tomb,  and  figures  in  sculpture  on 
the  walls,  238. 

Painting — method  taken  for  procuring  a 
Jac  simile  of  the  tomb,  239. 

Description  of  the  various  figures,  240. 

Dr.  Young's  discovery  of  the  name  of  the 
tomb,  242. 

Continuation  of  the  description  of  the 
figures,  243. 

Mahomet  Aga  visits  the  tomb,  246. 

Unfortunate  fate  of  the  stones  prepared  to 
be  taken  from  the  isle  of  Philce,  248. 

Arrival  of  a  noble  family  and  the  consul  at 
Thebes — set  off  for  and  arrive  at  Boolak, 
250. 

Meet  with  Count  de  Forbin,  251. 

Despatches  arrive  from  India,  252. 

Farther  account  of  Count  de  Forbin,  253. 

Transmit  to  Europe,  by  the  Count,  an  ac- 
count of  his  proceedings,  254. 

Visit  the  Pyramids — reflection  on  the  pos- 
sibility of  penetrating  that  of  Ccphrenes, 
and  motive  which  induced  the  author  to 
undertake  it,  255. 

Difficulties  encountered,  256. 

Observations  on  the  Pyramids,  257. 

Mode  of  obtaining  permission  for  the  ope- 
ration, 258. 

Caution  observed  not  to  let  the  proceedings 
be  known,  259. 

Begin  the  undertaking,  260. 

Foundation  ofalarge  templediscovercd,261. 

Tedious  operations  without  any  prospect 
of  success — first  discovery  of  an  entrance, 
262. 

Disappointment,  and  determination  still  to 
persevere,  265. 


XVI 


CONTENTS. 


Calculation  by  which  the  true  entrance  was 
discovered,  266. 

Again  resume  the  work — Arrival  of  Che- 
valier Frediani,  267. 

Discovery  of  the  blocks  of  granite  belong- 
ing to  the  true  entrance —discovery  of 
the  true  entrance,  268. 

Difficulties  in  entering — description  of  the 
portcullis,  270. 

Description  of  the  interior — the  sarcophagus 
found  in  the  great  chamber,  271. 

Arabic  inscription  observed  on  the  wall  of 
the  chamber — translation  of  it,  272. 

Bones  found  in  the  sarcophagus — place  from 


whence  the  stones  have  been  taken  for 

building  the  Pyramids,  275. 
Accounts  of  the  Pyramids,  276. 
The  supposed  purpose  for  which  they  were 

erected,  277. 
Their  dimensions,  278. 
Opinion  on  there  not  being  hieroglyphics 

on  the  Pyramids,  279- 
Their  coating — on  their  being  surrounded 

by  the  Nile — operation  on  the  third  Py- 
ramid, 280. 
Preparations  for  a  third  journey  to  Thebes, 

282. 
Set  off  for  Thebes,  28.3. 


THIRD  JOURNEY. 


Visit  the  Deftcrdar  Bey  of  Siout — his 
amusements  in  military  exercise  and  ob- 
servations on  fire-arms,  283. 

Mode  of  trying  capital  crimes,  284. 

The  Bey's  knowledge  on  architecture,  286. 

Proceed  towards  Thebes — visit  my  old 
friend  Soliman,  Cacheff  of  Erments,  at 
Tacta,  288. 

Ecbpse  of  the  sun — arrival  and  proceedings 
at  Thebes,  289. 


Discover  a  fine  colossal  statue — opinion  on 

the  right  site  of  the  temple  of  Memnon, 

291. 
Hints  to  travellers  where  to  dig  for  anti- 

quities,  292. 
Take  models  of  the  tombs  in  wax,  294. 
The  author's  motives   for  undertaking  a 

journey  to  the  Red  Sea,  295. 
Preparations  for  departure,  296. 


JOURNEY  TO  THE  RED  SEA. 


Set  sail — extraordinary  inundation  of  the 

Nile,  299. 
Arrive  at  Esne,  and  visit  Ibrahim  Bey — 

arrive  at  the  island  of  Hovassce,  302. 
Preparations  for  entering  the  desert,  303. 
Set  off  for  the  desert  towards  the  Red  Sea 

— arrive  at  the  first  well  in  the  desert,  304. 


Approach    towards  Wady  el   Meeah— its 

temple,  305. 
Continuation  of  journey,  307. 
Observe  several  hills  of  granite,  30S 
Description  of  the  Ababdy  tribes,  809- 
Continuation  of  the  journey — sight  of  the 

Red  Sea,  313. 


CONTENTS. 


xvn 


Sight  of  the  Zubara  or  Emerald  Mountains 

— description  of  the  miners,  314. 
And  of  the  mines,   315. 
Preparations  for  journey  to  Sakiet,  31 G. 
Description  of  the  road  towards  it — searches 

for  Sakiet  in  consequence  of  Mr.  Caliud's 

erroneous  information,  317. 
View  the  Red  Sea  from  the  top  of  a  moun- 
tain, 321. 
Continue   our  journey  towards   the  Red 

Sea,  323. 
Arrival  at  the  Red  Sea,  324. 
Description  of  the  coast,  325.' 
Correctness  of  Mr.  Bruce's  account  of  that 

coast — sulphur  mines,  326. 
Fishermen — their  mode  of  fishing,  327. 
Island  of  Gambe — its  situation  with  the 

Wady  el  Gemal,  328. 
Sulphur  mines— effects  of  the  south-east 

wind — arrive  at  Cape  Golahen,  or  Lept 

Estrama,  329. 
Arrive  at  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  town — 

its  situation,  bay  and  harbour,  330. 
Dimensions  of  the  town,  331. 


Farther  account  of  the  town  and  lands 
round  it — proved  to  be  the  Berenice  de- 
scribed by  D'Anville,  332. 

Its  supposed  ancient  population,  &c.  334. 

Left  Berenice  on  return  to  the  Nile- 
arrived  at  the  first  well,  335. 

Arrive  at  Haboo  Grey,  station  of  the  an- 
cient caravan  passing  to  and  from  Bere- 
nice, Coptos,  and  Amusue! — a  spring 
of  running  water,  336. 

Arrive  at  Sakiet— returned  to  the  Red  Sea 
— observations  on  the  coast,  337. 

Return  to  Sakiet,  338. 

Greek  inscription  found  there,  339. 

Arrive  at  Kafafeet,  another  caravan  station 
— arrive  at  Habookroog — description  of 
a  desert,  341. 

Arrive  at  Hamesh — arrive  at  Samout, 
another  caravan  station — arrive  at  Dan- 
gos,  344. 

Returned  to  Wady  el  Meeah — return  to 
the  Nile — interview  with  the  Sheik  of 
the  Ababdy,  345. 

Voyage  from  Elethias  to  Gournou,  346. 


ACCOUNT    OF    THE    TAKING    THE    OBELISK    FKOM    THE    ISLAND    OF    PHIL(E    TO 

ALEXANDRIA. 


Arrival  of  various  persons  in  Thebes,  347. 

Account  of  their  proceedings,  348. 

Set  off'  for  the   first  Cataract — arrive  at 

Elethias  and  Edfu,  351. 
Account  of  Silsili,  352. 
Arrive  at  Assouan,  353. 
Proceedings  of  the  agents  of  Mr.  Drouetti 

at  Philce,  355. 
Commencement  of  operations  for  removing 

the  obelisk — difficulties  encountered,  356. 


It  falls  into  the  Nile,  357. 

Preparations  for  taking  it  out — description 
of  the  operation,  358. 

Again  embarked — preparations  for  launch- 
ing it  down  the  Cataract — observations 
on  the  various  colours  of  the  cut  granite, 
360. 

Launch  the  obelisk,  361. 

Arrive  at  Assouan,  and  voyage  to  Thebes, 
363. 

c 


Will 


CONTENTS. 


Account  of  a  stranger,  364. 

Visit  Carnak,  365. 

Assaulted  by  a  band  of  Arabs,  led  on  by 
two  Piedmontese  in  Mr.  Drouetti's  em- 
ploy, 366. 

Preparations  for  returning  to  Europe,  370. 

Reflections  on  the  climate  under  the  tropic 
of  Cancer  on  the  Nile,  371. 


Left  Thebes — arrive  at  Benisouef,  and  met 

with  Mr.  Pearce,  the  Abyssinian  traveller, 

373. 
Difficulties   and    delay    in   embarking   for 

Europe,  375. 
Form  a  resolution    of  making  a  journey 

into  the  Oasis,  376. 


JOURNEY    TO    THE    OASIS    OF    AMMON. 


Arrive  at  Benisouef — entrance  into  the 
Faioum,  377. 

Description  of  the  first  pyramid  of  bricks, 
378. 

Visit  to  the  second  pyramid  of  bricks — ar- 
rive at  Medinet  el  Faioum — set  off  for 
the  lake  Mceris,  379. 

Arrive  at  the  lake — description  of  the  fisher- 
men and  their  boat — embark  for  the  town 
of  Haron,  380. 

Reflections  on  the  shore,  381. 

Visit  to  and  description  of  the  town  and 
temple  of  Haron,  382. 

Surprised  by  a  hya?na — further  account  of 
the  town,  383. 

Opinion  on  the  Labyrinth — re-embarked 
for  the  north  side  of  the  lake,  384. 

Visit  and  description  of  the  ancient  town 
of  Denay,  the  ancient  Bacchus,  385. 

Visit  the  island  of  El  Hear,  and  return  to 
the  east  of  the  lake — make  a  tour  in  va- 
rious places  in  the  neighbourhood — re- 
flection and  opinion  on  the  situation  of 
the  Labyrinth,  387. 

Account  of  Fedmin  el  Kunois,  3S9. 

Arrive  at  the  ruins  of  ancient  Arsinoc, 
390. 


Description  of  it — preparations  for  a  jour- 
ney into  the  Oasis,  391. 

Visit  Khalil  Bey  at  Benisouef,  393. 

Obtain  a  guide  for  the  desert,  394. 

Residence  at  the  Bedoweens'  camp,  395. 

Description  of  it,  396. 

Set  off  for  the  desert — arrive  at  El  Kharah 
— continue  the  journey,  397. 

Arrive  at  Rejcn  el  Cassar — proceed  on,  and 
discover  various  tumuli,  398. 

Opinion  on  them,  399. 

Arrive  at  Bahar  Bela  Me,  401. 

Arrive  in  sight  of  the  Elloah — description 
of  it,  402. 

Approach  the  village  of  Zaboo — introduc- 
tion to  the  natives,  404. 

Their  reception,  405. 

Excursion  round  the  country  in  search  of 
antiquities,  408. 

Curious  mineral  fountain — their  worship — 
mode  of  living,  410. 

Information  received  respecting  the  village 
of  El  Cassar,  411. 

Interview  with  the  great  Sheiks  of  El  Cassar, 
412. 

Quit  Zaboo  for  El  Cassar — prevented  from 
entering  the  village,  415, 


CONTENTS. 


XIX 


Enter  the  village,  416. 

Visit  the  ruins  at  El  Cassar,  418. 

Go  to  see  the  tombs,  and  the  noted  fountain 

mentioned  by  Herodotus,  421. 
Setoff  for  El  Haix,  424. 
Return  to  El  Cassar,  429. 
Return  to  Zaboo,  430. 
Proceeding  thei-e,  431. 
Left  the  Oasis  for  Moele,  432. 


Arrival  at  that  place — description  of  it — 
continuation  of  the  journey  towards  the 
Nile — arrival  at  Benisouef,  433. 

Return  to  Cairo — leave  Cairo — return  to 
Rosetta — proceeding  and  'conclusion  of 
the  action  carried  on  against  the  two 
Piedmontese  in  Mr.  Drouetti's  service, 
434. 

Return  to  Europe,  437. 


ERRATA. 


Page   24,  line  21,  for  Memnion,  read  Memnonium. 

62,  line     1 ,  for  El  Shal,  read  El  Shag. 

102,  line  32,  for  Todfa,  rarc/Taffa. 

103,  line  20,  for  large,  read  small. 

168,  line  15,  referrenee  omitted  to  Plate  44. 

— —  203,  line  28,  for  opposite  Deir,  we  found  that  the  Cacheffs  were  not  there  hut  at  Tomas, 
read  we  found  that  the  Cacheffs  were  not  there,  but  at  Tomas  opposite 
Deir. 

338,  line  20,  for  six  hours,  read  twelve. 

-  389,  line  29,  Jar  Fedmin  el  Hanaiser,  read  Fedmin  el  Kunois. 


RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

IN 

EGYPT,    NUBIA,   &c. 


FIEST  JOURNEY. 


We  sailed  from  Malta  on  the  19th  of  May,  1815,  and  arrived  at 
Alexandria  on  the  9th  of  June  following ;  Mrs.  Belzoni,  myself,  and 
James  Curtain,  a  lad,  whom  I  brought  with  me  from  Ireland,  formed 
our  party.     The  principal  cause  of  my  going  to  Egypt  was  the  pro- 
ject of  constructing  hydraulic  machines,  to  irrigate  the  fields,  by  a 
system  much  easier  and  more  economical  than  what  is  in  use  in  that 
country.    On  entering  the  harbour  of  Alexandria,  the  pilot  informed 
us,  that  the  plague  was  in  the  town.    To  a  European,  who  had  never 
been  in  that  country,  this  was  alarming  intelligence.    As  I  wished  to 
have  some  information  concerning  the  state  of  the  disease,  we  did 
not  land  till  the  next  day,  when  two  European  gentlemen  came 
alongside  in  a  boat,  and  informed  us,  that  it  was  rapidly  diminishing. 
We  accordingly  landed,  but  with  much  caution,  as,  in  our  way  to 
the  French  Occale,  where  we  were  to  perform  quarantine,  we  had 
to  pass  through  the  town.     Fortunately,  St.  John's  day,  which  is 
the  24th  of  June,  was  not  far  off;  and  on  that  day  the  plague  is 
supposed  to  cease.    Some  superstitious  persons  attribute  this  to  the 
power  of  the  saint  himself;  but  it  is  too  well  known,  that  extreme 
heat  checks  the  plague  in  the  same  manner  as  the  cold  season ; 

B 


2  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

and  I  observed  myself,  that  when  the  heat  of  summer  was  not  so 
great  as  usual,  the  plague  lasted  longer ;  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
when  the  cold  season  lasted  longer,  the  plague  came  later. 

The  necessity  of  putting  ourselves  into  a  voluntary  prison ;  the 
caution  we  were  obliged  to  take,  not  to  touch  any  person,  or  suffer 
any  one  to  touch  us ;  the  strict  order  to  be  observed  in  receiving 
any  thing  that  came  from  out  of  doors ;  and  the  continual  perfumes 
with  which  we  were  regaled,  to  prevent  the  plague,  as  they  say, 
were  extremely  strange  to  a  novice  in  the  customs  of  the  country. 
We  were  confined  to  our  apartment,  and  for  three  or  four  days  no 
one  came  near  us.     We  were  really  sick,  but  I  took  the  caution 
not  to  let  it  be  known ;  for  the  plague  is  so  dreadful  a  scourge,  and 
operates  so  powerfully  on  human  fears  and  human  prejudices,  that, 
during  its  prevalence,  if  a  man  be  ill,  he  must  be  ill  of  the  plague, 
and  if  he  die,  he  must  have  died  of  the  plague :  no  inquiry  is  made, 
no  examination  takes  place.     Accordingly,  had  the  people  of  the 
Occale  come  to  the  knowledge  of  our  being  indisposed,  and  par- 
ticularly that  we  vomited,  they  would  have  concluded,  though  it 
was  merely  the  effect  of  a  new  climate,  that  we  had  caught  the 
pestilence   in  passing  through  the  town ;    and  the  whole  Occale 
would  have  been  struck  with  terror,  thinking  the  enemy  was  within 
the  gate. 

The  Occale  is  an  enclosure  of  several  houses,  so  disposed  as  to 
form  a  square.  There  is  no  entrance  to  the  area  of  the  square  but 
by  the  great  gate,  leading  to  a  common  staircase,  above  which  a  gal- 
lery takes  you  to  every  house.  In  plague  time,  the  people  of  these 
habitations  must  communicate  with  each  other  without  touching : 
no  provision  can  enter  without  being  passed  through  water,  nor 
must  bread  be  touched  whilst  warm.  The  disease  is  so  easily 
caught,  that  a  piece  of  thread  blown  by  the  wind  is  quite  sufficient 
to  infect  the  whole  country.     Had  it  been  known  that  we  were  ill, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  3 

no  one  would  have  come  near  us,  except  the  Arabs,  who  go  in  case  of 
sickness  indiscriminately  to  every  one ;  and  are  thus  likely  to  spread 
the  plague,  by  giving  it  to  those  who  had  it  not.  Many  die  the  vic- 
tims of  neglect,  merely  because  every  disease  is  taken  for  the  plague : 
others  are  victims  of  a  different  kind,  of  the  atrocious,  interested 
views  of  their  relatives,  who,  profiting  by  their  death,  may  take  what 
advantage  they  please,  even  by  poison,  as  no  investigation  takes 
place  in  any  instance.  "  He  died  of  the  plague,"  is  the  general 
cry,  whatever  may  be  the  disease ;  and  as  several  hundreds  perish 
daily,  they  are  all  carried  away  without  distinction. 

After  the  24th  June,  called  the  great  St.  John,  the  plague  nearly 
ceased ;  and  as  my  principal  view  was  to  reach  Cairo,  we  lured  a 
boat,  in  company  with  Mr.  Turner,  an  English  gentleman,  who  was 
going  up  the  Nile.  We  sailed  on  the  1st  of  July,  but,  owing  to 
contrary  winds,  were  brought  back  the  same  evening.  The  next 
day  we  re-embarked,  and  were  then  obliged  to  land  at  Aboukir,  in 
consequence  of  high  winds.  We  visited  the  place,  where  many  a 
brave  fellow  had  fallen  a  sacrifice  to  the  war,  and  to  the  glory  of 
his  country.     Human  bones  were  scattered  here  and  there. 

Continuing  our  voyage  the  same  day,  we  entered  the  mouth 
of  the  Nile,  and  landed  at  Eosetta;  four  days  more  brought 
us  to  Boolak,  within  a  mile  of  Cairo.  Though  our  eyes  began 
to  be  accustomed  to  the  sight  of  the  Arabs  in  Alexandria,  the 
bustling  scene  here  was  still  more  striking.  The  majestic  ap- 
pearance of  Turkish  soldiers  in  various  costumes,  without  regu- 
larity or  discipline,  Arabs  of  many  tribes,  boats,  canjeas,  camels, 
horses,  and  asses,  all  in  motion,  presented  a  striking  picture.  I 
landed,  and  went  immediately  to  Cairo ;  and  as  the  holy  fathers  of 
the  convent  of  Terrasanta  could  not  receive  women  within  their 
walls,  we  were  accommodated  in  an  old  house  in  Boolak,  belonging 
to  Mr.  Baghos,  to  whom  I  was  recommended.    He  was  the  principal 

b  2 


4  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

interpreter  of  Mahomed  Ali,  and  director  of  all  foreign  affairs  :  a  man 
of  great  aeuteness  of  understanding,  and  so  well  disposed  towards 
strangers,  particularly  Europeans,  that  it  was  soon  arranged,  that  on 
such  a  day  I  was  to  be  presented  to  his  highness  the  Bashaw,  to 
make  my  proposal.  The  house  we  inhabited  was  so  old  and  out 
of  repair,  that  I  expected  every  moment  it  would  fall  on  our  heads; 
all  the  windows  were  shut  up  with  broken  wooden  rails ;  the  stair- 
case was  in  so  wretched  a  condition,  that  scarcely  a  step  was  left 
entire ;  the  door  was  fastened  simply  by  a  pole  placed  against  it, 
having  neither  lock  nor  any  thing  else  to  secure  the  entrance. 
There  were  many  rooms  in  it,  but  the  ceiling  in  all  of  them  was  in 
a  most  threatening  state.  The  whole  furniture  consisted  of  a 
single  mat  in  one  of  the  best  rooms,  which  we  considered  as  our 
drawing-room.  We  had  mattresses  and  linen  with  us,  otherwise 
we  must  have  adopted  the  Arab  method  of  sleeping :  as  no  chairs 
are  to  be  had  in  this  country,  we  sat  on  the  ground ;  a  box  and  a 
trunk  served  as  a  table :  fortunately,  we  had  a  few  plates,  as  well 
as  knives  and  forks,  which  we  had  provided  to  use  in  the  boat; 
and  James,  our  Irish  lad,  bought  us  a  set  of  culinary  utensils,  of 
pottery.     Such  were  our  accommodations. 

Though  my  principal  object  was  not  antiquities  at  that  time, 
I  could  not  restrain  myself  from  going  to  see  the  wonder  of  the 
world,  the  pyramids.  I  took  an  opportunity  of  going  with  Mr. 
Turner,  who  obtained  an  escort  of  soldiers  from  the  Bashaw,  to 
accompany  us.  We  went  there  to  sleep,  that  we  might  ascend 
the  first  pyramid  early  enough  in  the  morning,  to  see  the  rising 
of  the  sun ;  and  accordingly  we  were  on  the  top  of  it  long 
before  the  dawn  of  day.  The  scene  here  is  majestic  and 
grand,  far  beyond  description :  a  mist  over  the  plains  of  Egypt 
formed  a  veil,  which  ascended  and  vanished  gradually  as  the 
sun  rose  and  unveiled  to  the  view  that  beautiful  land,  once  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  5 

site  of  Memphis.  The  distant  view  of  the  smaller  pyramids  on 
the  south  marked  the  extension  of  that  vast  capital ;  while  the 
solemn,  endless  spectacle  of  the  desert  on  the  west  inspired  us  with 
reverence  for  the  all-powerful  Creator.  The  fertile  lands  on  the 
north,  with  the  serpentine  course  of  the  Nile,  descending  towards 
the  sea ;  the  rich  appearance  of  Cairo,  and  its  numerous  minarets,  at 
the  foot  of  the  Mokatam  mountain  on  the  east ;  the  beautiful  plain 
which  extends  from  the  pyramids  to  that  city;  the  Nile,  which 
flows  magnificently  through  the  centre  of  the  sacred  valley,  and  the 
thick  groves  of  palm  trees  under  our  eyes ;  all  together  formed  a 
scene,  of  which  very  imperfect  ideas  can  be  given  by  the  most 
elaborate  description.  We  descended  to  admire  at  some  distance 
the  astonishing  pile  that  stood  before  us,  composed  of  such  an 
accumulation  of  enormous  blocks  of  stones,  that  I  was  at  a  loss  to 
conjecture  how  they  could  be  brought  thither ;  and  presently  we 
entered  the  pyramid :  but  I  must  reserve  for  some  other  time  the 
more  minute  account  of  this  wonderful  work.  We  went  round  the 
second  pyramid,  examined  several  of  these  mausoleums,  and  re- 
turned to  Cairo  with  the  satisfaction  of  having  seen  a  wonder, 
which  I  had  long  desired,  but  never  supposed  I  should  have  the 
happiness  to  behold. 

A  few  days  after  we  made  a  party  of  Europeans,  to  go  as  far  as 
Sacara  by  water,  and  after  visiting  the  pyramids  of  that  place,  the 
party  returned  to  Cairo,  except  Mr.  Turner  and  myself,  who  went 
to  see  the  pyramids  of  Dajior.  These  are  considerably  smaller  than 
the  large  ones,  I  believe  in  the  proportion  of  about  one  to  six.  One 
of  them  is  of  a  different  form,  as  it  has  a  curve  in  the  angles,  which 
brings  it  to  a  perpendicular  near  the  ground.  This,  and  those  at 
Sacara,  which  appear  like  hanging  galleries,  differ  from  the  generality 
in  point  of  shape ;  but  the  two  of  Dajior  are  in  better  preservation 
than  any  of  the  rest.     I  observed  also  near  Sacara  and  Betracina, 


6  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

which  I  believe  to  be  the  central  part  of  Memphis,  the  remains  of 
other  pyramids,  which,  by  their  dilapidated  state,  induced  me  to 
suppose,  that  they  are  of  an  earlier  date  than  any  of  the  rest.  At 
this  time  I  had  no  opportunity  of  visiting  the  pits  of  the  embalmed 
mummies,  and  birds ;  but  a  Fellah  brought  us  one  of  the  earthen  vases 
that  contained  a  bird,  which  I  believed  to  be  a  hawk  by  the  shape  of 
the  bones.  The  vase  was  so  perfect,  that  we  laughed  at  the  Arab  for 
his  attempting  to  impose  on  us.  Seeing  that  he  could  not  sell  his 
piece  of  antiquity,  and  that  he  was  laughed  at  besides,  he  broke 
the  vase  before  us,  to  show  what  connoisseurs  we  were  of  antiques. 
We  overshot  the  mark  this  time ;  for  the  caution  that  had  been 
given  us,  never  to  credit  what  an  Arab  says,  made  us  disbelieve  the 
truth.  On  our  returning  towards  the  Nile,  we  passed  by  the  broken 
pyramid  of  sun-baked  bricks  ;  and  it  appeared  to  me,  on  examining 
it  afterwards,  that  it  did  not  decay  gradually,  like  the  other  pyra- 
mids, but  by  large  masses  of  the  bricks  separating  at  a  time  from 
the  rest. 

On  our  arrival  at  the  Nile  it  was  quite  night,  and  we  had  to 
pass  several  villages  to  come  to  a  place  where  we  could  embark  for 
old  Cairo.  Our  road  was  through  a  cluster  of  palm  trees,  which 
by  moonlight  had  a  most  solemn  effect.  Some  of  the  Arabs  were 
dancing  to  the  usual  tunes  on  the  tambourines ;  and,  forgetting 
perhaps  the  slavish  condition  in  which  they  are  held  by  the  Turks, 
were  happy  for  a  while.  We  took  a  small  boat,  and  arrived  in  old 
Cairo  before  day.  Two  days  after  I  was  to  be  presented  to  the  Ba- 
shaw on  the  subject  of  my  hydraulic  project ;  and  accordingly  I  went 
to  the  house  of  Mr.  Baghos,  where  I  first  became  acquainted  with  the 
late  Mr.  Burckhardt.  Tins  acquaintance  was  a  fortunate  circumstance 
for  me,  as  the  various  and  important  information  I  acquired  from 
him  proved  to  be  of  the  greatest  service  to  me  in  that  country,  and 
I  shall  ever  remember  it  with  the  deepest  gratitude.    Going  to  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  7 

citadel  with  Mr.  Baghos,  we  had  to  pass  through  several  of  the 
principal  streets,  which  are  always  crowded  with  people,  and  for 
this  reason  a  stranger  supposes  the  capital  to  be  very  populous ;  but 
except  these  streets  and  the  bazars,  the  rest  of  the  town  is  quite 
deserted,  and  a  great  number  of  falling  houses  and  much  rubbish 
are  to  be  seen  every  where.  We  were  mounted  on  our  asses,  the 
most  convenient  and  only  mode  of  travelling  for  Franks  in  that  city. 
We  met  a  soldier  on  horseback,  who,  when  he  came  near,  gave  me 
such  a  blow  with  his  staff  upon  my  right  leg,  that  I  thought  he  had 
cut  it  in  two.  The  staves  of  the  Turks,  which  are  like  shovels,  cut 
very  sharp;  and  one  of  the  corners,  catching  the  calf  of  my  leg,  tore  off 
a  piece  of  flesh  in  a  triangular  form,  two  inches  broad,  and  pretty 
deep.  After  this  he  swore  two  or  three- oaths  at  me,  and  went  on 
as  if  nothing  had  happened.  The  blood  ran  out  copiously ;  and, 
instead  of  seeing  the  Bashaw,  I  was  taken  to  the  convent  of  Tera- 
santa,  as  the  nearest  Christian  place  I  could  go  to.  It  is  to  be 
remarked,  that,  at  this  time,  there  was  a  great  discontent  among  the 
soldiers  against  the  Bashaw,"  for  having  given  orders,  that  they 
should  learn  the  European  military  evolutions ;  and,  as  I  was  in  a 
Frank's  dress,  I  suppose  the  fellow  paid  me  for  what  he  had  learned 
of  European  fighting.  From  the  convent  I  was  taken  home  to  my 
house  in  Boolak,  where  I  remained  under  cure  for  thirty  days, 
before  I  could  stand  on  my  legs. 

During  my  confinement  in  this  house,  I  had  an  opportunity  of 
observing  at  some  distance  the  manners  of  the  Arabs,  who  passed 
under  our  window.  Our  house  stood  in  a  good  situation,  where  we 
could  observe  all  the  landing  from  the  boats  that  came  from  Alex- 
andria and  Kosetta.  All  the  goods  which  went  or  came  passed  our 
residence ;  and  the  caravans  of  the  Moors  from  Mecca  halted  for 
several  days  in  this  place.  It  was  a  strange  sight  for  us,  to  observe 
these  people  in  their  tents,  living  in  separate  families,  while  their 
chief  occupation  was  sitting  on  the  ground,  smoking,  singing,  and 


8  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

saying  prayers,  which  I  observed  lasted  sometimes  three  or  four 
hours,  besides  the  ceremonial  prayers,  repeated  standing  and  kneel- 
ing. I  did  not  make  any  minute  observations,  for,  as  I  have  said,  my 
first  occupation  was  with  a  different  view ;  nor  did  I  expect  at  that 
period,  that  I  should  ever  have  any  thing  to  do  with  these  people, 
as  a  traveller. 

When  I  recovered,  I  was  presented  to  Mahomet  Ali  Bashaw, 
who  received  me  very  civilly.  Seeing  that  I  walked  lamely,  and 
being  told  the  cause,  he  said,  such  accidents  could  not  be  avoided 
where  there  were  troops.  I  made  an  arrangement  with  him,  and 
undertook  to  erect  a  machine,  which  would  raise  as  much  water 
with  one  ox,  as  the  machines  of  the  country  with  four.  He  was 
much  pleased  with  my  proposal,  as  it  would  save  the  labour  and 
expense  of  many  thousands  of  oxen  in  the  country ;  a  matter  of 
importance,  since  these  animals  are  scarcely  of  any  other  use  than 
working ;  for,  though  they  are  in  pretty  good  condition,  they  are 
seldom  killed  for  food,  the  Turks  eating  mutton,  and  the  Arabs 
buffalo's  flesh,  when  they  can  afford  it.  The  Bashaw  was  just 
returned  from  Arabia,  where  he  had  conquered  some  of  the  Wa- 
haby  tribes,  and  delivered  the  holy  cities  of  Mecca  and  Medina 
from  the  Infidels.  He  himself  conducted  the  war  till  lately,  when 
his  son  Ibrahim  Bashaw  conquered  some  of  the  great  chiefs,  who 
were  taken  prisoners,  and  sent  to  Constantinople,  where  they  were 
executed.  Notwithstanding  this,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  Mecca  will 
be  to  the  Turks,  what  Jerusalem  is  to  the  Christians ;  for,  unless  a 
strong  army  be  kept  there,  the  croisades  of  Mahomet  Ali  will  have 
no  better  effect,  than  that  of  our  Godfrey  of  Bouillon. 

During  the  time  that  I  was  engaged  in  preparing  my  hydraulic 
machine,  one  morning  I  went  on  the  road  towards  Cairo,  and,  to  my 
surprise,  found  a  perfect  silence,  instead  of  the  continual  confusion 
of  noise  and  bustle  of  every  description.  The  boatmen  were  getting 
their  boats  ready,  as  if  to  set  off  immediately.     No  camels  appeared 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  9 

to  carry  water  to  Cairo  ;  no  ass-drivers  were  seen  ;  no  shops  open  ; 
and  no  person  in  the  streets.  I  could  not  conceive  what  was  the 
reason  of  this  singularity,  nor  could  I  inquire  of  any  one,  as  no  per- 
son was  in  the  way ;  but,  being  Friday,  I  concluded  it  might  be 
some  particular  holiday  with  the  Mahommedans.  I  went  on,  and 
still  I  met  no  one.  The  distance  from  Boolak  to  Cairo  is  about 
a  mile,  through  an  open  country  ;  and  midway  is  a  bridge,  near 
which  I  found  a  group  of  soldiers.  I  continued  my  walk  without 
noticing  them  ;  one  of  them,  however,  levelled  a  gun  at  me,  and  all 
the  rest  laughed  at  the  idea  of  frightening  a  Frank. 

I  passed  on  till  I  entered  Cairo.     When  I  reached  the  Franks' 
quarter,  both  gates  were  shut ;  but  through  the  small  door  I  observed 
a  Frank,  engaged  like  myself  in  the  act  of  peeping,  and  who  proved  to 
be  Mr.  Bocty,  the  Swedish  consul-general,  who  was  surprised  to  see 
me.     I  could  not  imagine  what  all  this  meant.     At  first  I  concluded, 
that  a  violent  plague  had  broken  out,  and  that  every  one  kept  his 
house  :   but  the  Mahommedans  do  not  seclude  themselves  on  such 
occasions  ;  so  I  was  at  a  great  loss  what  inference  to  draw.    Mr.  Bocty 
anxiously  inquired  of  me  how  I  happened  to  be  there,  whence  I  came, 
and  what  I  had  seen  on  the  road  ;  and  he  Avas  not  a  little  surprised, 
when  I  told  him,  that  I  came  from  Boolak,  and  did  not  see  any 
thing  particular  on   the  way.     I  had  not  been  at  the  door  long, 
before  we  heard  a  great  noise  in  some  of  the  streets,  and  a  volley 
of  musketry   discharged.     I   was   then  hurried   into   the   Franks' 
quarter,  and  the  gates  were  closely  shut.     I  was  soon  informed, 
that  a  revolution  had  broken  out  among  the  soldiers  against  the 
Bashaw,   and    that  some   of  the  troops  were  in  pursuit  of  him 
to  the  citadel,  whither  he  had  retired  for  safety.     Strange  as  it  may 
appear,    it  proved,  that  by  our  not  communicating  with  any  body 
in  Boolak,  we  knew  nothing  of  what  passed  in  the  morning  at 
Cairo ;   and   it  so   happened,  that   at  the  very  place  where   the 

c 


10  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

revolution  had  begun,  which  was  the  seraglio,  in  the  Esbakie,  no 
one  was  visible  when  I  passed;  for  after  the  Bashaw  had  retired 
into  the  citadel,  all  the  soldiers  ran  after  him  ;  and  as  to  the  rest 
of  the  people,  no  one  came  out  of  their  houses.  All  the  Franks  in 
their  quarter  were  alarmed,  and  prepared  for  defence  in  case  the 
gates  should  be  attacked.  I  went  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Baghos,  as 
I  had  business  with  him,  and  he  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  see 
me,  knowing  where  I  lived. 

I  Avas  much  concerned  for  Mrs.  Belzoni,  whom  I  had  left  at 
home  with  only  James  and  an  Arab ;  and  though  Mr.  Baghos 
endeavoured  to  persuade  me  to  stop  with  them  all  night,  I  insisted 
on  returning  almost  immediately.  I  went  off  unperceived  by 
any  one  in  the  house  ;  but  at  the  gates  of  the  quarter  I  found 
great  difficulty  in  having  the  door  opened ;  and  no  sooner  was 
I  out,  than  it  was  instantly  closed  after  me.  I  took  the  same 
road  that  I  came,  and  had  not  gone  far,  when  I  met  a  body  of 
armed  soldiers  running  towards  the  centre  of  the  town.  Advancing 
further  I  heard  several  muskets  discharged  in  a  street  near,  and 
many  others  at  some  distance ;  indeed  there  was  a  continual  firing 
kept  up.  On  my  approaching  the  Esbakie,  I  saw  several  soldiers 
running  towards  the  seraglio,  and  others  hastening  towards  me. 
When  they  came  up,  one  seized  my  bridle,  while  another  took  me 
by  the  collar,  and  the  rest  were  busied  in  rifling  my  pockets.  I 
had  but  a  few  dollars  in  my  possession ;  and  my  pocket-book  con- 
tained only  letters  and  passports,  of  which  I  know  not  how  they 
have  disposed :  but  what  principally  drew  their  attention  was  a 
white  topaz  brooch,  which  I  had  in  the  frill  of  my  shirt,  and  which 
they  took  for  a  brilliant.  I  kept  in  good  humour  with  them  ;  and 
when  I  perceived  their  attention  to  the  topaz,  I  began  to  move  in 
order  to  depart.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  had  reason  to  fear 
they  would  call  after  me,  suspecting  that  I  marked  them  so  as  to 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  1 1 

recognize  them  again :  but  I  proceeded,  and  nothing  further  hap- 
pened to  me  on  the  road. 

For  several  days  we  kept  ourselves  close  in  the  house,  as  we  were 
advised  by  a  friendly  Turk,  our  neighbour,  not  to  be  seen.  During 
this  time,  the  soldiers  plundered  the  shops  in  Cairo,  and  the  Bashaw 
sent  the  Syrian  horse  against  them,  now  known  under  the  appellation 
of  Tartoor.  These  were  the  only  troops  faithful  to  him  ;  but  being 
mounted,  they  could  not  follow  the  Albanians,  who  were  posted  in 
ploughed  fields  between  Cairo  and  Boolak.  One  day  the  cavalry 
advanced,  and  the  Albanians  retired  towards  Boolak.  Our  house  was 
so  situated,  that  from  the  upper  part  of  it  we  could  see  the  firing  of 
the  troops  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  the  confusion  of  the  people, 
who  had  taken  to  the  boats,  which  were  soon  crowded  with  them,  and 
in  the  hurry  many  of  the  boats  went  adrift.  It  was  expected,  that 
the  troops  would  plunder  the  place,  if  they  entered  it :  in  such  case, 
I  depended  on  the  appearance  and  ruined  state  of  our  habitation, 
which,  I  had  reason  to  think,  would  rather  deter  the  soldiers  from 
entering  it,  lest  it  should  fall  on  their  heads,  than  invite  them  to 
plunder.  Besides,  we  had  no  treasure  with  us,  unless  they  had 
taken  our  kitchen  furniture  of  earthen  pots,  &c.  There  was  a 
universal  cry  among  the  people,  and  the  troops  advanced  to  the 
very  entrance  of  the  town ;  but,  fortunately,  they  were  prevented 
from  coming  in  by  the  cavalry,  who,  by  making  a  circuit,  had  taken 
post  on  the  road.  The  confusion  continued  in  this  manner  for 
several  days :  at  last,  after  having  plundered  and  ravaged  Cairo  at 
their  pleasure,  the  troops  retired  to  their  camps,  and  in  a  few  days 
more  matters  were  arranged  again.  I  have  reason  to  think,  that 
the  Bashaw  knew  who  the  chief  instigators  of  this  insurrection 
were,  for  we  found  that  several  persons  shortly  after  died  of  sudden 
deaths ;  and,  indeed,  many  of  the  Chiefs  and  Beys  disappeared. 
The  discontented  troops  were  all  sent  to  encampments  in  various 

c  2 


12  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

stations  at  a  distance  from  Cairo,  and  part  towards  Mecca ;  but  the 
European  exercise,  which  was  said  to  have  been  the  cause  of  the 
revolt  of  the  troops,  was  wholly  abandoned,  and  consigned  to  ob- 
livion. Turks  are  averse  to  control  of  any  sort,  and  particularly 
to  what  is  not  the  result  of  Mahommedan  customs.  I  was  never 
more  amused,  than  when  I  saw  our  military  evolutions  attempted  by 
men,  whose  large  trowsers  are  peculiarly  unsuited  to  our  light 
motions. 

When  all  was  quiet  again,  I  recommenced  my  hydraulic  pre- 
parations. The  place,  where  I  was  to  erect  my  machine,  was  in 
Soubra,  at  the  garden  of  the  Bashaw,  on  the  Nile,  three  miles  from 
Cairo.  We  went  to  reside  there,  in  a  small  house  within  the  walls 
of  the  governor's  palace,  which  was  closed  at  night  by  large  gates, 
something  like  the  Occales  in  Alexandria.  I  had  many  provoking 
difficulties  to  encounter,  before  I  became  acquainted  with  the 
people  of  the  place,  as  they  supposed,  that  the  introduction  of 
such  machines  into  the  country  woidd  throw  many  of  them  out 
of  work  ;  consequently  I  was  not  welcome  among  them  ;  and  the 
very  persons  who  were  to  furnish  me  with  what  was  necessary  in 
wood,  iron,  carpentry,  &c.  would  be  the  first  to  suffer  by  it,  if  the 
machine  succeeded.  It  may,  therefore,  easily  be  imagined  that  I  had 
to  contend  with  many  obstacles,  besides  the  prejudice  against  all 
strangers,  or  innovations  in  the  customs  of  the  natives.  As  a  proof 
of  this  may  be  cited  the  hydraulic  machine  already  in  Soubra,  sent  as 
a  present  from  England  to  the  Bashaw  of  Egypt,  which  is  said  to  have 
cost  ten  thousand  pounds.  It  was  neatly  put  up,  though  the  en- 
gineer, who  was  in  charge  of  it,  met  with  many  difficulties  before  he 
effected  it.  At  last  it  was  set  to  work ;  but  as  it  was  imagined, 
that  an  English  machine  would  inundate  the  whole  country  in  an 
hour,  the  quantity  of  water  raised  was  not  adequate  to  their 
expectation,  and  it  has  been  left  useless  ever  since.     For  my  own 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  13 

part,  I  have  no  doubt,  that  the  machine  might  have  been  made 
to  draw  up  more  water,  if  the  person  who  constructed  it  could  have 
seen  the  place  and  situation  in  which  it  was  to  act.  The  failure 
in  this  instance  had  given  me  an  early  surmise  of  what  might  be 
mv  own  fate ;  and  I  was  not  mistaken. 

During  my  stay  at  Soubra  I  became  aquainted  with  many 
Turks,  and  in  particular  with  the  governor  of  the  palace,  as  we 
had  our  house  within  his  Malls.  The  garden  of  the  Bashaw  was 
under  his  care,  and  a  guard  was  kept  at  the  gates.  The  seraglio  is 
so  situated,  that  the  front  looks  over  the  hill :  at  the  back  of  it 
is  the  garden,  which  is  under  the  care  of  Greeks,  who  in  a  few 
years  have  brought  it  to  great  perfection.  There  are  beautiful 
alcoves,  made  in  form  of  cupolas,  entirely  covered  with  plants ;  and 
the  water  machines,  which  are  constantly  at  work,  keep  up  a  per- 
petual verdure.  There  is  a  fountain  in  the  European  style,  and 
a  great  quantity  of  fruit,  particularly  grapes  and  peaches;  but 
they  never  grow  to  any  size  like  ours,  for  many  get  rotten  and 
fall  before  they  are  ripe ;  in  consequence,  the  Turks  eat  them 
green. 

The  Bashaw  is  in  continual  motion,  being  sometimes  at  his 
citadel,  and  sometimes  at  his  seraglio  in  the  Esbakie ;  but  Soubra 
is  his  principal  residence.  His  chief  amusement  is  in  the  evening 
a  little  before  sunset,  when  he  quits  Iris  seraglio,  and  seats  him- 
self on  the  bank  of  the  Nile,  to  fire  at  an  earthen  pot,  with  his 
guards.  If  any  of  them  hit  it,  he  makes  him  a  present,  occasionally 
of  forty  or  fifty  rubies.  He  is  himself  an  excellent  marksman  ;  for 
I  saw  him  fire  at  and  hit  a  pot  only  fifteen  inches  high,  set  on  the 
ground  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Nile,  though  the  river  at  Soubra 
is  considerably  wider  than  the  Thames  at  Westminster  Bridge. 
As  soon  as  it  is  dark,  he  retires  into  the  garden,  and  reposes 
either    in    an    alcove,   or    by    the   margin    of  a   fountain,   on    an 


14  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

European  chair,  with  all  his  attendants  round  him.  Here  his 
numerous  buffoons  keep  him  in  continual  high  spirits  and  good 
humour.  By  moonlight  the  scene  was  beautiful.  I  was  admitted 
into  the  garden  whenever  I  wished,  by  which  means  I  had  an 
opportunity  of  observing  the  domestic  life  of  a  man,  who  from 
nothing  rose  to  be  viceroy  of  Egypt,  and  conqueror  of  the  most 
powerful  tribes  of  Arabia. 

From  the  number  of  lights  I  frequently  saw  through  the 
windows  of  the  seraglio,  I  supposed  the  ladies  were  at  such  times 
amusing  themselves  in  some  way  or  other.  Dancing  women  are 
often  brought  to  divert  them,  and  sometimes  the  famous  Catalani 
of  Egypt  was  introduced.  One  of  the  buffoons  of  the  Bashaw  took 
it  into  his  head  one  day,  for  a  frolic,  to  shave  his  beard  ;  which  is  no 
trifle  among  the  Turks  ;  for  some  of  them,  I  really  believe,  would 
sooner  have  their  head  cut  off  than  their  beard :  he  borrowed  some 
Franks'  clothes  of  the  Bashaw's  apothecary,  who  was  from  Europe, 
and,  after  dressing  himself  in  our  costume,  presented  himself  to  the 
Bashaw  as  a  European,  who  could  not  speak  a  single  word  either 
of  Turkish  or  Arabic,  which  is  often  the  case.  Being  in  the  dark, 
the  Bashaw  took  him  for  what  he  represented  himself  to  be,  and  sent 
immediately  for  the  interpreter,  who  put  some  questions  to  him  in 
Italian,  which  he  did  not  answer :  he  was  then  questioned  in 
French,  but  no  reply ;  and  next  in  the  German  and  Spanish 
languages,  and  still  he  was  silent :  at  last,  when  he  saw  that  they 
were  all  deceived,  the  Bashaw  not  excepted,  he  burst  out  in  plain 
Turkish,  the  only  language  he  was  acquainted  with,  and  his  well 
known  voice  told  them  who  he  was ;  for  such  was  the  change  of 
his  person,  particularly  by  the  cutting  off  his  beard,  that  otherwise 
they  could  scarcely  have  recognised  him.  The  Bashaw  was  de- 
lighted with  the  fellow ;  and,  to  keep  up  the  frolic,  gave  him  an 
order  on  the  treasury  for  an  enormous  sum  of  money,  and  sent 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  15 

him  to  the  Kaciabay,  to  present  himself  as  a  Frank,  to  receive  it. 
The  Kaciabay  started  at  the  immensity  of  the  sum,  as  it  was  nearly 
all  that  the  treasury  could  furnish :  but  upon  questioning  this  new 
European,  it  was  soon  perceived  who  he  was.  In  this  attire  he 
went  home  to  his  women,  who  actually  thrust  him  out  of  the  door ; 
and  such  was  the  disgrace  of  cutting  off  his  beard,  that  even  his 
felloAv  buffoons  would  not  eat  with  him  till  it  was  grown  again. 

The  Bashaw  seems  to  be  well  aware  of  the  benefits  that  may 
be  derived  from  his  encouraging  the  arts  of  Europe  m  his  country, 
and  had  already  reaped  some  of  the  fruits  of  it.     The  fabrication  of 
gunpowder,  the  refining  of  sugar,  the  making  of  fine  indigo,  and 
the  silk  manufacture,  are  introduced,  much  to  his  advantage:  he 
is  constantly  inquiring  after  something  new,  and  is  delighted  with 
any  thing  strange  to  his  imagination.     Having  heard  of  electricity, 
he  sent  to  England  for  two  electric  machines,  one  with  a  plate,  the 
other  with  a  cylinder.       The  former  was  broken  by  the  way;  the 
latter  was  dismounted.    The  physician  of  the  Bashaw,  an  Arminian, 
did  not  know,  though  it  was  so  easy  a  matter,  how  to  set  it  up. 
Happening  to  be  at  the  garden  one  evening,  when  they  were 
attempting  it,  and  could  not  succeed,  I  was  requested  to  put  the 
several  pieces  together  ;  and,  having  done  so,  I  made  one  of  the  sol- 
diers mount  on  the  insulating  stool,  charged  the  machine,  and  gave 
the  Turk  a  good  shock  ;  who,  expecting  no  such  thing,  uttered  a  loud 
cry,  and  jumped  off,  as  much  terrified  as  if  he  had  seen  the  devil. 
The  Bashaw  laughed  at  the  man's  jumping  off,  supposing  his  fright 
to  be  a  trick,  and  not  the  effect  of  the  machine  ;  and  when  told,  that 
it  was  actually  occasioned  by  the  machine,  he  affirmed  positively 
that  it  could  not  be,  for  the  soldier  was  at  such  a  distance,  that  it 
was  impossible  the  small  chain  he  held  in  his  hand  could  have  such 
power.      I  then  desired  the  interpreter  to  inform  his  Highness, 
that  if  he  would  mount  the  stool  himself,  he  would  be  convinced 


16  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

of  the  fact.  He  hesitated  for  a  wliile  whether  to  believe  me  or  not ; 
however  he  mounted  the  stool.  I  charged  well,  put  the  chain  into 
his  hand,  and  gave  him  a  pretty  smart  shock.  He  jumped  off,  like 
the  soldier,  on  feeling  the  effect  of  the  electricity ;  but  immediately 
threw  himself  on  the  sofa  in  a  fit  of  laughter,  not  being  able  to  con- 
ceive how  the  machine  could  have  such  power  on  the  human  body. 

The  governor  of  Soubra,  Zulfur  Carcaja,  was  a  Mamelouk  of  about 
sixty-five  years  of  age,  and  an  instance  of  the  promotion  of  one  of  that 
body  of  men,  who  for  so  many  centuries  ruled  Egypt.  His  political 
conduct  towards  the  Bashaw  procured  him  the  place  of  governor  of 
a  village,  which  contained  the  residence  of  the  Bashaw  himself,  and  a 
vast  tract  of  land,  the  cultivation  of  which  was  entirely  under  his 
direction.  He  was  a  learned  man  among  the  Turks,  and  had  a 
considerable  portion  of  knowledge  in  agriculture,  which  I  suppose 
to  be  the  cause  of  his  continuing  to  enjoy  the  Bashaw's  favour. 
He  had  travelled  a  great  deal  in  the  Ottoman  dominions,  and  had 
acquired  much  information  ;  which  is  uncommon  for  a  Turk :  but 
the  prejudices  of  his  nation,  and  the  superstitions  of  his  religion, 
notwithstanding  all  this,  did  not  quit  him  an  instant.  At  night  I 
used  to  go  to  his  divan,  or  conversazione,  to  chat,  drink  coffee, 
and  smoke  a  pipe.  We  agreed  in  many  points  ;  but  on  that  of  the 
hydraulic  machine  I  could  make  no  impression  upon  him,  as  it  was 
against  his  interest  to  be  convinced.  He  was  one  day  taken  very 
ill ;  and  as  there  was  no  physician  nearer  than  Cairo,  he  sent  to  know 
whether  we  could  not  do  something  for  him.  As  it  was  only  a 
violent  cold,  Mrs.  Belzoni  sent  him  a  negus,  which  he  liked  so 
well,  that  he  continued  the  medicine  for  several  days. 

Some  time  after  this,  "Mrs.  Belzoni  had  a  pain  in  her  side.  One 
evening,  1  went  to  his  divan  ;  and  as  he  always  inquired  after 
the  health  of  his  physician,  I  informed  him  of  the  circumstance : 
upon  which  he  assured  me,  that  it  was  nothing  but  what  he  would 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  kc.  17 

find  a  remedy  for  immediately  ;  and  he  rose  and  went  into  an  inner 
room,  from  which  with  all  imaginable  pomp  and  devotion  he  brought 
out  a  book.  The  Sheik  of  the  mosque  was  present ;  and,  after  turn- 
ing over  and  over  again  the  leaves  of  this  book,  they  concluded  on 
what  was  to  be  done.  Three  pieces  of  paper  were  cut  in  a  trian- 
gular form,  the  size  of  a  playing  card,  and  the  Sheik  wrote  on  them 
several  words  in  Arabic.  Of  these  pieces  of  paper,  he  told  me,  that 
Mrs.  Belzoni  must  fasten  one  to  her  forehead  by  a  string,  and  one 
to  each  ear.  He  then  fetched  a  piece  of  the  skin  of  a  lamb,  that 
had  been  sacrificed  during  the  feast  of  Bairam.  The  Sheik  wrote  on 
tins  also,  and  it  was  to  be  applied  to  the  part  affected.  I  thanked 
him  very  much  for  his  kindness,  and  brought  away  the  amulets, 
which  we  keep  to  this  day,  as  a  memorial  of  the  Turkish  method 
of  curing  pains.  It  happened,  that  Mrs.  Belzoni  was  somewhat 
better  a  day  or  two  after,  and  the  old  Turk  exulted  in  having  repaid 
the  obligation  he  had  incurred,  when  cured  by  her  of  his  cold. 

The  Arabs  of  Soubra  exhibit  as  much  festivity,  when  a  marriage 
of  consequence  takes  place,  as  those  of  any  of  the  villages  in  Egypt. 
Fortunately,  one  happened  while  we  were  there  ;  and  as  the  window 
of  our  house  overlooked  the  very  spot  where  the  festival  Mas  to  be 
celebrated,  we  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  whole  ceremony. 
Early  in  the  morning  of  the  grand  holiday,  a  high  pole  was  planted 
in  the  centre  of  the  place,  with  a  banner  belonging  to  the  village. 
A  large  assembly  of  people  gathered  under  it,  and  preparations  were 
made  for  an  illumination  with  glass  lamps,  &c.  The  Arabs  from 
other  villages  came  to  the  feast  in  procession,  beating  their  tam- 
bourines, and  waving  their  flags.  At  some  distance  from  the  pole 
they  halted,  and  did  not  advance  till  a  deputation  was  sent  to 
invite  them  to  the  feast.  The  elders  of  the  village  seated  them- 
selves around  and  under  the  pole,  and  the  strangers  at  a  little 
distance.      One  of  those  standing  near  the  pole,  who  had  an  un- 

D 


18  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

commonly  good  pipe,  began  to  sing ;  while  the  rest  divided  them- 
selves into  two  parties,  forming  two  circles,  one  within  the  other, 
round  the  pole  and  facing  each  other.  By  each  man  putting  his  arms 
over  his  neighbours'  shoulders,  each  circle  formed  a  continuous 
chain.  The  outer  circle  stood  still,  while  the  people  of  the  inner 
circle  kept  dancing  and  bowing  in  an  orderly  manner  to  those  in 
the  outer.  Thus  they  continued  three  hours,  and  those  who  were 
not  in  the  circles  made  separate  rings  by  themselves.  Some  of  the 
Hadgees,  who  were  desirous  of  exhibiting  their  powers  in  ceremonial 
devotion,  went  on  positively  for  two  hours,  and  some  minutes, 
bending  their  bodies  nearly  to  the  ground,  and  raising  them  up 
again  with  such  quickness,  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  any 
one,  who  was  not  accustomed  to  it,  to  undergo  such  exertion  a 
quarter  of  an  hour.  All  the  women  were  at  a  distance  by  them- 
selves, and  among  them  was  the  bride.  When  the  dancing  and 
singing  ended,  they  all  sat  down  in  large  circles;  and  a  great 
quantity  of  boiled  rice  was  brought  to  them  in  large  wooden  bowls, 
beside  a  number  of  dishes  of  melokie  and  bamies*,  and  three  or  four 
large  sheep  roasted,  which  were  immediately  torn  to  pieces  and 
devoured.  For  the  drinking  department  they  had  a  number  of 
boys,  who  were  fully  employed  in  fetching  water  in  large  bardacks 
from  the  Nile ;  but  some  of  the  party  I  knew  had  a  sly  corner,  to 
which  to  retire  for  a  drop  of  horaky ;  for  it  is  in  this  private  way 
they  drink  it.  At  night,  the  pole  and  all  the  place  around  it  was 
illuminated.  The  people  seated  themselves  in  an  orderly  manner, 
in  the  form  of  an  amphitheatre,  the  women  forming  a  part  of  the 
circle,  separate  from  the  men.  A  band  of  tambourines  and  pipes 
was  continually  playing ;  and  the  entertainment  began  with  dancing, 
by  two  well-known  and  distinguished  performers. 

*  Plants  eaten  in  common  by  the  Arabs  ns  greens. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  19 

This   particular  mode  of  dancing,  I  believe,  has  never  been 
described,  and  all  who  see  it  properly  must  be  excused  from  giving  a 
faithful  picture  of  it.     When  the  dancing  was  at  an  end,  a  sort  of 
play  was  performed,  the  intent  of  which  was  to  exhibit  life  and  man- 
ners, as  we  do  in  our  theatres.     The  subject  represented  an  Hadgee, 
who  wants  to  go  to  Mecca,  and  applies  to  a  camel-driver,  to  procure  a 
camel  for  him.    The  driver  imposes  on  him,  by  not  letting  him  see  the 
seller  of  the  camel,  and  putting  a  higher  price  on  it  than  is  really 
asked,  giving  so  much  less  to  the  seller  than  he  received  from  the 
purchaser.    A  camel  is  produced  at  last,  made  up  by  two  men  covered 
with  a  cloth,  as  if  ready  to  depart  for  Mecca.     The  Hadgee  mounts 
on  the  camel,  but  finds  it  so  bad,  that  he  refuses  to  take  it,  and 
demands  his  money  back  again.     A  scuffle  takes  place,  when,  by 
chance,  the  seller  of  the  camel  appears,  and  finds  that  the  camel  in 
question  is  not  that  which  he  sold  to  the  driver  for  the  Hadgee. 
Thus  it  turns  out,  that  the  driver  was  not  satisfied  with  imposing 
both  on  the  buyer  and  seller  in  the  price,  but  had  also  kept  the 
good  camel  for  himself,  and  produced  a  bad  one  to  the  Hadgee.    In 
consequence  he  receives  a  good  drubbing,  and  runs  off. — Simple  as 
this  story  appears,  yet  it  was  so  interesting  to  the  audience,  that  it 
seemed  as  if  nothing  could  please  them  better,  as  it  taught  them  to 
be  on  their  guard  against  dealers  in  camels,  &c. — This  was  the  play ; 
and  the  afterpiece  represented  a  European  traveller,  who  served  as  a 
sort  of  clown.     He  is  in  the  dress  of  a  Frank ;  and,  on  his  travels, 
comes  to  the  house  of  an  Arab,  who,  though  poor,  wishes  to  have 
the  appearance  of  being  rich.     Accordingly  he  gives  orders  to  his 
wife,  to  kill   a  sheep   immediately.     She   pretends  to  obey;  but 
returns  in  a  few  minutes,  saying,  that  the  flock  has  strayed  away, 
and  it  would  be  the  loss  of  too  much  time  to  fetch  one.     The  host 
then  orders  four  fowls  to  be  killed ;  but  these  cannot  be  caught. 
A  third  time,  he  sends  his  wife  for  pigeons ;  but  the  pigeons  are  all 

d2 


20  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

out  of  their  holes ;  and  at  last  the  traveller  is  treated  only  with 
sour  milk  and  dhourra  bread*,  the  only  provision  in  the  house. 
Tliis  finishes  the  play. 

During  my  stay  in  Soubra,  a  circumstance  took  place,  which  I 
shall  remember  as  long  as  I  live,  and  which  showed  me  plainly  the 
country  I  was  in,  and  the  people  I  had  to  deal  with.  Some  par- 
ticular business  calling  me  to  Cairo,  I  was  on  my  ass  in  one  of 
the  narrow  streets,  where  I  met  a  loaded  camel.  The  space  that 
remained  between  the  camel  and  the  wall  was  so  little,  that  I  could 
scarcely  pass;  and  at  that  moment  I  was  met  by  a  Binbashi,  a  subaltern 
officer,  at  the  head  of  his  men.  For  the  instant  I  was  the  only 
obstacle  that  prevented  his  proceeding  on  the  road ;  and  I  could 
neither  retreat  nor  turn  round,  to  give  him  room  to  pass.  Seeing 
it  was  a  Frank  who  stopped  his  way,  he  gave  me  a  violent  blow  on 
my  stomach.  Not  being  accustomed  to  put  up  with  such  saluta- 
tions, I  returned  the  compliment  with  my  whip  across  his  naked 
shoulders.  Instantly  he  took  his  pistol  out  of  his  belt ;  I  jumped 
off  my  ass ;  he  retired  about  two  yards,  pulled  the  trigger,  fired  at 
my  head,  singed  the  hair  near  my  right  ear,  and  killed  one  of  his 
own  soldiers,  who,  by  this  time,  had  come  behind  me.  Finding 
that  he  had  missed  his  aim,  he  took  out  a  second  pistol ;  but  his 
own  soldiers  assailed  and  disarmed  him. 

A  great  noise  arose  in  the  street,  and,  as  it  happened  to  be  close 
to  the  seraglio  in  the  Esbakie,  some  of  the  guards  ran  up ;  but  on 
seeing  what  the  matter  was,  they  interfered  and  stopped  the  Bin- 
basi.  I  thought  my  company  was  not  wanted,  so  I  mounted  my 
charger,  and  rode  off.  I  went  to  Mr.  Baghos,  and  told  him  what 
had  happened.  We  repaired  immediately  to  the  citadel,  saw  the 
Bashaw,  and  related  the  circumstance  to  him.     He  was  much  con- 

*  Dhurra  is  the  common  grain  of  Egypt. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  21 

cerned,  and  wished  to  know  where  the  soldier  was,  but  observed, 
that  it  was  too  late  that  evening  to  have  him  taken  up.  However,  he 
was  apprehended  the  next  day,  and  I  never  heard  or  knew  any  thing 
more  about  him.  Such  a  lesson  on  the  subject  was  not  lost  upon 
me ;  and  I  took  good  care,  in  future,  not  to  give  the  least  oppor- 
tunity of  the  kind  to  men  of  that  description,  who  can  murder  an 
European  with  as  much  indifference  as  they  would  kill  an  insect. 

Some  little  time  after  this,  another  circumstance  took  place,  which 
I  cannot  omit  relating.  A  charming  young  lady,  about  sixteen 
years  of  age,  daughter  of  the  Chevalier  Bocty,  now  consul-general 
of  Sweden,  went  out  of  her  house,  in  company  with  her  mother, 
sister,  and  some  other  ladies,  to  go  to  a  bath.  They  formed  a 
cavalcade  on  asses,  as  is  the  custom  of  the  country ;  and  had  not 
proceeded  far  from  their  door,  when  they  met  a  soldier,  a  monster 
I  should  say,  who  took  a  pistol  from  his  belt,  and,  with  the  greatest 
coolness,  fired  and  killed  the  young  lady.  She  was  one  of  the  most 
amiable  creatures,  both  in  her  manners  and  person,  that  ever  lived  ; 
and  was  most  deservedly  lamented  by  every  one  who  knew  her. 
This  is  quite  enough,  surely,  to  invite  young  European  ladies  to 
that  country  !  I  must  say,  to  the  honour  of  Mahomed  Ali,  that 
the  monster  was  taken  and  executed :  but  what  satisfaction  could 
this  be  to  her  afflicted  parents  ? 

About  this  time  Mr.  Eankes  arrived  in  this  country,  and  pro- 
ceeded almost  immediately  to  Mount  Sinai,  and  thence  to  Upper 
Egypt ;  but  returned  in  three  months,  and  went  to  Syria.  Mr. 
Eurckhardt  had  for  a  long  time  premeditated  the  removal  of  the 
colossal  head,  or  rather  bust,  known  by  the  name  of  Young 
Memnon,  to  England,  and  had  often  endeavoured  to  persuade  the 
Bashaw  to  send  it  as  a  present  to  the  Prince  Regent ;  but  as  it 
must  have  appeared  to  a  Turk  too  trifling  an  article  to  send  to  so 
great  a  personage,  no  steps  were  taken  for  this  purpose.      Mr. 


22  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Burckhardt  then  proposed  it  to  Mr.  Bankes ;  but  the  reason  why 
this  gentleman  did  not  take  it  away  I  am  not  acquainted  with. 

By  this  time  the  water  machine  was  finished ;  and  we  waited 
the  arrival  of  the  Bashaw  from  Alexandria,  to  give  his  opinion  on 
the  advantages  which  might  be  derived  from  introducing  it  into 
the  country.  It  was  constructed  on  the  principle  of  a  crane  with 
a  walking  wheel,  in  which  a  single  ox,  by  its  own  weight  alone, 
could  effect  as  much  as  four  oxen  employed  in  the  machines  of  the 
country.  I  accomplished  this  undertaking,  notwithstanding  the 
various  species  of  intrigue  and  difficulty  which  were  incessantly 
thrown  in  my  way.  The  Bashaw  arrived  at  Cairo,  but  did  not 
come  to  Soubra  till  some  time  after. 

At  this  period  Mr.  Salt,  the  consul-general  from  England,  arrived 
in  that  capital,  having  business  to  transact  in  Cairo.  I  had  frequent 
interviews  with  Mr.  Burckhardt ;  and,  knowing  the  wish  he  had  for 
the  removal  of  the  colossal  bust  of  Mcmnon,  I  repeatedly  told  him 
that  I  would  undertake  its  conveyance  from  Thebes  to  Alexandria, 
so  that  it  might  be  sent  to  England.  On  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Salt, 
Mr.  Burckhardt  proposed  it  to  him  ;  and  shortly  after  having  myself 
occasion  to  see  that  gentleman,  I  repeated  to  him,  before  Mr.  Burck- 
hardt, that  I  should  be  happy  to  undertake  the  removal  of  the  bust, 
without  the  smallest  view  of  interest,  as  it  was  to  go  to  the  British 
Museum.  The  consul  seemed  inclined  to  comply,  but  was  indecisive 
for  some  time,  saying  he  would  think  about  it.  A  few  days  after  this, 
he  avoided  all  communication,  keeping  himself  in  strict  seclusion,  as 
the  plague  had  begun  to  show  itself  in  the  streets  of  Cairo. 

The  Bashaw  was  now  come  to  Soubra,  accompanied  with  several 
connoisseurs  in  hydraulics.  The  machine  was  set  to  work ;  and, 
although  constructed  with  bad  wood  and  bad  iron,  and  erected  by 
Arabian  carpenters  and  bricklayers,  it  was  a  question  whether  it  did 
not  draw  six  or  seven  times  as  much  water  as  the  common  machines. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  23 

The  Bashaw,  after  long  consideration,  gave  his  decision ;  and  declared, 
that  it  drew  up  only  four  times  as  much.  It  is  to  be  observed, 
that  the  water  produced  by  this  machine  was  measured  by  com- 
parison with  the  water  procured  by  six  of  their  own ;  and  that,  at 
the  time  of  measuring,  the  Arabs  urged  their  animals  at  such  a 
rate,  that  they  could  not  have  continued  their  exertion  above 
an  hour;  and  for  the  moment  they  produced  nearly  double  the 
quantity  of  water,  that  was  usually  obtained.  Notwithstanding  all 
this,  the  calculation  of  the  Bashaw  was  to  my  satisfaction,  as  it 
decided  on  the  accomplishment  of  my  undertaking.  Still  Ma- 
hommed  Ali  perceived  plainly  the  prejudice  among  the  Arabs,  and 
some  of  the  Turks,  who  were  concerned  in  the  cultivation  of  the 
land ;  for  instead  of  four  hundred  people,  and  four  hundred  oxen, 
they  would  have  only  to  command  one  hundred  of  each,  which 
would  make  a  considerable  difference  in  their  profits :  but,  as  it 
happened,  an  accident  occurred,  that  put  an  end  to  all  their  fears. 

The  Bashaw  took  it  into  his  head  to  have  the  oxen  taken  out  of 
the  wheel,  in  order  to  see,  by  way  of  frolic,  what  effect  the  machine 
would  have  by  putting  fifteen  men  into  it.  James,  the  Irish  lad  in 
my  service,  entered  along  with  them  ;  but  no  sooner  had  the  wheel 
turned  once  round,  than  they  all  jumped  out,  leaving  the  lad  alone 
in  it.  The  wheel,  of  course,  overbalanced  by  the  weight  of  the 
water,  turned  back  with  such  velocity,  that  the  catch  was  unable  to 
stop  it.  The  lad  was  thrown  out,  and  in  the  fall  broke  one  of  his 
tliighs.  I  contrived  to  stop  the  wheel  before  it  did  farther  injury, 
which  might  have  been  fatal  to  him.  The  Turks  have  a  belief,  that, 
when  such  accidents  happen  in  the  commencement  of  any  new  inven- 
tion, it  is  a  bad  omen.  In  consequence  of  this,  exclusive  of  the  pre- 
judice against  the  machine  itself,  the  Bashaw  had  been  persuaded  to 
abandon  the  affair.  It  had  been  stated  to  him,  also,  that  it  cost  as 
much  as  four  of  the  usual  machines  in  making,  while  nothing  was 


24  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

said  of  the  advantages  as  to  the  oxen,  that  would  be  saved  in  the 
working  of  it.  The  business  ended  in  this  manner ;  and  all  that 
was  due  to  me  from  the  Bashaw  was  consigned  to  oblivion,  as  well 
as  the  stipulation  I  had  made  with  him. 

It  was  with  considerable  pain  to  my  feelings,  that  I  reflected  on 
the  idea  of  leaving  a  country,  which  has  ever  been  one  of  the 
principal  points  of  research  among  the  learned.  The  fame  of  its 
antiquity  excited  in  me  the  desire  of  investigation  ;  but,  under  the 
circumstances  I  have  mentioned,  my  purse  would  not  afford  the 
expenses  of  a  journey  to  any  great  distance ;  and  having  Mrs.  Bel- 
zoni  with  me,  it  required  some  deliberation,  before  I  could  decide, 
whether  I  should  proceed  to  the  north  or  to  the  south.  I  had 
been  to  visit  the  consul-general,  but  nothing  more  was  said  re- 
specting the  colossal  head;  so  that  the  project  of  removing  it 
seemed  to  have  been  forgotten.  After  having  taken  all  matters 
into  consideration,  and  made  a  proper  calculation  of  the  expenses, 
I  found,  that  in  an  economical  way  I  could  make  a  voyage  as  far  as 
Assouan  and  back  again. 

From  the  circumstances  that  follow,  the  reader  will  be  able  to 
form  a  proper  idea  of  the  motives  by  which  I  was  induced  to 
undertake  the  removal  of  the  Memnion  bust,  which  is  now  lodged 
in  the  British  Museum ;  and  for  what  purpose  I  made  the  re- 
searches, and  accumulated  the  various  remains  of  antiquity,  which 
will  find  a  place  in  this  volume.  There  will  be  no  occasion  for  me 
to  enter  into  such  particulars  as  would  call  for  the  evidence  of 
others  to  the  facts,  as  I  am  well  assured,  that  a  simple  statement  of 
the  case  will  make  the  reader  perfectly  acquainted  with  it. 

It  has  been  erroneously  stated,  that  I  was  regularly  employed 
by  Mr.  Salt,  the  consul-general  of  his  Britannic  majesty  in  Egypt, 
for  the  purpose  of  bringing  the  colossal  bust  from  Thebes  to 
Alexandria.      I  positively  deny  that  I  was  ever  engaged  by  him 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  25 

ill  any  shape  whatever,  either  by  words  or  writing ;  as  I  have  proofs 
of  the  case  being  on  the  contrary.  When  I  ascended  the  Nile,  the 
first  and  second  time,  I  had  no  other  idea  in  my  mind,  but  that  I 
was  making  researches  for  antiquities,  which  were  to  be  placed  in 
the  British  Museum ;  and  it  is  naturally  to  be  supposed  that  I 
would  not  have  made  these  excursions,  had  I  been  previously  aware, 
that  all  I  found  was  for  the  benefit  of  a  gentleman,  whom  I  never 
had  the  pleasure  to  see  before  in  my  life.  But  what  has  displeased 
me  above  all  is,  that  while  occupied  in  my  researches,  an  advantage 
has  been  taken,  and  a  notion  promulgated,  the  very  reverse  of  the 
real  matter  of  fact ;  and  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  be  silent  on  the  subject, 
feeling  it  an  indispensable  duty  to  myself,  as  well  as  the  public,  to 
bring  the  truth  to  light.  I  am  happy,  however,  to  state,  that  I  suc- 
ceeded in  putting  all  the  articles  of  my  discovery  on  their  way  to 
the  British  Museum,  though  not  in  the  same  manner  in  which  I 
thought  they  were  to  be  entered  in  that  place  at  first,  as  was  the 
case  with  the  young  Memnon  head. 

The  indecision,  whether  I  should  go  up  or  down  the  Nile,  came 
at  last  to  a  point.  I  know  not  what  to  call  it,  whether  curiosity,  or 
that  enthusiasm  for  antiquities,  which  I  can  trace  from  my  younger 
days  while  in  Borne,  that  spurred  me  on  to  decide  to  ascend  the 
Nile. 

Agreeably  to  the  resolution  I  had  taken,  I  hired  a  boat  at  a  very 
cheap  rate,  with  four  sailors,  a  boy,  and  the  Beis,  or  captain.  I  made 
provision  for  the  voyage,  and  every  thing  was  ready  for  our  de- 
parture. Any  one  may  ascend  the  Nile  without  being  interrupted; 
but  it  is  better  to  obtain  a  firman  from  the  Bashaw,  in  case  of  the 
want  of  protection  from  any  of  his  Beys,  Cacheffs,  or  Caimacans,  in 
Upper  Egypt ;  and  Mahomet  Ali  was  always  ready  to  give  a  firman 
to  any  one  who  asked  for  it.  I  communicated  my  intended  de- 
parture to  Mr.  Burckhardt,  who,  on  hearing  that  nothing  more  was 


!K)  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

said  about  taking  away  the  colossal  head,  seemed  to  be  quite 
disappointed.  Being  a  native  of  that  part  of  Italy  which  had 
lately  come  under  the  Austrian  dominions,  I  might  have  applied  to 
the  Austrian  consul,  to  obtain  a  firman  from  the  Bashaw :  but  as 
I  enjoyed  the  British  protection,  I  applied  to  the  British  consul. 
Going  to  his  house  for  the  purpose,  I  found  Mr.  Burckhardt  there : 
it  seems  he  had  persuaded  the  consul  to  avail  himself  of  the  oppor- 
tunity of  my  ascending  the  Nile,  by  offering  to  pay  half  the  expense. 
Accordingly,  when  1  informed  the  consul  of  my  intended  journey, 
and  that  1  came  to  request  he  would  do  me  the  favour  to  obtain  a 
firman  for  me  from  the  Bashaw,  he  expressed  his  joy  by  exclaiming, 
"  This  is  a  godsend  indeed  !"  and  I  was  then  informed,  that  they 
had  made  up  their  minds  to  have  the  colossus  conveyed  down  the 
Nile,  and  to  offer  it  as  a  present  to  the  British  Museum,  if  I  would 
kindly  undertake  the  removal  of  it.  I  replied  that  my  capacity  was 
little,  but  that  I  would  use  all  my  efforts  to  succeed  in  the  enterprise ; 
adding  that  I  should  be  happy  at  all  times  to  increase  the  British 
Museum  with  the  product  of  my  exertions.  To  which  the  British 
consul  answered,  "  And  I  shall  be  glad  to  do  every  thing  in  my  power 
to  promote  your  wishes."  This  was  all  that  passed  on  either  side. 
As  I  was  unacquainted  with  the  upper  country,  I  received 
instructions  concerning  the  manner  in  which  I  was  to  proceed,  to 
obtain  information,  and  to  provide  myself  with  implements  for  the 
purpose  in  view.     The  instructions  were  as  follow  : 

"  Boolak,  June  28,  1816. 
"  Mr.  Belzoni  is  requested  to  prepare  the  necessary  implements, 
at  Boolak,  for  the  purpose  of  raising  the  head  of  the  statue  of  the 
younger  Memnon,  and  carrying  it  down  the  Nile.  He  will  proceed 
as  speedily  as  circumstances  will  allow  to  Siout,  there  to  deliver  his 
letters,  prepared  for  that  effect,  to  Ibrahim  Bashaw,  or  whoever 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  27 

may  be  left  in  the  charge  of  the  government ;  and  he  will,  at  that 
place,  consult  with  Doctor  Scotto  on  the  subject  of  his  further  pro- 
ceedings. He  will  take  care  to  engage  a  proper  boat  for  bringing 
down  the  head,  and  will  request  Mr.  Scotto  to  provide  him  with  a 
soldier  to  go  up  with  him,  for  the  purpose  of  engaging  the  Fellahs 
to  work  whenever  he  may  require  their  assistance,  as  otherwise 
they  are  not  likely  to  attend  to  Mr.  Eelzoni's  orders ;  and  he  should 
on  no  account  leave  Siout  without  an  interpreter. 

"  Having  obtained  the  necessary  permission  to  hire  workmen, 
&c,  Mr.  Belzoni  will  proceed  direct  to  Thebes.  He  will  find  the 
head  referred  to  on  the  western  side  of  the  river,  opposite  to 
Carnak,  in  the  vicinity  of  a  village  called  Gornou,  lying  on  the 
southern  side  of  a  ruined  temple,  called  by  the  natives  Kossar  el 
Dekaki.  To  the  head  is  still  attached  a  portion  of  the  shoulders,  so 
that  altogether  it  is  of  large  dimensions,  and  will  be  recognized, — 
1st,  by  the  circumstance  of  its  lying  on  its  back  with  the  face  up- 
permost— 2dly,  by  the  face  being  quite  perfect,  and  very  beautiful 
— 3dly,  by  its  having,  on  one  of  its  shoulders,  a  hole  bored  arti- 
ficially, supposed  to  have  been  made  by  the  French  for  separating 
the  fragment  of  the  body — and  4thly,  from  its  being  a  mixed 
blackish  and  reddish  granite,  and  covered  with  hieroglyphics  on  its 
shoulders.  It  must  not  be  mistaken  for  another,  lying  in  that 
neighbourhood,  which  is  much  mutilated. 

"  Mr.  Belzoni  will  spare  no  expense  or  trouble  in  getting  it  as 
speedily  conveyed  to  the  banks  of  the  river  as  possible ;  and  he 
will,  if  it  be  necessary,  let  it  wait  there  till  the  river  shall  have 
attained  sufficient  height,  before  he  attempts  to  get  it  into  the 
boat.  But,  at  the  same  time,  he  is  requested  not  to  attempt 
removing  it,  on  any  account,  if  he  should  judge  there  would  be  any 
serious  risk  of  either  injuring  the  head,  of  burying  the  face  in  the 
sand,  or  of  losing  it  in  the  Nile. 


28  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

••  If,  on  arriving  at  the  ground,  too,  he  should  perceive  that  his 
means  are  inadequate,  or  that  the  difficulties  of  the  undertaking, 
from  the  nature  of  the  ground,  or  other  causes,  are  likely  to  prove 
insurmountable,  he  will,  at  once,  relinquish  the  enterprise,  and  not 
enter  into  farther  expense  on  that  account. 

"  Mr.  Belzoni  will  have  the  goodness  to  keep  a  separate  account 
of  the  expenses  incurred  in  this  undertaking,  which,  as  well  as  his 
other  expenses,  will  gladly  be  reimbursed ;  as,  from  the  knowledge 
of  Mr.  Belzoni's  character,  it  is  confidently  believed  they  will  be  as 
reasonable  as  circumstances  will  allow. 

"  The  boat  meant  to  carry  the  head  should  be  hired  for  a  suf- 
ficient time  to  allow  of  its  being  carried  directly  down  to  Alex- 
andria ;  but,  on  the  way,  Mr.  Belzoni  will  not  fail  to  stop  at  Boolak 
for  further  instructions. 

"  If  Mr.  Belzoni  should  ascertain  the  certainty  of  his  being  able 
to  accomplish  his  purpose,  he  is  requested  immediately  to  despatch 
an  express  with  the  gratifying  intelligence  to  Cairo. 

"  Henry  Salt." 

I  beg  leave  to  observe,  that  in  the  whole  of  these  instructions, 
though  written  in  an  assuming  style,  not  a  word  is  said  about  any 
payment  to  myself,  wliich  would  certainly  have  been  the  case,  had 
I  been  employed  in  the  way  that  has  been  represented. 

Every  thing  was  ready  in  the  boat  for  our  departure  from 
Boolak.  The  whole  of  the  implements  for  the  operation  consisted 
of  a  few  poles  and  ropes  of  palm  leaves,  no  other  implements  being 
to  be  procured  in  the  place  at  that  time.  Seeing  I  undertook  the 
enterprise  cheerfully,  the  consul  did  me  the  honour  to  request 
something  more,  which  was,  to  purchase  whatever  antiquities  I 
could  on  the  road.     I  assented  to  his  wishes ;  and  for  this  purpose 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  29 

he  supplied  me  with  money,  as  well  as  for  the  removal  of  the 
colossal  head.  On  the  30th  of  June  we  left  Boolak ;  and  as  Mrs. 
Belzoni  determined  to  accompany  me,  we  took  with  us  the  Irish 
lad,  and  a  Copt  interpreter,  who  had  been  in  the  French  army. 

The  first  ruins  we  arrived  at  were  those  of  Shak  Abade,  or  the 
ancient  Antinoe ;  for  I  omit  the  pyramids  for  the  present.  Not 
to  depreciate  the  works  of  Adrian,  these  ruins  did  not  surprise 
me  at  all.  There  are  few  columns  standing ;  many  are  fallen  ; 
and  what  are  of  granite  were  evidently  taken  from  more  ancient 
edifices.  I  made  a  drawing  of  one  of  the  standing  columns, 
merely  to  give  an  idea  of  the  order,  &c.  (see  Plate  32) ;  and 
we  crossed  the  same  day  over  to  Ashmounain.  Here  is  the  first 
Egyptian  architecture  that  travellers  meet  with  on  the  Nile  above 
the  pyramids ;  and  I  must  say,  that  it  has  made  a  great  impression 
on  my  mind,  though  it  is  only  a  portico  of  two  rows  of  columns. 
The  solitary  place  on  which  it  stands,  in  the  midst  of  the  ruins  of 
Hermopolis,  and  the  majestic  appearance  of  the  columns,  of  a  form 
so  uncommon  to  a  European,  cannot  fail  to  inspire  veneration  for 
the  people  that  erected  such  edifices.  It  appears  to  me,  that  these 
ruins  are  of  remoter  date  than  those  of  Thebes  ;  which  does  not 
agree  with  the  opinion,  that  the  temples  in  the  Lower  Thebais 
were  of  later  date  than  those  of  Upper  Egypt.  From  what  I  have 
seen  of  the  tombs  in  these  mountains,  I  am  of  opinion,  that 
Hermopolis  was  inhabited  by  some  great  people,  as  nothing  can 
give  juster  ideas  of  the  condition  of  the  Egyptians  than  the  quality 
of  the  tombs  in  which  they  were  buried. 

On  the  5th,  in  the  evening,  we  arrived  at  Manfalut,  where  we 
met  Ibrahim,  Bashaw  of  Upper  Egypt,  son  of  Mahomet  Ali,  on  his 
way  to  Cairo.  Having  presented  my  letters,  he  politely  requested, 
that  I  would  deliver  them  to  the  Defterdar,  who  was  left  in  com- 
mand in  Siout.  Along  with  him  was  Mr.  Drouetti,  the  ex-consul- 
general  of  the  late  government  of  France.     He  was  on  his  return 


SO  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

from  Thebes,  and  had  been  in  the  habit  of  making  a  collection  of 
antiquities  during  the  many  years  he  resided  in  Egypt.  He  was 
already  informed,  that  I  had  undertaken  to  remove  the  colossal 
bust,  and  he  told  me  the  Arabs  would  not  work  at  Thebes,  as  he  had 
occasion  to  try  them.  He  then  made  me  a  present  of  a  granite 
cover  of  a  sarcophagus,  which  the  Arabs  had  discovered  in  one  of 
the  tombs.  He  said  that  he  had  employed  several  of  them  for 
many  days  to  take  it  out  for  himself,  but  they  could  not  succeed  ; 
so  that,  if  I  could  take  it  out,  I  was  welcome  to  it.  I  thanked  him 
for  his  present,  and  proceeded  on  my  voyage. 

On  the  6th,  in  the  afternoon,  we  arrived  in  Siout.  The  Defterdar 
Bey  was  not  there,  but  was  expected  in  two  or  three  days.  I  waited 
upon  the  physician  of  Ibrahim  Bashaw,  Mr.  Scotto,  to  whom 
I  was  referred  for  information  respecting  boats,  carpenters,  &c. 
This  person  had  never  seen  Mr.  Salt,  by  whom  I  was  recommended 
to  him.  He  behaved,  however,  very  well  to  Mr.  Bankes,  as  I  have 
reason  to  believe,  when  he  passed  that  way,  and  he  did  also  to 
me ;  but  as  to  taking  away  the  colossal  bust,  after  gradually 
introducing  the  matter,  he  made  many  difficulties  :  first,  about 
obtaining  permission  to  have  the  necessary  workmen  ;  then  there 
were  no  boats  to  be  had ;  and  next,  the  bust  was  a  mass  of  stone 
not  worth  the  carriage :  at  last,  he  plainly  recommended  to  me  not 
to  meddle  in  this  business,  for  I  should  meet  with  many  disagreeable 
things,  and  have  many  obstacles  to  encounter.  I  saw  that  I  could 
obtain  but  little  help  from  this  quarter;  so  I  procured  all  that 
I  wanted  by  means  of  my  interpreter,  and  a  few  words  of  my  own. 
I  provided  myself  with  a  Greek  carpenter,  who  agreed  to  follow  us 
to  Thebes ;  and  on  the  sixth  day  the  Bey  arrived.  He  received  me 
very  politely.  I  presented  the  letter  to  him  which  Mr.  Salt  had 
obtained  from  Mahomet  Ali  himself,  and  he  furnished  me  with 
orders  to  the  Casheff  of  the  province  of  Erments,  to  whom  the 
Fellahs  of  Thebes  are  subject. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  31 

While  waiting  for  the  Bey  I  visited  the  tombs  of  Issus.  There 
are  only  two  that  are  worth  notice,  and  these  are  so  decayed  inside, 
that  there  is  scarcely  any  remains  of  figures  or  painting ;  all  the 
rest  are  small  holes  for  the  lower  class  of  people.  Siout  is  the 
capital  of  Sais,  or  Upper  Egypt.  There  is  a  constant  commerce 
kept  up  by  the  caravans  from  Darfoor.  Negroes,  feathers,  elephants' 
teeth,  and  gum,  are  the  principle  articles  brought  to  market.  The 
viceroy  of  Upper  Egypt  is  always  the  first  to  select  what  he 
pleases  from  the  caravan ;  for  which  he  fixes  his  own  price,  and 
pays  what  he  likes.  The  rest  is  for  the  merchants,  who  dare  not 
buy  any  thing  till  the  viceroy  has  made  his  choice. 

This  place  is  celebrated  for  the  making  of  eunuchs.  As  soon  as 
the  operation  is  performed  the  boys  are  buried  in  the  ground,  all 
but  the  head  and  shoulders  ;  and  many,  who  are  not  of  strong 
constitutions,  die  with  the  excruciating  pain.  It  is  calculated,  that 
the  operation,  during  its  performance  or  afterwards,  proves  fatal  to 
two  out  of  three. 

Besides  the  usual  produce  of  the  country,  wheat,  beans,  flax, 
and  seeds,  a  great  number  of  wax-candles  are  made  ;  and  it  is  from 
hence  Cairo  is  supplied  with  this  article.  Ibrahim  Bashaw  has 
latterly  been  the  terror  of  the  people.  When  an  unfortunate 
culprit  was  brought  before  him,  after  some  few  questions,  he  sent 
him  to  the  Cady*to  be  judged.  This  was  the  signal  for  taking 
him  to  a  particular  cannon,  to  the  mouth  of  which  he  was  tied  ; 
and  it  was  then  fired  off,  loaded  with  a  ball,  so  that  the  body  was 
scattered  about  in  pieces  at  a  considerable  distance.  In  the  case 
of  two  Arabs,  who  had  killed  a  soldier,  not  without  provocation, 
this  Bashaw  had  them  fastened  to  a  pole,  like  two  rabbits  on  a  spit, 
and  roasted  alive  at  a  slow  fire :  yet  this  man  is  now  heir  to  the 
government  of  Egypt  on  the  death  of  Mahomet  AIL 

*  An  Arab  Sheik,  who  often  decides  trifling  cases- 


32  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

On  our  proceeding  up  towards  Acmin,  we  saw  the  columns  at 
Gow ;  which  have  since  all  fallen  into  the  river,  one  excepted.  I 
observed  there  the  largest  monolite  I  have  seen  any  where.  It 
was  near  twelve  feet  high,  but  of  very  rough  workmanship.  The 
temple  had  been  very  extensive,  but  the  work  not  of  the  best  sort. 

Next  day,  the  15th,  we  went  to  Acmin,  to  visit  the  fathers  of 
that  convent.  There  is  nothing  interesting  in  the  place,  except 
some  stairs,  the  only  remains  of  the  ancient  temple.  One  of  the 
fathers  told  me,  that  at  some  distance  in  the  mountain  there  is  a 
small  lake,  which  he  had  visited  himself,  entirely  surrounded  by 
cassia  trees.  Among  the  rubbish  in  the  town  are  found  a  few 
trifling  antiquities,  but  nothing  of  any  consequence.  The  fathers 
took  me  to  see  the  Casheff,  or  governor  of  the  place  ;  who,  hearing 
that  I  was  in  search  of  antiquities,  said  that  he  well  knew  there 
were  many  in  the  town,  for  the  Fellahs  had  often  told  him  so.  I 
inquired  of  him  where  they  were  ?  "  Oh  !  but  you  cannot  have 
them,"'  he  replied :  "  they  are  all  enchanted  by  the  devil ;  and  no 
one  can  take  them  from  where  they  are  !"  I  told  him,  if  he  would 
but  tell  me  where  they  were,  I  would  arrange  the  business  in  the 
other  quarter.  "  That  is  very  well,"  said  he  ;  "  bvit  no  one  here  dares 
to  tell  you,  for  fear  the  devil  should  do  him  a  mischief."  He  then 
informed  me,  that  in  the  mountains,  about  six  miles  distant,  there 
was  a  large  gold  ring  stuck  into  the  rock,  which  no  one  could  take 
out :  that  some  of  his  soldiers  went  with  a  cannon,  and,  after  firing 
several  balls  at  it,  were  returning  without  success,  when  by  chance 
a  man  who  was  eating  a  cucumber  threw  a  part  of  it  at  the  ring, 
which  immediately  fell  to  the  ground  ;  so  that  it  must  have  been 
fixed  by  enchantment  there,  and  nothing  but  the  rind  of  a  cu- 
cumber could  make  it  fall.  This  I  received  from  the  governor  of  a 
province  !  "What  sort  of  a  country  must  that  be,  which  allows  itself 
to  be  ruled  by  a  man  of  so  elevated  a  mind  ! 

On  the  16th  we  passed  before  Manshia,  and  arrived  at  Georgia. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  33 

There  we  procured  some  provision,  and  continued  our  voyage.  It 
was  from  this  place  I  visited  Arabat,  the  ancient  Abydos,  two  years 
after,  as  I  shall  take  a  proper  opportunity  of  relating. 

Near  Cossar  el  Sajats  there  is  a  narrow  passage  of  the  Nile, 
particularly  at  low  water.  The  wind  here  was  so  strong,  that  we 
made  considerable  way  against  the  current,  even  without  sails  ;  or, 
in  nautical  language,  "  scudding  under  bare  poles." 

On  the  18th,  at  night,  we  arrived  at  Dendera,  where  we  saw  a 
phenomenon  that  I  never  before  heard  of.  A  meteor  appeared 
over  our  heads,  and  took  its  course  towards  the  south  ;  but  so 
slowly,  that,  from  the  time  of  its  setting  off  to  that  of  its  dispersion, 
to  the  best  of  my  reckoning,  it  was  visible  for  about  twenty  seconds. 
It  first  appeared  of  a  blueish  colour,  then  became  white,  and  lastly 
red  ;  leaving,  apparently,  many  sparks  on  the  way  it  had  passed. 

On  the  19th,  early  in  the  morning,  my  curiosity  was  at  a  high 
pitch,  the  noted  temple  of  Tentyra  being  the  only  thought  I  had 
in  my  head.      Accordingly,  we   set  off  on  asses,   as   usual,   and 
proceeded  to  the  ruins.    Little  could  be  seen  of  the  temple,  till  we 
came  near  to  it,  as  it  is  surrounded  by  high  mounds  of  rubbish  of 
the  old  Tentyra.    On  our  arriving  before  it,  I  was  for  some  time  at 
a  loss  to  know  where  I  should  begin  my  examination.     The  nu- 
merous objects  before  me,  all  equally  attractive,  left  me  for  a  while 
in  a  state  of  suspense  and  astonishment.     The  enormous  masses  of 
stone  employed  in  the  edifice  are  so  well  disposed,  that  the  eye 
discovers  the  most  just  proportion  every  where.      The  majestic 
appearance  of  its  construction,  the  variety  of  its  ornaments,  and, 
above  all,  the  singularity  of  its  preservation,  had  such  an  effect  on 
me,  that  I  seated  myself  on  the  ground,  and  for  a  considerable  time 
was  lost  in  admiration.     It  is  the  first  Egyptian  temple  the  tra- 
veller sees  on  ascending  the  Nile,  and  it  is  certainly  the  most 
magnificent.     It  has  an  advantage  over  most  others,  from  the  good 


34  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

state  of  preservation  it  is  in;  and  I  should  have  no  scruple  in 
saying,  that  it  is  of  a  much  later  date  than  any  other.  The  supe- 
riority of  the  workmanship  gives  us  sufficient  reason  to  suppose  it 
to  be  of  the  time  of  the  first  Ptolemy ;  and  it  is  not  improbable, 
that  he,  who  laid  the  foundation  of  the  Alexandrian  library,  insti- 
tuted the  philosophical  society  of  the  Museum,  and  studied  to 
render  himself  beloved  by  his  people,  might  erect  such  an  edifice, 
to  convince  the  Egyptians  of  his  superiority  of  mind  over  the 
ancient  kings  of  Egypt,  even  in  religious  devotion. 

This  is  the  cabinet  of  the  Egyptian  arts,  the  product  of  study  for 
many  centuries,  and  it  was  here  that  Denon  thought  himself  in  the 
sanctuary  of  the  arts  and  sciences.      The  front  is  adorned  with  a 
beautiful  cornice,  and  a  frieze  covered  with  figures  and  hieroglyphics, 
over  the  centre  of  which  the  winged  globe  is  predominant,  and  the 
two  sides  are  embellished  with  compartments  of  sacrifices  and  offer- 
ings.   The  columns  that  form  the  portico  are  twenty-four  in  number, 
divided  into  four  rows,  including  those  in  the  front.     On  entering 
the  gate  the  scene  changes,  and  requires  more  minute  observation. 
The  quadrangular  form  of  the  capitals  first  strikes  the  eye.     At 
each  side  of  the  square  there  is  a  colossal  head  of  the  goddess  Isis 
with  cows'  ears.      There  is  not  one  of  these  heads  but  is  much 
mutilated,  particularly  those  on  the  columns  in  the  front  of  the 
temple  facing  the  outside :  but  notwithstanding  this  disadvantage, 
and  the  flatness  of  their  form,  there  is  a  simplicity  in  their  coun- 
tenance that  approaches  to  a  smile.     The  shafts  of  the  columns 
are  covered  with  hieroglyphics  and  figures,   which  are  in  basso 
relievo,  as  are  all  the  figures  in  the  front  and  lateral  walls.     The 
front  of  the  door- way,  which  is  in  a  straight  line  with  the  entrance 
and  the  sanctuary,  is  richly  adorned  with  figures  of  smaller  size 
than  the  rest  of  the  portico.     The  ceiling  contains  the  zodiac,  in- 
closed by  two  long  female  figures,  which  extend  from  one  side  to 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  35 

the  other  of  it,     The  walls  are  divided  into  several  square  com- 
partments, each  containing  figures  representing  deities,  and  priests 
in  the  act  of  offering  or  immolating  victims.      On  all  the  walls, 
columns,  ceiling,  or  architraves,  there  is  nowhere  a  space  of  two 
feet,  that  is  not  covered  with  some  figures  of  human  beings,  animals, 
plants,  emblems  of  agriculture,  or  of  religious  ceremony.    Wherever 
the  eyes  turn,  wherever  the  attention  is  fixed,  every  thing  inspires 
respect  and  veneration,  heightened  by  the  solitary  situation  of  this 
temple,  which  adds  to  the  attraction  of  these  splendid  recesses.    The 
inner  apartments  are  much  the  same  as  the  portico,  all  covered  with 
figures  in  basso  relievo,  to  which  the  light  enters  through  small  holes 
in  the  walls :  the  sanctuary  itself  is  quite  dark.    In  the  corner  of  it  I 
found  the  door,  which  leads  to  the  roof  by  a  staircase,  the  walls  of 
which  are  also  covered  with  figures  in  basso  relievo.     On  the  top  of 
the  temple  the  Arabs  had  built  a  village,  I  suppose  to  be  the  more 
elevated,  and  exposed  to  the  air ;  but  it  is  all  in  ruins,  as  no  one  now 
lives  there.    From  the  top  I  descended  into  some  apartments  on  the 
east  side  of  the  temple.  There  I  saw  the  famous  zodiac  on  the  ceiling. 
The  circular  form  of  this  zodiac  led  me  to  suppose,  in  some  measure, 
that  this  temple  was  built  at  a  later  period  than  the  rest,  as  nothing 
like  it  is  seen  any  where  else.     In  the  front  of  the  edifice  there  is 
a  propylaeon,  not  inferior  to  the  works  in  the  temple  ;  and,  though 
partly  fallen,  it  still  shows  its  ancient  grandeur.     On  the  left,  going 
from  the  portico,  there  is  a  small  temple  surrounded  by  columns. 
In  the  inside  is  a  figure  of  Isis  sitting  with  Orus  in  her  lap,  and 
other  female  figures,  each  with  a  child  in  her  arms,  are  observable. 
The  capitals  of  the  columns  are  adorned  with  the  figure  of  Typhon. 
The  gallery  or  portico,  that  surrounds  the  temple,  is  filled  up  with 
rubbish  to  a  great  height,  and  walls  of  unburnt  bricks  have  been 
raised  from  one  column  to  another.     Farther  on,  in  a  right  line 
with  the  propyleeon,  are  the  remains  of  an  hypaethral  temple,  which 

f  2 


36  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

form  a  square  of  twelve  columns,  connected  with  each  other  by  a 
wall,  except  at  the  door-way,  which  fronts  the  propylaeon.  The 
eastern  wall  of  the  great  temple  is  richly  adorned  with  figures 
in  intaglio  relevato :  they  are  perfectly  finished :  the  female 
figures  are  about  four  feet  high,  disposed  in  different  compart- 
ments. Behind  the  temple  is  a  small  Egyptian  building,  quite 
detached  from  the  large  edifice ;  and  from  its  construction  I  would 
venture  to  say,  that  it  was  the  habitation  of  the  priests.  At  some 
distance  from  the  great  temple  are  the  foundations  of  another,  not 
so  large  as  the  first.  The  propylaeon  is  still  standing  in  good  pre- 
servation. My  principal  object  did  not  permit  me  to  stay  here  any 
longer  ;  but  I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  quitted  a  place  with  so  much 
regret  and  wish  to  remain. 

When  we  again  reached  the  Nile,  the  people  of  Dendera  were 
assembled  in  great  numbers,  waiting  our  return  from  the  ruins.  On 
approaching  them  they  surrounded  my  interpreter,  and  caught  hold 
of  him,  some  by  the  arms,  others  by  the  garments,  and  insisted  that 
he  should  remain  there,  as  he  belonged  to  that  village.  The  fact 
was,  at  the  time  the  French  were  there,  a  boy  from  that  place  went 
alono-  with  them  ;  and,  as  our  interpreter  told  them  that  he  had  been 
in  the  French  army,  they  concluded  he  must  be  the  same  person ; 
nor  could  we  persuade  them  to  the  contrary.  I  was  not  willing 
to  part  with  him,  as  I  was  but  little  acquainted  with  the  Arabic  lan- 
o-uao-e ;  but  no  reasoning  with  them  would  avail,  and  they  were  too 

to      to     '  ° 

numerous  for  him  to  escape  from  them.  At  last,  I  told  them  to  call 
for  the  mother  of  the  boy  in  question.  To  this  they  answered,  that 
she  lived  at  six  miles  distance,  and  they  woidd  not  take  the  trouble 
to  go  and  fetch  her.  Presently,  however,  they  consented ;  but  they 
would  not  release  their  supposed  old  friend  from  their  hands,  telling 
him  he  had  been  long  enough  among  christian  dogs.  Some  brought 
him  milk  and  bread,  others  dates,  others  sugar-canes,  &c.    At  length 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  37 

the  desired  old  woman  arrived,  accompanied  with  another  son  ;  and, 
on  her  coming  up  to  my  interpreter,  he  addressed  her  in  such  a 
manner,  that  she  soon  acknowledged  he  did  not  belong  to  her. 

We  set  off  the  same  morning,  and  arrived  in  an  hour  at  Kenneh. 
This  place  is  well  known  for  its  trade  with  India  through  Cosseir, 
and  as  it  is  a  halting-place  for  the  Hadgees,  is  always  well  supplied 
with  provisions.  The  Aga  has  under  his  command  five  hundred 
soldiers,  to  escort  the  caravan  through  the  desert  to  Cosseir.  The 
Bashaw  sends  supplies  of  wheat  to  his  troops  in  Arabia,  beside  the 
usual  trade  in  sugar  and  silk ;  and  they  bring  coffee  from  Mocha, 
with  cottons  and  Cashmire  shawls  of  India  manufacture.  The 
Hadgees  here  take  a  stock  of  provision  sufficient  to  last  them  as 
far  as  Mecca,  and  in  the  proper  season  the  town  is  crowded  with 
them  from  all  parts.  The  camels  for  the  caravans  are  furnished  by 
the  Ababdy,  who  make  it  a  profitable  business  with  the  Hadgees. 
The  best  vessels  for  cooling  water  are  met  with  in  this  town. 
The  slaves  that  come  from  the  upper  country  pay  a  duty  of  four 
dollars  for  a  boy,  two  for  a  woman,  and  one  for  a  man. 

We  continued  our  voyage,  and  arrived  at  Gamola  on  the  21st 
at  night.  On  the  22d,  we  saw  for  the  first  time  the  ruins  of  great 
Thebes,  and  landed  at  Luxor.  Here  I  beg  the  reader  to  observe, 
that  but  very  imperfect  ideas  can  be  formed  of  the  extensive  ruins 
of  Thebes,  even  from  the  accounts  of  the  most  skilful  and  accurate 
travellers.  It  is  absolutely  impossible  to  imagine  the  scene  dis- 
played, without  seeing  it.  The  most  sublime  ideas,  that  can  be 
formed  from  the  most  magnificent  specimens  of  our  present  archi- 
tecture, would  give  a  very  incorrect  picture  of  these  ruins ;  for  such 
is  the  difference,  not  only  in  magnitude,  but  in  form,  proportion, 
and  construction,  that  even  the  pencil  can  convey  but  a  faint  idea 
of  the  whole.  It  appeared  to  me  like  entering  a  city  of  giants,  who, 
after  a  long  conflict,  were  all  destroyed,  leaving  the  ruins  of  their 


38  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

various  temples  as  the  only  proofs  of  their  former  existence.     The 
temple   of  Luxor  presents  to  the  traveller  at  once  one  of  the 
most  splendid  groups  of  Egyptian  grandeur.     The  extensive  pro- 
pylaeon,  with  the  two  obelisks,  and  colossal  statues  in  the  front; 
the  thick  groups  of  enormous  columns ;  the  variety  of  apartments 
and  the  sanctuary  it   contains  ;    the   beautiful   ornaments  which 
adorn  every  part   of  the  walls  and  columns,   described   by  Mr. 
Hamilton ;  cause  in  the  astonished  traveller  an  oblivion  of  all  that 
he  has  seen  before.     If  his  attention  be  attracted  to  the  north  side 
of  Thebes  by  the  towering  remains,   that  project  a  great  height 
above  the  wood  of  palm  trees,  he  will  gradually  enter  that  forest- 
like  assemblage   of  ruins  of  temples,    columns,   obelisks,   colossi, 
sphynxes,   portals,   and  an  endless  number  of  other  astonishing 
objects,  that  will  convince  him  at  once  of  the  impossibility  of  a 
description.     On  the  west  side  of  the  Nile,  still  the  traveller  finds 
himself  among  wonders.     The  temples  of  Gournou,  Memnonium, 
and  Medinet  Aboo,  attest  the  extent  of  the  great  city  on  this 
side.     The   unrivalled   colossal  figures  in  the   plains  of  Thebes, 
the  number  of  tombs  excavated  in  the  rocks,  those  in  the  great 
valley  of  the  kings,    with  their  paintings,   sculptures,  mummies, 
sarcophagi,  figures,  &c.  are  all  objects  worthy  of  the  admiration  of 
the  traveller;   who  will  not  fail  to  wonder  how  a  nation,  which 
was  once  so  great  as  to  erect  these  stupendous  edifices,  could  so 
far  fall  into  oblivion,  that  even  their  language  and  writing  are 
totally  unknown  to  us. 

After  having  taken  a  cursory  view  of  Luxor  and  Carnak,  to  which 
my  curiosity  led  me  on  my  landing,  I  crossed  the  Nile  to  the  west, 
and  proceeding  straight  to  the  Memnonium,  I  had  to  pass  before 
the  two  colossal  figures  in  the  plain.  1  need  not  say,  that  I  was 
struck  with  wonder.  They  are  mutilated  indeed,  but  their  enormous 
size  strikes  the  mind  with  admiration.   The  next  object  that  met  my 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sc  39 

view  was  the  Memnonium.  It  stands  elevated  above  the  plain,  which 
is  annually  inundated  by  the  Nile.  The  water  reaches  quite  to  the 
propylaeon  ;  and,  though  this  is  considerably  lower  than  the  temple, 
I  beg  leave  to  observe,  that  it  may  be  considered  as  one  of  the 
proofs,  that  the  bed  of  the  Nile  has  risen  considerably  higher  since 
the  Memnonium  was  erected ;  for  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the 
Egyptians  built  the  propylaeon,  which  is  the  entrance  to  the  temple, 
so  low  as  not  to  be  able  to  enter  it  when  the  water  was  at  its  height. 
There  are  other  proofs  of  this  opinion,  which  I  shall  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  introducing  in  this  volume.  The  groups  of  columns  of 
that  temple,  and  the  views  of  the  numerous  tombs  excavated  in  the 
high  rock  behind  it,  present  a  strange  appearance  to  the  eye.  On 
my  approaching  these  ruins,  I  was  surprised  at  the  sight  of  the 
great  colossus  of  Memnon,  or  Sesostris,  or  Osymandias,  or  Phame- 
noph,  or  perhaps  some  other  king  of  Egypt;  for  such  are  the 
various  opinions  of  its  origin,  and  so  many  names  have  been  given 
to  it,  that  at  last  it  has  no  name  at  all.  I  can  but  say,  that  it  must 
have  been  one  of  the  most  venerated  statues  of  the  Egyptians ;  for 
it  would  have  required  more  labour  to  convey  such  a  mass  of 
granite  from  Assouan  to  Thebes,  than  to  transport  the  obelisk^ 
commonly  known  under  the  appellation  of  Pompey's  Pillar,  to 
Alexandria. 

As  I  entered  these  ruins,  my  first  thought  was  to  examine  the 
colossal  bust  I  had  to  take  away.  I  found  it  near  the  remains  of  its 
body  and  chair,  with  its  face  upwards,  and  apparently  smiling  on  me, 
at  the  thought  of  being  taken  to  England.  I  must  say,  that  my 
expectations  were  exceeded  by  its  beauty,  but  not  by  its  size.  I 
observed,  that  it  must  have  been  absolutely  the  same  statue  as  is 
mentioned  by  Norden,  lying  in  his  time  with  its  face  downwards, 
which  must  have  been  the  cause  of  its  preservation.  I  will  not 
venture  to  assert  who  separated  the  bust  from  the  rest  of  the  body 


40  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

by  an  explosion,  or  by  whom  the  bust  has  been  turned  face  upwards. 
The  place  where  it  lay  was  nearly  in  a  line  with  the  side  of  the 
main  gateway  into  the  temple  ;  and,  as  there  is  another  colossal  head 
near  it,  there  may  have  been  one  on  each  side  of  the  doorway,  as 
they  are  to  be  seen  at  Luxor  and  Carnak. 

All  the  implements  brought  from  Cairo  to  the  Memnonium  con- 
sisted of  fourteen  poles,  eight  of  which  were  employed  in  making  a 
sort  of  car  to  lay  the  bust  on,  four  ropes  of  palm  leaves,  and  four 
rollers,  without  tackle  of  any  sort.  I  selected  a  place  in  the  por- 
ticoes ;  and,  as  our  boat  was  too  far  off  to  go  to  sleep  in  it  every 
night,  I  had  all  our  things  brought  on  shore,  and  made  a  dwelling 
house  of  the  Memnonium.  A  small  hut  was  formed  of  stones,  and 
we  were  handsomely  lodged.  Mrs.  Belzoni  had  by  this  time  ac- 
customed herself  to  travel,  and  was  equally  indifferent  with  myself 
about  accommodations.  I  examined  the  road  by  which  I  was  to 
take  the  bust  to  the  Nile.  As  it  appeared,  that  the  season  of  the 
inundation  was  advancing  very  fast,  all  the  lands  which  extend  from 
the  Memnonium  to  the  water  side  would  have  been  covered  in  one 
month's  time ;  and  the  way  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  was  very 
uneven,  and  in  some  parts  ran  over  ground  to  which  the  water 
reached,  so  that,  unless  the  bust  was  drawn  over  those  places  before 
the  inundation  commenced,  it  would  become  impossible  to  effect  it 
after,  till  the  next  summer ;  a  delay  which  might  have  occasioned 
even  still  more  difficulties  than  I  had  to  encounter  at  that  time ; 
for  I  have  reason  to  assert,  that  an  intrigue  was  going  on  to  prevent 
the  removal  of  the  head. 

On  the  24th  of  July,  I  went  to  the  Cacheff  of  Erments  to  obtain 
an  order  to  the  Caimakan  of  Gournou  and  Agalta,  to  procure  for 
me  eighty  Arabs,  to  assist  in  the  removal  of  the  young  Memnon. 
He  received  me  with  that  invariable  politeness  which  is  peculiar  to 
the  Turks,  even  when  they  do  not  mean  in  the  slightest  degree 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  41 

to  comply  with  your  wishes,  and  which  often  deceives  a  traveller, 
who  only  en  passant  takes  coffee,  smokes  his  pipe,  and  goes  away. 
It  is  not  so  these  people  can  be  known.  This  requires  an  oppor- 
tunity of  dealing  with  them,  and  in  matters  in  which  their  interest 
is  concerned.  There  are  exceptions  among  them,  as  there  are 
among  the  Christians  of  Europe ;  and  I  often  found  myself  de- 
ceived where  I  least  expected  it.  The  smooth-faced  protestations 
of  friendship  and  partiality  for  a  person,  whom  they  never  saw 
before,  ,is  so  common  among  them,  that  at  last  it  becomes  a 
matter  of  course ;  and  no  reliance  is  placed  on  it,  except  by  those 
who  are  unacquainted  with  the  customs  of  the  country. 

I  presented  the  firman  from  the  Defterdar  at  Siout.  He  received 
it  reverently,  and  promised  to  do  every  thing  in  his  power  to  get 
the  Arabs  to  work ;  but  observed  that,  at  the  present  season,  they 
were  all  occupied,  and  it  would  be  better  to  wait  till  after  the 
inundation  of  the  Nile.  I  remarked,  that  I  had  seen  a  great 
many  Arabs  about  the  villages,  who  appeared  perfectly  idle,  and 
who  would  be  glad  to  gain  something  by  being  employed.  "  You 
are  mistaken,"  he  replied,  "  for  they  would  sooner  starve  than  un- 
dertake a  task  so  arduous  as  yours ;  since,  to  remove  that  stone, 
they  must  be  helped  by  Mahomet,  or  they  will  never  stir  it  the 
thickness  of  a  thumb.  Now,  at  the  rise  of  the  Nile,  the  Arabs  of 
these  banks  are  quite  unoccupied,  and  that  is  the  very  time  for 
your  purpose."  The  next  objection  was  the  Ramadan,  which  was 
just  beginning ;  and  the  third,  that  he  could  not  spare  any  Arabs, 
as  they  must  work  in  the  fields  for  the  Bashaw,  whose  work  could 
not  be  interrupted.  I  saw  plainly,  that  I  should  have  to  encounter 
many  difficulties,  but  I  was  determined  to  persist ;  and  I  told  him, 
I  should  collect  men  myself,  accompanied  by  my  Janizary  ;  and 
that  all  the  Arabs  I  might  find  idle  and  willing  to  come,  I  should 
engage,  according  to  the  firman  I  had  received.     "  To-morrow," 

o 


42  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

he  then  replied,  "  I  will  send  my  brother  to  see  if  any  men  can  be 
got."  I  told  him  I  relied  on  his  word,  and  gave  him  to  under- 
stand, that,  if  he  behaved  in  a  manner  conformably  to  the  orders 
of  the  Bashaw,  he  would  receive  a  present  accordingly ;  and,  leaving 
my  Janizary  there,  to  conduct  the  men  who  might  be  procured  for 
me  to  the  Memnonium  the  next  morning,  I  withdrew. 

The  morning  arrived,  but  no  men  appeared.  I  waited  patiently 
till  nine  o'clock,  and  then  mounted  a  camel,  and  went  again  to 
Erments.  I  gave  my  interpreter  some  powder,  and  about  two 
pounds  of  raw  coffee,  to  be  produced  when  I  should  ask  for  them. 
I  found  the  Cacheff  occupied  in  giving  directions  to  build  a  tomb  for 
a  Mahometan  saint ;  but  it  was  of  no  use  to  complain.  I  told  him, 
therefore,  that  I  came  to  drink  coffee  with  him,  and  smoke  a  pipe. 
He  was  pleased,  and  we  sat  together  on  the  divan.  I  pretended  to 
be  quite  unconcerned  about  the  removal  of  the  colossus ;  and  at  a 
proper  time  I  presented  the  powder  and  the  coffee  to  him,  with  winch 
he  was  much  gratified.  I  then  repeated  to  him,  that,  if  he  would 
obtain  men  for  me,  it  would  be  much  to  his  advantage ;  and  if  not, 
he  would  lose  the  chance  of  reward,  and  I  should  act  accordingly. 
He  promised  again  that,  on  the  next  morning,  I  should  have  the 
assistance  I  wanted,  and  gave  me  an  order  for  the  purpose.  I 
returned  to  Gournou  on  the  same  evening,  and  sent  the  tiscarry,  or 
order,  to  the  Caimakan  of  the  place,  whose  business  it  was  to 
attend  to  it.  This  man  was  an  old  acquaintance  of  a  certain  col- 
lector of  antiquities  in  Alexandria ;  and,  as  he  had  immediate  com- 
mand over  the  Fellahs,  gave  me  much  trouble.  He  had  collected 
antiquities  for  this  person  for  many  years  at  Gournou,  was  married 
and  settled  there,  so  that  I  was  by  no  means  welcome  to  him. 
Agreeably  to  the  order,  he  also  promised,  like  his  master,  to  furnish 
me  with  men  ;  but  again,  on  the  26th,  not  one  appeared. 

I  then  sent  for  him,  and,  with  an  air  of  indifference,  he  told  me, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  43 

that  men  could  not  be  procured  that  day,  but  he  would  do  what  he 
could  on  the  morrow  or  next  day  :  at  the  same  time  the  Fellahs, 
who  were  idle,  would  have  been  glad  to  be  employed,  as  they  came 
by  twenty  at  a  time  to  see  if  permission  were  granted  for  them  to 
work.  The  Cacheff,  too,  instead  of  sending  the  assistance  he  had 
promised  from  his  part  of  the  country,  sent  only  a  soldier,  to 
inquire  whether  I  still  wanted  it ;  and  I  replied,  that,  if  he  did  not 
supply  me  with  some  men  the  next  morning,  I  should  write  to  Cairo. 
I  knew,  that  writing  to  Cairo  would  have  been  to  no  purpose,  for  it 
would  take  a  month  before  I  could  receive  an  answer,  and  then  it 
would  be  too  late,  in  consequence  of  the  rising  of  the  Nile.  I  tried 
in  vain  to  persuade  those  Arabs  whom  I  saw  unemployed  to  work ; 
but,  though  they  were  desirous  of  earning  money,  they  dared  not 
do  so,  without  permission  either  from  the  Cacheff  or  the  Caimakan. 
To  the  Cacheff  I  now  applied  again,  and  at  last,  on  the  27th,  he 
sent  me  a  few  men,  but  by  no  means  sufficient  for  my  purpose ;  yet, 
when  others  saw  them  at  work,  by  permission,  they  were  easily 
persuaded  to  join  the  party.  I  arranged  my  men  in  a  row,  and 
agreed  to  give  them  thirty  paras  a  day,  which  is  equal  to  fourpence 
halfpenny  English  money,  with  which  they  were  much  pleased,  as  it 
was  more  by  one  half  than  they  were  accustomed  to  receive  for 
their  daily  labour  in  the  fields.  The  carpenter  had  made  the  car, 
and  the  first  operation  was  to  endeavour  to  place  the  bust  on  it. 
The  Fellahs  of  Gournou,  who  were  familiar  with  Caphany,  as  they 
named  the  colossus,  were  persuaded,  that  it  could  never  be  moved 
from  the  spot  where  it  lay ;  and  when  they  saw  it  moved,  they  all 
set  up  a  shout.  Though  it  was  the  effect  of  their  own  efforts,  it  was 
the  devil,  they  said,  that  did  it ;  and,  as  they  saw  me  taking  notes, 
they  concluded  that  it  was  done  by  means  of  a  charm.  The  mode 
I  adopted  to  place  it  on  the  car  was  very  simple,  for  work  of 
no  other  description  could  be  executed  by  these  people,  as  their 

g  2 


44  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

utmost  sagacity  reaches  only  to  pulling  a  rope,  or  sitting  on  the 
extremity  of  a  lever  as  a  counterpoise.  By  means  of  four  levers  I 
raised  the  bust,  so  as  to  leave  a  vacancy  under  it,  to  introduce  the 
car  ;  and,  after  it  was  slowly  lodged  on  this,  I  had  the  car  raised  in 
the  front,  with  the  bust  on  it,  so  as  to  get  one  of  the  rollers  under- 
neath. I  then  had  the  same  operation  performed  at  the  back,  and 
the  colossus  was  ready  to  be  pulled  up.  I  caused  it  to  be  well 
secured  on  the  car,  and  the  ropes  so  placed  that  the  power  might 
be  divided.  I  stationed  men  with  levers  at  each  side  of  the  car, 
to  assist  occasionally,  if  the  colossus  should  be  inclined  to  turn  to 
either  side.  In  this  manner  I  kept  it  safe  from  falling.  Lastly,  I 
placed  men  in  the  front,  distributing  them  equally  at  the  four 
ropes,  while  others  were  ready  to  change  the  rollers  alternately. 
Thus  I  succeeded  in  getting  it  removed  the  distance  of  several 
yards  from  its  original  place. 

According  to  my  instructions,  I  sent  an  Arab  to  Cairo  with  the 
intelligence,  that  the  bust  had  begun  its  journey  towards  England. 
From  the  great  heat  of  the  day  I  was  unwell  at  night,  having  never 
felt  the  sun  so  powerful  before  in  my  life.  Being  in  the  hottest 
season,  the  air  was  inflamed ;  and  even  at  night  the  wind  itself  was 
extremely  hot.  The  place  I  had  chosen  in  the  Memnonium  was 
worse  than  any,  as  the  whole  mass  of  stones  was  so  heated,  that  the 
hands  could  not  be  kept  on  it.  In  the  course  of  time  these  places 
became  familiar  to  me,  as  well  as  the  climate ;  for  I  observed,  three 
years  after,  that  I  was  often  on  the  same  spot,  and  at  the  same 
season,  without  feeling  the  least  inconvenience,  or  being  sensible  of 
the  intense  heat  I  had  felt  on  my  first  arrival.  When  the  Arabs 
found  that  they  received  money  for  the  removal  of  a  stone,  they 
entertained  the  opinion,  that  it  was  filled  with  gold  in  the  inside, 
and  that  a  thing  of  such  value  should  not  be  permitted  to  be  taken 
away. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  45 

On  the  28th  we  recommenced  the  work.  The  Arabs  came 
pretty  early,  as  they  preferred  to  work  in  the  morning,  and  rest  in 
the  middle  of  the  day  from  twelve  to  two.  This  day  we  removed 
the  bust  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  Memnonium.  To  make  room  for 
it  to  pass,  we  had  to  break  the  bases  of  two  columns.  It  was 
advanced  about  fifty  yards  out  of  the  temple.  In  the  evening  I 
was  very  poorly :  I  went  to  rest,  but  my  stomach  refused  any 
aliment.  I  began  to  be  persuaded,  that  there  is  a  great  difference 
between  travelling  in  a  boat,  with  all  that  is  wanted  in  it,  and  at 
leisure,  and  the  undertaking  of  an  operation,  which  required  great 
exertions  in  directing  a  body  of  men,  who  in  point  of  skill  are  no 
better  than  beasts,  and  to  be  exposed  to  the  burning  sun  of  that 
country  from  morning  till  night. 

On  the  next  day,  the  29th,  I  found  it  impossible  to  stand  on 
my  legs,  and  postponed  the  work  to  the  day  following.  I  had  all 
our  household-furniture,  beds,  kitchen-pottery,  and  provisions,  put 
on  a  camel,  and  returned  to  the  boat,  in  hopes  that  the  air  might 
be  cool  at  night ;  but  I  remained  very  ill  the  whole  day,  my  stomach 
refusing  to  take  almost  any  thing. 

On  the  30th  we  continued  the  work,  and  the  colossus  advanced 
a  hundred  and  fifty  yards  towards  the  Nile.  I  was  a  little  better 
in  the  morning,  but  worse  again  in  the  evening. 

On  the  31st  I  was  again  a  little  better,  but  could  not  proceed, 
as  the  road  became  so  sandy,  that  the  colossus  sunk  into  the  ground. 
I  was  therefore  under  the  necessity  of  taking  a  long  turn  of  above 
three  hundred  yards,  to  a  new  road.  In  the  evening  of  this  day 
I  was  much  better. 

On  the  1st  of  August  we  still  improved  in  our  success,  as  we 
this  day  proceeded  above  three  hundred  yards.  I  was  obliged  to 
keep  several  men  employed  in  making  the  road  before  us,  as  we 
went  on  with  the  head.     The  Irish  lad  that  was  with  me  I  sent  to 


46  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Cairo,  as  he  could  not  resist  the  climate;  but  what  is  singular, 
Mrs.  Belzoni  enjoyed  tolerable  health  all  the  time.  She  was  con- 
stantly among  the  women  in  the  tombs  ;  for  all  the  Fellahs  of 
Gournou  make  dwelling-houses  where  the  Egyptians  had  burial- 
places,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  mention  hereafter. 

On  the  2d  the  head  advanced  farther ;  and  I  was  in  great  hopes 
of  passing  a  part  of  the  land,  to  which  the  inundation  would  extend, 
previous  to  the  water  reaching  that  spot. 

On  the  3d  we  went  on  extremely  well,  and  advanced  nearly  four 
hundred  yards.     We  had  a  bad  road  on  the  4th  ,  but  still  we 
proceeded  a  good  way.     On  the  5th  we  entered  the  land  I  was  so 
anxious  to  pass  over,  for  fear  the  water  should  reach  it  and  arrest 
our  course  ;  and  I  was  happy  to  think,  that  the  next  day  would 
bring  us  out  of  danger.     Accordingly,  I  went  to  the  place  early  in 
the  morning,  and,  to  my  great  surprise,  found  no  one  there  except 
the  guards  and  the  carpenter,  who  informed  me,  that  the  Caimakan 
had  o-iven  orders  to  the  Fellahs  not  to  work  for  the  Christian  dogs 
any  longer.     I  sent  for  him,  to  know  the  reason  of  this  new  pro- 
ceeding ;  but  he  was  gone  to  Luxor.     It  is  to  be  observed,  that  the 
spot  where  the  head  lay  at  this  time  was  expected  to  be  under 
water  in  a  few  days  ;  and  that  by  delay  the  risk  would  be  incurred 
of  having  it  sunk  in  the  earth,  so  that  it  could  not  have  been  taken 
out  till  the  following  year,  and  then  not  without  a  great  deal  of 
additional  trouble,  exclusive  of  the  tricks  that  might  be  played  in 
the  interval.     Under  these  circumstances,  it  may  be  imagined  I 
was  uneasy  upon  the  subject,  and  anxious  for  despatch.     I  after- 
wards learned,  that  the  rogue  of  a  Caimakan  had  suggested  to  the 
Cacheff  to  take  advantage  of  the  situation,  when  the  head  was  to 
pass  that  spot,  to  put  an  end  to  our  proceeding.      I   took  the 
Janizary  with  me,  and  crossed  the  water  to  Luxor.     I  there  found 
the  Caimakan,  who  could  give  me  no  reason  for  his  proceeding 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  47 

but  saucy  answers ;  and  the  more  I  attempted  to  bring  him  into 
good  humour  by  smooth  words  and  promises,  the  more  inso- 
lent he  became.  My  patience  was  great,  and  I  was  determined 
that  day  to  carry  it  to  its  utmost  length :  but  there  is  a  certain 
point,  which,  if  exceeded,  these  people  do  not  understand ;  and,  in 
a  country  where  respect  is  paid  only  to  the  strongest,  advantage 
will  always  be  taken  of  the  weak :  consequently,  if  a  man  carry  his 
policy  beyond  that  point,  they  mistake  him  for  a  coward ;  he  is 
despised,  and  will  have  the  more  difficulties  to  encounter. 

This  was  the  case  on  the  present  occasion :  my  patience  was 
mistaken  ;  and  this  man,  after  having  said  all  that  he  could  against 
my  nation,  and  those  who  protected  me,  was  so  much  encouraged 
by  my  forbearance,  that  he  attempted  to  put  his  hands  on  me, 
which  I  resisted.     He  then  became  more  violent,  and  drew  his 
sword,  though  he  had  a  brace  of  pistols  in  his  belt.     There  was  no 
time  to  be  lost ;  and  as  I  had  received  a  good  lesson  at  Cairo  from 
another  Albanian  like  himself,  I  gave  him  no  leisure  to  execute  his 
purpose.     I  instantly  seized  and  disarmed  him,  placed  my  hands  on 
his  stomach,  and  made  him  sensible  of  my  superiority,  at  least  in 
point  of  strength,  by  keeping  him  firm  in  a  corner  of  the  room. 
The  pistols  and  sword,  which  I  had  thrown  on  the  ground,  were 
taken  up  by  my  Janizary;    and  after  giving  the  fellow  a  good 
shaking,  I  took  possession  of  them,  and  told  him,  that  I  should 
send  them  to  Cairo,  to  show  the  Bashaw  in  what  manner  his  orders 
were  respected.     He  followed  me  towards  the  boat,  and  was  no 
sooner  out  of  the  crowd  that  had  assembled,  than  he  began  to  be 
quite  humble,  and  talk  of  matters  as  if  nothing  had  happened. 
He  then  told  me,  that  the  order  he  had  given  to  the  Fellahs  not  to 
work  he  had  received  from  the  Cacheff  himself,  and  it  covdd  not  be 
expected,  that,  being  only  a  Caimakan,  he  could  disobey  his  su- 


48  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

perior.     I  did  not  stop  one  instant,  but  ordered  the  boat  to  take 
me  to  Ermentes  immediately. 

The  reader,  perhaps,  may  think  my  narrative  too  minute ;  but 
I  beg  to  observe,  that  it  is  in  this  way  only  the  true  character  of 
these  people  can  be  known.  I  remarked,  that  in  almost  every 
thing  he  said  to  me  nothing  escaped  him  against  my  religion, 
which  is  generally  the  first  thing  with  a  Mahometan ;  but  I  found 
afterwards,  that  the  friend  in  Lower  Egypt,  with  whom  he  had 
trafficked  in  antiques,  from  whom  he  received  money  and  presents, 
and  who  influenced  him  on  this  occasion,  was  a  Christian ;  and 
if  he  could  have  found  the  means  to  interrupt  my  proceedings 
respecting  the  bust,  he  would  greatly  have  obliged  this  friend. 

I  hastened  to  Erments,  and  arrived  there  before  sunset.  As 
it  was  the  time  of  Ramadan,  the  Cacheff  had  many  of  his  principal 
officers,  and  several  Hadgees  and  Santons  at  dinner  with  him ;  it 
being  the  custom  of  these  Turkish  travellers,  particularly  at  this 
season,  to  live  at  great  men's  tables.  There  were  about  thirty  in 
all  in  the  place.  The  dinner  was  prepared  in  a  field  before  the 
house,  as  no  room  within  it  would  contain  so  many  persons.  An 
old  carpet,  about  twenty  feet  long  and  three  wide,  was  spread  on  the 
ground ;  and  where  we  should  put  plates,  cakes  were  placed  of  fine 
white  bread,  made  expressly  for  the  occasion.  On  my  arrival  they 
were  just  going  to  begin,  the  hour  of  dining  being  always  a  little 
after  sunset  during  the  festival  of  Ramadan,  as  they  are  then  not 
allowed  to  eat  till  the  sun  has  wholly  disappeared ;  so  that  I  could 
introduce  no  business  at  that  time.  There  is  certainly  something 
in  the  ceremonial  manners  of  the  Turks,  that  is  often  peculiarly 
provoking.  At  the  very  moment  that  they  order  your  throat  to  be 
cut,  they  will  not  fail  to  salute  you,  apparently,  with  the  utmost 
cordiality.     The  Cacheff  received  me  very  politely,  and  invited  me 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  49 

to  dine  with  him.  I  dared  not  refuse,  as  it  would  have  been  the 
greatest  affront  I  could  have  offered  him.  Accordingly,  we  sat  all 
round  the  carpet,  on  the  ground.  The  Turkish  cookery  does  not 
always  suit  a  European  palate ;  but  there  are  a  few  dishes,  that  are 
equally  agreeable  with  our  own ;  particularly  mutton  roasted  on 
a  wooden  pole,  at  a  wood  fire.  They  have  a  particular  way.  of 
cooking  it,  putting  it  on  the  fire  immediately  after  it  is  killed,  and 
before  it  has  lost  its  natural  warmth ;  and  in  this  way  it  has  a 
particular  flavour,  quite  agreeable  to  the  taste.  The  soldiers  and 
Hadgees  tucked  up  their  large  sleeves,  and  with  naked  arms  dipped 
the  fingers  of  their  right  hands  into  the  various  dishes.  They 
never  employ  the  left  hand  in  eating,  nor  do  they  eat  much  out  of 
one  dish,  but  taste  of  all  that  are  within  their  reach.  They  always 
finish  their  dinner  with  pilau,  and  seldom  drink  while  eating. 
They  wash  immediately  after,  and  pipes  and  coffee  being  served  all 
round,  they  begin  to  converse  on  their  usual  topics,  horses,  arms, 
saddles,  or  dress. 

At  a  proper  time  I  expressed  to  the  Cacheff  the  necessity  of  my 
having  an  order  for  the  Fellahs,  to  proceed  with  my  operations  the 
next  morning.  He  answered  with  indifference,  that  they  must  work 
in  the  fields  for  the  Bashaw,  and  that  he  could  not  spare  one ;  but 
that,  if  I  would  wait  till  the  next  season,  I  might  have  as  many  as  I 
liked.  I  replied  to  this,  that  as  I  could  obtain  no  men  from  him, 
I  would  bring  over  some  from  Luxor,  and  he  would  thus  lose  the 
merit  of  what  he  had  done ;  and  as  I  had  to  return  to  Luxor  that 
night,  I  must  take  my  leave.  He  observed,  I  had  no  reason  to  be 
afraid,  as  I  was  armed  with  such  a  pair  of  fine  English  pistols.  I 
answered,  they  were  very  necessary  in  that  country,  but  they  were  at 
his  service  notwithstanding,  if  he  would  be  pleased  to  accept  of  them; 
though  1  had  written  to  Cairo  for  a  better  pair  for  him,  which  would 
soon  arrive.  At  these  words,  he  put  his  hands  on  my  knees,  and  said, 
"We  shall  be  friends."     He  ordered  the  firman  to  be  written  out 

H 


50  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

immediately,  and  set  his  seal  to  it.  I  left  him,  returned  to  the 
boat,  and  arrived  at  Gournou  before  daylight.  On  passing  before 
Luxor,  we  were  in  danger  of  being  drowned.  The  pier,  that  pro- 
tects these  ruins  from  the  force  of  the  current,  on  the  swelling 
of  the  Nile  is  always  under  water ;  and  our  boatman,  not  being 
acquainted  with  its  situation,  ran  the  boat  against  it.  The 
current  was  very  strong ;  no  power  could  resist  it ;  and  the  boat 
heeled  so  much,  that  the  water  kept  running  over  the  gunwale.  As 
the  rapidity  in  this  spot  is  so  great,  that  the  most  expert  swimmer, 
being  once  in  the  stream,  has  no  chance  of  reaching  the  shore, 
we  appeared  to  have  inevitable  death  before  us,  but  Providence 
ordered  it  otherwise.  At  that  moment  a  fresh  breeze  arose,  the 
advantage  of  which  was  seized  by  the  pilot,  who  hoisted  the  sail, 
got  the  boat  under  proper  management,  crossed  the  current,  and 
escaped  the  danger. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  7th,  I  sent  for  the  Sheik  of  the 
Fellahs,  and  gave  him  the  Cacheff's  order.  The  men  were  ready 
in  an  hour  after,  and  we  continued  the  operation.  The  bust 
advanced  this  day  considerably  more  than  usual,  owing  to  the  men 
having  rested  on  the  preceding  day :  and  on  the  8th  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  it  out  of  danger  of  being  overtaken  by  the 
water. 

On  the  9th,  I  was  seized  with  such  a  giddiness  in  my  head,  that 
I  could  not  stand.  The  blood  ran  so  copiously  from  my  nose  and 
mouth,  that  I  was  unable  to  continue  the  operation :  I  therefore 
postponed  it  to  the  next  day. 

On  the  10th  and  11th,  we  approached  towards  the  river ;  and  on 
the  12th,  thank  God,  the  young  Memnon  arrived  on  the  bank  of  the 
Nile.  Besides  their  promised  payment,  I  gave  the  Arabs  a  bakshis, 
or  present,  of  one  piastre  each,  equal  to  sixpence  English,  with  which 
they  were  exceedingly  pleased ;  and  they  well  deserved  their  reward, 
after  an  exertion,  to  which  no  labour  can  be  compared.     The  hard 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  51 

task  they  had,  to  track  such  a  weight,  the  heavy  poles  they  were 
obliged  to  carry  to  use  as  levers,  and  the  continual  replacing  the 
rollers,  with  the  extreme  heat  and  dust,  were  more  than  any 
European  could  have  withstood :  but  what  is  still  more  remarkable, 
during  all  the  days  of  this  exertion,  it  being  Kamadan,  they  never 
ate  or  drank  till  after  sunset.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  conceive,  how  they 
existed  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  at  a  work  to  which  they  were 
totally  unaccustomed. 

Next  day,  in  the  morning,  according  to  my  wish,  some  Arabs 
came  to  conduct  me  to  the  cave,  where  the  sarcophagus  was  which 
Mr.  Drouetti  had  attempted  to  take  out,  and  had  given  to  me  as  a 
present,  if  I  could  get  it.  I  was  conducted  into  one  of  those  holes, 
that  are  scattered  about  the  mountains  of  Gournou,  so  celebrated 
for  the  quantities  of  mummies  they  contain.  The  Janizary  remained 
without,  and  I  entered,  with  two  Arabs  and  the  interpreter. 

Previous  to  our  entering  the  cave,  we  took  off  the  greater  part 
of  our  clothes,  and,  each  having  a  candle,  advanced  through  a 
cavity  in  the  rock,  which  extended  a  considerable  length  in  the 
mountain,  sometimes  pretty  high,  sometimes  very  narrow,  and 
without  any  regularity.  In  some  passages  we  were  obliged  to 
creep  on  the  ground,  like  crocodiles.  I  perceived,  that  we  were  at 
a  great  distance  from  the  entrance,  and  the  way  was  so  intricate, 
that  I  depended  entirely  on  the  two  Arabs,  to  conduct  us  out 
again.  At  length  we  arrived  at  a  large  space,  into  which  many 
other  holes  or  cavities  opened ;  and  after  some  consideration  and 
examination  by  the  two  Arabs,  we  entered  one  of  these,  which  was 
very  narrow,  and  continued  downward  for  a  long  way,  through  a 
craggy  passage,  till  we  came  where  two  other  apertures  led  to  the 
interior  in  a  horizontal  direction.  One  of  the  Arabs  then  said 
"  This  is  the  place."  I  could  not  conceive  how  so  large  a  sarco- 
phagus, as  it  had  been  described  to  me,  could  have  been  taken 

h  2 


52  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

through  the  aperture,  which  the  Arab  now  pointed  out.     I  had 
no  doubt,  but  these  recesses  were  burial-places,  as  we  continually 
walked  over  skulls  and  other  bones:  but  the  sarcophagus  could 
never   have    entered  this  recess ;   for  it  was  so   narrow,  that   on 
my  attempt  to  penetrate  it,  I  could  not  pass.     One  of  the  Arabs, 
however,  succeeded,  as  did  my  interpreter ;   and  it  was  agreed,  that 
I  and  the  other  Arab  should  wait  till  they  returned.     They  pro- 
ceeded evidently  to  a  great  distance,  for  the  light  disappeared,  and 
only  a  murmuring  sound  from  their  voices  could  be  distinguished 
as  they  went  on.     After  a  few  moments,  I  heard  a  loud  noise,  and 
the  interpreter  distinctly  crying,  "  O  mon  Dieu  !  nion  Dieu  !  je  suis 
perdu!"     After  which,  a  profound  silence  ensued.     I  asked  my 
Arab,  whether   he   had  ever   been   in  that   place  ?     He   replied, 
"  Never."     I  could  not  conceive  what  could  have  happened,  and 
thought  the  best  plan  was  to  return,  to  procure  help  from  the  other 
Arabs.    Accordingly,  I  told  my  man  to  show  me  the  way  out  again  ; 
but,  staring  at  me  like  an  ideot,  he  said  he  did  not  know  the  road. 
I  called  repeatedly  to  the  interpreter,  but  received  no  answer ;  I 
watched  a  long  time,  but  no  one  returned  ;  and  my  situation  was  no 
very  pleasant  one.     I  naturally  returned  through  the  passages,  by 
which  we  had  come ;  and,  after  some  time,  I  succeeded  in  reaching 
the  place,  where,  as  I  mentioned,  were  many  other  cavities.    It  was  a 
complete  labyrinth,  as  all  these  places  bore  a  great  resemblance  to 
the  one  which  we  first  entered.    At  last  seeing  one,  which  appeared 
to  be,  the  right,  we  proceeded  through  it  a  long  way ;  but  by  this 
time  our  candles  had  diminished  considerably ;  and  I  feared,  that, 
if  we  did  not  get  out  soon,  we  should  have  to  remain  in  the  dark : 
meantime  it  would  have  been  dangerous  to  put  one  out,  to  save 
the  other,  lest  that  which  was  left  should,  by  some  accident,  be 
extinguished.    At  this  time  we  were  considerably  advanced  towards 
the  outside,  as  we  thought ;  but  to  our  sorrow  we  found  the  end 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  53 

of  that  cavity,  without  any  outlet.  Convinced  that  we  were  mis- 
taken in  our  conjecture,  we  quickly  returned  towards  the  place  of 
the  various  entries,  which  we  strove  to  regain.  But  we  were  then 
as  perplexed  as  ever,  and  were  both  exhausted  from  the  ascents  and 
descents,  which  we  had  been  obliged  to  go  over.  The  Arab  seated 
himself,  but  every  moment  of  delay  was  dangerous.  The  only 
expedient  was,  to  put  a  mark  at  the  place  out  of  which  we  had  just 
come,  and  then  examine  the  cavities  in  succession,  by  putting  also 
a  mark  at  their  entrance,  so  as  to  know  where  we  had  been.  Un- 
fortunately, our  candles  would  not  last  through  the  whole :  how- 
ever, we  began  our  operations. 

On  the  second  attempt,  when  passing  before  a  small  aperture, 
I  thought  I  heard  the  sound  of  something  like  the  roaring  of  the 
sea  at  a  distance.  In  consequence  I  entered  this  cavity;  and  as 
we  advanced  the  noise  increased,  till  I  could  distinctly  hear  a 
number  of  voices  all  at  one  time.  At  last,  thank  God,  we  walked 
out ;  and,  to  my  no  small  surprise,  the  first  person  I  saw  was  my 
interpreter.  How  he  came  to  be  there  I  could  not  conjecture. 
He  told  me,  that,  in  proceeding  with  the  Arab  along  the  passage 
below,  they  came  to  a  pit,  wliich  they  did  not  see ;  that  the  Arab 
fell  into  it,  and  in  falling  put  out  both  candles.  It  was  then  that 
he  cried  out,  "  Mon  Dieu  !  je  suis  perdu  !"  as  he  thought  he  also 
should  have  fallen  into  the  pit ;  but,  on  raising  his  head,  he  saw  at 
a  great  distance  a  glimpse  of  daylight,  towards  which  he  advanced, 
and  thus  arrived  at  a  small  aperture.  He  then  scraped  away 
some  loose  sand  and  stones,  to  widen  the  place  where  he  came 
out,  and  went  to  give  the  alarm  to  the  Arabs,  who  were  at  the 
other  entrance.  Being  all  concerned  for  the  man  who  fell  to  the 
bottom  of  the  pit,  it  was  their  noise  that  I  heard  in  the  cave.  The 
place  by  which  my  interpreter  got  out  was  instantly  widened  ;  and 
in  the  confusion  the  Arabs  did  not  regard  letting  me  see  that  they 


54  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

were  acquainted  with  that  entrance,  and  that  it  had  lately  been 
shut  up.  I  was  not  long  in  detecting  their  scheme.  The  Arabs 
had  intended  to  show  me  the  sarcophagus,  without  letting  me  see 
the  way  by  which  it  might  be  taken  out,  and  then  to  stipulate  a 
price  for  the  secret.  It  was  with  this  view  they  took  me  such  a  way 
round  about. 

I  found  that  the  sarcophagus  was  not  in  reality  a  hundred  yards 
from  the  large  entrance.  The  man  was  soon  taken  out  of  the  well, 
but  so  much  hurt  in  one  of  his  hips,  that  he  went  lame  ever  after. 
Finding  that  the  cover  of  the  sarcophagus  could  be  taken  out,  I  set 
several  men  at  work  to  clear  the  passage ;  but  on  the  third  day,  on 
my  return  from  the  king's  tombs,  I  found  that  the  Cacheff  had 
recommenced  his  old  tricks.  He  came  to  Gournou  from  Erments  ; 
and,  seeing  the  Arabs  at  work,  he  took  them  all  to  the  latter  place, 
bound  like  thieves,  and  put  them  into  prison.  I  could  not  imagine 
the  reason  of  all  this,  after  the  promises  I  had  made  him,  and 
the  protestations  on  his  part  which  he  had  made  to  me ;  but,  on 

inquiry,  I  found  that  some  agents  of  Mr.  D had  just  arrived 

from  Alexandria  and  brought  him  presents.  I  do  not  know  what 
passed  between  them ;  I  only  state  the  case  as  it  appeared.  On  my 
applying  to  him  again,  he  said  that  the  sarcophagus  was  sold  to  the 
French  consul,  and  no  one  else  should  have  it.  I  feigned  to  be  quite 
unconcerned  about  the  matter,  as  well  as  about  the  Arabs  he  had 
put  into  prison  ;  for,  if  I  had  appeared  anxious,  he  would  have  kept 
them  longer,  as  his  motives  were  all  mercenary.  I  told  him  I 
should  write  to  Cairo  about  the  sarcophagus.  In  fact,  I  had  to 
write  to  Mr.  Salt,  to  have  a  boat  sent  to  convey  the  colossus  down 
the  Nile,  as  none  could  be  had  at  that  season  in  Upper  Egypt ;  for 
they  were  all  engaged,  and  mostly  for  the  Bashaw. 

After  having  sent  a  courier  to  the  consul  about  the  boat,  I  thought 
I  could  not  employ  my  time  better  than  in  going  up  the  Nile,  as  no 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  5.5 

extra  expense  would  be  incurred.  The  boat  which  I  had  engaged 
might  go  where  I  pleased  ;  and,  by  the  time  the  answer  from  Cairo 
arrived,  I  should  be  back  again.  I  always  had  two  guards  kept  at 
the  colossal  bust  day  and  night ;  but  when  I  found  that  I  could 
not  get  a  boat  to  embark  it  without  writing  to  Cairo,  I  formed  an 
inclosure  of  earth  all  round  it ;  and  on  the  18th  we  set  off  for  Esne. 
Our  number  was  diminished  in  this  voyage,  as  I  had  sent  the  Irish 
lad  to  Cairo,  and  discharged  the  carpenter ;  so  that  we  remained 
only  with  the  Janizary  and  the  interpreter.  The  next  day  we 
reached  Esne,  and  I  landed  just  in  time  to  see  Khalil  Bey  on  the 
same  evening,  whom  I  knew  some  time  before  in  Soubra.  He  was 
appointed  to  the  government  of  the  upper  provinces,  from  Esne  to 
Assouan  ;  and  having  married  one  of  the  Bashaw's  sisters,  he  was 
quite  independent  of  the  orders  of  the  Deftardar  Bey  at  Siout. 
It  was  nearly  night  when  I  went  to  him.  He  was  just  returned 
from  an  excursion  into  the  country.  I  found  him  seated  on  a  sofa 
made  of  earth,  covered  with  a  fine  carpet  and  satin  cushions,  sur- 
rounded by  a  great  number  of  his  chiefs,  Cacheffs,  and  San  tons. 
They  had  just  finished  their  dinner  ;  and  I  could  not  have  arrived 
at  a  better  time  for  conversation.  He  was  much  pleased  to  see  me, 
and  offered  to  give  me  letters  to  all  the  people  under  his  command. 
Understanding  that  I  might  perhaps  proceed  as  far  as  Ibrim,  he 
caused  a  letter  to  be  written  to  Osseyn  Cacheff,  who  was  one  of  the 
three  princes  residing  in  Nubia  :  and  as  Khalil  Bey  received  a  yearly 
contribution  from  the  Nubians,  he  had  sent  his  soldiers  thither; 
so  they  were  now  on  friendly  terms.  The  moment  the  troops  of 
Egypt  enter  Nubia  to  receive  the  tribute,  the  princes  march  higher 
up  the  Nile,  and  are  never  to  be  seen. 

The  usual  conversation  on  horses,  &c.  was  laid  aside ;  and,  as  I 
was  going  to  Nubia,  the  topics  were  the  various  personages  I  should 
meet  with  in  that  country,  and  the  risk  I  ran  of  being  robbed  by 


56  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

them,  &c.     After  smoking  a  few  pipes,  and  drinking  as  many  cups 
of  coffee,  I  left  the  Bey,  and  returned  to  the  boat. 

The  next  day  I  made  a  cursory  inspection  of  the  temple  in  that 
town.  It  is  much  encumbered  with  rubbish,  and  only  the  portico 
of  it  is  now  to  be  seen  ;  but  the  beautiful  variety  and  fine  shaped 
capitals  of  the  columns,  as  well  as  the  zodiacal  figures  on  the  ceiling, 
announce  that  it  was  one  of  the  principal  temples  of  Egypt.  The 
figures  and  hieroglyphics  are  somewhat  larger  than  those  of  Ten- 
tyra  ;  and  it  is  a  great  pity  that  such  beautiful  edifices  should  be 
inhabited  by  dirty  Arabs  and  their  cattle. 

On  the  20th  we  passed  Elethias  with  a  strong  wind,  and  there- 
fore did  not  stop  till  we  arrived  at  Edfu.  This  temple  may  be 
compared  with  that  of  Tentyra  in  point  of  preservation,  and  is 
superior  in  magnitude.  The  propylason  is  the  largest  and  most 
perfect  of  any  in  Egypt :  it  is  covered  on  all  sides  with  colossal 
figures  of  intaglio  relevato,  and  contains  several  apartments  in  the 
interior,  which  receive  light  by  square  apertures  in  the  side.  We 
have  here  one  of  those  curious  subjects  of  inquiry,  which,  in  my 
opinion,  have  never  yet  been  explained.  These  square  holes,  or 
windows,  viewed  from  the  inside  of  the  chambers,  appear  to  have 
been  made  for  the  purpose  of  giving  light  to  these  apartments, 
or  to  hold  some  particular  ornaments  or  emblems,  placed  in  them 
occasionally  on  festival  days  ;  consequently,  it  might  be  concluded 
that  they  were  made  at  the  same  time  with  the  building.  Yet,  on 
the  outside,  these  very  windows  come  in  contact  with  the  colossal 
figures  which  are  sculptured  on  the  walls  ;  and  part  of  these 
appear  as  if  cut  off  where  the  windows  have  been  made  :  so  that, 
from  the  appearance  on  the  outside,  it  is  to  be  inferred,  that  these 
apertures  were  formed  after  the  building  was  finished.  For  my 
own  part,  I  think  they  were  cut  long  after  that  period,  and  made  to 
give  light  to  the  apartments,  which  were  inhabited  by  people  of 


IX  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  57 

a  different  religion  from  those  who  built  the  temple.     The  pronaos 
is  very  wide,  and  is  the  only  one  to  be  seen  in  Egypt  in  such 
perfection,  though  completely  encumbered  with  Arab  huts.      The 
portico  is  also  magnificent ;  but,  unfortunately,  above  three-fourths 
of  it  covered  with  rubbish.     Through  some  holes  in  the  upper  part 
of  the  sekos  I  entered   the  inner  apartments ;    but  they  were  so 
obstructed,  that  I  could  not  proceed  far.     The  Fellahs  have  built 
part  of  their  village  on  the  top  of  it,  as  well  as  stables  for  cattle,  &c. 
The  temple  is  surrounded  by  a  high  thick  wall,  which  extends  from 
each  side  of  the  propylaeon,  so  as  to  inclose  the  whole  building. 
Not  only  the  temple,  but  every  part  of  the  wall,  is  covered  with 
hieroglyphics  and  figures.     On    the  side   wall   of  the   pronaos   I 
observed  the   figure  of  Harpocrates  which   is   described  bv  Mr. 
Hamilton,  seated  on  a  full-blown  lotus,  with  his  finger  on  his  lips, 
as  in  the  minor  temple  at  Tentyra ;  and  on  the  west  side  of  the 
wall  is  the  figure  of  an  unicorn.    This  is  one  of  the  few  figures  of 
beasts  I  observed  in  Egypt.     The  elephant  is  to  be  seen  only  in 
the  entrance  to  the  temple  of  Isis,  in  the  island  of  Philoe  :  the 
horse,  as  a  hieroglyphic,  is  on  the  northern  exterior  wall  at  Medinet 
Aboo ;    and   the  camelopard   is   on   the  wall  of  the  sekos  of  the 
Memnonium,  and  on  the  back  of  the   temple   at  Erments.     On 
looking  at  an  edifice   of  such  magnitude,  workmanship,  and  an- 
tiquity, inhabited  by  a  half  savage  people,  whose  huts  are  stuck 
against  it,  not  unlike  wasps'  nests,  and  to  contrast  their  filthy  clothes 
with  these   sacred   images,   that   once  were   so  highly  venerated, 
makes  one  strongly  feel  the  difference  between  the  ancient  and 
modern  state  of  Egypt.     The  minor  temple  is  but  of  small  dimen- 
sions.    It  had  a  portico  in  the  front ;  nothing  of  which  is  to  be 
seen  but  fragments  of  columns  buried  in  the  rubbish.       Some  say 
this  temple  was  dedicated  to  Apollo :  but  I  do  not  know  why  there 


58  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

is  not  as  much  reason  to  suppose  that  it  was  dedicated  to  Typhon, 
as  that  the  temple  at  Tentyra  was  dedicated  to  Isis.  The  square 
capitals  on  the  columns  at  Tentyra  are  adorned  with  heads  of  Isis ; 
and  this  is  one  of  the  principal  circumstances,  that  indicate  the 
deity  to  whom  the  temple  was  dedicated.  In  the  temple  at  Edfu 
the  figure  of  Typhon  is  placed  on  the  capitals  in  a  similar  manner  ; 
and  though  there  are  representations  of  the  beneficent  deeds  of 
nature  on  the  walls,  these  may  have  been  placed  there  by  way  of 
contrast,  to  elucidate  the  destroying  power  of  the  cruel  god.  Farther 
on  to  the  south  is  part  of  a  building,  which  no  doubt  was  a  second 
propyheon,  as  it  faces  the  one  now  standing.  Farther  still  is  a  small 
temple,  almost  unnoticed  by  travellers,  which  has  an  avenue  of 
sphinxes  leading  in  a  right  line  towards  the  great  temple.  The 
sphinxes,  several  of  which  I  cleared  from  the  surrounding  sand, 
have  a  lion's  body  and  female  head  as  large  as  life.  There  are  vast 
heaps  of  ruins  all  round  these  temples,  and  many  relics  of  antiquity 
may  be  buried  there. 

On  our  passing  by  Djebel  Cilcilly  we  did  not  stop,  as  we  had  a 
fair  wind  ;  and  I  deferred  visiting  that  place  till  our  return.  On 
the  22d  we  arrived  at  Ombos.  The  ruins  that  are  now  left  give  a 
clear  idea  of  what  it  has  been.  The  columns  of  the  portico  form 
one  of  the  richest  groups  of  architecture  I  have  seen  :  the  hiero- 
glyphics are  well  executed,  and  some  still  retain  their  colours.  On 
the  water-side  are  the  remains  of  a  smaller  temple,  part  of  which 
is  fallen  into  the  Nile.  The  stones  of  this  little  temple  are  not 
so  large  as  most  of  the  rest ;  which  proves,  that  the  Egyptians 
paid  great  attention  to  the  proportion  of  masses,  as  one  of  the 
principal  points  in  the  effect  they  were  intended  for.  The  aspect 
of  this  little  temple  is  somewhat  graceful ;  and  some  of  the  figures 
retain  part  of  their  colours,  though  exposed  to  the  open  air.     In 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  59 

this  temple  the  same  state  of  decay  was  apparent  as  in  various 
others.  The  altar  is  fallen  down,  and  may  be  seen  when  the 
water  is  low.  It  is  a  piece  of  gray  marble,  without  hieroglyphics. 
Close  to  the  water-side  are  some  landing-places,  with  covered 
staircases,  leading  up  to  the  temple ;  but  these  are  quite  filled 
up  with  sand.  We  have  reason  to  suppose  this  little  temple  to  have 
been  dedicated  to  Isis,  as  there  are  the  heads  of  that  goddess  on  the 
capitals  of  the  two  pillars,  like  those  on  the  columns  at  Tentyra. 

Before  our  arrival  at  Assouan,  we  landed  on  the  western  bank 
of  the  Nile.     Here  the  country  has  a  more  pleasing  aspect  than 
any  we  had  passed  since  the  Chained  Mountains.     There  are  palm- 
trees  in  great  abundance,  on  each  side  of  the  river,  and  some  cul- 
tivated spots  of  ground,  which  extend  from  the  Nile  to  the  moun- 
tains.     The  distant  view  of  Assouan   presents  a  very  gratifying 
aspect,  perhaps  increased  by  the  barrenness  of  the  preceding  lands. 
The  old  town  of  Assouan  stands  on  a  hill,  which  overhangs  the 
Nile.      On    its   left   is  a  forest   of  palm-trees,  which   hides    the 
modern  town ;    and   on   its  right  a   distant   view  of  the   granite 
mountain   that   forms  the   cataract.     The   island  of  Elephantine 
seems  to  interfere  with  the  barrenness  of  the  western  bank,  and 
fills  the  ground  with  picturesque  groups  of  various  trees ;  and  the 
high  rock  on  the  left,  with  the  remains  of  a  Coptic  convent  nearly 
on  the  summit  of  it,  forms  a  view,  to  which  travellers  in  Egypt  are 
not  accustomed ;  and  this  may  be  the  cause  of  their  describing  it 
with  so  much  partiality.     We  landed  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  on 
the  left  of  the  Nile,  and  went  to  see  the  ruins  of  the  convent, 
where  I  observed  many  grottoes,  which  had  served  as  chapels  for  the 
Christian  worship.     The  convent  is  formed  of  several  small  arched 
cells,  separate  from  each  other ;  and  commands  a  very  pleasing  view 
of  the  cataract,  Assouan,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  Nile.     One  of 
the  Arabian  traditions  relating  to  this  place,  I  think  worth  notice. 

i  2 


CO  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

There  is  in  this  spot,  say  the  Arabs,  great  treasure,  left  by  an 
ancient  king  of  the  country,  previous  to  his  departure  for  the 
upper  part  of  the  Nile,  on  a  war  against  the  Ethiopians.  He  was 
so  avaricious,  that  he  did  not  leave  his  family  any  thing  to  live  on ; 
and  he  was  in  close  friendship  with  a  magician,  whom  he  appointed 
to  guard  his  treasure  till  his  return.  But  no  sooner  was  he  gone, 
than  his  relations  attempted  to  take  possession  of  the  treasure : 
the  magician  resisted,  was  killed  in  the  defence  of  his  charge, 
and  changed  to  an  enormous  serpent,  which  devoured  all  his 
assailants.  The  king  is  not  yet  returned,  but  the  serpent  still 
keeps  watch  over  the  treasure ;  and  once  every  night,  at  a  par- 
ticular position  of  the  stars,  he  comes  out  of  the  caves,  with  a 
powerful  light  on  his  head,  which  blinds  all  that  attempt  to  look  at 
it.  He  is  of  an  enormous  size ;  descends  to  the  Nile,  where  he 
drinks ;  and  then  returns  to  his  cave,  to  watch  the  treasure  till  the 
king  returns. 

The  24th,  on  our  arrival  at  Assouan,  I  made  application  to  the 
Aga  for  a  boat  to  proceed  to  Nubia  ;  but,  it  being  the  last  two  days 
of  Ramadan,  none  could  be  had,  for  every  body  was  feasting.  I 
went  the  same  evening  to  the  outer  town  of  Assouan,  and  found 
it  more  extensive  than  it  appeared  from  an  external  view.  It 
stands  on  a  granite  rock,  and  its  situation  is  extremely  pleasant. 
The  higher  part  commands  a  view  over  the  cataract,  the  Elephantine, 
and  the  New  Town.  The  granite  quarries  of  the  ancient  Egyptians 
are  to  be  seen  every  where.  From  this  spot  we  have  a  full  view  of 
the  cataract,  which,  when  the  water  is  high,  scarcely  deserves  the 
name ;  for  it  consists  merely  of  several  rapids,  where  the  river  is 
divided  in  its  course  by  various  granite  islands  scattered  about,  and 
ascending  gradually  to  the  island  of  Philoe,  distant  from  Assouan 
about  three  hours' journey  by  water,  but  two  only  by  land.  When  the 
Nile  is  low,  the  cataract  has  a  different  appearance,  as  I  shall  have 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  61 

to  describe  in  my  subsequent  excursions.  Above  the  New  Town 
are  the  remains  of  a  small  Egyptian  temple,  so  buried  in  the 
rubbish  and  stones,  that  it  has  escaped  the  notice  of  many 
travellers. 

On  my  return  to  the  boat,  I  found  the  Aga  and  all  his  retinue 
seated  on  a  mat  under  a  cluster  of  palm-trees  close  to  the  water. 
The  sun  was  then  setting,  and  the  shades  of  the  western  mountains 
had  reached  across  the  Nile,  and  covered  the  town.  It  is  at  this 
time  the  people  recreate  themselves  in  various  scattered  groups, 
drinking  coffee,  smoking  their  pipes,  and  talking  of  camels,  horses, 
asses,  dhourra,  caravans,  or  boats.  The  Aga  came  on  board,  with 
as  many  of  his  followers  as  the  boat  could  hold.  We  treated  them 
indiscriminately  with  coffee,  and  a  small  portion  of  tobacco  each. 
As  a  present  to  the  Aga,  I  sent  to  his  house  about  a  pound  of  tobacco, 
some  soap  and  raw  coffee,  which  he  gladly  accepted.  His  manners 
were  pretty  free ;  and,  from  motives  of  self-interest,  he  proposed  to 
furnish  us  with  a  boat  of  his  own.  This  I  preferred,  because  I 
supposed  we  should  be  the  more  respected  by  the  people  of  Nubia, 
whither  we  were  going.  He  promised,  that  I  should  see  the  Reis 
of  the  Nubian  boat  the  same  evening,  but  he  did  not  appear. 
Showy  as  the  appearance  of  the  Aga  was,  the  inside  of  his  house  was 
not  in  conformity  with  his  dress,  which  by  no  means  corresponded 
with  that  of  many  persons  in  Cairo  employed  by  the  Turkish  govern- 
ment ;  who  dare  not  make  the  least  show  of  riches,  lest  they  should 
incur  the  suspicion  of  having  defrauded  their  master.  This  proves, 
that  the  fear  of  the  Turks  has  in  a  great  measure  lost  its  in- 
fluence here.  While  remaining  with  our  boat,  Mrs.  Belzoni  took 
an  opportunity  to  visit  his  harem,  or  seraglio,  which  consisted  of 
two  houses ;  for  the  old  Aga  had  separated  the  old  wives  from  the 
young,  though  he  still  visited  them. 

Next  morning  early  I  went  to  see  the  island  of  Elephantine, 


62  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

named  by  the  Arabs  El-Shal.  As  I  could  get  no  boat  from  the 
shore  where  we  were,  we  went  to  the  old  town,  and  crossed  in  the 
ferry-boat,  which  is  made  of  branches  of  palm-trees,  fastened 
together  with  small  cords,  and  covered  on  the  outside  with  a  mat 
pitched  all  over.  There  were  nine  of  us  in  this  boat.  Its  length 
was  ten  feet,  its  breadth  five,  and  it  might  weigh  about  fifty 
pounds.     It  cost,  when  new,  twelve  piastres,  or  six  shillings. 

On  my  arrival  at  the  island,  I  went  to  see  the  temple,  supposed 
to  be  dedicated  to  the  serpent  Knuphis ;  and,  I  may  truly  say, 
the  only  antiquity  in  it  worthy  of  mention.     It  consisted  of  one 
chamber,  with  two  doors  facing  each  other,  and  a  gallery  of  square 
pillars  all  round.     The  walls  are  adorned  with  hieroglyphics,  and 
it  has  a  staircase  in  the  front.     I  could  not  see  the  pedestal  with 
Greek  inscriptions,  mentioned  by  Mr.  Norden.     There  was  a  sub- 
terraneous staircase  leading  from  the  temple  to  the  river ;  and,  a 
little  above  it,  two  lateral  parts  of  a  gateway,  made  of  square  blocks 
of  granite,  sculptured  with  hieroglyphics.     Several  large  pieces  of 
granite  are  lying  about,  apparently  as  if  there  had  been  a  building 
of  some  magnitude.     Towards  the  centre  of  the  island  is  a  kind 
of  gallery,  built   of  several   square   pillars  of  sandstone,  full   of 
hieroglyphics.     The  rocks  of  blue  granite,  that  project  out  of  the 
earth,  serve  as  foundations.     Not  far  from  this  temple,  I  saw  a 
statue  of  granite,  I  believe  of  Osiris,  about  double  the  size  of  life. 
It  is  sitting  on  a  chair,  with  some  hieroglyphics  on  it,  and  its  arms 
crossing  the  breast :  but  it  was  so  mutilated,  that  it  did  not  appear 
worth  taking  away. 

I  crossed  the  island,  and  on  the  west  bank  found  it  to  contain 
many  trees  of  cassia  and  sycamore.  The  ground  is  well  cultivated, 
and  altogether  it  is  pleasant  enough ;  but  it  has  not  those  beauties, 
which  have  been  ascribed  to  it  by  some  travellers.  In  crossing  the 
river,  I  saw  the  rocks  of  granite,  with  the  hieroglyphics  and  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  63 

Xilometer  cut  on  them.     I  returned  to  our  bark,  and  prepared  for 
our  departure. 

August  25,  in  the  morning,  I  waited  to  see  the  Reis,  whom  the 
Aga  had  promised  to  send  to  me  the  night  before ;  but  no  one  came. 
In  the  afternoon  I  went  to  the  Aga,  who  repeated,  that  I  should  see 
the  Eeis  in  a  few  minutes.  I  waited  patiently  some  time ;  at  length 
the  Aga  himself  came  on  board.  After  the  usual  ceremonies  and 
protestations,  he  gave  me  to  understand,  that  we  must  make  an 
arrangement  about  the  money  to  be  paid  for  the  boat.  I  told  him, 
that  I  should  be  very  glad  to  see  the  Eeis  himself  on  the  business. 
He  answered,  that  if  I  agreed  with  him,  it  was  the  same  thing.  He 
added,  that  the  bark  was  ready :  but  he  demanded  so  exorbitant  a 
sum,  that  I  told  him  I  never  would  pay  it,  and  that  I  would  contrive 
to  provide  myself  with  a  Eeis,  who  knew  the  cataract,  and  would 
draw  up  our  own  bark.  He  seemed  very  much  dissatisfied  with 
my  answer,  and  said,  that  the  Reis  of  the  Shellal  could  agree  with 
no  sailors  but  their  own. 

I  went  with  my  Janizary  and  the  interpreter  to  the  upper  part 
of  the  cataract  at  Morada,  which  is  two  hours  distant.  Two 
soldiers  of  the  Aga  offered  to  accompany  us,  but  I  told  them  we 
were  not  afraid,  as  we  were  well  armed.  They  almost  insisted  on 
going,  but  I  would  not  permit  them ;  for  I  was  aware,  that  they 
wanted  only  to  see  what  we  were  doing,  and  to  interrupt  my  plans 
if  possible.  When  we  arrived,  we  found  the  boat  not  ready,  without 
a  mast,  and  the  Reis  not  there.  On  inquiry  we  met  with  a  man,  who 
undertook  to  pilot  our  bark  up  the  first  cataract,  and  as  far  as  the 
second,  and  back  again,  for  twenty  pataks,  which  are  equal  to  forty- 
five  piastres,  or  four  dollars  and  a  half.  As  we  were  returning,  the 
Reis  of  the  first  boat  came,  and  protested,  that  his  boat  would  be 
ready  early  next  morning.  I  asked  him  about  the  price,  but  he  said, 
that  this  was  left  entirely  to  the  Aga.    I  was  now  certain  of  the  Aga's 


64  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

tricks,  and  felt  pleased,  that  I  had  a  Eeis  to  pilot  our  own  bark  ;  but  I 
found  myself  much  mistaken.  While  I  was  absent  on  this  expedition, 
the  Aga  had  threatened  our  Arab  Reis,  if  he  proceeded  any  farther 
with  his  bark ;  and  he  was  glad  to  obey,  for  he  thought  I  should  leave 
him  and  his  bark  to  wait  at  Assouan  till  my  return,  and  pay  him  his 
monthly  money  during  the  whole  time.  I  had  scarcely  arrived  on 
board,  when  the  Aga  came  with  great  speed,  attended  by  his  whole 
train  of  courtiers,  in  their  rags  and  finery.  They  were  all  clad  in 
their  gala  attire,  as  this  was  their  grand  feast  of  the  Eamadan. 

I  cannot  describe  the  motley  confused  manner,  in  which  this 
great  divan  was  decorated :  one  had  a  new  tunic  of  their  brown 
cloth,  and  a  ragged  turban  :  another  had  a  fine  turban,  and  a  ragged 
tunic :  a  third,  without  turban  or  tunic,  had  a  fine  red  woollen 
shawl  round  his  body  ;  the  Aga  himself  was  uncommonly  dirty  and 
showy,  being  dressed  in  green  and  red,  and  without  a  shirt  on  his 
back.  He  came  on  board  with  all  his  suite.  I  observed  the  Reis, 
whom  I  had  brought  from  Morada,  advance  to  kiss  the  hand  of  the 
Aga ;  but  he  refused  with  an  angry  look,  saying  to  him,  "  Do  you 
dare  to  hinder  me  from  letting  a  boat." — I  then  told  the  Aga  that, 
if  my  taking  a  boat  from  any  one  but  himself  would  cause  a 
disturbance,  I  would  rather  return  back,  as  I  was  not  anxious  to  see 
a  country,  where  there  was  nothing  to  interest  me,  and  which  would 
occasion  me  such  enormous  expense.  At  this  he  became  all  at  once 
very  mild  ;  and  still  more  so  when  I  told  him,  that  I  was  determined 
to  return,  and  not  go  any  farther,  as  my  patience  was  worn  out  with 
the  number  of  obstacles  thrown  in  my  way.  The  result  was,  that  he 
offered  me  his  boat  at  the  price  a  Nubian  would  have  paid ;  and 
with  the  positive  condition,  that  it  should  be  entirely  at  my  disposal, 
to  stop  where  I  pleased,  go  where  I  pleased,  and  take  us  to  the 
second  cataract  and  back  again ;  that  it  mattered  not  how  long  I 
should  stay  in  a  place,  even  a  fortnight  if  I  liked  it ;  that  the  Eeis 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  65 

should  be  obliged  to  bring  on  board  four  other  sailors  besides 
himself,  supply  them  with  provision,  and  give  us  all  the  assistance 
and  information  in  his  power ;  and  for  all  this  accommodation  I  was 
to  pay  the  sum  of  two  hundred  piastres,  or  twenty  dollars,  which 
was  less  than  I  should  have  had  to  pay,  if  I  had  kept  the  former  boat 
from  Cairo,  as  I  incurred  no  extra  expenses.  The  first  demand  of 
the  Aga  was  fifty  thousand  paras,  equal  to  about  a  hundred  and 
twenty  dollars.  Our  luggage  was  to  be  sent  on  board  the  next 
morning  on  camels,  and  we  ourselves  set  off  in  the  evening. 

Early  in  the  morning  the  Aga  came  again  to  our  boat,  begging 
for  a  bottle  of  vinegar,  which  I  gave  him,  accompanied  with  a 
trifling  sum  of  money  for  his  trouble,  to  induce  him  to  take  care  of 
the  baggage  we  left  behind  till  our  return.  He  was  well  satisfied, 
and  promised  to  do  all  in  Ins  power  to  expedite  our  departure.  The 
boat  I  had  from  Cairo  was  to  go  back  ;  and  I  embraced  the  oppor- 
tunity to  write  to  the  consul,  informing  him  of  my  scheme  of 
ascending  the  Nile  to  the  second  cataract,  during  the  interval  re- 
quired for  the  arrival  of  the  boat  from  Thebes,  winch  was  to  convey 
the  colossal  bust. 

We  arrived  at  Morada  in  the  evening,  and  accommodated  our- 
selves in  the  boat  as  well  as  we  could  for  the  night. 

In  the  morning  of  the  27th,  long  before  the  rising  of  the  sun, 
I  stood  at  the  stern,  waiting  the  light  to  unveil  that  goodly  sight, 
the  beautiful  island  of  Philoe.  My  anxiety  to  see  the  ruins  was 
as  great  as  my  expectations ;  but,  when  I  beheld  them,  they  sur- 
passed every  thing  that  imagination  could  anticipate.  We  crossed 
the  water,  and  three  hours  elapsed,  which  appeared  to  us  as  so 
many  minutes ;  but,  as  I  intended  to  inspect  these  ruins  minutely 
on  our  return,  I  only  took  a  hasty  view  of  the  island.  I  observed 
several  blocks  of  stones,  with  hieroglyphics  on  them  in  great  perfec- 
tion, that  might  be  taken  away,  and  an  obelisk  of  granite  about  twenty- 
two  feet  in  length,  and  two  in  breadth.     I  think  this  also  might 


66  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

easily  be  removed,  as  it  lies  in  a  good  situation,  and  not  far  from  the 
water-side.  On  our  return  to  the  boat  we  set  sail,  and  in  about 
three  hours  arrived  at  Debod :  but  I  would  not  go  to  see  the 
temple  there,  as  the  wind  was  so  favourable  I  did  not  like  to  lose 
the  advantage  of  it.  This,  therefore,  I  also  deferred  to  my  coming 
back.     We  stopped  near  the  shore  above  Sardeeb  el  farras. 

28th. — We  passed  several  ruins  this  day  on  the  western  bank  of 
the  Nile,  which  I  shall  mention  hereafter,  and  about  noon  we 
stopped  at  a  village  on  the  eastern  bank,  I  believe  to  take  in  pro- 
vision for  the  crew.  The  Keis,  the  Janizary,  and  the  sailors  went 
on  shore ;  Mrs.  Belzoni,  the  interpreter,  and  myself,  remained  on 
board.  Some  time  after,  a  few  natives  came  to  our  boat,  and  seemed 
anxious  to  see  what  we  had  in  it ;  but  as  it  was  covered  with 
mats,  they  could  not  look  into  it  so  well  as  they  wished.  After 
one  of  them  had  approached,  and  examined  every  thing  with  at- 
tention, they  all  retired ;  but  a  few  minutes  had  scarcely  elapsed, 
when  we  saw  several  of  them  returning  armed  with  spears  and  shields 
of  crocodile  skins.  As  they  came  straight  towards  us,  and  were 
joined  by  some  others,  their  appearance  was  rather  alarming,  and  I 
thought  it  was  time  to  be  on  our  guard.  Though  we  were  well  armed, 
we  were  only  three  in  the  boat :  accordingly  I  took  a  pistol  in  each 
hand ;  Mrs.  Belzoni  also  seized  one,  and  the  interpreter  another. 
They  approached  us  in  their  boats,  as  if  with  intention  to  come  on 
board.  We  asked  them  what  they  wanted ;  but,  as  they  had  no 
knowledge  of  the  Arabic  language,  they  did  not  understand  us.  I 
made  signs  to  them  to  keep  off;  but  they  appeared  indifferent 
to  all  we  said  or  did.  I  then  stepped  forward,  and  with  my  right 
hand  prevented  the  first  of  them  from  entering  the  boat,  while  I 
held  the  pistols  in  my  left.  He  began  to  be  rather  rough  in 
his  manner,  but  kept  his  eyes  on  the  pistols,  while  the  others  behind 
were  urging  him  on.  At  last  I  pointed  a  pistol  at  him,  making 
signs,  that,  if  he  did  not  retire,  I  would  shoot  at  him.     On  this  lie 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  67 

drew  back,  and  remained  with  the  rest  for  some  time,  apparently  in 
consultation.  The  Reis,  the  crew,  and  the  Janizary,  now  came  on 
board.  I  told  the  Reis  what  had  happened  to  us,  and  he  talked  to 
the  men  in  their  own  language ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  untied  the 
boat,  and  we  went  from  the  shore  into  the  middle  of  the  Nile.  On 
my  expostulating  with  him  upon  the  impropriety  of  leaving  the 
boat  without  any  one  who  could  speak  the  language  of  the  country, 
he  said,  that  these  people  had  a  dispute  with  their  neighbours, 
which  was  the  reason  of  their  being  armed ;  and  that  they  only 
wanted  our  boat  to  go  to  another  island,  to  fight  with  the  inhabit- 
ants, their  adversaries.  Whatever  might  have  been  their  intention, 
whether  to  attack  us,  or  to  fight  others,  neither  would  have  been  a 
pleasant  adventure  to  us. 

Proceeding  on  our  voyage,  we  passed  TafFa,  and  entered  the 
rocks  of  granite  above  that  place.  Here  the  Nile  seems  as  if  a 
passage  had  been  cut  for  it  through  a  chain  of  high  mountains, 
which  rise  nearly  perpendicular  on  each  side  of  the  river,  and  open 
gradually  to  the  south,  into  another  country.  As  we  advanced  for- 
ward, the  view  extended  more  and  more.  On  the  right  of  the 
Nile  were  several  groups  of  palm-trees ;  on  the  left,  the  distant 
rums  of  Kalabshe ;  and  in  the  centre,  the  island  of  the  same  name, 
which  has  a  formidable  appearance  at  a  distance,  owing  to  the  ruins 
of  some  Saracenic  houses,  which  give  it  the  resemblance  of  a 
castle.     We  arrived  at  this  island  the  same  evening. 

29th.  This  day  we  arrived  at  a  village  named  El  Kalabshe. 
At  the  foot  of  a  rock,  and  facing  the  river,  stand  the  ruins  of  a 
temple,  which  certainly  must  have  been  of  later  date  than  any 
other  in  Nubia ;  for  it  appeared  to  me  to  have  been  thrown  down 
by  violence,  as  I  did  not  see  that  decay  in  its  materials,  which  I  have 
observed  in  other  edifices;  and  what  remained  standing  clearly 
proved,  that  time  had  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  destruction  of 

k  2 


68  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

it.  On  the  water-side,  before  the  temple,  is  a  landing-place,  which 
leads  straight  to  the  propylason,  as  the  gate  of  this  does  to  the 
portico.  The  propyla?on  is  in  good  preservation,  but  the  portico 
is  quite  destroyed.  There  are  two  columns,  and  one  pedestal,  on 
each  side  of  the  door  into  the  pronaos.  They  are  joined  by  a  wall 
raised  to  nearly  half  their  height,  which  proves  the  late  period  when 
this  temple  was  erected,  as  such  a  wall  is  clearly  seen  in  all  other 
temples  of  later  date ;  and  I  would  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  Ten- 
tyra,  Philoe,  Edfou,  and  this  temple,  were  erected  by  the  Ptolemies  : 
for  though  there  is  great  similitude  in  all  the  Egyptian  edifices,  yet 
there  is  a  certain  elegance  in  the  forms  of  the  more  recent,  that  di- 
stinguishes them  from  the  older  massy  and  enormous  works  ;  whence 
they  appear  to  me  to  have  been  executed  by  Egyptians  under  the 
direction  of  Greeks.  The  pronaos  and  the  cella  are  detached  from 
the  main  wall  all  round ;  the  intermediate  space  forms  a  gallery, 
so  as  to  leave  them  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  wall.  The  roof 
has  fallen  down,  except  a  small  portion  on  the  chamber  behind  the 
adytum,  in  the  wall  of  which  there  are  several  cells,  merely  large 
enough  to  contain  a  single  person  in  each.  They  must  have  been 
either  prisons  for  men,  or  places  for  the  sacred  animals.  There  are 
groups  of  figures  on  the  walls  of  the  cella,  which  retain  their  colours 
remarkably  well ;  better  indeed  than  in  any  other  temple  in  Egypt ; 
which  I  think  is  another  proof  of  its  being  of  later  date  than  many 
others.  As  we  entered  this  temple  immediately  on  our  landing, 
there  were  none  of  the  people  at  its  door :  but  when  we  were 
coming  out,  we  found  a  great  number  of  natives  assembled  at  the 
entrance  of  the  propylason ;  and  as  we  attempted  to  pass  through 
it,  they  closed  it  entirely,  and  demanded  money.  They  were  all 
armed  with  spears,  shields,  halberts,  &c.  I  told  them  that  I  would 
not  be  forced  to  part  with  money  thus ;  but  if  they  would  let  us 
pass,  I  would  do  what  I  thought  proper.     I  did  not  allow  them 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  69 

time  to  reflect,  but  immediately  walked  forward,  staring  them  in  the 
face,  and  no  one  touched  us.  When  on  the  outside,  I  gave  them  a 
bakshis,  and  told  them,  I  was  ready  to  give  them  a  farther  present, 
if  they  would  bring  me  some  antiquities.  This  they  did,  and  I 
bought  several  tombstones  with  Greek  inscriptions. 

They  took  us  to  see  a  smaller  temple,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant ; 
and  we  passed  a  great  deal  of  rubbish  and  stones,  which  indicate  the 
nuns  of  an  ancient  town,  extending  about  a  mile.  Mr.  Burckhardt 
says,  this  seems  to  have  been  the  town  of  Talmis.  The  quantity  of 
pottery  in  the  ruins  is  all  of  Greek  manufacture  ;  scarcely  any  thing 
Egyptian  is  found  among  them  :  but  if  this  be  not  sufficient  evidence 
that  the  town  was  built  by  the  Greeks,  I  can  produce  an  incontro- 
vertible proof  that  the  temple  was  a  place  of  their  worship.  It  was 
only  a  few  months  previous  to  our  arrival  there,  that  one  of  the 
natives,  raising  a  stone  among  the  ruins  of  the  temple,  saw  a  piece 
of  metal.  He  did  not  know  what  it  was ;  but  as  whatever  is  found 
in  the  ruins  the  natives  always  suspect  to  be  gold,  he  took  this 
to  be  so.  Not  being  certain  of  it,  however,  he  communicated  his 
discovery  to  others,  who  immediately  claimed  a  share  of  it,  and  of 
course  a  scuffle  ensued.  Some  time  after,  the  circumstance  came  to 
the  ears  of  Ibrahim  Bashaw,  or  his  soldiers  at  Assouan,  who  did  not 
fail  to  take  possession  of  it,  on  their  first  tour  to  collect  the  Miri  in 
that  country.  The  piece  turned  out  to  be  a  golden  lamp  of  Grecian 
form,  with  part  of  a  chain  attached  to  it.  It  was  sent  to  Cairo,  and 
I  believe  money  was  made  of  it.  This  will  prove  two  points ;  one, 
that  the  temple  was  used  by  the  Greeks ;  and  the  other,  that  it  was 
destroyed  by  violence ;  for  if  the  temple  had  fallen  gradually  by 
decay,  the  lamp  would  not  have  been  left  there,  to  be  buried  under 
the  ruins.  The  small  temple  we  saw  cut  out  of  the  rock,  I  think, 
is  considerably  older  than  this,  and  of  a  construction  more  conform- 
able with  the  others  of  that  country. 


70  RESEARCHES  AND   OPERATIONS 

On  the  south  of  the  large  temple  stands  the  village,  which  con- 
sists of  a  few  huts  built  of  earth  and  of  stones  from  the  ruins.  Near 
the  temple  I  observed  an  ancient  wall,  parallel  with  the  front  of 
it,  and  having  several  divisions,  apparently  the  habitations  of  the 
priests.  The  country  round  has  a  pleasing  aspect,  owing  to  the 
groups  of  palm-trees,  and  their  contrast  with  the  barren  rocks  every 
where  else ;  but  the  cultivated  grounds  are  very  scanty.  Behind  the 
mountain  are  valleys  with  some  acacia  trees,  of  which  the  natives 
make  charcoal :  when  the  Nile  is  at  its  height,  they  make  rafts  of 
the  same  wood;  and  the  charcoal,  put  into  sacks  fabricated  of  palm 
leaves,  or  of  a  kind  of  rush,  is  conveyed  on  them  to  Cairo  for  sale ; 
dhourra,  salt,  and  tobacco,  being  brought  back  in  return. 

We  arrived  on  the  same  day  at  Garba  Dandour,  where  are  the 
ruins  of  a  small  temple,  consisting  only  of  a  pronaos  and  two  chambers 
in  the  front.  There  is  a  small  portal,  and  a  species  of  platform, 
which  extends  from  the  propylaeon  to  the  river,  one  hundred  feet 
long  and  fifty  wide.  This  could  not  have  been  built  as  a  landing- 
place,  as  there  are  no  marks  of  stairs  any  where.  The  inner  apart- 
ments have  a  few  hieroglyphics,  and  two  columns.  The  rocks  here 
are  pretty  close  to  the  water,  and  for  some  miles  without  a  spot  of 
cultivated  land. 

We  proceeded  on  to  Garba  Merieh,  and  early  the  next  morn- 
ing landed  at  Gyrshe.  This  temple  is  partly  hewn  out  of  a  rock, 
which  rises  perpendicularly,  facing  the  east,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from 
the  river.  In  our  way  to  it  we  crossed  the  ruins  of  a  small  ancient 
town.  I  observed  the  fragments  of  four  lions,  probably  sphinxes, 
which  stood  before  the  temple ;  and  a  mutilated  statue,  apparently 
of  a  woman.  The  portico  consists  of  five  pilasters  on  each  side  of 
the  door,  cut  out  of  the  rock,  each  of  which  has  a  striking  figure 
before  it,  I  believe  representing  Hermes.  In  the  front  of  the  por- 
tico are  four  columns,  formed  of  several  blocks  of  stone :  the  pronaos 


IN  EGYPT,   NUBIA,  &c.  71 

is  hewn  out  of  the  rock,  and  has  three  square  pillars  on  each  side, 
in  a  line  from  the  door  to  the  entrance  into  the  cella.     In  front  of 
each  of  these  pillars  stands  a  colossal  figure,  about  eighteen  feet 
high,  elevated  four  feet  above  the  ground.     We  may  here  see  how 
the  sculpture  of  primitive  ages  differs  from  that  of  the  more  modern 
school.      The  figure  of  these  colossi  indicates  that  the  artist  meant 
to  represent  men  ;  but  this  is  all :  their  legs  are  mere  shapeless 
columns,  and  their  bodies  out  of  all  proportion :  their  faces  are  as 
bad  as  the  artist  could  make  them  from  the  model  of  an  Ethiopian  : 
they  have  the  usual  mitres  on  their  heads ;  and  are  adorned  on  the 
lower  part  of  their  bodies  with  curious  appendages,  not  unlike  the 
tobacco  pouches  used  among  the  Highlanders ;  though  I  hope  no 
one  will  suppose,  that  I  mean  to  suggest  a  comparison  between  the 
two  nations.     The  place  is  blackened  with  smoke,  I  presume  from 
the  fires  made  by  the  natives.      Behind  the  pillars   are   several 
niches  cut  in  the  rock,  but  all  mutilated.     In  the  cella  are  two 
small  chambers,  one  on  each  side,  cut  also  in  the  rock ;  and  at  the 
end  two  lateral  doors  leading  into  smaller  apartments,  independent 
of  the  adytum.     In  the  wall  at  the  end  of  this  are  four  figures 
seated,  as  large  as  life,  and  an  altar  before  them,  as  I  have  seen  in 
other  places,  without  hieroglyphics  or  any  inscription.     The  floor  is 
in  many  places  dug  up,  I  suppose  by  the  Barabra  or  other  nations, 
in  search  of  treasure.     The  natives  of  this  place  are  rather  rough 
in  their  manners,  but  were  easily  satisfied  with  a  piece  of  soap,  a 
pipe  of  tobacco,  and  a  few  paras.     Here  we  bought  some  gryadan, 
a  grain  of  the  size  of  a  small  shot,  which  the  Nubians  use  as  coffee. 
It  is  a  good  substitute  where  no  coffee  is  to  be  had,  and  is  much 
cheaper.     A  little  above  this  place  is  a  dangerous  passage  of  the 
Nile,  a  chain  of  rocks  running  across  the  river,  and  making  it  very 
alarming,  when  the  waters  are  low ;  but  as  they  were  now  high,  we 
passed  without  danger.     The  country  here  still  continues  quite 
barren. 


72  RESEARCHES   AND   OPERATIONS 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day  we  arrived  at  Dakke,  (see  plate 
2 1 ).  The  mountains  at  this  place  stretch  far  from  the  Nile,  and  leave 
a  spacious  plain,  which  no  doubt  has  been  formerly  cultivated,  but  is 
now  covered  with  sand.  A  stratum  of  vegetable  mould  is  visible, 
three  feet  under  the  sand  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  The  temple 
stands  about  a  hundred  yards  from  the  river,  and  has  a  very  elegant 
appearance.  There  are  no  hieroglyphics  on  the  outside  wall,  but 
the  interior  is  adorned  with  beautiful  figures  in  basso  relievo  :  it  has 
a  pronaos,  an  adytum,  and  a  cella.  On  the  west  side  of  the  adytum 
is  a  small  staircase  which  leads  to  the  top  of  the  temple ;  and  on 
the  east  a  small  chamber,  with  figures  uncommonly  well  executed : 
the  walls  of  the  cella  are  well  covered  with  religious  processions. 
In  the  lower  part  I  observed  several  figures,  not  unlike  herma- 
phrodites. From  the  cella  a  door  in  a  fine  with  the  first  entrance 
leads  into  an  area,  formed  by  a  wall  which  surrounds  the  edifice, 
except  in  front.  On  the  east  side  of  the  exterior  wall  is  a  door, 
which  leads  to  a  passage  across  the  temple,  that  separates  the  pro- 
naos from  the  adytum.  The  temple  faces  the  north,  and  at  the 
distance  of  forty-eight  feet  is  a  propylaeon,  with  the  gateway  facing 
the  entrance  to  the  pronaos.  The  isolated  situation  of  this  edifice 
renders  it  still  more  gracefid  to  the  eyes  of  the  traveller,  as  it  is 
entirely  free  from  any  other  building  near  it.  On  the  propylaeon 
are  several  Egyptian,  Coptic,  and  Greek  inscriptions,  one  of  which 
is  as  follows  : 

AOMI2IOCAPPIANOC 

CTPATlCIielPHjITOTPAN, 

OHAIKOKAIAOMITI 

OTIOCMOTCTNT^nANrA 

OIKftdlPOCsKTNHOA 

OsONMerlCTONsPMH 

KAAPIANOTK  AICAPOC 

TOTKTPIOTTTBIIH 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  73 

We  continued  our  voyage,  and  arrived  in  the  afternoon  at 
Meharraka,  or  Offelina,  where  stand  the  ruins  of  a  small  Egyptian 
temple,  but  evidently  built  by  the  Greeks.  It  consists  of  only  a 
single  portico,  forty-two  feet  long  and  twenty-five  wide,  with  a  row 
of  columns  round  the  two  sides  and  the  back.  On  the  right  is  a 
winding  staircase,  the  only  one  I  recollect  having  seen  in  any  temple 
in  Egypt  or  Nubia.  The  columns  are  fourteen  in  all.  It  has  served 
as  a  christian  chapel,  as  is  shown  by  many  figures  of  the  apostles 
which  remain  perfect  on  the  walls  ;  but  on  close  examination  I 
observed  clearly  the  Egyptian  figures  under  the  saints.  The  main 
entrance  is  closed  by  an  altar,  no  doubt  built  by  the  Copts  or  Greeks 
after  the  christian  epoch.  The  wall  facing  the  south  is  fallen  down, 
but  the  stones  still  adhere  to  each  other.  On  one  of  them  I  saw  the 
following  inscription. 

NHLL 

VICIHROTNl    cTTc 
TI0)TOTKAIT0JNe/-CeBeC 
TAT(DNFONeCJGNKAIF-AIOY 

T    W  IKTOTAAeAoCTKN 

AOITF^NAAGAOII 

A  few  paces  to  the  east  stands  part  of  another  temple,  on 
which  is  the  figure  of  Isis,  dressed  in  the  Greek  costume,  sitting 
under  a  tree.  Before  her  stands  the  figure  of  Orus,  in  the  act  of 
offering  to  his  mother.  In  a  niche  further  to  the  east  is  the  figure 
of  the  Egyptian  Isis  ;  and  in  another  small  niche  above  are  a  Greek 
priest  and  priestess,  and  the  Egyptian  Priapus.  A  greater  proof 
than  this  I  never  saw  of  the  religion  of  the  Egyptian  and  Greek 
nations  united  (see  Plate  29).  On  the  south  of  this  temple  is  a 
large  pedestal  of  granite,  formed  by  three  steps,  which  appears  to 
have  been  erected  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  some  large  statue 
or  obelisk. 


74  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

We  proceeded  with  a  fair  wind  to  Wowobat ;  and  the  next  day, 
the  31st  of  August,  brought  us  to  Seboua.  On  our  landing,  the  first 
thing  that  attracted  my  notice  was  a  propylaeon,  at  a  small  distance 
from  the  Nile ;  in  the  middle  of  which  interval  are  two  standing  figures 
eleven  feet  high.  These  form  the  entrance  to  an  avenue  of  sphinxes 
with  lions'  bodies  and  men's  heads,  that  leads  to  the  propylaeon, 
which  is  much  decayed.  There  is  the  usual  entrance  or  gateway 
into  the  pronaos,  at  each  side  of  which  are  five  columns,  with  figures 
in  the  front  of  each,  not  unlike  those  in  the  pronaos  at  Medinet 
Aaboo.  The  wind  has  accumulated  a  great  quantity  of  sand,  which 
has  not  only  covered  the  court,  but  closed  the  entrance  to  the 
adytum  and  the  cella.  From  what  I  could  discover,  after  a  close 
examination  from  the  top  part  of  this  temple,  it  deserved  to  be 
opened ;  but  as  my  principal  views  were  bent  on  other  objects,  which 
I  thought  of  greater  importance,  we  continued  our  voyage  towards 
Deir.  The  country  here  is  very  barren,  and  few  habitations  are  to 
be  seen  any  where. 

Next  day  we  arrived  at  Korosko.  A  few  miles  above  this  place 
the  Nile  turns  towards  the  north-west,  and  as  the  wind  blew  mostly 
from  that  quarter,  we  had  it  right  against  us,  besides  a  very  strong 
current,  for  the  Nile  was  nearly  at  its  height.  Though  the  day  was 
very  hot,  the  night  was  exceedingly  cold,  considering  the  climate  we 
were  in.  At  this  place  we  found  it  very  difficult  to  advance,  for  the 
wind  still  continued  strong  ahead,  and  the  sailors  could  not  track 
the  boat  by  ropes  on  the  shore,  as  the  bank  was  covered  with  thorns 
and  acacia-trees,  so  that  it  took  us  two  days  to  reach  the  territory  of 
Deir,  where  the  river  resumes  its  course  again  to  the  south.  From 
the  trees  I  have  mentioned  we  gathered  a  little  gum-arabic ;  and 
the  Reis  of  the  boat  caught  some  cameleons,  which  we  intended  to 
keep  alive.  They  feed  on  flies  and  boiled  rice,  and  drink  water ; 
but  they  do  not  agree  together  in  confinement,  for  they  bit  off  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  75 

tails  and  legs  of  each  other.  If  put  into  the  water,  they  swell  like 
bladders,  and  swim  faster  than  they  can  crawl.  They  generally  live 
on  palm-trees,  and  descend  in  the  evening  to  drink.  We  caught 
about  thirty,  but  they  all  gradually  died.  I  saw  a  female  full  of 
eggs,  of  the  size  of  large  peas,  eighteen  in  number,  all  attached  to 
the  matrix. 

The  5th  of  September  brought  us  to  Deir,  the  great  capital  of 

Lower  Nubia.    The  town  consists  of  several  groups  of  houses,  built  of 

earth  intermixed  with  stones.    They  are  in  general  not  higher  than 

eight  or  ten  feet,  a  few  excepted,  which  are  the  habitations  of 

the  Cacheffs  of  the  country.     The  town  is  close  to  the  water-side. 

At  the  foot  of  the  sloping  and  rocky  hill  is  a  small  temple ;  but  I 

could  not  venture  to  go  to  see  it,  as  I  observed  we  were  closely 

watched.     I  went  immediately  to  Hassan  Cacheff,  who  received  me 

with  an  air  of  suspicion,  and  wanted  to  know  our  business.     I  told 

him,  that  we  ascended  the  Nile  merely  to  seek  for  antiquities,  and 

that  we  wished  to  proceed  as  far  as  the  Shellal,  or  second  cataract. 

This  he  said  was  impossible,  for  the  people  in  the  upper  country 

were  at  war  with  each  other.     He  then  ordered  his  mat  to  be 

brought  to  him,  seated  himself  close  before  the  door  of  his  house, 

and  invited  me  to  sit  also.    The  first  question  he  put  to  me  was,  if  I 

had  any  coffee.     I  replied  we  had  a  little  on  board  for  our  own  use, 

but  that  he  was  welcome  to  half  of  it.    He  next  asked  for  soap,  and 

I  made  the  same  reply.     Then  he  inquired  if  we  had  any  tobacco. 

I  told  him  we  had  but  a  few  pipes,  and  we  would  smoke  it  together ; 

with  which  he  was  exceedingly  pleased.     The  next  question  was,  if 

I  had  any  powder.      To  which  I  answered,  that  I  had  very  little, 

and  could  not  spare  any.     At  this  he  laughed,  and  put  his  hand  on 

my  shoulder,  saying,    "  You  are  English,  and  can  make  powder 

wherever  you  go."     I  was  glad  that  he  thought  so,  and  deemed  it 

prudent  to  leave  him  with  this  impression ;  but  I  told  him  1  did 


76  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

not  come  there  either  to  make  powder  or  to  waste  any.  By  this 
time  my  Janizary  had  brought  me  some  tobacco  from  on  board  ;  so 
we  began  to  smoke ;  and  coffee  of  gryadan  was  served  ;  but,  not- 
withstanding this,  he  said  my  sailors  would  not  advance  any  farther, 
for  they  were  afraid  to  go  into  the  upper  country.  I  told  him,  that 
if  he  gave  me  a  letter  to  his  brother  Osseyn,  we  should  be  out  of 
any  danger.  I  then  showed  him  the  letter  of  Callil  Bey  at  Esne 
to  his  brother  :  on  which  he  observed,  that  this  letter  did  not 
mention  where  I  was  going.  Perceiving  that  the  affair  was  likely 
to  proceed  very  dilatorily,  I  frankly  told  him,  if  he  meant  to  let  me 
pursue  my  journey,  I  would  make  him  a  very  handsome  present  of  a 
fine  looking-glass,  some  soap,  and  some  coffee ;  on  the  contrary,  if  I 
were  to  return,  he  would  lose  all,  and  incur  the  displeasure  of  the 
Bey  of  Esne  besides.  His  reply  was,  "  We  will  talk  of  this  to- 
morrow."   So  I  returned  to  our  boat  without  any  positive  answer. 

Early  in  the  morning  I  went  to  him  again.  When  he  asked 
me  for  the  looking-glass,  I  replied,  that  it  was  ready,  if  he  gave  me 
the  letter  to  his  brother  at  Farras,  which  at  last  he  did.  Previous 
to  our  departure  from  Cairo,  I  took  occasion  to  obtain  all  the 
information  possible  concerning  the  country  of  Nubia,  from  the 
natives  who  came  to  that  city  with  dates  and  charcoal ;  and  from 
them  I  learned,  that  a  looking-glass  and  a  few  Venetian  beads  would 
be  equal  there  to  silver  plate  and  pearls.  Accordingly  we  took  a 
good  stock  with  us,  though  I  was  not  certain  of  entering  Nubia. 
The  looking-glass  I  gave  the  Cacheff  was  twelve  inches  long  and 
ten  broad,  and  was  the  largest  the  people  there  had  ever  seen. 
It  made  a  great  impression  on  them.  Many,  who  never  came 
down  as  far  as  Assouan,  had  not  seen  a  looking-glass  before,  and  it 
astonished  them  greatly.  The  Cacheff  was  never  tired  of  admiring 
his  bear-like  face  ;  and  all  his  attendants  behind  him  strove  to  get 
a  peep  at  their  own  chocolate  beauty,  laughing,  and  much  pleased 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  77 

with  it.  The  Cacheff  gave  it,  not  without  Fear,  to  one  of  them,  with 
a  strict  charge  to  be  careful  not  to  break  it. — On  my  way  to  our 
boat  I  met  a  very  old  man,  who  knew  Baram  Cacheff,  the  tyrant  of 
Deir  in  the  time  of  Norden.  He  said,  that  Baram  died  in  his 
bed,  but  all  his  descendants  were  slain  by  the  Mamelukes  ;  and  that 
he  was  a  boy  when  Baram  died. 

We  left  Deir  about  noon  ;  and  a  few  hours  brouglrt  us  to  Hafee, 
where  the  river  flows  from  the  south-west.  The  country  all  the 
way  from  Deir  to  this  place  is  tolerably  productive  of  dhourra  and 
dates,  and  furnishes  also  a  great  deal  of  cotton,  which  is  gathered, 
and  sent  to  Cairo.  The  sugar-cane  is  not  cultivated  here,  which  I 
know  not  whether  to  attribute  to  the  laziness  of  the  natives,  or  to 
the  country  being  too  hot  for  that  plant ;  but  I  am  inclined  to  think 
the  former  is  the  real  cause. 

Proceeding  onward,  we  came  to  Ibrim.  This  place  stands  on  a 
high  rock,  nearly  perpendicular,  and  forming  the  bank  of  the  Nile. 
The  town  is  surrounded  by  a  wall  of  sun-baked  bricks.  The  houses 
are  all  in  a  ruined  state,  having  been  uninhabited  ever  since  the 
Mamelukes  made  it  their  abode  on  their  retreat  to  Danffola.  Close 
to  the  water-side  are  several  chambers,  not  unlike  sepulchres,  hewn 
out  of  the  rock ;  some  of  which  have  been  painted,  apparently  by 
the  Greeks,  and  retain  their  colour  remarkably  well.  The  cul- 
tivated land  on  the  south  side  of  the  river  in  some  parts  extends  not 
more  than  two  hundred  yards  in  width  ;  but  it  is  thickly  set  with 
palm-trees,  producing  dates,  which  are  esteemed  the  best  in  Egypt, 
and  in  which  the  Nubians  carry  on  a  considerable  trade.  The 
northern  bank  is  quite  barren,  except  a  few  date  and  acacia  trees. 

In  my  voyage  from  Ibrim  to  the  second  cataract  I  must  entreat 
the  reader's  indulgence.  I  noted  down  the  names  of  all  the  vil- 
lages we  passed,  as  they  were  given  to  me ;  and  thus  I  lay  them 
before  the  public,  as  I  am  not  aware,  that  they  have  been  yet  de- 


78  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

scribed  by  any  traveller.  Messrs.  Legh  and  Smelt,  who  were  the  first 
to  penetrate  to  any  extent  up  this  country  by  water,  did  not  proceed 
beyond  Ibrira  ;  and  Norden  has  given  a  correct  account  of  all  the 
villages  and  districts  he  passed  only  as  far  as  Deir.  About  a  league 
above  Ibrim  we  came  to  the  village  of  Vady  Shubak  on  the  east, 
and  Mosmos  on  the  west.  The  country  on  the  east  continued  to 
be  covered  with  dates  as  far  as  Bostan,  but  on  the  west  it  is  quite  a 
desert.  From  Toske  we  saw  several  rocks  in  the  plain  toward  the 
east,  which  resembled  so  many  pyramids  of  various  sizes ;  and  I 
should  not  wonder  if  these  suggested  to  the  Egyptians  the  first 
idea  of  this  form.  Some  of  them  appear  to  be  about  two  hundred 
feet  high. 

We  went  on  shore  at  Ermyne,  on  the  west  of  the  river.  The 
banks  here  are  covered  with  the  thorny  acacia,  tamarisks,  and  palm- 
trees,  and  some  cultivated  ground.  Next  day  we  saw  the  island  of 
Hogos.  On  tins  island  are  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  tower,  which 
must  have  commanded  the  whole  Nile,  as  the  river  is  not  very 
narrow  here,  and  the  island  is  exactly  in  the  centre  of  it.  The 
blocks  of  stone  are  not  so  large  as  those  in  the  temples  in  Egypt, 
but  they  are  well  connected  together.  After  this  we  reached  For- 
mundy,  a  district  extending  on  both  sides  of  the  Nile  as  far  as 
Saregg.  At  Formundy  the  river  turns  to  the  north-east,  for  two 
leagues  only ;  but  we  had  as  much  trouble  to  pass  this  place  as  we 
had  at  Korosko,  the  current  and  wind  being  both  against  us. 

I  cannot  omit  mentioning  the  hard  labour  the  barbarian  boat- 
men had  on  tins  occasion.  They  were  continually  in  the  water ;  and, 
though  good  swimmers,  they  had  great  trouble  in  wading  against 
the  currant  to  pull  the  rope  from  under  the  trees,  which  cover  the 
banks  of  the  Nile  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  is  impossible  to  track  it 
along  on  the  shore.  They  are  a  people  living  very  hardly,  and  eat 
any  thing  in  the  world.     They  chew  the  rock  salt,  or  natron,  mixed 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  79 

with  tobacco,  putting  the  mixture  between  the  front  teeth  and  the 
lower  lip.  The  natron  is  found  in  several  parts  of  Egypt,  and  is 
one  of  their  articles  of  trade.  The  Laplanders  are  said  to  be  very 
filthy  in  their  food,  and  I  am  sure  these  people  are  not  unlike  them 
in  that  respect.  When  we  killed  a  sheep,  I  had  sometimes  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  the  entrails  opened,  pieces  of  which,  dipped  once 
into  the  water,  were  eaten  by  them  raw.  The  head  and  feet,  with  the 
skin,  wool,  hoofs,  and  all,  were  put  into  a  pot,  which  is  never  washed, 
to  be  half-boiled,  when  they  drank  the  broth,  and  devoured  the  rest. 

We  fastened  our  bark  to  the  shore  in  the  district  of  Formundy, 
and  I  mounted  a  high  rock,  to  have  a  view  of  the  country  round. 
I  found,  on  the  west  of  the  Nile,  an  extensive  plain,  with  low, 
isolated  hills,  in  the  form  of  sugar-loaves,  covered  with  black,  smooth 
stones,  something  approaching  to  basalt.  Some  of  the  stones  are 
above  five  feet  in  length.  The  country  is  every  where  barren ; 
there  are  only  a  few  date-trees  near  the  water. 

Next  morning  we  reached  Faras,  which  we  left  on  the  east,  and 
went  to  see  the  temples  of  Ybsambul  on  the  west.  As  we  crossed 
the  Nile  exactly  opposite  these  temples,  we  had  an  opportunity  of 
examining  and  having  full  views  of  them  at  a  distance  (see  Plate  42). 
In  the  front  of  the  minor  temple  are  six  colossal  figures,  which  make 
a  better  appearance  at  a  distance  than  when  near  them.  They  are 
thirty  feet  high,  and  are  hewn  out  of  the  rock ;  as  is  also  the  large 
temple,  which  has  one  figure  of  an  enormous  size,  with  the  head 
and  shoulders  only  projecting  out  of  the  sand  ;  and  notwithstanding 
the  great  distance,  I  could  perceive,  that  it  was  beautifully  executed. 
On  the  upper  part  or  frieze  of  the  temple  was  a  line  of  hieroglyphics, 
which  covered  the  whole  front ;  and  above  this,  a  range  of  figures  in 
a  sitting  posture,  as  large  again  as  life.  The  sand  from  the  north  side, 
accumulated  by  the  wind  on  the  rock  above  the  temple,  and  which 
had  gradually  descended  towards  its  front,  choked  the  entrance,  and 


80  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

buried  two-thirds  of  it.  On  my  approaching  this  temple,  the  hope  I 
had  formed  of  opening  its  entrance  vanished  at  once ;  for  the  amazing 
accumulation  of  sand  was  such,  that  it  appeared  an  impossibility 
ever  to  reach  the  door.  We  ascended  a  hill  of  sand  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  temple,  and  there  found  the  head  of  a  hawk  projecting 
out  of  the  sand  only  to  its  neck.  From  the  situation  of  this  figure, 
I  concluded  it  to  be  over  the  door.  From  the  size  of  the  head,  the 
figure  must  have  been  more  than  twenty  feet  high  ;  below  the  figure 
there  is  generally  a  vacant  space ;  so  that,  with  the  cornice  over  the 
door  and  the  frieze,  I  calculated,  that  the  doorway  could  not  be  less 
than  thirty-five  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  sand  ;  and  this  distance 
would  have  accorded  in  proportion  with  the  front  of  the  temple, 
which  is  one  hundred  and  seventeen  feet  wide.  The  sand  ran 
down  in  a  slope  from  one  side  to  the  other,  and  to  attempt  to  make 
an  aperture  straight  through  it  to  the  door  would  have  been  like 
making  a  hole  in  the  water.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  remove 
the  sand  in  such  a  direction,  that  it  might  fall  off  from  the  front  of 
the  door :  but  in  doing  this  the  sand  from  above  would  continue  to 
fall  on  the  place  whence  that  below  was  removed,  and  render  it  an 
endless  task.  Besides,  the  natives  were  wild  people,  totally  unac- 
customed to  such  labour,  and  knew  nothing  of  working  for  money : 
indeed  they  were  ignorant  of  money  altogether.  All  these  difficulties 
seemed  such  insurmountable  obstacles,  that  they  almost  deterred  me 
from  the  thought  of  proceeding :  yet  perseverance,  stimulated  by 
hope,  suggested  to  me  such  means,  that  at  last,  after  much  exertion 
and  two  voyages  thither,  I  had  the  satisfaction  of  entering  the  great 
Temple  of  Ybsambul. 

Having  taken  a  proper  measurement  of  the  front  of  the  temple, 
and  made  a  calculation,  I  found,  that,  if  I  could  persuade  the  people 
to  work  with  persevering  steadiness,  I  might  succeed  in  the  under- 
taking.   I  did  not  examine  the  small  temple  that  night,  as  I  wished 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  81 

early  to  reach  the  village  of  Ybsambul,  and  to  see  Osseyn  Cacheff. 
The  rocks  out  of  which  the  temple  is  hewn  continue  for  about  two 
hundred  yards  southward,  and  then  open  into  a  flat  country,  where 
are  some  good  spots  of  cultivated  land  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile, 
abounding  with  palm-trees.  We  embarked,  and  soon  landed  at  the 
village.  I  perceived  a  group  of  people  assembled  under  a  grove  of 
trees,  who,  when  I  came  near  them,  seemed  to  be  somewhat  sur- 
prised at  the  sudden  arrival  of  a  stranger.  Having  desired  to  see 
Osseyn  Cacheff,  for  some  time  I  received  no  answer ;  but  at  last  was 
told,  that  he  who  sat  there  was  Daoud  Cacheff,  his  son.  I  saw  a  man 
about  fifty  years  of  age,  clad  in  a  light  blue  gown,  with  a  white  rag 
on  his  head  as  a  turban,  seated  on  a  ragged  mat,  on  the  ground,  a 
long  sword  and  a  gun  by  his  side,  with  about  twenty  men  surrounding 
him,  who  were  well  armed  with  swords,  spears,  and  shields.  A younger 
brother,  of  much  inferior  rank  and  dignity,  was  among  them,  who 
behaved  very  roughly  towards  me.  Some  had  garments,  others  had 
none,  and  they  all  together  formed  a  ragged  assembly,  by  no  means  of 
most  encouraging  aspect.  These  people  have  no  other  employment, 
than  to  gather  the  imposts  of  their  master  from  the  poorer  sort  of 
natives.  The  Cacheff  himself  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  go  from  one 
place  to  another  to  receive  his  revenue ;  and  in  every  place  to  which 
he  goes  he  has  a  house  and  a  wife.  He  is  absolute  master  to  do 
what  he  pleases  :  there  is  no  law  to  restrain  him ;  and  the  life  of  a 
man  here  is  not  considered  of  so  much  worth  as  that  of  a  cat  among 
us.  If  he  have  not  what  he  wants,  he  takes  it  wherever  he  can  find 
it :  if  refused,  he  uses  force  ;  if  resisted,  the  opponent  is  murdered : 
and  thus  the  Cacheff  lives. 

They  are  not  easily  led  by  promises,  for  there  is  so  little  faith 
among  them,  that  what  is  not  obtained  is  considered  as  imaginary. 
It  was  with  such  a  race  of  people  I  had  to  deal ;  and  from  whom  I  had 
to  obtain  permission  to  penetrate  into  a  place,  and  to  carry  on  opera- 

M 


82  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

lions,  the  thought  of  which  appeared  to  them  like  that  of  a  mad- 
man. To  persuade  them  to  undertake  work  for  money  was  still 
worse,  as  their  only  mode  of  buying  and  selling  is  by  bartering 
dhourra  for  dates,  or  dates  for  salt.  It  will  be  recollected  that 
Messrs.  Legh  and  Smelt  did  not  think  proper  to  go  any  higher  than 
Ibrim,  as  it  was  useless  to  penetrate  into  a  country,  where  money 
was  of  little  or  no  use,  wliich  in  fact  was  the  case  at  that  time  at 
Deir,  and  much  more  so  above  that  place.  Daoud  Cacheff  demanded 
of  me  what  business  brought  me  there.  I  told  him  I  had  a  letter 
from  the  Cacheff,  his  uncle,  directed  to  Osseyn  Cacheff,  his  father ; 
and  that  I  came  into  the  country  in  search  of  ancient  stones.  He 
laughed,  and  said  that  a  few  months  before  he  had  seen  another  man, 
who  came  from  Cairo  in  search  of  treasure,  and  took  away  a  great 
deal  of  gold  in  his  boat ;  and  that  I  came  for  the  same  purpose,  not 
to  take  stones :  what  had  I  to  do  with  stones,  if  it  were  not  that  I 
was  able  to  procure  gold  from  them  ?  I  answered,  the  stones  I 
wished  to  take  away  were  broken  pieces  belonging  to  the  old 
Pharaoh  people ;  and  that  by  these  pieces  we  were  in  hopes  of 
learning,  whether  our  ancestors  came  from  that  country ;  which 
was  the  reason  of  my  coming  in  search  of  ancient  stones.  I  thought 
this  might  serve  as  a  good  explanation  of  the  motives  by  which  I 
was  induced  to  open  the  temple.  He  then  asked  where  I  meant 
to  go  in  search  of  these  stones.  I  told  him  the  place  in  the 
rock  had  a  door,  and  by  removing  the  sand  we  could  enter,  and 
perhaps  should  find  many  stones  there.  Accordingly  I  proposed  to 
have  the  place  opened ;  and  on  a  promise,  that,  if  I  succeeded,  he 
should  receive  a  bakshis,  he  consented  on  his  own  part ;  but  still 
his  father  remained  to  be  persuaded,  and  then  people  to  be  procured, 
who  would  work  at  such  a  place  without  fearing  harm  from  the 
devil.  I  told  him,  that  those  who  worked  would  gain  money. 
"  What  money  do  you  mean  ? "   said  he,  "  money  from  Mahomet 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &&  83 

Ali,  Bashaw  of  Cairo  ?  what  can  we  do  with  it  ?  we  cannot  buy 
any  thing  here,  or  at  Dongola."  I  said,  the  money  may  be 
sent  to  Assouan,  and  there  dhourra  could  be  purchased  with  it. 
"  But,"  replied  Daoud,  "  if  we  do  so,  they  keep  the  money,  and 
send  us  no  dhourra."  I  could  scarcely  believe,  that  they  had  so 
little  faith,  or  notion  of  commerce :  but  the  fact  is,  that  what  pro- 
duce they  carry  to  Cairo,  Siout,  or  Esne,  they  exchange  for  other 
articles,  which  they  send  to  the  southern  country  of  Nubia,  and 
never  receive  any  money  for  it. 

I  produced  a  piastre,  and  showed  it  to  some  of  the  people,  who 
by  this  time  had  increased  in  number  all  round,  seated  themselves 
in  form  of  a  crescent  before  us,  and  were  staring  me  in  the  face, 
observing  all  my  motions.  I  went  on  endeavouring  to  persuade 
them  of  the  advantages  they  would  derive  from  such  money,  if  they 
introduced  it  into  their  country.  The  Cacheff,  however,  seemed 
convinced,  that  it  would  do  no  good  ;  for  then,  he  observed,  the 
people  who  were  not  contented  to  stay  in  Nubia  could  sell  their 
cows  and  goats,  and  go  and  live  in  Egypt.  I  believe  he  was  right  in 
this  point ;  but  it  was  certainly  impolitic  in  him  to  make  such  a 
remark  before  his  subjects.  One  of  them  took  the  piastre  from  my 
hands,  and,  after  looking  at  it  for  some  time,  asked  me  who  would 
give  any  thing  for  that  small  piece  of  metal.  "  Any  one,"  I  answered, 
"  will  give  you  a  measure  of  dhourra  for  it,  quite  enough  for  a  man 
to  eat  in  three  days."  "  That  may  be  so  in  your  country,"  replied 
he ;  "  but  here  I  am  sure  no  one  will  give  six  grains  of  dhourra  for 
so  small  a  bit  of  iron."  I  told  him,  if  he  went  on  board  our  boat, 
and  presented  it  to  any  one  there,  he  would  get  for  it  dhourra 
enough  to  suffice  him  for  the  time  I  had  mentioned.  Off  he  ran 
like  a  deer,  and  in  a  few  minutes  returned  with  the  dhourra  folded 
in  a  rag  fastened  to  his  waist. 

I  had  previously  instructed  the  Beis  of  our  boat  what  he  had 

m  2 


84  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

to  do,  if  any  of  the  natives    should  come  with  money  to  fetch 
dhourra ;  and  accordingly  he  gave  him  the  measure  so  ordered  for 
a  piastre.      This  experiment  had  a  good  effect,  not  only  on  the  minds 
of  the  people,  but  also  on  that  of  the  Cacheff;  though,  barbarian- 
like, he  was  not  yet  thoroughly  satisfied.     He  observed,  that  a  man 
who  laboured  a  whole  day  ought  to  have  four  times  that  measure  for 
his  share ;  therefore,  if  I  would  give  them  four  piastres  a  day  each,  he 
would  persuade  the  people  to  work.     At  length,  with  much  ado,  I 
made  a  bargain  for  two  piastres  a  man.     Daoud  told  me,  that  a 
man  who  came  there  a  few  months  before  had  left  in  his  hands 
three  hundred  piastres,  to  open  that  place  for  him  ;  but  the  people 
would  not  undertake  the  business,  as  no  one  cared  for  such  small 
pieces  of  metal.     On  the  traveller's  return  from  Wady  Haifa,  he 
expected  to  have  found  the  place  open ;   but  Daoud  gave  him  his 
pieces  of  metal  back  again,  as  he  did  not  know  what  to  do  with 
them.     I  found  afterwards,  that  the  person  who  had  been  there 
was  Mr.  D.,  the  ex-consul  of  France  in  Egypt ;  and  that  in  fact  he 
received  his  money  back,  as  the  people  would  not  work  for  it. 

The  next  and  greatest  difficulty  was  to  persuade  Osseyn  CachefF 
to  let  us  proceed ;  for  without  his  consent  nothing  could  be  done. 
He  lived  at  Eshke,  a  day  and  half  up  the  Nile.  That  night  we 
slept  at  Ybsambul,  as  I  wished  to  strengthen  the  disposition  of 
the  Cacheff  in  my  favour.  Accordingly  I  sent  him  a  measure  of 
rice,  about  four  pounds  weight,  three  ounces  of  coffee,  half  a  pound 
of  sugar,  and  a  few  leaves  of  a  particular  sort  of  tobacco,  called 
Tunny  Djebel,  from  Syria,  which  the  Barabra  chew,  and  consider 
it  a  great  luxury. 

In  the  evening  we  received  on  board  some  sour  milk,  and  warm 
thin  cake  of  dhourra  bread.  This  is  baked  on  a  flat  stone,  eighteen 
inches  square,  raised  from  the  ground  by  a  small  stone  at  each 
corner,  so  as  to  admit  a  fire  under  it ;  and  when  it  is  at  a  certain 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  85 

degree  of  heat,  the  paste  is  laid  on  it,  which  being  quite  soft,  or 
nearly  liquid,  spreads  in  a  sheet  all  over  the  stone,  and  in  one 
minute  is  firm  enough  to  be  turned,  which  is  done  with  great 
dexterity  without  breaking  it.  As  soon  as  one  is  baked,  another 
is  placed  on  the  stone  ;  and  they  are  pretty  good  if  eaten  while  hot, 
but  when  cold  they  are  quite  sour  and  disagreeable.  They  are 
generally  eaten  with  sour  milk ;  but  if  allowed  to  get  cold  they  are 
broken  to  pieces,  put  into  a  bowl,  and  boiled  lentils  poured  on  them. 
This  forms  the  general  food  of  the  country. 

In  the  morning  of  the  11th,  we  passed  near  the  ruined  town  of 
Adda,  in  a  pleasant  situation,  commanding  a  view  of  the  Nile,  and  a 
considerable  part  of  the  country.  It  contains  a  great  number  of 
houses,  built  like  those  at  Ibrim  ;  but  the  land  on  the  east  side  is 
covered  with  sand.  The  western  bank  of  the  Nile  is  fertile,  abound- 
ing with  trees  of  various  sorts,  acacias,  tamarisks,  and  many  thorny 
groups.  Farther  on  we  came  to  the  district  of  Kosko,  on  both 
sides  of  the  Nile ;  then  to  Enhana,  or  Oddenham,  Garba,  Zarras, 
and,  a  little  farther,  to  the  island  of  the  same  name ;  beyond  which 
was  Antero  on  the  south,  and  above  it  on  the  same  side  Diberet, 
and  the  island  so  called.  In  almost  all  these  parts  we  observed 
the  left  side  of  the  Nile  quite  barren,  except  at  Zarras.  On  the 
right  it  is  pretty  full  of  palm-trees,  and  some  dhourra  is  seen.  The 
soil  of  tire  islands,  however,  seems  to  be  the  most  fertile. 

We  next  reached  Eshke,  the  residence  of  the  Cacheff,  and 
certainly  the  best  spot  of  land  above  Ibrim  and  Assouan.  The  trees 
are  very  thick  here,  and  a  large  tract  of  land  is  cultivated  along  the 
Nile,  producing  a  great  deal  of  dhourra  and  cotton,  which,  being 
cleaned  and  sent  to  Cairo,  are  exchanged  for  ready  made  lines,  salt, 
and  tobacco.  On  our  arrival  we  were  told,  that  Osseyn  Cacheff  was 
not  now  at  Eshke,  but  would  return  in  a  few  days,  as  he  was  only  at  a 
small  distance.    As  I  did  not  like  to  go  back  to  Ybsambul  till  I  had 


86  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

an  interview  with  him,  we  advanced  to  the  second  cataract,  situated 
a  little  higher  up.  The  Nile  here  turns  to  the  south-west,  the 
lands  as  we  advanced  still  continued  to  be  well  cultivated,  and  the 
few  huts,  which  were  visible  among  the  trees,  were  stronger  and 
better  built  than  those  of  the  Arabs  of  Egypt.  We  fastened  our 
boat  to  the  shore,  in  the  same  district. 

We  set  off  early  next  morning,  and  with  a  good  north  wind 
soon  saw  Aloanortis  on  the  right,  and  above  it  on  the  left  Debrous.  A 
little  farther  on  was  an  island  of  the  same  name ;  and  higher  up  on 
our  left  the  district  of  Angosh  or  Sukoy.  I  had  expected,  judging 
from  the  rocky  nature  of  the  country  about  the  first  cataract,  to  have 
seen  the  mountain  of  the  second  at  a  great  distance ;  but  to  my 
surprise  we  arrived  at  the  very  last  district,  without  perceiving  any 
thing  but  a  flat  country  before  us.  The  territory  of  Wady  Haifa 
is  the  last  on  the  Nile,  on  this  side  of  the  cataract.  In  the  middle 
of  the  river  is  an  island  called  Givarty,  after  this  another  called 
Mainarty,  and  beyond  these  two  others,  named  Genesap  and  En- 
nerty.  These  four  are  cultivated ;  but  there  are  others  innume- 
rable, which  form  the  shellal  or  cataract,  that  are  all  barren.  Some 
present  nothing  to  the  eye  but  bare  stones  and  sand ;  others  a  few 
sycamore  trees  and  sunt ;  but  there  are  no  palm-trees,  except  in 
the  four  islands  first  mentioned. 

About  nine  in  the  morning  we  made  to  the  shore,  as  near  as 
possible  to  the  last  cultivated  land  on  the  left,  which  is  Wady  Haifa. 
A  few  of  the  natives  came  to  see  us,  whom  I  requested  to  bring  some 
asses,  that  we  might  ride  to  the  cataract,  a  request  they  complied  with 
without  any  difficulty.  Mrs.  Belzoni  and  myself  (the  Janizary  and 
interpreter  advancing  before  us)  proceeded  as  far  as  the  day  would 
permit  us,  so  as  to  return  in  proper  time  to  the  bark  at  night.  We 
had  many  views  of  the  cataract,  and  in  different  directions.  I 
mounted  one  of  the  rocks,  to  have  a  distant  view  of  the  deserts ; 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  87 

and  as  far  as  I  could  see  it  is  a  flat  country,  except  a  few  rocks  that 
project  here  and  there,  particularly  at  the  river's  side,  but  they  are 
of  small  dimensions.  Towards  the  desert  we  saw  several  wild  ante- 
lopes, which  kept  at  a  great  distance  from  us.  As  the  Nile  was 
high,  the  current  had  not  so  great  a  fall,  as  when  it  is  low ;  but  I 
believe  the  cataract  is  not  navigable  at  any  time  of  the  year.  The 
rock  forming  this  cataract  differs  from  that  of  the  first,  for  here  is 
no  granite,  but  a  kind  of  black  marble  quite  as  hard.  Some  say  it 
is  black  granite,  but  I  cannot  consider  it  as  such :  the  grain  of  it  is 
too  coarse,  and  not  so  compact  as  that  of  granite. 

We  returned  to  the  bark  after  sunset,  and  immediately  crossed 
to  the  island  Mainarty,  where  we  arrived  at  dusk.  We  saw  fires 
and  people  at  a  distance;  but  when  we  arrived  we  could  not 
find  any  one.  Their  huts  were  left  with  all  they  had,  which  con- 
sisted only  of  dry  dates,  and  a  kind  of  paste  made  of  the  same,  which 
they  kept  in  large  vases  of  clay  baked  in  the  sun,  and  covered  with 
baskets  made  of  palm-leaves.  A  baking-stove  and  a  mat  to  sleep  on 
were  the  whole  of  their  furniture.  They  had  pots  and  leathern  bags 
to  bring  water  from  the  Nile  for  their  lands.  Their  settlement 
consisted  of  four  men  and  seven  women,  with  two  or  three  children. 
They  have  no  communication  with  the  main  land,  except  when  the 
water  is  low,  for  at  any  other  time  the  current,  being  immediately 
under  the  cataract,  is  so  rapid,  as  to  render  it  impossible  to  ford  it ; 
and  boats  never  go  to  these  islands,  seldom  passing  farther  than 
Wady  Haifa.  They  are  poor  but  happy :  knowing  nothing  of 
the  inticing  luxuries  of  the  world,  and  resting  content  with  what 
Providence  supplies  as  the  reward  of  their  industry.  There  are 
a  few  sheep  and  goats,  which  furnish  them  with  milk  all  the  year 
round ;  and  the  few  spots  of  land  they  have  are  well  cultivated, 
producing  a  little  dhourra,  which  forms  their  yearly  stock  of  pro- 
vision.     The  wool  they  spin  into  yarn ;  wind  the  threads  round 


88  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

little  stones,  and  thus  suspend  them  to  a  long  stick  fixed  in  an 
horizontal  position  between  two  trees,  to  form  a  warp;  and  by 
passing  another  thread  alternately  between  these  fabricate  a  kind  of 
coarse  cloth,  with  which  they  cover  the  lower  part  of  their  bodies. 

I  visited  along  with  the  Eeis  the  whole  of  the  rock,  which  is  about 
an  eighth  of  a  mile  in  length,  and  half  as  much  in  breadth.  It 
was  quite  late  when  we  found  this  poor  but  truly  happy  people. 
They  had  lighted  a  fire  to  make  their  bread,  and  it  was  this  fire 
which  directed  us  to  that  quarter.  They  were  all  hidden  in  a  hole 
under  some  ruins  of  an  old  castle,  which  stands  on  the  south  side 
of  the  island ;  and  when  we  approached  them,  the  women  set  up 
a  loud  scream  through  fear.  Our  Eeis,  who  was  a  native  of  the 
lower  part  of  Nubia,  could  talk  their  language,  and  pacified  them : 
yet,  notwithstanding  this,  we  could  not  entice  more  than  one  man 
out  of  the  place.  Their  fear  was  owing  to  some  depredations  com- 
mitted by  the  robbers  of  Wady  Haifa  a  few  years  before,  who,  at 
low  water,  forded  over  to  the  island,  and  did  all  the  injury 
that  could  be  done  to  such  people.  We  assured  them,  that  we 
were  not  like  the  robbers  of  Wady  Haifa,  but  came  only  to  get 
some  one  to  show  us  the  way  to  the  cataract.  At  this,  they 
were  more  afraid  than  ever ;  and  said,  that  it  never  appeared, 
that  boats  passed  higher  than  Wady  Haifa,  which  is  at  the 
beginning  of  the  cataract ;  it  being  impossible  to  proceed  farther, 
owing  to  the  quantity  of  rocky  islands.  The  Eeis  himself  op- 
posed my  wish  to  ascend  higher,  fearing  more  for  his  boat  than 
for  our  lives.  At  last  it  was  concluded,  that  the  Eeis  should 
leave  his  son  on  the  island  as  a  hostage  for  the  two  men,  while 
they  came  on  board,  to  show  us  the  way  up.  They  knew  their 
way  to  these  islands ;  for  at  low  water  they  frequent  them,  to 
collect  some  of  the  earth,  from  which  they  extract  a  sort  of  salt- 
petre, which  they  use  in  their  food.    I  had  reasons  for  not  remaining 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  89 

at  night  with  the  boat  fastened  to  the  main  land,  and  consequently 
preferred  staying  at  the  island. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  14th,  we  took  on  board  the  two 
men  of  the  island,  to  pilot  us  towards  the  cataract  as  far  as  the 
boat  could  go,  and  then  to  show  us  the  way  we  should  proceed. 
We  went  on  with  the  same  strong  north  wind;  and  as  we  had 
plenty  of  water,  advanced  with  our  bark  till  we  found  ourselves 
so  tossed  about  by  the  different  currents  and  eddies,  as  to  prevent 
our  farther  progress ;  and  at  the  same  time  were  so  situated,  that 
we  could  not  return  back,  for  fear  of  being  driven  against  some  of 
the  rocks,  which  abounded  on  each  side.     Thus  we  were  confined  to 
one  spot  for  about  an  hour.     Sometimes  we  had  a  rapid  start  for  a 
hundred  yards ;  then  all  at  once  were  stopped,  and  turned  round, 
in  spite  of  all  our  efforts,  and  of  the  north  wind,  which  blew  very 
hard.     At  last  we  were  caught  on  a  sudden  in  one  of  the  eddies 
of  water,  and  driven  against  a  rock  concealed  about  two  feet  below 
the  surface.     The  shock  was  terrible ;  and  I  must  confess,  having 
Mrs.  Belzoni  on  board,  I  felt  no  small  degree  of  alarm,  as  I  thought 
the  boat  was  split  in  two.     For  my  own  part,  perhaps  I  might  have 
swam  on  shore;  but  Mrs.  Belzoni  was  no  small  charge  to  me  on 
this  occasion.     However,  as  it  pleased  God,  and  to  my  astonishment, 
there  was  no  harm  done.    We  succeeded  in  getting  to  the  other  side 
of  the  river  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  when  we  arrived,  forgot  all  the 
danger  we  had  just  passed.     We  landed,  and  took  our  route  on  foot ; 
Mrs.  Belzoni,  myself,  the  interpreter,  the  Janizary,  the  two  men 
from  the  island,  and  four  boys  belonging  to  the  bark ;  carrying 
with  us  some  provision  and  water.     We  proceeded,  on  the  rocks, 
and  over  a  plain  of  sand  and  stones,  till  we  arrived  at  the  rock  called 
Apsir,  which  is  the  highest  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  cataract, 
and  commands  a  complete  view  of  the  falls.     The  prospect  from 
this  spot  is  magnificent.     The  several  thousand  islands  you  see,  of 

N 


90  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

various  sizes  and  forms,  with  as  many  different  falls  of  water, 
running  rapidly  onward,  while  counter-currents  return  with  equal 
velocity,  exhibit  a  diversified  appearance,  truly  grand.  The  black- 
ness of  the  stones,  the  green  of  the  trees  on  the  islands,  intermixed 
with  the  white  froth  of  the  water,  form  a  fine  picture,  which  can 
scarcely  be  described  or  delineated. 

Hence  you  see  the  four  cultivated  islands,  which  lie  on  the 
south,  or  the  most  remote  part  of  the  cataract.  They  are  named  as 
follows :  Nuba,  Gamnarty,  Ducully,  and  Suckeyr :  on  the  north 
side  are  two  others,  called  Dorge  and  Tabai.  These  islands  are  in- 
habited by  a  race  of  people  who  may  be  looked  on  as  living  in  the 
most  primitive  state ;  for  no  one  ever  goes  to  them,  nor  do  they  ever 
quit  their  island.  They  are  very  few  in  number — in  some  of  the 
islands  not  more  than  five  or  six ;  and  they  live  on  the  produce  of 
the  few  spots  of  ground  they  find  on  them,  which  they  continually 
irrigate  with  the  common  machine  named  hade,  consisting  only  of  a 
piece  of  sheepskin  and  two  sticks,  by  which  they  draw  up  the  water. 
They  have  also  a  few  sheep  ;  and  fabricate  a  cloth  from  cotton  pro- 
duced in  the  islands,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  make  that  of 
wool. 

On  the  left  of  the  cataract  the  soil  differs  from  that  on  the 
right.  It  consists  of  soft  whitish  stones  and  sand.  From  this  spot 
it  may  be  seen,  that  the  course  of  the  river  is  for  a  considerable 
extent  among  the  rocks ;  and  the  summits  of  two  high  mountains 
are  to  be  seen  at  a  great  distance.  This  part  is  not  frequented  by 
travellers ;  for  there  is  no  mode  of  conveyance,  and  no  inhabitants 
on  that  side  of  the  cataract.  Boats  never  venture  thither:  when 
the  water  is  low,  it  is  impossible ;  and,  when  high,  it  would 
require  a  very  strong  north  wind,  to  stem  the  rapid  current  against 
you. 

We  returned  slowly  to  the  bark,  and  took  our  course  towards 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  91 

the  island  we  had  left  in  the  morning  ;  but  unfortunately  the  wind, 
being  very  strong,  drove  us  to  the  island  of  Gulgc.  The  Eeis 
wished  to  pass  the  whole  night  there  ;  but  in  the  evening  the  wind 
shifting  a  little,  we  returned  to  the  island  we  were  at  before.  But 
again,  notwithstanding  the  proof  we  had  given  of  our  harmless 
intentions,  the  natives  were  not  to  be  seen ;  and  even  the  two 
men  who  had  been  with  us  in  the  boat  no  sooner  landed  than  they 
disappeared.  The  son  of  the  Eeis,  however,  was  preparing  some  food ; 
and  we  were  glad  to  have  escaped  the  danger  of  so  many  eddies  and 
rocks. 

I  forgot  to  mention  that  on  the  island  Gulge  I  perceived  the 
remains  of  an  ancient  wall,  in  the  form  of  a  church,  and  built  of 
sun-baked  bricks.  It  was  in  the  centre  of  the  island,  and  consisted 
of  three  divisions. — See  Plate  32. 

15th. — In  the  morning  we  would  not  leave  the  island  without 
seeing  the  inhabitants.  The  men  soon  appeared  for  their  bakshis ; 
and  at  last  came  the  women,  to  see  Mrs.  Belzoni,  who  made  them 
presents  of  glass  bead-necklaces,  with  which  they  were  wonderfully 
pleased :  though,  as  it  is  their  custom  to  take  all,  and  give  nothing, 
they  did  not  even  return  vis  thanks  for  what  they  received ;  but 
took  their  presents,  laughed,  and  ran  away  immediately. 

We  now  descended  the  river  with  a  strong  north  wind  against 
us ;  and  though  some  authors  assert,  that  the  Nile  has  no  waves, 
but  runs  quite  smooth,  I  can  assure  the  reader,  that  we  were  this 
day  tossed  about  as  if  by  a  gale  at  sea.  The  wind  blowing  fresh 
against  a  strong  current  naturally  caused  this  effect. 

We  arrived  in  the  afternoon  at  the  village  of  Iskus,  and  went 
to  see  Osseyn  Cacheff,  who  was  returned,  and  to  whom  we  had  a 
letter  from  his  brother  Mahomet  at  Deir.  I  had  landed  with  my 
interpreter  and  the  Janizary,  and  entered  a  kind  of  house  made  in 
the  shape  of  an  angle  of  a  propylaeon.    These  houses  would  not  stand 

n  2 


92  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

the  weight  of  an  upper  apartment,  if  they  were  built  perpendicularly  ; 
for  the  clay  walls,  of  which  they  are  made,  would  fall  outward.  The 
CachefFs  house  was  adorned  with  an  old  mat  spread  on  the  ground 
as  usual,  a  water  jar,  and  a  chain  with  two  hooks  made  in  a  par- 
ticular manner.  This  was  that  same  Osseyn,  who  was  one  of  the 
two  brothers  that  caused  Mr.  Burckhardt  to  return  from  Tinareh. 
He  was  about  sixty-eight  years  of  age,  five  feet  eleven  inches  high, 
stout  and  robust,  and  able  to  support  the  charge  he  was  born  to 
hold.  He  was  surrounded  by  thirty  men,  all  armed,  some  with 
matchlock  guns  and  long  swords,  and  some  with  spears  and  shields 
intead  of  guns.  He  was  clothed  in  a  long  tunic  down  to  his  feet, 
made  of  white  woollen  cloth,  with  a  belt  round  lus  waist,  to  which 
his  sword,  flint,  and  steel  were  attached.  Over  his  shoulder  he  had 
a  long  shawl,  made  of  the  same  stuff  as  the  tunic,  thrown  partly  over 
lus  head,  so  as  to  cover  it  from  the  sun.  He  had  also  a  red  turban, 
and  on  his  feet  a  pair  of  ragged  shoes.  Notwithstanding  his  dress, 
there  was  an  air  of  superiority  about  him,  which  distinguished  him 
at  once  above  all  the  rest.  It  is  worthy  of  observation,  that  even 
among  barbarians  great  respect  is  paid  to  superiors  ;  and  those  very 
men,  who  would  murder  a  fellow-creature  in  a  difference  about  a 
few  pipes  of  tobacco,  almost  tremble  at  the  frown  of  a  single  and 
sometimes  harmless  old  man.  His  inquiries  concerning  my  business 
were  very  minute  ;  but  I  soon  brought  the  affair  of  the  temple 
forward,  which  did  not  a  little  surprise  him.  He  said  he  knew  the 
entrance  into  the  place  very  well ;  that  the  round  ball  on  the  large 
head  was  the  door  of  the  great  Here,  as  he  named  it,  and  if  re* 
moved  I  could  immediately  enter.  This  round  ball  was  no  other 
than  the  globe  on  the  head  of  the  hawk-headed  Osiris,  which  stood 
over  the  door,  as  I  mentioned  before.  At  first  he  stated  to  me  the 
great  difficulty,  if  not  impossibility  of  opening  this  place ;  and  at 
last,  when  I  had  endeavoured  to  remove  these  obstacles,  lie  made 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  93 

me  promise,  that,  if  I  found  the  temple  full  of  gold,  I  should  give 
him  half.  To  this  I  agreed,  on  condition  that  if  I  found  only 
stones,  they  should  be  all  my  own  property ;  and  he  immediately 
assented,  for  he  said  he  wanted  no  stones.  Upon  this  he  gave  me 
a  letter  to  his  son  at  Ybsambul,  and  when  I  left  him,  and  went  on 
board,  I  sent  him  some  trifling  presents,  which  he  received  with 
pleasure,  and  sent  us  a  lamb. 

When  I  came  to  the  bark  I  found  it  crowded  with  women,  who 
had  learned  from  our  crew,  as  we  passed  upwards,  that  there  was  a 
woman  on  board ;  and  as  soon  as  we  arrived,  on  our  return*  they  all 
ran  to  the  shore.  Mrs.  Belzoni,  not  supposing  they  would  come  in 
such  numbers,  made  a  present  of  some  glass  beads  to  one  of  the 
wives  of  the  Cacheff.  This  was  enough  :  they  increased  in  crowds, 
and  we  had  to  please  them  all. 

Next  morning  we  continued  our  voyage,  and  arrived  very  early 
at  Ybsambul.  I  went  to  see  a  small  temple  on  the  south  side, 
opposite  the  village ;  but  it  is  of  no  consecpience,  only  it  may  be 
remarked  as  the  last  on  the  Nile  on  this  side  of  the  cataract.  It 
has  served  as  a  chapel  to  the  Christian  Greeks ;  and  the  figures  of 
the  Apostles  remain  nearly  perfect  painted  on  the  wall  and  roof. 
We  crossed  the  river,  and  I  went  immediately  to  Daoud  Cacheff. 
Having  presented  the  letter  from  his  father,  he  sent  for  the  men 
who  wrere  intended  to  work.  I  found  these  people  complete  savages, 
and  entirely  unacquainted  with  any  kind  of  labour.  They  had 
changed  their  minds  since  I  was  there  last ;  and,  though  I  had  the 
authority  of  the  Cacheff,  they  would  not  work.  My  persuasion  was 
of  no  avail ;  first,  because  they  were  not  inclined  to  such  labour ; 
secondly,  they  did  not  know  the  value  of  money,  &c.  At  last  I  pre- 
tended to  give  up  my  project,  and  go  away.  When  the  Cacheff  saw 
that  I  meant  to  go,  and  that  he  should  lose  many  a  good  present,  he 
began  to  talk  to  them ;  and  at  last,  with  much  difficulty,  reduced 
the  payment  to  one  half  of  what  they  had  demanded  before.     On 


!)4  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

my  agreeing  to  this,  they  immediately  insisted,  that  I  should  employ 
as  many  as  they  chose.  It  was  in  vain  I  told  them,  thirty  were 
more  than  sufficient  for  my  purpose ;  they  would  not  hear  of  less 
than  a  hundred.  With  this  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  comply ;  so 
I  rose,  and  took  leave  of  the  CachefF,  ordering  the  Eeis  to  go  on 
board,  and  set  off  immediately.  Tliis,  however,  was  not  satisfactory 
to  the  parties ;  they  had  still  more  to  say,  and  at  last  it  was  con- 
cluded, that  I  should  take  forty  men,  who  were  to  be  at  the  bark 
before  the  sun  rose  next  morning,  as  it  was  nearly  two  miles  from 
the  village  to  the  temple.  I  went  on  board  heartily  wishing  I  had 
done  with  these  people. 

17th. — Early  in  the  morning  when  I  expected  to  see  these  wild 

men,  for  such  I  must  call  them,  I  was  greatly  disappointed :  the 

sun  was  very  high,  and  no  one  appeared.     I  then  returned  to  the 

Cacheff,  to  inquire  whether  the  men  meant  to  make  a  joke  of  the 

business,  or  to  work.    Not  being  accustomed  to  be  disturbed  so  early, 

he  rose  very  slowly,  and  sent  a  party  of  his  soldiers  to  search  for 

the  men,  some  of  whom  at  last  made  their  appearance,  while  others 

pretended  they  could  not  come.     Their  excuse  was,  that  they  saw  a 

Bedoween  in  the  desert,  and  they  were  all  on  the  watch.     The  day 

before  they  wanted  to  be  employed  to  the  number  of  a  hundred,  and 

to-day  they  were  unwilling  to  be  employed  at  all.     At  length  some 

arrived  by  land,  some  by  water,  but  very  late,  and  we  went  at  last  to 

the  temple.     I  took  it  patiently,  and  began  the  work  in  such  a 

direction,  that  the  sand  should  fall  off  from  the  centre  of  the  front 

of  the  temple,  where  naturally  the  door  must  be.     They  had  a  long 

stick,  with  a  cross  piece  of  wood  at  the  end,  at  each  extremity  of 

which  was  a  rope.     One  man  drew  the  long  stick  back,  and  another 

pulled  it  forward.     This  is  the  method  they  use  in  removing  the 

earth  in  their  cultivated  ground,  and  I  found  it  very  useful  in  clearing 

away  sand  also.     As  it  was  the  first  day  of  our  enterprise,  they  went 

on  better  than  I  expected ;  and  all  their  thoughts  and  talk  were  on 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  95 

the  quantity  of  gold,  pearls,  and  jewels,  we  should  find  in  the  place. 
I  did  not  discourage  them  in  their  supposition,  as  I  considered  it  to 
be  the  best  stimulus  they  could  have  to  proceed.  At  noon  I  gave 
them  some  boiled  lentils,  and  bread  soup,  with  which  they  were 
pretty  well  pleased.  The  Cacheff,  who  attended  to  the  work  himself, 
partook  of  what  I  ate.  At  night  I  paid  the  men,  and  recommended 
them  to  be  there  again  early  in  the  morning.  The  Cacheff  and 
part  of  his  court  came  on  board,  and  we  returned  to  the  village  for 
the  night. 

18th. — In  the  morning  we  went  to  the  temple,  and  the  Fellahs 
came  after  us  rather  late,  and  we  began  the  work  again  very  slowly. 
I  had  to  use  a  great  deal  of  persuasion  this  day;  for  the  savages 
were  led  to  think,  they  had  laboured  too  hard  on  the  first  day,  so 
that  they  were  obstinate,  and  I  had  much  ado  to  prevail  on  them  to 
continue.  As  they  complained  of  being  very  much  tired,  I  pro- 
mised, that  they  should  not  work  the  next  day,  but  be  allowed  to 
rest  themselves.  We  ended  this  day's  work  before  sunset,  and  re- 
turned to  the  village.  Finding  ourselves  but  ill  supplied  with  pro- 
vision in  this  place,  I  offered  more  than  usual  for  a  sheep,  but  to  no 
purpose :  I  was  obliged  to  eat  rice  and  water,  and  very  little  of  that, 
as  we  had  not  much  on  board.  Our  stock  of  butter  was  quite 
finished,  and  milk  was  very  scarce. 

19th. — In  the  morning  I  went  to  see  the  Cacheff,  to  speak  about 
some  palm  wood.  I  found  him  quite  changed  in  his  behaviour, 
starting  a  thousand  difficulties  ;  in  particular,  that  the  Fellahs  would 
not  come  to  work  any  more,  as  it  was  useless  for  them  to  fatigue 
themselves  for  a  little  money  ;  adding,  that  it  was  impossible  to  get 
any  palm  wood  ;  though  at  the  same  time  we  were  surrounded  by  it. 
I  answered,  that  this  was  not  our  agreement ;  and,  as  I  kept  my 
word,  and  paid  the  Fellahs  according  to  our  first  engagement,  I 
expected  them  to  perform  their  part  of  the  bargain.     After  much 


96  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

debate,  it  Avas  at  last  concluded,  that  I  should  see  the  Fellahs  at 
night,  and  try  myself  what  could  be  done,  for  he  could  not  serve 
me.  In  short,  I  could  make  nothing  of  him ;  but  his  interpreter 
soon  gave  me  to  understand,  that  all  this  difficulty  arose  from  my 
not  having  made  him  any  considerable  present ;  and  the  soldier 
who  was  with  me  from  Siout  told  me,  that  I  ought  not  to  omit 
giving  him  a  brace  of  pistols,  or  some  other  valuable  thing.  I 
saw  through  the  plot  immediately;  and  I  also  knew  that  these 
people  never  feel  grateful  for  any  thing  after  they  receive  it,  but 
think  only  of  contriving  new  tricks  to  extort  more,  if  possible ; 
so  that  it  is  just  the  same  whether  you  give  or  not.  However, 
I  took  a  middle  course,  and  told  the  interpreter,  that  I  would 
provide  a  good  bakshis  both  for  his  master  and  himself,  if  they 
would  interest  themselves  in  my  favour.  In  the  afternoon  the 
savages  were  all  assembled,  and  I  was  sent  for.  The  brother  of  the 
Cacheff,  whom  I  saw  the  first  time  we  arrived  at  Ybsambul,  was 
there :  his  behaviour  however  was  altered,  and  much  for  the  better ; 
so  that  he,  who  at  first  was  rough,  became  smooth,  and  the  smooth 
became  rough.  I  inquired  about  the  wood,  and  was  told,  that 
I  must  go  to  a  place  two  leagues  off,  where  I  should  find  some ; 
but  this  was  said  only  to  start  new  difficulties,  as  I  knew  there 
was  plenty  in  the  village.  With  respect  to  the  savages,  I  was  in- 
formed, that  they  wovdd  not  come  to  work  so  hard,  unless  I  doubled 
the  numbers.  It  was  in  vain  for  me  to  tell  them,  that  a  man  does 
not  work  more  when  alone,  than  when  accompanied  by  multitudes. 
They  were  obstinate,  and  I  could  do  nothing  with  them ;  for  had  I 
consented  to  employ  a  hundred,  I  should  soon  have  been  called  on 
to  make  it  up  two  hundred.  I  promised  to  give  bakshis  to  the  brother 
of  the  Cacheff,  who  began  to  talk  to  them  in  their  own  language ; 
and  to  my  astonishment  all  at  once  they  agreed  to  come  to  the 
number  of  forty  only ;  on  condition,  however,  that  I  should  give 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  97 

them  the  sixth  part  of  an  ardep  of  corn  to  make  bread  with.  The 
Cacheff  seemed  displeased  with  the  influence  of  his  brother,  and 
rose  and  walked  off.  A  barbarian  from  Deir,  who  was  a  stranger  in 
the  island,  and  had  come  thither  to  cultivate  a  piece  of  ground,  had 
bought  some  wood  to  build  a  sakias,  or  water  machine ;  but  as  he 
could  not  agree  with  the  savages  at  Ybsambul,  and  was  going  away, 
he  proposed  to  sell  his  wood  to  me ;  and  I  gladly  availed  myself  of 
the  opportunity,  and  thus  got  over  this  difficulty. 

20th. — Next  day  in  the  morning  the  people  came  slowly  to  work, 
but  upon  the  whole  we  went  on  very  well,  though  I  had  much  ado 
to  make  them  proceed  in  the  right  way.  The  Cacheff,  with  his 
attendants,  came  to  see  how  we  were  proceeding,  and  gave  me 
to  understand,  that  he  intended  dining  with  me.  I  told  him  I 
was  very  glad  of  his  company,  but  had  nothing  except  boiled 
rice,  unless  he  would  order  his  people  to  kill  a  sheep  for  us, 
which  I  would  gladly  pay  for.  They  consulted  about  who  could 
afford  to  part  with  a  sheep,  and  receive  piastres  in  payment,  and 
at  last  the  order  was  given  to  an  old  man,  who  had  five,  which 
was  a  greater  number  than  any  body  else.  When  the  sheep 
was  brought  to  us,  the  difficulty  was  to  fix  the  price  of  it.  Being 
the  first  ever  sold  for  money  in  that  place,  to  put  a  high  price  on  it 
would  have  increased  the  value  of  sheep  in  general,  and  consequently 
would  have  been  against  the  interest  of  the  Cacheff;  for  when  he 
receives  his  revenue  in  these  animals,  he  sets  them  at  a  very  low 
price,  that  he  may  have  the  more  given  him.  To  estimate  it  at  a 
low  price  would  be  worse,  for  it  would  be  against  them  all  in  the 
exchange  of  sheep  for  dhourra  with  the  other  villages.  Finding 
it  a  dangerous  point  to  decide,  it  was  at  length  resolved,  that  no 
price  at  all  should  be  put  upon  the  sheep,  but  that  the  man  should 
make  me  a  present  of  it,  and  I  should  give  any  thing  I  pleased  in 

o 


98  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

return.     To  prevent  any  standard  being  established  from  what  I 
gave  the  man,  I  paid  him  in  soap,  tobacco,  and  salt. 

At  dinner  the  sheep  was  brought  in  pieces  in  two  wooden  bowls 
and  the  Cacheff  and  his  attendants  seated  themselves  in  a  circle  on 
the  sand  near  the  temple.     The  extremities  of  their  filthy  hands 
were  soon  washed  in  the  liquor,  and  in  a  few  seconds  the  whole  was 
devoured.     Not  being  accustomed  to  this  unceremonious  sort  of 
feasting,  I  stood  but  a  poor  chance  ;  but  in  subsequent  occurrences 
of  this  kind  I  contrived  to  take  my  share  without  interfering  with 
their  scramble.     Soon  after  dinner  coffee  was  brought  up  from  the 
boat,  and  I  went  on  board  to  take  my  dinner  with  Mrs.  Belzoni, 
who  had  boiled  rice  and  water  for  her  fare,  in  preference  to  the 
chieftain's  mess  of  mutton.  In  a  short  time  the  Cacheff  approached, 
and  signified  Iris  wish  to  speak  to  me  in  secret.     We  retired,  and 
Iris  principal  interpreters  were  called  to  us.     The  great  secret  was 
this :  on  the  night  before,  as  he  stood  on  the  bank  close  to  our  boatj 
he  saw  me  drinking  a  coffee  cup  of  red  liquor  that  I  poured  out  of 
a  bottle  ;  and  having  inquired  what  it  was,  was  told  it  was  nebet 
(wine).     Now  he  had  heard  that  the  wine  of  the  English  was  much 
better  than  what  they  made  in  their  own  country  with  dates ;  he 
wished,  therefore,  to  have  some  to  drink  also,  but  in  a  secret  way. 
Fortunately  I  had  a  few  bottles  left  from  our  stock  in  Cairo,  which 
we  preserved  for  extraordinary  occasions ;  and  I  sent  my  interpreter 
down  to  the  boat  to  fetch  one.  When  the  wine  was  first  poured  out 
into  a  cup  and  presented  to  the  Cacheff,  he  sternly  looked  at  the  in- 
terpreter, and  told  him  to  drink  first.     The  interpreter,  who  was  a 
Copt,  and  had  been  in  the  French  army  for  several  years,  did  not 
want  much  persuasion  to  make  a  libation  to  Bacchus  ;  so  with  a 
smile  he  soon  convinced  the  Cacheff  of  the  purity  of  the  contents  of 
the  bottle,  and  the  Cacheff  did  not  hesitate  to  drink  the  next  cup. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  99 

At  the  first  taste  it  did  not  appear  to  him  so  strong  as  he  had  sup- 
posed; but  at  last  he  found  it  so  good,  that  in  three  days  my 
scanty  stock  was  nearly  finished.  I  had  much  reason  to  repent 
having  taken  a  Janizary  with  me,  for  instead  of  assisting  me  in  my 
dealing  with  these  people,  he  was  the  first  to  suggest  to  them  what 
they  never  would  have  thought  of.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  a 
Mussulman  will  ever  take  the  part  of  a  Christian  dog,  against  any 
of  his  own  religion,  unless  he  is  responsible  for  the  life  of  the 
stranger ;  and  then  he  does  it  for  his  own  sake,  and  not  from 
any  attachment  to  the  European.  The  work  went  on  very  slowly 
this  day ;  but  altogether  we  had  made  a  considerable  advance  in 
the  sand,  towards  the  centre  of  the  front  of  the  temple. 

21st. — Next  morning,  the  people  took  it  into  their  heads  to 
come  in  such  numbers,  that  I  could  not  employ  them  all,  as  the 
work  was  directed  only  to  one  point.  There  was  warm  debating  on 
the  subject ;  but,  as  I  would  not  spend  one  farthing  more  than  I 
had  promised  from  the  first,  they  agreed  at  last  that  the  pay  should 
be  divided  amongst  them  all ;  and  thus,  instead  of  forty  men,  I  had 
eighty  for  the  same  price,  which  was  less  than  sixpence  a  day.  The 
anxiety  to  see  the  inside  of  the  temple,  and  to  plunder  all  that  it 
might  contain,  brought  the  two  brothers  on  board  very  early  in  the 
morning.  They  soon  gave  me  to  understand  plainly,  that  all  that 
was  there  was  their  own  property;  and  that  the  treasure  should 
be  for  themselves.  Even  the  savages  began  to  lay  their  account  in 
the  division  of  the  spoil.  I  assured  them  that  I  expected  to  find 
nothing  but  stones,  and  wanted  no  treasure.  They  still  persisted, 
that,  if  I  took  away  the  stones,  the  treasure  was  in  them ;  and,  if 
I  could  make  a  drawing,  or  likeness  of  them,  I  could  extract  the 
treasure  from  them  also,  without  their  perceiving  it.  Some  pro- 
posed, that,  if  there  were  any  figure  discovered,  it  should  be  broken 
before  I  carried  it  away,  to  see  the  inside  of  it.     Thus  I  plainly 

o  2 


100  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

perceived,  that,  on  entering  the  temple,  I  should  not  be  at  liberty 
either  to  take  notes  of  what  was  in  it,  or  to  make  any  drawings, 
much  less  to  take  away  any  statue,  or  any  thing  else  that  might  be 
found.  We  went  on  with  our  labour,  however,  and,  as  I  made 
a  palisade  with  the  palm  wood  I  had  bought,  I  had  no  need 
of  so  many  men,  as  they  had  only  to  clear  the  space  between  the 
palisade  and  the  temple. 

In  the  course  of  the  morning,  two  of  the  men  left  the  work,  and 
went  down  the  Nile  to  our  boat.  Finding  Mrs.  Belzoni  on  board, 
with  only  a  little  girl  from  the  village,  they  were  rather  impertinent 
to  her,  and  attempted  to  go  on  board  in  spite  of  all  she  could  say  to 
them,  intending  to  rob  the  boat.  At  last  she  presented  a  pistol  to 
them,  on  which  they  immediately  retired,  and  ran  up  the  hill.  She 
followed,  but  they  mixed  with  a  number  of  their  fellow  savages,  and 
it  was  impossible  to  find  them  out ;  for  they  were  all  like  so  many 
lumps  of  chocolate  seated  on  the  sand  at  work,  and  not  to  be 
distinguished  the  one  from  the  other.  At  night,  when  I  paid  the 
men,  the  Cacheff 's  brother  said,  the  money  must  be  counted  all  in 
one  heap,  before  it  was  divided  among  the  people.  My  interpreter, 
who  was  also  my  treasurer,  accordingly  counted  the  money  on  a 
piece  of  a  ragged  shawl,  which  he  had  no  sooner  done,  than  the 
CachefF's  brother  threw  himself  on  it,  and  seized  every  piastre. 
The  men  looked  at  each  other,  but  no  one  dared  to  say  a  word 
about  it ;  and  he  took  it  all  away  with  him.  I  observed  to  him, 
that  his  magic  was  much  more  sure  in  its  operation  than  mine,  for 
obtaining  money.  But  I  was  pleased  to  find  they  had  begun  to 
know  the  worth  of  it  so  well. 

I  naturally  expected,  that  no  one  would  come  to  work  the  next 
morning ;  but  in  this  I  was  mistaken.  As  much  of  the  sand  had 
been  taken  away,  the  first  palisade  was  insufficient.  I  made 
another,  therefore,  directly  before  the  place  where  I  supposed  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  101 

entrance  of  the  temple  to  be,  to  prevent  the  sand  from  falling 
against  it.  I  now  began  to  perceive  clearly,  that  this  work  would 
employ  more  time  than  I  could  spare  in  that  country,  and  the  period 
I  had  meant  to  dedicate  to  it  was  already  elapsed ;  but  this  would 
not  have  deterred  me  from  proceeding,  and  no  doubt  I  should  have 
accomplished  my  undertaking,  had  it  not  been  for  a  material  cause 
which  compelled  me  to  quit  the  work  for  a  time.  This  was  the 
want  of  that  very  article  which,  a  few  days  before,  was  so  despised 
and  unknown ;  and  now  I  absolutely  could  not  proceed  without  it. 
It  was  money,  which,  even  here,  had  shown  its  usual  power  among 
mankind,  of  exciting  avarice,  and  of  which  those  wild  people  soon 
became  very  fond.  I  had  some  water  brought  up  from  the  Nile, 
and  poured  down  close  to  the  wall  over  the  door.  This  stopped 
the  sand  from  running,  till  1  had  a  hole  made  so  deep,  that  I  coidd 
perceive  it  required  a  longer  time  than  I  coidd  stay,  and  more 
money  than  I  could  then  afford.  I  had  by  tins  time  removed  so 
much  sand,  as  to  uncover  twenty  feet  in  the  front  of  the  temple. 
The  colossal  statues  above  the  door  were  completely  exposed ;  and 
one  of  the  great  colossi  sitting  before  the  temple,  on  the  north 
side,  which  was  buried  in  the  sand,  appeared  with  his  face  and 
shoulders  like  his  companion  on  the  south.  Having  obtained  a 
promise  from  the  Cacheff,  that  he  would  not  let  any  one  touch  the 
place  till  my  return,  which  would  be  in  a  few  months,  I  contented 
myself  with  putting  a  mark  where  the  sand  was  before  I  commenced 
the  operation ;  and  after  taking  a  drawing  of  the  exterior  of  the 
temple,  quitted  it,  with  a  firm  resolution  of  returning  to  accomplish 
its  opening.  We  brought  our  boat  to  the  village,  and,  after  making 
some  trifling  presents  to  the  Cacheff,  set  off  the  same  evening. 

We  descended  the  Kile  rapidly,  as  the  current  was  very  strong, 
winch  was  a  fortunate  circumstance  for  us,  for  we  were  almost  with- 
out provisions  on  board.  Two  hours  after  we  left  Ybsambul,  a 
Turkish  soldier  on  a  dromedary  hailed  us  from  the  right  bank  of  the 


102  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Nile;  but,  without  attending  to  him,  we  continued  our  voyage. 
He  turned  back,  and  followed  us  a  considerable  way  ;  and  when  he 
came  to  a  place,  where  the  current  brought  us  near  the  shore,  he 
fired  a  pistol,  as  a  signal  to  stop.  We  were  greatly  at  a  loss  to 
conjecture  who  he  could  be,  as  it  was  not  to  be  supposed,  that  a 
Turkish  soldier  would  venture  alone  into  this  country.  At  length, 
as  we  drew  near  the  bank,  he  said  he  had  letters  for  me  from  the 
Bey  of  Esne.  This  was  not  true.  He  produced  two  letters  in 
Arabic,  signed  by  two  different  persons  not  in  existence,  which 
ordered  me,  in  an  insolent  tone  of  command,  to  desist  from  any 
Avork  I  might  have  begun  in  Nubia,  and  return  to  Cairo.  The 
reason  why  these  letters  were  sent  to  me,  by  whom,  and  for  what 
purpose,  is  one  of  those  mysteries  which,  for  the  present,  must 
remain  unknown. 

The  soldier  came  on  board,  and  sent  the  dromedary  back  by  his 
servant;  for  in  that  country  every  soldier  has  a  servant,  to  take 
care  of  his  camel,  horse,  or  asses,  if  he  have  any.  Thus,  when  a 
body  of  five  thousand  men  marches  against  an  enemy,  there  are 
always  at  least  six  thousand  people  more  to  encumber  it,  and  eat 
up  the  provision :  for  not  only  every  common  soldier  has  a  man, 
but  every  officer  has  two  or  three ;  and  those  of  the  higher  rank,  as 
Beys,  Cacheffs,  &c.  have  ten  or  more. 

As  the  current  was  so  rapid,  the  next  day,  in  the  evening,  we 
arrived  at  Ibrim,  and  early  on  the  day  after  at  Deir.  I  went  to  see 
the  temple,  but  in  a  cursory  way,  reserving  my  observations  to  my 
next  visit.  We  took  in  some  provision,  set  off  immediately,  arrived 
in  the  evening  at  Nobat,  and  the  next  night  stopped  at  El  Ka- 
labshe.  Here  we  visited  the  temple  a  second  time,  but  rather  too 
late  for  much  inspection.  Mrs.  Belzoni  went  to  see  the  women  of 
this  place  ;  of  whom  an  account,  given  by  her,  will  be  found  in  the 
Appendix. 

Next  day  we  visited  the  two  temples  at  Todfa,  my  humble  ob- 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  8cc.  103 

servations  on  which  I  shall  give  in  my  next  voyage  in  Nubia. 
Here  a  barbarian,  armed  with  a  spear  and  shield,  called  to  me  to 
stop,  which  I  did,  as  he  said  he  had  something  to  communicate. 
He  demanded  my  money  in  a  resolute  manner,  and  with  a  savage 
look ;  but  when  I  made  the  interpreter  inquire  of  him  if  he  de- 
manded the  money  per  force,  or  as  a  voluntary  bakshis,  he  laughed 
and  ran  ofF. 

Continuing  our  voyage,  at  Cardassy  I  saw  the  remains  of  some 
very  extensive  buildings,  and  of  some  quarries,  where  a  small 
chapel  is  cut  in  the  rock,  containing  many  Greek  inscriptions,  which 
I  regretted  I  had  not  time  to  copy.  We  next  came  to  Gamby, 
where,  on  the  east,  is  a  small  temple,  but  almost  even  with  the 
ground,  and  a  few  figures  and  hieroglyphics  on  the  stones.  This 
temple,  that  of  Deir,  and  the  one  opposite  Ybsambul  are  all  I  have 
seen  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Nile  above  the  first  cataract.  We 
came  down  to  Deboude  in  the  afternoon,  and  went  to  see  the  ruins 
of  that  place. 

Next  day  brought  us  to  the  Shellal,  or  first  cataract.      The 
soldier  of  Derow,  who  brought  the  letters,  set  off  immediately,  and 
I  never  saw  him  afterwards.     I  took  particular  notice  of  a  large 
obelisk  which  was  lying  before  the  propylaeon,  and  which,  if  brought 
to  England,  might  serve  as  a  monument  in  some  particular  place,  or  as 
an  embellishment  to  the  metropolis.    I  sent  for  the  Aga  of  Assouan, 
and  a  Keis  who  knew  the  channels  in  the  Shellal,  and  in  the  mean- 
time took  a  general  view  of  these  superb  ruins.    I  observed  in  the 
southern  part  of  the  island  the  remains  of  a  small  temple,  quite  in 
ruins,  with  blocks  of  stone  scattered  here  and  there,  and  remarked, 
that  a  part  of  the  remaining  wall  contained  the  legs  of  several 
figures  in  basso  relievo  finely  finished.     I  examined  the  blocks  that 
had  been  thrown  down  from  the  wall,  and  found  they  contained 
the  remaining  parts  of  the  figures,  which  had  formed  a  group  of 
seven  in  all.     When  the  Aga  and  the  lieis  came,  I  made  an  agree- 


104  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

ment  with  them  to  have  the  obelisk  taken  down  the  cataract ;  but, 
for  want  of  a  boat,  it  could  not  be  effected  that  season.  The 
obelisk  is  twenty-two  feet  long,  by  two  wide  at  the  base ;  so  that  it 
required  a  pretty  large  boat  to  convey  it.  It  was  agreed,  and  per- 
fectly understood,  that  I  took  possession  of  this  obelisk  in  the  name 
of  his  Britannic  Majesty's  consul-general  in  Cairo ;  and  I  gave  four 
dollars  to  the  Aga,  to  pay  a  guard  for  it  till  my  return. 

I  entreat  the  reader  here  to  pause,  and  to  recollect  what  caution 
I  took  in  securing  this  piece  of  antiquity  ;  as  he  will  find,  in  the 
course  of  this  volume,  that  the  obelisk  in  question  has  caused  me 
more  trouble  and  persecution  than  any  thing  else  I  succeeded  in 
removing  from  Egypt.  Indeed,  it  nearly  cost  me  my  life  ;  and  for 
such  disinterested  exertions  I  received,  in  return,  the  meanest 
insults.  Unfortunately  such  was  my  situation  in  Egypt,  that  some 
of  the  very  people  I  had  to  deal  with,  though  I  was  acting  for 
the  credit  both  of  their  country  and  of  themselves,  could  not 
restrain  the  impulse  of  jealousy,  which  they  nourished  in  their 
breasts,  and  which  always  operated  to  my  disadvantage.  In  a 
future  work,  that  I  intend  to  lay  before  the  public,  I  shall  unfold 
these  matters ;  so  that  any  one  who  has  common  feeling  will 
wonder  how  I  could  persist  so  long  in  my  researches  under  such 
circumstances. 

The  blocks  of  stone,  which  formed  the  compartment  of  fourteen 
feet  long  and  twelve  wide,  were  twelve  in  number.  When  they  were 
put  together  on  the  ground,  they  were  a  beautiful  group,  consisting 
of  the  great  god  Osiris  seated  on  his  chair,  with  an  altar  before  him, 
receiving  offerings  from  priests  and  female  figures ;  the  whole  sur- 
rounded by  flowers  and  hieroglyphics.  The  blocks  were  three  feet 
six  inches  long,  and  three  feet  wide :  but  as  they  were  two  feet 
three  inches  thick,  they  were  too  bulky  to  be  embarked  whole. 
As  they  could  be  easily  cut,  being  a  calcareous  gritstone,  I  made 
an  agreement  for  one  hundred  piastres,  to  have  them  cut  to  six 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  105 

inches.  I  left  the  money  in  the  hands  of  the  Aga ;  and  it  was 
understood,  that  these  stones  were  to  be  embarked  by  the  first 
opportunity  of  a  boat,  and  sent  down  to  Luxor.  The  Aga  hinted, 
that  he  should  be  happy  to  know  what  I  meant  to  give  him  for 
permission  to  take  away  the  obelisk ;  for  though  I  was  authorised 
by  the  firman  of  the  Bashaw  to  take  what  stones  or  statues  I 
pleased,  yet  these  fellows  think  they  have  a  right  to  demand  some- 
thing ;  and  if  they  cannot  openly  refuse,  still  they  have  it  in  their 
power  to  throw  such  obstacles  in  the  way,  as  to  entirely  defeat 
your  undertaking.  It  was  agreed,  that  he  should  give  orders 
to  the  Sheik  of  the  island,  to  guard  the  stones  and  the  obelisk,  so 
that  no  one  should  injure  them ;  for  which  guard,  as  before  stated, 
he  received  four  dollars ;  and  that  on  the  removal  of  the  obelisk  he 
should  receive  three  hundred  piastres,  equal  to  thirty  dollars. 

Next  day,  the  27th  of  September,  we  came  to  Assouan  by  land ; 
just  one  month  from  the  day  on  which  we  first  entered  that  place. 
On  our  arrival,  we  were  informed,  that  there  were  no  boats  to  take 
us  to  Esne ;  and,  in  spite  of  all  our  haste,  we  were  obliged  to  wait 
till  some  came  from  the  North.  We  therefore  took  another  tour  in 
the  island  of  Elephantine,  and  on  the  next  morning  I  set  off  for  the 
granite  mountain,  about  two  hours  and  a  half  south-east  of  Assouan. 
I  took  an  Arab  of  Assouan  with  me  as  a  guide,  and  walked  about 
the  greater  part  of  the  day.  I  saw  a  great  many  granite  quarries, 
which  plainly  showed,  that  the  ancients  took  the  granite  intended 
for  the  temples,  statues,  and  ornaments,  from  these  places ;  and  in 
one  of  these  excavations  I  saw  two  large  basins  in  the  rough  cut 
out  of  the  rock,  one  of  which  was  ready  to  be  taken  away,  as  it  was 
nearly  finished.  It  appeared  to  me,  by  what  I  could  observe,  that 
the  pieces  of  granite  were  procured  by  cutting  a  fine  with  a  chisel, 

about  two  inches  deep,  round  the  stone  intended  to  be  removed, 

p 


106  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

and  then  by  giving  a  great  blow  with  some  machine,  which  se- 
parated the  part  like  glass  when  cut  with  a  diamond.  In  this  basin 
were  pieces,  which  plainly  showed  the  fact  of  this  operation.  On 
my  return  towards  the  west,  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  find  a 
column  lying  on  the  ground,  with  a  Latin  inscription,  as  in  the 
annexed  plate.  It  proves,  that  the  Romans  used  to  take  granite 
from  these  quarries,  and,  no  doubt,  chiefly  for  religious  purposes, 
like  the  Egyptians. 

On  my  return  to  Assouan,  no  boat  had  arrived,  and  I  became 
impatient,  for  I  wished  to  reach  Thebes.  We  were  seated  under 
a  grove  of  palm-trees,  eating  our  soup  of  rice  and  meat  with 
the  Aga,  when  an  Arab  came  to  him,  and  whispered  in  his  ear,  as 
if  he  had  something  of  great  importance  to  communicate.  The 
Aga  rose,  though  his  dinner  was  not  finished,  and  went  away 
with  the  air  of  a  man  of  great  business.  Half  an  hour  after  he 
returned,  accompanied  by  two  other  persons  of  distinction,  and  the 
old  man  who  came  before.  They  all  seated  themselves  round  me, 
and  after  introducing  the  affair  with  a  degree  of  caution,  I  was  asked, 
whether  I  wished  to  purchase  a  large  piece  of  diamond.  I  con- 
sidered, that  I  was  no  diamond  merchant ;  but  in  a  case  like  this, 
I  would  have  contrived  to  become  a  jeweller,  and  have  procured 
the  money  from  Esne,  if  it  had  been  to  my  advantage ;  for,  in  the 
times  in  which  we  live,  jewels  are  no  despicable  articles,  if  they 
can  be  obtained  at  a  cheap  rate.  I  told  the  Aga,  that  if  the 
article  were  good,  I  would  purchase  it,  if  we  could  agree ;  but 
it  was  necessary  that  I  should  see  it.  He  said,  the  piece  had 
been  found  by  one  of  the  natives  of  that  place ;  and,  as  he  was 
not  in  want  of  money,  it  had  been  preserved  in  the  family  for  many 
years.  This  original  proprietor  being  now  dead,  his  successors 
wished  to  dispose  of  it.     I  requested  to  see  it ;  so  we  retired  some 


IOMH4MMi)NKENVBtDl 
V/NONIREklNAEQV/OR.jVf 
TV/TELA-  HIC-MONS-ESTQVO 
PRlMlTER-SV/B-IMPEfUOPR 
fELKISSIMO-SAEO/LO-D-D 

NNINVICTOR-IMPPSEVEWE 
A  NiTO N I M I  PI  I SS I  MOR.VM  AVCJC 

ET-;  ;SS; 

IVLIAE  POMMAE  AV/6M-K- 
IUXSTAPHILAS-  NO  V/A  E 
LAPICAEDINAEADIIMV/EN 

TA E  TRACTAEQl/E  Sl/IVTPAR/> 
STATICAEETCOLWMNAE 
bHA^D  ESETMl/LTAESt/B 
5V/BATIA(V0AQVILAE  PH- 
AE6-CViRA^AGENEOPPOM^ 
Al/REL-HERAUIDAE-DECAL-MHVR 


L 


i  


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  107 

distance  out  of  the  way  of  the  people.     The  old  man  then  with 
great  solemnity  took  a  small  wooden  box  from  a  pocket  in  his 
leathern  belt.     In  this  was  a  paper,  which  he  unfolded  ;  after  that, 
two  or  three  others,  till  at  last  he  opened  the  sanctum  sanctorum. 
I  took  its  contents  in  my  hands  with  no  small  degree  of  expectation  : 
but,  alas  !  how  did  I  look,  when  I  saw  it  was  only  part  of  the  stopple 
of  a  common  glass  cruet,  of  the  size  of  a  hazel-nut,  with  two  or 
three  little  gilt  flowers  on  it !    All  my  hopes  vanished ;  and  as  the 
others  were  anxiously  observing  my  motions,  they  could  not  fail  to 
see  disappointment  so  strongly  marked  in  my  countenance,  as  de- 
cided their  fate,  and  destroyed  their  great  expectations  of  wealth 
from  this  invaluable  jewel.     When  I  told  them,  that  it  was  only  a 
piece  of  glass,  the  words  affected  their  minds  like  the  unhappy 
tidings  of  some  great  misfortune  :  they  walked  off  in  solemn  silence, 
not  without  giving  me  an  inquiring  look,  to  learn  whether  I  were 
really  in  earnest.     But  I  also  shared  their  disappointment,  and  no 
smile  on  my  face  could  give  them  any  hopes. 

Another  day  passed,  but  no  boat  appeared.  At  last  I  thought  of 
bespeaking  two  camels,  and  proceeding  to  Esne  by  land,  with  Mrs. 
Belzoni  and  the  interpreter,  and  letting  the  Janizary  remain  there, 
to  follow  by  the  first  boat,  and  bring  the  implements  we  should  leave 
behind.    But  when  the  Aga  saw,  that  I  had  taken  this  resolution,  he 
sent  for  a  boat,  which  was  hidden  about  a  league  distant,  and  there 
were  two  or  three  more  concealed  in  other  places.    I  found,  that  all 
this  was  done  to  keep  us  a  few  days  in  that  place  for  the  benefit  of 
the  town,  strangers  being  of  course  obliged  to  spend  money  while 
they  are  there.     After  the  boat  was  hired,  at  a  great  price,  I  found 
it  belonged  to  the  Aga  himself;  and  the  Captain  or  Beis  told  us, 
afterwards,  that  he  ordered  him  to  hide  it,  to  compel  me  to  give 
what  he  liked  for  the  hire  of  it. 

Some  travellers  give  us  the  notions  they  have  formed  of  the 

p  2 


10S  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Arabs  and  Berberys ;  but  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  there  is  a  very 
great  difference  in  the  manner  in  which  different  persons  travel ; 
and  the  methods  pursued  in  going  through  a  country  may  afford 
one  more  opportunities  of  seeing  and  judging  than  another. 

A  traveller  who  has  all  the  accommodation  possible,  and  nothing 
to  do  with  these  people  but  in  passing,  can  never  judge  of  their 
ideas,  their  system  of  conduct,  and  their  rapacious  manners ;  for  in 
the  little  interval,  and  the  limited  business  he  has  to  transact  with 
them,  they  do  not  appear  to  be  the  people  they  really  are.     Some 
travellers   even    receive   civilities,  with  which   they  are   mightily 
pleased ;  without  having  time  to  discover,  that  the  very  persons, 
whom  they  suppose  to  be  naturally  civil,  are  so  only  to  serve  their 
own  interested  views.    They  pass  on,  and  in  their  journal  of  remarks 
just  say,  that  they  were  received  civilly  at  such  and  such  a  place. 
But  let  a  traveller  deal  with  them  in  any  transaction,  where  their 
interest  is  concerned,  and  where  their  execution  of  any  undertaking 
is  required,  he  will  soon  find,  that  in  every  point  they  are  the  most 
cheating  people  on  earth.     Their  deception  is  extreme.     A  traveller 
passing  by  a  village  stops  his  bark  for  an  hour  or  two :  what  good 
people  he  finds !  Some  bring  him  a  small  basket  of  dates,  others  a 
few  eggs,  another  some  bread  and  milk  ;  with  wliich  he  is  so  pleased, 
that  he  immediately  gives  them  five  or  perhaps  ten  times  more  than 
the  worth  of  what  he  receives,  without  being  aware,  that  it  is 
through  such  an  expectation  they  bring  him  these  things ;  but 
exclaims,  that  in  Europe  they  do  not  treat  a  stranger  so  civilly.  But 
let  him  take  the  smallest  of  these  presents  without  giving  any  thing 
in  return,  or  even  no  more  than  it  is  worth,  they  will  not  fail  to 
murmur  at  him.     If  he  give  only  double  the  price,  they  have  the 
art  of  returning  the  money  with  scorn  and  contempt,  in  order  to 
shame  him  to  give  more : — and  if  he  take  the  money  returned,  or 
give  them  nothing  from  the  beginning,  he  must  not  expect,  that 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  109 

they  will  let  him  go  away  without  paying  them  for  what  they  brought 
him.  All  this  is  unknown  to  a  traveller  merely  passing  by;  for 
there  is  no  one  in  this  character,  who  would  be  so  mean  as  to  accept 
any  tiling,  without  returning  double  or  treble  its  value.  From  these 
trifles  it  may  be  presumed  what  they  are  in  all  their  dealings :  to 
night  one  word  for  such  a  thing,  to  morrow  another  :  their  intrigues 
are  beyond  description :  they  have  the  art  of  making  one  thing 
appear  like  another  so  well,  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  avoid  falling 
into  their  trap. 

There  are  two  extremes  in  travellers.  One  who  is  just  arrived, 
has  never  before  been  in  the  country,  and  of  course  has  no  know- 
ledge of  customs  and  things,  cannot  see  one-fourth  of  what  he 
should  see :  the  other  is  so  thoroughly  initiated  into  their  customs 
and  manners,  that  those  which  shock  at  first  sight,  lose  their  effect 
on  him ;  he  almost  forgets  his  own  ways,  and  does  not  reckon  any 
thing  he  beholds  extraordinary  or  worth  attention,  though  perhaps 
even  of  the  greatest  consequence. 

At  last,  after  settling  all  my  affairs  with  the  Aga,  and  satisfying 
his  demands  of  oil,  vinegar,  and  some  empty  bottles,  we  left  Assouan 
in  the  morning  of  the  29th,  and  two  days  brought  us  to  Esne,  the 
cm-rent  being  very  strong.  Khalil  Bey  was  not  there,  and  his  Has- 
nadar  or  treasurer  did  not  know  any  thing  about  the  orders,  which 
were  sent  to  me  in  Nubia :  but  on  seeing  the  Bey  sometime  after, 
he  said  he  never  sent  me  any  such.  On  the  morning  of  the  fourth 
day  we  arrived  at  Luxor.  I  set  off  next  morning  in  the  same  boat 
to  Gheneh,  arrived  there  the  next  day,  and  went  to  see  Mr.  Sokiner, 
a  person  whom  I  knew,  and  who  served  me  much  in  tins  business. 
We  went  to  the  Cacheff,  who  could  not  give  me  a  boat,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  fresh  order  from  Cairo  to  press  all  boats  that  passed ; 
and  I  was  therefore  obliged  to  despatch  a  courier  to  Cairo,  for  an 
order  from  the  Consul  to  obtain  one. 


110  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

On  the  7th,  in  the  morning,  we  were  preparing  for  our  return 
to  Gournou,  when  the  courier  came,  and  said  he  had  been  bitten  by 
a  dog,  and  could  not  proceed  on  the  journey.  I  was  not  pleased  at 
this  circumstance,  as  it  tended  to  retard  the  embarkation  of  the 
bust,  and  sent  immediately  to  seek  for  another  courier,  but  could 
not  find  one.  We  lost  the  whole  day  in  this  manner,  and  I  was 
nearly  despairing  of  success ;  but,  repairing  the  next  morning  to 
the  Cacheff,  I  begged  him  to  give  me  an  order  to  press  a  courier, 
and  he  complied  immediately,  for  he  was  of  a  very  different  cast 
from  the  Cacheff  of  Erments.  The  courier  received  his  despatch 
about  noon,  and  was  to  go  and  return  from  Cairo  in  sixteen  days. 
All  was  ready  for  his  departure,  and  he  was  on  the  point  of  setting 
off,  when  a  large  boat  appeared,  which  brought  Messrs.  Jacque  and 
Caliad,  two  agents  of  the  French  consul,  who  were  going  to  As- 
souan. On  inquiry  I  found  that  the  boat  was  at  liberty  to  be 
engaged  after  it  arrived  at  Assouan.  Accordingly  I  bespoke  it  of 
the  Reis,  before  the  Aga,  who  made  him  promise  not  to  retract  his 
agreement.  Fortunately,  the  courier  had  not  yet  set  off,  and  there 
was  now  no  necessity  of  sending  to  Cairo,  as  I  was  assured  of 
having  this  boat. 

On  our  arrival  at  Thebes,  the  boat  happened  to  be  fastened  to 
the  bank,  where  the  colossal  head  was.  I  will  not  waste  my  time 
in  describing  the  remarks  made  by  the  two  French  agents  of  Mr. 
D.,  on  seeing  the  head  :  suffice  it  to  say,  they  positively  declared,  in 
gpite  of  the  evident  mark  it  bore  on  its  breast,  that  the  French 
army  did  not  take  it  away,  because  they  thought  it  not  worth  the 
taking !  On  hearing  of  my  fortunate  success  in  collecting  several 
valuable  pieces  of  antiquity,  their  Dragoman,  a  renegado  French- 
man, observed  to  me,  that,  if  I  persevered  in  my  researches,  I 
should  have  my  throat  cut,  by  order  of  two  personages ;  one  was 
the  Cacheff  of  Erments,  the  other  I  shall  not  mention  at  present.     1 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  Ill 

told  him  I  was  greatly  obliged  to  him  for  his  information,  but  did 
not  believe  any  one  would  make  such  an  attempt.  They  went  to 
visit  the  soldiers,  who  lived  in  the  tombs  among  the  people  at 
Gournou,  and  assembled  several  Arabs  of  that  place  before  the  two 
agents,  who  told  them  plainly  in  my  presence,  that,  if  they  sold  any 
article  of  antiquity  to  the  English  party,  they  would  have  them  well 
beaten  by  the  Cacheff  of  Erments,  who  commanded  over  them. 
From  this  moment  I  perceived,  that  I  should  have  much  opposition 
and  many  difficulties  to  encounter ;  but  as  my  stay  there  was  to  be 
short,  I  did  not  regard  them,  and  continued  my  business.  Mrs. 
Belzoni  was  lodged  in  the  house  of  an  Arab  at  Luxor. 

The  same  day  I  went  to  Carnak,  and  set  twenty  men  at  work 
on  a  spot  of  ground,  that  I  chose  according  to  a  simple  calculation 
I  made,  of  which  I  shall  have  to  speak  hereafter.  I  re-embarked  for 
Esne  again,  as  I  had  to  conclude  the  contract  with  the  Reis  of  the 
boat,  and  to  pay  a  part  of  the  money  as  earnest.  The  two  French- 
men were  on  board  also.  We  proceeded  during  the  whole  night, 
being  favoured  with  a  good  strong  wind,  and  arrived  at  Esne  the 
next  day  at  noon. 

I  hope  the  reader  will  not  think  that  I  employ  my  pen  in  useless 
accounts,  or  to  make  a  display  of  the  difficulties  I  encountered  in 
my  operations,  merely  to  enhance  any  merit  on  my  part :  on  the 
contrary,  I  can  assure  him,  that  I  study  by  all  means  possible  to  be 
brief,  and  not  to  insert  the  least  thing  but  what  is  necessary  to  be 
known.  I  went  to  the  house  where  all  the  owners  of  the  boats 
were  assembled,  who  at  first  were  of  one  accord,  that  it  was  im- 
possible to  put  the  head  on  board  the  boat,  alleging  that  it  woidd 
break  it  to  pieces,  if  such  a  mass  of  stone  were  placed  in  it.  They 
then  strove  to  persuade  me  to  leave  the  stone,  as  they  were  disposed 
to  believe  that  there  was  no  gold  in  it ;  and,  if  I  took  it,  and 
found  none  after  I  had  spent  so  much,  I  should  lose  all.     Not- 


112  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

withstanding  their  simplicity,  when  I  persviaded  them  that  no 
accident  would  happen,  and  that  I  took  all  risks  upon  myself,  they 
did  not  fail  to  ask  me  an  enormous  sum  for  the  hire  of  the  boat. 
I  was  in  a  dilemma,  fearing,  that,  if  I  missed  this  boat,  I  might  lose 
the  high  water,  which  wovdd  have  obliged  me  to  wait  till  next 
year ;  and  in  a  country  like  this,  changing  from  one  day  to  another 
its  government  and  way  of  thinking,  I  did  not  know  what  might 
happen.  I  therefore  thought  it  best  to  secure  myself  from  any 
future  extortion,  and  give  an  enormous  hire  for  the  boat.  This 
was  tliree  thousand  piastres,  equal  to  seventy-five  pounds  sterling, 
from  that  place  to  Cairo. 

After  all  this  was  settled,  and  half  the  money  paid  down,  the 
boat  was  to  ascend  the  Nile  as  far  as  Assouan,  to  unload  at  that 
place,  and  to  return  immediately.  I  sent  my  Janizary  with  some 
presents  to  the  Aga,  and  some  trifles  for  Osseyn  CachefF,  to  be 
forwarded  to  him  at  Ybsambul,  by  the  first  opportunity  from 
Assouan  to  that  place ;  thinking  by  this  trifle  he  would  be  con- 
vinced, that  I  intended  to  return  to  that  country  to  finish  the 
operation,  and  be  induced  to  keep  his  promise,  not  to  let  any  one 
undertake  the  accomplishment  of  what  I  had  begun.  The  Janizary 
was  likewise  to  take  on  board  the  twelve  stones  which  I  left  there 
to  be  cut,  &c.  When  all  this  was  arranged,  I  set  off  for  Thebes  at 
night,  and  arrived  there  the  next  morning.  On  my  arrival,  I  went 
immediately  to  Carnak,  to  see  what  had  been  done  the  day  before 
by  the  twenty  men. 

Here,  reader,  was  the  beginning  of  those  discoveries,  which 
have  caused  me  so  much  trouble,  not  from  the  exertion  and 
arduous  labour  required  in  these  researches,  but  in  the  atrocious 
persecution  they  have  drawn  on  me,  from  malice,  jealousy,  and 
envy,  to  such  a  degree,  that  to  this  day,  the  very  goddess  Fortune, 
who  has  been  apparently  so  propitious  to  me,  I  had  reason  to  call 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  113 

barbarous  and  unkind.  Notwithstanding  which,  I  did  not  relin- 
quish jny  undertaking,  till  I  reached  the  accomplishment  of  my 
wishes.  Let  me  add,  I  have  further  enterprises  in  view,  which, 
I  hope,  will  convince  my  adversaries,  that  their  persecution  has 
had  no  other  effect  on  me,  than  that  of  strengthening  me  to  per- 
severance in  my  undertakings.  Had  I  not  determined  to  stand, 
like  a  pyramid  defying  the  wind,  against  all  their  numerous  attacks, 
which  poured  on  me  like  a  torrent,  I  should  not  have  been  able  to 
proceed,  even  from  the  commencement.  On  the  other  hand,  I  must 
acknowledge,  that  at  the  moment  when  I  was  persecuted  on  one 
side,  I  received  marks  of  kindness  and  good  wishes  on  the  other ; 
and  fortunately,  thank  God,  the  well-disposed  far  outnumbered  the 
others,  though  few  like  to  enter  into,  or  interfere  with  matters 
which  do  not  concern  themselves.  Many  travellers  of  various 
nations,  at  the  time  of  my  researches,  witnessed,  that  the  greatest 
difficulties  I  had  to  encounter  were  not  in  the  discovery  of  an- 
tiquities, which  I  consider  the  smallest  part  of  my  task,  but  in 
controlling  the  complicated  intrigues  of  my  enemies  and  false 
friends.  I  am  more  inclined  to  excuse  Count  Forbin,  as  the 
erroneous  and  false  accounts  he  gives  are  so  confused  and  con- 
tradictory to  the  facts,  that  he  openly  exposes  himself  to  ridicule  and 
contempt,  than  to  pardon  some  others,  who  should  have  been  above 
such  paltry  proceedings. 

The  works  in  Carnak  were  begun  when  I  returned  from  Esne, 
but  nothing  was  found,  and  there  was  no  likelihood  of  finding  any 
thing.  The  place  whence  the  French  had  taken  their  lion-headed 
statues,  at  the  time  of  the  invasion,  is  where  a  temple  stood,  sur- 
rounded on  three  sides  by  a  lake.  It  faces  the  avenue  of  the  great 
sphinx  to  the  north,  and  not  a  single  wall  or  column  remains  standing. 
On  the  exterior  side  of  the  wall  are  several  fragments  of  the  above 


114  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

statues,  which  were  there  before  the  French  army  invaded  Egypt,  but 
they  made  some  excavations  on  the  east  side  of  the  temple,  and 
made  discoveries,  the  fruits  of  which  are  now  to  be  seen  in  the 
British  Museum,  they  having  been  captured  at  sea.  The  Count 
de  Forbin  asserts,  that  after  all  these  sphynxes  had  been  discovered 
they  were  covered  up  again  by  some  French  gentlemen  who  super- 
intended the  work.  But  the  Count  did  not  mention  the  names 
of  those  persons,  for  he  knew  very  well  that  no  such  thing  ever 
took  place.  The  account  he  published  of  the  statues,  which  he 
acknowledges  to  have  been  found  twenty  feet  below  the  surface, 
and  backed  by  a  strong  ancient  wall,  was  taken  from  my  own 
letters,  which  I  gave  him  myself  in  Cairo,  of  which  I  shall  have 
to  speak  hereafter,  and  which  he  promised  to  give  to  the  world 
as  they  were.  Instead  of  tins,  the  only  use  he  made  of  them  was  to 
throw  all  the  facts  into  confusion,  and  prevent  the  real  truth  from 
coming  before  the  public. 

Now  to  more  obvious  facts.  According  to  a  calculation  I  had 
made,  I  dug  on  the  west  side  of  the  temple,  where  no  one  had  ever 
made  any  excavation  before,  nor  did  any  traveller  previous  to  me 
take  any  thing  thence  but  what  was  in  sight.  The  earth,  bricks, 
and  stones,  were  so  strongly  cemented  together  by  time,  particularly 
on  the  surface,  that  it  clearly  proved  the  ground  never  to  have  been 
touched  from  the  earliest  ages.  In  the  course  of  a  few  days  I  dis- 
covered about  eighteen  statues,  six  of  which  were  perfect,  and  among 
them  a  white  statue  as  large  as  life,  supposed  to  be  of  Jupiter 
Amnion,  which  is  now  also  in  the  British  Museum. 

1  here  beg  leave  to  make  an  observation  which  I  hope  will  con- 
vince the  world  of  the  false  statement  of  Count  de  Forbin.  The 
French  Consul,  Monsieur  Drouetti,  who  had  been  making  researches 
for  fifteen  years  in  that  country,  and  who  was  naturally  attached  to 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  115 

the  interest  of  France,  had  been  to  Thebes  twice  previous  to  my 
arrival  in  Egypt.  How  was  it,  that,  in  the  course  of  so  long  a  period, 
he  never  came  to  know  from  the  natives,  that  such  statues  had  been 
found  there  by  the  French,  and  covered  up  again  ?  and  how  hap- 
pened it,  that  the  person  who  covered  them  up  never  mentioned  it 
to  him,  or  to  any  one  else,  even  after  a  general  peace  took  place  ? 
We  should  suppose,  that  as  soon  as  the  seas  were  cleared  of  the 
English  cruizers,  whose  watchful  eyes  did  not  let  even  a  water-rat 
pass  into  France,  there  was  no  fear  that  these  statues  should  have 
been  taken,  and  thus  a  second  loss  incurred:  but  independent  of 
all  this,  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  Mr.  Drouetti  from  bringing 
them  safe  to  Alexandria,  as  he  did  other  antiquities,  which  were  the 
sole  object  of  his  ascending  the  Nile.  I  should  not  enter  on  this 
subject,  had  it  not  been  for  the  petty  means  which  have  been  em- 
ployed to  depreciate  every  thing  I  have  done,  and  which  are  a 
compound  of  erroneous  assertions,  that  I  believe  originated  in  the 
volcanic  brains  of  Count  de  Forbin  himself. 

The  place  where  I  found  these  statues  must  have  been  the  in- 
terior of  the  pronaos  ;  but  there  were  many  others  in  various  places, 
and  it  is  difficult  to  determine  their  original  stations.  In  another 
temple  in  Gournou,  which  is  yet  unknown,  and  of  which  I  shall  speak 
in  this  volume,  I  found  several  statues  of  the  same  sort,  and  by  the 
pedestals  it  appears  they  were  within  the  place  surrounded  by  the 
columns.  The  same  may  have  been  the  case  in  this  temple.  The 
situation  in  which  I  found  them  was  by  no  means  their  original  place, 
and  it  was  clearly  to  be  seen  by  their  irregular  positions,  that  they 
had  been  brought  thither  in  great  hurry  and  confusion.  Some  brick 
walls  had  been  built,  as  if  to  hide  them  from  the  destructive  hands 
of  an  invader,  and  the  white  statue  lay  among  the  rest  in  an  irre- 
gular manner. 

o.  2 


116  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

During  the  time  of  this  excavation  I  scrutinized  the  ruins  of 
Carnak,  and  perceived  a  great  number  of  spots  that  deserve  digging. 
I  saw  the  famous  altar,  with  the  six  deities  mentioned  in  the  great 
French  work,  and  the  colossal  arm,  both  of  which  I  formed  the  pro- 
ject of  removing  even  at  that  period.  Fortunately  on  this  side 
of  the  water  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  people  to  work  was  less 
than  I  had  found  it  on  the  other.  The  Cacheff  was  ready  to 
do  all  he  could  for  me,  and  every  thing  went  on  very  smoothly. 
The  only  impediment  here  was  that  the  Fellahs  of  Carnak  would 
insist  upon  coming  to  work  in  greater  numbers  than  those  of 
Luxor  ;  for  they  said  the  others  had  no  right  to  come  to  labour 
on  these  grounds,  and  sometimes  this  dispute  ended  in  blows. 
These  people  were  quite  the  reverse  of  those  in  Gournou,  who, 
having  become  opulent  by  the  trade  in  antiquities,  and  tricking 
travellers,  were  not  so  anxious  to  gain  thirty  paras  a  day.  During 
the  same  excavation  I  turned  up  a  fine  standing  colossus  without 
a  head,  part  of  which  projects  above  the  ground,  and  which  had  not 
been  seen  by  any  body.  For  my  part  I  think  it  one  of  the  most 
finished  pieces  of  Egyptian  sculpture  I  ever  saw. 

It  would  be  too  tedious  to  the  reader,  to  mention  all  the  par- 
ticulars that  occurred  during  my  researches.  Unfortunately  I  was 
without  money  to  proceed,  and  had  to  go  to  Esne,  to  borrow  some 
from  a  Greek  I  happened  to  know  in  that  place,  who  would  supply 
me  with  any  sum ;  but  as  I  expected  a  remittance  from  the  Consul, 
I  only  took  what  was  necessary  to  transport  the  lion-headed  statues 
from  Carnak  to  Luxor,  ready  for  embarkation.  On  my  return  to 
Carnak,  I  found,  that  an  order  had  come  from  the  Cacheff  of  Gous  to 
the  Caimakan  of  Luxor,  not  to  let  me  take  any  thing  away :  this 
being  contrary  to  the  order  I  had  from  Mahomet  Ali  Bashaw,  I 
set  off  for  Gous  immediately ;  and  finding,  on  my  arrival,  that  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  117 

Cacheff  was  gone  to  Gheneh,  I  dii*ected  my  course  to  that  place. 
As  the  current  was  very  strong,  we  went  on  pretty  fast.  About 
midnight  we  saw  two  cangias  coming  up.  I  inquired  what  party 
it  was,  and  was  told  it  was  Calil  Bey,  my  good  friend,  on  his 
return  from  Cairo.  I  was  pleased  at  this  circumstance,  as  I  meant 
to  complain  against  the  conduct  of  the  Cacheff ;  but,  on  approaching 
the  cangias,  I  found  that  the  Cacheff  was  there  also.  Calil  Bey  was 
well  pleased  to  see  me  returned  from  Nubia,  and  was  anxious  to 
inquire  how  they  received  me  in  that  country.  I  told  him,  that 
they  obeyed  his  firman,  and  that  I  had  done  all  I  wished  to  do 
in  respect  to  the  temple  at  Ybsambul ;  but  not  being  able  to 
finish  my  undertaking  that  year,  I  should  return  the  next.  He 
desired  to  know,  whether  the  two  brothers,  Mahomet  and  Osseyn 
Cacheff,  were  friends  again ;  a  question  to  which  I  was  unable 
to  reply ;  but  I  told  him  the  country  was  perfectly  quiet  at  that 
time. 

I  returned  to  Gous  with  him,  and  the  next  morning  took  an 
opportunity  to  inquire  of  the  Cacheff  the  reason  of  his  sending  the 
order  to  the  Sheik  not  to  let  the  English  take  away  any  thing  that 
was  found.  He  said,  he  knew  nothing  about  it ;  although  I  had 
seen  the  order  myself.  However,  he  was  ready  to  give  me  any 
order  I  pleased.  No  doubt  this  was  in  consequence  of  the  Bey 
being  there,  otherwise  I  should  not  have  found  him  so  easy  to  deal 
with. 

Calil  Bey  was  an  Albanian,  who  had  married  the  sister  of 
Mahomet  Ali,  Bashaw  of  Egypt,  and  held  the  command  of  the 
provinces  in  Upper  Egypt  from  Esne  to  Assouan ;  and  for  a  Turk 
was  much  attached  to  European  travellers.  He  was  continually 
inquiring  concerning  things  he  did  not  know,  and  had  a  degree  of 


118  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

sound  judgment ;  a  quality  very  scarce  among  Turks :  but  for  all 
this  he  was  a  complete  slave  to  superstition,  and  to  the  belief  of 
magical  powers.  On  our  arrival  at  Gous,  he  took  his  seat  in  the 
garden  of  the  Cacheff,  under  an  arbour  of  grape-vines,  shaded  all 
round  by  plantain  trees,  which  formed  a  very  pleasing  and  cool 
recess.  A  large  mat  was  spread  on  the  ground,  and  on  this  a  fine 
carpet,  and  cushions,  as  usual.  The  Cacheff  was  seated  at  his  right, 
and  a  Turkish  Sheik  on  his  left.  Two  Hadgees  sat  by  the  Cacheff, 
and  I  was  requested  to  take  my  seat  near  the  Holy-man.  Next  to 
me  was  a  Turkish  merchant,  and  after  him  a  fool  or  Santon  quite 
naked.  All  the  rest  of  the  followers,  soldiers,  and  attendants,  stood 
in  a  crescent  before  us.  Pipes  were  brought  in  for  the  Bey,  the 
Cacheff,  the  Holy-man,  and  myself.  Coffee  was  served  all  round  to 
the  persons  who  were  seated,  and  the  conversation  turned  on  the 
harvest,  that  was  to  be  the  next  season,  according  to  the  inundation 
of  that  year.  It  was  then  the  beginning  of  November.  They  were 
wondering  at  the  great  quantity  of  corn  the  Bashaw  was  sending  con- 
tinually to  be  embarked  at  Alexandria,  particularly  at  this  season. 
Some  supposed,  that  the  Europeans  were  about  to  make  war  against 
the  Porte,  and  that,  previous  to  the  declaration,  they  made  provision 
of  corn,  as  without  a  supply  from  Egypt  they  would  be  unable  to 
feed  their  troops.  Others  observed,  if  this  were  the  case,  Mahomet 
Ali  would  not  send  them  corn,  till  he  knew  for  what  purpose  it 
was  wanted.  One  said,  he  thought  the  corn  was  sent  into  Russia, 
as  he  heard  that  the  French  had  set  all  that  country  on  fire ;  and 
he  then  inquired  of  me,  whether  it  were  not  so.  I  told  him,  that  I 
did  not  know  what  the  French  did  in  that  country ;  but  I  knew 
that  the  corn  was  sent  into  Europe,  in  consequence  of  a  scarcity  in 
the  harvest  that  year,  through  the  whole  of  that  quarter  of  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  119 

globe.  The  Bey  agreed  it  must  be  so,  and  asked  whether  it  would 
be  the  same  the  next  season.  I  told  him  I  hoped  not,  for,  in 
general,  after  a  scarcity  came  a  plenty.  Yes,  says  the  Bey,  but 
the  Bashaw  will  sell  the  corn  at  a  high  price  for  three  or  four 
years  to  come,  till  your  granaries  are  filled  again.  "  But  pray," 
added  he,  smiling,  "  have  you  a  scarcity  of  stones  also  in  Europe, 
that  you  come  here  to  fetch  them  away?"  I  answered,  that  we 
had  plenty  of  stones,  but  we  thought  those  of  Egypt  were  of  a 
better  sort.  "  O  ho ! "  replied  he,  "  it  is  because  you  find  some 
gold  in  them  perhaps,  thank  God  ! "  This  is  the  first  instance  of 
my  hearing  the  word  "  perhaps"  employed ;  for  they  are  so  positive 
on  this  point,  that  they  never  make  any  doubt  of  it. 

The  dinner  was  brought  in  a  large  tray.  It  consisted,  as  usual, 
of  very  poor  rice  soup,  which,  after  eating  three  spoonsful,  was 
taken  away,  and  a  dish  of  roast  mutton  brought  forward.  No 
sooner  had  we  begun  to  eat  of  that,  than  a  man  came  in  with  his 
hand  full  of  large  green  peppercorns,  and  let  them  fall  on  the  tray, 
which,  being  of  metal,  sounded  like  a  drum-head.  After  him  came 
another,  with  half-a-dozen  onions  peeled,  which  he  let  fall  in  like 
manner,  and  they  rolled  about  the  tray  like  billiard  balls  ;  and  a 
third  followed  with  peeled  garlic,  &c.  After  eating  the  mutton,  a 
dish  of  very  small  fried  fish  was  served  up.  They  were  about 
half-a-dozen,  and  we  were  eight  of  us,  so  that  we  could  not  eat  too 
much  of  this.  It  was  soon  removed,  and  a  kind  of  tart  was  pro- 
duced ;  but  neither  the  Bey,  the  Cacheff,  the  Sheik,  nor  myself, 
could  eat  a  single  bit  of  it.  The  fruit  consisted  of  a  water 
melon,  which  having  demolished,  they  finished  their  repast  by 
washing  their  beards.  It  was  rather  too  mean  to  set  before 
the  Bey,  as  I  have  seen  the  Cacheff  take  a  better  for  himself  at 
other  times ;  but  it  is  a  general  system  among  these  people,  both 
Turks  and  Arabs,  always  to  make  themselves  appear  poor  in  the 


120  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

presence  of  their  superiors.  As  the  Cacheff  had  furnished  me  with 
an  order  for  the  Caimakan  of  Luxor  to  let  me  carry  away  what 
stones  I  pleased,  I  took  my  leave  of  the  Bey  and  set  off. 

On  my  arrival  at  Carnak,  the  work  to  he  done  consisted  only  in 
transporting  the  six  sphinxes  and  the  white  statue  to  Luxor  for 
embarkation,  a  distance  of  nearly  a  mile,  without  a  road.  In  many 
parts  the  water  had  left  a  soft  ground  where  the  statues  had  to 
pass ;  and,  as  there  was  no  mechanical  power  to  assist,  the  Arabs 
had  enough  to  do  to  carry  them  to  the  place  of  destination.  With 
this  all  my  labour  at  Carnak  ended  ;  and  while  thus  waiting  for  the 
boat  from  Assouan,  and  the  cash  from  Cairo,  I  paid  a  daily  visit  to 
the  tombs  in  Gournou.  These  sepulchres  are  excavated  in  all 
directions  in  the  rocks,  but  generally  with  the  entrance  facing 
the  east,  as  the  chain  of  these  mountains  runs  from  north  to 
south.  They  are  intermixed  of  all  sizes ;  and  some  of  them 
have  porticoes  hewn  out  of  the  rocks  before  the  entrance ;  but, 
generally,  they  are  within  the  outer  door,  which  is  mostly  adorned 
with  well-finished  figures  and  hieroglyphics,  and  generally  the 
watchful  fox  is  represented  at  each  side  of  the  inner  door  leading 
to  the  grotto.  Some  of  them  are  very  extensive,  and  run  down 
in  various  directions,  something  like  winding  stairs,  having  on 
each  side,  at  regular  distances  of  a  few  paces,  small  chambers  to 
deposit  the  mummies.  Some  have  deep  shafts,  or  wells,  with 
excavations  on  each  side  of  the  shaft  to  receive  the  mummies  ; 
and  at  the  bottom  of  the  wells  are  passages  leading  to  smaller 
apartments,  with  endless  winding  recesses.  It  was  here  that  I  had 
first  leisure  to  examine  and  find  the  means  of  ascertaining  where 
the  entrances  were  to  many  of  the  tombs,  which  had  been  hidden 
for  centuries  from  the  eye  of  mankind. 

The  extensive   ruins   of  Medinet   Aboo   are,   in   my  humble 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  121 

opinion,  best  worthy  the  attentive  scrutiny  of  a  traveller  of  any  on 
the  west  of  Thebes.  The  descriptions  given  by  Messrs.  Hamilton 
and  Denon  are  sufficient  to  convey  a  correct  idea  of  these  edifices, 
which  contain  propykea,  temples,  and  dwelling-places.  It  seems 
that  here  was  the  residence  of  some  of  the  sovereigns  of  Egypt ; 
for  in  no  other  edifices  of  ancient  Egypt  have  I  seen  the  remains 
of  habitations  as  they  are  in  this  place.  There  are  two  separate 
temples,  of  which  the  first  that  meets  the  view  going  from  the  Mem- 
nonium  is  of  a  less  ancient  date  than  the  other.  On  the  west  side  of 
the  portal  are  stones  with  hieroglyphics  upside-down,  evidently  be- 
longing to  a  former  temple.  The  pronaos  is  surrounded  by  a  portico 
of  pilasters,  at  each  side  of  which  are  two  chambers :  one  on  the 
right  of  the  entrance  has  been  used  as  a  Christian  chapel.  The 
cella  contains  various  apartments,  quite  dark  ;  in  one  of  which,  on 
the  right  side,  is  a  monolite  temple  of  red  granite,  without  hiero- 
glyphics. It  is  wider  than  the  door,  and  must  have  been  placed 
there  before  the  cella  was  erected.  The  hieroglyphics  and  figures 
of  this  edifice  differ  from  those  of  the  other  temple  in  proportion 
as  the  two  temples  differ  from  each  other.  On  the  north  side  of 
this  little  temple  was  a  small  lake,  or  rather  a  tank  for  water,  which 
is  now  filled  up  with  earth  and  rubbish  ;  and  there  must  have  been 
statues  all  round  it,  as  I  found  part  of  one  and  fragments  of  others 
in  an  excavation  I  made  in  that  place.  Perhaps  it  might  have 
been  used  for  the  same  purposes  as  the  small  lakes  near  the  temple 
of  Carnak,  which  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  the  public  baths 
destined  for  the  religious  visitors  to  the  temple.  On  the  south 
of  these  ruins  is  a  building  something  like  a  square  tower,  with  a 
large  gateway,  which  I  opened  and  went  through.  It  is  nearly  in 
a  line  with  the  gates  leading  into  the  great  temple.  Above  the 
gateway  is  a  chamber  with  two  square  windows,  looking  over  it 
at  each  side.     There  are  also  two  doors  opposite  each  other  on  the 

R 


s 


122  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

sides.  Above  this  chamber  was  another,  with  two  windows  like 
those  below ;  but  the  fore  part  of  the  upper  chamber  is  fallen  in. 
There  are  recesses  at  the  sides  of  the  windows,  no  doubt  to  place 
the  shutters.  No  hieroglyphics  are  to  be  seen  within  this  building, 
though  on  the  outside  it  is  every  where  covered  with  them.  The 
two  lateral  walls  in  front  of  this  place  form  an  avenue  to  the 
gateway. 

Further  on,  about  two  hundred  yards  to  the  west,  stands  the 
great  temple.  There  is  a  large  propylseon,  with  the  entrance  into 
the  inner  yard.  The  walls  are  covered  with  hieroglyphics,  deeply 
cut.  The  gateway,  which  is  also  adorned  in  like  manner,  leads 
into  a  large  yard,  with  a  wall  opposite  to  the  propylaeon,  and  a 
gateway  into  another  yard.  At  each  side  of  this  yard  is  a  portico. 
On  the  right  are  seven  pilasters,  with  colossal  figures  before  them ; 
and  on  the  left  eight  columns,  with  capitals  in  the  form  of  the  lotus. 
Both  of  these  porticoes  are  also  adorned  with  hieroglyphics,  deeply 
cut.  The  next  yard  has  a  gallery,  or  area,  all  round  it,  of  pilasters 
and  columns.  The  walls  are  beautifully  embellished  with  battles, 
men  on  chariots,  captives,  and  slaves ;  together  with  which  are 
distinctly  visible  procession  offerings,  initiations,  and  sacrifices,  so 
well  described  by  Mr.  Denon.  The  excavation  of  these  works  shows, 
that  they  are  of  a  very  ancient  period.  The  hieroglyphics  are  uncom- 
monly deep,  more  so  than  any  I  have  seen  in  other  buildings  in  Egypt. 
In  some  parts  the  figures  retain  their  colours  pretty  well,  particu- 
larly in  the  ceiling  on  the  capitals  of  the  columns.  This  edifice  has 
been  used  as  a  Christian  church ;  and  the  rude  columns,  employed 
in  a  more  modern  building  within  this  yard,  show  the  wonderful 
difference  between  the  arts  of  the  two  ages.  Further  on,  through 
the  last  gate,  was  the  entrance  to  the  pronaos  and  cella :  but  now 
these  are  buried  under  the  earth,  and  several  Saracenic  buildings 
have  been  raised  on  it.     The  exterior  wall  of  these  ruins  is  filled 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  123 

with  historical  subjects,  such  as  land  and  sea  fights,  lion  hunting, 
processions  of  captives,  and  various  national  emblems.  Further  to 
the  south  of  the  town  is  a  small  temple,  which  now  serves  for  the 
shepherds  to  keep  their  cattle  in  at  night.  The  whole  town,  in  my 
opinion,  appears  to  have  been  rebuilt  twice  or  three  times  suc- 
cessively on  the  ruins  of  the  former. 

It  was  at  this  period,  that  I  began  to  make  some  researches  in 
the  valley  adjacent  to  that  of  Beban  el  Malook.  I  had  seen  all  the 
tombs  of  the  kings  :  as  I  did  not  go  there,  however,  with  any  intention 
of  making  researches,- my- curiosity  must  have  been  greater  than  that 
of  many  who  had  been  there  before,  as  I  went  into  every  little  recess 
of  these  valleys.  It  was  in  the  western  valley  that  one  of  the  French 
savans  discovered  a  large  tomb,  which  he  found  open,  but  was  quite 
unknown  before  his  time.  I  went  to  visit  this  tomb,  and  found  it  very 
extensive,  and  in  pretty  good  preservation.  My  curiosity  did  not 
end  here.  I  went  farther  on  in  the  valley ;  and  in  one  of  the  most 
remote  spots  saw  a  heap  of  stones,  which  appeared  to  me  detached 
from  the  mass.  The  vacancies  between  these  stones  were  filled  up 
with  sand  and  rubbish.  I  happened  to  have  a  stick  with  me,  and 
on  thrusting  it  into  the  holes  among  the  stones,  I  found  it  penetrate 
very  deep.  I  returned  immediately  to  Gournou,  and  procured  a  few 
men,  to  open  these  places.  Unfortunately,  both  Mrs.  Belzoni  and 
myself  had  been  much  afflicted  for  some  time  with  the  ophthalmia, 
which  was  so  severe  on  me  at  this  time,  that  I  could  scarcely  see 
any  thing  before  me. 

I  took  the  men  into  the  same  valley  the  next  morning ;  but  in 
consequence  of  my  eyes  being  so  bad,  it  was  some  time  before 
I  could  fmd  the  spot  again.  On  removing  a  few  stones,  we  per- 
ceived, that  the  sand  ran  inwards ;  and,  in  fact,  we  were  so  near 
the  entrance,  that  in  less  than  two  hours  all  the  stones  were  taken 
away.     I  had  caused  some  candles  to  be  brought,  and  I  went  in, 

r  2 


124  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

followed  by  the  Arabs.  I  cannot  boast  of  having  made  a  great 
discovery  in  this  tomb,  though  it  contains  several  curious  and 
singular  painted  figures  on  the  walls ;  and  from  its  extent,  and 
part  of  a  sarcophagus  remaining  in  the  centre  of  a  large  cham- 
ber, have  reason  to  suppose,  that  it  was  the  burial-place  of  some 
person  of  distinction.  The  tomb  consists  of  three  chambers,  two 
corridors,  and  a  staircase ;  but  the  remote  situation  in  which  it 
was  found  renders  it  remarkable :  and  I  declare,  that  I  owe  this 
discovery  merely  to  fortune,  not  to  any  premeditated  research, 
as  I  went  into  these  mountains  only  to  examine  the  various 
places,  where  the  water  descends  from  the  desert  into  the  valleys 
after  rain.  It  is  singular  to  observe,  that  though  rain  falls  very 
seldom,  perhaps  not  more  than  once  or  twice  a  year,  yet  such  is 
the  effect  of  the  climate  and  the  sun  on  the  spots  where  the  water 
passes,  that  they  are  as  strongly  marked,  as  if  it  were  continually 
running  over  them,  and  much  harder  than  the  rest  of  the  masses. 

The  higher  part  of  the  mountain  on  the  west  of  Thebes  extends 
in  wide  plains,  which  rise  gradually  towards  the  west ;  and  when 
rain  falls  upon  them,  the  water  takes  its  course  towards  the  Nile, 
descending  into  the  valleys  of  Egypt.  There  are  very  few  places 
in  these  mountains  where  water  gathers  in  such  quantities,  as  in 
the  valley  of  Beban  el  Malook,  and  its  adjoining  branch  on  the 
west  side.  For  some  time  the  water  forms  a  small  torrent,  that 
carries  every  thing  before  it.  Mr.  Salt  superintended  the  making 
of  a  road  from  the  tombs  of  the  kings  to  the  Nile,  for  the  purpose 
of  transporting  a  large  sarcophagus,  and  one  of  these  falls  of  water 
from  the  desert  destroyed  the  whole  road.  For  the  present, 
however,  I  shall  leave  this  valley,  as  I  shall  have  to  speak  of  it  in 
another  part  of  this  volume,  on  my  second  journey  to  Thebes  and 
Nubia. 

The  time  having  elapsed,  in  which  1  expected  to  receive  letters 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  125 

from  Cairo,  I  was  rather  uneasy,  and  resolved  to  return  to  Kenneh. 
On  my  arrival  at  this  place,  1  found  the  courier  had  just  entered  it. 
He  brought  me  letters  from  Mr.  Salt,  with  an  order  for  money  on 
the  Seraf,  or  banker,  of  Kenneh.  I  quickly  finished  my  business 
there,  and  speeded  to  Luxor,  where  1  was  pleased  to  find  the  boat 
returned  from  Assouan,  to  take  the  colossal  bust  on  board :  but  I 
was  soon  informed  by  the  proprietor,  that  it  was  loaded  with  dates, 
and  that  he  was  come  himself  from  Esne,  to  return  the  money 
I  had  paid  as  earnest ;  for  they  could  not  think  of  taking  that 
large  stone  into  the  boat,  as  it  would  crush  it  to  pieces.  All  my  per- 
suasions were  useless  ;  and  though  I  had  a  written  agreement  in 
my  hands,  they  signified  to  me,  that  it  was  of  no  use,  they  never 
would  take  the  stone  on  board.  I  had  much  to  say  to  them,  as 
may  be  imagined  in  such  a  case ;  for  I  was  so  circumstanced,  that  if 
the  present  opportunity  of  transporting  the  bust  were  lost,  the  water 
in  the  Nile  would  have  become  much  too  low,  and  the  conveyance 
could  not  have  been  effected  till  the  next  season.  At  the  same 
time  I  was  informed  by  my  Janizary,  whom  I  sent  to  Assouan  in 
the  same  boat  with  the  two  agents  of  Mr.  D.,  that  it  was  owing  to 
them  the  owner  would  not  take  the  stone  on  board :  for  they  told 
him  he  would  lose  his  boat,  and  never  receive  any  recompense  for 
it ;  and  that  the  agreement  I  made  with  them  was  good  for  nothing 
when  in  Cairo.  In  fact,  these  gentlemen  had  so  much  the  minds  of 
the  crew,  that  they  were  resolved  not  to  perform  their  contract. 

The  twelve  stones  I  had  left  in  the  island  of  Pliilce,  and  which 
were  to  have  been  conveyed  in  the  same  boat,  in  like  manner  could 
not  be  embarked,  as  the  Eeis  said  there  were  no  small  boats  to 
take  them  down  the  cataract :  and  I  afterwards  learned,  that  this 
also  was  owing  to  the  same  influence.  The  unfortunate  history  of 
these  stones  will  not  be  read  without  exciting  sentiments  of  de- 
testation towards  the  parties  concerned :  they  had  been  mutilated, 


126  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

and  rendered  useless,  how,  and  by  whom,  I  shall  mention  here- 
after. My  situation  with  regard  to  the  boat  was  far  from 
pleasant,  and  I  had  no  resource,  but  to  take  the  owner  to  Esne 
and  lay  the  case  before  Khalil  Bey,  who  by  this  time  must  have 
arrived  at  that  place :  but  even  then  I  did  not  know  how  far  he 
would  interfere  in  compelling  these  people  to  keep  to  their  agree- 
ment, as  he  had  himself  observed,  that  he  thought  the  stone  would 
break  the  boat.     This,  however,  was  the  only  step  I  could  take. 

Fortune  sometimes  brings  troubles  on  mankind  merely  that 
they  may  taste  the  fickleness  of  her  nature  and  uncertainty  of  the 
favours  she  condescends  to  bestow  on  them.  My  vexation  was 
great,  thinking  all  my  efforts  and  exertion  in  bringing  the  bust 
to  the  Nile  were  to  no  purpose,  and  that  very  probably  it  would 
never  reach  England,  as  the  underhand  machinations  against  it 
were  so  powerful.  At  that  moment,  however,  a  soldier  arrived  from 
Erments,  acquainting  me  that  the  Cacheff  was  returned  from  Cairo  ; 
and  he  gave  me  at  the  same  time  a  letter  from  him,  with  a  present 
which  he  had  sent  of  two  small  bottles  of  anchovies  and  two  of 
olives.  Strange  as  it  may  appear,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  effects 
of  a  few  salted  little  fish  contributed  the  greatest  share  towards 
the  removal  of  the  colossus,  which  I  had  so  much  at  heart,  and 
which,  in  all  probability,  but  for  them,  would  not  have  been  in  the 
British  Museum  to  this  day.  The  letter  contained  a  very  gratify- 
ing invitation  to  a  feast  to  be  given  by  the  Cacheff,  and  the  present 
was  in  token  of  a  friendly  disposition  towards  me.  I  was  not  a 
little  surprised  at  this  change,  but  I  soon  discovered  the  reason. 
The  soldier  acquainted  me,  that  the  Cacheff  was  in  a  terrible  rage 
with  a  certain  correspondent  and  friend  of  his,  a  Frank,  who  for 
some  time  had  raised  his  expectation  of  having  some  valuable  pre- 
sents sent  him  ;  but,  instead  of  this,  he  received  at  last  only  a 
few  bottles  of  insignificant  fish,  which  may  be  had  in  plenty  from 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  127 

the  Nile,  and  a  few  olives,  not  worth  a  pipe  of  tobacco.  I  took 
care,  that  this  should  not  be  told  to  the  owner  of  the  boats  ;  and,  as 
it  was  arranged  that  we  should  go  to  Esne  for  the  decision  of  the 
affair,  I  took  them  on  board  the  little  boat  which  I  had  hired,  and 
we  set  off  for  that  place,  leaving  the  large  one  at  Luxor.  Knowing 
in  what  humour  the  Cacheff  must  be  in  from  his  disappointment,  I 
thought  to  strike  while  his  mind  was  hot. 

On  our  arrival  before  Erments  I  begged  the  two  owners  of  the 
boat  to  wait  a  little,  as  I  had  business  with  the  Cacheff  of  the 
village.  It  was  already  an  hour  after  sunset,  and  the  village  is 
about  a  mile  from  the  Nile.  I  took  my  interpreter  and  Janizary 
with  me,  and  set  off  alertly  to  my  anchovy  and  olive  man.  I  found 
him  seated  on  a  mat  in  the  middle  of  a  field,  a  stick  fastened  in  the 
around  with  a  lantern  attached  to  it,  and  all  his  attendants  stand- 
ing  before  him.  On  seeing  me,  he  made  a  great  parade  of  com- 
pliments ;  I  suppose  because  he  thought,  that,  as  he  was  dis- 
appointed of  presents  from  one  quarter,  he  would  make  the  best 
market  he  could  by  trying  the  other.  Pipes  and  coffee  were 
brought  as  usual ;  and  an  offer  was  made  me,  to  send  as  many  men 
as  I  liked  to  have  to  work,  that  I  might  take  away  the  great  head 
early  the  next  morning,  and  the  cover  of  the  sarcophagus,  or  any 
thing  else  I  pleased.  Had  I  requested  him  to  let  me  take  the  two 
large  colossi  of  Thebes,  Tommy  and  Dummy,  as  the  Arabs  call 
them,  he  would  have  had  no  objection  to  my  putting  them  on 
board  my  little  boat  that  night.  I  then  introduced  the  affair  of 
the  boat,  produced  the  written  agreement  I  had  drawn  up  at  Esne 
with  the  two  owners,  and  mentioned  the  money  I  had  paid,  which 
amounted  to  half  the  sum  of  what  they  were  eventually  to  receive. 
He  immediately  said,  I  need  not  go  to  Esne  for  the  decision,  the 
affair  belonging  to  himself,  as  the  boat  was  to  be  loaded  on  a  bank 
in  his  province.     The  two  gentlemen  from  Esne  were  sent  for,  and 


128  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

when  they  heard,  that  the  cause  was  to  be  tried  at  Erments,  they  were 
thunderstruck-  They  considered  the  boat  lost  to  them,  though  I  re- 
peatedly told  them,  that  I  would  be  answerable  for  any  damage  that 
might  be  incurred  in  the  embarkation  or  landing  ;  but  it  was  all  to 
no  purpose.  The  Cacheff,  however,  insisted  that  they  should  keep 
their  agreement  with  me  ;  and  still  more  to  accommodate  matters,  as 
they  were  at  a  loss  what  to  do  with  the  dates,  offered  them  his  canja, 
which  would  contain  as  much  as  was  necessary  to  be  taken  out  of  the 
boat,  as  I  did  not  wish  to  unload  it  entirely.  Meanwhile,  as  he  did 
not  like  to  appear  too  openly  decided  in  my  favour,  he  proposed  that 
in  the  morning  the  owners  should  be  summoned,  and  the  case  brought 
to  a  fair  hearing.  They  then  retired  to  pass  the  night  on  board. 
In  continuing  his  civilities  and  protestations  of  friendship,  the 
Cacheff  came  to  an  explanation  of  his  former  conduct,  and,  in  par- 
ticular, of  the  letter  he  sent  to  his  brother  respecting  the  sarcopha- 
gus. It  was  written,  he  said,  before  he  saw  Mr.  D. ;  but  now  that 
he  found  how  things  were,  I  might  have  the  sarcophagus,  or  any 
thing  else ;  that  he  would  guard  it  for  me  as  long  as  I  desired  ; 
that  no  one  else  should  have  it ;  and  added  a  thousand  other 
obliging  things. 

So  extraordinary  a  change  led  me  to  suppose,  that  Mr.  Salt  had 
made  him  some  handsome  present  when  in  Cairo ;  but  I  was  mis- 
taken, for,  a  little  after,  asking  him  what  he  thought  of  the  consul, 
to  my  surprise  he  told  me,  that  he  did  not  see  him.  The  consul 
invited  him,  he  said,  to  his  house,  and  prepared  a  dinner  for  him  ; 
but  that,  on  the  day  he  was  to  go,  news  arrived  of  the  death  of 
Tusoon  Bashaw,  the  eldest  son  of  Mahomet  Ali ;  and  he  was 
ordered  to  come  away  immediately,  which  put  an  end  to  the  plea- 
sure of  seeing  the  consul,  for  he  loved  him  like  his  right  eye.  The 
story  was  equally  well  invented,  and  well  told ;  and  I  saw  plainly 
he  was  so  ashamed  of  his  late  conduct  towards  me,  that  he  could 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  129 

not  face  the  consul.  He  caused  dinner  to  be  brought,  and  carried 
his  civilities  to  such  a  height,  that  I  began  to  be  alarmed,  suspecting 
him  of  some  diabolical  trick.  On  my  thanking  him  for  the  bottles 
of  anchovies  and  olives,  he  said,  they  were  the  whole  of  the  French 
consul's  present  to  him  while  he  was  in  Cairo.  I  took  the  oppor- 
tunity of  observing,  that  it  would  have  been  well  for  him,  if,  while 
he  was  there,  he  had  called  on  the  English  consul.  To  which  he 
replied,  that  he  had  been  told  the  consul  had  a  fine  brace  of  pistols 
for  him ;  but  that  unfortunately  it  was  out  of  his  power  to  go  to 
see  him.  I  answered,  I  had  no  doubt  he  would  make  him  some 
present  when  the  stone  should  reach  Cairo ;  on  which  he  im- 
mediately rejoined,  that  there  was  nothing  he  would  not  do 
either  for  him  or  for  me ;  but  I  must  not  think  that  what  he  did 
was  with  any  view  of  interest.  I  said,  I  was  quite  persuaded  of  the 
contrary ;  and  should  trouble  him  for  an  order  to  be  given  to  the 
people  at  Gournou  to  come  to  work.  He  protested  he  would 
comply  with  all  I  wished ;  but  added,  with  a  smile,  "  What  will  you 
do,  if  the  trial  should  go  against  you  ?"  I  told  him  I  should  pro- 
ceed to  Esne,  where  the  agreement  was  made  in  the  presence  of  the 
Sharif,  and  show  that  I  was  in  the  right.  He  laughed,  put  his  hand 
on  my  shoulder,  and  said,  "  You  may  sleep  in  peace,  for  to-morrow 
I  will  myself  see  the  boat  unloaded  of  every  date  that  is  in  it,  and 
you  may  re-load  it  at  your  pleasure."  I  answered,  that  I  had  no 
doubt  he  would  do  what  was  just,  and,  taking  leave,  I  returned  on 
board  the  little  boat  for  the  night. 

13th. — In  the  morning  I  found  him  in  his  chamber  of  audience, 
surrounded  by  several  Arabs,  Sheiks  of  the  village.  He  made  me 
sit  down  on  his  right  hand,  and  coffee  and  pipes  were  brought ;  for 
no  judgment  could  be  pronounced  without  these  luxuries.  He  had 
explained  the  cause  to  the  gentlemen  of  the  jury,  who  said,  without 
hearing  the  other  side,  that  what  he  intended  to  do  was  perfectly 

s 


ISO  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

equitable,  and  they  would  have  said  the  same  whether  I  had  been 

right  or  wrong ;  for  these  juries  are  not  so  deficient  in  politeness  as 

to  contradict  the  judge.     The  other  parties  came,  and  he  received 

them  politely,  but  with  a  frown  on  his  brow,  from  which  I  have  no 

doubt  they  sufficiently  augured  their  fate.     However,  not  to  keep 

them  in  suspense,  they  were  soon  plainly  told,  that  the  bark,  except 

only  eighty  ardeps,  an  indulgence  to  winch  I  had  agreed,  must  be 

unloaded ;  and  he  saw  no  other  way  of  settling  the  business.     He 

then  referred  to  the  gentlemen  of  the  jury,  to  know  whether  they 

had  any  thing  to  say.     To  my  astonishment  they  answered,  that,  as 

the  other  parties  made  no  defence,  they  of  course  acknowledged 

themselves   wrong;    and,   having   nothing   more   to   do,    they  all 

instantly  rose  and  walked  off.     The  defendants  then  partook  of 

what  was  before  them ;  but  I  believe  never  made  a  worse  breakfast 

in  their  lives.     They  began  to  talk  about  where  to  find  a  boat, 

though  they  were  obliged  of  necessity  to  hire  one  of  the  Cacheff, 

being  fully  aware  of  his  design,  which  was  to  get  the  best  part  of 

the  money  for  himself.     The  contract  was  soon  made,  and  they 

paid  him  two-thirds  of  what  they  were  to  receive  from  me,  which, 

indeed,  they  were  glad  to  do,  lest  he  should  scrutinise  the  business, 

and,  finding  the  freight  to  be  double  what  was  mentioned  in  the 

bill  of  lading,  they  should  thus  lose  still  more.     I  then  took  leave 

of  the  Cacheff,  that  I  might  hasten  to  Gournou,  to  settle  what 

business  was  to  be  done  there.     He  had  given  me  a  tiscary  for  the 

soldier  to  furnish  me  with  what  I   wanted,  gave  orders   to  the 

Fellahs  to  do   all  I  desired,  and  take  out  the  sarcophagus;  and 

on  going  on  board,  I  found  that  he  had  sent  me  two  sheep,  a  jar  of 

cheese,  and  some  bread.     We  set  off  immediately.     One  of  the 

sheep  died  in  the  evening,  the  other  next  day,  and  the  cheese  was 

full  of  vermin.     We  arrived  at  Luxor  in  the  afternoon,  and  a  few 

hours  after  went  to  Gournou,  and  saw  the  Sheik  el  bellad  of  that 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  131 

place.  I  sent  my  Janizary  to  the  soldier,  and  it  was  concerted,  that 
the  Fellahs  I  wanted  should  be  ready  for  me  in  the  morning. 

Early  on  the  14th,  I  went  again  to  Gournou  to  begin  the  work, 
and  was  not  a  little  surprised  when  I  saw  no  Fellahs  assembled. 
By  one  whom  I  met,  I  was  told,  that  they  were  afraid,  being  ordered 
not  to  work  for  the  English.  I  applied  as  before  to  the  soldier, 
who  sent  a  man  to  collect  the  Fellahs;  but  it  was  too  late:  they 
were  all  dispersed.  Accordingly,  I  contented  myself  this  day  with 
only  having  the  apparatus,  necessary  to  embark  the  head,  conveyed 
over  from  Luxor.  The  CachefF's  boat  from  Erments  arrived,  and 
that  at  Luxor  came  also  to  Gournou  to  unload. 

15th. — The  next  day  we  collected,  though  not  without  trouble, 
a  hundred  and  thirty  men ;  and  I  begun  to  make  a  causeway,  by 
which  to  convey  the  head  down  to  the  river  side  ;  for  the  bank  was 
more  than  fifteen  feet  above  the  level  of  the  water,  which  had  retired 
at  least  a  hundred  feet  from  it. 

Next  morning  a  soldier  came  from  the  Cacheff,  to  say  that  I 
was  not  to  pay  the  Fellahs  any  thing,  as  they  were  ordered  to  work 
for  me  for  nothing  as  long  as  I  required,  and  that  he  made  me  a 
present  of  their  labour.  I  thanked  him,  but  desired  the  soldier  to 
tell  him,  at  the  same  time,  that  it  was  not  my  custom  to  have  the 
labour  of  men  for  nothing,  nor  would  the  consul  of  England  accept 
of  such  a  present.  I  this  day  finished  the  causeway  down  the 
bank,  and  had  the  head  brought  to  the  edge  of  the  slope,  ready  to 
be  embarked. 

On  the  17th  of  November,  I  succeeded  in  my  attempt,  and  the 
head  of  the  younger  Memnon  was  actually  embarked.  I  cannot 
help  observing,  that  it  was  no  easy  undertaking  to  put  a  piece  of 
granite,  of  such  bulk  and  weight,  on  board  a  boat,  that,  if  it  received 
the  weight  on  one  side,  would  immediately  upset ;  and,  what  is 
more,  this  was  to  be  done  without  the  smallest  help  of  any  me- 

s  2 


132  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

chanical  contrivance,  even  a  single  tackle,  and  only  with  four  poles 
and  ropes,  as  the  water  was  about  eighteen  feet  below  the  bank 
where   the   head  was   to  descend.      The   causeway  I  had   made 
gradually  sloped  to  the  edge  of  the  water  close  to  the  boat,  and 
with  the  four  poles  I  formed  a  bridge  from  the  bank  into  the  centre 
of  the  boat,  so  that  when  the  weight  bore  on  the  bridge,  it  pressed 
only  on  the  centre  of  the  boat.     The  bridge  rested  partly  on  the 
causeway,  partly  on  the  side  of  the  boat,  and  partly  on  the  centre  of 
it.     On  the  opposite  side  of  the  boat  I  put  some  mats  well  filled 
with  straw.     I  necessarily  stationed  a  few  Arabs  in  the  boat,  and 
some  at  each  side,  with  a  lever  of  palm- wood,  as  I  had  nothing  else. 
At  the  middle  of  the  bridge  I  put  a  sack  filled  with  sand,  that,  if 
the  colossus  should  run  too  fast  into  the  boat,  it  might  be  stopped. 
In  the  ground  behind  the  colossus  I  had  a  piece  of  a  palm-tree  firmly 
planted,  round  which  a  rope  was  twisted,  and  then  fastened  to  its 
car,  to  let  it  descend  gradually.     I  set  a  lever  at  work  on  each 
side,  and  at  the  same  time  that  the  men  in  the  boat  were  pulling, 
others  were  slackening  the  ropes,  and  others  shifting  the  rollers  as 
the  colossus  advanced. 

Thus  it  descended  gradually  from  the  main-land  to  the  causeway, 
when  it  sunk  a  good  deal,  as  the  causeway  was  made  of  fresh  earth. 
This,  however,  I  did  not  regret,  as  it  was  better  it  should  be  so,  than 
that  it  should  run  too  fast  towards  the  water ;  for  I  had  to  consider, 
that,  if  this  piece  of  antiquity  should  fall  into  the  Nile,  my  return  to 
Europe  would  not  be  very  welcome,  particularly  to  the  antiquaries ; 
though  I  have  reason  to  believe,  that  some  among  the  great  body  of 
its  scientific  men  would  rather  have  seen  it  sunk  in  the  Nile,  than 
where  it  is  now  deposited.  However,  it  went  smoothly  on  board.  The 
Arabs,  who  were  unanimously  of  opinion  that  it  would  go  to  the 
bottom  of  the  river,  or  crush  the  boat,  were  all  attention,  as  if  anxious 
to  know  the  result,  as  well  as  to  learn  how  the  operation  was  to  be 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  133 

performed ;  and  when  the  owner  of  the  boat,  who  considered  it  as 
consigned  to  perdition,  witnessed  my  success,  and  saw  the  huge  piece 
of  stone,  as  he  called  it,  safely  on  board,  he  came  and  squeezed  me 
heartily  by  the  hand.  "  Thank  heaven !"  I  exclaimed,  and  I  had  reason 
to  be  thankful ;  for  I  will  leave  it  to  the  judgment  of  any  engineer, 
whether  it  would  not  be  easier  to  embark  a  mass  ten  times  larger 
on  board  a  competent  vessel,  where  all  sorts  of  mechanical  powers 
can  be  procured,  instead  of  being  destitute,  as  I  was,  of  every  thing 
necessary. 

The  boat  then  crossed  the  water  to  Luxor,  for  what  was  to  be 
taken  in  there,  which  was  done  in  three  days,  and  on  the  21st  we 
left  Thebes  on  our  return  to  Cairo. 

I  had  just  finished  my  business,  when  I  was  again  so  affected  with 
ophthalmia,  that  for  twelve  days  I  kept  myself  shut  up  in  the  cabin  of 
the  boat,  so  that  I  can  give  no  account  of  this  voyage,  till  we  reached 
Siout.  I  could  then  just  peep  at  the  light ;  but  it  gave  me  great  pain 
whenever  I  attempted  to  open  my  eyes.  At  Siout  I  went  to  see  the 
Deftardar  Bey,  to  return  him  thanks  for  the  firman  he  had  given 
me  when  I  ascended  the  Nile.  I  found  him  in  his  tent  in  the 
middle  of  a  field  of  high  clover,  which  had  nearly  reached  its  growth, 
and  his  horses  were  all  out  at  grass.  He  was  pleased  to  hear  that 
I  had  succeeded  in  my  undertaking,  and  requested  to  be  remembered 
to  the  English  Consul,  to  whom  he  sent  a  letter  by  me. 

Next  morning  we  set  off  for  Cairo,  and  reached  it  on  the  15th 
of  December,  having  been  twenty-four  days  from  Thebes.  Thus  I 
had  been  five  months  and  a  half  in  continual  activity  and  exertion ; 
but  I  must  not  let  pass  the  unjust  observation  made  by  the  ever 
veracious  Count  de  Forbin,  who  asserted,  that  I  employed  six 
months  solely  in  taking  the  colossal  bust  on  board  the  boat.  It  is 
true,  I  was  absent  five  months  and  a  half  from  Cairo,  and  six  months 
had  elapsed  before  I  reached  Alexandria ;  but  this  time  was  not  all 


134  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

devoted  to  the  removal  of  the  bust,  as  I  employed  only  eighteen  days 
in  that  operation,  and  but  a  single  day  in  embarking  it :  the 
greater  part  of  the  time  was  spent  in  more  arduous  researches ;  and 
the  various  pieces  of  antiquity  which  I  brought  down  the  Nile  will 
bear  infallible  testimony  to  my  labour. 

At  Cairo  I  found  that  the  consul  was  gone  to  Alexandria,  but 
had  left  with  Mr.  Beechey,  his  secretary,  instructions  and  letters  for 
me.  He  requested,  that  every  thing  might  be  landed  and  lodged 
in  the  consulate  except  the  bust.  I  could  not  conceive  the  reason 
of  this  distinction,  as  I  thought  that  all  the  articles  I  collected  were 
to  go  to  the  British  Museum.  However,  I  made  no  inquiry  into 
the  business,  and  every  thing  was  deposited  as  desired.  The  first 
hour  of  my  arrival  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  my  good  and 
much  lamented  friend,  Burckhardt,  whose  death  has  been  a  great 
loss  to  me.  He  was  the  most  candid,  disinterested,  and  sincere 
being  I  have  ever  met  with ;  totally  free  from  that  invidious  and 
selfish  disposition,  which  is  so  often  to  be  found  in  travellers,  who 
wish  to  be  alone  in  one  quarter  of  the  world,  to  relate  their  story 
agreeably  to  the  suggestions  of  their  own  imagination  to  the  people 
of  another.  But  Burckhardt  had  none  of  that  littleness  of  mind : 
he  was  a  true  explorer,  and  a  hardy  one,  without  pride,  or  the  am- 
bition to  be  thought  more  than  he  was.  He  made  no  parade  of  his 
knowledge,  as  his  works  plainly  evince. 

Having  prepared  for  my  departure  for  Alexandria,  we  left 
Boolak  on  the  3d  of  January,  1817,  and  arrived  in  Raschid,  or 
Rosetta,  on  the  10th.  There  I  had  to  land  the  colossus,  and 
embark  it  again  on  board  a  djerm ;  but  as  I  had  now  some  tackle, 
of  which  I  was  destitute  before,  and  proper  people  to  work,  I  found 
it  quite  an  easy  operation.  Besides,  I  took  care  to  land  it  in  a 
situation,  that  was  advantageous  for  embarking  it  again.  Having 
finished,  I  set  off  on  board  the  same  djerm,  with  the  bust,  and  was 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  135 

fortunate  enough  to  reach  Alexandria  two  hours  after  sunset  of  the 
same  day,  which  was  the  fourth  after  our  arrival  in  Eosetta.  That 
very  day,  above  two  hundred  djerms  came  out  of  the  Nile,  some  of 
which  had  been  waiting  for  an  opportunity  of  passing  the  bar 
above  eighty  days.  Mrs.  Belzoni  went  by  land,  accompanied  by 
the  Irish  lad,  and  arrived  the  next  day.  I  will  not  mention  the 
kind  reception  of  the  consul-general,  and  the  under-consul,  Mr. 
Lee ;  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  become  acquainted  with  a  gentle- 
man, Mr.  Briggs,  who  received  me  into  his  house  in  the  most 
hospitable  manner,  and  was  as  much  concerned  for  the  success  of 
my  affairs  as  it  was  possible  to  be ;  for  he  felt  the  pleasure  of  a 
true  Englishman,  in  seeing  one  of  the  most  finished  monuments  of 
Egyptian  art  ready  to  be  embarked  for  his  native  country. 

The  next  and  final  operation  with  respect  to  the  bust,  on  my 
part,  was  to  land  it,  and  have  it  conveyed  in  safety  to  the  Bashaw's 
magazine,  there  to  await  its  embarkation  for  England.  I  had  some 
difficulty  in  landing  it,  as  the  pier  was  much  higher  than  the  djerm, 
and  the  motion  of  the  sea  did  not  permit  me  to  erect  any  bridge. 
I  was  so  fortunate  as  to  procure  the  crew  of  a  British  transport, 
which  was  there  at  the  time;  and  with  their  help,  with  proper 
tackle,  and  a  hundred  men  besides,  it  was  landed  safely. 

Having  finished  my  operations,  and  whatever  was  necessary 
respecting  the  head,  I  proposed  to  the  consul,  to  make  another  trip 
into  Upper  Egypt  and  Nubia,  to  open  the  temple  at  Ybsambul. 
Nothing  could  be  more  pleasing  to  me,  than  to  find,  that  my 
proposal  was  accepted ;  as  I  thought  I  might  have  an  opportunity 
of  accomplishing  the  wishes  I  had  formed,  which,  to  a  certain 
extent,  were  with  particular  views ;  though,  as  the  consul  has 
proved,  no  interested  motives  governed  my  mind.  The  only  sti- 
pulation I  made  was,  that,  if  I  were  successful,  he  should  give  me 
an  official  letter  of  introduction  to  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  when 


186  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

I  should  return  to  England ;  with  which  he  promised  to  comply. 
Thinking,  however,  I  might  be  indulging  hopes  that  would  not 
be  realised,  he  cautioned  me  against  any  expectations  from  that 
quarter.  I  told  him,  I  was  not  rich ;  but  as  I  had  no  other  view, 
than  to  serve  the  nation  at  large,  I  intended  to  make  certain  pro- 
posals to  the  members  of  that  honourable  society.  On  this  he 
again  promised  me  the  letter  requested,  and  in  a  few  days  we 
all  set  off  for  Cairo.  There  the  worthy  Burckhardt  would  insist, 
that  I  should  receive  a  present,  half  of  which  he  obtained  from 
the  consul,  as  an  acknowledgment  for  my  success  with  regard  to 
the  colossus ;  of  the  general  expenses  attending  which  he  paid  a 
moiety. 

It  was  at  this  period  that  Captain  Cabillia  had  ventured  into 
the  well  of  the  first  pyramid  of  Gaza.  His  enterprise  was  hazardous 
and  bold,  and  nothing  but  an  enthusiasm  for  discovery  could  induce 
a  man  to  take  such  a  step.  The  consul,  with  Mr.  Briggs,  Mr. 
Beechey,  and  myself,  went  to  see  the  operations  that  were  going  on. 
Captain  Cabillia's  circumstances  were  much  better  than  mine ;  but 
he  had  no  superfluous  wealth  at  command,  to  continue  what  he  had 
begun,  winch  required  a  supply  beyond  his  means.  Mr.  Briggs 
was  the  first  who  generously  offered  to  furnish  money  for  this  pur- 
pose ;  and,  after  a  consultation  with  Mr.  Salt,  they  agreed  to  sup- 
port the  work  to  any  extent  that  might  be  required.  This  gentle- 
man not  only  encouraged  the  undertaking  at  the  pyramid,  but  has 
exerted  his  influence  with  Mahomed  Ali  for  the  general  advantage 
of  the  commerce  of  Europe,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  mention 
hereafter.  The  enterprise  of  Captain  Cabillia  is  worthy  the  atten- 
tion of  every  one  interested  in  antiquities,  as  he  has  solved  a 
question,  by  which  the  learned  world  has  been  puzzled  for  many 
centuries.  The  famous  well,  which  has  given  rise  to  so  much 
conjecture,  turns  out  to  be  a  communication  with  a  lower  passage 


IX  EGYPT,   NUBIA,  &c.  137 

leading  into  an  inferior  chamber,  discovered  and  opened  by  him- 
self. He  first  descended  the  well  to  the  depth  of  thirty-eight  feet, 
where  his  progress  was  stopped  by  four  large  stones.  Three  of 
these  being  removed,  there  was  space  enough  for  a  man  to  pass 
through ;  but  the  fourth  he  could  not  stir,  though  he  had  the  help 
of  Mr.  Kabitsch,  a  young  man  in  the  employment  of  ?\Ir.  Baghos, 
who  bore  a  share  of  the  expense  with  the  captain.  Twenty-one 
feet  below  this  place  they  found  a  grotto,  seventeen  feet  long 
and  four  high ;  and  seven  feet  below  this,  a  platform,  from  which 
the  well  descended  two  hundred  feet  lower.  The  captain  went 
down,  and  at  the  bottom  found  earth  and  sand :  but  from  the 
hollow  sound  under  his  feet,  he  judged,  that  the  passage  must 
communicate  with  some  other  apartment  below.  He  then  set 
some  Arabs  at  work,  to  remove  the  sand :  but  the  heat  was  so 
great,  and  the  candles  so  incapable  of  burning,  for  want  of  oxygen, 
that  they  were  compelled  to  desist.  The  captain  then  turned  his 
researches  to  another  quarter,  and  began  to  enlarge  the  entrance 
into  the  first  passage  of  the  pyramid.  For  this  operation  he  was 
well  rewarded ;  for  by  it  he  found,  that  the  passage  continued 
downward ;  and  having  employed  several  men,  and  taken  out  a 
great  deal  of  earth  and  rubbish,  at  last,  after  a  long  and  arduous 
toil,  he  came  in  contact  with  the  bottom  of  the  well,  where  he 
found  the  baskets  and  rope  which  had  been  left  there.  The  same 
day  that  this  occurred,  was  that  on  which  we  had  agreed  to  visit 
the  pyramids,  and  I  had  the  pleasure  to  be  an  eye-witness  of  the 
arduous  task  of  Captain  Cabillia.  Proceeding  in  his  laborious 
researches,  he  found,  that  the  passage  led  into  a  chamber  cut  out 
of  the  rock,  under  the  centre  of  the  pyramid. 

Captain  C.  made  several  researches  round  the  pyramids  also,  but 
none  exceeded  his  toil  in  uncovering  the  front  of  the  great  sphinx. 
He  found  a  small  temple  between  the  two  paws,  and  a  large  tablet 


138  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

of  granite  on  its  breast.  The  tablet  is  adorned  with  several  figures 
and  hieroglyphics,  and  two  representations  of  sphinxes  are  sculp- 
tured on  it.  Before  the  entrance  into  the  small  temple  was  a  lion. 
placed  as  if  to  guard  the  approach.  Farther  on  from  this  front  of  the 
sphinx  is  a  staircase  of  thirty-two  steps,  at  the  bottom  of  which  is  an 
altar,  with  a  Greek  inscription,  of  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies.  At  each 
side  of  the  altar  was  a  sphinx  of  calcareous  stone,  much  mutilated. 
From  the  base  of  the  temple  to  the  summit  of  the  head  is  sixty- 
five  feet :  the  legs  of  the  sphinx  are  fifty-seven  feet  long  from  the 
breast  to  the  extremity  of  the  paws,  which  are  eight  feet  high. 
Forty-five  feet  from  the  first  altar,  he  found  another,  with  an 
inscription,  alluding  to  the  emperor  Septimus  Severus  ;  and  near  to 
the  first  step  was  a  stone,  with  another  Greek  inscription,  alluding  to 
Antoninus.  Notwithstanding  his  own  occupation  about  the  sphinx, 
Captain  Cabillia  employed  other  people  to  carry  on  other  researches. 
He  opened  some  of  the  mausoleums  which  were  choked  up  with 
sand,  and  found  several  small  chambers,  with  hieroglyphics  and 
figures,  some  of  them  pretty  well  executed,  and  in  good  pre- 
servation. In  one  of  the  pits  he  found  some  mummies,  in  their 
linen  envelopes,  and  various  fragments  of  Egyptian  antiquity.  He 
also  opened  some  of  the  smaller  pyramids,  and  from  the  suggestion 
of  Mr.  Briggs  to  follow  a  certain  direction,  he  succeeded  in  finding 
the  entrance  into  one  of  them :  but  it  appears,  that  it  was  so  de- 
cayed in  the  interior,  he  could  advance  only  a  feAv  feet  in  it.  No 
doubt  this  led  into  some  chamber,  or  apartment,  containing,  perhaps, 
a  sarcophagus,  &c. 

I  was  then  merely  a  spectator  of  the  works  of  Captain  Cabillia. 
The  consul,  Mr.  Salt,  proposed  to  me,  to  enter  into  the  researches 
in  concert  with  the  Captain  ;  but  as  I  thought  it  would  not  be 
right  to  attempt  to  share  the  credit  of  one,  who  had  already  exerted 
himself  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  I  declined.     Besides,  it  would 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  13!) 

have  been  a  poor  victory  on  my  part  to  enter  into  the  field  after 
the  battle  had  been  fought,  and  conquest  gained  by  another.  I 
contented  myself,  therefore,  with  hoping  for  a  better  opportunity 
to  try  my  skill,  independent  of  any  one.  Having  got  all  things 
ready  for  my  departure,  the  consul  proposed  that  I  should  take 
Mr.  Beechey  with  me  up  the  Nile.  Nothing  could  suit  me  better 
than  to  have  a  companion  in  a  young  gentleman,  with  the  prospect 
of  whose  society,  from  what  I  had  seen  of  him,  I  had  much  reason 
to  be  pleased.  I  was  fully  satisfied  that,  after  having  weaned  him- 
self from  those  indulgences  to  which  he  was  accustomed,  he  would 
make  a  good  traveller  ;  though  it  is  not  easy,  to  one  who  is  not 
accustomed  to  an  arduous  life,  to  pass  on  a  sudden  from  the  ac- 
commodation of  a  comfortable  house  to  that  of  a  rough  uneasy 
boat,  and  much  less  to  a  life  that  is  so  irregular.  However, 
Mr.  Beechey  soon  accustomed  himself  to  the  change,  and  in  a 
few  months  became  quite  indifferent  to  the  many  inconveniences 
he  had  to  undergo.  As  to  Mrs.  Belzoni,  I  left  her  at  Cairo,  in  the 
family  of  Mr.  Cochini,  the  British  chancellor;  and  when  all  was 
ready,  we  took  leave  of  the  consul  and  Mr.  Burckhardt.  Alas  ! 
I  little  thought  it  was  the  last  time  I  should  see  my  friend ;  but 
so  it  was  ordained. 


END    OF     THE    FIRST    JOURNEY. 


T  2 


RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 


IN 


EGYPT,    NUBIA,   &c 


SECOND  JOURNEY. 


Having  thus  finished  the  account  of  my  first  journey  up  the 
Nile,  I  shall  proceed  to  the  narrative  of  my  second.  We  set  off 
from  Boolak  on  the  20th  of  February,  1817.  Mr.  Beechey  had 
the  stern  of  the  boat  well  covered  with  mats,  and  close  lined  all 
round,  with  a  curtain  to  the  door  from  which  we  had  light,  which 
was  occasionally  shut  up,  to  prevent  the  dust  or  wind  from  pene- 
trating from  any  quarter ;  beside,  another  cover  over  all,  rendering 
it  entirely  secure,  not  only  from  the  wind  and  dust,  but  also  from 
the  rain,  if  any  should  happen  to  fall.  We  had  on  board  a  Greek 
servant,  a  Janizary  from  the  Bashaw,  and  a  cook ;  all  persons  who 
never  saw  any  necessity  for  economy  in  the  article  of  provision,  and 
who  would  make  as  much  waste  at  Deir  in  Nubia  as  they  would  in 
Cairo.  The  result  was,  our  provision,  which  was  to  last  six  months, 
began  to  fail  at  the  end  of  one ;  consequently,  with  all  the  caution 
we  took,  we  were  obliged  to  live  on  what  the  country  afforded. 
Indeed,  while  we  were  at  Thebes  we  had  no  reason  to  complain ; 
for  there  is  a  good  supply  to  be  had  of  meat,  fowls,  and  pigeons  : 
and,  after  the  inundation,  some  greens,  such  as  bamies,  malokies, 
beans,  &c. 


142  RESEARCHES   AND    OPERATIONS 

Our  Reis  and  crew  were  Barabras,  engaged  to  go  and  stop  where 
we  pleased.  They  were  hired  by  the  month,  and  had  to  find  them- 
selves in  provisions.  As  to  the  Janizary  from  the  Bashaw,  we  found 
him  of  so  little  use  (as  he  did  scarcely  any  thing  except  treat  the 
Christian  dogs  with  insolence),  that  we  sent  him  back  after  a  few 
days  trial. 

Our  departure  from  Boolak  was  attended  with  a  contrary  wind, 
which  very  seldom  happens  in  going  up  the  Nile,  as  the  north 
winds  prevail  there  at  least  nine  months  in  the  year.  We  passed 
the  island  of  Roda,  old  Cairo,  and  all  the  pyramids :  but  such  was 
the  slowness  of  our  progress,  that  in  four  days  we  only  reached 
Tabeen,  a  village  on  the  eastern  bank,  opposite  Dajior.  We  stopped 
at  this  place  pretty  early,  as  the  wind  would  not  permit  us  to  pro- 
ceed ;  and  it  happened  to  be  a  situation  so  elevated,  that  it  com- 
manded a  distant  view  of  Cairo,  the  pyramids  of  Ghizeh,  Saccara,  and 
Dajior.  1  took  this  opportunity  to  make  a  sketch,  which  I  humbly 
present  to  the  reader  (See  Plate  22).  One  day  more  brought  us 
near  Lafachie,  where  we  went  to  see  a  Bedoween  camp.  Hearing 
we  were  only  travellers  in  search  of  antiquities,  the  Bedoweens 
were  quite  civil  to  us,  as  far  as  these  people  can  be.  Our  business 
was  immediately  known  to  them  from  our  servants  and  the  crew; 
for  no  secrecy  can  be  kept  in  that  country,  owing  to  these  persons. 
The  Bedoweens  told  us,  that  at  Boorumbol,  the  next  village,  there 
was  a  statue  half  buried  in  the  sand,  which  they  had  seen  them- 
selves. Next  day  we  came  to  this  village;  and  as  we  coidd  not 
proceed,  owing  to  a  calm,  we  landed,  and  went  in  quest  of  the  said 
statue.  On  our  arrival  we  were  shown  a  piece  of  rock,  wluch  had 
not  the  form  of  any  thing.  The  Fellahs  told  us  it  was  once  a 
camel;  that  God  turned  it  into  a  stone;  and  that  the  smaller 
ones  which   lay  round  it  were   water-melons,  with  which  it  was 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  143 

loaded,  and  which  were  metamorphosed  into  stones  also.     Perfectly 
satisfied  with  the  story,  we  returned  to  our  bark. 

In  the  evening  we  arrived  at  Meimond ;  and,  hearing  the  tam- 
bourine, went  to  see  an  Arabic  feast  in  the  village  (See  Plate  30.) 
We  were  introduced  in  front  of  the  spectators.  The  performers 
consisted  of  about  thirty  men,  all  in  a  row,  clapping  their  hands  in 
concert,  so  as  to  form  a  kind  of  accompaniment  to  their  song,  which 
consisted  of  three  or  four  words ;  and  with  one  foot  before  the  other 
keeping  a  sort  of  perpetual  motion,  but  without  changing  their 
positions.  Before  the  men  were  two  women  with  daggers  in  their 
hands,  also  in  continual  action,  running  toward  the  men  and  then 
returning  from  them  with  an  extraordinary  motion,  brandishing 
their  daggers,  and  waving  their  garments.  In  this  they  persevered 
for  such  a  length  of  time,  that  I  wondered  how  they  could  support 
the  exertion.  This  is  a  sort  of  Eedoween  dance,  and  is  the  most 
decent  of  all  that  I  ever  saw  in  Egypt ; — but  no  sooner  was  it  ended, 
than,  in  order  I  suppose  to  please  us,  they  immediately  began 
another,  in  the  fashion  of  the  country,  which  fully  compensated  for 
the  extraordinary  modesty  of  the  first :  but  we  returned  to  our  boat 
more  disgusted  than  pleased  with  it. 

For  three  days  we  had  a  strong  southerly  wind,  so  that  we  ad- 
vanced but  a  few  miles,  and  did  not  arrive  at  Minieh  till  the  5th  of 
March.  It  was  necessary  for  us  to  land  there,  to  see  Hamet  Bey. 
who  has  the  command  over  all  the  boats  on  the  river.  He  styles 
himself  admiral  of  the  Nile,  and  thinks  himself  as  great  as  any 
British  admiral  on  the  sea.  One  day  at  a  christian  party  in 
Cairo,  the  discourse  happened  to  fall  upon  Sir  Sydney  Smith ; 
"  Ah !"  said  Hamet  Bey,  "  Sir  Sydney  is  a  very  clever  man,  and 
holds  tbe  same  rank  as  myself."  From  this  great  commander 
we  had  to  obtain  a  protection  for  our  Pieis,  to  secure  him  from 


144  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

having  his  boat  pressed  while  we  employed  it.  We  found  him 
sitting  on  a  wooden  bench,  attended  by  two  or  three  of  his  sailors. 
He  complied  with  our  request,  and  gave  a  hint  for  a  bottle  of  rum. 
We  sent  him  two,  and  he  made  a  feast  in  high  glee  with  them.  We 
went  to  the  house  of  Doctor  Valsomaky,  who  distils  aqua  vita,  and 
sells  medicines  wholesale  and  retail.  Pie  also  collects  antiquities 
from  the  Fellahs  round  the  country,  and  disposes  of  them  to  any 
one,  who  chooses  to  buy  them ;  and  it  was  in  hope  of  purchasing  some- 
thing of  this  sort,  that  we  visited  him.  There  we  saw  two  Copts 
dressed  like  Franks,  as  they  had  been  in  France  with  the  army. 
They  were  employed  by  Mr.  Drouetti,  the  ex-French  consul  in 
Alexandria,  who  sent  them  up  the  Nile  in  search  of  antiquities. 

As  we  did  not  wish  to  interfere  with  these  men,  we  set  off  from 
Minieh  immediately,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  next  day  arrived  at 
Eraramoun  near  Eshmounein.  the  ancient  Hermopolis.  where  we 
went  to  see  Mr.  Brine,  an  Englishman,  who  had  introduced  sugar- 
baking  into  the  country.  After  encountering  many  obstacles,  he 
had  succeeded  in  purifying  and  refining  the  sugar  to  great  per- 
fection. His  chief  difficulties  were  to  surmount  the  tricks  played 
off  against  him  by  the  Arab  sugar  dealers  in  that  country,  and  to 
free  the  sugar  from  a  particular  smell  occasioned  by  the  soil,  which, 
though  not  disagreeable,  might  retard  its  introduction  into  Europe. 
At  his  house  Ave  learned,  that  the  two  agents  of  Mr.  Drouetti  were 
making  a  forced  march  to  Thebes,  of  their  motives  for  which  I  was 
aware.  They  wished  to  arrive  there  before  us,  and  purchase  all 
that  had  been  accumulated  by  the  Arabs  in  the  preceding  season  ; 
so  that  we  should  have  had  no  chance  of  buying  any  thing  on 
our  arrival.  It  was  not  on  this  account  however  I  was  uneasy,  but 
because  the  spot,  where  I  had  been  digging  and  found  the  sphinxes 
and  statues,  was  so  evidently  pregnant  with  objects  worthy  the  risk 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  145 

of  excavation,  that  I  had  no  doubt,  if  they  reached  Thebes  before 
us,  they  would  take  possession  of  that  ground,  and  we  should  have 
no  longer  a  right  to  explore  it. 

The  mode  of  travelling  on  asses  or  horses  is  much  more  speedy 
than  the  progress  of  our  boat  could  be,  so  that  we  should  certainly 
have  no  chance  of  regaining  my  old  spot  of  ground  where  I  found 
the  statues.  I  was  not  long  therefore  in  considering  the  matter, 
and  resolved  to  set  off  immediately,  and  by  travelling  day  and  night 
was  in  hopes  to  reach  the  place  before  them.  Accordingly  a 
horse  and  an  ass  were  got  ready,  and  taking  with  me  the  Greek 
servant,  I  left  Mr.  Beechey  to  come  up  in  the  boat  at  his  leisure. 
By  this  time  it  was  midnight,  yet  we  set  off  immediately,  and  forced 
marches  brought  us  on  the  next  evening  to  Manfalout.  From  this 
place  we  hastened  without  delay,  and  arrived  at  Siout  before  day- 
light. At  sunrise  we  mounted  again,  and  arrived  at  dark  at  Tahta. 
Here  we  rested  in  the  convent  for  four  hours,  started  afresh  by  the 
light  of  the  moon,  and  arrived  at  Girgeh  in  the  night.  We  resumed 
our  journey  at  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  reached  Farshiout  at  noon, 
and  after  a  delay  of  four  hours,  in  consequence  of  not  finding  beasts 
immediately,  arrived  at  night  at  a  village  three  leagues  above  Bad- 
joura.  Here  we  rested  two  hours,  set  off  by  moonlight,  and  arrived 
at  Gheneh  at  three.  Having  dined,  we  proceeded  onward,  rested  a 
couple  of  hours  at  Benut  at  night,  and  arrived  at  Luxor  the  following 
noon. 

The  whole  of  our  journey  occupied  five  days  and  half,  during 
which  I  slept  eleven  hours,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  time  we  were 
hastening  on  with  asses,  horses,  or  camels,  as  we  could  procure  them 
on  the  road.  The  principal  places  we  passed  in  this  journey  were 
Manfalout,  Siout,  Aboutij,  Tahta,  Menshieh,  Girgeh,  Farshiout,  Bad- 
joura,  Gheneh,  Copt,  and  Ghous.  Any  one  who  has  been  in  the  country 
may  fonn  some  idea  of  the  hardships  a  person  must  undergo,  tra- 
il 


146  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

veiling  through  a  tract  entirely  destitute  of  the  necessaries  of  life. 
The  fathers  of  the  convents  of  Propaganda  at  Tahta,  Girgeh,  and 
Farshiout,  afforded  great  accommodation  to  me  on  this  forced  march. 
They  provided  me  with  beasts  and  provisions  for  the  road  imme- 
diately on  my  arrival,  for  which  I  felt  myself  deeply  indebted  to  them. 
The  Arabs  make  every  stranger  welcome  when  they  are  at  their  meals ; 
and  I  generally  took  advantage  of  the  custom,  whenever  oppor- 
tunity served  ;  but  on  this  occasion  it  would  have  caused  the  loss  of 
that  time  I  was  so  eager  to  gain.  In  places  where  there  was  no 
convent  I  went  to  the  house  of  the  Sheik  el  balet,  where  travellers 
of  all  sorts  assemble  at  night.  I  was  so  fatigued  and  stiff,  that  any 
place  of  rest  was  acceptable  to  me.  The  bare  earth  generally 
afforded  me  a  bed,  and  when  I  could  procure  a  mat  it  was  a  luxury. 
I  was  refreshed  one  night  with  a  few  pieces  of  sugar-cane,  which, 
after  passing  the  torch  where  the  juice  has  been  extracted,  becomes 
pretty  soft,  and  affords  a  tolerable  bed.  I  was  also  regaled  with 
sugar-canes  as  a  dessert  after  a  repast  of  bread  and  onions.  The 
sugar-cane  is  pleasant  at  the  first  taste,  but  on  pressing  it  to  extract 
the  juice,  it  gives  an  acid  that  is  not  agreeable,  and  the  flavour  is 
rather  insipid.  The  people  of  the  country  eat  of  it  continually, 
and  are  very  fond  of  it.  It  is  sold  in  the  markets  as  fruit  when  in 
season. 

On  the  road  between  Siout  and  Tahta  I  met  a  body  of  Be- 
doween  horsemen.  I  never  had  an  opportunity  of  viewing  these 
people  to  more  advantage  than  at  this  time ;  and  I  must  observe, 
that  I  never  saw  a  finer  set  of  men  in  my  life.  The  horses  were 
very  strong,  though  not  in  full  flesh.  The  riders  were  clothed  only 
with  a  kind  of  mantle,  made  of  white  woollen,  of  their  own  manu- 
facturing, which  covered  the  head,  and  part  of  the  body.  They 
had  very  small  saddles,  contrary  to  the  custom  of  this  country; 
were  armed  with  guns,  pistols,  and  swords ;  and  were  going  to 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  147 

Cairo  to  enter  into  the  service  of  the  Bashaw,  who  could  find  no 
other  expedient  for  suppressing  this  body  of  freebooters,  than  offer- 
ing to  give  them  good  pay,  horses,  and  arms,  and  to  send  them  to 
Mecca.  Tins  proposal  has  had  its  due  effect ;  for  all  the  young  men 
have  embraced  it,  and  left  the  old  men  and  women  in  the  deserts. 
In  this  manner  the  Bashaw  entertains  hopes  of  getting  rid  of  the 
greater  part,  if  not  all,  of  these  people,  who  are  detested  in  the  coun- 
try, and,  in  case  of  any  insurrection,  always  avail  themselves  of  it  to 
plunder.  I  passed  through  their  camp,  at  the  time  of  their  con- 
vention with  the  Bashaw,  so  that  I  escaped  unmolested,  and 
perhaps  unnoticed,  as  I  was  covered  with  a  large  burnoose  of  their 
own  fashion,  and  my  beard  was  pretty  long.  Their  tents  consist  of 
four  sticks  set  in  the  ground,  about  a  yard  in  height,  to  which  is 
fastened  one  of  their  shawls  as  a  cover,  with  another  behind,  so  as 
to  form  a  kind  of  shelter  from  the  sun,  wind,  or  dew.  They 
generally  pitch  their  camps  near  a  fertile  spot,  but  always  at  the 
foot  of  the  desert,  so  that  in  case  of  surprise  they  are  soon  in  their 
native  country  :  like  the  crocodile,  winch  enjoys  the  land,  but  when 
disturbed,  or  at  the  approach  of  any  person,  immediately  plunges 
into  the  river,  as  a  place  of  safety.  The  women  were  all  uncovered, 
and  the  children  entirely  naked.  They  are  very  frugal  in  their 
diet,  and  never  drink  any  strong  liquor.  They  are  Arabs,  but  no 
more  like  the  Arabs  of  Egypt,  than  a  freeman  is  like  a  slave. 
The  Egyptian  Arabs  are  accustomed  to  obey,  but  will  not  do  any 
thing  unless  compelled  by  force.  They  are  humbled,  because  they 
are  continually  under  the  rod ;  and  indolent,  because  they  have  no 
interest  in  any  tiring.  But  the  wild  Arabs,  on  the  contrary,  are 
constantly  in  motion,  and  labour  to  procure  provision  for  their 
beasts  and  themselves ;  and  being  in  perpetual  war  with  each 
other,  their  thoughts  are  incessantly  employed  in  improving  their 
arts  of  defence,  or  in  obtaining  plunder. 

u2 


148  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

I  must  here  mention  a  circumstance,  which  occasioned  me  so 
many  unpleasant  events,  and  so  much  loss  of  time,  and  unnecessary 
labour,  that  I  would  not  undertake  to  go  through  the  business  again 
for  the  discovery  of  another  tomb  of  Apis.    This  was  merely  in  con- 
sequence of  an  interpreter's  not  choosing  to  take  the  trouble  of 
writing  a  few  lines.     It  will  be  recollected,  that,  on  my  return  from 
Thebes  to  Cairo,  I  stopped  at  Siout ;  and  that  the  Defterdar  Bey  sent 
a  letter  on  board  our  boat  for  the  consul.     Previous  to  my  return 
into  Upper  Egypt,  I  urged  to  the  consul  the  necessity  of  sending 
some  presents  to  the  Bey,  and  in  particular  an  answer  to  his  letter 
from  Siout.     The  consul,  naturally  thinking  that  his  interpreter, 
who  had  been  many  years  settled  in  the  country,  should  know  the 
customs  of  it  better  than  myself,  consulted  him ;  and  this  man, 
merely  to  save  writing,  told  the  consul  there  was  no  occasion  for 
it.    Belying  on  him,  my  remonstrances  were  of  no  avail.     The  Bey, 
whose  pride  was  touched  to  the  quick  at  not  seeing  any  present,  or 
receiving  any  letter,  was  exasperated  at  every  thing  belonging  to 
our  party.     I  do  not  mean  to  impute  any  neglect  to  the  consul  for 
not  sending  a  present  to  the  Bey,  as  I  know  he  intended  to  make 
him  one ;  but  the  avaricious  mind  of  the  Defterdar  did  not  place 
any  reliance  on  the  future,  particularly  when  he  found  no  reply  to 
his  letter,  which  he  certainly  had  a  right  to  expect.     On  the  other 
hand,  our  opponents  took  every  advantage,  and  neglected  no  means 
of  attracting  the  good  will  of  the  Bey,  sending  him  continually 
something  or  other,  so  that  he  openly  promoted  their  interest  in 
every   respect.       Such,   with   what   follows,    is   the   real    state   of 
the  case;  and  let  the  Count  de  Forbin  invent  some  other  story 
to  disguise  the  truth,  if  he  can.     On  my  arrival  at  Luxor,  I  found 
the  Defterdar  Bey  had  just  passed,  and,  after  having  inquired  which 
was  the  ground  where  I  discovered  the  sphinxes,  ordered  it  to  be 
excavated,  and  returned  to  Siout,  leaving   his  physician,   Doctor 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  149 


Moroki,  a  Piedmontese,  and  countryman  of  Mr.  Drouetti,  to  su- 
perintend the  work.  I  was  not  a  little  surprised,  to  see  the  advantage 
which  had  heen  taken  of  us  by  this  intrigue  ;  and  the  Doctor,  who 
was  in  the  plot,  ashamed,  I  suppose,  of  his  own  mean  conduct,  told 
me,  that  what  he  found  was  for  the  Bey,  who  had  taken  it  into  his 
head  to  be  an  antiquary.      Several  Sphinxes  had  been  uncovered, 
and  more  were  to  be  found,  while  I  was  obliged  to  be  a  mere  spec- 
tator of  the  operation,  made  on  the  very  ground  I  first  opened. 
Yet  the  Count  de  Forbin  had  impudence  enough  to  assert,  that 
they  were  discovered  by  a  gentleman,  and  covered  up  again,  with 
other  idle  stories  from  his  own  school.     Many  sphinxes  had  been 
found  in  the  Doctor's  excavation,  but  only  four  were  worth  taking 
out.     Having  finished  his  operation,  he  left  a  guard  to  the  sta- 
tues, and  returned  to  Siout,  as  he  was  ordered  by  his  master ;  but 
previous  to  his  departure  he  went  to  the  west  side  of  Thebes,  and 
forbade  the  Fellars  with  threats  to  sell  any  tiling  to  the  English. 
On  finding  that  I  had  already  purchased  some  articles,  which  I  did 
immediately  on  my  arrival,  he  took  such  a  spite  against  me,  as  he  has 
not  forgotten  to  this  day.  The  conclusion  of  all  tins  parade  about  the 
Bey,  the  Doctor,  the  statues,  and  the  excavation,  was,  that  though 
the  statues  were  for  the  Bey,  yet  on  the  arrival  of  the  agents  of 
Mr.  Drouetti  (as  will  be  seen  hereafter),  they  took  possession  of 
them.     Some  time  after  the  Doctor  wrote  me  a  letter,  to  inquire 
whether  it  were  really  true,  that  the  agents  of  Mr.  Drouetti  had 
taken  away  the  statues  he  had  found  in  Carnak,  and  pretending  to 
be  quite  shocked  at  their  proceeding.    I  plainly  saw  that  the  Doctor 
did  not  wish  to  open  my  eyes,  but,  on  the  contrary,  sent  me  the 
letter  to  blind  me  entirely,  and  make  me  believe,  that  he  had  no 
hand  in  the  plot.     But  what  could  he  say,  when  he  as  well  as  we 
saw  Mr.  Drouetti  himself  come  to  Luxor,  and  with  great  coolness 
take  away  these  very  statues  or  sphinxes,  pretended  to  have  been 


150  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

found  for  the  Defterdar  ?  I  leave  the  farce  to  be  explained  by  the 
veracious  Count  de  Forbin,  who  may  invent  some  other  puff  to 
cover  a  trick  so  openly  executed. 

During  this  time  I  was  not  idle.  I  set  a  few  men  to  work  on 
both  sides  of  Thebes,  and  went  to  Erments  to  present  to  the  Cacheff 
the  letter  I  had  from  Cairo.  On  my  arrival  he  received  me  with 
much  politeness ;  and  after  the  usual  ceremonious  protestation  of 
friendship,  I  took  the  first  opportunity  of  presenting  to  him  the 
letter  of  the  Bashaw.  He  was  a  little  alarmed  at  first,  and  very 
anxious  to  know  the  contents ;  but  was  relieved  when  he  heard,  that 
I  had  made  no  complaint  against  him,  as  his  good  behaviour  just 
before  my  departure  retrieved  in  part  the  faults  he  had  committed 
before.  I  then  reminded  him  of  the  behaviour  of  the  Caimakan  of 
Gournou.  He  swore  that  he  would  punish  him,  and,  if  I  pleased, 
would  turn  him  out  of  his  place.  I  said  I  did  not  desire  him  to  do 
either  on  my  account,  but  for  the  future  wished  to  proceed  in  my 
business  undisturbed,  and  we  concluded,  that  the  next  morning  he 
should  come  to  Gournou,  and  settle  the  affair  in  a  proper  manner. 

He  afterwards  introduced  to  me  one  of  those  wonderful  saints, 
who  work  miracles  by  dozens,  catching  scorpions,  serpents,  &c.  This 
fellow  brought  a  serpent  with  no  teeth,  and  the  CachefF  was  much 
alarmed  when  he  put  it  into  his  lap.  I  took  it,  and  opened  its 
mouth  without  uttering  a  word ;  but  the  wonder-worker  understood 
me  very  well.  We  then  went  into  a  dark  room  to  see  a  miracle. 
He  began  with  a  long  prayer,  and  after  a  few  minutes  stretched  out 
his  hand  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  and  to  the  great  astonishment  of 
the  beholders  produced  a  scorpion.  I  observed  closely  this  wonder- 
working saint,  and  saw  clearly  what  was  passing.  The  scorpion  was 
kept  in  the  enormous  large  sleeve  of  his  garment,  and  being  pro- 
duced in  an  instant,  it  appeared  as  if  it  came  out  of  the  wall.  We 
were  now  taken  to  see  the  apartments  all  through  the  house,  and 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  151 

he  practised  the  same  deception  over  again.  In  a  particular  lower 
room  the  son  of  this  Santon  pretended  to  find  a  small  serpent,  but 
not  being  so  adroit  as  his  father,  he  contented  himself  with  protest- 
ing that  it  had  no  teeth,  which  made  me  ask  where  serpents  could  be 
found  in  this  country  without  teeth.  The  CachefF,  I  perceived,  was 
a  man  who  would  swallow  the  grossest  impositions.  He  told  me 
many  stories  truly  ridiculous  ;  among  the  rest,  he  said  that  his  caste 
were  subjects  to  a  king  in  the  mountains  of  Cassara,  and  had  such 
power,  that  if  caught  in  a  storm  at  sea,  a  calm  was  restored  in  a 
minute ;  and  if  a  cannon  ball  made  a  hole  in  the  ship,  a  Santon  could 
stop  it ;  that  the  Venetian  zechins  are  made  by  the  magic  of  these 
Santons  ;  and  that  one  of  them  being  with  the  Sultan  at  Constan- 
tinople, where  the  Persian  Ambassador  had  been  to  announce  war 
against  the  Porte,  he  said,  that  they  would  conquer  the  Persians,  and 
that  on  his  thrusting  out  his  finger,  the  sovereign  of  Persia  should 
become  blind. 

I  left  Erments  and  went  to  Luxor ;  and  the  next  morning  I  met 
the  CachefF  at  Gournou,  according  to  his  promise.  He  gave  orders, 
to  the  Caimakan  on  every  necessary  subject ;  not  to  threaten  the 
Fellahs,  if  they  sold  me  any  papyri,  &c.  and  to  furnish  me  with  men 
to  excavate  in  whatever  place  I  pleased.  The  works  in  Carnak 
were  going  on,  and  I  had  begun  to  uncover  one  of  the  sitting 
colossi  before  the  second  propylason,  beyond  the  large  avenue  of 
sphinxes  leading  into  the  great  temple.  I  had  it  cleared  all  round, 
and  found  it  to  be  twenty-nine  feet  high  from  the  bottom  of  the 
chair  ;  it  is  of  a  white  calcareous  stone,  and  very  hard.  At  the  foot 
of  the  chair  I  found  a  sitting  statue  seven  feet  lrigh.  It  represented 
a  female  figure,  perhaps  of  Isis.  Its  head-dress,  of  enormous  size, 
differed  from  that  of  the  generality  of  the  Egyptian  statues,  and 
from  its  style  appeared  to  be  of  a  very  remote  age.  The  bust 
was  divided  at  the  waist  from  the  rest  of  the  body  and  chair.     I  took 


152  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

out  the  bust,  and  intended  to  take  out  the  chair,  as  soon  as  the 
boat  arrived  with  the  implements.  Having  then  set  the  people  to 
work  in  another  direction,  where  also  I  had  hopes,  I  took  the  op- 
portunity to  examine  at  leisure  the  superb  ruins  of  this  edifice.  In 
a  distant  view  of  them  nothing  can  be  seen  but  the  towering  pro- 
pylasa,  high  portals,  and  obelisks,  which  project  above  the  various 
groups  of  lofty  palm-trees,  and  even  at  a  distance  announce  mag- 
nificence. On  approaching  the  avenue  of  sphinxes,  which  leads  to 
the  great  temple,  the  visiter  is  inspired  with  devotion  and  piety : 
their  enormous  size  strikes  him  with  wonder  and  respect  to  the 
Gods,  to  whom  they  were  dedicated.  They  represent  lions  with 
heads  of  rams,  the  symbols  of  strength  and  innocence,  the  power 
and  purity  of  the  Gods.  Advancing  farther  in  the  avenue,  there 
stand  before  it  towering  propylaea,  which  lead  to  inner  courts, 
where  immense  colossi  are  seated  at  each  side  of  the  gate,  as  if 
guarding  the  entrance  to  the  holy  ground.  Still  farther  on  was  the 
magnificent  temple  dedicated  to  the  great  God  of  the  creation.  It 
was  the  first  time  that  I  entered  it  alone,  without  being  interrupted 
by  the  noise  of  the  Arabs,  who  never  leave  the  traveller  an  instant. 
The  sun  was  rising,  and  the  long  shades  from  the  various  groups  of 
columns  extended  over  these  ruins,  intermixed  with  the  rays  of 
light  striking  on  these  masses  in  various  directions,  formed  such  de- 
lightful views  all  round  as  baffle  description.  Plate  24  will  give  a 
general  idea  of  these  extensive  ruins ;  and  the  small  sketch,  Plate 
SI,  exhibits  a  small  part  of  the  interior  of  the  great  temple.  I  was 
lost  in  contemplation  of  so  many  objects ;  and  being  alone  in  such 
a  place,  my  mind  was  impressed  with  ideas  of  such  solemnity,  that 
for  some  time  I  was  unconscious  whether  I  were  on  terrestrial  ground, 
or  in  some  other  planet. 

I  had  seen  the  temple  of  Tentyra,  and  I  still  acknowledge,  that 
nothing  can  exceed  that  edifice  in  point  of  preservation,  and  in  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  153 

beauty  of  its  workmanship  and  sculpture ;  but  here  I  was  lost 
in  a  mass  of  colossal  objects,  every  one  of  which  was  more  than 
sufficient  of  itself  alone  to  attract  my  whole  attention.  How  can  1 
describe  my  sensations  at  that  moment !  I  seemed  alone  in  the 
midst  of  all  that  is  most  sacred  in  the  world ;  a  forest  of  enormous 
columns,  adorned  all  round  with  beautiful  figures,  and  various 
ornaments,  from  the  top  to  the  bottom ;  the  graceful  shape  of  the 
lotus,  which  forms  their  capitals,  and  is  so  well  proportioned  to  the 
columns,  that  it  gives  to  the  view  the  most  pleasing  effect ;  the 
gates,  the  walls,  the  pedestals,  and  the  architraves,  also  adorned 
in  every  part  with  symbolical  figures  in  basso  relievo  and  intaglio, 
representing  battles,  processions,  triumphs,  feasts,  offerings,  and 
sacrifices,  all  relating  no  doubt  to  the  ancient  history  of  the  country  ; 
the  sanctuary,  wholly  formed  of  fine  red  granite,  with  the  various 
obelisks  standing  before  it,  proclaiming  to  the  distant  passenger, 
"  Here  is  the  seat  of  holiness ;"  the  high  portals,  seen  at  a  distance 
from  the  openings  to  this  vast  labyrinth  of  edifices ;  the  various 
groups  of  ruins  of  the  other  temples  within  sight ;  these  altogether 
had  such  an  effect  upon  my  soul,  as  to  separate  me  in  imagination 
from  the  rest  of  mortals,  exalt  me  on  high  over  all,  and  cause  me 
to  forget  entirely  the  trifles  and  follies  of  life.  I  was  happy  for 
a  whole  day,  which  escaped  like  a  flash  of  lightning;  but  the 
obscurity  of  the  night  caused  me  to  stumble  over  one  large  block  of 
stone,  and  to  break  my  nose  against  another,  which,  dissolving  the 
enchantment,  brought  me  to  my  senses  again.  It  was  quite  late 
when  I  returned  to  Luxor,  to  the  hut  of  an  Arab,  who  ceded  to 
me  part  of  his  chamber,  and  a  mat,  which  afforded  me  an  excel- 
lent bed. 

The  change  from  those  ruins  to  the  Arab's  hut  was  not  less  than 
that  from  the  elevated  ideas  the  sight  of  them  inspired,  to  the 
thought  of  procuring  my  supper,  if  I  could. 

x 


154  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

By  this  time  the  two  agents  of  Mr.  Drouetti  had  arrived.  They 
immediately  set  to  work  to  take  out  the  lower  Sphinxes,  which  the 
Doctor  had  discovered,  and  commenced  their  labours  on  a  very 
extensive  scale.  The  Bey  had  left  his  orders  with  the  Caimakan 
and  the  Sheiks,  and  now  scarcely  a  Fellah  could  be  gotten  for  us. 
Air.  D.*s  agents  had  employed  them  all,  and  my  remonstrances 
were  to  little  purpose.  From  the  moment  these  personages  came 
to  Thebes,  I  had  a  continual  series  of  disagreeable  circumstances  to 
encounter,  which  I  could  not  describe,  were  I  to  attempt  it.  Suffice 
it  to  say,  that  the  Bey,  who  had  the  command  of  the  whole  country, 
made  it  a  particular  point,  I  have  no  doubt,  to  thwart  our  views  ;  and 
consequently  took  care  to  express  his  wishes,  as  to  each  party,  to  the 
Cacheffs  and  Caimakans,  who  could  not  avoid  obeying  their  superior. 
The  petty  advantage  taken  on  this  occasion  soon  showed  me  the 
characters  of  the  persons  I  had  to  deal  with.  I  do  not  mean  the 
first  two  agents  alone,  who  had  arrived  in  Thebes,  but  those  who 
had  given  them  instructions,  and  others  who  were  sent  after  them, 
consisting  of  European  renegadoes,  desperadoes,  exiles,  &c.  People 
of  this  sort,  under  no  restraint  in  any  thing  they  do,  were  sent  to 
obstruct  my  proceedings  ;  and  met  with  every  encouragement  from 
the  Bey,  and  of  course  from  his  subalterns. 

The  first  two  agents,  as  I  have  said,  begun  their  researches 
extensively ;  and,  as  I  could  get  but  a  few  men  to  employ  on  the 
east  side  of  the  Nile,  I  determined  to  try  what  could  be  done  on 
the  west,  as  I  had  the  good-will  of  the  Cacheffs  there ;  but  unfor- 
tunately the  boat  with  Air.  Beechey  had  not  arrived,  and  I  coidd 
not  proceed  for  want  of  money,  having,  from  prudence,  as  I  came 
by  land,  taken  but  little  with  me.  Accordingly,  I  left  my  inter- 
preter, with  instructions  how  to  act  with  the  few  men  I  had 
engaged,  and  set  off  in  a  small  boat  to  meet  him.     In  twenty-four 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  155 

hours  I  arrived  at  Gheneh,  as  the  wind  happened  to  be  in  my 
favour,  and  had  the  good  fortune  to  find  him  at  that  place. 

It  took  us  three  days  to  reach  Thebes,  when  we  moored  our  bark 
at  Luxor,  and  I  recommenced  my  operations  with  what  Fellahs  I 
could  obtain.  The  work  at  Gournou  was  continued  also  ;  and  1 
must  confess  occupied  a  greater  share  of  my  attention  than  that  at 
Carnak.  Could  it  but  be  accurately  known,  with  what  a  wretched 
set  of  people  in  these  tribes  travellers  have  to  deal,  their  mean  and 
rapacious  dispositions,  and  the  various  occurrences  that  render  the 
collection  of  antiquities  difficult,  whatever  came  from  thence  would 
be  the  more  prized,  from  the  consideration  of  these  circumstances. 

The  people  of  Gournou  are  superior  to  any  other  Arabs  in 
cunning  and  deceit,  and  the  most  independent  of  any  in  Egypt. 
They  boast  of  being  the  last  that  the  French  had  been  able  to  sub- 
due, and  when  subdued,  they  compelled  them  to  pay  the  men  what- 
ever was  asked  for  their  labour ;  a  fact  which  is  corroborated  by 
Baron  Denon  himself.  They  never  would  submit  to  any  one, 
either  the  Mamelukes  or  the  Bashaw.  They  have  undergone  the 
most  severe  punishments,  and  been  hunted  like  wild  beasts,  by 
every  successive  government  of  Egypt.  Their  situations  and 
hiding-places  were  almost  impregnable.  Gournou  is  a  tract  of 
rocks,  about  two  miles  in  length,  at  the  foot  of  the  Libyan  moun- 
tains, on  the  west  of  Thebes,  and  was  the  burial-place  of  the  great 
city  of  a  hundred  gates.  Every  part  of  these  rocks  is  cut  out  by 
art,  in  the  form  of  large  and  small  chambers,  each  of  which  has  its 
separate  entrance ;  and,  though  they  are  very  close  to  each  other, 
it  is  seldom  that  there  is  any  interior  communication  from  one  to 
another.  I  can  truly  say,  it  is  impossible  to  give  any  description 
sufficient  to  convey  the  smallest  idea  of  those  subterranean  abodes, 
and  their  inhabitants.  There  are  no  sepulchres  in  any  part  of  the 
world  like  them  ;  there  are  no  excavations,  or  mines,  that  can  be 

x2 


156  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

compared  to  these  truly  astonishing  places ;  and  no  exact  de- 
scription can  be  given  of  their  interior,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of 
visiting  these  recesses.  The  inconveniency  of  entering  into  them 
is  such,  that  it  is  not  every  one  who  can  support  the  exertion. 

A  traveller  is  generally  satisfied  when  he  has  seen  the  large 
hall,  the  gallery,  the  staircase,  and  as  far  as  he  can  conveniently  go : 
besides,  he  is  taken  up  with  the  strange  works  he  observes  cut  in 
various  places,  and  painted  on  each  side  of  the  walls  ;  so  that  when 
he  comes  to  a  narrow  and  difficult  passage,  or  to  have  to  descend  to 
the  bottom  of  a  well  or  cavity,  he  declines  taking  such  trouble, 
naturally  supposing  that  he  cannot  see  in  these  abysses  any  thing 
so  magnificent  as  what  he  sees  above,  and  consequently  deeming  it 
useless  to  proceed  any  farther.     Of  some  of  these  tombs  many  per- 
sons could  not  withstand  the  suffocating  air,  which   often   causes 
fainting.     A  vast  quantity  of  dust  rises,  so  fine  that  it  enters  into 
the  throat  and  nostrils,  and  chokes  the  nose  and  mouth  to  such  a 
degree,  that  it  requires  great  power  of  lungs  to  resist  it  and  the  strong 
effluvia  of  the  mummies.     This  is  not  all ;  the  entry  or  passage 
where  the  bodies  are  is  roughly  cut  in  the  rocks,  and  the  falling  of 
the  sand  from  the  upper  part  or  ceiling  of  the  passage  causes  it  to 
be  nearly  filled  up.      In  some  places   there  is  not  more  than  a 
vacancy  of  a  foot  left,  which  you  must  contrive  to  pass  through  in  a 
creeping  posture  like  a  snail,  on  pointed  and  keen  stones,  that  cut 
like  glass.     After  getting  through  these  passages,  some  of  them 
two  or  three  hundred  yards  long,  you  generally  find  a  more  com- 
modious place,  perhaps  high  enough  to  sit.     But  what  a  place  of 
rest !  surrounded  by  bodies,  by  heaps  of  mummies  in  all  directions ; 
which,  previous  to  my  being  accustomed  to  the  sight,  impressed  me 
with  horror.     The  blackness  of  the  wall,  the  faint  light  given  by 
the  candles  or  torches  for  want  of  air,  the  different  objects  that 
surrounded   me,  seeming  to  converse  with   each   other,  and   the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  157 

Arabs  with  the  candles  or  torches  in  their  hands,  naked  and  co- 
vered with  dust,  themselves  resembling  living  mummies,  absolutely 
formed  a  scene  that  cannot  be  described.  In  such  a  situation 
I  found  myself  several  times,  and  often  returned  exhausted  and 
fainting,  till  at  last  I  became  inured  to  it,  and  indifferent  to  what  I 
suffered,  except  from  the  dust,  which  never  failed  to  choke  my 
throat  and  nose  ;  and  though,  fortunately,  I  am  destitute  of  the 
sense  of  smelling,  I  could  taste  that  the  mummies  were  rather  un- 
pleasant to  swallow.  After  the  exertion  of  entering  into  such  a 
place,  through  a  passage  of  fifty,  a  hundred,  three  hundred,  or  per- 
haps six  hundred  yards,  nearly  overcome,  I  sought  a  resting-place, 
found  one,  and  contrived  to  sit ;  but  when  my  weight  bore  on  the 
body  of  an  Egyptian,  it  crushed  it  like  a  band-box.  I  naturally  had 
recourse  to  my  hands  to  sustain  my  weight,  but  they  found  no  bet- 
ter support ;  so  that  I  sunk  altogether  among  the  broken  mummies, 
with  a  crash  of  bones,  rags,  and  wooden  cases,  which  raised  such  a 
dust  as  kept  me  motionless  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  waiting  till  it 
subsided  again.  I  could  not  remove  from  the  place,  however,  with, 
out  increasing  it,  and  every  step  I  took  I  crushed  a  mummy  in 
some  part  or  other.  Once  I  was  conducted  from  such  a  place  to 
another  resembling  it,  through  a  passage  of  about  twenty  feet  in 
length,  and  no  wider  than  that  a  body  could  be  forced  through.  It 
was  choked  with  mummies,  and  I  could  not  pass  without  putting 
my  face  in  contact  with  that  of  some  decayed  Egyptian  ;  but  as  the 
passage  inclined  downwards,  my  own  weight  helped  me  on  :  how- 
ever, I  could  not  avoid  being  covered  with  bones,  legs,  arms,  and 
heads  rolling  from  above.  Thus  I  proceeded  from  one  cave  to  an- 
other, all  full  of  mummies  piled  up  in  various  ways,  some  standing, 
some  lying,  and  some  on  their  heads.  The  purpose  of  my  re- 
searches was  to  rob   the  Egyptians  of  their  papyri ;    of  which  I 


1 58  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

found  a  few  hidden  in  their  breasts,  under  their  arms,  in  the  space 
above  the  knees,  or  on  the  legs,  and  covered  by  the  numerous  folds 
of  cloth,  that  envelop  the  mummy.     The  people  of  Gournou,  who 
make  a  trade  of  antiquities  of  this  sort,  are  very  jealous  of  strangers, 
and  keep  them  as  secret  as  possible,  deceiving  travellers  by  pre- 
tending, that  they  have  arrived  at  the  end  of  the  pits,  when  they  are 
scarcely  at  the  entrance.    I  could  never  prevail  on  them  to  conduct 
me  into  these  places  till  this  my  second  voyage,  when  I  succeeded  in 
obtaining  admission  into  any  cave  where  mummies  were  to  be  seen. 
My  permanent  residence  in  Thebes  was  the  cause  of  my  suc- 
cess.    The  Arabs  saw  that  I  paid  particular  attention  to  the  situa- 
tion of  the  entrance  into  the  tombs,  and  that  they  could  not  avoid 
being  seen  by  me  when  they  were  at  work  digging  in  search  of 
a  new  tomb,  though  they  are  very  cautious  when  any  stranger  is  in 
Gournou  not  to  let  it  be  known  where  they  go  to  open  the  earth ; 
and  as  travellers  generally  remain  in  that  place  a  few  days  only, 
they  used  to  leave  off  digging  during  that  time.     If  any  traveller 
be  curious  enough  to  ask  to  examine  the  interior  of  a  tomb,  they 
are  ready  to  show  him  one  immediately,  and  conduct  him  to  some 
of  the  old  tombs,  where  he  sees  nothing  but  the  grottoes  in  which 
mummies  formerly  had  been  deposited,  or  where  there  are  but  few, 
and  these  already  plundered ;  so  that  he  can  form  but  a  poor  idea 
of  the  real  tombs,  where  the  remains  were  originally  placed. 

The  people  of  Gournou  live  in  the  entrance  of  such  caves  as  have 
already  been  opened,  and,  by  making  partitions  with  earthen  walls, 
they  form  habitations  for  themselves,  as  well  as  for  their  cows, 
camels,  buffaloes,  sheep,  goats,  dogs,  &c.  I  do  not  know  whether  it 
is  because  they  are  so  few  in  number,  that  the  government  takes  so 
little  notice  of  what  they  do ;  but  it  is  certain,  that  they  are  the  most 
unruly  people  in  Egypt.    At  various  times  many  of  them  have  been 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  159 

destroyed,  so  that  they  are  redviced  from  three  thousand,  the  number 
they  formerly  reckoned,  to  three  hundred,  which  form  the  population 
of  the  present  day.  They  have  no  mosque,  nor  do  they  care  for  one  ; 
for  though  they  have  at  their  disposal  a  great  quantity  of  all  sorts 
of  bricks,  which  abound  in  every  part  of  Gournou,  from  the  sur- 
rounding tombs,  they  have  never  built  a  single  house.  They  are 
forced  to  cultivate  a  small  tract  of  land,  extending  from  the  rocks  to 
the  Nile,  about  a  mile  in  breadth,  and  two  and  a  half  in  length  ;  and 
even  this  is  in  part  neglected ;  for  if  left  to  their  own  will,  they 
would  never  take  a  spade  in  their  hands,  except  when  they  go  to 
dig  for  mummies ;  which  they  find  to  be  a  more  profitable  employ- 
ment than  agriculture.  This  is  the  fault  of  travellers,  who  are  so 
pleased  the  moment  they  are  presented  with  any  piece  of  antiquity, 
that,  without  thinking  of  the  injury  resulting  from  the  example  to 
their  successors,  they  give  a  great  deal  more  than  the  people  really 
expect.  Hence  it  has  arisen,  that  they  now  set  such  an  enormous 
price  on  antiquities,  and  in  particular  on  papyri.  Some  of  them 
have  accumulated  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  and  are  become 
so  indifferent,  that  they  remain  idle,  unless  whatever  price  they  de- 
mand be  given  them  ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  it  is  a  fixed  point 
in  their  minds,  that  the  Franks  would  not  be  so  liberal,  unless  the 
articles  were  worth  ten  times  as  much  as  they  pay  for  them. 

The  Fellahs  of  Gournou  who  dig  for  antiquities  are  sometimes 
divided  into  parties,  and  have  their  chiefs  over  each ;  so  that  what 
is  found  by  any  of  the  party  is  sold,  and  the  money  divided  among 
them  all.  They  are  apparently  very  true  to  each  other,  and  par- 
ticularly in  cheating  strangers ;  but  when  they  can  find  a  good 
opportunity,  they  do  not  scruple  to  cheat  each  other  also.  One  day 
when  I  had  to  purchase  some  antiquities  according  to  appointment, 
and  was  going  to  the  tomb  of  one  of  these  companies,  my  guide  told 
me  by  the  way,  that  he  had  some  papyri  to  sell,  which  he  had  himself 


160  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

found,  previous  to  his  entering  into  partnership  with  his  associates  ; 
and  it  was  agreed,  that  I  was  to  repair  to  his  house  alone  to  see 
them.  However,  I  took  Mr.  Beechey  with  me,  and  we  had  great 
difficulty  to  prevent  those  hy  whom  we  were  observed  from  following 
us ;  as  it  is  the  common  custom  among  these  people  to  enter  each 
other's  houses  as  they  please,  and  see  and  hear  all  that  passes.  In 
spite  of  all  his  caution,  they  suspected  that  the  old  man  had  a  con- 
siderable hoard  of  papyri,  and  were  persuaded  that  he  wished  them 
not  to  know  the  large  sum  he  was  to  receive  for  them.  Accordingly 
they  did  not  fail  to  watch  our  coming  out,  so  that  they  might  see 
what  we  purchased ;  and  when  they  saw  we  had  nothing  they  were 
all  surprised  and  disappointed.  One  of  the  chiefs,  who  was  a  fa- 
vourite with  the  English,  approached  the  interpreter,  to  know  what 
had  passed ;  and  when  he  heard  that  nothing  had  passed  but  words, 
he  said,  the  old  man  dared  not  sell  any  papyri  without  the  con- 
sent of  the  company,  and  that  all  they  had  to  sell,  and  all  he  had, 
must  be  brought  to  us  conjointly.  They  had  no  idea  how  this 
veteran  had  deceived  them  ;  for  other  articles  of  consequence  are  so 
very  seldom  found,  that  they  did  not  suspect  his  having  any  thing 
but  papyri  to  dispose  of.  Age  and  experience,  however,  had 
naturally  rendered  him  a  greater  adept  in  the  art  of  deceit.  When 
Mr.  Beechey,  myself,  and  the  interpreter,  entered  his  cave,  his  wife 
walked  out  to  watch  if  any  one  approached.  The  donkey-men, 
who  brought  us,  were  at  some  distance  from  the  cave,  and  not  a 
single  being  was  near  us.  His  dwelling  was  a  grotto  cut  in  the 
rock  like  the  rest,  and  black  as  any  chimney.  He  made  us  sit  down 
on  a  straw  mat,  which  is  a  luxurious  thing  in  Gournou,  and  after  a 
little  ceremony,  put  into  my  hands  a  brazen  vessel,  one  of  the  finest 
and  most  perfect  pieces  of  Egyptian  antiquity  I  have  ever  seen  of 
the  kind.  It  was  covered  with  hieroglyphic  engravings,  very  finely 
executed.     It  was  about  eighteen  inches  high  and  ten  in  diameter. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c. 


1G1 


The  composition  is  extremely  fine,  and  it  sounds  not  unlike  the  Co- 
rinthian brass.  I  was  most  agreeably  surprised,  and  covdd  scarcely 
believe  that  I  had  such  a  treasure  in  my  hands.  I  conceive  it  to  be 
a  sacred  vessel  used  by  the  Egyptians.  It  has  a  handle  something 
like  our  common  baskets.  We  were  examining  it  with  astonishment, 
when  the  old  man  took  it  from  our  hands,  and  presented  us  with 
another  exactly  similar  to  it.  The  sight  of  a  pair  of  antiques  like 
these,  their  admirable  preservation,  and  the  opportunity  we  had  of 
purchasing  them,  delighted  us  so  much,  that  the  bargain  with  the 
old  man  was  made  in  a  few  words.  The  great  difficulty  was  to  take 
them  to  our  boat,  which  the  old  man  promised  to  do  in  the  night, 
after  all  were  asleep.  We  returned  to  Luxor  in  high  glee,  from 
the  expectation  of  having  in  our  possession  two  of  the  finest  articles 
of  metallic  composition,  that  ever  were  to  be  found  in  Egypt.  At  night 
the  old  man  did  not  come,  which  made  me  uneasy  ;  but  he  came  in 
the  morning,  and  said,  that  he  could  not  bring  the  vases  with  him, 
as  his  companions  Avere  watching,  but  that  he  would  not  fail  to 
bring  them  at  night,  meanwhile  he  should  be  glad,  he  added,  to 
receive  the  money  and  the  present  we  had  promised ;  and  we  paid  him 
without  hesitation,  that  he  might  not  retract  his  bargain.  At  night, 
however,  no  old  man  ;  nor  the  next  day  did  he  make  his  appearance. 
I  thought  it  necessary  therefore  to  go  to  his  habitation.  I  found 
him  at  home,  and  he  said,  as  before,  he  would  not  fail  to  come  to 
us  at  night.  Night,  however,  again  arrived  without  him  ;  but  early 
the  next  morning  he  brought  the  vessels  to  our  boat.  Some  time 
after,  one  of  his  companions  inquired  of  me  what  the  old  man  had 
received  for  his  antiques.  We  wondered  how  he  came  to  know  any 
thing  of  the  matter  ;  when  he  informed  vis,  the  vessels  belonged  to  the 
company,  and  the  pretence  of  secrecy  was  a  scheme  of  the  old  man  to 
extract  from  us  the  present  of  a  turbouse*,in  which  he  had  succeeded. 

*  A  red  cap,  or  bonnet. 


162  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

After  having  described  the  tombs,  the  mummies,  the  rocks,  and 
the  rogues  of  Gournou,  it  is  time  to  cross  the  Nile,  and  return  to 
Carnak.  Here  we  continued  the  work,  as  I  mentioned  before. 
Our  opponents  had  taken  away  the  four  sphinxes,  which  the 
doctor  had  dug  up,  in  the  name  of  the  Defterdar-bey,  from  the 
ground  I  had  opened  the  year  before,  but  had  found  nothing 
more,  which  is  somewhat  singular,  considering  the  number  of 
men  they  had  employed  in  their  excavation.  I  now  opened  another 
piece  of  ground,  in  a  line  parallel  with  the  point  of  the  temple, 
and  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  find  another  line  of  sphinxes.  From 
the  fragments  there  were  probably  twenty,  but  five  only  were  in 
good  preservation.  Among  them  was  a  sitting  figure  of  a  young 
man  nearly  of  the  size  of  life,  of  gray  granite  ;  but  though  the 
face,  hands,  and  arms,  were  in  good  condition,  the  chest  and  lower 
parts  were  quite  decayed,  and  the  bust  detached  from  the  rest  of 
the  body.  In  the  same  place  I  found  two  small  sitting  figures  of 
red  granite,  nearly  two  feet  high,  and  a  stone  irregularly  shaped, 
but  flat  and  smooth  on  the  surfaces.  It  is  divided  by  lines  into 
many  little  squares  of  half  an  inch,  in  each  of  which  is  a  hieroglyphic, 
but  all  different  from  each  other.  This  piece  in  my  opinion  might 
be  of  much  service  to  Dr.  Young  in  his  undertaking  of  the  disco- 
very of  the  alphabet  of  the  Egyptians,  particularly  in  the  advanced 
state  at  which  he  has  at  present  arrived.  Two  other  articles  were 
found  in  this  excavation,  of  which  one  is  a  tombstone,  and  the  other 
an  iron  sickle,  that  I  think  worthy  the  attention  of  the  antiquary. 
It  is  certain,  that  the  burial-places  of  the  Egyptians  were  on  the  west 
side  of  the  Nile,  for  not  a  single  place  is  to  be  found  on  the  eastern 
side  to  indicate  there  having  ever  been  a  burial-ground  there  :  yet 
among  these  sphinxes  was  a  tombstone  similar  to  those  which  are 
found  in  the  tombs  on  the  other  side  of  the  Nile,  and  probably,  there- 
fore, made  to  be  taken  to  the  tomb  of  some  family  on  the  west.    But 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  163 

the  iron  sickle  to  which  I  would  call  the  attention,  was  found  under 
the  feet  of  one  of  the  sphinxes  on  its  removal.  I  was  present ; 
one  of  the  men  took  it  up  and  gave  it  me.  It  was  broken  into 
three  pieces,  and  so  decayed,  that  the  rust  had  eaten  even  to 
the  centre.  It  was  rather  thicker  than  the  sickles  of  the  present 
time,  but  exactly  of  the  common  shape  and  size  of  ours.  It  is  now 
in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Salt.  The  question  is,  at  what  time  were 
these  statues  placed  there  ?  They  could  not  have  been  deposited 
subsequently  to  the  age  of  the  Ptolemies ;  for  it  appears,  that  since 
the  time  of  Cambyse;:,  who  destroyed  the  Gods  of  Egypt,  the  country 
has  never  been  invaded,  so  as  to  compel  the  people  to  conceal  their 
idols ;  and  it  is  evident,  that  these  statues  had  been  hidden  in  a 
hurry,  from  the  irregular  and  confused  manner  in  which  they  lie. 
Now,  as  the  sickle  was  found  under  the  statue  above  mentioned,  I 
think  it  a  sufficient  proof,  that  there  was  iron  in  the  country  long 
before  the  invasion  of  the  Persians,  since  the  Egyptians  had  enough 
to  make  instruments  of  agriculture  with  it.  Sickles  of  the  same 
form  are  to  be  seen  in  many  agricultural  representations  in  the 
tombs ;  but  it  does  not  follow,  that  they  were  taken  from  sickles 
of  iron,  like  the  one  in  question.  I  do  not  mean  to  decide  this 
point  by  my  own  suppositions  :  I  lay  the  fact  before  the  reader, 
that  he  may  form  his  own  opinion  upon  it ;  yet  there  are  circum- 
stances that  would  destroy  the  conjecture,  that  might  be  drawn 
from  this  discovery.  It  is  very  singular,  if  the  Egyptians  had  iron 
in  such  abundance,  as  to  make  sickles,  that  they  did  not  make  in- 
struments of  war,  and  other  articles  for  their  common  use,  of  the 
same  metal ;  and  if  they  had  done  so,  it  is  strange,  that  none  are  to 
be  found  among  the  various  specimens  of  their  manufacture. 

I  continued  the  work  as  fast  as  I  could  with  the  few  men  I  had, 
as  I  foresaw,  that  when  the  Defterdar  came  to  the  knowledge  of  my 
success  he  would  put  a  stop  to  our  proceedings  by  some  intrigue  or 

y  2 


164  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

other.     My  daily  employment  kept  me  in  continual  motion.     In 
the  morning  I  used  to  give  my  directions  for  the  works  at  Carnak. 
The  Arabs  generally  come  to  work  at  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and 
leave  off  from  noon  till  two  or  three  o'clock.     When  I  had  many 
employed,  I  divided  them  into  parties,  and  set  an  overseer  over 
each,  to  see  that  they  worked  at  the  proper  hours,  and  on  the 
allotted  spots  of  ground,  which  I  had  previously  marked  out ;  but 
generally  some  of  our  people  were  obliged  to  be  there,  for  no  trust 
is  to  be  reposed  in  the  Arabs,  if  they  should  find  any  small  pieces 
of  antiquity.     Before  noon  I  used  to  cross  the  river  and  inspect  the 
works  at  Gournou.    Having  been  there  the  year  before,  and  had  deal- 
ings with  these  people,  I  was  at  home  in  every  part  of  Thebes,  knew 
every  Arab  there,  and  they  knew  me  as  well.     Mr.  Beechey  had 
taken  possession  of  the  temple  at  Luxor,  without  requesting  per- 
mission from  the  Gods,  and  we  made  a  dwelling-place  of  one  of  the 
chambers  :  I  believe  it  must  have  been  the  sekos.     By  the  help  of 
some  mats  we  procured  a  very  tolerable  accommodation,  but  could 
not  prevent  the  dust  from  coming  on  our  beds,  and  clothes,  to  which 
for  my  part  I  had  long  before  become  indifferent.     We  could  not 
sleep  any  longer  in  the  boat ;  for  in  consequence  of  the  provision 
we  had  on  board,  such  quantities  of  large  rats  accompanied  us  all 
the  way  to  Luxor,  that  we  had  no  peace  day  or  night,  and  at  last 
they  succeeded  in  fairly  dislodging  us.     We  thought  to  have  been 
a  match  for  them,  however,  for  we  caused  all  the  provision  to  be 
taken  out,  and  the  boat  to  be  sunk  at  Luxor,  but  as  they  were 
good  swimmers,  they  saved  their  lives,  and  hid  themselves  in  the 
holes  of  the  pier  ;  and  when  the  provision  had  been  put  on  board 
again,  they  all  returned  cheerfully,  a  few  excepted,  and  were  no 
doubt  grateful  to  us  for  having  given  them  a  fresh  appetite  and 
a  good  bathing. 

In  Gournou,  our  researches  continued  among  the  mummies.  The 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  165 

Arabs  had  become  quite  unconcerned  about  the  secret  of  the 
tombs ;  for  they  saw  it  was  their  interest  to  search,  as  they  were 
rewarded  for  what  they  found,  and  those  who  were  duly  paid  were 
indifferent  whether  we  or  their  brethren  found  a  tomb.  The  men 
were  divided  into  two  classes.  The  most  knowing  were  making 
researches  on  their  own  account,  employing  eight  or  ten  to  assist 
them.  They  indicated  the  ground  where  they  hoped  to  find  a 
tomb,  and  sometimes  were  fortunate  enough  to  hit  on  the  entrance 
of  a  mummy  pit  in  the  first  attempt.  At  other  times,  after  spending 
two  or  three  days,  they  often  found  only  a  pit  filled  with  mummies  of 
the  inferior  class,  which  had  nothing  among  them  worthy  of  notice  : 
so  that,  even  to  the  most  skilful  explorer,  it  was  a  mere  chance  what 
he  should  find.  On  the  other  hand,  in  some  of  the  tombs  of  the 
better  class  they  found  very  good  specimens  of  antiquity,  of  all 
sorts.  I  met  with  some  difficulty  at  first  in  persuading  these  people 
to  work  in  search  of  tombs,  and  receive  a  regular  daily  payment ; 
for  they  conceived  it  to  be  against  their  interest,  supposing  I  might 
obtain  the  antiquities  at  too  cheap  a  rate :  but  when  they  saw,  that 
sometimes  they  received  their  pay  regularly,  and  I  had  nothing  for 
it,  they  found  it  was  rather  in  their  favour,  to  secure  twenty  paras 
(three  pence)  a  day,  than  run  the  risk  of  having  nothing  for  their 
labour,  which  often  happened  to  those  who  worked  at  adventure. 

It  was  from  these  works  that  I  became  better  acquainted  with 
the  manner  in  which  the  Egyptians  regulated  their  burial-places  ; 
and  I  plainly  saw  the  various  degrees  and  customs  of  the  divers 
classes,  from  the  peasant  to  the  king.  The  Egyptians  had  three 
different  methods  of  embalming  their  dead  bodies,  which,  Herodotus 
informs  us,  were  according  to  the  expense  the  persons  who  pre- 
sented the  dead  bodies  to  the  mummy-makers  chose  to  incur. 
This  father  of  history  thus  expresses  himself  on  the  subject : 
''Certain  persons  were  appointed  by  the  laws  to  the  exercise  of  this 


166  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

profession.     When  a  dead  body  was  brought  to  them,  they  ex- 
hibited to  the  friends   of  the  deceased   different  models,  highly 
finished  in  wood.     The  most  perfect  of  these,  they  said,  resembles 
one,  whom  I  do  not  tlunk  it  religious  to  name  on  such  an  occasion  ; 
the  second  was  of  less  price,  and  inferior  in  point  of  execution  ;  the 
other  was  still  more  mean.     They  then  inquired  after  which  model 
the  deceased  should  be  represented.     When  the  price  was  deter- 
mined, the  relations  retired,  and  the  embalmers  proceeded  in  their 
work.     In  the  most  perfect  specimens  of  their  art,  they  extracted 
the  brain  through  the  nostrils,  partly  with  a  piece  of  crooked  iron, 
and  partly  by  the  infusion  of  drugs.     They  then,  with  an  Ethiopian 
stone,  made  an  incision  in  the  side,  through  which  they  drew  out 
the   intestines.     These   they  cleansed   thoroughly,  washing  them 
with  palm-wine,  and  afterward  covering  them  with  pounded  aro- 
matics.     They  then  filled  the  body  with  powder  of  pure  myrrh, 
cassia,  and  other  spices,  without  frankincense.     Having  sown  up 
the  body,  it  was  covered  with  nitre  for  the  space  of  seventy  days, 
which  time  they  were  not  allowed  to  exceed.     At  the  end  of  this 
period,  being  first  washed,  it  was  closely  wrapped  in  bandages  of 
cotton,  dipped  in  a  gum,  which  the  Egyptians  used  as  a  glue.     It 
was  then  returned  to  the  relations,  who  enclosed  the  body  in  a  case 
of  wood,  made  to  resemble  a  human  figure,  and  placed  it  against 
the  wall  in  the  repository  of  their  dead.     This  was  the  most  costly 
mode  of  embalming. 

"  For  those  who  wished  to  be  at  less  expense,  the  following 
method  was  adopted.  They  neither  drew  out  the  intestines,  nor 
made  any  incision  in  the  dead  body,  but  injected  a  liniment  made 
from  the  cedar.  After  taking  proper  means  to  secure  the  injected 
oil  within  the  body,  it  was  covered  with  nitre  for  the  time  above 
specified.  On  the  last  day  they  withdrew  the  liquid  before  intro- 
duced, which  brought  with  it  all  the  intestines.     The  nitre  dried 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  167 

up  and  hardened  the  flesh,  so  that  the  corpse  appeared  little  but 
skin  and  bone.  In  this  state  the  body  was  returned,  and  no  further 
care  taken  concerning  it. 

"  There  was  a  third  mode  of  embalming,  appropriated  to  the 
poor.  A  particular  kind  of  lotion  was  made  to  pass  through  the 
body,  which  was  afterward  merely  left  in  nitre  for  the  above  space 
of  seventy  days,  and  then  returned."  Such  is  the  account  given  us 
by  Herodotus. 

Nothing  can  more  plainly  distinguish  the  various  classes  of 
people,  than  the  manner  of  their  preservation  :  but  there  are  many 
other  remarks,  that  may  be  made  to  the  same  effect.  I  shall  de- 
scribe how  I  have  found  the  mummies  of  the  principal  class  un- 
touched, and  hence  we  may  judge  how  they  were  prepared  and 
deposited  in  their  respective  places.  I  am  sorry  that  I  am  obliged 
to  contradict  my  old  guide  Herodotus ;  for  in  this  point,  and  many 
others,  he  was  not  well  informed  by  the  Egyptians.  In  the  first 
place,  speaking  of  the  mummies  in  their  cases,  he  mentions  them 
as  erect :  but  it  is  somewhat  singular,  that  in  so  many  pits  as  I 
have  opened,  I  never  saw  a  single  mummy  standing.  On  the  con- 
trary, I  found  them  lying  regularly,  in  horizontal  rows,  and  some 
were  sunk  into  a  cement,  which  must  have  been  nearly  fluid  when 
the  cases  were  placed  on  it.  The  lower  classes  were  not  buried  in 
cases :  they  were  dried  up,  as  it  appears,  after  the  regular  pre- 
paration of  the  seventy  days.  Mummies  of  this  sort  were  in  the 
proportion  of  about  ten  to  one  of  the  better  class,  as  near  as  I  could 
calculate  by  the  quantity  I  have  seen  of  both  ;  and  it  appeared  to 
me,  that,  after  the  operation  of  the  nitre,  adopted  by  the  mummy- 
makers,  these  bodies  may  have  been  dried  in  the  sun.  Indeed,  for 
my  own  part,  I  am  persuaded  it  was  so ;  as  there  is  not  the  smallest 
quantity  of  gum  or  any  thing  else  to  be  found  on   them.     The 


168  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

linen  in  which  they  are  folded  is  of  a  coarser  sort,  and  less  in 
quantity ;  they  have  no  ornaments  about  them  of  any  consequence, 
and  they  are  piled  up  in  layers,  so  as  to  crowd  several  caves  ex- 
cavated for  the  purpose  in  a  rude  manner.  In  general,  these  tombs 
are  to  be  found  in  the  lower  grounds,  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains 
of  Gournou ;  and  some  extend  as  far  as  the  border  to  which  the 
inundation  reaches.  They  are  to  be  entered  by  a  small  aperture, 
arched  over,  or  by  a  shaft  four  or  five  feet  square,  at  the  bottom  of 
which  are  entrances  into  various  chambers,  all  choked  up  with 
mummies :  and  though  there  is  scarcely  any  thing  to  be  found  on 
them,  many  of  these  tombs  have  been  rummaged,  and  left  in  the 
most  confused  state. 

I  must  not  omit,  that  among  these  tombs  we  saw  some  which 
contained  the  mummies  of  animals  intermixed  with  human  bodies. 
There  were  bulls,  cows,  sheep,  monkeys,  foxes,  bats,  crocodiles,  fishes, 
and  birds,  in  them  :  idols  often  occur ;  and  one  tomb  was  filled 
with  nothing  but  cats,  carefully  folded  in  red  and  white  linen,  the 
head  covered  by  a  mask  representing  the  cat,  and  made  of  the  same 
linen.  I  have  opened  all  these  sorts  of  animals.  Of  the  bull,  the 
calf,  and  the  sheep,  there  is  no  part  but  the  head  which  is  covered 
with  linen,  and  the  horns  projecting  out  of  the  cloth ;  the  rest  of 
the  body  being  represented  by  two  pieces  of  wood,  eighteen  inches 
wide  and  three  feet  long,  in  an  horizontal  direction,  at  the  end  of 
which  was  another,  placed  perpendicularly,  two  feet  high,  to  form 
the  breast  of  the  animal.  The  calves  and  sheep  are  of  the  same 
structure,  and  large  in  proportion  to  the  bulls.  The  monkey  is  in 
its  full  form,  in  a  sitting  posture.  The  fox  is  squeezed  up  by  the 
bandages,  but  in  some  measure  the  shape  of  the  head  is  kept  per- 
fect. The  crocodile  is  left  in  its  own  shape,  and  after  being  well 
bound  round  with  linen,  the  eyes  and  mouth  are  painted  on  this 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  169 

covering.  The  birds  are  squeezed  together,  and  lose  their  shape 
except  the  ibis,  winch  is  found  like  a  fowl  ready  to  be  cooked,  and 
bound  round  with  linen,  like  all  the  rest. 

It  is  somewhat  singular  that  such  animals  are  not  to  be  met  with 
in  the  tombs  of  the  higher  sort  of  people  ;  while  few  or  no  papyri  are 
to  be  found  among  the  lower  order,  and  if  any  occur  they  are  only 
small  pieces  stuck  upon  the  breast  with  a  little  gum  or  asphaltum, 
being  probably  all  that  the  poor  individual  could  afford  to  himself. 
In  those  of  the  better  classes  other  objects  are  found.  I  think  they 
ought  to  be  divided  into  several  classes,  as  I  cannot  confine  myself 
to  three.  I  do  not  mean  to  impute  error  to  Herodotus  when  he 
speaks  of  the  three  modes  of  embalming ;  but  I  will  venture  to 
assert,  that  the  high,  middling,  and  poorer  classes,  all  admit  of  farther 
distinction.  In  the  same  pit  where  I  found  mummies  in  cases,  I 
found  others  without ;  and  in  these,  papyri  are  most  likely  to  be 
met  with.  I  remarked,  that  the  mummies  in  the  cases  have  no 
papyri ;  at  least,  I  never  observed  any :  on  the  contrary,  in  those 
without  cases  they  are  often  obtained.  It  appears  to  me,  that  such 
people  as  could  afford  it  would  have  a  case  to  be  buried  in,  on 
which  the  history  of  their  lives  was  painted :  and  those  who  could 
not  afford  a  case,  were  contented  to  have  their  lives  written  on 
papyri,  rolled  up,  and  placed  above  their  knees.  Even  in  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  cases  there  is  a  great  difference :  some  are  exceedingly 
plain,  others  more  ornamented,  and  some  very  richly  adorned  with 
figures,  well  painted.  The  cases  are  generally  made  of  Egyptian 
sycamore :  apparently,  this  was  the  most  plentiful  wood  in  the 
country,  as  it  is  usually  employed  for  the  different  utensils.  All  the 
cases  have  a  human  face,  male  or  female.  Some  of  the  large  cases 
contain  others  within  them,  either  of  wood  or  of  plaster,  painted.  The 
inner  cases  are  sometimes  fitted  to  the  body  of  the  mummy :  others 
are  only  covers  to  the  body,  in  form  of  a  man  or  woman,  easily 

z 


170  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

distinguishable  by  the  beard  and  the  breast,  like  that  on  the  out- 
side.    Some  of  the  mummies  have  garlands  of  flowers,  and  leaves 
of  the  acacia,  or  sunt  tree,  over  their  heads  and  breasts.      This 
tree  is  often  seen  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  above  Thebes,  and 
particularly  in  Nubia.     The  flower,  when  fresh,  is  yellow,  and  of  a 
very  hard  substance,  appearing  as  if  artificial.     The  leaves,  also,  are 
very  strong,  and  though  dried  and  turned  brown,  they  still  retain 
their  firmness.     In  the  inside  of  these  mummies  are  found  lumps 
of  asphaltum,  sometimes  so  large  as  to  weigh  two  pounds.     The 
entrails  of  these  mummies  are  often  found  bound  up  in  linen  and 
asphaltum.    What  does  not  incorporate  with  the  fleshy  part,  remains 
of  the  natural  colour  of  the  pitch  ;  but  that  which  does  incorporate 
becomes  brown,  and  evidently  mixed  with  the  grease  of  the  body, 
forming  a  mass,  which  on  pressure  crumbles  into  dust.   The  wooden 
case  is  first  covered  with  a  layer  or  two  of  cement,  not  unlike  plaster 
of  Paris  ;  and  on  this  are  sometimes  cast  figures  in  basso  relievo,  for 
which  they  make  niches  cut  in  stone.     The  whole  case  is  painted  ; 
the   ground  generally  yellow,   the  figures  and  hieroglyphics  blue, 
green,  red,  and  black.    The  last  is  very  seldom  used.    The  whole  of 
the  painting  is  covered   with  a  varnish,  which  preserves  it  very 
effectually.     Some  of  the  colours,  in  my  humble  opinion,  were  ve- 
getable, for  they  are  evidently  transparent ;  besides,  I  conceive  it  was 
easier  for  the  Egyptians  to  produce  vegetable  colours  than  mineral 
from  the  great  difficulty  of  grinding  the  latter  to  such  perfection. 

The  next  sort  of  mummy  that  drew  my  attention,  I  believe  I  may 
with  reason  conclude  to  have  been  appropriated  to  the  priests.  They 
are  folded  in  a  manner  totally  different  from  the  others,  and  so 
carefully  executed,  as  to  show  the  great  respect  paid  to  those  per- 
sonages. The  bandages  are  stripes  of  red  and  white  linen  inter- 
mixed, covering  the  whole  body,  and  forming  a  curious  effect  from 
the  two  colours.     The  arms  and  legs  are  not  enclosed  in  the  same 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  171 

envelope  with  the  body,  as  in  the  common  mode,  but  are  bandaged 
separately,  even  the  ringers  and  toes  being  preserved  distinct.  They 
have  sandals  of  painted  leather  on  their  feet,  and  bracelets  on  their 
arms  and  wrists.  They  are  always  found  with  the  arms  across  the 
breast,  but  not  pressing  it ;  and  though  the  body  is  bound  with 
such  a  quantity  of  linen,  the  shape  of  the  person  is  carefully  pre- 
served in  every  limb.  The  cases  in  which  mummies  of  this  sort  are 
found  are  somewhat  better  executed,  and  I  have  seen  one,  that  had 
the  eyes  and  eyebrows  of  enamel,  beautifully  executed  in  imitation 
of  nature.  Among  the  various  tombs,  I  discovered  one  of  this 
description  in  the  valley  adjacent  to  Beban  el  Malook  on  the  west 
of  it,  of  which  I  shall  have  to  speak  hereafter. 

I  found  eight  mummies,  all  untouched  since  they  had  been  de- 
posited in  their  resting-place.  The  cases  lay  flat  on  the  ground, 
facing  the  east,  in  two  equal  rows,  imbedded  four  inches  deep 
in  mortar,  which  must  have  been  soft  when  they  were  put  into 
it ;  for  when  I  had  them  removed  the  impression  of  them  remained 
perfect.  The  opening  of  them  I  shall  describe,  with  that  of  the 
tomb. 

The  tombs  containing  the  better  classes  of  people  are  of  course 
superior  to  the  others.  There  are  some  more  extensive  than  the 
rest,  having  various  apartments,  adorned  with  figures  representing 
different  actions  of  life.  Funeral  processions  are  generally  predo- 
minant. Agricultural  processes,  religious  ceremonies,  and  more 
ordinary  occurrences,  such  as  feasting,  &c.  are  to  be  seen  every 
where.  I  shall  not  enter  into  a  minute  account  of  these  paintings, 
as  they  have  been  so  often  described,  particularly  by  Mr.  Hamilton, 
whose  perspicuous  observations  upon  them  give  the  best  idea  of 
their  various  representation.  It  would  be  impossible  to  describe 
the  numerous  little  articles  found  in  them,  which  are  well  adapted 
to  show  the  domestic  habits  of  the  ancient  Egyptians.  It  is  here 
the  smaller  idols  are  occasionally  found,  either  lying  on  the  ground, 

z2 


172  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

or  on  the  cases  of  the  mummies.  Vases  are  sometimes  found  con- 
taining the  embalmed  entrails  of  the  mummies.  These  are  generally 
made  of  baked  clay,  and  painted  over :  their  sizes  differ  from  eight 
inches  to  eighteen  :  their  covers  represent  the  head  of  some  divinity, 
bearing  either  the  human  form,  or  that  of  a  monkey,  fox,  cat,  or  some 
other  animal.  I  met  with  a  few  of  these  vases  of  alabaster  in  the  tombs 
of  the  kings,  but  unfortunately  they  were  broken.  A  great  quantity 
of  pottery  is  found,  and  also  wooden  vessels  in  some  of  the  tombs, 
as  if  the  deceased  had  resolved  to  have  all  he  possessed  deposited 
along  with  him.  The  most  singular  among  these  things  are  the 
ornaments,  in  particular  the  small  works  in  clay  and  other  com- 
position. I  have  been  fortunate  enough  to  find  many  specimens  of 
their  manufactures,  among  which  is  leaf  gold,  beaten  nearly  as  thin  as 
ours.  The  gold  appears  to  me  extremely  pure,  and  of  a  finer  colour 
than  is  generally  seen  in  our  own.  It  is  somewhat  singular  that  no 
instruments  of  war  are  found  in  these  places,  when  we  consider  what 
a  warlike  nation  the  Egyptians  were.  What  has  become  of  their 
weapons  I  cannot  conjecture ;  for  in  all  my  researches  I  found  only 
one  arrow,  two  feet  long.  At  one  extremity  it  had  a  copper  point 
well  fixed  in  it,  and  at  the  other  a  notch  as  usual  to  receive  the 
string  of  the  bow:  it  had  been  evidently  split  by  the  string,  and 
glued  together  again. 

Among  other  articles  too  numerous  to  be  mentioned,  the  beetle, 
or  scarabreus,  to  all  appearance  a  highly  sacred  animal,  is  found  in 
the  tombs.  There  are  various  sorts  ;  some  of  basalt,  verde  antico, 
or  other  stones,  and  some  of  baked  clay.  They  are  scarce,  particu- 
larly those  with  hieroglyphics  on  them,  which  no  doubt  contain 
some  particular  prayers,  or  the  commemoration  of  striking  events 
in  the  life  of  the  deceased.  It  is  supposed,  that  the  Egyptians 
hung  the  scarabseus  to  their  necks  when  they  went  to  war ;  but  of 
this  we  have  no  clear  proofs.  I  must  mention  a  circumstance  on 
this  subject,  which  perhaps  will  solve  the  doubt.     The  scarabeei  are 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  173 

of  such  a  peculiar  form,  that,  if  they  were  among  the  ornaments 
of  the  warriors,  they  would  be  easily  distinguished.  One  solitary 
instance  of  this  kind  I  have  observed.  There  is  a  sitting  figure  in 
the  tomb  of  Samethis,  which  I  discovered  in  the  valley  below 
Beban  el  Malook,  that,  by  its  splendid  dress  and  ornaments,  may 
be  intended  to  represent  a  king.  It  has  a  square  plate  of  basalt 
hung  to  its  neck,  with  an  obelisk  in  the  centre,  and  a  figure  on  each 
side  of  it.  I  was  extremely  fortunate  in  meeting  with  one  of  these 
plates,  I  believe  the  only  one  that  ever  was  found  of  the  kind.  It 
has  the  form  of  an  Egyptian  temple,  and  in  the  centre  is  an  elevated 
scarabaeus  on  a  boat,  guarded  by  two  figures,  one  at  each  side ;  and 
on  the  reverse  of  the  scarabteus  is  an  inscription  over  a  boat,  on 
which  are  two  other  figures,  exactly  like  the  former.  The  plate  has 
the  holes  by  which  it  was  hung  to  a  chain  or  string.  I  found  also 
other  scarabaei,  with  human  heads,  which  I  never  saw  before. 

The  Egyptians  were  certainly  well  acquainted  with  linen  ma- 
nufactures to  a  perfection  equal  to  our  own  ;  for,  in  many  of  their 
figures,  we  observe  their  garments  quite  transparent ;  and  among 
the  folding  of  the  mummies,  I  observed  some  cloth  quite  as  fine  as 
our  common  muslin,  very  strong,  and  of  an  even  texture.  They 
had  the  art  of  tanning  leather,  with  which  they  made  shoes  as  well 
as  we  do,  some  of  which  I  found  of  various  shapes.  They  had  also 
the  art  of  staining  the  leather  with  various  colours,  as  we  do  Mo- 
rocco, and  actually  knew  the  mode  of  embossing  on  it,  for  I  found 
leather  with  figures  impressed  on  it,  quite  elevated.  I  think  it 
must  have  been  done  with  a  hot  iron  while  the  leather  was  damp. 
They  also  fabricated  a  sort  of  coarse  glass,  with  which  they  made 
beads  and  other  ornaments. 

Beside  enamelling,  the  art  of  gilding  was  in  great  perfection 
among  them,  as  I  found  several  ornaments  of  the  kind.  They  knew 
how  to  cast  copper  as  well  as  to  form  it  into  sheets,  and  had  a 


174  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

metallic  composition  not  unlike  our  lead,  rather  softer,  but  of  greater 
tenacity.  It  is  much  like  the  lead  which  we  see  on  paper  in  the  tea- 
chests  from  China,  but  much  thicker.  I  found  some  pieces  of  it  covered 
on  both  sides  with  a  thin  coat  of  another  metal,  which  might  be 
taken  for  silver,  but  I  cannot  believe  it  to  be  so.  It  certainly  is  a 
proof  of  the  scarcity  of  this  metal  in  Egypt,  where,  in  my  opinion, 
it  was  less  common  than  gold ;  for  it  is  seldom  found,  whereas  the 
latter  is  quite  common  on  the  ornaments. 

Carved  works  were  very  common,  and  in  great  perfection,  par- 
ticularly in  the  proportion  of  the  figures ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that  though  the  Egyptians  were  unacquainted  with  anatomy,  yet 
in  these,  as  well  as  in  their  statues  of  marble,  they  preserved  that 
sweet  simplicity  peculiar  to  themselves,  which  is  always  pleasing  to 
the  beholder. 

In  one  of  the  tombs  of  the  kings  I  found  two  wooden  figures, 
nearly  seven  feet  high,  of  very  fine  workmanship.  They  are  in  a 
standing  posture,  with  one  arm  extended,  as  if  holding  a  torch. 
They  had  many  other  carved  works,  hieroglyphics,  ornaments,  &c. 

The  art  of  varnishing,  and  baking  the  varnish  on  clay,  was  in 
such  perfection  among  them,  that  I  doubt  whether  it  could  be 
imitated  at  present.  Articles  of  the  best  sort  of  this  manufacture, 
however,  were  rather  scarce,  as  there  are  but  few  to  be  found ; 
while,  on  the  contrary,  there  are  great  quantities  of  the  inferior 
sorts.  Indeed,  the  few  good  ones  I  met  with  were  all  in  the  great 
tomb  of  Samethis,  and  these  are  of  the  most  beautiful  colour. 

The  art  of  painting  was  but  simple  among  the  Egyptians,  as 
thev  had  no  knowledge  of  shadowing  to  elevate  their  figures ;  but 
^reat  credit  is  due  to  them  for  their  taste  in  disposing  their 
colours.  There  is  great  harmony  even  in  the  red  and  green, 
which  do  not  always  agree  with  us,  and  which  they  knew  how  to 
mingle  so  well,  that  it  produced  a  very  splendid  effect,  particularly 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  175 

by  candle-light.  As  I  observed  before,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  these 
colours  were  from  the  vegetable  kingdom,  and  think  I  can  pro- 
duce a  pretty  strong  proof  of  the  fact.  The  present  natives  of 
Egypt,  who  manufacture  indigo,  make  it  up  in  cakes  of  the  size  of 
a  sea  biscuit,  in  a  very  rough  manner.  Not  knowing  how  to 
extract  the  colour  from  the  plant  without  mixing  it  with  sand,  the 
cake  glitters  all  over,  the  light  being  reflected  from  every  particle. 
Of  this  imperfection  the  ancient  Egyptians  could  not  get  the 
better ;  for  whenever  there  is  blue  in  any  of  their  paintings,  which 
is  evidently  indigo,  the  same  sparkling  sand  is  to  be  seen,  as  in  the 
modern  cakes.  Their  drawings  and  sculpture  are  but  simple,  and 
systematically  done ;  notwithstanding  which,  they  knew  how  to 
impart  a  certain  vivacity  to  their  posture,  which  animates  their 
figures.  They  knew  little  or  nothing  of  perspective,  and  all  that 
was  done  was  in  profile.  The  wall  or  whatever  other  place  was  to  be 
ornamented  was  previously  prepared,  by  grinding  it  very  smooth. 
The  first  lines  were  done  in  red  by  a  scholar,  or  one  not  so  expert 
as  the  master,  who  examined  the  outlines,  and  corrected  them  in 
black.  Specimens  of  this  are  to  be  seen  in  the  tomb  of  Samethis, 
as  I  shall  have  to  mention  hereafter. 

When  the  outlines  were  completed,  the  sculptor  began  his 
work.  He  raised  the  figure  by  cutting  away  the  stone  all  round  it. 
The  angles  are  smoothly  turned,  and  the  ornaments  on  the  figure 
or  garments  are  traced  with  a  chisel  which  leaves  a  slight  impres- 
sion, and  adorns  the  wholefigure.  The  last  was  the  painter,  who 
finished  the  piece.  They  could  not  find  any  other  colours  than 
red,  blue,  yellow,  green,  and  black.  The  blue  is  divided  into  two 
sorts,  the  dark  and  the  light.  With  these  colours  they  adorned 
their  temples,  tombs,  or  whatever  they  wished  to  have  painted. 
As  there  is  no  colour  among  these  that  could  imitate  the  living 
human  flesh,  they  adopted  the  red  for  this  purpose.    The  ornaments 


176  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

were  decorated  with  the  other  colours  ;  and,  though  so  few,  I  am 
sure  they  are  not  all  used  in  the  same  piece. 

As  to  their  architecture,  I  can  only  say  it  is  in  conformity  with 
their  ideas.  It  is  to  he  recollected,  that  they  had  a  notion  of  re- 
turning to  life  again,  body  and  soul,  after  a  period  of  three  thousand 
years  :  whence  we  may  presume,  that  they  intended  to  make  their 
edifices  last  so  long,  that  they  might  see  them  again  in  good  pre- 
servation. As  to  arches,  can  we  not  prove,  from  the  circumstance 
of  their  having  made  them  in  a  different  form  from  ours,  that  they 
could  also  have  made  them  of  a  larger  size,  than  we  see  to  this  very 
day  in  Thebes  ?  Yes,  I  say,  in  Thebes  there  are  Egyptian  arches. 
If  any  reader  will  observe  Plate  44,  he  will  see  an  Egyptian  arch 
which  exists  at  Gournou,  under  the  rocks  that  separate  this  place 
from  the  valley  Beban  el  Malook.  The  arch  is  made  in  a  manner 
entirely  different  from  our  own  ;  but  if  the  Egyptians  were  inclined 
to  have  arches,  they  might  soon  have  constructed  them  in  this 
manner,  and  of  considerable  sizes,  equal  in  proportion  to  the  enor- 
mous blocks  which  we  see  in  their  edifices.     No,  they  did  not  want 

arches they  preferred  having  their  temples  crowded  with  columns, 

which  formed  the  finest  embellishments  of  their  edifices  ;  and  I 
assert,  that  the  number  of  these  columns  is  no  detriment  to  the 
beauty  or  magnificence  of  these  sacred  places.  On  the  contrary, 
without  these  columns,  their  architecture  would  not  have  appeared 
to  the  Egyptians  so  substantiaDy  firm,  which  was  their  principal 
object.  This,  in  my  opinion,  was  their  reason  for  not  erecting 
arches.  But  I  shall  endeavour  farther  to  prove,  that  they  knew 
how  to  make  an  arch  with  the  key-stone  as  well  as  we  do.  A 
traveller  may  wander  among  the  ruins  of  Thebes,  and  his  attention 
be  so  much  taken  by  the  magnificence  of  the  great  edifices,  as  to 
overlook  what  is  inferior,  especially  what  is  constructed  of  simple 
bricks,  baked  in  the  sun.     Besides,  he  has  a  preconceived  notion, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  177 

that  the  Egyptians  were  ignorant  of  the  art  of  turning  an  arch ;  so 
that,  if  lie  should  see  one,  or  even  pass  under  an  archway,  he 
would  take  it  for  granted,  that  it  was  the  work  of  a  later  people. 
I  shall  now  describe  the  situation  of  several  arches,  which  are  to 
be  seen  in  Thebes;  point  out  the  purpose  for  which  they  were 
evidently  erected ;  and  leave  the  reader  to  conjecture  whether 
they  were  made  by  the  Egyptians,  or  by  any  other  people. 

The  mode  of  building  enormously  strong  walls  with  unburnt 
bricks  is  peculiar  to  the  Egyptians.  Of  this  I  trust  there  can  be 
no  doubt,  from  the  many  instances  clearly  before  our  eyes ;  but  if 
it  be  questioned,  I  would  inquire  of  any  traveller,  who  has  seen 
Thebes,  whether  he  thinks  that  the  wall,  winch  surrounded  the 
avenue  of  sphinxes,  or  lion-headed  statues,  which  I  discovered  at 
Carnak,  could  have  been  made  by  any  other  people.  There  are 
even  some  of  these  walls  that  enclose  their  sacred  places :  and  if  it 
be  objected,  that  some  subsequent  nation,  who  adored  the  same 
gods,  may  have  erected  these  walls  to  preserve  the  holy  edifices, 
■I  can  boldly  say:  No,  this  was  not  the  fact;  for  the  walls  are  so 
connected  with  the  Egyptian  works,  that  it  is  plain  they  were  con- 
structed at  the  same  time  with  them.  But  what  is  still  more  to 
the  point,  at  Gournou  there  are  various  and  extensive  tombs,  ex- 
cavated not  in  the  rocks  themselves,  but  in  the  plains  at  their  foot, 
twelve  or  fourteen  feet  below  the  surface,  and  extending  a  con- 
siderable length  under  ground.  The  way  to  these  tombs  is  gene- 
rally by  a  staircase,  winch  led  into  a  large  square  hall,  cut  in  the 
rock,  in  some  instances  ninety  or  a  hundred  feet  long ;  and  opposite 
the  stairs  is  generally  the  entrance  into  the  tomb.  It  is  to  be 
observed,  that  these  halls  entered  into  the  original  plan  of  the 
structure :  there  was  nothing  to  protect  or  to  enclose  them  on 
any  side  but  a  wall,  by  which  they  were  completely  covered. 
Without  this,  they  would  have  been  exposed  to  all  the  rubbish  of 

A  A 


178  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

other  tombs,  which  might  have  fallen  in.  The  necessity  of  building 
these  walls  is  evident ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  many  travellers  will 
plainly  see,  that  no  other  succeeding  nation  would  have  built  these 
enormous  walls  to  preserve  the  tombs  of  the  Egyptians.  Now 
over  the  stairs,  which  lead  into  the  hall,  there  are  some  very  high 
and  majestic  arches,  not  only  made  of  the  same  bricks,  but  con- 
nected with  the  walls  themsehes;  consequently,  made  by  the 
Egyptians,  and  constructed  with  the  same  key-stones  as  our  own 
in  the  present  day.  There  is  also  at  Gournou  a  great  number  of 
other  buildings  of  sun-burnt  bricks,  of  a  later  date,  which  I  hope 
will  not  be  confounded  with  the  others.  Some  of  these  are  built 
with  a  smaller  sort  of  bricks ;  others  with  bricks  taken  from  the 
Egyptian  walls ;  but  their  construction  plainly  shows  the  difference 
of  the  people  who  erected  them. 

If  we  extend  our  observations  on  the  Egyptian  architecture,  it 
will  appear,  that  the  Egyptians  undoubtedly  have  the  merit  of 
invention,  which  I  consider  as  the  source  of  improvement,  &c. 
The  Greeks  may  claim  their  having  brought  the  art  to  great  per- 
fection ;  but  it  is  well  known,  that  they  took  their  principal  hints 
from  the  Egyptians. 

The  Egyptians  were  a  primitive  nation.  They  had  to  form  every 
thing  without  any  model  before  them  to  imitate.  Yet  so  fertile 
was  their  inventive  faculty,  that  to  this  day  new  orders  of  archi- 
tecture might  be  extracted  from  their  ruins.  If  we  observe  the 
Egyptian  capitals,  do  we  not  see  a  complication  of  orders  in  one 
mass,  which,  if  divided,  would  produce  numerous  hints  for  new  ideas  ? 
If  the  lover  of  truth  will  but  inspect  the  various  representations  of 
the  lotus  on  the  capitals,  he  will  plainly  see,  that  not  only  the  Doric 
and  the  Corinthian  orders  have  been  extracted  from  them,  but  that 
more  might  still  be  formed.  There  is  reason  also  to  believe,  that 
the  Ionic  order  originated  in  Egypt.     The  capitals  of  the  columns 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  179 

of  Tentyra,  those  in  the  small  temple  of  Edfu,  and,  lastly,  the  others 
in  the  small  temple  of  Isis,  in  the  island  of  Philce,  sufficiently  indicate 
this.  The  name  of  the  deity,  to  which  the  first  and  third  of  these 
temples  are  dedicated,  seems  to  strengthen  this  supposition.  We 
well  know,  that  Isis  is  the  Io  of  the  Greeks,  from  whom  the  name 
of  Ionic  was  no  doubt  derived  ;  and  it  is  very  probable,  that  he  Avho 
introduced  the  order  gave  it  that  name,  as  having  been  taken  from 
the  temple  of  the  goddess. 

The  wonderful  sculptures  of  the  Egyptians  are  to  be  admired  for 
the  boldness  of  their  execution.  Their  enormous  sizes  rendered  it 
difficult  for  the  artists  to  maintain  their  due  proportions,  which 
were  according  to  the  height  of  the  figure.  For  instance,  if  a  statue 
were  erected  of  the  size  of  life,  the  head  was  of  the  natural  size  ;  if 
the  statue  were  thirty  feet  high,  the  head  was  larger  in  proportion 
to  the  body  ;  and  if  fifty  feet  high,  the  magnitude  of  the  head  was  far- 
ther increased.  Had  it  been  otherwise  in  statues  of  so  great  height, 
the  distance  from  the  eyes  of  the  spectator  would  have  so  much  dimi- 
nished the  size,  that  the  head  would  have  appeared  too  small  in  pro- 
portion to  the  legs.  The  tedious  work  of  the  endless  hieroglyphics 
which  are  to  be  seen  in  every  part  of  every  edifice,  the  numberless 
figures  on  the  temples,  tombs,  obelisks,  and  walls,  must  have  required 
wonderful  labour.  They  had  only  four  sorts  of  stones  in  general  use  for 
sculpture,  the  sandy,  the  calcareous,  breccia,  and  granite.  All  except 
the  first  are  very  hard,  and  what  is  most  singular  is,  we  do  not  know 
with  what  tools  they  were  cut  out.  We  have  ocular  demonstration, 
that  the  tools  of  the  present  day  will  not  cut  granite  without  great 
difficulty,  and  I  doubt  whether  we  could  give  it  that  smoothness  of 
surface  we  see  in  Egypt.  But  I  would  observe  it  is  not  unreasonable 
to  suppose,  that  the  granite  and  other  stones  were  less  hard  at  the 
time  of  the  Egyptians,  than  they  are  at  present.  On  the  calcareous 
stone  the  figures  have  angles  so  sharp,  that  the  best  tempered  chisel 

a  a  9, 


180  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

of  our  time  could  not  produce  the  like ;  it  is  so  hard  that  it  breaks 
more  like  glass  than  stone  ;  and  the  granite  is  almost  impenetrable. 

At  the  end  of  the  above  mentioned  plain  in  Gournou,  at  the  foot 
of  the  rocks  which  divide  that  valley  from  Beban-el-Malook,  the 
excavation  was  going  on  at  the  end  of  an  avenue  where  sphinxes 
must  have  been.  Here  was  found  a  causeway  gradually  rising  to 
some  ruins,  which  being  uncovered,  proved  to  be  a  temple,  with 
columns  doubly  octangular,  the  only  one  of  such  form  I  saw  in 
Egypt.  The  temple  is  evidently  ancient,  but  I  dare  not  affirm  it 
to  be  Egyptian,  though  it  has  hieroglyphics,  &c.  on  the  walls  ;  for  the 
proportions  of  the  plan,  as  far  as  I  could  see,  and  the  order  of  the 
columns,  being  totally  different  from  any  others  of  the  Egyptians, 
lead  me  to  suppose  this  temple  to  be  of  a  later  date.  Farther  on, 
just  under  the  rocks,  we  discovered  a  granite  door  nine  feet  high 
by  five  wide,  and  one  and  a  half  thick.  It  is  covered  with  hie- 
roglyphics and  figures  neatly  cut,  and  on  the  top  it  has  the  winged 
<dobe  and  a  cornice.  It  had  been  painted,  and  was  buried  entirely 
under  ground. 

While  my  men  were  at  work,  I  was  in  the  habit  of  searching 
among  these  tombs,  and  entered  all  the  places  and  holes  I  covdd 
possibly  squeeze  myself  into.  In  the  large  tombs  I  caused  the  side 
wall  or  rock  to  be  struck  with  the  large  sledge  hammer,  to  discover 
by  the  sound  if  any  cavity  were  near.  One  day  the  hammer  not 
only  gave  a  hollow  sound,  but  made  an  aperture  a  foot  and  half 
wide  into  another  tomb.  Having  enlarged  the  hole  sufficiently  to 
pass,  we  entered,  and  found  several  mummies,  and  a  great  quantity 
of  broken  cases.  The  stones  which  had  fallen  from  the  roof  were 
as  sharp  as  a  razor,  and  as  my  shoes  were  not  very  strong,  my  feet 
were  cut  in  several  places.  These  stones  detach  themselves  from 
the  roof  in  flakes,  which  proves  them  to  be  much  harder  than  when 
first  cut.     In  an  inner  apartment  of  this  tomb  is  a  square  opening, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  181 

into  which  we  descended,  and  at  the  bottom  found  a  small  chamber 
at  each  side  of  the  shaft.  In  one  was  a  granite  sarcophagus  with 
its  cover  quite  perfect,  but  so  situated,  that  it  would  be  an  arduous 
undertaking  to  draw  it  out.  Among  the  mummies  I  found  some 
small  papyri,  and  one  extraordinarily  large. 

When  I  did  not  choose  to  pass  the  river  in  the  night  to  our  habita- 
tion at  the  temple  of  Luxor,  I  took  up  my  lodging  in  the  entrance 
of  some  of  the  tombs  along  with  those  troglodytes.     Nothing  could 
be  more  amusing  to  me.    Their  dwelling  is  generally  in  the  passages 
between  the  first  and  second  entrance  into  a  tomb.     The  walls  and 
the  roof  are  as  black  as  any  chimney.     The  inner  door  is  closed  up 
with  mud,  except  a  small  aperture  sufficient  for  a  man  to  crawl 
through.     Within  this  place  the  sheep  are  kept  at  night,  and  occa- 
sionally accompany  their  masters  in  their  vocal  concert.     Over  the 
doorway  there  are  always  some  half-broken  Egyptian  figures,  and  the 
two  foxes,  the  usual  guardians  of  burial-places.     A  small  lamp,  kept 
alive  by  fat  from  the  sheep,  or  rancid  oil,  is  placed  in  a  niche  in  the 
wall,  and  a  mat  is  spread  on  the  ground;  and  this  formed  the  grand 
divan,  wherever  I  was.     There  the  people  assembled  round  me, 
their  conversation  turning  wholly  on  antiquities.     Such  a  one  had 
found  such  a  thing,  and  another  had  discovered  a  tomb.     Various 
articles  were  brought  to  sell  to  me,  and  sometimes  I  had  reason  to 
rejoice  at  having  stayed  there.     I  was  sure  of  a  supper  of  milk  and 
bread  served  in  a  wooden  bowl ;  but  whenever  they  supposed  I 
should  stay  all  night,  they  always  killed  a  couple  of  fowls  for  me, 
which  were  baked  in  a  small  oven  heated  with  pieces  of  mummy 
cases,  and  sometimes  with   the  bones  and  rags  of  the  mummies 
themselves.     It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  sit  down  near  fragments 
of  bones ;  hands,  feet,  or  sculls  are  often  in  the  way ;  for  these  people 
are  so  accustomed  to  be  among  the  mummies,  that  they  think  no 
more  of  sitting  on  them,  than  on  the  skins  of  their  dead  calves.     I 


182  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

also  became  indifferent  about  them  at  last,  and  would  have  slept  in 
a  mummy  pit  as  readily  as  out  of  it. 

Every  human  being  can  be  happy  if  he  likes,  for  happiness  cer- 
tainly depends  on  ourselves.  If  a  man  be  satisfied  with  what  he 
has,  he  is  happy ;  but  much  more  so  when  he  thinks,  that  there  is 
nothing  more  to  be  got.  It  is  somewhat  singular  to  talk  of  hap- 
piness among  people  who  live  in  caves  like  brutes,  or  rather  who 
live  in  sepulchres  among  the  corpses  and  rags  of  an  ancient  nation, 
of  which  they  know  nothing.  But  this  is  trifling  compared  with 
their  slave-like  state,  subject  to  the  caprice  of  a  tyrannical  power, 
who  leaves  them  no  chance  of  receiving  any  remuneration  for  their 
labour,  and  no  prospect  of  any  change  except  for  the  worse.  But 
custom  reconciles  all  this.  The  labourer  comes  home  in  the  evening, 
seats  himself  near  his  cave,  smokes  his  pipe  with  his  companions, 
and  talks  of  the  last  inundation  of  the  Nile,  its  products,  and  what 
the  ensuing  season  is  likely  to  be.  His  old  wife  brings  him  the 
usual  bowl  of  lentils  and  bread  moistened  with  water  and  salt,  and 
when  she  can  add  a  little  butter  it  is  a  feast.  Knowing  nothing 
beyond  this,  he  is  happy.  The  young  man's  business  is  to  accu- 
mulate the  amazing  sum  of  a  hundred  piasters  (two  pounds  and  ten 
shillings)  to  buy  himself  a  wife,  and  to  make  a  feast  on  the  wedding 
day.  If  he  have  any  children,  they  want  no  clothing :  he  leaves 
them  to  themselves  till  mother  nature  pleases  to  teach  them  to 
work,  to  gain  money  enough  to  buy  a  shirt  or  some  other  rag  to 
cover  themselves ;  for  while  they  are  children,  they  are  generally 
naked  or  covered  with  rags.  The  parents  are  roguishly  cunning, 
and  the  children  are  schooled  by  their  example,  so  that  it  be- 
comes a  matter  of  course  to  cheat  strangers.  Would  any  one 
believe,  that  in  such  a  state  of  life  luxury  and  ambition  exist  ? 
If  any  woman  be  destitute  of  jewels,  she  is  poor,  and  looks  with 
envy  on  one  more  fortunate  than  herself,  who  perhaps  has  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  fee.  183 

worth  of  half-a-crown  round  her  neck ;  and  she  who  has  a  few  glass 
beads,  or  some  sort  of  coarse  coral,  a  couple  of  silver  brooches,  or 
rings  at  her  arms  and  legs,  is  considered  as  truly  rich  and  great. 
Some  of  them  are  as  complete  coquettes,  in  their  way,  as  any  to  be 
seen  in  the  capitals  of  Europe.  I  often  noticed,  that  modesty  was 
most  apparent  among  the  ugliest.  These  do  not  care  to  let  a 
stranger  see  their  faces ;  as  they  have  nothing  to  gain  by  it,  they 
deem  it  better  to  keep  it  covered :  on  the  contrary,  one  who  hopes 
to  excite  admiration  in  the  stranger,  takes  care  that  some  accident 
or  other  shall  cause  the  veil,  or  cloth,  or  rag,  covering  her  face,  to 
fall  or  turn  aside.  The  artifice  having  succeeded,  she  pretends  to 
be  quite  anxious  to  cover  herself  again ;  but  she  is  satisfied  the 
stranger  has  had  his  peep,  and  she  passes  on,  proud  that  he  knows 
her  to  be  pretty. 

When  a  young  man  wants  to  marry,  he  goes  to  the  father  of  the 
intended  bride,  and  agrees  with  him  what  he  is  to  pay  for  her. 
This  being  settled,  so  much  money  is  to  be  spent  on  the  wedding- 
day  feast.  To  set  up  house-keeping  nothing  is  requisite  but  two 
or  three  earthen  pots,  a  stone  to  grind  meal,  and  a  mat,  which 
is  the  bed.  The  spouse  has  a  gown  and  jewels  of  her  own  ;  and,  if 
the  bridegroom  present  her  with  a  pair  of  bracelets  of  silver,  ivory, 
or  glass,  she  is  happy  and  fortunate  indeed.  The  house  is  ready, 
without  rent  or  taxes.  No  rain  can  pass  through  the  roof;  and 
there  is  no  door,  for  there  is  no  want  of  one,  as  there  is  nothing  to 
lose.  They  make  a  kind  of  box  of  clay  and  straw,  which,  after  two 
or  three  days'  exposure  to  the  sun,  becomes  quite  hard.  It  is 
fixed  on  a  stand,  an  aperture  is  left  to  put  all  their  precious  things 
into  it,  and  a  piece  of  a  mummy  case  forms  the  door.  If  the  house 
do  not  please  them,  they  walk  out  and  enter  another,  as  there  are 
several  hundreds  at  their  command ;  I  might  say  several  thousands, 
but  they  are  not  all  fit  to  receive  inhabitants. 


184  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

While  I  was  thus  occupied  in  my  researches  at  Thebes,  we 
received  news  that  the  Defterdar  was  to  come  up  the  Nile  again. 
By  this  time  I  had  arranged  my  operations,  and  they  were  going  on 
very  well.  At  Carnak,  one  morning  previous  to  my  crossing  the 
Nile  to  Gournou,  I  set  several  men  to  work  on  a  spot  of  ground  at 
the  foot  of  a  heap  of  earth,  where  part  of  a  large  colossus  projected  out. 
Mr.  Beechey,  who  sometimes  visited  the  ruins,  did  me  the  favour  to 
superintend  the  work  on  that  day  ;  and,  on  my  return  from  Gournou, 
I  had  the  pleasure  to  find  the  discovery  had  been  made  of  a  colossal 
head,  larger  than  that  I  had  sent  to  England.  It  was  of  red  granite, 
of  beautiful  workmanship,  and  uncommonly  well  preserved,  except 
one  ear,  and  part  of  the  chin,  which  had  been  knocked  off  along  with 
the  beard.  It  is  detached  from  the  shoulder  at  the  lower  part  of  the 
neck,  and  has  the  usual  corn  measure,  or  mitre,  on  its  head.  Though 
of  larger  proportion  than  the  young  Memnon,  it  is  not  so  bulky  or 
heavy,  as  it  has  no  part  of  the  shoulder  attached  to  it.  I  had  it 
removed  to  Luxor,  which  employed  eight  days,  though  the  distance 
is  little  more  than  a  mile. 

I  had  by  this  time  accumulated  at  Luxor  articles  enough  to  fill 
another  boat,  as  large  as  that  of  the  preceding  year.  Besides  this 
head,  which  is  ten  feet  from  the  neck  to  the  top  of  the  mitre,  I 
procured  an  arm  belonging  to  the  same  colossus,  which  measures 
also  ten  feet,  and  with  the  head,  will  give  a  just  idea  of  the  size  of 
the  statue. 

I  brought  also  the  famous  altar,  with  the  six  divinities,  in  alto 
relievo,  which  are  the  most  finished  works  of  any  I  have  seen  in 
Egypt.  It  was  thrown  from  its  pedestal  in  a  small  temple  in  the 
north-east  angle  of  the  wall  inclosing  the  great  temple  of  Carnak 
The  pedestal  is  still  there,  and  is  of  a  kind  of  whitish  marble.  I 
had  also  four  large  statues  with  the  lion-heads ;  and  the  cover  of 
the  sarcophagus,  of  wliich  so  much  was  said  on  my  first  visit.     It  cost 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  185 

much  trouble,  as  may  be  supposed,  to  remove  a  heavy  piece  of 
granite  from  those  abysses,  through  a  place  scarcely  high  enough  to 
allow  a  man  to  sit  on  the  ground,  up  an  uneven  and  craggy 
ascent,  by  the  assistance  of  people,  strangers  to  every  sort  of  order, 
and  who  had  to  contend  with  the  dust  that  rose  under  the  feet, 
and  the  excessive  heat  from  the  number  of  labourers.  I  had  it 
conveyed  over  the  water  to  Luxor,  ready  to  embark,  and  it  was  well 
that  I  did  so. 

Fortune  seemed  to  favour  me  so  far  this  time ;  for,  no  sooner 
had  I  finished  the  operation,  and  made  the  above  collection,  than 
an  order  came  from  the  Defterdar  Bey,  who  had  arrived  at  Gamola, 
three  miles  north  of  Thebes,  to  all  the  Cacheffs  and  Caimakans, 
who  commanded  on  both  sides  of  Thebes,  not  to  permit  the  English 
party  to  accumulate  any  more  antiquities,  nor  to  allow  the  Arabs  to 
work  or  sell  any  thing  more  to  them  on  any  account. 

I  must  inform  my  reader,  that  the  two  agents  for  the  opposite 
party  had  gone  to  Gamola  on  the  arrival  of  the  Bey,  and  requested 
him  to  send  this  order,  under  the  pretext,  that  they  could  not  find 
or  buy  a  single  article  in  consequence  of  the  English,  who  laid  their 
hands  on  every  thing.  He  did  not  want  much  persuasion  to  this ; 
and  immediately  sent  for  the  chiefs  of  Gournou,  Luxor,  and  Carnak, 
to  whom  he  gave  strict  orders  as  above. 

The  Sheik  of  Gournou  came  to  tell  us  of  the  order  the  Bey  had 
issued.  The  poor  fellow,  who  was  rather  attached  to  us,  was  sorry 
for  his  part,  but  said  he  must  obey.  It  was  too  late  to  set  off  that 
evening  to  see  the  Bey,  so  I  waited  till  early  the  next  morning. 
On  my  arrival,  I  found  the  mighty  potentate  seated  on  his  divan, 
surrounded  by  his  Cacheffs,  and  a  number  of  other  attendants.  He 
received  me  more  coolly  than  on  my  former  visit.  He  inquired 
whether  I  had  not  yet  made  up  my  collection.     I  answered,  that, 

1!    B 


186  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

as  long  as  I  had  his  permission,  I  would  still  endeavour  to  find 
something  more. 

I  presented  the  letter  from  the  Bashaw  ;  hut,  if  I  had  brought 
him  a  present,  it  would  have  had  a  hetter  effect.  As  he  saw  the 
address  previous  to  taking  the  letter  into  his  hands,  he  dexterously 
turned  the  discourse  on  other  business ;  and  half  an  hour  passed  be- 
fore I  could  bring  the  subject  on  again,  which  he  still  contrived  to 
divert.  I  was  at  a  loss  what  to  think  of  his  behaviour,  and  began  to 
inquire,  if  there  were  any  reasons  why  our  works  were  stopped  at 
Carnak,  and  orders  given  at  Gournou,  that  the  English  should 
not  purchase  any  thing,  and  on  what  account  they  were  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  opposite  party.  He  looked  at  the  letter  a 
second  time ;  and,  with  a  smile,  told  the  Cacheffs  what  the  Bashaw 
had  written,  but  the  letter  was  expressed  in  a  manner  as  if  the  old 
Bashaw  were  in  his  dotage  and  quite  childish  ;  so  that  the  Bey 
might  do  as  he  pleased  in  the  affair.  He  then  put  the  letter  aside, 
and  began  to  talk  of  other  matters.  I  saw  that  he  wanted  an 
excuse  for  his  conduct  towards  us ;  for  he  said  he  had  been  in- 
formed that  the  Fellahs  had  complained  of  being  so  exceedingly  ill- 
treated  by  us,  that  we  drew  our  swords  every  moment  to  cut  off 
their  heads,  and  that  we  beat  them  continually.  At  this  I  rose  from 
my  seat,  and  said  I  was  surprised  that  a  man  of  his  good  under- 
standing could  believe  such  reports,  and  condemn  us  without 
proof ;  that,  if  he  would  inquire  into  the  matter,  he  would  find  it 
to  be  all  false ;  and  that  it  was  his  duty  to  do  me  justice.  He 
answered,  that  we  had  bought  nearly  every  article  of  antiquity  that 
could  be  obtained  in  Gournou,  while  the  other  party  could  pur- 
chase nothing,  and  therefore  it  was  time  to  stop  our  proceedings. 
I  replied,  what  we  had  bought  had  been  voluntarily  sold  us  by  the 
Arabs,  and  begged  him  not  to  believe  what  he  heard  from  our  op- 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  See.  187 

pbnents,  who  played  such  tricks,  that  we  could  not  be  aware  of  them. 
He  continued  to  talk  of  other  things,  till  at  last  I  asked  him  what 
he  intended  to  do  with  respect  to  the  order  for  Carnak  :  to  which 
he  made  no  reply,  but  inquired  whether  Gournou  were  far  off.  On 
being  shown  the  place  out  of  the  window,  six  miles  distant,  he 
ordered  horses,  and  in  a  few  minutes  we  set  off  for  that  place.  We 
arrived  in  two  hours,  and  he  went  straight  on  to  Memnonium; 
where  he  inquired  about  these  great  "  mosquees,"  as  he  named 
them,  and  put  several  questions  concerning  the  buildings  and  the 
colossi  that  are  there.  He  then  proceeded  to  the  two  colossi,  and 
from  them  to  Medinet,  whither  I  followed  him,  as  I  was  determined 
to  have  the  order  he  gave  to  the  Sheiks  recalled.  I  sought  an 
opportunity  to  speak  to  him  tete-a-tete,  and  indeed  I  had  many, 
but  all  to  no  purpose  ;  for  the  moment  I  began  to  mention  the 
business  he  put  some  other  question,  so  that  my  words  were  of 
no  effect.  Still  I  was  determined  not  to  lose  my  patience,  as  I 
saw  this  was  what  he  wanted,  and  resolved  not  to  leave  him  a 
moment ;  for  it  is  the  character  of  the  Turks,  that  they  must  be 
importuned  into  compliance  with  whatever  is  against  their  in- 
clination. After  a  general  survey  of  the  ruins,  he  seated  him- 
self before  the  famous  battle  painted  on  the  wall,  and  gave  his 
opinion  respecting  it;  observing,  it  was  impossible  that  the  co- 
louring could  have  been  done  at  the  time  the  figures  were  made, 
as  it  was  so  fresh,  and  the  stones  were  so  much  broken.  I  told 
him,  it  was  owing  to  the  climate  of  the  country  that  these  things 
were  preserved ;  but  he  persisted  in  his  opinion,  that  it  was 
impossible  it  could  be  so.  Then,  quitting  his  station,  he  seated 
himself  under  the  archway  of  the  first  entrance,  and  called  the 
Sheik  of  Gournou,  whom  he  knew  to  be  our  friend,  and  who 
had  received  the  order  the  night  before.     The  poor  Sheik,  trem- 

bb2 


188  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

bling  all  over  at  this  call,  was  asked  how  many  men  there  were  in 
Gournou  who  dug  the  ground  in  search  of  mummies.     The  Sheik 
answered  six  or  seven.     I  saw  the  Bey  did  not  know  what  to  do  to 
gratify  his  spleen ;  and,  as  he  could  not  avoid  retracting  the  order, 
the  poor  Sheik  was  to  suffer,  and  our  party  to  be  mortified.     A 
diabolical  thought  came  into  his  head ;  and  he  asked  the  Sheik  if 
he  could  find  in  Gournou  a  mummy  that  had  not  been  opened. 
The  Sheik  answered,  that  one  might  be  found,  if  he  gave  him  time 
to  search ;  but  the  people  who  find  them  always  open  them  in- 
stantly.   On  this  the  Bey  flew  into  a  great  rage,  and  insisted  that  one 
should  be  found  immediately ;  and,  if  he  did  not  find  it,  he  would 
give  him  the  bastinado.      The  poor  Sheik  was  ordered  to  dig  di- 
rectly under  his  feet,  and  take  out  a  mummy ;  but  he  answered, 
that  the  mummies  were  in  Gournou,  and  none  were  ever  found  in 
the  place  where  he  stood :  and  it  was  well  for  him  that  one  of  the 
attendants  and  a  Cacheff  confirmed  what  he  said.     The  Bey  then 
sent  him  to  Gournou,  and  told  him  to  see  that  he  found  a  mummy, 
in  its  case  and  unopened ;  and  he  allowed  him  an  hour  for  doing  it 
The  poor  Sheik  attempted  to  speak,  but  was  tinned  out  by  three  or 
four  soldiers.      A  little  after,  the  Bey  began  to  ask  some  other 
questions  respecting  the  temple,  particularly  if  we  had  taken  any 
drawings  ;  adding,  that  he  could  draw  liimself,  if  he  had  paper  and 
pencils.     I  told  him  I  had  no  doubt  he  might  make  some  good 
sketches  from  what  was  before  him ;  on  which  he  asked  me  for  a 
pencil  and  some  paper,  which  I  gave  him  from  my  pocket-book, 
and  he  made  a  sketch  of  the  capital  of  one  of  the  columns  that  are 
before  the  gate.     When  finished,  it  was  shown  to  all  around  with 
great  parade.     He  praised  it  liimself  highly,  and  every  one  agreed, 
that  it  was  very  fine  indeed.     He  then  gave  it  me,  with  an  air 
of  self-conceit,  saying,  "  There,  see  what  I  can  do  !"     I  took  it,  put 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  fee.  189 

it  into  my  pocket,  and  have  preserved  it,  as  it  may  give  an  idea  of 
the  person  by  whom  it  was  executed.  We  left  Medinet  Abou  and 
came  to  Gournou,  and  under  a  doum-tree  saw  the  Sheik  and  some  of 
the  Janizaries,  with  the  mummy  ready  for  his  highness.  Before  he 
drew  near  to  ascertain,  the  Bey  began  to  cry  out  that  he  was  sure  it 
had  been  opened  by  one  of  the  fellows  who  search  for  mummies  ;  and 
it  was  in  vain  he  was  told  otherwise,  and  that  he  had  himself  found  it. 
I  did  not  imagine  things  would  be  carried  to  such  an  extreme.  That 
the  case  had  been  opened  no  one  covdd  suspect ;  but  the  Bey  wanted 
a  pretence  to  beat  the  poor  Sheik  for  being  our  friend.  Accordingly* 
he  ordered  him  to  be  immediately  stretched  on  the  ground ;  and  such 
a  scene  ensued,  that  I  heard  from  the  Turks  themselves  expressions 
both  of  displeasure  and  disgust.  I  perceived  that  all  this  was  owing  to 
the  intrigues  of  our  opponents,  who  had  told  the  Bey,  that  the  Sheik 
was  our  friend ;  and  as  they  brought  him  some  trifling  presents  to 
back  their  assertion,  of  course  he  listened  to  what  they  said.  I  did 
not  fail  to  intercede  for  the  poor  unfortunate  wretch,  who  all  this 
time  was  under  the  stick,  but  it  was  useless ;  and  I  was  persuaded, 
the  more  I  entreated,  the  more  beating  he  would  receive.  The  in- 
terpreter, not  reflecting  on  what  he  did,  ventured  to  intercede  in 
the  name  of  Mr.  Salt,  the  British  consul ;  at  which  the  Bey 
laughed.  He  then  begged  in  the  name  of  his  father-in-law,  the 
Bashaw  ;  and  the  Bey  made  answer,  that  he  was  the  sole  com- 
mander in  all  business  there ;  adding,  to  the  man  who  was  punish- 
ing the  Sheik,  "  Go  on,  go  on,  and  hard." 

By  this  time  the  poor  fellow  was  like  the  mummy  that  lay  by  his 
side,  deprived  of  sense  and  feeling ;  and  with  a  little  more  beating 
I  have  no  doubt  would  have  remained  there  for  ever,  and  been 
buried  where  he  lay.  I  leave  to  the  imagination  of  any  friend  of 
humanity  to  what  a  height  my  blood  rose,  and  what  my  feelings 
must  have  been  at  that  moment.     I  can  assure  the  reader  1  did  not 


190  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

think  I  could  have  stood  so  long  without  openly  declaring  them  ;  but 
I  reflected,  that  my  losing  my  patience  would  answer  no  good  pur- 
pose, and  only  expose  me  to  insults  from  the  Bey,  for  all  he  wanted 
was  an  opportunity  to  justify  him  in  acting  as  he  liked  towards  us. 
Reason,  however,  subdued  not  my  rage,  but  it  restrained  the  mere 
action  of  my  body,  and  I  stood  for  a  long  time  motionless.  The 
Bey  was  smiling,  and  I  was  afraid  might  discover  the  state  of  my 
feelings,  which  would  have  increased  his  pleasure.  At  last  he 
told  the  man  to  stop,  and  the  miserable  Sheik  was  carried  to  his 
cave  as  into  his  tomb ;  and  was,  indeed,  more  fit  for  the  tomb  than 
for  a  house.  The  Bey  then  caused  the  mummy  to  be  opened,  and 
finding  nothing,  he  exclaimed,  if  they  did  not  bring  him  one  that 
was  entire,  he  would  throw  the  Sheik  into  the  river.  Observing 
that  I  avoided  speaking  to  him,  for  I  was  too  much  disgusted  even 
to  continue  near  such  a  being,  he  called  another  Sheik,  and  ordered, 
that  henceforth  whatever  antiquities  were  found  in  Gournou  should 
be  sold  to  our  opponents.  On  my  representing  to  him,  that  I  now 
felt  myself  under  the  necessity  of  writing  to  Cairo  that  very  night, 
he  mounted  his  horse,  called  my  interpreter,  and  bade  him  despatch 
a  man  to  Gamola,  and  he  would  send  an  order  by  him,  to  have  the 
men  at  work  the  next  day.  I  told  him,  that  I  should  send  to  Cairo 
notwithstanding  this  apparent  change  in  his  sentiments ;  as  it  was 
incumbent  on  me  to  let  the  Bashaw  know  how  his  commands  were 
obeyed.  I  then  went  to  see  the  Sheik,  whom  I  found  unable 
to  speak ;  I  did  all  I  could  for  him ;  but  there  was  such  fear 
amongst  the  Arabs,  that  they  dreaded  having  any  thing  to  do  with 
us. 

In  the  morning  I  was  about  to  send  the  interpreter  to  Gamola, 
when  we  saw  the  cangiar  of  the  Bey  passing  before  Luxor,  and  the 
Cacheff  of  Gheneh  just  landing  the  man  from  Gamola,  who  brought 
an  order,  that  we  might  have  twenty  men  to  work  for  eight  days. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  191 

When  I  perceived  that  the  Bey  did  not  stop,  I  spoke  to  the  Cacheff, 
to  use  Ms  influence,  that  the  order  might  be  enforced ;  but  he  seemed 
desirous  of  evading  it,  as  he  was  aware  it  was  merely  a  pretext  on 
the  part  of  the  Bey.  He  told  us  plainly,  that  our  opponents  had 
calumniated  vis  to  the  Bey ;  and  protested,  that  if  it  had  been  in 
his  power,  he  would  have  befriended  us.  Accordingly  I  gave  him 
to  understand,  that  it  would  be  to  his  advantage  to  be  friendly  to 
our  party,  as  well  as  to  the  other,  and  that  the  Bey's  enmity  would 
not  last  much  longer,  as  it  was  simply  owing  to  some  business  which 
had  prevented  the  Consul  from  coming,  who  intended  to  bring  with 
him  presents  both  to  the  Bey  and  to  himself,  when  all  would  be  set 
to  rights  again.  At  length  my  persuasions  prevailed ;  he  ordered 
the  men  to  work ;  and  in  a  few  days  I  collected  all  the  pieces  of 
antiquity  together  on  the  quay  of  Luxor ;  and  caused  a  mud  wall 
to  be  made  round  them. 

At  this  time  the  Fellahs  of  Gournou  were  all  in  great  conster- 
nation, in  consequence  of  another  order  they  had  received  from  the 
Bey,  not  to  sell  any  thing  either  to  us,  or  to  the  French  ;  and  to  get 
three  unopened  mummies  ready  for  him  on  his  return,  which  would 
be  in  a  few  days.  This  was  a  pretext  they  had  no  doubt  for  a 
general  bastinadoing,  as  it  was  expressly  said,  that  the  mummies 
were  to  be  procured  by  the  men  who  worked  for  the  English.  The 
poor  Sheik,  who  still  could  scarcely  move,  began  to  fear  that  he 
should  receive  another  beating;  and  we  had  just  finished  some 
works  at  Carnak  and  Luxor,  when,  on  the  3d  of  May,  in  the  morning, 
our  gentleman  made  his  appearance  at  Luxor  on  his  return  from 
Derou.  On  landing,  he  came  to  see  our  collection  of  antiques,  which 
certainly  formed  no  inconsiderable  group.  He  made  a  remark  or 
two,  that  the  head  was  a  very  fine  piece,  &c.  and  then,  like  a  being 
bewildered,  ran  here  and  there  among  the  ruins,  to  seek  for  an- 
tiquities, without  knowing  where  he  went.  As  he  appeared  to  be 
a  little  more  disposed  to  hearken  to  what  we  had  to  say  to  him. 


192  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

we  complained  of  our  situation ;  stating  to  him,  that  in  con- 
sequence of  what  he  had  done  to  the  Sheik  on  the  other  side  of 
the  water,  the  Fellahs  would  not  work,  and  that,  although  we  had 
brought  strong  letters  of  recommendation  from  the  Bashaw  himself, 
we  were  without  protection,  exposed  to  the  insolence  of  our  op- 
ponents, and  every  one  else,  who  thought  they  might  act  as  they 
pleased  towards  us  with  impunity.  He  inquired  if  any  one  had 
done  us  any  injury  ;  and  we  informed  him,  that  our  interpreter  had 
been  beaten  by  the  Fellahs  of  Carnak,  and  that  the  Caimakan,  after  it 
had  been  proved,  said  he  could  do  nothing  to  the  assailants,  as  he  was 
afraid  of  incurring  the  displeasure  of  the  Bey.  He  next  asked,  if  I 
were  displeased  because  he  had  beaten  the  Sheik  of  Gournou.  I 
said,  it  was  not  pleasant  to  see  any  one  beaten  without  cause, 
for  the  Sheik  had  had  no  dealings  with  us,  had  not  sold  us  a 
single  article  of  antiquity  ;  but  he  might  treat  his  own  people  as 
he  liked,  for  we  had  no  business  to  interfere  either  with  his  orders,  or 
with  them,  so  long  as  they  were  not  injurious  to  us.  He  then 
wished  to  know  what  we  wanted.  We  said,  that  we  wanted  to  be 
respected,  and  to  be  allowed  to  proceed  in  our  researches.  We  did 
not  wish  to  be  treated  with  more  favour  than  our  opponents  ;  but 
we  were  desirous  of  an  order  to  the  people  of  Gournou,  that  we 
might  purchase  antiquities  as  well  as  others ;  and  a  farther  order 
for  the  Cacheffs  of  Assouan  and  Ibrim,  as  we  intended  to  ascend  the 
Nile  ;  with  which  he  complied,  and  set  off. 

On  our  return  to  Luxor  I  found  two  of  the  fathers  of  the  Pro- 
paganda whom  I  had  met  with  on  my  first  journey  from  Redamont 
to  Luxor,  and  who  were  come  to  see  the  antiquities.  As  they  had 
treated  me  with  civility  on  my  journey,  I  felt  it  my  duty  to  return 
the  obligation.  Accordingly  I  went  with  them  to  all  the  places  I 
knew,  and  in  particular  to  the  tombs  of  the  kings,  the  Memnonium, 
Medinet  Abou,  Carnak,  Luxor,  &c.  To  me  it  was  in  general  a  source 
of  pleasure  to  show  these  things  to  strangers,  to  hear  their  remarks, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  193 

and  to  observe  their  astonishment  and  satisfaction,  after  coming  so 
far  to  view  what  cannot  be  seen  any  where  else  ;  at  the  same  time  no 
vexation  can  be  greater  to  a  lover  of  antiqutiy,  when,  which  is  often 
the  case,  he  witnesses  indifference  even  to  what  is  most  striking. 
These  two  holy  fathers  had  been  in  the  country  for  about  ten  years, 
and  their  place  of  residence  was  only  at  the  distance  of  three  days' 
journey  from  Thebes ;  yet  they  had  never  thought  of  taking  the 
trouble  of  such  a  journey  during  all  that  time,  and  probably  never 
would  have  done  it,  had  it  not  been  for  my  persuasion  when  I  first 
saw  them.  Such  neglect  of  antiquities  would  be  not  a  little  pro- 
voking to  the  travellers  who  come  from  London,  Paris,  Vienna,  and 
Petersburgh,  to  see  these  magnificent  ruins.  On  arriving  at  the 
first  tombs  through  the  entrance,  which  is  truly  magnificent,  the 
holy  fathers,  who  had  as  much  taste  for  antiquity  as  the  animals 
that  brought  them,  complained  of  being  very  much  fatigued,  though 
they  had  been  carried  by  two  very  good  asses.  My  attention  was 
on  the  alert  for  the  first  bursts  of  their  astonishment ;  but  how 
I  was  disappointed  !  They  dismounted  without  taking  any  more 
notice  of  these  magnificent  places,  than  of  a  common  building, 
or  of  the  cloister  of  a  convent.  They  sent  immediately  for  the  boy 
who  had  the  bottle  of  aquavita?,  and  drank  a  glass  each.  I  thought 
they  meant  to  take  it  easily,  and  to  examine  every  thing  minutely, 
but  I  was  soon  undeceived,  for  the  only  observation  they  made  was 
on  the  name  of  a  friend  they  happened  to  know,  which  was  scrawled 
on  one  of  these  sacred  walls  in  charcoal.  They  expressed  their 
wonder  how  he  had  come  thither,  when  he  had  been  there,  and  so 
on  ;  and  although  they  were  surrounded  by  Egyptian  antiquities, 
hieroglyphics,  figures,  fine  paintings,  &c.  all  their  occupation  was  to 
inspect  the  numerous  other  scrawls  on  the  stones,  to  see  whether 
any  more  of  their  friends  had  been  there.  On  our  arrival  at  the 
great  hall,  they  could  not  help  observing  the  immense  sarcophagus 

c  c 


194  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

that  lies  there,  and  immediately  inquired  whether  the  body  were 
still  in  it.  On  advancing  a  little  farther,  and  perceiving  it  had  been 
emptied,  they  concluded  there  was  nothing  worth  seeing,  as  there 
were  none  of  the  kings'  bodies  to  be  found.  At  my  request  they 
cast  their  eyes  on  the  painting,  otherwise  they  would  have  walked 
out  without  knowing  whether  it  were  a  tomb  or  a  cellar  :  in  the 
mean  time  a  friend  of  theirs,  who  not  being  quite  so  anxious  as  the 
fathers  to  see  these  antiquities,  had  seated  himself  near  the  entrance, 
as  he  cared  not  about  coming  any  farther,  was  calling  to  the  holy 
friars  to  make  haste,  and  wondered  why  they  would  waste  so  much 
time  in  examining  such  things.  It  may  easily  be  imagined,  that 
I  was  not  only  disappointed  in  the  taste  of  my  companions,  but 
also  provoked  at  their  indifference ;  and  as  I  saw  there  was  no 
remedy,  I  hurried  them  out  of  the  tomb  as  fast  as  I  could,  to  show 
them  another  more  magnificent,  in  hopes  to  have  better  success. 
Accordingly  I  took  them  to  see  the  most  remarkable  of  the  tombs, 
and  that  which  is  reckoned  the  best.  This  tomb  is  truly  grand ; 
it  is  distinguished  from  the  others  not  only  by  its  excellent  state  of 
preservation,  but  because  it  contains  eight  small  cells  cut  in  the 
rock,  in  the  first  passage  on  each  side  of  it,  in  which  are  painted  a 
multitude  of  articles  used  by  the  ancient  Egyptians,  such  as  imple- 
ments of  war,  domestic  and  ceremonial  dresses,  decorations,  musical 
instruments,  and  in  short  all  that  was  conducive  to  utility,  ornament, 
or  convenience,  in  their  time,  so  as  to  give  perfect  ideas  of  their 
mode  of  living,  &c.  The  ground  is  white,  and  the  colours  are  so 
lively  and  striking,  that  we  cannot  fail  to  wonder  at  them.  Farther 
on  you  pass  tlu-ough  a  long  gallery,  painted  with  the  most  beautiful 
hieroglyphics,  in  as  good  perfection  as  the  former  ;  and  in  the  great 
hall  lies  an  enormous  sarcophagus,  of  one  single  piece  of  granite, 
measuring  ten  feet  long,  five  wide,  six  high,  and  six  inches  thick, 
covered  with  hieroglyphics  inside  and  out.      This  is  one  of  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  195 

largest  sarcophagi  remaining  in  perfection  at  this  day.  There 
are  other  apartments  communicating  with  the  great  hall,  all  of 
which  deserve  the  attention  of  the  traveller,  for  in  them  he  sees 
various  groups  of  figures  and  hieroglyphics  indicating  the  manner  of 
living,  agriculture,  &c.  of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  country. 

On  our  entering  I  informed  the  fathers  that  this  was  the  finest 
tomb,  and  that  it  contained  paintings  of  the  implements  and  other 
things  of  the  ancients,  which  are  very  interesting.  They  passed  the 
first  corridor  with  the  same  apathy  as  the  first  tomb,  holding  a 
candle  into  each  of  the  cells  as  they  passed,  and  peeping  in  with 
their  heads,  but  without  entering.  The  only  thing  that  struck 
their  attention  were  the  hasps  on  a  little  box,  somewhat  like  those 
which  contain  large  flasks  for  liquors.  On  coming  out  I  took  the 
road  over  the  mountain,  which  is  a  little  troublesome,  but  in  a 
few  minutes  it  brings  you  to  the  summit,  and  then  descends  to 
Medinet  Abou.  Having  no  better  success  here,  I  returned  with 
them  to  Luxor. 

A  strong  wind  that  arose  this  day  leads  me  to  mention  some 
particulars  of  the  phenomena  that  often  happen  in  Egypt.  The 
first  I  shall  notice  is  the  whirlwinds,  which  occur  all  the  year  round, 
but  especially  at  the  time  of  the  camseen  wind,  which  begins  in 
April,  and  lasts  fifty  days.  Hence  the  name  of  camseen,  which  in 
Arabic  signifies  fifty.  It  generally  blows  from  the  south-west,  and 
lasts  four,  five,  or  six  days  without  varying,  so  very  strong,  that 
it  raises  the  sands  to  a  great  height,  forming  a  general  cloud,  so 
thick  that  it  is  impossible  to  keep  the  eyes  open,  if  not  under  cover. 
It  is  troublesome  even  to  the  Arabs  ;  it  forces  the  sand  into  the 
houses  through  every  cranny,  and  fills  every  thing  with  it.  The 
caravans  cannot  proceed  in  the  deserts  ;  the  boats  cannot  continue 
their  voyages ;  and  travellers  are  obliged  to  eat  sand  in  spite  of 
their  teeth.     The  whole  is  like  a  chaos.     Often  a  quantity  of  sand 

c  c  2 


196  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

and  small  stones  gradually  ascends  to  a  great  height  and  forms  a 
column  sixty  or  seventy  feet  in  diameter,  and  so  thick,  that  were  it 
steady  on  one  spot,  it  would  appear  a  solid  mass.  This  not  only 
revolves  within  its  own  circumference,  but  runs  in  a  circular  direction 
over  a  great  space  of  ground,  sometimes  maintaining  itself  in  motion 
for  half  an  hour,  and  where  it  falls  it  accumulates  a  small  lull  of  sand. 
God  help  the  poor  traveller  who  is  caught  under  it ! 

The  next  phenomenon  is  the  mirage,  often  described  by  tra- 
vellers, who  assert  having  been  deceived  by  it,  as  at  a  distance  it 
appears  to  them  like  water.  This  is  certainly  the  fact,  and  I  must 
confess,  that  I  have  been  deceived  myself,  even  after  I  was  aware  of 
it.  The  perfect  resemblance  to  water,  and  the  strong  desire  for  this 
element,  made  me  conclude,  in  spite  of  all  my  caution  not  to  be 
deceived,  that  it  was  really  water  I  saw.  It  generally  appears  like 
a  still  lake,  so  unmoved  by  the  wind,  that  every  thing  above  is  to  be 
seen  most  distinctly  reflected  by  it,  which  is  the  principal  cause  of 
the  deception.  If  the  wind  agitate  any  of  the  plants  that  rise  above 
the  horizon  of  the  mirage,  the  motion  is  seen  perfectly,  at  a  great 
distance.  If  the  traveller  stand  elevated  much  above  the  mirage, 
the  apparent  water  seems  less  united  and  less  deep,  for,  as  the  eyes 
look  down  upon  it,  there  is  not  thickness  enough  in  the  vapour  on 
the  surface  of  the  ground  to  conceal  the  earth  from  the  sight. 
But,  if  the  traveller  be  on  a  level  with  the  horizon  of  the  mirage, 
he  cannot  see  through  it,  so  that  it  appears  to  him  clear  water. 
By  putting  my  head  first  to  the  ground,  and  then  mounting  a 
camel,  the  height  of  which  from  the  ground  might  have  been  about 
ten  feet  at  the  most,  I  found  a  great  difference  in  the  appearance  of 
the  mirage.  On  approaching  it,  it  becomes  thinner,  and  appears  as 
if  agitated  by  the  wind,  like  a  field  of  ripe  corn.  It  gradually 
vanishes  as  the  traveller  approaches,  and  at  last  entirely  disappears 
when  he  is  on  the  spot. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  197 

The  third  phenomenon  is  the  locusts.  These  animals  I  have 
seen  in  such  clouds,  that  twice  the  number  in  the  same  space 
would  form  an  opaque  mass,  which  would  wholly  intercept  the  rays 
of  the  sun,  and  cause  complete  darkness.  They  alight  on  fields  of 
corn,  or  other  vegetables,  and  in  a  few  minutes  devour  their  whole 
produce.  The  natives  make  a  great  noise  to  frighten  them  away, 
but  in  vain;  and,  by  way  of  retaliation,  they  catch  and  eat  them 
when  fried,  considering  them  a  dainty  repast.  They  are  something 
like  the  grasshopper  in  form,  about  two  inches  in  length.  They 
are  generally  of  a  yellow  or  gold  colour,  but  there  are  some  red  and 
some  green. 

To  return  to  our  proceedings  at  Luxor.  By  this  time  our 
opponents  were  preparing  to  depart  for  Cairo,  at  which  we  rejoiced, 
as  we  thought  we  should  remain  quite  alone.  We  had  written  to 
Cairo,  informing  Mr.  Salt,  the  consul,  of  all  that  passed  with  the 
Bey ;  but  indeed,  unless  a  person  is  present  at  such  occurrences,  he 
can  feel  no  interest  in  them,  nor  understand  the  disgust  they  excite. 
I  had  written  also  to  Mr.  Burckhardt  on  the  subject,  and  from 
his  answer  I  perceived,  that  the  Bey's  conduct  excited  in  him  no 
surprise. 

When  at  last  we  thought  we  should  remain  alone,  and  pursue 
our  researches  in  peace,  I  made  preparations  for  recommencing  our 
work  at  Gournou.  After  having  in  some  measure  persuaded  the 
Sheiks  and  the  people  of  the  place,  that  they  would  not  incur  the 
displeasure  of  the  Bey,  as  I  had  an  order  from  himself,  which  per- 
mitted them  to  work  for  us,  and  sell  us  antiques,  it  was  agreed, 
that  all  the  Sheiks  should  meet  in  the  morning,  and  hear  the  order 
read.  Accordingly,  we  assembled  in  the  grotto,  that  usually  serves 
as  a  public  place  for  strangers,  and  a  sort  of  exchange  for  buying 
and  selling  antiques.  A  great  number  of  the  Fellahs  also  came  to 
hear  the  firman,  which  the  great  man  had  written  with  his  own 


19S  RESEARCHES   AND   OPERATIONS 

hand ;  and  in  consequence  of  the  example  that  had  recently  been 
made  of  their  Sheik,  they  were  very  attentive.  The  firman  had 
been  kept  by  our  interpreter  well  secured  in  his  pocket,  as  the 
most  mighty  order  that  had  ever  been  given ;  and  he  often  boasted 
of  having  it  in  his  possession.  At  last  it  was  produced,  and  put 
into  the  hands  of  the  only  person  among  the  Sheiks  who  could  read 
it.  He  first  perused  it  to  himself,  that  he  might  read  it  fluently  to 
the  assembly ;  but  had  not  gone  far,  when  he  turned  towards  me  a 
look  of  astonishment :  however,  he  proceeded  to  the  end,  and  then 
asked  me  whether  he  should  read  it  aloud  to  the  assembly ;  and 
upon  my  answering  in  the  affirmative,  read  nearly  as  follows : 

"  It  is  the  will  and  pleasure  of  Hamed,  the  Defterdar  Bey  and 
present  ruler  of  Upper  Egypt,  that  no  Sheiks,  Fellahs,  or  other 
persons,  shall  from  this  moment  sell  any  article  of  antiquity  to  the 
English  party,  or  work  for  them ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  hereby 
ordered,  that  every  thing  that  may  be  found  shall  be  sold  to  the 
party  of  Mr.  Drouetti ;  and  whoever  disobeys  this  order  will  incur 
the  displeasure  of  the  Bey." 

I  need  not  inform  the  reader  how  I  felt  on  hearing  tins 
mandate,  the  very  reverse  of  what  the  Bey  had  given  me  reason  to 
expect.  Were  I  sure  of  not  returning  to  Egypt  again,  I  would 
explain  farther  how  this  happened,  and  what  means  had  been  em- 
ployed to  influence  the  Bey :  but  as  I  do  not  know  what  fate  may 
attend  my  future  proceedings,  I  shall  say  nothing  on  the  subject 
till  the  proper  season,  when  this  and  many  other  things,  of  which 
the  world  has  not  the  smallest  idea,  shall  be  explained,  and  the 
various  intrigues  be  exposed  to  light,  that  were  darkly  carried  on 
against  me  by  more  than  one  description  of  persons. 

Under  the  circumstances  I  have  stated,  we  deemed  it  of  no 
use  to  attempt  a  renewal  of  our  labours,  and  contented  ourselves 
with  writing  to  Cairo,  and  entering  on  our  intended  journey  to  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  199 

island  of  Philoe.  I  had  suggested  to  Mr.  Salt,  that,  if  he  could 
send  us  a  supply  of  money,  we  would  proceed  to  open  the  temple 
of  Ybsambul ;  a  project  that  was  deemed  nearly  imaginary,  a 
castle  in  the  air,  as  no  one  supposed  any  temple  really  existed 
there.  After  having  secured  all  our  collection  in  one  spot,  and 
built  a  mud  wall  round  it,  and  covered  it  with  earth,  we  left  an 
Arabian  Sheik  to  guard  it,  and,  on  the  23d  of  May,  set  off  for 
Assouan. 

As  we  intended  to  examine  every  thing  on  our  return,  we 
went  straight  on,  seeing  scarcely  any  thing  except  Edfu  and 
Ombos.  At  Assouan,  we  took  a  general  view  of  Elephantine,  and 
the  other  islands,  and  proceeded  to  Philoe,  as  our  station  to  await 
the  answer  to  the  letters  we  had  sent  from  Luxor  to  Mr.  Salt.  On 
our  way,  we  took  a  good  view  of  the  cataract.  One  of  the  principal 
falls  at  tins  season  is  about  thirty  feet  in  length,  forming  an  angle 
of  fifteen  degrees.  Small  boats  and  cangiars  can  be  drawn  up  or 
down  at  all  times  of  the  year. 

The  prospect  of  the  island  of  Philoe  and  its  ruins  is  truly  mag- 
nificent, particularly  at  some  distance,  though  it  is  extremely 
barren.  It  is  surrounded  by  rocks  of  granite  in  all  directions, 
forming  part  of  the  main  land,  and  part  of  other  islands.  The 
style  of  the  hieroglyphics  proves,  that  the  edifice  on  it  is  of  the 
last  era  of  the  Egyptian  nation  :  in  my  opinion,  of  the  time  of  the 
Ptolemies.  There  are  reasons  enough  to  remove  all  doubts  of 
this,  if  any  were  entertained :  in  particular,  the  peripteral  temple, 
supposed  to  have  been  at  the  landing-place  at  the  east  of  the 
island,  is  evidently  of  the  last  school,  and  not  half  finished.  The 
work  of  the  columns  is  in  a  much  lighter  style  than  the  old 
Egyptian,  evincing,  if  that  nation  had  continued  its  existence,  it 
would  have  improved  gradually ;  and  in  due  course  of  time,  by 
amalgamating  the  Grecian  elegance  with  the  vast  and  lofty  mag- 


200  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

nificence  of  its  own  works  of  art,  would  have  formed  an  architecture 
of  which  we  have  no  idea,  but,  no  doubt,  most  sublime.  There  are 
other  proofs  that  this  temple  is  a  more  modern  structure,  formed 
of  the  materials  of  an  older  edifice.  In  one  of  the  columns,  op- 
posite the  gate  in  the  portico  which  leads  to  the  sanctuary,  there  is 
in  the  centre  a  stone,  sculptured  with  hieroglyphics  inverted ;  and 
another  stone  of  this  kind  is  to  be  seen  in  the  same  column  on 
the  west  side,  near  the  ground.  The  whole  ruins  consist  of  two 
temples,  nearly  united  together.  The  small  temple,  dedicated  to 
Isis,  is  within  the  peristyle  of  the  larger,  which  was  dedicated, 
I  believe,  to  the  same  goddess,  to  Serapis,  and  to  the  rest  of  the 
gods.  The  building  faces  the  south,  with  a  large  portal  or  pro- 
pylaeon,  flanked  by  two  porticoes  or  colonnades,  the  capitals  of  the 
pillars  of  which  are  different  from  each  other.  At  the  entrance  of 
the  first  portal  lies  the  obelisk  of  granite,  thrown  down,  as  men- 
tioned before,  its  pedestal  having  a  Greek  inscription  on  it,  which 
is  a  complaint  of  the  priests,  addressed  to  Ptolemy  and  Cleopatra, 
against  the  soldiers  and  the  government  of  the  place,  and  proves  that 
the  Egyptian  priests  had  no  influence  in  the  government  at  that 
period.  The  inscription  was  discovered  by  an  English  traveller, 
Mr.  Banks,  who,  not  having  time  to  dig  it  out,  left  it,  and  Mr. 
Eeechey  took  a  copy  of  it.  Part  of  another  obelisk  and  pedestal 
are  to  be  seen  in  the  mud  wall  opposite.  There  are  also  two  lions, 
of  granite,  which  were  at  the  sides  of  the  stairs  formed  by  four 
steps,  that  must  have  been  in  this  situation,  as  I  observed,  that 
the  bases  of  the  colonnades  are  lower  than  the  bases  of  the 
propyla?a. 

After  passing  the  first  portal  is  the  entrance  to  the  pronaos  ;  on 
the  west  of  which  is  the  small  temple  of  Isis,  surrounded  by  square 
pillars,  with  the  head  of  the  goddess  as  the  capital.  The  inner  part 
consists  of  three  apartments :  the  portico,  the  cella,  and  the  ady- 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  201 

turn.  The  hieroglyphics  on  it  are  nearly  perfect,  but  almost  co- 
vered with  mud,  as  it  has  served  as  a  Greek  chapel.  On  the  east  of 
the  pronaos  is  a  gallery  with  several  cells,  no  doubt  for  the  use 
of  the  priests  ;  and  the  north  is  the  second  portal,  covered  with 
colossal  figures  like  the  first.  On  passing  this  we  come  to  the  por- 
tico, which  is  reckoned  the  most  perfect  and  beautiful  part  of  this 
building.  The  hieroglyphics  are  entire  and  highly  painted,  as  are 
the  capitals  of  the  columns,  which  are  ten  in  number.  The  figures 
on  the  wall  of  this  portico  are  all  divided  into  several  groups,  form- 
ing compartments  of  five  feet  high  ;  those  on  the  columns  forming 
the  ornaments  of  this  hall  are  highly  beautiful.  There  are  other 
ruins  on  the  west  of  the  island,  which  formed  the  entrance  into  the 
temple  by  the  water-side ;  and  on  the  north-east  are  the  remains 
of  three  arches  made  by  the  Romans.  Here  must  have  been  the 
landing-place  to  the  island.  The  middle  arch  has  fallen  down. 
On  the  key-stones  the  words  "  sanctum,  sanctum,  sanctum,"  are 
cut ;  affording  clear  evidence,  that  this  island  served  as  a  holy  seat 
not  only  to  the  Egyptians  and  Greeks,  but  also  to  the  Romans. 
There  are  palpable  marks  of  the  whole  temple  having  been  fitted 
up  for  Christian  worship.  The  walls  are  covered  with  mud,  to 
hide  the  hieroglyphics  on  them ;  and  some  figures  peculiar  to  the 
Christian  religion  were  painted  on  this ;  but  time  uncovered  the 
hieroglyphics  again,  as  the  mud  lost  its  hold  in  several  places.  At 
the  back  of  the  temple,  or  on  the  north  side  of  it,  are  the  founda- 
tions of  a  building  that  served  for  a  Greek  church,  and  was  formed 
of  the  stones  from  the  ruins  of  the  other  buildings,  as  is  obvious  from 
the  hieroglyphics  on  them.  I  cannot  avoid  observing,  that  this 
island  is  the  most  superb  group  of  ruins  I  ever  beheld  together  in 
so  small  a  space  of  ground.  The  whole  island,  which  is  not  more 
than  a  thousand  feet  in  length,  and  less  than  five  hundred  in 
breadth,  is  richly  covered  with  ruins  ;  and  being  detached  from  the 

D  D 


202  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

other  barren  islands  which  surround  it  at  some  distance,  has  a  very 
superb  appearance.  On  the  island  to  the  west  of  Philce  are  the 
remains  of  a  small  temple,  which  has  also  served  for  Christian  pur- 
poses. There  are  but  few  hieroglyphics  to  be  seen,  and  the  remains 
of  two  sitting  figures  in  granite  much  mutilated.  On  the  south  of 
this  temple  is  a  burying-ground,  so  much  like  that  of  Gournou 
that  I  was  led  to  suppose  it  may  have  been  the  burying-place  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Philoe,  though  there  are  other  tombs  in  the  mountains 
on  the  east  of  the  island. 

During  our  stay  in  Philce  I  made  a  model  in  wax  of  the 
portico  of  the  great  temple.  The  beautiful  capitals  and  other 
ornaments  of  the  columns  induced  me  to  do  this.  It  was  the 
month  of  May,  and  the  heat  was  so  great,  that  wax  incorporated 
with  resin  could  scarcely  be  kept  in  a  mass  of  sufficient  solidity  to 
be  reduced  into  form.  The  thermometer  stood  as  high  as  124° 
of  Fahrenheit ;  but  the  mercury  had  risen  to  the  top  of  the  glass, 
so  that  we  could  not  judge  what  degree  it  would  have  reached 
had  the  tube  been  longer. 

An  Arab  now  arrived  from  Cairo  with  a  letter  from  Mr.  Salt. 
He  had  performed  his  journey  in  eighteen  days,  all  by  land.  The 
letter  brought  us  a  supply  of  money ;  and,  to  my  great  satisfac- 
tion, Mr.  Salt  complied  with  my  wishes  of  opening  the  temple  of 
Ybsambul,  which  I  had  so  often  suggested  to  him ;  and  I  must 
give  him  much  credit  for  risking  the  expense  of  such  an  under- 
taking, the  uncertainty  of  which  would  have  deterred  most  people 
from  doing  it,  particularly  as  he  himself  entertained  strong  doubts 
of  the  existence  of  a  temple  there ;  for  he  said,  in  the  same  letter, 
that  he  thought  we  should  find  no  entrance,  but  that  it  would  turn 
out  to  be  like  some  of  the  mausoleums  round  the  pyramids. 

A  few  days  previous  to  this  the  two  captains,  Irby  and  Mangles, 
had  arrived  in  the  island.     They  were  going  up  the  Nile,  as  far 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  203 

as  the  second  cataract,  and  as  there  was  some  difficulty  in  ob- 
taining two  boats,  we  made  a  joint  party,  and  contented  ourselves 
with  one  only.  We  had  to  send  our  interpreter  to  Esne  for 
provision,  nothing  being  to  be  had  at  Assouan.  The  fourth  of 
June  arrived,  and  our  jolly  companions,  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles, 
proposed  to  commemorate  the  birth-day  of  his  Majesty  George 
III.  Accordingly  we  took  an  old  flag  we  had  in  the  boat,  and 
planted  it  on  the  highest  propylaeon  in  the  island.  At  noon  we 
brought  out  all  our  fire-arms,  and  went  through  the  regular  salute 
of  twenty-one  guns.  Having  only  five,  we  had  to  load  them 
again  immediately  after  being  fired ;  and  from  the  heat  of  the  fire 
and  that  of  the  sun,  the  barrels  soon  became  so  hot,  that  we  could 
not  touch  them  with  our  hands.  At  night  we  repeated  our  re- 
joicings, and  frightened  all  the  natives  round,  who  could  not 
imagine  why  we  wasted  so  much  powder  without  killing  somebody. 
However,  it  convinced  them,  I  believe,  that  we  were  well  pre- 
pared in  case  it  should  be  requisite  to  make  our  defence.  The  next 
day  Mrs.  Belzoni  arrived  from  Cairo,  a  voyage  which  she  performed 
accompanied  only  by  the  Irish  lad,  James.  I  could  not  contrive 
to  take  her  higher  up  the  Nile  with  us,  as  we  had  only  one  boat ; 
and  therefore  left  her  in  the  island  till  our  return.  The  account  of 
her  stay  there  will  be  given  by  herself. 

On  the  16th  of  June  we  left  the  island  of  Philce.  Our  company 
consisted  of  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles,  Mr.  Beechey,  and  myself; 
two  servants,  and  Mahomed,  a  soldier  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  Salt.  On 
our  voyage  up  we  had  much  trouble  with  our  crew,  who  were  five 
men  and  three  boys,  all  of  one  family. 

On  our  arrival  at  Ybsambul,  opposite  Deir,  we  found  that  the 
Cacheffs  were  not  there,  but  at  Tomas.  We  sent  an  express  to  inform 
them,  that  we  were  to  open  the  temple,  and  meanwhile  we  proceeded 
to  the  second  cataract.     Previous  to  our  arrival  at  Wady  Haifa  we 

d  d  2 


204  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

followed  the  west  side  of  the  Nile,  as  far  as  we  could  go  with  the  boat, 
and  then  landed,  and  walked  three  or  four  miles  to  the  Kock  Upsir  ; 
for  as  I  had  seen  such  beautiful  views  there  on  my  first  voyage,  when 
the  water  was  high,  I  wished  to  see  how  they  appeared  at  this  season 
and  to  show  them  to  my  companions.  I  found  them  not  so  in- 
teresting as  the  first  time ;  the  islands  did  not  appear  so  numerous ; 
nor  did  the  water  form  those  foaming  eddies,  which  so  finely  in- 
terspersed the  views  with  white  and  green.  Notwithstanding  this, 
the  whole  was  very  grand,  and  I  was  gratified  in  seeing  it  again. 

Having  returned  to  our  boat,  we  passed  the  night  on  the  same 
side  of  the  river.  The  next  morning  we  crossed  the  water,  and 
entered  into  an  inlet  of  the  Nile,  where  we  moored  our  boat  near 
the  village  of  Wady  Haifa.  The  crew  took  it  into  their  heads  to 
extort  money  from  us  by  force,  for  which  purpose  they  landed,  and 
said  we  might  return  by  ourselves  if  we  liked.  They  knew  we  could 
not  effect  this  without  some  difficulty,  as  the  boat  was  surrounded 
by  sand  banks.  We  had  intended  to  proceed  by  land  to  see  the 
cataract  on  the  east  side,  as  I  had  done  the  year  before,  but  under 
the  present  circumstances  we  deemed  it  imprudent  to  leave  the  boat, 
lest  all  we  had  in  it  should  be  plundered ;  for  the  crew  had  collected 
several  of  the  natives,  who  were  apparently  disposed  to  aid  them  in 
their  undertakings.  We  would  not  give  up  to  them,  and  they 
protested  that  they  would  not  come  on  board,  unless  we  first  gave 
them  some  money.  We  then  took  the  resolution  to  try  what  we 
could  do  ourselves,  but  it  was  more  in  appearance  than  reality,  for 
we  never  could  have  got  the  boat  out  of  that  place.  However, 
the  appearance  of  our  attempt  to  strike  the  sail,  which  must  be  done 
to  fall  down  the  river  with  the  current,  had  the  intended  effect ;  for 
these  fellows  immediately  sent  one  of  the  crew  to  a  parley.  We 
told  him,  if  they  took  the  boat  out  into  the  middle  of  the  river,  we 
would  give  them  a  bakshis,  but  not  till  then.    This  was  agreed  on, 


IN  EGYPT,   NUBIA,  &c.  205 

and  at  last,  after  losing  the  whole  day  in  this  business,  we  returned 
toward  Ybsambul.  During  this  day  the  natives  came  to  examine 
every  tiling  we  had  on  board ;  but  they  perceived  that  we  were 
too  well  armed  for  them,  and  quite  ready  for  defence  in  case  of 
necessity. 

On  our  reaching  Ybsambul  we  found  that  no  answer  had  been 
sent  from  Mosmos.  We  waited  three  days,  and  on  the  fourth  a 
messenger  arrived  on  a  camel.  He  said  he  came  to  see  whether  I 
were  the  same  person,  from  the  English  consul,  who  was  there  the 
preceding  year  and  wished  to  open  the  temple.  On  recognizing 
me,  he  returned  immediately. 

Three  days  after  the  two  Cacheffs  appeared,  and  took  up  their 
abode  in  small  huts  made  of  rushes,  on  a  sandy  bank  of  the  river. 
We  waited  on  their  highnesses,  and  were  well  received,  as  we  were 
much  respected  for  what  we  might  bring  with  us.  We  presented 
Daoud  Cacheff  with  a  fine  gun,  powder  and  ball,  a  shawl  some  soap, 
and  some  tobacco.  Tins  distinction  unfortunately  caused  a  jealousy 
between  the  two  brothers.  Khalil  considered  himself  his  brother's 
equal  since  the  absence  of  his  father.  I  was  not  aware  of  this,  as  the 
first  year  he  was  merely  an  attendant  on  his  brother  Daoud.  He  was 
in  a  terrible  rage,  and  informed  us,  that  he  was  as  great  a  man  as  his 
brother.  We  told  him,  that  we  would  give  him  one  of  our  guns  ;  but 
our  endeavours  to  appease  him  were  all  to  no  purpose.  We  passed 
the  whole  day  without  knowing  our  fate.  Daoud  kindly  insisted 
that  we  should  stop  and  dine  with  him  ;  but  I  declined  it  on  account 
of  his  brother's  not  being  there,  who  had  retired  to  his  hut.  He 
went  over  to  bring  him  to  dinner,  but  in  vain.  I  then  went  myself 
to  speak  to  him,  and  after  much  ado,  I  succeeded  in  making  peace 
with  this  great  potentate.  He  took  one  of  our  guns,  and  some 
powder  and  ball ;  and  it  was  concluded,  that  we  should  begin  to 
work  in  the  morning  with  thirty  men. 


206  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

In  the  morning  the  men  appeared  rather  late,  but  we  recom- 
menced the  work  at  the  temple  with  much  enthusiasm  and  good 
hopes.  I  perceived  the  necessity  of  drawing  the  sand  from  the 
sides  of  the  door,  so  that  it  might  run  off  from  the  centre ;  toward 
which,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  sand  were  taken  from  the  centre,  that 
from  the  sides  would  continually  run.  The  enterprising  Count  de 
Forbin,  who  never  was  within  five  hundred  miles  at  least  of  the 
place,  judged  that  the  sand  might  have  been  easily  thrown  into  the 
river.  I  wish  he  had  been  there  once  in  his  life,  and  then  he  might 
have  seen,  whether  it  were  such  a  trifle  as  he  represents  it.  It  was 
a  mass  of  sand  accumulated  by  the  winds  for  many  centuries,  and 
to  have  had  it  removed,  and  thrown  into  the  river,  would  have  been 
an  undertaking,  that  all  the  people  the  adjacent  country  afforded 
could  not  have  effected  in  twelve  months.  I  was  contented  to 
make  it  my  principal  object  to  reach  the  door,  as  the  most  speedy 
means  of  entering  the  temple. 

This  day  I  divided  the  men  into  two  parties,  and  stationed  one 
on  each  side  of  the  colossal  figure  that  stood  over  the  entrance. 
They  worked  pretty  well,  but  were  so  few  that  the  little  sand 
they  removed  could  scarcely  be  perceived.  Seeing  that  it  would 
be  a  very  tedious  business  that  way,  in  the  evening  I  made  a 
proposal  to  the  Cacheff  to  pay  three  hundred  piastres  for  opening 
the  temple,  which  was  agreed  to  by  the  Cacheff  and  the  working 
men.  They  continued  their  labour  for  three  days  with  much 
ardour,  for  they  supposed  they  could  finish  it  in  that  time,  as  their 
number  was  increased  to  eighty  by  order  of  the  Cacheff;  but  on  the 
evening  of  the  third  day  there  was  as  little  prospect  of  seeing  the 
door  as  on  the  first.  They  got  tired  at  last,  and  under  the  pretext 
that  the  Kamadan  was  to  commence  on  the  next  day,  they  left  us  with 
our  temple,  the  sand,  and  the  treasure,  and  contented  themselves 
with  keeping  the  three  hundred  piastres,  which  were  partly  paid  to 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  207 

them  previously  to  their  beginning,  and  partly  on  the  third  day. 
During  this  time  the  Cacheffs  dined  with  us.  Our  mess  was  in 
company  with  them  and  all  their  followers.  Our  banquet  consisted 
of  a  small  piece  of  mutton,  the  water  in  which  it  was  stewed,  some 
bread,  and  a  little  butter  or  fat.  No  sooner  was  the  dinner  set  on 
the  ground,  than  a  scramble  took  place.  Every  one  crowded  round 
the  earthen  bowl :  the  CachefF  was  the  first  to  dip  in  his  hand,  and 
immediately  the  rest  followed  his  example.  We  four,  the  two 
Captains  Irby  and  Mangles,  Mr.  Beechy,  and  myself,  contrived  to 
keep  as  close  together  as  possible,  that  we  might  all  eat  out  of  the 
same  side  of  the  dish,  and  by  this  means  have  some  chance  of  a 
cleaner  meal.  The  CachefF  seeing  that  we  stood  no  chance  against 
his  people,  who  at  last  plunged  their  hands  into  the  dish  from  all 
quarters,  politely  picked  out  the  most  fleshy  parts  from  the  bowl, 
which  he  distinguished  from  the  bones  by  a  squeeze  with  his  hand, 
placed  them  on  the  sleeve  of  his  gown,  and  then  continued  to 
eat  till  the  bowl  was  nearly  emptied.  When  all  had  done  eating, 
he  presented  each  of  us  with  a  piece  of  the  fleshy  parts  he  had 
reserved  as  a  compliment,  which  we  gladly  devoured,  as  there  was 
no  other  chance  of  our  having  a  morsel  to  eat  till  the  next 
morning. 

This  day  being  the  first  of  Ramadan,  the  Fellahs  could  not 
work,  but  they  could  feast  according  to  their  holy  law ;  for,  though 
they  know  very  little  of  religion,  they  keep  their  own  festivals  as 
correctly  and  as  regularly  as  an  European.  The  next  day  again 
nobody  came  near  us,  and  the  two  Cacheffs  Daoud  and  Khalil 
went  away. 

From  that  time  we  took  the  resolution  to  work  at  the  sand 
ourselves.  We  were  only  six,  but  the  crew  offered  their  services, 
and  thus  our  party  amounted  to  fourteen  in  all.  Finding  that  one 
of  us  did  as  much  work  as  in  the  proportion  of  one  to  five  of  the 


208  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Barabra,  we  were  well  satisfied,  and  resolved  to  continue.  We  rose 
every  morning  at  the  dawn  of  day,  and  left  off  two  hours  and  half 
after  sunrise.  Our  perseverance  and  independence  drew  some  of 
the  peasants,  to  offer  their  services,  which  we  accepted;  but  as 
many  of  them  were  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  Nile,  they  could 
not  agree  with  those  of  Ybsambul,  and  there  was  a  perpetual 
warfare  between  them ;  besides,  from  jealousy,  they  increased  to 
such  a  number,  that  we  could  not  employ  them  all,  which  gave  rise 
to  fresh  disputes,  so  that  we  resolved  to  dismiss  them  all,  and  con- 
tinue the  work  by  ourselves.  They  still  persisted  in  offering  their 
services  to  what  number  we  pleased ;  but  we  saw  it  would  not 
prevent  their  having  quarrels  and  fighting  every  day,  and  we  there- 
fore refused  their  offer. 

One  day  we  observed  a  boat  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Nile 
steering  toward  us,  and  as  it  approached  we  perceived,  that  it  was 
filled  with  well  armed  men.  After  the  Cacheffs  of  Ybsambul  left 
us,  there  was  a  man  of  that  village,  who,  in  spite  of  their  orders, 
still  remained  with  us,  and  occasionally  helped  us  in  the  work.  His 
name  was  Musmar,  which  in  English  signifies  nail.  Mr.  Nail  was 
a  great  man  ;  told  us  wonderful  stories  of  his  astonishing  courage  ; 
gave  us  to  understand,  that,  when  the  Bedoweens  from  the  Desert 
attacked  the  village  of  Ybsambul  he  was  the  first  to  resist  them  ; 
and  vaunted,  that  he  was  not  afraid  of  any  man  in  the  world.  We 
were  of  course  charmed  at  having  such  a  gallant  knight  with  us. 
On  the  approach  of  the  boat  he  seemed  agitated,  and  was  very 
anxious  to  know  who  the  people  were.  While  they  were  at  a 
distance,  he  said  no  one  dared  come  where  he  was.  When  they 
were  nearer,  and  he  might  see  distinctly  who  they  were,  he  could  not 
conceive  what  they  wanted  on  this  side  of  the  water.  As  soon  as 
they  had  nearly  reached  the  shore,  still  pretending  he  was  unable  to 
guess  who  they  could  be,  he  would  ascend  the  mountain  to  observe 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  209 

them  better.  With  this  lie  took  to  his  heels,  and  ran  off  as  fast  as 
he  could  scamper.  The  men  landed,  and  ascended  the  hill  of  sand 
where  we  were.  We  seized  our  arms,  for  this  is  the  only  way  to  be 
respected  by  these  gentry.  They  approached. — The  first  was  an 
elderly  man,  who  had  strong  traits  of  resolution  in  his  countenance. 
He  held  out  his  hand,  which  I  immediately  shook  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  country.  They  were  the  Cacheffs  of  Ibrim,  father 
and  son.  They  seated  themselves  on  the  sand,  and  the  others 
stood. 

They  appeared  in  greater  style  than  our  sovereigns  of  Ybsambul, 
and  had  more  swords  and  fire-arms.  We  were  pleased  to  find  them 
friends,  particularly  as  we  knew  they  were  at  war  with  Hassan 
CachefF  and  his  sons  Daoud  and  Khalil.  I  perceived  their  disap- 
pointment, for  our  attire  did  not  bespeak  riches.  Besides,  seeing 
us  at  work  like  labourers,  they  concluded  we  were  but  poor  people. 
They  told  us  they  were  afraid  of  Mahomed  Ah,  Bashaw  of  Egypt, 
and  presented  us  with  two  small  and  meager  sheep.  I  was  not 
pleased  at  this,  for  I  knew  how  the  politeness  of  such  gifts  always 
ends :  we  returned  this  civility  by  paying  the  servant  who  brought 
the  sheep  twice  as  much  as  they  were  worth,  and  told  the 
Cacheffs,  that  we  were  sorry  we  had  nothing  to  give  them,  as  we 
had  exhausted  every  thing,  but  that  we  should  recollect  them 
on  our  return  to  the  country.  They  said,  they  did  not  come 
thither  to  have  any  thing  from  us,  and  hoped  on  our  return  to  Cairo 
we  would  speak  to  the  Bashaw  in  their  favour.  We  answered,  we 
could  not  say  any  thing  against  them,  as  they  never  did  us  any 
harm,  or  ever  saw  us  before.  Soon  after  they  rose,  and  we  gave 
them  the  usual  salute,  but  they  said  they  were  going  to  see  the 
small  temple  below.  Our  interpreter  followed  them,  as  the  boat  was 
near  that  place ;  and  when  they  reached  the  temple  they  took  him 
aside,  and  told  him,  that  they  were  the  masters  of  the  country ;  if 

E  E 


210  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

the  other  Cacheffs  killed  one  man,  they  killed  two;  they  could 
stop,  or  let  us  proceed  on  our  works,  as  well  as  the  other  Cacheffs, 
for  they  were  more  powerful ;  adding,  they  knew  we  gave  guns, 
powder,  shot,  soap,  and  tobacco  to  the  others — therefore  they 
expected  we  should  do  more  for  them,  as  they  were  superior,  and 
we  might  expect  the  consequences  of  refusing  to  comply  with  their 
demands.  At  such  proceedings  I  thought  we  were  in  as  bad  a 
situation  as  ever  respecting  our  works  at  the  temple,  for  we  had 
nothing  left  to  give  these  people.  Accordingly  we  sent  them  an 
answer,  that  we  had  nothing  for  them  at  present,  but  that  they 
might  depend  on  our  words,  that  we  would  bring  them  something 
on  our  future  visit  to  Nubia.  They  replied,  we  had  no  business  to 
come  into  the  country  without  written  orders  directed  to  them,  as 
they  were  the  true  masters  of  it.  We  informed  them  we  had  a 
firman  from  the  Bashaw,  and  sent  our  interpreter  with  it  to  show 
it  them.  They  opened  it,  and  looking  at  it  said  they  could  not 
understand  one  word  in  it;  besides  it  was  not  for  them,  and 
therefore  was  good  for  nothing,  and  even  if  we  had  one,  it  would  be 
to  no  purpose,  unless  it  was  accompanied  with  presents  of  more 
value  than  we  had  given  to  the  other  Cacheffs.  While  all  this 
was  passing,  the  great  potentates  and  their  honourable  followers 
walked  towards  their  boat,  and  hinted,  that  we  must  think  on  the 
business  while  they  were  going  to  the  village  of  Ybsambul. 

We  left  off  work  at  our  usual  time,  and  resumed  our  labour  in 
the  afternoon,  expecting  that  we  should  have  some  interruption 
in  our  proceedings ;  but  on  the  next  day  to  our  astonishment  we 
heard,  that  the  great  men  were  off  at  night.  We  continued  our 
operations  regularly,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  days  more  we  per- 
ceived a  rough  projection  from  the  wall,  which  indicated  apparently 
that  the  work  was  unfinished,  and  no  door  to  be  found  there.  At 
this  the  hopes  of  some  of  our  party  began  to  fail ;  nevertheless  we 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  211 

persevered  in  our  exertions,  and  three  days  after  we  discovered  a 
broken  cornice,  the  next  day  the  torus,  and  of  course  the  frize 
under,  which  made  us  almost  sure  of  finding  the  door  the  next  day  ; 
accordingly  I  erected  a  palisade,  to  keep  the  sand  up,  and  to  my 
utmost  satisfaction  saw  the  upper  part  of  the  door  as  the  evening 
approached.  We  dug  away  enough  sand  to  be  able  to  enter  that 
night,  but  supposing  there  might  be  some  foul  air  in  the  cavity,  we 
deferred  this  till  the  next  morning. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  1st  of  August  we  went  to  the 
temple  in  high  spirits,  at  the  idea  of  entering  a  newly  discovered 
place.      We  endeavoured   as  much  as  we  could  to   enlarge  the 
entrance ;  but  our  crew  did  not  accompany  us  as  usual.     On  the 
contrary,  it  appeared  that  they  intended  to  hinder  us  as  much  as 
lay  in  their  power  ;  for  when  they  saw,  that  we  really  had  found  the 
door,  they  wished  to  deter  us  from  availing  ourselves  of  it :  the 
attempt  however  failed.     They  then  pretended,  that  they  could  not 
stop  any  longer  with  the  boat  in  that  place,  and  if  we  did  not  go 
on  board  immediately,  they  would  set  off  with  her  and  leave  us. 
On  our  refusal  they  knelt  on  the  ground,  and  threw  sand  over  their 
faces,  saying,  that  they  would  not  stop  an  instant.     The  fact  was, 
they  had  promised  to  the  Cacheffs  to  play  some  trick  to  interrupt 
our  proceedings,  in  case  we  should  come  to  the  door.     But  even  all 
this  would  not  do.     We  soon  made  the  passage  wider,  and  entered 
the  finest  and  most  extensive  excavation  in  Nubia,  one  that  can 
stand  a  competition  with  any  in  Egypt,  except  the  tomb  newly 
discovered  in  Beban  el  Malook. 

From  what  we  could  perceive  at  the  first  view,  it  was  evidently 
a  very  large  place  ;  but  our  astonishment  increased,  when  Ave  found 
it  to  be  one  of  the  most  magnificent  of  temples,  enriched  with 
beautiful  intaglios,  painting,  colossal  figures,  &c.  We  entered  at 
first  into  a  large  pronaos,  fifty-seven  feet  long  and  fifty-two  wide, 

e  e  2 


212  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

supported  by  two  rows  of  square  pillars,  in  a  line  from  the  front  door 
to  the  door  of  the  sekos  (See  Plate  43).    Each  pillar  has  a  figure,  not 
unlike  those  at  Medinet  Aboo,  finely  executed,  and  very  little  injured 
by  time.    The  tops  of  their  turbans  reach  the  ceiling,  winch  is  about 
thirty  feet  high  :  the  pillars  are  five  feet  and  a  half  square.     Both 
these  and  the  walls  are  covered  with  beautiful  hieroglyphics,  the 
style  of  which  is  somewhat  superior,  or  at  least  bolder,  than  that  of 
any  others  in  Egypt,  not  only  in  the  workmanship,  but  also  in  the 
subjects.    They  exhibit  battles,  storming  of  castles,  triumphs  over  the 
Ethiopians,  sacrifices,  &c.     In  some  places  is  to  be  seen  the  same  hero 
as  at  Medinet  Aboo,  but  in  a  different  posture.    Some  of  the  columns 
are  much  injured  by  the  close  and  heated  atmosphere,  the  temperature 
of  which  was  so  hot,  that  the  thermometer  must  have  risen  to  above 
a  hundred  and  thirty  degrees.     The  second  hall  is  about  twenty- 
two  feet  high,  thirty-seven  wide,  and  twenty-five  and  a  half  long. 
It  contains  four  pillars  about  four  feet  square  ;  and  the  walls  of  tins 
also  are  covered  with  fine  hieroglyphics  in  pretty  good  preservation. 
Beyond  this  is  a  shorter  chamber,  thirty-seven  feet  wide,  in  which 
is  the  entrance  into  the  sanctuary.     At  each  end  of  this  chamber  is 
a  door,  leading  into  smaller  chambers  in  the  same  direction  with 
the  sanctuary,  each  eight  feet  by  seven.     The  sanctuary  is  twenty- 
three  feet  and  a  half  long,  and  twelve  feet  wide.     It  contains  a 
pedestal  in  the  centre,  and  at  the  end  four  colossal  sitting  figures, 
the   heads   of  which  are   in  good  preservation,  not  having  been 
injured  by  violence.     On  the  right  side  of  this  great  hall,  entering 
into  the  temple,  are  two  doors,  at  a  short  distance  from  each  other, 
winch  lead  into  two  long  separate  rooms,  the  first  thirty-eight  feet  ten 
inches  in  length,  and  eleven  feet  five  inches  wide ;  the  other  forty- 
.  eight  feet  seven  inches,  by  thirteen  feet  three.     At  the  end  of  the 
first  are  several  unfinished  hieroglyphics,  of  which  some,  though 
merely  sketched,  give  fine  ideas  of  their  manner  of  drawing.     At 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  213 

the  lateral  corners  of  the  entrance  into  the  second  chamber  from 
the  great  hall  is  a  door,  each  of  which  leads  into  a  small  chamber 
twenty-two  feet  six  inches  long,  and  ten  feet  wide.  Each  of  these 
rooms  has  two  doors  leading  into  two  other  chambers,  forty-three 
feet  in  length,  and  ten  feet  eleven  inches  wide.  There  are  two 
benches  in  them,  apparently  to  sit  on.  The  most  remarkable  subjects 
in  this  temple  are,  1st,  a  group  of  captive  Ethiopians,  in  the  western 
corner  of  the  great  hall :  2d,  the  hero  killing  a  man  with  his  spear, 
another  lying  slain  under  his  feet,  on  the  same  western  Avail :  3d, 
the  storming  of  a  castle,  in  the  western  corner  from  the  front  door. 
The  outside  of  this  temple  is  magnificent.  It  is  a  hundred  and 
seventeen  feet  wide,  and  eighty-six  feet  high ;  the  height  from  the 
top  of  the  cornice  to  the  top  of  the  door  being  sixty-six  feet  six 
inches,  and  the  height  of  the  door  twenty  feet.  There  are  four 
enormous  sitting  colossi,  the  largest  in  Egypt  or  Nubia,  except  the 
great  Sphinx  at  the  pyramids,  to  which  they  approach  in  the  pro- 
portion of  near  two-thirds.  From  the  shoulder  to  the  elbow  they 
measure  fifteen  feet  six  inches ;  the  ears  three  feet  six  inches ;  the 
face  seven  feet ;  the  beard  five  feet  six  inches ;  across  the  shoulders 
twenty-five  feet  four  inches  ;  their  height  is  about  fifty-one  feet,  not 
including  the  caps,  which  are  about  fourteen  feet.  There  are  only 
two  of  these  colossi  in  sight,  one  is  still  buried  under  the  sand,  and 
the  other,  which  is  near  the  door,  is  half  fallen  down,  and  buried  also. 
On  the  top  of  the  door  is  a  colossal  figure  of  Osiris  twenty  feet 
high,  with  two  colossal  hieroglyphic  figures,  one  on  each  side, 
looking  towards  it.  On  the  top  of  the  temple  is  a  cornice  with 
hieroglyphics,  a  torus  and  frize  under  it.  The  cornice  is  six  feet 
wide,  the  frize  is  four  feet.  Above  the  cornice  is  a  row  of  sitting 
monkeys  eight  feet  high,  and  six  across  the  shoulders.  They  are 
twenty-one  in  number.  This  temple  was  nearly  two-thirds  buried 
under  the  sand,  of  which  we  removed  thirty-one  feet  before  we  came 


214  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

to  the  upper  part  of  the  door.  It  must  have  had  a  very  fine  landing- 
place,  which  is  now  totally  buried  under  the  sand.  It  is  the  last 
and  largest  temple  excavated  in  the  solid  rock  in  Nubia  or  Egypt, 
except  the  new  tomb.  It  took  twenty-two  days  to  open  it,  beside 
six  days  last  year.  We  sometimes  had  eighty  men  at  work,  and 
sometimes  only  our  own  personal  exertions,  the  party  consisting  of 
Mr.  Beechey,  Captains  Irby  and  Mangles,  myself,  two  servants,  and 
the  crew,  eleven  in  all,  and  three  boys.  It  is  situated  under  a  rock 
about  a  hundred  feet  above  the  Nile,  facing  the  south-east  by  east, 
and  about  one  day  and  a  half's  journey  from  the  second  cataract  in 
Nubia,  or  Wady  Haifa. 

The  heat  was  so  great  in  the  interior  of  the  temple,  that  it  scarcely 
permitted  us  to  take  any  drawings,  as  the  perspiration  from  our 
hands  soon  rendered  the  paper  quite  wet.  Accordingly,  we  left  this 
operation  to  succeeding  travellers,  who  may  set  about  it  with  more 
convenience  than  we  could,  as  the  place  will  become  cooler.  Our 
stock  of  provision  was  so  reduced,  that  the  only  food  we  had  for  the 
last  six  days  was  dhourra,  boiled  in  water  without  salt,  of  which  we 
had  none  left.  The  Cacheffs  had  given  orders  to  the  people  not  to 
sell  us  any  kind  of  food  whatever,  hoping  that  we  might  be  driven 
away  by  hunger.  But  there  was  an  Abady,  who  lived  in  the  village, 
and  as  he  was  of  a  different  tribe,  he  was  not  so  much  afraid  of 
disobeying  the  Cacheffs.  He  sometimes  came  at  night,  and  brought 
us  milk ;  but  he  was  at  last  detected,  and  prevented  from  bringing 
any  more. 

Great  credit  is  due  to  Mr.  Beechey,  and  the  two  Captains,  for 
their  laborious  exertions  in  assisting  me  in  the  above  operation.  I 
must  not  omit  to  mention,  that,  in  the  temple,  we  found  two  lions 
with  hawks'  heads,  the  body  as  large  as  life  ;  a  small  sitting  figure, 
and  some  copper  work  belonging  to  the  doors. 

We  left  Ybsambul  on  the  4th  of  August,  and  did  not  stop  at 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  215 

Ibrim,  as  we  had  seen  it  before.  On  passing  Tomas,  a  village  on 
the  western  banks  of  the  Nile,  we  were  told,  that  Daoud  Cacheff 
was  there.  We  found  he  was  ready  to  receive  us,  and  came  him- 
self on  board,  entreating  vis  to  go  on  shore,  which  we  did,  though 
not  without  hesitation,  as  he  had  not  behaved  well  to  us.  He 
wished  us  to  stop  all  night,  and  attempted  to  be  very  civil.  We 
stated  to  him,  that  we  had  not  been  well  treated  by  the  people 
of  Ybsambul ;  to  which  he  replied,  hastily,  that  he  knew  no- 
thing of  the  matter.  But  how  could  he  be  ignorant  of  it,  when 
one  of  his  men,  who  came  to  see  us  at  work,  and  inquired  whether 
we  atqst-one,  was  at  that  moment  standing  by  his  side,  as  well  as 
others,  whom  we  recognized  to  have  been  of  the  party,  and  who 
came  there  to  raise  a  disturbance  ?  Perceiving  we  knew  what  he 
had  done  to  us,  he  attempted  to  make  vis  amends,  presenting  us 
with  a  sheep  and  a  basket  of  bread ;  and  on  quitting  the  place,  I 
received  a  present  from  his  wife  for  Mrs.  Belzoni,  of  a  milch  goat,  two 
small  baskets,  and  a  carpet  made  of  palm  leaves.  I  gave  in  return 
two  pair  of  Turkish  women's  boots,  and  two  small  looking-glasses. 

On  our  arrival  at  Deir,  we  met  Khalil  Cacheff,  .who  crossed  the 
Nile  in  a  boat,  and  hailed  vis,  saying  he  would  return  to  us  very 
soon.  By  this  time  it  was  quite  dark,  and  we  went  to  see  the 
temple  immediately  with  candles,  as  we  hoped  to  set  off  early  in 
the  morning,  and  avoid  meeting  such  a  sincere  friend.  On  our 
return,  we  attempted  to  procure  some  provision,  but  it  was  too  late 
at  night.  Abovit  ten  o'clock,  Khalil  returned,  but  we  were  asleep. 
Early  in  the  morning  we  were  told,  that  he  had  sent  us  some  aqua 
vitae  and  a  lamb.  We  were  sorry  for  this,  as  it  retarded  vis.  Some 
time  after  he  came  on  board,  accompanied  by  his  party.  We  re- 
turned him  thanks  for  what  we  had  received,  but  told  him,  that 
we  could  not  give  him  any  thing  in  return,  as  we  were  destitute 


216  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

ourselves,  and  that  at  Ybsambul  we  had  lived  on  boiled  dhourra 
for  several  days,  as  the  peasants  had  refused  to  sell  us  any  thing  to 
eat.  We  knew  very  well  that  all  this  was  done  by  his  order,  but 
he  pretended,  like  his  brother,  not  to  know  any  thing  of  it.  We 
did  not  think  proper  to  say  much,  as  we  wished  to  be  gone,  and 
leave  these  affectionate  friends  on  peaceful  terms.  At  last,  after 
examining  our  boat,  and  the  strange  figure  we  had  found  in  the 
temple,  he  with  great  sorrow  quitted  us,  and  we  set  off  imme- 
diately. It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  all  his  civility  was  out  of 
opposition  to  his  brother  Daoud,  in  hopes  that  we  should  bring 
him  something  on  our  coming  up  again ;  for  it  was  plain  to  be  seen, 
that  it  was  all  forced  politeness. 

The  temple  at  Deir  is  in  a  very  ruinous  state.  I  saw  but  one 
or  two  figures  entire :  the  fragments  of  the  rest  indicate,  that  it 
was  dedicated  to  Osiris.  There  was  a  portico,  with  sixteen  pillars, 
twelve  of  which  are  fallen  down.  It  has  a  chamber,  and  a  sanctuary, 
with  two  small  chambers,  one  on  each  side. 

In  about  two  hours  we  arrived  at  Almeida,  the  ruins  of  a  small 
temple  on  the  north  of  the  Nile.  The  river  there  takes  its  course 
from  north-west  to  south-east.  It  is  a  small  temple,  and  has  served 
for  a  Greek  chapel.  The  hieroglyphics  are  pretty  well  finished, 
but  nearly  covered  with  plaster  by  the  Greeks.  There  are  other 
apartments,  of  unburnt  bricks,  which  served  as  a  monastery  to  the 
works.  Toward  evening  we  arrived  at  Seboua.  The  ruins  of  the 
temple  here  I  have  described  before. 

Four  days  more  brought  us  down  to  El  Kalabshe.  We  landed, 
to  visit  the  temple ;  but  the  Fellahs,  seeing  our  boat  at  some 
distance,  gathered  together  at  the  entrance  to  the  temple,  deter- 
mined that  we  should  not  go  in,  unless  we  first  paid  them  for 
leave.     We  were  accordingly  stopped,  and  money  was  demanded. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  217 

We  refused  to  comply,  but  promised,  that,  if  they  would  let  us  in, 
we  would  give  them  a  bakshis  afterward.  As  this  did  not  satisfy 
them,  and  they  behaved  in  a  very  insolent  manner,  we  were  return- 
ing to  our  boat,  when  our  soldier  said,  that  he  would  remember 
them.  On  this  their  daggers  were  instantly  drawn,  and  his  gun 
was  seized.  A  scuffle  took  place,  which  gave  us  something  to  do 
to  rescue  the  gun  from  the  one  who  had  taken  it  from  the  soldier, 
and  was  endeavouring  to  decamp  with  it.  On  our  approaching 
the  boat,  some  of  them,  perceiving  our  indifference  whether  we 
saw  the  temple  or  not,  came  to  offer  to  let  us  enter,  while  others 
were  of  a  different  opinion  ;  but,  as  we  had  seen  the  temple  be- 
fore, we  did  not  think  it  worth  our  while  to  venture  to  force  our 
way  into  it.  While  all  this  was  going  on  at  the  temple,  others 
attacked  the  boat ;  but,  as  our  people  were  armed  with  pistols  and 
guns,  they  retreated.  One  man  entered  the  boat  with  a  drawn 
sword,  but  was  turned  out. 

Having  left  El  Kalabshe,  we  passed  by  Taffa,  but  could  not 
land  there,  as  the  narrow  passage  of  the  Nile  did  not  permit  us  to 
approach  the  shore.  There  are  two  small  temples  at  Taffa,  which 
I  had  seen  before.  One  consists  of  a  single  chamber,  and  two 
columns,  one  of  which  is  not  finished.  The  other  has  some  few 
hieroglyphics  in  a  good  style :  it  serves  as  a  stable  for  sheep  and 
cows.  We  arrived  the  same  evening  at  Hindau,  where  we  saw  an 
extensive  wall,  apparently  made  to  enclose  a  vast  building,  or  pro- 
bably more  than  one.  There  are  the  remains  of  a  portal  on  the 
north  side,  and  a  great  quantity  of  ruins  within.  Coming  down, 
we  saw  several  quarries  and  ruins ;  in  one  of  which  is  a  door  cut  in 
the  rock  in  the  Egyptian  style,  and  a  number  of  Greek  inscriptions, 
written,  I  suppose,  by  some  Greek  workmen,  and  which  I  think  serve 
to  prove  that  the  Greeks  procured  stones  from  this  place.  We  ob- 
served the  remains  of  a  temple,  of  which  six  columns  are  standing, 

F  F 


218  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

beautifully  adorned  with  the  lotus  and  other  emblematic  devices  of 
the  Egyptians.     Farther  down  there  is  another  column  standing 

alone. 

In  a  few  hours  we  arrived  at  Debod.  This  temple  has  a  portico 
and  a  sekos,  which  leads  into  the  cella,  at  each  side  of  which  is  a 
small  chamber.  In  the  portico  also  are  two  chambers,  and  a  stair- 
case leading  to  the  top.  There  are  a  few  hieroglyphics ;  and  in  the 
sekos  are  two  monolite  temples  of  granite.  In  the  porch  of  the 
building  are  three  portals,  one  before  another.  The  whole  build- 
ing is  surrounded  by  a  wall.  On  the  water-side  is  a  quay,  with  an 
entrance  toward  the  temple. 

We  arrived  on  the  same  day  at  the  island  of  Philoe  :  Mrs.  Eel- 
zoni  went  to  Assouan  by  land,  and  we  resolved  to  pass  the  cataract 
in  the  boat  in  which  we  came.    The  barbarians  made  objections  and 
took  some  advantage,  but  they  will  do  any  thing  for  money.     Ac- 
cordingly we  set  off  from  the  island,  and  began  to  take  our  course 
gradually  among  the  rapids  and  rocks  of  the  Shellal.    As  we  advanced, 
we  expected  every  moment  to  arrive  at  the  spot  where  the  great  fall 
is ;  but  having  passed  over  several  rapids,  one,  in  particular,  a  little 
stronger,  but  not  more  extraordinary  than  are  seen  in  other  rivers,  we 
were  agreeably  surprised  to  find,  that  in  less  than  an  hour  we  were  out 
of  all  danger.    I  have  seen  the  great  cataract  on  the  west  side  when 
the  water  is  low  ;  and  its  fall  was  then,  in  length,  about  six  hundred 
yards,  forming  an  angle  of  thirty  or  thirty-five  degrees,  divided  by 
the  interspersed  rocks  into  various  branches.     On  our  arrival  at 
Assouan  we  prepared  immediately  for  our  departure  ;  but  mean- 
while we  visited  the  island  of  Elephantine  once  more,  and  in  the 
evening  went  to  see  the  column  with  the  Latin  inscription,  which  I 
discovered  in  the  mountain  of  Assouan.     We  had  some  difficulty 
to  find  it  again,  as  the  guide  conducted  us  by  another  road,  dif- 
ferent from  that  which  I  took  the  first  time.     Next  day  we  left 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  219 

that  place  ;  and  as  the  current  of  the  Nile  (it  being  now  near  its 
height)  was  very  strong,  we  reached  Thebes  in  three  days. 

On  our  passage  we  visited  Edfu  once  more  ;  and,  farther  down, 
we  landed  at  Elethias,  and  took  a  cursory  view  of  its  ruins  and 
grottoes.  There  is  a  high  thick  wall  of  unburnt  bricks,  which  sur- 
rounds the  whole  town.  It  is  a  square  enclosure  of  six  hundred 
and  seventy  yards.  We  saw  the  ruins  of  three  or  four  temples. 
One  appears  to  have  been  very  extensive ;  but  only  six  columns 
of  the  portico  remain  (See  Plate  41),  and  part  of  the  sekos  of 
another.  This  town  was  formerly  much  more  extensive  than  it 
is  at  present,  as  appears  by  its  ruins.  I  observed  part  of  the 
walls  of  ancient  buildings  at  some  distance  from  the  great  wall 
which  surrounds  the  town.  Among  the  ruins  of  the  largest  temple 
I  noticed  part  of  a  large  sphinx  of  white  marble,  with  the  head  of  a 
woman  and  body  of  a  lion.  There  were  also  fragments  of  several 
statues,  and  other  ornaments  of  the  temple,  part  of  which  are  co- 
vered by  its  own  ruins.  On  the  east  of  this  temple  was  a  small 
lake,  or  rather  tank,  which  perhaps  was  a  public  bath,  as  we  may 
likewise  presume  of  those  near  the  temple  in  Carnak ;  but  at  pre- 
sent there  is  no  water  in  it.  On  the  west  of  the  town  is  another 
building,  of  a  later  date,  which  extends  from  the  great  wall  to  the 
river.  There  are  many  ruins  of  houses  with  arches,  but  the  walls 
are  inferior  in  point  of  size.  The  remains  of  a  pier  or  landing- 
place  are  visible  when  the  water  is  low  ;  and  it  appeared  to  me,  that 
there  had  been  a  causeway  from  the  stair  at  the  water-side  to  the 
temple. 

The  country  round  the  town  is  pretty  flat,  and  extends  above  a 
mile  from  the  Nile  to  the  mountains.  It  must  have  been  all  cul- 
tivated and  fertile,  as  the  few  spots  that  are  now  in  cultivation  are 
very   productive.      Some    excellent   grapes   are   produced   in   this 

f  f  2 


220  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

place ;  and  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that,  from  the  representations  in 
the  grottoes  or  sepulchres  in  the  mountains,  the  dressing  of  vines 
appears  to  have  formed  one  of  the  chief  occupations  of  the  people. 
The  sepulchres  in  these  rocks  are  numerous,  and  several  are  much 
on  the  same  plan  as  those  of  Gournou.  Some  contain  various  agri- 
cultural representations  ;  from  which  may  be  formed  a  more  exact 
idea  of  their  manner  of  living  than  I  have  seen  any  where  else. 
The  figures  and  colours  are  in  pretty  good  preservation.  I  cannot 
say,  however,  that  they  can  boast  of  any  great  perfection  in  their 
sculpture ;  and  it  is  evident  that  the  dead  deposited  in  those  places 
must  have  been  husbandmen.  I  am  of  opinion  that  this  town  had 
a  communication  with  the  Red  Sea  ;  my  reason  for  which  I  shall 
state  hereafter. 

One  mile  to  the  north  of  the  town  is  a  small  peripteral  temple, 
situated  in  the  midst  of  an  extensive  plain,  now  covered  with  sand, 
but  which  evidently  was  once  cultivated.  The  rock  in  which  the 
tombs  are  cut  forms  a  solitary  hill,  that  commands  the  surrounding 
country.  From  its  summit  I  could  see  an  extensive  plain  of  sand, 
extending  north  and  south  of  the  town  nine  or  ten  miles  along  the 
banks  of  the  Nile,  and  a  mile  and  a  half  in  breadth  from  the  river 
to  the  foot  of  the  mountain.  When  the  whole  of  this  land  was 
cultivated,  it  must  have  produced  provisions  sufficient  for  a  town  of 
considerable  importance.  Three  miles  to  the  north  of  Elethias  the 
rocks  reach  close  to  the  Nile.  There  is  a  village  named  El  Khab, 
which  includes  the  whole  of  the  above-mentioned  land,  with  the 
ruins  of  Elethias. 

On  our  arrival  at  Luxor  we  took  up  our  former  abode  in  the  sekos 
of  the  temple,  and  found  ourselves  at  home  again ;  for  Thebes  was 
now  become  quite  familiar  to  me.  We  received  letters  from  Mr. 
Salt,  by  which  we  learned  that  he  was  purposing  to  ascend  the  Nile. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  221 

The  two  Captains,  Irby  and  Mangles,  set  off  for  Cairo,  Mr.  Beechey 
began  to  take  drawings  of  the  different  places,  and  I  recommenced 
my  researches. 

At  Gournou  I  found  two  more  agents  of  Mr.  Drouetti  busied  in 
digging  the  ground  in  all  directions,  and  who  had  been  tolerably 
successful  in  their  researches  for  mummies.  These  agents  were  of 
a  different  cast  from  the  two  Copts  who  had  been  there  before. 
Both  of  them  were  Piedmontese.  One  a  renegado  who  had  deserted 
from  the  French  army  when  in  Egypt,  and  entered  the  service  of 
the  Bashaw ;  the  other  had  left  Piedmont  after  the  fall  of  the  late 
government.  I  did  not  like  to  begin  my  work  in  any  place  near 
these  people,  and  therefore  gave  up  the  idea  of  prosecuting  my  re- 
searches in  Gournou.  It  was  fortunate  for  me  I  did  so,  and  from 
that  time  I  made  the  valley  of  Beban  el  Malook  the  scene  of  my 
researches,  which  is  completely  separated  from  Gournou  by  the  chain 
of  mountains,  that  divides  Thebes  from  the  valley.  I  went  to  this 
plain  quite  alone,  and  spent  the  whole  day  in  making  observations, 
the  result  of  which  confirmed  me  in  the  opinion,  that  there  was  a 
sufficient  prospect  to  encourage  me  to  commence  my  work. 

It  will  be  recollected,  that,  when  we  left  Thebes  for  the  island 
of  Philce,  we  could  not  obtain  any  labourers,  in  consequence  of  the 
orders  of  the  Bey.  Supposing  the  same  would  be  the  case  at  this 
time,  I  sought  the  Cacheff  of  Erments,  to  obtain  an  order  to  allow 
the  men  to  work.  I  found  that  the  old  Cacheff  had  fallen  into 
disgrace  with  the  Defterdar  Bey,  and  was  displaced  and  gone  ;  con- 
sequently I  applied  to  the  Cacheff  of  Ghous,  who  had  become  ruler 
over  the  great  city  of  a  hundred  gates.  He  was  well  aware,  that  to 
allow  us  to  engage  men  to  work  would  not  please  the  Defterdar  Bey  ; 
but  reflecting  on  the  firman  we  had  from  the  Bashaw  himself,  and  the 
barefaced  distinction  made  in  favour  of  the  opposite  party,  who  had 
many  men  at  work,  he  could  not  well  refuse  me  a  small  number  of 


222  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Arabs.  I  accordingly  obtained  from  him  a  firman  to  the  Sheiks  of 
Gournou,  to  furnish  me  with  twenty  men,  with  whom  I  began  my 
operations  in  the  valley  above  mentioned.  Here  I  entered  upon  an 
undertaking,  that  appeared  rather  presumptuous,  when  I  recollected, 
that  many  travellers  had  been  there,  and  many  had  inquired  as  to 
the  possibility  of  discovering  more  tombs,  than  were  already  known, 
even  from  the  time  of  Herodotus  and  Strabo.  The  former  speaks 
of  the  tombs  as  being  above  forty  in  number.  In  the  time  of  Strabo 
not  half  so  many  were  known  to  exist.  Having  found  by  experience, 
that  the  reports  of  ancient  authors  are  not  always  to  be  depended 
upon,  particularly  when  they  speak  from  hearsay,  I  put  them  out 
of  the  account,  and  proceeded  entirely  on  my  own  judgment  to 
search  for  the  tombs  of  the  monarchs  of  Thebes. 

I  began  in  the  valley  to  the  westward  of  Beban  el  Malook,  near 
the  same  place  where  I  discovered  the  tomb  the  year  before.    Here 
I  must  acquaint  my  reader,  that  the  only  guide  I  had  in  these  dis- 
coveries  was   the   knowledge  I   had   acquired   in  the   continued 
researches  for  tombs  I  made  in  Gournou.     In  these  I  found,  that 
the  Egyptians  had  a  particular  manner  of  forming  the  entrance  into 
their  tombs,  which  gave  me  many  leading  ideas  to  the  discovery  of 
them.     Besides,  the  supposition  that  many  of  these  tombs  must  have 
been  buried  under  the  stones  and  rubbish,  which  continually  fall 
from  the  upper  parts  of  the  mountains,  the  great  quantity  of  ma- 
terials cut  out  of  the  tomb  accumulated  in  considerable  heaps  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  valley,  might  give  various  suggestions  of  the  spots 
where  the  entrance  to  the  tombs  was  to  be  found,  as  is  justly  ob- 
served by  Mr.  Hamilton.     But  all  these  striking  reasons  it  appears 
were  insufficient  to  lead  any  traveller  to  persevere  in  the  attempt, 
or  to  make  the  attempt  at  all ;  and  indeed  it  would  have  been  the 
same  with  me,  had  I  not  been  acquainted  with  a  more  secure  mode 
of  proceeding. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  223 

After  a  long  survey  of  the  western  valley,  I  could  observe  only  one 
spot,  that  presented  the  appearance  of  a  tomb.  Accordingly,  I  set 
the  men  to  work  near  a  hundred  yards  from  the  tomb  which  I  dis- 
covered the  year  before ;  and  when  they  had  got  a  little  below  the 
surface,  they  came  to  some  large  stones,  which  had  evidently  been 
put  there  by  those  who  closed  the  tomb.  Having  removed  these 
stones,  I  perceived  the  rock  had  been  cut  on  both  sides,  and  found 
a  passage  leading  downwards.  I  could  proceed  no  farther  that 
day,  as  the  men  were  much  fatigued,  and  we  had  more  than  four 
miles  to  return  to  Thebes.  The  next  day  we  resumed  our  labour, 
and  in  a  few  hours  came  to  a  well-built  Avail  of  stones  of  various 
sizes.  The  following  day  I  caused  a  large  pole  to  be  brought,  and 
by  means  of  another  small  piece  of  palm-tree  laid  across  the  en- 
trance, I  made  a  machine  not  unlike  a  battering-ram.  The  walls 
resisted  the  blows  of  the  Arabs  for  some  time,  as  they  were  not 
Romans,  nor  had  the  pole  the  ram's  head  of  bronze  at  its  end ; 
but  they  contrived  to  make  a  breach  at  last,  and  in  the  same  way 
the  opening  was  enlarged.  We  immediately  entered,  and  found 
ourselves  on  a  staircase,  eight  feet  wide  and  ten  feet  high,  at  the 
bottom  of  which  were  four  mummies,  in  their  cases,  lying  flat  on 
the  ground,  with  their  heads  toward  the  outside.  Farther  on  were 
four  more,  lying  in  the  same  direction.  The  cases  were  all  painted, 
and  one  had  a  large  covering  thrown  over  it,  exactly  like  the  pall 
upon  the  coffins  of  the  present  day. 

I  went  through  the  operation  of  examining  all  these  mummies 
one  by  one.  They  were  much  alike  in  their  foldings,  except  that 
which  had  the  painted  linen  over  it.  Among  the  others  I  found 
one,  that  had  new  linen,  apparently,  put  over  the  old  rags ;  which 
proves,  that  the  Egyptians  took  great  care  of  their  dead,  even  for 
many  years  after  their  decease.  That  which  was  distinguished 
from  all  the  rest,  I  observed  was  dressed  in  finer  linen,  and  more 


224  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

neatly  wrapped  up.  It  had  garlands  of  flowers  and  leaves,  and  on 
the  side  over  the  heart  I  found  a  plate  of  the  metal  which  I  have 
already  described,  soft  like  lead,  covered  with  another  metal,  not 
unlike  silver  leaf.  It  had  the  eyes  of  a  cow,  which  so  often  repre- 
sents Isis,  engraved  on  it;  and  in  the  centre  of  the  breast  was 
another  plate,  with  the  winged  globe.  Both  plates  were  nearly  six 
inches  long.  On  unfolding  the  linen,  we  still  found  it  very  fine, 
which  was  not  the  case  with  the  other  mummies ;  for,  after  three 
or  four  foldings,  it  was  generally  of  a  coarser  kind.  At  last  we 
came  to  the  body,  of  which  nothing  was  to  be  seen  but  the  bones, 
which  had  assumed  a  yellow  tint.  The  case  was  in  part  painted ; 
but  the  linen  cloth  covering  it  fell  to  pieces  as  soon  as  it  was 
touched,  I  believe  owing  to  the  paint  that  was  on  it,  which  con- 
sisted of  various  devices  and  flowers.  The  cases  were  sunk  four 
inches  into  the  cement  I  have  already  mentioned.  Some  of  the 
painting  on  the  inside  of  the  cases  appeared  quite  fresh,  as  if 
recently  done ;  and  there  was  generally  a  coat  of  varnish,  whether 
laid  on  over  the  colours,  or  incorporated  with  them,  I  do  not  know. 
For  what  purpose  this  tomb  might  have  been  intended,  I  cannot 
pretend  to  say :  perhaps  it  was  originally  designed  for  one  of  the 
royal  blood.  It  appeared  by  the  entrance  to  have  been  commenced 
on  a  scale  similar  to  those  of  the  kings ;  though  it  seems  to  have 
been  finished  for  a  more  humble  family. 

The  result  of  my  researches  gave  me  all  the  satisfaction  I  could 
desire,  of  finding  mummies  in  cases,  in  their  original  position  :  but 
this  was  not  the  principal  object  I  had  in  view;  for,  as  I  was  near 
the  place  where  the  kings  of  Egypt  were  buried,  I  thought  I  might 
have  a  chance  of  discovering  some  of  their  relics. 

The  sacred  valley,  named  Beban  el  Malook,  begins  at  Gournou, 
runs  toward  the  south-west,  and  gradually  turns  due  south.  It 
contains  the  celebrated  tombs  of  the  kings  of  Egypt,  and  divides 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  225 

itself  into  two  principal  branches,  one  of  which  runs  two  miles 
farther  to  the  westward,  making  five  miles  from  the  Nile  to  the 
extremity.  The  other,  which  contains  most  of  the  tombs,  is  separated 
from  Gournou  only  by  a  high  chain  of  rocks,  which  can  be  crossed 
from  Thebes  in  less  than  an  hour.  The  same  rocks  surround  the 
sacred  ground,  which  can  be  visited  only  by  a  single  natural 
entrance,  that  is  formed  like  a  gateway,  or  by  the  craggy  paths 
across  the  mountains.  The  tombs  are  all  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock, 
which  is  of  hard  calcareous  stone,  as  white  as  it  is  possible  for  a 
stone  to  be.  The  tombs  in  general  consist  of  a  long  square  passage, 
which  leads  to  a  staircase,  sometimes  with  a  gallery  at  each  side 
of  it,  and  other  chambers.  Advancing  farther  we  come  to  wider 
apartments,  and  other  passages  and  stairs,  and  at  last  into  a  large 
hall,  where  the  great  sarcophagus  lay,  containing  the  remains  of  the 
kings.  Some  of  these  tombs  are  quite  open,  and  others  incumbered 
with  rubbish  at  the  entrance.  Nine  or  ten  may  be  reckoned  of  a 
superior  class,  and  five  or  six  of  a  lower  order.  Strabo  may  have 
counted  eighteen,  as  may  be  done  to  this  day,  including  some  of 
an  inferior  class,  which  cannot  be  esteemed  as  tombs  of  the  kings 
of  Egypt  from  any  other  circumstance,  than  that  of  having  been 
placed  in  this  valley.  For  my  part,  I  could  distinguish  only  ten 
or  eleven  that  could  be  honoured  with  the  name  of  the  tombs  of 
kings,  nor  do  I  suppose  when  Strabo  was  told  by  the  Egyptian 
priests,  that  there  were  forty-seven  tombs  of  the  kings  of  Egypt, 
they  meant  to  say,  these  tombs  were  all  in  the  place,  now  named 
Beban  el  Malook.  In  confirmation  of  this  I  would  observe,  that 
similar  tombs,  and  perhaps  even  more  magnificent  ones,  are  to  \ye 
found  out  of  this  valley,  which  are  open  to  this  very  day.  I  do 
not  mean  the  tombs  in  the  western  valley,  that  forms  the  other 
branch  of  Beban  el  Malook ;  but  those  in  Gournou,  which  the  tra- 
veller seldom  fails  to  see.     There  are  various  tombs  at  that  place, 

G  G 


226  RESEARCHES   AND   OPERATIONS 

which  are  worthy  to  be  compared  with  those  in  Beban  el  Malook ; 
and  I  will  venture  to  say,  that  there  is  one  in  Gournou  far  superior 
to  any  in  that  valley,  being  more  extensive,  and,  from  the  fragments 
that  remain,  apparently  of  greater  magnificence.     But  the  frequent 
exposure  to  all  sorts  of  injury  from  the  various  visitors,  owing  to 
their  being  nearer  to  the  Nile,  has  reduced  the  tombs  at  Gournou 
to  a  state  of  the  greatest  dilapidation.     From  the  besmoked  and 
defaced  walls  it  is  easy  to  see,  that  they  have  been  frequently  visited 
and  perhaps  inhabited  by  herds  of  Arabs  at  a  time,  who  retired  to 
these  recesses  to  escape  the  violent  hands  of  their  pursuers.     If  we 
add  the  tombs  in  the  valley  above  mentioned  to  those  of  the  supe- 
rior class  at  Gournou,  I  will  allow,  that  the  Egyptian  priests  were 
right  in  their  reports ;  otherwise  I  must  say,  it  is  my  firm  opinion, 
that  in  the  valley  of  Beban  el  Malook,  there  are  no  more  than  are 
now  known,  in  consequence  of  my  late  discoveries  ;  for,  previously 
to  my  quitting  that  place,  I  exerted  all  my  humble  abilities  in  en- 
deavouring to  find  another  tomb,  but  could  not  succeed ;  and  what 
is  a  still  greater  proof,  independent  of  my  own  researches,  after  I 
quitted  the  place,  Mr.  Salt,  the  British  consul,  resided  there  four 
months,  and  laboured  in  like  manner  in  vain  to  find  another.     I 
think  therefore  I  may  venture  to  assert,  that  the  whole  forty  or 
forty-seven  tombs  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  could  not  be  in  this  valley, 
but  some  of  them  were  in  various  other  places. 

One  argument  more  I  shall  offer  on  this  subject.  If  the  tombs 
of  Gournou  above  mentioned,  which  are  superior  to  those  in  the 
valley  of  Beban  el  Malook  in  size,  in  variety  of  apartments,  conse- 
quently in  number,  and  I  will  add,  from  what  now  remains  to  be 
seen,  in  the  excellence  of  the  sculpture,  were  not  for  the  kings  of 
Egypt,  what  other  person  in  that  country  could  aspire  to  such  high 
honours,  and  presume  to  have  tombs  superior  to  those  of  the  kings? 
If  I  may  be  permitted  to  give  my  humble  opinion  on  the  subject,  I 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  227 

should  conclude,  that  the  tombs  in  the  valley  of  Beban  el  Malook 
were  erected  subsequently  to  those  in  Goumou ;  for  I  could  scarcely 
find  a  spot  in  the  latter  place  adapted  to  the  excavation  of  one  of 
the  great  tombs,  and  it  may  be  supposed,  that  when  all  the  best 
spots  for  large  tombs  in  Gournou  had  been  occupied,  the  Egyptians 
went  over  the  rocks  to  seek  another  situation  in  which  to  deposit 
their  kings.  Certain  it  is,  that  the  tombs  in  the  valley  of  Beban 
el  Malook  are  in  far  better  condition  than  those  in  Gournou. 

Under  these  circumstances,  reflecting  on  the  possibility  of  dis- 
covering some  of  the  tombs  of  the  kings,  I  set  the  few  men  I  had 
to  work. 

On  the  Gth  of  October  I  began  my  excavation,  and  on  the  9th 
discovered  the  first  tomb :  the  apparent  arrangement  of  the  entrance 
indicated  it  to  be  a  very  large  one ;  but  it  proved  to  be  only  the 
passage  of  one  that  was  never  finished.  The  Egyptians,  however, 
would  not  lose  their  labour,  for  they  used  it  as  a  tomb  notwith- 
standing. Though  it  is  not  extensive,  they  plastered  it  very  finely 
with  white,  and  painted  some  very  fine  figures  on  it  in  the  most 
finished  style.  This  passage  is  ten  feet  five  inches  wide,  and 
seventy-five  feet  from  the  entrance  to  the  part  where  we  come  to 
evidently  the  unfinished  work.  From  the  appearance,  as  it  stands, 
it  is  plain,  that  they  intended  to  proceed,  and  that  some  particular 
event  caused  the  work  to  be  stopped.  The  painted  figures  on  the 
wall  are  so  perfect,  that  they  are  the  best  adapted  of  any  I  ever  saw 
to  give  a  correct  and  clear  idea  of  the  Egyptian  taste.  This  tomb 
lies  south-east  from  the  centre  of  the  valley,  and  quite  at  the  foot 
of  the  large  rocks,  that  overlook  Gournou.  As  I  had  several  parties 
of  Fellahs  at  work  in  different  directions,  I  hoped  to  make  farther 
discoveries ;  and  indeed  this  first  success  gave  me  much  encourage- 
ment, as  it  assured  me,  that  I  was  correct  in  my  idea  of  dis- 
covering the  tombs.     On  the  same  day  we  perceived  some  marks  of 

g  g  2 


228  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

another  tomb  in  an  excavation,  that  had  been  begun  three  days 
before,  precisely  in  the  same  direction  as  the  first  tomb,  and  not  a 
hundred  yards  from  it.  In  fact,  I  had  the  pleasure  to  see  this 
second  tomb  on  the  same  day,  the  9th.  This  is  more  extensive,  but 
entirely  new,  and  without  a  single  painting  in  it :  it  had  been  searched 
by  the  ancients,  as  we  perceived  at  the  end  of  the  first  passage  a 
brick  wall,  which  stopped  the  entrance,  and  had  been  forced  through. 
After  passing  this  brick  wall  you  descend  a  staircase,  and  proceed 
through  another  corridor,  at  the  end  of  which  is  the  entrance  to  a 
pretty  large  chamber,  with  a  single  pillar  in  the  centre,  and  not 
plastered  in  any  part.  At  one  corner  of  this  chamber  we  found 
two  mummies  on  the  ground  quite  naked,  without  cloth  or  case. 
They  were  females,  and  their  hair  pretty  long,  and  well  preserved, 
though  it  was  easily  separated  from  the  head  by  pulling  it  a  little. 
At  one  side  of  this  room  is  a  small  door,  leading  into  a  small  chamber, 
in  which  we  found  the  fragments  of  several  earthen  vessels,  and  also 
pieces  of  vases  of  alabaster,  but  so  decayed  that  we  could  not  join 
one  to  another.  On  the  top  of  the  staircase  we  found  an  earthen 
jar  quite  perfect,  with  a  few  hieroglyphics  on  it,  and  large  enough 
to  contain  two  buckets  of  water.  This  tomb  is  a  hundred  feet  from 
the  entrance  to  the  end  of  the  chamber,  twenty  feet  deep,  and 
twenty-three  wide.  The  smaller  chamber  is  ten  feet  square :  it 
faces  the  east  by  south,  and  runs  straight  towards  west  by  north. 

Several  days  before  we  received  news,  that  there  were  some  En- 
glish people  coming  up  from  Cairo,  and  we  were  anxiously  expecting 
them,  as  we  knew  by  letter  from  that  place,  that  they  were  three 
English  gentlemen.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  they  reached 
Beban  el  Malook,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Beechey,  who  was  at  Luxor, 
where  they  arrived  the  evening  before.  They  were  the  first  to 
enter  into  the  two  discovered  tombs,  and  observed,  that  the  painted 
figure  in  the  first  was  the  best  to  be  seen  in  Egypt,   in  point 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  229 

of  preservation.  We  were  just  quitting  the  valley,  to  go  over  the 
mountain  to  Medinet  Abou,  when  I  was  informed,  that  there  was 
some  other  discovery  in  one  of  the  excavations  near  the  centre  of 
the  valley.  Thither  we  went  immediately,  and  I  perceived  that 
there  was  another  tomb ;  but  as  it  could  not  be  opened  that  day, 
the  travellers  proposed  to  return  the  next  morning.  That  night  I 
went  over  to  Luxor  also,  where  we  arrived  very  late  in  the  evening. 
Early  on  the  next  morning,  the  11th,  we  began  the  tour  of 
Thebes.  We  went  to  see  the  tombs  in  Gournou,  and  the  little 
temple  in  the  valley  behind  the  Menmonium.  About  twelve 
o'clock  word  was  brought  me,  that  the  tomb  discovered  the  day 
before  was  opened,  so  that  we  might  enter  it.  On  this  we  took  the 
road  over  the  rocks  immediately,  and  arrived  in  less  than  three 
quarters  of  an  hour.  I  found  the  tomb  just  opened,  and  entered  to 
see  how  far  it  was  practicable  to  examine  it.  Having  proceeded 
through  a  passage  thirty-two  feet  long,  and  eight  feet  wide,  I  de- 
scended a  staircase  of  twenty- eight  feet,  and  reached  a  tolerably 
large  and  well-painted  room.  I  then  made  a  signal  from  below  to 
the  travellers,  that  they  might  descend,  and  they  entered  into  the 
tomb,  which  is  seventeen  feet  long,  and  twenty-one  wide.  The 
ceiling  was  in  good  preservation,  but  not  in  the  best  style.  We 
found  a  sarcophagus  of  granite,  with  two  mummies  in  it,  and  in  a 
corner  a  statue  standing  erect,  six  feet  six  inches  high,  and  beauti- 
fully cut  out  of  sycamore- wood :  it  is  nearly  perfect  except  the  nose. 
We  found  also  a  number  of  little  images  of  wood,  well  carved,  re- 
presenting symbolical  figures.  Some  had  a  lion's  head,  others  a 
fox's,  others  a  monkey's.  One  had  a  land-tortoise  instead  of  a 
head.  We  found  a  calf  with  the  head  of  a  hippopotamus.  At  each 
side  of  this  chamber  is  a  smaller  one,  eight  feet  wide,  and  seven  feet 
long  ;  and  at  the  end  of  it  is  another  chamber,  ten  feet  long  by 
seven  wide.     In  the  chamber  on  our  right  hand  we  found  another 


230  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

statue  like  the  first,  but  not  perfect.  No  doubt  they  had  been 
placed  one  on  each  side  of  the  sarcophagus,  holding  a  lamp  or  some 
offering  in  their  hands,  one  hand  being  stretched  out  in  the  proper 
posture  for  this,  and  the  other  hanging  down.  The  sarcophagus  was 
covered  with  hieroglyphics  merely  painted,  or  outlined:  it  faces 
south-east  by  east. 

Next  day,  the  12th,  the  party  could  not  proceed  on  their 
voyage,  the  wind  being  foul.  On  the  13th  I  caused  some  spots  of 
ground  to  be  dug  at  Gournou,  and  we  succeeded  in  opening  a 
mummy-pit  on  that  day,  so  that  the  party  had  the  satisfaction  of 
seeing  a  pit  just  opened,  and  receiving  clear  ideas  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  mummies  are  found,  though  all  tombs  are  not  alike.  This 
was  a  small  one,  and  consisted  of  two  rooms  painted  all  over,  but 
not  in  the  best  style.  It  appeared  to  me  that  the  tomb  belonged 
to  some  warrior,  as  there  were  a  great  number  of  men  enrolling 
themselves  for  soldiers,  and  another  writing  their  names  in  a  book. 
There  are  also  several  other  figures,  &c.  In  the  lower  apartment  we 
saw  the  mummies  lying  here  and  there  one  on  another,  without  any 
regularity.  To  all  appearance  therefore  this  pit  had  been  opened 
by  the  Greeks,  or  some  other  people  to  plunder  it. 

The  same  day  we  visited  another  mummy-pit,  which  I  had 
opened  six  months  before.  The  construction  is  somewhat  similar 
to  what  I  have  just  described,  a  portico  and  a  subterraneous  cavity 
where  the  mummies  are.  Here  the  paintings  are  beautiful,  not 
only  for  their  preservation,  but  for  the  novelty  of  their  figures.  There 
are  two  harps,  one  with  nine  strings,  and  the  other  with  fourteen, 
and  several  other  strange  representations :  in  particular,  six  dancing 
girls,  with  fifes,  tambourins,  pipes  of  reeds,  guitars,  &c. 

On  the  16th  I  recommenced  my  excavations  in  the  valley  of 
Beban  el  Malook,  and  pointed  out  the  fortunate  spot,  which  has 
paid  me  for  all  the  trouble  I  took  in  my  researches.     I  may  call 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  231 

this  a  fortunate  day,  one  of  the  best  perhaps  of  my  life ;  I  do  not 
mean  to  say,  that  fortune  has  made  me  rich,  for  I  do  not  consider 
all  rich  men  fortunate ;  but  she  has  given  me  that  satisfaction,  that 
extreme  pleasure,  which  wealth  cannot  purchase ;  the  pleasure  of 
discovering  what  has  been  long  sought  in  vain,  and  of  presenting 
the  world  with  a  new  and  perfect  monument  of  Egyptian  antiquity, 
which  can  be  recorded  as  superior  to  any  other  in  point  of  grandeur, 
style,  and  preservation,  appearing  as  if  just  finished  on  the  day  we 
entered  it ;  and  what  I  found  in  it  will  show  its  great  superiority 
to  all  others.  Not  fifteen  yards  from  the  last  tomb  I  described,  T 
caused  the  earth  to  be  opened  at  the  foot  of  a  steep  hill,  and  under 
a  torrent,  which,  when  it  rains,  pours  a  great  quantity  of  water  over 
the  very  spot  I  have  caused  to  be  dug.  No  one  could  imagine, 
that  the  ancient  Egyptians  would  make  the  entrance  into  such  an 
immense  and  superb  excavation  just  under  a  torrent  of  water;  but 
I  had  strong  reasons  to  suppose,  that  there  was  a  tomb  in  that 
place,  from  indications  I  had  observed  in  my  pursuit.  The  Fellahs 
who  were  accustomed  to  dig  wrere  all  of  opinion,  that  there  was 
nothing  in  that  spot,  as  the  situation  of  this  tomb  differed  from  that 
of  any  other.  I  continued  the  work  however,  and  the  next  day,  the 
17th,  in  the  evening,  we  perceived  the  part  of  the  rock  that  was 
cut,  and  formed  the  entrance.  On  the  18th,  early  in  the  morning, 
the  task  was  resumed,  and  about  noon  the  workmen  reached  the 
entrance,  which  wras  eighteen  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  ground. 
The  appearance  indicated,  that  the  tomb  was  of  the  first  rate  :  but 
still  I  did  not  expect  to  find  such  a  one  as  it  really  proved  to  be.  The 
Fellahs  advanced  till  they  saw  that  it  was  probably  a  large  tomb, 
when  they  protested  they  covdd  go  no  farther,  the  tomb  was  so 
much  choked  up  with  large  stones,  which  they  could  not  get  out  of 
the  passage.  I  descended,  examined  the  place,  pointed  out  to  them 
where  they  might  dig,  and  in  an  hour  there  was  room  enough  for 


232  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

me  to  enter  through  a  passage  that  the  earth  had  left  under  the 
ceiling  of  the  first  corridor,  which  is  thirty-six  feet  two  inches  long, 
and  eight  feet  eight  inches  wide,  and,  when  cleared  of  the  ruins,  six 
feet  nine  inches  high.  I  perceived  immediately  hy  the  painting  on 
the  ceiling,  and  by  the  hieroglyphics  in  basso  relievo,  which  were  to 
be  seen  where  the  earth  did  not  reach,  that  this  was  the  entrance 
into  a  large  and  magnificent  tomb.  At  the  end  of  this  corridor 
I  came  to  a  staircase  twenty-three  feet  long,  and  of  the  same 
breadth  as  the  corridor.  The  door  at  the  bottom  is  twelve  feet 
high.  From  the  foot  of  the  staircase  I  entered  another  corridor, 
thirty-seven  feet  three  inches  long,  and  of  the  same  width  and 
height  as  the  other,  each  side  sculptured  with  hieroglyphics  in  basso 
relievo,  and  painted.  The  ceiling  also  is  finely  painted,  and  in  pretty 
good  preservation  (See  Plate  2).  The  more  I  saw,  the  more  I  was 
eager  to  see,  such  being  the  nature  of  man  :  but  I  was  checked  in  my 
anxiety  at  this  time,  for  at  the  end  of  this  passage  I  reached  a  large 
pit,  which  intercepted  my  progress.  This  pit  is  thirty  feet  deep,  and 
fourteen  feet  by  twelve  feet  three  inches  wide.  The  upper  part  of 
the  pit  is  adorned  with  figures,  from  the  wall  of  the  passage  up  to 
the  ceiling.  The  passages  from  the  entrance  all  the  way  to  this 
pit  have  an  inclination  downward  of  an  angle  of  eighteen  degrees. 
On  the  opposite  side  of  the  pit  facing  the  entrance  I  perceived  a 
small  aperture  two  feet  wide  and  two  feet  six  inches  high,  and  at 
the  bottom  of  the  wall  a  quantity  of  rubbish.  A  rope  fastened  to 
a  piece  of  wood,  that  was  laid  across  the  passage  against  the  pro- 
jections which  form  a  kind  of  door,  appears  to  have  been  used  by 
the  ancients  for  descending  into  the  pit ;  and  from  the  small 
aperture  on  the  opposite  side  hung  another,  which  reached  the 
bottom,  no  doubt  for  the  purpose  of  ascending.  We  could  clearly 
perceive,  that  the  water  which  entered  the  passages  from  the  torrents 
of  rain  ran  into  this  pit,  and  the  wood  and  rope  fastened  to  it 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  233 

crumbled  to  dust  on  touching  them.  At  the  bottom  of  the  pit 
were  several  pieces  of  wood,  placed  against  the  side  of  it,  so  as  to 
assist  the  person  who  was  to  ascend  by  the  rope  into  the  aperture. 
I  saw  the  impossibility  of  proceeding  at  the  moment.  Mr.  Beechey, 
who  that  day  came  from  Luxor,  entered  the  tomb,  but  was  also 
disappointed. 

The  next  day,  the  19th,  by  means  of  a  long  beam  we  succeeded 
in  sending  a  man  up  into  the  aperture,  and  having  contrived  to 
make  a  bridge  of  two  beams,  we  crossed  the  pit.  The  little  aper- 
ture we  found  to  be  an  opening  forced  through  a  wall,  that  had 
entirely  closed  the  entrance,  which  was  as  large  as  the  corridor. 
The  Egyptians  had  closely  shut  it  up,  plastered  the  wall  over,  and 
painted  it  like  the  rest  of  the  sides  of  the  pit,  so  that  but  for  the 
aperture,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  suppose,  that  there  was 
any  farther  proceeding  ;  and  any  one  would  conclude,  that  the 
tomb  ended  with  the  pit.  The  rope  in  the  inside  of  the  wall  did 
not  fall  to  dust,  but  remained  pretty  strong,  the  water  not  having 
reached  it  at  all ;  and  the  wood  to  which  it  was  attached  was  in 
good  preservation.  It  was  owing  to  this  method  of  keeping  the 
damp  out  of  the  inner  parts  of  the  tomb,  that  they  are  so  well  pre- 
served. I  observed  some  cavities  at  the  bottom  of  the  well,  but  found 
nothing  in  them,  nor  any  communication  from  the  bottom  to  any 
other  place  ;  therefore  we  could  not  doubt  their  being  made  to 
receive  the  waters  from  the  rain,  which  happens  occasionally  in  this 
mountain.  The  valley  is  so  much  raised  by  the  rubbish,  which  the 
water  carries  down  from  the  upper  parts,  that  the  entrance  into 
these  tombs  is  become  much  lower  than  the  torrents ;  in  consequence, 
the  water  finds  its  way  into  the  tombs,  some  of  which  are  entirely 
choked  up  with  earth. 

When  we  had  passed  through  the  little  aperture,  we  found  our- 

H  H 


9JU  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

selves  in  a  beautiful  hall,  twenty-seven  feet  six  inches  by  twenty- 
five  feet  ten  inches,  in  which  were  four  pillars  three  feet  square.  I 
shall  not  give  any  description  of  the  painting,  till  I  have  described 
the  whole  of  the  chambers.  At  the  end  of  this  room,  which  I  call 
the  entrance-hall,  and  opposite  the  aperture,  is  a  large  door,  from 
which  three  steps  lead  down  into  a  chamber  with  two  pillars.  This 
is  twenty-eight  feet  two  inches  by  twenty-five  feet  six  inches.  The 
pillars  are  three  feet  ten  inches  square.  I  gave  it  the  name  of  the 
drawing-room  ;  for  it  is  covered  with  figures,  which,  though  only  out- 
lined, are  so  fine  and  perfect,  that  you  would  think  they  had  been 
drawn  only  the  day  before.  Keturning  into  the  entrance-hall,  we 
saw  on  the  left  of  the  aperture  a  large  staircase,  which  descended 
into  a  corridor.  It  is  thirteen  feet  four  inches  long,  seven  and 
a  half  wide,  and  has  eighteen  steps.  At  the  bottom  we  entered 
a  beautiful  corridor,  thirty-six  feet  six  inches  by  six  feet  eleven 
inches.  We  perceived,  that  the  paintings  became  more  perfect  as 
we  advanced  farther  into  the  interior.  They  retained  their  gloss, 
or  a  kind  of  varnish  over  the  colours,  which  had  a  beautiful  effect. 
The  figures  are  painted  on  a  white  ground.  At  the  end  of  this 
corridor  we  descended  ten  steps,  which  I  call  the  small  stairs,  into 
another,  seventeen  feet  two  inches  by  ten  feet  five  inches.  From 
this  we  entered  a  small  chamber,  twenty  feet  four  inches  by  thirteen 
feet  eight  inches,  to  which  I  gave  the  name  of  the  Room  of  Beau- 
ties ;  for  it  is  adorned  with  the  most  beautiful  figures  in  basso 
relievo,  like  all  the  rest,  and  painted.  When  standing  in  the  centre 
of  this  chamber,  the  traveller  is  surrounded  by  an  assembly  of 
Egyptian  gods  and  goddesses.  Proceeding  farther,  we  entered  a 
large  hall,  twenty-seven  feet  nine  inches  by  twenty-six  feet  ten 
inches.  In  this  hall  are  two  rows  of  square  pillars,  three  on  each 
side  of  the  entrance,  forming  a  line  with  the  corridors.     At  each 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  235 

side  of  this  hall  is  a  small  chamber :  that  on  the  right  is  ten  feet 
five  inches  by  eight  feet  eight  inches ;  that  on  the  left,  ten  feet 
five  inches  by  eight  feet  nine  inches  and  a  half.  This  hall  I  termed 
the  Hall  of  Pillars ;  the  little  room  on  the  right,  Isis'  Room,  as  in 
it  a  large  cow  is  painted,  of  which  I  shall  give  a  description  here- 
after ;  that  on  the  left,  the  Room  of  Mysteries,  from  the  mysterious 
figures  it  exhibits.  At  the  end  of  this  hall  we  entered  a  large 
saloon,  with  an  arched  roof  or  ceiling,  which  is  separated  from  the 
Hall  of  Pillars  only  by  a  step ;  so  that  the  two  may  be  reckoned 
one.  The  saloon  is  thirty-one  feet  ten  inches  by  twenty-seven 
feet.  On  the  right  of  the  saloon  is  a  small  chamber  without  any 
thing  in  it,  roughly  cut,  as  if  unfinished,  and  without  painting :  on 
the  left  we  entered  a  chamber  with  two  square  pillars,  twenty-five 
feet  eight  inches  by  twenty-two  feet  ten  inches.  This  I  called  the 
Sideboard  Room,  as  it  has  a  projection  of  three  feet  in  form  of  a 
sideboard  all  round,  which  was  perhaps  intended  to  contain  the 
articles  necessary  for  the  funeral  ceremony.  The  pillars  are  three 
feet  four  inches  square,  and  the  whole  beautifully  painted  as  the 
rest.  At  the  same  end  of  the  room,  and  facing  the  Hall  of  Pillar;-, 
we  entered  by  a  large  door  into  another  chamber  with  four  pillars, 
one  of  which  is  fallen  down.  This  chamber  is  forty -three  feet  four 
inches  by  seventeen  feet  six  inches ;  the  pillars  three  feet  seven 
inches  square.  It  is  covered  with  white  plaster,  where  the  rock  did 
not  cut  smoothly,  but  there  is  no  painting  on  it.  I  named  it  the 
Bull's,  or  Apis'  Room,  as  we  found  the  carcass  of  a  bull  in  it,  em- 
balmed with  asphaltum  ;  and  also,  scattered  in  various  places,  an. 
immense  quantity  of  small  wooden  figures  of  mummies  six  or  eight 
inches  long,  and  covered  with  asphaltum  to  preserve  them.  There 
were  some  other  figures  of  fine  earth  baked,  coloured  blue,  and 
strongly  varnished.     On  each  side  of  the  two  little  rooms  were 

H  II  2 


236  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

some  wooden  statues  standing  erect,  four  feet  high,  with  a  circular 
hollow  inside,  as  if  to  contain  a  roll  of  papyrus,  which  I  have  no 
doubt  they  did.  We  found  likewise  fragments  of  other  statues  of 
wood  and  of  composition. 

Eut  the  description  of  what  we  found  in  the  centre  of  the  saloon, 
and  which  I  have  reserved  till  this  place,  merits  the  most  particular 
attention,  not  having  its  equal  in  the  world,  and  being  such  as  we 
had  no  idea  could  exist.  It  is  a  sarcophagus  of  the  finest  oriental  ala- 
baster, nine  feet  five  inches  long,  and  three  feet  seven  inches  wide. 
Its  thickness  is  only  two  inches  ;  and  it  is  transparent,  when  a  light  is 
placed  in  the  inside  of  it.  It  is  minutely  sculptured  within  and  with- 
out with  several  hundred  figures,  which  do  not  exceed  two  inches 
in  height,  and  represent,  as  I  suppose,  the  whole  of  the  funeral 
procession  and  ceremonies  relating  to  the  deceased,  united  with 
several  emblems,  &c.  I  cannot  give  an  adequate  idea  of  this  beautiful 
and  invaluable  piece  of  antiquity,  and  can  only  say,  that  nothing 
has  been  brought  into  Europe  from  Egypt  that  can  be  compared 
with  it.     The  cover  was  not  there  :  it  had  been  taken  out,  and 
broken   into   several   pieces,   which  we  found   in   digging  before 
the  first  entrance.     The  sarcophagus  was  over  a  staircase  in  the 
centre  of  the  saloon,  which  communicated  with  a  subterraneous 
passage,  leading   downwards,   three  hundred  feet  in  length.     At 
the  end  of  this  passage  we  found  a  great  quantity  of  bats'  dung, 
which    choked   it    up,    so    that  we  could   go   no   farther  without 
digging.     It  was  nearly  filled  up  too  by  the  falling  in  of  the  upper 
part.     One  hundred  feet  from  the  entrance  is  a  staircase  in  good 
preservation  ;  but  the  rock  below  changes  its  substance,  from  a 
beautiful  solid  calcareous  stone,  becoming  a  kind  of  black  rotten 
slate,    which  crumbles   into  dust   only  by   touching.      This   sub- 
terraneous  passage   proceeds   in  a   south-west   direction    through 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  237 

the  mountain.  I  measured  the  distance  from  the  entrance,  and 
also  the  rocks  above,  and  found,  that  the  passage  reaches  nearly 
half  way  through  the  mountain  to  the  upper  part  of  the  valley.  I 
have  reason  to  suppose,  that  this  passage  was  used  to  come  into  the 
tomb  by  another  entrance ;  but  this  could  not  be  after  the  death  of 
the  person  who  was  buried  there,  for  at  the  bottom  of  the  stairs 
just  under  the  sareophagus  a  wall  was  built,  which  entirely  closed 
the  communication  between  the  tomb  and  the  subterraneous 
passage.  Some  large  blocks  of  stone  were  placed  under  the  sar- 
cophagus horizontally,  level  with  the  pavement  of  the  saloon,  that 
no  one  might  perceive  any  stairs  or  subterranean  passage  was  there. 
The  door- way  of  the  sideboard  room  had  been  walled  up,  and  forced 
open,  as  we  found  the  stones  with  which  it  was  shut,  and  the  mortar 
in  the  jambs.  The  staircase  of  the  entrance-hall  had  been  walled 
up  also  at  the  bottom,  and  the  space  filled  with  rubbish,  and  the 
floor  covered  with  large  blocks  of  stone,  so  as  to  deceive  any  one 
who  should  force  the  fallen  wall  near  the  pit,  and  make  him  suppose, 
that  the  tomb  ended  with  the  entrance-hall  and  the  drawing-room. 
I  am  inclined  to  believe,  that  whoever  forced  all  these  passages 
must  have  had  some  spies  with  them,  who  were  well  acquainted 
with  the  tomb  throughout.  The  tomb  faces  the  north-east,  and 
the  direction  of  the  whole  runs  straight  south-west. 

To  give  an  accurate  description  of  the  various  representations 
within  this  tomb,  would  be  a  work  above  my  capacity.  I  shall 
therefore  only  endeavour  to  describe  the  most  remarkable  that  are 
to  be  seen  in  the  various  parts  of  it.  From  these  the  reader  may 
form  some  idea  of  this  magnificent  excavation. 

The  entrance  into  the  tomb  is  at  the  foot  of  a  high  hill,  with  a 
pretty  steep  ascent.  The  first  thing  the  traveller  comes  to  is  a 
staircase  cut  out  of  the  rock,  which  descends  to  the  tomb.     The 


238  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

entrance  is  by  a  door  of  the  same  height  as  the  first  passage.  I 
beg  my  kind  reader  to  observe,  that  all  the  figures  and  hieroglyphics 
of  every  description  are  sculptured  in  basso  relievo,  and  painted  over, 
except  in  the  outlined  chamber,  winch  was  only  prepared  for  the 
sculptor.  This  room  gives  the  best  ideas  that  have  yet  been  dis- 
covered of  the  original  process  of  Egyptian  sculpture.  The  wall  was 
previously  made  as  smooth  as  possible,  and  where  there  were  flaws  in 
the  rocks,  the  vacuum  was  filled  up  with  cement,  which,  when  hard, 
was  cut  along  with  the  rest  of  the  rock.  Where  a  figure  or  any  thing 
else  was  required  to  be  formed,  after  the  wall  was  prepared,  the 
sculptor  appears  to  have  made  his  first  sketches  of  what  was  intended 
to  be  cut  out.  When  the  sketches  were  finished  in  red  lines  by  the 
first  artist,  another  more  skilful  corrected  the  errors,  if  any,  and 
his  lines  were  made  in  black,  to  be  distinguished  from  those  winch 
were  imperfect.  When  the  figures  were  thus  prepared,  the  scidptor 
proceeded  to  cut  out  the  stone  all  round  the  figure,  which  remained 
in  basso  relievo,  some  to  the  height  of  half  an  inch,  and  some  much 
less,  according  to  the  size  of  the  figure.  For  instance,  if  a  figure 
were  as  large  as  life,  its  elevation  was  generally  half  an  inch ;  if  the 
figure  were  not  more  than  six  inches  in  length,  its  projection  would 
not  exceed  the  thickness  of  a  dollar,  or  perhaps  less.  The  angles 
of  the  figures  were  all  smoothly  rounded,  which  makes  them  appear 
less  prominent  than  they  really  are.  The  parts  of  the  stone  that 
were  to  be  taken  off  all  round  the  figure  did  not  extend  much  farther, 
as  the  wall  is  thickly  covered  with  figures  and  hieroglyphics,  and  I 
believe  there  is  not  a  space  on  those  walls  more  than  a  foot  square 
without  some  figure  or  hieroglyphic.  The  garments,  and  various 
parts  of  the  limbs,  were  marked  by  a  narrow  line,  not  deeper  than 
the  thickness  of  a  half-crown,  but  so  exact,  that  it  produced  the 
intended  effect. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  239 

When  the  figures  were  completed  and  made  smooth  by  the 
sculptor,  they  received  a  coat  of  whitewash  all  over.  This  white  is 
so  beautiful  and  clear,  that  our  best  and  whitest  paper  appeared 
yellowish  when  compared  with  it.  The  painter  came  next,  and 
finished  the  figure.  It  would  seem  as  if  they  were  unacquainted 
with  any  colour  to  imitate  the  naked  parts,  since  red  is  adopted  as 
a  standing  colour  for  all  that  meant  flesh.  There  are  some  ex- 
ceptions indeed;  for  in  certain  instances,  when  they  intended  to 
represent  a  fair  lady,  by  way  of  distinguishing  her  complexion  from 
that  of  the  men,  they  put  on  a  yellow  colour  to  represent  her  flesh  ; 
yet  it  cannot  be  supposed,  that  they  did  not  know  how  to  reduce 
their  red  paints  to  a  flesh  colour,  for  on  some  occasions,  where  the 
red  flesh  is  supposed  to  be  seen  through  a  thin  veil,  the  tints  are 
nearly  of  the  natural  colour,  if  we  suppose  the  Egyptians  to  have 
been  of  the  same  hue  as  their  successors,  the  present  Copts,  some  of 
whom  are  nearly  as  fair  as  the  Europeans.  Their  garments  were 
generally  white,  and  their  ornaments  formed  the  most  difficult  part, 
when  the  artists  had  to  employ  red  in  the  distribution  of  the  four 
colours,  in  which  they  were  very  successful.  When  the  figures  were 
finished,  they  appear  to  have  laid  on  a  coat  of  varnish ;  though  it 
may  be  questioned,  whether  the  varnish  were  thus  applied,  or  in- 
corporated with  the  colour.  The  fact  is,  that  nowhere  else  except 
in  this  tomb  is  the  varnish  to  be  observed,  as  no  place  in  Egypt  can 
boast  of  such  preservation,  nor  can  the  true  customs  of  the  Egyptians 
be  seen  any  where  else  with  greater  accuracy. 

With  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Kicci,  I  have  made  drawings  of  all 
the  figures,  hieroglyphics,  emblems,  ornaments,  &c.  that  are  to  be 
seen  in  this  tomb ;  and  by  great  perseverance  I  have  taken  im- 
pressions of  every  thing  in  wax :  to  accomplish  the  work  has  been  a 
laborious  task,  that  occupied  me  more  than  twelve  months. 


240  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

The  drawings  show  the  respective  places  of  the  figures,  so 
that  if  a  building  were  erected  exactly  on  the  same  plan,  and  of 
the  same  size,  the  figures  might  be  placed  in  their  situations 
precisely  as  in  the  original,  and  thus  produce  in  Europe  a  tomb, 
in  every  point  equal  to  that  in  Thebes,  which  I  hope  to  execute  if 
possible. 

Immediately  within  the  entrance  into  the  first  passage,  on  the 
left  hand,  are  two  figures  as  large  as  life,  one  of  which  appears  to  be 
the  hero  entering  into  the  tomb.  He  is  received  by  a  deity  with 
a  hawk's  head,  on  which  are  the  globe  and  serpent.  Both  figures 
are  surrounded  by  hieroglyphics  ;  and  farther  on,  near  the  ground, 
is  a  crocodile  very  neatly  sculptured.  The  walls  on  both  sides  of 
this  passage  are  covered  with  hieroglyphics,  which  are  separated  by 
lines  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,  at  the  distance  of  five  or  six 
inches  from  one  another.  Within  these  lines  the  hieroglyphics 
form  their  sentences ;  and  it  is  plainly  to  be  seen,  that  the  Egyptians 
read  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,  and  then  recommenced  at  the  top. 
The  ceiling  of  this  first  passage  is  painted  with  the  figure  of  the 
eagles,  as  in  Plate  2.  Beyond  the  first  passage  is  a  staircase  with  a 
niche  on  each  side,  adorned  with  curious  figures  with  human  bodies 
and  the  heads  of  various  animals,  &c.  At  each  side  of  the  door 
at  the  bottom  of  the  stairs  is  a  female  figure  kneeling,  with  her 
hands  over  a  globe.  Above  each  of  these  figures  is  the  fox,  which, 
according  to  the  Egyptian  custom,  is  always  placed  to  watch  the 
doors  of  sepulchres.  On  the  front  space  over  the  door  are  the 
names  of  the  hero  and  his  son,  or  his  father,  at  each  side  of  which 
is  a  figure  with  its  wings  spread  over  the  names  to  protect  them,  as 
is  seen  in  Plate  3.  The  names  are  distinguished  by  being  inclosed 
in  two  oval  niches.  In  that  of  Nichao  is  a  sitting  figure,  known  to 
be  a  male  by  the  beard.    He  has  on  his  head  the  usual  corn  measure. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  241 

and  the  two  feathers  ;  on  his  knees  the  sickle  and  the  flail :  over  his 
head  is  a  crescent  with  the  horns  upward :  above  which  is  what  is 
presumed  to  be  a  faggot  of  various  pieces  of  wood  bound  together, 
and  by  its  side  a  group  twisted  in  a  serpentine  form.  Behind  the 
figure  are  what  are  thought  by  some  to  be  two  knives,  by  others 
feathers ;  but  as  the  feathers  are  of  a  different  form,  I  for  my  part 
think  they  are  sacrificing  knives,  which  may  have  served  as  emblems 
of  the  priesthood,  for  we  know,  that  the  heroes  or  kings  of  Egypt 
were  initiated  into  the  sacred  rites  of  the  gods.  Below  the  figure  is 
a  frame  of  two  lines  drawn  parallel  to  each  other,  and  connected  by 
similar  fines,  beneath  which  is  the  emblem  of  moving  water. 

In  the  next  oval  on  the  right  is  a  sitting  female  figure  with  a 
band  round  the  head  fastening  a  feather,  and  on  her  knees  she  holds 
the  keys  of  the  Nile.  Above  the  head  is  the  globe,  and  beneath 
the  figure  the  form  of  a  tower,  as  it  is  supposed  to  represent  strength. 
The  faces  of  both  figures  are  painted  blue,  which  is  the  colour  of 
the  face  of  the  great  God  of  the  creation.  On  each  of  the  oval 
frames  there  is  the  globe  and  feathers,  and  beneath  it  two  hiero- 
glyphics not  unlike  two  overflowing  basins,  as  they  are  under  the 
two  protecting  figures  at  each  side  of  the  oval  frame. 

Next  is  the  second  passage,  on  the  right  hand  side  of  which 
are  some  funeral  processions,  apparently  in  the  action  of  taking  the 
sarcophagus  down  into  the  tomb,  the  usual  boat,  which  carries  the 
male  and  female  figures  upon  it,  and  in  the  centre  the  boat  with 
the  head  of  the  ram  drawn  by  a  party  of  men. 

The  wall  on  the  left  is  likewise  covered  with  similar  processions. 
Among  them  is  the  scarabaeus,  or  beetle,  elevated  in  the  air,  and 
supported  by  two  hawks,  which  hold  the  cords  drawn  by  various 
figures;  and  many  other  emblems  and  symbolical  devices.  The 
figures  on  the  wall  of  the  well  are  nearly  as  large  as  life.     They 

i  i 


9A2  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

appear  to  represent  several  deities ;  some  receiving  offerings  from 
peojjle  of  various  classes. 

Next  is  the  first  hall,  which  has  four  pillars  in  the  centre,  at 
each  side  of  which  are  two  figures,  generally  a  male  and  a  female 
deity.  On  the  right  hand  side  wall  there  are  three  tiers  of  figures 
one  above  the  other,  which  is  the  general  system  almost  all  over  the 
tomb.  In  the  upper  tier  are  a  number  of  men  pulling  a  chain 
attached  to  a  standing  mummy,  which  is  apparently  unmoved  by 
their  efforts.  The  two  beneath  consist  of  funeral  processions,  and 
a  row  of  mummies  lying  on  frames  horizontally  on  the  ground.  On 
the  left  is  a  military  and  mysterious  procession,  consisting  of  a  great 
number  of  figures  all  looking  toward  a  man  who  is  much  superior 
to  them  in  size,  and  faces  them.  At  the  end  of  this  procession  are 
three  different  sorts  of  people,  from  other  nations,  evidently  Jews, 
Ethiopians,  and  Persians.  Behind  them  are  some  Egyptians  without 
their  ornaments,  as  if  they  were  captives  rescued  and  returning  to 
their  country,  followed  by  a  hawk-headed  figure,  I  suppose  their 
protecting  deity.     For  this  procession  see  Plates  6,  7,  and  8. 

I  have  the  satisfaction  of  announcing  to  the  reader,  that,  according 
to  Dr.  Young's  late  discovery  of  a  great  number  of  hieroglyphics,  he 
found  the  names  of  Nichao  and  Psammethis  his  son,  inserted  in  the 
drawings  I  have  taken  of  this  tomb.  It  is  the  first  time  that  hiero- 
glyphics have  been  explained  with  such  accuracy,  which  proves  the 
doctor's  system  beyond  doubt  to  be  the  right  key  for  reading  this 
unknown  language ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  he  will  succeed  in 
completing  his  arduous  and  difficult  undertaking,  as  it  would  give 
to  the  world  the  history  of  one  of  the  most  primitive  nations,  of 
which  we  are  now  totally  ignorant.  Nichao  conquered  Jerusalem 
and  Babylon,  and  his  son  Psammethis  made  war  against  the 
Ethiopians.     What  can  be  more  clear  than  the  above  procession  ? 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  243 

The  people  of  the  three  nations  are  distinctly  seen.  The  Persians, 
the  Jews,  and  the  Ethiopians,  come  in,  followed  by  some  captive 
Egyptians,  as  if  returning  into  their  country,  guarded  by  a  protecting 
deity.  The  reason  why  the  Egyptians  must  be  presumed  to  have 
been  captives  is,  their  being  divested  of  all  the  ornaments,  which 
served  to  decorate  and  distinguish  them  from  one  another.  The 
Jews  are  clearly  distinguished  by  their  physiognomy  and  com- 
plexion, the  Ethiopians  by  their  colour  and  ornaments,  and  the 
Persians  by  their  well-known  dress,  as  they  are  so  often  seen  in  the 
battles  with  the  Egyptians. 

In  the  front  of  this  hall,  facing  the  entrance,  is  one  of  the  finest 
compositions  that  ever  was  made  by  the  Egyptians,  for  nothing  like 
it  can  be  seen  in  any  part  of  Egypt.     It  consists  of  four  figures  as 
large  as  life.     The  god  Osiris  sitting  on  his  throne,  receiving  the 
homages  of  a  hero,  who  is  introduced  by  a  hawk-headed  deity. 
Behind  the  throne  is  a  female  figure  as  if  in  attendance  on  the 
great  god.     The  whole  group  is  surrounded  by  hieroglyphics,  and 
inclosed  in  a  frame  richly  adorned  with  symbolical  figures.     The 
winged  globe  is  above,  with  the  wings  spread  over  all,  and  a  line  of 
serpents  crowns  the  whole.     The  figures  and  paintings  are  in  such 
perfect  preservation,  that  they  give  the  most  correct  idea  of  their 
ornaments  and  decorations  (See  Plate  19). 

Straight  forward  is  the  entrance  into  another  chamber  with  two 
pillars.  The  wall  of  this  place  is  outlined,  ready  for  the  sculptor  to 
cut  out  his  figure.  It  is  here  that  we  may  plainly  see  the  manner, 
in  which  the  artist  prepared  the  figure  on  the  wall  ready  to  be  cut ; 
and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  give  a  description  of  the  various 
figures,  which  adorn  the  walls  and  pillars  of  this  chamber.  There 
are  great  varieties  of  symbolical  figures  of  men,  women,  and  animals, 
apparently  intending  to  represent  the  different  exploits  of  the  hero, 
to  whom  the  tomb  was  dedicated. 

i  i  2 


244  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

On  going  out  of  tliis  chamber  into  the  first  hall  is  a  staircase, 
which  leads  into  a  lower  passage,  the  entrance  into  which  is  de- 
corated with  two  figures,  on  each  side,  a  male  and  a  female,  as  large 
as  life.  The  female  appears  to  represent  Isis,  having,  as  usual,  the 
horns  and  globe  on  her  head.  She  seems  ready  to  receive  the  hero, 
who  is  about  to  enter  the  regions  of  immortality.  The  garments 
of  tins  figure  are  so  well  preserved,  that  nothing  which  has  yet 
been  brought  before  the  public  can  give  a  more  correct  idea  of 
Egyptian  customs.  The  figure  of  the  hero  is  covered  with  a 
veil,  or  transparent  linen,  folded  over  his  shoulder,  and  covering  his 
whole  body,  which  gives  him  a  very  graceful  appearance.  Isis  is 
apparently  covered  with  a  net,  every  mesh  of  which  contains  some 
hieroglyphic,  serving  to  embellish  the  dress  of  the  goddess.  The 
necklace,  bracelets,  belt,  and  other  ornaments,  are  so  well  arranged, 
that  they  produce  the  most  pleasing  effect,  particularly  by  the 
artificial  lights,  all  being  intended  to  conduce  to  this  purpose  (See 
Plate  18). 

On  the  wall  to  the  left,  on  entering  this  passage,  is  a  sitting 
figure  of  the  size  of  life  :  it  is  the  hero  himself  on  his  throne,  having 
the  sceptre  in  his  right  hand,  while  the  left  is  stretched  over  an 
altar,  on  which  are  twenty  divisions,  as  will  be  seen  in  Plate  1.  A 
plate  in  the  form  of  an  Egyptian  temple  is  hung  to  his  neck  by  a 
strinff.  It  contains  an  obelisk  and  two  deities — one  on  each  side  of 
it.  Plates  of  this  kind  have  been  much  sought  after,  as  they  appear 
to  have  been  the  decoration  or  breastplate  of  the  kings  of  Egypt. 
Few  have  been  found,  and  I  have  seen  only  two, — one  is  in  the 
British  Museum,  and  the  other  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  procure 
from  an  Arab,  who  discovered  it  in  one  of  the  tombj  of  the  kings  in 
Beban  el  Malook.  It  is  of  black  basalt,  much  larger  and  superior 
in  workmanship  to  the  other,  which  proves,  that  they  were  of  various 
sizes,  and  more  or  less  finished.     It  has  the  scarabceus  or  beetle  in 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  245 

alto  relievo  on  a  small  boat  with  a  deity  on  each  side  of  it,  and  on 
the  reverse  is  the  usual  inscription.     Over  the  head  of  this  figure  is 
the  eagle  with  extended  wings,  as  if  protecting  the  king.     On  the 
upper  part  of  each  side  of  the  walls  of  the  passage  is  the  history  of 
the  hero  divided  into  several  small  compartments  nearly  two  feet 
square,   containing  groups  of  figures  eighteen  inches  high.     The 
hero  is  to  be  seen  every  where  standing  on  a  heap  of  corn,  receiving 
offerings  from  his  soldiers  or  companions  in  war.     Farther  on  is  a 
small  staircase  leading  into  a  short  passage,  where  the  procession 
still  continues,  and  the  sacrifice  of  a  bull  is  to  be  seen,  as  in  Plate 
IS.     The  walls  of  both  passages  are  covered  with  hieroglyphics  in 
separate  divisions.     From  this  short  passage  there  is  an  entrance 
into  another  much  wider  than  the  rest.     The  charming  sight  of  this 
place  made  us  give  it  the  name  of  the  Eoom  of  Beauties.     All  the 
figures  are  in  such  perfection,  that  the  smallest  part  of  their  orna- 
ments can  be  clearly  distinguished.    The  sides  of  the  doors  are  most 
beautifully  adorned  with  female  deities,   surrounded  with  hiero- 
glyphics, and  the  lotus  is  to  be  seen  both  in  bud  and  in  full  bloom, 
with  the  serpent  on  a  half  globe  over  it  (See  Plate  17).     Farther 
on  is  the  great  hall  with  six  pillars,  containing  on  each  side  of  it, 
two  figures  as  large  as  life.     The  walls  are  adorned  with  the  pro- 
cession and  other  symbolical  figures.     Over  the  door,  in  the  inside, 
is  the  figure  of  a  female  with  extended  wings,  as  in  Plate  3.     At 
each  side  of  this  hall  is  a  small  cell ;  that  on  the  left  containing 
various  mummies  and  other  figures,  and  that  on  the  right  a  cow 
of  half  the  natural  size,  with  a  number  of  figures  under  it,  which 
form  a  very  curious  group.     The  walls  also  are  covered  with  hiero- 
glyphics.    In  the  large  hall  close  to  the  door  are  a  number  of  men 
carrying  a  long  slender  pole,  at  each  end  of  which  is  a  cow's  head, 
and  on  the  pole,  two  bulls,  as  in  Plate  15.     Still  farther,  the  hall 
opens  into  the  large  vaulted  chamber.     It  would  be  impossible  to 


246  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

give  any  description  of  the  numerous  figures,  which  adorn  the  wall 
of  this  place.  It  was  here  that  the  body  of  the  king  was  depo- 
sited, as  I  found  in  its  centre  the  beautiful  sarcophagus.  This 
is  sculptured  within  and  without  with  small  figures  in  intaglio, 
coloured  with  a  dark  blue,  and,  when  a  light  is  put  into  the  inside 
of  it,  it  is  quite  transparent.  The  ceiling  of  the  vault  itself  is 
painted  blue,  with  a  procession  of  figures  and  other  groups  relating 
to  the  zodiac. 

The  next  is  a  chamber  with  a  projection  like  a  side-board.  It 
has  two  square  pillars  with  two  figures  on  every  side,  as  represented 
in  Plates  4  and  5.  The  walls  in  every  part  of  this  chamber  are  also 
beautifully  adorned  with  symbolical  figures,  a  specimen  of  which  is 
given  in  Plate  2,  which  represents  a  compartment  over  the  door 
within  the  chamber.  It  is  useless  to  proceed  any  further  in  the 
description  of  this  heavenly  place,  as  I  can  assure  the  reader  he  can 
form  but  a  very  faint  idea  of  it  from  the  trifling  account  my  pen  is 
able  to  give ;  should  I  be  so  fortunate,  however,  as  to  succeed  in 
erecting  an  exact  model  of  this  tomb  in  Europe,  the  beholder  will 
acknowledge  the  impossibility  of  doing  it  justice  in  a  description. 

The  Arabs  made  such  reports  of  this  discovery,  that  it  came  to 
the  ears  of  Hamed  Aga  of  Kenneh ;  and  it  was  reported  to  him,  that 
great  treasure  was  found  in  it.  On  hearing  this,  he  immediately  set 
off  with  some  of  Iris  soldiers  to  Thebes,  generally  a  journey  of  two 
days,  but  such  was  his  speed  in  travelling,  that  he  arrived  in  the 
valley  of  Beban-el-Malook  in  thirty-six  hours  by  land.  Before  his 
arrival  some  Arabs  brought  us  intelligence,  that  they  saw  from  the 
tops  of  the  mountains  a  great  many  Turks  on  horseback  entering 
the  valley,  and  coming  toward  us.  I  could  not  conceive  who  they 
could  be,  as  no  Turks  ever  came  near  this  place.  Half  an  hour  after 
they  gave  us  the  signal  of  their  approach,  by  firing  several  guns.  I 
thought  an  armed  force  was  sent  to  storm  the  tombs  and  rocks,  as 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  247 

no  other  object  could  bring  the  Turks  there ;  at  last,  when  this  mighty 
power  reached  us,  I  found  it  to  be  the  well-known  Hamed  Aga  of 
Kenneh,  for  some  time  commander  of  the  eastern  side  of  Thebes,  and 
his  followers.  Accordingly  I  was  at  a  loss  to  conceive  what  he  wanted 
there,  as  we  were  on  the  west,  and  under  another  ruler  ;  but  I  sup- 
pose, in  case  of  a  treasure  being  discovered,  the  first  that  hears  of  it 
seizes  it  as  a  matter  of  privilege.     He  smiled,  and  saluted  me  very 
cordially ;  indeed  more  so  than  usual,  I  presume  for  the  sake  of  the 
treasure  I  had  discovered,  of  which  he  was  in  great  expectation.     I 
caused  as  many  fights  to  be  brought  as  we  could  muster,  and  we 
descended  into  the  tomb.      What  was  on  the  walls  of  this  ex- 
traordinary place  did  not  attract  his  attention  in  the  least ;  all  the 
striking  figures  and  lively  paintings  were  lost  on  him ;  his  views 
were  directed  to  the  treasure  alone;  and  his  numerous  followers 
were  like  hounds,  searching  in  every  hole  and  corner.     Nothing, 
however,  being  found  to  satisfy  their  master  or  themselves,  after  a 
long  and  minute  survey,  the  Aga  at  last  ordered  the  soldiers  to 
retire,  and  said  to  me,  "  Pray  where  have  you  put  the  treasure  ?" 
"  What  treasure  ?"  "  The  treasure  you  found  in  this  place."     I 
could  not  help  smiling  at  his  question,  which  confirmed  him  in  his 
supposition.     I  told  him  that  we  had  found  no  treasure  there.     At 
this  he  laughed,  and  still  continued  to  entreat,  that  I  would  show  it 
him.     "  I  have  been  told,"  he  added,  "  by  a  person  to  whom  I  can 
give  credit,  that  you  have  found  in  this  place  a  large  golden  cock, 
filled  with  diamonds  and  pearls.     I  must  see  it.     Where  is  it  ?"  I 
could  scarcely  keep  myself  from  laughing,  while  I  assured  him  that 
nothing  of  the  kind  had  been  found  there.     Seeming  quite  dis- 
appointed, he  seated  himself  before  the  sarcophagus,  and  I  was 
afraid  he  would  take  it  into  his  head,  that  this  was  the  treasure, 
and  break  it  to  pieces,  to  see  whether  it  contained  any  gold ;  for 
their  notions  of  treasure  are  confined  to  gold  and  jewels.     At  last 


248  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

he  o-ave  up  the  idea  of  the  riches  to  be  expected,  and  rose  to  go  out 
of  the  tomb.  I  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  the  beautiful  figures 
painted  all  around.  He  just  gave  a  glance  at  them,  quite  un- 
concerned, and  said,  "  This  would  be  a  good  place  for  a  harem,  as 
the  women  would  have  something  to  look  at."  At  length,  though 
only  half  persuaded  there  was  no  treasure,  he  set  off  with  an  ap- 
pearance of  much  vexation. 

Every  thing  must  come  round,  and  be  told  in  proper  time.     I 
shall  now  introduce  what  happened  previous  to  this  period.    It  will 
be  recollected,  on  my  first  voyage  up  to  Nubia  I  took  possession,  in 
the  island  of  Philce,  of  sixteen  large  blocks  of  stone,  which  formed  a 
fine  group  of  various  figures  in  basso  relievo  ;  that  I  had  them  cut 
thinner,  to  be  taken  more  easily  down  the  Nile  ;  and  that  the  boat, 
which  was  engaged  to  carry  them,  returned  without  them,  as  the 
Reis  did  not  intend  to  take  the  great  head  on  board  his  boat.     On 
our  arrival  at  the  island,  on   my  second  voyage,  we  found  these 
stones  had  been  mutilated,  and  written  upon  in  the  French  lan- 
guage, "  operation  manquee."      The   hand  writing  could   not  be 
ascertained,  as  it  was  done  with  charcoal ;  but  we  knew  there  had 
been  only  three  French  agents  there,  Mr.  Caliud,  Mr.  Jaques,  and 
the   renegado    Eosignana,    all   in   the   employ   of  Mr.    Drouetti. 
Ignorant  which  of  the  three  to  point  out  as  the  perpetrator  of  this 
wanton  and  spiteful  mischief,  we  contented  ourselves  with  writing 
to  the  consul  at  Cairo,  and  nothing  more  was  said.      Eut  by  this 
time  Mr.  Jaques,  who  had  parted  from  the  others  and  was  alone, 
came  to  us,  and,  by  way  of  exculpating  himself,  said  that  Caliud  was 
the  man,  who  mutilated  the  figures  with  his  little  hammer,  which 
he  always  carried  with  liim  to  break  stones.     Mr.  Caliud  was  now 
in  Cairo,  and  Mr.  Beechey  wrote  to  the  consul  an  account  of  what 
had  passed.     Mr.  Caliud,  afraid  of  being  turned  out  of  employment, 
assured  the  consul,  that  he  would  prove  his  innocence  in  the  face 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  249 

of  Mr.  Jaques,  when  he  arrived  in  Thebes.  Sometime  after  Mr. 
Caliud  reached  Thebes  with  a  letter  from  the  consul,  stating  the 
promise  he  had  made  of  clearing  himself  from  the  imputation  of  Mr. 
Jaques  concerning  the  breaking  of  the  stones ;  but  instead  of  con- 
fronting Mr.  Jaques,  who  was  there,  he  contented  himself  with 
abusing  the  English  consid  for  having  spoken  to  him  about  the 
business  while  in  Cairo,  and  did  not  choose  to  meet  Mr.  Jaques 
and  us,  or  say  whether  the  charge  were  true  or  false.  After  abusing 
the  consul,  who  was  now  five  hundred  miles  distant  from  him,  Mr. 
Caliud  meditated  more  mischief  before  liis  departure.  He  became 
the  friend  again  of  Mr.  Jaques,  who  stated  to  the  consul,  that  ail- 
that  had  been  written  to  him  by  Mr.  Beechey  concerning  Mr. 
Caliud  was  not  true,  and  that  he  never  told  us  any  thing  of  the 
kind.  On  the  arrival  of  the  consul  at  Thebes,  Mr.  Jaques  was 
questioned  before  us,  whether  he  had  not  told  us,  that  Caliud 
mutilated  the  stones  in  the  island  of  Philce.  He  again  repeated  to 
the  consul  before  us,  that  Caliud  did  break  the  stones :  and  being 
questioned  by  the  consul,  why  he  afterwards  wrote,  that  such  was 
not  the  case,  said  with  the  greatest  sangfroid,  that  he  merely  con- 
tradicted it  at  the  request  of  Caliud.  One  broke  the  stones ;  the 
other  first  betrayed  him,  then  retracted,  and  lastly  confirmed  it 
again.  These  were  the  sort  of  honourable  Monsieurs  I  had  to 
guard  against. 

Twenty  days  after  the  tomb  was  opened,  we  heard  by  the  boats 
which  came  up  the  Nile,  that  there  were  three  maishes,  or  large 
boats,  coming  up,  with  Englishmen  on  board  ;  and,  a  few  days  after, 
Earl  Belmore  and  family,  Mr.  Salt  the  consul,  Captain  Cory,  Dr. 
Eichardson,  and  the  Eev.  Mr.  Holt,  arrived  at  Thebes. 

In  passing  Kenneh  they  went  to  see  Hamed  Aga,  who  told 
them  of  the  new  discovery  of  the  tomb.  They  were  delighted  when 
they  saw  it ;  and  as  his  Lordship  was  anxious  to  find  a  tomb,  I 

K   K 


250  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

pointed  out  two  likely  spots  of  ground  in  the  valley  of  Beban  el 
Malook,  but  they  turned  out  to  be  two  small  mummy  pits.  This 
proves,  that  small  tombs  were  permitted  to  be  dug  out  in  that  valley, 
where  it  was  supposed,  that  none  but  the  tombs  of  the  kings  of 
Egypt  were  to  be  found ;  and  agrees  with  my  former  opinion,  that 
it  was  not  in  this  valley  alone  the  tombs  of  the  kings  were  excavated. 
During  his  stay,  his  Lordship  made  many  researches,  and  was  pleased 
to  send  down  the  Nile  two  of  the  lion-headed  statues  I  discovered 
in  Carnak.  Thus,  with  what  was  found  and  brought  by  the  Arabs, 
he  accumulated  a  vast  quantity  of  fragments,  which,  when  in  Europe, 
will  form  a  pretty  extensive  cabinet  of  antiquities. 

The  consul  was  so  enraptured  with  the  sight  of  the  tomb,  and,  I 
suppose,  of  the  sarcophagus,  that  he  also  began  making  excavations 
in  the  valley  of  Beban  el  Malook,  in  order  to  find  some  more  of  the 
depositories  of  kings.  He  continued  his  research  four  months ;  and 
what  he  has  found  he  will  of  course  describe  himself  with  more 
minuteness  than  I  could  do.  Lord  Belmore  and  his  family  pro- 
ceeded to  Nubia  a  few  days  after ;  and  I  prepared  to  descend  the 
Nile,  as  I  had  business  in  Cairo.  Such  however  was  the  impression 
made  on  me  by  that  beautiful  tomb,  that  I  resolved  to  return  to 
Thebes,  and  form  a  complete  model  of  it,  of  which  I  shall  speak 
hereafter.  The  three  travellers  were  now  come  back  from  Nubia, 
but  they  passed  on  without  stopping. 

Having  embarked  all  that  was  found  this  season,  I  left  Thebes 
with  another  accumulation  of  antiquities,  of  which  an  account  will 
be  found  at  the  end  of  this  volume.  I  shall  not  describe  this 
voyage,  as  I  think  it  useless  to  repeat  almost  the  same  things  over 
again.  We  arrived  at  Boolak  on  the  twenty-first  of  December, 
after  ten  months  absence.  My  business  in  Cairo  detained  me  longer 
than  I  wished,  as  I  was  anxious  to  return  to  Thebes,  for  the  sole 
purpose  of  taking  models  and  impressions  in  wax  of  all  the  figures 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  251 

and  hieroglyphics  in  the  newly  discovered  tomb,  first  called  that  of 
Apis,  but  now  of  Psammethis.  Finding  I  could  not  immediately 
despatch  my  little  business  there,  I  sent  up  the  boat,  with  the 
intention  of  going  myself  by  land.  I  had  engaged  Signor  Kicci,  a 
young  man  from.  Italy,  who  was  very  clever  at  drawing,  and  who 
with  a  little  practice  became  quite  perfect  in  his  imitations  of  the 
hieroglyphics.  He  was  to  begin  the  drawings  of  the  tomb  on  his 
arrival  at  Thebes.  Mrs.  Belzoni  resolved  to  visit  the  Holy  Land, 
and  wait  for  me  at  Jerusalem,  to  which  place  I  intended  to  go  after 
finishing  my  model  of  the  tomb.  My  purse  was  now  pretty  well 
exhausted ;  for  all  my  former  stock  of  money  was  spent,  and  very 
little  remained  of  the  present  I  received  from  Mr.  Burckhardt  and 
the  consul  after  my  first  voyage  with  the  colossal  head.  Mrs.  Bel- 
zoni  set  out  for  Jerusalem,  accompanied  by  James  the  Irish  lad  and 
a  Janizary,  who  went  to  meet  a  traveller  in  Syria,  to  escort  him  to 
Egypt. 

At  this  time  the  celebrated  and  veracious  Count  de  Forbin 
arrived  at  Cairo.  I  then  lodged  at  the  consulate  ;  and  the  Count 
visited  the  house,  to  see  the  collection  I  had  just  brought  down 
with  me,  as  well  as  what  had  been  brought  the  year  before.  The 
Count  was  not  a  little  confounded  at  the  sight  of  so  many  valuable 
things  ;  and  being  Director  of  the  French  Museum,  they  could  not 
fail  to  be  interesting  to  him.  The  colossal  head,  the  altar  with  the 
six  deities,  the  colossal  arm,  and  the  various  statues,  particularly 
attracted  his  attention. 

I  was  then  in  possession  of  some  statues,  which  I  had  brought 
from  Thebes  on  my  own  account,  according  to  an  understanding  with 
the  consul.  I  intended  to  send  them  to  my  native  town  ;  for  which 
purpose  I  had  arranged  for  their  embarkation  at  Alexandria.  The 
Count  made  a  proposal  to  purchase  them  ;  and  being  told  they 
were  destined  for  Europe  immediately,  he  urgently  requested  that 

k  k  2 


252  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

I  would  dispose  of  them  to  him,  saying  he  should  be  under  great 
obligations  to  me  if  I  would  comply  with  his  request.  I  recollected 
that  I  might  find  more,  and  accordingly  consented  to  gratify  him. 
What  he  paid  me  for  them  was  not  one  fourth  of  their  value  ;  but 
I  was  fully  satisfied,  as  I  never  was  a  dealer  in  statues  in  my  life. 

At  this  time  I  received  several  journals  from  Europe  ;  and 
found,  to  my  great  surprise,  that  all  my  former  discoveries  and 
labours  had  been  published  in  the  names  of  other  people,  while 
mine  was  not  even  mentioned.  I  must  confess,  I  was  weak  enough 
to  be  a  little  vexed  at  this  ;  for,  after  such  exertions  as  I  had  made 
in  Upper  Egypt,  it  was  not  pleasant  to  see  the  fruits  and  the  credit 
of  them  ascribed  to  others,  who  had  no  more  to  do  with  them 
than  the  governor  of  Siberia,  except  as  far  as  related  to  supplying 
me  with  money.  Thinking  all  was  not  right,  and  that  people  were 
by  some  means  misinformed,  I  drew  up  a  statement  of  the  facts. 
I  gave  this  account  of  my  operations  in  Egypt  to  the  Count  de 
Forbin  in  the  shape  of  a  letter,  which  he  promised  to  have  pub- 
lished in  France  ;  but  it  would  have  been  better,  if  I  had  never  en- 
trusted it  to  him,  as  the  use  he  made  of  it  was  quite  the  reverse  of 
what  was  intended.  Every  thing  was  again  thrown  into  confusion 
by  the  French  journals,  who  confounded  one  thing  with  another? 
so  that  the  public  knew  but  little  of  the  truth  from  that  quarter  ; 
and  some  others  of  the  European  journals,  which  copied  and  ex- 
tracted from  them,  were  also  misled.  I  had  despaired  of  correcting 
these  mis-statements ;  but  the  many  travellers  who  afterwards 
visited  that  country,  and  were  impartial  spectators,  wrote  to  Europe 
an  account  of  what  they  saw  and  heard  ;  and  by  these  means  the  real 
facts  in  time  came  out. 

At  this  period  Major  Moore  arrived  in  Cairo  with  despatches 
from  India ;  and,  as  he  could  not  set  off  on  the  same  day  for  Alex- 
andria for  want  of  a  cangiar,  he  went  with  me  to  visit  the  pyramids 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  253 

inside  and  out.  Wliile  on  the  top  of  the  first  pyramid,  I  descanted 
to  him  on  the  various  opinions  entertained  concerning  the  second, 
and  what  a  pity  it  was,  that,  in  an  intelligent  age  like  the  present, 
it  had  not  been  opened,  so  that  the  interior  remained  quite  unknown. 
On  Major  Moore's  departure  for  England,  he  took  with  him  the 
account  of  my  operations  in  Egypt,  and  some  of  the  plans  of  the 
newly  discovered  places,  which  he  faithfully  delivered  to  Lord 
Aberdeen,  president  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  agreeably  to  my 
request ;  and  this  was  one  source  by  which  the  truth  began  to  be 
known. 

The  Count  de  Forbin  made  much  inquiry  about  Upper  Egypt, 
and  expressed  his  wish  to  see  that  country.  I  know  not  whether 
it  were  my  persuasions,  or  his  own  inclinations,  but  he  took  the 
resolution  to  go  up,  though  the  whole  of  his  journey,  from  his 
departure  to  his  return,  occupied  only  one  month.  Having  done 
so,  he  gave  an  account  of  the  country,  the  city  of  Thebes,  its  mo- 
numents, tombs,  temples,  colossi,  scaraba?i,  Europeans,  &c.  But  he 
said  his  enterprising  spirit  of  penetrating  into  Africa  failed  him, 
when  he  saw  European  women  walking  about  Luxor.  A  very 
pretty  excuse  for  a  traveller  !  At  the  time  of  Norden,  European 
women  could  not  go  about  in  Alexandria  as  they  can  now  in 
Thebes,  yet  Norden  continued  to  make  his  way  as  far  as  Deir.  If 
the  Count  wanted  to  signalize  himself  as  a  traveller,  he  should  not 
have  scorned  to  enter  the  extensive  sandy  ocean  of  Africa,  merely 
because  he  saw  a  European  family  walking  freely  at  Luxor  in 
Egypt.  If  the  Count  look  at  the  map  of  that  unknown  country, 
he  will  find,  that  the  civilization  of  Egypt  will  diminish  very 
little  of  the  glory  he  seems  to  wish  to  acquire  by  penetrating  into 
Africa. 

The  Count  mentions  having  found  a  colossal  arm  in  Thebes ; 
and  that  I,  by  advice  of  the  British  consul,  had  it  taken  away? 
though  it  belonged  to  him.     Such  an  arm  never  existed.     But  if 


254  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

the  Count  be  ashamed  to  say,  that  he  has  been  in  Egypt  without 
finding  a  single  piece  of  antiquity,  and  returned  without  bringing 
any  thing  to  France  except  the  statues  he  obtained  from  me,  I 
think  he  might  have  been  more  candid,  and  have  confessed,  that 
the  attraction  of  a  more  easy  life  did  not  permit  him  to  proceed 
any  farther  into  Africa.  The  Count  abuses  almost  every  one  who 
comes  in  his  way,  merely  because  he  did  not  succeed  in  making  any 
thing  of  Egypt  himself;  but  I  should  not  have  mentioned  his  name, 
had  he  not  impelled  me  to  it  by  the  falsehoods  inserted  against 
me  in  his  journal.  One  thing  more  I  must  observe  respecting  the 
Count.  On  his  return  from  Thebes  I  met  him  at  Cairo,  in  the  house 
of  the  Austrian  consul.  I  had  begun  the  task  of  opening  the 
pyramids,  and  had  already  discovered  the  false  passage.  The  Count 
requested  in  a  kind  of  sarcastic  manner,  when  I  had  succeeded 
in  opening  the  pyramid,  which  no  doubt  he  supposed  would  be 
never,  that  I  would  send  him  the  plan  of  it,  as  he  was  about 
setting  off  for  Alexandria  the  next  day,  and  thence  to  France.  I 
thought  the  best  retaliation  I  could  make  was  to  send  him  the  de- 
sired plan,  and  I  did  so,  as  soon  as  I  opened  the  pyramid,  which  was 
in  a  few  days  after  his  departure.  Would  any  one  believe,  that  the 
noble  Count,  on  his  arrival  in  France,  gave  out,  that  he  had  succeeded 
in  penetrating  the  second  pyramid  of  Ghizeh,  and  brought  the  plan 
of  it  to  Paris  ?  Whether  this  be  the  fact  or  no  will  appear  from  the 
following  paragraph,  taken  from  a  French  paper  now  in  my  possession. 
"  On  the  24th  of  April,  Mr.  Le  Comte  de  Forbin,  Director 
General  of  the  Royal  Museum  of  France,  landed  at  the  lazaretto  of 
Marseilles.  He  came  last  from  Alexandria,  and  his  passage  was 
very  stormy.  He  has  visited  Greece,  Syria,  and  Upper  Egypt.  By 
a  happy  chance,  some  days  before  his  departure  from  Cairo,  be 
succeeded  in  penetrating  into  the  second  pyramid  of  Ghizeh.  Mr. 
Forbin  brings  the  plan  of  that  important  discovery,  as  well  as  much 
information  on  the  labours  of  Mr.  Drouetti,  at  Carnak,  and  on  those 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  255 

which  Mr.  Salt,  the  English  consul,  pursues  with  the  greatest 
success  in  the  valley  of  Beban  el  Malook,  and  in  the  plain  of  Me- 
dinet  Aboo.  The  Museum  of  Paris  is  going  to  be  enriched  with 
some  of  the  spoils  of  Thebes,  which  Mr.  Forbin  has  collected  in  his 
travels."  Was  this  written  in  ridicule  of  the  Count  de  Forbin  by 
some  person  in  France  ?  or  is  it  an  attempt  to  impose  on  the  public 
by  a  tissue  of  falsehoods  ? 

Having  seen  so  many  erroneous  accounts   in  the  journals  of 
Europe,  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  inform  the  public  of  the  real 
facts.     Before  my  departure  for  Thebes  I  visited  the  pyramids  in 
company  with  two  other  persons  from  Europe.     On  our  arrival  at 
these  monuments  they  went  into  the  first  pyramid,  while  I  took  a 
turn  round  the  second.     I  seated  myself  in  the  shade  of  one  of 
those  stones  on  the  east  side,  which  form  the  part  of  the  temple 
that  stood  before  the  pyramid  in  that  direction.     My  eyes  were 
fixed  on  that  enormous  mass,  which  for  so  many  ages  has  baffled  the 
conjectures  of  ancient  and  modern  writers.     Herodotus  himself  was 
deceived  by  the  Egyptian  priests,  when  told  there  were  no  chambers 
in  it.     The  sight  of  the  wonderful  work  before  me  astonished  me 
as  much,  as  the  total  obscurity  in  which  we  are  of  its  origin,  its  in- 
terior, and  its  construction.     In  an  intelligent  age  like  the  present, 
one  of  the  greatest  wonders  of  the  world  stood  before  us,  without  our 
knowing  even  whether  it  had  any  cavity  in  the  interior,  or  if  it  were 
only  one  solid  mass.     The  various  attempts  which  have  been  made 
by  numerous  travellers  to  find  an  entrance  into  this  pyramid,  and 
particularly  by  the  great  body  of  French  savans,  were  examples  so 
weighty,  that  it  seemed  little  short  of  madness,  to  think  of  renewing 
the  enterprise.     Indeed,  the  late  researches  made  by  Mr.  Salt  him- 
self, and   by  Captain  Cabilia,   during  four  months,   round  these 
pyramids,  were  apparently  sufficient  to  deter  any  one.    A  short  time 
before  this  period  the  few  Franks  who  resided  in  Egypt  had  some 


256  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

idea  of  obtaining  permission  from  Mahomed  Ali,  and  by  the  help 
of  a  subscription,  which  was  to  be  made  at  the  various  Courts  in 
Europe  to  the  amount  of  at  least  ^20,000,  were  to  force  their  way 
into  the  centre  of  this  pyramid  by  explosions,  or  any  other  means 
that  could  be  suggested.  Mr.  Drouetti  was  to  have  had  the  super- 
intendence of  this  work.  Indeed  it  had  created  some  difference 
among  themselves  who  was  to  have  had  the  direction  of  the  whole 
concern.  Was  not  this  enough  to  show  the  difficulties  I  had  to 
encounter,  and  to  make  me  laugh  at  myself,  if  any  thought  of  such 
an  attempt  should  cross  my  mind?  Besides,  there  was  another 
obstacle  to  overcome.  I  had  to  consider,  that  in  consequence  of 
what  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  do  in  Upper  Egypt,  and  under  the 
circumstances  above  mentioned,  it  was  not  likely  that  I  should 
obtain  permission  to  make  such  an  attempt :  for  if  it  could  be 
supposed,  that  there  was  any  possibility  of  penetrating  into  the 
pyramid,  the  operation  would  certainly  be  given  to  people  of  higher 
influence  than  myself. 

With  all  these  thoughts  in  my  mind  I  arose,  and  by  a  natural 
impulsion  took  my  walk  toward  the  south  side  of  the  pyramid.  I 
examined  every  part,  and  almost  every  stone.  I  continued  to  do  so 
on  the  west, — at  last  I  came  round  to  the  north.  Here  the  appearance 
of  things  became  to  my  eye  somewhat  different  from  that  at  any 
of  the  other  sides.  The  constant  observations  I  made  on  the 
approach  to  the  tombs  at  Thebes  perhaps  enabled  me  to  see  what 
other  travellers  did  not :  indeed,  I  think  this  ought  to  be  considered 
as  a  standing  proof,  that  in  many  cases  practice  goes  farther  than 
theory.  Other  travellers  had  been  also  in  various  places  where  I 
had  been,  and  came  often  to  the  same  spot  where  I  was,  but 
perhaps  did  not  make  the  observations  I  did.  I  certainly  must  beg 
leave  to  say,  that  I  often  observed  travellers,  who,  confident  of  their 
own  knowledge,  let  slip  opportunities  of  ascertaining  whether  they 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  257 

were  correct  in  their  notions ;  and  if  an  observation  was  made  to 
them  by  any  one,  who  had  not  the  good  fortune  of  having  received 
a  classical  education,  they  scorned  to  listen  to  it,  or  replied  with  a 
smile,  if  not  a  laugh  of  disapprobation,  without  investigating  whether 
the  observation  were  just  or  not.  I  had  often  the  satisfaction  of 
seeing  such  travellers  mortified  by  the  proof  of  being  wrong  in  their 
conjecture.  I  do  not  mean  to  say,  that  a  man,  who  has  had  a  clas- 
sical education,  should  think  himself  under  a  disadvantage  in  regard 
to  knowing  such  things,  compared  with  him  who  has  not ;  but,  that 
a  man,  who  thinks  himself  Avell  informed  on  a  subject,  often  does 
not  examine  it  with  such  precision  as  another,  who  is  less  confident 
in  himself. 

I  observed  on  the  north  side  of  the  pyramid  three  marks,  which 
encouraged  me  to  attempt  searching  there  for  the  entrance  into  it. 
Still  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  principal  signs  I  discovered  there 
were  not  deduced  solely  from  the  knowledge  I  had  acquired  among 
the  tombs  of  the  Egyptians  at  Thebes ;  for  any  traveller  will  ac- 
knowledge, that  the  pyramids  have  little  in  common  with  the  tombs, 
either  in  their  exterior  appearance,  or  in  any  shape  whatever: — 
they  are  two  different  things, — one  is  formed  by  a  vast  accumula- 
tion of  large  blocks  of  stones ; — the  other  is  entirely  hewed  out  of 
the  solid  rock.  My  principal  guide,  I  must  own,  was  the  cal- 
culation I  made  from  the  first  pyramid,  and  such  was  my  assurance 
on  this  point,  that  I  then  almost  resolved  to  make  the  attempt.  I 
had  been  at  the  pyramids  various  times  before,  but  never  with  any 
intention  of  examining  into  the  practicability  of  finding  the  entrance 
into  them,  which  was  deemed  almost  impossible.  The  case  was 
now  different, — I  saw  then  what  I  had  not  seen  before. — I  observed, 
that  just  under  the  centre  of  the  face  of  the  pyramid  the  accu- 
mulation of  materials,  which  had  fallen  from  the  coating  of  it,  was 
higher  than  the  entrance  could  be  expected  to  be,  if  compared  with 

L  L 


258  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

the  height  of  the  entrance  into  the  first  pyramid,  measuring  from 
the  basis.  I  could  not  conceive  how  the  discovery  of  the  entrance 
into  the  second  pyramid  could  be  considered  as  a  matter  to  be 
despaired  of,  when  no  one  had  ever  seen  the  spot,  where  it  must 
naturally  be  presumed  to  exist,  if  there  were  any  entrance  at  all.  I 
farther  observed,  that  the  materials  winch  had  fallen  exactly  in  the 
centre  of  the  front  were  not  so  compact  as  those  on  the  sides ;  and 
hence  concluded,  that  the  stones  on  that  spot,  had  been  removed 
after  the  falling  of  the  coating.  Consequently  I  perceived  the  pro- 
bability of  there  being  an  entrance  into  the  pyramid  at  that  spot. 
Encouraged  by  these  observations,  I  rejoined  my  companions  in  the 
first  pyramid.  We  visited  the  great  sphinx,  and  returned  to  Cairo 
the  same  evening. 

I  resolved  to  make  a  closer  examination  the  next  day,  which 
I  did  accordingly,  without  communicating  my  intention  to  any  one, 
as  it  would  have  excited  great  inquiry  among  the  Franks  at  Cairo, 
and  in  all  probability  I  should  not  have  obtained  permission  to 
proceed  in  my  design.  The  next  day's  examination  encouraged  me 
in  the  attempt.  I  was  confident,  that,  if  my  purpose  had  been 
known  to  certain  persons,  who  had  influence  at  the  court  of  the 
Bashaw,  I  should  never  succeed  in  obtaining  permission.  On  the 
following  day  therefore  I  crossed  the  Nile  to  Embabe,  as  the  Cacheff 
who  commanded  the  province  which  includes  the  pyramids  resided 
there.  I  introduced  myself  to  him,  and  acquainted  him  with  my 
intention  to  excavate  the  pyramids,  if  it  met  his  approbation.  His 
answer  was,  as  I  expected,  that  I  must  apply  to  the  Bashaw,  or  to 
the  Kakia  Bey,  for  a  firman,  without  which  it  was  not  in  his  power 
to  grant  me  permission  to  excavate  at  the  harrans,  or  pyramids.  I 
asked  him,  whether  he  had  any  other  objection,  provided  I  obtained 
the  firman  from  the  Bashaw ;  he  replied,  "  none  whatever."  I  then 
went  to  the  citadel,  and  as  the  Bashaw  was  not  in  Cairo,  I  presented 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  259 

myself  to  the  Kakia  Bey,  who  knew  me  from  the  time  I  was  at 
Soubra,  and  who,  on  my  request  for  permission  to  excavate  at  the 
pyramids,  had  no  other  objection,  than  that  of  not  being  certain, 
whether  round  the  harrans  there  were  any  ploughed  grounds,  on 
which  he  could  not  grant  permission  to  dig.  He  sent  a  message  to 
the  above  Cacheff  at  Embabe,  who  assured  him,  that  round  the 
harrans  there  was  no  cultivated  land,  but  that  on  the  contrary  it 
was  solid  rock. 

With  such  an  assurance  I  obtained  a  firman  to  the  Cacheff, 
to  furnish  me  with  men  to  work  at  the  pyramids.  My  undertaking 
was  of  no  small  importance :  it  consisted  of  an  attempt  to  pe- 
netrate into  one  of  the  great  pyramids  of  Egypt,  one  of  the  wonders 
of  the  world.  I  was  confident,  that  a  failure  in  such  an  attempt 
would  have  drawn  on  me  the  laughter  of  all  the  world  for  my  pre- 
sumption in  undertaking  such  a  task :  but  at  the  same  time  I  con- 
sidered, that  I  might  be  excused,  since  without  attempting  we 
should  never  accomplish  any  thing.  However,  I  thought  it  best 
to  keep  my  expedition  as  secret  as  possible ;  and  I  communi- 
cated it  only  to  Mr.  Walmas,  a  worthy  Levantine  merchant  of 
Cairo,  and  partner  in  the  house  of  Briggs.  It  is  not  to  be  under- 
stood, that  I  intended  to  conceal  the  attempt  I  wished  to  make  on 
the  pyramids,  for  the  effects  of  my  work  would  plainly  show  them- 
selves ;  but  being  near  the  capital,  where  many  Europeans  resided, 
I  could  not  prevent  myself  from  being  interrupted  during  my  opera- 
tions ;  and  as  I  knew  too  well  how  far  the  influence  and  intrigues 
of  my  opponents  could  be  carried,  I  was  not  certain,  that  the  per- 
mission I  had  procured  might  not  have  been  countermanded,  so  as 
to  put  an  end  to  all  my  proceedings.  Accordingly  having  provided 
myself  with  a  small  tent,  and  some  provision,  that  I  might  not  be 
under  the  necessity  of  repairing  to  Cairo,  I  set  off  for  the  pyramids. 

My  sudden  departure  from  Cairo  was  supposed  to  be  an  expe- 

i,l2 


260  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

ditioii  to  the  mountain  of  Mokatam,  for  a  few  days,  as  I  had  given 
out.  At  the  pyramids  I  found  the  Arabs  willing  to  work,  and  im- 
mediately set  about  the  operation. 

My  purse  was  but  light,  for  very  little  remained  of  what  I  re- 
ceived as  a  present  from  Mr.  Burckhardt,  and  the  consul;  and 
though  it  had  been  a  little  strengthened  by  the  two  statues  I  lately 
disposed  of  to  the  Count  de  Forbin,  who  had  paid  me  one  third  of  the 
money  on  account,  my  whole  stock  did  not  amount  to  two  hundred 
pounds,  and  if  I  did  not  succeed  in  penetrating  the  pyramid  before 
this  was  exhausted,  I  should  have  been  at  a  stand,  before  the  accom- 
plishment of  my  undertaking,  and  perhaps  prepared  the  way  for 
others  stronger  than  myself  in  purse. 

Two  points  principally  excited  my  attention  :  the  first  was  on 
the  north  side  of  the  pyramids,  and  the  second  on  the  east.  There 
is  on  the  latter  side  part  of  a  portico  of  the  temple  which  stood 
before  the  pyramid,  and  which  has  a  causeway  descending  straight 
towards  the  great  sphinx.  I  thought,  that  by  opening  the  ground 
between  the  portico  and  the  pyramid  I  should  necessarily  come  to 
the  foundation  of  the  temple,  which  in  fact  I  did.  I  set  eighty  Arabs 
to  work,  forty  on  the  above  spot,  and  forty  in  the  centre  of  the  north 
side  of  the  pyramid,  where  I  observed  the  earth  not  so  solid  as  on 
the  east  and  west.  The  Arabs  were  paid  daily  one  piastre  each, 
which  is  sixpence  English  money.  I  had  also  several  boys  and 
girls  to  carry  away  the  earth,  to  whom  I  gave  only  twenty  paras, 
or  three  pence,  a  day.  I  contrived  to  gain  their  good  will  by  trifles 
I  gave  as  presents,  and  by  pointing  out  to  them  the  advantage  they 
would  gain,  if  we  succeeded  in  penetrating  into  the  pyramid,  as 
many  visitors  would  come  to  see  it,  and  they  would  get  bakshis  from 
them.  Nothing  has  so  much  influence  on  the  mind  of  an  Arab  as 
reasoning  with  him  about  his  own  interest,  and  showing  him  the  right 
way  to  benefit  himself.     Any  thing  else  he  seems  not  to  understand. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  26 1 

I  must  confess,  at  the  same  time,  that  I  found  this  mode  of  proceed- 
ing quite  as  efficacious  in  Europe. 

The  works  on  each  side  continued  for  several  days  without  the 
smallest  appearance  of  any  thing.  On  the  north  side  of  the  pyramid, 
the  materials  which  were  to  be  removed,  consisting  of  what  had 
fallen  from  the  coating,  notwithstanding  the  appearance  of  having 
been  removed  at  a  later  period  than  the  first,  were  so  closely 
cemented  together,  that  the  men  could  scarcely  proceed.  The 
only  instrument  they  had  to  work  with  was  a  kind  of  hatchet  or 
spade,  which  being  rather  thin,  and  only  fit  to  cut  the  soft  ground, 
could  not  stand  much  work  among  stones  and  mortar,  which  latter 
I  suppose,  as  it  fell  from  the  pyramid,  had  been  moistened  by  the 
dew  *,  and  gradually  formed  itself  almost  into  one  mass  with  the 
stones. 

On  the  east  side  of  the  pyramid,  we  found  the  lower  part  of  a 
large  temple  connected  with  the  portico,  and  reaching  within  fifty 
feet  of  the  basis  of  the  pyramid.  Its  exterior  walls  were  formed  of 
enormous  blocks  of  stone,  as  may  now  be  seen.  Some  of  the  blocks 
in  the  porticoes  are  twenty-four  feet  high.  The  interior  part  of  this 
temple  was  built  with  calcareous  stones  of  various  sizes,  but  many 
finely  cut  at  the  angles,  and  is  probably  much  older  than  the  ex- 
terior wall,  which  bears  the  appearance  of  as  great  antiquity  as  the 
pyramids.  In  order  to  find  the  basis  of  the  pyramid  on  this  side, 
and  to  ascertain  whether  there  were  any  communication  between 
it  and  the  temple,  I  had  to  cut  through  all  the  material  there 
accumulated,  which  rose  above  forty  feet  from  the  basis,  and  con- 
sisted of  large  blocks  of  stone  and  mortar,  from  the  coating,  as  on 
the  north  side.  At  last  we  reached  the  basis,  and  1  perceived  a  flat 
pavement  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock.  I  caused  all  that  was  before  me 
to  be  cut  in  a  right  line  from  the  basis  of  the  pyramid  to  the  temple? 

*  In  spring  and  summer,  very  heavy  dews  fall  at  night. 


262  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

and  traced  the  pavement  quite  to  the  back  of  it,  so  that  there  was 
evidently  a  spacious  pavement  from  the  temple  to  the  pyramid; 
and  I  do  not  hesitate  to  declare  my  opinion,  that  the  same  pavement 
goes  all  round  the  pyramid.  It  appeared  to  me,  that  the  sphinx, 
the  temple,  and  the  pyramid,  were  all  three  erected  at  the  same 
time,  as  they  all  appear  to  be  in  one  line,  and  of  equal  antiquity. 
On  the  north  side  the  work  advanced  towards  the  basis ;  a  great 
number  of  large  stones  had  been  removed,  and  a  great  part  of  the 
face  of  the  pyramid  was  uncovered,  but  still  there  was  no  appearance 
of  any  entrance,  or  the  smallest  mark  to  indicate  that  there  ever 
had  been  one. 

The  Arabs  had  great  confidence  in  the  hopes  I  had  excited 

among  them,  that  if  any  entrance  into  the  pyramid  were  found,  I 

would  give  great  bakshis,  in  addition  to  the  advantage  they  would 

derive  from  other  strangers.    But  after  many  vain  expectations,  and 

much  hard  labour  in  removing  huge  masses  of  stone,  and  cutting 

the  mortar,  which  was  so  hard  that  their  hatchets  were  nearly  all 

broken,  they  began  to  flag  in  their  prospect  of  finding  any  thing,  and 

I  was  about  to  become  an  object  of  ridicule  for  making  the  attempt 

to  penetrate  a  place,  which  appeared  to  them,  as  well  as  to  more 

civilized  people,  a  mass  of  solid  stone.     However,  as  long  as  I  paid 

them  they  continued  their  work,  though  with  much  less  zeal.     My 

hopes  did  not  forsake  me,  in  spite  of  all  the  difficulties  I  saw,  and 

the  little  appearance  of  making  the  discovery  of  an  entrance  into 

the  pyramid.     Still  I  observed,  as  we  went  on  with  our  work,  that 

the  stones  on  that  spot  were  not  so  consolidated  as  those  on  the  sides 

of  them,  and  this  circumstance  made  me  determine  to  proceed,  till  I 

should  be  persuaded  that  I  was  wrong  in  my  conjecture.    At  last,  on 

the  18th  of  February,  after  sixteen  days  of  fruitless  labour,  one  of 

the  Arabian  workmen  perceived  a  small  clunk  between  two  stones 

of  the  pyramid.     At  this  he  was  greatly  rejoiced,  thinking  we  had 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  £cc.  263 

found  the  entrance  so  eagerly  sought  for.  I  perceived  the  aperture 
was  small,  but  I  thrust  a  long  palm-stick  into  it  upwards  of  two 
yards.  Encouraged  by  this  circumstance,  the  Arabs  resumed  their 
vigour  on  the  work,  and  great  hopes  were  entertained  among  them. 
Thus  it  served  my  purpose,  as  the  work  now  went  on  briskly.  I 
was  aware,  that  the  entrance  to  the  pyramid  could  not  be  between 
two  stones  in  this  manner ;  but  I  was  in  hopes,  that  the  aperture 
would  furnish  some  clew  by  which  the  right  entrance  would  be  dis- 
covered. Proceeding  farther,  I  perceived,  that  one  of  the  stones, 
apparently  fixed  in  the  pyramid,  was  in  fact  loose.  I  had  it  re- 
moved the  same  day,  and  found  an  opening  leading  to  the  interior. 
Tins  sort  of  rough  entrance  was  not  more  than  three  feet  wide,  and 
was  choked  up  with  smaller  stones  and  sand,  which  being  removed, 
it  proved  to  be  much  wider  within.  A  second  and  third  day  were 
employed  in  clearing  this  place  ;  but  the  farther  we  advanced,  the 
more  materials  we  found.  On  the  fourth  day  I  observed,  that  sand 
and  stones  were  falling  from  the  upper  part  of  this  cavity,  which 
surprised  me  not  a  little.  At  last  I  found,  that  there  was  a  passage 
from  the  outside  of  the  pyramid  by  a  higher  aperture,  which  ap- 
parently was  thought  to  have  had  no  communication  with  any 
cavity.  When  all  the  rubbish  was  taken  out,  and  the  place  cleared, 
I  continued  the  work  in  the  lower  part  beneath  our  feet ;  and  in 
two  days  more  we  came  to  an  opening  inward.  Having  made  it 
wide  enough,  I  took  a  candle  in  my  hand,  and,  looking  in,  perceived 
a  spacious  cavity,  of  which  I  could  not  form  any  conjecture.  Having 
caused  the  entrance  to  be  cleared  of  the  sand  and  stones,  I  found  a 
tolerably  spacious  place,  bending  its  course  towards  the  centre.  It 
is  evidently  a  forced  passage,  executed  by  some  powerful  hand,  and 
appears  intended  to  find  a  May  to  the  centre  of  the  pyramid. 
Some  of  the  stones,  which  are  of  an  enormous  size,  are  cut  through, 


264  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

some  have  been  taken  out,  and  others  are  on  the  point  of  falling  from 
their  old  places  for  want  of  support.  Incredible  must  have  been  the 
labour  in  making  such  a  cavity,  and  it  is  evident,  that  it  was  continued 
farther  on  towards  the  centre  ;  but  the  upper  part  had  fallen  in,  and 
filled  up  the  cavity  to  such  a  degree,  that  it  was  impossible  for  us  to 
proceed  any  farther  than  a  hundred  feet.  Half  this  distance  from  the 
entrance  is  another  cavity,  which  descends  forty  feet  (See  Plate  11), 
in  an  irregular  manner,  but  still  turns  towards  the  centre,  which  no 
doubt  was  the  point  intended  by  the  persons  who  made  the  ex- 
cavation. To  introduce  many  men  to  work  in  this  place  was  dan- 
gerous, for  several  of  the  stones  above  our  heads  were  on  the  point 
of  falling ;  some  were  suspended  only  by  their  corners,  which  stuck 
between  other  stones,  and  with  the  least  touch  would  have  fallen, 
and  crushed  any  one  that  happened  to  be  under  them.  I  set  a  few 
men  to  work,  but  was  soon  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  ad- 
vancing any  farther  in  that  excavation.  In  one  of  the  passages 
below,  one  of  the  men  narrowly  escaped  being  crushed  to  pieces. 
A  large  block  of  stone,  no  less  than  six  feet  long  and  four  wide,  fell 
from  the  top,  while  the  man  was  digging  under  it ;  but  fortunately 
it  rested  on  two  other  stones,  one  on  each  side  of  him,  higher  than 
himself,  as  he  was  sitting  at  his  work.  The  man  was  so  incarcerated, 
that  we  had  some  difficulty  in  getting  him  out ;  yet,  happily,  he 
received  no  other  injury  than  a  slight  bruise  on  his  back.  The 
falling  of  this  stone  moved  many  others  in  this  passage :  indeed,  they 
were  so  situated,  that  I  thought  it  prudent  to  retreat  out  of  the 
pyramid,  or  we  might  have  reason  to  repent  when  too  late ;  for  the 
danger  was  not  only  from  what  might  fall  upon  us,  but  also  from 
what  might  fall  in  our  way,  close  up  the  passage,  and  thus  bury  us  alive. 
My  expectation  in  this  passage  was  not  great,  as  I  perceived  from 
the  beginning  it  could  not  be  the  true  entrance  into  the  pyramid, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  265 

though  I  had  strong  hopes  that  it  would  lead  to  some  clew  for  the 
discovery  of  the  real  entrance  ;  but,  alas !  it  gave  me  none,  and 
I  remained  as  ignorant  of  it  as  I  was  before  I  began. 

Having  spent  so  many  days  at  the  pyramids  without  being  dis- 
covered by  any  of  the  people  at  Cairo,  I  did  not  expect,  that  my 
retreat  could  be  concealed  much  longer,  as  there  were  constantly 
Franks  from  Cairo  making  a  Sunday's  excursion  to  the  pyramids,  or 
travellers,  who,  of  course,  made  it  a  point  to  see  these  wonders  on 
their  first  arrival  at  the  metropolis.  In  fact,  the  very  day  I  was 
to  have  quitted  this  work,  I  perceived,  in  the  afternoon,  some 
people  on  the  top  of  the  first  pyramid.  I  had  no  doubt  they  were 
Europeans,  as  the  Arabs  or  Turks  never  go  up,  unless  to  accom- 
pany somebody,  to  gain  money.  They  saw  part  of  my  men  at 
work  at  the  second  pyramid,  and  concluded  that  none  but  Eu- 
ropeans could  be  conducting  such  an  operation.  They  fired  a  pistol 
as  a  signal,  and  I  returned  another.  They  then  descended  the 
angle  which  led  towards  us ;  and  on  their  arrival  proved  to  be 
Monsieur  L'Abbe  de  Forbin,  who  had  accompanied  his  cousin,  the 
celebrated  Count,  into  Egypt,  but  did  not  proceed  higher.  With 
him  were  the  father  superior  of  the  convent  of  Terra  Santa,  Mr. 
Costa,  an  engineer,  and  Mr.  Gaspard,  vice-consul  of  France,  by 
whom  I  was  introduced  to  the  Abbe.  They  all  entered  into  the 
newly  discovered  passage ;  but  it  gave  the  Abbe  less  pleasure 
than  a  cup  of  coffee,  which  he  honoured  me  by  accepting  in  my 
humble  tent.  Naturally,  after  such  a  visit,  all  the  Franks  in  Cairo 
knew  what  I  was  doing  ;  and  not  a  day  passed  without  my  having 
some  visitors. 

I  was  determined  to  proceed  still  farther  with  my  researches, 
the  recent  disappointment  making  me  rather  more  obstinate  than 
I  was  before.  1  had  given  a  day's  rest  to  the  Arabs,  which  1  dedicated 
to  a  closer  inspection  of  the  pyramid.     It  often  happens,  that  a 

M   M 


266  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

man  is  so  much  ingulfed  in  the  pursuit  of  his  views,  as  to  be  in 
danger  of  losing  himself,  if  he  do  not  quickly  find  the  means  either 
of  an  honourable  retreat,  or  of  attaining  the  accomplishment  of  his 
intended  purpose.  Such  was  my  case.  The  success  of  my  discovery 
of  the  false  passage  was  considered  as  a  failure.  I  cared  little  what 
was  thought  of  it,  but  I  was  provoked  at  having  been  deceived  by 
those  marks,  which  led  me  to  the  forced  passage,  with  the  loss  of  so 
much  time  and  labour.  However,  I  did  not  despair.  I  strictly 
noticed  the  situation  of  the  entrance  into  the  first  pyramid,  and 
plainly  saw,  that  it  was  not  in  the  centre  of  the  pyramid.  I  observed 
that  the  passage  ran  in  a  straight  line  from  the  outside  of  the 
pyramid  to  the  east  side  of  the  king's  chamber  ;  and  this  chamber 
being  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  pyramid,  the  entrance  consequently 
must  be  as  far  from  the  middle  of  the  face  as  the  distance  from  the 
centre  of  the  chamber  to  the  east  side  of  it. 

Having  made  this  clear  and  simple  observation,  I  found,  that,  if 
there  were  any  chamber  at  all  in  the  second  pyramid,  the  entrance 
or  passage  could  not  be  on  the  spot  where  I  had  excavated,  which 
was  in  the  centre,  but  calculating  by  the  passage  in  the  first  pyramid, 
the  entrance  into  the  second  would  be  near  thirty  feet  to  the  east. 

Satisfied  with  this  calculation,  I  repaired  to  the  second  pyramid 
to  examine  the  mass  of  rubbish.  There  I  was  not  a  little  astonished 
when  I  perceived  the  same  marks,  which  I  had  seen  on  the  other 
spot  in  the  centre,  about  thirty  feet  distant  from  where  I  stood. 
This  gave  me  no  little  delight,  and  hope  returned  to  cherish  my 
pyramidical  brains.  I  observed  in  this  spot  also,  that  the  stones 
and  mortar  were  not  so  compact  as  on  the  east  side,  which  mark  had 
given  me  so  much  encouragement  to  proceed  in  the  first  attempt ; 
but  what  increased  my  hopes  was  an  observation  I  made  on  the 
exterior  of  the  front  where  the  forced  passage  is.  1  observed  the 
stones  had  been  removed  several  feet  from  the  surface  of  the  pyra- 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  267 

mid,  which  I  ascertained  by  drawing  a  line  with  the  coating  above 
to  the  basis  below,  and  found  the  concavity  was  inclined  to  be 
deeper  towards  the  spot  where  I  intended  to  make  my  new  at- 
tempt. Any  traveller,  who  shall  hereafter  visit  the  pyramids,  may 
plainly  perceive  this  concavity  above  the  true  entrance.  Such  has 
been  the  effect  of  two  different  hints  ;  first  my  old  guide  from 
Thebes,  I  mean  the  spots  where  the  stony  matter  is  not  so  compact 
as  the  surrounding  mass ;  and,  secondly,  the  concavity  of  the  pyra- 
mid over  the  place  where  the  entrance  might  have  been  expected 
to  be  found,  according  to  the  distance  of  the  entrance  into  the  first 
pyramid  from  its  centre. 

I  immediately  summoned  the  Arabs  to  work  the  next  day. 
They  were  pleased  at  my  recommencing  the  task,  not  in  hopes  of 
finding  the  entrance  into  the  pyramid,  but  for  the  continuation  of 
the  pay  they  of  course  were  to  receive.  As  to  expectation  that  the 
entrance  might  be  found,  they  had  none  ;  and  I  often  heard  them 
utter,  in  a  low  voice,  the  word  " magnoon"  in  plain  English,  mad- 
man. I  pointed  out  to  the  Arabs  the  spot  where  they  had  to  dig, 
and  such  was  my  measurement,  that  I  was  right  within  two  feet,  in 
a  straight  direction,  as  to  the  entrance  into  the  first  passage,  as  will 
be  seen  from  Plates  9  and  10 ;  and  I  have  the  pleasure  of  reckoning 
this  day  as  fortunate,  being  that  on  which  I  discovered  the  entrance 
into  the  great  tomb  of  Psammethis  at  Thebes.  The  Arabs  began 
their  work,  and  the  rubbish  proved  to  be  as  hard  as  that  of  the  first 
excavation,  with  this  addition,  that  we  found  larger  blocks  of  stone 
in  our  way,  which  had  belonged  to  the  pyramid,  besides  the  falling 
of  the  coating.     The  stones  increased  in  size  as  we  went  on. 

A  few  days  after  the  visit  of  the  Abbe  de  Forbin  I  was  surprised 
by  the  appearance  of  another  European  traveller.  It  was  the 
Chevalier  Frediani,  who,  on  his  return  from  the  second  cataract  of 
the  Nile,  came  to  visit  the  great  pyramids.     I  had  known  him  at 

mm2 


268  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Thebes  on  his  ascending  the  Nile,  and  was  much  pleased  to  see  him, 
as  I  thought  he  might  be  an  impartial  spectator  of  the  event  of  my 
operations,  which  in  fact  he  was.  He  greatly  approved  of  my  under- 
taking, but  after  being  two  days  with  me  was  ready  to  take  his  de- 
parture. I  suppose  he  had  as  much  expectation,  that  I  should  open 
the  pyramid,  as  the  Arabs  who  named  me  the  magneton.  It  hap- 
pened, that  on  the  very  day  he  was  to  set  off*  for  Cairo,  I  perceived 
in  the  excavation  a  large  block  of  granite,  inclining  downward  at 
the  same  angle  as  the  passage  into  the  first  pyramid,  and  pointing 
towards  the  centre.  I  requested  the  Chevalier  to  stay  till  the 
morrow,  thinking  perhaps  he  might  have  the  pleasure  of  being  one 
of  the  first  who  saw  the  entrance  into  the  pyramid.  He  consented, 
and  I  was  pleased  to  have  a  countryman  of  my  own  to  be  a  wit- 
ness of  what  passed  on  this  important  occasion.  The  discovery 
of  the  first  granite  stone  occurred  on  the  28th  of  February,  and  on 
the  1  st  of  March  we  uncovered  three  large  blocks  of  granite,  two 
on  each  side,  and  one  on  the  top,  all  in  an  inclined  direction  towards 
the  centre.  My  expectation  and  hope  increased,  as  to  all  appear- 
ance, this  must  prove  to  be  the  object  of  my  search.  I  was  not 
mistaken,  for  on  the  next  day,  the  2d  of  March,  at  noon,  we  came 
at  last  to  the  right  entrance  into  the  pyramid.  The  Arabs,  whose 
expectation  had  also  increased  at  the  appearance  of  the  three 
stones,  were  delighted  at  having  found  something  new  to  show  to 
the  visitors,  and  get  bakshis  from  them.  Having  cleared  the  front 
of  the  three  stones,  the  entrance  proved  to  be  a  passage  four  feet 
high,  three  feet  six  inches  wide,  formed  of  large  blocks  of  granite, 
which  descended  towards  the  centre  for  a  hundred  and  four  feet 
five  inches  at  an  angle  of  twenty-six  degrees.  Nearly  all  tins  passage 
was  filled  up  with  large  stones,  which  had  fallen  from  the  upper 
part,  and  as  the  passage  is  inclined  downwards,  they  slid  on  till 
some  larger  than  the  rest  stopped  the  way. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  269 

I  had  much  ado  to  have  all  the  stones  drawn  out  of  the  passage, 
■which  was  rilled  up  to  the  entrance  of  the  chamber.  It  took  the 
remainder  of  this  day  and  part  of  the  next  to  clear  it,  and  at  last 
we  reached  a  portcullis.  At  first  sight  it  appeared  to  be  a  fixed 
block  of  stone,  which  stared  me  in  the  face,  and  said  ne  plus  ultra, 
putting  an  end  to  all  my  projects  as  I  thought ;  for  it  made  a  close 
joint  with  the  groove  at  each  side,  and  on  the  top  it  seemed  as  firm 
as  those  which  formed  the  passage  itself.  On  a  close  inspection 
however  I  perceived,  that,  at  the  bottom,  it  was  raised  about  eight 
inches  from  the  lower  part  of  the  groove,  which  is  cut  beneath  to 
receive  it;  and  I  found,  by  this  circumstance,  that  the  large  block 
before  me  was  no  more  than  a  portcullis  of  granite,  one  foot  three 
inches  thick. 

Having  observed  a  small  aperture  at  the  upper  part  of  the 
portcullis,  I  thrust  a  long  piece  of  barley  straw  into  it,  and  it  entered 
upwards  of  three  feet,  which  convinced  me,  that  there  was  a 
vacuum  ready  to  receive  the  portcullis.  The  raising  of  it  was  a 
work  of  no  small  consideration.  The  passage  is  only  four  feet  high, 
and  three  feet  six  inches  wide.  When  two  men  are  in  it  abreast  of 
each  other  they  cannot  move,  and  it  required  several  men  to  raise  a 
piece  of  granite  not  less  than  six  feet  high,  five  feet  wide,  and  one 
foot  three  inches  thick.  The  levers  could  not  be  very  long,  other- 
wise there  was  not  space  in  the  four  feet  height  to  work  with  them  ; 
and  if  they  were  short,  I  could  not  employ  men  enough  to  raise  the 
portculbs.  The  only  method  to  be  taken  was,  to  raise  it  a  little  at 
a  time ;  and  by  putting  some  stones  in  the  grooves  on  each  side,  to 
support  the  portcullis  while  changing  the  fulcrum  of  the  levers,  it 
was  raised  high  enough  for  a  man  to  pass.  An  Arab  then  entered 
with  a  candle,  and  returned  saying,  that  the  place  within  was  very 
fine.  I  continued  to  raise  the  portcullis,  and  at  last  made  the 
entrance  large  enough  to  squeeze  myself  in ;  and  after  thirty  days 


270  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

exertion  I  had  the  pleasure  of  finding  myself  in  the  way  to  the  central 
chamber  of  one  of  the  two  great  pyramids  of  Egypt,  which  have  long 
been  the  admiration  of  beholders.  The  Chevalier  Frediani  folbwed 
me,  and  after  passing  under  the  portcullis  we  entered  a  passage  not 
higher  or  wider  than  the  first.  It  is  twenty-two  feet  seven  inches  long, 
and  the  works  including  the  portcullis  occupy  six  feet  eleven  inches 
in  all.  Where  the  granite  work  finishes  at  the  end  of  this  passage, 
there  is  a  perpendicular  shaft  of  fifteen  feet,  and  at  each  side  of  the 
passage,  an  excavation  in  the  solid  rock,  one  of  which,  on  the  right 
as  you  enter,  runs  thirty  feet  in  an  upward  direction,  approaching 
the  end  of  the  lower  part  of  the  forced  passage,  as  will  be  seen  in 
Plates  9  and  10.  Before  us  we  had  a  long  passage  running  in  a 
horizontal  direction  toward  the  centre.  We  descended  the  shaft  by 
means  of  a  rope.  At  the  bottom  of  it  I  perceived  another  passage 
running  downward  at  the  same  angle  of  26°  as  that  above,  and 
toward  the  north.  As  my  first  object  was  the  centre  of  the 
pyramid,  I  advanced  that  way,  and  ascended  an  inclined  passage, 
which  brought  me  to  a  horizontal  one,  that  led  toward  the  centre. 
1  observed,  that  after  we  entered  within  the  portcullis,  the  passages 
were  all  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock.  The  passage  leading  toward  the 
centre  is  five  feet  eleven  inches  high,  and  three  feet  six  inches 
wide. 

As  we  advanced  farther  on  we  found  the  sides  of  this  passage 
covered  with  arborizations  of  nitre  ;  some  projecting  in  ropes,  some 
not  unlike  the  skin  of  a  white  lamb,  and  others  so  long  as  to 
resemble  an  endive-leaf.  I  reached  the  door  at  the  centre  of  a 
large  chamber.  (See  Plate  12.)  I  walked  slowly  two  or  three  paces, 
and  then  stood  still  to  contemplate  the  place  were  I  was.  What- 
ever it  might  be,  I  certainly  considered  myself  in  the  centre  of  that 
pyramid,  which  from  time  immemorial  had  been  the  subject  of  the 
obscure  conjectures  of  many  hundred  travellers,  both  ancient  and 


IN  EGYPT,   NUBIA,  &c.  271 

modern.  My  torch,  formed  of  a  few  wax  candles,  gave  but  a  faint 
light ;  I  could,  however,  clearly  distinguish  the  principal  objects. 
I  naturally  turned  my  eyes  to  the  west  end  of  the  chamber,  looking 
for  the  sarcophagus,  which  I  strongly  expected  to  see  in  the  same 
situation  as  that  in  the  first  pyramid ;  but  I  was  disappointed  when 
I  saw  nothing  there.  The  chamber  has  a  painted  ceiling;  and 
many  of  the  stones  had  been  removed  from  their  places,  evidently 
by  some  one  in  search  of  treasure.  On  my  advancing  toward  the 
west  end,  I  was  agreeably  surprised  to  find,  that  there  was  a  sarco- 
phagus buried  on  a  level  with  the  floor. 

By  this  time  the  Chevalier  Frediani  had  entered  also ;  and  we 
took  a  general  survey  of  the  chamber,  which  I  found  to  be  forty-six 
feet  three  inches  long,  sixteen  feet  three  inches  wide,  and  twenty- 
three  feet  six  inches  high.  It  is  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock  from  the 
floor  to  the  roof,  which  is  composed  of  large  blocks  of  calcareous 
stone,  meeting  in  the  centre,  and  forming  a  roof  of  the  same  slope 
as  the  pyramid  itself.  The  sarcophagus  is  eight  feet  long,  three 
feet  six  inches  wide,  and  two  feet  three  inches  deep  in  the  inside. 
It  is  surrounded  by  large  blocks  of  granite,  apparently  to  prevent 
its  removal,  which  could  not  be  effected  without  great  labour. 
The  lid  had  been  broken  at  the  side,  so  that  the  sarcophagus  was 
half  open.  It  is  of  the  finest  granite  ;  but,  like  the  other  in  the 
first  pyramid,  there  is  not  one  hieroglyphic  on  it. 

Looking  at  the  inside,  I  perceived  a  great  quantity  of  earth  and 
stones,  but  did  not  observe  the  bones  among  the  rubbish  till  the 
next  day,  as  my  attention  was  principally  bent  in  search  of  some 
inscription  that  would  throw  light  on  the  subject  of  this  pyramid. 
We  examined  every  part  of  the  walls,  and  observed  many  scrawls 
executed  with  charcoal,  but  in  unknown  characters,  and  nearly 
imperceptible.     They  rubbed  off  into  dust  at  the  slightest  touch ; 


9,19,  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

and  on  the  wall  at  the  west  end  of  the  chamber  I  perceived  an  in- 
scription in  Arabic,  as  follows : 

and  the  various  interpretations  given  of  it  compel  me  to  explain 
some  points,  which  will  perhaps  lead  to  a  satisfactory  explanation. 
It  appears  to  me,  that  all  the  difficulty  lies  in  the  last  letters  of  the 
inscription,  which  are  supposed  to  be  obscure.  This  indeed  is  the 
fact ;  but  I  must  say,  that  these  letters  were  so  blotted  on  the 
wall,  that  they  were  scarcely  visible.  The  transcriber  was  a  Copt> 
whom  I  had  brought  from  Cairo  for  the  purpose,  as  I  would  not 
trust  to  my  own  pen ;  and  not  being  satisfied  of  his  protestations 
of  accuracy,  though  it  was  copied  under  ray  own  eyes,  I  invited 
many  other  persons,  who  were  considered  as  the  best  skilled  in  the 
Arabic  language  of  any  in  Cairo,  and  requested  them  to  compare 
the  copy  with  the  original  on  the  wall.  They  found  it  perfectly 
correct,  except  the  concluding  word,  which  indeed  appeared  obscure ; 
but  if  it  be  considered  how  much  that  word  resembles  the  right  one, 
we  shall  find  a  correct  sense,  and  the  whole  inscription  made  out. 

Translation  of  the  Inscription  by  Mr.  Salame. 

"  The  Master  Mohammed  Ahmed,  lapicide,  has  opened  them  ; 
and  the  Master  Othman  attended  this  (opening) ;  and  the  King 
Alij  Mohammed  at  first  (from  the  beginning)  to  the  closing  up."  * 

*  The  Arabic  to  which  I  gave  the  meaning  of  these  last  words,  "  to  the  closi?ig  up," 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  273 

I  must  add,  that  the  circumstance  of  the  pyramid  having  been 
again  closed  up  agrees  with  what  I  have  said  of  my  finding  it  so. 

On  several  parts  of  the  wall  the  nitre  had  formed  many  beautiful 
arborizations  like  those  in  the  passage,  but  much  larger  and  stronger. 
Some  were  six  inches  long,  resembling  in  shape  a  large  endive  leaf, 
as  I  mentioned  before.  Under  one  of  the  blocks  that  had  been 
removed,  I  found  something  like  the  thick  part  of  a  hatchet,  but  so 
rusty,  that  it  had  lost  its  shape.  At  the  north  and  south  sides  are 
two  holes,  which  run  in  an  horizontal  direction,  like  those  that  are 
seen  in  the  first  pyramid,  but  higher  up. 

Returning  out  of  this  chamber  we  reached  the  passage  below. 
At  the  bottom  of  the  perpendicular  shaft  were  so  many  stones  as 
nearly  to  choke  up  its  entrance,  and  after  removing  these  we  found 
the  passage  running  to  the  north,  at  the  same  inclination  as  above, 
an  angle  of  26°,  as  is  to  be  seen  in  Plate  10.  This  passage  is 
forty-eight  feet  six  inches  in  length,  when  it  joins  an  horizontal 
passage  of  fifty-five  feet  still  running  north.  Half-way  up  this 
passage  on  the  right  is  a  recess  eleven  feet  long  and  six  feet  deep. 
On  the  left,  opposite  to  it,  is  another  passage,  running  twenty-two 
feet  with  a  descent  of  26°  towards  the  west.  Before  we  proceeded 
any  farther  toward  the  north,  we  descended  this  passage,  and  entered 
a  chamber  thirty-two  feet  long,  nine  feet  nine  inches  wide,  and 
eight  feet  six  inches  high.  This  chamber  contains  many  small  blocks 
of  stone,  some  not  more  than  two  feet  in  length.  It  has  a  pointed 
roof  like  that  before  mentioned,  though  it  is  cut  out  of  the  solid 

is  not  spelled  correctly  in  the  paper  I  saw,  a  fault  which  I  attribute  to  the  transcriber 
from  the  stone.     It  ought  to  be     •■v\*  \)  9   instead  of  ^-,\-\\X)  3  t  the  latter  word 

not  being  to  be  found  in  the  Arabic  language. 

The  words  between  the  parentheses  in  the  translation  are  not  in  the  original. 

A.  S. 
N  N 


274.  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

rock ;  for  it  is  to  be  understood,  as  I  before  observed,  that,  after 
we  entered  through  the  portcullis,  all  the  passages,  and  the  large 
chamber,  as  high  as  the  roof,  are  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock  of  cal- 
careous stone.     On  the  walls  and  roof  of  this  chamber  are  several 
unknown  inscriptions,  as  there  are  in  the  upper  chamber.     They 
are  perhaps  Coptic.    Keascending  into  the  horizontal  passage,  at  the 
end  of  it  we  found  grooves  for  a  portcullis  like  the  former ;  but  the 
stone  of  granite  which  served  for  this  purpose  had  been  taken  down, 
and  is  to  be  seen  under  the  rubbish  and  stones  near  the  place. 
Passing  the  portcullis  we  entered  into  a  passage,  which  ascended  in 
a  direction  parallel  with  that  above,  as  in  Plate  10.     This  passage 
runs  up  forty-seven  feet  six  inches.     Here  we  found  a  large  block 
of  stone,  placed  there  from  the  upper  part ;  and  by  calculation  I 
found,  that  this  passage  ran  out  of  the  pyramid  at  its  basis,  as,  from 
the  upper  part  of  this  square  block,  I  could  perceive  other  stones, 
which  filled  up  the  passage  to  the  entrance,  so  that  this  pyramid  has 
two  entrances  to  it.     Half-way  up  the  horizontal  passage,  which 
leads  into  the  large  chamber,  is  some  mason's  work  ;  but  I  believe  it 
to  be  only  the  filling  up  of  a  natural  cavity  in  the  rock. 

Having  made  all  my  observations,  we  came  out  of  the  pyramid 
with  no  small  degree  of  satisfaction  ;  and  I  was  highly  gratified  with 
the  result  of  my  labour,  of  very  little  more  than  a  month,  the 
expense  of  which  did  not  amount  in  all  to  =£150,  though  I  had 
accomplished  a  task,  which  was  supposed  would  have  required  several 
thousands. 

The  Chevalier  Frediani  went  to  Cairo  the  same  day,  and  the 
news  of  the  opening  of  the  pyramid  soon  brought  the  Franks  to 
visit  its  interior.  As  I  had  no  fear  that  the  Arabian  women  would 
break  the  pyramid,  I  left  the  entrance  open  (jiro  bono  publico);  and  in 
that  place  where  the  perpendicular  descent,  just  inside  the  portcullis, 
is,  I  made  a  stone  step  for  the  accommodation  of  visitors,  leaving 
half  of  the  passage  to  enter  into  the  lower  chamber. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  275 

A  young  man  of  the  name  of  Pieri,  employed  in  the  counting- 
house  of  Briggs  and  Walmas  in  Cairo,  came  the  next  day  to  visit 
the  pyramid,  and,  having  rummaged  the  rubbish  inside  of  the  sar- 
cophagus, found  a  piece  of  bone,  which  we  supposed  to  belong  to  a 
human  skeleton.     On  searching  farther,  we  found  several  pieces, 
which,  having  been  sent  to  London,  proved  to  be  the  bones  of  a  bull. 
Some  consequential  persons,  however,  who  would  not  scruple  to 
sacrifice  a  point  in  history,   rather  than  lose  a  bon  mot,  thought 
themselves  mighty  clever  in  baptizing  the  said  bones  those  of  a  cow, 
merely  to  raise  a  joke.     So  much  for  their  taste  for  antiquity.     It 
has  been  stated  also,  that  it  might  be  supposed  these  large  sar- 
cophagi were  made  to  contain  the  bones  of  bulls,  as  the  sarcophagus 
which  we  found  in  the  tombs  of  the  kings  at  Thebes  was  of  enormous 
size,  and  more  fit  for  a  bull  than  a  human  body.     I  cannot  agree 
in  this  opinion,  however,  for  if  the  person  who  made  the  observation 
had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  and  examining  the  cases  and  sarcophagi 
in  which  the  Egyptians  were  buried,  he  would  find,  that  the  better 
classes  of  people  had  cases  within  cases,  some  nearly  double  the 
size  requisite  to  contain  one  person ;  and  it  is  natural  therefore  to 
suppose,  that  the  kings  of  Egypt  had  more  cases  than  one  or  two, 
consequently  the  sarcophagus,  which  was  the  outer  case,  must  have 
l>een  much  larger  than  the  rest,  to  contain  them  all. 

Outside  of  the  pyramid  I  observed  the  rock  surrounding  it  on 
the  north  and  west  sides  to  be  on  a  level  with  the  upper  part  of 
the  chamber ;  and,  as  the  rock  is  evidently  cut  all  round,  it  appeared 
to  me,  that  the  stones  taken  from  it  must  have  been  applied  to  the 
erection  of  the  pyramid.  Accordingly  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the 
stones  which  seem  to  form  these  enormous  edifices  were  not  all 
taken  from  the  east  side  of  the  Nile,  as  is  supposed  and  mentioned 
by  ancient  writers.  I  cannot  conceive  why  the  Egyptians  should 
be  thought  so  simple,  as  to  fetch  stones  at  seven  or  eight  miles 

n  n  2 


276  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

distance,  and  across  the  Nile,  when  they  could  have  them  from 
much  nearer  points  ;  indeed  from  the  very  spot  where  the  pyramids 
stand.  It  is  evident,  that  stones  of  an  enormous  size  have  been  cut 
out  of  the  very  rocks  around  the  pyramids  ;  and  for  what  purpose 
were  these  stones  extracted?  It  might  as  well  be  asserted,  that  they 
were  cut  to  build  old  Babylon  of  Egypt,  or  to  fill  up  the  vacancies 
in  the  quarries  of  the  Mokattam.  If  any  traveller  will  go  within 
less  than  half  a  mile  of  the  pyramids,  particularly  on  the  east  and 
south  sides,  he  may  see  many  places,  where  the  rock  has  been  for- 
merly quarried  to  a  great  length ;  and  he  will  find  that  there  is 
stone  enough  to  build  many  other  pyramids  if  required.  It  is  true, 
that  Herodotus  says,  the  stones  to  erect  the  pyramids  were  brought 
from  quarries  on  the  other  side  of  the  Nile;  but  I  firmly  believe  he 
was  misinformed  on  this  subject,  unless  what  he  asserts  is  to  be 
understood  of  the  granite  alone.  And  as  to  the  causeways  in 
front  of  the  pyramids,  said  to  have  been  made  to  convey  the 
stones  for  the  erection  of  these  masses,  I  believe  they  were  in- 
tended for  the  accommodation  of  visitors,  particularly  at  the  time 
of  high  Nile  ;  for  if  they  were  only  to  convey  stones,  the  labour  of 
making  them  must  have  been  nearly  equal  to  the  erection  of  the 
pyramids. 

So  much  has  been  already  said  about  the  pyramids,  that  very  little 
is  left  to  observe  respecting  them.  Their  great  appearance  of  an- 
tiquity certainly  leads  us  to  suppose,  that  they  must  have  been  con- 
structed at  an  earlier  period  than  any  other  edifices  to  be  seen  in 
Egypt.  It  is  somewhat  singular,  that  Homer  does  not  mention  them  ; 
but  this  is  no  proof,  that  they  did  not  exist  in  his  time  ;  on  the  con- 
trary, it  may  be  supposed  they  were  so  generally  known,  that  he 
thought  it  useless  to  speak  of  them.  It  appears,  that  in  the  time  of 
Herodotus  as  little  was  known  of  the  second  pyramid  as  before  the 
late  opening,  with  this  exception,  that  in  his  time  the  second  pyramid 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  277 

was  nearly  in  the  state  in  which  it  was  left  when  closed  by  the 
builders,  who  must  have  covered  the  entrance  with  the  coating,  so 
that  it  might  not  be  perceived.  But  at  the  time  I  was  fortunate 
enough  to  find  my  way  into  it,  the  entrance  was  concealed  by  the 
rubbish  of  the  coating,  which  must  have  been  nearly  perfect  at  the 
time  of  Herodotus :  notwithstanding  this  we  were  as  much  in  the 
dark  in  this  present  age,  as  he  was  in  his.  We  know,  however,  now, 
that  it  has  been  opened  by  some  of  the  rulers  or  chiefs  of  Egypt ; 
a  fact  that  affords  no  small  satisfaction  to  the  inquirer  on  the  subject 
of  these  monuments.  Some  persons,  who  would  rather  let  this  cir- 
cumstance remain  in  obscurity,  regretted,  that  I  should  have  found 
the  inscription  on  the  wall,  which  proved  it  to  have  been  opened 
at  so  late  a  period,  as  very  little  more  than  a  thousand  years  ago ; 
but  I  beg  them  to  recollect,  that  the  present  opening  has  not  only 
made  known  this  very  interesting  circumstance,  but  has  thrown 
much  light  on  the  manner  in  which  these  enormous  masses  were 
erected?  as  well  as  explained  the  occasion  of  them. 

The  circumstance  of  having  chambers  and  a  sarcophagus  (which 
undoubtedly  contained  the  remains  of  some  great  personage),  so 
uniform  with  those  in  the  other  pyramid,  I  think  leaves  very  little 
question,  but  that  they  were  erected  as  sepulchres ;  and  I  really 
wonder,  that  any  doubt  has  ever  existed,  considering  what  could 
be  learned  from  the  first  pyramid,  which  has  been  so  long  open. 
This  contains  a  spacious  chamber  with  a  sarcophagus  ;  the  passages 
are  of  such  dimensions  as  to  admit  nothing  larger  than  the  sar- 
cophagus ;  they  had  been  closely  shut  up  by  large  blocks  of  granite 
from  within,  evidently  to  prevent  the  removal  of  that  relic.  Ancient 
authors  are  pretty  well  agreed  in  asserting,  that  these  monuments 
were  erected  to  contain  the  remains  of  two  brothers,  Cheops  and 
Cephren,  kings  of  Egypt.  They  are  surrounded  by  other  smaller 
pyramids  intermixed  with  mausoleums  on  burial-grounds.  Many 
mummy-pits  have  been  continually  found  there ;  yet  with  all  these 


278  RESEARCHES   AND   OPERATIONS 

proofs,  it  lias  been  asserted,  that  they  were  erected  for  many  other 
purposes  than  the  true  one,  and  nearly  as  absurd  as  that  they  served 
for  granaries. 

Some  consider  them  as  built  for  astronomical  purposes,  but  there 
is  nothing  in  their  construction  to  favour  this  supposition.  Others 
maintain,  that  they  were  meant  for  the  performance  of  holy  cere- 
monies by  the  Egyptian  priests.  Any  thing  in  short  for  the  sake  of 
contradiction,  or  to  have  something  new  to  say,  finds  its  advocate. 
If  the  ancient  authors  had  advanced,  that  they  were  erected  for 
treasuries,  the  moderns  would  have  agreed  perhaps  more  in  con- 
formity with  the  truth,  that  they  were  made  for  sepulchres ;  and 
they  would  not  have  failed  to  see  plainly  those  circumstances,  which 
clearly  prove  the  facts,  and  which  are  not  noticed  as  they  ought 
to  be.  I  will  agree  with  others  thus  far,  that  the  Egyptians,  in 
erecting  these  enormous  masses,  did  not  fail  to  make  their  sides  due 
north  and  south,  and  consequently,  as  they  are  square,  due  east  and 
west.  Their  inclination  too  is  such  as  to  give  light  to  the  north 
side  at  the  time  of  the  solstice.  But  even  all  this  does  not  prove 
in  the  least,  that  they  were  erected  for  astronomical  purposes ;  though 
it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  Egyptians  connected  astronomy  with 
their  religious  ceremonies,  as  we  found  various  zodiacs,  not  only 
among  the  temples,  but  in  their  tombs  also. 

By  the  measurement  I  took  of  the  second  pyramid  I  found  it  to 
be  as  follows. 

Feet. 

The  basis 684 

Apotome  or  central  line  down  the  front,  from 

the  top  to  the  basis 568 

Perpendicular 456 

Coating  from  the  top  to  the  place  where  it 

ends 140 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  279 

The  circumstance  of  not  finding  hieroglyphics  in  or  out  of  it  makes 
it  appear,  that  they  were  erected  before  this  mode  of  writing  was 
invented ;  for,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  not  a  single  hieroglyphic  is 
found  in  all  these  enormous  masses.  Yet  I  must  beg  leave  to  remark 
a  circumstance,  which  perhaps  will  lead  to  the  conjecture,  that  it 
might  not  have  been  the  custom  of  the  Egyptians  in  that  part  of  the 
country,  who  might  perhaps  be  even  of  a  different  religion  from  their 
countrymen,  to  put  hieroglyphics  on  their  monuments;  for  there 
are  many  mausoleums  round  the  pyramids,  and  some  of  them  very 
extensive,  without  an  hieroglyphic  to  be  seen  within  or  without  them ; 
and  I  observed,  that  those  which  contain  chambers  with  hiero- 
glyphics are  evidently  of  a  later  date  than  the  former.  All  this 
would  seem  to  prove,  that  till  a  certain  period  subsequent  to  the 
building  of  the  pyramids  hieroglyphics  were  not  known.  But  what 
can  be  said  when  I  assure  the  reader,  that  in  one  of  these  mauso- 
leums, which  stands  on  the  west  of  the  first  pyramid,  and  which  is 
so  decayed  that  it  has  fallen  in,  and  is  in  a  very  ruinous  state,  I  saw 
and  made  others  observe  some  hieroglyphics  and  figures  reversed  in 
one  of  the  blocks,  which  formed  that  mausoleum  ;  and  the  hiero- 
glyphics so  preserved  within,  as  if  they  were  to  be  hidden  from  the 
view  ?  It  certainly  must  be  concluded,  that  this  stone  had  been 
employed  in  a  building,  which  was  adorned  with  hieroglyphics, 
and  consequently  proves,  that  they  were  known  previous  to  the 
erection  of  these  mausoleums,  though  they  were  without  any  of 
these  ornaments  or  inscriptions.  This  being  the  case,  it  may  be 
supposed,  that  the  people,  who  built  the  pyramids,  were  of  the  same 
way  of  thinking  as  those,  who  built  the  mausoleums  ;  consequently 
nothing  can  be  inferred  respecting  the  age  of  the  pyramids  from  the 
circumstance  of  their  not  having  any  hieroglyphics. 

It  has  been  supposed,  that  the  first  pyramid,  or  that  of  Cheops, 


280  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

was  not  coated.  I  must  agree  in  this  opinion,  for  there  is  not  the 
slightest  mark  remaining  of  any  coating.  As  to  the  coating  of  the 
second  pyramid,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  investigating  this  subject 
in  the  excavation  I  made  on  the  east  side  of  it,  where  I  found  the 
lower  part  as  rough  as  any  of  the  upper,  below  the  remaining 
coating,  which  confirms  the  account  of  Herodotus  in  this  respect, 
who  says,  that  the  coating  was  begun  from  above ;  and  I  believe 
myself  that  it  never  was  quite  finished  to  the  basis,  for  if  it  had,  I 
should  have  met  with  some  below,  as  the  accumulation  of  rubbish 
over  the  basis  would  have  kept  the  stones  in  their  places,  or  at  least 
enough  of  them  to  show  there  was  a  coating,  as  was  the  case  in 
the  third  pyramid,  of  which  I  shall  have  to  speak  presently. 

It  is  supposed,  that  the  inundation  of  the  Nile  surrounded  the 
pyramids,  so  that  they  remained  like  islands.  I  cannot  say  that  it 
was  not  so,  for  the  situation  of  the  pyramids  is  like  an  island  of 
rocks,  separated  from  those  on  the  west  only  by  a  valley  of  sand, 
which  might  naturally  have  been  accumulated  by  the  wind  in  the 
course  of  so  many  centuries.  I  think  we  cannot  have  a  stronger 
proof  of  this  than  the  sphinx  itself,  the  basis  of  which  is  so  much 
below  the  present  surface,  that  if  all  the  sand  around  the  pyra- 
mids were  on  a  level  with  it,  I  have  no  doubt  the  Nile  must 
have  run  round  them,  which  probably  was  the  case  in  the  early 
ages. 

Having  thus  finished  my  operation  on  the  second  pyramid,  I 
felt  a  great  inclination  to  have  a  cursory  view  of  the  third.  I 
observed,  that  some  one  had  made  an  attempt  to  penetrate  it  by 
excavations  on  the  east  side.  I  commenced  my  labours  on  the 
north  side,  and,  after  removing  a  great  quantity  of  materials,  found 
a  considerable  accumulation  of  enormous  blocks  of  granite,  which 
had  evidently  formed  the  coating. — Proceeding  yet  lower,   as   I 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  281 

cleared  away  the  rubbish  I  found,  that  part  of  the  coating  still  re- 
mained in  its  place  down  to  the  bases.  The  removal  of  these  blocks 
would  evidently  have  brought  me  to  the  entrance  into  the  pyramid, 
but  it  required  more  money  and  time  than  I  could  spare. 

By  this  time  the  consul,  who  was  at  Thebes,  hearing  of  the 
opening  of  the  pyramid,  wrote  to  me,  that  he  was  coming  down  the 
Nile ;  and  at  the  same  time  Lord  Belmore  and  family  arrived  at 
Cairo.  It  is  somewhat  singular,  and  I  mention  it  with  much  satis- 
faction, that  his  Lordship  arrived  at  Thebes  one  month  after  my 
discovery  of  the  celebrated  tomb  of  Psammethis,  and  was  the  first 
British  traveller  who  entered  it.  On  his  return  from  Nubia,  he 
arrived  at  Cairo  a  little  more  than  a  month  after  my  opening  the 
second  pyramid,  and  was  the  first  British  traveller  who  entered  this 
also.  His  Lordship  and  family  had  been  at  Thebes  for  some  time, 
and  had  accumulated  no  small  collection  of  antiquities  ;  indeed,  I 
esteem  it  the  largest  ever  made  by  any  occasional  traveller.  Dr. 
Richardson  had  taken  the  opportunity  of  observing  the  ruins  of 
ancient  Thebes  at  leisure ;  and  I  believe,  by  his  minute  remarks, 
he  must  have  made  himself  well  acquainted  with  many  interesting 
points  not  yet  explained,  and  I  have  no  doub  this  account  will  be 
highly  interesting. 

The  Earl  and  family  set  off  for  Jerusalem  by  way  of  the  Desert ; 
and  I  prepared  for  my  departure  for  Thebes,  my  old  residence, 
which  I  knew  better  than  any  other  place  in  Egypt.  A  few  days 
after,  the  consul  arrived,  and,  in  half  an  hour  after  him,  Colonel 
Fitzclarence,  with  despatches  from  India  for  England.  The  consul, 
Mr.  Salt,  would  have  been  kind  enough  to  have  paid  all  the  ex- 
penses I  had  incurred  in  opening  the  pyramid  ;  but  this  I  positively 
refused,  as  I  thought  it  would  not  be  fair  and  right  that  he  should 
pay  for  what  he  had  nothing  to  do  with. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  accompanying  the  Colonel  in  a  visit  to  the 

o  o 


282  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS,  &c. 

pyramid,  as  described  by  himself  in  his  account  of  his  journey  from 
India  to  England  through  Egypt.  He  had  suffered  many  hardships 
on  his  journey,  but  did  not  appear  fatigued  in  the  least.  His  short 
stay  in  Cairo  did  not  permit  me  to  write  a  full  account  of  my 
labours ;  but  at  night  I  made  a  hasty  sketch  as  well  as  I  could,  and 
addressed  it  to  the  Antiquarian  Society  of  London,  which  he  was 
kind  enough  to  take  to  England  for  me.  Mr.  Salt,  the  consul,  took 
the  same  opportunity  of  sending  an  official  account  of  my  operations 
in  Egypt  and  Nubia  to  the  ministers  in  England,  I  suppose  because 
he  had  no  opportunity  of  sending  any  correct  account  before  that 
time. 

My  next  and  principal  object  was  to  make  a  small  collection  on 
my  own  account,  and  to  take  drawings  of  the  tomb  of  Psammethis, 
with  impressions  in  wax  of  all  the  figures,  emblems,  and  hiero- 
glyphics, the  whole  of  which  are  in  basso  relievo;  noting  the 
colours  exactly  as  in  the  originals,  so  as  to  enable  me  to  erect  a  fac- 
simile in  any  part  of  Europe.  This  project  deserved  my  serious 
consideration,  not  only  in  calculating  the  time  that  it  would  require 
to  complete  it,  but  the  expense  I  must  incur.  However,  though 
I  was  only  in  Cairo,  I  did  not  want  means  of  finding  supplies  for 
what  I  intended  to  execute,  and  in  a  few  days  all  was  ready  for  my 
departure  on  my  third  voyage  up  the  Nile  ;  when,  having  arranged 
my  affairs  with  the  consul,  I  set  off  for  my  old  habitation  anion  o- 
the  tombs  of  Thebes. 


END    OF    THE    SECOND    JOURNEY. 


RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

IN 

EGYPT,    NUBIA,   &c. 


THIRD  JOURNEY. 


In  the  narrative  of  this  my  third  journey  to  Thebes,  I  shall  not 
detain  the  reader  with  an  account  of  my  stopping  here  or  setting  off 
there,  as  it  would  be  no  more  than  a  repetition  of  what  has  been  said 
before ;  but  shall  remark  only  the  principal  things  worthy  of  notice. 
I  made  an  extraordinary  quick  voyage  from  Cairo  to  Melawi,  wluch 
place  we  reached  in  two  days  and  a  half,  though  it  occupied 
eighteen  days  in  our  second  voyage.  I  stopped  two  days  at  Mr. 
Brine's,  the  sugar-baker,  as  it  was  a  calm,  and  in  two  days  more 
arrived  at  Siout.  The  next  morning  I  went  to  see  the  Bey,  that 
worthy  fellow  and  dear  friend  to  the  English.  He  was  about  a 
mile  out  of  town,  exercising  his  soldiers  and  young  Mamelukes  in 
gunnery  and  horsemanship.  The  cannon  exercise  was  with  balls 
against  the  rocks  ;  and,  I  must  say,  there  were  better  marksmen  than 
I  expected  to  find  among  soldiers  without  discipline.  He  fired 
himself  at  the  same  mark  with  two  balls  in  one  barrel  of  an  English 
gun,  of  which  some  one  in  Cairo  had  made  him  a  present  He  liked  it 
extremely ;  and  observed,  "  These  guns  may  become  offensive  to 
their  makers  some  day  or  other."    I  told  him,  if  ever  such  a  period 

o  o  2 


284  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

should  arrive,  the  English  would  still  be  superior  in  their  weapons, 
as  by  that  time  they  would  have  invented  some  guns  of  another 
construction,  much  superior  to  the  most  effective  of  the  present 
day,  as  they  are  continually  studying  something  new.     I  saw  he 
was  not  pleased  with  my  answer ;  but  I  said  it,  and  would  have  said 
it  again.      After  the  cannon  exercise,  they  began    to   fire  at   an 
earthen  pot  placed  on  a  kind  of  pedestal  of  about  six  feet  high. 
They  commence  their  course  at  two  hundred  feet  from  it;   ride 
towards  it  at  full  gallop  ;  at  the  distance  of  fifty  feet  drop  the  bridle, 
take  their  gun,  and  fire  at  the  pot  while  at  full  speed.     The  horse 
is  so  accustomed  to  this,  that,  before  he  reaches  the  stand  on  which 
the  pot  is,  he  wheels  to  the  right,  to  make  room  for  the  next  in  the 
course.     It  is  a  very  difficult  matter  to  hit  a  small  pot  about  a  foot 
high,  while  the  horse  is  running  with  all  speed.      In  about  two 
hundred  shots  I  saw  only  six  pots  broken :   the  favourite  Mameluke 
of  the  Bey,  a  lad  of  twelve  years  old,  broke  three.     He  had  the 
best  horse  belonging  to  the  Bey,  and  went  as  near  the  pot  as  the 
length  of  a  gun  and  a  half.     Two  other  Mamelukes  broke  one  each 
at  a  good  distance,  and  one  was  broken  by  the  Bey  himself,  for 
which  he  received  of  course  great  praise  from  all  his  subjects.    The 
gold  and  silver  on  the  riders   gave  them  quite  a  theatrical  ap- 
pearance.    When  the  exercise  was  ended,  the  Bey  seated  himself 
under  a  tree,  and  was  very  curious  to  know  the  particulars  of  my 
opening  the  pyramid,  as  he  had  heard  of  it,  and  desired  to  see  a 
plan.     As  I  was  to  visit  him  in  the  afternoon,  I  promised  he  should 
then  see  one. 

At  four  o'clock  I  went  to  his  palace.  He  was  sitting  on  a  very 
high  armed  chair,  a  fashion  not  common  among  Turks  ;  though  he 
did  not  sit  like  an  European,  but  in  the  Turkish  manner,  with  his 
legs  up.     Here  I  had  an  opportunity  of  being  present  at  a  trial 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  kc.  285 

upon  life  or  death.  The  case  was  tliis  :  a  soldier  belonging  to  the 
Bey  had  been  found  dead  upon  the  road  near  the  village  of  Acmin, 
with  his  throat  cut,  and  several  marks  of  violence  upon  his  body. 
He  was  on  his  return  from  Mecca,  where  he  had  been  on  a 
pilgrimage.  His  camel  was  found  dead  near  the  door  of  a  peasant, 
and  it  was  supposed  that  he  had  a  great  deal  of  money  about  him. 
He  was  seen  in  the  house  of  the  peasant,  near  which  the  camel  was 
found,  in  company  with  seven  other  men,  among  whom  was  a 
Bedoween.  The  soldiers  of  the  village,  who  took  the  prisoners 
into  custody,  asserted,  that  the  prisoners  had  assisted  the  Eedoween 
in  making  his  escape ;  and  the  Sheik  of  the  same  village  affirmed, 
that  one  of  them  said  he  knew  where  to  find  him  at  any  time. 
Several  witnesses  were  examined,  but  no  one  gave  any  evidence 
that  could  bring  the  facts  home  to  the  supposed  culprits. 

One  point,  however,  was  very  much  against  one  of  them,  and  this 
was,  his  countenance  did  not  please  the  Bey ;  for  no  sooner  did  the 
Bey  set  his  eyes  on  the  poor  fellow,  than  he  exclaimed,  "  O  ho  !  the 
case  is  evident !  I  see  plainly  who  is  the  murderer ;  look  at  that 
man  ;  can  there  be  any  doubt  but  it  was  he  who  committed  the 
crime  ?  So  own  at  once  that  you  did  it,  for  denial  will  be  useless  ;  I 
see  it  in  your  face !"  I  must  confess,  I  never  saw  more  appearance 
of  the  assassin  in  a  countenance  in  my  life ;  but  God  forbid,  that 
our  courts  of  justice  should  adopt  such  a  method  of  proceeding,  and 
condemn  people  merely  because  the  expression  of  their  features  is 
against  them.  Several  witnesses  came  forward  to  prove,  that  the 
peasant,  in  whose  house  the  soldier  was,  could  have  had  nothing  to 
do  with  it,  as  he  was  not  in  the  town  at  the  time.  I  have  reason  to 
believe,  that  witnesses  in  that  country  are  rather  more  exact  in  their 
depositions  than  those  of  Europe,  for  they  do  not  get  off  so  easily 
as  in  our  country.     To  make  them  impartial  they  generally  get  so 


286  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

severe  a  bastinado  on  the  soles  of  their  feet,  that  all  the  flesh  is  off 
to  the  bones,  and  they  are  unable  to  walk  for  a  long  time  after.  A 
thousand  blows  is  reckoned  a  moderate  number  for  a  witness  to 
receive.  The  business  ended  this  day  with  beating  and  sending  to 
prison  again.  I  heard  afterwards,  however,  that  several  of  those 
supposed  to  be  concerned  in  the  murder  had  their  heads  cut  off; 
but  for  this  I  have  no  further  authority  than  my  own  interpreter. 

After  the  trial  the  Bey  sent  to  me,  as  if  he  were  desirous  of 
some  conversation.     I  took  the  interpreter  with  me,  as  the  Bey 
will  speak   no  language  but  the  Turkish,  and  seated  myself  on 
the  bench  near   his  chair.      He   began    to   talk  again  about   the 
pyramids,  and  wondered  we  could  not  tell  when  they  were  built. 
He  wished  to  be  made  acquainted  with  things,  but  in  such  a  manner 
that  his  ignorance  might  not  be  perceived,  asking  questions  as  if  he 
were  already  informed  of  what  he  was  most  anxious  to  learn.     I 
showed  him  the  plan  of  the  second  pyramid.     He  understood  it 
immediately,  as  he  said,   taking  a  general  view  of  it  without  in- 
quiring into  a  single  circumstance.     As  I  knew  he  passed  for  an 
architect  among  the  Turks,  I  took  a  pair  of  compasses,  and  showed 
him  the  scale  of  English  feet,  by  which  the  plan  was  made.     The 
word  scale  was  mistaken  for  the  Italian  scala,  and  he  asked  me 
where  a  person  mounted  with  that  scale ;  and  the  interpreter,  who 
was  as  curious  as  himself,  asked  nearly  the  same  question.     1  could 
not  help  smiling,  and  turned  the  discourse  to  the  forced  passage,  on 
which  he  rightly  observed,  that  they  who  made  it  must  have  been  in 
search  of  gold,  or  else  they  would  not  have  given  themselves  so  much 
trouble,  with  some  similar  remarks.     I  quitted  him  that  evening, 
as  it  was  rather  late,  being  half  an  hour  after  sunset,  and  went  to 
him  to  take  my  leave  the  next  morning.     I  had  a  firman  for  him  to 
renew,  and  to  my  surprise  he  did  it  without  hesitation.    He  seemed 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  287 

to  be  pleased  when  he  was  told,  that  I  was  going  to  make  a  col- 
lection for  myself,  for  which  reason,  as  he  said,  he  had  given  me  the 
firman  with  full  power  to  dig  wherever  I  pleased,  right  and  left  of 
the  Xile.     I  answered,  that  I  felt  much  obliged  to  him,  but  that  I 
hoped  he  would  consider  what  I  did  for  myself  would  be  still  for 
the  English  party.     Pie  made  no  reply  to  this,  but  I  could  easily 
see,  that  he  felt  a  kind  of  displeasure  at  my  returning  to  search  as 
connected  with  the  English.     I  wish  Mr.  Salt  had  been  there  incog, 
as  he  would  have  seen  the  difference  of  this  man  when  behind  his 
back,  from  what  it  had  been  before  his  face.   He  introduced  the  little 
story  of  the  pipe  made  by  Caliud,  and  sold  as  an  antique  to  Mr.  Salt ; 
laughed  much,  and  wondered  how  a  person  so  full  of  knowledge  could 
suffer  himself  to  be  so  easily  deceived  by  a  Frenchman.    I  told  him, 
that  any  one  might  well  be  deceived,  as  we  bought  many  things  from 
the  peasants,  good  and  bad  together  in  lots,  without  even  looking  to 
see  what  they  were,  till  they  were  brought  home  ;  consequently  this 
pipe  might  have  been  bought  in  that  manner.     He  asked  me  many 
curious  questions,  and  among  them,  whether  I  should  shave  my 
beard  when  I  returned  to  Europe,   supposing   my  answer  would 
be,  that  I  should  not  do  any  such  thing;  for  my  beard  appeared 
the  finest  of  all  that  were  before  him  at  that  moment,  even  superior 
to   his   own,      I  told  him,    to   his  astonishment,  that   no    sooner 
should  I  reach  the  shore  of  my  dear  Europe,  than  I  should  rid  myself 
of  it  as  a  great  burden.   He  saw  he  had  got  himself  into  a  scrape,  by 
exposing  the  sanctity  of  the  beard,  to  be  despised  before  so  many 
of  his  bearded  countrymen,  by  asking  such  questions  of  a  Christian  ; 
and  thinking  to  mend  the  matter,  as  some  of  the  French  told  him 
that  in  France  many  wear  their  beards,  he  said  he  knew  that  in 
France  many  people  wore  them,  but  did  not  know  whether  it  was 
so  in  England.     I  replied,  that  neither  in  France,  England,  nor 


288  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

in  any  part  of  Europe,  except  by  a  few  of  the  Russians,  were  beards 
ever  worn.  This  sort  of  disrespect  for  beards  did  not  appear  to 
meet  the  approbation  of  the  assembly,  and  he  was  glad  to  turn  the 
discourse  upon  horses,  &c. 

Having  received  my  firman,  I  left  Siout  the  same  day,  and  on 
the  next  arrived  at  Tacta.     This  I  recollected  was  the  residence  of 
my  old  acquaintance  Soliman  Cacheffof  Erments,  who  played  me  so 
many  tricks  ;  but  as  in  the  latter  part  of  his  command  in  that  province 
he  became  our  friend,  at  least  in  appearance,  I  thought  proper  to 
pay  him  a  friendly  visit,  as,  according  to  the  way  of  thinking  of 
the  Turks,  an  injury  is  not  easily  forgotten,  and  sometimes  revenge 
is  taken,  when  the  offender  is  in  disgrace  or  in  misfortune.     I  do 
not  know  whether  this  man  were  pleased  at  seeing  me  in  his  hut, 
as  perhaps  he  might  be  mortified  at  the  supposition,  that  I  must 
recollect  his  prejudice,  and  the  trouble  he  had  given  me :  certain 
however  it  is,  that  he  received  me  with  all  the  marks  of  cordiality, 
that  can  be  expected  from  a  Turk.     He  gave  me  to  understand, 
that  as  the  deficiency  found  in  his  account  with  the  Bashaw  was 
nearly  made  good  out  of  his  monthly  pay,  his  employ  would  be 
soon  ended,  when  he  should  be  a  free  man,  and  could  go  where  he 
pleased ;  and  if  the  Bashaw  did  not  come  to  good  terms  with  him, 
he  would  go  to  a  place  above  Ibrim.     Knowing  he  meant  to  Don- 
gola,  to  the  Mamelukes,  1  told  him,  that  his  highness  the  Bashaw 
was  a  worthy  man,  and  if  some  friends  of  his  in  Cairo  were  to  speak 
to  him,  all  would  end  well.     He  said  he  expected,  that  the  French 
consul  would  have  done  something  for  him,  from  his  friendly  pro- 
fessions, but  he  was  disappointed ;  and  added  many  other  things, 
but  all  of  trivial  importance.     At  a  moment  when  we  remained 
alone  however,  even  without  the  interpreter,  he  told  me,  in  the 
Arabic  language,  that  he  should  be  under  great  obligations  to  our 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  289 

consul,  if  he  would  speak  to  the  Bashaw  in  his  favour ;  and  that  he 
might  be  assured  he  would  gladly  come  to  an  understanding  with 
him,  as  he  had  made  great  improvements  in  the  lands,  from  winch 
the  Bashaw  derived  considerable  advantages ;  but  above  all,  as  his 
debt  was  paid  with  the  khasna  or  treasury.  I  promised  I  would  do 
all  I  could  for  him  ;  and  sometime  after  I  wrote  all  the  particulars 
to  Mr.  Salt,  acquainting  him,  that,  if  he  could  succeed  in  getting 
this  man  restored  to  his  situation  at  Erments,  he  might  depend 
on  having  a  good  friend  in  the  commander  of  Thebes.  I  could 
scarcely  get  away  from  him ;  he  sent  his  horses  and  soldiers  to 
accompany  me  to  the  water-side ;  and  on  board  our  cangiar  I  found 
the  customary  provision  of  bread,  a  sheep,  &c. 

Proceeding  on  my  voyage,  the  next  day  at  about  a  league  before 
we  reached  Acmin,  on  the  5th  of  May,  1818,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  I  saw  the  finest  eclipse  I  ever  beheld.  The  moon  at  its 
full  passed  completely  before  the  sun.  The  eclipse  lasted  about 
three-quarters  of  an  hour.  I  saw  the  full  moon  in  the  centre  of  the 
sun,  which  formed  a  disc  or  ring ;  the  moon  appeared  to  me  in  the 
proportion  of  about  half  the  size  of  the  sun. 

On  the  10th  of  May  I  arrived  at  Thebes,  and  immediately  pro- 
ceeded to  take  the  drawings  of  the  tombs  and  impressions,  as  I 
stated  before. 

In  the  arrangement  I  had  made  with  Mr.  Salt  previously  to  my 
re-ascending  the  Nile  this  time,  it  was  agreed,  that  I  should  make 
researches  on  my  own  account :  but  on  my  arrival  at  Thebes  I 
found,  that  all  the  grounds  on  each  side  of  the  Nile  were  taken, 
partly  by  Mr.  Drouetti's  agents,  and  partly  by  Mr.  Salt  himself, 
who  marked  the  grounds  before  his  return  to  Cairo  this  last  time. 
Seeing  that  there  was  no  chance  of  making  any  researches  on  my 
own  account,  without  incurring  the  risk  of  some  difference  either 

p  p 


290  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

with  the  French  party  or  the  English,  I  retired  to  my  tomb,  and 
devoted  my  whole  time  to  taking  models  of  it. 

It  is  somewhat  singular,  and  by  no  means  pleasing  to  my  recol- 
lection, that  at  this  time  I  was  at  Thebes  on  my  own  account,  and 
at  my  own  expense,  yet  with  less  chance  of  finding  any  thing,  than 
a  perfect  stranger  who  had  never  been  in  that  country.  A  stranger 
might  come,  fix  on  a  spot  of  ground,  and  take  his  chance,  whether 
good  or  ill.  My  case  was  different ;  for  if  I  pointed  out  any  spot 
in  any  place  whatever,  one  of  the  parties,  I  mean  the  agents 
of  Mr.  Drouetti  or  those  of  Mr.  Salt,  would  consider  it  as  valuable 
ground,  and  protest  that  it  was  taken  by  them  long  before.  I  verily 
believe,  if  I  had  pointed  out  one  of  the  sandbanks  or  the  solid  rocks, 
they  would  have  said  they  just  intended  to  have  broken  into  it  the 
next  day  :  being  however  in  the  midst  of  Thebes,  a  place  which  was 
become  to  me  quite  familiar,  and  accustomed  as  I  had  been  to  con- 
tinual researches,  1  could  scarcely  keep  myself  from  doing  something. 
I  had  already  tried  on  an  exhausted  ground,  known  to  have  been 
originally  opened  by  me,  so  that  no  one  could  say  it  was  taken  by 
them ;  but  I  soon  perceived,  that  it  was  a  hopeless  attempt  to 
proceed  on  spots  which  I  considered  as  exhausted. 

Between  the  Memnonium  and  Medinet  Aboo,  it  is  well  known 
there  are  several  fragments  of  enormous  statues ;  particularly  behind 
the  two  colossi.  I  had  long  before  marked  tins  ground,  and  Mr. 
Drouetti  first  opened  near  these  fragments ;  but  finding  nothing 
except  broken  pieces  of  lion-headed  statues,  he  quitted  it.  Some- 
time after  Mr.  Salt  began  to  excavate  in  tins  ground  while  I  was  in 
Cairo,  and  found  it  to  be  the  site  of  an  extensive  temple.  There 
are  pedestals  of  many  columns  of  very  large  diameter  and  in  great 
numbers.  I  counted  about  thirty,  but  it  appears  they  are  not  half 
uncovered,  and  among  them  Mr.  Salt  found  several  colossal  frag- 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  291 

ments  of  breccia  and  calcareous  stone,  but  all  so  mutilated,  that 
none  were  worth  taking  away.  He  proceeded  in  his  work  for  a 
long  time,  but  left  the  spot  at  last,  I  believe,  as  unworthy  of  farther 
labour.  On  mentioning  my  wish  to  proceed  in  my  researches  in  the 
same  place  to  Mr.  Beechey,  he  informed  me,  that  it  was  reserved  for 
the  consul,  as  it  had  been  dug  before  on  his  account  and  under  his 
own  inspection.  But  such  was  my  hope  of  discovering  something 
of  importance,  that  I  determined  to  proceed,  whether  for  my  ad- 
vantage or  that  of  the  consul. 

I  accordingly  commenced  my  operations,  and  having  observed, 
that  the  part  where  the  sekos  and  cella  must  be  was  not  touched, 
I  set  the  men  to  work  there.  It  was  perhaps  fortune  that  would 
have  it  so ;  but  the  fact  is,  that  on  the  very  second  day  of  my 
researches  we  came  to  a  large  statue,  which  proved  to  be  the  finest 
of  the  kind  I  had  yet  found.  It  is  a  sitting  figure  of  a  man,  in  all 
points  resembling  the  great  colossus  of  Memnon.  On  the  side  of 
its  chair  are  the  same  hieroglyphics,  which  are  to  be  seen  on  the 
chair  of  the  Memnon.  It  is  nearly  ten  feet  high,  and  of  the  most 
beautiful  Egyptian  workmanship.  The  stone  is  gray  granite,  and 
has  the  peculiarity  of  having  particles  in  it  of  a  colour  not  unlike 
that  of  the  substance  generally  known  by  the  name  of  Dutch  metal. 
This  and  a  lion-headed  statue  are  the  only  ones  of  the  kind  I  ever 
saw.  Part  of  its  chin  and  beard  have  been  knocked  off,  but  all  the 
rest  is  quite  perfect.  In  the  same  ground  I  found  several  lion- 
headed  statues,  like  those  I  found  in  Carnak,  some  sitting  and  some 
standing. 

I  know  not  what  to  say  about  this  temple,  as  I  do  not  pretend 
to  give  an  absolute  decision  on  any  subject ;  but  as  every  one  may 
have  an  opinion  of  his  own,  I  shall  venture  to  make  a  few  remarks, 
or  rather  put  some  questions.  Why  may  not  this  be  deemed  the 
great  temple  of  Memnon,  with  as  much,  or  perhaps  more  reason, 

p  p  2 


292  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

than  what  is  now  named  the  Memnonium  ?     It  is  to  be  observed, 
that  the  name  was  given  to  those  ruins  on  the  supposition  that  the 
great  colossal  statue  now  lying  on  the  ground  within  the  space 
included  was  that  of  Memnon  ;  but  now,  when  every  one  agrees 
that  the  statue  of  Memnon  cannot  be  any  other  than  that  which  is 
to  the  north  of  the  two  in  the  plain  between  Medinet  Aboo  and 
the  Memnonium,  I  tliink  that  the  temple,  which  stood  in  a  direct 
line  with  these  colossi,  might  with  more  probability  be  named  the 
Memnonium.     That  the  northernmost  statue  of  the  two  in  the 
plain   of  Gournou  was  that  from  winch   the  sound  proceeded  I 
believe  is  beyond  doubt,  from  the  combination  of  numerous  circum- 
stances, but  in  particular  from  the  testimony  of  the  many  visitors, 
who  have  verified  it  by  their  inscriptions  on  its  leg.     If  the  said 
statue  were  intended  to  represent  the  Great  Memnon,  I  think  the 
temple  with  which  it  was  connected  was  the  Memnonium.     The 
magnificence  of  this  edifice  has  never  been  described,  because  it 
never   was  seen  or  known   to  exist.     Between   the   two   colossal 
statues  and  the  portico  of  the  temple  is  an  enormous  colossus, 
thrown  down  and  buried,   all  but  the  back   of  its   chair,  which 
is   broken   in   two   about  the   middle.      I   cannot   conceive   how 
this  colossus  escaped  the  notice  of  travellers.     It  was  one  of  my 
principal  objects  to  uncover  it,  but  I  never  had  an  opportunity. 
I   have   no   doubt   some   interesting  points   may   be   solved,  and 
perhaps  pieces  of  antiquity  may  be  found  in  it ;  and  I  hope  this 
opinion  of  mine  will  induce  some  of  the  travellers  or  other  antiqua- 
ries in  Egypt  to  excavate  the  interesting  spot  round  the  colossus. 
Among  the  columns  of  the  portico  were  found  a  great  many  frag- 
ments of  colossal  statues  of  granite,  breccia,  and  calcareous  stones ; 
and  from  the  great  number  of  fragments  of  smaller  dimensions,  and 
of  standing  and  sitting  lion-headed  statues,  I  can  boldly  state,  that 
these  ruins  appear  to  me  to  have  belonged  to  the  most  magnificent 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  293 

temple  of  any  on  the  west  side  of  Thebes.  It  is  my  humble 
opinion,  that  the  entrance  into  this  temple  was  guarded  by  the  two 
colossi,  one  of  which  is  supposed  to  have  represented  the  Great 
Memnon ;  and  that  on  advancing  farther  there  were  other  colossal 
statues  in  inner  courts,  the  fragments  of  winch  are  still  to  be  seen, 
as  I  have  just  mentioned,  in  a  line  with  the  temple  and  the  two 
colossi.  In  the  front  of  the  portico  are  other  colossi,  of  smaller 
size,  which  appear  as  if  adorning  the  entrance  into  it.  The  whole 
combined  induces  me  to  think,  that  an  extensive  temple  stood  on 
this  ground.  To  explore  it  would  require  an  excavation  of  no 
small  extent ;  but  I  believe  it  well  worth  attention,  and  I  am  per- 
suaded it  would  not  prove  a  disadvantageous  speculation  to  the 
adventurer.  The  base  of  the  above  columns  stood  much  hic-her 
than  the  bases  of  the  two  colossi,  consequently  there  must  be  an 
ascent  from  the  colossi  lo  the  temple.  If  we  take  as  an  example 
the  temple  called  the  Memnonium,  we  shall  find  the  same  to  be 
the  case,  and  that  the  ascent  into  the  temple  was  by  steps.  On  my 
removing  the  colossal  statue  from  the  ruins  last  mentioned,  I  found 
that  the  pavement  of  the  place  where  it  lay  was  much  lower  than 
the  interior  of  the  temple ;  whence  we  may  conclude  that  the 
former  temple  was  erected  on  the  same  principle ;  and  if  it  were 
so,  the  front  of  this  temple  is  not  uncovered;  and  I  do  not 
hesitate  to  say,  that  some  interesting  pieces  of  antiquity  might  be 
found  there,  beside  perhaps  giving  farther  elucidation  of  the  real 
seat  of  Memnon.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that  the  regular 
inundation  of  the  Nile  over  that  very  ground  has  raised  the  soil  to 
such  a  height,  that  it  discourages  a  traveller  from  making  re- 
searches ;  but  without  perseverance  nothing  can  be  effected.  My 
occupation  at  the  tomb  did  not  permit  me  to  advance  farther  in 
these  researches,  and  I  quitted  them  with   the  intention  of  re- 


294  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

commencing,  when  I  should  have  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Salt ; 
for,  as  he  had  marked  all  this  ground  to  be  kept  for  his  own 
excavation,  I  did  not  wish  to  encroach  on  his  Thebean  territory. 

The  works  at  the  tomb  went  on  uncommonly  well.  By  this 
time  I  had  taken  many  impressions  of  the  principal  figures  in  basso 
relievo  to  my  entire  satisfaction.  The  wax  alone  I  found  would 
not  stand,  as  the  climate  did  not  permit  it ;  but  with  wax,  resin, 
and  fine  dust,  I  made  an  excellent  composition.  The  greatest 
difficulty  was  to  take  the  impression  of  the  figure  without  injuring 
the  colours  of  it.  The  figures  as  large  as  life  I  found  to  be  in  all 
a  hundred  and  eighty-two :  those  of  a  smaller  size,  from  one  to 
three  feet,  I  did  not  count,  but  they  cannot  be  less  than  eight 
hundred.  The  hieroglyphics  in  this  tomb  are  nearly  five  hundred, 
of  which  I  took  a  faithful  copy,  with  their  colours ;  but  they  are  of 
four  different  sizes,  from  one  to  six  inches ;  so  that  I  have  been 
obliged  to  take  one  of  each  size,  which  makes  nearly  two  thousand 
in  all.  Some  wax  I  procured  in  the  small  towns  of  the  country, 
but  in  such  small  quantities,  that  I  was  obliged  to  send  down  the 
Nile  to  Kenneh,  Farshiout,  and  Girgeh. 

At  the  latter  end  of  June  we  had  a  visit  from  Mr.  Briggs, 
on  his  return  from  India.  He  brought  with  him  from  that 
country  the  pine-apple  and  the  mango,  some  of  which  he  had 
planted  in  the  garden  of  the  Aga  at  Kenneh,  and  some  he  tried  to 
cultivate  at  Thebes.  The  mango  at  Kenneh  I  believe  turned  out 
very  well ;  but  those  winch  were  planted  in  Thebes  died,  I  imagine 
from  want  of  care,  as  we  had  no  gardener. 

By  this  time  I  had  ceased  all  sort  of  researches.  As  I  could  not 
dig  on  the  grounds  I  wished,  I  contented  myself  with  collecting 
what  the  peasants  of  Gournou  used  to  bring  to  me ;  and  I  must  say, 
that  in  consequence  of  having  so  many  acquaintances  among  these 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  295 

mummy  plunderers,  I  have  been  able  to  make  a  little  collection  of 
ray  own,  in  which  I  can  boast  of  having  a  few  good  articles,  par- 
ticularly in  manuscript,  &c. 

During  this  time,  I  attempted  to  make  an  excavation  among  the 
ruins  of  the  temple  at  Erments,  but  I  was  soon  convinced  it  would 
be  to  no  purpose,  and  withdrew.  This  temple  is  very  interesting, 
for  it  differs  from  almost  every  other  in  its  plan  and  construction. 
The  drawing,  Plate  37,  is  as  correct  a  representation  as  I  could 
take  of  it.  On  the  back  of  this  temple  is  the  figure  of  the  camelopard, 
which  is  of  such  very  rare  occurrence  among  the  hieroglyphics,  that 
this,  and  that  which  I  mentioned  in  the  sekos  of  the  Memnonium, 
are  the  only  instances  I  can  point  out  in  Egypt. 

MOTIVE  OF   MY  JOURNEY  TO   THE  RED   SEA. 

Some  time  prior  to  this,  the  Bashaw  of  Egypt  was  informed  by 
two  Copts,  who  landed  on  the  coast  of  the  Pied  Sea  from  Arabia,  that 
they  had  seen  some  sulphur  mines  in  the  mountains  near  that  shore, 
several  days  journey  above  Cosseir.  On  the  report  of  these  two  men, 
the  Bashaw  sent  an  order  to  the  Cacheff  of  Esne  to  enter  the  desert 
in  search  of  those  mines.  He  set  off  with  an  escort  of  soldiers,  and 
sixty  camels  to  load  with  sulphur,  but  on  their  arrival,  they  found 
only  several  pieces  scattered  about  here  and  there,  and  having 
collected  them  all,  they  were  not  sufficient  to  load  twenty  camels. 
Among  the  soldiers  of  that  escort  was  one  of  the  Mameluke  re- 
negadoes,  who  stated,  that  he  saw  several  mines  and  temples  on  the 
road  to  the  coast  of  the  Red  Sea. 

This  little  success  did  not  discourage  Mahomed  Ali,  who  was 
always  ready  to  persevere  in  any  enterprise.  He  was  advised  to 
send  some  Europeans  to  examine  these  places,  and  see  whether  it 
were  worth  while  to  proceed  in  the  discovery  of  sulphur.      Mr. 


296  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Drouetti  recommended  to  the  Bashaw  Mr.  Caliud,  a  silversmith, 
who  had  been  employed  by  him  some  time  in  the  collection  of 
antiquities.  Mr.  Caliud  set  off  for  that  place,  accompanied  by  an 
escort  of  soldiers  and  miners  from  Syria,  and  found  the  mines  as 
steril  as  they  had  been  described  ;  but  on  his  return  he  did  not  fail 
to  visit  the  emerald  mountains,  according  to  the  instructions  he 
received  from  Mr.  Drouetti,  who  evidently  had  seen  the  work  of 
Bruce,  where  he  mentions  having  visited  these  mines.  On  his 
arrival  at  the  place,  Mr.  Caliud  found  several  caves  or  mines,  which 
had  been  evidently  left  by  the  ancients,  and  probably  had  never 
been  touched  by  any  one  since.  From  the  exterior  of  some  of  them 
he  collected  several  pieces  of  the  matrix  of  the  emeralds  ;  and  when 
these  were  produced  to  the  Bashaw,  they  were  deemed  sufficient  to 
prove,  that  there  were  mines  in  the  country,  and  to  persuade  Ma- 
homed Ali  to  pursue  his  researches.  Mr.  Caliud  in  his  pursuit 
of  mines  in  this  country  happened  to  reach  Sakial-Minor,  situated 
in  a  valley,  a  few  miles  from  the  mountain  of  Zabara,  and  about 
twenty-five  from  the  sea  (See  Plate  35). 

It  is  a  valley  surrounded   by  high  rocks.      On  each  side  of 
the  rocks,  at  some  little  distance,  are  the  remains  of  a  few  very 
small  houses,  built  of  rough  stones,  and  all  except  one   or   two 
without  mortar.      The   rocks  of  this   place   resemble  an  amphi- 
theatre in  form,  not  more  than  two  hundred  and  fifty  yards  in 
length.     The  upper  part  of  the  rocks  contains  several  mines  of 
the  ancients,  and  at   one  side   there  is   a   small  chapel  cut  out 
of  the  rock,  thirty   feet  deep,  and  less  than  twenty   wide    (See 
Plate  33,  Nos.  6  and  7).    The  houses  in  all,  as  we  counted  them  on 
our  visiting  that  place,  are  eighty-seven,  one  only  of  which  can  be 
considered  as  the  residence  of  a  person  distinguished  from  the  rest. 
T  do  not  know  how  it  happened,  but  it  appears,  that  the  enthusiasm 
with  which  Monsieur  Caliud  gave  the  account  of  this  place,  seemed 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  297 

to  impress  on  the  minds  of  the  antiquaries  in  Egypt  the  notion  that 
it  must  have  been  the  ancient  Berenice,  especially  when  he  reported 
it  to  have  eight  hundred  houses  and  several  temples,  and  seemed  to 
him  in  appearance  like  the  ruins  of  Pompeia,  &c.  He  asserted  also, 
that  it  was  near  the  coast,  and  that  the  communication  with  the  sea 
was  quite  easy.  At  the  same  time  he  produced  a  Greek  inscription, 
which  we  also  found  on  the  top  of  a  niche :  we  copied  it  with  the 
greatest  care,  and  it  will  be  inserted  hereafter.  Tliis  was  quite 
enough.  The  ancient  Berenice  had  at  last  been  visited,  and  it  was 
known  where  it  was.  Indeed,  in  a  few  points  it  did  not  quite  agree 
with  the  situation  described  by  the  ancients ;  but  these  obstacles 
were  soon  removed,  for  I  saw  a  modern  geographer,  a  man  of  classical 
education,  and  a  great  traveller,  take  the  pen  in  his  hand,  and,  in 
order  to  make  the  newly  discovered  Berenice  fall  on  the  spot  where 
it  ought  to  be,  and  accord  with  the  description  of  the  ancient 
geographer,  scratch  out  a  large  cape  that  incumbered  him,  being 
on  the  south  of  the  supposed  Berenice,  and  with  the  same  coolness 
as  if  it  had  been  a  piece  at  draughts  or  chess,  place  it  on  the  north  ; 
affirming  that  the  bay  was  erroneously  laid  down  by  the  ancient 
geographers,  who  made  the  chart  of  the  Red  Sea. 

In  the  description  of  the  mines  Mr.  Caliud  was  pretty  correct, 
but  it  would  have  been  more  to  his  credit,  if  he  had  contented 
himself  with  an  exact  account  of  the  new  Berenice,  as  it  was  named. 
In  consequence  of  all  these  reports  Mahomed  Ali  engaged  a  Ma- 
homedan  Aga,  a  Syrian  miner,  and,  with  two  hundred  men,  set 
off  accompanied  by  Mr.  Caliud,  to  show  him  where  he  found  the 
ancient  mines.  Some  time  after,  Mr.  Caliud,  finding  that  the 
mines  would  not  be  so  productive  as  it  was  expected,  quitted  the 
place  and  returned  to  Egypt,  leaving  the  Syrian  miner  to  look  out 
for  the  emeralds. 

From  the  time  of  these  reports  I  conceived  the  idea  of  making 


298  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

an  excursion  into  these  deserts  on  a  visit  to  the  new  Berenice,  and 
only  waited  the  opportunity  of  a  proper  time,  to  execute  my  intended 
journey. 

It  happened,  that  near  the  end  of  September,  one  of  the  miners, 
who  was  sent  from  the  mountains  to  the  Nile  for  provision,  had  to 
come  down  from  Edfu  to  Esne,  and  was  returning  to  the  desert, 
when  he  fell  sick.  Hearing  from  some  of  the  Arabs,  that  a  christian 
physician  was  at  Beban  el  Malook,  he  came  to  beg  the  doctor  would 
prescribe  something  to  cure  him.  Of  course  I  had  good  and  clear 
information  of  all  I  wished  from  this  man,  who  promised  to  show 
me  the  way  through  the  desert,  if  I  wished  to  go.  I  made  up  my 
mind  at  once,  and  set  about  preparing  for  my  departure.  Having 
communicated  my  intention  to  Mr.  Beechey,  he  resolved  to  go  also, 
and  as  the  doctor  would  have  been  useful  in  drawing,  I  proposed 
that  he  should  accompany  vis. 

At  this  time  we  had  a  large  boat  loaded  with  antiquities  of 
various  kinds,  among  which  I  embarked  the  fine  colossal  statue  I 
had  discovered  in  the  ruins  of  the  temple,  which  I  should  name  the 
Memnonium.  The  boat  being  ready,  a  servant  of  Mr.  Drouetti 
requested  Mr.  Beechey  to  be  permitted  to  take  his  passage  on  board 
to  Cairo,  which  was  of  course  granted.  The  boat  set  off.  By  the 
information  I  received  from  the  miner,  it  appeared  to  me  clear,  that 
the  place  could  not  agree  with  the  description  given  of  its  situation 
by  Herodotus  and  Pliny ;  and  that  the  direction  of  the  road  Mon- 
sieur Caliud  had  taken  could  not  bring  him  so  far  south,  as  the 
town  of  Berenice  was  marked  by  the  geographer  D'Anville,  who  I 
had  reason  to  believe  was  correct,  having  found  him  so  on  other 
occasions.  At  last,  two  days  after  the  boat  set  off  for  Cairo,  we 
hired  a  smaller  one  from  Luxor,  to  take  us  up  to  Edfu,  where  we 
were  to  enter  the  desert.  We  embarked  near  the  temple  of  Gour- 
nou,  as  the  water  reached  quite  to  that  place. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  fee.  299 

Accordingly  we  set  sail  on  the  16th  of  September,  1818.  Our 
company  consisted  of  Mr.  Beechey,  the  doctor,  and  myself,  two 
Greek  servants,  the  miner,  and  two  boys  from  Gournou,  whom  we 
hired  to  take  care  of  our  luggage  in  the  desert. 

It  so  happened,  that  we  were  to  witness  one  of  the  greatest 
calamities  that  have  occurred  in  Egypt  in  the  recollection  of  any 
one  living.  The  Nile  rose  this  season  three  feet  and  a  half  above 
the  highest  mark  left  by  the  former  inundation,  with  uncommon 
rapidity,  and  carried  off  several  villages  and  some  hundreds  of  their 
inhabitants. 

I  never  saw  any  picture  that  could  give  a  more  correct  idea  of 
a  deluge  than  the  valley  of  the  Nile  in  this  season.  The  Arabs  had 
expected  an  extraordinary  inundation  this  year,  in  consequence  of 
the  scarcity  of  water  the  preceding  season ;  but  they  did  not  ap- 
prehend it  would  rise  to  such  a  height.  They  generally  erect  fences 
of  earth  and  reeds  around  their  villages,  to  keep  the  water  from 
their  houses ;  but  the  force  of  this  inundation  baffled  all  their 
efforts.  Their  cottages,  being  built  of  earth,  could  not  stand  one 
instant  against  the  current,  and  no  sooner  did  the  water  reach  them, 
than  it  levelled  them  with  the  ground.  The  rapid  stream  carried 
off  all  that  was  before  it;  men,  women,  children,  cattle,  corn,  every 
thing  was  washed  away  in  an  instant,  and  left  the  place  where  the 
village  stood  without  any  thing  to  indicate  that  there  had  ever  been 
a  house  on  the  spot.  It  is  not  the  case,  as  is  generally  supposed, 
that  all  the  villages  of  Egypt  are  raised  so  high  above  the  general 
level  of  the  ground,  that  the  water  cannot  reach  them  ;  on  the  con- 
trary, most  of  those  in  Upper  Egypt  are  little  if  any  thing  higher 
than  the  rest  of  the  ground,  and  the  only  way  they  have  to  keep  off 
the  water  on  the  rise  of  the  Nile,  is  by  artificial  fences  made  of 
earth  and  reeds.  It  appeared  to  me  to  be  in  the  midst  of  a  vast  lake 
containing  various  islands  and  magnificent  edifices.    On  our  right  we 

Q  Q  2 


300  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

had  the  high  rocks  and  the  temples  of  Gournou,  the  Memnonium,  the 
extensive  buildings  of  Medinet  Aboo,  and  the  two  colossal  statues, 
which  arose  out  of  the  water  like  the  lighthouses  on  some  of  the 
coasts  of  Europe.  On  our  left  we  had  the  vast  ruins  of  Carnak  and 
Luxor ;  to  the  east  of  which,  at  a  distance  of  eight  miles,  ran  the 
Mokattam  chain  of  mountains,  forming  the  boundaries  of  this  vast 
lake  as  it  appeared  from  our  boat. 

The  first  village  we  came  to  was  Agalta,  whither  we  went  not 
merely  to  see  the  place  but  to  desire  the  Caimakan  to  send  a  soldier 
to  guard  the  tombs,  in  addition  to  the  Arabs,  and  some  of  our 
people,  whom  we  had  left  there.     I  thought  this  necessary,  not- 
withstanding  the  strong  door  I  had   caused   to  be   made   at  its 
entrance.    He  appeared  immediately  on  our  approaching  the  village, 
and  greatly  lamented  his  situation,  as  he  expected  to  be  washed 
away  by  the  Nile.     There  was  no  boat  in  the  village ;  and  should 
the  water  break  down  their  weak  fences,  the  only  chance  of  escape 
was  by  climbing  the  palm-trees,  till  Providence  sent  some  one  to  their 
relief.     All  the  boats  were  employed  in  carrying  away  the  corn  from 
villages  that  were  in  danger.     Both  in  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  the 
men,  women,  and  children  are  left  to  be  the  last  assisted,  as  their 
lives  are  not  so  valuable  as  corn,  which  brings  money  to  the  Bashaw. 
As  this  village  was  then  four  feet  below  the  water,  the  poor  Fellahs 
were  on  the  watch  day  and  night  round  their  fences.     They  em- 
ployed their  skin  machines  or  bags  to  throw  the  water  out  again 
which  rose  from  under  the  ground ;  but  if  their  fences  should  be 
broken  down  all  was  lost.     We  offered  to  take  the  Caimakan  with 
us  in  our  boat,  but  he  could  not  quit  the  place  which  he  was  ordered 
to  guard.     When  we  left  this  village  there  was  but  little  wind,  so 
we  did  not  proceed  much  farther,  and  in  the  evening  made  fast  our 
boat  to  some  high  ground  between  Agalta  and  Erments. 

On  the  17th  we  saw  several  villages  in  great  danger  of  being  de- 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  301 

stroyed.  The  rapid  stream  had  carried  away  the  fences,  and  their 
unfortunate  inhabitants  Avere  obliged  to  escape  to  higher  grounds, 
where  it  was  possible,  with  what  they  could  save  from  the  water.  The 
distress  of  these  people  was  great.  Some  of  them  had  only  a  few  feet 
of  land,  and  the  water  was  to  rise  twelve  days  more,  and  after  that 
to  remain  twelve  days  at  its  height,  according  to  the  usual  term  of 
the  inundation.  Fortunate  was  he  who  could  reach  a  high  ground. 
Some  crossed  the  water  on  pieces  of  wood,  some  on  buffaloes  or 
cows,  and  others  with  reeds  tied  up  in  large  bundles.  The  small 
spots  of  high  ground,  that  stood  above  the  water,  formed  so  many 
sanctuaries  for  these  poor  refugees,  and  were  crowded  with  people 
and  beasts  (See  Plate  2G).  The  scanty  stock  of  provision  they  could 
save  was  the  only  subsistence  they  could  expect.  In  some  parts  the 
water  had  left  scarcely  any  dry  ground,  and  no  relief  could  be  hoped 
till  four  and  twenty  days  had  elapsed.  The  Cacheffs  and  Caima- 
kans  of  the  country  did  all  they  could  to  assist  the  villages  with 
their  little  boats,  but  they  were  so  small  in  proportion  to  what  was 
wanted,  that  they  could  not  relieve  the  greater  part  of  the  unfor- 
tunate people.  It  was  distressing  to  behold  these  poor  wretches  in 
such  a  situation.  To  approacli  them  in  our  little  boat  would  have 
been  dangerous  both  to  them  and  to  us,  for  so  many  would  enter  it  at 
once,  that  the  boat  would  sink,  and  we  along  with  them,  to  increase 
the  number.  On  our  arrival  at  Erments,  where  fortunately  the 
land  is  very  high,  we  found  many  of  the  neighbouring  people  col- 
lected. We  landed  immediately,  and  employed  our  boat  to  fetch 
the  people  from  an  opposite  village.  The  Caimakan  set  off  himself 
with  another  boat,  and  in  the  course  of  an  hour  he  returned  with 
several  men  and  boys.  He  sent  the  boats  again,  and  they  returned 
loaded  with  men,  corn,  and  cattle.  The  third  trip  brought  still 
more  corn,  buffaloes,  sheep,  goats,  asses,  and  dogs.     I  remarked, 


302  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

that  there  were  no  women  in  that  village ;  but  we  were  soon 
convinced  of  the  regard  paid  to  the  fair  sex  in  that  country.  The 
fourth  voyage  was  employed  in  fetching  over  the  women,  as  the 
last  and  most  insignificant  of  their  property,  whose  loss  would 
have  been  less  regretted  than  that  of  the  cattle.  I  hope  this 
circumstance  will  convince  the  European  fair  sex  of  our  superiority 
over  the  Turks  and  Arabs,  at  least  in  point  of  due  respect  to  them. 
These  people  say,  that  women  have  no  souls ;  and  indeed,  by 
the  brutal  manner  in  which  they  are  treated,  we  cannot  expect 
such  poor  creatures  to  have  any. 

On  the  18th  we  arrived  in  Esne.     Khalil  Bey  was  gone  to  Cairo, 
to  take  the  command  of  the  province  of  Benesouef ;  and  Ibrahim 
Bey  was  now  governor  of  Esne.     He  received  us  with  uncommon 
civility,  and  furnished  us  with  a  firman  to  the  Cacheff  who  com- 
manded the  province  of  Edfu.     On  our  return  on  board  we  found 
some  bread,  greens,  and  a  sheep,  sent  by  the  Bey,  for  which  we 
returned  a  fine  English  gun  and  some  powder.     At  our  desire,  he 
sent  us  a  soldier,  to  accompany  us  wherever  we  went,  but  he  gave 
strict  orders  that  we  should  not  take  any  of  the  emeralds  from  the 
mines  ;  for,  though  he  was  the  most  civilized  Turk  I  ever  knew,  he 
could  not  help  supposing,  that  we  did  not  go  into  these  deserts 
merely  to  see  the  mountains  and  the  sand.     He  imagined,  that,  if 
we  came  where  the  mines  were,  we  should  naturally  help  ourselves 
to  emeralds,  which  he  thought  would  be  worthy  our  notice.     We 
set  off  on  the  next  day,  and  arrived  at  the  island  of  Hovasee  before 
Edfu. 

It  was  rather  late  in  the  evening ;  and  on  our  approach  to  the 
fences  which  surrounded  the  village  to, keep  off  the  water,  we 
alarmed  the  Fellahs  so  much,  that  they  all  came  to  the  spot  where 
we  were,  made  us  proceed  up  to  a  place  where  there  was  no  danger 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Stc  303 

of  injuring  the  fence,  and  kept  strict  watch  over  us  all  night.  They 
were  certainly  right ;  for  if  our  boat  had  struck  against  the  fence, 
it  would  have  inevitably  made  a  breach,  and,  of  course,  inundated 
the  village  and  the  rest  of  the  land. 

On  the  21st,  in  the  morning,  we  all  went  to  the  Cacheff,  who 
did  what  he  coidd  to  procure  us  every  thing  necessary.  He  sent 
for  the  Sheik  of  the  tribe  that  inhabited  the  deserts  we  had  to  pass. 
His  name  was  Abada  ;  and  he  was  a  hostage  for  the  security  of  the 
people  that  worked  at  the  mines  near  the  Red  Sea.  We  made  our 
arrangements  about  the  camels  and  drivers,  and  found  the  terms 
very  reasonable ;  for  we  paid  only  one  piastre  a  day  for  every  camel, 
and  twenty  paras  for  every  man ;  out  of  which  they  were  to  pro- 
vide food  both  for  themselves  and  their  beasts.  It  was  agreed,  that 
we  should  keep  the  camels  as  long  as  we  pleased,  and  go  wherever 
we  thought  proper.  We  crossed  part  of  the  island  with  the  boat,  as 
there  were  four  feet  water  above  the  banks,  and  went  on  shore  on 
the  east  side  of  the  main  land.  On  our  arrival  we  met  with 
Mohammed  Aga,  the  chief  of  the  miners,  who  had  just  arrived  from 
the  emerald  mountains,  and  was  repairing  to  Esne.  He  seemed  to  be 
much  concerned  at  our  going  thither,  and  would  fain  have  per- 
suaded us  to  wait  till  he  returned,  that  he  might  accompany  us, 
as  no  one  could  go  to  the  place  without  him.  We  told  him  not  to 
be  alarmed,  for  we  were  not  in  search  of  precious  stones,  but  of 
antiquities.  This  did  not  appear  to  satisfy  him,  and  he  said  he 
would  soon  be  back  again.  We  remained  the  rest  of  the  day, 
waiting  while  the  drivers  prepared  bread  for  their  journey. 

In  the  morning  of  the  22d  there  was  no  appearance  of  de- 
parture. I  had  observed  a  sudden  change  in  the  Sheik  since 
he  saw  the  chief  miner,  and  began  to  suppose,  that  his  influence 
still  prevailed  on  the  Sheik  to  detain  us  at  least  as  much  as  he 
could.     The  miner  himself  had  proposed,  that  we  should  wait  at 


304  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

the  ruins  of  a  temple,  about  two  days  on  our  journey,  till  his 
return ;  to  which  proposal  of  course  we  did  not  agree.  I  saw 
clearly  he  was  not  a  little  alarmed  at  our  going,  for  fear  we  should 
make  some  discovery  among  the  minerals ;  and  all  our  assertions  to 
the  contrary  had  little  effect.  We  insisted  on  setting  off  that  day, 
and  we  did  so  the  same  evening. 

Our  party  was  increased  by  the  soldier  from  Esne,  four  camel- 
drivers,  and  a  Sheik  to  guide  us,  making  in  all  twelve  men.  We 
had  sixteen  camels,  six  of  which  were  laden  with  provisions,  water, 
culinary  utensils,  &c.  We  halted  at  the  foot  of  a  hill  three  hours 
distance. 

In  the  morning  of  the  23d  we  set  off  very  early,  and  arrived  at 
the  first  well  in  three  hours.  Here  the  camel-drivers  informed  us, 
that  we  could  not  advance  till  Sheik  Ibrahim  joined  us,  as  he  had 
to  bring  us  more  food  for  the  camels.  We  had  been  waiting  the 
whole  day  with  impatience,  but  without  seeing  any  body.  The 
valley  we  entered  afforded  a  good  level  road,  till  we  came  to  the 
foot  of  the  mountain,  about  fifteen  miles  from  the  Nile.  We  were 
seated  under  a  dry  sunt  tree,  at  a  little  distance  from  a  small  well. 
Hot  winds,  that  raised  the  sand,  blew  the  whole  day.  Several  of  the 
Ababde  came  to  water  their  cattle  at  the  well,  but  kept  at  a  distance 
from  us.  They  live  scattered  about  in  the  rocks  and  little  valleys 
among  the  mountains,  but  occasionally  assemble  together  in  a  few 
minutes.  To  pass  this  place  without  a  good  understanding  with 
their  Sheik  for  security  would  be  imprudent  and  dangerous.  Find- 
ing that  the  guide  did  not  arrive  in  the  evening,  we  sent  one  of  the 
drivers  to  the  Sheik,  requesting  him  to  send  the  man  immediately, 
otherwise,  if  he  were  not  with  us  at  sunrise,  we  should  return, 
and  complain  to  the  Cacheff. 

At  length,  on  the  next  morning,  the  24th,  he  appeared,  and  we 
set  off  pretty  early.   The  valley  we  now  entered  afforded  a  very  level 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c. 


305 


and  good  road.     There  are  in  it  several  sunt  and  sycamore  trees, 
and  in  various  places  the  thorny  plant  called  basillah,  represented 
in  Plate  36.     This  is  the  plant  on  winch  the  camels  feed.     It  is  of 
a  green  colour  at  a  certain  season  of  the  year,  I  believe  in  the 
spring ;  but  it  soon  becomes  dry,  and,  of  course,  of  a  straw  colour. 
It  bears  a  small  fruit  of  the  size  of  a  pea,  but  hollow  inside.     The 
stalk  is  of  a  similar  substance  with  that  of  rushes,  and  it  never 
grows  liigher  than  three  feet.     As  we  advanced,  the  valley  became 
narrow,  and  the  trees  thicker  in  some  places ;  but  they  gradually 
diminished,  and  at  last  we  entirely  lost  them.     On  the  right  of  the 
valley  as  we  went  up  I  observed  the  remains  of  a  settlement,  which 
I  considered  as  a  station  for  the  ancient  caravans  from  the  Nile  to 
Berenice,  of  which  we  afterwards  found  many  others  on  the  road, 
placed  at  proper  distances  for  the  caravans  to  halt  at  night.  At  some 
of  them  it  is  evident  there  were  wells  of  good  water,  but  they  are 
now  quite  filled  up.     Advancing  farther,  the  mountains  approach 
till  the  valley  becomes  little  else  than  a  wide  road  ;  and  after  pass- 
ing a  narrow  and  high  defile  we  entered  an  open  plain.     Here  the 
mountains  on  the  right  run  towards  the  south,  and  after  a  long 
circuit  return  to  form  a  valley  with  those  on  the  left.      At  the 
entrance  of  this  valley  stands  a  lrigh  rock,  on  the  left  of  which  is 
a  small  Egyptian  temple.      To  this  we  now  directed  our  course, 
and  arrived  at  it  six  hours  after  setting  off  from  the  well  in  the 
morning. 

On  our  approaching  it  we  were  not  a  little  pleased  at  the  sight. 
It  is  of  small  magnitude,  as  will  be  seen  in  Plate  20.  The  plan  of 
it  is  given  in  Plate  33,  No.  3.  The  portico,  which  is  built  project- 
ing from  the  rock,  has  four  columns,  two  in  front  and  two  in  the 
centre.  It  is  adorned  with  Egyptian  figures  in  intaglio  relievato, 
and  some  retain  their  colour  pretty  well.  They  are  as  large  as  life, 
and  not  of  the  worst  execution.     In  the  sekos,  which  is  cut  out  of 

R  R 


306  RESEARCHES   AND   OPERATIONS 

the  rock,  are  four  pilasters.  At  the  end  of  it  are  three  small 
chambers ;  and  there  are  two  others,  one  at  each  side,  in  the 
corners  of  the  lateral  walls,  on  which  are  to  be  seen  figures  and 
hieroglyphics  in  a  pretty  good  style.  On  one  of  the  columns  we 
observed  a  Greek  inscription,  which  I  did  not  copy,  as  Mr.  Beechey 
took  the  trouble  himself*.  I  made  the  drawing  of  the  exterior 
view  of  the  temple  stone  by  stone.  The  two  front  columns  are 
joined  to  the  sides  of  the  portico  by  a  wall  nearly  two  thirds  of 
their  height.  Near  the  temple  are  the  remains  of  an  enclosure, 
which  no  doubt  was  a  station  for  the  caravans ;  but  it  is  totally 
different  from  any  other  that  we  met  with  on  that  road  as  far  as 
Berenice.  It  consists  of  a  wall,  the  form  and  extent  of  which 
may  be  seen  in  Plate  33,  No.  4.  It  was  built  by  the  Greeks, 
is  twelve  feet  high,  and  contained  several  houses  within  it  for  the 
accommodation  of  travellers.  In  the  centre  was  a  well,  which 
is  now  filled  up  with  sand.  All  round  the  well  there  is  a  platform 
or  gallery,  raised  six  feet  high,  on  which  a  guard  of  soldiers  might 
walk  all  round.  On  the  upper  part  of  the  wall  are  holes  for 
discharging  arrows,  similar  to  those  we  see  formed  in  our  ancient 
buildings  for  the  same  purpose.  The  sides  of  the  gateways  are 
built  of  calcareous  stones,  and  the  wall  is  of  bricks.  By  this  time 
I  was  convinced,  that  this  must  have  been  a  road  to  some  place  of 
consequence,  as  it  was  obvious,  that  there  was  a  frequent  passage  of 
caravans  this  way.  The  place  is  named  Wady  el  Meeah.  The 
fort,  I  think,  must  have  been  built  by  some  of  the  Ptolemies,  to 
protect  the  caravans,  at  the  time  when  the  trade  with  India,  by  the 
way  of  Berenice  and  the  Bed  Sea,  flourished. 

At  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  25th,  we  continued  our 

*  The  inscription  taken  by  Mr.  Beechey  cannot  be  inserted,  as,  when  that  gentle- 
man returned  to  London,  he  unfortunately  doubted  whether  he  had  copied  it  cor- 
rectly enough  to  be  published. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  307 

journey.  No  vegetation  of  any  sort  was  to  be  seen  any  where. 
Sometimes  we  passed  over  wide  and  level  plains,  and  sometimes 
crossed  rugged  hills,  till  two  hours  before  sunset,  when  we  entered 
the  valley  called  Beezak  by  the  Arabs.  This  valley  runs  from  south 
to  north,  and  has  several  sunt  trees  scattered  about  in  it,  and  the 
usual  thorn.  Here  we  halted  for  the  night,  and  while  our  cook 
prepared  our  supper,  Mr.  Beechey  and  I  went  to  see  a  granite  rock 
at  some  distance,  as  the  Ababde  had  informed  us,  that  there  was  a 
magical  stone  there.  We  entered  the  valley  toward  the  north,  and 
observed,  that  it  must  have  been  an  ancient  road,  as  the  usual  marks 
of  camels'  feet  were  clearly  impressed  on  the  ground.  There  is 
seldom  any  sand  on  these  roads ;  on  the  contrary  they  are  covered 
with  small  pebbles,  and  where  the  passage  of  camels  was  frequent, 
they  formed  a  strong  impression,  which  is  to  be  seen  to  this  day, 
and  may  be  traced  to  great  length  through  those  valleys  till  they 
reach  the  sandy  country.  When  we  arrived  at  the  rock,  we  found 
it  to  be  of  fine  granite  in  very  large  masses.  On  one  side  of  it  are 
several  figures  cut  on  the  stone,  which  cannot  be  taken  for  any  other 
than  imitations  of  the  Egyptian.  They  are  meanly  scrawled,  without 
shape  or  form,  but,  united  with  the  circumstance  of  the  camels'  paths, 
they  are  sufficient  to  indicate,  that  the  valley  was  a  high  road,  which, 
by  the  direction  it  takes,  must  have  been  that  from  Coptos  to 
Berenice,  so  well  described  by  D'Anville.  At  this  place  Mr.  Eicci, 
the  doctor,  was  attacked  with  a  violent  disorder,  and  it  was  decided, 
that  he  should  return  the  next  morning,  as  it  would  increase  if  he 
advanced  farther  in  the  desert. 

On  the  26th,  in  the  morning,  our  caravan  was  divided  into  three 
different  detachments.  We  sent  the  luggage  and  provision  on  the 
way  toward  the  east,  which  we  intended  to  take ;  the  doctor  returned 
toward  the  Nile  on  the  west ;  Mr.  Beechey  and  myself  went  in  a 
south-east  direction,  to  see  something  that  the  Ababde  mentioned, 

rr2 


308  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

though  we  could  not  make  out  what  they  meant.  We  entered  a 
sandy  valley  with  rocks  on  each  side  nearly  perpendicular,  of  white 
and  calcareous  grit-stone,  with  some  veins  of  white  marble  in- 
termixed. After  some  hours'  march  we  reached  a  place  named 
Samount ;  here  we  found  the  remains  of  an  ancient  settlement  or 
station,  winch  appears,  by  its  situation,  to  have  been  on  the  road 
from  Berenice  to  Coptos. 

It  has  several  pieces  of  walls,  which  are  the  only  remains,  and 
evidently  a  well  in  the  centre  (See  Plate  33,  No.  5).  The  walls  are 
built  of  rough  stones  without  mortar. 

We  took  the  road  to  the  east  through  several  beautiful  and 
romantic  valleys,  if  so  they  may  be  called.  The  soil  was  sandy  and 
stony,  but  there  are  thorny  plants  to  feed  cattle,  and  so  many  sunt 
trees,  as  to  form  a  complete  forest  in  some  parts.  The  rocks  on 
each  side  are  of  divers  colours,  exhibiting  the  most  beautiful  and 
solitary  scenes.  One  who  wishes  to  retire  from  the  world  might 
find  a  charming  retreat  in  these  wilds,  were  it  not  for  the  want  of 
water  and  all  that  is  necessary  to  the  subsistence  of  human  life, 
beside  the  intense  heat  of  the  sun,  which  on  calm  days  is  so 
great  in  these  valleys,  as  to  be  almost  insupportable.  Advancing 
onward,  in  three  hours  we  reached  a  summit,  whence  we  saw 
at  some  distance  what  appeared  to  be  the  walls  of  a  large  and 
extensive  town,  surrounded  by  high  rocks,  as  if  by  a  fortifica- 
tion. On  our  approach  we  saw  it  was  an  extensive  sandy  plain, 
with  several  granite  eminences.  The  rocks  rose  at  some  dis- 
tance from  each  other,  and  appeared  like  so  many  little  islands. 
If  the  sand  had  been  water,  I  could  not  have  distinguished  this  spot 
from  the  centre  of  the  cataract,  I  mean  from  above  Syene  to  the 
island  of  Philce.  This  place  seemed  to  me  as  if  I  were  passing  the 
cataract,  with  the  difference  only,  that  I  had  a  camel  instead  of  a 
boat,  and  the  granite  appeared  to  be  of  a  finer  quality  than  that  of 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  309 

the  cataract,  approaching  to  porphyry.  If  the  ancients  did  not  make 
any  use  of  it,  it  was  no  doubt  in  consequence  of  the  difficulty  of 
conveying  it  to  the  Nile. 

From  this  place  we  travelled  to  the  left  toward  the  valley  where 
it  was  intended  we  should  halt.  Our  caravan  had  reached  the  place  an 
hour  before  us,  though  we  proceeded  very  fast  on  our  march.  Here 
we  found  two  wells,  one  of  salt  water,  and  the  other  quite  putrid 
and  brackish.     There  are  few  waters  in  the  world  better  than  that 
of  the  Nile ;  and  now  to  have  to  drink  the  worst  was  such  a  change 
in  one  day,  that  we  could  not  help  feeling  the  consequences  of  it. 
Mr.  Beechey  was  taken  very  ill,  from  drinking  at  the  first  well,  and 
we  had  great  apprehension  of  the  next,  which  was  worse.     We  had 
provision  for  a  month,  but  our  fresh  meat  was  gone,  and  it  was  with 
difficulty  we  could  procure  a  very  lean  goat.     The  tribe  of  this 
country  are  all  Ababde,  and  extend  from  the  confines  of  Suez  to  the 
tribe  of  Bisharein,  on  the  coast  of  the  Red  Sea,  below  the  latitude  of 
23°.  The  manners  of  this  race  show  them  to  be  lovers  of  freedom :  they 
prefer  living  among  these  solitary  rocks  and  deserts,  where  they  eat 
nothing  but  dhourra  and  drink  water,  before  submission  to  the  com- 
mand of  any  government  on  earth.    It  is  a  great  feast  among  them 
when  they  take  the  resolution  of  killing  a  lean  goat,  but  they  eat  it 
without  fearing,  that  any  rapacious  hands  should  take  it  from  them. 
A  man  of  this  stamp,  accustomed  to  liberty  and  independence,  would 
naturally  find  himself  as  in  a  prison,  if  under  the  control  of  even  the 
best  of  governments.     Their  greatest  care  is  for  their  camels,  which 
are  their  support.  They  breed  them  up  to  a  certain  growth,  and  then 
send  them  to  be  exchanged  for  dhourra,  which  constitutes  their 
food.     The  camels,  as  well  as  other  animals,  live  upon  the  common 
thorn  plant,  which  is  the  most  abundant  to  be  found  in  the  country. 
Some  of  the  most  industrious  of  the  Ababde  cut  wood,  and  make 
charcoal  with  it,  which  they  send  to  the  Nile  on  camels,  and  barter  it 


310  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

for  dhourra,  tallow,  and  tent  cloth.  Few,  however,  undergo  such 
a  labour,  for  they  like  to  live  at  their  ease.  A  pipe  of  tobacco  is  a 
luxury,  and  a  piece  of  a  fat  ram  quite  raw  a  great  dainty.  They  are  all 
nearly  naked,  badly  made,  and  of  small  stature.  They  have  fine  eyes, 
in  particular  the  women,  as  far  as  we  could  see  of  those  that  came 
to  the  wells.  The  married  women  are  covered,  the  rest  uncovered. 
Their  head-dresses  are  very  curious.  Some  are  proud  of  having 
hair  long  enough  to  reach  below  their  ears,  and  there  formed  into 
curls  which  are  so  entangled,  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  pass  a 
comb  through  them,  therefore  the  women  never  use  such  an  instru- 
ment. When  they  kill  a  sheep  that  has  any  fat,  which  is  very 
seldom,  they  grease  their  heads  all  over,  and  leave  the  fat  in  small 
pieces  to  be  melted  by  the  sun,  which  makes  them  appear  as  if  they 
had  powder  on  their  heads  ;  and  this  lasts  for  several  days,  till  the 
sun  melts  the  whole,  and  produces  an  exquisite  odour  for  those  who 
have  a  good  nose.  As  their  hair  is  very  crispy,  their  heads  remain 
dressed  for  a  long  time ;  and  that  they  may  not  derange  their  coiffure 
when  their  heads  itch,  they  have  a  piece  of  wood  something  like  a 
packing  needle,  with  which  they  scratch  themselves  with  great  ease 
without  disordering  their  head-dress,  of  winch  they  are  very  proud. 
Their  complexions  are  naturally  of  a  dark  chocolate ;  their  hair  quite 
black  ;  their  teeth  fine  and  white,  protuberant,  and  very  large. 

The  spot  where  the  well  at  which  we  halted  is  situated  is  an  am- 
pin theatre  of  rocks,  with  trees  in  the  centre.  In  the  winter  all  the 
scattered  Ababde  in  the  mountains  assemble  together  here,  and  if  any 
marriage  takes  place,  it  is  at  this  time.  It  is  always  performed  with 
due  ceremony.  The  lover  first  sends  a  camel  to  the  father  of  the  girl. 
If  this  be  accepted,  he  applies  personally  to  herself,  in  the  presence 
of  one  man  as  a  witness.  If  she  consent,  the  day  of  marriage  is  ap- 
pointed, before  winch  the  lover  does  not  see  his  bride  for  seven  days. 
On  the  eighth,  she  is  presented  to  lum  in  the  tent  of  her  father.  This 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  311 

day  is  celebrated  by  killing  some  of  their  lean  sheep,  and  by  camel 
races.  The  next  day  the  happy  couple  retire  to  the  tent  of  the 
bridegroom.  If  the  man  become  tired  of  his  wife,  he  sends  her  back 
with  the  same  camel  which  he  sent  to  her  father,  as  this  is  her  own 
from  the  time  of  the  marriage.  The  mother  of  the  bride  must  not 
speak  a  word  to  the  bridegroom  as  long  as  she  lives ;  a  regulation 
intended  to  prevent  her  from  making  mischief  between  the  young 
couple ;  and  which  might  perhaps  be  adopted  with  advantage  in 
some  countries  of  Europe. 

It  was  now  three  years  since  they  had  had  any  rain,  whence  there 
was  a  scarcity  of  thorns ;  which  was  the  cause,  as  they  said,  that 
their  sheep  were  so  meagre.  To  make  some  arrangements  for  our 
proceeding,  and  to  purchase  some  sheep,  we  were  obliged  to  stop 
all  this  day  at  the  well.  Having  contrived  to  boil  a  quantity  of 
the  water,  it  became  a  little  sweeter,  and  we  were  told,  that  the 
water  of  the  next  well  was  not  so  good  as  this.  The  Nile  water 
we  brought  with  us  became  bad  two  days  after.  We  had  put  it 
into  skins  called  hudry. 

Before  taking  leave  of  this  place,  I  shall  give  some  farther  account 
of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  people.  When  a  child  is  born, 
the  next  day  the  father  kills  a  sheep,  and  gives  the  child  a  name. 
^V^len  they  are  sick,  they  say  India  kerim,  and  lie  down  till  they 
are  better,  or  till  they  die.  I  saw  old  men  that  did  not  know  or 
could  not  tell  their  age,  as  they  keep  no  account  of  such  things ; 
but  by  appearance  they  must  have  been  ninety  years  old.  When 
any  one  dies,  they  dig  a  hole  in  the  ground,  and  put  the  corpse  into 
it,  and  very  often  on  the  spotwhere  the  person  died,  and  then 
remove  their  tents  a  little  farther  on.  They  never  intermarry  with 
any  but  their  own  people.  A  girl  had  been  refused  in  marriage  to 
a  Turkish  CachefF,  though  she  was  as  poor  as  any  of  her  tribe.  The 
Cacheff  attempted  to  use  force,  and  the  consequence  was,  that  they 


312  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

assembled  to  the  number  of  above  three  hundred,  and  he  prudently 
retired,  leaving  his  intended  bride  to  be  married  to  her  cousin. 
They  have  shown,  that  they  are  sensible  of  their  wild  manner  of 
living,  but  continue  in  it  for  the  sake  of  liberty ;  for  they  wrote  to 
the  Bey  at  Esne,  that  they  were  content  to  live  in  that  wild  state, 
as  all  their  forefathers  had  done,  to  remain  free  from  tyranny  and 
despotism  ;  and  that  they  would  be  quiet,  if  they  were  left  so  ;  but 
on  the  contrary,  they  would  sooner  perish  than  lose  their  liberty. 

Some  of  these  wild  people,  as  they  are  called,  came  to  the  well 

in  the  course  of  the  day,  and  as  they  saw  us  quiet  and  peaceful,  they 

ventured,  at  the  persuasion  of  our  drivers,  to  approach  us.     A  few 

of  them  had  been  as  far  as  the  Nile  to  purchase  dhourra,  and  these 

were  accounted  men  of  knowledge,  but  the  greater  part  had  never 

quitted  their  mountains.    One  of  them  seeing  a  piece  of  lemon-peel 

lying  on  the  ground,  wondered  what  it  was ;  and  another,  who  had 

been  to  the  Nile,  to  show  his  great  knowledge  of  things,  took  it  up, 

and  ate  it  with  an  air  of  self-sufficiency.     We  gave  them  a  piece  of 

loaf-sugar,  and  when  they  had  eaten  it,  they  declared,  that  our  valley 

must  be  better  than  their  own,  as  it  produces  such  good  and  sweet 

bread.     When  they  buy  dhourra  they  generally  get  it  ground  with 

the  usual  hand  millstone  in  the  village  where  they  buy  it,  and  carry 

the  flour  into  the  desert.     Their  bread  is  baked  under  the  ashes, 

and  is  in  the  form  of  a  large  cake,  without  leaven  or  salt.     Their 

great  enemies  were  the  tribe  of  El  Mahasa  and  Banousy,  which 

dwell  from  between  Suez  to  the  interior  of  Arabia  and  the  confines  of 

Syria.  With  these  tribes  they  had  had  many  battles,  but  it  appeared, 

that  neither  one  or  the  other  advanced  beyond  their  old  possessions. 

They  had  also  been  at  variance  with  the  Bishareines  on  the  south, 

but  were  now  at  peace  with  them  all. 

Their  arms  are  chiefly  spears,  and  swords  or  sabres  of  very  old 
fashion,  narrow  at  the  hilt  and  broad  at  the  point.    They  have  very 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  313 

few  firearms,  and  those  they  have  are  with  matchlocks.  Their  con- 
stant hard  way  of  life  made  them  accustomed  to  eat  raw  meat,  and 
to  suffer  the  inconveniences  of  a  desert  with  the  greatest  indif- 
ference. I  have  seen  them  for  near  four  and  twenty  hours  without 
drinking,  and  walking  the  whole  day  and  night  in  the  hottest  season. 
They  are  not  so  religious  as  the  Arabs  of  the  Nile.  I  scarcely  ever 
saw  them  saying  their  prayers.  By  the  great  caution  I  observed 
in  our  guide  as  we  advanced  in  the  desert,  I  perceived  it  was 
necessary,  that  he  should  acquaint  them  of  the  protection  we  had 
from  their  Sheik,  by  whose  permission  we  ventured  among  them 
thus  alone  and  without  any  escort.  It  appeared  to  me,  that  they 
were  much  exasperated  toward  the  soldiers,  who  had  lately  been 
sent  into  their  mountains  in  search  of  emeralds ;  and  had  it  not 
been  for  the  danger  of  their  Sheik,  whose  property  and  life  were  in 
the  hands  of  the  Turks,  they  would  soon  have  turned  these  people 
out  of  the  mountains,  particularly  as  the  miners  were  a  set  of 
desperate  fellows,  who  behaved  very  ill,  often  assailed  their  tents, 
committed  depredations,  and  insulted  their  women,  of  which  the 
Ababdes  complained  very  much. 

On  the  28th,  early  in  the  morning,  we  set  off,  and  passed  through 
many  rocky  valleys.  The  road  was  not  quite  so  level  as  before,  but 
good  enough  for  any  horse  to  trot  along.  There  was  nothing  in- 
teresting, except  large  plains  of  sand,  and  high  mountains  before  us. 
We  arrived  in  the  evening  at  a  spot  named  Gerf. 

On  the  29th  we  traversed  several  pleasing  valleys.  The  moun- 
tains that  surrounded  them  were  all  of  hard  stones,  and  beautifully 
variegated  with  different  coloured  marble. 

About  two  in  the  afternoon  we  saw  the  Ked  Sea  at  a  great 
distance,  and  having  entered  a  range  of  mountains,  stopped  at  a 
place  called  Owell,  or  place  of  the  dragon. 

On  the  30th  we  set  off  early,  bent  our  course  to  the  south- 

s  s 


314  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

south-west,  and  passed  through  several  valleys,  towards  a  very  high 
mountain   called  Zubara,  a  name  given   to  it  in  consequence  of 
the  emeralds  which  have  been  found  there.     At  the  foot  of  this 
mountain  about  fifty  men   were  encamped,  and  at  work  in   the 
old  mines  of  the  ancients,  in  hopes  of  finding  some  of  the  precious 
stones  :  but  it  appeared,  that  their  predecessors  had  searched  pretty 
well  before  they  quitted  their  works.     These  unfortunate  wretches 
received  a  supply  of  provision  from  the  Nile,  but  sometimes  it  did 
not  arrive  in  due  time,  and  great  famine  of  course  prevailed  among 
them.     There  were  two  small  wells,   not  more  than  half  a  day's 
journey  distant,  and  one  of  them  had  a  tolerably  good  quantity  of 
water.     Their  work  had  commenced  about  six  months  before,  but 
had  been  attended  with  no  success.     The  mines  or  excavations  of 
the  ancients  were  all  choked  up  with  the  rubbish  of  the  upper  part 
that  had  fallen  in,  and  the  labour  to  remove  this  rubbish  was  great, 
for  the  holes  were  very  small,  scarcely  capable  of  containing  the  body 
of  a  man,  crawling  like  a  cameleon.    They  were  all  thoroughly  tired 
of  their  situation,  and  cursed  the  being  who  had  caused  them  to  be 
sacrificed  in  these  deserts,  destitute  of  all  the  common  necessaries  of 
life.  They  rose  several  times  against  their  leaders,  and  in  one  instance 
two  of  them  were  killed.  On  the  day  we  were  there  one  of  the  poor 
wretches  nearly  fell  a  victim  to  the  avaricious  caprice  of  their  power- 
ful employer.     As  he  was  penetrating  into  one  of  the  holes,  part 
of  the  roof  fell  down  upon  him,  and  not  only  cut  off  his  retreat,  but 
nearly  killed  him  on  the  spot.     He  was  fortunately  taken  out  alive, 
but  it  did  not  give  much  encouragement  to  the  rest.    We  contrived 
to  acquire  all  the  information  we  could  about  our  expedition,  and 
received  very  favourable  accounts  of  it,  with  some  additional  hopes 
respecting  the  old  town  in  question,  which,  according  to  these  people, 
was  only  six  hours  distant  south  from  us,  and  at  six  hours  more  there 
was  a  fountain  of  water.    The  sea  was  only  six  hours  distant  from  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  315 

town,  of  which  we  hoped  to  have  a  fine  view  before  night.  We 
went  to  see  the  entrance  into  the  mines.  They  were  something 
like  the  common  tombs  at  Gonrnou  cut  in  the  rock  ;  but  I  observed, 
that  the  cavities  were  made  so  as  to  follow  the  veins  of  mica  and 
marble,  and  had  been  carried  to  a  great  distance  into  the  bowels  of 
the  mountain,  till  they  found  the  emeralds. 

There  are  a  great  number  of  mines  all  over  this  mountain ;  and 
the  rubbish  taken  out  of  them,  which  is  scattered  about,  gives  an 
idea  of  the  amazing  works  of  the  ancients. 

The  excavations   are  not  carried  on  in  any  regular  direction. 
Sometimes  they  are  in  an  inclined  plane  of  various  angles,  at  other 
times  they  are  perpendicular,  or  horizontal,  as  the  mica  runs.    I  was 
told  by  the  miners,  that,  as  they  advanced  towards  the  centre,  and 
at  great  distances  from  the  entrance,  the  two  strata  of  marble,  which 
inclose  the  mica,  approach  each  other,  till  at  last  they  join,  and  there 
is  the  most  chance  of  finding  the  emeralds.     Where  the  rocks  form 
separate  hills,  I  observed,  that  the  veins  of  marble  and  the  mica 
take  their  course  towards  the  centre,  and,  by  the  distance  they  run 
inward  from  their  entrance,  it  appears  to  me,  that  the  j)lace  where 
the  emeralds  are  found  must  be  pretty  near  the  centre  of  the  lull ; 
I  mean  under  the  highest  point  of  that  elevation,  which  distin- 
guishes one  lull  from  another.     I  was  not  fortunate  enough  to  see 
any  emeralds,  as  these  people  had  not  met  with  any  in  all  their 
researches.    Indeed  their  leader  showed  us  some  few  specimens  of  a 
very  inferior  kind,  and  what  was  found  till  that  period  was  only  the 
matrix.     He  was  determined,  however,  to  persevere ;  and  I  heard 
some  months  after,  that  he  had  succeeded  in  finding  some,  but  in 
small  quantity.     I  believe  too  they  are  of  a  secondary  quality,  by 
what  I  have  seen  of  them.     The  people  who  live  there  are  in  a 
dreadful  situation.     The  nearest  habitation  is  on  the  Nile,  which 
cannot  be  reached  in  less  than  seven  days  by  a  caravan.     They 

s  s  2 


316  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

depend  entirely  on  the  supply  of  provision  sent  them  from  Esne, 
which  is  sometimes  very  scanty,  though  only  bread,  rice,  and  lentils  : 
and  according  to  their  account  it  happens  very  often,  that  their  sup- 
ply is  delayed  merely  by  the  negligence  of  the  purveyors,  who  are 
directed  to  furnish  them  with  it.  Besides,  they  have  another  source 
of  apprehension.  They  consider,  and  with  good  reason,  that  the 
Ababde  are  not  pleased  to  see  them  in  the  deserts ;  and  much  less 
since  some  of  the  miners  behaved  very  brutally  to  them,  surprising 
them  in  their  tents,  and  insulting  their  women,  as  before  stated ; 
and  they  were  alarmed  for  the  consequences. 

Their  great  fear  was,  that  the  Ababde  would  assail  the  caravan 
of  provision  on  its  way  from  the  Nile  :  for  as  they  had  no  stock  with 
them,  before  another  supply  could  arrive,  which  would  require  at 
least  fourteen  days,  they  would  all  perish  with  hunger.  These 
considerations  rendered  the  people  imwilling  to  work,  and  the 
operations  were  going  on  very  slowly  when  we  were  there. 

Having  procured  an  old  man  from  among  the  natives  to  guide 
us  to  the  ruins  of  the  anticipated  Berenice,  we  sought  all  the 
information  we  could  from  the  people,  and  some  of  the  miners  who 
had  been  at  the  very  place  when  Monsieur  Caliud  was  there. 
Their  account  of  it  indeed  was  not  in  conformity  with  that  of  Mon- 
sieur Caliud ;  but  we  considered,  that  these  people  went  only  in 
search  of  mines,  and  little  regarded  the  beauties  of  ancient  archi- 
tecture, or  the  magnificence  of  edifices,  which  according  to  our 
expectations  must  be  stupendous  at  least. 

We  prepared  for  our  departure  on  the  next  morning,  the  1st  of 
October ;  and  when  we  had  gone  about  half  a  mile  Ave  perceived, 
that  we  were  without  our  guides.  Both  he  who  had  brought  us 
from  the  Nile,  and  the  old  man  who  was  to  conduct  us  all  over  the 
country,  to  see  the  town  and  other  places,  were  missing.  We  were 
consequently  obliged  to  return  in  search  of  them,  and  found  them 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  317 

hidden  behind  a  rock,  conversing  secretly  with  each  other.  They 
professed  to  have  been  in  search  of  a  sheep,  which  was  stolen  in  the 
night,  and  we  had  nothing  else  to  live  upon  ;  but  as  they  said  they 
could  not  find  it,  we  set  off  for  the  so  much  desired  ancient  city  of 
Berenice. 

Our  road  was  now  among  the  high  rocks,  and  in  very  narrow 
valleys,  but  in  which  there  were  a  great  number  of  trees.  Some- 
times the  mountains  diverged  into  wide  circles  one  or  two  miles 
wide.  In  such  places  the  wood  is  abundant,  and  it  is  from  these 
that  the  miners  get  the  timber  for  their  use.  The  most  common 
plants  among  them  are  the  sunt  and  the  usual  thorn.  On  the 
ground  among  the  sandy  spots  I  observed  the  coloquintida  and 
other  shrubs.  Our  direction  was  toward  the  south-west,  and  gra- 
dually to  the  west,  till  Ave  reached  the  south  side  of  the  mountain 
of  Zubara,  which  is  the  highest  of  the  emerald  mountains.  Here 
we  were  led  by  the  old  man  in  various  directions  through  wild 
and  craggy  places  for  seven  hours.  He  told  us,  the  place  we 
wanted  to  see  was  near,  but  we  had  a  high  pass  to  go  over  the 
mountain  named  Arraie.  We  continued  our  journey  and  ascended 
a  kind  of  gully,  at  the  side  of  which  was  something  like  an  ancient 
road  or  rather  path.  On  the  summit  of  the  mountain  above  we 
observed  a  large  wall,  so  situated,  that  it  appeared  to  look  over  the 
path  on  both  sides  of  the  mountain.  When  we  reached  the  top  of 
the  road,  our  camels  were  exhausted ;  some  of  them  had  fallen  on 
the  way,  and  were  unloaded  to  enable  them  to  ascend,  and  the 
strongest  camels  had  to  return  to  fetch  the  loads  of  the  others. 
I  never  saw  the  camels  suffer  so  much  on  any  occasion  as  on  this. 
A  steep  and  craggy  road  over  a  mountain  is  no  more  adapted  to 
a  camel,  than  the  deep  sand  of  the  desert  to  a  horse. 

From  this  summit  we  began  to  look  out  for  the  desired  Berenice, 
but  alas  !  in  vain.     Our  imagination  was  so  raised  by  the  account  of 


318  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Monsieur  Caliud,  that  I,  for  my  part,  expected  to  distinguish  the 
town  by  the  lofty  columns  and  architecture  of  some  magnificent 
edifice,  or  the  remains  of  some  high  tower,  which  was  to  serve  me  as 
a  guide  to  the  spot,  to  which  I  intended  to  run  on  the  first  view  of 
it.  Mr.  Beechey  was  not  less  anxious  than  myself,  and  in  equal 
expectation  of  grandeur.  We  had  made  our  arrangements  how  to 
proceed  when  we  arrived.  We  considered,  that,  as  our  provision 
was  scanty,  we  could  stop  there  but  a  few  days,  and  we  had 
already  distributed  our  time  accordingly.  He  was  to  take  drawings 
of  all  the  beautiful  edifices,  monuments,  figures,  paintings,  if  any, 
sculptures,  statues,  columns,  &c.  I  was  to  run  all  over  the  vast 
ruins  like  a  pointer,  as  fast  as  I  could,  to  observe  where  any  thing 
was  to  be  found  or  discovered,  to  take  measures  of  all  the  beautiful 
monuments,  and  plans  of  every  stone  in  that  great  city.  Such  was 
our  imagination  ;  now  to  the  fact.  From  the  summit  where  we  now 
were,  I  expected  to  have  a  distant  view  not  only  of  the  sea,  but  of 
a  wide  plain,  as  it  was  natural  to  suppose  that  a  town  like  Pompeii 
could  not  have  been  built  among  these  savage  mountains  without 
one  foot  of  cultivated  land  about  it.  The  non-appearance  of  any 
wide  space  I  attributed  to  the  situation  where  we  were,  and  pre- 
sumed, that  we  should  be  agreeably  surprised  on  turning  some  of 
the  rocks  before  us  ;  so  that  my  expectation  was  not  diminished  in 
the  least.  On  our  descent  the  old  man  told  us,  that  we  should  soon 
see  the  ballet.  He  had  already  said,  that,  previous  to  our  reaching 
the  town  we  should  see  some  grottoes  in  the  mountains,  which, 
according  to  our  Quixotic  imagination,  we  concluded  were  the 
tombs  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  vast  city.  We  advanced  insensibly, 
I  continually  keeping  my  eyes  on  the  points  of  some  rocks  which 
stood  before  me,  with  the  expectation,  that  on  turning  the  next 
angle,  I  should  have  the  glorious  sight ;  and  indeed  the  scattered  and 
ruined  walls  of  some  ancient  enclosures  announced  to  us,  that  we 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  319 

should  soon  see  some  habitation.  I  observed  a  square  hole  in  the 
rock,  which  had  evidently  been  cut  by  some  of  the  miners  in  form  of 
a  chapel,  as  before  mentioned  (See  Plate  S3,  No.  7). 

I  now  began  to  congratulate  myself  that  we  had  nearly  arrived, 
and  while  I  was  thus  thinking,  all  at  once  the  old  man,  who  was  at 
the  head  serving  us  as  a  guide,  made  a  sign  to  halt.  The  drivers  gave 
the  signal  to  the  camels,  and  the  camels,  who  were  already  exhausted 
by  passing  over  the  mountains,  did  not  wait  for  its  repetition,  but 
with  all  the  baggage  were  quickly  crouched  on  the  ground,  before  I 
could  perceive  the  reason  why.    I  told  the  drivers,  that  we  did  not 
intend  to  stop  there,  but  would  advance  farther  into  the  town  where 
the  houses  were  to  be  seen  ;  when  to  our  no  small  astonishment 
we  were  told  by  the  old  man,  that  this  was  the  place  where  the 
other  Christian  was   before.      I  must  confess,  that  my  stupidity 
would   not  allow  me  at   once   to  conjecture,    that  the   report  of 
Monsieur  Caliud  could  be  so  exaggerated,  as  to  lead  us  to  suppose 
we  should  find  another  Pompeii  instead  of  the  place  at  which  we 
had  just  arrived  ;  and  reproached  the  old  man  for  his  stopping  there, 
and  not  advancing  to  the  town,  which,  according  to  his  own  account, 
could  not  be  far  off.    He  again  protested,  that  this  was  the  place,  and 
that  there  was  no  other  with  houses  in  any  part  of  these  deserts  or 
mountains.     I  was  still  deeper  in  perplexity,  and  continued  to  urge 
him  to  take  us  farther.    As  to  Mr.  Beechey,  he  was  in  the  same  pre- 
dicament as  myself.    Resolved  not  to  submit  to  what  I  thought  the 
imposition  of  the  old  man  any  longer,  as  it  now  wanted  four  hours  to 
sunset,  I  mounted  my  camel  again,  which  would  much  rather  have 
remained  where  he  was  than  have  gone  in  search  of  old  Berenice.   I 
set  off  immediately ;  Mr.  Beechey  did  the  same,  and  consequently 
all  the  rest  of  the  caravan  followed  at  a  distance.  We  entered  a  long 
valley,  which  ran  toward  the  south,  and  filled  with  the  hopes  of 


320  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

seeing  the  said  Berenice  on  turning  every  corner  of  the  valley  in 
succession,  we  went  on  incessantly  for  four  hours,  till  it  was  nearly 
dark,  without  perceiving  the  smallest  appearance  of  any  habitation. 
At  last  we  reached  another  valley,  more  spacious,  and  covered  with 
the  trees  which  the  Ababde  call  egley,  and  other  plants.  The  valley 
runs  from  south-east  to  north-west,  and  having  lost  all  hopes  of 
finding  Berenice  that  night,  we  halted  to  rest  under  a  beautiful  rock 
on  a  clean  bed  of  sand,  instead  of  sleeping  among  the  magnificent 
temples  of  the  great  city.  By  this  time  we  were  without  water, 
and  though  in  the  proximity  of  a  great  town,  according  to  Monsieur 
Caliud,  no  water  could  be  had  at  less  than  fifteen  miles  distance. 
The  camels,  though  more  than  tired,  were  obliged  to  set  off  imme- 
diately to  the  spring,  not  only  to  drink  themselves,  but  to  fetch  water 
for  us,  as  we  were  much  in  want. 

Many  were  the  conjectures  we  made  on  the  cause,  that  could 
induce  the  old  man  not  to  show  us  the  place  described  by  Monsieur 
Caliud.  I  sometimes  fancied  that  our  drivers  had  received  instruc- 
tions from  the  leader  of  the  miners,  when  we  met  him  at  the  Nile, 
that  we  might  not  see  any  of  the  mines  in  or  near  the  town  of 
Berenice  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  we  could  not  believe  that  the 
drivers  would  all  with  one  consent  deceive  us,  merely  to  oblige  a 
man  who  had  no  influence  over  them.  Thus  we  did  not  know  what 
to  think.  Our  provision  at  this  time  began  to  make  us  cautious. 
We  had  biscuit  for  twenty  days  yet ;  but  the  loss  of  the  sheep  in  the 
mountain  made  it  worse.  Our  little  stock  of  water  also  was  quite 
putrid.  Still  we  were  easily  satisfied,  so  that  we  did  but  reach  the 
desired  emporium  of  the  commerce  formerly  carried  on  by  the  nations 
of  Europe  with  India ;  but  alas  !  this  much  sought  for  town  vanished, 
or  rather  never  appeared,  like  the  desired  island  of  the  squire  of 
the  astonishing  champion  of  La  Mancha.     We  contented  ourselves 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  321 

with  biscuit,  and  a  piece  of  mutton  killed  three  days  before,  which 
by  the  by  gave  me  reason  to  congratulate  myself  on  not  possessing 
the  sense  of  smell. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  2d,  we  perceived  a  high  mountain 
on  the  south-east  of  the  valley,  about  four  or  five  miles  distant. 
The  valley  we  were  told  was  named  Wady  el  Gimall.  It  was  quite 
full  of  that  beautiful  tree  the  egley,  and  as  we  had  to  wait  the  return 
of  the  camels,  I  thought  we  might  ascend  the  mountain  to  have  a 
view  of  the  country,  or  of  the  remains  of  Berenice.  Accordingly 
we  set  off,  and  on  our  way  observed  several  flocks  of  antelopes,  from 
which  we  were  in  hopes  to  obtain  a  repast  for  our  empty  stomachs, 
but  with  all  our  caution  we  never  could  get  near  enough  to  shoot  at 
them.  They  were  pretty  fat,  and  we  were  extremely  hungry,  but  for 
all  this  we  were  not  able  to  approach  them.  The  valley  continued 
very  beautiful,  adorned  with  several  groves  of  suvaroe  and  debbo 
trees,  in  addition  to  a  profusion  of  the  egley.  The  rocks  on  each  side 
afforded  many  pleasing  recesses  to  admit  the  traveller  to  rest  and 
solitude.  Perhaps  no  one  had  been  in  this  valley  for  many  centuries, 
and  very  likely  no  one  will  pass  through  it  for  many  more  to  come. 
On  our  reaching  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  we  took  a  view  all 
round  us.  We  had  the  map  of  the  coast  of  the  Red  Sea  by  D'Anville, 
and  a  small  perspective  glass.  The  peak  on  which  we  stood  com- 
manded a  prospect  of  many  miles  all  around  ;  but  no  place  was  to 
be  seen,  where  the  city  could  have  stood.  All  that  we  saw  was  the 
summits  of  other  lower  mountains,  and  at  last  we  began  to  be  per- 
suaded, that  no  such  town  existed,  and  that  Monsieur  Caliud  had 
seen  the  great  city  only  in  his  own  imagination.  It  was  rather 
provoking,  to  have  taken  such  a  journey  in  consequence  of  such  a 
fabricated  description  ;  and  I  hope  this  circumstance  will  serve  as  a 
warning  to  travellers,  to  take  care  to  what  reports  they  listen,  and 
from  whom  they  receive  their  information.     From  the  accounts  of 

T  T 


322  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

persons  who  arc  so  given  to  exaggeration  you  cannot  venture  on 
a  journey  without  running  the  risk  of  being  led  astray  and  dis- 
appointed, as  we  were  in  our  search  after  the  said  town  with  its 
eight  hundred  houses,  and  much  like  Pompeii. 

Having  observed  all  the  adjacent  country  and  the  mountains 
near  us,  I  took  a  distant  view  where  the  opening  between  the 
mountains  permitted,  and  observed,  that  the  valley  from  which  we 
ascended  the  mountain  continued  its  course  toward  the  east ;  and 
it  appeared  by  the  gullies,  that  the  water  of  the  rainy  seasons  dis- 
charged itself  in  that  direction.  On  the  south-east  I  saw  some  high 
mountains,  which  we  were  told  by  the  old  man,  who  had  followed  us 
all  the  way,  were  near  the  sea.  Taking  a  minute  view  in  that 
direction,  on  the  north-east  from  the  place  where  we  stood,  I  per- 
ceived the  motion  of  the  water  under  the  sun  at  a  great  distance, 
and  we  concluded,  that  the  valley  must  conduct  us  to  the  sea-coast. 
Accordingly  we  made  up  our  minds  to  pursue  that  course ;  and,  as 
we  had  been  disappointed  in  seeing  the  extensive  ruins  of  Berenice, 
we  proposed  to  ourselves  to  try  whether  we  could  reach  the  spot 
Where  DAnville  lays  down  the  Berenice  Trogloditica.  We  there- 
fore descended  the  mountain,  and  returned  to  the  place  where  we 
had  passed  the  preceding  night,  to  wait  the  return  of  the  camels 
with  a  fresh  supply  of  water  ;  of  which  we  had  so  little  by  this  time, 
that  a  single  zemzabie  (a  leathern  bag  containing  nearly  three  quarts) 
only  remained.  Our  thirst  was  great,  and  we  felt  in  some  degree 
the  dreadful  calamity  of  being  in  a  desert  without  water.  Hunger  is 
painful  to  endure,  but  thirst  is  by  far  more  intolerable.  We  often  hear 
to  what  extremities  a  man  can  be  reduced  by  hunger,  because  water 
is  always  at  hand ;  but,  if  this  element  were  to  be  deficient,  we  should 
see  still  more  dreadful  effects.  At  last,  tluee  hours  after,  the  camels 
appeared  in  sight  at  the  head  of  the  valley  on  the  west,  and  we  rejoiced 
much  at  their  arrival.     The  poor  drivers  were  excessively  fatigued  ; 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  323 

but  we  had  no  time  to  lose  in  debates.  When  we  told  them,  that 
we  intended  to  go  farther  on  to  the  south,  they  were  all  in  consterna- 
tion, and  we  had  much  ado  to  persuade  them  to  agree  to  it.  Indeed, 
it  was  not  without  promises  and  threats  that  we  prevailed  on  them. 
At  length  we  set  off  toward  the  sea  in  a  north-east  direction. 

After  travelling  six  hours  we  arrived  in  a  valley,  the  rocks  on 
each  side  of  which  were  nearly  perpendicular.  They  were  com- 
posed of  calcareous  stone,  intermixed  with  strata  of  white  marble, 
as  well  as  of  red  granite.  During  this  time  we  proceeded  without 
knowing  in  the  least  where  our  journey  would  end,  our  only  hope 
arising  from  the  sight  I  had  of  the  sea  in  the  morning.  At  sunset 
we  came  to  a  place  where  there  was  an  opening  in  the  mountains 
not  unlike  a  breach.  It  is  called  by  the  Ababde  Sharm  el  Gemaal 
(the  rent  of  the  camels),  and  appears  as  if  the  rocks  had  been 
separated  by  art ;  for  each  side  is  so  perpendicular,  that  it  might  be 
supposed  to  have  been  cut  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  way  through 
it.  After  we  had  passed  this,  we  entered  a  more  spacious  valley. 
The  hills  were  small ;  and  the  sandy  banks  made  us  expect  to  reach 
the  sea  every  moment.  We  went  on  till  a  late  hour,  and  at  last 
halted  on  a  spot  where  we  thought  the  sand  would  afford  us  a 
pretty  comfortable  bed.  Fortunate  for  me  that  it  was  so ;  for 
the  camel  was  so  weary,  that  no  sooner  did  we  reach  the  sand, 
than,  supposing  I  intended  to  go  still  farther,  he  completely 
threw  me  off  his  back,  left  me  there,  saddle  and  all,  and,  without 
delay,  set  out  to  feed  among  the  thorns.  Mr.  Beechey  and  myself, 
anxious  for  the  result  of  our  journey,  and  in  hopes  of  seeing  the 
sea,  which  we  thought  not  far  off;  walked  to  the  summit  of  one  of 
the  small  hills  ;  but,  on  reaching  it,  we  could  scarcely  perceive  any 
distant  object,  as  it  was  nearly  dark.  I  was  fully  convinced  of  the 
non-existence  of  the  imaginary  Berenice,  and  felt  the  necessity 
of  being  on  friendly  terms  with   our  guides,  who  I  found  were 

t  x  2 


324  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

pretty  correct  in  the  information  they  had  given  to  us.  But  no  one 
could  have  supposed  that  a  man,  who  found  only  a  few  desolate 
ruins  of  the  miserable  residence  of  poor  miners,  could  fabricate  a 
report,  that  he  had  discovered  the  city  of  Berenice,  the  emporium 
of  the  commerce  between  India,  Africa,  and  Europe. 

Early  on  the  next  day  we  resumed  our  journey.  The  valley 
still  continued  in  the  same  direction,  but  to  my  amazement  the 
hills,  instead  of  diminishing,  increased  in  size,  which  made  us  fearful, 
that  we  were  yet  far  from  the  sea.  At  length,  about  noon,  the  valley 
opened  all  at  once,  and  at  the  distance  of  five  miles  we  saw  the 
Arabian  gulf.  The  sight  of  an  open  horizon,  after  the  contracted 
view  of  a  long  and  narrow  valley,  was  much  welcomed  by  us.  On  our 
reaching  the  shore,  we  plunged  into  the  sea  like  the  crocodiles  into 
the  Nile,  and  found,  that  a  bath  after  a  long  journey  was  very 
refreshing ;  we  had  no  time  to  lose,  as  our  biscuit,  as  we  calculated, 
would  last  only  seventeen  days,  and  not  an  hour  longer. 

Directly  opposite  us  we  saw  the  island  of  Jambo.  It  appeared 
at  first  sight  only  a  sand  bank ;  but  on  narrower  inspection  we  per- 
ceived, that  it  had  some  high  rocks  on  the  south  side.  It  was 
pretty  high  in  the  centre,  and  gradually  sloped  toward  the  north. 
The  Ababde  call  it  Gasira  el  Gimal,  I  suppose  because  it  is  just 
before  the  valley  of  this  name.  All  the  shore,  as  far  as  we  could 
see,  was  composed  of  a  mass  of  petrifactions  of  various  kinds.  I  do 
not  know  whether  I  give  the  right  name  to  this  sort  of  composition, 
but  it  is  a  mixture  of  sea-weeds,  madrepores,  corals,  roots  and  shells 
of  many  sorts,  all  formed  into  a  solid  mass  like  a  rock,  which  extends 
from  the  bank  of  sand  that  forms  the  boundary  of  the  tide,  and 
runs  into  the  sea  for  a  great  length.  In  some  places  there  are  beds 
of  sand,  but  there  is  not  a  spot  any  where  for  a  boat  to  land  without 
the  risk  of  being  staved  against  the  rock.  We  now  resolved  without 
loss  of  time  to  take  the  road  toward  the  south  along  the  coast,  as 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  325 

far  as  till  we  might  suppose  we  had  passed  the  spot,  where  our  maps 
place  the  ruins  of  Berenice,  which,  according  to  D'Anville,  who  is 
considered  as  best  skilled  in  ancient  geography,  is  immediately 
after  the  Cape  Lepte  extrema,  a  little  beyond  the  24th  degree  of 
latitude.  We  communicated  our  intention  to  our  drivers,  who  were 
thunderstruck  with  fear  on  hearing  such  a  project.  They  positively 
refused  to  accompany  us  any  farther,  and  though  we  were  very 
urgent  with  them,  it  was  all  to  little  purpose.  They  remonstrated, 
that  we  ran  a  great  risk ;  our  stock  of  biscuit  was  very  scanty, 
there  was  no  water  to  be  found  on  that  road,  and  we  might  meet 
the  Bisharein,  whose  country  we  proposed  to  approach.  But 
being  determined  to  proceed  in  our  design,  we  took  that  method, 
which  persuades  every  one  to  act  even  against  his  own  will :  we 
told  them,  that  we  meant  to  go  whether  they  would  or  not ;  and 
that,  as  we  were  superior  in  number,  we  would  compel  them.  They 
soon  saw,  that  it  was  in  vain  to  resist ;  and  at  length  it  was  con- 
cluded, that  the  camels  should  go  with  two  drivers  to  the  nearest 
spring,  to  take  as  much  water  as  they  could  ;  that  on  their  return  we 
should  set  off  to  proceed  as  far  as  El  Galahen,  to  which  place  we 
made  them  understand  we  must  go ;  and  thence  take  the  road 
across  to  the  well  of  running  water.  On  a  calculation  we  found,  that 
with  great  economy  in  using  the  water  we  could  do  very  well. 

Accordingly  on  the  4th  the  camels  set  off  for  the  well,  and  we 
had  to  wait  two  days  till  their  return.  During  this  interval  Mr. 
Beechey  and  myself  made  an  excursion  along  the  coast  toward  the 
north,  to  examine  a  small  bay,  which  we  observed  in  the  chart.  We 
went  along  the  sea-shore,  and  on  our  arrival  at  the  spot  where  the 
bay  ought  to  have  been,  we  found  that  it  did  not  exist.  The  coast 
was  every  where  the  same  with  respect  to  the  petrifactions,  and  the 
plain,  which  extends  from  the  mountains  to  the  sea,  was  covered  in 
many  places  with  woods  of  sycamore  and  ciall  trees  ;  which  confirms 


326  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

the  account  of  Bruce,  for  undoubtedly  this  must  have  been  the  place 
where  he  landed,  when  he  went  to  visit  the  emerald  mines.  The 
distance,  in  a  right  line,  from  the  mines  to  the  sea,  is  about  twenty- 
five  miles,  and  it  may  be  thirty  or  thirty-two  by  the  two  valleys, 
which  are  the  only  passable  roads.  I  do  not  see  any  reason  why 
Mr.  Bruce's  assertion  of  having  visited  these  mountains  should  be 
doubted.  Neither  the  distance  he  had  to  walk  from  the  sea,  nor 
the  danger  of  falling  a  victim  to  the  rapacity  of  the  natives,  are  any 
arguments  against  it ;  for  we  have  instances  enough  to  prove,  that 
he  was  capable  of  overcoming  greater  difficulties  than  these ;  and  I 
will  venture  to  assert,  that  the  only  reason  why  such  doubts  coidd 
have  been  started,  as  well  as  many  others  respecting  his  work,  was 
the  spirit  of  contradiction  excited  by  the  illiberality  of  travellers,  and 
those  who  were  no  travellers ;  the  former,  because  they  have  not 
power  to  resist  jealousy,  which,  in  spite  of  all  their  efforts  to  conceal 
it,  shows  itself  through  the  veil  of  their  pretended  liberality  and 
impartiality ;  and  the  latter,  because  they  are  unable  to  control 
their  bad  propensity  to  dispute,  and  condemn  every  thing  that  they 
have  no  knowledge  of. 

In  some  rocks  that  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  facing  the 
sea,  we  saw  several  mines  of  sulphur,  but  I  doubt  whether  their 
produce  would  be  advantageous,  owing  to  their  situation.  They 
are  near  the  sea,  but  the  conveyance  by  land  to  the  Nile  would 
prevent  any  benefit  from  the  speculation.  Being  persuaded,  that 
no  vessel  could  be  loaded  on  that  coast,  we  returned  to  the  place 
where  we  had  left  our  caravan :  hunger  was  not,  I  believe,  visible  on 
our  faces,  for  we  contrived  to  make  some  repasts  out  of  some  shell- 
fish, which  abound  in  great  quantities  along  the  coast,  and  I 
cherished  the  idea,  that  as  long  as  I  could  find  some  of  them  I 
should  not  perish.  The  large  periwinkles  are  excellent,  and,  when 
young,  are  very  tender  and  delicious,  particularly  to  a  hungry  man. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  327 

We  had  some  of  them  which  weighed  half  a  pound,  and  part  of  the 
tail  quite  delicate,  though  the  white,  or  upper  part,  is  rather  tough. 
On  our  return  we  found  that  the  guide  had  met  with  an 
acquaintance  of  his  who  lived  by  catching  fish,  not  far  from  where 
we  were.  His  only  habitation  consisted  of  a  tent  four  feet  high 
and  five  feet  wide;  and  his  wife,  a  daughter,  and  a  young  man, 
her  husband,  formed  the  whole  family.  We  contrived  to  persuade 
the  old  man  to  go  out  and  fish,  and,  though  he  was  living  in  those 
deserts,  he  knew  the  worth  of  money,  for  he  said  that  there  were 
people  among  them  who  went  yearly  on  the  Nile  and  purchased 
dhourra,  which  they  carried  on  camels  all  round  those  deserts,  and 
sold  it  to  the  inhabitants,  for  which  they  took  in  exchange  either 
camels  or  money ;  consequently  we  easily  persuaded  the  old  fisher 
to  go  out  and  catch  fish  for  us  ;  in  fact,  he  set  off  to  sea,  accom- 
panied by  his  son-in-law.  Their  mode  of  fishing  is  somewhat  strange ; 
they  throw  in  the  water  a  part  of  the  trunk  of  the  doomt  tree, 
perhaps  ten  or  twelve  feet  long,  at  each  end  of  which  is  a  piece  of 
wood  attached  in  an  horizontal  direction,  so  as  to  prevent  the  tree 
from  turning  round ;  at  one  of  the  ends  a  small  pole  is  stuck  up- 
right to  serve  as  a  mast,  on  the  top  of  which  there  is  a  piece  of 
wood  horizontally  fastened  as  that  below.  A  woollen  shawl  thrown 
over  it,  and  fastened  at  each  end,  and  to  the  piece  of  wood  ho- 
rizontally fixed  below,  forms  a  kind  of  sail,  and  the  two  fishermen 
mount  on  the  large  trunk  as  on  horseback,  and  by  way  of  cord, 
attached  to  the  middle  of  the  sail,  take  the  wind  more  or  less  as 
is  required.  But  it  is  only  when  the  wind  blows  either  from  north 
or  south  that  such  a  contrivance  can  serve ;  for  if  it  blows  from  the 
east  they  cannot  set  off  their  boat  from  the  shore,  or  if  it  blows 
from  the  west  it  will  blow  them  too  far  out  at  sea.  When  the  fisher- 
men are  thus  at  some  distance  from  the  shore,  I  do  not  know  by 
what  means  the  rest  of  the  operation  is  executed  ;  but  from  what  I 
could  see  they  darted  their  long  thin  spear  at  the  fish  when  they 


328  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

happened  to  see  any,  and  by  these  means  they  procured  their 
subsistence.  On  their  return  they  brought  us  four  fish,  each  of  about 
six  pounds  weight,  and  one  foot  six  inches  long ;  they  were  of  a 
strong  blue  silvered  colour;  their  fins,  head,  and  tail  red;  and  their 
teeth,  which  are  only  four,  are  quite  flat  and  out  of  their  mouths. 
They  had  very  large  scales,  and  their  form  not  unlike  the  benne  of 
the  Nile.  I  am  certain  the  Egyptians  must  have  had  a  knowledge 
of  this  fish,  as  it  is  so  clearly  seen  in  their  hieroglyphics,  and  in  the 
new  tomb  of  Psamethis  I  saw  some  painted  exactly  as  they  are  in 
reality.  They  are  exceedingly  good,  have  very  few  bones,  and  very 
large  galls. 

On  the  5th,  in  the  morning,  I  ascended  a  high  mountain  to  view 
the  coast  as  far  as  I  could,  and  I  saw  that  it  ran  straight  towards 
the  south-east.  The  spot  which  we  occupied  is  marked  No.  16 
on  the  map,  to  which  I  cannot  give  a  better  name  than  the 
mouth  of  Wady  el  Gemal,  as  it  is  precisely  opposite  the  entrance 
into  the  valley  of  that  name.  I  observed  also  that  the  southern 
point  of  the  island  of  Gambe  was  in  a  right  line  with  the  rising  sun 
at  sea,  and  myself.  It  will  be  seen  on  the  map,  supposing  the 
place  I  stood  upon  to  be  on  the  top  of  the  mountain  nearest  to  the 
above  No.  16.  By  the  help  of  a  small  compass,  we  contrived  to  take 
the  direction  of  the  northern  coast  as  far  as  we  had  been  the  day 
before ;  our  maps  being  so  small,  we  did  not  find  them  so  correct  as 
we  wished.  Early  on  the  6th,  the  camels  returned  with  a  load  of 
fresh  water,  and  it  was  well  they  did  so,  for  our  thirst  was  in- 
creased, not  only  from  the  scarcity  of  water,  but  by  the  shell-fish 
which  we  had  found  and  eaten  abundantly ;  an  inconvenience  which 
the  fishermen  had  not  to  contend  with,  being  accustomed  to  the 
bitter  water  of  a  well  not  so  far  off.  We  now  divided  our  ca- 
ravan into  two  parties ;  we  sent  all  the  luggage,  culinary  utensils,  the 
soldier,  my  Greek  servant,  and  the  best  part  of  the  camels,  to  a 
spring  of  running  water  in  the  mountains  of  Amusue,  there  to  wait 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  329 

till  our  return.  For  ourselves,  we  took  with  us  as  much  water  as  we 
could,  and  formed  a  party,  consisting  of  Mr.  Beechey  and  myself, 
a  Greek  servant,  four  drivers,  and  the  two  Arabian  boys  we  had 
brought  from  Gournou,  with  five  camels  in  all. 

We  set  off  in  the  forenoon,  and  went  along  the  coast  till  we 
arrived  at  El  Whady  Abghsoon,  near  the  mines  of  El  Kebrite,  or 
sulphur,  and  on  the  south-west  were  the  mountains  of  Hamata.     I 
observed  the  coast  all  the  way,  and  took  its  direction.    On  our  road 
we  met  some  fishermen,  like  the  former  ones.     When  they  saw  us 
at  a  distance,   they  left  their  tents  and  marched  off  towards  the 
mountains ;  all  our  signs  to  them  to  stop  were  to  no  purpose.     We 
arrived  at  their  tents,  and  found  some  excellent  fish  just  roasted, 
which,  no  doubt,  these  people  had  made  ready  for  their  supper.  We 
partook  of  their  meal,  and  left  some  money  in  payment,  on  the 
top  of  a  water  jar,  and  continued  our  journey.  For  two  days  we  had 
been  troubled  with  the  winds  from  the  east,  blowing  strong  and  re- 
sembling the  siroccos  of  Italy,  so  that  all  our  nerves  were  relaxed. 
During  this  time,  every  thing  we  touched  felt  as  if  it  had  just  been 
taken  out  of  the  water,  and  at  night  there  was  an  excessive  heat,  and 
the  atmosphere  quite  covered  with  clouds,  which  I  had  not  seen 
for  three  years  and  a  half:  fortunately  it  changed  after  two  days,  and 
the  north  wind  dissipated  all.      Had  it  lasted  longer  we  could  not 
have  proceeded  on  our  journey.     At  night  we  stopped  at  a  well  of 
bitter  water.     On  the  7th,  we  set  off  early  to  see  the  mines  of  El 
Kebrite,  or  sulphur,  as  they  were  not  out  of  our  road.    They  never 
wrere  productive  ;  but  what  little  they  may  have  afforded,  it  appeared 
that  the  ancients  had  carried  entirely  away,  so  that  they  left  them 
exhausted  like  those  of  the  emeralds.     Towards  the  evening  we 
saw  the  island  of  Suarif,  and  we  arrived  at  night  at  the  Cape  el 
Golahen.     It  was  here  that  we  began  to  feel  short  allowance  of 
water.      We  calculated,   and  found  that  without  great  care  we 

u  u 


330  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

should  be  without  it ;  therefore,  our  thirst  was  not  satisfied.  The 
8th,  early  in  the  morning,  we  set  off  and  continued  our  road  to  the 
south.  Two  hours  after,  we  saw  the  sea  at  a  distance,  and  went  over 
a  very  extensive  plain.  At  about  noon  we  approached  the  sea,  very 
thirsty,  and  regaled  ourselves  with  a  little  water;  and  at  one  o'clock 
we  arrived  on  the  shore.  We  did  not  expect  to  arrive  at  any  ruins, 
for,  as  yet,  it  did  not  agree  exactly  with  the  situation  laid  down  by 
D'Anville ;  but,  to  our  agreeable  surprise,  we  found  ourselves  all  at 
once  on  one  of  those  moles  of  ruins  which  show  the  spot  of  ancient 
towns,  so  often  seen  in  Egypt.  We  entered,  and  at  once  we  saw 
the  regular  situations  of  the  houses ;  the  main  streets,  their  con- 
struction, and  in  the  centre,  a  small  Egyptian  temple,  nearly  covered 
by  the  sand,  as  well  as  the  insides  of  the  houses ;  and  our  wonder 
increased  on  examining  the  materials  with  winch  the  houses  were 
built.  We  could  see  nothing  but  coral,  roots,  madrepore,  and  several 
petrifactions  of  sea- weeds,  &c. 

The  temple  is  built  of  a  kind  of  soft,  calcareous,  and  sandy  stone, 
but  decayed  much  by  the  air  of  the  sea.  The  situation  of  this  town 
is  delightful  (See  Plate  34).  The  open  sea  before  it  is  on  the  east, 
and  from  the  southern  coast  to  the  point  of  the  cape  is  like  an  am- 
phitheatre of  mountains,  except  an  opening  on  the  north-west  plain, 
where  we  came  from.  The  Cape  el  Galahen  extends  its  point  nearly 
opposite  the  town  on  the  east,  and  forms  a  shelter  for  large  ships 
from  the  north  and  north-west  winds.  Right  opposite  the  town  there 
is  a  very  fine  harbour  entirely  made  by  nature  ;  its  entrance  is  on  the 
north,  it  is  guarded  on  the  east  by  a  neck  of  incrusted  rock,  on  the 
south  by  the  land,  and  on  the  west  by  the  town  ;  the  north  side,  as  I 
said  before,  being  covered  by  the  range  of  mountains  which  forms  the 
cape,  protects  the  harbour  also.  Its  entrance  has  been  deep  enough 
for  small  vessels,  such  as  the  ancients  had  at  those  times,  but  no  doubt 
was  deeper.     It  has  at  present  a  bar  of  sand  across,  so  that  nothing 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  S31 

could  enter  at  low  water ;  but  a  passage  could  be  easily  cut,  and  the 
harbour  rendered  useful.     We  concluded  this  to  be  the  Berenice 
described  by  Pliny  and  Herodotus,  laid  down  by  D'Anville,  and  it 
nearly  agreed  with  the  situation  where  it  is  marked  on  the  map ;  but 
in  order  to  ascertain  with  more  accuracy,  we  resolved  to  venture  by 
going  half  a  day  higher  towards  the  south,  and  then  we  should  be 
certain  that  we  shoidd  pass  the  spot  where  D'Anville  has  put  down  the 
said  Berenice.  I  measured  the  town,  which  is  in  breadth,  from  north 
to  south,  1G00  feet,  and  in  length,  from  east  to  west,  2000  feet.     I 
took  the  plan  of  the  temple,  winch  seems  to  be  in  construction 
according  to  the  Egyptian  style,  and  we  imagined  that  the  Greeks 
had  taken  their  plans  from  this  ancient  people,  as  they  had  done 
in  many  other  things  (See  Plate  32).     It  is  one  hundred  and  two 
feet  long,  and  forty-three  feet  wide ;  it  contains  four  chambers,  two 
on  each  side  of  the  sekos  and  cella,  and  two  in  the  great  hall  in  the 
front.     Our  difficulty  now  was  about  the  water;  it  became  very 
scarce,  and  we  could  not,  positively,  stay  there  the  whole  of  the  next 
day.    The  Ababdes  nearly  lost  their  patience  with  our  researches,  for 
they  had  not  a  drop  of  water  for  themselves  ;  we  could  not  spare  any 
of  ours,  and  the  nearest  well  was  supposed  to  be  a  day's  journey  dis- 
tant.    They  had  drank  but  little  the  day  before.    Notwithstanding 
all  tins,  we  were  determined  not  to  leave  any  thing  undone  as  far 
as  we  could.     We  promised  them  that  we  would  set  off  on  the  next 
day  at  twelve  o'clock,  and  fortunately  being  moonlight,  we  em- 
ployed part  of  the  night  to  scrutinize  the  place. 

It  was  now  three  days  since  we  had  eaten  any  thing  but  dry 
biscuit  and  water,  except  the  fish  we  found  at  the  fishermen's  hut. 
We  were  contented  ourselves  with  eating  biscuit ;  but  our  thirst 
increased,  and  our  hudry  diminished.  We  persuaded  the  Sheik 
Ibrahim,  our  guide,  to  go  with  us  towards  the  south  on  the  next 

u  u  2 


332  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

morning,  and  leave  the  rest  of  the  people  at  the  town,  He  agreed 
with  reluctance,  and  said,  that  he  feared  his  camels  and  people  could 
not  start  without  water.  However,  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  before 
the  sun  rose,  we  set  the  little  Mussa  to  digging.  He  was  one  of  the 
Arab  boys  we  brought  with  us  from  Gournou.  I  made  him  dig  in  the 
temple.  He  had  no  spade  ;  but  with  a  shell  or  caquille  he  worked  very 
well,  as  it  was  only  soft  sand.  We  set  off  along  the  beach,  and  made 
straight  towards  the  southern  point  before  us.  We  passed  the 
fore  part  of  the  day  in  calculating  that  the  spot  where  D'Anville 
marked  the  town  could  not  be  farther  south.  We  saw  nothing 
before  us  but  an  extensive  plain  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain  that 
formed  the  cape  on  the  south.  We  had  glasses,  and  could  see  all 
the  ground,  but  no  sort  of  elevation,  or  any  other  indication  tha* 
could  give  a  supposition  of  any  remains  of  habitations. 

We  returned  to  the  town,  and  found  that  the  boy  had  ex- 
cavated about  four  feet  of  sand  close  to  the  north-east  corner  of  the 
cella ;  and,  to  our  surprise,  we  saw  that  the  temple  was  Egyptian. 
The  part  of  the  wall  which  was  discovered  was  adorned  with 
Egyptian  sculpture  in  basso  relievo,  and  well  executed.  We  could 
see  three  figures,  two  feet  three  inches  high,  of  which  I  took 
drawings  as  well  as  I  could  (See  Plate  33,  No.  1),  The  remaining 
part  of  the  wall  was  covered  with  hieroglyphics,  &c.  I  observed  the 
upper  part  of  the  door  which  leads  into  the  inner  chamber;  and  in 
the  same  sandy  hole  the  boy  found  part  of  an  Egyptian  tablet  covered 
with  hieroglyphics  and  figures  (See  Plate  16.)  It  is  of  a  kind  of 
reddish  pudding-stone  or  breccia,  not  belonging  to  the  rocks  near 
that  place.  We  took  it  away,  as  a  memorandum  of  having  seen  an 
Egyptian  temple  on  the  coast  of  the  Red  Sea ;  a  circumstance  that, 
as  yet,  no  antiquarian  has  had  any  idea  of.  The  plain  that  sur- 
rounds  this  town  is  very  extensive:    the  nearest  point  to   the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  333 

mountains  which  form  the  crescent  is  about  five  miles  on  the  west 
of  it.     On  the  north,  the  mountain  is  about  twelve  miles  distant, 
and  on  the  south  fifteen.     All  the  plain  is  inclined  to  vegetation, 
such  as  a  sandy  soil  can  produce  ;  but,  in  particular,  the  lower  part 
of  it  towards  the  sea  is  perpetually  moist,  and  would  produce,  if 
cultivated,    pasture  for   camels,  sheep,    and  other   animals.     This 
moisture  is  naturally  produced  by  the  damp  of  the  sea,  which  is 
very  strong  when  it  happens.     The  upper  part  of  the  plain  is  not 
so    damp,   and,  I  believe,    would  be  perhaps   more  productive  of 
dry  plants.     I  do   not   know  whether   grain  for   bread   could   be 
brought  to  any  perfection,  as  the  soil  is  of  a  sandy  nature,  with 
but  a  small  portion  of  clay,  impregnated  with  salt  incrustations. 
It  is  full  of  small  plants  of  sunt  and  suvaroes.     This  last  plant  I 
observed  along  the  coast,   growing  close  to  the   salt  water,  and 
generally  out  of  the  rocks,  some  quite  under  water,  particularly  at 
high  tides.     It  is  a  small  tree,  generally  no  higher  than  eight  feet : 
its  leaves  are  of  a  substance  like  the  laurel.     Its  form  will  be  seen 
in  Plate  36.     This  makes  very  good  firewood ;  and,  with  the  sunt- 
tree,  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  town  was  well  provided  with  that 
article.    Water  is  the  commodity  of  most  importance  in  such  a  spot, 
for  though  there  are  three  wells,  they  are  so  bitter,  that  the  human 
palate  cannot  taste  it  without  increasing  the  thirst.  Camels  and  other 
beasts  can  drink  it  very  well.    As  to  good  water,  it  is  supposed  that 
such  a  town  could  not  be  without  a  great  supply  of  it.     I  observed, 
that  the  nearest  mountain  is  only  five  miles  distant.     There  must 
have  been  some  wells  in  those  rocks,  which  are  now  either  choked  up 
or  are  unknown.    What  I  can  assert  is,  that,  at  only  one  day's  jour- 
ney, there  is  a  well  of  tolerably  good  water  ;  and,  at  one  and  a  half, 
an  excellent  spring  runs  out  of  the  rocks  of  granite  :  and  as  the 
ancients  had  such  facilities  in  transporting  any  thing  from  a  great 


334  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

distance  by  camels,  so  this  town  may  have  been  supplied  with 
water  at  one  day's  journey  distance.  But  I  am  inclined  to  think, 
that  they  had  it  from  the  nearest  mountains  ;  as,  by  their  situation, 
they  must  afford  wells,  &c.  As  to  greens  and  other  necessaries, 
they  might  easily  have  been  supplied  by  the  soil,  or  from  the  Nile, 
as  Cassara  is  at  this  very  day.  At  a  small  distance  from  the  city 
I  saw  several  groups  of  ruins.  It  appears  that  they  were  houses 
situated  out  of  the  town  in  different  directions. 

The  calculation  I  made  about  the  houses  and  population  com- 
pels me  to  observe,  that  the  houses  were  not  so  extensive  as  they 
are  built  at  this  day.  It  was  the  custom  of  those  people  to  live 
close  to  each  other.  I  observed  that  the  largest  houses  were  about 
forty  feet  in  length,  and  twenty  in  breadth ;  some  were  smaller ; 
but  I  made  the  calculation  at  the  rate  of  twenty  by  forty,  and  I 
found  that  the  square  of  2000  by  1600  feet  would  contain  4000 
houses  ;  but,  as  there  were  spaces  of  ground  without  buildings,  which 
may  be  reckoned  half  of  the  town,  I  counted  them  to  be  only 
2000,  that  I  might  not  be  mistaken  for  another  Caliud.  Those 
people  had  no  need  of  great  sheds  to  put  coaches,  chariots,  or  any  such 
luxurious  lumber.  Their  cattle  and  camels  lay  always  in  the  open 
air,  as  they  still  do  in  all  these  countries :  nor  had  they  extensive 
manufactories.  The  only  massy  buildings  for  their  commerce  could 
be  but  a  few  store-houses,  nor  could  the  narrow  lanes,  which  were 
in  use  in  those  times,  occupy  much  of  the  ground.  I  calculated  that, 
with  the  houses  out  of  town,  which  are  scattered  about  in  groups 
here  and  there,  the  population  of  that  port  must  have  exceeded 
10,000  inhabitants;  a  town  which  even  to  this  day  would  be 
reckoned  of  consequence,  if  situated  on  that  coast,  as  a  port  for  com- 
merce with  India.  I  observed  also  some  of  the  tombs  dug  in  the 
nearest  lower  rocks,  of  a  kind  of  soft  or  calcareous  stone,  which  are 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  335 

the  only  ones  on  the  plain  near  the  town  on  the  western  side.  We 
left  the  spot  before  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  in  consequence 
of  the  want  of  water ;  and,  as  our  camel-drivers  had  nearly  lost 
their  patience,  we  gave  them  half  a  pint  each,  and  continued  our 
road  towards  the  mountain  on  the  north-west,  with  the  firm  inten- 
tion of  returning  prepared  to  scrutinize  the  whole  of  those  ruins. 

At  about  twelve  miles  from  the  sea  we  entered  a  vale,  on  the 
north-west  of  the  town,  in  the  mountain  which  forms  the  crescent 
round  it. 

We  continued  the  best  part  of  the  night  by  moonlight,  and 
fortunately  arrived  at  the  well  at  Aharatret  at  midnight,  a  moun- 
tainous place,  where  the  water  was  good  enough  to  drink.  We 
were  agreeably  surprised  to  find  the  well,  but  much  more  so  when 
we  saw  a  few  sheep  around  it.  There  never  was  a  more  welcome 
sight.  We  thought  we  might  have  something  to  refresh  us.  We 
proposed  to  purchase  one,  and  eat  it  as  soon  as  it  could  be  half 
cooked.  We  approached,  but  the  guardian  of  the  flock  beat  a 
forced  march  into  the  mountain,  and  drove  the  intended  repast 
away  from  us.  We  began  to  think  we  would  not  continue  to  be 
deprived  of  what  we  could  purchase,  and  sent  some  of  our  drivers 
to  follow  the  flock,  which  they  heartily  did,  as  they  were  not  less 
hungry  than  ourselves.  The  fugitives  were  pursued  and  stopped. 
We  reached  the  flock,  and  found  that  its  guardians  were  two 
beautiful  damsels  of  the  deserts.  The  chocolate  nymphs  were 
surprised  at  the  fountain  by  their  pursuers,  and  took  refuge  on 
the  mountains ;  but,  with  some  few  good  words  from  their  coun- 
trymen, they  were  soon  persuaded  to  return,  and  trust  themselves 
near  us.  We  were  gallant  with  them,  for  the  sake  of  devouring 
some  of  their  lambs.  They  became  gradually  more  familiar,  and 
scrupled  not  to  let  us  see  their  chocolate  faces  by  the  moonlight ; 
but  the  sheep  prevailed  above  all,  and  took  our  chief  attention. 


336  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Those  poor  girls  had  no  other  way  to  show  themselves  but  at  the 
well ;  that  is  the  only  place  they  have  a  chance  to  see  or  be  seen. 
At  last  we  purchased  the  sheep,  and  devoured  it;  the  nymphs 
watered  their  flocks,  filled  their  skins,  and  set  off  at  daylight.  On 
this  road  we  observed  camels'  paths,  and  pieces  of  broken  pottery, 
which  indicated  this  to  have  been  a  principal  way  to  the  town  ;  and 
half  way  between  this  well  and  Haboo  Grey,  we  met  with  a  station 
like  the  one  which  we  saw  before  on  the  road  to  Coptos.  I  in- 
quired and  found  that  this  valley  communicated  with  the  same  I 
have  mentioned  ;  which  gave  us  reason  to  believe,  that  the  great  road 
from  Coptos  to  Berenice  was  directed  to  this  place,  which  agreed 
with  the  opinion  and  maps  of  D'Anville. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  10th  we  set  off  again  toward  the 
mountain  Zabara,  with  the  intention  to  examine  Sakiet  Minor,  as 
we  had  not  well  seen  it  before. 

The  valley  we  were  in  continued  to  the  north-west,  and  we 
followed  the  sea.  At  about  one  o'clock  we  arrived  at  Khefeiri,  a 
well  of  excellent  water.  Here  we  rested  the  remaining  part  of  the 
afternoon,  and  succeeded  in  procuring  another  sheep,  but  no  better 
than  the  first.  The  entrails  were  the  best  part  of  it ;  and  on  all 
the  rest  it  may  have  had  about  one  pound  of  pure  flesh.  No  sheep 
has  more  in  this  country,  unless  of  an  extraordinary  size. 

We  set  off  on  the  1 1  th,  and  passed  through  a  valley  surrounded 
by  granite  rocks.  In  the  afternoon  we  arrived  at  a  running  spring, 
rising  out  of  a  granite  chasm — a  singular  thing  in  this  country,  as 
no  such  abundance  of  water  is  to  be  found  any  where.  It  affords 
water  enough  to  make  a  jet  of  about  one  inch  diameter,  and  the  water 
is  excellent.  This  place  is  called  Amusue,  and  is  only  at  one  day's 
journey  from  Sakiet.  Here  we  found  the  rest  of  the  caravan,  which 
we  had  sent  from  the  sea-side,  waiting  for  us. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th  we  sent  our  Greek  interpreter  to 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  337 

Zabara,  requesting  Mahomet  Aga,  the  leader  of  the  miners,  to  send 
us  two  of  those  Greeks  who  saw  the  Frenchman  measure  the  place 
in  the  mountains,  or  the  ancient  town ;  and  we  arranged  to  meet 
them  at  Sakiet,  on  the  next  night. 

The  spot  where  we  were  this  day  formed  a  cataract,  which 
descended  from  an  upper  valley,  connected  with  others  still  higher, 
and  so  on  to  the  tops  of  the  mountains. 

On  the  13th,  we  rested  at  this  place  all  day,  as  we  were  all  tired ; 
and  on  the  14th  we  set  off  for  Sakiet.  On  our  arrival  there,  we 
heard  from  my  servant,  that  Mahomet  Aga  was  not  returned  from 
the  Nile  to  the  mines.  We  might  have  waited  for  him  at  the  first 
temple  long  enough. 

By  this  time  we  were  pretty  well  convinced  that  no  other  place 
was  to  be  seen ;  but,  to  satisfy  ourselves,  we  set  off  on  the  15th,  for 
the  coast  again,  through  the  valley  from  Sakiet  to  the  sea,  on  the 
same  road  Mr.  Caliud  passed.  I  took  all  the  directions  possible 
with  compasses  and  calculations.  We  arrived  at  the  sea  in  the 
evening,  a  journey  much  longer  than  Caliud  had  said,  as  he  reported 
it  was  only  three  hours'  walk,  but  we  found  it  required  nine,  and  that 
by  the  best  mode  of  travelling  in  these  deserts.  We  had  left  part 
of  our  water  skins  at  Sakiet,  on  purpose  to  facilitate  our  march. 
We  arrived  about  a  mile  on  the  north  of  the  valley  Ell  Gimal,  the 
spot  which  we  had  visited  before. 

The  16th. — We  occupied  ourselves  with  a  long  examination  of 
this  coast,  and  were  convinced  that  there  could  be  no  landing  on 
that  shore.  It  happens  that  D'Anville's  map  is  not  correct  on  this 
point,  for  it  marks  a  bay  here,  which,  according  to  him,  would  form 
a  fine  harbour ;  but,  on  the  conti-ary,  there  is  not  such  a  bay,  and 
the  coast  is  one  continued  rocky  shore,  so  that  a  small  vessel  could 
not  approach,  nor  is  there  any  shelter  for  ships  against  any  wind,  or 
any  appearance  of  a  road  leading  to  the  inland  places.     The  road  we 

x  x 


338  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

passed  from  Sakiet  is  the  very  way  which  Caliud  took  to  the  sea- 
side, if  a  road  it  can  be  called.  It  is  a  vale  which  leads  to  the  sea 
from  the  pass  in  the  mountains ;  but  it  has  not  the  least  appearance 
of  having  been  a  road  at  any  time.  The  inconvenience  for  camels 
to  pass  over  this  mountain,  when  loaded,  would  make  the  transport 
impracticable ;  besides,  if  they  had  to  build  a  town  for  commercial 
purposes,  they  would  never  have  built  it  on  this  spot.  It  is  one 
day's  journey  from  the  nearest  point  of  the  mountains  towards  the 
east  to  the  sea,  situated  among  craggy  rocks,  in  a  dry  and  sterile 
valley. 

On  the  17th,  we  returned  to  Sakiet.  I  can  but  conclude  of  this 
spot,  that  it  could  never  have  been  a  place  of  commerce,  or  the 
habitation  of  any  sort  of  commercial  people ;  but  I  really  believe 
that  these  few  scattered  houses  may  have  been  built  for  miners,  who 
worked  in  the  mountains  in  search  of  emeralds  in  the  adjacent 
places,  and  that  here  was  their  chief  residence.  We  arrived  at 
this  place  late  at  night,  and  found  that  the  man  we  left  there  to 
guard  our  water  was  gone.  He  had  taken  the  skins  with  him,  and 
did  not  leave  us  a  drop  of  water.  Fortunately  the  well  was  at  only 
six  hours'  journey  distance  from  us,  so  we  sent  the  camels  to  water, 
and  likewise  to  bring  some  to  us. 

The  following  are  the  Greek  inscriptions,  which  Dr.  Young  has 
translated  for  me,  and  which  I  copied  from  a  niche  in  the  rocks. 
If  the  antiquarians,  by  these  inscriptions,  can  make  out  that  the 
above  place  is  one  of  the  Berenices,  still  it  is  certain  that  the  Greeks 
did  not  build  a  great  town  under  that  name. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  339 

Perhaps  we  should  read, 


\  ~  \  > 


A.      tvv  ro7g  rixnotc  xat  Toig  o~uv  illoi 

spyu^oaevoig 

xui  7roifi<rua-i  xct)  pupTvpovfi.  ruga,  tu  §sZ. 
xat  ■za.poc  Tr;  xvp'ictY'tndi  ty\  "^svtrxsirri. 

Jj.       Op,oici)$  tpia.'hrjv  unvpav  A  /3'  .ravra  tccivtu. 
ix  tov  ip,uv  yj>ri- 

fAuruv,  sv^ccpitrTtio'ix.g  to  Iupccti  xat  tZ  Mh'si,  5^. 
tov  Xtzxxov  >  q  K.og  Ylciuvi  xci. 

2«£«5r  .  .  Mvlet  .  .  to  itgo- 
v  ZTor/jcra. 

L  .       .  .  to  .  .  vpctXiog  xcc)  tov  To  .  .  $ 
.  .  codtqvov  'Msy/e}p  xY' 

D.  .  .  .  pov'tov  sv^apiiTT^trag  to  .  .  . 

xat  Ttj  I  (Tioi  xcc)  to  AttoXXovi  \jro7g  eye-] 
vecotg  §eo7g  ttuo-i  ivor/iira,  ito  ispov. 

E.  ••.  Bspsvzixqg  xa)  to  Zo^iov  xcc)  opv^ccg 
gtvpccTog  ccxo  §zy.zXtov  xcc)  \ix  tov  Wiuv  ypn-\ 
pctTW  oui&tjxe'  eV  ccyct&o. 

F.  TlaxvfiiirTig  ttjj  .  . 

UsToo-igig  .  .  .  sVo  .  .  .  "  <&uccti"  x& 

Upot]Tt;g 
Trig  Info 
Tog  Ila  .  .  xW . 

x  x  2 


340  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

The  translation  will  be  nearly  thus  : 

A.  [The  homage  of]  ...  .  with  my  sons,  and  those  who  have  laboured  with  me, 
and  have  done  this,  and  have  testified  to  the  god  .   .  and  to  our  lady  Isis  of  Senscis. 

B.  ...  Likewise  a  phial  untouched  by  fire  of  two  pounds  weight :  all  these  things 
at  my  own  expense:  having  presented  to  Sarapis  and  to  Mneuis  four  drachms:  the 
cistern  half  a  drachm.     The  eighth  year  of  Caesar ;  the  21  of  Payni. 

To  Sarapis  .  .  to  Mneuis  ?     I  have  made  the  temple. 

C.  Under  Aurelius  and  Trajan?  .  .  . 
Of  Herodian  ?     Mechir  27th. 

D.  [Of  Semp]ronius :  doing  honour  to  .  .  and  to  Isis,  and  to  Apollo,  and  to  all  the 
other  gods  enshrined  with  them,  I  have  made  the  temple. 

E.  .  .  Of  Berenice,  and  the  sculptured  animal;  and  having  dug  [the  channel]  of  the 
river  from  the  foundation;  and  [at  his  own  ex]pense  has  dedicated  them:  with  good 
fortune. 

F.  Pacybistis  the  .  .  • 

Petosiris  .  .  made  .  .  Phaophi  29th. 
Proetes  the  son  of  Isidei's.     Pa[yni]  29th. 

Here  is  no  water  nearer  than  one  day's  journey,  either  for  man 
or  beast,  nor  soil  for  any  verdure:  the  spot  is  sheltered  from  the  winds, 
so  that  it  receives  the  full  power  of  the  sun  in  all  points.  Besides 
all  the  circumstances  before  mentioned,  the  small  niche  where  this 
inscription  was  found  is  situated  on  the  road  to  Berenice ;  and  I 
cannot  persuade  myself  that  such  a  place  as  this  can  be  one  of  those 
of  that  name.  On  the  18th,  we  searched  for  some  hours  all  the 
neighbouring  mountains,  and  found  several  mines  at  about  half 
an  hour's  walk  distant,  in  the  valley  that  leads  to  the  pass  towards 
Zabora,  and  three  others  near  this  place. 

The  19th. Early  in  the  morning  we  took  our  course  to  the 


IN  EGYPT,   NUBIA,  &c.  341 

south,  and  at  about  two  P.  M.  we  reached  the  point  where  the  road 
takes  its  course  to  the  west.  In  this  spot  we  found  one  of  the 
stations,  as  before  mentioned;  it  is  called  Kafafeet.  We  continued 
till  the  evening,  and  arrived  at  Habookady,  near  a  mountain  in 
form  of  a  bell,  in  the  valley  of  Wady  cl  Gimal :  we  saw  abundance 
of  the  trees  egfey,  and  the  plant  like  rushes,  called  murk. 

The  20th,  early,  we  set  off,  and  passed  through  a  wide  plain.     As 
we  left  the  mountain,  and  arrived  at   Habookroog,  a  place  that 
appears  to  be  at  the  entrance  of  the  chain  of  mountains  that  leads 
to  the  Nile,  our  camels  were  so  tired  they  could  hardly  crawl :  we 
had  lost  three  on  the  road,  and  one  we  expected  would  not  last  long. 
It  is  difficult  to  form  a  correct  idea  of  a  desert  without  having  been 
in  one ;  it  is  an  endless  plain  of  sand  and  stones,  sometimes  inter- 
mixed with  mountains  of  all  sizes  and  heights,  without  roads  or 
shelter,  without  any  sort  of  produce  for  food.      The  few  scattered 
trees  and  shrubs  of  thorns,  that  only  appear  when  the  rainy  season 
leaves   some   moisture,   barely  serve  to  feed  wild  animals,  and  a 
few  birds.    Every  thing  is  left  to  nature ;  the  wandering  inhabitants 
do  not  care  to  cultivate  even  these  few  plants,  and  when  there  is 
no  more  of  them  in  one  place,  they  go  to  another.     When  the 
trees  become  old,  and  lose  their  vegetation  in  such  climates  as  these, 
the  sun,  which  constantly  beams  upon  them,  burns  and  reduces 
them  to  ashes.     I  have  seen  many  of  them  entirely  burnt.     The 
other  smaller  plants  have  no  sooner  risen  out  of  the  earth  than 
they  are  dried  up,  and  all  take  the  colour  of  straw,  with  the  exception 
of  the  plant  harack;  this  falls  off  before  it  is  dry.     Speaking  in 
general  of  a  desert,  there  are  few  springs  of  water,  some  of  them  at 
the  distance  of  four,  six,  and  eight  days'  journey  from  one  another, 
and  not  all  of  sweet  water ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  generally  salt  or 
bitter,  so  that  if  the  thirsty  traveller  drinks  of  it,  it  increases  his 
thirst,  and  he  suffers  more  than  before;   but  when  the  dreadful 


;J42  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

calamity  happens  that  the  next  well,  which  is  so  anxiously  sought 
for,  is  found  dry,  the  misery  of  such  a  situation  cannot  be  well 
described.  The  camels,  which  afford  the  only  means  of  escape,  are 
ho  thirsty  that  they  cannot  proceed  to  another  well ;  and  if  the 
travellers  kill  them  to  extract  the  little  liquid  which  remains  in 
their  stomachs,  they  themselves  cannot  advance  any  farther.  The 
situation  must  be  dreadful,  and  admits  of  no  resource.  I  must  not 
omit  what  I  have  been  told  happens  in  such  cases. 

Many  perish  victims  of  the  most  horrible  thirst.    It  is  then  that 
the  value  of  a  cup  of  water  is  really  felt.     He  that  has  a  zenzabiu  of 
it  is  the  richest  of  all.     In  such  a  case  there  is  no  distinction ;  if 
the  master  has  none,  the  servant  will  not  give  it  to  him,  for  very  few 
are  the  instances  where  a  man  will  voluntarily  lose  his  life  to  save 
that  of  another,  particularly  in  a  caravan  in  the  desert,  where  people 
are  strangers  to  each  other.     What  a  situation  for  a  man,  though  a 
rich  one,  perhaps  the  owner  of  all  the  caravans  !  He  is  dying  for  a 
cup  of  water — no  one  gives  it  to  him — he  offers  all  he  possesses — 
no  one  hears  him — they  are  all  dying — though  by  walking  a  few 
hours  farther  they  might  be  saved, — the  camels  are  lying  down,  and 
cannot  be  made  to  rise — no  one  has  strength  to  walk — only  he  that 
has  a  glass  of  that  precious  liquor  lives  to  walk  a  mile  farther,  and 
perhaps  dies  too.     If  the  voyages  on  seas  are  dangerous,  so  are 
those  in  the  deserts  :  at  sea,  the  provisions  very  often  fail ;  in  the 
desert  it  is  worse :  at  sea,  storms  are  met  with ;  in  the  desert  there 
cannot  be  a  greater  storm  than  to  find  a  dry  well :  at  sea,  one  meets 
with  pirates — we  escape — we  surrender — we  die ;  in  the  desert  they 
rob  the  traveller  of  all  his  property  and  water ;  they  let  him  live 
perhaps — but  what  a  life !  to  die  the  most  barbarous  and  agonising 
death.      In  short,  to  be  thirsty  in  a  desert,  without  water,  exposed 
to  the  burning  sun,  without  shelter,  and  no  hopes  of  finding  either, 
is  the  most  terrible  situation  that  a  man  can  be  placed  in  ;  and,  I 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  343 

believe,  one  of  the  greatest  sufferings  that  a  human  being  can  sus- 
tain :  the  eyes  grow  inflamed,  the  tongue  and  lips  swell :  a  hollow 
sound  is  heard  in  the  ears,  which  brings  on  deafness,  and  the  brains 
appear  to  grow  thick  and  inflamed : — all  these  feelings  arise  from  the 
want  of  a  little  water.  In  the  midst  of  all  this  misery,  the  de- 
ceitful morasses  appear  before  the  traveller  at  no  great  distance, 
something  like  a  lake  or  river  of  clear  fresh  water.  The  deception 
of  this  phenomenon  is  well  known,  as  I  mentioned  before  ;  but  it 
does  not  fail  to  invite  the  longing  traveller  towards  that  element, 
and  to  put  him  in  remembrance  of  the  happiness  of  being  on  such 
a  spot.  If  perchance  a  traveller  is  not  undeceived,  he  hastens  his 
pace  to  reach  it  sooner  ;  the  more  he  advances  towards  it,  the  more 
it  goes  from  him,  till  at  last  it  vanishes  entirely,  and  the  deluded 
passenger  often  asks  where  is  the  water  he  saw  at  no  great  distance  : 
he  can  scarcely  believe  that  he  was  so  deceived ;  he  protests  that  he 
saw  the  waves  running  before  the  wind,  and  the  reflection  of  the 
high  rocks  in  the  water. 

If,  unfortunately,  any  one  falls  sick  on  the  road,  there  is  no 
alternative;  he  must  endure  the  fatigue  of  travelling  on  a  camel,  which 
is  troublesome  even  to  healthy  people,  or  he  must  be  left  behind  on 
the  sand,  without  any  assistance,  and  remain  so  till  a  slow  death  come 
to  relieve  him.  What  horror  !  What  a  brutal  proceeding  to  an  un- 
fortunate sick  man  !  No  one  remains  with  him,  not  even  his  old  and 
faithful  servant ;  no  one  will  stay  and  die  with  him  ;  all  pity  his 
fate,  but  no  one  will  be  his  companion.  Why  not  stop  the  whole 
caravan  till  he  is  better,  or  do  what  they  can  for  the  best  till  he 
dies  ?  No,  this  delay  cannot  be ;  it  will  put  all  indanger  of  perishing 
of  thirst  if  they  do  not  reach  the  next  well  in  such  a  time  ;  besides, 
they  are  all  different  parties  generally  of  merchants  or  travellers, 
who  will  not  only  refuse  to  put  themselves  in  danger,  but  will  not 
even  wait  a  few  hours  to  save  the  life  of  an  individual,  whether 
they  know  him  or  not. 


344  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

In  contrast  to  the  evil,  there  is  the  luxury  of  the  desert,  and  also 
its  sport,  which  is  generally  at  the  well ;  there  one  enjoys  all  the 
delight  of  drinking  as  much  water  as  one  likes,  which  tastes  not 
unlike  cordials  or  other  precious  liquors,  with  the  others  in  that 
situation.     The  beasts,  mixed  with  birds,  drink  together  close  to 
the  well.     There  is  a  kind  of  basin  made  of  clay  which  is  filled 
up  by  the  drivers,  from  the  well,  where  the  thirsty  animals  all  drink 
together,  camels,  sheep,  dogs,  donkeys,  and  birds,  as  it  is  the  only 
time  they  can  partake  of  that  liquid ;  for  if  it  is  not  drawn  up 
from  the  well,  they  cannot  reach  it.    I  only  saw  four  species  of  birds, 
viz.  the  vulture,  crow,  wild  pigeon,  and  partridge ;  of  this  last  we 
eat  some,  and  found  them  exceedingly  good :  the  crows  are  the  most 
numerous ;  they  tease  the  camels  by  picking  their  wounds,  if  they 
have  any.     The  other  and  most  pleasing  diversion  is  the  beautiful 
damsels  who  come  as  shepherdesses  to  water  their  flocks,  who,  after 
being  assured  that  there  is  no  danger  in  approaching  strangers, 
become  more  sociable.     On   such   occasions,   our   observing  their 
gestures  afforded  us  great  amusement :  but,  our  water  skins  filled, 
and  the  camels  loaded,  we  were  obliged  to  quit  these  dear  spots,  with 
the  hope  of  meeting  another  like  it  in  a  few  days,  and  so  on  till  we 
reached  the  blessed  Nile ;  but  the  journey  was  pleasant  enough 
this  day,  as  we  had  a  well  only  within  a  few  hours.     We  set  off  at 
two  in  the  morning  of  the  20th,  and,  before  noon,  reached  the  well 
at  Hamesh,  containing  very  good  water.     Here  we  lost  another 
camel ;  he  could  not  go  any  farther.     We   set  off  again  in  the 
afternoon,  and  arrived  at  a  place  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain   of 
granite.     Early  on  the  21st,  we  set  off  again,  and  soon  entered  the 
ravine  of  granite  rocks,  that  reminded  us  of  the  cataract  which  we 
saw  on  our  passing  before.     After  this,  we  arrived  at  the  station 
of  Samout,  which  we  also  saw  before  at  the  same  time.     We  arrived 
at   night   at   Dangos,   where   the   mountains   are   not   very  high, 
and  of  calcareous  stone.     From  the  cataract,  and  nearly  down  to 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  345 

this  place,  we  found  the  track  of  an  old  road,  which  continued  in 
the  direction  of  south-east  and  north-west,  and  I  have  very  little 
doubt  but  that  it  is  the  same  we  saw  at  Bezack  on  our  passing  before, 
and  which  takes  its  course  in  a  right  line  from  Coptos  to  Berenice. 
On  the  22d,  we  continued  our  route  at  one  in  the  morning,  and 
arrived  at  Wady  el  Medah  at  sunset.  We  took  a  measurement  of 
the  fort,  which  I  mentioned  before  ;  and,  early  on  the  23d,  pro- 
ceeded, and  arrived  at  the  first  well :  the  water  of  this  place  tasted 
to  us  very  bad  on  our  going  up,  but  it  appeared  pretty  good  on  our 
return.  In  the  night  we  arrived  at  the  Nile,  and  our  having  been 
long  deprived  of  good  water  made  us  sensible  of  the  superiority  of 
that  of  the  river  over  the  wells  we  had  been  accustomed  to. 

Certainly,  1  am  of  opinion  that  there  are  few  waters,  if  any,  in 
Europe  that  can  be  compared  with  that  of  the  Nile.  It  answers 
all  purposes  ;  it  has  the  freshness  of  spring,  and  the  softness  of 
river  water ;  it  is  excellent  to  drink,  and  serves  all  other  purposes. 
Plate  38  is  a  topographical  map  which  I  made  of  the  above  journey, 
as  correct  as  I  could. 

We  went  on  board  our  little  boat  the  same  night.  On  the 
24th,  the  Sheik  of  the  Ababdy  came  to  us,  and  we  presented  him 
with  a  gun,  and  some  powder  and  balls.  We  complained  of  the 
badness  of  the  camels  with  which  he  had  provided  us ;  he  assured 
us  that  no  one  of  the  Ababdy  had  ever  undertaken  such  a  journey 
as  we  had,  and  that  the  camels  were  not  accustomed  to  such  forced 
marches.  We  gave  a  gun,  a  shawl,  and  money,  to  our  guide,  who 
behaved  uncommonly  well.  We  talked  of  repeating  our  journey, 
and  they  assured  us,  that  if  we  returned  they  would  furnish  us 
with  camels  that  would  take  us  any  where  we  pleased,  and  as  long- 
as  we  would  stay.  We  sent  a  pair  of  pocket  pistols  to  the  Cacheff 
in  the  island,  thanking  him  for  his  goodness  and  attention. 

The  place  we  now  reached  on  the  Nile  was  a  few  miles  north  of 

Y  Y 


346  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

that  where  we  had  entered  in  the  desert  opposite  Elfou,  and  a  little 
south  of  Eleithias.  The  road  which  I  observed  all  along  the  valley 
undoubtedly  was  a  communication  between  that  town  and  Berenice, 
and  on  the  east  to  the  emerald  mines.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
that  the  town  of  Eleithias  must  have  been  of  some  consequence, 
as  there  is  all  the  probability  of  commerce  having  been  carried  on 
there  :  there  is  still  a  landing-place,  which  evidently  proves  the 
loading  and  unloading  of  boats  for  that  purpose  ;  and  I  am  of  opinion 
that  this  place  must  have  been  more  frequented  by  the  caravans  from 
the  sea  than  Coptos,  as  it  is  a  somewhat  shorter  journey  to  the 
Nile. 

We  set  off  for  Esne.  On  our  way  down  it  was  pleasing  to  see  the 
difference  of  the  country  :  all  the  lands  that  were  under  water  before 
were  now  not  only  dried  up,  but  were  already  sown ;  the  muddy 
villages  carried  off  by  the  rapid  current  were  all  rebuilt ;  the  fences 
opened ;  the  Fellahs  at  work  in  the  fields,  and  all  wore  a  different 
aspect.  It  was  only  fifteen  days  since  the  water  had  retired,  and  in 
that  period  it  decreased  more  than  eight  feet,  It  is  not  so  every 
year :  when  the  Nile  increases  slowly,  it  decreases  also  in  the  same 
manner ;  this  is  in  consequence  of  the  abundance  or  scarcity  of 
rain  which  falls  during  the  rainy  season  in  Abyssinia. 

The  natives  rather  prefer  the  rapid  rising  of  the  Nile,  for  it 
covers  more  space  of  land,  so  that  it  be  not  too  much,  as  was  the 
case  this  year  ;  and  if  the  water  remain  eight  days  over  it,  it  does 
as  much  good  as  if  it  continued  twenty.  By  this  time  the  drowned 
people  were  forgotten,  and  the  only  calamity  remaining  was  the 
scarcity  of  provisions  among  the  Fellahs.  The  Nile  had  taken  away 
their  stock,  and  the  Cacheffs  were  only  busied  in  procuring  grain 
for  seed.    In  all  such  cases  the  poor  labourer  is  the  last  thought  of. 

We  arrived  at  Esne  on  the  morning  of  the  25th,  and  visited 
the  Bey,  who  received  us  very  politely :  he  inquired  about  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  347 

mines,  and  was  very  anxious  to  know  the  result.  We  told  him 
that  nothing  could  be  known  on  the  subject  till  they  were  cleared 
of  all  the  materials  with  which  they  were  choked  up.  We  made 
him  a  present  of  a  fine  English  gun :  he  was  much  pleased,  and 
offered  to  give  us  all  his  assistance  in  any  thing  that  he  could. 
We  set  off,  and  arrived  at  Gournou  on  the  same  night,  after  forty 
days'  absence,  which  I  hope  were  not  uselessly  employed. 


ACCOUNT    OF    THE    TAKING    THE    OBELISK    FROM    THE    ISLAND 
OF    PHILCE   TO    ALEXANDRIA. 

Having  made  arrangements  for  accomplishing  the  models  of  the 
tombs,  I  set  off  for  Esne,  with  the  intention  of  inquiring  into  the 
possibility  of  obtaining  camels  to  go  to  the  Great  Oasis,  which  lies 
due  west  from  that  place.  When  I  had  obtained  all  the  information 
I  desired,  I  returned  to  Thebes  to  prepare  for  another  sally  into  the 
western  desert.  On  my  arrival  in  Gournou,  I  found  the  consul,  Mr. 
Salt,  Mr.  Bankes,  and  Baron  Sack,  had  arrived  from  Cairo.  Having 
convinced  Mr.  Salt  of  the  impossibility  of  making  a  collection  on 
my  own  account,  according  to  our  understanding,  in  consequence  of 
his  having  taken  possession  of  the  grounds  in  Thebes,  he  proposed 
a  new  arrangement  to  be  made  between  us,  which  was,  that  I  might 
be  at  liberty  to  dig  on  either  side  of  Thebes,  on  any  ground  I 
thought  proper,  taking  for  my  exertion  a  certain  share  of  what  might 
be  found  in  the  intended  researches.  Having  agreed  to  this  propo- 
sition, I  had  to  recommence  my  operations.  I  was  fully  satisfied  with 
the  above  arrangement,  as  I  supposed  that  I  should  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  making  a  collection  of  antiques  out  of  the  share  which 
would  be  allotted  to  me.  About  this  time  Mr.  Drouetti  arrived  in 
Thebes,  and,  by  the  medium  of  Mr.  Bankes,  made  an  offer  to  pur- 

y  y  2 


348  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

chase  the  celebrated  sarcophagus  of  alabaster,  but  his  offer  was  not 
accepted*.  At  this  period  Mr.  Bankes  solicited  me  to  ascend  the 
Nile  as  far  as  the  island  of  Philoe,  to  remove  the  obelisk  I  had 
taken  possession  of  before  in  the  name  of  the  British  consul.  The 
consul  then  informed  me,  that  he  had  ceded  the  said  obelisk  to  Mr. 
Bankes,  who  intended  to  send  it  to  England  on  his  own  account. 
I  gladly  accepted  the  undertaking,  as  I  was  pleased  to  have  the 
opportunity  of  seeing  another  piece  of  antiquity  on  its  way  to 
England,  and  of  obliging  a  gentleman  for  whom  I  had  great  regard. 
Two  days  previous  to  our  departure,  the  consul  and  myself  crossed 
the  Nile  to  Carnak,  to  point  out  the  various  spots  of  ground  which 
had  been  previously  taken  by  himself.  On  our  landing  at  Luxor 
we  met  Mr.  Drouetti,  who  offered  to  accompany  us  to  Carnak,  to 
be  witness  of  the  various  spots  of  ground  which  were  to  be  allotted 
to  me  for  excavation.  On  the  way,  Mr.  Drouetti  told  us  a  pleasant 
story  of  a  man  who  was  dressed  like  myself,  and  who  was  hidden 
among  the  ruins  of  the  temple ;  whom  he,  Mr.  Drouetti,  had  great 

*  One  evening  that  the  whole  party  were  assembled,  Mr.  Drouetti  happened  to  be 
there.  The  consul  and  he  had  some  few  words  about  a  circumstance  which  I  cannot 
avoid  mentioning.  It  will  be  recollected  that,  previous  to  our  departure  for  the  Red  Sea, 
a  man  from  the  opposite  party  desired  to  have  a  passage  on  board  of  our  boat  to  Cairo, 
which  was  granted.  At  Girgeh,  six  days'  sail  below  Thebes,  this  unfortunate  man  was 
drowned,  by  falling  overboard,  as  was  stated  by  all  the  crew,  and  some  of  our  people 
who  were  on  board  when  the  boat  arrived  at  Cairo.  The  report  was  made  to  the  consul, 
Mr.  Salt,  of  the  accident ;  and,  though  Mr.  Drouetti  was  there  at  the  time,  he  did  not 
signify  that  any  investigation  should  take  place  on  this  affair.  Now  that  Mr.  Drouetti  was 
in  Thebes,  and  the  consul  also,  Mr.  Drouetti  complained  much  that  he  did  not  take  into 
consideration  the  death  of  that  man.  The  consul  replied,  that  he  never  heard  of  any 
occasion  to  investigate  the  matter :  to  which  Mr.  Drouetti  replied,  that  he  ought  to  have 
done  it.  The  consul  then  told  him,  that,  as  the  man  was  in  Mr.  Drouetti's  employ,  he 
was  surprised  that  he  did  not  make  an  application  while  in  Cairo.  Mr.  D.  said,  that  he 
did  not  for  delicacy's  sake ;  which  answer  was  received  with  general  laughter.  Nothing 
was  left  undone  by  our  opponents  to  slander  out  insinuations. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  349 

reasons  to  believe  was  a  person  who  wished  to  do  him  some  injury ; 
and  that  he  had  already  acquainted  the  Caimakan  of  that  place 
of  the  circumstance.  I  begged  him  to  tell  me  what  reason  that  man 
could  have  for  assuming  my  appearance.  He  said,  that  it  was  done 
to  deceive  him,  and  if  he  (the  impostor)  had  done  any  thing  bad, 
it  was  to  make  the  people  believe  that  it  was  myself  who  had  done 
it.  The  consul  laughed  at  the  story,  and  observed  that  I  could 
not  be  so  easily  imitated.  The  conclusion  of  all  this  was,  that, 
if  I  had  happened  to  go  among  the  ruins,  which  it  was  my  constant 
practice  to  do,  and  some  one  had  sent  a  ball  at  me,  they  could  have 
said  after,  that  they  mistook  me  for  the  person  who  had  assumed  my 
appearance  in  dress  and  figure.  I  informed  Mr.  Drouetti  that  I 
hoped  he  would  tell  his  European  people  to  inquire  before  they 
should  fire  at  the  supposed  person  representing  me,  whether  it 
was  the  real  or  the  sham  Eelzoni,  as  it  would  not  be  quite  so 
pleasant  or  satisfactory  to  me  if  the  mistake  had  been  found  out 
after.  He  replied,  that  that  person  was  sent  away  from  Thebes,  and 
would  not  return  again.  We  went  all  over  the  ruins,  and  marked 
out  the  various  spots  of  land  which  had  been  taken  by  us  previous 
to  Mr.  Drouetti's  agent's  arrival  in  Thebes ;  so  all  was  well  under- 
stood, and  all  was  so  arranged  that  it  was  hoped  that  no  further 
differences  should  arise  from  any  party.  Now,  my  reader,  read  it 
and  judge. 

It  is  not  agreeable  to  my  wishes  to  insert  in  this  volume  these 
matters,  which  perhaps  may  cause  a  supposition  of  my  inclination 
to  expose ;  but  such  is  the  case  that  I  cannot  avoid  mentioning  it, 
as  I  have  done  many  others ;  for  if  I  was  to  conceal  from  the 
public  what  happened  at  that  period,  an  advantage  might  be 
taken,  and  matters  brought  before  them  in  any  light  but  that  of 
truth. 

After  having  now  gone  over  the  various  places  where  I  had  to 


350  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

excavate,  Mr.  Drouetti,  with  all  the  complaisance  possible,  invited 
the  consul  and  myself  into   his   habitation   among   the   ruins  of 
Carnak.      We    were    regaled   with    sherbet    and    lemonade,   and 
talked   of  our   late  journey  to  Berenice.     The   discourse   turned 
on    our   next   expedition    to   the    Isle    of  Philce ;    when   I   hap- 
pened to  say,  that,  as  I  had  to  take  the  obelisk  from  that  island 
down  the  cataract,  I  feared  it  was  too  late  in  the  season,  as  the 
water  would  not  serve  at  the  cataract  to  float  and  launch  down  a 
boat  adequate  to  support  such  a  weight.      On  hearing  this,  Mr. 
Drouetti  said,  that  those  rogues  at  the  Shellal,  meaning  at  Assouan, 
had  deceived  him  ;  that  they  promised  many  times  to  bring  down 
the  said  obelisk  for  him,  but  that  they  only  promised  to  do  it,  to 
extort  money  from  him.     I  then  informed  Mr.  Drouetti  that  those 
people  knew  they  could  not  take  away  that  obelisk ;  as,  since  my 
first  voyage  up  the  Nile,  I  took  possession  of  it  in  consequence  of 
a  firman  which  the  consul,  Mr.  Salt,  who  was  there  present,  had 
obtained  from  the  Bashaw.      The  consul  informed  Mr.  Drouetti 
that  he  had  ceded  the  said  obelisk  to  Mr.  Bankes,  who  intended  to 
have   it   removed    to  England.      On   hearing   this,    Mr.  Drouetti 
said,  that  he  was  not  aware  we  had  taken  possession  of  it,  and 
inquired   if  any  money  was    spent   in   that  affair  on    our   side ; 
and  having  been  answered  that  we  paid  money  to  keep  a  guard 
over  the  obelisk,  and  that  it  was  well  understood  with  the  Aga 
of  Assouan  that  we  were   again    to   carry   it   away   on   the  first 
opportunity,  he  replied,  that  those   people  had  deceived  him,  to 
exact  money  from  his  agents,  &c. ;  but  notwithstanding  all  this,  as 
the  obelisk  was  intended  for  Mr.  Bankes,  he  would  not  say  a  word 
about  it,  and  voluntarily  ceded  it  to  him.     This  was  not  in  com- 
pliment to  our  consul,  who  was  present.     I  thought  this  was  an- 
other present,  made  to  Mr.  Bankes  like  the  cover  of  the  sarcophagus 
made  to  me,  which  was  so  far  buried  among  the  rocks  of  Gournou, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  351 

that  all  their  efforts  could  not  prevail  to  take  it  out.  Mr.  Drouetti 
inquired  when  we  should  set  off,  and  the  consul  told  him  on  the 
day  after  to-morrow. 

Accordingly,  on  the  16th  of  November,  we  left  Thebes  for  the 

first  cataract  of  the  Nile.     The  party  was  numerous — Mr.  Bankes, 

Mr.  Salt,  Baron  Sack,  a  Prussian  traveller  and  a  celebrated  naturalist, 

Mr.  Beechey,  Mr.  Linon,  a  draftsman,  Doctor  Ilicci,  and  myself :  a 

large  boat  was  taken  for  the  consul,  a  cangiar  for  Mr.  Bankes,  a  small 

boat  for  the  Baron,  and  a  canoe  for  the  sheep,  goats,  fowls,  geese, 

ducks,  pigeons,  turkeys,  and  donkeys,  which  occasionally  joined  the 

chorus  with  the  rest  of  the  tribes,  and  accompanied  the  fleet  with  a 

perpetual  concert.     As  to  provisions,  we  were  pretty  well  supplied, 

I  believe  ;  for,  as  their  boats  came  lately  from  Cairo,  they  brought 

full  stores :  yet  it  was  arduous  travelling,  living  in  that  manner, 

destitute  of  every  commodity  of  life  ;  for  even  at  table  we  had  not 

ice  to  cool  ourselves  after  the  hot  repast,  which  was  concluded  with 

fruits,  and  only  two  sorts  of  wine.    In  short,  our  lives  were  a  burthen 

to  us  from  the  fatigue  and  dangerous  mode  of  travelling.    We  were 

not  like  travellers  who  live  on  the  best  of  every  thing  they  can  get, 

and  write  at  home  the  hard  life  they  undergo.     O,  no  !  O,  no !  we 

would  scorn  to  travel  in  such  an  effeminate  manner.     To  be  sure, 

some  travellers  will  say,  Why  should  I  starve  myself,  while  I  am  in 

a  plentiful  country  ?     O  !  then,  but  you  should  not  make  the  world 

believe  you  are  starving,  while  you  live  like  Sir  John  Falstaff. 

On  our  passing  Eleithias,  we  stopped  there  part  of  a  day,  and 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  next.  As  I  have  nothing  to  add  to  the 
description  of  that  place,  I  shall  not  enter  into  any  further  de- 
scription of  it. 

On  the  21st,  we  visited  Edfu,  and  took  a  minute  survey  of 
these  truly  magnificent  ruins,  which  are  so  covered  with  a  profusion 
of  objects,  that  if  a  traveller  was  to  repeat  his  visits  every  day  of 


352  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

his  life,  lie  might  still  find  something  new  to  be  observed.  This 
place  was  at  that  time  under  the  researches  of  Mr.  Drouetti's 
agents ;  one  of  whom,  we  understood,  had  received  a  despatch  from 
Ins  master,  by  an  extra  courier,  and  had  immediately  set  off  for 
the  island  of  Philoe. 

We  continued  our  voyage,  and  before  we  arrived  at  Silsili,  or 

the  Chain  of  Mountains,  we  met  a  small  boat,  in  which  was  Mr. 

Lebulo,  the  said  agent  and  countryman  of  Mr.  Drouetti,  a  Pied- 

montese :    he   was   hailed,   but   would    not   stop   to  speak.     We 

stopped  at  this  place  at  night,  and  early  in  the  morning  we  were 

all  scattered  about  these  quarries,  not  in  search  of  partridges,  but 

in  search  of  sepulchres,  ancient  stones,  Greek  inscriptions,  sphinxes, 

or  any  sort  of  Egyptian  wonder.     Indeed,  I  must  say,  that  this 

place  deserves  more  of  the  attention  of  the  scientific  traveller  than 

has  hitherto  been  bestowed  upon  it.     There  are  several  interesting 

burial-places  among  the  quarries  of  the  rocks  ;  and  it  is  evident, 

that  the  famous  sphinxes  with  the  ram's  head,  which  are  to  be  seen 

in  Carnak,  have  been  taken  from  this  spot,  as   one  of  the  same 

kind  is  to  be  seen  cut  out  in  the  rough,  and  partly  removed  from  the 

rocks  to  the  Nile,  and  another,  like  it,  is  nearly  cut  out  of  the 

quarry.     As   to   the  old   story,  that   these   two   mountains  were 

chained,  I  can  but  say,  that  I  have  my  objection  as  to  the  fact  of 

it ;  for  if  the  ancients  wanted  to  prevent  the  passing  of  boats,  it 

may  be  supposed  that  Assouan  was  a  more  suitable  place  for  that 

purpose,  as  the  passage  from  the  island  of  Elephantine  to  the  rocks 

of  old  Assouan  is  much  narrower  than  that  of  the  Silsili  mountains, 

and  the  cataract  itself  would  form  as  good  a  barrier  as  any  that 

could  be  constructed  on  the  Nile.     There  is  a  stone  on  the  west 

side  of  the  said  mountain,  which  is  supposed  to  be  that  to  winch 

the  chain  was  attached ;  but,  for  my  part,  I  could  not  see  any  marks 

where  this  chain  was  fixed,  nor  does  the  stone  seem  to  have  been 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  See,  353 

suited  to  such  purposes ;  and  I  am  rather  inclined  to  think,  that  the 
name  of  the  Chained  Mountains  is  derived  from  the  position  of  the 
mountain  itself:  it  runs  in  a  chain  from  east  to  west,  and  stretches 
over  the  Nile  at  each  side,  so  that  it  forms  the  narrowest  passage 
in  that  river,  from  the  cataract  to  the  sea;  from  which  circum- 
stance it  is  possible  that  the  ancients  had  given  it  that  name,  for  I 
do  not  believe  that  their  commerce  was  so  flourishing  as  to  oblige 
them  to  put  an  iron  chain  across  the  Nile,  to  stop  the  boats  at 
night,  at  a  time  when  iron  was  reckoned  a  most  valuable  article, 
and  was  employed  for  better  purposes. 

We  reached  Ombos  on  the  next  day ;  and  as  the  party  had  to 
stop  there  one  day  longer,  I  was  anxious  to  reach  Assouan,  as 
I  expected  no  good  from  the  early  journey  of  Lebulo,  the  agent  of 
Mr.  Drouetti.  Accordingly,  I  set  off  for  that  place  in  a  cangiar, 
which  had  come  to  meet  us,  to  take  the  consul  up  to  Nubia. 
I  took  with  me  a  young  Scotchman,  who  had  been  brought  into 
Egypt  at  the  time  of  the  last  English  invasion  of  that  country  :  he 
was  taken  prisoner,  and  some  years  after  entered  into  the  service 
of  the  Bashaw  of  Egypt,  and  assumed  the  name  of  Osman.  He 
became  acquainted  with  Sheik  Burekhardt ;  and,  in  consequence  of 
his  honesty  and  attachment  to  him,  the  Sheik  rewarded  him  in  his 
will.  He  was  the  only  and  the  last  person  who  closed  the  eyes  of 
that  lamented  traveller,  and  I  had  much  conversation  with  him  on 
the  subject. 

On  my  arrival  at  Assouan,  I  found  that  the  said  Lebulo  had 
suggested  to  the  Aga  of  Assouan,  and  to  the  natives  of  the  island 
of  Philce,  not  to  let  the  English  party,  who  were  coming  up,  carry 
away  the  obelisk.  The  Aga  remonstrated  with  him,  that  the  obelisk 
had  been  taken  possession  of  by  me  three  years  before,  and  a  guard 
had  been  paid  for  it  on  that  account.  In  consequence  of  this  re- 
fusal, Mr.  Lebulo  proceeded  to  the  island  of  Philce ;  and  having 

z  z 


354  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

heard  from  all  the  natives  that  I  had  taken  possession  so  long 
before,  he  adopted  the  method  of  a  trick  to  seduce  those  simple 
people :  he  pretended  he  could  read  the  hieroglyphics  on  the 
obelisk,  and  said  it  was  written,  that  the  obelisk  belonged  to  Mr. 
Drouetti's  ancestors  ;  consequently  he  had  a  right  to  it.  The  people 
believed  him,  and  he  gave  them  some  trifling  presents,  and  brought 
them  to  the  Cady,  or  justice,  to  hear  their  testimony  that  the 
obelisk  was  the  property  of  Mr.  Drouetti.  The  Cady  received  a 
present,  and  wrote  a  sort  of  certificate,  on  the  evidence  of  these 
people.  Having  done  all  this,  Mr.  Lebulo  wrote  a  note,  which  he 
left  with  one  of  the  Sheiks  in  the  island  to  give  it  to  us  when  we 
arrived,  and  set  off  immediately,  as  he  thought  his  face  could  not 
be  impudent  enough  to  meet  us. 

On  my  arrival  at  Assouan,  I  heard  of  the  difficulties  this  agent 
had  thrown  in  our  way ;  but  I  remonstrated  with  the  Aga,  that 
he  must  recollect  that  it  was  well  understood,  that  I  took  pos- 
session of  that  obelisk  ever  since  my  first  voyage,  and  that  the 
money  I  paid  for  a  guard  was  given  to  him  by  the  medium  of  one 
of  the  Bashaw's  Janizaries,  who  was  ready  to  testify  the  case,  and 
that  he,  the  Aga  himself,  made  a  contract  to  receive  three  hundred 
piastres  (thirty  dollars)  on  the  removal  of  the  obelisk.  He  acknow- 
ledged all  this,  and  said,  that  the  other  party  woidd  have  taken  the 
obelisk  away  several  times,  but  they  could  not  succeed ;  and  that 
lately  they  tried  again,  but  the  water  of  the  cataract  was  too 
low,  so  that  they  could  not  effect  the  passage  through  for  this 
season.  This  last  observation  concerned  me  more  than  all  the 
rest  of  his  discourse ;  for  it  was  entirely  on  the  possibility  of  ef- 
fecting the  passage  down  the  cataract  this  year  that  depended  the 
success  of  exporting  the  obelisk.  Next  day  the  party  arrived  at 
Assouan,  and  I  went  to  the  island  of  Philce  to  take  a  view  of  the 
bank  where  I  was  to  embark  the  obelisk,  and  have  it  conveyed 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  355 

to  the  cataract  where  it  was  to  be  launched.     On  my  arrival  there, 
an  old  Sheik  immediately  presented  to  me  the  following  note : 

"  Le  charge  d'affaire  de  Mr.  Drouetti  prie  Messieurs  les 
Voyageurs  Europeens  de  respecter  le  porteur  du  present  billet 
gardant  1'  obelisque,  qui  est  dans  1'  ile  de  Philoe,  appartenant  a 
Mr.  Drouetti. 

"  Lebulo." 

"  Philoe,  le  22  Sepbre.  1818." 

The  people  of  the  island  then  informed  me  of  the  means  which 
Mr.  Lebulo  had  taken  to  persuade  them  to  testify  that  the  obelisk 
belonged  to  his  party.  By  the  date  of  the  note  I  perceived  that 
this  was  done  only  eight  days  before ;  and  as  we  had  been  fifteen 
days  on  our  voyage  from  Thebes  to  Assouan,  they  had  time  to  do 
all  this  underhand  work  at  their  leisure. 

On  my  return  to  Assouan  I  acquainted  the  consul  and  Mr. 
Bankes  of  what  passed,  and  suggested  to  them,  that  the  only  mode 
of  proceeding  was  to  have  an  interview  with  the  Aga  himself,  and 
from  him  to  hear  who  was  the  first  to  take  possession  of  the  obelisk. 
Accordingly  the  Aga  was  requested  to  come  on  board,  and,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  consul,  he  declared,  that  I  was  the  first  person  of  all  who 
took  possession  of  the  obelisk.  Accordingly  I  set  the  men  to  work. 
I  procured  a  boat  for  that  purpose,  which  by  chance  was  in  Assouan. 
The  greatest  difficulty  was  to  persuade  the  Beis,  or  captain  of  the 
shallal,  to  undertake  to  launch  the  boat  down  the  cataract  with 
the  obelisk  on  board.  The  water  was  very  low  at  that  time ;  and 
what  was  more  against  the  undertaking  of  the  operation  was,  that 
the  opposite  party  had  applied  to  him  two  months  before,  when 
the  water  was  much  higher,  and  he  refused  on  the  score  that  it 

z  z  2 


.356  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

was  not  high  enough.     However,  the  promise  of  a  good  present, 
and  half  of  the  money  in  his  hands,  mollified  the  captain,  and  he 
promised  that  he  would  accomplish  the  undertaking.     To  the  Aga 
I  made  a  present  of  a  gold  watch,  worth  one  hundred  and  fifty 
piastres  (fifteen  dollars),  in  the  name  of  Mr.  Bankes ;  the  Sheiks  of 
the  Moraida,  and  other  places  round,  were  to  be  gained  to  our 
side,  that  they  might  provide  men  to  work.     This  was  done,  of 
course,  by  way  of  giving  a  trifle  more  than  to  the  rest  of  the  labourers, 
and  promising  more  if  they  behaved  well.     I  had  some  little  diffi- 
culty to  procure  a  few  sticks,  or  small  poles,  at  Assouan,  as  there  is 
no  wood  in  those  places   except  what  they  procure  from  Cairo, 
merely  to  repair  their  boats.     I  had  also  some  difficulty  at  first  in 
removing  the  said  obelisk  from  its  original  station ;  but  once  put 
on  its  way,  it  soon  came  to  the  water-side.     The   pedestal  was 
rather  more  troublesome ;  owing  to  its  square  form,  it  was  almost 
buried  under  the  rubbish ;  and  as  we  had  no  tackle  whatsoever, 
and  very  little  wood,  it  retarded  the  work  one  or  two  days  longer. 
At  this  time  the  Aga  of  Assouan  came  to  the  island,  and  pre- 
sented a  letter  he  had  received  from  Mr.  Drouetti  himself  sealed 
with  his  own  seal,  which  the  Aga  knew  well,  ordering  the  Aga  not 
to  permit  any  one   to  take  away  the  obelisk.     The   letter   was 
translated  by  the  Scotch  Osman,  from  whom  we  had  no  doubt  of 
the  correctness  of  its  contents.     The  consul  begged  the  Aga  to 
send  back  his  compliments  to  Mr.  Drouetti,  and  to  tell  him  that 
we  were  going  to  remove  the  obelisk.     At  this  time,  Mr.  Baley, 
Mr.  Godfrey,  and  two  other  gentlemen,  arrived  in  the  island,  from 
their  tour  through  Greece,  &c. 

Our  party  prepared  for  their  voyage  to  the  second  cataract. 
The  obelisk  was  now  ready  to  be  embarked,  when  the  following 
accident  happened,  which  was  entirely  owing  to  my  own  neglect,  by 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  357 

trusting  a  single  manoeuvre  to  some  who  speak  more  than  they  can 
execute.  I  had  left  the  care  to  others  of  making  a  sort  of  temporary 
pier  of  large  blocks  of  stones,  while  I  had  to  go  to  examine  a  certain 
passage  in  the  cataract  where  the  boat  was  to  be  taken  up  empty,  and 
launched  down  when  loaded.  On  my  return,  the  pier  appeared 
quite  strong  enough  to  bear  at  least  forty  times  the  weight  it  had 
to  support ;  but,  alas !  when  the  obelisk  came  gradually  on  from 
the  sloping  bank,  and  all  the  weight  rested  on  it,  the  pier,  with  the 
obelisk,  and  some  of  the  men,  took  a  slow  movement,  and  majes- 
tically descended  into  the  river,  wishing  us  better  success.  I  was 
not  three  yards  off  when  this  happened,  and  for  some  minutes,  I 
must  confess,  I  remained  as  stiff  as  a  post.  The  first  thing  that 
came  into  my  head,  was  the  loss  of  such  a  piece  of  antiquity;  the 
second  was,  the  exultation  of  our  opponents,  after  so  much  question- 
ing to  what  party  it  belonged ;  and,  lastly,  the  blame  of  all  the  anti- 
quarian republic  in  the  world.  It  happens  very  often,  that  after  a 
vase  slips  through  the  hands  and  breaks  on  the  ground,  it  is  by  a 
natural  impulse  that  one  turns  himself  to  look  at  the  pieces ;  so 
did  I :  I  fixed  my  eyes  on  the  place  where  the  pier  set  off  by 
itself  into  the  Nile,  and  observed  that  the  stones  which  were  to 
serve  as  a  foundation  on  a  sloping  bank  had  been  only  laid  on  the 
surface  of  it,  so  that  naturally  the  weight  of  the  obelisk  must  have 
carried  it,  or  rather  pressed  down  into  the  Nile.  The  obelisk  was 
still  peeping  a  little  out  of  the  water :  the  labourers  were  of  various 
humours ;  some  were  sorry,  not  for  the  obelisk,  which  was  no  loss 
to  them,  but  for  the  loss  of  what  they  might  have  gained  in  future 
operations  in  passing  it  down  the  cataract,  and  others  were  laughing, 
I  suppose,  at  seeing  the  evident  disappointment  expressed  on  my 
countenance ;  some  went  one  way,  some  another,  and  I  remained 
alone,  seated  on  the  bank,  to  contemplate  the  little  part  which  pro- 


358  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

jected  out  of  the  water,  and  the  eddies  made  by  the  current  on 
that  spot  in  consequence  of  the  obelisk  below.  The  effects  of 
surprise  did  not  last  long ;  I  began  to  reflect,  and  saw  the  possibility 
of  taking  the  obelisk  up  again.  Unfortunately  I  had  not  a  single 
machine  to  help  the  undertaking,  and  even  our  ropes,  which  were  of 
palm  leaves,  were  broken  and  half  rotten,  and  scarcely  any  wood 
at  all  suited  to  employ  to  that  purpose.  The  obelisk  is  one  single 
piece  of  granite  of  twenty-two  feet  in  length,  and  two  in  breadth 
at  the  basis.  It  is  not  smaller  in  height  than  that  in  St.  George's 
fields,  but  of  a  stone  of  a  much  heavier  quality.  I  had,  however, 
in  my  favour  the  people,  who  are  excellent  watermen,  and  who  could 
stay  in  the  water  the  whole  day  without  the  least  difficulty. 

Having  made  up  my  mind  to  have  the  obelisk  taken  up,  I  found 
that  the  loss  would  be  only  two  or  three  days  work.  Accordingly 
I  ordered  the  men  to  come  the  next  morning,  and  sent  to  As- 
souan that  evening  to  fetch  some  ropes  if  possible.  Mr.  Bankes 
was  not  there  when  this  happened,  as  he  had  crossed  the  Nile  that 
afternoon ;  but  the  labourers  who  returned  home  after  the  obelisk 
had  fallen  in  the  water,  informed  him  of  what  had  happened.  I 
believe  he  was  not  less  displeased  than  myself  when  I  saw  the 
accident,  and  on  his  arrival  he  said,  that  such  things  would  happen 
sometimes ;  but  I  saw  he  was  not  in  a  careful  humour  himself,  so  I 
informed  him  that  the  obelisk  was  not  lost,  and  that  in  two  or  three 
days  it  would  be  on  board.  The  two  next  days  were  employed  in 
this  operation,  which  was  done  as  follows : 

I  caused  a  great  quantity  of  stones  to  be  brought  to  the  water- 
side. I  then  desired  several  men  to  enter  the  water,  and  to  make 
a  heap  of  stones  on  the  side  of  the  obelisk  opposite  to  the  shore, 
and  to  form  a  solid  bed  for  the  levers  to  rest  upon.  I  accord- 
ingly placed  the  levers  under  the  obelisk,  one  at  the  basis,  and 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  fee.  359 

the  other  near  the  leaning  point,  so  that  by  the  pressure  of  the 

levers,  the  obelisk  must  turn  round  upon  its  axis :  the  men  could 

not  put  down  the  lever  under  water  as  they  do  on  shore,  but  by 

seating  themselves  on  the  extremity  of  the  levers,  the  pressure  of 

their  own  weight  produced  the  effect.     Two  ropes  were   passed 

under  the  obelisk :  that  end  which  was  from  under  it  was  fastened  to 

some  date-trees,  which  happened  to  be  on  the  bank,  and  to  the  ends 

which  came  from  above  I  put  as  many  men  to  pull  as  I  thought 

were  sufficient.     At  the  side  where  the  levers  were  I  put  some 

good  divers,  who  were  ready  to  put  large  stones  under  the  obelisk 

when  it  rose,  so  that  it  might  not  return  back  to  its  former  situation. 

Having  set  the  men  at  the  rope  to  pull,  and  those  of  the  divers  to 

mount  on  the  extremities  of  the  levers,  the  obelisk   rose   on  the 

side  opposite  the  bank  ;  and  when  the  levers  were  to  be  removed,  the 

obelisk  was  propped  by  stones  under  it.    It  was  risen  so  that  its  own 

weight  caused  it  to  move  round  at  each  turn  of  it,  when  we  gained 

nearly  the  space  of  its  own  breadth,  and  so  on  till  it  came  quite  on 

dry  ground,  which  was  effected  in  less  than  two  days;  the  party 

then  set  off  for  the  second  cataract.  Previous  to  the  taking  on  board 

the  obelisk,  I  thought  it  better  to  export  from  the  island  the  pedestal 

of  it,  as  I  could  not  use  the  boat  for  both.     I  embarked  and  took  it 

at  the  Marada,  in  a  good  situation,  that  it  might  be  easily  embarked. 

At  this  moment,  an  agent  of  Mr.  Drouetti  came  to  Assouan,  and 

put  the  whole  town  in  an  uproar.     He  brought  the  Aga  to  the 

island  of  Philce,  to  speak  to  me,  and  to  persuade  me  for  my  best 

advantage  to  leave  the  obelisk  there.  I  asked  the  Aga  what  he  had 

to  say  on  this  affair ;  that  if  he  thought  proper  I  should  leave  the 

obelisk  where  it  was,  ready  for   embarkation,   for  Mr.   Drouetti. 

The  Aga  seeing  me  smile,  replied  that  he  had  nothing  to  say  on 

the  subject ;  that  Mr.  Drouetti  had  written  to  the  Defterdar  Bey 

at  Siout,  and  that  the  Defterdar  Bey  had  written  to  him,  the  Aga, 


360  RESEARCHES   AND   OPERATIONS 

not  to  meddle  with  either  party.  The  agent  abused  the  Aga,  but 
to  no  purpose,  as  all  his  proceedings  would  not  interrupt  my 
work.  He  then  attempted  to  convince  the  Sheiks  that  they 
might  stop  the  men  from  working,  offering  to  pay  them  for  their 
loss  of  time  without  any  trouble.  Such  offers,  made  even  to  the 
labourers,  were  rejected  by  them  with  disgust.  I  continued  my 
operation,  and  put  the  obelisk  on  board,  by  means  of  a  bridge  of 
palm-trees,  thrown  from  across  the  boat  to  the  land  under  the 
obelisk,  which  was  now  turned  on  the  bridge,  and  entered  on 
board :  when  in  the  centre  of  the  boat,  I  removed  the  trees  from 
under  it ;  and  no  sooner  was  this  done  than  we  set  off  with  the 
obelisk  for  the  Marada,  to  have  it  ready  to  be  launched  down  the 
cataract  on  the  next  morning. 

The  Eeis  of  the  Shalal,  or  cataract,  continued  firm  on  my  side, 
and  I  continued  to  keep  him  so.  He  had  half  of  the  money.  He 
now  came  to  receive  the  other  half  previous  to  his  undertaking.  I 
did  not  think  it  prudent  to  disappoint  him  in  his  expectation,  so  I 
paid  him  the  other  half,  which  was  twenty-five  dollars,  on  condition 
that  he  would  make  a  promise,  before  two  of  my  people,  to  maintain 
his  word ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  if  he  failed,  that  I  should  appeal  to 
Mahomet  Ah,  the  Bashaw  at  Cairo.  He  was  satisfied ;  and,  having 
made  the  arrangement  for  the  number  of  men  who  were  to  be 
employed  the  next  day,  he  set  off  on  his  business.  On  the  same 
evening  I  took  a  walk  among  the  granite  rocks  of  the  cataract, 
where  we  had  to  pass.  The  next  day  an  object  of  attention  came 
in  my  way,  which  I  often  thought  to  speak  of.  There  are  many  of 
these  rocks  with  hieroglyphics  and  figures  cut  on  them,  which 
evidently  were  done  only  by  scholars,  who,  perhaps,  were  practising 
the  science  of  sculpture  on  those  masses.  The  observation  I  made 
was,  that  a  calculation  of  ages  might  be  made  by  the  various  colours 
which  the  rocks  have  taken  from  their  original,  and  from  the  time 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  361 

it  has  been  cut ;  for  instance,  we  have  to  suppose  that,  when 
nature  first  formed  the  mass  of  granite,  it  was  as  white  as  it  may 
be  seen  now  when  newly  cut.  We  next  must  fix  on  an  epoch  for 
the  time  when  the  hieroglyphics  on  those  rocks  were  engraved,  and 
by  that  we  may  calculate  the  degree  of  the  three  colours,  which  are 
in  view ;  for  instance,  the  part  which  has  never  been  touched  is  dark 
brown ;  that  which  has  been  cut,  supposed  about  three  thousand 
years  ago,  is  light  brown ;  and  some  sculptured  in  later  ages  is  still 
lighter.  That  which  has  been  cut  only  one  hour  before  may  be 
supposed  to  be  as  it  was  on  the  day  of  its  creation  as  above :  so,  by 
the  proportion  of  the  various  colours  on  the  rocks,  a  calculation  of 
the  age  may  be  formed,  and  by  that  means  we  may  found  the  age 
of  the  creation. 

I  beg  my  readers  to  pardon  my  thus  speculating  on  a  point 
which,  in  my  humble  capacity,  can  afford  but  little  instruction ; 
however,  as  the  idea  struck  me,  I  lay  it  before  the  public. 

Next  morning  all  was  ready  for  the  dangerous  operation  of 
passing  the  cataract  with  the  obelisk.  I  have  mentioned  before  that 
this  is  the  greatest  fall,  or  rather  descent,  of  water  in  the  cataract. 
When  the  inundation  is  half  high  in  the  Nile,  it  is  a  column  of  water 
of  about  three  hundred  yards  in  length,  which  falls  in  an  angle 
of  twenty  and  twenty-five  degrees  among  rocks  and  stones,  which 
project  out  in  various  directions.  The  boat  was  brought  to  the 
margin  of  the  cascade ;  a  strong  rope,  or  rather  a  small  cable,  was 
attached  to  a  large  tree,  the  end  of  which  was  passed  through  the 
beams  of  the  boat,  so  as  to  be  slackened  or  stopped  at  pleasure. 
In  the  boat  there  were  only  five  men ;  and  on  the  rocks,  on  each 
side  of  the  cascade,  a  number  of  others  in  various  places,  with  ropes 
attached  to  the  boat,  so  as  to  put  it  either  on  one  side  or  the 
other,  as  it  required,  to  prevent  its  running  against  the  stones ;  for 
if  it  should  be  touched  in  the  smallest  degree,  with  such  a  weight  on 
board,  and  in  such  a  rapid  stream,  the  boat  could  not  escape  being 

3  a 


•362  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

dashed  to  pieces.  The  cable,  which  I  borrowed  from  a  merchant- 
boat  in  Assouan,  was  pretty  strong,  but  not  sufficient  to  stop  the 
boat  in  its  course,  in  case  it  should  be  in  danger  of  running  against 
a  rock.  It  was  only  sufficient  to  check  its  course  down  ;  nor  could 
the  boat  have  been  stopped  in  such  a  situation,  for  in  that  case  the 
water  would  run  over  the  boat,  and  sink  it  instantly.  Under  these 
circumstances,  all  depended  on  the  dexterity  of  the  men  who  were 
posted  in  various  parts  to  pull  or  slacken  according  as  necessity 
required.  I  did  not  fail  to  use  all  the  persuasion  possible,  and 
promises  of  bakshis,  to  the  wild  people,  as  they  are  called,  but  who 
on  this  occasion  were  as  steady  as  so  many  pilots.  The  Eeis,  of 
whom  I  had  hired  the  boat,  was  almost  out  of  his  senses,  thinking 
it  would  be  certainly  lost.  The  poor  fellow  had  engaged  his  vessel 
merely  because  it  happened  that  his  trade  failed  ;  and  he  was  in 
Assouan  for  some  time  without  hope  of  getting  a  cargo,  and  had 
incurred  debts,  which  confined  him  there,  and  he  would  have  been 
glad  of  any  freight  to  get  out ;  but  when  he  saw  the  danger  his  boat 
was  in,  he  cried  like  a  child,  and  begged  I  would  relinquish  my  pro- 
ject, and  return  his  boat  safe  to  him.  But  when  he  saw  the  vessel 
on  the  point  of  being  launched,  he  threw  himself  with  his  face  to 
the  ground,  and  did  not  rise  till  all  was  out  of  danger.  Having  seen 
that  all  was  ready,  I  gave  the  signal  to  slacken  the  cable.  It  was 
one  of  the  greatest  sights  I  have  seen.  The  boat  took  a  course 
which  may  be  reckoned  at  the  rate  of  twelve  miles  an  hour. 
Accordingly,  the  men  on  land  slackened  the  rope ;  and  at  the 
distance  of  one  hundred  yards  the  boat  came  in  contact  with  an 
eddy,  which,  beating  against  a  rock,  returned  towards  the  vessel, 
and  that  helped  much  to  stop  its  course.  The  men  on  the  side 
pulled  the  boat  out  of  the  direction  of  that  rock,  and  it  continued 
its  course,  gradually  diminishing  its  rate,  till  it  reached  the  bottom 
of  the  cataract ;  and  I  was  not  a  little  pleased  to  see  it  out  of 
danger.      The  labourers  altogether  seemed  pleased  at  the  good 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  363 

success  of  the  attempt,  even  independently,  I  believe,  of  the 
interest  they  might  derive  from  it ;  and  it  is  not  very  often  that 
such  feelings  enter  the  bosoms  of  these  people.  The  Reis  of  the 
boat  came  to  me  with  joy  expressed  in  Ins  countenance,  as  may 
easily  be  imagined. 

Having  set  all  to  rights  to  pass  the  other  parts  of  the  cataract, 
I  went  on  board,  and  we  continued  the  course  of  the  current.  We 
had  only  two  or  three  places  of  little  danger  to  pass  ;  but,  thank 
God,  we  arrived  safe  at  Assouan  on  the  same  day.  I  beg  it  to  be 
observed,  that  this  is  not  the  passage  where  small  boats  are  taken 
up  or  down  the  cataract ;  for  there  are  other  smaller  columns  of 
water,  which  are  deep  enough  to  float  small  boats,  but  not  such  as 
that  one  with  the  obelisk. 

Immediately  after  my  arrival  there,  I  prepared  to  depart  for 
Thebes,  and  having  satisfied  the  Aga  according  to  our  promise,  I 
departed.      Previous  to  my  arrival  there,  I  quitted  the  boat,  as 
the  wind  was  against  us,  and  went  by  land.     I  took  up  my  old 
residence  at  the  tombs,  in  Beban  el  Malook.     There  I  found  Mrs. 
Belzoni,    who  had  returned  from   Jerusalem,  as  I  had  written  to 
her  that  I  could  not  go  into  Syria.     It  was  then  Christmas,  and 
we  passed  the  solemnity  of  that  blessed  day  in  the  solitude  of 
those  recesses,  undisturbed  by  the  folly  of  mankind ;  and  only  a 
few  inoffensive  Arabs,  who  guarded  the  new  tombs,  were  there  *, 
but  it  was  not  to  last  long  so.     I  must  now  enter  into  new  contests 
with  evil  beings ;  and  in  spite  of  all  the  study  I  made  to  avoid 
bringing  before  the  public  the  foul  deeds  of  malice,  I  find  that  I 
cannot  avoid  inserting  them  in  this  volume.    The  following  circum- 
stances have  induced  me  to  quit  Egypt ;  and  any  one  who  will 
kindly  read  and  attend  to  the  catastrophe,  will  agree  with  me  in 
saying,  that  it  was  high  time  to  do  so.     It  happened  at  this  period 
that  a  certain  person,  whose  name,  for  compassion's  sake,  I  do  not 
wish  to  mention,  but  who  was  neither  English  nor  French,  came  into 

3a2 


364  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

Upper  Egypt,  not  to  see  antiquities,  but  to  purchase  some  if  he 
could.  He  came  from  one  of  the  capitals  of  Europe,  and  was  to 
return.  He  offered  to  do  any  tiling  for  me  in  Europe  if  I  wished ; 
he  was  on  friendly  terms,  and  I  believe  sincere,  till  the  diabolical 
spirit  of  interest  got  into  his  breast,  and  then  he  suffered  himself 
to  be  led  by  it.  As  I  happened  to  know  him  before,  I  took  the 
opportunity  of  his  return  to  that  very  place  where  I  was  in  want 
of  a  person  to  transact  some  business  for  me.  The  business  was, 
that,  as  he  was  on  his  return  to  Europe,  he  would  take  four  of  the 
sphinxes,  or  lion-headed  statues,  which  were  allotted  me  for  my 
share,  to  the  very  metropolis  where  he  was  going,  and  there  make 
an  offer,  as  a  present,  to  a  certain  high  personage  in  my  name, 
which  he  undertook  to  do  with  great  pleasure ;  and  it  was  so 
arranged  that  I  should  give  him  an  order  on  the  British  consul  in 
Alexandria,  to  receive  the  aforesaid  statues,  which  were  lodged  in 
the  charge  of  the  British  agent  in  Rosetta.  It  happened  that,  at 
the  same  time,  this  man  became  acquainted  with  the  people  of  our 
opposite  party,  and,  as  he  must  come  in  in  the  following  account, 
I  shall  call  him  the  "stranger." 

On  the  eve  of  Christmas,  the  boat  with  the  obelisk  on  board 
arrived,  and  stopped  at  Luxor,  waiting  for  a  few  small  articles  to  be 
loaded,  and  then  to  proceed  to  Rosetta. 

It  will  be  recollected  that,  previous  to  our  last  departure  for  the 
cataract,  I  entered  into  an  arrangement  with  Mr.  Salt,  settling  where 
I  was  to  excavate  on  several  spots  among  the  ruins  of  Carnak.  On  St. 
Stephen's  day  I  passed  the  Nile  to  that  place,  with  the  intention  of 
examining  the  spots  of  ground  which  were  allotted  to  our  party, 
according  to  the  arrangement  made  by  Messrs.  Salt  and  Drouetti. 
At  Luxor  I  was  mounted  on  a  very  high  donkey,  the  only  mode  of 
travelling  short  journeys  in  those  countries,  as  horses  are  scarce, 
and  it  is  too  inconvenient  to  mount  a  camel  for  a  small  distance. 
I  was  followed  by  my  Greek  servant  and  two  Arabian  drivers.  I  was 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  365 

unarmed ;  my  servant  had  two  pistols  as  usual.  Our  opponents,  with 
their  commander,  Mr.  Drouetti,  were  lodged  in  some  mud  houses 
among  the  ruins  of  Carnak.  The  boat  with  the  obelisk  which  I  had 
just  brought  down  and  put  up  at  Luxor,  was  rather  too  close  under 
their  noses,  as  they  expressed  themselves ;  and  it  irritated  them  to 
such  a  degree,  that  they  premeditated  the  mode  of  revenge  by,  as 
they  said,  only  abusing  and  insulting  Belzoni ;  but  this  could  not 
have  been  done  without  some  danger  of  retaliation,  and  perhaps  with 
interest  equivalent  to  the  merit  of  the  operation.  The  only  way 
this  was  to  be  done  was  by  taking  the  advantage  of  a  pretext,  and  by 
raising  some  differences  against  me  in  some  way  or  other ;  the  plan  was 
well  laid.  The  first  piece  of  ground  I  had  to  examine  among  these 
ruins,  was  occupied  by  the  labourers  of  Mr.  Drouetti ;  consequently, 
it  was  expected  that  I  should  take  notice  of  it,  that  some  altercation 
would  ensue,  and  then  would  be  the  time  to  satiate  their  revenge. 
Previous  to  my  arrival  at  the  above  ground,  I  was  warned  by  an 
Arab  not  to  go  where  the  other  Europeans  were ;  but  I  took  no 
notice  of  what  he  said,  as  sometimes  those  people  make  much  out 
of  nothing.  I  continued  my  route  till  I  arrived  on  the  above 
ground,  and  the  first  thing  I  saw  was  a  number  of  men  working 
on  a  spot  too  well  known  to  be  of  our  lot  according  to  the  ar- 
rangement. I  then  perceived  what  these  gentlemen  wanted;  so  I 
took  no  notice,  and  actually  passed  on  without  stopping  to  look  at 
them.  None  of  the  Europeans  were  there,  and  my  servant  observing 
to  me,  that  that  ground  was  of  our  share,  I  told  him  not  to  meddle 
himself  about  it,  and  we  passed  on.  The  above  working  ground 
was  close  to  the  small  lakes,  and  these  gentlemen  were  living  in  the 
window  of  the  great  propylaeon,  which  is  at  least  a  good  quarter  of  a 
mile  distant  from  the  above  ground.  We  passed  quietly  before 
them,  and  continued  on  our  way  straight  to  the  north  side  of  the 
ruins  as  far  as  their  extremity,  another  quarter  of  a  mile  from  where 


366  RESEARCHES   AND   OPERATIONS 

they  were.     I  remained  some  time  there  in  examining  some  grounds, 
and  on  my  return  towards  the  great  propylaeon  where  we  had  to 
pass  on  our  return  to  Luxor,  we  met  an  Arab  running  towards  us, 
crying,  from  having  received  a  severe  beating  from  our  opponents, 
merely  because  he  served,  and  was  faithful  to  us,  as  far  as  an  Arab 
can  be.      This  would  have  been  another  motive  to  create  some 
altercation,  but  it  had  no  effect ;  I  took  no  notice  of  it,  and  was  going 
on  straight  to  Luxor.    I  was  at  about  three  hundred  yards  from  the 
great  propylaeon,  when  I  saw  a  group  of  people  running  towards  us  ; 
they  were  about  thirty  Arabs,  headed  by  two  Europeans,  agents 
of  Mr.  Drouetti.     On  their  approaching,  Mr.  Lebulo  was  first,  and 
the  renegado  Rossignano  second,  both  Piedmontese,  and  country- 
men of  Mr.  Drouetti.     Lebulo  began  his  address  to  me,  by  asking, 
what  business  I  had  to  take  away  an  obelisk  that  did  not  belong  to 
me ;  and  that  I  had  done  so  many  things  of  this  kind  to  him,  that 
I  should  not  do  any  more.     Meanwhile  he  seized  the  bridle  of  my 
donkey  with  one  hand,  and  with  the  other  he  laid  hold  of  my  waist- 
coat, and  stopped  me  from  proceeding  any  farther  :  he  had  also  a 
large  stick  hung  to  his  wrist  by  a  string.     By  this  time  my  servant 
was  assailed  by  a  number  of  Arabs,  two  of  whom  were  constantly  in 
the  service  of  Mr.  Drouetti.     At  the  same  moment,  the  renegado 
Rossignano  reached  within  four  yards  of  me,  and  with  all  the  rage 
of  a  ruffian,  levelled  a  double-barrelled  gun  at  my  breast,  loading 
me  with  all  the  imprecations  that  a  villain  could  invent ;  by  this 
time  my  servant  was  disarmed,  and  overpowered  by  numbers,  and 
in  spite  of  his  efforts,  took  his  pistols  from  his  belt.    The  two  gallant 
knights  before  me,  I  mean  Lebulo  and  Rossignano,  escorted  by  the 
two  other  Arabian  servants  of  Mr.  Drouetti,  both  armed  with  pistols, 
and  many  others  armed  with   sticks,  continued   their   clamorous 
imprecations  against  me,  and  the  brave  Rossignano  still  keeping 
the  gun  pointed  at  my  breast,  said,  that  it  was  time  that  I  should 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  be.  367 

pay  for  all  I  had  done  to  them.  The  courageous  Lebulo  said,  with 
all  the  emphasis  of  an  enraged  man,  that  he  was  to  have  one-third 
of  the  profit  derived  from  the  selling  of  that  obelisk,  when  in 
Europe,  according  to  a  promise  from  Mr.  Drouetti,  had  I  not  stolen 
it  from  the  island  of  Philoe.  My  situation  was  not  pleasant,  sur- 
rounded by  a  band  of  ruffians  like  those,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that 
if  I  had  attempted  to  dismount,  the  cowards  would  have  despatched 
me  on  the  ground,  and  said  that  they  did  it  in  defence  of  their 
lives,  as  I  had  been  the  aggressor.  I  thought  the  best  way  was  to 
keep  on  my  donkey,  and  look  at  the  villains  with  contempt.  Lebulo 
said,  that  another  of  their  party  had  been  drowned  at  Girgeh,  on 
board  of  the  English  boat,  and  that  they  had  no  redress  for  it, 
meaning,  I  suppose,  the  poor  man  that  fell  overboard  at  Girgeh  on 
his  passage  to  Cairo.  I  told  Lebulo  to  let  me  proceed  on  my  way, 
and  that  if  I  had  done  any  thing  wrong,  I  should  be  ready  to  account 
for  it ;  but  all  was  to  no  purpose.  Their  rage  had  blinded  them  out 
of  their  senses. 

While  this  was  going  on,  I  observed  another  band  of  Arabs 
running  towards  us.  When  they  came  nearer,  I  saw  Mr.  Drouetti 
himself  among  them,  and  close  to  him  a  servant  of  his,  armed  with 
pistols.  On  his  arrival  before  me,  Mr.  Drouetti  demanded,  in  a  tone 
not  inferior  to  that  of  his  disciples,  what  reason  or  authority  I  had  to 
stop  his  people  from  working.  I  told  him  that  I  knew  nothing  of 
what  he  meant,  and  that  I  found  myself  extremely  ill  used  by  his 
own  people,  and  that  he  must  answer  for  their  conduct.  In  an 
authoritative  tone  he  desired  I  should  dismount,  which  I  refused  to 
do.  At  this  moment  a  pistol  was  fired  behind  me,  but  I  could  not 
tell  by  whom.  I  was  determined  to  bear  much,  sooner  than  come 
to  blows  with  such  people,  who  did  not  blush  to  assail  me  all  in 
a  mass  ;  but  when  I  heard  the  pistol  fired  behind  my  back,  I 
thought  it  was  high  time  to  sell  my  life  as  dear  as  I  could.     I  dis- 


368  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

mounted,  but  then  the  kind  Mr.  Drouetti  assured  me  that  I  was  not 
in  danger  while  he  was  there ;  and  Mr.  Lebulo,  who  had  before  acted 
the  part  of  a  ruffian,  now  contrived  to  play  that  of  a  neutral  gentle- 
man. By  this  time  many  other  Arabs  of  the  village  of  Carnak  had 
reached  this  place,  and  seeing  me  thus  surrounded,  would  any  one 
suppose  it!  for  the  honour  of  Christendom  and  civilization,  those  wild 
Arabs,  as  we  call  them,  were  disgusted  at  the  conduct  of  Europeans, 
and  interfered  in  my  behalf.  They  surrounded  the  renegado 
Rossignano,  whose  conduct  they  thought  most  outrageous  and  base, 
not  for  an  European,  but  even  for  the  worst  of  Arabs.  What  ideas 
must  have  been  formed  in  the  minds  of  those  people  of  the  civili- 
zation of  Europe,  by  the  conduct  of  such  villains  !  I  was  now 
informed  that  an  European  stranger  was  in  the  place  of  residence 
of  Mr.  Drouetti.  I  sent  an  Arab  to  beg  he  would  come  where  we 
were,  as  I  thought  I  might  have  a  witness  to  what  might  afterwards 
take  place,  though  the  affray  was  almost  over.  Mr.  Drouetti,  who  was 
now  very  mild,  said,  that  he  never  had  given  any  order  to  his  people 
to  work  on  any  grounds  belonging  to  vis ;  that  I  should  have  made 
application  to  him,  and  he  would  have  put  them  right ,  but  that  I 
should  not  stop  the  people  from  their  work.  I  repeated  that  I 
did  not  know  what  he  meant,  and  that  all  tliis  was  a  combination  of 
traps  put  together  by  his  agents.  He  said  that  an  Arab  came  to  his 
lodging,  and  informed  him  that  I  ordered  the  people  away  from  their 
work.  I  persisted  that  the  Arab  should  be  brought  before  me,  but 
he  was  not  to  be  found ;  he  was  called  every  where,  but  did  not 
answer.  One  of  the  two  Arabs  from  Gournou,  who  followed  me 
as  a  driver,  recognised  the  said  Arab,  who  all  this  time  was  close 
to  Mr.  Drouetti,  who  had  called  to  him  in  vain,  and  who,  though 
he  had  seen  him  a  few  minutes  before,  did  not  recognise  him  again. 
Being  before  me,  I  stared  in  the  man's  face,  and  ordered  him  to 
repeat  what  he  had  said  of  me  to  Mr.  Drouetti.    He  replied,  that  he 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  369 

did  not  say  to  Mr.  Drouetti  that  I  stopped  the  men  from  working, 
but  that  my  servant  did,  though  I  was  totally  confident  of  the  con- 
trary, as  he  was  not  two  yards  from  me  when  we  passed  that  way. 
It  was  useless  for  me  to  contest  that  point,  as  I  saw  it  was  brought 
forward  merely  to  cover  the  true  cause  for  which  they  attacked  me, 
which  was  shown  by  their  first  words  to  me  about  the  obelisk.  I 
insisted  that  Mr.  Drouetti  should  come  where  the  men  were  at 
work,  that  I  might  point  out  to  him  that  his  people  were  the 
aggressors,  by  encroaching  on  our  lot  of  ground,  of  which  he  was 
forcibly  convinced.  As  we  went  on,  the  assailant  Rossignano  con- 
tinued at  a  distance  behind  me.  The  stranger  arrived  where  I  was, 
and  proved  to  be  the  person  alluded  to  before,  by  whom  I  had  to 
send  the  four  statues  to  Europe.  On  his  arrival,  I  informed  him 
of  what  had  passed ;  but  Mr.  Drouetti  told  him  that  we  had  only 
had  a  few  words,  and  that  was  all.  The  stranger  observed  to  him, 
that  he  saw  those  people  take  up  arms,  while  he  was  in  their 
house  or  habitation,  and  run  out,  and  remembered  Mr.  Drouetti 
himself  said,  he  must  run  after  them,  for  fear  they  should  do 
some  mischief,  and  that  they  did  wrong  to  act  so.  To  which 
Mr.  Drouetti  replied,  that  he  could  not  help  what  these  people 
did ;  to  which  observation  the  stranger  replied,  that  he  should  not 
keep  them  in  his  service.  Mr.  Drouetti  made  a  long  lamentation 
on  the  taking  away  the  obelisk.  I  reminded  him  that  he  must 
have  known  it  was  taken  possession  of  long  before  any  of  his  agents 
reached  the  island  of  Philoe ;  and  that  he  did  wrong  to  send  his 
agents  to  that  place  to  prevent  my  taking  it,  after  he  knew  we  had 
set  off  for  that  purpose.  He  said,  this  was  owing  to  Mr.  Rankes 
not  calling  on  him  previous  to  his  departure  for  that  place,  and 
conversing  with  him  on  the  subject.  The  fact  is,  that  Mr.  Bankes 
did  not  think  proper  to  put  himself  under  an  unnecessary  obligation 

3  D 


370  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

to  Mr.  Drouetti.  I  then  informed  Mr.  Drouetti,  that  I  had  re- 
sisted many  and  various  sorts  of  attacks  by  Ms  agents,  but  I  did 
not  expect  they  would  come  to  such  a  pitch,  and  that  it  was 
high  time  for  me  to  quit  the  country ;  so  I  returned  to  Beban  el 
Malook,  and  immediately  commenced  my  preparations  to  depart  for 
Europe,  as  I  could  not  live  any  longer  in  a  country  where  I  had 
become  the  object  of  revenge,  of  a  set  of  people  who  could  take  the 
basest  means  to  accomplish  their  purpose  ;  and  notwithstanding  the 
advantages  I  might  have  derived  in  the  continuation  of  my  re- 
searches, the  conditions  of  which  with  the  consul  were  now  more  ad- 
vantageous to  me  than  any  I  had  hitherto  obtained,  I  was  so  totally 
disgusted,  that  I  took  the  above  resolution  accordingly. 

I  had  written  the  particulars  of  what  had  happened,  to  the  consul, 
adding,  that  by  the  time  he  received  my  letter  I  should  be  on  my 
way  to  Alexandria,  as  I  was  determined  to  proceed  to  Europe  by 
the  first  opportunity.  As  to  any  redress,  I  did  not  ask  for  it,  as  I 
could  not  expect  to  have  any  in  that  country  ;  and  as  the  boat  with 
the  obelisk  was  not  set  off  I  availed  myself  of  the  opportunity  of 
descending  the  Nile  in  it. 

Having  finished  all  the  models,  drawings,  &c.  of  the  tomb,  and 
put  on  board  all  that  I  had  accumulated  on  my  own  account,  I 
began  the  operation  of  taking  the  sarcophagus  out  of  the  tombs.  I 
must  lament  the  unfortunate  fate  of  some  of  the  figures  within  this 
place.  It  will  be  recollected,  as  I  mentioned  before,  that  the  entrance 
into  the  tombs  was  situated  under  a  small  torrent  of  water,  which, 
when  it  happens  to  rain,  runs  over  into  the  valley.  I  was  then 
making  a  canal  to  turn  the  course  of  the  water,  that  it  might  not 
run  into  the  tomb  in  case  of  rain  ;  but,  on  the  arrival  of  the  consul, 
all  was  put  an  end  to.  The  consequence  was,  that  while  I  was  absent 
up  the  Nile  it  happened  to  rain ;  the  water,  finding  the  entrance 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  371 

open,  ran  into  the  tomb,  and  though  not  much,  was  enough  to 
occasion  some  damage  to  some  of  the  figures.  The  dryness  of  the 
calcareous  stone,  which  is  more  like  lime  itself  than  raw  stone, 
absorbed  the  dampness,  and  consequently  cracked  in  many  places, 
particularly  in  the  angles  of  the  pillars  on  the  doorways,  &c. ;  and  in 
one  of  the  rooms  there  was  a  piece  of  stone  detached,  containing  the 
upper  part  of  three  figures  ;  and  in  another  chamber,  was  a  figure, 
which  fortunately  fell  without  much  injury  ;  though  broken  in  three 
pieces,  I  saved  it  from  farther  destruction.  I  was  not  a  little 
vexed  to  see  such  a  thing  happen.  The  damage  done  at  that  time 
was  inconsiderable  in  a  place  of  such  an  extent ;  but  I  fear,  that 
in  the  course  of  a  few  years  it  will  become  much  worse;  and  I 
am  persuaded,  that  the  damp  in  the  rainy  days  has  caused  as  much 
damage  in  the  tombs  as  has  been  occasioned  in  any  other  way.  It 
is  worthy  of  observation,  that  the  atmosphere  must  be  much  changed 
since  the  time  of  Herodotus,  when  he  mentions  a  circumstance  of 
some  rain  having  fallen  in  Thebes  as  an  extraordinary  case  or  a 
phenomenon,  for  at  present  it  rains  in  Thebes  every  year.  I  do 
not  mean  to  say  that  it  rains  in  a  manner  similar  to  what  we 
are  accustomed  to  in  Europe,  but  enough  to  say  it  does  rain ; 
for  instance,  two  or  three  days  in  the  winter,  and  in  these  two 
or  three  days  perhaps  only  half  an  hour  at  a  time.  It  appears 
also,  that  at  moments  the  water  drops  are  pretty  large,  and  wet 
the  traveller,  who,  not  being  prepared,  feels  it  strange  to  be  thus 
served ;  but  the  great  body  of  water,  as  I  mentioned  before,  comes 
from  the  desert,  through  the  valleys  into  the  Nile.  It  is  curious 
also  to  remark,  the  great  difference  in  the  climates  only  in  the 
short  distance  of  bttle  more  than  two  hundred  miles  to  the  south 
of  Thebes,  where  it  very  seldom  rains ;  indeed,  some  years  pass 
without  any,  and  it  is  owing  to  this  circumstance,  with  the  com- 

3  b  2 


372  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

bination  of  this  place  being  under  the  tropic  of  Cancer,  that  it 
may  be  calculated  to  be  the  driest  and  hottest  spot  on  earth :  I 
mean  that  track  of  land  which  extends  from  the  first  to  the  second 
cataract  of  the  Nile,  named  Lower  Nubia.  It  includes  the  tropic 
of  Cancer,  consequently  these  countries  receive  greater  heat  from  the 
sun  than  any  other  on  this  side  of  the  equinoctial  line,  as  it  passes 
vertically  over  it  twice  in  the  course  of  a  few  days,  at  the  time  of 
the  solstice.  Tliis  circumstance,  united  with  the  phenomenon  that 
it  never  rains,  for  it  never  can  be  said  to  do  so,  unless  a  few  drops, 
perhaps,  in  the  course  of  five  years,  or  more,  can  be  reckoned  as  rain, 
cause  the  rocks  to  be  so  perpetually  hot,  that  the  heat  rises  in 
higher  degrees  than  any  other  part  on  earth.  It  will  be  recol- 
lected, as  I  mentioned  before,  that  in  the  beginning  of  June,  in 
the  island  of  Philce,  we  had  the  thermometer  at  124°  of  Fahren- 
heit in  the  shade ;  but  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  thermometer 
did  not  show  us  to  what  degree  the  heat  arose,  as  it  only  marked 
124°,  consequently  the  mercury  might  mount  higher  if  the  glass 
had  permitted.     But  now  to  our  departure  from  Thebes. 

Having  put  all  things  in  readiness,  and  all  the  models  of  the 
tombs  being  embarked,  1  took  out  the  celebrated  sarcophagus,  which 
gave  me  something  to  do  (in  consequence  of  its  being  so  very 
slender  and  thin),  lest  it  might  break  at  the  smallest  touch  of  any 
thing :  however,  it  was  safely  got  out  of  the  tomb  and  put  in  a  strong 
case.  The  valley  it  had  to  pass  to  reach  the  Nile  is  rather  uneven 
for  more  than  two  miles,  and  one  mile  of  good  soft  sand  and  small 
pebbles.  I  had  it  conveyed  on  rollers  all  the  way,  and  safely  put 
on  board.  By  this  time  Mr.  Wright  and  Mr.  Fisher  arrived  in 
Thebes,  on  their  return  from  Nubia.  I  had  the  pleasure  to  walk 
over  the  remains  of  old  Thebes  with  these  gentlemen,  and  I  must 
confess,  that  I  felt  no  small  degree  of  sorrow  to  quit  a  place  which 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  373 

was  become  so  familiar  to  me,  and  where,  in  no  other  part  of  the 
world,  I  could  find  so  many  objects  of  inquiry  so  congenial  to  my 
inclination.  I  must  say,  that  I  felt  more  in  leaving  Thebes,  than 
any  other  place  in  my  life.  It  was  on  the  27th  of  January,  1819, 
when  we  left  these  truly  magnificent  ruins,  and  we  arrived  in  Cairo 
on  the  18th  of  February. 

After  passing  Benisouef  we  saw  a  small  boat,  and,  by  its  ap- 
pearance, concluded  there  must  be  some  Europeans  in  it.  They 
called  to  us,  as  they,  too,  saw  we  were  Europeans.  We  went  to 
shore :  it  was  Mr.  Fuller,  who  ascended  the  Nile, — a  gentleman  of 
most  excellent  good  manners,  and  whom  I  had  the  pleasure  to  know 
after  in  Cairo.  He  was  accompanied  by  a  person  who  ascended  the 
Nile  to  distribute  the  Arabic  Bibles  for  the  society.  It  was  pity 
that  he  was  not  well  informed  of  some  particular  places  in  Egypt, 
and  in  the  province  of  Faioum,  where  many  christian  Copts  are 
residing,  and  would  have  been  happy  to  have  had  a  Bible  amongst 
them.  In  the  above  boat  I  saw  a  person  of  a  strange  appearance, 
which  caused  my  inquiring  who  he  was.  I  was  agreeably  surprised 
when  I  found  him  to  be  Mr.  Pearce,  who  resided  in  Abyssinia  for 
several  years,  and  was  left  there  by  Lord  Valentia,  now  the  Earl  of 
Mountnorris.  Our  acquaintance  was  soon  made,  but  I  was  sorry  I 
should  have  met  him  on  such  an  occasion,  as  we  could  be  together 
but  so  short  a  time.  To  the  inquiries  I  wished  to  make  of  him 
concerning  those  countries,  he  answered  in  a  manner  that  con- 
vinced me  he  was  an  enterprising  man,  much  accustomed  to  fatigue  : 
the  life  and  hardships  he  underwent  in  Abyssinia  would  be  most 
interesting  to  the  public.  At  Cairo  we  only  stopped  a  few  days,  and 
continued  our  voyage  to  Rosetta  :  there  we  landed  the  various  pieces 
of  antiquity,  the  obelisk,  the  sarcophagus  found  in  one  of  the  king's 
tombs,  and  the  cover  of  another  sarcophagus,  which  is  the  best  piece 


374  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

I  accumulated  on  my  own  account.  It  had  been  thrown  from  its  sar- 
cophagus when  it  was  forced  open,  and  being  reversed  it  remained 
buried  by  the  stones,  and  unnoticed  by  any  visitor.  I  cleared  off  all 
the  stones,  and  on  examination  of  the  under  part,  found  that  it  was  a 
fine  figure,  larger  than  life,  in  alto  relievo,  and,  except  the  foot,  all  the 
rest  was  quite  perfect.  On  turning  the  stone,  I  found  that,  besides  the 
said  figure,  which  is  in  the  centre  of  the  cover,  there  are  two  others 
at  each  side  in  basso  relievo,  and,  also,  excepting  the  feet,  are  quite 
perfect:  its  preservation  is  owing  to  its  being  reversed.  Having  re- 
imbarked  all  those  articles  again  on  board  of  a  djerm,  we  came  to 
Alexandria  with  a  firm  intention  to  set  off  with  the  first  opportunity ; 
for  though  I  felt  much  regret  in  quitting  the  very  country  in  which 
I  wished  to  remain  undisturbed  a  little  longer,  yet  under  the  cir- 
cumstances of  such  a  persecution  I  could  not  help  hastening  my 
departure.  But  the  time  was  not  yet  arrived.  At  Alexandria  I  found 
letters  from  the  consul  and  from  Mr.  Bankes,  in  answer  to  mine  from 
Baban  el  Malook.  The  letters  had  been  sent  by  an  Arab  as  far  as 
Cairo,  and  from  thence  to  Alexandria.  The  consul  advised  me  to  stop 
till  I  could  receive  a  certain  answer  from  England,  and  to  have  redress 
of  the  outrageous  behaviour  of  those  gentry  :  this  was  the  last  thing 
that  I  could  wish  for,  for  I  knew  enough  of  the  country  to  know 
how  that  affair  would  end  ;  I  knew  the  influence  of  their  master,  who 
I  was  certain  woidd  do  all  in  his  power  to  prevent  any  justice  being 
done,  so  I  did  not  find  my  inclination  to  remain,  particularly  as  it 
happened  to  be  the  time  of  the  plague ;  but  Mr.  Lee,  the  vice- 
consul  in  Alexandria,  acquainted  me  that  he  had  already  made  a  de- 
position of  the  deeds  in  Thebes,  and  presented  to  the  French  consul, 
Mr.  Eousell.  I  was  glad  to  see  that  my  cause  had  been  taken  up, 
but  I  was  in  very  little  hopes  to  have  any  redress,  as  no  such  a  thing 
ever  happened  in  those  countries,  in  particular  against  such  people. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  375 

Mr.  Drouetti,  who  was  by  this  time  in  Alexandria,  took  to  himself 
the  defence  of  his  agents,  and  made  a  protest  against  Mr.  Salt,  the 
British  consul,  who,  he  said,  was  his  accuser ;  and  it  was  agreed  that 
the  matter  should  be  left  alone  till  Mr.  Salt's  return  from  Upper 
Egypt,  so  my  departure  was  postponed  till  that  period.  At  tins  time 
I  had  the  pleasure  of  becoming  more  acquainted  with  Mr.  Briggs, 
a  gentleman  who  was  on  the  eve  of  setting  off  for  Europe :  he  was 
the  person  who  suggested  to  the  Bashaw  of  Egypt  to  cut  the  canal 
from  Foua  to  Alexandria,  to  facilitate  the  exportation  of  the  products 
of  the  country  on  board  of  the  European  vessels  in  the  harbour? 
which  sometimes  were  obliged  to  wait  six  months  for  their  cargoes, 
owing  to  the  difficulty  of  passing  the  bogazo,  or  bar,  that  crosses 
the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  often  kept  the  djerms  loaded  for  three 
months  without  effecting  the  passage.  This  cut  is  forty  miles  in 
length,  and  cost  above  three  hundred  thousand  pounds  to  finish 
it ;  but  it  is  a  great  accommodation  in  the  exportation,  and  of  course 
useful  to  the  commerce  of  Egypt  in  general. 

Before  this  time  the  stranger,  to  whom  I  have  before  alluded,  had 
arrived  in  Alexandria,  and  was  quite  changed  in  his  conduct  as  a 
witness :  he  had  already  signed  his  name  to  a  deposition  written  by 
Lebulo  himself,  which  of  course  was  not  against  the  party  ;  and  when 
he  was  called  to  give  evidence,  had  forgotten  that  he  saw  those  people 
take  up  arms  and  run  towards  the  spot  where  I  was  :  whatever  points 
or  words  I  could  clearly  put  in  remembrance,  and  repeat  to  him,  he 
had  forgotten  all,  and  did  not  scruple  to  say,  before  the  consul,  Mr. 
Lee,  that  if  I  had  been  the  first  to  apply  to  him,  or  to  make  my  own 
deposition,  he  would  have  signed  his  name  for  me  as  he  did  for  the 
other  people.  Now  having  proved  him  contradictory  to  his  deposition, 
he  came  into  the  office  of  the  consul,  and,  with  the  greatest  indiffer- 
ence, actually  made  a  deposition  to  contradict  what  he  had  asserted  in 


37  C  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

favour  of  the  assailants.  He  had  stated  previously,  that  he  was 
present  at  the  dispute  or  altercation,  as  the  gentlemen  of  our 
opponents'  party  would  have  it  called ;  but  he  now  said,  that  he 
only  heard  by  Mr.  Drouetti  and  his  agents  that  an  altercation  of 
words  had  taken  place.  Such  were  the  preparations  for  this  defence ; 
and  now  to  end  the  affair  with  the  stranger.  No  sooner  did  he  com- 
municate to  my  opponents  the  intention  I  had  to  make  an  offer  of 
the  four  statues  above  mentioned,  as  a  present  to  a  certain  court  of 
Europe,  than  they  immediately  entered  into  a  league  with  each  other, 
and  every  thing  was  carried  on  in  great  secresy.  Some  statues  of 
their  own  were  put  on  board  a  vessel  for  Europe,  and  a  collection 
of  antiquities  was  made  up  to  be  offered  for  sale  to  the  above  court, 
and  this  was  to  be  done  previous  to  my  offer  being  made ;  and  when 
I  thought  my  statues  were  to  be  embarked,  and  conveyed  to  Europe 
to  be  presented  as  above,  I  found  that  the  stranger  had  set  off  with 
what  he  had  procured  from  my  opponents,  leaving  me  and  my  statues 
to  learn  how  to  know  him  better. 

I  do  not  mean  to  blame  any  one  for  endeavouring  to  do  any 
thing  to  their  advantage,  so  that  it  is  done  in  an  honourable  manner; 
but  I  cannot  help  observing,  that  whatever  speculation  he  could 
have  made,  with  what  he  has  brought  into  Europe  for  our  opponents, 
was  obtained  by  a  very  wrong  proceeding. 

Seeing  that  some  time  would  elapse  before  the  consul  returned, 
I  did  not  know  how  to  employ  myself  in  the  interval :  I  thought 
of  making  some  researches  in  Lower  Egypt,  but  I  doubted  not 
I  should  encounter  some  difficulty  there  also,  as  the  fountain 
head  of  our  opponents  was  not  far  off;  but  idle  I  could  not  stay. 
For  a  long  time  I  had  a  wish  to  make  a  small  excursion  into  the 
western  desert.  I  had  observed  that  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon 
had  been  an  object  of  search  for  a  long  time,  and  by  more  than  one 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  377 

traveller,  but  that  the  true  spot  where  it  existed  had  not  been  fixed. 
I  considered  that  the  Faioum  was  a  province  as  yet  little  explored, 
and  that  I  might  make  an  excursion  in  it  perhaps  undisturbed,  and 
from  thence  proceed  to  the  western  desert.  I  should  have  no  difficulty 
in  obtaining  a  firman,  but  as  I  could  not  have  it  without  letting 
every  one  know  where  I  was  going,  I  preferred  to  go  without,  as  I 
hoped  to  make  my  way  in  some  manner  or  other.  An  English 
merchant,  who  resided  in  Alexandria,  lent  me  a  small  house  in 
Rosetta,  near  the  British  agency,  where  I  left  Mrs.  Belzoni.  Accord- 
ingly I  took  a  small  boat,  and  set  off  for  the  Faioum. 


JOURNEY    TO    THE    OASIS    OF    AMMON. 

I  left  Rosetta  on  the  20th,  and  arrived  at  Benisouef  on  the 
29th  of  April,  1819.  I  took  with  me  a  Sicilian  servant,  whom  I 
hired  in  Alexandria,  as  my  Irish  lad  had  taken  the  opportunity  of 
returning  to  England  from  Jerusalem  with  Mr.  Legh.  I  took  with 
me,  also,  a  Moorish  Hadge,  who  was  on  his  return  from  Mecca,  and 
begged  to  be  taken  on  board  our  boat  at  Gene.  I  thought,  as  he  was 
a  Hadge,  or  pilgrim,  his  company  would  be  of  some  service  to  me  ; 
and  he  proved  very  useful.  At  Benisouef  we  procured  some  donkeys 
to  take  us  and  a  little  provision  as  far  as  the  lake  Mceris. 

On  the  29th  we  set  off,  and  directed  our  course  through  a  vast 
plain  of  cultivated  land,  of  corn  and  other  products  of  the  country. 
This  plain  is  all  under  water  at  the  time  of  the  inundation,  except- 
ing the  scattered  villages,  which  stand  elevated,  and  appear  like  so 
many  islands  during  that  time.  About  fifteen  miles  from  the  Nile? 
the  chain  of  mountains  on  the  west  are  but  low.  They  open  and 
form  a  valley  into  the  Faioum  ;  and  it  was  at  this  entrance  that  we 
arrived  on  the  first  night  of  our  journey.     The  Bahr  Yousef  passes 

3  c 


378  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

into  the  centre  of  tins  valley,  and  enters,  in  various  serpentine 
directions,  into  the  Faioum.  We  took  our  station  under  some  date- 
trees  near  the  water,  about  two  miles  from  the  first  pyramid.  Here, 
after  a  slight  repast,  I  went  to  sleep  on  my  usual  bed,  a  mattress, 
thin  enough  to  serve  as  a  saddle  when  folded  up,  but,  when  laid  on 
a  mat  or  on  the  ground,  affording  as  good  a  bed  as  any  traveller  ought 
to  expect.  The  Sicilian  servant,  the  Moorish  Hadge,  and  the 
donkey-drivers,  kept  watch  in  their  turn  ;  and  I  arranged  so,  that 
this  system  should  be  observed  during  the  whole  of  our  journey. 

On  the  30th,  we  set  off  before  sunrise,  and  soon  arrived  at  the 
pyramid.  It  is  composed  of  sun-burnt  bricks,  and  stands  on  a  high 
ground  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  on  the  northern  side  of  the  valley. 
Its  basis  is  covered  round  with  sand  and  stones,  out  of  which  it  rises 
sixty  feet,  but  its  original  height  must  have  been  above  seventy,  as 
the  top  has  been  thrown  down.  The  basis  above  the  sand  is  eighty 
feet.  I  observed  several  large  blocks  of  stone  intermixed  with  brick- 
work, so  disposed  as  to  support  and  strengthen  the  whole  of  the 
mass.  The  bricks  are  twelve,  fourteen,  and  sixteen  inches  long, 
and  five  or  six  inches  wide.  I  ascended  the  pyramid,  and  from  the 
top  could  see  the  whole  valley,  and  the  entrance  into  the  Faioum. 
On  the  west,  at  only  two  hours'  walk  distance,  I  could  see  the  other 
pyramid,  situated  on  a  lower  ground  ;  consequently  it  appeared  less 
high.  Further  to  the  west,  I  saw  Medinet  El  Faioum,  which  stands 
on  the  ruins  of  ancient  Arsinoe,  and  has  a  respectable  appearance 
at  a  distance.  From  this  pyramid  I  descended  towards  the  canal 
again,  and  crossed  a  strong  bridge  on  the  west  side  of  the  valley. 
We  then  continued  along  the  foot  of  these  hills,  till  we  reached  the 
other  pyramid.  We  forded  the  river  on  donkeys  to  come  to  the 
west,  and  pass  over  another  branch  of  the  same  river,  which  was 
nearly  dried  up  at  that  season.  We  entered  a  place  600  feet 
square,   surrounded  by  high  earthen  dikes,  apparently  to  protect 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  379 

the  above  ground  from  the  inundation  of  the  canal.  This  spot 
had  no  doubt  been  the  seat  of  some  ancient  town,  of  which  nothing 
remained  but  a  few  blocks  of  stone,  and  the  appearance  of  some 
brick-work.  We  advanced  towards  the  pyramid,  and,  after  passing  a 
small  canal,  which  had  been  cut  by  some  of  the  late  rulers  of  Egypt, 
came  to  the  foot  of  the  pyramid.  I  found  that  the  basis  of  it  is 
only  thirty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  water  of  the  canal,  and  nearly 
of  the  same  size  as  the  first.  It  is  surrounded  by  smaller  tombs  ; 
and,  on  the  south  side,  there  are  the  remains  of  an  Egyptian  temple, 
which  must  have  been  most  magnificent.  Of  this  there  are  to 
be  seen  only  some  fragments,  of  the  colours  of  granite,  and  I  must 
observe  that  it  is  the  only  column  of  that  stone  I  had  seen  any 
where ;  and  that,  in  all  the  temples  known  in  the  valley  of  the 
Nile,  there  are  none  that  can  boast  of  such  grandeur.  There  are 
several  tombs,  quite  in  the  Egyptian  style,  cut  under  ground.  We 
quitted  this  place,  and  arrived  at  Medinet  El  Faioum  on  the  same 
evening.  The  whole  country  is  very  fertile,  and  interspersed  with 
plantations  of  fruit-trees  and  roses.  This  place  is  celebrated  for 
making  rose-water,  which  is  sold  in  Cairo,  and  all  over  Egypt,  for 
the  use  of  the  great  people,  who  continually  keep  their  divans  and 
other  places  sprinkled  with  it,  and  present  it  also  to  any  stranger  who 
visits  them.  On  our  approaching  the  town,  I  agreed  to  call  at  the 
house  of  HusufF  Bey,  the  governor  of  the  province  of  Faioum,  but 
found  he  was  gone  to  Cairo.  However,  on  application  to  his  Kakia 
Bey,  I  obtained  a  firman  and  a  guide,  which  was  all  I  wanted,  and 
was  also  accommodated  with  a  lodging  in  one  of  the  rooms  of  the 
house. 

On  the  morning  of  the  31st,  a  soldier  was  given  to  me  as  a 
guide  to  the  Lake  Mceris.  I  set  off  the  same  day  by  the  road  leading 
to  the  northward,  and  passed  the  extensive  ruins  of  Arsinoe, 
which  I  reserved  for  inspection  till  my  return,  as  I  intended   to 

3  c  2 


380  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

come  back  by  tbe  same  route.  The  country  continued  very  fine 
and  well  cultivated.  At  noon  we  arrived  at  El  Cassar,  the  ruins 
of  an  ancient  temple,  and  site  of  a  town,  where  nothing  remained 
but  part  of  the  walls.  The  temple  was  not  very  extensive,  as  may 
be  seen  by  what  is  left  of  the  foundation  ;  and  two  parts  of  the  wall, 
the  only  remains  of  which  are  composed  of  large  blocks  of  stone, 
without  hieroglyphics.  At  night  we  arrived  at  Senures,  a  village 
situated  about  10  miles  from  Lake  Mceris. 

On  the  morning  of  the  1st  of  May,  we  proceeded  on  our  jour- 
ney, and,  after  passing  several  groves  of  palm  trees  and  other  plant- 
ations as  before,  the  view  opened  all  at  once  on  a  wild  country, 
which  gradually  sloped  to  the  edge  of  the  lake.  The  water  ex_ 
tended  from  north-east  to  south-west,  and  the  mountains  oppo- 
site formed  an  awful  and  sterile  appearance.  At  noon  we  reached 
the  lake,  but  could  observe  no  trace  of  any  living  being.  The 
guide  conducted  us  along  the  shore,  till  we  arrived  at  a  small  ha- 
bitation, or  rather  a  fisherman's  hut,  situated  near  the  place  where 
the  canal,  or  Bahar  Yousef,  discharges  into  the  lake,  where  only 
a  small  rotten  boat  was  seen. 

The  hut  was  inhabited  by  a  few  fishermen  and  a  soldier,  who 
formerly  received  the  duties  on  the  fish  they  caught ;  but  now,  the 
fishermen  have  only  a  share  of  the  fish  they  catch,  and  the 
remainder  is  sold  at  Medinet  el  Faioum,  of  which  the  Bashaw 
receives  the  profit.  Our  guide  bespoke  a  boat,  which  was  sent  for 
at  some  distance  up  the  canal,  and  when  it  arrived  I  never  saw 
any  thing  that  could  be  better  compared  to  old  Baris*,  or  boat  of 
Charon :  it  was  entirely  out  of  shape.  The  outer  shell  or  hulk 
was  composed  of  rough  pieces  of  wood  scarcely  joined,  and  fastened 
by   four   other    pieces,    wrapped   together   by   four   more   across, 

*  The  boat  in  which  the  Egyptians  carried  their  dead  to  the  grave. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  381 

which  formed  the  deck :  no  tar,  no  pitch  either  inside  or  out,  and 
the  only  preventive  against  the  water  coming  in  was  a  kind  of 
weed  moistened,  which  had  settled  in  the  joints  of  the  wood. 
Having  made  an  agreement  with  the  owner  of  the  hoat,  who  might 
have  been  named  Old  Charon  himself,  we  put  on  board  some  pro- 
visions, and  made  towards  the  west,  where  the  famous  Labyrinth  is 
supposed  to  have  been  situated.  The  water  of  the  lake  was  good 
enough  to  drink,  but  a  little  saltish :  it  was  only  this  year  that  it 
could  be  tasted  at  all,  owing  to  the  extraordinary  overflow  of  the 
Nile,  which  surmounted  all  the  high  lands,  and,  in  addition  to  the 
Bahr  Yousef,  came  in  such  torrents  into  the  lake,  that  it  raised  the 
water  twelve  feet  higher  than  ever  it  had  been  remembered  by  the 
oldest  fisherman  among  them.  We  advanced  with  old  Baris,  or 
Charon's  boat,  towards  the  west,  and  at  sunset  saw  the  shore  quite 
deserted,  and  nothing  to  look  at  but  the  lake  and  the  mountains 
on  the  north  side  of  it.  Old  Charon,  the  pilot,  lighted  a  fire,  while 
the  other  went  to  fish  with  a  net,  and  soon  returned  with  a  supper 
of  fish. 

The  land  we  were  now  in  had  anciently  been  cultivated,  as 
there  appeared  many  stumps  of  palm  and  other  trees,  nearly  petri- 
fied. I  also  observed  the  vine  in  great  plenty.  The  scene  here  was 
beautiful — the  silence  of  the  night,  the  beams  of  the  radiant  moon 
shining  on  the  still  water  of  the  lake,  the  solitude  of  the  place,  the 
sight  of  our  boat,  the  group  of  fishermen,  the  temple,  which  bears  the 
name  of  Old  Charon,  a  little  way  off,  put  me  in  mind  of  the  Lake 
Acheron,  the  boat  Baris,  and  the  old  ferryman  of  the  Styx.  I  per- 
ceived this  was  the  very  spot  where  the  poets  originated  the  fable  of 
the  passage  of  the  souls  over  the  river  of  Oblivion.  Nothing  could  be 
more  pleasing  to  my  imagination  than  being  so  near  the  Elysium, 
perhaps  on  the  very  Elysium  itself.  I  thought  that  the  plants, 
which  appeared  nearly  petrified,  have  been  the  very  ones  when  the 
souls  were  enjoying  the  happiness  of  their  purity.     I  was   thus 


382  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

strolling  along  the  banks  of  the  lake  in  solitary  musing,  not  unlike 
one  of  these  wandering  souls  waiting  its  turn  to  cross  the  Styx, 
while  my  old  Charon  with  his  semi-demons  were  preparing  supper. 
I  wish  that  I  had  been  a  poet,  that  I  might  sing  in  verse  the 
beautiful  ideas  and  sensations  I  felt  on  that  occasion.  I  thought 
that  night  one  of  the  happiest  in  my  life,  and  myself  out  of  the 
reach  of  evil  mortals.  Happy  in  the  Elysian  Fields,  I  feared  not 
the  malice  and  treacherous  arts  of  envy,  jealousy,  spite,  revenge, 
nor  the  thousand  other  snares  of  man.  I  nearly  forgot  I  was 
living :  and  I  suppose,  that  had  I  continued  in  my  ecstacy,  I  should 
have  verified  that  these  waters  had  the  power  of  oblivion. 

On  the  2d,  before  sunrise,  we  entered  the  old  Baris,  and  steered 
towards  the  west  till  we  arrived  near  the  end  of  the  lake,  which, 
according  to  these  fishermen,  extended  further  this  year  than  ever 
they  remembered  it,  in  consequence  of  the  above  extraordinary 
inundation.  Wre  landed  here,  and  I  took  two  of  the  boatmen  and 
set  off  for  the  temple,  named  Cassar  el  Haron,  about  three  miles 
from  the  lake,  standing  in  the  midst  of  the  ruins  of  a  town,  of 
which  there  is  still  a  track  of  the  wall  to  be  seen,  and  the  founda- 
tions of  several  houses  and  other  small  temples.  There  are  frag- 
ments of  columns,  and  blocks  of  stone  of  a  middling  size.  The 
temple  is  in  pretty  good  preservation,  excepting  in  the  upper  part : 
it  is  of  a  singular  construction,  and  differs  somewhat  from  the 
Egyptian ;  but  I  believe  it  has  been  altered,  or  rather  rebuilt,  and 
divided  into  various  small  apartments,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  plan, 
Plate  No.  32.  There  are  no  hieroglyphics  either  inside  or  out,  and 
only  two  figures  on  the  wall  of  the  western  side  of  the  upper  apart- 
ments, one  of  which  I  took  for  Osiris,  and  the  other  for  Jupiter 
Amnion.  In  the  front  of  this  temple  there  is  a  semicircular  pilaster 
at  each  side  of  the  door,  and  two  pilasters  attached  to  the  wall ; 
but  the  exterior  workmanship  is  evidently  of  a  later  date  than  the 
temple.     Part  of  the  town  is  covered  with  sand.     On  the  east  side 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  383 

of  it  there  is  something  like  a  gateway,  in  an  octangular  form,  and 
at  a  little  distance  there  is  a  Greek  chapel,  elevated  on  a  platform, 
with  cellars  under  it. 

After  having  taken  a  proper  view  of  the  temple  and  of  the 
town,  I  went  to  see  the  small  Greek  chapel,  accompanied  by  the 
two  boatmen ;  and  as  there  was  no  appearance  of  any  danger,  I 
left  my  gun  and  pistols  in  the  temple,  but  had  nearly  suffered  for 
my  temerity ;  for  just  as  I  was  mounting  the  few  steps  that  lead 
to  the  platform  of  the  small  chapel,  a  large  hyena  rushed  from  the 
apartments  beneath  the  chapel,  and  had  I  not  been  on  the  first 
step  it  could  not  have  avoided  attacking  me,  as  there  was  no  other 
way  by  which  it  could  come  out.  The  animal  stopped  three  or  four 
yards  from  me,  and  then  turned  round  as  if  determined  to  attack  me ; 
but  it  appeared  on  second  thoughts  to  have  relinquished  its  intent, 
and  after  having  shown  me  its  pretty  teeth,  gave  a  hideous  roar,  and 
set  off  galloping  as  fast  as  it  could.  At  the  moment  I  regretted  I 
had  no  arms  with  me,  but  was  happy  to  see  it  gone.  I  attributed 
its  flight  to  the  noise  made  by  the  two  boatmen,  who  being  near  me 
thought  the  hyena  would  swallow  them  alive. 

This  little  chapel  was  evidently  built  in  a  later  age  than  the  rest 
of  those  works  of  which  but  very  little  now  remain.  On  the  west 
of  the  temple  there  are  parts  of  other  gates  connected  with  the 
wall.  I  observed  several  pieces  of  marble  and  white  granite.  The 
granite  has  given  me  reason  to  think  that  there  must  have  been 
some  building  of  considerable  importance  in  this  town,  for  they 
must  have  had  more  trouble  to  convey  it  hence  than  to  any  other 
place  in  Egypt,  in  consequence  of  the  distance.  But  whatever 
remains  of  beauty  might  be  seen  in  this  town,  it  does  not  ap- 
pear that  this  was  the  place  of  the  famous  Labyrinth,  nor  any 
thing  like  it;  for,  according  to  Herodotus,  Pliny,  &c.  there  is 
not  the  smallest  appearance  which  can   warrant  the  supposition 


384  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERxVTIONS 

that  any  such  edifice  was  there.  The  Labyrinth  was  a  building  of 
3,000  chambers,  one  half  above  and  one  half  below.  The  con- 
struction of  such  an  immense  edifice,  and  the  enormous  quantity 
of  materials  which  must  have  been  accumulated,  would  have  yet 
left  specimens  enough  to  have  seen  where  it  had  been  erected, 
but  not  the  smallest  trace  of  any  such  thing  is  any  where  to  be 
seen.  The  town  was  about  a  mile  in  circumference,  with  the 
temple  in  its  centre,  so  that  I  could  not  see  how  the  Labyrinth 
could  be  placed  in  this  situation.  I  accordingly  left  the  place,  and 
on  my  return  towards  the  lake  passed  a  tract  of  land  which  had 
once  been  cultivated,  and  saw  a  great  many  stumps  of  plants  almost 
burnt.  On  my  arrival  at  the  lake  a  high  wind, arose  from  the 
south-west,  which  swelled  the  lake  very  much,  drifted  the  sand  in 
the  air,  and  drove  our  boat  on  shore.  At  the  above  place  we 
gathered  plenty  of  wood,  made  a  fire,  and  passed  the  night  under 
shelter  of  a  mat  hung  over  two  sticks  planted  in  the  ground. 

Before  morning  of  the  3d  the  wind  ceased,  and  the  lake  soon 
became  smooth.  We  re-embarked,  and  shaped  our  course  towards 
the  north  side,  coastwise  the  whole  day.  At  the  foot  of  the  moun- 
tain, which  bounds  the  lake  on  that  side,  I  perceived  nothing 
worthy  of  remark.  There  are  a  few  spots  near  the  water's  edge 
where  great  quantities  of  weeds  grow  from  under  the  water ;  and 
great  quantities  of  game  are  always  found  among  these  plants.  The 
pelican  is  as  common  on  this  lake  as  it  is  on  the  Nile.  There  are 
many  wild  ducks  and  a  kind  of  large  snipe.  Towards  evening  we 
arrived  at  the  shore  opposite  to  where  we  embarked,  and  the  boat- 
men made  up  their  minds  to  cross  the  lake  the  next  morning,  and 
take  us  back  to  our  former  place  of  embarkation ;  but  as  I 
recollected,  that  in  some  of  the  descriptions  of  that  lake  I  had 
seen  a  town  marked  not  far  from  the  spot  where  we  then  were, 
on  the  morning  of  the  4th,  instead  of  going  on  board,  I  took  my 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  385 

route  towards  the  mountains.    The  soldier  and  the  boatmen  ran  after 
me,  to  persuade  me  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen  there ;  but  I  told 
them  I  must  ascend  the  mountains  to  see  the  lake  and  the  whole 
country  round.  One  of  them  happened  to  say  unguardedly  that  there 
was  nothing  to  be  seen  except  a  few  houses  in  ruins,  and  a  high 
wall.     That  was  enough  for  me ;  and  having  secured  the  man  by 
promises  and  threats,  I  insisted  that  he  should  show  me  the  above 
place.     I  accordingly  set  off  with  my  whole  crew,  and  had  scarcely 
reached  the  summit  of  the  lower  range  of  the  mountains,  when  I 
perceived  the  ruins  of  a  town  not  far  distant.    On  my  arrival,  I  found 
it  to  be  a  Greek  town,  (vide  Plate  23.)  and  it  cannot  be  any  other  than 
the  city  of  Bacchus,  which  I  have  observed  in  some  of  the  maps  of 
ancient  authors.     There  are  a  great  number  of  houses,  half  tumbled 
down,  and  a  high  wall  of  sun-burnt  bricks,  which  incloses  the  ruins 
of  a  temple.     The  houses  are  not  united,  nor  built  in  any  regularity 
as  streets,  but  only  divided  by  narrow  lanes,  not  more  than  three 
or  four  feet  wide,  and  all  built  of  sun-burnt  bricks.     There  is  a 
causeway,  or  road,  made  of  large  stones,  winch  runs  through  the 
town  to  the  temple,  which  faces  the  south.     In  the  centre  of  the 
city  I  observed  several  houses,  or  rather  cellars,  underground,  as 
they  appeared  from   their  tops,  which  were  covered  with  strong 
pieces  of  wood,  over  which  there  were  some  cane,  and  then  above 
that  a  layer  of  bricks,  on   a   level  with  the  surface,  so  that  one 
might  walk  over  without  perceiving  that  he  was  treading  on  the 
top  of  a  house.      As  the  fishermen  had  brought   their  hatchets, 
I   caused  two  or  three  of  these  houses  to  be  uncovered.     After 
removing  the  layer  of  bricks,  we  found  a  layer  of  clay,  then  a  layer 
of  canes,  which  were  nearly  burnt,  and  lastly,  under  the  canes  some 
rafters  of  wood,  forming  the  ceiling.      The  wood  was  in   good 
preservation,  and  of  a  hard  quality.     The  inside  of  the  hut,  or  cellar, 
was  filled  up  with  rubbish ;  but  they  had  evidently  been  habitations, 

3d 


386  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

as  we  saw  a  fire-place  in  every  one  of  them.  They  were  not  more 
than  ten  or  twelve  feet  square,  and  the  communication  to  each 
house  was  by  a  narrow  lane,  not  more  than  three  feet  wide, 
which  was  also  covered.  I  cannot  conceive  the  reason  why  these 
people  lived  in  such  places.  Certain  it  is  that  they  did  not  live 
there  to  he  out  of  the  heat ;  on  the  contrary,  they  must  have  had 
all  the  force  of  the  sun  shining  upon  them,  without  the  slightest 
chance  of  a  breath  of  wind.  The  houses  above  ground  were  con- 
structed in  a  manner  somewhat  different  from  any  I  had  seen 
before.  There  were  few  which  had  a  second  floor,  and  those  which 
were  higher  than  the  rest  were  very  narrow,  so  that  they  were 
more  like  the  form  of  towers  than  common  houses ;  but  now  there 
is  scarcely  one  to  be  seen  entire.  As  to  the  temple,  it  is  fallen, 
but  appears  to  have  been  pretty  extensive.  The  blocks  of  stone 
are  of  the  largest  size,  some  eight  and  nine  feet  long.  The  ruins 
are  in  such  confusion,  that  it  is  impossible  to  form  an  idea  of  its 
plan  or  foundation.  I  am  almost  certain,  by  what  I  could  see,  that 
the  falling  of  this  temple  was  caused  by  violence,  as  it  appears  to 
me  that  it  never  could  have  been  so  dilapidated  by  the  slow  hand 
of  time.  Among  these  blocks  I  saw  the  fragments  of  statues,  of 
breccia  and  other  stones  of  Grecian  sculpture,  but  no  granite ; 
and  I  observed  the  fragment  of  one  winch  appeared  to  me  not 
unlike  part  of  an  Apollo.  There  were  also  fragments  of  lions  of 
grey  stone,  not  belonging  to  these  mountains.  The  town,  from 
what  I  could  see,  might  have  consisted  of  500  houses,  the  largest 
of  which  was  not  more  than  forty  feet  square.  The  area  of  the 
wall  which  surrounds  the  temple  is  150  feet  square,  thirty  feet 
high,  and  eight  feet  thick.  On  the  north  side  of  this  town  is  a 
valley,  which  appears  to  have  been  once  cultivated,  but  at  present  is 
covered  with  sand.  On  inquiry,  I  found  this  town  was  known  to  the 
Arabs  of  the  lake  under  the  name  of  Denav.     We  returned  to  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  387 

boat  and  crossed  to  the  island  of  El  Hear,  which  is  entirely  barren, 
and  no  trace  of  any  habitation  any  where  to  be  seen.  We  then 
crossed  the  lake  to  the  east,  and  saw  several  fragments  of  pillars 
and  ruins  nearly  under  water,  and  arrived  in  the  evening  at  the 
same  shore  where  we  embarked.  I  took  up  my  station  for  the 
night  to  the  eastward  of  the  small  hut,  and  made  an  excellent 
supper  of  fresh  fish  and  a  piece  of  pelican.  The  soldier  who  lived 
there  happened  to  kill  one  of  these  birds,  which  was  devoured  by 
the  fishermen  as  soon  as  it  was  boiled:  its  flesh  is  not  unlike 
mutton  in  substance  and  appearance,  but  it  tasted  much  like  game, 
and  was  upon  the  whole  very  tender,  and  pleasant  to  the  palate.  It 
must  have  weighed  at  least  forty  pounds ;  the  fat  was  rancid,  and  as 
yellow  as  saffron. 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th,  I  took  the  road  on  the  west  side  of 
the  lake,  and  saw  the  site  of  another  town,  named  El  Haman,  oi* 
which  nothing  now  remains  but  scattered  pieces  of  brick  and  part 
of  a  bath.  This  place  is  situated  full  forty  feet  above  the  lake, 
and  the  ground  all  round  was  covered  with  small  shells,  such  as 
cockles,  small  conchilies,  and  others  not  unlike  periwinkles.  We 
returned  afterwards  on  the  east  on  the  same  day,  and  passed  several 
ancient  villages,  built  of  sun-burnt  bricks.  At  a  place  named  Terza 
I  observed  several  blocks  of  white  stone  and  red  granite,  which 
evidently  must  have  been  taken  from  edifices  of  greater  magnitude 
than  what  had  ever  stood  there.  Eeflecting  on  the  description  of 
Pliny  of  the  situation  of  the  Labyrinth,  which  he  says  was  on  the 
west  side  of  the  Lake  Mceris,  I  made  diligent  researches  on  that 
subject  in  particular,  on  the  ground  where  I  then  stood.  I  coidd 
not  see  the  smallest  appearance  of  an  edifice,  either  on  the  ground, 
or  any  appearance  from  under  it ;  but  I  observed  all  through  that 
part  of  the  country  a  great  number  of  stones  and  columns  of 
beautiful  colours,  of  white  marble  and  of  granite.     I  saw  the  above 

3  d  2 


388  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

pieces  of  antiquity  scattered  about  for  the  space  of  several  miles, 
some  on  the  road,  and  some  in  the  houses  of  the  Arabs,  and  others 
put  to  various  uses  in  the  erection  of  huts,  &c.     I  have  no  doubt» 
that  by  tracing  the  source  of  these  materials,  the  seat  of  the  Laby- 
rinth could  be  discovered,  which  must  be  most  magnificent  even  in 
its  ruined  state ;  but  I  fear  it  is  rather  too  late  for  such  researches, 
for  the  cause  of  its  disappearing  might  be,  that  it  was  not  an  edifice 
of  great  height,  the  lower  apartments  being  under  ground.     It  may 
have  been  buried   by  the  earth  which  is   yearly  brought   there 
by  the  water  of  the  Nile ;  or  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  Laby- 
rinth stood  in  such  a  situation  as  to  be  covered  entirely  by  the 
water,  as  we  may  see  other  remains  of  antiquities  on  the  east  side 
of  the    lake,  which   are    nearly   all  under  water.       It  is  certain, 
that  the  yearly  discharge  of  the  Nile  into  the  lake  brings  with  it  a 
great  quantity  of  earth  or  clay,  and  leaves  it  there,  consequently 
the  lake  must  have  risen  from  its  original  bed  and  spread  so  much 
over  the  land,  as  to  induce  one  to  suppose  that  the  said  lake  was 
made  for  a  reservoir  to  retain  the  water  at  high  Nile,  and  to  make 
a  kind  of  second  inundation  :  it  is  evident  that  it  is  made  by  nature 
and  not  by  art;  but  that  it  might  have  served  as  a  reservoir  for 
the  above  purpose,  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  at  all  impossible. 
This  second  inundation  could  not  extend  out  of  the  Faioum ;  the 
water  might  be  retained  in  the  lake  at  the  time  of  high  Nile,  by 
a  bar  across  the  canal,  at  the  entrance  into  the  lake ;  and  at  low 
water  it  might  be  let  out :  but  the  canal  must  be  stopped  at  the 
entrance  into  the  Faioum  on  the  east,  otherwise  the  water  would 
again  return  into  the  Nile  by  the  said  Bahr  Yousef,  consequently  a 
second  inundation  could  not  take  place  in  any  other  part  but  the 
Faioum,  which  being  surrounded  by  mountains  on  the  north,  and 
high  grounds  on  the  other  side,  would  form  a  lake  of  itself. 

We  continued  our  journey,  in  a  direction  parallel  with  the  lake, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  389 

through  several  villages,  woods  of  palm  and  other  fruit-trees,  and 
well  cultivated  lands,  and  at  sunset  arrived  at  Fedmin  el  Kunois, 
which  means  the  Place  of  Churches :  it  stands  on  a  high  mound 
of  earth  and  rubbish,  and  has  evidently  been  rebuilt  on  other  ruins. 
It  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  a  small  canal  from  the  Bahr  Yousef. 
One  side  of  the  town  is  inhabited  by  Christian  Copts,  and  the 
other  by  Mahomedans ;   and  though  the  two  religions  officiated 
almost  in  sight  of  each  other,  they  never  interfered  on  each  other's 
rights.     The  poor  Copts  were  destitute  of  the  principal  means  of 
educating  their  children ;  and  the  only  reference  they  had  to  the 
rites  of  the  Christian  religion  was  an   old  book   of  manuscripts, 
copied  from  the  Bible :  but  even  this  was  kept  as  the  only  relic 
they  had.     If,  by  chance,  I  had  had  an  Arabic  Bible  or  Testament, 
I   might  indeed  have  become  a  great  man  among  them  ;  and  I 
wonder   that   the  Missionaries   of  the   Bible  Society,  who  lately 
visited  Egypt,  omitted  this  place,  being  a  noted  Christian  town ; 
but  I  suppose  the  magnificent  works  of  old  Pharaoh  made  them 
forget  Moses,  his  followers,  and  all  those  who  wish  to  know  any 
thing  about  him.      But  I  must  do  justice  to  truth.      A   young 
man,  of  the  name  of  Burckhardt,  cousin  to  my  good  friend  the 
celebrated  traveller  of  that  name,  came,  unprotected,  into  Egypt 
for  the  purpose  of  distributing  Bibles,  consequently  was  persecuted, 
and  obliged  to  fly  in  great  haste.     He  went  into  Syria,  but  with 
over  fatigue,  or  perhaps  from  the  effects  of  the  climate,  he  was 
unable  to  proceed  higher  than  Aleppo,  where  he  died ;  and,  I  am 
sorry    to  say,  that  others  who  succeeded  him,  and  went  up  the 
Nile  with  protection  and  all  their  leisure,  made  their  journey  to 
very  little  purpose. 

The  tradition  of  the  town  of  Fedmin  el  Hanaiser  is,  that  in 
ancient  times  there  were  on  that  spot  three  hundred  churches, 
which  were  allowed  to  fall  in  ruins  by  the  old  inhabitants  of  the 


390  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

place,  and  that  when  the  Mahomedans  succeeded  to  the  country, 
they  built  the  present  town  on  these  very  three  hundred  churches  ; 
for  which  reason  the  town  is  named  Fidmin  of  the  Churches.  The 
story  is  somewhat  strange,  and  may  afford  grounds  for  a  modern  tra- 
veller to  place  the  Egyptian  Labyrinth  in  this  spot ;  for,  by  con- 
ceiving that  the  three  hundred  churches  were  the  three  hundred 
cellars  of  the  Labyrinth,  as  mentioned  by  Herodotus,  or  by  sup- 
posing that  the  father  of  history  meant  to  say  three  hundred 
instead  of  three  thousand,  the  above  churches  could  have  been 
nothing  less  than  the  old  Egyptian  Labyrinth  itself.  All  this 
might  pass  off  well  enough  among  the  wanderers  ;  but,  unfor- 
tunately, there  is  proof  to  the  contrary,  which  will  do  away  with 
any  such  supposition.  The  above  branch  of  the  Bahr  Yousef  passes 
through  the  town,  cut  not  above  two  centuries  ago ;  and  none  of 
the  said  churches  appeared  in  the  progress  of  the  excavation 
through  the  town,  which  must  have  been  the  case  had  it  been  built 
on  the  said  three  hundred  churches.  However,  I  must  conclude, 
that,  notwithstanding  the  little  probability  there  is  of  the  Labyrinth 
being  in  this  place,  I  cannot  help  repeating  my  observation,  that  it 
must  have  been  at  no  great  distance  from  the  lake,  as  the  great 
quantity  of  materials  which  is  scattered  about  the  country  has 
evidently  belonged  to  some  extensive  and  splendid  building. 

We  left  Fidmin  on  the  6th ;  and,  after  traversing  a  most  beau- 
tiful country,  arrived  at  night  at  Medinet  el  Faioum. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  I  went  to  see  the  ruins  of  the 
ancient  Arsinoe.  It  had  been  a  very  large  city ;  but  nothing  of  it 
remained,  except  high  mounds  of  all  sorts  of  rubbish.  The  chief 
materials  appear  to  have  been  burnt  bricks.  There  were  many 
stone  edifices,  and  a  great  quantity  of  wrought  granite.  In  the 
present  town  of  Medinet  I  observed  several  fragments  of  granite 
columns,  and  other  pieces  of  sculpture,  of  a  most  magnificent  taste- 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &p.  391 

It  is  certainly  strange  that  granite  columns  are  only  to  be  seen  in 
this  place  and  near  the  pyramids,  six  miles  distant.  Among  the 
ruins  at  Arsinoe  I  also  observed  various  fragments  of  statues  of 
granite,  well  executed,  but  much  mutilated ;  and  it  is  my  opinion, 
that  this  town  has  been  destroyed  by  violence  and  fire.  Among 
the  rubbish  there  are  pieces  of  stones  and  glass,  which  have 
evidently  been  nearly  melted  by  fire.  It  is  clearly  seen,  that  the 
new  town  of  Medinet  is  built  out  of  the  old  materials  of  Arsinoe, 
as  the  fragments  are  to  be  met  with  in  every  part  of  the  town. 
The  large  blocks  of  stone  have  been  diminished  in  their  sides,  but 
enough  is  left  to  show  the  purposes  for  which  they  originally  served. 
About  the  centre  of  these  ruins  I  made  an  excavation  in  an  ancient 
reservoir,  which  I  found  to  be  as  deep  as  the  bottom  of  the  Bahr 
Yousef,  and  which  was  no  doubt  filled  at  the  time  of  the  inundation 
for  the  accommodation  of  the  town.  There  are  other  similar  wells 
in  these  ruins,  which  proves  that  tins  was  the  only  mode  they  had 
of  keeping  water  near  them,  as  the  river  is  at  some  distance  from 
the  town.  Among  these  mounds  I  found  several  specimens  of  glass 
of  Grecian  manufacture  and  Egyptian  workmanship ;  and  it  appears 
to  me,  that  this  town  must  have  been  one  of  the  first  note  in 
Egypt. 

Having  seen  all  I  wished  in  that  place,  I  visited  the  obelisk, 
which  is  too  well  known  to  require  any  more  said  about  it.  I  then 
prepared  for  my  journey  into  the  oasis  on  the  west.  Accordingly 
I  went  to  see  Hussuff  Bey,  who  by  this  time  had  returned  from 
Cairo.  He  was  a  native  of  Circassia,  and  bought  at  the  usual 
market  as  a  slave,  by  the  Bashaw  of  Egypt,  who,  after  many  years' 
servitude,  made  him  Bey,  or  governor,  of  the  finest  province  of 
that  country.  He  was  uncommonly  civiL  and  eager  to  know  any 
thing  with  which  he  was  unacquainted ;  but,  on  my  application  for 


392  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

a  Bedoween  guide  to  conduct  me  through  the  desert,  he  said  that  the 
Bedoweens  were  all  encamped  in  that  part  of  the  province  which  was 
subject  to  Khalil  Bey  at  Benisoeuf.  I  was  happy  to  hear  that  my 
old  friend  Khalil  Bey  was  the  person  to  whom  I  had  to  make  my 
request,  and  immediately  inquired  where  the  Bedoweens  were 
encamped,  and  on  being  told  that  they  were  about  ten  miles 
distant,  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  I  set  off,  and  reached  the 
camp  before  noon  ;  but  none  of  these  people  could  inform  me  about 
the  oasis  on  the  west.  They  all  pointed  towards  the  south, 
indicating  that  the  oasis  were  in  that  direction.  I  saw  that  they 
meant  the  oasis  of  Siout  and  Maloni,  which  are  known  by  the 
name  of  the  Great  Oasis.  At  last,  after  much  ado,  an  old  man 
told  me  that  there  was  an  Eloah  on  the  west  of  the  Lake  Mceris, 
the  very  place  I  wished  to  go  to,  but  that  none  of  the  Bedoweens 
would  go  there.  I  inquired  if  any  of  them  knew  the  road ;  he  said 
that  he  knew  a  Sheik  of  theirs,  who  lived  in  a  camp  at  eight  miles 
distant,  who  had  a  daughter  married  to  one  of  the  Sheiks  of  the 
Eloah.  I  was  not  a  little  pleased  with  this  discovery,  and  flattered 
myself  that  I  would  be  able  to  persuade  the  said  Sheik  to  accom- 
pany me  thither.  We  remained  all  night  at  the  camp,  and,  on 
the  morning  of  the  12th,  set  off  for  the  ]STile  again.  We  passed 
through  several  plantations  of  fruit  trees,  and  a  great  quantity  of 
roses,  with  which,  as  I  mentioned  before,  they  make  the  rose- 
water.  The  cotton-plant  is  quite  abundant ;  and  figs  are  in  such 
plenty,  that  they  dry  them  in  the  sun,  and  send  them  to  Cairo. 
It  was  quite  night  before  we  arrived  at  the  banks  of  the  Nile ; 
and,  as  no  business  could  be  done  that  evening,  I  caused  my 
saddle  to  be  prepared  for  my  bed,  and  went  to  sleep.  I  do  not 
know  to  what  cause  it  is  to  be  attributed,  but  I  certainly  slept 
more  soundly  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  or  on  the  sands  of  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c  393 

desert,  than  I  ever  did  in  any  other  place,  and  particularly  under 
a  roof. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  13th  I  was  awoke  by  the  Moorish 
Hadge,  who  told  me,  with  an  air  of  surprise,  that  a  strange  person  was 
coming  towards  us :  he  mistook  him  by  fear,  and  supposed  that 
some  thief  was  at  hand.  I  took  up  my  arms,  but  was  soon  un- 
deceived when  I  saw  an  European,  who  turned  out  to  be  the 
Reverend  Mr.  Slowman,  a  gentleman  sixty-two  years  of  age,  who 
for  a  walk  had  alighted  from  his  canjiar,  and,  in  spite  of  his  years, 
followed  the  tracks  of  celebrated  travellers,  but  who  did  not  boast 
to  his  friends  in  England  of  his  arduous  task,  and  consequently  did  not 
pass  for  a  courageous  and  gallant  adventurer.  This  old  reverend 
divine  had  the  courage  to  go  through  all  the  lands  in  Syria, 
which  travellers  fancy  wonderful  difficult.  He  never  had  an  in- 
terpreter, nor  did  he  know  a  single  word  of  Arabic.  He  encountered 
and  overcame  every  difficulty.  He  suffered  much,  but  never  com- 
plained, except  of  the  ill  treatment  he  received  from  other  travellers, 
who  were  ashamed  that  a  venerable  old  man  of  sixty-two  should 
silently  follow  all  their  steps,  and  think  nothing  of  what  he  had 
undergone,  nor  did  he  care  Avhether  any  one  ever  knew  any  thing 
about  his  journey.  He  was  then  on  his  way  to  the  second  cataract ; 
and  some  time  afterwards  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  him,  safe  and 
well,  on  his  return  from  that  place.  He  was  laughed  at,  and  even  ill- 
treated,  by  some  person  who  deserves  to  be  mentioned,  and  who 
wished  to  be  alone  in  travelling  ;  but,  as  I  said  before,  I  will  not  now 
enter  into  the  particulars  of  the  proceedings  of  some  travellers  in 
Egypt,  as  I  mean  to  explain  the  whole  facts  in  another  volume.  The 
Rev.  Mr.  Slowman  proceeded  on  his  journey,  and  I  went  to  see  my 
good  old  friend  Ivhalil  Bey  of  Esne,  who  was  now  commander  of  the 
province  of  Benesouef.  It  happened  to  be  after  dinner  when  I  called. 
He  was  much  pleased  to  see  me,  and  glad  he  had  it  in  his  power  to 

3  E 


394  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

serve  me.  Having  informed  him  that  I  wished  to  penetrate  into 
the  western  Oasis,  he  immediately  sent,  agreeably  to  my  request, 
for  the  Sheik  of  the  Bedoweens.  He  inquired  after  many  things,  and 
in  particular  about  the  sulphur  and  emerald  mines,  as  he  thought 
them  extremely  interesting  to  the  treasury  of  the  Bashaw.  I  re- 
mained with  him  the  rest  of  the  evening,  and  promised  to  see  him 
again  the  next  day,  when  I  should  see  the  Sheik  of  the  Bedoweens. 

I  went  accordingly  on  the  14th,  but  the  Sheik  did  not  arrive, 
and  I  spent  the  whole  day  in  the  laborious  task  of  idleness.  As  the 
Bey  entered  his  harem  after  a  certain  hour,  I  went  to  the  coffee- 
house in  the  bazar  of  the  town,  the  only  place  of  amusement, 
and  in  such  cases  one  cannot  help  wishing  for  something  to 
occupy  the  time.  These  places  are  only  frequented  by  the  Turkish 
soldiers,  for  though  a  cup  of  coffee  is  only  five  paras,  little  more 
than  a  halfpenny,  yet  it  is  more  than  an  Arab  can  afford  to  pay, 
as  his  general  pay  for  a  day's  labour  is  only  twenty  paras,  three- 
pence, so  that  it  is  very  seldom  an  Arab  is  to  be  seen  in  these 
spendthrift  places.  It  is  somewhat  singular  to  observe,  that  while 
these  soldiers  are  drinking  their  coffee,  they  assume  the  same  airs 
and  consequence  as  their  Beys.  A  beenbashe,  who  is  only  in  rank 
with  a  serjeant,  issues  to  the  corporal  the  order  he  received  from  the 
Cacheff,  in  the  same  tone  as  it  was  delivered  to  him  ;  the  corporal 
does  so  to  the  soldier,  who  occasionally  passes  it  to  an  Arab  in  the 
same  manner. 

On  the  15th  the  Sheik  arrived,  and  protested  he  was  unable 
to  show  me  the  road  to  the  place  I  wished  to  visit.  The  Bey  in- 
sisted that  he  should  find  some  one  in  his  camp  who  knew  the  way, 
which  he  of  course  promised  to  do.  It  was  agreed  that  I  should 
meet  the  Sheik  at  a  village  at  the  foot  of  the  desert  where  I  was  to 
meet  Sheik  Grumar,  who  would  conduct  me  to  the  Oasis.  I  pro- 
posed to  the  Sheik  that  I  should  have  a  firman  from  the  Bey  for 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  395 

the  Sheiks  of  the  Oasis,  but  he  said  it  was  unnecessary,  and  made 
me  understand  that  it  was  better  to  go  without  one,  as  I  should  be 
accompanied  by  a  man  sent  from  the  Bey. 

Accordingly,  on  the  morning  of  the  lGth,  we  set  off  for  the 
appointed  village,  named  Sedmin  el  Djabel,  at  the  foot  of  the  desert, 
where  the  Bedoweens  were  encamped.  I  need  not  describe  the 
ground  we  went  over,  as  it  is  pretty  much  like  the  rest  of  the  Faioum. 
On  my  arrival  I  went  to  see  the  Cacheffof  the  village,  where  I  also 
found  the  Sheik  of  the  Bedoweens,  and  Sheik  Grumar,  waiting  for  us. 
I  had  some  little  difficulty  in  persuading  them  to  take  only  six 
camels,  as  they  feared  we  should  not  be  able  to  carry  enough  of 
water ;  but  the  great  difficulty  was,  that  Sheik  Grumar,  who  was 
to  accompany  us,  was  afraid  of  ill  consequences  by  taking  us  to  the 
Oasis,  as  he  assured  me  that  no  European  had  yet  been  there,  and 
that  even  very  few  of  the  Bedoweens  themselves  travel  to  these  places 
at  all,  excepting  when  they  go  to  purchase  rice  and  dates ;  but  having 
surmounted  all  these  little  difficulties,  it  was  arranged  that  we  should 
wait  three  days  at  the  camp,  for  the  purpose  of  making  provision 
for  our  journey,  &c. 

The  camp  of  the  Bedoweens  was  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  range 
of  low  mountains  which  form  the  skirt  of  the  desert  (See  Plate 
25).  The  chief  had  a  large  tent,  higher  than  the  rest,  and  was  as 
great  as  a  king  among  his  own  people.  I  took  up  my  residence 
directly  before  his  tent,  and  my  Moorish  Hadge,  with  two  shawls, 
contrived  to  make  a  tent  for  me.  The  mode  of  living  of  these  people 
has  been  so  often  described,  that  I  conceive  every  one  to  be 
acquainted  with  it ;  but  as  there  may  be  some  peculiarity  in  one 
tribe  more  than  in  another,  I  shall  insert  what  I  have  seen  in  that 
of  Sheik  Grumar.  He  was  a  tall  stout  man,  six  feet  three  inches 
high,  with  a  countenance  that  bespoke  a  resolute  mind,  and  great 
eagerness  after  gain.     He  preserved  an  air  of  superiority  over  his 

3e2 


396  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

subalterns,  and  what  he  ordered  was  instantly  done  without  any 
hesitation.     He  had  two  wives,  who  agreed  pretty  well  with  each 
other,  and  an  old  black  slave,  by  whom  he  had  two  fine  children, 
and  who  in  consequence  had  as  much  power  as  the  other  two,  who 
were  only  somewhat  fairer  than  herself.     Their  chief  occupation 
was  arindinff  corn  and  making  butter.     Their  hand-mill  was  rather 
of  a  larger  size  than  what  is  used  by  the  Arabs  of  Egypt,  which 
proves  their  superior  strength.    The  flour  is  put  into  boiling  water, 
and  by  stirring  it  with  a  stick  they  make  a  large  pudding.      It  is 
then  turned  out  upon  a  straw  plate,  when  a  hole  is  made  in  the 
top  and  filled  with  butter.     This  is  their  chief  repast,  which  is 
called  asceed.     These  people  are  now  happier  than  they  were  a 
few  years  ago,  as  Mahomed  Ali  has   given  them  liberty  to  rent 
lands  on  the  borders  of  the  desert.    They  do  not  trouble  themselves 
about  plowing  the  ground,  for  they  find  it  more  profitable  to  breed 
camels.      Their  greatest   trouble  is   to   break  the  straw   to   feed 
them  when  there  is  no  pasture,  and  this  is  done  by  a  machine 
of  five  or  six  irons,  passing  over  the  straw  on  the  ground.      Their 
horses  are  not  in  very  good  condition,  but  they  are  very  strong. 
They  often  remove  their  camps  into  better  situations,  but  always  far 
from  any  habitation,  at  least  a  large  village  or  town.     The  women 
are  covered  with  a  thick  woollen  cloth  made  on  the  Barbary  coast, 
and   sold  in   Cairo  and   other   towns  in  Egypt.     The  men  have 
generally  a  linen  gown  and  a  large  woollen  shawl,  which  covers  the 
whole  person  from  head  to  foot.    They  generally  have  a  great  many 
fleas,  I  believe  owing  to  the  quantity  of  thick  cloth  they  wear, 
and  even  their  tents  are  so  infested,  that  it  is  impossible  to  approach 
them  without  being  molested.  During  the  time  I  was  there,  I  never 
slept  a  moment.    The  first  day  of  our  arrival,  the  people  were  rather 
shy  in  entering  into  conversation  with  us,  but  when  once  they  did 
begin,  they  were  continually  inquiring  of  many  things  concerning  our 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  397 

country,  and  asking  for  trifling  articles  of  little  value.  At  last,  after 
having  provided  bread  for  our  journey,  and  provisions  for  the  camels, 
we  set  off  on  the  19th,  and  entered  the  desert  in  a  western  direction, 
along  the  south  side  of  the  Faioum,  and  after  two  hours  march,  we 
passed  near  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  village  ;  and  in  another  hour  and 
a  half  we  reached  a  place  called  Raweje  Toton,  the  seat  of  a  very  ex- 
tensive ancient  town.  I  saw  a  great  many  blocks  of  calcareous  stone 
with  hieroglyphics  and  Egyptian  figures  very  finely  executed,  and 
some  pedestals  of  columns.  The  chief  materials  were  burnt  bricks  ; 
but  I  observed  several  pieces  of  granite,  and  from  their  extent,  I  have 
no  doubt  that  this  must  have  been  a  very  large  town.  In  another 
hour  after  this,  we  came  to  the  ruins  of  another  village,  named 
Talet  el  Hagar.  It  is  somewhat  singular  that  this  village  is  crowded 
with  pedestals  of  columns,  which  evidently  have  been  taken  from 
the  large  town,  and  converted  into  millstones  for  grinding  corn. 
At  sunset  we  reached  a  place  called  El  Kharak,  a  land  quite 
detached  from  Faioum,  and  which  is  watered  by  a  branch  of  the 
canal  or  Bahr  Yousef.  This  place  has  a  village  of  that  name,  with 
several  pieces  of  well  cultivated  ground  around  it,  which  produce 
dlpurra  and  clover  in  the  proper  season.  The  few  people  who  live 
there  are  mostly  of  the  labouring  class,  who  rent  the  place  from  the 
Bey  of  the  Faioum.  Here  we  took  in  provision  for  the  camels,  and 
filled  the  skins  with  fresh  water. 

On  the  20th,  we  advanced  towards  the  west :  here  the  face 
of  the  earth  is  entirely  changed.  We  soon  found  ourselves  among 
low  rocks,  sandy  hills,  and  barren  valleys.  At  a  few  miles  distant 
from  our  last  place,  I  observed  the  upper  part  of  a  very  thick 
wall,  evidently  as  if  it  had  surrounded  a  large  town,  but  en- 
tirely buried  under  the  sand.  I  should  have  taken  it  for  a  wall 
inclosing  some  cultivated  spots  of  land,  had  I  not  observed  in  the 
interior  of  it  the  upper  part  of  other  buildings,  and  very  thick 


398  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

walls  of  sun-burnt  bricks.  On  the  exterior  of  the  wall  I  perceived  a 
great  quantity  of  stumps  of  trees,  and  vines,  nearly  burnt  to  ashes, 
and  which  crumbled  into  dust  as  soon  as  touched.  This  place  is 
named  the  same  as  the  one  we  left  in  the  morning,  El  Kharak. 

We  continued  the  remaining  part  of  the  forenoon  through 
several  valleys  of  rocks  and  banks  of  sand ;  and  towards  evening  we 
arrived  at  a  spot  parallel  with  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  lake 
Mceris.  We  passed  the  night  at  the  bottom  of  a  sand-bank,  and 
at  four  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  21st  continued  our  route. 
The  valley  we  were  now  in  opened  wider ;  and,  in  a  few  hours,  we 
came  in  sight  of  a  high  rock  at  a  great  distance  from  us.  We 
continued  nearly  the  whole  day  in  the  said  valley,  among  rocks  and 
sand ;  and,  towards  evening,  arrived  at  Eejen  el  Cassar,  a  place 
once  populated,  where  there  were  several  good  spots  of  ground, 
which  had  been  once  cultivated,  but  now  was  nearly  all  covered  up 
with  sand.  It  is  surrounded  by  high  rocks,  and  its  extent  might 
have  been  about  three  miles  square.  There  is  a  great  abundance 
of  sunt  and  date  trees,  which  bear  no  fruit.  Under  the  sand  there 
is  water  to  be  found  in  great  abundance ;  for,  by  only  thrusting 
down  a  stick,  the  water  springs  up.  There  are  the  remains  of  the 
foundation  of  a  small  Egyptian  temple,  which  has  served  as  a 
burial-place  to  people  of  later  ages.  We  passed  the  night  very 
happily  under  the  palm-trees  ;  but,  unfortunately,  the  water  of  this 
place  was  rather  saltish,  otherwise  it  might  invite  a  hermit  to  pass 
his  days  out  of  the  busy  world. 

On  the  22d  we  continued  our  route  toward  the  west,  and  had 
to  pass  over  a  very  high  bank  of  sand  to  leave  Eejen  el  Cassar  and 
reach  a  valley,  in  which  we  continued  travelling  in  that  direction  till 
we  came  to  an  open  plain,  and  a  fine  horizon  before  us.  I  observed  at 
a  distance  a  spacious  plain  of  sand  and  stones,  with  several  heaps 
above  the  rest.     On  our  approach  I  found  that  they  were  tumuli, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  399 

nearly  in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram,  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet 
long.  There  were,  I  believe,  nearly  thirty,  and  some  of  them  I 
calculated  were  large  enough  to  contain  a  hundred  corpses;  and 
consequently,  altogether,  form  a  good  number.  I  must  beg  leave 
to  make  one  observation  on  these  tumuli,  which,  perhaps,  will  give 
some  idea  to  the  learned,  as  I  hope  my  humble  opinion  will  meet 
the  approbation  of  some  of  them.  It  will  be  recollected,  that  Cam- 
byses,  after  having  conquered  Egypt,  sent  part  of  his  army  to  the 
conquest  of  the  Ammonii  in  the  deserts  of  Lybia,  which  was 
betrayed  by  their  guides,  Avho  were  Egyptians,  and  left  to  perish  in 
the  desert,  and  nothing  more  was  heard  of  them.  It  is  the  general 
opinion,  that  the  Ammonii  were  in  the  western  direction  of  the 
Nile ;  and  it  is  well  known  that  Alexander  employed  only  nine 
days  on  his  visit  to  that  place  from  Alexandria.  Consequently,  it 
is  pretty  clear  that  the  Ammonii  were  not  in  the  southern  Oasis, 
as  it  is  supposed,  merely  because  it  is  stated  by  Herodotus,  that 
Cambyses  sent  his  army  into  that  place  from  Thebes ;  but,  by  all 
other  accounts,  it  appears  that  they  could  not  have  been  so  far  from 
the  sea.  And  it  is  more  probable  that  the  army  was  sent  from 
Memphis,  and  not  from  Thebes,  which  agrees  with  many  other 
points  in  history ;  for  instance,  not  only  in  the  distance,  but  also  in 
the  description  of  the  western  Oasis  and  its  temple.  I  am  now 
laying  before  my  readers  my  own  ideas,  which  I  formed  in  con- 
sequence of  what  I  had  seen,  and  of  the  little  calculation  I  could 
make  from  ancient  history  on  the  subject.  Recollecting  that  the 
said  army  of  Cambyses  had  been  lost  in  these  deserts,  I  have  no 
hesitation  in  supposing,  that  the  above  tumuli  were  made  to  cover 
the  unfortunate  wretches  who  perished,  no  doubt,  from  thirst. 
The  direction  from  Memphis  to  these  Elloah,  either  of  Siwah 
or  El  Cassar,  is  westward.  The  situation  where  these  people  are 
stated  to  have  perished  is  the  desert  of  Lybia  :  the  tumuli  are 
situated  between  Memphis  and  the  Elloah  in  the  desert  of  Lybia, 


400  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

where  there  is  no  index  to  direct  the  stranger  on  his  way,  if  he  is  left 
by  his  guide  ;  nor  even  a  stone  or  a  shadow  to  shelter  him  from  the  sun. 

A  learned  man  wrote  to  me,  that  these  people  could  not  be 
Persians,  merely  because  it  was  not  their  custom  or  religion  to  cover 
the  dead  bodies,  but  to  leave  them  to  the  birds  of  prey ;  con- 
sequently, these  could  not  be  the  army  of  Cambyses.  But  let 
this  learned  man  recollect,  that,  independently  of  the  points  he 
has  mentioned,  these  people  could  not  have  been  buried  by  their 
countrymen  at  all ;  for  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  they  did  not 
know  where  they  were,  otherwise  there  would  be  reason  to  believe 
that  we  should  know  something  more  of  what  became  of  them  than 
the  dry  account  given  by  Herodotus,  that  they  were  left  to  perish 
in  these  deserts.  It  is,  therefore,  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
the  remains  of  these  wretches  were  accumulated  by  some  other 
nation,  perhaps  by  the  Ammonii  themselves,  though  they  protested 
they  knew  nothing  of  them,  and  that  the  army  never  reached  their 
country.  At  any  rate,  I  should  be  happy  to  know  who  these  people 
were,  and  by  what  cause  they  came  there,  if  they  are  not  the  above 
people  from  the  army  of  Cambyses. 

The  calculation  of  the  number  could  not  have  been  made  with 
accuracy,  in  consequence  of  the  different  sizes  of  the  tombs;  besides,  if 
these  corpses  were  collected  only  when  skeletons,  they  would  of  course 
occupy  much  less  space  than  when  in  flesh ;  but,  notwithstanding 
all  this  uncertainty,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  asserting  that,  in  those 
tumuli  I  saw,  there  could  have  been  buried  3000  people.  Be- 
sides, from  the  information  I  received  from  the  Bedoweens,  I  found 
that  this  was  not  the  place  where  there  were  the  greatest  number, 
and  that,  at  a  little  distance,  there  were  a  great  many  of  the  same, 
to  which  I  could  not  persuade  the  Bedoweens  to  take  me,  as  they 
were  afraid  that  our  supply  of  water  would  fall  short, 

On  the  23d,  we  continued  our  journey  to  the  west,  over  a  plain, 
covered  with  pebbles  of  brown  and  black  colours,  and  so  flat  that,  in 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  401 

a  few  hours,  we  found  an  horizon  all  round,  not  unlike  the  sea.  We 
continued  so  the  whole  day. 

On  the  24th  we  went  on,  and  towards  the  evening  reached 
Bahar  Bela  Me,  where  we  saw  high  rocks  on  the  west.  This  place 
is  singular,  and  deserves  the  attention  of  the  geographer,  as  it  is  a 
dry  river,  and  has  all  the  appearance  of  water  having  been  in  it : 
the  bank  and  bottom  are  quite  full  of  stones  and  sand.  There  are 
several  islands  in  the  centre ;  but  the  most  remarkable  circumstance 
is,  that,  at  a  certain  height  upon  the  bank,  there  is  a  mark,  evidently 
as  if  the  water  had  reached  so  high ;  the  colour  of  the  materials 
above  that  mark  is  also  much  lighter  than  those  below.  And  what 
would  almost  determine  that  there  has  been  water  there,  is,  that 
the  island  has  the  same  mark,  and  on  the  same  level  with  that  on 
the  banks  of  the  said  dry  river.  I  am  a  little  at  a  loss  to  know  how 
the  course  of  this  river  is  so  little  knoAvn,  as  I  only  found  it  marked 
near  the  Lakes  Natron,  taking  a  direction  of  north-west  and  south- 
east, which  does  not  agree  with  its  course  here,  which  is  from  north 
to  south ;  yet  it  has  the  same  name,  and  runs  north  and  south  as 
far  as  I  could  see  from  the  summit  of  a  high  rock  on  the  west  side 
of  it.  The  Arabs  assured  me  that  it  ran  a  great  way  in  both 
directions,  and  that  it  is  the  same  which  passes  near  the  Lakes 
Natron.  If  this  is  the  case,  it  must  pass  right  before  the  extremity 
of  the  Lake  Mceris,  at  two  or  three  days'  journey  distance,  in  a 
western  direction.  This  is  the  place  where  several  petrified  stumps 
of  trees  are  found,  and  many  pebbles,  with  moving  or  quick  water 
inside.  I  saw  about  half  a  dozen  of  a  flinty  substance,  without 
veins  of  any  sort. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th,  we  continued  westward,  and  passed 
several  isolated  rocks  and  sand-banks.  At  noon  we  saw  a  high  hill 
at  a  distance,  and  soon  after  the  guide  pointed  out  the  Rocks  of 
Elloah :  in  a  few  minutes  after  this  we  saw  two  crows,  which  ap- 

3  F 


402  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

peared  to  have  come  to  meet  us, — a  sure  sign  that  water  is  not  far 
off;  for  though  these  birds  can  travel  both  cheap  and  expeditious, 
they  generally  keep  near  the  water  in  those  deserts.  In  the  after- 
noon we  reached  the  brink  of  the  Elloah,  named  El  Cassar,  a 
valley  surrounded  by  high  rocks,  which  form  a  spacious  plain  of 
twelve  or  fourteen  miles  long,  and  about  six  in  breadth.  There  is 
only  a  small  portion  of  the  valley  cultivated  on  the  opposite  side 
which  we  reached,  and  it  can  only  be  distinguished  by  the  woods 
of  palm-trees  which  cover  it.  The  rest  of  the  valley  is  wholly 
covered  with  tracts  of  sand,  but  it  is  evidently  seen  that  it  has 
once  been  cultivated  every  where.  Many  tracts  of  land  are  of  a 
clayey  substance,  which  could  be  brought  into  use  even  now. 
There  are  several  small  hills  scattered  about,  some  with  a  natural 
spring  on  the  top,  and  covered  with  rushes  and  small  plants. 
We  advanced  towards  a  forest  of  date-trees,  and  before  evening  we 
reached  within  a  mile  of  a  village,  named  Zaboo,  all  of  us  exceedingly 
thirsty :  here  we  observed  some  cultivation,  several  beds  of  rice, 
and  some  sunt-trees,  &c.  Before  the  camels  arrived  they  scented  the 
water  at  some  distance ;  and  as  they  had  not  drank  since  they 
left  Rejan,  they  set  off  at  full  gallop,  and  did  not  stop  till  they 
reached  a  rivulet,  which  was  quite  sweet,  although  the  soil  was 
almost  impregnated  with  salt.  I  observed  here  a  great  many  wild 
birds,  particularly  wild  ducks,  in  greater  abundance  than  any  other. 
At  this  place  we  alighted  for  a  moment,  to  allow  our  camels  to 
drink ;  and  I  observed  a  certain  uneasiness  in  the  manner  of  Sheik 
Grumar,  our  guide,  that  I  could  not  account  for.  He  had  often 
hinted  to  me  whether  I  wished  to  pass  for  a  Mahomedan  or  Christian, 
but  I  always  told  him  I  could  see  no  reason  for  disguising  myself. 
I  went  some  distance  from  the  camels  to  drink  too ;  and  after 
having  watered  our  camels,  we  were  about  to  proceed  slowly  towards 
the  village ;  but  no  sooner  were  we  mounted  than  we  heard  a  voice 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &e.  403 

hallooing  at  us,  and  at  the  same  time  a  man  rushed  out  of  one  of 
the  bushes  with  a  gun,  and  put  himself  in  an  attitude  as  if  to  fire 
upon  us.  His  appearance  was  not  very  terrifying,  nor  did  his 
garments  bespeak  him  to  be  a  person  of  any  consequence  in  that 
land.  He  was  not  above  four  feet  high,  of  a  chocolate  colour, 
most  wretchedly  ill  made,  and  covered  with  a  black  woollen  cloth. 
Sheik  Grumar  immediately  dismounted,  and  advanced  towards  the 
man,  speaking  to  him  in  a  kind  of  Arabic  dialect,  which  I  found  to 
be  the  dialect  of  the  place.  The  man  soon  recognised  him,  and 
they  approached  each  other  in  a  friendly  manner,  wliich  gave  me 
hopes  that  all  would  go  on  well  at  that  place.  The  man  was  anxious 
to  learn  who  we  were,  when  our  guide  at  once  told  him  that  we  were 
people  in  search  of  old  stones,  and  that  one  of  us  was  a  Hadge,  just 
returning  from  Mecca.  This  last  assertion  appeared  to  satisfy  the 
man ;  but  he  replied,  that  no  one  ever  came  there  to  seek  for  old 
stones ;  and  that  he  did  not  know  what  the  Sheiks  of  Zaboo,  the 
village,  would  think  of  our  coming  there,  and  that  he  was  going  to 
shoot  me  when  I  was  drinking.  Meanwhile  we  advanced  towards 
the  village,  and  our  guide  contrived  to  persuade  him  that  we  were 
harmless  Franks,  meaning  me  and  my  Sicilian  servant.  He  did 
not  know  of  what  tribe  the  Franks  were,  but  said  that  their  Cady, 
who  had  been  once  in  Cairo,  must  know  them.  All  this  was  told 
us  in  Arabic  by  ovir  guide,  who  continually  kept  inquiring  about 
the  health  of  such  and  such  a  Sheik,  and,  above  all,  of  the  Sheik 
Hebrims,  his  son-in-law.  The  man  began  to  walk  before  us,  and 
on  our  approaching  the  village,  he  ran  off  as  fast  as  he  could  into 
the  wood  of  palm-trees.  We  advanced,  and  entered  a  lane  among 
these  plants ;  and  as  we  penetrated  farther,  we  entered  a  most 
beautiful  place,  full  of  dates,  intermixed  with  other  trees,  some  in 
blossom,  and  others  in  fruit:  there  were  apricots,  figs,  almonds, 
plums,  and  some  grapes.     The  apricots  were  in  greater  abundance 

3  f  2 


404  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

than  the  rest,  and  the  figs  were  very  fine.  The  soil  was  covered 
with  verdure  of  grass  and  rice,  and  the  whole  formed  a  most 
pleasing  recess,  particularly  after  the  barren  scenes  of  the  desert. 

On  our  approaching  a  wide  place  the  guide  halted,  and  desired 
us  to  wait  till  he  returned :  he  walked  on,  and  I  observed  him  go 
into  a  kind  of  habitation  at  some  distance.     Accordingly  we  waited 
there  some  time ;  but  in  about  half  an  hour  I  thought  it  rather 
strange  that  he  did  not  return.     I  inquired  of  the  drivers  where 
our  guide  had  gone ;  they  told  me  they  did  not  know.     At  last,  I 
became  tired  of  waiting,  and  set  off  with  my  gun  towards  the  place 
where  I  saw  the  guide  enter;  but  before   I  reached  the  place  I 
heard  the  voices  of  men,  women,  and  children ;  and  when  I  came 
nearer,  I  saw  a  wall  inclosing  a  great  many  houses,  and  immediately 
within  the  gates  there  was  a  yard,  in  which  were  assembled  all  the 
chiefs  of  the  village  and  many  others,  sitting  on  the  ground,  de- 
bating whether  or  not  we  should  be  admitted,  and  my  guide  very 
busy  in  persuading  them  that  we  were  but  harmless  people,  and 
only  come  there  to  look  after  old  stones.     On  my  arrival  at  the 
gate  their  whole  attention  was  turned  upon  me,  and  a  perfect 
silence  ensued.     I  walked  straight  forward,  when  they  all  rose  and 
stared  at  me ;    but  from  their  countenances  I  saw  they  did  not 
know  what  to  say.      I  went  in  among  them  and  inquired  who 
was  their  Sheik,  when  my  guide  told  me  that  three  or  four  elders 
and  a  young  man  were  the  Sheiks  of  the  place.     I  saluted  them 
freely,  and  shook  hands,  which  they  do  not  unlike  the  English 
manner.     I  wished  them  prosperity.     I  saw  by  their  manner  on 
this  occasion  that  they  were  divided  in  opinion.     Some  received 
me  with  good  humour,  and  others  retired  murmuring  something  I 
could  not  learn  at  the  moment.     They  inquired  what  I  wanted. 
I  told  them  I  was  a  stranger,  merely  come  to  visit  that  place,  as  I 
expected  to  find  some  stones  belonging  to  the  holy  mosque  of  my 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  405 

ancestors,  and  hoped  we  should  be  friends.  At  the  same  time,  I 
sent  my  guide  to  fetch  the  camels,  and  on  their  arrival  ordered 
coffee  to  be  made.  I  had  a  good  mat  and  a  new  carpet,  which  made 
a  fine  appearance.  I  spread  them  by  the  side  of  a  wall,  sat  down, 
and  invited  the  Sheiks  to  come  and  sit  near  me ;  at  the  same  time, 
I  asked  if  I  could  procure  a  sheep  at  a  cheap  rate.  Some  of  them 
cheerfully  seated  themselves  on  my  mat,  but  others  kept  at  a  distance, 
frowning  upon  me,  which  I  pretended  not  to  see.  The  son-in-law 
of  my  guide  approached,  and  said  he  would  sell  me  a  sheep  for  a 
dollar,  which  I  accepted,  on  condition  that  he  would  boil  two  large 
basins  of  rice  in  its  broth.  I  knew  that  rice  was  very  cheap  there, 
and  took  that  method,  to  let  them  suppose  I  had  not  plenty  of 
money,  but  at  the  same  time  that  I  wished  to  make  a  feast  with 
them.  By  tins  time,  my  Sicilian  servant  and  the  Hadge  had  made  a 
large  pot  of  coffee,  and  become  quite  free  with  some  of  them.  In 
serving  round  the  coffee,  I  gave  the  preference  of  the  first  cups  to  the 
Sheiks,  and  the  sight  of  such  a  treat  brought  the  other  rusty  fellows 
to  sit  down  also  and  share  the  same  dainty,  as  they  could  not  resist  the 
attraction  of  a  cup  of  coffee,  a  luxury  which  they  perhaps  taste  only 
once  a  year,  on  the  first  day  of  the  arrival  of  the  caravan  of  Bedo  weens, 
who  come  there  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  dates  to  Cairo  or 
Alexandria.  By  this  means  the  wildest  became  more  mild,  and 
seeing  my  indifference  whether  they  were  friends  or  not,  thought 
it  would  be  more  to  their  advantage  to  become  social.  By  this  time 
the  rest  of  the  village  had  assembled,  cows,  camels,  sheep,  donkeys, 
men,  women,  and  children,  all  staring  in  a  semicircle  as  if  I  had 
come  from  the  moon.  Some  of  them  had  seen  Turks  and  other 
tribes  of  Arabs,  but  none  had  ever  seen  a  Frank  or  a  Christian  before. 
I  produced  a  little  good  tobacco,  and  having  presented  each  of  the 
Sheiks  with  a  pipe,  we  commenced  smoking,  and  talked  of  what  I 
could  see  the  next  day.  They  told  me  I  could  see  nothing  there, 
but  must  go  to  the  next  EUoah,  four  days'  journey  north-west,  where 


406  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

I  would  see  something  I  was  in  search  of.  No  doubt  they  meant 
Siwah,  which  is  also  reckoned  to  be  one  of  the  Oasis  of  the  Ammonii. 
There  is  a  temple  there,  visited  by  Messrs.  Brown,  Horneman,  and 
De  Buden.  My  guide  told  them  several  stories  during  this  time, 
wonderful  indeed,  but  one  in  particular,  that  he  and  some  of  his 
companions  had  gone  far  to  the  south,  and  met  with  a  tribe  quite 
different  from  us,  who  walked  like  dogs,  and  that  the  women  fought 
against  the  other  tribes.  These  tribes,  said  my  guide,  are  so  far  off, 
that  their  bellad,  or  village,  is  very  near  the  skies,  and  that  if  I  had 
time  to  walk  to  the  top  of  a  high  hill,  I  might  touch  it  with  my 
own  hands.  The  ideas  of  these  people  are,  that  the  sky  and  the 
earth  meet  at  the  horizon. 

While  all  this  was  going  on,  the  other  Sheiks  held  a  consultation 
among  themselves,  and  appeared  much  concerned  about  my  ex- 
pressing an  intention  of  visiting  the  country  all  round,  to  see  if  I 
could  meet  with  some  old  stones.  At  this  time  three  men  brought 
some  large  wooden  bowls  filled  with  rice,  and  having  put  one  down 
to  me,  they  set  the  rest  before  the  other  people.  They  all  sat 
round  theirs,  and  I  remained  with  my  large  portion  by  myself.  I 
immediately  told  them  that  unless  all  the  Sheiks  ate  with  me  I 
would  not  taste  it,  at  which  they  were  all  much  pleased,  and  came 
to  mess  with  me ;  even  the  most  rough  among  them  came  and 
dipped  in  the  same  bowl.  Soon  after  a  man  came  and  threw  a 
basket  on  the  ground,  which  raised  such  a  dust,  that  it  covered  our 
rice  like  sugar  on  cream.  As  I  could  not  conjecture,  I  was  anxious 
to  know  what  was  in  the  basket,  when  one  of  the  Sheiks  opposite 
thrust  his  hand  in  and  took  out  a  piece  of  boiled  mutton.  I  had 
seen  dinner  served  up  in  many  ways,  but  I  never  saw  boiled  mutton 
eaten  out  of  a  basket  thrown  on  the  ground  in  that  manner.  The 
pieces  were  distributed  and  devoured.  We  became  more  intimate 
after  dinner,  as  I  found  that  an  empty  stomach  makes  a  man  angry  as 
well  as  hungry;  but  the  fact  is,  that  strangers  in  these  countries,  after 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  407 

having  eaten  together,  lay  aside  all  enmity,  and  sometimes  become 
friends.  There  is  treachery,  it  is  true;  but  after  a  person  has  eaten 
with  a  stranger  in  public,  he  must  at  least  play  the  part  of  a  friend. 
We  had  some  more  coffee  and  pipes,  and  I  again  hinted  about  going 
to  see  the  grounds  the  next  morning,  and  the  son-in-law  of  my 
guide  promised  to  conduct  me  any  where  I  chose.  Our  conversation 
was  in  bad  Arabic  as  far  as  they  liked  to  converse  with  me,  but 
amongst  themselves  they  talked  in  another  language,  in  use  in 
Siwah.  It  being  rather  dark  by  this  time,  a  wax  candle  was  righted, 
which  astonished  them  much,  and  was  handed  all  round  for  every  one 
to  see  it.  I  should  not  have  mentioned  this  circumstance,  had  it 
not  appeared  almost  incredible  that  these  people,  living  only  at  the 
distance  of  a  few  days'  journey  from  the  Nile,  should  never  have 
seen  a  candle.  Coffee  being  ended,  one  of  the  Sheiks  rose,  when 
the  rest  followed,  and,  without  saying  a  single  word,  walked  off  with 
the  candle,  leaving  me  in  the  dark,  with  my  carpet  and  saddle  to 
sleep  on.  The  camel  drivers  had  brought  all  our  provisions,  &c. 
quite  close  to  us,  and  continued  the  old  plan  of  keeping  watch  all 
night,  of  two  hours  each. 

On  the  26th,  before  sunrise,  some  of  the  natives  came  thither 
to  see  us,  and  for  all  my  civilities  to  them  on  the  preceding  evening, 
they  were  quite  rude  in  the  morning.  As  the  sun  rose,  the  Sheiks 
came  and  held  a  consultation,  whether  I  was  to  be  permitted  to  see 
the  ruins,  or  whether  I  was  to  be  sent  to  the  other  village  over  the 
mountain.  I  was  already  informed,  that  on  the  west  of  the  Elloah 
there  are  other  and  greater  villages  than  this,  and  that  there  were 
several  ruins  among  them  ;  but  as  I  had  made  an  acquaintance  here, 
I  wished  to  see  every  thing  before  I  proceeded  elsewhere.  Ac- 
cordingly, when  the  Shieks  were  all  in  council,  I  went  and  told  them 
I  had  not  come  there  as  their  enemy,  but  their  friend,  and  that  I 
wished  to  be  informed  of  their  objection  against  my  going  to  see  the 


408  RESEARCHES  AND   OPERATIONS 

country.  They  replied,  that  they  knew  I  wanted  treasure,  and  not 
stones,  and  that  a  man  would  not  cross  the  desert  to  procure  stones 
in  the  Elloah,  &c.  In  short,  all  I  could  do  was  to  no  purpose ;  they 
were  persuaded  that  I  wanted  to  go  there  for  treasure,  which  is  their 
constant  story.  I  then  adopted  the  ancient  mode  of  persuading 
them  to  the  contrary.  I  told  them  that  if  I  found  any  gold  I  would 
give  it  to  them,  to  which  they  all  agreed,  and  said  it  was  done, 
meaning  that  they  should  have  the  treasure.  At  last,  off  we  set 
towards  the  east,  and  after  passing  through  a  thick  wood  of  palm- 
trees,  &c.  as  on  the  day  before,  we  came  to  an  open  ground,  the  soil 
of  which  is  in  some  places  so  covered  with  fine  salt,  that  it  appeared 
like  snow.  And  what  is  more  singular,  there  are  several  rivulets 
which  run  over  that  salt  plain,  and  form  a  sediment  of  their  own 
which  does  not  incorporate  in  any  way  with  the  salt,  and  keeps  quite 
sweet;  and  on  advancing  farther,  we  came  to  a  place  where  there 
had  evidently  been  an  ancient  town.  A  little  farther  there  were 
several  holes,  not  unlike  the  tombs  of  Egypt.  On  my  approaching 
these  cavities,  I  entered  one,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  the 
natives,  who  never  in  their  life  ventured  to  penetrate  any  of  them, 
as  they  supposed  the  devil  was  in  them.  I  found  it  to  be  a  tomb 
cut  out  of  the  rock,  in  the  same  manner  as  those  in  Egypt,  and 
running  downwards  in  various  directions.  On  my  coming  out 
again,  I  underwent  a  minute  scrutiny  by  the  Sheiks,  in  order  to 
discover  if  I  had  any  treasure.  It  was  well  I  had  no  money  of  my 
own,  as  they  would  have  said  that  I  found  it  there ;  and  it  is  some- 
what singular  that  their  chief  notion  of  coin  is  the  Spanish  dollar.  The 
reason  is,  because  the  few  Bedoweens  who  go  there  to  buy  dates 
and  rice  bring  some  of  that  money  to  pay  for  them,  besides  several 
articles  for  barter ;  and  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  caravan  from 
Mecca  to  Fezan  or  Tripoli  passes  through  the  Oasis,  and  purchases 
rice,  which  is  paid  for  in  dollars.     We  advanced  farther,  and  at 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  409 

last  I  was  taken  to  see  the  ruins  of  an  old  edifice  made  only  of  sun- 
burnt bricks,  and  which  perhaps  might  have  served  for  a  Christian 
church,  but  no  signs  of  any  thing  now  remained,  and  I  only  judged 
so  from  its  form,  which  is  somewhat   inclined   to    that  mode  of 
building.     We  then  took  the  route  towards  the  village  again,  but 
in  another  direction.     We  passed  over  several  pieces  of  ground 
which  might  have  been  cultivated,  and  I  believe  the  only  reason 
why  it  was  not  was  merely  because  the  inhabitants  had  enough 
for   what    they    wished   to   cultivate.       Their   lands   are    watered 
from  the  running  springs.     On  our  way  I  was  taken  to  see  what 
they  named  the  devil's  habitation,  made  by  himself  in  one  night 
for  his  own  use ;   it  was  a  low  rock,  at  one  side  of  which   there 
were   several    tombs,    also   in    the    Egyptian    style ;    but  as  their 
entrance  was  somewhat  different  from  the  other,  it  bore  the  above 
title,   and   the  natives   never  ventured   near   them.     On    my  ap- 
proaching the  place,  they  all  kept  at  a  great  distance,  and  even 
the  Moorish  Hadge,  who  had  seen  the  tombs  near  the  pyramid 
in  the  Faioum,  began   to  be  alarmed   on   their  report   that   the 
devil   was    in    these   places.     I    took    my   Sicilian    servant   and   a 
lighted   candle,  and  entered  a  chasm  in  the  rock,  which  in   the 
interior  led  into  various  small  apartments,  and  little  chambers  cut 
out  as  sepulchres  in  the  Egyptian  manner,  but  without  any  hiero- 
glyphics.    In  an  inner  apartment  we  found  several  sarcophagi  of 
burnt  clay,  in  the  form  of  a  man,  and  generally  of  the  usual  size  to 
contain  one  :  they  are  two  inches  thick,  and  baked  very  strong ;  the 
lids  are  quite  flat,  and  have  a  head  of  a  man,  woman,  or  animal,  just 
above  the  head  of  the  mummy.     The  sarcophagus  being  rather  too 
heavy  for  a  camel  to  carry  through  the  desert,  I  took  with  me  some 
of  the  men's  heads  on  the  lids,  and  one  of  a  ram.    They  are  most 
roughly  made.      On  our  coming   out,   we  found   the  Sheiks  and 
others  in  doubt,  whether  we  could  return  from  the  habitation  of 

3  G 


410  RESEARCHES   AND   OPERATIONS 

Pluto;    but,    notwithstanding    this,    they  did    not    give    up    the 
supposition   that  we  searched  for  money.     We   returned  to  the 
village,  and  after  a  slight  repast,  went  to  see  a  fountain  of  water? 
or  rather  a  running  spring.      It  is  a  rivulet  of  curious  water,  and 
very   convenient   for   the   people;    for   by   putting  their   woollen 
cloth,  if  white,  into  it,  for  twenty-four  hours,  it  is  taken  out  as  black 
as  any  dyer  could  make  it.     This  is  a  great  accommodation  to  the 
women  and  children,  who  are  nearly  all  covered  with  gowns  of  that 
colour.    The  Sheiks  and  people  of  respectability  are  in  white.    They 
are  of  the  Mahomedan  religion,  but  very  poor  followers  of  it.     In 
the  village  there  was  a  young  man  who  had  been  in  Egypt,  and 
had   learned   a   little  spelling,   and  was  an  oracle   among   them  ; 
and  all  his  references  were  made  to  a  few  sheets  of  paper,  with 
copies  of  texts  of  the  Alcoran.     What  a  precious  article  would  an 
Arabic  Bible  have  been  in  this  place !     Their  mode  of  living  was 
very  simple ;  rice,  of  which  they  have  great  abundance,  was  their 
chief  food  ;  but  it  is  of  so  inferior  a  sort,  that  they  have  but  very  little 
traffic  in  it,  and  what  they  have  is  only  among  a  few  Bedoweens 
who  go  there  yearly  to  purchase  dates,  winch  are  very  fine.     They 
have  a  few  camels  and  donkeys,  several  cows,  buffaloes,  goats,  and 
sheep,  and  altogether  have  no  reason  to  complain.     They  could 
be  happy  in  this  Elysium,  indeed,  for  this  place  has  more  to  deserve 
that  name  than  any  other,  as  it  is  separated  from  the  rest  of  man- 
kind; but  they  are  mortal,  and  they  must  have  their  evils.     The 
greatest  enemies  they  have  are  their  own  neighbours  at  the  other 
village,  named  El  Cassar,  on  the  other  side  of  a  high  rock,  separated 
from  them  three  hours'  journey,  and  Siwah  four  days.    They  are  con- 
tinually in  dispute,  and  often  attack  each  other's  party,  and  sometimes 
for  very  trifling  causes.    In  the  afternoon,  I  was  taken  to  see  another 
piece  of  antiquity  not  far  from  the  town,  and  passed  over  some  high 
hills  of  sand,  and  arrived  at  a  wide  plain  which  extended  to  the  foot  of 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  411 

the  rock  which  divided  the  two  villages.    In  the  midst  of  this  plain 
there  is  a  small  hill  on  which  there  were  the  ruins  of  a  small  temple, 
built  of  large  bricks  of  sand-stone  not  unlike  the  Egyptian,  but  not 
one  single  hieroglyphic  was  to  be  seen  on  it.     It  has  several  scrawls 
in  Greek  letters,  but  so  defaced  that  I  could  only  trace  one  or  two 
in  different  places.     Eound  the  temple  there  have  been  houses 
built  of  burnt  brick.     By  this  time  the  village  of  El  Cassar  were 
informed  that  a  stranger  had  arrived  in  Zaboo,  in  search  of  treasure, 
which  was  to  be  found  in  the  ruins  under  the  village,  and  that  he 
had  ventured  into  the  devil's  house  without  fear.     They  were  all  in 
an  uproar,  and  swore  that  he  should  never  enter  their  village,  or  even 
come  near  it.  A  man  who  lived  halfway  between  the  two  villages,  and 
occasionally  reported  what  passed  or  was  said  from  one  to  another, 
came  to  me  while  I  was  looking  at  the  said  temple,  and  said  there 
was  a  very  large  temple  in  the  other  village,  named  El  Cassar,  and 
that  there  were  holes  under  ground,  directly  under  the  village,  where 
great  treasure  was  to  be  found,  but  that  the  people  had  sworn  that 
I  should  not  enter  the  village  at  all.  I  inquired  of  him  the  names  of 
the  principal  people,  the  great  Sheik  and  the  Cady,  and  having  taken 
down  their  names,  I  asked  him  if  he  would  take  a  message  to  them 
from  me:   at  first  he  hesitated,  but  on  promising   that  I  would 
not  tell  them  that  he  informed  me  about  the  treasure,  he  agreed  to 
go  to  the  village  early  next  morning.    The  message  was,  my  salutes 
to  the  great  Sheik  Salem,  and  to  the  Cady,  or  justice,  Sheik  Ibrahim, 
and  to  tell  them  that  I  came  into  the  Elloah  to  visit  them  ;  that  I 
was  not  a  soldier,  and  that  if  they  would  appoint  a  place  where  I 
could  meet  them  the  next  morning,  I  should  be  glad  to  see  them 
any  where  they  pleased.     I  returned  to  the  village,  and  the  man 
to  his  habitation.     The  evening  was  passed  much  in  the  same  way 
as  the  preceding  one,  and  the  great  talk  was  on  the  risk  I  had  run 
in  entering  the  devil's  house  without  finding  any  money  or  gold  in 

3  g  2 


412  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

it.    The  Sheiks  were  laughing  at  each  other,  at  the  thought  of  their 
having  approached  near  enough  the  place. 

On  the  morning  of  the  27th,  I  was  taken  to  see  the  seat  of  an 
old  town  in  the  south.  The  Sheiks  were  sure,  that  if  I  knew  how 
to  look  I  should  find  the  treasure  there ;  but  all  ray  endeavours  to 
persuade  them  I  was  not  in  search  of  treasure  were  of  no  avail. 
We  arrived  at  this  place,  which  is  not  more  than  a  mile  and  a  half 
distant.  There  are  several  heaps  of  rubbish,  and  tombs  cut  out  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  rest,  some  of  which  were  choked  up  with 
rubbish.  I  proposed  to  dig  and  open  one  of  them,  and  they  did 
not  dislike  my  idea,  as  we  might  find  some  jewels  in  it ;  but  after 
a  faint  trial  they  got  tired,  and  left  the  tombs  with  the  supposed 
treasure.  We  returned  towards  the  village,  but  before  we  reached 
it,  we  were  informed  that  the  Great  Sheik  and  the  Cady  of  the 
other  village  were  coming  towards  Zaboo.  We  hastened  to  meet 
them,  but  I  observed  that  some  of  our  Sheiks  were  not  pleased 
with  the  intelligence.  On  our  arrival  at  the  village,  we  met  the 
party  coming  towards  us.  The  first  was  a  good-natured  looking 
man  on  horseback,  dressed  in  linen  cloth,  striped  blue,  red  turban, 
pistols,  and  a  gun.  I  was  informed  he  was  the  Great  Sheik  of 
the  Eiloah.  The  next  was  a  complete  rough  looking  fellow  as 
ever  I  saw,  dressed  in  green  cloth  and  turban,  pistols  and  gun. 
He  was  the  Cady  and  Shiek,  which  means  justice  of  peace  and 
Sheik  of  the  church.  He  was  more  conspicuous  than  the  rest  in 
his  attire,  with  a  turban  of  a  Cashmere  shawl,  which  he  had  procured 
when  in  Cairo.  After  these  two  personages  came  about  twenty 
horsemen  and  as  many  foot,  all  well  armed  with  pistols,  guns,  and 
swords.  My  guide  by  this  time  had  drawn  near  me,  and  informed 
me  that  these  two  personages  were  the  chief  commanders  of  the 
Eiloah.  When  Sheik  Salem  reached  the  walls  which  surround  the 
village,  he  halted,  dismounted,  and  looked  round  to  see  whom  he 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  413 

knew.  The  Cady  did  the  same  ;  and  the  other  people  on  horse  and 
foot  surrounded  them.  A  few  mats  were  brought  and  laid  on  the 
ground,  under  the  little  shade  of  a  wall,  ten  feet  high.  The  chiefs 
seated  themselves  there,  and  invited  some  of  their  attendants  to  sit 
with  them.  Meanwhile  I  observed  the  principal  Sheiks  of  Zaboo 
had  retired  to  another  spot  by  themselves.  I  kept  at  some  distance, 
till  I  saw  they  were  all  accommodated,  and  then  went  to  them. 
After  the  usual  salute  of  salame  was  over,  I  was  requested  to  sit  down 
between  the  two  chiefs.  I  do  not  know  what  figure  I  cut  in  that 
place,  but  I  certainly  knew  this,  that  to  judge  from  appearance,  the 
party  round  me,  except  the  Sheik  Salem,  was  not  favourably  inclined 
towards  me.  I  then  began  to  enter  into  conversation  with  the 
two  great  men,  who  Avere  anxious  to  know  my  business  in  the 
Elloah,  but  did  not  like  to  be  the  first  to  inquire.  At  last,  the  Cady 
said  plainly  to  me  in  Arabic,  "  Where  are  you  going,  and  for  what 
are  you  come  here  ?"  I  replied,  that  I  was  a  wandering  traveller  in 
search  of  old  stones  ;  that  I  only  came  there  to  see  if  any  old 
buildings  could  be  seen,  that  could  give  me  any  idea  of  the  religion 
and  writing  of  my  ancestors,  which  was  now  lost.  It  appeared  that 
tin's  man  had  the  same  impression  as  Daud  Cacheff  in  Nubia,  for 
he  made  me  the  same  answer,  but  rather  more  roughly.  "  You  came 
here  in  search  of  treasure,"  said  he,  "  and  not  for  stones.  What 
have  you  to  do  with  stones  ?"  I  replied,  that  I  wanted  no  treasure, 
but  only  to  look  at  the  stones ;  that  I  did  not  want  to  take  them 
away  unless  it  was  agreeable  to  him;  and,  as  a  proof  of  my  sincerity,  I 
promised  to  give  them  whatever  treasure  I  found.  My  proposal 
made  the  Cady  consider,  and  the  Sheik  Salem  said,  that  if  I  found 
any  treasure,  the  Bashaw  of  Egypt  would  make  war  against  them, 
and  take  it  away.  His  reflection  was  very  just,  but  I  told  him  there 
was  no  danger  of  their  running  any  risk  in  my  finding  money,  for  I  had 
no  thought  of  the  kind.  "  But,"'  said  the  Cady,  "  for  what  purpose  then 


414  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

do  you  come  into  this  country  ?"  I  again  explained  to  them  about 
the  stones,  and  that  I  came  only  to  look,  if  they  would  allow  me, 
and  if  they  did  not,  that  I  did  not  care ;  that  to-morrow  I  should 
return  to  the  Nile  again,  since  they  threw  so  many  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  a  stranger,  who  wished  only  to  see  a  few  stones.  My 
apparent  indifference  had  its  desired  effect,  and  the  two  Sheiks 
began  to  relax  in  their  austerity.  By  this  time  some  of  my  good 
coffee  and  tobacco  came  in,  when  we  all  smoked  and  drank.  The 
Cady  kept  a  secret  conversation  with  some  of  the  horsemen  by  his 
side,  and  one  of  them  suddenly  rose,  and  swore  by  Mahomet,  that 
the  stranger  should  never  enter  their  village,  for  if  he  did,  they  should 
all  fall  sick  and  die.  This  was  done  at  the  instigation  of  the  Cady, 
perhaps  to  see  what  impression  it  would  make  on  me.  I  replied 
again,  that  if  my  going  into  the  village  was  the  cause  of  dispute,  I 
would  return,  sooner  than  have  the  bad  will  of  any  of  them.  The 
Sheik  Salem  then  said,  that  his  people  were  afraid  I  would  bring 
some  evil  disorder  into  the  village.  I  then  observed,  that  if  I  had 
the  power  of  doing  so,  1  certainly  had  not  done  it  to  the  people  of 
Zaboo,  who  were  all  well,  although  I  had  been  there  three  days. 
There  was  much  to  do  and  say  on  this  subject  for  about  two  hours. 
At  last  it  was  concluded  that  I  should  enter  the  village  in  the 
evening,  but  only  on  condition  that  I  was  not  to  write  a  single 
word ;  to  touch  or  take  any  thing  away ;  and  that  I  should  keep 
at  a  great  distance  from  the  ruins.  I  agreed  to  all  these  points; 
and  as  I  had  ordered  a  sheep  to  be  killed,  fortunately  dinner  was 
brought  in.  The  armed  men  were  fed  by  the  Sheiks  of  the  village 
Zaboo,  and  we  were  left  to  eat  by  ourselves.  The  Sheiks  of  Zaboo 
seeing  that  I  would  become  friendly  with  the  others,  were  more 
free  with  me  than  before  ;  however,  on  my  inviting  them  to  eat, 
they  refused,  but  at  the  request  of  the  Cady  they  came,  and  we  all 
ate  out  of  the  same  dish,  or  wooden  bowl,  except  Sheik  Salem,  avIio 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  415 

ate  with  none.  I  asked  him  several  times  to  say  what  was  the 
reason,  but  he  refused,  and  smiled  at  me.  I  soon  perceived  that 
these  people  were  not  on  friendly  terms,  and  that  he,  as  chief  Sheik, 
could  not  eat  with  the  people  of  Zaboo,  for  if  he  did,  it  would  have 
made  a  general  peace  among  them  ;  but  as  I  was  perhaps  not  sure  in 
my  conjecture,  I  could  not  interfere  in  such  an  affair,  which  would 
have  been  dangerous  in  my  case.  No  sooner  had  the  rest  finished 
their  dinner,  than  a  portion,  reserved  for  that  purpose,  was  brought  to 
the  Sheik  himself.  I  was  then  invited  to  eat  with  him,  which  I 
contrived  to  do,  as  my  first  repast  was  not  so  abundant  but  that  I 
could  take  another.  After  dinner  and  coffee,  they  all  set  off.  Some 
time  after  we  prepared  to  follow  them,  and  the  Sheiks  of  Zaboo  made 
me  promise  that  I  would  come  there  on  my  return.  Three  hours 
before  sunset  we  set  off,  and  passed  over  the  sandy  banks  on  the 
west  of  the  village,  crossed  the  plain,  and  ascended  the  rocks 
which  separate  the  two  villages.  From  the  summits  I  had  a  fine 
view  of  the  site  of  the  Elloah,  and  on  the  side  of  El  Cassar  the 
country  was  most  pleasant.  A  forest  of  palm-trees  surrounded  the 
village,  and  stretching  over  a  wide  circuit,  which  included  a  great  sj)ace 
of  cultivated  lands.  Farther  on  before  us,  there  was  the  range  of 
rocks  which  surrounds  the  Elloah,  and  opens  to  the  west,  forming  an 
entrance  into  a  valley  which  runs  in  that  direction.  We  descended 
the  rock,  and  gradually  advanced  towards  the  village,  and  on  our 
approaching,  we  found  the  place  we  had  to  pass  crowded  with 
people ;  they  knew  the  stranger  was  coming  there  to  seek  for 
treasure,  and  they  were  not  pleased  with  our  intrusion.  It  was 
well  for  me  that  I  had  had  an  interview  with  their  Sheik  and  Cady, 
who  had  previously  assured  them  that  they  would  take  care  we 
should  do  no  harm  to  them.  The  first  we  met  came  right  before 
us,  stopped  the  first  camel,  and  would  not  let  us  proceed  any 
farther;  consequently  we  stopped  where  we  were,  at  a  quarter  of  a 


416  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

mile  from  the  village,  but  he  thought  we  had  advanced  far  enough. 
I  told  my  guide  to  speak  to  them,  and  to  send  one  to  the  Sheik  or 
to  the  Cady  ;  but  it  was  almost  night,  and  there  we  remained.  The 
people  kept  watch  all  night  that  we  did  not  advance  any  farther. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  28th  many  of  them  came  to  look  at 
us,  but  kept  at  a  great  distance.  We  wished  to  send  some  one  to 
the  Sheik,  but  no  one  would  hear  us.  The  guide  told  them,  that 
the  camels  could  not  stay  without  provisions,  consequently  that 
they  would  die.  The  people  replied,  that  we  might  die  too  as  soon 
as  we  liked.  All  the  forenoon  was  passed  in  this  manner.  The 
place  we  were  in  was  a  dry  spot,  without  shelter  from  the  sun,  and 
no  water  near  us  ;  nor  had  we  brought  any  provisions  with  us,  as  we 
did  not  expect  such  a  reception.  My  guide  and  camel-drivers  were 
determined  to  return  to  Zaboo  as  soon  as  the  sun  was  declining, 
and  I  could  not  prevent  them.  Near  this  place  I  observed  a 
quarry,  from  which  large  blocks  of  stone  had  been  taken,  which 
assured  me  that  some  building  of  the  same  must  be  in  the  village, 
or  not  far  off.  At  last,  towards  evening,  the  Cady  came  to  vis,  and 
said,  that  we  could  not  enter  on  the  night  before,  because  the  people 
were  not  consulted,  and  did  not  agree  that  we  should  enter  till 
that  moment — a  difficulty  which  I  afterwards  learned  was  entirely 
owing  to  the  Cady  himself;  for  though  the  people  were  not  pleased 
at  our  going  into  the  village,  they  did  not  make  more  objection  on 
the  first  night  than  the  second. 

At  length,  we  marched  slowly  toward  the  village,  and  before  we 
entered  we  dismounted.  We  passed  under  a  gateway,  which  led 
into  a  spacious  place.  This  was  their  market,  the  place  where 
camels  and  other  cattle  were  sold  ;  in  the  midst  of  which  we  took 
up  our  abode.  The  principal  difficulty  was  to  obtain  food  for 
the  camels,  which  they  absolutely  refused  at  first ;  but,  on  con- 
sideration that  a  Mahomedan  would  be  at  the  loss  of  his  beasts, 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  417 

they  gave  them  some  rice-straw.     We  made  a  fire,  and  prepared 
our  utensils  for  coffee.     The  baggage  was  all  put  close  to  us,  and 
we  seated  ourselves  round  it.     The  fragrant  smell  of  the  enticing 
coffee  made  these  wild  people  stretch  out  their  noses.     By  the  time 
it  was  made,  some  of  them  came  near  us  in  soft  conversation.     I 
drank  my  coffee,  and  so  did  my  guide.     The  people  drew  nearer 
still,  till  I  could  ask  them  if  they  wished  to  take  any ;  to  which 
they  replied  with   a  hearty  affirmative.      The  sight  of  drinking 
coffee  by  these  people  drew  many  others  nearer  and  round  us.    We 
began  our  conversation,  and,  after  some  time,  the  Cady  appeared,  and 
caused  a  large  mat  to  be  spread  on  the  ground  near  me ;  and,  to 
my  great  surprise,  two  large  bowls  of  rice  were  brought  before  us. 
This  was  in  return  for  what  I  had  given  to  them  on  the  morning 
before.     After  this,   coffee  was  given  again,  and  the  great  Sheik 
himself  came  to  partake  of  it.     I  might  with  reason  exclaim  on  the 
virtue  of  a  cup  of  coffee.    We  talked  of  every  thing  but  the  subject 
of  seeing  the  ruins.     At  last,  as  the  night  grew  dark  and  late,  the 
Sheik  invited  me  to  enter  his  house  to  pass  the  night.      I  would 
rather  have  remained  where   I  was,  but  I  could  not  venture  to 
refuse  him.     I  went,  and,  having  laid  my  saddle  on  the  ground,  I 
thought   I   could  sleep.      The  house  of  the   Sheik  was   as  usual 
made  of  mud ;  a  few  beams,  of  palm-tree,  laid  across,  formed  the 
roof;  on  the  top  of  which  was  thrown  a  great  quantity  of  straw, 
with   old  mats  over.     It  rains  in  this  place  sometimes,  but   not 
much.     When  we  were  alone,  the  Sheik  told  me,  that  all  he  could 
do  for  me  he  would ;  but  that  the  Cady's  father,  being  a  mer- 
chant of  dates,  had  received  many  dollars  from  the  Bedoweens,  who 
came  there  to  market  once  a  year,  and  that  it  was  supposed  that  he 
hid  them  in  the  ruins ;  consequently  he  was  alarmed,  thinking  that  I 
would  take  them  from  under  the  ground  by  my  magic.   I  assured  the 
Sheik  that  I  was  not  a  magician,  and  that  T  did  not  care  for  treasure. 

3  n 


418  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

At  last  the  old  Sheik  went  to  sleep,  and  so  did  I ;  but  I  hope  my 
reader  will  not  do  the  same. 

On  the  morning  of  the  29th  a  great  consultation  took  place, 
and  the  great  difficulty  was  to  persuade  the  father  of  the  Cady  to 
let  me  walk  to  the  ruins.  The  debates  were  great ;  but  at  last  it 
was  concluded  that  he  himself  should  accompany  me,  and  no  one  else; 
that  I  should  go  no  farther  than  where  he  led  me  ;  and  that  I 
should  not  write  any  thing  down,  or  take  any  thing  away.  All  the 
above  conditions  were  of  course  agreed  to,  as  I  considered,  that,  if 
there  should  be  much  to  see,  I  could  not  avoid  observing  it,  and 
could  put  it  in  my  memorandum-book  at  night ;  or,  if  any  thing  of 
consequence  to  examine,  that  I  would  find  the  means  to  see  it 
again  after  my  first  visit.  We  set  off  with  the  old  miser,  and  he 
took  me  through  a  lane  where  the  houses  were  built  upon  the 
ruins  of  some  great  edifice.  The  blocks  of  stone  project  in  several 
parts,  and  into  the  very  path  in  the  lane  :  but  this  was  all  seen  in 
passing.  At  last,  we  descended  on  one  side  of  the  village,  which  is 
situated  on  an  eminence,  no  doubt  formed  by  the  ruins.  We  went 
round  part  of  the  village,  and  on  the  north  side  of  it  I  saw  the 
remains  of  a  Greek  temple,  consisting  of  a  high  wall  with  two 
lateral  sides,  and  an  arch  in  the  centre.  It  is  so  situated,  that  it 
must  have  been  built  on  the  ruins  of  another  of  larger  dimensions. 
This  is  not  more  than  sixty  feet  in  breadth,  and,  of  course,  it  must 
have  been  long  in  proportion.  The  people  were  in  crowds  behind 
us,  but  kept  at  some  distance  ;  and  it  appeared  to  me  that  the 
influence  of  the  old  man  was  great.  At  about  one  hundred  and 
fifty  feet  he  stopped  me  from  going  any  farther,  and  I  could  not 
persuade  him  that  the  distance  was  too  great  for  me  to  be  able 
to  distinguish  any  thing.  On  the  top  of  the  wall  there  were  many 
people  looking  outside  at  what  I  was  going  to  do. 

As  I  thought  I  might  see  some  inscription  on  the  wall,  I  took  from 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  419 

my  pocket  a  small  telescope,  which,  when  opened,  was  not  more  than 
two  feet  long.  Having  put  it  in  a  direction  to  the  upper  part  of  the 
wall,  all  the  people  that  were  there  retired  in  great  precipitation, 
and  the  others  near  us  were  on  the  point  of  doing  the  same.  The 
old  man  stared  at  me  and  at  the  telescope,  and  wished  to  know 
what  I  was  about.  I  thought  it  best  to  please  the  old  man  by 
letting  him  have  a  peep.  He  was  shy  at  first,  but  he  took  it ;  and, 
after  a  long  examination,  I  had  some  trouble  to  make  him  put  it  to 
his  eyes.  At  last  he  caught  the  focus  of  the  glasses,  and  was  much 
astonished  that  the  stones  of  the  wall  should  come  so  near  to  him. 
He  thought  this  was  not  fair,  as  I  promised  not  to  do  any  thing 
magical.  I  explained  to  him  that  it  was  not  magic,  but  what  the 
Europeans  could  make  everyday.  I  took  a  long  observation  on  that 
wall,  but  could  not  discover  any  inscription,  except  four  letters  on 
the  lateral  wall  on  the  east,  and  above  the  cornice,  which  are 
exactly  as  follow :  E  •  P  •  H  •  S  • 

We  reascended  the  ruins,  and  entered  through  a  house  into  the 
interior  of  the  temple  ;  but  there  I  could  see  nothing  but  the  inner 
part  of  the  above  wall,  which  must  have  been  the  sanctuary.  We 
returned  to  the  house  by  the  same  road,  and  all  I  had  observed  was 
apparently  to  me  the  vast  ruins  of  a  great  edifice,  covered  with  the 
mud  cottages  which  formed  the  village,  and  that  the  standing 
part  of  a  temple  was  built  by  later  nations,  and  that  the  materials 
of  the  former  temple  have  been  employed  to  erect  the  latter, 
but  the  stones  had  been  diminished  in  size.  The  rest  of  the 
evening  was  passed  in  the  house  of  the  Sheik,  to  persuade  him  and 
the  others  of  my  honourable  views,  as  by  this  first  trial  they  must  have 
found  that  I  did  no  harm  to  any  one.  The  telescope  remained 
fixed  in  the  mind  of  the  old  man ;  and  he  told  the  rest,  that 
though  I  did  not  trespass  farther  than  he  permitted  me  to  go,  yet 
I  had  the  mode  to  draw  the  wall  of  the  Cassar,  or  ruin,  near  me,  so 

3h  2 


420  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

that  it  was  the  same  as  if  I  had  gone  near.    But  all  this  was  said  in 
a  pleasant  manner  by  the  old  man,  so  that  all  the  rest  laughed. 

At  this  time  two  negroes  who  lived  in  the  Elloah  brought  in  two 
pomkins  of  a  liquor  which  they  extract  from  the  palm-tree,  by  cutting 
all  the  branches  of  it ;  they  make  a  hole  in  the  top  of  the  tree,  into 
which  they  thrust  a  pipe,  attached  to  which  is  a  pomkin  flask  ;  the 
liquor  runs  up  the  trees,  and  is  discharged  into  the  flask  through 
the  pipe.  It  is  not  unlike  ale,  but  the  natives  cannot  drink  much  of 
it  without  getting  tipsy.  I  drank  some,  and  ordered  the  blacks  to 
bring  more. 

By  this  time  the  principal  people  of  the  village  had  arrived, 
and  in  consequence  of  my  not  having  taken  any  treasure  from  the 
temple,  they  began  to  persuade  themselves  that  I  was  not  in  search 
of  gold.  But,  notwithstanding  all  this,  the  idea  that  a  man  should 
travel  so  many  miles  only  to  come  to  see  the  stones  of  that  place 
could  not  enter  into  their  heads.  The  telescope  was  what  drew 
their  attention  at  present,  and  it  was  handed  from  one  to  another ; 
but  unfortunately,  after  the  first  no  one  could  see  any  thing  ;  he 
protested  that  a  branch  of  a  date  tree,  which  was  at  some  distance, 
came  so  close  to  him  that  it  touched  his  nose.  All  the  rest  were 
willing  to  see  this  wonder,  but  he  unwarily  had  put  the  telescope 
off  its  focus,  consequently  the  others  could  not  see.  When  I  pvit  the 
focus  right  again,  the  first  that  could  see  exclaimed,  that  he  was  close 
to  the  tree.  His  pleasure  of  sight  did  not  last  long,  for  no  sooner  did 
he  say  that  he  saw  something,  than  the  glass  was  taken  from  him,  and 
put  out  of  its  focus  again.  This  created  us  sport  for  more  than  two 
hours,  and  I  received  my  telescope  back  again  without  injury,  which 
was  more  than  I  expected.  They  were  so  pleased  with  it  and 
with  their  knowledge,  that  I  proposed  to  take  a  tour  round  the 
village  on  the  outside  of  it,  and  they  all  agreed  to  accompany  me 
any  where  I  pleased  to  go.     I  was  on  my  legs  immediately,  and  off 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  421 

we  all  set  out  of  the  village,  with  at  least  half  of  the  people  of  it 
after  me ;  for  when  the  people  saw  that  I  had  not  brought  any  disorder 
among  them,  they  became  more  free  with  us.  I  inquired  from  some  of 
them,  who  seemed  to  be  disposed  to  tell  me  any  thing,  if  there  were 
any  places  under  ground  any  where  :  they  seemed  surprised  how  I 
should  know  of  any  places  of  the  kind,  and  told  me  that  there  were 
many  round  the  village.  I  took  my  course  towards  them  ;  and  on 
my  arrival,  I  perceived  several  tombs  cut  out  of  the  rock,  like  the 
others  at  Zaboo,  and  much  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Egyptians. 
I  entered  with  candle-light.  I  found  three  or  four  chambers,  in 
each  of  which  were  several  sarcophagi  of  burnt  clay  with  the 
mummies  inside,  their  folding  not  so  rich  or  so  fine,  the  linen  of  a 
coarse  sort,  and  the  corpses  without  asphaltum,  consequently  not 
so  well  preserved.  They  are  in  great  quantity  in  each  tomb.  Many 
of  the  sarcophagi  are  still  in  good  preservation,  but  I  could  not 
take  any  away,  as  it  wovdd  have  been  too  great  a  burthen  for  a 
camel. 

After  a  long  tour  over  these  tombs,  we  returned  towards  the 
village.  My  next  point  was  the  well  of  warm  and  cold  water  which 
I  heard  talked  of  by  my  guide.  Had  I  inquired  for  this  fountain, 
I  should  have  found  perhaps  some  difficulty  to  be  taken  there ;  so  I 
expressed  a  wish  for  bathing,  and  the  said  fountain  was  pointed  to 
me.  I  returned  to  the  house  of  the  Sheik,  and  after  all  the  crowd 
had  dispersed,  which  must  have  been  about  three  hundred  people,  I 
waited  for  an  opportunity  to  set  off  unperceived,  not  to  have  such  a 
crowd  about  me.  I  took  my  Sicilian  servant,  and  the  Hadge,  who 
by  this  time  had  been  to  see  the  fountain,  as  he  was  more  at  liberty 
to  go  unnoticed  than  I  was.  I  found  it  to  be  a  well,  eight 
feet  square,  and  above  sixty  deep.  When  I  first  put  my  hands  into 
this  water  I  felt  it  warm  :  it  was  then  after  sunset :  it  springs  from 


422  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

the  bottom  of  the  well,  and  overflows  in  a  rivulet,  which  runs  to 
irrigate  some  cultivated  lands.  This  well  is  situated  near  the  ruins, 
in  the  centre  of  a  beautiful  wood  of  palms  and  other  trees.  The 
water  is  blackish,  but  perhaps  this  is  owing  to  the  soil  of  the  earth ; 
it  passes  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  the  well.  The  next  visit  was 
to  be  made  at  midnight,  to  observe  the  difference  of  the  temperature 
of  the  water.  On  our  return  to  the  Sheik's  house,  I  found  there 
the  Sheiks  of  the  village  of  Zaboo,  who  came  to  see  me,  as  they  said, 
but  I  rather  think  that  these  people  were  inclined  to  become  friends 
again  with  those  of  El  Cassar.  Some  rice  was  brought  to  us  as  usual, 
but  no  mutton.  I  observed  that  the  great  Sheik  of  Zaboo  did  not  eat 
with  the  rest,  as  the  other  did  on  his  visit  to  his  village,  and  a  portion 
had  been  brought  to  him  as  the  other  had  also  for  himself.  He 
invited  me  to  eat,  and  of  course  I  could  not  refuse,  so  I  partook  with 
him.  Rice  and  fried  eggs  was  the  supper  for  him.  Though  it  was 
rather  late,  they  all  set  off  to  return  to  Zaboo  again,  and  we  went  to 
rest  for  a  while,  but  not  to  sleep,  as  I  waited  till  midnight  to  visit  the 
fountain.  They  all  went  to  sleep,  and  I  contrived  by  the  light  of  a 
small  lamp  to  write  my  little  journal,  of  what  passed  on  that  day. 
At  midnight,  I  took  my  servant  and  the  Hadge,  and  went  to  the 
fountain.  On  our  way  we  passed  by  several  people,  who  sleep  always 
about  the  lane  which  leads  to  the  outer  part  of  the  village,  and 
reached  the  fountain.  We  had  to  go  over  a  wall  to  get  at  the  place, 
as  the  door  was  closed  at  this  time,  but  we  soon  overcame  that 
difficulty.  I  found  the  water  apparently  much  warmer  than  I  had 
left  it  in  the  evening,  and  indeed  I  regretted  I  had  broken  my 
thermometer.  We  returned  safely  to  the  house,  and  went  to  sleep. 
Early  in  the  morning,  before  the  sun,  we  went  to  the  fountain 
again,  on  pretext  of  bathing.  I  found  the  water  as  I  left  it  at 
midnight,  or  rather  less  warm,  but  not  so  much  as  in  the  evening. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  423 

For  instance,  if  we  were  to  suppose  the  water  to  have  been  at  60° 
in  the  evening,  it  might  be  at  100°  at  midnight,  and  in  the  morning 
at  about  80° ;  but  when  I  returned  at  noon,  it  appeared  quite  cold, 
and  it  might  be  calculated  in  proportion  to  the  other  at  40°. 
These  are,  to  my  little  observations,  the  various  degrees  of  tem- 
perature which  appeared  in  the  water  of  that  fountain,  but  I  am 
well  convinced,  that  it  must  have  been  the  effect  of  the  various 
degrees  of  heat  in  the  atmosphere,  and  that  water  being  so  kept  in 
a  well  of  sixty  feet  deep  by  eight  sqviare,  has  not  time  to  cool,  so  that 
it  being  constantly  in  one  temperature,  and  that  the  effect  of  the 
apparent  change,  is  caused  by  the  change  of  the  atmosphere  itself, 
particularly  as  the  water  has  proved  to  be  pure,  and  free  from  any 
saline  incorporation,  as  I  had  the  analysis  made  since  my  arrival  in 
London.  But  whatever  may  have  been  the  causes  of  this  apparent 
change  of  temperature,  it  does  not  signify,  for  the  principal  point  is 
to  prove  the  existence  of  the  fountain  itself,  according  to  the 
description  found  in  Herodotus,  in  Melpomene,  where  he  says  that 
there  is  a  fountain  near  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Amnion,  whose  water 
changes  its  temperature,  being  cold  at  noon  and  midnight,  and  warm 
in  the  morning  and  evening.  This  does  not  altogether  agree  with 
my  finding  the  water  warm  at  midnight,  but  we  have  to  recollect  that 
Herodotus  was  only  told  of  this  phenomenon,  for  he  never  was  himself 
in  the  deserts  of  Lybia,  and  that  if  the  fountain  was  only  apparently 
changed  in  its  temperature,  owing  to  the  heat  of  the  atmosphere,  we 
have  to  consider  that  the  simplicity  of  these  people  did  not  let 
them  observe  the  true  reason  of  the  above  change ;  but  they  naturally 
supposed  it  was  the  water  that  made  this  alteration.  It  is  enough 
for  me  to  remind  my  reader,  that  it  is  said  that  such  a  fountain 
was  described  to  be  near  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Amnion,  and  that  in 
the  combination  with  other  descriptions  concerning  the  distance 


424  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

and  situation  of  these  ruins,  we  have  reason  to  suppose  that  this 
may  be  the  seat  of  Jupiter  Amnion's  temple ;  for  my  part,  I  shall 
leave  others  to  conjecture,  whether  it  is  or  it  is  not ;  in  my  simple 
opinion,  I  think  that,  with  all  this  combination,  we  ought  to  con- 
sider that  Siwah,  which  is  another  Elloah  of  the  Ammonii,  has  as 
much  right  to  be  supposed  the  seat  of  the  above  temple  of  Jupiter 
Amnion ;  though,  unfortunately,  it  is  the  opinion  of  many  of  the 
first  literati,  that  it  is  not  according  to  the  description  given  by  the 
travellers  who  have  been  there,  particularly  Mr.  Horneman  and  Mr. 
Brown,  who  positively  affirm,  that  the  temple  they  saw  in  Siwah  was 
not  that  of  Jupiter  Amnion.  Still  I  beg  to  observe,  that  the  Elloah 
of  Siwah  agrees  with  the  account,  in  point  of  distance,  as  well  as 
the  Elloah  el  Cassar ;  and  as  it  forms  an  angle  with  that  place  and 
Alexandria,  and  is  at  the  same  distance  of  nine  days'  journey  from 
that  port,  I  think  that  one  place  has  as  much  claim  as  the  other  ;  the 
only  objection  I  have  against  Siwah  is,  that  the  ruins  in  that  place 
are  surrounded  by  water,  of  which  we  have  no  account  from  the 
ancient  authors,  yet  it  might  have  formed  a  lake  since  that  time ; 
but  what  I  will  give  as  my  firm  opinion  is,  that  no  other  places  but 
these  two  Elloahs  are  meant  by  the  old  authors  as  the  residence 
of  the  Ammonii,  consequently  the  seat  of  its  temple  can  but  be 
within  them,  or  not  far  off.  Having  seen  all  I  could  in  this  place, 
I  made  a  proposal  to  pass  to  the  other  Elloah  of  Siwah ;  but  for  all 
my  offers,  promises,  and  entreaties,  I  could  not  persuade  my  guide, 
Grumar,  to  take  me  there :  I  then  proposed  to  go  to  the  Elloah 
el  Haix,  three  days  in  a  south-west  direction,  and  found  some  little 
difficulty,  but  I  overcame  it  by  a  small  present  to  the  Sheik  and 
the  Cady ;  and  on  the  31st,  we  set  off  through  the  valley  on  the 
west  side  of  the  Elloah.  AVe  continued  our  route  south-west 
the  whole  day,  and  nothing  of  consequence  to  be  described,  as  I 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  425 

saw  only  a  few  rocks,  elevated  above  those  which  formed  the  valley. 
We  went  a  good  day's  march,  as  the  camels  were  fresh  again  ;  and 
the  next  day,  the  1st  of  June,  towards  the  evening,  we  saw  another 
Elloah  at  a  great  distance.  On  the  2d  we  arrived  there ;  it  was  a 
long  tract  of  land,  forming  a  crescent  of  more  than  twenty  miles, 
from  one  point  to  the  other.  There  are  several  good  spots  of 
ground  to  cultivate,  and  various  springs  of  good  water.  The  side 
where  we  entered  was  at  one  point  of  the  crescent ;  there  we 
found  a  few  trees,  some  spots  of  ground  with  rice,  a  tomb  of  a 
Mahomedan  saint,  and  no  one  to  be  seen  any  where.  We  ad- 
vanced in  search  of  water,  and  soon  found  it  close  to  a  large  syca- 
more tree,  which  afforded  a  fine  shelter  from  the  sun  ;  close  to  the 
tree  we  found  a  hut,  made  of  four  mats  attached  together ;  inside 
of  it  we  saw  a  bowl  of  fresh  milk,  and  in  a  bag  attached  to  the  hut 
we  found  some  dates.  One  of  the  drivers  was  sent  in  search  of  the 
inhabitants  of  this  hut,  and  it  was  some  time  before  he  could  find 
one  ;  at  last  a  miserable-looking  wretch  was  brought  there,  who  was  so 
frightened  at  the  sight  of  strangers,  that  notwithstanding  the  good 
treatment  he  met  from  us,  he  could  not  get  the  better  of  it.  He 
was  a  good-natured  sort  of  being,  living  far  from  the  wicked  world, 
as  I  thought,  and  I  almost  envied  him  ;  but  mankind  are  the  wildest 
of  all  animals,  particularly  against  each  other.  We  took  the  usual 
accide,  which  we  ate  with  the  milk,  and  made  the  man  partake  with 
us :  we  gave  him  some  dhourra  and  flour,  and  some  grains  of  burnt 
coffee,  which  he  tasted  with  delight.  After  eating  he  set  off,  and 
soon  returned  with  another  man,  with  an  appearance  even  worse  than 
his  own :  a  sort  of  short  ugly-looking  fellow,  turned  up  nose,  long 
teeth  out  of  his  mouth,  and  uncommon  thick  lips  ;  his  eyes  standing- 
out  of  his  forehead,  and  his  hair  resembling  the  serpents  of  Medusa. 
He  was  very  sulky  with  us;  and  for  all  we  tried  to  be  friendly 
with  him,   he   could  not    reconcile  himself  to    us.      I  could  not 

3  i 


42G  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

conceive  what  was  the  reason  why  this  man  was  so  totally  different 
from  the  other ;  the  fact  was  this, — that  my  guide  happened  to  be 
recognised  by  him  to  be  one  of  the  assailants  of  part  of  his  tribe 
at  a  place  near  the  southern  Elloah,  and  that  he  escaped  from 
them  by  chance.  All  this  was  told  by  the  good-natured  man  to 
my  Hadge,  in  Arabic,  who  repeated  it  to  me.  I  told  it  to  the 
guide,  and  he  immediately  recognised  the  man.  The  guide  then 
went  up  to  him  and  talked  in  friendly  terms,  but  he  could  not  put 
him  into  good  humour.  I  caused  the  Hadge  to  inquire  how 
many  people  there  were  in  the  Elloah ;  he  said  a  great  many,  but 
would  not  tell  the  number :  probably,  I  thought,  they  were  but 
few,  only  they  wished  to  frighten  us  away.  Notwithstanding  all 
this,  I  thought  it  would  be  proper  to  keep  a  strict  guard  at 
night ;  but  we  soon  found  that  we  were  not  to  sleep  there.  The 
ugly  man  disappeared  half  an  hour  before  we  perceived  it,  and  by 
this  time  it  was  quite  dark :  we  perceived  great  uneasiness  in  our 
guide,  but  he  did  not  wish  to  show  it  either  to  us  or  to  the  other 
men  of  the  place.  Some  time  after  the  other  man,  on  pretence  of 
fetching  water,  set  off,  so  that  we  remained  by  ourselves.  Our  guide 
was  still  more  uneasy :  at  last  I  insisted  to  know  what  was  the 
matter ;  he  then  told  us  plainly  that  he  expected  we  should  be  at- 
tacked by  a  party  on  that  night,  and  that  lie  feared  they  would  l>e 
too  strong  for  us ;  he  thought  the  best  expedient  was  to  load  our 
camels,  and  set  off  as  soon  as  we  could.  I  thought  there  was  no 
time  to  be  lost ;  but  notwithstanding  I  did  not  like  to  be  frightened 
away  merely  on  supposition :  we  concluded  that  we  should  load 
the  camels,  and  change  our  position,  till  we  saw  what  might 
happen.  It  was  well  that  we  did  so,  for  soon  after  we  perceived  a 
number  of  men  from  various  parts.  Our  camels  were  sent  off  with 
the  luggage,  and  I  remained  not  far  from  the  place  where  we  were 
before  with  the  guide.     Though  it  was  pretty  dark,  we  could  see 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  427 

enough  of  their  actions  and  of  their  disappointment  at  not  finding 
us  there :  they  were  in  greater  numbers  than  we  could  have  opposed. 
We  made  a  forced  march,  or  rather  a  hasty  retreat,  and  with  the  same 
pace  we  kept  on  the  whole  night,  till  we  reached  the  opposite 
point  of  this  Elloah :  here  we  were  extremely  tired ;  the  camels 
could  not  stir  any  further  without  resting:  at  last, after  a  few  hours, 
we  entered  this  place  in  the  morning  of  the  3d,  which  we  found 
better  cultivated  than  the  other  side  of  the  crescent.  It  was 
owing  to  the  necessity  of  wanting  water  that  we  came  there  to 
refresh  our  camels,  otherwise  we  should  not  have  passed  that  way, 
as  it  was  not  in  our  road  back  to  the  great  Elloah.  Here  I  found 
more  verdure,  and  several  trees  of  small  sweet  apples,  which  are  also 
found  in  Egypt:  there  are  dates,  plants,  and  vegetation  for  the 
camels.  At  some  distance  I  saw  a  high  wall,  which  drew  my  atten- 
tion. On  my  arrival  there  I  found  the  site  of  a  small  ancient 
town,  built  of  burnt  bricks :  the  baths  are  the  only  buildings  which 
remain  in  good  preservation.  They  are  cemented  within  with  the 
same  material  which  was  in  use  by  the  Greeks  and  Komans  for 
that  purpose  :  it  is  a  kind  of  reddish  cement,  made  of  ground  bricks 
mixed  with  lime.  The  walls  of  the  houses  are  to  be  seen ;  and 
close  to  the  town  stands  the  high  wall  which  drew  me  there.  It 
evidently  enclosed  an  edifice,  of  which  a  very  little  portion  now 
remains ;  no  doubt  the  materials  have  been  taken  to  erect  other 
buildings,  as  at  no  great  distance  from  this  I  saw  another  wall,  and 
on  my  approaching  it  I  found  it  to  be  a  Greek  Christian  church, 
in  a  good  state  of  preservation.  The  inside  is  built  in  the  form  of 
a  cross,  and  has  various  divisions  at  each  side ;  at  the  end  there  is 
the  usual  chapel,  and  two  places  for  the  lateral  altars,  which  form 
the  sides  of  the  cross.  It  is  about  fifty  feet  long  and  twenty  wide  : 
the  materials  are  of  burnt  and  unburn t  bricks.  At  some  distance  from 
this  I  came  to  another  building,  very  massive  ;  it  was  a  square  wall, 

3  i  2 


428  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

without  entrance.  I  contrived  to  ascend  to  the  top  of  it,  and 
found  that  it  must  have  been  a  Copt  convent.  There  were  several 
cells  separated  from  each  other,  and  a  very  deep  well  of  water  in  the 
centre,  so  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  place  were  independent  of  the 
necessity  of  coming  out  to  seek  that  element. 

Having  fed  the  camels,  we  advanced  farther  into  this  part  of  the 
Elloah,  as  we  had  to  cross  it  to  come  on  our  road  again.     At  some 
distance  we  saw  a  man,  who  no  sooner  perceived  us  than  he  set 
off  like  an  antelope.     Our  guide  ran  after  and  succeeded  in  reach- 
ing him  within  the  distance  of  a  gun  shot ;  he  then  hailed  him, 
and  he  stopped ;  for  when  a  man  is  within  the  reach  of  a  gun,  if  he 
do  not  obey,  he  may  expect  a  ball  will  reach  him.     Our  guide  then 
turned  back,  and  the  man  followed  him.     When  he  came  suffi- 
ciently near  to  allow  me  to  speak  to  him,  I  found  that  he  was 
nearly  out  of  breath  with  fear.    As  it  is  time  that  I  should  state  the 
reason  why  this  man,  as  well  as  he,  of  the  other  part  of  this  Elloah, 
were  so  frightened,  I  must  inform  my  reader  that  my  guide  was 
no  less  than  one  of  the  Sheiks  of  these  Bedoween  tribes,  who  make 
their  incursions  into  these  places  at  a  time  when  the  rice  or  barley 
are  up,  and  take  away  all  they  find ;  rob  the  poor  inhabitants  of  the 
fruits  of  their  labour,  and  often  leave  them  to  starve  in  the  lone 
desert ;    and  if  any  resistance  is  made,  their  lives  are  often  the 
forfeit  of  this  attempt  to  protect  their  property.     Grumar  was  well 
known  by  all  the  people  of  the  Elloah,  but  no  one  communicated 
this  to  me ;  but  the  M oorish  Pladge  came  to  the  knowledge  of  it 
by  other  people,  and  he  of  course  communicated  it  to  me ;  and  if 
we  had  staid  a  little  longer  in  the  place  where  we  were  the  night 
before,  we  should  have  paid  the  forfeit  for  what  Grumar  had  done 
before  to  these  people.     This  was  the  reason  why  he  would  not 
take  us  to  Siwah,  for  he  was  too  well  known  there ;  and  if  we  had 
gone  to  that  place  with  such  a  man,  we  should  have  become  the 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  kc.  429 

victims  of  revenge.  We  requested  the  poor  man  to  show  us  some 
water,  which  he  took  us  to  in  a  few  moments.  We  halted  a  while 
to  refresh  our  camels,  and  make  our  accide,  or  flour  pudding.  We 
took  our  station  under  a  large  sunt  tree,  and  set  the  camels  to  finish 
their  repast.  The  country  here  forms  a  circle,  with  a  running 
rividet  in  the  centre.  The  water  is  very  sweet,  and  the  land  pro- 
duces good  rice  and  barley.  The  inhabitants  are  only  six  in  number, 
four  men  and  two  women :  they  live  entirely  on  the  product  of 
their  own  labour  and  water.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  they 
were  afraid  of  my  guide,  as  they  knew  his  past  tricks,  when  he 
visited  them  with  all  his  tribe.  Of  these  people  we  only  saw  two ; 
the  rest  were  absent  far  off  at  work,  and  would  not  return  till 
night.  We  left  this  place,  and  arrived  at  a  day's  distance  from  our 
first  Elloah,  or  El  Cassar ;  and  on  the  4th,  in  the  evening,  we 
reached  that  spot  again.  It  appeared  that  our  Hadge  had  lost  his 
purse  on  the  road,  with  three  or  four  dollars  in  it.  He  thought  he 
could  find  it  if  he  could  procure  a  donkey  to  go  back  a  few  miles, 
but  no  one  was  willing  to  lend  him  one ;  and  having  informed 
themselves  where  he  thought  he  might  have  lost  it,  they  set  off 
themselves  and  found  the  purse,  which  they  of  course  claimed  as 
their  own. 

We  passed  the  forenoon  of  the  5th  in  the  village :  I  inquired  if 
any  of  them  had  any  articles  to  dispose  of,  and  told  them  that  I  would 
give  them  money  in  return  :  nothing  was  brought  to  me  of  any  con- 
sequence, only  a  broken  Grecian  vase  of  bronze,  about  eight  inches 
high,  of  a  very  curious  shape ;  and  a  small  cherub  of  Greek  work, 
not  more  than  three  inches  high.  During  the  morning  I  was  taken 
on  one  side  by  the  Cady,  who  was  uncommonly  polite  to  me  all  this 
time,  for  which  attention  I  could  not  account :  he  told  me  in  a  few 
words,  that  himself,  the  Sheik  Salem,  and  his  father,  had  made  up 
their  minds  to  offer  me  to  remain  there  with  them ;  that  I  should 
become  a  Mahomedan,  and  that  a  great  feast  would  be  made  on 


430  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATION'S 

my  account  on  the  day  of  the  festival  of  that  ceremony  ;  that  I  should 
partake  of  part  of  their  lands,  and  if  I  knew  how  to  introduce 
some  new  produce,  it  would  be  all  to  my  own  advantage  ;  and  lastly, 
that  I  might  choose  four  wives  from  among  their  own  daughters,  and 
that  I  should  be  happy  there  without  going  about  so  much  after 
stones.  I  had  not  a  little  difficulty  to  get  myself  out  of  this  scrape  : 
I  left  the  Cady  with  hopes  that  I  would  return  soon,  and  then, 
perhaps,  my  mind  might  be  more  inclined  to  stop  there  and  marry  ; 
but,  for  the  present,  I  could  not  leave  all  the  rest  of  my  affairs  at 
Cairo,  which  I  left  unsettled.  My  Sicilian  servant  was  attacked 
also  at  the  same  time,  but  he  got  off  in  a  more  speedy  way  than 
myself:  he  told  and  promised  them,  that  as  soon  as  he  had  accom- 
panied me  to  Cairo,  he  would  return  immediately,  and  stay  there 
with  them  all  the  rest  of  his  life. 

At  last,  we  set  off  in  the  afternoon  for  the  village  of  Zaboo,  and 
left  all  good  friends  at  the  village  of  El  Cassar.  To  Sheik  Salem  I 
made  a  present  of  a  string  of  very  ordinary  sort  of  corals,  which  he 
took  with  great  pleasure,  some  pieces  of  soap,  and  a  portion  of 
coffee  ;  to  the  Cady  I  gave  equally  the  same.  On  our  coming  out 
of  the  village,  the  people  saluted  us  very  cordially,  and  said  they 
expected  us  soon  back  again  to  stay  with  them.  This  day  we  began 
our  journey  very  merrily,  but  it  ended  very  badly.  We  ascended  the 
rock  we  had  to  pass  to  come  at  the  village  of  Zaboo,  and  on  our 
descending,  my  camel  slipt  his  foot  on  one  side,  and  rolled  down  the 
rock  the  height  of  about  twenty  feet,  taking  me,  of  course,  along 
with  him.  I  did  not  get  off  so  easily  this  time  as  I  did  when  I 
fell  on  the  sand  in  Wady  el  Gemal,  for  here  they  were  all  hard 
stones  ;  fortunately,  however,  no  other  harm  was  done,  as  it  appeared 
at  the  time,  but  a  few  bruises  and  a  blow  on  my  side.  I  was 
put  on  a  donkey  belonging  to  a  man  who  followed  us  from  the 
other  village,  and  I  was  brought  so  to  Zaboo,  to  the  house  of  Sheik 
Ibrahim,  the  son-in-law  of  our  guide.     My  saddle  was  my  bed,  as 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  &c.  431 

usual.  Fortunately  we  had  a  few  drops  of  brandy  in  our  stock,  and 
my  bruises  were  rubbed  with  it,  but  my  side  did  not  permit  me  to  stir 
without  great  pain.  On  our  entering  into  the  house,  I  saw  a  great 
number  of  people  assembled,  eating  rice  out  of  their  usual  bowls. 
I  was  accommodated  in  the  passage  which  leads  from  the  street  door 
to  the  yard  behind  the  house.  My  mattress,  or  saddle,  occupied 
half  of  the  space  from  one  wall  to  the  other,  and  in  all  there  was 
not  two  feet  left,  for  the  men,  women,  children,  cows,  buffaloes, 
donkeys,  sheep,  goats,  and  dogs,  to  pass  there.  The  passage  was 
constantly  crowded  with  people,  who  occasionally  trod  on  my 
feet,  or  gave  me  a  kick  on  the  head.  But  this  was  not  the  worst  of 
the  thing ;  it  happened  often,  that  while  the  cows,  buffaloes,  or 
donkeys  passed,  I  had  reason  to  fear  the  consequence  of  my  being 
thus  situated.  There  was  another  thing  which  was  not  the  least  of 
all  the  rest.  The  feast  of  rice  eating  was  kept  in  consequence  of  the 
death  of  a  man  related  to  Sheik  Ibrahim,  the  landlord  of  the  house 
where  I  was,  and  he  was  taken  to  be  buried  just  before  we  arrived. 
No  sooner  was  the  eating  ended,  than  the  most  tremendous  noise 
issued  from  the  outer  doors  ;  it  was  the  widow  of  the  deceased,  who 
returned  home,  accompanied  with  all  the  rest  of  the  matrons  of  the 
village,  all  in  great  uproar ;  they  had  all  to  pass  by  my  side  into 
the  yard,  where  the  house  of  the  deceased  was,  and  every  half  hour 
they  had  to  repeat  this  lamentation  all  through  the  street  before 
the  house,  so  that  the  place  where  I  lay  was  a  continual  passage. 
The  pain  in  my  side  was  not  diminished,  and  the  skin  became  rather 
black :  I  tried  to  move,  but  I  could  not. 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th,  I  had  many  visits  of  the  Sheiks. 
They  all  congratulated  with  me  that  I  did  not  break  my  neck,  for  it 
might  have  been  so  by  the  fall  I  had.  I  spent  the  rest  of  the  day  in 
taking  notes.  Towards  the  evening  of  the  second  day,  I  was  with 
the  Moorish  Hadge  and  my  Sicilian  servant,  who  were  my  physicians. 


432  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

I  felt  my  side  was  somewhat  better,  and  I  was  in  hopes  to  be  able  to 
bear  the  motion  of  the  camel  on  the  next  day.  After  sunset,  the 
widow  who  had  buried  her  husband  on  the  day  before  came  and 
seated  herself  near  to  me,  sobbing,  I  supposed,  for  the  loss  of  her 
husband.  My  Sicilian  servant  tried  to  persuade  her  to  bear  the  loss 
patiently  ;  but  she  continued  sobbing :  at  last  she  said,  that  none  but 
me  could  restore  her  to  happiness,  and  that  she  hoped  that  I  would 
not  refuse  her  the  favour.  I  could  not  understand  what  the  woman 
meant,  and  she  sobbed  again,  while  the  Moorish  Hadge  was  talking 
to  quiet  her,  but  in  vain.  She  still  continued  there,  and  said,  that  none 
but  me  could  cure  her  of  all  her  trouble.  At  last  I  asked  what 
she  wanted  of  me.  She  said,  that  she  saw  me  writing  magic,  and 
begged  I  would  write  two  pieces  of  paper — one  to  get  another  hus- 
band, as  soon  as  possible,  and  the  other  to  make  use  of  for  the  same 
purpose  if  he  should  die.  We  endeavoured  to  persuade  her  that  I 
was  not  in  possession  of  magic ;  but  she  would  not  be  convinced, 
and  went  away  much  displeased  with  my  harsh  proceeding  against 
her.  I  could  not  help  reflecting,  that  if  I  had  the  art  of  procuring 
husbands  to  widows,  I  could  have  obtained  employment  enough  in 
Europe,  without  travelling  in  strange  lands  for  such  a  purpose. 

On  the  7th,  I  tried  to  mount  the  camel,  but  my  side  would  not 
permit  me.  At  last,  on  the  8th,  in  the  afternoon,  we  set  off.  1  felt 
much  pain  the  two  first  days,  but  it  appeared  diminishing  after.  The 
above  two  days,  the  8th  and  9th,  brought  us  to  the  flat  desert  of  the 
horizon;  and  another  day,  the  10th,  to  the  tumulus;  the  11th  to 
Eajan.  There  we  were  without  water,  and  we  had  to  drink  some, 
from  that  place,  which  was  very  salt ;  we,  however,  filled  the  hudris, 
and  on  the  12th,  took  the  road  towards  the  south-east  by  east,  as  I 
wanted  to  go  to  see  a  place  named  El  Moele.  We  passed  a  great  quan- 
tity of  sand-banks  this  day,  and  slept  on  the  summit  of  one  of  them. 

On  the  15th,  after  noon,  we  reached  El  Moele,  hoping  to  find 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  433 

fresh  Mater,  but,  alas  !  we  were  disappointed.    The  drivers  made  the 
accide  with  salt  water,  and  we  eat  it.     In  this  place  I  found  the 
ruins  of  a  small  ancient  village,  and  the  remains  of  a  very  large 
Christian  church  and  convent.     Some  of  the  paintings  on  the  wall 
are  very  finely  preserved,  particularly  the   figures    of  the  twelve 
apostles  on  the  top  of  a  niche,  over  an  altar  ;  the  gold  is   still 
to  be  seen   in   several  parts,  and  their  faces  are  well  preserved. 
This  place  is  situated  at  the  end  of  a  long  tract  of  land,  which  had 
been  cultivated  in  former  times,  but  it  is  now  left  for  want  of  water. 
It  extends  more  than  ten  miles  from  west  to  east  towards  the  Nile. 
We  went  on  as  soon  as  we  had  refreshed  ourselves  with  salt  pudding 
and  salt  water  ;  for  as  we  were  disappointed  there,  our  next  resource 
was  the  Nile,  or  at  least  some  of  its  canals.     We  travelled  till  mid- 
night, and  arrived  within  twelve  miles  of  that  river.     We  suffered 
much  from  thirst  this  night :  though  we  were  so  near  the  water,  my 
mouth  had  formed  a  crust  of  salt  within  it,  so  that  I  could  scarcely 
articulate  a  word,  and  for  several  hours  I  felt  what  it  was  to  be 
truly  thirsty.     We  were  almost  all  in  great  distress.     At  last  one 
of  the  drivers  told  us  to  stop,  for  there  was  sweet  water  near 
us.     At  the  sound  of  these  words,  we  were  all  agreeably  surprised ; 
but  I  could  not  conceive  where  the  water  could  be,  as  we  were  in  a 
flat  plain,  covered  with  small  pebbles  and  stones.     He  had  kept  a 
small  skin  of  water  concealed  in  a  sack  all  the  way  from  the  Elloah, 
as  he  said  he  expected  this  would  happen.     I  do  not  know  that  in 
all  my  life  I  have  tasted  any  thing  more  sweet  and  pleasant  than 
that  water,  though  it  had  been  closed  up  in  a  skin  for  several  days. 
At  last,  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  before  the  sun,  we  arrived  in 
the  valley  of  the  Nile,  at  the  Bahar  Yousef:  on  the  evening  of  the 
same  day  we  reached  Sedmin,  the  place  where  I  engaged  my  guide  ; 
and  on  the  15th,  we  returned  to  Eenesoeuf,  where  I  embarked  for 
Cairo. 

3  K 


434  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

The  blow  I  received  from  the  fall  in  the  Elloah  did  not  get 
better  ;  it  continued  to  pain  me  much,  and  the  part  became  black, 
and  swelled.    I  found  the  consul,  Mr.  Salt,  had  returned  from  Upper 
Egypt.     The  plague  was  very  violent  in  Cairo  at  that  time  ;  but 
as  I  had  business  to  transact  with  the  consul,  I  went  at  night  to 
the  consulate,  and  having  arranged  my  affairs  with  him,  I  returned 
to  Eosetta,  where  I  arrived  on  the  23d,  in  hopes  to  end  the  business 
of  the  attack  in  Carnak,  as  soon  as  I  could,  and  set  off  for  Europe. 
But  I  was  totally  mistaken,  for  the  intrigue  displayed  in  this  affair 
is  almost  beyond  the  possibility  of  explaining.     Mr.  Drouetti,  in 
defence  of  the  two  assailants,  Lebulo  and  Bosignano,  his  compatriots, 
and  in  his  service,  said  that  Mr.  Salt  was  the  accuser ;  that  in  the 
account  I  sent  to  Mr.  Salt  I  had  declared  that  I  did  not  seek  for 
redress  :  and,  in  fact,  I  did  not,  as  I  was  well  aware  of  the  intrigues 
which  would  have  been  displayed  by  my  adversary  ;  but  as  the  affair 
had  been  brought  forward,  I  made  a  formal  declaration  against  the  two 
assailants,  Lebulo  and  Rosignano.     Mr.  Drouetti,  availing  himself 
of  the  influence  he  had  with  the  new  consul,  Mr.  Russel,  made  up  a 
tissue  of  stories  of  his  own  fabrication,  saying,  that  I  went  under  his 
window  to  stop  the  people  from  working ;  and  that  it  was  a  mere 
dispute,  and  not   a  premeditated  attack.      Mr.  Russel  wished  to 
have  this  affair  thrown  aside,  and  that  nothing  more  should  be  said  ; 
but  we  insisted  it  should  be  brought  forward,  and  upon  having  the 
two  assailants  brought  down  from   Thebes  to  Alexandria.     Mr. 
Drouetti  continued  to  put  himself  forward,  saying,  he  was  accused 
by  Mr.  Salt ;  but  a  declaration  made  by  me,  that  my  deposition  was 
against  the  two  assailants,  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  have  any  farther 
ground  to  prevent  our  proceeding  against  his  agents,  on  the  pretext 
that  he  was  accused  also. 

By  this  time,  the  hurt  I  received  from  the  fall  in  the  Elloah 
turned  out  to  be  troublesome,  and  had  confined  me  near  a  month 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sec.  485 

to  my  bed  in  Rosetta.  It  happened  that  Mr.  Eussel,  the  French 
consul,  was  to  return  to  France,  and  Mr.  Tednar  Divan,  the  vice- 
consul,  succeeded  him  provisionally.  This  good  sort  of  honest 
gentleman,  a  great  honour  to  his  country  as  a  justice  of  peace,  had 
been  in  Egypt  for  many  years ;  he  was  one  who  cut  a  conspicuous 
figure  in  the  days  of  the  Revolution  :  he  never  was  higher  than 
Cairo,  and  had  a  great  wish  to  go  up  to  Thebes.  He  never  had  a 
better  opportunity  offered  to  him  than  the  present,  as  he  was  to  be 
judge  in  the  above  cause.  He  answered  to  our  consuls,  that  if  I 
wished  to  proceed,  I  must  deposit  immediately  1200  dollars,  as  a 
security  to  defray  the  expenses  which  would  be  incurred  in  the 
examination  of  this  affair  ;  that  he  must  go  up  to  Thebes  accompanied 
with  Lowjars,  clerks,  stewards,  witnesses,  beats,  barges,  canjars,  &c. 
and  all  this  at  my  expense,  while  I  might  only  hope  for  redress.  I 
was  more  than  tired,  and  as  I  knew  the  people  we  had  to  deal  with, 
and  to  what  point  they  could  carry  their  intrigues,  1  had  no  hopes 
of  redress. 

Be  assured,  my  gentle  reader,  that  in  this  simple  sketch  of  this 
affair,  you  can  but  form  a  very  small  idea  of  what  passed,  for  I 
cannot  at  present  enter  too  far  into  the  explanation  of  it.  I  shall 
only  state  how  it  ended. 

The  two  assailants,  Lebulo  and  the  renegado  Eosignano,  Pied- 
montese,  were  obliged  to  come  to  Alexandria,  to  take  their  trials ; 
and  when  they  arrived,  were  so  sure  of  getting  off  in  some  way  or 
other,  that  they  not  only  confirmed  my  deposition,  but  boasted  of 
what  they  had  done.  Now  to  the  conclusion.  Their  protector, 
Mr.  Drouetti,  knew  very  well  how  he  should  get  out  when  the  affair 
came  to  the  extremity.  I  demanded  an  interview  with  him  before 
the  consul,  and  a  number  of  other  people,  to  have  an  explanation 
of  the  various  wrongs  he  had  done  to  me ;  but  all  to  no  purpose. 
I  insisted,  and  at  last  it  was  arranged  by  Mr.  Drouetti,  that  an 

3k2 


436  RESEARCHES  AND  OPERATIONS 

interview  should  take  place  with  only  the  British  vice-consul,  the 
French  consul,  him,  and  myself.  This  was  not  what  I  wanted ;  as 
I  thought  I  might  have  the  chance  to  expose  his  conduct  publicly ; 
but  he  took  care  not  to  consent  that  a  public  meeting  should  ever 
take  place.  Unfortunately,  on  my  first  landing  in  that  country,  I 
became  under  an  obligation  to  him  and  another  person,  particularly 
by  having  had  an  apartment  in  his  occaley  for  three  weeks,  during 
the  time  of  the  plague ;  and  through  the  said  obligation  it  was 
supposed  and  expected  I  should  sacrifice  my  principles,  which 
has  been  another  cause  of  so  much  hatred  against  me.  When  I 
requested  him  to  explain  before  the  two  consuls  what  cause  I  had 
given  him  to  induce  him  to  evince  such  animosity  against  me,  I 
believe  he  was  not  on  his  guard  at  that  moment ;  for  the  first  word 
he  expressed  related  to  my  wrong  proceeding  in  taking  the  obelisk 
from  the  island  of  Philce.  I  could  scarcely  believe  that  a  man,  who 
held  a  situation  once  as  a  consul,  should  forget  himself,  and  show  an 
open  inveteracy  against  an  individual,  merely  because  he  was  for- 
tunate in  his  undertakings.  I  must  acknowledge,  that  it  must  have 
been  provoking  to  a  man  like  Drouetti,  who  did  not  search  antiquity 
from  the  love  of  these  relics,  but  merely  for  interest,  and  whose 
views  were  directed  chiefly  to  the  British  and  French  Museums,  to 
see  a  stranger  accumulate  in  three  years  a  greater  and  far  superior 
collection  than  he  had  done  in  fifteen ;  and,  as  in  consequence  of 
this,  his  hopes  on  the  British  Museum  were  lost,  he  could  not 
restrain  his  passion.  The  conclusion  of  all  this  affair  was,  that 
after  a  nine  months'  struggle  to  bring  the  two  assailants  to  a  trial, 
the  French  consul  put  an  end  to  it  in  a  few  words,  by  only  saying, 
that  the  two  persons  accused  were  not  French  subjects,  but  Pied- 
montese ;  and  that  if  we  wanted  redress,  we  must  go  to  Turin  for 
it.  Thus  I  received  redress  for  that  shameful  outrage ;  but  I  was 
not  surprised,  as  I  fully  expected  it  would  end  in  such  a  manner. 


IN  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  Sic.  437 

J  should  not  intrude  such  a  narrative  on  the  patience  of  my 
reader  were  it  not  that,  even  at  Paris,  1  found  the  persecution  of 
Mr.  Drouetti  had  not  ceased.  On  my  arrival  in  that  capital,  I 
found  his  son-in-law  busied  with  the  public  prints,  who,  only  on 
the  assurance  of  his  assertion,  and  the  prejudice  already  excited 
against  me,  lor  serving  another  nation,  put  before  the  public  what- 
ever he  could  persuade  the  censors  to  pass,  and  what  he  could 
not,  he  publicly  asserted  in  a  most  atrocious  manner.  I  had  sent 
an  answer  to  these  publications  to  be  inserted  in  the  journals  of 
Paris,  but  such  were  the  intrigues  carried  on,  that  my  reply  was 
intercepted,  and  sent  to  Mr.  Drouetti,  in  Alexandria ;  consequently 
it  never  reached  the  hands  of  the  editors.  At  last,  having  put  an 
end  to  all  my  affairs  in  Egypt,  in  the  middle  of  September,  1819,  we 
embarked,  thank  God  !  for  Europe  :  not  that  I  disliked  the  country 
I  was  in,  for,  on  the  contrary,  I  have  reason  to  be  grateful ;  nor  do 
I  complain  of  the  Turks  or  Arabs  in  general,  but  of  some  Europeans 
who  are  in  that  country,  whose  conduct  and  mode  of  thinking  are  a 
disgrace  to  human  nature. 

After  an  absence  of  twenty  years  I  returned  into  the  bosom  of 
my  family,  from  whence  I  departed  for  England  ;  and  having  been 
persuaded  to  put  before  the  world  the  narrative  of  my  researches 
and  operations  in  these  countries,  I  hope  the  English  reader  will 
pardon  me  for  the  many  errors  I  have  committed  in  this  volume, 
particularly  in  the  English  phrases. 


MRS.  BELZOM  S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT, 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT 


OF  THE 


WOMEN  OF  EGYPT,  NUBIA,  AND  SYRIA. 


Having  heard  so  much  of  Turks  and  Arabs.  I  took  the  opportunity, 
while  in  Egypt,  to  observe  the  manners  of  the  women  in  that  country. 
During  my  stay  in  Soubra,  I  had  many  occasions  to  remark  them ;  but 
as  it  was  my  lot  to  ascend  the  Nile,  I  contrived  to  see  the  various  modes 
of  living  among  these  half  wild  people.  The  first  place  we  staid  at  for 
any  length  of  time  was  Old  Thebes ;  but  I  shall  pass  this,  as  I  mean  to 
speak  of  it  hereafter. 

On  our  arrival  at  Assouan  I  went  to  visit  the  women  of  the  Aga  of 
that  place.  I  was  met  at  the  door  by  himself,  his  wife,  his  sister,  her 
husband,  two  young  children,  three  old  women,  uglier  than  Macbeth's 
witches,  and  an  old  negro  slave.  I  entered  into  a  small  yard,  and  a  deal 
chair  was  brought  me.  The  Aga  went  out,  and  the  women  then  stood 
round  me,  while  the  husband  of  the  Aga's  sister  made  coffee,  and  pre- 
pared a  pipe,  which  he  presented  me,  not  allowing  the  women  to  toucli 
it.  He  durst  not  trust  them  with  any  thing,  as  he  knew  of  their  monkeyish 
tricks  whenever  he  turned  his  back.  He  seemed  to  pride  himself  much 
on  his  great  knowledge  of  the  world,  by  correcting  the  rough  curiosity  of 
the  women  when  they  attempted  to  examine  my  dress  too  rudely. 

3  L 


442  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

I  made  a  sign  I  wished  them  to  sit  down,  and  in  particular  that  the 
wife  should  take  coffee  with  me  :  but  he  treated  them  very  harshly,  made 
me  understand  that  coffee  would  be  too  good  for  them,  and  said  water 
was  good  enough ;  at  the  same  time  he  held  the  coffee-pot,  pressing  me 
to  drink  more :  on  my  refusing,  he  locked  it  up  in  a  small  room,  that  the 
women  might  not  drink  it.  By  this  time  I  had  been  so  much  among  the 
women  in  Egypt,  and  compelled  to  smoke,  that  I  could  easily  finish  my 
half  pipe.  After  having  smoked  for  some  time,  I  laid  it  down ;  one  of 
the  women  took  it  up,  and  began  to  smoke :  on  seeing  such  a  horrid  pro- 
fanation, the  man  took  it  from  her  with  violence,  and  was  going  to  beat 
her,  which  I  naturally  prevented  :  he  filled  it  again,  and  offered  it  to  me  ; 
but  as  I  did  not  wish  to  smoke  any  more,  he  went  and  carefully  locked 
it  up,  making  me  understand  when  I  wanted  it,  it  was  at  my  service. 

I  must  confess  I  felt  hurt  to  see  the  distinction  he  made,  but  after- 
wards I  saw  the  necessity  of  so  doing.  I  could  not  help  reflecting  on  the 
inconsistency  I  often  met  with  from  these  men :  they  treat  women  with 
the  greatest  contempt,  and  yet  they  always  behaved  to  me  not  only  with 
respect,  but  even  with  humility;  so  that  their  roughness  seems  not  di- 
rected towards  women  in  general ;  and  I  have  often  heard  them  remark 
to  me,  that  if  they  treated  these  women  as  I  was  treated,  they  would  be- 
come quite  unruly. 

A  short  time  afterwards  the  Aga  came  in,  and  inquiring  if  they 
had  served  me  with  coffee  and  a  pipe,  he  went  to  his  treasury  and 
brought  out  some  dirty  bruised  grapes,  as  a  great  treat,  which  he  pre- 
sented me,  the  poor  women  looking  with  wistful  eyes  towards  the  basket : 
in  the  impulse  of  the  moment  I  took  it  and  offered  them  to  his  wife,  and 
then  to  the  rest,  who  all  refused ;  and  though  they  did  not  dare  to  take 
any  themselves,  yet  they  pressed  me  to  eat,  and  seemed  astonished  when 
on  account  of  their  dirt  I  only  took  a  small  bunch.  I  kept  the  grapes  in 
my  hands  for  some  time  before  I  could  muster  resolution  to  eat  them.  I 
began  at  last,  one  by  one,  trying  to  wipe  them  in  an  handkerchief  without 
their  perceiving  it ;  but  I  was  mistaken,  for  their  eyes  were  fixed  upon 
me  very  closely :  an  old  woman  saw  what  I  was  doing,  and  ran  and  fetched 
me  a  burdock  of  water.  I  did  not  ask  for  water  at  first,  as,  not  knowing 
the  customs  of  these  people,  I  was  afraid  to  do  any  thing  to  offend  them. 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  443 

I  now  gave  my  little  present  of  beads  and  a  looking-glass,  which  con- 
tained a  drawer :  the  beads  pleased  them,  and  the  glass,  being  the  largest 
they  had  ever  seen,  and  made  to  stand  by  itself,  was  to  them  a  matter  of 
astonishment.  To  describe  the  tricks  the  women  played  with  it,  tearing 
it  from  each  other,  and  setting  it  in  any  way  but  the  right,  would  be 
thought  a  caricature.  I  at  first  attempted  to  show  them  the  right  way  to 
use  it,  but  there  is  no  other  method  with  those  women  than  letting  them 
have  their  own  way ;  and  I  believe  it  is  pretty  well  so  in  more  civilized 
countries,  or  I  am  much  mistaken.  When  the  wife  perceived  they  had 
got  the  glass  out  of  its  frame,  she  put  it  in  a  little  room,  and  locked  it 
up  with  the  beads  :  they  then  began  their  examination  of  my  dress,  as 
the  man  was  not  there,  which  I  had  reason  to  be  sorry  enough  for.  I  was 
then  in  European  clothes. 

The  first  thing  was  my  hat  and  hair ;  my  neckerchief  of  black  silk, 
which  they  coveted  much;  next  the  buttons  of  my  coat:  nothing  could 
persuade  them  but  money  was  hid  in  them.  I  opened  one,  to  con- 
vince them  of  the  contrary:  this  seemingly  did  not  satisfy  them,  for, 
judging  by  their  own  tricks,  they  thought  it  was  one  put  there  purposely 
to  deceive.  I  verily  believe,  if  the  man  had  not  now  come  in,  they  would 
have  been  very  troublesome.'  However  I  learnt  sufficient  in  this  my  first 
visit  to  guide  me  in  future,  and  to  put  on  a  greater  degree  of  consequence 
with  other  women  I  might  have  to  deal  with  ;  for  by  showing  myself 
free  with  them,  on  account  of  my  ignorance  of  their  character,  they 
would  take  advantage  of  it.  On  the  man  coming  in,  they  began  to  pre- 
pare to  cook  the  dinner  for  the  Aga,  which  consisted  of  a  dish  of  bamia 
boiled  in  mutton  broth,  poured  over  bread,  with  a  little  mutton,  and  some 
minced  meat,  mixed  up  with  rice  into  balls:  what  other  ingredients  might 
be  mixed  shall  by  me  be  nameless ;  the  cleanliness  of  this  preparation  I 
I  have  not  eloquence  to  describe :  the  horror  I  felt  at  the  idea  that  I 
should  be  obliged  to  eat  of  it,  was  more  than  my  English  stomach  could 
reconcile  at  that  moment.  They  brought  me  all  the  dishes  before  they 
took  them  out  to  the  Aga  and  Mr.  B.,  who  was  to  dine  with  him ;  the 
first  was  the  bamia,  which  I  refused,  but  I  took  a  piece  of  the  boiled 
mutton,  as  being  the  cleanest,  with  some  bread  :  that  would  not  do :  the 
wife  took  some  of  the  minced  meat  and  rice  in  her  hands,  and  insisted 
on  my  eating  it,  making  me  understand  it  was  the  best.     At  last  all  was 

3l2 


444  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

carried  to  the  Aga.  I  was  then  served  with  the  customary  coffee  and  pipe. 
The  house,  or  rather  stable,  consisted  of  four  walls,  which  had  the  sky  for 
its  ceiling,  inclosing  two  small  rooms  ;  one  in  which  the  Aga  used  to  keep 
his  treasure  locked,  such  as  coffee,  coffee-cups,  tobacco,  &c. ;  the  other 
was  the  wife's,  and  contained  all  their  great  wardrobe,  besides  bread, 
onions,  flour,  dhourra,  oil,  and  many  other  things  of  the  kind.  The  furni- 
ture consisted  of  water  jars,  sieves  to  clean  the  corn  and  sift  the  flour,  a 
few  earthen  pots  to  cook  in,  some  wooden  bowls  to  eat  out  of,  an  oven, 
and  some  burdocks  for  cooling  water,  a  small  coffee-pot,  and  old  mats  to 
lie  on.  I  took  my  leave,  giving  the  children  and  women  a  small  present 
of  money,  promising  to  call  and  see  them  on  my  return. 

Next  morning  another  wife  of  the  Aga  sent  me  word  she  would  be 
glad  to  see  me.  I  felt  little  inclination  to  go,  but  not  wishing  to  make 
any  distinction  between  them,  I  went,  and  found,  to  my  surprise,  a  very 
pretty  young  woman  :  she  lived  next  door  to  the  other,  who  got  upon  the 
walls  to  see  what  was  passing  between  us.  She  had  no  coffee  to  give  me, 
but  instead  presented  me  with  some  dates  and  dhourra  in  grain.  She 
seemed  much  afraid  of  the  other  wife.  Though  pretty  in  my  eyes,  she  was 
not  thought  so  by  her  own  people ;  the  other,  though  old,  was  considered 
the  greatest  beauty  in  Assouan,  on  account  of  her  being  so  extremely  fat. 
Their  hair  was  plaited  after  the  Nubian  custom,  adorned  with  a  few  gold 
ornaments,  with  plenty  of  stinking  raw  fat,  and  a  certain  bark  of  a  tree 
heat  in  powder  to  make  it  black  besides,  giving  a  horrid  perfume,  which 
they  consider  as  a  great  improvement  to  their  charms  :  it  is  not  the  same 
powder  they  use  in  blacking  the  eyebrows  and  eyelids.  I  made  her  a  pre- 
sent of  some  beads,  which  she  tried  to  hide,  and  I  wished  her  farewell. 

On  our  arrival  at  Ybsambul  I  did  not  go  on  shore.  The  wife  of 
Davoud  Cacheff  having  heard  there  was  a  Frank  woman  on  board,  sent  a 
young  negro  girl  on  purpose  to  see  what  kind  of  animal  I  was  :  she  was 
rather  shy  to  come  near  me  at  first,  but  the  men  telling  her  if  she  came 
into  the  boat  the  sette  would  give  her  a  bakshis,  she  came  with  re- 
luctance. I  gave  her  some  beads,  which  instantly  got  the  better  of  her 
fears,  and  she  observed  every  thing  on  board  minutely.  Having  kept  her 
eyes  fixed  upon  a  half-pint  basin,  she  jumped  up  and  ran  away ;  she  returned 
in  a  few  minutes,  bringing  me  some  dhourra  bread  and  dates,  telling  me 
her  mistress  hoped  I  would  not  refuse  to  send  her  that  beautiful  basin, 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  445 

pointing  to  it :  it  was  curious  to  see  the  anxiety  the  girl  showed,  for  fear 
I  should  not  give  it  to  her :  she  made  me  understand  her  mistress  had 
taken  all  the  beads  I  had  given  her.  I  gave  her  some  more,  with  the 
wonderful  basin  and  a  plate  like  it.  The  joy  the  poor  thing  felt  on  re- 
ceiving it  was  such,  that  in  her  hurry  to  get  out  of  the  boat  she  had  nearly 
broke  them. 

On  our  return  from  the  Shallal  we  stopped  at  the  village  Eshke  to 
transact  some  business  with  Hosseyn  CachefF.  I  remained  on  board  while 
Mr.  B.  went  to  visit  him ;  during  which  time  the  women  of  the  village  with 
their  children  came  running  towards  the  boat ;  but  some  men  belonging 
to  the  Cacheff  would  not  let  them  approach,  and  those  who  pressed 
forward  they  beat,  and  at  the  others  flung  stones :  on  my  seeing  this  I 
made  a  sign  to  the  women  to  approach,  and  seemed  in  a  great  passion 
with  the  men  for  beating  them :  those  that  could  come  near  me  kissed 
my  hand,  and  seemed  much  gratified  at  my  preventing  the  men  from 
beating  them  ;  they  were  much  pleased  at  the  whiteness  of  my  skin  and 
the  colour  of  my  hair.  To  those  that  had  but  few  ornaments  I  gave 
beads  for  themselves  and  children.  What  pleased  me  most  was,  they  did 
not  show  any  disposition  to  covetousness,  or  express  any  desire  that 
I  should  give  them  any  thing ;  they  seemed  perfectly  content  that  I 
allowed  them  to  see  me,  and  imitated  the  action  that  I  made  to  the 
men  not  to  beat  them.  Those  I  gave  beads  to  went  away;  I  did  not 
expect  to  see  them  again :  they  shortly  after  returned,  bringing  me  some 
dhourra  bread  and  dates,  finer  than  I  had  ever  seen  before  or  since.  I 
naturally  concluded  it  was  a  demand  for  another  bakshis.  According 
to  the  custom  of  the  Arab  women,  on  my  giving  them  some  beads,  they 
took  out  what  I  had  before  given  them,  and  kissing  my  hands,  begged 
me  to  accept  their  presents,  which  I  did ;  they  then  sent  for  more  dates. 
I  made  them  understand  I  gave  them  the  beads  only  as  remembrances  of 
me,  and  not  for  the  sake  of  getting  any  thing  in  return.  On  seeing  Mr.  B. 
and  some  of  the  CachefF's  men  at  a  distance,  they  set  up  a  great  shout, 
and  made  me  understand  they  must  go.  I  was  very  sorry  to  part  so  soon 
with  those  women :  their  manners  were  much  more  friendly  than  I  have 
ever  met  with  :  they  watched  the  boat  at  a  distance  till  we  left  the  shore. 

On  our  return  to  Ybsambul  I  went  to  visit  Davoud  Cacheff's  wife  : 
she  had  been  previously  informed  of  my  intended  visit,  and  accordingly 


{3 


446  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

put  herself  and  palace  in  order :  by  the  look  of  the  building  outside,  I 
certainly  expected  to  have  found  something  better  inside;  but  it  was  much 
the  same  as  that  of  Assouan.  On  entering,  I  found  her  sitting  on  black 
goats'  skins  sewed  together ;  I  perceived  this  was  considered  a  mark  of 
grandeur  that  was  not  used  in  common:  she  got  up,  and  after  saluting 
me  took  the  said  skin  and  placed  it  for  me  to  sit  on,  and  sat  on  the  earth 
herself.  I  would,  with  much  pleasure,  have  dispensed  with  the  skin.  She 
was  dressed  in  a  blue  cotton  gown  of  Lower  Egypt,  which  is  considered 
a  very  grand  dress  in  Nubia.  The  coffee  that  was  brought  me  was  some 
we  had  given  them  on  passing,  as  they  can  seldom  have  any :  they  use 
kerkadan,  a  small  grain,  the  produce  of  the  country,  of  which  I  have  a 
few.  Her  young  child  was  lying  on  a  skin  naked  :  it  was  twenty  days 
old :  but  she  scarcely  took  any  notice  of  it.  I  gave  her  some  different 
kinds  of  beads  ;  she  was  surprised  I  did  not  wear  any  myself.  I  informed 
her  as  well  as  I  could  that  I  was  dressed  as  a  man  ;  she  then  spoke  softly 
to  the  little  girl,  the  slave  before  mentioned,  who  came  and  sat  down  by 
me,  and  some  other  old  hags  she  had  sent  for :  the  girl  first  untied  my 
neckerchief,  examined  my  coat,  and  showed  as  much  curiosity  about  the 
buttons  as  my  friends  at  Assouan;  their  remarks  on  my  corsets,  which 
I  still  wore,  were  extremely  sensible.  I  made  them  understand  they 
belonged  to  the  female  part  of  my  dress,  not  knowing  the  custom  that 
is  come  up  since  I  left  Europe :  they  kept  crying  tayib,  tayib,  (good)  at 
every  thing  I  showed  them.  The  Nubian  women  in  general  I  found 
more  kind  and  civil,  and  did  not  show  that  invidious  jealousy  and  covet- 
ousness  the  Arab  women  possess.  After  satisfying  their  curiosity  about 
my  clothes,  she  ordered  the  women,  whom  she  had  sent  for  on  purpose,  to 
dance,  thinking  to  amuse  me ;  but  unfortunately  I  did  not  appreciate  this 
mark  of  respect  they  thought  they  were  paying  me.  Some  time  after  I 
got  up  and  bade  her  farewell,  though  she  wished  me  to  stay  longer. 

During  my  stay  there  a  young  woman  came  on  board,  begging  me  to 
give  her  some  beads,  showing  me  at  the  same  time  she  had  but  very  few, 
among  which  I  saw  she  had  two  or  three  antique  beads  of  cornelian, 
with  a  drop,  which  she  exchanged  with  me  for  other  beads,  and  went 
away  very  highly  pleased.  I  was  well  content  with  my  exchange,  and 
was  determined  to  go  among  the  women  at  every  place  we  might  stop  at. 
On  our  arrival  at  the  isle  of  Philce,  I,  according  to  custom,  left  Mr.  B.  and 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  447 

went  in  search  of  the  women.  The  first  I  met  was  a  pretty  young  female 
with  a  child  on  her  shoulder,  who  saluted  me  in  a  very  friendly  way,  and 
offered  to  show  me  about  the  place :  in  a  few  moments  after  we  were 
joined  by  an  old  woman  and  her  daughter,  a  very  pretty  girl ;  she  did  not 
seem  pleased  with  the  notice  I  took  of  the  other  young  woman,  to  whose 
child  I  had  given  some  beads  ;  but  I  have  reason  to  think  they  did  not 
know  I  was  a  woman,  for  they  had  not  seen  any  of  the  people  of  our 
boat,  and  as  they  had  seen  some  Europeans  some  months  before  in  the 
same  kind  of  dress,  it  is  possible  they  were  mistaken.  Seeing  the  other 
had  got  beads,  she  demanded  some  in  a  rough  manner ;  however  I  gave 
her  the  same  quantity  I  had  given  the  other  :  she  asked,  in  an  importunate 
manner,  for  more,  and  made  as  if  she  would  return  those  I  had  given 
her  if  I  did  not :  on  seeing  this  I  took  them  from  her,  and  gave  them 
with  some  more  to  the  first  young  woman.  She  got  in  a  passion,  and 
attempted  to  take  them  from  her,  which  I  prevented ;  she  then  begged 
me  more  civilly  to  give  her  some,  but  I  would  not  give  her  any  then, 
and  made  her  understand  I  would  not  be  compelled.  After  this  we  went 
to  see  the  different  temples ;  we  were  joined  by  other  women  belonging 
to  the  island.  After  seeing  all  the  buildings,  we  came  to  a  very  small 
temple,  wherein  this  same  lady  lived :  it  was  closed  by  a  door,  but  she 
offered  to  show  it  to  me.  She  took  me  by  the  hand  very  kindly,  and 
seemed  to  have  forgot  the  little  dispute  about  the  beads,  and  was  unlock- 
ing the  door,  when  my  good  friend  with  the  child  gave  me  a  squeeze  on 
the  right  arm,  which  was  next  to  her,  and  made  me  a  sign  not  to  go  in:  I 
concluded  she  had  heard  the  other  express  some  bad  intention  against 
me.  I  refused  to  go  in.  I  could  not  conceive  why  the  other  did  not 
wish  me  to  enter :  she  seemed  pleased  I  took  the  hint,  and  immediately 
showed  me  back  to  where  Mr.  B.  wras.  I  gave  her  and  another  good- 
natured  old  woman  a  small  bakshis,  and  I  passed  the  remainder  of  the 
day  at  the  Morada,  in  exchanging  beads  with  the  women.  Were  I  to 
mark  down  every  thing  that  I  saw,  or  that  happened  to  me,  it  would  be 
thought,  perhaps,  too  trivial. 

On  our  return  to  Assouan  we  had  to  procure  a  boat  to  take  us  to 
Luxor.  The  Aga  wished  me  to  go  and  stop  with  his  beautiful  fat  wife 
till  we  got  a  boat,  which  I  positively  refused,  preferring  rather  to  rest 
under  the  palm-trees  than  run  the  risk  of  being  more  disagreeably  accom- 


448  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

modated.  After  fixing  on  a  spot,  we  had  all  our  luggage  which  we  had 
brought  with  us,  and  likewise  all  that  which  we  had  left  with  the  Aga, 
particularly  a  large  mat,  which  I  was  happy  to  be  in  possession  of:  I  had 
it  immediately  spread  on  the  ground,  one  part  for  our  mattresses,  and  the 
other  part  to  eat  off.  I  was  flattering  myself  we  should  be  very  comforta- 
ble, and  get  a  little  rest  from  much  fatigue,  after  being  screwed  up  in 
a  small  boat  for  a  month.  After  all  was  prepared  for  the  night's 
lodging,  the  Aga  made  his  appearance,  followed  by  a  servant,  bringing 
a  tray  with  a  number  of  dishes,  which  he  said  he  had  prepared  for  us  and 
himself.  I  am  certain  it  was  the  first  time  the  Aga  in  his  life  had  dipped 
in  the  same  dish,  sour  sour,  together  with  a  woman.  After  our  feast 
was  over  he  wished  us  good  night.  We  tried  to  sleep,  but  to  no  purpose; 
we  were  much  tormented,  as  we  supposed,  by  ants  from  the  trees. 

The  next  morning  early  we  went  on  board  a  little  boat,  scarcely  large 
enough  to  hold  us ;  there  was  no  other,  and  we  were  in  a  great  hurry  to 
reach  Tebes.  The  large  mat  I  mentioned  before,  I  had  spread  over  the 
boat,  covered  with  other  small  ones,  to  shade  us  from  the  sun  :  but  woe 
unto  us !  the  wicked  Aga  had,  during  our  absence,  used  the  mat  all  the 
time  we  were  in  Nubia,  and  on  our  return  had  it  rolled  up  as  we  left  it, 
and  the  very  thing  we  had  been  guarding  so  perseveringly  against  befel 
us.  What  with  being  attacked  with  an  intermitting  fever,  without  medicine 
or  tea,  and  not  being  able  to  lay  my  mattress  straight,  besides  the  dreadful 
situation  the  miserable  mat  had  involved  us  in,  made  our  condition  very 
unpleasant  indeed. 

We  at  last  reached  Luxor.  Still  there  was  no  rest  for  the  soles  of 
our  feet.  There  was  no  boat  to  take  the  great  colossal  head  on  board  ; 
and,  notwithstanding  this  poor  accommodation,  we  were  obliged  to  set  off 
for  Gheneh.  We  had  no  sooner  arrived  there  than  we  were  obliged  to 
return,  as  there  was  a  large  boat  pressed  for  the  use  of  the  bashaw, 
wherein  some  Franks  had  taken  their  passage  as  far  as  Assouan,  which 
boat  was  promised  to  Mr.  B.  for  the  head.  We  tied  our  little  boat  to  the 
large  one.  We  had  come  down  well  enough  with  the  stream  with  our 
miserable  bark;  but  on  going  against  it  we  had  not  set  off  twenty  minutes 
when  the  Arabs  began  to  cry  out  most  dreadfully  :  in  a  moment  we  found 
the  boat  half  full  of  water.  Fortunately  the  large  boat,  perceiving  our 
danger,  ran  to  land  immediately,  and  we  went  on  board  of  it. 


MRS.  BELZONFS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  449 

The  next  morning  we  arrived  at  the  wished-for  haven.  Mr.  B.  had 
but  just  time  to  put  me  in  a  house,  where  he  was  informed  there  was  a 
room  on  the  top  for  me ;  he  was  then  obliged  to  sail  to  Esne,  to  secure 
the  boat. 

This  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  been  left  alone  with  the  Arabs 
without  an  interpreter  or  an  European,  with  about  twenty  Arab  words 
in  my  mouth.  What  they  denominated  a  room,  consisted  of  four  walls 
open  to  the  sky,  full  of  dates  put  to  dry  in  the  sun,  an  oven  in  one  corner, 
a  water  jar,  and  a  fire-place  of  three  bricks  for  a  pot  to  stand  on,  without 
a  chimney ;  and  this  place  not  to  myself,  as  it  was  the  apartment  of  the 
women.  I  never  in  my  life  felt  so  isolated  and  miserable,  in  a  violent 
fever,  exposed  to  the  burning  sun ;  besides  the  torment  to  have  all  the 
women  of  the  village  coming  out  of  curiosity  to  see  me.  At  last  I 
began  seriously  to  think  of  inclosing  one  corner  this  place  for  myself:  it 
fortunately  happened  to  be  market  day ;  I  sent  to  buy  some  mats,  and 
with  the  help  of  the  women  (I  was  going  to  say),  who  did  more  harm 
than  good,  I  made  me  a  comfortable  little  room,  inclosed  and  covered 
over  :  I  had  all  my  things  taken  in.  Beside  the  pleasure  to  be  by  myself, 
I  had  the  additional  luxury  of  two  ounces  of  tea,  which  I  had  received 
from  Cairo  by  return  of  a  courier.  I  felt  more  content  at  that  moment 
than  I  now  should  in  the  first  palace  in  Europe.  The  inmates  of  the 
other  part  were  an  old  woman,  four  daughters,  and  a  daughter-in-law, 
the  wife  of  the  master  of  the  house.  During  this  time  I  observed  a 
woman  bringing  some  meat :  they  made  me  understand  it  was  for  me ; 
but  on  account  of  the  fever  I  then  laboured  under,  I  did  not  mean  to 
eat  any:  I  made  me  some  tea,  and  retired  to  my  apartment,  where  I  could 
see  every  thing  that  passed,  and  from  whence  I  saw  the  daughter-in-law 
with  the  meat  between  her  teeth,  one  hand  holding  it  out,  and  the  other 
with  a  bad  knife,  cutting  or  rather  tearing  it  up  till  she  made  it  small 
enough  to  her  mind.  I  considered  it  very  lucky  I  was  not  hungry  or 
inclined  to  eat:  when  done,  the  poor  woman  brought  it,  and  begged  me  to 
eat :  I  told  her  as  well  as  I  could,  that  after  taking  the  tea  I  could  not 
take  any  thing  else.  I  pressed  her  to  eat,  which  she  did,  no  doubt  to  let 
me  see  there  was  not  anything  in  it  to  hurt  me  ;  I  broke  some  bread  with 
her  and  eat  a  little,  to  let  her  see  I  did  not  object  to  eat  with  her.  I  had 
just  began  to  enjoy  a  little  repose,  when  I  had  an  attack  of  ophthalmia. 

3  M 


450  MRS.  BELZONFS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

During  the  first  ten  days  a  virulent  humour  discharged  from  my  eyes:  I 
had  not  any  tiling  to  apply  to  them:  I  could  not  hear  the  light.  I  used  to 
filter  the  water  to  wash  them.  Whenever  the  women  saw  me  wash  them 
with  water  they  would  all  set  up  a  cry,  telling  me  it  was  very  bad,  and 
that  it  was  my  washing  them  every  morning  that  had  made  them  so.  In 
Nubia  they  had  the  same  idea. 

During  this  time   Mr.   B.   had  to  go  several  times  backwards  and 
forwards  to  Esne  and  Gheneh,  which  he  could  not  avoid.     I  must  do 
justice  to  the  Arab  women,  Mahometans  as  well  as  Christians,  for  their 
kind  treatment  of  me ;    there  was  not  a  day  I  was  not  visited  by  the 
women  of  Luxor,  Carnak,  and  other  villages  near  :  the  Christian  women, 
in  particular,  used  to  burn  certain  herbs  in  a  small  earthen  pot,  repeating 
prayers,   and  making  the  sign   of  the  cross  over  it;    the    Mahometan 
women  waiting  with  great  anxiety  to  get  possession  of  the  blessed  ashes 
that  might  be  left,  thinking  as  those  were  done  for  a  Christian  it  would 
have  its  full  virtue,  which,  if  done  for  them,  would  not  have  the  same 
effect :  for  example,  the  last  time  I  was  at  Luxor,  and  on  the  point  of 
leaving  it,  I  showed  to  some  of  the  men  by  putting  scorpions  in  oil  they 
would  have  a  remedy  against  the  bite ;  I  believe  oil  alone  would  be  as 
efficacious.     They  looked  at  me  and  shook  their  heads,  and  said  I  had 
some  other  secret  which  I  put  into  it.     When  I  went  in  my  little  room, 
the  second  year  I  was  there,  scarcely  a  night  passed  I  was  not  called  up 
by  people  who  had  been  bit ;  it  was  useless  my  sending  out  the  oil  to 
them,  for  unless  I  did  it  myself  they  took  it  in  their  heads  it  would  have 
no  effect.     I  make  these  remarks  only  to  show  the  incredulity  of  the 
Arabs ;  the  most  simple  things  are  by  them  kept  as  great  secrets,  which 
makes  them  pass  for  wise  and  learned  men.     Most  villages  have  one  of 
those  great  men  of  knowledge  ;  therefore  if  a  traveller  is  kind  enough  to 
tell  them  any  thing  to  be  serviceable,  they  will  not  believe  but  he  keeps 
the  great  secret  back,  as  they  are  accustomed  to  from  the  example  of  their 
own  wise  men. 

To  return  to  my  eyes ;  they  were  determined  not  to  be  cured  so 
easily:  blest  with  the  comforters  of  Job,  the  women  told  me  in  twenty 
days  perhaps  I  might  get  better ;  but  if  not  in  that  time,  it  would  go  on  for 
forty  days,  and  finished  by  crying  malash  (no  matter).  Instead  of  being 
better  at  the  end  of  twenty  days,  I  became  totally  blind.    I  cannot  describe 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  451 

the  agony  I  felt  on  the  occasion  :  I  thought  I  had  lost  my  sight  for  ever. 
My  situation  was  not  an  enviable  one  ;  the  women  still  crying  malash. 
The  last  stage  of  the  disorder  was  truly  dreadful;  the  eyelids  lost  their 
power,  I  could  not  lift  them  up :  this  was  another  blow.  The  women 
boiled  garlic  in  water  to  steam  my  eyes  over :  it  is  possible  it  might 
have  done  some  good,  though  I  did  not  feel  the  effect  immediately.  I 
found  their  experience  in  this  matter  perfectly  correct;  the  eyelids  began 
to  gain  strength,  and  by  degrees,  at  the  end  of  forty  days,  I  could  see  a 
little. 

By  this  time  Mr.  B.  had  got  the  colossal  head  on  board,  when  he  was 
attacked  with  the  same  disorder.  I  have  not  the  presumption  to  give  a 
fixed  opinion  on  what  it  proceeds  from,  I  only  remark  how  I  came  by  it. 
I  had  been  the  night  before  standing  sidewise  by  a  hole,  that  served 
for  a  window,  in  the  wall  of  my  apartment ;  I  felt  at  the  time  a 
draught  of  wind  to  my  eyes,  but  took  no  notice  of  it.  The  same  way 
Mr.  B.  got  his ;  he  received  a  blast  of  wind.  It  is  in  general  sup- 
posed it  proceeds  from  the  great  heat  or  sands,  which  the  air  is  at 
times  full  of;  it  may  be  so ;  I  speak  from  my  own  experience  only.  At 
this  time  we  had  been  in  Egypt  and  Nubia  eighteen  months,  ten  of 
which  we  resided  at  Subra,  a  short  distance  from  Cairo,  in  front  of  the 
Nile,  exposed  to  all  winds.  We  had  no  glass  windows,  therefore  if  the 
hot  winds  affected  the  eyes,  I  think  we  should  have  not  have  escaped  all 
this  time,  annoyed  and  exposed  as  we  had  been  in  Egypt  and  Nubia; 
at  Soubra,  in  the  time  of  the  camseens,  our  shutters  were  not  sufficient 
to  keep  the  sands  out.  Eor  hours  the  air  has  been  full  of  hot  sands,  so 
as  to  render  it  troublesome  to  breathe,  and  obliged  us  to  keep  our  eyes 
shut.  During  this  time  I  expected  every  day  we  should  be  affected  with 
this  disorder;  but  nothing  happened,  except  feeling  my  eyes  a  little 
uneasy  in  consequence  of  the  hot  winds.  I  used  to  wash  them,  which 
gave  me  instant  relief.  I  found  my  sight  much  clearer  at  that  period 
than  I  had  it  in  Europe.  The  great  perspiration,  in  my  simple  opinion, 
helps  to  clear  the  sight,  provided  it  does  not  go  into  the  eyes. 

After  getting  well  of  this  attack,  I  made  it  a  rule  to  wash  my  eyes 
daily  with  water  mixed  with  aqua  vita;,  which  strengthened  them  much  : 
if  ever  I  found  them  inclined  to  a  relapse,  I  made  the  wash  stronger,  and 
kept  washing  them  several  times  in  the  day:  it  never  failed  to  cure  them  ; 
though  I  have  never  had  my  eyes  so  strong  as  they  were  before. 

3m2 


452  MRS.  BELZONFS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

On  my  second  arrival  at  Philoc,  on  June  the  5th,  1817,  I  found  Mr. 
B.  and  some  countrymen  of  mine  preparing  to  depart  for  Ybsambul. 
Mr.  B.  felt  very  anxious  to  finish  opening  the  temple,  which  he  had 
began  on  our  first  visit  the  year  before,  when  there  was  not  one  European 
with  us.  My  wishes  were  to  go  also,  but  as  we  could  not  afford  to  incur 
the  expenses  of  a  boat  expressly  for  that  occasion,  I  was  obliged  to  re- 
main at  the  isle,  to  my  great  mortification,  and  left  that  country  without 
seeing  the  inside  of  that  interesting  temple,  which  had  occasioned  us  so 
much  anxiety  the  preceding  year.  I  still  live  in  hopes.  I  cannot  pass 
this  over  without  dwelling  a  little  on  the  partiality  of  some  of  my  country- 
men, who  on  their  visiting  Ybsambul,  some  time  afterwards,  gave  the  merit 
to  others,  and  not  to  the  right  person  ;  such  is  liberality  and  love  of  truth 
at  the  present  day.  Truth  must  be  sacrificed  by  some  travellers,  because 
they  are  absolutely  afraid  of  speaking,  for  fear  of  gaining  the  ill  will  of 
some  of  their  colleagues. 

I  was  informed  by  some  one  who  was  there,  that  the  boatman,  as 
well  as  the  servants  of  Mr.  Salt,  who  accompanied  Mr.  Beechey,  had  as 
much  merit  in  assisting  in  the  concern  as  the  other  gentlemen,  but  they 
were  not  English.  Had  I  been  there,  I  should  have  helped  to  remove 
the  sand  as  well  as  them,  as  far  as  my  strength  would  have  allowed  me  on 
such  an  occasion,  and  claimed  as  much  merit. 

During  Mr.  B.'s  absence,  I  took  up  my  residence  on  the  top  of  the 
temple  of  Osiris  in  that  island,  and  with  the  help  of  some  mud  walls,  I 
had  inclosed  two  comfortable  rooms.  It  was  rumoured  about  there  were 
thieves  on  the  island  opposite,  though  I  rather  think  it  was  a  trick  to  see 
what  effect  it  might  have  on  me.  I  thought  it  proper  to  guard  even 
against  those  Barabras  that  had  been  engaged  by  Mr.  B.  to  guard  me. 
I  had  a  servant  with  me  at  this  time  who  had  been  with  us  some  years : 
we  kept  the  fire-arms  always  ready,  and  made  our  guards  see  we  were  not 
afraid,  and  that  they  might  inform  their  friends  we  had  plenty  of  powder 
and  ammunition  for  their  reception.  It  is  well  known  that  the  people 
fear  you  when  they  know  you  do  not  fear  them.  They  knew  there  was 
a  deal  of  luggage  left  with  me,  and  saw  some  silver  spoons  and  forks  which 
were  brought  up  for  the  use  of  Mr.  Beechey ;  and  the  servant  used  to 
let  the  Arabs  and  Nubians  see  and  clean  them.  These  people,  when 
they  see  trunks  or  boxes  belonging  to  Europeans,  judge  they  are  full  of 
gold  and  silver,  particularly  after  having  seen  such  unnecessary  things  as 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  453 

spoons  and  forks  of  that  metal.  I  was  visited  every  day  by  the  women 
inhabiting  the  different  villages  on  the  other  side  of  the  Nile ;  they  used 
to  cross  on  a  ramouse,  bringing  sometimes  one  or  two  beads  of  cornelian 
antiques,  or  a  little  barley,  some  eggs  and  onions,  getting  in  exchange  glass 
beads  or  small  looking-glasses.  My  old  acquaintance  from  the  first  year 
came  to  see  me,  particularly  the  friendly  Zara,  with  the  good  old  woman, 
who  hailed  me  affectionately,  and  continued  so  to  the  last.  The  old  woman 
was  the  merriest  and  best  natured  simple  creature  I  ever  met  with :  she 
would  not  have  disgraced  England  itself;  she  used  to  make  many  sensible 
remarks  upon  our  customs.  Her  husband  and  two  fine  lads  were  killed 
in  a  battle  with  another  tribe,  mentioned  by  our  much  esteemed  friend 
Burckhardt,  page  the  6th,  account  of  Philce.  One  day,  on  seeing  some  of 
our  coarse  cloth,  she,  in  a  very  humble  tone,  asked  me,  if  I  had  got  an  old 
piece  of  the  same  kind  to  put  on  her  head,  as  she  had  not  got  any  thing,  she 
should  be  very  happy.  I  told  her  I  would  look  if  I  possessed  such  a  thing, 
for  I  made  it  a  rule,  from  dear  bought  experience,  never  to  give  any  thing 
on  the  moment  it  was  asked  for :  on  the  next  day  I  gave  her  a  piece.  I 
cannot  describe  the  joy  she  expressed  on  receiving  this  present ;  but  after 
examining  it  some  time,  she  said  it  was  too  clean,  and  would  spoil  her 
head,  and  she  must  make  it  dirty  before  she  could  use  it.  The  reason 
she  gave  was,  that  being  clean  it  would  draw  all  the  grease  out  of  her 
hair,  and  particularly  as  all  kind  of  fat,  butter  or  oil,  was  very  scarce  and 
hard  to  be  got :  besides  the  beauty  the  glitter  of  the  fat  gives,  it  preserves 
the  head  against  the  burning  heat  of  the  sun.  She  wanted  to  go  with  me 
to  my  bellad,  meaning  my  village  or  country  (they  knew  of  no  other  town 
besides  Stambul  or  Mesr),  telling  me  she  would  wear  Franks  clothes,  or 
any  thing  I  would  give  her,  showing  me  by  pantomime  she  would  wash 
my  feet  and  clothes,  make  my  bread,  cook  for  me,  and  any  thing  else  I 
might  want ;  the  only  stipulation  she  made  was,  that  I  must  give  her 
wheat  bread,  and  not  dhourra.  If  she  could  have  spoken  Arabic  I 
should  have  taken  her  :  they  certainly  have  not  the  prejudice  of  the  Arab 
women. 

One  day  some  of  my  people  brought  twelve  fowls ;  a  native  told 
me  to  look  at  them,  for  they  were  not  fit  to  eat,  as  they  were  full  of 
vermin,  and  the  skins  sore,  desiring  me  not  to  tell  who  told  me.  On  find- 
ing what  he  said  was  true,  I  desired  to  know  who  they  were  brought 


454  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

from ;  but  that  was  a  secret  none  dared  to  tell  me.  All  that  I  could  find 
out  was,  that  ten  had  been  bought  from  a  woman  from  the  opposite 
island,  and  two  from  the  she  devil,  as  they  style  her,  inhabiting  the  small 
temple,  whom  I  had  affronted  on  my  first  visit  the  year  before  :  the  women 
begged  me  not  to  have  any  thing  to  do  with  her,  calling  her  a  fright,  and 
many  other  names  ;  but  as  I  had  a  reason  to  suppose  the  whole  was  brought 
from  her,  I  was  determined  not  to  let  such  an  imposition  pass,  as  I  had  longer 
to  stay  in  the  island  than  they  knew  of.  The  women  I  could  perceive  did 
not  give  me  the  above  advice  in  earnest,  as  she  had  made  them  all  tremble 
at  her.  I  made  a  boy,  a  native  of  the  place,  and  who  had  been  with  us  on 
our  first  voyage,  pick  out  the  two  fowls  and  carry  them  back,  and  desire 
her  to  give  me  two  better,  or  send  the  money  back  :  the  women  laughed, 
and  said  I  should  never  get  one  or  the  other;  which  made  me  more 
determined.  The  next  day  I  went  myself  with  the  boy  and  an  old  man  : 
the  boy  told  me  to  take  my  pistols,  or  she  might  do  something  bad  to 
me ;  I  took  them,  and  put  them  under  my  coat,  not  on  account  of  her,  but  it 
was  well  for  those  who  were  with  me  to  know  I  had  such  a  thing.  When 
she  saw  me  coming  she  called  her  mother,  thinking  to  frighten  me ;  the 
other  woman  stood  at  a  respectable  distance,  not  daring  to  approach.  I 
made  the  old  man  demand  better  fowls  or  money  ;  the  old  woman  abused 
me  much,  with  her  daughter ;  I  thought  it  then  time  to  speak  in  a  com- 
manding tone.  I  went  up  to  them,  and  insisted  they  should  speak  no  more. 
The  mother,  on  seeing  I  was  not  to  be  frightened,  began  to  cry  out  dread- 
fully, and  beat  herself,  and  fling  dirt  over  her  head,  and  exclaim  they  were 
lost.  I  left  them,  threatening  vengeance  against  them  if  they  did  not 
send  me  the  money  or  fowls.  Seeing  she  could  not  succeed  in  mastering 
me,  the  next  morning  she  sent  me  word  she  wished  to  be  in  peace  with 
me,  and  that  she  would  send  me  two  better  fowls.  I  sent  her  wrord  she 
must  bring  them  herself.  She  came  with  her  mother  with  two  better 
fowls,  kissed  my  hands,  and  begged  me  not  to  think  any  more  of  it.  I 
told  her  it  was  not  the  fowls  or  money  I  wanted,  but  that  I  would  not 
let  any  one  impose  on  me  :  I  then  made  her  a  present  of  the  two 
fowls  she  had  brought,  and  gave  her  some  beads.  I  then  called  in  my 
friendly  Zara,  and  gave  her  the  other  ten  fowls :  she  had  never  been  so 
rich  in  her  life.  She  said  the  only  food  herself,  her  husband,  and  two 
children,  had  daily,  was  a  small  bowl  of  dhourra,  boiled  in  the  morning, 


MBS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  455 

with  a  little  bread  of  that  grain,  and  the  same  at  night.  She  said  she 
could  clean  the  fowls  by  washing  them  in  salt-water.  Peace  was  once 
more  restored  in  the  island,  to  the  no  small  gratification  of  the  rest  of  the 
women,  to  see  I  had  conquered  the  great  devil.  She  used  to  beat  their 
children  whenever  she  could  catch  them,  because  she  had  none  herself. 

One  thing  I  must  observe,  which  I  did  not  think  to  mention,  till  on 
reading  in  page  146  of  Burckhardt's  account  of  Nubia,  of  the  dreadful 
death  the  Nubians  give  their  wives.  When  the  women  used  to  recount 
me  many  particulars  concerning  this  woman,  I  expressed  my  astonish- 
ment, as  she  used  them  so  ill  at  times,  that  they  did  not  tell  her  husband : 
the  Arab  women  would  have  done  so,  besides  exaggerating  the  facts. 
The  answer  a  young  Barabra  gave  me  was  this,  that  if  they  did,  the 
husband  would  cut  her  to  pieces  and  fling  her  in  the  Nile ;  besides,  the 
husbands  of  the  other  women  would  beat  them  for  so  doing.  My  idea 
on  the  subject  is,  that  it  is  not  so  much  from  humanity  as  from  the  dread 
of  the  consequences  of  such  quarrels  between  the  different  tribes,  that 
these  women  have  learnt  to  be  prudent. 

The  trifling  anecdote  of  the  fowls  is,  indeed,  too  insignificant  to  have 
been  recounted ;  but  as  a  countryman  of  mine  has  already  made  himself 
very  liberal  on  this  subject,  whose  merit  lies  in  low  buffoonery,  carica- 
turing, and  imitating, like  a  monkey,  every  one  he  has  ever  been  in  company 
with,  no  matter  whether  friends  or  foes,  particularly  against  unprotected 
females  and  old  men,  without  much  regard  to  common  decorum  or  delicacy, 
I  take  the  present  occasion  of  noticing  his  behaviour.  I,  indeed,  pity,  and 
feel  contempt  for  men  who  daily  amuse  themselves  by  slandering  any 
one  whom  their  wanton  malice  may  dislike  :  was  my  soul  as  illiberal  as 
that  of  some  of  those  kind  of  gentlemen,  I  have  sufficient  scope  to  return 
the  compliment  with  interest.  I  shall  say  with  the  Arab  Ma-lash,  every 
thing  will  find  its  own  level. 

Mr.  B.  having  returned  from  Ybsambul,  we  departed  a  few  days  after- 
wards for  Luxor.  On  my  return  to  that  place  I  went  to  my  old  habita- 
tion, which  they  had  inclosed  with  brick  walls.  Unfortunately  the  hus- 
band had  taken  another  wife  during  my  absence,  and  had  built  up  an 
apartment  for  her,  attached  to  the  walls  of  our  house,  whose  top  was 
covered  with  mats.  The  first  wife  was  first  cousin  to  her  husband,  and 
his  sister  was  married  to  her  brother :  on  account  of  this  double  tie,  she 


456  MRS.  BELZONrS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

took  those  advantages  that  are  not  allowed  to  women  in  general.  There 
was  a  continual  disturbance  every  day ;  and  when  her  husband  used  to 
threaten  to  send  her  home,  her  brother  sent  him  word,  if  he  sent  back  his 
wife,  he  would  do  the  same  by  him.  The  old  mother-in-law,  who  was 
her  aunt,  of  course  sided  privately  with  her  niece,  not  on  account  of  any 
love  for  her,  but  to  prevent  her  own  daughter  from  being  sent  home : 
unfortunately  all  her  hopes  rested  upon  me.  The  Christians  in  the  village 
had  made  much  mischief,  and  had  put  her  up  to  resist  the  other  wife  j 
and  upon  my  arrival,  she  thought  I  would  head  the  concern,  and  used  to 
tell  her  husband  when  the  cette  arrived,  meaning  me,  that  she  would  not 
allow  him  to  keep  his  new  wife  :  as  she  knew  I  was  her  friend,  and  as  the 
Christian  women  imprudently  meddled  with  Mahometan  customs,  she 
thought  I  should  do  the  same.  All  I  could  or  would  do  was  to  give  her 
good  advice,  and  point  out  to  her  she  was  acting  wrong,  and  contrary  to 
her  laws ;  and  according  to  these  laws,  a  man  may  take  four  wives  if  he 
can  support  them,  which  her  husband  could,  therefore  he  might  marry 
two  more :  and  if  he  did  not  send  her  home,  as  she  had  no  children,  at 
least  as  good  as  none,  as  she  only  had  a  female  child  of  four  years  old,  he 
might  make  her  the  last,  and  treat  her  as  a  slave.  Though  it  is  the 
custom  from  time  immemorial  to  marry  four  wives,  yet  they  hate  each 
other  most  cordially.  The  sly,  Avicked  tricks  they  play,  and  the  hatred 
that  grows  up  between  the  different  children,  continually  employ  their 
thoughts.  The  husband  seldom  knows  of  the  tricks  they  play  among 
themselves :  they  are  obliged  to  show  a  good  humour  before  him ;  that 
is,  if  he  is  a  husband  who  knows  how  to  govern  his  family  properly.  I 
had  felt  much  friendship  for  this  woman,  on  account  of  the  attention  I 
received  from  her  the  first  year,  when  my  eyes  were  bad,  and  out  of 
kindness  to  her  did  not  see  the  new  wife,  but  tried  all  I  could  to  make 
peace  between  them  ;  and  often  when  all  the  women  of  the  village  went 
out  to  any  feast,  and  she  was  locked  in,  on  account  of  quarrelling  with 
her,  I  used  to  intercede  with  her  husband  that  she  might  go  out  with  his 
mother  and  sisters :  when  she  got  permission,  she  lamented  and  said  she 
had  got  no  money  like  the  rest  of  the  women:  I  would  then  give  her 
some.  When  I  tried  to  reconcile  her  to  her  situation,  she  would  say, 
But  your  men  have  got  but  one  wife.  I  told  her  our  laws  and  religion 
did  not  permit  them  to  have  more. 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  457 

It  was  customary  with  me  every  evening  to  ride  to  Carnak :  I  was 
certain  on  coming  home  to  see  the  house  in  the  greatest  confusion. 
She  had  a  great  party  in  her  favour,  particularly  all  the  Christian 
Avomen,  not  out  of  iove  or  friendship,  but  because  the  other  wife  was 
a  native  of  Carnak.  The  people  of  Carnak  and  Luxor  are  never 
friendly.  The  sisters,  who  had  instigated  their  brother  originally  to 
take  another  wife  because  of  her  arrogance  to  them,  enjoyed  the  mor- 
tification she  now  suffered.  One  evening  on  coming  home  I  found 
the  yard  full  of  people,  and  flinging  stones,  bricks,  and  any  thing  they 
could  catch  hold  of,  into  the  apartment  of  the  new  wife.  On  my  en- 
tering they  were  in  hopes  I  should  interfere.  She  never  would  persuade 
herself  but  I  would  join  her  in  so  laudable  a  concern  ;  but  when  she  was 
convinced  I  would  not  head  her  party,  as  I  told  her  the  English  never 
interfered  with  the  laws  or  customs  of  others,  she  got  outrageous  against 
me  in  her  heart,  and  did  me  all  the  petty  tricks  an  Arab  woman  is  capable 
of  5  such  as  coming  up  at  night  softly  and  spoiling  the  jar  of  water  which 
was  always  prepared  at  night  to  clear  for  the  next  day,  and  then  making  a 
noise  to  prevent  my  sleeping.  One  night  we  saw  her  set  fire  to  the  mats 
that  covered  the  house  of  the  other  wife.  One  morning  I  am  certain  she 
put  something  into  the  water  she  used  to  prepare  for  my  breakfast,  for  I 
was  seized  with  a  violent  sickness :  I  took  some  medicine,  though  it  left  me 
very  weak  for  some  days.  At  that  moment  I  did  not  suspect  her,  but  I  soon 
had  reason  to  observe  the  change  in  her  conduct.  About  a  fortnight  after- 
wards I  was  served  the  same.  After  this  time  I  took  care  she  should 
not  do  any  thing  more  for  me,  and  we  soon  after  went  to  reside  at  Beban  el 
Malook,  in  the  entrance  of  one  of  the  tombs  of  the  kings.  When  I  men- 
tioned the  subject  to  Scotch  Osman,  he  said  he  was  certain  she  had  given 
me  something  to  injure  my  health,  as  he  said  they  were  full  of  those 
tricks  to  each  other.  Shortly  after,  we  left  this  place,  and  departed  for 
Cairo. 

When  we  arrived  there,  I  found  it  impossible  to  remain  in 
that  place ;  and  go  again  to  Thebes  I  would  not.  I  persuaded  Mr. 
B.  to  let  me  visit  the  Holy  Land.  It  was  that  idea  only  that  had 
brought  me  first  into  Egypt ;  and  as  I  knew  circumstances  might  pre- 
vent him  from  his  intended  visit  to  that  place,  and  that  I  should  be 
obliged  likewise  to  depart  without  seeing   it,   I  took  this  opportunity. 

3a 


458  MRS.  BELZONFS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

I  accordingly  left  Cairo  on  the  5th  of  January,  1818,  and  arrived  at 
Damietta  on  the  10th,  where  I  was  detained  two  months,  through  the 
negligence   of  our   agent.     One   month   I  staid   in   his   house,   in  the 
apartments  of  his  mother,  waiting  with  the  utmost  anxiety  to  hear  if 
there  was  water  enough  to  take  the  ships  out  of  the  Bogos,  when,  one 
day  being  on  the  top  of  the  house,  I  saw  a  ship  go  out.     It  was  vexatious 
to  see  myself  detained  there  when  other  ships  could  go  out.     My  passage 
had  been  taken  on  board  of  a  ship  the  day  after  I  had  arrived  there,  with 
the  promise  of  being  the  first  to  set  off.     I  had  then  waited  a  month. 
I  insisted  on  going  on  board,  which  I  did  that  night;    and,  with  the 
continual  hopes  of  daily  going,  I  was  detained  another  month.     At  last 
we  departed,  and  arrived  in  Jaffa  on  the  9th  of  March ;    and  left  there 
on  the  11th  for  Rama,  where  we  slept,  and  arrived  in  Jerusalem  on  the 
12th  of  March.     I  shall  never  forget  the  effect  the  first  sight  of  the 
walls  of  that  memorable  place  had  on  me.     I  arrived  just  in  time  to 
witness  the  Catholic  ceremony  that  took  place  the  three  last  days  of 
Passion  week,  inside  of  the  building  that  covers  the  holy  sepulchre.     My 
much  esteemed  and  respected  countryman,  Maundrell,  has  given  so  exact 
and  minute  an  account,  that  I  feel  myself  incapable  of  giving  a  better. 

On  the  first  of  May  I  went  to  the  Jordan.  A  Christian  merchant  of 
Jerusalem,  a  relation  of  our  consul  at  Jaffa,  provided  me  a  mule  and  a 
driver  he  could  depend  upon,  to  accompany  me.  I  set  off  some  time 
before  the  governor  who  goes  to  protect  the  pilgrims :  they  were  all  on 
the  sides  of  the  road,  waiting  for  the  signal  of  departure,  on  my  arrival  at 
the  boundaries,  where  none  dare  go  beyond.  A  black  man  who  was  put  as 
guard  there,  on  seeing  me  ride  on,  galloped  furiously  up  to  me,  gave  my 
poor  mule  a  blow,  and  desired  me  to  stop.  On  his  trying  to  take  hold  of 
the  mule,  I  aimed  a  blow  at  him  with  a  corbatch,  which  he  avoided,  bran- 
dishing his  sword  at  me.  The  mule  then  stopped,  and  I  slipt  off,  being 
determined  to  be  as  obstinate.  I  dared  him  to  touch  me,  and  walked  on, 
leaving  both  mule  and  driver  behind,  who  was  much  frightened  at  my 
insisting  to  go  on.  When  outside  of  the  boundaries  I  looked  back,  and, 
to  my  surprise,  saw  the  man  driving  the  mule  after  me. 

My  wish  was  to  arrive  in  the  valley  of  Jericho  before  the  great 
concourse  of  pilgrims.  As  I  had  no  one  but  myself  to  depend  upon,  I 
wished  to  procure  a  spot  where  I  could  be  out  of  the  crowd;  and,  without 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  459 

putting  myself  under  obligation  to  any  one,  I  just  arrived  in  time  to  take 
possession  of  two  bushes.  I  made  the  man  cover  them  over  with  Arab 
shawls  to  shade  me  from  the  sun,  and  remained  there  till  our  departure 
for  the  Jordan.  During  the  afternoon,  an  European  traveller  we  had 
known  in  Egypt,  in  his  strolling  about  encountered  me,  and  politely 
offered  to  render  me  any  services  he  could  in  that  place ;  but  in  those 
journeys  I  made  it  an  invariable  rule  to  be  independent  of  every  one, 
that  it  might  not  be  said,  if  it  had  not  been  for  me  or  for  us,  she  could  not 
have  gone  on ;  and  indeed  as  it  was,  I  could  not  escape  petty  hints  from 
a  countryman  of  mine,  who,  "  for  his  part,  had  no  notion  of  people  being 
so  romantic  as  to  travel  about,  who  had  no  fortune  to  support  it." 

The  European  traveller  whom  I  mentioned  before  informed  the 
English  party  where  I  was,  some  of  whom  kindly  condescended  to  visit 
me,  and  invited  me  to  their  tent,  which  I  justly  refused  ;  and  though  the 
only  European  woman  there,  I  was  better  where  I  was  than  expose  myself 
to  receive  some  polite  insults,  which  some  of  the  party  were  so  well 
versed  in  towards  women.  Yet  it  is  true  I  felt  a  little  cowardly  as  the 
night  drew  on. 

The  gentleman  who  had  engaged  my  servant,  who  wanted  to  return  to 
England,  was  good  enough  to  permit  him  to  come  and  guard  me  till  we 
should  depart.  I  felt  a  little  fear,  though  I  took  care  no  one  should  know  it, 
particularly  when  the  pilgrims  were  made  to  enter  the  camp,  which  I  did 
not,  as  I  had  nowhere  to  go  to.  It  is  true  I  might  have  joined  some  Syrian 
women  ;  but  the  next  day  I  should  have  had  no  peace,  for  they  would  have 
spread  it  about  among  the  pilgrims  I  was  a  woman.  As  I  had  now  some 
one  that  could  answer  the  guards  as  they  passed,  I  had  nothing  more  to 
fear  ;  for  I  never  could  have  got  the  poor  driver  that  was  with  me  to  have 
courage  enough  to  answer  them.  Some  time  before  daylight  I  mounted 
my  mule,  as  all  the  pilgrims  were  in  motion.  We  all  set  off.  I  find  it 
impossible  to  describe  the  scene.  Camels,  horses,  mules,  donkeys,  mixed 
in  confusion  together ;  women  and  children,  screaming  and  crying,  hung 
at  the  sides  of  the  camels  in  baskets.  I  was  in  danger  of  being  knocked 
off"  my  mule  by  their  coming  in  contact  with  me.  All  my  man  did  was 
to  drive  my  mule,  no  matter  for  what  was  on  it,  sometimes  in  profound 
darkness,  at  other  moments  the  glare  from  the  fire-pots  showed  me  the 
confusion  of  the  scene,  the  negro  guards  flying  about  to  keep  us  together. 

3  n  2 


460  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

We  arrived  at  the  Jordan  by  break  of  day.     The  principal  part  of  the 
pilgrims  were  Greeks.     They  all  took  with  them  a  new  gown,  in  which 
they  bathe  in  the  Jordan  :  they  immediately  after  fold  it  up,  wet  as  it  is  ; 
and  on  their  return  to  the  valley  of  Jericho,  they  open  and  dry  it :  when 
arrived  at  Jerusalem,  they  take  some  wax  candles  that  were  lighted  at 
the  holy  fire  that  descended  from  Heaven  into  the  Holy  Sepulchre  on  a 
feast-day  of  theirs,  and  make  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  the  said  gown  with 
the  wicks  of  the  above  candles :  this  gown  is  to  be  kept  till  they  die,  and  in  it 
they  are  to  be  buried.     Hell  has  no  power  over  those  who  are  thus  attired. 
After  resting  some  time  on  our  return  to  the  valley,  we  once  more 
set  off  for  Jerusalem,  where  we  arrived  late  at  night,  all  fatigued  enough. 
A  noble  family  then  at  Jerusalem,  from  whom  I  received  much  polite- 
ness, hearing  I  meant  to  go  to  Nazareth  some  time  before  I  quitted  the 
Holy  Land,  as  they  were  going  there,  kindly  invited  me  to  join  theiv 
party ;  which  opportunity  I  gladly  embraced.     Being  a  good  many  in 
number,  they  took  the  most  interesting  roads  mentioned  in  Scripture, 
and  which  road  is  not  always  safe  for  two  or  three  to  pass.     We  left  Je- 
rusalem on  the  Sth  of  May,  1818,  and  arrived  at  Nazareth  on  the  14th, 
where  I  remained. 

It  was  my  intention  to  have  remained  there  some  time,  but  the 
Christian  Arabs  employed  in  the  convent  had  reported  in  the  village  I 
was  some  great  person  in  disguise.  Accordingly,  I  never  could  go  out 
without  being  followed  by  a  concourse  of  women  and  children.  Having 
seen  every  thing  that  was  interesting  in  that  place,  I  left  them  eight  days 
after.  The  superior  engaged  a  Christian  Mokaro  to  go  with  me.  I  left 
Nazareth  on  Friday,  22nd  of  May,  in  the  evening,  with  the  intention  of 
travelling  all  night,  on  account  of  the  heat,  and  particularly  as  I  was 
alone,  to  avoid  meeting  any  Arab  tribes.  By  the  time  the  sun  was  hid 
we  arrived  at  some  long  black  tents  belonging  to  the  shepherds  of  the 
Bashaw  of  Acre :  they,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  world,  judging 
me  wrongly  by  my  dress,  took  me  into  the  tent  of  the  men ;  that  of  the 
women  joined  this,  but  none  dared  to  make  their  appearance.  I  was 
presented  with  coffee  and  fresh  milk  from  the  goats.  They  killed  a  kid. 
We  eat  with  a  friendly  hospitality  together,  unknown  in  Europe.  I  am 
entirely  indebted  to  the  great  cowardice  of  my  Mokaro  for  keeping  the 
secret  of  my  being  a  woman.     He  begged  of  me  to  remain  there  till 


MRS.  BELZONTS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  461 

twelve  o'clock,  as  being  a  safer  hour  to  depart.  Having  consented,  I  put 
my  portmanteau  under  my  head,  and  covering  myself  up  in  my  burnoose, 
I  composed  myself  to  sleep  ;  but  the  fleas,  to  welcome  my  arrival,  were 
determined  I  should  not.  Unfortunately  for  me,  they  did  not  prevent  my 
Mokaro  from  sleeping.  Having  awoke  him,  I  desired  him  to  prepare  for 
departure,  which  he  positively  refused ;  alleging,  by  way  of  excuse,  that 
on  our  passing  the  different  tents,  though  the  people  might  be  asleep,  the 
dogs  were  not,  and  would  fly  out  upon  us,  and  a  great  many  more  lies. 
Finding  I  could  not  prevail,  patience  was  my  only  remedy:  with  much 
persuasion,  an  hour  before  daybreak  on  the  23d,  we  departed.  I  never 
suffered  in  Egypt  or  Nubia  such  a  dreadful  unwholesome  heat  as  on  this 
day. 

I  could  enter  into  many  particulars ;  such  as,  at  daybreak  meeting 
with  a  camp  of  Arabs  in  their  tents,  all  busily  employed  in  preparing 
cheese,  sour-milk,  and  gista,  or  clouted  cream ;  women  churning  butter 
in  the  skins  of  goats,  hung  up  in  the  middle  of  three  poles,  which  they 
kept  shaking.  Going  on,  we  met  with  a  number  of  wild-looking  Arabs  ; 
which  not  only  frightened  my  poor  Mokaro,  but  would  have  frightened 
Munchausen  himself,  had  he  been  there ;  and  I  must  confess,  I  did  not 
feel  very  courageous  myself.  We  arrived,  in  the  evening,  at  the  most 
wretched,  miserable  Turkish  village  I  had  ever  met  with.  I  would  not 
go  to  the  Shiek,  which  is  customary,  as  I  knew  my  Mokaro  would 
have  told  him  who  I  was.  We  went  to  an  enclosed  yard  belonging  to 
some  poor  miserable  creatures,  the  most  wretched  in  Egypt ;  where,  a 
princess,  compared  to  the  people  of  this  village,  I  fixed  upon  a  spot,  and 
was  in  hopes  of  resting  a  little  after  the  miserable  night  and  day  I  had 
passed.  During  the  time  I  was  eating  some  bread  and  cucumber,  the 
only  thing  I  could  obtain,  a  number  of  men,  women,  and  children  came, 
and  said  I  was  passing  that  road  to  avoid  paying  the  tribute  that 
Christians  are  liable  to.  I  had  left  my  firman  at  Jerusalem,  and  I  began 
to  consider  what  to  do,  as  the  Europeans  are  exempted  from  paying.  I 
was  determined  not  to  give  any  thing.  On  my  desiring  my  Mokaro 
to  tell  the  people  to  go  away,  that  they  had  no  right  to  demand  any  thing 
from  me,  instead  of  telling  them  so,  he  begged  me  to  give  the  people 
something,  or,  he  said,  it  would  be  bad  for  us.  This  made  me  nearly 
lose  patience,  and  I  saw  into  the  trick.     Having  hinted  them  myself  to  go 


■4G2  MRS.  BELZONrS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

away,  but  still  resisting,  and  being  importunate,  I  got  up  in  a  threaten- 
ing  manner,  and  began  to  open  my  portmanteau.  The  Mokaro  not 
knowing  but  that  I  might  have  pistols  in  it,  began  to  tell  them  to 
disperse.  I  complained  unjustly  of  the  few  fleas  I  had  the  preceding 
night  at  the  shepherds'  tent ;  for  the  horrid  torture  I  suffered  this  night 
no  words  can  express :  they  must  have  been  in  thousands.  The  very 
inmates,  accustomed  as  they  were  to  them,  were  far  from  sleeping  sound, 
scratching  and  rubbing  in  a  most  miserable  way,  and  at  times  getting  up 
and  shaking  themselves,  and  walking  about,  but  seemingly  unconscious 
of  what  made  them  so  miserable.  Some  time  back  I  might  have  got 
a  premium  in  Spain  from  the  Holy  Inquisition  for  such  an  invaluable 
addition  of  cruel  torture. 

We  left  this  village  of  fleas  on  the  24th,  two  hours  before  day.  The 
country  we  passed  this  day  was  finely  cultivated,  and  the  best  I  have  seen 
since  I  left  Europe.     We  saw  immense  quantities  of  Indian  figs. 

We  arrived  at  the  convent  of  Rama  at  one.  I  went  to  bed  imme- 
diatelv,  being  too  much  fatigued  to  eat ;  not  so  much  from  the  journey, 
as  that  was  trifling,  but  from  the  dreadful  nights  I  had  passed.  I  rested 
in  this  quiet,  peaceful  retreat  till  the  27th.  Its  situation  is  beautiful: 
from  the  top  there  is  a  fine  view  of  the  country  for  miles.  We  departed 
for  Jersualem  on  Wednesday,  where  I  went  to  remain  till  Mr.  B.  should 
come  for  me,  which  was  his  original  intention.  During  this  time  I  tried 
all  means  I  possibly  could  to  enter  the  temple  of  Solomon,  but  to  no 
purpose,  though  often  promised. 

When  the  Turks  want  to  repair  any  buildings,  they  send  to  Acre  and 
other  places  for  the  poor  Christian  Arabs,  who  do  all  the  labourers'  work, 
though  they  allow  no  Christian  to  enter  into  the  temple.  Inconsistent  as 
they  are,  they  are  glad  enough  to  have  them  to  repair  or  build  their  sacred 
places;  and  when  finished,  purify  it  from  their  contamination.  Such 
was  the  case  when  I  arrived  at  Jerusalem  :  the  temples  were  undergoing 
a  repair.  The  Christians  employed  in  this  work  were  nearly  all  Catholics. 
They  were,  of  course,  lodged  in  a  quarter  appropriated  by  the  convent 
for  pilgrims  and  Europeans ;  in  which  quarter  I  was,  as  women  are  not 
allowed  to  enter  the  convent.  As  I  daily  mixed  among  those  people,  it 
struck  me,  that  by  their  means  I  might  get  into  the  temple.  Some  one 
put  it  into  my  head,  after  the  men  had  given  up  all  hopes  of  assisting  me 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  468 

to  enter,  that  it  might  be  possible,  if  the  men  could  procure  permission 
for  their  wives  to  enter,  as  they  had  been  allowed  to  go  in  when  they  first 
began  to  repair  the  temple,  that  by  dressing  myself  like  one  of  them,  I 
might  enter  with  them.  It  was  a  good  plan  ;  but  the  temple  was  nearly 
finished,  and  the  Turks  did  not  care  to  oblige  them.  They  did  not,  however, 
tell  me  they  could  not  get  permission ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  said  they 
had  procured  it,  and  I  should  go  in  with  their  women.  According  to  the 
time  appointed,  they  brought  me  the  clothes.  Being  dressed,  and  my 
face  comfortably  smothered  up  in  July,  my  feet  cramped  into  boots 
with  high  heels,  that  were  not  large  enough  for  me,  but  like  the  glass 
slipper,  I  would  have  suffered  any  thing  rather  than  not  go,  off  we 
went.  I  cannot  describe  the  sensations  I  felt  between  hope  and  fear. 
After  going  down  hill  for  some  time,  creeping  like  snails,  as  it  is  not  the 
custom  to  walk  fast,  beside  the  misery  I  endured,  from  my  toes  being 
cut  by  being  flung  forwards  by  the  high  heels,  we  arrived  at  Mount  Sion, 
where  stands  the  Moska  where  our  Blessed  Saviour  eat  his  last  supper 
with  his  disciples,  and  where  the  tomb  of  David  and  Solomon  is.  As  I 
had  seen  it  on  the  outside  on  my  first  arrival,  I  knew  I  could  enter  at 
any  time  for  a  dollar.  The  women  began  to  whisper  among  themselves, 
and  called  their  husbands  out,  I  thought  for  the  purpose  of  accompanying 
us  to  the  temple ;  but  no  one  can  imagine  the  cruel  disappointment, 
when  they  told  me  this  was  the  temple.  Judging  me  like  their  own 
women,  they  thought  they  could  pass  this  off  as  the  Temple,  and  get  the 
bakshis  from  me.  I  instantly  saw  their  intention,  when  too  late.  What 
with  the  disappointment,  and  the  imposition  they  had  put  upon  me,  and 
the  state  of  my  feet,  and  the  shame  I  felt  at  having  been  deceived 
by  those  women,  I  refused  to  enter,  and  began  to  scold  them  for  the  trick 
they  wanted  to  play  me.  Seeing  I  knew  this  place  was  not  the  temple, 
they  seemed  for  a  few  moments  quite  stupefied ;  at  last  they  began  to 
excuse  themselves,  saying  they  had  just  heard  they  could  not  get  per- 
mission for  their  wives  to  enter :  but  I  was  not  in  a  humour  to  listen  to 
those  stories.  They,  thinking  to  pacify  me,  told  me  the  Ramadan  would 
begin  in  a  few  days,  and  that  it  would  be  easy  enough  to  get  me  in  then. 
I  had  lost  all  confidence,  and  was  quite  indifferent  to  all  they  could  say. 
After  venting  my  passion  a  little,  I  went  into  the  Moska.  I  returned 
properly  mortified,  and  shut  myself  up  in  my  room,  and  would  not  let 


4()4  MRS.  BELZONrS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

any  of  the  women  come  nigh  me.  They  sent  me  all  the  excuses  possible, 
with  a  thousand  promises.  After  this  I  Avent  to  Bethlehem  and  to  St. 
Giovanni,  and  to  the  desert  where  he  preached,  and  to  the  valley  where 
David  killed  Goliah.  After  my  return,  I  began  to  prepare  to  depart  for 
that  sink  of  vice  and  wickedness,  Grand  Cairo,  as  I  had  received  letters 
from  Mr.  B.  that  there  was  no  chance  of  his  being  able  to  visit  Syria, 
at  least  for  some  months.  During  my  preparation  for  my  voyage,  the 
drogueman  of  Mr.  Bankes  arrived  in  Jerusalem  to  fetch  the  doctor  of  the 
convent,  as  he  was  ill  in  Jaffa.  This  man  had  been  some  time  in  Nubia 
with  Mr.  Belzoni.  I  took  this  opportunity,  as  I  did  not  dare  to  trust  the 
interpreter  of  the  convent,  to  get  this  man  to  go  to  the  head  scrivan 
of  the  temple,  telling  him  what  I  would  give  him  if  he  could  succeed  in 
getting  me  in.  The  drogueman  returned,  telling  me  the  man  would  give 
me  an  answer  in  the  evening :  it  was  only  a  trial,  for  I  had  no  hopes. 
The  drogueman  told  me  the  scrivan  said,  if  I  had  been  a  man  he  could  get 
me  in.  Of  course,  when  he  heard  that,  he  thought  of  his  master,  who 
he  knew  wished  much  to  enter  two  years  before.  A  few  days  after  this, 
having  all  my  things  ready,  and  my  mules  engaged,  I  took  a  little  boy 
of  nine  years  old,  son  of  the  porter,  well  known  by  travellers,  and  told 
him  to  show  me  the  way  to  the  door  that  leads  into  the  grounds  where 
the  temple  was.  Leaving  the  boy  at  the  gate,  I  walked  slowly  on.  I  had 
got  half  way  towards  the  steps,  when  I  saw  a  Turk  at  a  distance  ;  but 
being  dressed  as  one,  he  took  no  notice  of  me.  I  had  got  black  shoes 
on,  which  I  had  blacked  for  the  Passion  Week,  to  enter  the  Holy  Se- 
pulchre, and  which  I  was  determined  to  wear  all  the  time  in  the  Holy 
Land,  and  which  I  have  now.  The  weeds  prevented  my  shoes  from 
being  seen,  otherwise  I  should  have  been  known  for  a  Christian.  I  at 
last  got  to  the  steps  on  the  north,  that  lead  up  to  the  platform  where 
the  Holy  of  Holies  stands.  During  the  time  I  took  to  consider  whether 
I  should  venture  to  go  on,  I  found  myself  on  the  top.  Here  I  had  to 
consider  again ;  but  imperceptibly  I  walked  on,  and  passed  the  door 
on  the  east,  and  came  to  that  on  the  south,  which  has  an  inscription 
over  it,  and  which  looks  towards  steps  opposite  to  those  I  came  up.  I 
passed  and  went  towards  that  on  the  west,  and  then  to  the  northern,  and 
passed  again  the  one  on  the  east,  and  came  again  to  the  southern  door, 
which  I  went  up  to,  and  looked  in,  and  saw  some  pillars  of  marble  or 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  465 

granite  in  the  inside.  I  left  it  again  with  the  intention  of  reconnoitring 
a  little,  to  see  if  any  Turks  were  in  the  way.  I  had  got  to  the  western 
door  the  second  time,  when  I  observed  a  man  following  me,  but  did  not 
dare  to  look  at  him.  He  said  to  me,  in  Italian,  when  passing,  "  Follow 
me,"  and  went  on,  as  if  not  noticing  me.  I  was  surprised;  but,  on 
looking,  I  found  it  to  be  a  Christian,  with  whose  wife  I  was  intimate,  who 
lived  in  the  same  quarter,  and  who  often  said,  if  he  had  not  been  afraid 
of  the  other  Christians,  he  would  have  taken  me  in.  Unfortunately,  the 
Christians  are  very  treacherous,  and  betray  each  other  to  the  Turks ; 
which  makes  those  people  dislike  and  despise  the  Christians  so  much. 

I  naturally  concluded  he  woidd  take  me  into  this  same  building ;  but  as  I 
could  not  speak  to  him,  I  followed  in  silence.  We  went  down  the  southern 
steps,  and  passed  a  fountain  of  water  which  comes  from  Solomon's  pools 
at  Bethlehem.  This  water  both  Turks  and  Christians  prize  much ;  and 
during  the  time  they  were  working  there,  each  man  was  allowed  to  bring 
home  a  large  pitcher  every  night  for  his  own  use ;  and  the  women  used 
to  give  me  some  every  day  as  a  great  treat.  Having  passed  some  cedar 
trees,  we  came  to  the  great  mosque,  according  to  Ali  Bey  Ell  Aksa,  a 
large  building.  In  the  words  of  Ali  Bey,  page  215,  no  Mussulman 
governor  dare  permit  an  infidel  to  pass  in  the  territory  of  Mecca,  or  into 
the  temple  of  Jerusalem.  A  permission  of  this  kind  would  be  looked 
upon  as  a  horrid  sacrilege  :  it  would  not  be  respected  by  the  people,  and 
the  infidel  would  become  the  victim  of  his  imprudent  boldness.  This 
edifice  forms  the  south-east  corner  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  oc- 
cupies the  site  on  which  formerly  stood  the  temple  of  Solomon. 

When  we  consider  the  permission  which  Dr.  Richardson  had  to  enter, 
it  may  be  observed  there  is  some  inconsistency  in  the  above  account  of 
Ali  Bey :  but  no,  the  Doctor  had  rendered  the  Capodi  Verde  a  service  in 
his  medical  capacity,  which  he  knew  not  how  to  return  in  a  manner  suf- 
ficiently to  gratify  him,  and  to  show  the  high  estimation  and  gratitude  he 
held  the  service  he  had  received  from  him,  but  by  granting  him  permission 
to  enter  the  Holy  Sanctuary :  a  permission  the  Emperor  himself  has  not 
power  to  grant.  It  is  true,  he  may  give  a  firman  to  that  effect;  but  when 
arrived  in  Jerusalem,  and  on  their  presenting  it,  they  are  told  they  do 
not  refuse  them  to  enter  according  to  the  firman,  but  it  does  not  say  any 
thing  about  coming  out :  therefore  that  he  is  welcome  to  go  in  if  he  likes, 

3o 


466  MRS.  BELZONFS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

but  remember,  if  he  wishes  to  come  out,  he  must  embrace  their  religion, 
or  suffer  death  in  all  its  horrors,  by  being  burnt  alive.  Such  is  the  informa- 
tion I  received  in  Jerusalem,  and  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  truth 
of  it. 

On  entering  it,  the  man  took  off  his  shoes,  and  put  them  under  his 
arms.  I  slipt  mine  off;  but,  in  the  hurry  on  entering  this  building, 
I  left  them  at  the  door,  and  went  after  the  man.  This  place  is  full 
of  large  columns  and  pillars,  some  of  granite,  with  different  capitals, 
in  the  rude  Turkish  style,  which  I  could  scarcely  look  at,  after  what  I 
had  seen  in  Egypt.  We  entered  a  recess,  wherein  was  a  large  window : 
there  I  found  a  Christian  at  work.  He  was  well  known,  as  he  had  his 
nose  cut  off  by  the  Bashaw  of  Acre,  a  little  time  after  the  French  were 
there.  He  told  me  this  was  the  spot  where  St.  Simon  and  St.  Anne 
had  taken  our  Saviour  in  their  arms  and  prophesied.  There  are  some 
small  marble  and  granite  pillars  in  this  place.  On  walking  to  the  end 
of  this  building,  where  are  windows  which  look  over  Siloe,  they  showed 
me  a  place  in  the  wall  where,  as  they  say,  originally  stood  a  door  which 
our  Saviour  used  to  go  out  of;  and  on  the  spot  was  a  stone  on  which 
they  say  is  the  impression  of  our  Saviour's  foot.  Close  by  there  is  a 
small  staircase  to  ascend,  similar  to  our  pulpits,  where  the  priests,  I 
suppose,  preach  or  pray  with  the  people.  The  men  took  me  into  two 
other  little  rooms,  one  on  the  right  and  the  other  on  the  left,  which  were 
undergoing  a  repair,  and  full  of  rubbish  of  stones  and  mortar.  They  told 
me  they  were  holy  on  account  of  our  Saviour :  for  what,  I  could  not 
understand.  I  do  not  attempt  to  give  an  account  of  this  place.  I  un- 
derstood but  very  few  words  of  Arabic,  and  Italian  very  imperfectly;  and 
if  I  had,  it  would  here  have  availed  me  nothing,  for  those  men  knew  it  not : 
that  is  to  say,  they  had,  when  boys,  and  serving  at  mass,  picked  up  a 
mixture  of  Italian,  Portuguese,  and  Spanish.  Therefore  I  saw  without 
understanding,  and  had  not  the  advantage  of  having  every  thing  pointed 
out  to  me.  Having  seen  all  in  that  place,  I  expected  to  return  the  same 
way  I  came.  The  man,  observing  I  had  not  my  shoes,  asked  me  what  I 
had  done  with  them  :  I  recollected  I  had  left  them  at  the  door  on  entering. 
On  attempting  to  go  after  them,  he  stopped  me,  and  said  he  would  go 
for  them  himself.  I  remained  in  the  recess  before  mentioned.  He 
returned  without  my  shoes.     He  said  a  Turk  had  seen  them,  and  taken 


MRS.  BELZONFS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  467 

them  as  a  witness  against  him  that  he  had  let  a  Christian  enter.  He 
seemed  much  frightened.  Whether  all  this  was  true  I  know  not.  He  gave 
me  a  pair  of  red  shoes.  I  was  now  more  vexed  at  the  loss  of  my  precious 
shoes  than  alarmed  at  the  consequences,  and  told  him  positively,  that  he 
must  get  them,  promising  to  give  him  a  bakshis  when  he  brought  them 
to  me ;  which  he  did  the  day  after.  He  then  took  me  out  at  a  little 
door,  thinking  he  was  going  to  show  me  something  more,  when  I  found 
myself  outside  the  building,  in  a  wild  kind  of  a  place  ;  and  though  I  kept 
asking  where  we  were  going,  he  made  no  answer,  making  a  sign  not  to 
speak ;  but,  to  my  sorrow,  I  soon  found  out  where  I  was,  seeing  we  were  near 
the  Armenian  convent.  I  had  left  the  poor  boy  at  the  door,  who  knew  not 
what  had  become  of  me.  About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  my  return,  he 
came  into  our  quarter,  crying  and  beating  himself,  saying  that  I  was  lost ; 
that  after  he  had  waited  some  time  at  the  door,  he  went  in  and  ran  all  over 
the  place  to  seek  for  me,  but  could  not  find  me.  This  day  turned  out  to 
be  a  day  of  strife ;  for,  on  my  return,  the  carpenters,  scrivans,  and  their 
wives,  were  quarrelling  amongst  themselves,  because  I  had  been  in  with- 
out them,  and  had  lost  the  promised  bakshis  ;  each  reproaching  the  other 
with  having  taken  me  in  slily.  The  Padre  Curato,  a  Spaniard,  had  been 
informed  of  the  confusion  in  our  quarter,  though  I  had  shut  myself  up 
very  quietly  in  my  room,  without  taking  notice  of  the  quarrelling  in 
the  yard  below ;  indeed,  I  did  not  know  it  concerned  me.  On  his 
coming  into  my  room,  the  first  word  he  said  was,  Is  it  true,  Signora,  you 
have  been  in  the  temple  ?  I  understood  the  poor  father  was  alarmed  for 
fear  the  Turks  should  come  to  be  informed  of  it,  and  should  come  upon 
the  convent  for  a  sum  of  money,  which  they  are  accustomed  to  do  very 
often,  upon  one  frivolous  pretext  or  other.  I  answered  him  I  had  been 
in  a  building,  where  I  was  informed  our  Saviour  was  presented,  and  had 
seen  a  stone  with  the  impression  of  our  Saviour's  feet  on  it,  which  I  had 
the  satisfaction  of  kneeling  down  to  kiss.  He  had  evidently  come  into 
the  room  to  scold  me ;  but  the  pious  father,  on  knowing  what  a  good 
Christian  I  was,  could  not  find  in  his  heart  to  proceed,  only  saying,  "  Che 
corragio,"  and  telling  me  that  the  oldest  friar  there  had  never  dared 
to  go  into  the  street  that  leads  to  the  temple,  which  I  sincerely  believe. 
In  the  evening,  the  Christian  women  of  this  quarter  having  satisfied 
themselves  that  no  one  had  taken  me  into  the  Temple,  came  to  my  room, 

3  o  2 


468  MRS.  BELZONFS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

and  sitting  down  around  me,  exclaimed  every  now  and  then,  lifting  up 
their  hands,  that  it  was  God  saved  me.  And  when  I  expressed  my 
sorrow  that  I  did  not  go  into  the  Holy  of  Holies  on  the  platform, 
when  I  was  on  it,  they  would  exclaim,  in  crossing  themselves,  that 
it  was  Christ  and  the  Virgin  Mary  that  protected  me  from  going  in, 
otherwise  I  must  have  been  burnt,  and  a  great  many  more  things.  But, 
however,  I  thought  it  prudent  to  leave  Jerusalem  the  day  but  one  after 
for  Jaffa.  On  arriving  at  the  house  of  our  Levantine  agent,  I  found  Mr. 
Bankes,  who  was  beginning  to  recover  from  a  fever.  I  was  obliged  to 
wait  some  days  before  I  could  procure  a  passage  for  Damietta.  During 
this  time  I  understood  from  the  Drogueman  of  Mr.  B.  that  he  was  buying 
an  Albanian  dress  for  him,  with  the  plea  of  going  to  Rama  for  few  days 
on  account  of  ill  health,  and  to  pass  on  quick  to  Jerusalem,  and  proceed 
straight  into  the  temple.  It  was  a  good  plan,  and  nothing  more  easy ; 
for  as  Mahomet  passed  for  an  Albanian,  he  could  pass  Mr.  B.  off  as  his 
countryman,  who  could  not  speak  any  other  language  but  his  own,  as  it 
is  not  expected  an  Albanian  should  know  either  Arabic  or  Turkish  ;  and 
having  practised  from  his  Drogueman  the  ceremony  of  the  prayers,  there 
was  little  doubt  of  his  succeeding. 

The  domestic  comfort  of  the  Christian  women  I  had  the  opportunity  of 
mixing  with  in  Jerusalem,  Bethlehem,  and  Nazareth,  was  much  greater, 
and  they  were  much  more  respected  by  their  husbands,  than  any  I  had 
seen  since  I  left  England ;  for  the  state  of  the  Christian  women  and 
natives  of  Egypt  is  not  better  than  the  Mahometans.  During  a  few 
months'  residence  in  the  Holy  Land,  particularly  in  Jerusalem,  I  used  to 
go  among  them  every  day.  In  their  houses  they  were  particularly  neat  and 
clean ;  though  they  had  neither  chairs  nor  tables,  yet,  according  to  their 
customs,  they  were  very  proud  to  furnish  their  little  place,  such  as  having 
mattresses  with  good  coverings,  and  quilts  of  printed  cotton,  which  are 
things  of  some  consideration  in  Syria,  besides  a  handsome  set  of  coffee-cups, 
and  pictures  on  the  walls :  they  are  fond  of  ornaments  in  their  houses, 
but  every  thing  for  use  and  comfort.  The  women  in  the  quarters  were 
the  wives  of  the  carpenters  and  scrivans  employed  in  the  temples,  so  that 
I  used  to  see  all  their  customs.  They  used  to  wash  their  clothes  on 
Friday  or  Saturday,  and  mend  and  fold  them  up  with  the  greatest  neat- 
ness, and  clean  up  all  the  house  for  the  Sunday,  which  they  passed  in  the 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  469 

most  comfortable  and  amicable  way :  they  had  only  to  prepare  their  little 
dinner :  husband  and  wife,  father  and  mother,  and  children,  always  eat 
together,  and  sometimes  invite  a  few  friends  to  dine  with  them   on  a 
Sunday,  or  go  and  take  a  walk.     The  best  part  of  the  women  I  knew 
were  very  pretty,  and  some  would  even  in  England  have  been  accounted 
beautiful.     I  knew  one  young  married  woman:  according  to  my  idea  of 
female  beauty  she  was  very  fair,  without  that  sickly  fairness  which  is  so 
often  seen  in  the  East :  I  have  seen  no  face  to  please  me  so  much  in  any 
place  I  have  been  in  since ;  something  so  extremely  expressive  in  her  coun- 
tenance ;  large,  full,  light  blue  eyes,  with  an  engaging  simplicity  seldom  to 
be  met  with  in  those  countries.    In  general  their  eyes  are  black,  and,  when 
expressive  of  modesty,  are  very  pleasing ;  but  then  there  are  some  that 
disgust  you  by  too  bold  or  forward  a  look,  or  extreme  stupidity.    I  visited 
a  family  belonging  to  a  Christian  merchant — I  do  not  mean  merchants  like 
ours  ;  but  however  he  was  very  well  off:  his  house  had  every  domestic  com- 
fort, and  was  provided  even  with  what  are  considered  luxuries,  and  would, 
in  England,  be  thought  so  too.     I  took  a  lady,  then  in  Jerusalem,  to  see 
this  family.  In  Bethlehem  the  Turks  are  absolutely  afraid  of  the  Christians. 
I  one  day  went  to  see  the  wife  and  family  of  the  Drogueman.     A  poor 
Mahometan  woman  came  in  :  I  was  astonished  to  see  her  humility.     The 
Christian  woman  treated  her  like  a  slave.     The  Christians  had  massacred 
a  great  number  of  Turks  about  fifty  years  ago,  and  this  woman  was  one 
belonging  to  some  that  had  been  murdered.    By  what  I  saw,  the  Christian 
women  in  those  places  are  much  superior  to  any  others,  both  in  regard 
to  their  household  concerns,  and  the  consideration  they  are  treated  with. 
In  Egypt  the  Christians  seldom  eat  with  their  wives. 

The  English  agent  had  engaged  a  cabin  for  me  on  board  a  Turkish 
ship,  and  as  it  was  not  to  go  till  the  next  day,  he  invited  me  to  go  and 
see  a  garden  of  his :  we  had  scarcely  arrived  there,  when  some  one 
came  running  after  us,  saying  the  ship  was  going  to  sail  immediately : 
through  this  mistake  I  had  not  bought  any  provisions  for  the  voyage. 
Fortunately  for  me  there  happened  to  be  in  Jaffa  two  Italians  who  had 
been  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  one  a  worker  in  tin,  and  the  other 
had  served  his  time  to  the  wax  business  in  all  its  branches;  a  thing  much 
wanted  in  Egypt.  They  wished  to  go  to  Alexandria  straight  forward, 
but  not  being  able  to  procure  an  immediate  passage,  and  having  heard  Mr. 


470  MRS.  BELZONFS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

13.  was  an  Italian,  they  consented  to  go  to  Cairo  with  me  ;  and  though  it 
is  a  short  passage  of  two  or  three  days,  yet  sometimes  it  is  much  longer. 
Had  it  not  been  for  these  two  men,  I  believe  I  never  should  have  reached 
Cairo  alive,  being  continually  troubled  with  bilious  fever. 

A  Portuguese  servant  of  Mr.  Bankes,  who  was  left  in  Jaffa,  exerted 
himself  with  the  other  two  men  in  sending  my  luggage  to  the  water  side, 
and  in  procuring  what  little  provision  they  could  get  at  that  late  hour 
in  the  evening.  We  went  down  to  the  water  side,  with  the  intent  of 
going  on  board.  On  arriving  at  the  port-gate,  I  was  informed  the  go- 
vernor was  sitting  in  it,  but  that  he  would  go  in  a  few  minutes.  After  wait- 
ing a  good  half  hour,  I  asked  the  consul  what  I  was  made  to  wait  for  in 
that  manner:  he  told  me  there  was  no  other  door  to  go  out  at,  but  that  one 
where  the  governor  was  sitting,  and  that  no  one  could  go  out  of  it  till  he 
left  it.  If  they  were  all  slaves  to  the  Turks,  I  told  them,  I  was  not.  As 
I  knew  none  of  these  courageous  gentlemen  durst  speak  a  word  to  the 
Turks,  I  began  to  complain  in  bad  Italian,  and  still  worse  Arabic,  of 
my  being  kept  a  prisoner  by  the  Turks  in  Jaffa.  A  respectable  Turk, 
formerly  belonging  to  the  Barbary  coast,  and  who  had  been  to  England, 
that  is  Gibraltar,  which  they  denominate  so,  spoke  Italian  very  well : 
he  said  the  governor  would  be  gone  in  a  short  time,  and  begged  me  to 
have  patience.  I  told  him,  in  broken  Arabic,  the  English  were  not  slaves 
to  the  Turks,  loud  enough  for  the  governor  to  hear  me. 

I  certainly  did  not  think  my  words  would  have  any  effect.  This 
man  went  to  the  governor,  and  he  immediately  left  the  place.  I  was 
glad  at  his  going.  The  English  agent,  a  Levantine,  thought  proper 
to  say  the  governor  wanted  to  see  me,  having  heard  I  was  a  woman. 
This  is  not  true,  and  if  it  was  so,  I  am  indebted  to  him  for  telling 
the  governor  that  I  was  a  woman.  It  is  the  custom,  when  any  English 
arrive  there,  for  him  to  accompany  them  to  the  governor,  and,  to 
support  his  high  notions  of  dignity,  he  thinks  they  cannot  be  too  liberal 
in  their  presents,  and  cries  up  the  greatness  of  the  riches  of  my  lord 
English  ;  but  understanding  I  was  not  a  rich  person,  though  as  liberal 
in  making  remuneration  in  return  for  civilities  or  things  received  as 
others,  no  doubt  had  reported  I  was  a  person  of  no  consequence,  which 
the  governor  hearing,  he  thought,  though  he  dare  not  show  his  conse- 
quence to  Englishmen,  he  could  display  it  to  me  :  at  any  rate,  if  such  was 


MRS.  BELZONFS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  471 

his  idea,  the  words  I  used  in  the  hearing  of  him  and  his  people  must  have 
made  him  feel  very  little.  We  went  on  board  the  ship,  which  was  under 
weigh.  What  was  my  distress  on  finding  the  cabin,  which  had  been  en- 
gaged for  me  for  a  hundred  and  thirty  piastres,  full  of  melons,  and  the 
deck  full  of  Albanian  soldiers,  which  alarmed  me,  on  account  of  what  I 
had  seen  in  Egypt  of  them ;  and  though  taken  ill  immediately  on  getting 
on  board,  I  insisted  on  being  sent  on  shore  to  complain  to  the  consul. 
The  boat  was  still  alongside  us :  the  moment  I  insisted  on  going,  and  re- 
quested that  my  luggage  should  be  put  in  the  boat,  they  ordered  it  slily 
off,  and  all  I  could  say  was  useless.  The  two  poor  men  who  were  with 
me,  and  who  knew  very  little  of  the  customs  of  the  Turks,  and  nothing  of 
the  language,  begged  me,  for  the  love  of  the  Virgin,  not  to  say  any  thing 
to  them,  for  we  were  in  their  power.  Though  extremely  sick,  I  desired 
them  not  to  show  these  people  they  were  at  all  alarmed.  I  was  still  on 
deck :  it  was  quite  dark,  and  we  were  in  great  confusion,  as  is  customary 
in  Turkish  ships,  which  have  no  regulation  or  compass  but  the  stars,  and 
pride  themselves  on  being  wiser  than  the  Europeans.  I  insisted  on  having 
my  cabin  cleaned  out,  according  to  contract.  After  a  great  deal  of 
talking,  and  trying  every  means  they  could  to  prevent  the  melons  being 
taken  out,  as  it  was  late,  it  was  at  last  concluded  a  part  should  then 
be  taken  out,  and  the  rest  the  next  morning :  my  luggage  was  taken 
down,  and  I  was  accommodated  as  well  as  could  be  expected.  The 
wind  altered,  and  after  three  days  of  contrary  weather  we  were  obliged 
to  put  into  Cyprus,  where  we  stopped  three  days.  We  once  more  set  sail 
for  Damietta,  and  were  much  delayed  by  calms.  At  last,  after  thirteen 
days  from  the  time  we  left  Jaffa,  we  arrived  in  that  port.  I  never  suffered 
on  the  ocean  what  I  suffered  in  this  insignificant  voyage.  I  must  now 
once  more  mention  with  gratitude  the  respectable  and  decent  conduct, 
added  to  the  assistance  these  men  rendered  me,  for  I  was  ill  the  whole 
time  I  was  on  board.  It  is  in  these  moments  we  see  the  soul  of  mankind, 
and  sorry  enough  I  was  I  could  not  show  a  greater  liberality  towards  them 
than  my  limited  purse  would  allow  me.  I  should  not  have  thought  any 
sum  too  much  for  the  assistance  they  had  given  me. 

On  arriving  at  Damietta  I  found,  in  the  short  space  of  six  months,  the 
mother  of  the  consul  and  his  sister,  with  whom  I  had  lived  a  month  in  much 
friendship,  both  dead  ;  the  mother  was  only  forty,  and  the  sister  twenty- 


472  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

eight,  and  left,  I  believe,  a  fond  husband  to  deplore  her  loss,  with  four 
fine  boys.  I  cannot  help  observing  and  thinking  with  the  Arab,  that,  indeed, 
God  was  with  me ;  for  during  the  time  I  was  in  that  house,  a  younger 
brother  of  the  consul,  about  nine  years  old,  came  home  one  day  in  a  high 
fever  ;  the  mother  told  me  of  it ;  I  presented  her  with  a  little  tea,  which 
she  made  for  him,  and  he  perspired :  the  next  day  he  was  better,  and  my 
going  on  board  the  ship,  vexed  at  being  detained  in  Damietta  so  long, 
was  what  saved  me ;  for  although  the  boy  got  better,  yet  the  disease 
lingered  about  him,  and  a  few  days  after  my  departure  he  was  seized 
with  a  violent  malignant  fever,  which  the  mother  caught  from  him.  Her 
daughter  caught  it  likewise,  and  both  died.  I  could  not  put  it  in  their 
heads  to  refrain  from  eating  many  things  which  I  told  them  were  bad ; 
the  only  answer  I  received  was,  What  can  I  do  ?  I  like  it,  and  God  is 
good.  The  women,  shut  up  as  they  are,  employ  themselves  in  eating 
every  trash  they  can  get  hold  of  to  get  fat ;  therefore  it  is  no  wonder  they 
are  ahvays  ill.  Had  I  staid,  I  probably  should  have  had  the  same  fate, 
by  catching  the  fever  from  them. 

After  resting  five  days  at  the  house  of  a  female  relation  of  the  consul's, 
we  departed  for  Cairo,  where  I  expected  to  have  met  Mr.  B.  I  remained 
there  two  months,  during  which  time  Abdalla,  the  Wahabee  chief,  was 
brought  in  a  prisoner  by  the  Turks,  to  be  sent  to  Constantinople  to  be 
beheaded.  Having  inquired  the  day  he  was  to  enter  Cairo,  I  took  a 
Mameluke  who  had  run  away  from  Dongola,  and  staid  some  time  with 
Mr.  B.  at  Ybsambul :  he  was  now  in  Cairo,  and  I  took  the  opportunity  of 
having  his  escort  about  the  town.  We  set  off  by  break  of  day,  and  having 
rode  in  and  out  of  that  city  till  we  were  tired,  each  Arab  giving  us  a 
different  account  of  the  road  the  chief  was  to  enter,  we  at  last  heard  he 
was  arrived,  and  was  gone  up  to  the  citadel :  on  our  arriving  there  we 
found  he  was  not  yet  come,  but  was  expected.  We  went  to  a  coffee-shop 
that  commanded  a  full  view  of  the  gate,  and  after  having  waited  about 
an  hour,  drinking  coffee  and  smoking,  we  at  last  found  out  he  was  at 
the  house  of  the  Kakia  Bay,  where  all  the  Turks  were  going  to  see  him.  I 
now  gave  up  all  hopes.  We  set  off,  however,  once  more  in  search  of  him, 
but  on  arriving  at  the  Kakia  Bey's  house  I  stopped  on  seeing  a  number 
of  Turks,  and  felt  my  courage  give  way,  as  they  are  very  different  to  the 
Arabs,  and  was  a  little  shy  about  entering.   At  last  I  asked  the  Mameluke 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  473 

what  answer  he  would  give  in  case  any  one  should  question  him  about 
who  I  was.  He  said  that  he  would  tell  them  I  was  an  English  Turk.  I  was 
dressed  as  a  Mameluke,  so  I  mustered  all  the  consequence  and  courage 
I  could  assume,  though,  indeed,  I  felt  a  little  unpleasant,  fearing  the  Turks 
should  recognise  me  to  be  a  woman  :  let  it  not  be  mistaken — they  would 
not  molest  me,  but  their  curiosity  would  be  excited. 

I  went  through  a  large  yard,  and  entered  a  little  room  where  Abdallah 
the  chief  was  seated,  seemingly  much  fatigued :  I  understood  he  had  been 
ill  on  the  road.  The  Pashaw  sent  his  carriage  for  him  some  part  of  the 
road,  but  they  took  care  to  put  heavy  irons  on  him.  I  judged  him  to  be 
about  twenty-eight  or  thirty,  of  a  very  expressive  and  interesting  counte- 
nance ;  perhaps  his  situation  made  it  appear  more  so  to  me  :  he  spoke  to  no 
one.  He  had  a  brother  with  a  vulgar  Fellah  countenance,  talking  with 
every  one  of  the  Turks,  particularly  those  belonging  to  the  church :  he 
wanted  to  make  them  believe,  though  his  brother  had  fought  against 
them,  he  never  had.  After  we  had  staid  some  time  looking  at  him,  they 
ordered  all  out,  to  make  room  for  others.  I  passed  out  with  more  courage 
than  I  entered,  and  much  pleased  at  having  gratified  my  curiosity  so 
easily. 

After  waiting  two  months  in  Cairo,  and  understanding  it  might  be 
some  time  before  Mr.  B.  could  return,  I  determined  on  a  third  voyage 
to  Thebes,  taking  the  Mameluke  before  mentioned.  I  went  to  Boolak, 
and  engaged  a  canja  with  two  small  cabins;  one  held  my  luggage,  and  the 
other  my  mattress,  for  which  I  paid  125  piastres.  I  left  Cairo  on  November 
27th,  and  arrived  at  Ackmim  on  the  11th  December,  at  night.  A  heavy 
rain,  accompanied  with  thunder  and  lightning,  commenced  an  hour  after 
sunset,  and  continued  the  whole  of  the  night:  it  poured  in  torrents.  My 
mattress  and  coverings  were  wet  through,  and  were  so  for  some  days  ;  and 
though  the  rain  had  ceased,  yet  it  came  pouring  from  the  mountains 
through  the  lands  into  the  Nile  on  each  side  for  several  days  after.  I 
arrived  at  Luxor  on  the  16th,  and  was  informed  Mr.  B.  was  gone  to  the 
Isle  of  Philce :  I  crossed  the  Nile,  and  took  up  my  residence  at  Beban  el 
Malook*.    The  men  left  to  guard  the  tomb  in  Mr.  B.'s  absence  informed 

*  I  shall  here  take  occasion  to  mention  a  little  anecdote,  which  will  give  an  idea  how  far 
revenge  is  carried  by  these  people.     Having  no  one  to  attend  on  me  but  men,  I  took  for  that 

3p 


474  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

me  of  the  heavy  rain  they  had  experienced  on  the  night  I  mentioned,  and, 
in  spite  of  all  their  efforts,  they  could  not  prevent  the  water  entering  the 
tomb ;  it  had  carried  in  a  great  deal  of  mud,  and,  on  account  of  the  great 
heat,  and  the  steam  arising  from  the  damp,  made  some  of  the  walls  crack, 
and  some  pieces  had  fallen.  On  hearing  this  I  went  into  the  tomb,  and 
the  only  thing  we  could  do  was  to  order  a  number  of  boys  to  take  the 
damp  earth  away,  for  while  any  damp  remained  the  walls  would  still  go 
on  cracking.  Mr.  B.  arrived  two  days  before  Christmas,  and  on  St. 
Stephen's  day  he  crossed  to  Carnak  to  review  the  various  spots  of  earth 
he  had  to  excavate,  when  an  attempt  was  made  to  assassinate  him.  I  had 
then  a  violent  bilious  fever,  which,  added  to  this  fright,  flung  me  into  the 
yellow  jaundice.  Having  sent  a  man  to  procure  me  some  medicine  from 
a  doctor  at  Ackmeim,  he  returned  after  five  days  with  about  half  an 
ounce  of  cream  of  tartar,  and  two  teaspoonsful  of  rhubarb.  Fortunately 
for  me,  two  English  gentlemen  happened  to  arrive,  on  their  return  from 
Nubia  for  Cairo,  and  gave  me  some  calomel,  which  was  of  great  service 
to  me,  and  which  I  remember  with  much  gratitude. 

We  then  bade  adieu  to  Thebes,  and  embarked  for  Cairo.  On  our 
going  down,  the  Mameluke  informed  me  there  was  a  large  boat  with  four 
Turkish  ladies,  who  had  just  returned  from  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  and 
were  now  on  their  way  to  Constantinople.  They  had  stopped  two  nights 
where  we  did:  they  had  heard  there  was  an  Englishwoman  in  our  boat,  and 
expressed  a  wish  to  see  me.  When  we  halted  for  the  night,  I  sent  our 
Mameluke  to  them  to  say  I  should  be  happy  to  visit  them.  The  man  that 
was  sent  to  accompany  them  came  with  the  Mameluke  to  fetch  me.  On 
our  going  on  board,  he  knocked  at  the  door,  and  told  them  in  Turkish  that 
I  was  there.     The  door  was  opened  enough  to  permit  me  to  enter :  it 

purpose  a  young  girl,  the  sister-in-law  of  the  woman  at  Luxor  who  was  so  spiteful  on  ray 
refusing  to  head  her  party  against  her  husband's  second  wife,  and  whom  I  suspected  to  have 
on  that  account  given  me  something  to  injure  my  health.  I  was  very  partial  to  this  young 
girl,  and  some  few  days  after  my  arrival,  talking  to  her  about  her  sister-in-law,  I  told  her  I 
knew  what  she  had  done  to  me.  I  saw  the  girl  seemed  frightened.  The  day  after,  she  told  me 
she  wanted  to  go  and  see  her  mother,  but  she  did  not  come  back.  I  expressed  my  surprise  on 
the  occasion,  when  a  Christian  told  me,  that  after  what  I  had  told  her,  the  girl  was  afraid  to 
stay  with  me,  for  fear  I  should  revenge  myself  on  her  for  what  her  sister-in-law  had  done  to 
me,  as  they  were  accustomed  to  do  among  themselves. 


MRS.  BELZONrS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  475 

was  a  maish,  with  two  large  rooms  in  it.  On  entering,  I  found  the  ladies 
sitting  on  fine  cushions  that  were  placed  round  the  room.  They  received 
me  with  much  politeness.  Two  female  servants  sat  in  front  of  the 
middle  door  to  observe  what  was  passing,  and  to  be  ready  to  hand  the 
coffee,  sherbet,  and  oranges ;  and  though  they  knew  not  one  word 
of  Arabic,  and  myself  not  one  word  of  Turkish,  yet  women  are  never 
at  a  loss  to  talk.  My  Mameluke  stood  on  the  outside  of  the  door  to  tell 
me,  in  Arabic  mixed  with  a  few  words  of  Italian,  what  the  ladies  said  :  by 
which  means  we  contrived  to  keep  up  a  conversation  for  some  time. 
They  began  to  tell  me  of  the  holy  journey  they  had  taken,  and  the 
fatigue  they  had  undergone.  They  then  began  to  inquire  where  I  had 
been,  as  the  Mameluke  had  informed  their  men  that  I  was  a  Hadge, 
and  that  I  had  been  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem.  They  said  how 
happy  I  was  to  have  been  there,  as  this  place  is  considered  by  the  Turks 
as  a  holy  city,  on  account  of  its  being  one  of  the  stairs  to  Mecca,  as 
well  as  containing  the  tombs  of  Suleiman  and  Daoud.  They  expressed 
much  admiration  and  surprise  when  I  told  them  I  had  been  to  see  their 
tombs.  They  were  much  surprised  how  the  English  should  know  any 
thing  about  David,  and  Solomon,  and  Jacob,  and  Joseph,  as  they  belong 
to  the  Turks.  I  told  them  they  belonged  equally  to  us,  and  began  to 
mention  pretty  well  various  names  in  the  Old  Testament,  such  as  Adam 
and  Eve,  Cain  and  Abel,  Abraham  and  Isaac,  and  Sarah,  telling  them 
that  was  my  name,  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  all  I  could  think  of  at  the 
moment ;  telling  them  Christ  descended  from  David.  They  were  the 
first  to  ask  me  about  the  Virgin  Mary  and  our  Saviour,  and  seemed 
much  gratified.  The  Turks  have  a  great  respect  for  the  Virgin  Mary, 
and  likewise  for  our  Saviour.  Those  places  are  holy  to  them,  but  not 
the  tomb  of  our  Saviour.  They  laugh  at  our  kneeling  in  the  tomb,  as 
they  say  Christ  was  a  spirit,  and  as  such  could  not  have  been  crucified, 
and  that  a  man  in  his  form  and  figure  was  crucified  in  his  stead.  I  do 
not  wish  to  be  thought  presumptuous  enough  to  attempt  to  contradict  or 
to  know  better  than  any  one  else,  for  my  knowledge  is  very  limited  ;  but, 
according  to  Ali  Bey's  account  of  the  Turks,  our  Saviour  left  his  likeness 
to  Judas,  who  was  crucified  in  his  stead.  How  could  that  be  ?  for  in  the 
27th  chapter  of  St.  Matthew,  verse  5th,  he  went  and  hung  himself.     The 

3p  2 


476  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

ladies  lifted  up  their  eyes  and  hands  in  wonder,  and  began  asking  me  if 
I  could  read ;  and,  as  I  knew  all  those  belonging  to  them,  how  it  was  I  did 
not  know  Mahomet.     I  told  them  he  was  a  great  man. 

The  only  way  to  gain  these  people  is  by  giving  into  their  prejudices 
a  little,  if  we  wish  to  gain  any  advantage ;  for  from  my  small  expe- 
rience, there  is  not  an  easier  people  than  the  Turks  to  be  converted  to 
Christianity;  and  though  I  may  be  condemned  for  my  opinion,  there  is  no 
religion  would  suit  them  so  well  as  the  protestant  church  of  England, 
on  account  of  its  simplicity ;  for  they  cannot  bear  any  kind  of  figure  or 
images.  And  though  I  am  much  against  forcing  our  religion  on  any  one, 
yet,  as  they  have  began  to  translate  the  blessed  Scriptures  in  every 
language,  I  would  to  God  our  Prayer  Book  was  translated,  and  joined  to 
the  Old  and  New  Testament :  it  is  not  forcing  it  on  any  one,  and  those 
that  would  like  to  read  it  might  or  not,  as  they  pleased.  I  mean  those 
translated  into  the  eastern  languages. 

They  asked  me  if  I  had  ever  been  at  Stambul,  or  Constantinople. 
I  told  them  I  had  not,  but  that  I  hoped  I  should.  They  began  to  praise 
it,  telling  me  it  was  the  finest  place  in  the  world,  and  said  they  hoped 
they  should  see  me  there. 

All  this  time  they  had  been  anxious  to  know  if  I  had  any  jewels  on 
my  head  under  my  turban :  to  gain  this  information,  they  took  off  the 
kerchiefs  of  their  head-dresses  to  show  me  theirs.  I  observed  a  great 
delicacy  in  their  manners  towards  me,  fearing  to  offend.  I  was  not 
astonished  at  the  sight  of  the  pearls  and  diamonds,  but  that  they  should 
make  a  journey  to  Mecca  and  return  without  being  robbed:  though  it  is 
true  Mahomet  Ali  had  troops  there  at  this  time,  the  road  is  sometimes 
dangerous.  I  had  now  seen  their  jewels,  which  was  a  good  way  of  asking 
me  to  show  mine.  It  was  useless  for  me  to  observe  I  had  none,  but  I 
knew  I  could  gratify  their  curiosity  equally  well.  All  the  women  are 
extremely  fond  of  long  hair,  and  for  some  reason  or  other  they  seldom 
attain  it,  and  my  hair  was  a  little  longer  than  they  were  accustomed  to 
see.  I  told  them,  as  I  was  obliged  to  travel  in  the  dress  of  a  Turk,  I 
could  not  carry  any  thing  belonging  to  women.  They  seemed  to  think  it 
was  perfectly  right,  and  asked  me  if  our  women  in  England  wore  pearls, 
and  diamonds,  and  ear-rings,  and  bracelets,  and  many  other  questions. 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  477 

I  took  off  my  turban,  and  showed  them  my  hair :  they  got  up  and  felt  it, 
to  be  certain  it  was  my  own,  and  had  a  long  conversation  among  them- 
selves about  it. 

Among  the  four  ladies  were  a  mother  and  daughter.  The  daughter 
had  been  married  some  years,  and  had  no  children,  which  occasioned 
her  journey  to  the  holy  shrine  of  Mecca.  They  showed  me  many  relics 
they  had  brought  from  thence.  They  told  me  their  husbands  were 
scrivans  to  the  sultan,  and  that  on  their  arrival  in  Cairo  they  should  go 
to  the  house  of  the  Khalil  Bey  till  they  proceeded  to  Alexandria ;  and 
hoped  we  should  see  each  other  every  night  if  we  should  stop  in  the  same 
place,  if  not  in  Cairo.  We  parted  very  friendly,  hoping  to  meet  again ; 
and  certainly  if  I  ever  should  go  to  Constantinople,  I  shall  remind  them 
of  their  invitation.  I  sent  them  in  some  pieces  of  fine  soap  from  Jeru- 
salem, with  which  they  were  highly  pleased.  On  arriving  at  Cairo  I  was 
too  much  occupied  in  preparing  to  leave  that  place  for  Alexandria,  and 
could  not  visit  them.  The  Mameluke  saw  them  there,  and  they  sent  me 
a  message,  to  say  they  were  likewise  going  to  Alexandria  in  a  day  or  two, 
and  hoped  to  meet  me  in  that  place. 

On  arriving  at  Rosetta  I  remained  there  for  some  time,  therefore  I 
lost  the  opportunity  of  meeting  those  ladies  again.  On  Mr.  B.'s  making 
up  his  mind  to  go  into  Lybia,  he  settled  me  comfortably  in  a  house  in 
Rosetta,  which  belonged  to  an  English  merchant  of  Alexandria,  who  was 
kind  enough  to  lend  it  to  him  :  and  having  laid  in  those  provisions  that 
would  have  been  dangerous  for  me  to  buy,  as  the  plague  was  now  be- 
ginning to  show  its  horrid  face,  and  engaged  a  man  to  call  every  day,  to 
buy  meat,  bread,  vegetables,  &c.  he  departed  for  Lybia. 

My  prison  companions  were  antelopes,  sheep,  goats,  and  fowls.  I  had 
collected  a  great  number  of  cameleons,  but  I  never  could,  in  five  months' 
trial,  get  them  to  live  longer  than  two.  The  Arabs  in  Lower  Egypt  in 
catching  them  jump  upon  them,  or  fling  stones,  or  strike  them  with  sticks, 
which  hurts  them  much.  The  Nubians  lie  down  gently  on  the  ground, 
and  when  they  come  down  from  the  date-trees,  they  catch  hold  of  the 
tail,  and  fix  a  string  to  it,  therefore  the  body  does  not  get  injured. 

I  do  not  presume  to  give  a  description  of  the  cameleon  any  farther 
than  what  observation  I  could  make,  having  had  those  animals  for  several 
months  with  me.     In  the  first  place,  they  are  very  inveterate  towards 


478  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

their  own  kind,  and  must  not  be  shut  up  together,  for  they  bite  each 
others'  tails  and  legs  off.  There  are  three  species  of  cameleons,  whose 
colours  are  peculiar  to  themselves :  for  instance,  the  commonest  sort  are 
those  which  are  generally  green,  that  is  to  say,  the  body  all  green,  and 
when  content,  beautifully  marked  on  each  side  regularly  on  the  green 
with  black  and  yellow,  not  in  a  confused  manner,  but  as  if  drawn.  This 
kind  is  in  great  plenty,  and  never  have  any  other  colour  except  a  light 
green  when  they  sleep,  and  when  ill,  a  very  pale  yellow.  Out  of  near  forty 
I  had  the  first  year  when  in  Nubia,  I  had  but  one,  and  that  a  very  small 
one  of  the  second  sort,  which  had  red  marks.  One  cameleon  lived  with 
me  eight  months,  and  most  of  that  time  I  had  it  fixed  to  the  button  of  my 
coat :  it  used  to  rest  on  my  shoulder  or  on  my  head.  I  have  observed, 
when  I  have  kept  it  shut  up  in  a  room  for  some  time,  that  on  bringing 
it  out  in  the  air  it  would  begin  drawing  the  air  in,  and  on  putting  it  on 
some  marjoram  it  has  had  a  wonderful  effect  on  it  immediately :  its 
colour  became  most  brilliant.  I  believe  it  will  puzzle  a  good  many  to  say 
what  cause  it  proceeds  from.  If  they  did  not  change  when  shut  up  in  a 
house,  but  only  on  taking  them  in  a  garden,  it  might  be  supposed  the 
change  of  the  colours  was  in  consequence  of  the  smell  of  the  plants  ;  but 
when  in  a  house,  if  it  is  watched,  it  will  change  every  ten  minutes :  some 
moments  a  plain  green,  at  others  all  its  beautiful  colours  will  come  out, 
and  when  in  a  passion  it  becomes  of  a  deep  black,  and  will  swell  itself  up 
like  a  balloon,  and,  from  being  one  of  the  most  beautiful  animals,  it  becomes 
one  of  the  most  ugly.  It  is  true  they  are  extremely  fond  of  the  fresh 
air,  and  on  taking  them  to  a  window  when  there  is  nothing  to  be  seen,  it 
is  easy  to  observe  the  pleasure  they  certainly  take  in  it :  they  begin  to 
gulp  down  the  air,  and  their  colour  becomes  brighter.  I  think  it  proceeds 
in  a  great  degree  from  the  temper  they  are  in :  a  little  thing  will  put 
them  in  a  bad  humour  :  if  in  crossing  a  table,  for  instance,  you  stop  them, 
and  attempt  to  turn  them  another  road,  they  will  not  stir,  and  are  extremely 
obstinate  :  on  opening  the  mouth  at  them  it  will  set  them  in  a  passion  : 
they  begin  to  arm  themselves  by  swelling  and  turning  black,  and  will 
sometimes  hiss  a  little,  but  not  much.  The  third  I  brought  from  Jeru- 
salem was  the  most  singular  of  all  the  cameleons  I  ever  had :  its  temper, 
if  it  can  be  so  called,  was  extremely  sagacious  and  cunning.  This  one  was 
not  of  the  order  of  the  green  kind,  but  a  disagreeable  drab,  and  it  never 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  479 

once  varied  in  its  colour  in  two  months.  On  my  arrival  in  Cairo  I  used 
to  let  it  crawl  about  the  room,  on  the  furniture.  Sometimes  it  would 
get  down,  if  it  could,  and  hide  itself  away  from  me,  but  in  a  place  where 
it  could  see  me;  and  sometimes,  on  my  leaving  the  room  and  on  entering 
it,  would  draw  itself  so  thin  as  to  make  itself  nearly  on  a  level  with  what- 
ever it  might  be  on,  so  that  I  might  not  see  it.  It  had  often  deceived  me 
so.  One  day  having  missed  it  for  some  time,  I  concluded  it  was  hid  about 
the  room  ;  after  looking  for  it  in  vain,  I  thought  it  had  got  out  of  the 
room  and  made  its  escape  :  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  after  the  candle 
was  lighted,  I  went  to  a  basket  that  had  got  an  handle  across  it :  I  saw 
my  cameleon,  but  its  colour  entirely  changed,  and  different  to  any  I  ever 
had  seen  before  :  the  whole  body,  head  and  tail,  a  brown  with  black  spots, 
and  beautiful  deep  orange-coloured  spots  round  the  black.  I  certainly 
was  much  gratified:  on  being  disturbed,  its  colours  vanished,  unlike  the 
others ;  but  after  this  I  used  to  observe  it  the  first  thing  in  the  morn- 
ing, when  it  would  have  the  same  colours.  Some  time  after,  it  made  its 
escape  out  of  my  room,  and  I  suppose  got  into  a  garden  close  by.  I  was 
much  vexed,  and  would  have  given  twenty  dollars  to  have  recovered  it 
again,  though  it  only  cost  me  threepence,  knowing  I  could  not  get  another 
like  it;  for  afterwards  being  in  Rosetta,  I  had  between  fifty  and  sixty ;  but 
all  those  were  green,  yellow,  and  black ;  and  the  Arabs  in  catching  them 
had  bruised  them  so  much,  that  after  a  month  or  six  weeks  they  died.  It 
is  an  animal  extremely  hard  to  die.  I  had  prepared  two  cages  with  separate 
divisions,  with  the  intention  of  bringing  them  to  England ;  but  though  I 
desired  the  Arabs  that  used  to  get  them  for  me  to  catch  them  by  the  tail,  they 
used  to  hurt  them  much  with  their  hands;  and  if  once  the  body  is  squeezed, 
it  will  never  live  longer  than  two  months.  When  they  used  to  sleep  at 
night,  it  was  easy  to  see  where  they  had  been  bruised ;  for  being  of  a  very 
light  colour  when  sleeping,  the  part  that  had  been  bruised,  either  on  the 
body  or  the  head,  which  was  bone,  was  extremely  black,  though  when  green 
it  would  not  show  itself  so  clear.  Their  chief  food  was  flies :  the  fly  does  not 
die  immediately  on  being  swallowed,  for  upon  taking  the  cameleon  up  in  my 
hands  it  was  easy  to  feel  the  fly  buzzing,  chiefly  on  account  of  the  air  they 
draw  in  their  inside  :  they  swell  much,  and  particularly  when  they  want  to 
fling  themselves  off  a  great  height,  by  filling  themselves  up  like  a  balloon  : 
on  falling,  they  get  no  hurt,  except  on  the  mouth,  which  they  bruise  a 


480  MRS.  BELZONLS  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

little,  as  that  comes  first  to  the  ground.  Sometimes  they  will  not  drink 
for  three  or  four  days,  and  when  they  begin  they  are  about  half  an  hour 
drinking.  I  have  held  a  glass  in  one  hand  while  the  carneleon  rested  its 
two  fore  paws  on  the  edge  of  it,  the  two  hind  ones  resting  on  my  other 
hand.  It  stood  upright  while  drinking,  holding  its  head  up  like  a  fowl. 
By  flinging  its  tongue  out  of  its  mouth  the  length  of  its  body,  and 
instantaneously  catching  the  fly,  it  would  go  back  like  a  spring.  They 
will  drink  mutton  broth  :  how  I  came  to  know  this  was  one  day  having 
a  plate  of  broth  and  rice  on  the  table  where  it  was :  it  went  to  the  plate 
and  got  half  into  it,  and  began  drinking,  and  trying  to  take  up  some  of  the 
rice,  by  pushing  it  with  its  mouth  towards  the  side  of  the  plate,  which 
kept  it  from  moving,  and  in  a  very  awkward  way  talcing  it  in  its  mouth. 

When  in  Italy,  a  gentleman,  a  professor  of  natural  history,  had  two 
sent  him  from  the  coast  of  Barbary,  but  they  did  not  live  long;  he 
dissected  them,  and  his  idea  on  the  change  of  colour  is,  that  he  found 
they  had  four  skins  extremely  fine,  which  occasioned  the  different  colours. 
He  means  to  publish  his  opinion  soon.  It  may  be  so,  but  of  this  I  am 
positively  certain,  whatever  it  may  proceed  from,  they  have  their  different 
colours  peculiar,  distinct,  and  independent  of  each  other  and  of  them- 
selves. I  could  make  many  more  remarks,  but  wanting  capacity  to  ex- 
plain them,  I  thus  finish  my  little  description  of  these  animals. 

Having  occasion  to  change  the  man  who  used  to  buy  my  provision, 
another  was  recommended  to  me,  who  was  a  Jew.  I  thought  if  I  could 
procure  some  Bibles  from  the  British  consul  at  Alexandria,  through  the 
means  of  this  man,  I  might  distribute  some,  by  promising  him  a  profit : 
it  is  well  known  those  people  will  not  refuse  money  if  they  possibly  can 
help  it.  I  wrote  to  Alexandria  for  some,  and  as  I  was  entirely  ignorant 
in  what  manner  the  society  wished  them  to  be  disposed  of,  I  requested 
Mr.  Lee  to  inform  me  of  it.  The  answer  was,  that  "  as  to  the  money, 
it  was  of  the  least  consequence,"  leaving  it  to  me.  I  ordered  the 
Jew  to  go  to  all  the  Christians,  and  inform  them  what  books  I  had 
got.  The  plague  was  at  this  time  raging  abroad :  it  was  no  easy  task 
to  find  a  way  to  dispose  of  the  Bibles  without  risk  of  catching  the 
infection,  as  paper  is  susceptible.  The  first  Christian  who  came  for 
one  desired  to  see  it :  it  is  a  matter  of  much  consideration  when  a  man 
comes  to  the  determination  of  spending  so  large  a  sum  as  thirty  piastres, 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  481 

three  dollars.  I  sat  on  the  top  of  the  stairs :  he  ascended  some  steps, 
and  stood  near  enough  to  read  while  I  turned  over  the  leaves:  he 
bought  it  after  much  wrangling,  and  making  little  of  it,  in  hopes  to  get 
it  cheaper,  as  is  customary  in  those  parts  when  buying  or  selling.  I  re- 
commended to  this  young  man  to  let  his  friends  know  where  there  were 
more  to  be  had ;  but  so  much  for  Christians'  love  among  themselves, 
instead  of  doing  so,  the  pride  of  being  the  only  one  to  be  in  possession  of 
so  fine  a  book  would  have  frustrated  my  plan,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the 
Jew,  to  whom  I  had  promised,  on  selling  all,  to  give  a  bakshis.  The  next 
who  came  was  the  scrivan,  or  overseer  of  the  linen  fabric,  who  took 
five.  I  was  much  satisfied  at  my  success ;  this  was  six  out  of  eight. 
The  same  day  this  man  took  his  own  Bible  to  the  gate  of  the  governor's 
house,  where  the  governor  was  then  sitting,  as  is  the  custom  there,  and 
seeing  him  read  this  fine  book,  desired  to  know  what  it  was  about,  and 
asked  to  see  it.  He  told  him  to  read  some  of  it ;  and  I  suppose  he  read 
those  parts  in  the  Old  Testament  he  knew  the  Turks  were  acquainted  with. 
He  inquired  where  he  had  got  it:  the  man  telling  him  from  some  English 
in  Rosetta,  he  sent  to  Signor  Lcnzza,  our  agent  there,  desiring  him  to  get 
one  for  him,  sending  the  thirty  piastres  for  it.  The  other  I  had  left  I  sold 
to  another  Copt.  Had  it  concerned  any  other  cause,  I  should  not  have 
had  patience  to  have  passed  over  the  disagreeable  affronts  one  is  subject 
to  in  selling  things  to  those  people,  who  naturally  think  you  sell  them  from 
interested  views.  The  very  last  person  I  sold  to  affronted  me  grossly; 
but  on  such  an  occasion  I  was  indifferent  to  it.  They  all  informed  me  that 
some  friends  of  theirs  had  bought  them  for  two  dollars  in  Alexandria ; 
but,  as  I  saw  they  were  anxious  to  possess  them,  in  spite  of  all  their  chat- 
tering, I  was  obliged  to  keep  to  my  first  demand  of  thirty  piastres.  Being 
English,  I  made  it  a  rule  to  show  the  Arabs  with  whom  I  had  any  dealings 
that  we  had  but  one  word ;  and  when  they  know  people  to  be  particular 
on  that  point,  they  have  more  respect  and  confidence  in  any  future  dealing 
with  them. 

Having  sold  all  the  books,  I  sent  to  Mr.  Lee  for  more,  informing  him 
what  I  had  disposed  of  them  for,  when  he  sent  me  the  following  answer : 
"  The  cost  of  the  Bibles  is  from  forty-five  to  fifty  piastres ;  but  as  the 
principal  point  is  the  circulation  of  them,  they  can  be  distributed  for 

3q 


482  MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT. 

thirty,  if  more  cannot  be  procured  :  there  are  some  people  who  can  afford 
to  give  more  than  others."  Now  I  will  appeal  to  those  who  really  know 
the  Arabs  or  Copts,  whether  such  a  thing  can  take  place  in  that  country, 
as  to  make  one  pay  more  than  another.  Why  not  have  given  me  this 
information  in  the  first  letter,  when  I  requested  it  ?  I  own  I  was  at  that 
moment  vexed.  To  tell  an  Arab  Christian  that  Europeans  distribute 
those  books  out  of  humanity  and  brotherly  love,  that  they  may  have  the 
word  of  God,  and  that  we  give  them  for  less  than  they  cost,  out  of  christian 
love,  is  a  point  very  difficult  to  make  them  comprehend ;  and  let  any 
one  preach  such  a  doctrine  to  an  Arab  richer  than  another,  that,  on 
account  of  our  selling  the  books  to  the  poor  Arabs  for  less  than  they 
cost,  they  must  for  that  reason  pay  more,  it  would  be  preaching  to  the 
wind,  and  would  possibly  prevent,  in  a  great  measure,  the  distribution  of 
the  Bibles,  as  these  people  would  think  we  wished  to  impose  upon  them. 
If  indeed  we  could  establish  schools  upon  the  same  principle  as  in  India, 
where  the  morals  are  attended  to,  then  we  might  reap  the  benefit  of  the 
translation  of  the  blessed  Scriptures.  But  the  state  of  the  native  Christians 
in  Egypt  is  unfortunately  very  immoral,  and  I  see  no  chance  of  their 
being  much  better  while  under  the  Turks,  as  bad  examples  are  the  worst 
of  evils. 

Mr.  Lee  sent  me  more  Bibles ;  but  as  I  was  confident  I  could  not  get 
more  than  thirty  piastres,  as  they  had  never  been  sold  for  so  much  before, 
my  enthusiasm  began  to  give  way.  I  sold  only  two  more,  which  I  had 
promised  :  the  rest  I  returned. 

The  oshour  plant,  mentioned  by  Norden,  and  lastly  by  Sheik  Ibrahim, 
on  our  first  voyage  to  Nubia,  in  August,  1816,  was  then  in  full  bearing. 
On  examination,  it  struck  me  the  silky  texture  in  the  inside,  by  being 
properly  cultivated,  might  be  rendered  serviceable.  The  fruit  is  of  dif- 
ferent sizes :  I  have  seen  some  as  large  as  an  ostrich  egg  or  more ;  the 
outside  rind  is  full  of  a  thick  milky  juice  ;  the  pod  that  contains  the  silk 
is  in  the  centre,  and  detached  from  the  outside  rind  by  fibrous  strings, 
which  are  puffed  up  and  hollow  over  it.  By  cutting  a  branch  off,  the  juice 
runs  out  in  great  quantities.  It  has  never  been  cultivated.  By  the  little 
experiment  I  have  been  able  to  make,  I  am  certain  it  will  spin  well.  I 
have  some  of  the  silk  and  some  of  the  inside  pods.  I  felt  much  interested 
in  this  plant,  and  particularly  so,  as  the  Mameluke  I  have  mentioned 


MRS.  BELZONI'S  TRIFLING  ACCOUNT.  483 

before,  seeing  me  very  anxious  about  it,  told  me,  that  in  Dongola  they 
made  all  their  ropes  from  the  branches  of  this  plant,  and  were  much 
stronger  than  those  made  from  the  palm  or  date  tree ;  and,  by  his  de- 
scription, it  was  prepared  in  the  same  manner  we  do  hemp.  This  plant 
is  to  be  met  with  in  Syria,  in  the  Lower  and  Upper  Egypt,  and  Nubia  j 
and  very  possibly  in  Greece.  I  think  it  would  thrive  well  in  Malta,  as 
it  does  not  seem  to  require  good  earth :  I  have  observed  it  grow  near 
mountains  and  in  sandy  soils,  where  it  is  supplied  with  plenty  of  fresh 
water.  Though  I  have  not  been  in  the  Ionian  Islands,  I  have  reason  to 
think  it  would  do  well  there.  It  produces  in  its  wild  state  much  more 
than  the  cotton  plant.  The  juice  is  of  an  astringent  quality.  I  think 
the  plant  should  not  be  gathered  before  it  is  perfectly  dry,  as  it  must 
give  a  greater  strength  to  the  silk.  It  requires  some  process  after  being 
taken  out  of  the  pod,  as  the  least  air  disturbs  it,  and  it  gets  into 
the  eyes. 


THE   END. 


LONDON: 

7MKTZD    BV    THOMAS    DAVISON,    WHIT1FRURS- 


BOUND    TO    PLEASE 

'MM' 


uunu      i  u      runsc 


k     JULY. 67 


