Theory of Legislation
Jeremy Bentham (R. Hildreth, trans.) (1876)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Jeremy Bentham's 'Theory of Legislation', translated from the French of Étienne Dumont by R. Hildreth (London: Trübner, 1876). Scan via Internet Archive (Digital Library of India). Runs complete through the work's conclusion. This 1876 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THEORY


OF


LEGISLATION;


BY


JEREMY BENTHAM.


TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF ETIENNE DUMONT,
BY


R. HILDRETH.


LONDON:
TRUBNER & CO., 57 & 59, LUDGATE HILL.


MDOCCLEXYVI. |


LON Don:
WERTHEIMNMER, LEA AME CO., FPRINTERS,
OIERCUS PLACE, FINSBURY CIRCUS.


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE


Whatever may be thought of the Principle of Utility, when
considered as the foundation of morals, no one now-a-days will
undertake to deny that it is the only safe rule of legislation.

To establish and illustrate this proposition, and to show how
it ought to be, and might be carried into practice, was the aim
and end of Bentham’s life and writings.

Bacon derives his fame from the fact that he was the first who
fully appreciated and formally laid down the proposition, now
familiar to everybody, that experiment and observation are the
only solid bases of the physical sciences. In the moral sciences,
and especially in legislation, the principle of utility is the only
certain guide; and, in the estimation of an impartial posterity,
Bentham will rank with Bacon, as an original genius of the first.
order.

Already, upon the continent of Europe, his writings have at-
' tained the highest reputation. In England and America, though
frequently spoken of, they are little read; though they are often
criticised, or sneered at, by persons who have never seen them,
, and who are totally ignorant of their contents. This circum-
. stance is easily explained. Bentham was born and bred in Eng-
land, and spent all his life there; but his works, in any compact


iv PREFACE.


and collected form, exist only in French. He published ‘many ‘
treatises in English ; but for the generality of readers they have
very few attractions. He was not skilful in the art of composi-
tion; he did not possess the gift of eloquence. Though endowed
with a great genius for investigation, he lacked the talent of com-
municating his ideas. During a long life, devoted solely and
assiduously to the study of jurisprudence, besides his occasional
publications, he produced an immense mass of manuscripts, con-
taining a fund of most valuable ideas, but unshaped, unarranged,
and in a state quite unfit for publication. Fortunately for the
cause of science, these materials were not left to perish ; an inter-
preter, a compiler, a spokesman was found, every way worthy of
the task he assumed.

Dumont, a citizen of Geneva, whom political troubles had
driven from his own country, after a residence of some years at
St Petersburg, where he gained a high reputation as a preacher
of the Reformed Church, came to London under the patronage of
the Lansdowne family, and there made Bentham’s acquaintance.
He became his friend and disciple, was permitted to examine and
to study his manuscript treatises; and, having discovered the
value of this hidden treasure, he solicited the task of arranging,
condensing, filling out, compiling, and translating into the French
language.

But Dumont’s relation to the writings of Bentham will best
be explained in his own words. ‘‘If, in labouring upon these
manuscripts,” he says,* ‘I had been able to confine myself to a
‘mere translation, I should be more tranquil as to my success;
‘but I am not in a position so fit to inspire me with confidence.
‘f owe it to the public not to conceal my share in this compila-
‘tion; I owe it to the author to declare, that he only yielded to
the solicitations of friendship, and that he often unwillingly


Freliminary Discourse to the first edition of the Treatise on Legie


PREFACE. Vv


é


gave up to me works unfinished, and sometimes materials un-
formed, '

“In giving a general idea of my part in this undertaking, I
begin with a declaration which ought to shield me from undeserved.
blame, as well as from the distress of unmerited praise. I declare
that I have no share, no claim of association, in the composition
of these works. They belong entirely to the author, and to him
alone. The more I esteem them, the more desirous am I to
disavow an honour which would be a usurpation, as contrary to
the faith of friendship as it is repugnant to my personal charac-
ter. This declaration, which I owe to myself, would, I know,
be superfluous if all readers were philosophers. Such will them-
selves discover, amid all the diversity of these writings, the
impress of one mind,—a unity of plan, an original genius, aa
analytic and profound in the general design as in the execution
of the parts. :

‘“‘ My labour, subaltern in its kind, has been limited to details.
It was necessary to make a choice among various observations
upon the same subject; to suppress repetitions; to throw light
upon obscurities; to bring together all that appertained to the
same subject; and to fill up those gaps which, in the hurry of
composition, the author had left. I have had more to retrench
than to add; more to abridge than to expand. The mass of
manuscripts put into my hands was considerable. I have had
much to do in attaining correctness, and preserving uniformity of
style; little or nothing as respects the fundamental ideas, A
profusion of riches left me only the care of economy. As
manager of this great fortune I have spared no pains to realize
it, and put it into circulation.

‘¢The changes I have made have varied with the manuscripts.
‘When I have found many treatises relative to the same subject,
but composed at different times and with different views, it has
been necessary to reconcile them, and to incorporate them


vi PREFACE,


together, so as to form a perfect whole. The author perksps
had thrown aside some occasional composition, which now would
not be interesting, or even intelligible. Unwilling that the
whole should perish, I have stripped it, like an abandoned house,
of everything worth preserving. When he has delivered him-
self up to abstractions too profound, to metaphysics, I de not say
too subtle, but too dry, I have endeavoured to give more develop-
ment to his ideas, to illustrate them by applications, by facts, by
examples; and I have allowed myself to scatter, with discretion,
some ornaments. I have been obliged to write out some entire
chapters, but always after hints and notes of the author; and the
difficulty of the task would have sufficed to bring me back toa
modest estimation of myself, if at any time I had been exposed
to the temptation of thinking otherwise.

‘‘The author’s Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation, regarded by a small number of enlightened judges as
one of those original productions which form an epoch and a
revolution in science, in spite of its philosophical merit, and
perhaps on account of that merit, produced no sensation, and
remained almost unknown to the public,—though in England,
more than elsewhere, a useful book may come into notice, though
it does not happen to be easy and agreeable. In using many
chapters of that work to form the General Principles of Legtsla-
tion, I have endeavoured to avoid what prevented its success, —
forms too scientific, sub-divisions too much multiplied, analysis
too abstract. I have translated not the words, but the ideas; I
have sometimes made an abridgment, and at others a commentary,
I have been guided by the advice and the hints of the author,
contained in a preface, written many years after the work itself ;
and I have found among his papers all the additions of any con-
sequence.

“ Upon considermg how much this ‘enterprise, which I
thought to confine to two or three volumes, has extended by


PREFACE, Vii


degrees, and what a vast career I have run through,* I regret
that the labour had not fallen into abler hands; yet I am encou-
raged to applaud my perseverance, convinced as I am that other-
wise these manuscripts would for a long time have remained
buried in their own bulk, and that the author, always rushing
forward, would never have found the leisure nor the courage to
give himself up to the ungrateful labour of a general revision.

‘¢ This ardour to produce, and this indifference to publication ;
this perseverance in the severest labours; and this disposition to
abandon his work at the moment of completion, presents a sin-
gularity which needs to be explained.

‘¢ As soon as Bentham had discovered the great divisions, the
great classifications of laws, he embraced legislation as a whole,
and formed the vast project of treating it in all its parts. He
considered it not as composed of detached works, but as forming
3, single work. He had before his eyes the general chart of the
science, and after that model he framed particular charts of all
its departments. Hence it follows that the most striking pecu-
liarity of his writings is their perfect correspondence. I have
found the earlier ones full of references to works which were
merely projected, but of which the divisions, the forms, the prin-
cipal ideas, existed already in separate tables. It is thus that,
having subjected all his materials to a general plan, each branch
of legislation occupies its appropriate place, and none is to be
found under two divisions. This order necessarily supposes an
author who has for a long time considered his subject in all its
relations; who masters the whole of it; and who is not in-
fluenced by a puerile impatience for renown.

‘‘T have seen him suspend a work almost finished, and com-
pose a new one, only to assure himself of the truth of a single
proposition which seemed to be doubtful. A problem in finance


* This refers to other works of Bentham, announced by Dumont as
ready for publication.


viil PREFACE.


has carried him through the whole of political economy. Some
questions of procedure obliged him to interrupt his principal
work till he had treated of judicial organization. This prepara-
tory labour, this labour in the mines, is immense. No one can
form an idea of it except by seeing the manuscripts, the cata-
logues, the synoptical tables in which it is contained.

‘But I am not writing a panegyric. It must be confessed that
the care of arrangement and correction has few attractions for the
genius of Bentham. While pushed on by a creative force he
feels only the pleasure of composition; when it becomes necessary
to shape, to put in order, to finish, he experiences nothing but
fatigue. If a work is interrupted the evil becomes irreparable ;
the charm vanishes; disgust succecds; and passion, once quenched,
can only be rekindled by a new object.

‘This same turn of mind has prevented him from taking any
part in the compilations which I now present to the public. It
was rarely that I was able to obtain any explanations, or even
that aid of which I was absolutely in need. It cost him too much
to suspend the actual course of his ideas, and to return again
upon old tracks. ;

‘‘ But it is, perhaps, to this kind of difficulty that I owe my
perseverance. If it had been my business only to translate, I
should soon have grown wearied of a task so uniform yet so diffi-
cult; while the labour of a free compilation flatters by a kind of
illusion, which lasts as long as it is useful, and vanishes when
the work is done.”

Among Dumont’s first publications from the manuscripts of
Bentham, was the treatise of which these volumes contain a trans-
lation. He afterwards brought out several other works, com-
piled in the same way, and from the same sources ; and it is only
in these compilations that we find anything like a clear and
complete development of the ideas of Bentham, or a full exposi-
tion of his system of legislation.


PREFACE, 1x


Public attention in America is every day more and more at-
tracted to the subject of Legal Reform; and the translator flatters
himself that he will have performed a useful and acceptable ser-
vice, in restoring to its native English tongue the following
treatise.

It includes a vast field, never before surveyed upon any regu-
lar plan, and least of all according to such principles as Bentham
has laid down. In the application of those principles he has,
doubtless, made some mistakes; for mistakes are of necessity inci-
dent to a first attempt. But he has himself furnished us with
the means of detecting those mistakes and of correcting them.
He asks us to receive nothing on his mere authority. He sub-
jects everything to the test of General Utility.


CONTENTS.


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE . ; ‘ : ; : - P 7


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.
Carrer I. The Principle of Utility . . . . .
— II. The Ascetic Principle . ‘
— III. The Arbitrary Principle; or, the “Principle of Sym-
pathy and Antipathy . : . 2 A
IV. Operation of these Prinviples upon Legislation . .
V. Further Explanations. Objections Answered
VI. The different kinds of Pleasures and Pains. .
VII. Pains and Pleasures considered as Sanctions .
— VIII. The Measure of Pleasures and Pains. , So tk
— IX. Circumstances which Affect Sensibility ;
— X. Analysis of Political Good and Evil. Their Diffusion
through Society ee
— XI. Reasons for Erecting Certain ee ints Offences.
~- XII, The Limits which Separate Morals from Legislation .
— XIII. False Methods of Reasoning on the —— of Legis-
lation . . ° . . . . .


PRINCIPL OF THE CIVIL CODE.


Introduction . ‘ ‘ F ‘ i ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ -


Part ffirst.


OBJECTS OF THE Crviz Law.


Carrer I. Rights and Obligations . . .« +« « «©
am ll. Ends of Civil Law 8 e ° ° ® e e 8


18
15
20
27
31
33


SES


<i


CONTENTS.


Cuarrer III. Relations between these Ends. - + + °*
— IV. Laws relatively to Subsistence . . . —


— Vz.
— V1.


— VII.


— VIII.
— IX.


— X.


Laws relatively to Abundance

Pathological Propositions upon which ihe Good of
Equality is Founded ‘ ‘ : : ae

Of Security . : ‘ ; : : ‘ :

Of Property . ‘ : ‘

Answer to an Objection .

Analysis of the Evils which result ho om At: (aks upon
Property . ‘ ; &

Opposition between Seranity oe aga °


— Xi.

— XII. Means of Uniting Security and Equality . ae
— XIII. Sacrifice of Security to Security e 3

— XIV. Of some Cases hable to be Contested . ‘ So
-— XV. Examples of Attacks upon Security. . ° °
— XVI. Forced Exchanges. ; .


— XVIL Power of the Laws over Bynocuatd a


DISTRIBUTION OF PROPERTY.


Cuarter I. Titles which constitute Property . : ‘ ; .
— II. Title by Consent. : ‘ ‘ . ‘ é
— ITI. Title by Succession . . ‘ ge. ‘ ;
— IV. Testaments . . . . «©. © «© «
— V. Rights to Services. Methods of acquiring them .

— VI. Community of Goods, or Tenancy inCommon. . .
-— VII. Distribntion of Loss . .- . «© «© «© «


PAGE
97

100

101


102
109
111
113


115
119
122
124
126
137
146
148


158
168
177
183
187
194
197


RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS ATTACHED TO SEVERAL PRIVATE CONDITIONS.


Introduction


Cyarrer I. Master and Servant. , ‘ ‘ ‘ . ae
— II. Of Slavery . ‘ ‘ ; ; ; : : ‘
-—- JI. Guardian and Ward : ‘ ‘ . ° ar ck
— iV. Father and Child ; ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ 7 é


-~ YV, Of Marriage * ° e * ° e e oe


19%
199
201
209
213
215


Introduction . ‘ ; :
Cuaprer I. Classification of Offences ‘. ‘


CONTENTS.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


Part first.


Or OFFENCES.


II. Sub-division of Offences . , ‘
ILI. Some other Divisions . :
IV. Evil of the Second Order, or nen ;
V. Evil of the First Order—Its Influence on Alar:
VI. The Influence of Intention on Alarm ;
VII. Position of the Delinquent—Its effect on Alarm


— VIII. The Influence of Motives on Alarm . :
IX. Facility or Difficulty of Preventing Offences—Their


——
=a
mee aie
ial
ws


Influence on Alarm . ;


X. Effect produced on Alarm by is proate or less


Facility of Secrecy . :
XI. Effect of the Delinquent’s Chiiracter on Alex
XII. Cases in which there is no Alarm . .
XIII. Cases in which there is no Greater ee
Alarm . ° ° ° . °
XIV. Grounds of J aabiieaitn: ‘ : . .


Part Second.


e e
®


then


PouiticaL REMEDIES AGAINST THE Evin oF OFFENCES.
Cuaptre I. Subject of this Part. . : : : .


II. Direct Means of Preventing Offences . ;
III. Chronic Offences.
IV. Supressive Remedies for Chronio Offences .
V. Observations on Martial Law . ‘ ‘
VI. Nature of Satisfaction .


VII. Reasons on which the Necessity of Satisfaction ii is


founded ‘ ° . *
VIII. The different Kinds of Satisfaction ‘ ‘
IX. The Quantity of Satisfaction . ; .
X. The Certainty of Satisfaction . ‘ :


XI. Pecuniary Satisfaction . . . : .


PAGER


239
241


24:7
249
251
252


256
257
258
264


265
266


271
272


277
279


281
282
283


286


xiv CONTENTS.
Cuaprer XII, Restitution in Nature ; ; . : oe
— “XIV. Honorary Satisfaction ; ‘ “le


XV. Remedies for Offences against Honour ‘ ° ,
XVI. Vindictive Satisfaction .


XVII. Substitutive Satisfaction ; or, Satisfaction at the


Expense of a Third Person : :


XVIII. Subsidiary Satisfaction at the Public pense .


Part Third,


Or PUNISHMENTS.


Caarter I. Punishments which ought not to be inflicted . ‘


TI. Proportion between Offences and Punishments . .
IfI. Of Prescription as regards Punishments . ‘
1V. Mistaken Punishments, or Punishments misapplicd .

V. Of requiring Security for Good Behaviour io te
VI. The Choice of Punishments. ‘ 2 ‘ .


VII. The Kinds of Punishments . : 3s
VIII. Justification of Variety in Paniannente : 3 :


IX. Examination of some Common Punishments a
X. The Power of Pardoning . ; é . ¢ °


Part frourth.


InpIRECT MEANS OF PREVENTING OFFENCES.


Introduction .
Cuarrer I, Means of taking away the Physical Power to do Harm


II. Prohibition of acquiring Knowledge which may be
turned toa Bad Purpose, ° . ° ,

III, Indirect Means of preventing the Wish to commit
Offences . ‘ 6%

IV. To change the Course of Dangewus Desires, and to
direct the Inclinations towards Amusements con-
formable to the Public Interest . ° . :

V. To satisfy certain Desires without Inj eae or with the
least possible Injury . © 8

VI. To avoid furnishing Encouragement is Crimea. .


PAGB
288
291
294
305
309


310
317


322
324
327
329
333
336
341
343
347
355


358
362


866


871


878


5938


CONTENTS.


Carrer VII. To increase Responsibility in proportion as Tempta-
tion increases . : . ° 8

VIII. To diminish the Sensibility es Temptation ; ;
IX. To strenghen the Impression of Punishments upon


the Imagination . ; ‘
—~ X. To facilitate Knowledge of the Fact of an Offence :
— XI. To prevent Offences by giving to many Persons an
Interest to prevent them . z
— XII. To facilitate the Means of recognising aaa finding
Individuals . ‘ . ; o %


— XIII. To increase the Difficulty of iecatia .
— XIV. To dimmish the Uncertainty of Bioncoations ead


Punishments . Fi : :
— XV. To prohibit Accessory Offences, i in andes to Seacent
the Principal Offence . ; : ‘i
— XVI. Cultivation of Benevolence . ; ‘ ——
— XVII. Employment of the Motive of Honour, or the Popu-
lar Sanction : : A ‘
— XVIII. Employment of the Motive of Religion , «4
— XIX. Use to be made of the Power of Instruction . .


-—- XX. Use to be made of the Power of Education « %

—  XXI. General Precautions against Abuses of Authority

— XXII. Means of diminishing the Bad Effects of Offences
General Result and Conclusion . ° F .


PAGE


396
397


399
402


415


416
419


429


423
427


432
4.34,
442,
445
449


467


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


CHAPTER I.
The Principle of Vislity.


THE PUBLIC Goo ought to be the object of the legislator; cenznaL
UTILITY ought to be the foundation of his reasonings. To know
the true good of the community is what constitutes the science of
legislation ; the art consists in finding the means to realize that


The principle of utsltty, vaguely announced, is seldom contra-
dicted ; itis even looked upon as a sort of common-place in politics
and morals. But this almost universal assent is only apparent.
The same ideas are not attached to this principle; the same value
is not given to it; no uniform and logical manner of reasoning
results from it.

To give it all the efficacy which it ought to have, that is, to
make it the foundation of a system of reasonings, three conditions
are necessary.

First,—To attach clear and precise ideas to the word uttlsty,
exactly the same with all who employ it.

Second,—To establish the unity and the sovereignty of this
principle, by rigorously excluding every other. It is nothing to
subscribe to it in general; it must be admitted without any
exception.

Third,—To find the processes of a moral arithmetic by which
uniform results may be arrived at.


2° . PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


Tho oanses of dissent from the doctrine of utility may all be
referred to two false principles, which exercise an influence, some-
times open and sometimes secret, upon the judgments of men.
If these can be pointed out and excluded, the true principle will
remain in purity and strength.

These three principles are like three roads which often cross
each ot'er, but of which only ono leads to the wished-for desti-
nation. The traveller turns often from one into another, and loses
in these wanderings more than half his time and strength. The
true route is however the easiest; it has mile-stones which cannot
be shifted, it has inscriptions, in a universal language, which can-
not be effaced; while the two false routes have only contradic-
tory directions in enigmatical characters. But without abusing
the language of allegory, let us seck to give a clear idea of the
true principle, and of its two adversaries.

Nature has placed man under the empire of pleasure and of
gatn. We owe to them all our ideas; we refer to them all our
judgments, and all the determinations of our life. He who pre-
tends to withdraw himself from this subjection knows not what he
says. His only object is to seck pleasure and to shun pain, even
at the very instant that he rejects the greatest pleasures or
embraces pains the most acute. These eternal and irresistible
sentiments ought to be the great study of the moralist and the
Iégislator. The principle of utility subjects everything to these
two motives.

Utility is an abstract term. It expresses the property or ten-
dency of a thing to prevent some evil or to procure some good.
Evil is pain, or the cause of pain. Good is pleasure, or the cause
of pleasure. That which is conformable to the utility, or tho
interest of an individual, is what tends to augment the total sum
of his happiness. That which is conformable to the utility, or the
interest of a community, is what tends to augment the total sum
of the happiness of the individuals that compose it.

A principle is a first idea, which is made the beginning or
basis of a system of reasonings. To illustrate it by a sensible
image, it is a fixed point to which the first link of a chain is


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION, . 8


itteched. Such a principle must be clearly evident ;—to illustrate
and to explain it must secure its acknowledgment. Such are the
axioms of mathematics; they are not proved direetly ; it is enough
to show that they cannot be rejected without falling into
absurdity. ~
The logic of utility consists in setting out, in all the operations
of the judgment, from the calculation or comparison of pains and
pleasures, and in not allowing the interference of any other idea.
TI am a partisan of the principle of utility when I measure my
approbation or disapprobation of a public or private act by its
tendency to produce pleasure or pain; when I employ the words
just, unjust, moral, immoral, good, bad, simply as collective terms
including the ideas of certain pains or pleasures ; it being always
understood that I use the words pain and pleasure in their ordi-
nary signification, without inventing any arbitrary definition for
the sake of excluding ccrtain pleasures or denying the e
of certain pains. In this matter we want no refinement, ‘n0
metaphysics. It is not necessary to consult Plato, nor Aristotle.
Pain and pleasure are what everybody feels to be sack=ihe pea-
sant and the prince, the unlearned as well as the philosopher.

He who adopts the principle of utility, esteems virtue to be a
good only on account of the pleasures which result from it; he
regards vice as an evil only because of the pains which it pro-
duces. Moral good is good only by its tendency to produce phy-
sical good. Moral evil is evil only by its tendency to produce
physical evil; but when I say physical, I mean the pains and
pleasures of the soul as well as the pains and pleasures of sense.
I have in view man, such as he is, in his actual constitution.

If the partisan of the principle of utility finds in the common
list of virtues an action from which there results more pain than
pleasure; he does not hesitate to regard that pretended virtue as
a vice; he will not suffer himself to be imposed upon by the
general error; he will not lightly believe in the policy of employ-
ing false virtues to maintain the true.

If he finds in the common list of offences some indifferent


action, some innocent pleasure, he will not hesitate to transport
32 '


4 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


this pretended offence into the class of lawful actions; he will
pity the pretended criminals, and will reserve his indignation for
their persecutors.


CHAPTER II.
The Ascetic Principle.*

Tas principle is exactly the rival, the antagonist of that which
we have just been examining. Those who follow it have a horror
of pleasures. Everything which gratifies the senses, in their
view, is odious and criminal. They found morality upon priva-
tions, and virtue upon the renouncement of one’s self. In one
word, the reverse of the partisans of utility, they approve every-
thing which tends to diminish enjoyment, they blame everything
which tends to augment it.

This principle has been more or less followed by two classes of
men, who in other respects have scarce any resemblance, and who
even affect a mutual contempt. The one class are philosophers,
the other, devotees. The ascetic philosophers, animated by the
hope of applause, have flattered themselves with the idea of seem-
ing to rise above humanity, by despising vulgar pleasures. They
expect to be paid in reputation and in glory, for all the sacrifices
which they seem to make to the severity of their maxims. The
ascetic devotees are foolish people, tormented by vain terrors.
Man, in their eyes, is but a degenerate being, who ought to punish
himself without ceasing for the crime of being born, and never to
turn off his thoughts from that gulf of eternal misery which is
ready to open beneath his feet. Still, the martyrs to these absurd
opinions have, like all others, a fund of hope. Independent of
the worldly pleasures attached to the reputation of sanctity, these
atrabilious pietists flatter themselves that every instant of volun-
tary pain here below will procure them an age of happiness in


* Ascetic, by its etymology, signifies one who ewercises. It was ap-
plied to the monks, to indicate their favourite practices of devotion and
penitence.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. B


another life. Thus, even the ascetic principle reposes upon some
false idea of utility. It acquired its ascendancy only through
mistake.*

The devotees have carried the ascetic principle much further
than the philosophers. The philosophical party has confined
itself to censuring pleasures; the religious sects have turned the
inflietion of pain into a duty. The stoics said that pain was not
an evil; the Jansenists maintained that it was actually a good.
The philosophical party never reproved pleasures in the mass, but
only those which it called gross and sensual, while it exalted the
pleasures of sentiment and the understanding. It was rather a
preference for the one class, than a total exclusion of the other.
Always despised or disparaged under its true name, pleasure
was received and applauded when it took the titles of honour,
glory, reputation, decorum, or self-esteem.

Not to be accused of exaggerating the absurdity of the ascetics,
I shall mention the least unreasonable origin which can be assigned
to their system,

It was early perceived that the attraction of pleasure might
seduce into pernicious acts; that is, acts of which the good was
not equivalent to the evil. To forbid these pleasures, in consi-
deration of their bad effects, is the object of sound morals and
good laws. But the ascetics have made a mistake, for they have
attacked pleasure itself; they have condemned it in general ;
they have made it the object of a universal prohibition, the sign
of a reprobate nature; and it is only out of regard for human
weakness that they have had the indulgence to grant some parti-
cular exemptions.


* This mistake consists in representing the Deity in words, as a being
of infinite benevolence, yet ascribing to him prohibitions and threata
which are the attributes of an implacable being, who uses his power_only
to satisfy his malevolence.

We might ask these ascetic theologians what life is good for, if not for
the pleasures it procures us ?—and what pledge we have for the good-
ness of God in another life, if he has forbidden the enjoyment of this ?


6 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


CHAPTER III.


Section I.
The Arbitrary Principle; or the Principle of Sympathy and

Antipathy.
Tus principle consists in approving or blaming by sentiment,
without giving any other reason for the decision except the deci-
sion itself. J love, J hate; such is the pivot on which this prin-
ciple turns. An action is judged to be good or bad, not because
it is conformable, or the contrary, to the interest of those whom
it affects, but because it pleases or displeases him who judges.
He pronounces sovcreignly; he admits no appeal; he does not
think himself obliged to justify his opinion by any consideration
relative to the good of society. ‘It is my interior persuasion ;
it is my intimate conviction; I feel it; sentiment consults no-
‘body ; the worse for him who docs not agrce with me—he is not
aman, he is a monster in human shape.” Such is the despotic
tone of these decisions.

But, it may be asked, are there men so unreasonable as to dic-
tate their particular sentiments as laws, and to arrogate to them-
selves the privilege of infallibility ? What you call the principle
of sympathy and antipathy is not a principle of reasoning; it is
rather the negation, the annihilation of all principle. A true
anarchy of ideas results from it; since every man having an
equal right to give his sentiments as a universal rule, there will
no longer be any common measure, no ultimate tribunal to which
We can appeal.

Without doubt the absurdity of this principle is sufficiently
manifest. No man, therefore, is bold cnough to say openly, ‘I
wish you to think as I do, without giving me the trouble to
reason with you.” Every one would revolt against a pretension
so absurd. Therefore, recourse is had to diverse inventions of
disguise. Despotism is veiled under some ingenious phrase. Of
this the greater part of philosophical systems are a proof.

One man tells you that he has in himsclf something which has


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. q


been given him to teach what is good and what is evil; and this
he calls either his conscience or his moral sense. Then, working
at his ease, he decides such a thing to be good, such another to
be bad. Why? Because my moral sense tells me so; because
my conscience approves or disapproves it.

Another comes and the phrase changes. It is no longer the
moral sense,—it is common sense which tells him what is good and
what is bad. This common sense is a sense, he says, which be-
longs to everybody ; but then he takes good care in speaking of
every body to make no account of those who do not think as he does.

Another tells you that this moral sense and this common sense
are but dreams; that the understanding determines what is good
and what is bad. His understanding tells him so and s0; all
good and wise men have just such an understanding as he has.
As to those who do not think in the same way, it is a clear proof
that their understandings are defective or corrupt.

Another tells you that he has an eternal and immutable rule of
right, which rule commands this and forbids that ; then he retails
to you his own particular sentiments, which you are obliged to
receive as so many branches of the eternal rule of right.

You hear a multitude of professors, of jurists, of magistrates,
of philosophers, who make the /aw of nature echo in your ears.
They all dispute, it is true, upon every point of their system;
but no matter—each one proceeds with the same confident intre-
pidity, and utters his opinions as so many chapters of the law of
nature. The phrase is sometimes modified, and we find in its
place, natural right, natural equity, the rights of man, &c.

One philosopher undertakes to build a moral system upon what
he calls truth; according to him, the only evil in the world is
lying. If you kill your father, you commit a crime, because it
is a particular fashion of saying that he is not your father. Every-
thing which this philosopher does not like, he disapproves under
the pretext that it is a sort of falsehood—since it amounts to
asserting that we ought to do what ought not to be done.

The most candid of these despots are those who say openly,
‘‘T am one of the elect; and God takes care to enlighten the elect


8 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION,


as to what is good and what is evil. He reveals himself to me,
and speaks by my mouth. All you who are in doubt, come and
receive the oracles of God.”

All these systems, and many more, are at bottom only the
arbitrary principle, the principle of sympathy and antipathy,
masked under different forms of language. The object is, to
make our opinions triumph without the trouble of comparing
them with the opinions of other people. These pretended prin-
ciples are but the pretext and the support of despotism,—at
least of that despotism of disposition which has but too much
inclination to develop itself in practice whenever it can do so
with impunity. The result is, that with the purest intentions
a man torments himself, and becomes the scourge of his fellows.
If he is of a melancholy disposition, he falls into a sullen taci-
turnity, and bitterly deplores the folly and the depravity of man.
If he is of an irascible temper, he declaims furiously against
all who do not think as he does. He becomes one of those
ardent persecutors who do evil in the spirit of holiness; who
blow the fires of fanaticism with that mischievous activity which
the persuasion of duty always gives; and who brand with the
reproach of perversity or of bad faith all who do not blindly adopt
the opinions which they hold sacred.

However, it is essential to observe that the principle of sym-
pathy and antipathy must often coincide with the principle of
utsiity. To love what benefits us, to hate what hurts us, is a
universal principle of the human heart. It thus happens that,
from one end of the world to the other, acts beneficent or
hurtful are regarded with the same sentiments of approbation
or dislike. Morality and jurisprudence, led by this kind of
instinct, have often reached the great end of utility without
having a clear idea of it. But these sympathies and these anti-
pathies are not a sure and invariable guide. Let a man refer
his happiness or his misery to an imaginary cause, and he
becomes subject to unfounded loves and unreasonable hates.
Superstition, charlatanism, the spirit of sect and party, repose
almost entirely upon blind sympathies and blind antipathies.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 9


Incidents the most frivolous,—a difference in fashion, a slight
diversity of opinion, a variety in taste, are enough to present a
man to the eyes of another under the aspect of an enemy.
What is history, but a collection of the absurdest animosities,
the most useless persecutions? A prince conceives an antipathy
against certain men who use some indifferent expressions; he
calls them Arians, Protestants, Socinians, Deists. He builds
scaffolds; the ministers of the altar array the executioners;
the day on which the heretics perish in the flames is celebrated
as a national festival. In Russia a civil war was undertaken
to settle a long controversy as to the number of fingers which
ought to be used in making the sign of the cross. The citizens
of Rome and Constantinople were divided into implacable fac-
tions about players, chariotecrs, and gladiators; and to give
importance to such shameful quarrels, it was pretended that the
success of the greens or of the blues presaged abundance or famine,
victories or reverses to the empire.

Antipathy may sometimes be found in unison with the prin-
ciple of utility ; but even then it is not a good basis of action.
When a person through resentment prosecutes a robber before
the tribunals, the action is certainly good, but the motive is
dangerous. If it sometimes produces good actions, more often
its fruits are fatal. The sole basis of action always surely good
is the consideration of utility. Good is often done from other
motives; it is never constantly done except from that considera-
tion alone. Sympathy and antipathy must be subjected to it, to
prevent them from becoming hurtful; but the principle of utility
is its own regulator; it admits no other; and it is impossible to
give that principle too great extension.

To sum up ;—the ascetic principle attacks utility in front. The
principle of sympathy neither rejects it nor admits it; it pays no
attention to it; it floats at hazard between good and evil. The
ascetic principle is so unreasonable, that its most senseless foi-
lowers have never attempted to carry it out. The principle of
sympathy and antipathy does not prevent its partisans from hav-
ing recourse to the principle of utility. This last alone neither


10 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


asks nor admits any exception. Qus non eub me contra me; that
which is not under me is against me; suchisitsmotto. Accord-
ing to this principle, to legislate is an affair of observation and
calculation; according to the ascetics, it is an affair of fanaticism;
according to the principle of sympathy and antipathy, it is a
matter of humour, of imagination, of taste. The first method is
adapted to philosophers; the second to monks; the third is the
favourite of wits, of ordinary moralists, of men of the world, of
the multitude.


Section II.
Causes of <Antipathy.


Antipathy exercises so powerful an influence over morals and
legislation, that it is important to investigate the principles which
give birth to it.

First Causr.—Repugnance of Sense.—Nothing is more common
than the transition from a physical to a moral antipathy, espe-
cially with feeble minds. A multitude of innocent animals suffer
a continual persecution, because they have the misfortune to be
thought ugly. Everything unusual has the power of exciting in
us a sentiment of disgust and hatred. What is called a monster
is only a being which differs a little from others of its kind.
Hermaphrodites, whose sex is undetermined, are regarded with
a sort of horror, only because they are rare.

Seconp Cause.— Wounded Pride.—He who does not adopt my
opinion, indirectly declares that he has but little respect for my
knowledge upon the point in dispute. Such a declaration offends
my sclf-love, and shows me an adversary in this man, who not
only testifics a degree of contempt for me, but who will propa-
gate that contempt in proportion as his opinion triumphs over
mine.

Tuirp Cause.— Power controlled.—Even when our vanity does
not suffer, we perceive by the difference of tastes, by the resistance
of opinions, by the shock of interests, that our power is limited,
that our dominion, which we desire to extend everywhere, is


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. lt


bounded on every side. This compulsive feeling of our own
weakness is a secret pain, a germ of discontent against
others.

Fourts Cause.—Confidence in the future weakened or destroyed.
—— We love to belicve that men are such as we imagine our hap-
piness requires them to be. Every act on their part which tends
to diminish our confidence in them, cannot but give us a secret
disgust. An example of falschood makes us see that we cannot
always rely upon what they say, or what they promise; an
example of absurdity inspires a general doubt as to their reason,
and consequently as to their conduct. An act of caprice, or of
levity, makes us conclude that we cannot rely on their affections.

Firru Cause.—TZhe desire of unaniumity.—Unanimity pleases
us. This harmony of sentiment is the only pledge we can have,
apart from our own reason, of the truth of our opinions, and of
the utility of the actions founded upon those opinions. Besides,
we love to dwell-upon subjects to our taste; it is a source of
agreeable recollections and of pleasing hopes. The conversation
of persons whose taste conforms to ours, augments this fund of
pleasure, by fixing our attention upon agrecable objects, and pre-
senting them to us under new points of view.

Srxtn Cause.—L£nry.—He who enjoys himself without doing
harm to anybody, ought not, it would sccm, to have enemies.
Yet it may be said that his cnjoyment impoverishes those who
do not partake it.

It is a common observation, that envy acts with most
force against recent advantages, while it spares older ones.
Thus it is, that the word upstart always has an injurious accep-
tation. It expresses a new success; envy adds, as accessory
ideas, humbling recollections and a feigned contempt.

Envy makes ascetics. The differences of age, of wealth, of
circumstances, prevent all men from having equal enjoyments;
but the severity of privation can reduce all to the same level.
Envy inclines us towards rigid speculations in morals, as a
means of reducing the amount of pleasures. It has been said,—
and with reason,—that a man who should be born with an organ


12 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


of pleasure, which the rest of us do not possess, would be pur-
sued as a monster.

Such is the origin of antipathy ; such is the collection of sen-
timents of which it is composed. To moderate its violence, let
us recollect that there is no such thing as a perfect conformity
even between two individuals; that if we yield to this unso-
ciable sentiment, it will always go on increasing, and will con-
tract more and more the circle of our good-will and of our plea-
sures; that, in general, our antipathies re-act against ourselves ;
that it is in our power to enfeeble, and even to extinguish them,
by banishing from our minds the ideas of those objects by which
they are excited. Fortunately, the causes of sympathy are con-
stant and natural, while the causes of antipathy arc accidental
and transitory.

Moral writers may be arranged in two classes; those who
labour to extirpate the venomous plants of antipathy; and those
who seek to propagate them. The first class are apt to be calum-
niated; the others gain respect and popularity, because, under
the specious veil of morals, they are in the service of vengeance
and ofenvy. The books which attain the most speedy celebrity,
are those which the demon of antipathy has dictated, such as
libels, works of party, satirical memoirs, &c. TZelemachus
did not owe its brilliant success to its morality, or to the charm
of its style; but to the general opinion that it contained a satire
upon Louis XIV. and his Court. When Hume, in his History,
wished to calm the spirit of party, and to treat the passions like
a chemist who analyzes poisons, ‘he mob of readers rose up
against him; they did not like to see it proved that men were
rather ignorant than wicked, and that past ages, always cxtolled
to depreciate the present, had been far more fertile in misfortunes
and crimes.

Fortunate for himself, fortunate is the writer who can give
himself up to these two false principles; to him belong the field
of eloquence, the employment of figures, the vehemence of style,
exaggeration of expressions, and all the vulgar vocabulary of the
passions. All his opinions are dogmas, eternal, immutable truths,


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 13


as immoveable as God and nature. As a writer, he exercises
the power of a despot, and proscribes those who do agree with
him.

The partisan of the principle of utility is in a position by no
means 80 favourable toeloquence. His means are as different as
his object. He can neither dogmatize, dazzle, nor astonish. He
is obliged to define all his terms, and always to employ the same
word in the same sense. He consumes a long time in getting
ready, in making sure of his foundation, in preparing his instru-
ments; and he has everything to fear from that impatience which
grows weary with preliminaries, and which wishes to arrive in a
moment at great results. However, this slow and cautious
advance is the only one which leads to the end desired; for if
the power of spreading truth among the multitude belongs to
eloquence, the power of discovering it appertains only to
analysis.


CHAPTER IV.

Operation of these principles upon Legislation.
THE principle of utility has never yet been well developed, nor
well followed out by any legislator ; but, as we have already
mentioned, it has penetrated from time to time into laws, from
its occasional alliance with the principles of sympathy and anti-
pathy. The general ideas of vice and virtue, founded upon a
confused perception of good and evil, have been sufficiently uni-
form in every essential point; and the early laws, without which
no society can exist, have been made in conformity with these
popular ideas.

The ascetic principle, though embraced with warmth by its
partisans in their private conduct, has never had much direct
influence upon the operations of government. On the contrary,
every government has had for its system and its object the acqui-
sition of strength and prosperity. The rulers of states have never
made evil an end; they have been seduced into it by false views


Fe PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


of greatness and power, or by private passions which have resulted
in public evila, The system adopted at Sparta—a discipline
which well entitles that community to be called a convent of
warriors—in relation to the circumstances of that state, was
necessary to its preservation, or, at least, was esteemed so by its
legislator; and under that aspect, was conformable to the prin-
ciple of utility. Many Christian states have permitted the estab-
lishment of monastic orders; but the vows are supposed to be
voluntary. To torment one’s self was esteemed a work of merit ;
to torment another against his will has been always regarded as
a crime. St. Louis wore sackcloth, but he obliged none of his
subjects to wear it.

The principle which has exercised the greatest influence upon
governments, is that of sympathy and antipathy. In fact, we
must refer to that principle all those specious objects which
governments pursue, without having the general good for a single
and independent aim; such as good morals, equality, liberty,
justice, power, commerce, religion; objects respectable in them-
selves, and which ought to enter into the views of the Icgislator ;
but which too often lead him astray, because he regards them as
ends, not as means. He substitutes them for public happiness,
instead of making them subordinate to it.

Thus, a government, entirely occupied with wealth and com-
merce, looks upon socicty as a workshop, regards men only as
productive machines, and cares little how much it torments them,
provided it makes them rich. The customs, the exchanges, the
stocks, absorb all its thoughts. It looks with indifference upon
a multitude of evils which it might easily cure. It wishes only
for a great production of the means of enjoyment, while it is con-
stantly putting new obstacles in the way of enjoying.

Other governments esteem power and glory as the sole means
of public good. Full of disdain for those states which are ablo
to be happy in a peaccful security, they must have intrigues,
negotiations, wars and conquests, They do not consider of what
misfortunes this glory is composed, and how many victims theso
bloody triumphs require. The éclat of victory, the acquisition


‘


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 465


of a province, conceal from them the desolation of ‘their country,
and make them mistake the true end of government.

Many persons do not inquire if a state be well administered ;
if the laws protect property and persons; if the people are happy.
What they require, without’ giving attention to anything else, is
political liberty—that is, the most equal distribution which can
be imagined of political power. "Wherever they do not see the
form of government to which they are attached, they see nothing
but slaves; and if these pretended slaves are well satisfied with
their condition, if they do not desire to change it, they despise
and insult them. In their fanaticism they are always ready to
stake all the happiness of a nation upon a civil war, for the sake
of transporting power into the hands of those whom an invin-
cible ignorance will not permit to use it, except for their own
destruction.

These are examples of some of the phantasies which are sub-
stituted in politics, instead of the true search after happiness.
They do not grow out of an opposition to happiness; they are the
fruits of inadvertence or mistake. A small part of the plan of
utility is seized upon; an exclusive attachment is evinced for
that small part; in the pursuit of some particular branch of the
public good, the general happincss is disregarded; it is forgotten
that all these particular objects have only a relative value, and
that happiness alone has a value which is intrinsic.


CHAPTER V.
Further Explanations.— Objections answered.


Some trifling objections, some little verbal difficulties, may be
raised against the principle of utshty; but no real or distinct
objection can be opposed to it. In fact, how can it be contested
except by reasons taken from itself? To say that it is a dangerous
principle, is to say that it would be contrary to utility to consult
utility.

The difficulty upon this question grows out of a kind of per-


16 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


version of language. It has been customary to speak of virtue in
opposition to wtility. Virtue is described as the sacrifice of our
interest to our duties.

To convey clear ideas upon this subject, it should be explained,
that there are interests of different orders, and that different
interests, in certain circumstances, are incompatible. Virtue is
the sacrifice of a less interest to a greater, of a momentary to a
durable, of a doubtful to a certain interest. Every idea of virtue
not derived from this notion, is as obscure in conception as it is
precarious in motive.

Those who, for the sake of accommodation, are willing to dis-
tinguish between politics and morals, to assign utility as the
principle of the one, and justice as the foundation of the other,
announce nothing but confused ideas. The only difference
between politics and morals is, that one directs the operations of
governments, and the other the actions of individuals; but their
object is common; it is happiness. That which is politically
good cannot be morally bad, unless we suppose that the rules of
arithmetic, true for large numbers, are false for small ones.

While we imagine that we follow the principle of utility, we
may nevertheless do evil. <A feeble and narrow soul deceives
itself by taking into consideration but asmall part of evil or of good.
An ardent disposition deceives itself by giving an extreme im-
portance to a particular good, by which all consecutive evils are
concealed from its sight. That which constitutes a bad man, is
the habit of pleasures injurious to others; but this very habit
supposes the absence of many kinds of pleasure. One ought not
to hold utility responsible for mistakes contrary to its nature, and
which it alone is able to rectify. If aman calculates badly, it is
not arithmetic which is in fault; it is himself. If the charges
which are alleged against Machiavel are well founded, his errors
did not spring from having consulted the principle of utility, but
from having applied it badly. This fact, the author of the Antt-
Machiavel has clearly perceived. He refutes the Prince by
making it appear that its maxims are fatal; and that bad faith is
bad policy.


‘¢


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 17


Those who, from reading Cicero’s Offices and the Platonic
moralists, have a confused notion of the useful as opposed to the
honest, often quote that observation of Aristides upon the scheme
which Themistocles was unwilling to disclose, except to him alone.
*< The project of Themistocles is very advantageous,’’ said Aristides
to the assembled people, “but it is very unjust.”” Here seems to
be a decided opposition between the useful and the just. Not so.
It is only a comparison of good and evil. Unjust is a term
which presents the collective idea of all those evils which result
from a situation in which men can no longer trust one another.
Aristides might have said, ‘“‘ The project of Themistocles would be
useful for a moment, but injurious for ages; what it would give
is nothing in comparison with what it would take away.’’*

It is sometimes said that the principle of utility is only a
revival of epicureanism. The ravages which that doctrine made
in morals are well known. It was adopted by the most corrupt
of men.

It is true that Epicurus alone of all the ancients had the merit
of having known the true source of morals; but to suppose that
his doctrine leads to the consequences that have been imputed to
it, is to suppose that happiness may become the enemy of happi-
ness. Sic presentibus utaris voluptatibus, ut futurts non noceas,
—So use present pleasures as not to lessen those which are to
come. In this sentiment Seneca coincides with Epicurus; and
what more can morality desire than the retrenchment of every
pleasure injurious to one’s sclf or to others? Now this is the
very principle of utility.

But, it is again objected, every one makes himself the judge
of his own utility, and upon this system every obligation will
lose its force the moment people cease to see their interest in
regarding it.

* This anecdote is not worth being cited except to clear up the sense
of words. Its falsity has been proved. See Mitford’s History of
Greece. Plutarch wished to compliment the Athenians; but he would
have been much embarrassed to reconcile the greater part of their history


with this noble sentiment.
Cc


18 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


Every one makes himself the judge of his own utility; such
is the fact, and such it ought to be; otherwise man would not
be a rational agent. He who is not a judge of what is agreeable
to him, is less than achild; he is an idiot. The obligation
which binds men to their engagements is nothing but the percep-
tion of a superior interest, which prevails over an infcrior inte-
rest. A man is bound not only by the particular utility of such
or such an engagement; but when the engagement becomes
onerous to one of the parties, he is still bound by the general
utility of engagements; by the confidence in his word which
every sensible man wishes to inspire, in order that he may be
considered a man of truth, and enjoy the advantages incident to
the reputation of probity. It is not the engagement itself which
constitutes the obligation; for some engagements are void, and
some are unlawful. Why? Because they are esteemed inju-
rious. It is, then, the utility of a contract which gives force
to it.

It is easy to reduce to a calculation of good and of evil all the
acts of the most exalted virtue; and virtue is neither degraded
nor weakened by being represented as an effect of reason, and
being explained in a simple and intelligible manner.

If we refuse to acknowledge the principle of utility, we fall
into a complete circle of sophistry. I ought to keep my promise.
Why? Because my conscicnce bids me do it. How do you
know that your conscience bids you do it? Because I have
an interior feeling to that effect. Why ought you to obey your
conscience * Because God is the author of my nature, and to
obey my conscience is to obey God. Why ought you to obey
God? Because it is my first duty. How do you know that?
My conscience tells me so, &c., &. We can never get out of
this circle, which presently becomes the source of obstinate and
inveterate error. For if we judge of everything by fecling, there
is no means left to distinguish the dictates of an enlightened con-
science from those of a blinded one. All persecutors will have
the same pretence; all fanatics the same right.

If you desire to reject the principle of utility because it may


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 19


be ill applied, what is there to put in its place? Where is the
rule which carinot be abused? Where is this infallible guide?

Will you substitute for it some despotic principle, which
orders men, like passive slaves, to act so and so, without knowing
why ?

Will you substitute for it some fluctuating and capricious
principle, founded only upon your own intimate and particular
feelings?

If so, what motives will you hold out to induce people vo
follow you? Shall these motives be independent of interest?
In that case, if people do not agree with you, how will you
reason with them,—how bring them to terms? Whither will
you cite all the sects, all the systems, all the contradictions that
cover the world, if not to the tribunal of a common interest ?

The most obstinate opposers of the principle of utility are those
who take their stand upon what they call the religious principle.
They profess to take the will of God for the only rule of good
and evil. It is the only rule, they say, which has all the requi-
site characters; which is infallible, universal, sovereign, and so
on. I answer that the religious principle is not a distinct prin-
ciple by itself; it is only a particular form of one or the other of
those above deseribed. Unless God explains himself to each
individual by immediate acts and particular revelations, what is
called his will can only be what we presume to be such. How
does a man presume the will of God? From his own. Now
his particular will is always directed by one of the three prin-
ciples above described. How do you know that God forbids
such and such a thing? ‘Because it would be prejudicial to
the happiness of mankind,” answers the partisan of utility.
‘¢ Because it includes a gross and sensual pleasure,’’ says the
ascetic. ‘‘ Because it wounds the conscience, is contrary to
natural sentiments, and ought to be detested without stopping to
examine it,’”’—such is the language of antipathy.

But revelation, it will be said, is the direct expression of the
will of God. There is nothing left to be questioned or disputed.
Here is a guide far preferable to human reason.

c 2


20 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


‘Edo not answer indirectly that revelation is not universal;
that even among Christian nations there are many persons who
do not admit it; and that in morals and politics, some principle
‘of reasoning is necessary, Which is common to all men, But I
reply that revelation is not a system of politics nor of morals;
that all its precepts need to be explained, modified, and limited,
one by the other; that, taken in a literal sense, they would over-
turn tho world, annihilate self-defence, industry, commerce,
reciprocal attachments; and that ecclesiastical history is an in-
contestable proof of the frightful evils which have resulted from
religious maxims badly understood.

What a difference between the Protestant and Catholic theolo-
gians—between the moderns and the ancients! The gospel
morality of Paley is not the gospel morality of Nicole. That of
the Jansenists was not that of the Jesuits.

The interpreters of Scripture may be divided into three classes.
The first class have the principle of utility for their rule of
criticism; the second class are ascetics; the third class follows
the mixed impressions of sympathy and antipathy. The first,
far from excluding pleasure, quote it as a proof of the goodness
of God. The ascetics are its mortal enemies; if they ever permit
it, it is not for itself, but only in view of some certain necessary
end. The last approve it, or condemn it, according to their
fancy, without being guided by the consideration of consequences.
It seems, then, that revelation is not a principle by itself; for
nothing can be properly called a principle except that which
needs no proof, and which serves to prove everything else.


CHAPTER VI.
The different kinds of Pleasures and Pains.


We experience without ceasation a variety of sensations which
do not interest us, and which glide by without fixing our atten-
tion. Thus, the greater part of the objects which are familiar
to us no longer produce a sensation sufficiently vivid to cause us


4


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION, 21


either pain or pleasure. These names cannot be given except to
sensations which attract our attention; which make themselves
noticeable in the crowd; and of which we desire the continuance
or the end. These pleasurable perceptions are either simple or
complex: simple, when they cannot be decomposed into others;
complex, when they are composed of several simple pains or
eimple pleasures, or perhaps of a mixture of pleasures and pains.
What determines us to regard several pleasures as a complex
pleasure, and not as so many simple pleasures, is the nature of
the cause which excites them. We are led to consider all the
pleasures which are produced by the action of the same cause as
a single pleasure. Thus a theatrical show which gratifies many
of our senses at the same time by the beauty of decorationt,
music, company, dresses, and the action of performers, constitutes
a complex pleasure.

It has cost a great labour of analysis to prepare a complete
catalogue of the simple pleasures and pains. This catalogue has
a dryness which will repulse many readers, for it is not the work
of a writer of romance, who only seeks to please and move ; it is
a bill of particulars, it is the inventory of our sensations.


Secrron I,
Simple Pleasures.


Ist. Pleasures of Sense.—Those which can be immediately
referred to our organs independently of all associations, viz., the
pleasures of taste, of smell, of sight, of hearing, of touch, especially
the blessing of health, that happy flow of spirits, that perception
of an easy and unburdensome existence, which cannot be referred
to any of the senses 1n particular, but which appertains to all the
vital functions ; finally, the pleasures of novelty, those which we
experience when new objects are applied to our senses. They do
not form a separate class, but they play so conspicuous a part,
that it is necessary to mention them expressly.

Qnd, Pleasures of Riches—meaning thereby that kind of pleasure


22, PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


which we derive from the possession of a thing, which is a means
of enjoyment or security,—-a pleasure which is most lively at the
moment of acquisition.

8rd. Pleasures of Address.—Those which result from some
difficulty overcome, from some relative perfection in the handling
and employ of the instruments which aid in the attainment of
pleasure or utility. A person who touches a harpsichord, for
example, experiences a pleasure perfectly distinct from that of
hearing the same piece of music executed by another.

4th. Pleasures of Friendship—Those which accompany the
persuasion of possessing the good will of such and such indi-
viduals, and the right of expecting from them, in consequence,
spontaneous and gratuitous services.

5th. Pleasures of a good Reputation—Those which accompany
the possession or acquisition of the esteem and good will of the
people about us, the persons with whom we may have relations
or common interests; and as a fruit of this disposition on their
part, the right of expecting their voluntary and gratuitous ser-
vices, should we happen to need them.

6th. Pleasures of Power.—Those which a man experiences who
perceives in himself the means of disposing others to serve him
through their hopes or their fears; that is, by the fear of some
evil, or the hope of some good which he can do them.

7th. Pleasures of Piety—Those which accompany the per-
suasion of acquiring or possessing the favour of God; and the
power, in consequence, of expecting particular favours from him,
either in this life or in another.

Sth. Pleasures of Benevolence.—Pleasures which we are sensible
of tasting, when we contemplate the happiness of those who love
us. They may also be called pleasures of sympathy or pleasures
of the social affections. Their force is more or less expansive.
They have the power of concentrating themsclves into a narrow
circle, or of spreading over entire humanity. Benevolence extends
itself to animals of which we love the species or individuals; the
signs of their happiness affect us agreeably.

Sth. Pleasures of Malevolence.—They result from the sight or


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION, 23


the thought of pain endured by those beings who do not love us,
whether. men or animals, They may also be called pleasures of
the trascible passions, of antipathy, or of the anti-social affections.

10th. When we apply our mental faculties to the acquisition
of new ideas, and discover, or think we discover, interesting
truths in the moral or physical sciences, the pleasure which we
experience may be called the pleasure of knowledge. The trans-
port of joy which Archimedes felt at the solution of a difficult
problem, is easily understood by all those who have applied
themselves to abstract studies.

11th. When we have tasted such or such a pleasure, and in
certain cases even, when we have suffered such or such a pain,
we love to retrace them exactly in the precise order of all their
circumstances. These are the pleasures of memory. They are as
varied as the recollections in which they originate.

12th. But sometimes memory suggests certain pleasures, which.
we arrange in a different order, according to our desires; and to
which we join the most agreeable circumstances we have noticed,
either in our own life or in that of others. These are pleasures
of the tmagination. The painter who copies after nature, repre-
sents the operations of memory ; he who selects groups here and.
there, and arranges them fo suit himself, represents the workings.
of the imagination. New ideas in the arts and sciences, and all
discoveries which interest our curiosity, contribute to the pleasures.
of the imagination, which sees in these discoveries an extension
of its field of enjoyments.

13th. The idea of a future pleasure, joined to the expectation
of presently enjoying it, constitutes the pleasure of hope.

14th. Pleasures of Association —An object may be unable to
give any pleasure in itself; but if it is connected in the mind
with some other object which is agrecable, it participates in the
charm of that object. Thus the different incidents of a game of
chance, when we play for nothing, derive their interest from an
association with the pleasure of gaining.

15th. Lastly, there are pleasures founded upon pains. When
one has suffered, the cessation or diminution of the pain is itself


24 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


a pleasure, and often a very lively one. These may be called
pleasures of relief, or of deliverance. They are as various a8 our
pains.

Such are the materials of all our enjoyments. They unite,
combine, and modify each other in a thousand ways, so that it
requires some little attention and experience to discover, in a
complex pleasure, all the simple pleasures which are its
elements.

The delight which a country landscape gives, is composed of
different pleasures—pleasures of the senses, of the :magination,
and of sympathy. The varicty of objects and their various
colours, the flowers, the trees, the intermixture of light and
shade, gratify the sight; the car is soothed by the song of birds,
the murmur of fountains, and the gentle rustling which the wind
makes among the leaves; the air, embalmed with the perfume of
fresh vegetation, wafts agreeable odours; while its‘elastic purity
makes the circulation more rapid and exercise more agreeable.
Imagination and benevolence unite to embellish the scene, by
presenting ideas of wealth, of abundance, of fertility. The inno-
cence and happiness of the birds, the flocks, and the domestic
animals, furnish an agreeable contrast to the recollection of the
fatigues and agitations of human life. We transfer to the in-
habitants of the country all the pleasures with which the novelty
of these objects inspires us. Finally, a sentiment of gratitude to
that eternal Being, whom we regard as the author of all these
benefits, augments our confidence and our admiration.


Section II.
Simple Pains.


Ast. Pains of Privation.—These correspond to all the plea-
sures whose absence excites a sentiment of chagrin. They exist
in three principal modifications. First, if we desire a certain
pleasure, but have more fear of wanting it than hope of obtaining
it, the pain that results may be called pain of destre, or of unsatisfied


PRINGIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 25


desire. Second, if we have had strong hopes of enjoying the
pleasure question, but these hopes have suddenly failed, this
privation is a pain of disappointment. Third, if we have enjoyed
a good, or, what amounts to the same thing, if we have counted
strongly upon its possession, and then lose it, the sentiment
which this loss produces is called regret. That languor of soul
described by the word ennui is a pain of privation which cannot
be referred to any particular obiect, but to the absence of every
agreeable sensation.

2nd. Pans of Sense.—There are nine kinds: those of hunger
and thirst; those of taste, of smell, of touch, produced by the
application of substances which excite disagreeable sensations ;
those of hearing and sight, produced by sounds or images which
offend those organs, independently of association; excess of cold
or heat,—unless these pains ought to be referred to the sense of
touch; diseases of all kinds; finally, fatigue, whether of mind
or body.

3rd. Pains of Mal-address.—Those which are sometimes ex-
perienced in fruitless attempts or laborious efforts to apply to
their different uses the various kinds of toolsor instruments,
whether of pleasure or pain.

4th. Pains of Enmity.—Those which a man feels when he
believes himself an object of malevolence on the part of certain
individuals, and apprehends that he may be exposed in conse-
quence to experience the practical effects of their hatred.

Sth. Pains of a Bad Reputation.—Those which a man feels
when he believes himself actually an object of the malevolence or
contempt of the world which surrounds him, or exposed to become
so. They may also be called pains of dishonour, or pains of the
popular sanction.

6th. Pains of Piety.—They result from the fear of having
offended the Supreme Being, and of incurring his chastisements,
either in this life or in the life to come. If they are thought to
be well founded, they are called religious fears,—if ill founded,
they are denominated superstitions fears.

7th. Pains of Benevolence.—These are the pains which we


26 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISEACION:


experience at the sight or thought of the suffering whether of
men or animals. The emotions of pity make us weep at the
miseries of others, as well as at our own. They may also be
called patns of sympathy, patns of the soctal affections.

8th. Pains of Malevolence.—These are the pains we experience
at reflecting on the happiness of those we hate. They may also
be called pains of antipathy, pains of the anti-social affections.

9th, 10th, and llth. The pains of memory, of the amagination,
and of fear, are the exact reverse and counterpart of the pleasures
of corresponding names.

The labour of preparing this catalogue of pleasures and pains
is dry, but its utility is great. The whole system of morals, tho
whole system of legislation, rests upon a single basis, and that
basis is, the knowledge of pains and pleasures. It is the only
foundation of clear ideas upon those subjects. When we speak
of vices and virtues, of actions innocent or criminal, of a system
remuneratory or penal, what is it that we speak of? Of pains
and pleasures, and of nothing else. A reason in morals or politics,
which cannot be translated by the simple words pain or pleasure,
is an obscure and sophistical reason, from which nothing can be
concluded.

You wish, for example, to study the subject of offences,—that
great object which directs all legislation. This study, at bottom,
will be nothing but a comparison, a calculation, of pains and plea-
sures. You consider the er:minality or the evel of certain actions,
—that is, the pains which result from them to such and such
individuals; the motive of the delinquent,—that is, the expec-
tation of pleasure which led him to commit the action in question;
the advantage of the offence,—that is, the acquisition of pleasure
which has resulted from it; the legal punishment which ought to
be inflicted,—that is, what pain the guilty person ought to
undergo. It thus appears that the theory of pains and pleasures
is the sole foundation of all knowledge upon the subject of legis-
lation.

The more these two catalogues are examined, the more matter
for reflection they will be found to contain.


PRINCIELES OF LEGISLATION, 97


It is obvious at once, that pleasures and pains may be divided
into two classes: pleasures and pains which relate to others ;—
pleasures and pains purely personal. Those of bensvolence and of
malevolence compose the first class; all therest belong to the second.

It is worthy of observation that many kinds of pleasure exist
without having corresponding pains. Ist. Pleasures of novelty.
The sight of new objects is a source of pleasures, while the simple
absence of new objects is not felt as a pain. 2nd. Pleasures of
love. The want of them is not attended with positive pain,
except when there is disappointment. Some temperaments may
suffer from this want, but in general continence is in the power
of every one, and is very far from being a state of pain. 8rd.
Pleasures of riches and of acquisitions ; they have no corresponding
pains except where there is disappointment. To acquire is always
agreeable ; simple non-acquisition is not felt asa pain. 4th. It
is the same with the pleasures of power. Their possession is @
good; their mere absence is not an evil; it is only felt as an evil
by reason of some particular circumstance, such as privation or
disappointment. a


CHAPTER VII.
Pains and Pleasures considered as Sanctions.


Tne will cannot be influenced except by motives; but when we
speak of motives, we speak of pleasures or pains. A being whom
we could not affect either by painful or pleasurable emotions
would be completely independent of us.

The pain or pleasure which is attached to a law form what is
called its sanction. The laws of one state are not laws in another
because they have no sanction there, no obligatory force.

Pleasures and pains may be distinguished into four classes:

1st. Physical.
2nd. Moral.
8rd. Political.
4th. Religious.


28 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


Consequently, when we come to consider pains and pleasures
under the character of punishments and rewards, attached to
certain rules of conduct, we may distinguish four sanctions.

1st. Those pleasures and pains which may be expected in the
ordinary course of nature, acting by itself, without human inter-
vention, compose the natural or physical sanction.

2nd, The pleasures or pains which may be expected from the
action of our fellow-men, in virtue of their friendship or hatred,
of their esteem or their contempt—in one word, of their spon-
taneous disposition towards us, compose the moral sanction ; or it
may be called the popular sanction, sanction of public opinion,
sanction of honour, sanction of the pains and pleasures of sympathy.

3rd. The pleasures or pains which may be expected fiom the
action of the magistrate, in virtue of the laws, compose the pols-
tical sanction ; it may also be called the legal sanction.

4th. The pleasures or pains which may be expected in virtue
of the threats or promises of religion, compose the relsgtous
sanction,

A man’s house is destroyed by fire. Is it in consequence of
his imprudence ?—It is a pain of the natural sanction. Is it by
the sentence of a judge ?—It is a pain of the political sanction.
Is it by the malice of his neighbours ?—It is a pain of the popu-
larsanction. Isit supposed to be the immediate act of an offended
Divinity?—In such a case it would be a pain of the religious
sanction, or, vulgarly speaking, a judgment of God.

It is evident from this example that the same sort of pains
belong to all the sanctions. The only difference isin the circum-
stances which produce them.

This classification will be very useful in the course of this work.
It is an easy and uniform nomenclature, absolutely necessary to
distinguish and describe the different kinds of moral powers,
those intellectual levers which constitute the machinery of the
human heart.

These four sanctions do not act upon all men in the same
mannet, nor with the same degree of force. They are sometimes
rivals, sometimes allies, and sometimes enemies. When they


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION, 29


agree, they operate with an irresistible power ; when they are in
opposition, they mutually enfeeble each other; when they are
rivals, they produce uncertainties and contradictions in the con-
duct of men.

Four bodics of laws may be imagined, corresponding to these
four sanctions. The highest point of perfection would be reached
if these four cudes constituted butone. This perfection, however,
is as yet far distant, though it may not be impossible to attain it.
But the legislator ought always to recollect that he can operate
directly only by means of the political sanction. The three
others must necessarily be its rivals or its allies, its antagonists or
its ministers. If he neglects them in his calculations, he will be
deceived in his results; but if he makes them subservient to his
views, he will gain an immense power. There is no chance of
uniting them, except under the standard of utility.

The natural sanction is the only one which always acts; the
only one which works of itself; the only one which is unchange-
able in its principal characteristics. It insensibly draws all the
others to it, corrects their deviations, and produces whatever
uniformity there is in the sentiments and the judgments of men.

The popular sanction and the religious sanction are more
variable, more dependent upon human caprices. Of the two, the
popular sanction is more equal, more steady, and more constantly
in accordance with the principle of utility. The force of the
religious sanction is more unequal, more apt to change with times
and individuals, more subject to dangerous deviations, It grows
weak by repose, but revives by opposition.

In some respects the political sanction has the advantage of
both. It acts upon all men with a more equal force; it is clearer
and more precise in its precepts; it is surer and more exemplary
in its operations; finally, it is more susceptible of being carried
to perfection. Its progress has an immediate influence upon the
progress of the other two; but it embraces only actions of a cer-
tain kind; it has nota sufficient hold upon the private conduct of
individuals; it cannot proceed except upon proofs which it is
often impossible to obtain; and secrecy, force, or stratagem are


30 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


able to escape it. It thus appears, from considering what each
of these sanctions can effect, and what they cannot, that neither
ought to be rejected, but that all should be employed and directed
towards the same end, They are like magnets, of which the
virtue is destroyed when they are presented to each other by their
contrary poles, while their power is doubled when they are united
by the poles which correspond.

It may be observed, in passing, that the systems which have
most divided men have been founded upon an exclusive preference
given to one or the other of these sanctions, Each has had its
partisans, who have wished to exalt it above the others. Each
has had its enemies, who have sought to degrade it by showing
its weak side, exposing its errors, and developing all the evils
which have resulted from it, without making any mention of its
good effects, Such is the true theory of all those paradoxes
which elevate nature against society, politics against religion,
religion against nature and government, and so on.

Each of these sanctions is susceptible of error, that is to say, of
some applications contrary to the principle of utility. But by
applying the nomenclature above explained, it is easy to indicate
by a single word the seat of the evil. Thus, for cxample, the
reproach which after the punishment of a criminal falls upon an
innocent family is an error of the popular sanction. The offence
of usury, that is, of receiving interest above the legal interest, is
an error of the political sanction. Heresy and magic are errors
of the religious sanction. Certain sympathies and antipathies are
errors of the natural sanction. The first germ of mistake exists
in some single sanction, whence it commonly spreads into the
others. It is necessary, in all these cases, to discover the origin
of the evil before we can select or apply the remedy.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 31


CHAPTER VIII.
The measure of Pleasures and Paina.


Tux sole object of the legislator is to increase pleasures and to
prevent pains; and for this purpose he ought to be well acquainted
with their respective values. As pleasures and pains are the
only instruments which he employs, he ought carefully to study
their power.

Tf we examine the value of a pleasure, considered in itself, and
in relation to a single individual, we shall find’ that it depends
upon four circumstances, —

Ist. Its antenarty.
2nd. Jts duration.
srd. ts certainty.
4th. Lts proximity.
The value of a pain depends upon the same circumstances.

But it is not enough to examine the value of pleasures and
pains as if they were isolated and independent. Pains and
pleasures may have other pains and pleasures as their ccn-
sequences. Therefore, if we wish to calculate the dendency of an
act from which there results an immediate pain or pleasure, we
must take two additional circumstances into the account, viz.—

5th. Jts productiveness.
6th. Its purity.

A productive pleasure is onc which is likely to be followed by
other pleasures of the same kind.

A productive pain is one which is likely to be followed by
other pains of the same kind.

A pure pleasure is one which is not likely to produce pains.

A pure pain is one which is not likely to produce pleasures.

When the calculation is to be made in relation to a collection
of individuals, yet another element is necessary,—

7th. tts extent.
That is, the number of persons who are likely to find themselves
affected by this pain or pleasure.


$2 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


When we wish to value an action, we must follow in detail all
the operations above indicated. These are the elements of moral
calculation ; and legislation thus becomes a matter of arithmetic.
The evi? produced is the outgo, the good which results is the
income. The rules of this calculation are like those of any other.
This is a slow method, but a sure one; while what is called
sentiment is a prompt estimate, but apt to be deceptive. It is
not necessary to recommence this calculation upon every occasion.
When one has become familiar with the process; when he has
acquired that justness of estimate which results from it; he can
compare the sum of good and of evil with so much promptitude
as scarcely to be conscious of the steps of the calculation, It is
thus that we perform many arithmetical calculations almost
without knowing it. The analytical method, in all its details,
becomes essential, only when some new or complicated matter
arises ; when it is necessary to clear up some disputed point, or
to demonstrate a truth to those who are yet unacquainted with it.

This theory of moral calculation, though never clearly ex-
plained, has always been followed in practice; at least, in every
case where men have had clear ideas of their interest. What is
it, for example, that makes up the value of a landed estate? Is
it not the amount of pleasure to be derived from it? and does
not this value vary according to the length of time for which the
estate is to be enjoyed; according to the nearness or the distance
of the moment when the possession is to begin; according to the
certainty or uncertainty of its being retained ?

Errors, whether in legislation or the moral conduct of men,
may be always accounted for by a mistake, a forgetfulness, or a
false estimate of some one of these elements, in the calculation of
good and evil.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. $3


CHAPTER IX.


Section I.
Circumstances which affect Sonsibshity.


Att causes of pleasure do not give the same pleasure to all;
all causes of pain do not always produce the same pain. It is in
this that difference of sensibility consists, This difference is in
degree, or in kind: in degree, when the impression of a given
cause upon many individuals is uniform, but unequal; in kind,
when the same cause produces opposite sensations in different
individuals.

This difference of sensibility depends upon certain circum-
stances which influence the physical or moral condition of indi-
viduals, and which, being changed, produce a corresponding
change in their feelings. This is an experimental fact. Things

. do not affect us in the same manner in sickness and in health, in
plenty and in poverty, in infancy and old age. But a view so
gencral is not sufficient; it is necessary to go deeper into the
human heart. Lyonet wrote a quarto volume upon the anatomy
of the caterpillar ; morals are in need of an investigator as patient
and philosophical. I have not courage to imitate Lyonet. I
shall think it sufficient if I open a new point of view—if I
suggest a surer method to those who wish to pursue this subject.

Ist. The foundation of the whole is temperament, or the
original constitution. By this word I understand that radical and
primitive disposition which attends us from our birth, and which
depends upon physical organization, and the nature of the soul.,

But although this radical constitution is the basis of all the
rest, this basis lies so concealed that it is very difficult to get at
it, so as to distinguish those varieties of sensibility which it
produces from those which belong to other causes.

It is the business of the physiologist to distinguish these fem-
peraments; to follow out their mixtures; and to trace their
effects. But these grounds are as yet too little known to justify
the moralist or legislator in founding anything upon them.


o4 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


2nd. Health—We can hardly define it except negatively. It
is the absence of all sensation of pain or uneasiness of which the
first seat can be referred to some part of the body. As to sensi-
bility in general, it is to be observed, that, when sick, we are less
sensible to the causes of pleasure, and more so to those of pain.

8rd. Strength.—Though connected with health, this is a sepa-
rate circumstance ; sinec a man may be fecble compared with the
average of mcn, and yet not be an invalid. The degree of
strength may be measured exactly enough by the weight one can
lift, or in other ways. Feebleness is sometimes a negative term,
signifying the absence of strength; sometimes a relative term,
signifying that such an individual is not so strong as such
another, with whom he is compared.

4th. Corporal Imperfections.—I mean some remarkable de-
formity; the want of some limb or some faculty which other
men enjoy. Its particular effects upon sensibility depend upon
the kind of imperfection. Its general effect is, to diminish more
or less agreeable impressions, and to aggravate those which are
painful.

5th. The degree of Knowledge.—That is, the amount of ideas
which an individual posscsses of a nature calculated to exercise
an influence upon his happiness, or that of others. The man of
knowledge is he who possesses many of theso important ideas ;
the ignorant, he who has but few, and those few of minor’
importance.

6th. Strength of the Intellectual Faculties.—That is, the degree
of facility in recalling ideas already acquired, or in acquiring new
ones. Different qualities of mind may be referred to this head,
such as exactness of memory, capacity of attention, clearness of
discernment, vivacity of imagination, &c.

7th. Firmness of Soul.—This quality is attributed to a man
when he is less affected by immediate pleasures or pains, than by
great pleasures or great pains, which are distant or unccrtain.
Turenne lacked firmness of soul when he was prevailed upon by
the prayers of a woman to betray a state secret. The young
Lacedsemonians, who suffered themselves to be scourged to death


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 35


before the altar of Diana, without uttering a single cry, proved
that the fear of shame and the hope of glory had more influence
over them than present pain of the most piercing kind.

8th. Perseverance.—This circumstance relates to the length
of time during which a given motive acts upon the will with a
continuous force. We say of a man that he wants perseverance
when the motive which makes him act loscs all its force without
the happening of any external event, or the occurrence of any
reason which ought to weaken it; or when he is susceptible of
yielding by turns to a great variety of motives. It is thus that
children are delighted with playthings, yct soon grow tired of
them.

9th. The bent of Inclination —The ideas we have previously
formed of a pleasure or a pain, have a great influence upon the
manner in which we are affected, when we come to experience
that pleasure or that pain. The effect docs not always answer
the expectation, though it commonly does so. The pleasure
which results from the possession of a woman is not to be mea-
sured by her beauty, but by the passion of her lover. The incli-
nations of a man being known, we can calculate with tolerable
certainty the pleasure or the pain which a given event will cause


10th. Notions of Honowr.—By honour is meant that sensi-
bility to pains and pleasures, which springs from the opinion ot
other men; that is, from their esteem or their contempt. The
ideas of honour vary much with nations and with individuals ;
so that it becomes necessary to distinguish, in the first place, the
force of this motive, in the second place, its direction.

11th. Notions of Religion.—It is well known to what a
degree the entire system of sensibility may be affected by reli-
gious ideas. It is at the birth of a religion that its greatest
effects appear. Mild nations have become bloody; pusillanimous
nations have grown bold; slaves have regained their freedom ;


* The four following circumstances are only sub-divisions of this head ;
they are passions—that is, inclinations, considered in reference to certain
given pleasures and pains.


dv 2


36 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


and savages have submitted to the yoke of civilization. There
is not any cause which has produced such sudden and extraor-
dinary effects upon mankind. There is also an astonishing diver-
sity in the particular bias which religion gives to individuals.

12th. Sentiments of Sympathy.—I call sympathy that dispo-
sition which makes us find pleasure in the happiness of others,
and compels us to share their pains. When this disposition
extends to a single individual only, it is called friendshtp ; when
it acta in relation to persons in pain, it 1s called pity or compas-
ston; if it embraces an entire class of individuals, it constitutes
what is called esprit de corps, or party spirit; if it embraces a
whole nation, it is public spirit or patriotism; if it extends to
all men, it is humanity.

But the kind of sympathy which plays the greatest part in
¢ommon life is that which binds the affections to certain fixed
individuals, such as parents, children, a husband, a wife, an inti-
mate friend. Its general effect is to augment the sensibility,
whether to pains or pleasures. The individual acquires more
extension ; he ceases to be solitary; he becomes collective. We
see ourselves, so to speak, doubled in those we love; and it is by
mo means impossible to love ourselves better in these others
than in our actual self; and to be less sensible to the events
which concern us, by reason of their immediate effect upon our-
selves, than on account of their operation upon those connected
with us; to feel, for example, that the most bitter part of an
affliction is the pain it will cause our friends, and that the
greatest charm of personal success is the pleasure we shall take
in their joy. Such is the operation of sympathy. These senti-
ments received and paid back, increase by communication.
They may be compared to mirrors, so arranged as mutually to
transmit the rays of light, collect them in a common focus, and
produce an increase of heat by their reciprocal reflections. The
force of these sympathies is one of the reasons which has made
legislators prefer married men to bachelors, and fathers of a
family to those who have no children. The law has more power
over those who expose a greater surface to its operations. Such


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 37


men, through an interest in the happiness of those who are te
succeed them, look to the future as well as the present; while
men who have not the same ties are satisfied with a transitory
possession.

With regard to the sympathy which the paternal relation pro-
duces, it may be sometimes observed to act independently of any
affection. The honour acquired by the father extends to the son;
the disgrace of the son spreads back to the father. The members
of a family, although disunited by interest and inclination, have
a@ common sensibility for all that appertains to the honour of
each.

18th. Antipathres.—These are the reverse of those expansive
and affectionate sentiments, of which we have been speaking.
It is fortunate that the sources of sympathy are constant and
natural; they are found everywhere, at all times, and under all
circumstances; while antipathies are accidental, and of course
transitory. They vary according to times, places, events, and
persons; and they have nothing fixed nor determinate. Still,
these two principles sometimes coalesce and act together. Hu-
manity makes us hate the inhuman; friendship renders us hos-
tile to the adversaries of our friends; and antipathy itself becomes
a cause of union between two persons who have a common
enemy.

14th. Folly, or Disorder of Mind.—Imperfections of mind may
be reduced to ignorance, feebleness, irritability, and inconstancy.
What is called folly is an extraordinary degree of imperfection,
as striking to all the world as the most obvious corporal defect.
It not only produces all the imperfections above mentioned, and’
carries them to excess; but, in addition, it gives au absurd and’
dangerous turn to the inclinations.

The sensibility of a maniac becomes extreme upon a certain
point, while in other respects it is quite benumbed. He seems
to have an excessive distrust, a hurtful malignity, a cessation of
every sentiment of benevolence; he has no respect for himself
nor for others; he braves all decorum and propriety; he is not

insensible to fear, nor to good treatment—he yields to firmness


38 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


at the same time that mildness makes him tractable; but he has
hardly any regard for the future, and can only be acted upon by
immediate means.

15th. Pecunsary Circumstances.—They consist of the sum
total of means,.compared with the sum total of wants. Means
comprise, lst, property, that which is possessed independently of
labour ; 2nd, the profits of labour; 8rd, the pecuniary aids which
we may expect from our relations and friends.

Wants depend upon four circumstances: Ist. Habits of expense.
What is beyond these habits is superfluity, what is within them
is privation. The greater part of our desires exist only in the
recollection of some past enjoyment. 2nd. The persons with
whose support we are charged, cither by the laws or by opinion,
children, poor relations, old servants. 3rd. Unexpected wants.
A given sum may have a much egrcater value at onc moment than
another; if it is needcd, for instance, for an important lawsuit,
or for a journey upon which the fate of a family depends. 4th.
Expectations of a profit, of an inheritance, &c. It is evident that
the hopes of fortune, in proportion to their force, are true wants ;
and that their loss may affect us almost as much as that of a pro-
perty already in possession.


Section II.


Secondary Circumstances which affect Sensibility.


Authors who have wished to account for differences of sensi-
bility have ascribed them to circumstances of which no mention
has yct been made, viz., sex, age, rank, education, habitual occu-
pations, climate, race, government, religion—circumstances all
very apparcnt, very casy to observe, and very convenient for
explaining the differcnt phenomena of sensibility. Still, they are
but secondary circumstances; I mcan that in themselves they are
not reasons, but must be explained by the circumstances described
in the first section, which aro here represcnted and combined ;
each secondary circumstance containing in itself many primary


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 89


circumstances. As a matter of convenience, we speak of the
influence of sex upon sensibility; including in that single phrase
all the primary circumstances of strength, knowledge, firmness of
soul, perseverance, ideas of honour, sentiments of sympathy, &c.
Do we speak of the influence of rank ?—We mean by it a certain
assemblage of primary circumstances, such as the degree of know-
ledge, ideas of honour, conncctions of family, habitual occupations,
pecuniary circumstances. It is the same with all the others.
Each of these secondary circumstances may be translated by a
certain number of the primary. This distinction, though essen-
tial, has not yct been analyzed. Let us pass to a more particular
examination.

Ist. Sex.—The sensibility of women seems to be greater than
thatof men. Their health is more delicate. They are generally
inferior in strength of body, knowledge, the intellectual faculties,
and firmness of soul. Their moral and religious sensibility is
more lively ; sympathies and antipathies have a greater empire
over them. The honour of a woman consists more in modesty
and chastity ; that of man in probity and courage. The religion
of a woman more casily deviates towards superstition; that is,
towards minute observances. Her affections for her own children
are stronger during their whole hfe, and especially during their
early youth. Women are more compassionate for those whose
sufferings they sce; and the very pains they take to relieve them
form a new bond of attachment. But their benevolence is locked
up in a narrower circle, and is less governed by the principle of
utility. It is rare that they embrace in their affections the well-
being of their country, much less that of mankind; and the
interest which they take in a party depends almost always upon
some private sympathy. There enters into all their attachments
and antipathics morc of caprice and imagination ; while men have
more regard to personal intcrests or public utility. Their habitual
amusements are moro quiet and sedentary. On the whole,
woman is better fitted for the family, and man for matters out of
doors. The domestic economy is best placed in the hands of the
women; the principal management of affairs in those of the men.


40 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


2nd. Age.—Each period of life acts differently upon sensibility ;
but it is extremely difficult to state particulars, since the limits
of the different ages vary with individuals, and, in fact, are
arbitrary with regard to all. In considering infancy, adolesc-
ence, youth, maturity, decline, and decrepitude as divisions of
human life, we can only speak of them vaguely, and in general
terms. The different imperfections of mind, which we have
mentioned, are so striking in infancy, that it needs a vigilant and
constant protection. The affections of adolescence and early
youth are prompt and lively, but are seldom governed by the
principle of prudence. The legislator is obliged to protect this
age from the errors into which the want of experience or the
vivacity of the passions are apt to lead it. As to decrepitude, in
many respects it is only a rcturn to the imperfections of infancy.

3rd. Rank.—This circumstance depends so much for its effects
upon the political constitution of states, that it is almost impos-
sible to announce any proposition with respect to it which is
universally true. In general 1t may be said that the amount of
sensibility is greater in the upper ranks than in the lower; the
ideas of honour in particular are more predominant.

4th. Education.— Health, strength, robustness, may be referred
to physical education ; to intellectual education belong the amount
of knowledge, its kind, and, to a certain degree, firmness of soul,
and perseverance ; to moral education appertain the bent of the
inclinations, the ideas of honour and religion, the sentiments of
sympathy, &:, To education in general may be rcferred the
habitual occupations, amusements, attachments, habits of expense,
and pecuniary resources. But when we speak of education, we
ought not to forget that its influence in all these respects is so
modified, either by a concurrence of external circumstances or by
natural disposition, that it is often impossible to calculate its
effects.

Sth. Habitual occupations, whether of profit or of amusement
and choice. They influence all the other causes—health, strength,
knowledge, inclinations, ideas of honour, sympathics, antipathies,
fortune, &c. Thus we see common traits of character in certain


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 41


professions, especially in those which constitute a class or con-
dition, such as ecclesiastics, soldiers, sailors, lawyers, magis-
trates, &c.

6th. Climate.—Formerly too much was attributed to this cause;
it has since been underrated. What renders this examination
difficult, is the circumstance that a comparison of nation with
nation can only be made as to some great facts, which may be
explained in different ways. It seems to be proved that in warm
climates men are less strong, less robust; they have less need to
labour, because the earth is more fertile; they are more inclined
to the pleasures of love, a passior which in those latitudes mani-
fests itself earlicr, and with more ardour. All their sensibilities
are quicker ; their imagination is more lively ; their spirit is more
prompt, but less vigorous and Icss persevering. Their habitual
occupations announce more of indolence than of activity. They
have probably at their birth a physical organization less vigorous,
and a temperament of soul less firm and less constant.

7th. Race-—A negro born in France or England is in many
respects a different being from a child of the French or English
racc. A Spanish child born in Mexico or Peru at the hour of its
birth is very different from a Mexican or Peruvian child. The
race may perhaps have an influence upon that natural disposition,
which serves as a foundation for all the rest. Afterwards it
operates much more sensibly upon the moral and religious bias,
upon the sympathies and antipathies.

8th. Government.—This circumstance excrcises an influence of
the same sort with that of education. The magistrate may be
considered as a national instructor; and under a vigilant and
attentive government the particular preceptor, even the father
himself, is but a deputy, a substitute for the magistrate, with this
difference, that the authority of the father has its limit, while
that of the magistratc extends through the whole life,

The influence of this cause is immense; it extends to almost
everything ; in fact, it embraces everything except temperament,
race, and climate; for even health may depend upon it in many
respects, so far as relates to regulations of police, the abundance


42 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


of provisions, and the removal of apparent causes of disease.
The method of education, the plan followed in the disposal of
offices, and the scheme of rewards and punishments, will detcr-
mine in a great measure the physical and moral qualities of a
nation.

Under a government well constituted, or only well administered,
though with a bad constitution, it will be seen that men are
generally more governed by honour, and that honour is placed in
actions more conformed to public utility. Religious sensibility
will be more exempt from fanaticism and intolerance, more frec
from superstition and scrvile reverence. A common sentiment
of patriotism springs up. Men perccive the existence of a
national interest. Enfecbled factions will see ancient rallying
signs losing their power. The popular affection will be rather
directed towards the magistrate than towards the heads of a
party, and towards the whole country rather than towards any-
thing else. Private revenge will neither be protracted, nor will
it spread through society; the national taste will be directed
towards useful expenses, such as voyages of discovery, the per-
fecting of agriculture, improvements in the sciences, and the
embellishment of the country. There will be perceptible, even in
the productions of human genius, a gencral disposition to discuss
with calmness important questions of public good.

9th. Religeous Profession.—We may derive from this source
pretty clear indications with respect to religious sensibility,
sympathy, antipathy, and the ideas of honour and virtue. In
certain cases we may even judge of the intelligence, the strength
or weakness of mind, and the disposition of an individual from
the scct to which he belongs. I admit that it is common to
profess in public, from motives of convenicnco or good breeding,
religious opinions which are not very sincerely entcrtained
But in these cascs the influence of religious profession, though
weakened, is not destroyed. Early habits, the ties of society,
the power of example, continue to operate even after the prin-
ciple upon which they are founded ceases to exist.

The man who at heart has ceascd to be a Jew, a Quaker, an


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 43


Anabaptist, o Calvinist, or a Lutheran, will still be apt to retain
a partiality for those of the denomination to which he nominally
belongs, and a corresponding antipathy for those of every other.


Section III.
Practical application of this Theory.


We cannot calculate the motion of a vessel without knowing °
the circumstances which influence her sailing, such as the force
of the wind, the resistance of the water, the model of the hull,
the weight of the lading, &c. In hke manner we cannot operate
with any certaimty upon a question of legislation without con-
sidering all the circumstances which affect the sensibility.

I confine mysclf here to what concerns the penal code. In all
its parts a scrupulous attention to this diversity of circumstances
is necessary.

Ist. Zo ascertain the Evil of an Offence—The same nominal
offence is not in fact the same real offence, when the sensibility
of the injurcd individual is not the same. An action, for example,
might be a scrious insult to a woman, which to a man would be
wholly indifferent. A corporal injury, which, if done to an
invalid, would put his life in danger, would be of little com-
parative consequence to a man in full health. An imputation
which might ruin the honour or the fortune of one individual
might do no harm to anothcr.

2nd. Zo give a proper Satisfaction to the Indwidual injured.—
Where the sensibility is different, the same nominal satisfaction
is not the same real satisfaction. A pecuniary satisfaction for an
affront might be agreeable or offensive, according to the rank of
the person affronted, according to his fortune, or according to pre-
vailing prejudices. Am I insulted?—my pardon, publicly asked,
would be a sufticicnt satisfaction on the part of my superior, or
my equal; but not so on the part of my inferior.

3rd. Zo estimate the force of Puntshments and their Impression
agon Delinquents—When the sensibility is essentially different,


44 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


the same nominal punishment is not the same real punishment.
Exile is not the same thing to a young man and to an old man;
to a bachelor and to the father of a family; to an artisan who has
no means of subsistence out of his country, and to a rich man
who would only find himself obliged to change the scene of his
pleasures. Imprisonment would not be an equal punishment for
a man and for a woman, for an invalid and for a person in health;
for a rich man whose family would not suffer in his absence, and
for one who lives only by his labour, and who would leave his
children in distress.

4th. Zo transplant a Law from one Country to another.—The
same verbal law would not be the same real law, if the sensibility
of the two nations was cssentially different. A law on which
depends the happiness of European families, transported into
Asia, would become the scourge of society. Women in Europe
are accustomed to cnjoy liberty, and even a sort of domestic
empire; women in Asia are prepared by their education for the
imprisonment of the scraglio, and even for servitude. Marriage
is not a contract of the same kind in Europe and in the East;
and, if itwere submitted to the same laws, the unhappiness of all
parties would certainly ensuc.

The same punishments, it is said, for the same offences. This
adage has an appearance of justice and impartiality which seduces
the superficial observer. To give it a reasonable sense, we must
determine beforehand what is mcant by the same punishments
and the samc offences. An inflexible law, a law which should
regard neither age, nor fortune, nor rank, nor education, nor the
moral and religious prejudices of individuals, would be doubly
vicious, at once inefficacious and tyrannical. Too severe for one,
too indulgent for another; always failing through excess or de-
ficiency; under the appearance of equality, it conccals an in-
equality the most monstrous.

When a man of great wealth, and another of a moderate con-
dition, are condemned in the same fine, is the punishment the
same? Do they suffer the same evil? Is not the manifest
inequality of this treatment rendered yet more odious by its de-


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 45


lusive equality? And does not the law fail in its object; since
the one may lose all his resources of living, while the other pays,
and walks off in triumph? Leta robust youth and a weak old
man be both condemned to wear irons for the same number of
years—a reasoner skilful in obscuring the most evident truths
might undertake to prove the equality of this punishment; but
the people, who are little given to sophistry, the people, faithful
to nature and to sentiment, would feel an internal murmuring of
spirit at the sight of such injustice; and their indignation,
changing its object, would pass from the criminal to the judge,
and from the judge to the legislator.

There are some specious objections which I do not wish to dis-
semble. ‘‘ How is it possible to take account of all the circum-
stances which influence the sensibility? How can we appreciate
internal and secret dispositions, such as strength of mind, know-
ledge, inclinations, sympathies? How can we measure these
different qualities? The father of a family, in the treatment of
his children, may consult these interior dispositions, these diver-
sities of character; but a public instructor, though charged with
but a limited number of pupils, cannot do it. A legislator, who
has a numerous peoplc in view, is obliged to confine himself still
more to general laws; and he is bound to take care how he in-
creases their complication by descending into particulars. If he
leaves to the judges the right of varying the application of the
laws according to the infinite diversity of circumstances and
characters, there will be nothing to restrain them from the most
arbitrary judgments. Under pretext of observing the true spirit
of the legislator, the judges will make the laws an instrument of
caprice or antipathy.”

To all this, there needs less an answer than an explanation ;
for it is rather an objection than a decisive attack. The principle
is not denicd, but its application is thought to be impossible.

1st. I allow that the greater part of these differences in sensi-
bility cannot be appreciated ; that 1t would be impossible to prove
their existence in individual cases, or to measure their strength
and degree. But, happily, these interior and secret dispositions


4G PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


eertain outward and manifest indications. These are
secondary circumstances above enumerated, viz., ser, age,
race, climate, government, education, religious profession ;—pal-
pable and evident circumstances, which represent interior dis-
positions.

Thus the legislator is aided as to the most difficult point. He
need not trouble himself with mctaphysical or moral qualities;
he may confine himself to circumstances that are obvious. For
example, he directs a given punishment to be modified, not in
proportion to the sensibility of the criminal, his perseverance, his
strength of mind, his knowledge, &c., but according to sex or age.
It is true that presumptions drawn from these circumstances are
liable to error. A child of fifteen may have more knowledge
than a man of thirty; an individual woman may have more
courage or less modesty than an individual man: but these pre-
sumptions are in general just cnough for the avoidance of tyran-
nical laws, and will be sufficient to gain for the legislator the
suffrages of opinion.

2nd. These secondary circumstances are not only easy to
seize, but they are few in number, and they form general classes.
They furnish grounds of justification, of extenuation, or of uggra-
vation. Thus the difficulty disappears, and simplicity pervades
the whole.

3rd. In this there is nothing arbitrary. It is not the judge,
it is the law which modifies such and such a punishment, accord-
ing to the sex, the age, the rcligious profession. As to other
circumstances of which the cxamination must be absolutely left
to the judge, as the more or /ess of derangement of mind, the
more or less of strength, the more or Jesa of fortune, the legislator,
who cannot decide upon individual cases, will direct the tribunals
by general rules, and will leave them a ccrtain latitude in order
that they may proportion their judgment to the particular nature
of the circumstances.

What is here recommended is not a utopian idea. There has
scarcely been a legislator so barbarous or so stupid, as entirely
to neglect the circumstances which influence sensibility. A more


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 47


or less confused feeling of them has guided the establishment of
civil and political rights; and more or less of regard to these
circumstances has always been shown in the institution of punish-
ments. Hence the differences which have been admitted in the
case of women, children, freemen, slaves, soldiers, priests, &¢,

Droco seems to have been the only penal legislator who rejected
all these considerations. In his view all crimes were equal,
because they were all violations of the law. He condemned all
delinquents to death, without distinction. He confounded, he
overturned all principles of human sensibility. His horrible work
endured but a short time; nor is it probable that his laws were
ever literally followed. Without falling into this extreme, how
many faults of the same kind have been committed? I should
never finish were I to cite examples. It is notorious that there
have been sovereigns who have preferred to lose provinces, and
to make blood flow in streams, rather than humour a particular
sensibility, rather than tolerate a custom indifferent in itself,
rather than respect an ancient prejudice in favour of a certain
dress, or a certain form of praycr.

A prince of our times,* active, enlightened, and animated by
the desire of glory, and a wish to promote the happiness of his
subjects, undertook to reform everything in his territories ; and,
in so doing, excited all to oppose him. On the eve of his death,
recalling all the vexations he had experienced, he wished it to be
inscribed upon his tomb, that he had been unfortunate in all his
enterprises. It would have been well to add, for the instruction
of posterity, that he had never known how to respect and to
humour the prejudices, the inclinations, the sensibilities of men.

When a legislator studies the human heart, when he makes
provision for the different degrees, the different kinds of sensi-
bility, by exceptions, limitations, and mitigations, these tempera-
ments of power charm us as a paternal condescension. It is the
foundation of that approval which we give to the laws, under the
names, a little vague it is true, of humanity, equity, adaptation,
moderation, wisdom.


* Joseph IT. of Austria.


48 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


We may here discover a striking analogy between the art of
the legislator and that of the physician. A catalogue of circum-
stances which influence sensibility, is alike necessary to these
two sciences. That which distinguishes the physician from the
empiric, is an attention to everything which constitutes the par-
ticular state of the individual. But it is especially in maladies
of the soul, in those where the moral nature is affected, and
where it is necessary to surmount injurious habits and to form
new ones, that it is necessary to study everything which influ-
ences the disposition of the patient. A single error here may
change all the results, so that what were intended as remedies,
may prove to be aggravations.


CHAPTER X.


Analysts of Political Good and Evil.—How they are diffused
through Socrety.


Ir is with government as with medicine ; its only business is the
choice of evils. Every law is an evil, for every law is an in-
fraction of liberty. Government, I repeat it, has but the choice
of evils, In making that choice, what ought to be the object of
the legislator? He ought to be certain of two things: 1st, that
in every case the acts which he undertakes to prevent are really
evils; and, 2nd, that these evils are greatcr than those which he
employs to prevent them.

He has then two things to note—the evil of the offence, and
the evil of the law; the evil of the malady, and the evil of the
remedy.

An evil seldom comes alone. A portion of evil can hardly fall
upon an individual, without spreading on every side, as from a
centre. As it spreads, it takes different forms. We see an evil
of one kind coming out of an evil of another kind; we even see
evil coming out of good, and good out of evil. It is important
to know and to distinguish all these kinds of evil, for in this the
very essence of legislation consists. But, happily, these modifi.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. , 49


cations are few in number, and their differences are strongly
marked. Three principal distinctions, and two sub-divisions,
will be enough to solve the most difficult problems.

Evil of the first order.

Evil of the second order.

Evil of the third order.

Primitiwe Evil—Derivative Evil.

Immediate Fvil— Consequential Evil.

Extended Evil—Divided Evil.

Permanent Evil—Evanescent Evil.

These are the only new terms which it will be necessary to
employ to express the variety of forms which evil may take.

The evil resulting from a bad action may be divided into two
principal parts:—I1st, That which falls immediately upon such
and such assignable individuals, I call evil of the first order ; 2nd,
That which takes its origin in the first, and spreads through the
entire community, or among an indefinite number of non-assign-
able individuals, I call evil of the second order.

Evil of the first order may be distinguished into two branches,
viz., Ist, the primitue evil, which is peculiar to the individual
injured, to the first sufferer—the person, for example, who 1s
beaten or robbed; 2nd, the derivatice evil, that which falls upon
certain assignable individuals, as a consequence of the primitive
evil, by rcason of some relation between them and the first suf-
ferer, whether it be a relation of personal interest or merely of
sympathy.

Evil of the second order may also be distinguished into two
branches: Ist, alarm; 2nd, danger. Alarm is a positive pain, a
pain of apprehension, the apprehension of suffering the same evil
which we see has already fullen upon another. Danger is the
probability that a primitive evil will produce other evils of the
same kind.

These two branches of evil are closely connected, yet they are
so distinct as to be capable of a separate existence. There may
be alarm where there is no danger, there may be danger where
there is no alarm. We may be frightened at a conspiracy purely

E


&O PRINCIPLES OF LEGISEATION.


imaginary ; we may remain seoure in the midst of a conspirsdy*
ready to break out. But, commonly, alarm and danger go
together, as natural effects of the same cause. The evil that has
happened makes us anticipate other evils of the same kind, by
rendering them probable. The evil that has happened produces
danger ; danger produces alarm. A bad action is dangerous as an
example ; it prepares the way for other bad actions—lIst, By sug-
gesting the idea of their commission; 2nd, By augmenting the
force of temptation.

Let us follow the train of thought which may pass in the mind
of an individual when he hears of a successful robbery. Perhaps
he did not know of this means of subsistence, or never thought of
it. Example acts upon him like instruction, and gives him the
first idea of resorting to the same expedicnt. He sees that the
thing is possible, provided it be well managed; and, executed by
another, it appears to him less difficult and less perilous than it
really is. Example is a track which guides him along where he
never would have dared to be the first explorer. Such an example
has yet another effect upon him, not lcss remarkable. It weakens
the strength of the motives which restrain him. The fear of the
laws loses a part of its force so long as the culprit remains un-
punished; the fear of shame diminishes in the same degree,
because he sees accomplices who afford him an assurance against
the misery of being utterly despised. This is so true, that
wherever robberies are frequent and unpunished, they are as little
a matter of shame as any other means of acquisition. The early
Greeks had no scruples about them; they are gloricd in by the
Arabs of the present day.

Let us apply this theory. You have been beaten, wounded,
insulted, and robbed. The amount of your personal sufferings,
so far as they relate to you alone, forms the primitive evil. But
you have friends, and sympathy makes them share your pains.
You have a wife, children, parents; a part of the indignity which
you have suffered, of the affront to which you have been subjected,
falls upon them. You have creditors, and the loss you have
experienced obliges them to wait. All these parsons suffer a less


PRINCIPLES OF LEAYALATION. Si


or greater evil, derivative from yours; and these. two portions of
evil, yours and theirs, compose together the evs? of the first order
But this is not all. The news of the robbery, with all ite circum:
stances, spreads from mouth to mouth. An idea of danger springs
up, and alarm along with it. This alarm is greater or less,
according to what is known of the character of the robbers, of
the personal injuries they have inflicted, of their means and their
number; according as we are near the place or distant from it;
according to our strength and courage; according to our peculiar
circumstances, such as travelling alone, or with a family, carry-
ing little money with us, or being intrusted with valuable effects.
This danger and alarm constitute the evil of the second order.

If the evil which has been done to you is of a nature to spread
of itself—for example, if you have been defamed by an imputa-
tion which envelops a class of individuals more or less nume-
rous, it is no longer an evil simply private, it becomes an
extended evil. It is augmented in proportion to the number of
those who participate in it.

If the money of which you were robbed did not belong to
you, but to a society, or to the State, the loss would be a dwided
evil. This case differs from the former in the important circum-
stance, that here, the evil is diminished in proportion to the
number among whom it is shared.

If, in consequence of the wound you have received, you suffer
an additional evil distinct from the first, such as the abandon-
ment of a lucrative business, the loss of a marriage, or the
failure to obtain a profitable situation, that is a consequential
evil. A permanent evil is that which, once done, cannot be
remedied, such as an irreparable personal injury, an amputation,
death, &. An evanescent evil is that which may pass away
altogether, such as a wound which may be healed, or a loss
which may be entirely made up.

These distinctions, though partly new, are far from being use-
less subtilties. It is only by their means that we can appreciate
the difference of malignity in different offences, and regulate
accordingly the proportion of punishment.


32 PRIXCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


This analysis will furnish us a moral criterion, a means of
decomposing human actions, as we decompose the mixed metals,
in order to discover their intrinsic value, and their precise
quantity of alloy.

If among bad actions, or those reputed to be so, there are some
which cause no alarm, what a difference between these actions
and those which do cause it! The primitive evil affects but a
single individual ; the derivative evil can extend only to a small
number ; but the evil of the sccond order may embrace the whole
of society. Let a fanatic commit an assassination on account of
what he calls heresy, and the evil of the second order, especially
the alarm, may exceed many million times the evilof the first order.

There is a great class of offences of which the entire evil con-
sists in danecr. I refer to those actions which, without injuring
any particular individual, are injurious to society at large. Let
us take, for an example, an offence against justice. The bad
conduct of a judge, of an accuser, or a witness, causes a criminal
to be acquitted. Here is doubtless an evil, for here is a danger;
the danger that impunity will harden the offender, and excite
him to the commission of new crimes; the danger of encouraging
other offenders by the example and the success of the first. Still,
it is probable that this danger, great as it is, will escape the
attention of the public, and that those who by the habit of reflec-
tion are capable of perceiving it, will not derive from it any
alarm. They do not fear to sce it realized upon anybody.

But the importance of these distinctions can only be perceived
in their development. We shall presently sec a particular appli-
cation of them.

If we carry our views still further, we shall discover another
evil, which may result from an offence. When the alarm reaches
a certain point, and lasts a long time, the effect is not limited to
the passive faculties of man; it extends to his active faculties;
it deadens them ; it throws them into a state of torpor and de-
crepitude. Thus, when vexations and depredations have becomo
habitual, the discouraged labourcr only works to save himself
from starvation ; he secks in idleness the only consolation whick


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. &3


his misfortunes allow; industry fails with hope, and brambles
gain possession of the most fertile fields. This branch of evil ix
the evil of the third order.

Whether an evil happens by human agency, or whether it
results from an event purely physical, all these distinctions are
equally applicable.

Happily, this power of propagation and of diffusion does not
appertain to evil only. Good has the same prerogatives. Follow
an analogous division, and you will sce coming out of a good
action, a good of the first order, divisible into primitive and deriva-
tive; and a good of the second order, which produces a certain
degree of confidence and security.

The good of the third order is manifested in that energy, that
gaiety of heart, that ardour of action, which remuneratory motives
alone inspire. Man, animated by this sentiment of joy, finds in
himself a strength which he did not suspect.

The propagation of good is less rapid and less sensible than that
ofevil. The sced of good 1s not so productive in hopes as the
seed of evil is fruitful in alarms. But this difference is abun-
dantly made up, for good is a necessary result of natural causes
which operate always; while evil is produced only by accident,
and at intervals.

Society is so constituted that, in labouring for our particular
good, we labour also for the good of the whole. We cannot
augment our own means of enjoyment without augmenting also
the means of others. Two nations, like two individuals, grow
rich by a mutual commerce; and all exchange is founded upon
reciprocal advantages,

It is fortunate also that the effects of evil are not always evil.
They often assume the contrary quality. Thus, juridical punish-
ments applied to oftences, although they produce an evil of the
first order, are not gencrally regarded as evils, because they pro-
duce a good of the second order. They produce alarm and danger,
—but for whom? Only for a class of evil-doers, who are volun-
tary sufferers, Let them obey the laws, and they will be exposed
neither to danger nor alarm.


54 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


We should never be able to subjugate, however imperfectly,
the vast empire of evil, had we not learned the method of com-
bating one evil by another. It has been necessary to enlist
auxiliaries among pains, to oppose other pains which attack us on
every side. So, in the art of curing pains of another sort, poisons
well applied have proved to be remedics.


CHAPTER XI,
Reasons for erecting certain Acts into Offences.


We have made an analysis of evil. That analysis shows us that
there are acts from which there results more of evil than of good.
It is acts of this nature, or at least acts reputed to be such, that
legislators have prohibited. A prohibited act is what we call an
offence. To cause these prohibitions to be respected, it is neces-
sary to establish puncshments.

But is it necessary to crect certain acts into offences? or, in
other words, is it necessary to subject them to legal punishments ?

What a question! Is not all the world agreed on this matter?
Why seck to prove a truth universally acknowledged, and so
firmly rooted in the minds of men?

Doubtless, all the world is agreed upon this matter. But on
what is their agreement founded? Ask hisrcasons of every man
who assents, and you will see a strange diversity of sentiments
and principles; and that not only among the people, but among
philosophers. Will it be a waste of time to seek out some uniform
basis of consent upon a subject so important ?

The agreement which actually exists is only founded upon
prejudices, which vary according to times and placcs, customs
and opinions. I have always been told that such an action isa
crime, and I think that it is so; such is the guide of the people,
and even of legislators. But, if usage has erected innocent actions
into crimes; if it has made trifling offences to be considered as
grave ones, and grave ones as trifling; if it has varied every-
where, it is plain that usage ought to be subjected to some rule.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 6


and ought not to be taken as aruleitself. Let us appeal, then, to
the principle of utility. It will confirm the decrees of prejudice
when they are just ; it will annul them when they are wrong.

I suppose myself a stranger to all the common appellations of
vice and virtue. I am called upon to consider human actions
only with relation to their good or bad effects. I open two
accounts; I pass to the account of pure profit all the pleasures, I
pass to the account of loss all the pains. I faithfully weigh the
interests of all parties. The man whom prejudice brands as
vicious, and he whom it extols as virtuous, are, for the moment,
equal in my eyes. I wish to judge prejudice itself; to weigh
all actions in a new balance, in order to form a catalogue of
those which ought to be permitted, and of those which ought to
be forbidden. This operation, which appears at first so compli-
cated, is rendered casy by the distinction between evils of the
first, second, and third orders.

Am I to examine an act which attacks the security of an
individual? JI compare all the pleasure, or, in other words, all
the profit, which results to the author of the act, with all the
evil, or all the loss, which results to the party injured. I see at
once that the evil of the first order surpasses the good of the first
order. But I donot stop there. The action under consideration
produces throughout society danger and alarm. The evil which
at first was only individual spreads everywhere, under the form
of fear. The pleasure resulting from the action belongs solely to
the actor; the pain reaches a thousand—ten thousand—all.
This disproportion, alrcady prodigious, appears infinite upon
passing to the evil of the third order, and considering that, if the
act in question is not suppressed, there will result from it a
universal and durable discouragement, a cessation of labour, and,
at last, the dissolution of society.

I will now run through the strongest of our desires, those
whose satisfaction is accompanied with the greatest pleasures;
and we shall see that, when brought about at the expense of
security, their gratification is much more fertile in evil than in good.

I. In the first place let us consider the passion of hatred.


&6 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


This is the most fruitful cause of assaults upon the honour and
the person. I have conceived, no matter why, an enmity against
you. Passion bewilders me. I insult you; I humble you; I
wound you. The sight of your pain makes me experience, at
least for a time, a feeling of pleasure. But, even for that time,
can it be believed that the pleasure which I taste is equivalent
to the pain you suffer? If cvery atom of your pain separately
painted itself in my soul, is it probable that cach corresponding
atom of my pleasure would appear to have an equal intensity ?
In fact, only some scattering atoms of your pain present them-
selves to my troubled and disordered imagination. For you,
none is lost; for me, the greater part is completely thrown away.
But this pleasure, such as it is, soon betrays its natural impurity.
Humanity, a principle not to be entirely quenched, even in the
most savage souls, wakes up a secret remorse. Fears of every
kind, the fear of vengeance on your part, or on the part of those
connected with you, fear of public disapprobation; and, if any
sparks of religion are left to me, religious fears;—fears of all
kinds come to trouble my security and to disturb my triumph.
Passion has died away, the pleasure of its gratification vanishes,
and an inward reproach succeeds, But on your side the pain
still continues, and may have a long duration. This is the case,
even with trifling wounds, which time may cicatrize. How will
it be when the injury 1s incurable in its nature P—whcen limbs
have been maimed, features disfigured, or facultics destroyed ?
Weigh the evils—thur intensity, their duration, their consc-
quences; measure them under all their dimensions, and you will
see that in every sense the pleasure is inferior to the pain.

Lct us now pass to the effects of the second crdcr. The news
of your misfortune instils the poison of fear into every soul.
Every man who has an enemy, or who may have an enemy, con-
templates with terror what the passion of hate may inspire,
Among feeble beings, who have so much to dispute about, and so
many causes of mutual envy, among whom a thousand little
rivalries excite as many causeless hostilities, the spirit of revenge
holds forth a succession of endless evils.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION, 57


Thus, every act of cruelty produced by a passion, the principle
of which exists in every heart, and from which everybody is
exposed to suffer, creates an alarm, which will continue until the
punishment of the culprit has transferred the danger to the side
of injustice, and of cruel cnmity. This alarm is a suffering
common to all; and there is another suffering resulting from it,
which we ought not to forget,—that pain of sympathy felt by
generous hearts at the sight of such aggressions.

IT. If we examine the actions which may spring from that im-
perious motive, that desire to which nature has intrusted the per-
petuation of the species, we shall see that, when it attacks the
security of the person, or of the domestic condition, the good
which results from its gratification cannot be compared to the
evil it produces.

I speak here only of that attack which manifestly compromits
the security of the person, viz., ravishment. It is useless by a
gross and pucrile pleasantry to deny the existence of this
crime, or to diminish the horror of it. Whatever may be said, it
is certain that women the most prodigal of their favours do not
love to have them snatched by a brutal fury. But, in this case,
the greatness of the alarm renders all discussion of the primitive
evil unnecessary. However it may be of the actual offence, the
possible offence will always be an object of terror. The more
universal the desire which gives rise to this offence, the greater
and more violent is the alarm. In times when the laws have not
had sufficient power to repress it, when manners have not been
sufficiently regulated to brand it, it produced acts of vengeance
of which history has preserved the recollection. Whole nations
have interested themselves in the quarrel; and hatreds originating
in this source have been transmitted from fathers to their children.
It is possible that the close confinement of women, unknown
among the Greeks in tho time of Homer, owes its origin to an
epoch of troubles and revolutions, when the feebleness of the
laws had multiplicd disorders of this kind, and spread a general
terror.

III, With respect to the motive of cupidity,—if we compare


&8 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


the pleasure of acquiring by a violation of another's rights with
the pain which such a proceeding occasions, they will not prove
to be equivalents. It is true there are cases in which, if we con-
fine ourselves to the effects of the first order, the good will have
an incontestable preponderance over the evil. Were the offence
considered only under this point of view, it would not be casy to
assign any good reasons to justify the rigour of the laws. Every-
thing depends upon the evil of the second order; it is this which
gives to such actions the character of crime, and which makes
punishment necessary. Let us take, for example, the physical
desire of satisfying hunger. Let a beggar, pressed by hunger,
steal from a rich man’s house a loaf, which perhaps saves him
from starving,—can it be possible to compare the good which the
thief acquires for himsclf, with the evil which the rich man
suffers? The samc is truc of less striking examples; Lect a man
pillage the public treasury ; he enriches himself and impoverishes
nobody. The wrong which he docs to individuals is reduced to
impalpable parts. It is not on account of the evil of the first
order that it is necessary to erect these actions into offences, but
on account of the evil of the second order.

If the pleasure which attends the satisfaction of such powerful
desires as hatred, the sexual appetite, and hunger, when that
satisfaction runs countcr to the interests of others, is not equal to
the pain which it causes, the disproportion will appcar much
greater, as respects motives Iess active and strong.

The desire of self-preservation is the only one beside which
seems to demand a separate examination.

If the question relates to an evil which the laws themselves
seek to impose upon an individual, this can only be for some very
pressing reason, such as the necessity of carrying into execution
punishments ordaincd by the tribunals, punishments without
which there would be no security and no government. Now, if
the desire of escaping an evil of this sort be gratified, the law, to
the same extent, will be rendered inefficient. It appears, then,
that the evil resulting from this satisfaction is that which results
from the inefficiency of the laws, or, what amounts to the same


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 59


thing, from the non-existence of laws. But the evil which
results from the non-existence of laws is, in fact, an assemblage
of all the different evils which the laws are established to prevent ;
that is to say, of all the evils which men are liable to experience
on the part of other men, It is true that a single triumph over
the laws, obtained in this way by an individual, is not sufficient
to shake the whole system ; nevertheless, every example of this
kind is a symptom of weakness, a step towards destruction.
There results, then, from it an evil of the second order, an alarm,
at least a danger; and, if the laws connive at this evasion, they
will do it in contradiction to their own aim. In order to escape
one evil, they will admit another, much more than its equivalent.

There remains the case in which an individual repels an evil to
which the laws have not chosen to subject him. If they hare
not chosen to subject him to it, they do not wish him to submit
to it. To repel this evil is itself a good. It is possible that, in
making cfforts to preserve himsclf from it, the individual in
question may do an cvil more than equivalent to this good. Is
the evil he docs in his own defence confined to what is necessary
for that object, or does it go beyond? What is the proportion of
the evil which he does to the evil hcavoids? Isit equal, greater,
or less? Would the evil he has avoided have been susceptible of
compensation if, instead of defending himself by a method so
costly, he had preferred to submit to it for a time? These are
questions of fact, which the law ought to take into consideration,
before establishing in detail the regulations of self-defence. Itis
a subject which belongs to that part of the penal code which
treats of the means of justification or extenuation in regard to
offences committed. It is sufficient to observe here that in all
these cascs, though there is, in fact, an evil of the first order, yet
all the evil which an individual may do in self-defence produces
no alarm and no danger. Other men have nothing to fear, unicss
they first commence an illegal attack,


60 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


CHAPTER XII.
The Limits which separate Morals from Legislation.


Morauiry in gencral is the art of directing the actions of men in
such a way as to produce the greatest possible sum of good.

Legislation ought to have precisely the same object.

But although these two arts, or rather sciences, have the same
end, they differ greatly in extent All actions, whether public
or private, fall under the jurisdiction of morals. It is a guide
which leads the individual, as it were, by the hand through all
the details of his life, all his relations with his fellows. Legis-
lation cannot do this , and, if it could, it ought not to exercise a
continual interference and dictation over the conduct of men.

Morality commands each individual to do all that is advan-
tageous to the community, his own personal advantage included.
But there are many acts useful to the community which legisla-
tion ought not to command. There are also many injurious
actions which it ought not to forbid, although morality does so.
In a word, legislation has the same centre with morals, but it has
not the same circumference.

There are two reasons for this difference: 1st. Legislation can
have no direct influence upon the conduct of men, except by
punishments. Now these punishments are so many evils, which
are not justifiable except so far as there results from them a
greater sum of good. But, in many cases in which we might
desire to strengthen a moral precept by a punishment, the evil of
the punishment would be greater than the evil of the offence.
The means necessary to carry the law into execution would be of
a nature to spread through society a degree of alarm morc injurious
than the evil intended to be prevented.

2nd. Legislation is often arrested by the danger of overwhelm-
ing the innocent in seeking to punish the guilty. Whence comes
this danger? From the difficulty of defining an offence, and
giving a clear and precise idea of it. For example, hard-hearted-
ness, ingratitude, perfidy, and other vices which the popular


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 61


sanction punishes, cannot come under the power of the law, unless
they are defined as exactly as theft, homicide, or perjury.

But, the better to distinguish the true limits of morals and
legislation, it will be well to refer to the common classification of
moral duties,

Private morality regulates the actions of men, either in that
part of their conduct in which they alone are interested, or in
that which may affect the interests of others. The actions which
affect a man’s individual interest compose a class called, perhaps
improperly, duties to ourselves; and the quality or disposition
manifested in the accomplishment of those duties receives the
name of prudence. That part of conduct which relates to others
composes a class of actions called duties to others. Now there are
two ways of consulting the happiness of others: the one negative,
abstaining from diminishing it; the other positive, labouring to
augment it. The first constitutes probity ; the second is benefi-
cence.

Morality upon these three points needs the aid of the law;
but not in the same degree, nor in the same manner.

I. The rules of prudence are almost always sufficient of them-
selves. If a man fails in what regards his particular private
interest, it is not his will which 1s in fault, it is his understand-
ing. If he does wrong, it can only be through mistake. The
fear of hurting himself is a motive of repression sufficiently
strong; it would be useless to add to it the fear of an artificial
pain.

Does any one object, that fucts show the contrary? That
excesses of play, those of intemperance, the ilicit intercourse
between the sexes, attended so often by the greatest dangers,
are enough to prove that individuals have not always sufficient
prudence to abstain from what hurts them ?

Confining myself to a gencral reply, I answer, in the first place,
that, in the greater part of these cases, punishment would be so
easily eluded, that it would be inefficacious; secondly, that the
evil produced by the penal law would be much beyond the evil
of the offence.


62 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


.

Suppose, for example, that a legislator should feel himself
authorized to undertake the extirpation of drunkenness and for-
nication by direct laws. He would have to begin by a multitude
of regulations. The first inconvenience would therefore be a
complexity of laws. The easicr it is to conceal these vices, the
more necessary it would be to resort to severity of punishment,
in order to destroy by the terror of cxamples the constantly re-
curring hope of impunity. This excessive rigour of laws forms
a second inconvenience not less grave than the first. The diffi-
culty of procuring proofs would be such, that 1t would be neces-
sary to encourage informers, and to entertain an army of spies.
This necessity forms a third inconvenience, greater than either of
the others. Let us compare the results of good and evil. Offences
of this nature, if that name can be properly given to imprudences,
produce no alarm ; but the pretended remedy would spread a uni-
versal terror; innocent or guilty, every one would fear for him-
self or his connexions; suspicions and accusations would render
society dangerous; we should fly from it; we should involve
ourselves in mystery and concealment; we should shun all the
disclosures of confidence. Instead of suppressing onc vice, the
laws would produce other vices, new and more dangerous.

It is true that example may render certain excesses contagious ;
and that an evil which would be almost imperceptible, if it acted
only upon a small number of individuals, may become important
by its extent. All that the legislator can do in reference to
offences of this kind is, to submit them to somc slight punish-
ment in cases of scandalous notoricty. This will be sufficient to
give them a taint of illegality, which will excite the popular
sanction against them.

It is in cases of this kind that legislators have governed too
much. Instead of trusting to the prudence of individuals, they
have treated them like children, or slaves. They have suffered
themselves to be carried away by the same passion which has
influenced the founders of religious orders, who, to signalize their
authority, and through a littleness of spirit, have held their sub-
jects in the most abject dependence, and have traced for them,


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 68


day by day, and moment by moment, their occupations, their
food, their rising up, their lying down, and all the petty details
of their hfe. There are celebrated codes, in which are found a
multitude of clogs of this sort; there are useless restraints upon
marriage; punishments decreed against celibacy; sumptuary
laws regulating the fashion of dress, the expense of festivals, the
furniture of houses, and the ornaments of women; there are
numberless details about aliments permitted or forbidden; about
ablutions of such or such a kind; about the purifications which
health or cleanliness require; and a thousand similar puerilities,
which add, to all the inconvenience of useless restraint, that of
besotting the people, by covering these absurdities with a veil of
mystery, to disguise their folly.

Yet more unhappy are the States in which it is attempted to
maintain by penal laws a uniformity of religious opinions. The
choice of their religion ought to be referred entirely to the pru-
dence of individuals. If they are persuaded that their eternal
happiness depends upon a certain form of worship or a certain
belief, what can a legislator oppose to an interest so great? It
is not necessary to insist upon this truth—it is generally acknow-
ledged; but, in tracing the boundaries of legislation, I cannot
forget those which it is the most important not to overstep.

As a general rule, the greatest possible latitude should be left
to individuals, in all cascs in which they can injure none but
themselves, for they are the best judges of their own interests.
If they deceive themselves, it is to be supposed that the moment
they discover their error they will alter their conduct. The
power of the law need interfere only to prevent them from
injuring each other. It is there that restraint 1s necessary ; it is
there that the application of punishments is truly useful, because
the rigour exercised upon an individual becomes in such a case
the security of all.

II. It is true that there is a natural connection between pru-
dence and probity; for our own interest, well understood, will
never leave us without motives to abstain from injuring our


fellows.


64 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


Let us stop a moment at this point. I say that, independently
of religion and the laws, we always have some natural motives—
that is, motives derived from our own interest for consulting the
happiness of others. 1st. The motive of pure benevolence, &
sweet and calm sentiment which we delight to experience, and
which inspires us with a repugnance to be the cause of suffering.
2nd. The motives of private affection, which exercise their empire
in domestic life, and within the particular circle of our intimacies.
3rd. The desire of good repute, and the fear of blame. This is a
sort of calculation of trade. Itis paying, to have credit; speaking
truth, to obtain confidence; serving, to be served. It is thus we
must understand that saying of a wit, that, tf there were no such
thing as honesty, at would be a good speculation to invent it, as a
means of making one’s fortune.

A man enlightened as to his own interest will not indulge
himself in a secret offence through fear of contracting a shameful
habit, which sooner or later will betray him; and because the
having secrets to conceal from the prying curiosity of mankind
leaves in the heart a sediment of disqmet, which corrupts every
pleasure. All he can acquire at the expense of sccurity cannot
make up for the loss of that, and, if he desires a good reputation,
the best guarantee he can have for it 1s his own estecm.

But, in order that an individual should perccive this connection
between the interests of others and his own, he needs an en-
lightened spirit and a heart free from seductive passions. The
greater part of men have neither sufficicnt light, sufficient
strength of mind, nor sufficient moral sensibility to place their
honesty above the aid of the laws. The Icgislator must supply
the fecblencss of this natural interest by adding to it an artificial
interest, more steady and more casily perceived.

More yet. In many cases morality derives its existence from
the law; that is, to decide whether the action is morally good
or bad, it is necessary to know whether the laws permit or forbid
it. It is 80 of what concerns property. A manner of selling or
acquiring, estecmed dishonest in one country, would bo irre-
proachable in another. It is the same with offences ayainst the


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 65


state. The state exists only by law, and it is impossible to say
what conduct in this behalf morality requires of us before knowing
what the legislator has decreed. There are countries where it is
an offence to enlist into the service of a foreign power, and others
in which such a service is lawful and honourable.*

ITI. As to beneficience some distinctions are necessary. The
law may be extended to general objects, such as the care of the
poor; but, for details, it is necessary to depend upon private
morality. Beneficence has its mysteries, and loves best to employ
itself upon evils so unforeseen or so secret that the law cannot
reach them. Besides, it is to individual free-will that benevo-
lence owes its energy. Ifthe same acts were commanded, they
would no longer be benefits, they would lose their attraction and
their essence. It is morality, and especially religion, which
here form the necessary complement to legislation, and the
sweetest tie of humanity.

However, instead of having done too much in this respect,
legislators have not done enough. They ought to erect into an
offence the refusal or the omission of a service of humanity when
it would be easy to render it, and when some distinct ill clearly
results from the refusal; such, for example, as abandoning a
wounded man ina solitary road without secking any assistance
for him; not giving information to a man who is ignorantly
meddling with poisons; not reaching out the hand to one who
has fallen into a ditch from which he cannot extricate himself;
in these, and other similar cases, could any fault be found with a
punishment, exposing the delinquent to a certuin degree of shame,


* Here we touch upon one of the most difficult of questions. If the
law is not what it ought to be; if it openly combats the principle of
utility ; ought we to obey it? Ought we to violate it? Ought we to
remain neuter between the law which commands an evil, and morality
which forbids it? The solution of this question involves considerations
both of prudence and benevolence. We ought to examine if it is more
dangerous to violate the jaw than to obey it; we ought to consider
whether the probable evils of obedience are less or greater than the pro-
bable evils of disobedience.


é@ PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


or subjecting him to a pecuniary responsibility for the evil which
he might have prevented ?

I will add, that legislation might be extended further than it
is in relation to the interests of the inferior animals. I do not
approve the laws of the Hindus on this subject. There are
good reasons why animals should serve for the nourishment of
man, and for destroying those which incommode us. We are the
better for it, and they are not the worse; for they have not, as
we have, long and crucl anticipations of the future; and the
death which they receive at our hands may always be rendered
less painful than that which awaits them in the inevitable course
of nature. But what can be said to justify the useless torments
they are made to suffer, the crucl caprices which are exercised
upon them? Among the many reasons which might be given
for making criminal such gratuitous crucltics, I confine mysclf
to that which relates to my subject. It is a means of cultivating
a general sentiment of benevolence, and of rendering men more
‘mild; or at least of preventing that brutal depravity, which,
aftcr fleshing itself upon animals, presently demands human
suffering to satiate its appetite.*


CHAPTER XIII.
False Methods of Reasoning on the Subject of Legislation.


Ir has been the object of this introduction to give a clear idea of
the principle of utility, and of the method of reasoning conform-
able to that principle. There results from it a legislative logic,
which can be summed up in a few words. What is 1t to offer a
good reason with respect toa law? It is to allege the good or
evil which the law tends to produce: so much good, so many argu-
ments in its favour; so much-evil, so many arguments against it;
remembering all the time that good and evil are nothing else
than pleasure and pain.


* See Barrow's Voyage to the Cape ey Good Hope, for tho cruolties of
the Dutch settlers toward their cattle and their slaves.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 67


What is it to offer a false reason? It is the alleging for or
against a law something else than its good or evil effects.

Nothing can be more simple, yet nothing is more new. It is
not the principle of utility which is new; on the contrary, that
principle is necessarily as old as the human race. All the truth
there is in morality, all the good there is in the laws, cmanate
from it; but utility has often been followed by instinct, while it
has becn combatted by argument. Ifin books of legislation it
throws out some sparks here and there, they are quickly extin-
guished in the surrounding smoke. Brccanrra is the only writer
who deserves to be noted as an exception ; yet even in his work
there is some reasoning drawn from false sources.

It is upwards of two thousand ycars since Aristotle undertook
to form, undcr the title of Sophisms, a complete catalogue of the
different kinds of false reasoning. This catalogue, improved by
the information which so long an interval might furnish, would
here have its place and its use. But such an undertaking would
carry me too far. I shall be content with presenting some heads
of error on the subject of legislation. By means of such a con-
trast, the principle of utility will be put into a clearer hght.

1, Antiquity is not a Lteason.

The antiquity of a law may create a prejudice in its favour ; but
in itself, it isnotarcason. Ifthe law in question has contributed
to the public good, the older it is, the casicr it will be to enumerate
its good effects, and to prove its utility by a direct process.

2. The Authority of Religion 1s not a Reason.

Of late, this method of reasoning has gone much out of fashion, '
but till recently its use was very extensive. The work of
Algernon Sidney is full of tations from the Old Testament ; and
he finds there the foundation of a system of Democracy, as
Bossuet had found the principles of absolute power. Sidney
wished to combat the partisans of divine right and passive
obedience with their own weapons.

Tf we suppose that a law emanates from tho Deity, we suppose
that it cmanates from supreme wisdom, and supreme bounty.


68 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


Such a law, then, can only have for its object the most eminent
utility; and this utility, put into a clear light, will always be an
ample justification of the law.


3. Reproach of Innovation ts not a Reason.


To reject innovation is to reject progress: in what condition
should we be, if that principle had been always followed? All
which exists has had a beginning; all which is established has
been innovation. Those very persons who approve a law to-day
because it is ancient, would have opposed it as new when it was
first introduced.

4. An Arbitrary Definition 78s not a Reason.

Nothing is more common, among jurists and political writers,
than to base their reasonings, and even to write long works, upon
a foundation of purely arbitrary definitions. This artifice con-
sists in taking a word ino particular sense, foreign from its
common usage ; in employing that word as no one ever employed
it before; and in puzzling the reader by an appearance of pro-
foundness and of mystery.

Montesquieu himself has fallen into this fault in the very be-
ginning of his work. Wishing to give a definition of law, he
proceeds from metaphor to metaphor; he brings together the
most discordant objects—the Divinity, the matcrial world, superior
intelligences, beasts and men. We lcarn, at last, that laws are
relations ; and eternal relations. Thus the definition is more
obscure than the thing to be defined. The word law, in its
proper sense, excites in cvery mind a tolcrably clear idea, the
word relation excites no idea at all. The word daw, in its figura-
tive sense, produces nothing but equivocations; and Montesquicu,
‘who ought to have diasipated the darkness, has only in-
-creased it,

It 1s the character of a false definition, that it can only be em-
ployed in a particular way. That author, a little further on
(ch. ii1.), gives another definition. Zaw tn general, he says, ¢s
human reason, in 80 far as it governs all the people of the earth.
These terms are more familiar but no clear idea results from


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 69


them. Is it the fact, that so many laws, contradictory, ferocious,
or absurd, and in a perpetual state of change, are always
human reason? It would seem that reason, so far from being
the law, is often in opposition to it.

This first chapter of Montesquieu has given occasion to an
abundance of nonsense. The brain has been racked in search of
metaphysical mysteries, where none in fact exist. Even Beccaria
has suffered himself to be carried away by this obscure notion of
relations. ‘To interrogate a man in order to know whether he is
innocent or guilty, is to force him, he tells us, to accuse himself.
To this procedure he objects; and why? because, as he says, it
is to confound all relations.* But what docs that mean? To
enjoy, to suffer, to causc enjoyment, to cause suffering: those are
expressions which I understand; but to follow relations and to
confound relations, is what I do not understand at all. These
abstract terms do not excite any idca in my mind; they do
not awaken any sentiment. I am absolutely indifferent about
relations ;—pleasures and pains are what interest me.

Rousseau has not been satisfied with the definition of Mon-
tesquieu. He has given his own, which he announces as a great
discovery. aw, he says, is the expression of the general will.
There are, then, no laws except where the people have spoken
in a body. There is no law except in an absolute democracy.
Rousseau has suppressed, by this supreme decree, all existing laws;
and at the same time he has deprived of the possibility of
existence all those which are likely to be made hereafter,—the
legislation of the republic of San Marino alone excepted.

5. Metaphors are not Reasons.

I mean either metaphor properly so called, or allegory, used
at first for illustration or ornament, but afterwards made the basis
of an argument.

Blackstone, so great an enemy of all reform, that he has gone
so far as to find fault with the introduction of the English lan-
guage into the reports of cases decided by the courts, has neglected


* Beccaria, ch. xii.


70 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


no means of inspiring his readers with the same prejudice. He
represents the law* as a castle, as a fortress, which cannot he
,altéred without being weakened. I allow that he does not ad-
vance this metaphor as an argument; but why does he employ
it? To gain possession of the imagination; to prejudice his
readers against every idea of reform; to excite in them an arti-
ficial fear of all innovation in the laws. There remains in the
mind a false image, which produces the same effect with false
reasoning. He ought to have recollected that this allegory might
be employed against himsclf. When they see the law turned
into a castle, is it not natural for ruined suitors to represent it as
a castle inhabited by robbers ?

A man’s house, say the English, is his castle. This poctical
expression is certainly no reason; for if a man’s house be his
castle by night, why not by day? If it is an inviolable asylum
for the owner, why is it not so for every person whom he chooses
to receive there? The course of justice is sometimes interrupted
in England by this pucrile notion of liberty. Criminals seem to
be looked upon iike foxcs ; they are suffered to have their burrows,
in order to increase the sports of the chase.

A church in Catholic countries is the ZZouse of God. This
metaphor has served to establish asylums forcriminals. It would
be a mark of disrespect for the Divinity to scize by force those
who had taken refuge in his house.

The balance of trade has produced a multitude of reasonings
founded upon metaphor. It has been imagined that in the course
of mutual commerce nations rose and sank like the scales of a
balance loaded with uncqual weights, people have becn terribly
alarmed at what appearcd to them a want of cquilibrium; for it
has becn supposed that what one nation gained the other must
lose, as if a weight had been transferred from one scale to the
other.

The word mother-country has produced a great, number of pre-
Judices and false reasonings in all questions concerning colonies


* 3 Comm. ch. xvii.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 71


and the parent state. Duties have been imposed upon colonies,
and they have been accused of offences, founded solely upon the
metaphor of their filial dependence.


6. A Fiction is not a Reason.


I understand by fictiow an assumed fact notoriously false, apon
which one reasons as if it were true.

The celebrated Cocceiji, the compiler of the Code Frederic, fur-
nishes an example of this kind of reasoning on the subject of last
wills. After a deal of circumlocution about the natural right, he
decides that the legislator ought to grant to individuals the power
of making a will, Why? Because the heir and the deceased are
one and the same person, and consequently the herr ought to continue
to enjoy the property of the deceased. (Code Fred. part ii. 1. 110,
p- 156.) He offers, it is true, some arguments which involve, to
a small extent, the principle of utility ; but that 1s in the preface.
The serious reason, the judicial reason, is the identity of the living
and the dead!

The English lawyers, to justify the confiscation of property in
certain cases, have employed a style of reasoning not unlike that
of the chancellor of the great Frederic. They have imagined a
corruption of blood which arrests the course of legal succession.
A man has been capitally punished for the crime of high treason ;
his innocent son is not only deprived of his father’s goods, but he
cannot even inherit from his grandfather, because the channel
by which the goods ought to pass has been corrupted. This
fiction of a sort of political omginal sin serves as a foundation
to all this point of law. But why stop there? If in fact the
father’s blood is corrupted, why not destroy the vile offspring
of corruption? Why not execute the son at the same time with
the father ?

Blackstone, in the seventh chapter of his first book, in speak-
ing of the royal authority, has given himself up to all the
puerility of fiction. The king, he tells us, is everywhere pre-
sent; he can do no wrong; he is immortal.

These ridiculous paradoxes, the fruits of servility, so far from


72 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


furnishing just ideas of the prerogatives of royalty, only serve to
dazzie, to mislead, and to give to reality itself an air of fable and
of prodigy. But these fictions are not mere sparkles of imagi-
nation. He makes them the foundation of many reasonings.
He employs them to explain certain royal prerogatives, which
might be justified by very good arguments, without perceiving
how much the best cause is injured by attempting to prop it up
by falsehoods. The yudges, he tells us, are mirrors, tn which the
tmage of the king 1s reflected. What puerility! Is it not expos-
ing to ridicule the very objects which he designs to render the
most respectable ?

But there are fictions more bold and more important, which
have played a great part in politics, and which have produced
celebrated works: these are contracts.

The Leviathan of Hobbes, a work now-a-days but little known,
and detested through prejudice and at second-hand as a defence
of despotism, is an attempt to base all political socicty upon a
pretended contract between the people and the sovereign. The
people by this contract have renounced their natural liberty,
which produced nothing but evil; and have deposited all power
in the hands of the prince. All opposing wills have been united
in his, or rather annihilated byit. That which he wills is taken
to be the will of all his subjects. When David brought about the
destruction of Unah, he acted in that matter with Uriah’s con-
sent, for Uriah had consented to all that David might command.
The prince, according to this system, might sin against God, but
he could not sin against man, because all his actions proceeded
from the general consent. It was impossible to entertain the
idea of resisting him, because such an idea implied the contradic-
tion of resisting one’s sclf.

Locke, whose name is as dear to the friends of liberty as that
of Hobbes is odious, has also fixed the basis of government upon
acontract. He agrees that there is a contract between the prince
and the people; but according to him the prince takes an engage-
ment to govern according to the laws, and for the public good;
while the people, on their side, take an engagement of obedience


. PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 73


so long as the prince remains faithful to the conditions in virtue
of which he receives the crown.

Rousseau rejects with indignation the idea of this bilatera)
contract between the prince and the people. He has imagined a
social contract, by which all are bound to all, and which is the
only legitimate basis of government. Society exists only by
virtue of this free convention of associates.

These three systems—so directly opposed—agree, however, in
beginning the theory of politics with a fiction, for these three con-
tracts are equally fictitious. They exist only in the imagination of
their authors. Not only we find no trace of them in history, but
everywhere we discover proofs to the contrary.

The contract of Hobbes is a manifest falsehood. Despotism
has everywhere been the result of violence and of false religious
ideas. If a people can be found which by a public act has sur-
rendered up the supreme authority to its chief, 1t is not true that,
in so doing, that people submitted itself to all the caprices, how-
ever strange or cruel, of its sovereign. The singular act of the
Danish people in 1660 includes essential clauses which limit the
supreme power.

The socral contract of Rousseau has not been judged so severely,
because men are not difficult about the logic of a system which
establishes that which they best love—liberty and equality. But
where has this universal convention been formed? What arc its
clauses? In what language is it written? Why has it always
been unknown? Upon coming out of the forests, upon renouncing
savage life, whut tribe has possessed those great ideas of morals
and politics upon which this primitive convention is built?

The contract of Locke is more specious, because, in fact, there
are some monarchics in which the sovereign takes certain engage-
ments upon his accession to the throne; and accepts certain con-
ditions upon the part of the nation he is to govern.

However, even this contract is but a fiction. The essence of
a contract consists in the free consent of the parties interested.
It supposes that all the objects of the engagement are specified
and known. Now if the prince is free, at his accession, to accept


74 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


or to refuse, are the people equally soP: Can a few vague accla-
mations be counted as an act of individual and universal assent ?
Can this contract bind that multitude of individuals who nevcr
heard of it, who have never been ealled to sanction it, and who
could not have refused their consent without endangering their
fortunes and their lives?

Besides, in the greater part of monarchies, this pretended con-
tract has not cven the appearance of reality. We do not sec
even the shadow of an engagement between the prince and the
people.

It is not necessary to make the happiness of the human race
dependent ona fiction. Itis not necessary to crect the social
pyramid upon a foundation of sand, or upon a clay which slips
from bencath it. Let us leave such trifling to children; men
ought to speak the language of truth and reason.

The true political tic 1s the immense interest which men have
in maintaining a government. Without a government there can
be no security, no domestic cnjoyments, no property, no industry.
It is in this fact that we ought to seck the basis and the reason
of all governments, whatcvcr may be their origin and their form ;
it is by comparing them with their object that we can reason
with solidity upon ther rights and their obligations, without
having recourse to pretended contracts which can only serve to
produce interminable disputcs.


7. Lancy is not a Reason.


Nothing is more common than to say, reason decides, eternal
veason orders, &. But what is this reason? If it is not a dis-
tinct view of good or evil, it is mere fancy; it is a despotism,
which announces nothing but the intcrior persuasion of him who
speaks. Let us sce upon what foundation a distinguished jurist
has sought to establish the paternal authority. A man of ordinary
good sense would not sce much difficulty in that question; but
your learned men find a mystery everywhere.

“‘ The right of a father over his children,” says Cocceiji, “is
founded in reason ;—for, 1st, Children are born in a house, of


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 75


which the father is the master; 2nd, They are born in a fumily
of which he is the chief; 3rd, They are of his seed, and a part of
his body.”” These are the reasons from which he concludes,
among other things, that a man of forty ought not to marry
without the consent of a father, who in the'course of nature
must by that time be in his dotage. What there is common to
these thrce reasons is, that none of them has any relation to the
intercsts of the partics. The author consults ncither the welfare
of father nor that of the children.

The right of a father is an improper phrase. The question is
not of an unlimited, nor of an indivisible right. There are many
kinds of rights which may be granted or refused to a father, each
for particular reasons.

The first reanon which Cocceiji alleges is founded upon a fact
which is truc only by accident. Let a traveller have children
who are born at a tavern, on board a vesscl, or in the house of a
friend, such a father would lack this first basis of paternal
authority. According to this reasoning, the children of a
domestic, and those of a soldier, ought not to be subjcct to their
fathers’ commands, but to those of the person in whose house
they are born.

If the second reason has any determinate sense, it is only a
repetition of the first. Is the child of a man who lives in his
father’s house, or in the house of an elder brother, or a patron,
born in a family of which his father is the chief?

The third reason is as futile as it is ndecent. ‘‘The child is
born of the sced of his father, and is a part of his body.” If
this is the foundation of the nght, it ought to put the power of
the mother far above that of the father.

And here we may remark on essential difference between false
principles and the true one. The principle of utility, applying
itself only to the interests of the parties, bends to circumstances,
and accommodates itself to every case. False principles, being
founded upon things which have nothing to do with individual
interests, would be inflexible if they were consistent. Such is
the character of this pretended right founded upon birth. The


16 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION,


son naturally belongs to the father, because the matter of which
the son is formed once circulated in the father’s veins. No
matter how unhappy he renders his son;—it is impossible to
annihilate his right, because we cannot make his son cease to ba
his son. The corn of which your body is made formerly grew in
my field; how is it that you are not my slave?


8. Antinathy and Sympathy are not Reasons.


Reasoning by antipathy is most common upon subjects con-
nected with penal law; for we have antipathics against actions
reputed to be crimes; antipathics against individuals reputed to
be criminals; antipathies against the ministers of justice ; anti-
pathies against such and such punishments. This false prin-
ciple has reigned like a tyrant throughout this vast province of
law. Beccaria first dared openly to attack it. His arms were of
celestial temper; but if he did much towards destroying the
usurper, he did very little towards the establishment of a new
and more equitable rule.

It is the principle of antipathy which Icads us to speak of
offences as deserving punishment. It 1s the corresponding prin-
ciple of sympathy which leads us to speak of certain actions as
meriting reward. This word merit can only lead to passion and
tocrror. Itis effects, good or bad, which we ought alone toconsider.

But when I say that antipathies and sympathies are no reason,
I mean those of the legislator; for the antipathics and sympa-
thics of the people may be reasons, and very powerful ones.
Wowever odd or pernicious a religion, a law, u custom may be, it
is of no consequence, so long as the pcople are attached to it.
The strongth of their prejudice is the measure of the indul-
gence which should be granted to it. To take away an enjoy-
ment or a hope, chimerical though it may be, is to do the same
injury as if we took away arcal hope, arcal enjoyment. In such
a case the pain of a single individual becomes, by sympathy, the
pain of all. Thence results a crowd of evils; antipathy against
a law which wounds the general prejudice; antipathy against
the whole code of that law is a part; antipathy against the


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 77


government which carries the laws into execution; a disposi-
tion not to aid in their execution; a disposition secretly to oppose
it ; a disposition to oppose it openly and by force; a disposition
to destroy a government which sets itself in opposition to the
popular will—all the evils produced by those offences, which, in
a collective shape, form that sad compound called rebellion or
cewtl war—all the evils produced by the punishments which are
resorted to as a mcans of putting a stop to those offences. Such
is the succession of fatal consequences which are always ready to
arise from fancies and prejudices violently opposed. The legis-
lator ought to yield to the violence of a current which carries
away everything that obstructs it. But let us observe, that in
such a case, the fancies themselves are not the reason that
determines the legislator ; his reason is the evils which threaten
to grow out of an opposition to those fancies.

But ought the legislator to be a slave to the fancies of those
whom he governs? No. Between an imprudent opposition and
a servile compliance there is a middle path, honourable and safe.
It is to combat these fancies with the only arms that can conquer
them—example and instruction. He must enlighten the people,
he must address himself to the public reason; he must give
time for error to be unmasked. Sound reasons, clearly set forth,
are of necessity stronger than false ones. But the legislator
ought not to show himself too openly in these instructions, for
fear of compromitting himself with the public ignorance. Indi-
rect means will better answer his end.

It is to be observed, however, that too much deference for
prejudices is a more common fault than the contrary excess.
The best projects of laws are for evcr stumbling against this
common objection,—‘‘ Prejudice is opposed to it; the people
will be offended!” But how is that known? How has public
opinion becn consulted? What is its organ? Have the whole
people but one uniform notion on the subject? Have all the
individuals of the community the same sentiments, including
perhaps nine out of ten, who never hcard the subject spoken of?
Besides, if the people are in error, are they compelled always to


78 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


remain so? Will not an influx of light dissipate the darkness
which produces error? Can we expect the people to possess
sound knowledge, while it is yet unattained by their legislators,
by those who are regarded as the wise men of the land? Have
there not been examples of other nations who have come out of
a similar ignorance, and where triumphs have been achieved
over the same obstacles ?

After all, popular prejudice serves oftencr as a pretext than as
a motive. It is a convenient cover for the weakness of states-
men. The ignorance of the people is the favourite argument of
pusillanimity and of indolence, while the rcal motives are pre-
judices from which the legislators themselves have not been able
to get free. The name of the people is falsely used to justify
their leaders.


9. Begging the Question 18 not a Reason.


The petiteo prineipi, or begging the question, is one of the
sophisms which 1s noted by Aristotle; but it is a Proteus which
conceals itself artfully, and is reproduced under a thousand
forms.

Begging the question, or rather assuming the question, con-
sists in making use of the very proposition in dispute, as though
it were already proved.

This false procedure insinuatcs itself into morals and legisla-
tion, under the disguise of sentimental or zmpassioned terms;
that is, terms which, beside their pmnupal sense, carry with
them an accessory idca of praise or blame. Neuter terms are
those which simply express the thing in question, without any
attending presumption of good or evil; without introducing any
foreign idea of blame or approbation.

Now it is to be observed that an impassioned term cnvclops
a proposition not expressed, but understood, which always accom-
panies its employment, though in gencral unperceived by those
who employ it. This concealed proposition implies either blame
or praise; but the implication is always vague and undetermined.

Do I desire to connect an idea of utility with a term which


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION, 79


commonly conveys an accessory idea of blame? I shall seem to
advance a paradox, and to contradict myself. For example,
should I say that such a piece of Juzury is a good thing? The
proposition astonishes those who are accustomed to attach to this
word luxury a sentiment of disapprobation.

How shall I be able to examine this particular point without
awakening a dangcrous association? I must have recourse to a
neuter word; I must say, for cxample, such a manner of spending
one’s revenue is good. ‘This turn of expression runs counter to no
prejudice, and permits an impartial examination of the object in
question. When IJIlelvetius advanced the idea that all actions
have tnéerest for their motive, the public cried out against his
doctrinc without stopping to understand it. Why? Because
the word tnterest has an odious serfse; a common acceptation, in
which it seems to cxclude every motive of pure attachment and
of benevolence.

How many reasonings upon political subjects are founded upon
nothing but impassioned terms! People suppose they are giving
a reason for a law, when they say that it is conformable to the
principles of monarchy or of democracy. But that means nothing.
If there arc persons in whose minds these words are associated
with an idea of approbation, there are others who attach con-
trary ideas to them. Let these two parties begin to quarrel, tho
dispute will never come to an end, except through the weariness
of the combatants. For, before beginning a true examination, we
must renounce these impassioned terms, and calculate the effects
of the proposed law in good and evil. ;

Blackstone admires in the British constitution the combina-
tion of the three forms of government; and he hence concludes
that it must possess the collected good qualities of monarchy,
aristocracy, and democracy. How happened it that he did not
perceive, that without changing his premises, a conclusion might
be drawn from them, diametrically opposite, yet equally just; to
wit, that the British constitution must unite all the particular
faults of democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy ?

To the word independence, there are attached certain accessory


80 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


ideas of. dignity and virtue; to the word dependence, accessory
ideas of inferiority and corruption. Hence it is that the pane-
gyrists of the British constitution admire the independence of the
three powers of which the legislature is composed. This, in
their eyes, is the masterpiece of politics; the happiest trait in
that whole scheme of government. On the other side, those who
would detract from the merits of that constitution, are always in-
sisting upon the actual dependence of one or the other of its branches.
Neither the praise nor the censure contain any reasons.

As to the fact, the pretended independence does not exist.
The king and the greater part of the lords have a direct influence
upon the election of the House of Commons. The king has the
power of dissolving that House at any moment; a power of no
little efficacy. The king exercises a direct influence by honour-
able and lucrative employments, which he gives or takes away
at pleasure. On the other side, the king is dependent upon the
two Houses, and particularly upon the Commons, since he cannot
maintain himself without money and troops,—two principal and
essential matters which are wholly under the control of the re-
presentatives of the people. What pretence has the House of
Lords to be called independent, while the king can augment its
number at pleasure, and change the vote in his favour by the
creation of new lords; exercising too, as he does, an additional
influence on the temporal peers, by the prospect of advancement
in the ranks of the peerage; and on the bishops, by the bait of
ecclesiastical promotion ?

Instead of reasoning upon a deceptive word, let us consider
effects. It is the reciprocal dependence of these three powers
which produces their agreement; which subjects them to fixed
rules, which gives them a steady and systematic operation.
Hence the necessity of mutual respect, attention, concession, and
moderation. If they were absolutely independent, there would
be continual shocks between them. It would often be necessary
to appeal to force; and the result would be a state of anarchy.

I cannot refrain from giving two other examples of this error
of reasoning, founded upon the misuse of terms.


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 8]


If we attempt a theory upon the subject of national represen-
tation, in following out all that appears to be a natural conse-
quence of that abstract idea, we come at last to the conclusion
that universal suffrage ought to be established; and to the addi-
tional conclusion that the representatives ought to be re-chosen
as frequently as possible, in order that the national representation
may deserve to be esteemed such.

In deciding these same questions according to the principle of
utility, it will not do to reason upon words; we must look only
at cffects. In the election of a legislative assembly, the might
of suffrage should not be allowed except to those who are esteemed
by the nation fit to exercise it; for a choice made by men who
do not possess the national confidence will weaken the confidence
of the nation in the assembly so chosen.

Men who would not be thought fit to be electors, are those
who cannot be presumed to possess political integrity, and a
sufficient degree of knowledge. Now we cannot presume upon
the political integrity of those whom want exposes to the temp-
tation of selling themselves; nor of those who have no fixed
abode; nor of those who have been found guilty in the courts of
justice of certain offences forbidden by the law. We cannot
presume a sufficient degree of knowledge in women, whom their
domestic condition withdraws from the conduct of public affairs ;
in children and adults bencath a certain age; in those who are
deprived by their poverty of the first elements of education,
&e. &c.

It is according to these principles, and others like them, that
we ought to fix the conditions necessary for becoming an elector;
and it is in like manner, upon the advantages and disadvantages
of frequent elections, without paying any attention to arguments
drawn from abstract terms, that we ought to reason in establish-
ing the duration of a legislative assembly.

The last example I shall give will be taken from contracts; I
mean those political fictions to which this name has been applied
by their authors.

When Locke and Rousseau reason upon this pretended contract ;


g2 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


when they affirm that the social or political contract inclodes
such and such a clause, can they prove it otherwise than by the
general utility which is supposed to result from it? Grant that
this contract which has never been reduced to writing is, how-
ever, in full existence. On what depends all its force? Is it not
upon its utility? Why ought we to fulfil our engagements?
Because the faith of promises is the basis of society. It is for
the advantage of all that the promises of every individual should
be faithfully observed. There would no longer be any sccurity
among men, no commerce, no confidence ;—it would be neces-
sary to go back to the woods, if engagements did not posscss
an obligatory force. It is the same with these political con-
tracts. It is their utility which makcs them binding. When
they become injurious, they lose their force. Ifa king had taken
an oath to render his subjects unhappy, would such an engage-
be valid? If the people were sworn to obey him at all events,
would they be bound to suffer themselves to be exterminated by
a Nero or a Caligula, rather than violate thcir promise? If there
resulted from the contract cffects universally injurious, could
there be any sufficient reason for maintaining it? It cannot be
denied, then, that the validity of a contract is at bottom only a
question of utility—a little wrapped up, a little disguised, and,
in consequence, more susceptible of falsc interpretations.


10. An tmaginary Law 18s not a Leason.


Natural law, natural rights, are two kinds of fictions or meta-
phors, which play so great a part in books of legislation that
they deserve to be examined by themselves.

The primitive sense of the word Jaw, and the ordinary mean-
ing of the word, is—the will or command of a legislator. The
taw of nature is a figurative expression, in which nature is repre-
sented as a being; and such and such a disposition is attributed
to her, which is figuratively called a law. In this sense, all the
general inclinations of men, all those which appear to exist inde-
pendently of humap societies, and from which must proceed the


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 83


establishment of political and civil law, are called laws of nature.
This is the true sense of the phrase.

But this is not the way in which it is understood. Authors
have taken it in a dircct sense; as if there had been a real code
of natural laws. They appeal to these laws; they cite them, and
they oppose them, clause by clause, to the enactments of legis-
lators. They do not see that these natural laws are laws of their
own invention; that they are all at odds among themselves as to
the contents of this pretended code; that they affirm without
proof; that systems are as numerous as authors; and that, in
reasoning in this manner, it is necessary to be always beginning
anew, because every one can advance what he pleases touching
laws which are only imaginary, and so kcep on disputing for
ever.

What is natural to man is sentiments of pleasure or pain,
what are called inclinations. But to call these sentiments and
these inclinations das, is to introduce a false and dangerous idea.
It is to set language in opposition to itself; for it is necessary to
make laws precisely for the purpose of restraining these inclina-
tions. Instead of regarding them as laws, they must be sub-
mitted to laws. It is against the strongest natural inclinations
that it is necessary to have laws the most repressive. If there
were a law of nature which directed all men towards their common
good, laws would be useless; it would be employing a creeper to
uphold an oak; it would be kindling a torch to add light to the
sun.

Blackstone, in speaking of the obligation of parents to provide
for the support of their children, says, ‘“‘ that it is a principle of
natural law, a duty imposed by nature itself, and by the proper
act of the parents in bringing the children into the world.
Montesquieu,” he adds, ‘‘ observes with reason, that the natural
obligation of the father to support his children, is what has
caused the establishment of marriage, which points out the
person who ought to fulfil this obligation.” (Book i. ch. 16.)

Parents are inclined to support their children; parents ought
to support their children; these are two distinct propositions.

a 2


84 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


The first does not suppose the second; the second does not sup-
pose the first. There are, without doubt, the strongest reasons
for imposing upon parents the obligation to bring up their
children. Why have not Blackstone and Montesquieu mentioned
those reasons? Why do they refer us to what they call the law
of nature? What is this law of nature, which needs to be
propped up by a secondary law from another legislator? IEf this
natural obhgation exists, as Montesquieu says it does, far from
serving as the foundation of marriage, it proves its inutility,—at
least for the end which he assigns. One of the objects of mar-
riage is, precisely to supply the insufficiency of natural affection.
It is designed to convert into obligation that inclination of
parents, which would not always be sufficiently strong to sur-
mount the pains and embarrassments of education.

Men are very well disposed to provide for their own support.
It has not been necessary to make laws to oblige them to that.
If the disposition of parents to provide for the support of their
children had been constantly and universally as strong, legis-
lators never would have thought of turning it into an obligation.

The exposure of infants, so common in ancient Greece, is still
practised in China, and to a greater extent. To abolish this
practice, would it not be necessary to allege other reasons besides
this pretended law of nature, which here is evidently at fault ?

The word rights, the same as the word Jaw, has two scnses ;
the one a proper sense, the other a metaphorical sense. Lights,
properly so called, are the creatures of /aw properly so called ;
real laws give birth to real rights. Natural rights are the crea-
tures of natural law; they are a metaphor which derives its
origin from another metaphor.

What there is natural in man is means,—faculties. But to
call these means, these facultics, natural rights, is again to put
language in opposition to itsclf. For rights are established to
insure the exercise of means and facultics. The right is the
guarantee; the faculty is the thing guarantecd. How can we
understand each other with a language which confounds under
the same term things so different? Where would be the nomen-


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 85


clature of the arts, if we gave to the mechanic who makes an
article the same name as to the article itself?

Real rights are always spoken of in a legal sense; natural
rights are often spoken of in a sense that may be called anti-
legal. When it is said, for example, that law cannot avail against
natural rights, the word rights is employed in a sense above the
law ; for, in this use of it, we acknowledge rights which attack
the law; which overturn it, which annul it. In this anti-legal
sense, the word right is the greatest enemy of reason, and the
most terrible destroyer of governments.

There is no reasoning with fanatics, armed with natural rights ,
which each one understands as he pleases, and applies as he sees
fit; of which nothing can be yielded, nor retrenched ; which are
inflexible, at the same time that they are unintelligible; which
are consecrated as dogmas, from which it is a crime to vary.
Instead of examining laws by their effects, instead of judging
them as good or as bad, they consider them in relation to these
pretended natural rights; that is to say, they substitute for the
reasoning of experience the chimeras of their own imaginations.

This is‘not a harmless error; it passes from speculation into
practice. ‘‘ Those laws must be obeyed, which are accordant
with nature; the others are null in fact; and instead of obeying
them, they onght to be resisted. The moment natural rights are
attacked, every good citizen ought to rouse up in their defence.
These rights, evident in themsclves, do not necd to be proved ;
it is sufficient to declare them. How prove what is evident
already? To doubt implies a want of sense, or a fault of intel-
lect,” &c.

But not to be accused of gratuitously ascribing such seditious
maxims to these inspired politicians of nature, I shall cite a pas-
sage from Blackstone, directly to the point; and I choose Black-
stonc, because he is, of all writers, the one who has shown the
most profound respect for the authority of governments. In
speaking of these pretended laws of nature, and of the laws of
revelation, he says: ‘‘ Human laws must not be permitted to con-
tradict these; if a human law commands a thing forbidden by


86 PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION.


the natural or divine law, we are bound to transgress that human
law,” &. (1 Comm. p. 43.)

Is not this arming every fanatic against all governments? In
the immense variety of ideas respecting natural and Divine law,
cannot some reason be found for resisting all human laws? Is
there a single state which can maintain itself a day, if each indi-
vidual holds himself bound in conscience to resist the laws,
whenever they are not conformed to his particular ideas of natural
or Divine law? What a cut-throat scene of if we shonld have
between all the interpreters of the code of nature, and all the
interpreters of the law of God!

‘The pursuit of happincss is a natural right.” The pursuit
of happiness is certainly a natural inclination; but can it be de-
elared to be a right? That depends on the way in which it 1s
pursued. The assassin pursues his happiness, or what he estcems
such, by committing an assassination. Has he a right to do so?
If not, why declare that he has? What tendency is there in
such a declaration to render men more happy or more wise ?

Turgot was a great man; but he had adopted the general
opinion without examining it. Inalienable and natural mghts
were the despotism or the dogmatism which he wished to
exercise, without himself percciving it. Tf he saw no reason to
doubt a proposition ; if he judged it evidently truc; he referred
it, without going further, to natural right, to eternal justice.
Henceforward he made use of it as an article of faith, which he
was no longer permitted to cxamine.

Utility having been often badly applicd, understood in a nar-
row sense, and having lent its name to crimes, has appeared
contrary to eternal justice. It thus became degraded, and
acquired a mercenary reputation. It needs courage to restore it
to honour, and to re-establish reasoning upon its truc basis.

I propose a treaty of conciliation with the partisans of natural
rights. If nature has made such or such a law, those who cite
it with so much confidence, those who have modcstly taken upun
themselves to be its interpreters, must suppose that nature had
some reasons for her law. Would it not be surer, shorter and


PRINCIPLES OF LEGISLATION. 87


more persuasive, to give us those reasons directly, instead of
urging upon us the will of this unknown legislator, as itself an
authority ?

Here would be the place to remark the false methods of
argument, which especially prevail in deliberative assemblies—
personalities, imputations of bad motives, declamations, delays.
But what has been said above is enough to show what is reason-
ing, according to the principle of utility, and what is not.

All these false mcthods of reasoning can always be reduced to
one or the other of the two false principles. This fundamental
distinction is very useful in gctting rid of words, and rendering
ideas more clear. To refer such or such an argument to one or
another of the false principles, is hke tying weeds into bundles,
to be thrown into the fire

I conclude with a gencral observation. The language of crror
is always obscure and indefinite. An abundance of words serves
to cover a paucity and a falsity of ideas. The oftener terms are
changed, the casicr it is to delude the reader. The language of
truth is uniform and simple The same idcas are always ex-
pressed by the same terms. Everything is referred to pleasures
or to pains. Every expression is avoided which tends to disguise
or intercept the familiar idea, that from such and such actions
result such and such pleasures and pains. Trust not to me, but to
expericnee, and especially your own. Of two opposite methods
of action, do you desire to hnow which should have the preference ?
Calculate their effects in good and evil, and prefer that which pro-
mises the greater sum of good


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


INTRODUCTION.


BY DUMONT.


Or all the branches of legislation, civil law is that which has the
least attraction for those who do not study jurisprudence as a pro-
fession. But this is not saying enough. In fact, it inspires a
kind of terror. Curiosity has for a long time been ardently cx-
ercised upon political economy, upon penal law, and upon the
principles of government. Cclebrated works have given credit
to those studies; and under the penalty of confessing an humbling
inferiority, 1t is necessary to have some information, and to ex-
press some opinions about them. But civil law has not yct come
out of the narrow enclosure of the bar. Its commentators sleep
in the dust of libraries, by the side of its controversialists. The
public knows not even the names of its sects; and regards with
a mute and ignorant respect those numerous folios, those
enormous compilations, ornamented with the pompous titles of
Bodies of Law, and Collections of Universal Jurisprudence.

The general repugnance against this study results from the
manner in which it has been treated. The works above alluded
to bear the same relation to the scicnce of law which was borne
to the natural sciences by the works of the scholastic writers,
before the introduction of experimental philosophy. They who


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 89


attribute the dryness and obscurity of those works to the nature
of the subject, are altogether too indulgent.

What is it of which this part of the law treats? It treats of
everything that is most interesting to men: of their security; of
their property; of their mutual and daily transactions; of their
domestic condition, in the relations of father, of children, of
husband, and of wife. Here it is that rights and obligations
spring up; for all the objects of law may be reduced, without
mystery, to these two terms.

The civil law is, in fact, only another aspect of the penal law;
one cannot be understood without the other. To establish rights,
is to grant permissions; it 1s to make prohibitions; it is, in one
word, to create offences. To commit a private offence is to
violate an obligation which we owe to an individual,—a right
which he has in regard to us. To commit a public offence is to
violate an obligation which we owe to the public,—a right which
the public has in regard tous Civil law, then, 1s only penal
law viewed under another aspect. If I consider a law at the
moment when it confers a right, or imposes an obligation, this is
the civil point of view. If I consider a law in its sanction, in
its effects as regards the violation of that right, the breaking
through that obligation, that is the penal point of view.

What is to be understood by principles of civil law? They are
the motives of laws; the knowledge of the true reasons which
ought to guide the legislator in the distmbution of the rights
which he confers, and the obligations which he imposes.

We might search in vain through the hbraries of law books, for
a volume in which it has been attempted to found laws upon
reasons. The theory of cwel laws by Linguet, promises much in
its title, which it is very far from performing. It is the produc-
tion of a disordered imagination, in the service of a bad heart.
The author wishes to reduce all governments to the model of
oriental despotism, and to strike out:of them all notions of liberty
and humanity,—in his view mournful spectres, the sight of which
appears to torment him.

The disputes of jurisprudence have produced, among the


90 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


lawyers, a kind of unbelievers, who have doubted whether law
has any principles. According to them, everything is arbitrary.
The law is good because it is the law ; because a decision, of what-
ever kind, produces the great advantage of peace. There isa
little truth in this opinion, and a great deal of error. It will be
seen in the following chapters that the principle of utility ex-
tends to this part of the law, as to all others. But its application
is difficult; it demands an intimate knowledge of human nature.

The first ray of light which struck the mind of Bentham, in
the study of law, was the perception that natural rights, the
ortginal pact, the moral sense, the notion of just and unjust, which
are used to explain everything, were at bottom nothing but those
innate ideas of which Locke has so clearly shown the falsity. He
saw that authors were going round in a vicious circle Familiar
with the method of Bacon and of Newton, he resolved to transfer
it to the subject of legislaticn; he resolved to make jurisprudence
an experimental science. He avoided all dogmatic words; he
rejected everything which did not express a sensation of pain or
pleasure ; he refused to admit, for example, that property was an
inherent right, or a natural right, because these terms explained
nothing and proved nothing. The words justice and anjustice
had, in his estimation, a similar inconvenience,—that of pre-
judging questions, instead of throwing light upon them. When
he proposes a law, he docs not pretend to find a corresponding
law in the code of nature, and by a common picce of legerdemain
to present, as a thing made already, the very thing he wishes to
make. When he explains obligations, he does not wrap himself
up in mystcrious reasons; he admits no supposition; he shows
plainly that every obligation ought to be founded cither upon a
precedent service received by the person obligated; upon a
superior need on the part of him in whose favour the obligation
is imposed ; or upon a mutual agreement which derives all its
force from its utility. Thus, always guided by experience and
observation, he considers in laws nothing but the effects they
produce upon the faculties of man as a sensitive being; and he
always gives pains to be avoided as the only arguments of real value.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 9]


The lawyers are always reasoning upon fictions, and giving to
those fictions the same effect as to realities. They admit, for
example, contracts which never have existed; and quast contracts
which have not even an appearance of existence. In certain
cases. they admit a civil death, in others they deny the xatural
death: such a dead man is not dead; such a living man is not
hving. A person who is absent is takcn to be present ; a person
who is present is regarded as absent. A province is not where it
is; acountry docs not belong to those who own it. Men are
sometimes things, and as such are not susceptible of rights.
Things are sometimes beings who have rights, and who are sub-
mitted to obligations. They acknowledge imprcescriptible rights,
against which prescription has always prevailed, inalienable
rights which have always been alienated; and that which zs not,
in their eyes, is always of more avail than that whichis. Take
away these fictions, or rather these falsehoods, and they would
not know where they were. Accustomed to these false supports,
they cannot sustain themselves in any other way. Bentham has
rejected all these pucrile arguments; he makes no gratuitous
suppositions, he uses no arbitrary definitions; no reason which
is not the expression of a fact; no fact which is not a statement
of good or bad effects.

It is by this logical method of reasoning that he has made a
hew scicnee of civil law, new and even paradoxical for those who
have been bred in the opinions of the old schools, but simple,
natural, and even familiar, to those who have not been bewildered
by false systems. <A translation of this book will have, in all
languages, the same sense and the same force, because it appeals
to the universal experience of men ; while technical reasons—rea-
sons founded upon abstract terms, upon arbitrary definitions
having only a local value, and consisting only in words—vanish
when one attempts to find synonyms by which to translate them.
So the African tribes, who use shells for money, become conscious
of their poverty the moment they go beyond their own boundaries,
and offer thcir conventional riches to strangers.

I ought to add that Bentham made frequent digrcssions upon


92 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


the laws of England, which I have suppressed, for they have only
a localinterest. There are cases, however, where his observations
would have lacked a foundation if I had omitted to mention the
particular laws which were their object. In seeking to be more
clear, to develop that which in the original was often only an
allusion, I may have made some mistakes, which it would be
unjust to impute to the author. These laws are so difficult to
understand, that it is dangerous for an Englishman who is not a
lawyer to run the risk of speaking about them—a risk which,
for obvious reasons, must be still greater in the case of a
foreigner.


93


PART FIRST.


OBJECTS OF THE CIVIL LAW.


CHAPTER I.
Rights and Obligations.


Aut the objects which the legislator is called upon to distribute
among the members of the community may be reduced to two
classes :—

Ist. Rights.

2nd. Obligations.

Rights are in themselves advantages, benefits, for him who
enjoys them. Obligations, on the contrary, are duties, charges,
onerous to him who ought to fulfil them.

Rights and obligations, though distinct and opposite in their
nature, are simultaneous in their origin, and ‘inseparable in in their :
existence. In the nature of things, the law cannot grant a i benefit
to one without imposing, at the same time, some burden upon
another ; or, in other words, it is not possible to create a right in
favour of one, except by creating a corresponding obligation
tmposed upon another. How confer upon me the nght of property
in a piece of land? By imposing upon all others an obligation
not to touch its produce. How confer upon me a right of com-
mand? By imposing upon a district, or a number of persons, the
obligation to obey me.

The legislator ought to confer rights with pleasure, since they
are in themselves a good; he ought to impose obligations with
reluctance, since they are in themselves an evil. According to


94 PRINCIPLES OF TIE CIVIL CODE.


the principle of utility, he ought never to impose a burden except
for the purpose of conferring a benefit of a clearly greater value.

By creating obligations, the law to the same extent trenches
upon liberty. It converts into offences acts which would other-
wise be permitted and unpunishable. The law creatcs an offence
either by a positive command or by a prohibition.

These retrenchments of liberty are inevitable. It is impossible
to create rights, to impose obligations, to protect the person, life,
reputation, property, subsistence, hberty itself, except at the
expense of liberty.

But every restriction imposed upon hberty is subject to be
followed by a natural sentiment of pain, greater or less; and that
independently of an infinite varicty of inconveniences and suffer-
ings, which may result from the particular manner of this restric-
tion. It follows, then, that no restriction ought to be imposcd,
no power conferred, no cocrcive law sanctioned, without a suffi-
cient and specific reason. Thcre is always a reason against every
coercive law—a reason which, 1n default of any opposing reason,
will always be sufficient in itself; and that reason is, that such a
law is an attack upon hberty. He who proposes a coercive law
ought to be ready to prove, not only that there is a specific reason
in favour of it, but that this reason is of more weight than the
general reason against every such law.

The proposition that every law is contrary to liberty,* though
as clear as cvidence can make it, is not generally acknowledged.
On the contrary, those among the friends of liberty who are more
ardent than cnlightened, make it a duty of conscience to combat
this truth. And how? They pervert language; they refuse to
employ the word liberty in its common acceptation ; they speak a
tongue peculiar to themselves. This is the definition they give of
liberty: Liberty consists in the right of doing everything which ts
not injurious to another. But is this the ordinary sense of the
word? Is not the liberty to do cvil liberty? If not, what is it?
What word can we usc in speaking of it? Do we not say that it


* Those laws must be excepted by which restrictivo laws are revoked,
laws which permit what other laws had forbidden.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 95


is necessary to take away liberty from idiots and bad men, because
they abuse it ?

According to this definition, I can never know whether I have
the liberty to do an action until I have examined all its conse-
quences. If it seems to me injurious to a single individual, even
though the law permit it, or perhaps command it, I should not be
at liberty to doit. An officer of justice would not be at hkerty
to punish a robber, unless, indecd, he were sure that this purish-
ment could not hurt the robucr! Such are the absurdities which
this definition implies.

What docs simple reason tell us? Let us attempt to establish
a scrics of true propositions on this subject.

The only object of government ought to be the greatest possible
happiness of the community.

The happiness of an individual 1s increased 1 proportion as his
suffermgs are hghter and fewer, and his enjoyments greater and
more numerous.

The care of his enjoyments ought to be left almost entircly to
the individual. The principal function of government is to guard
against pains.

It fulfils this object by creating rights, which it confers upon
individuals: rights of personal security, rights of protection for
honour, nights of property, rights of receiving aid in case of need.
To these rights correspond offences of different kinds. The law
fannot create rights except by creating corresponding obligations,
Tt ca cannot create rights and obligations without creating i
It cannot command nor forbid without restraining the liberty of
individuals,

It appears, then, that the citizen cannot acquire rights except
by sacrificing a part of his liberty. But even under a bad govern-
ment there is no proportion between the acquisition and the sacri-
fice. (Government approaches to perfection in proportion as the
sacrifice is less and the acquisition more.


96 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


CHAPTER II.
Ends of Cwil Law.


In the distribution of rights and obligations, the legislator, as
we have said, should have for his end the happiness of society.
Investigating more distinctly in what that happiness consists, we
shall find four subordinate ends :—
t Subsistence.
‘ Abundance.
Equality.
. Security.

The more perfect enjoyment is in all these respects, the greater
is the sum of social happincss- and espccially of that happiness
which depends upon the laws.

We may hence conclude that all the functions of law may be
referred to these four heads:—To provide subsistence; to pro-
duce abundance ; to favour equality ; to maintain security.

This division has not all the exactness which might be desired.
The limits which separate these objects are not always easy to be
determined. They approach each other at different points, and
mingle together. But 1t is enough to justify this division, that
it is the most complete we can make; and that, in fact, we are
generally called to consider each of the objects which it con-
tains, separately and distinct from all the others.

Subsistence, for example, is included in abundance; still it is
very necessary to considcr it separately ; because the laws ought
to do many things for subsistence which they ought not to
attempt for the sake of abundance.

Security admits as many distinctions as there are kinds of
actions which may be hostile to it. It relatcs to the person, the
honour, to property, to condition. Acts injurious to security,
branded by prohibition of law, receive the quality of offences.

Of these objects of the law, security is the only one which ne-
cessarily embraces the future. Subsistence, abundance, equality,
may be considered in relation to a single moment of present


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 97


time; but security implies a given extension of future time
in respect to all that good which it embraces. Security, then,
is the pre-eminent object.

I have mentioned equality as one of the objects of law. In
an arrangement designed to give to all men the greatest possible
sum of good, there is no reason why the law should seek to give
more to one individual than to another. There are abundance of
reasons why it should not; for the advantages acquired on one
side, never can be an equivalent for the disadvantages felt upon
the other. The pleasure is exclusively for the party favoured ;
the pain for all who do not share the favour.

Equality may be promoted either by protecting it where it
exists, or by seeking to produce it. In this latter case, the
greatest caution is necessary; for a single crror may overturn
social order.*

Some persons may be astonished to find that Liberty is not
ranked among the principal objects of law. But a clear idea of
liberty will lead us to regard it as a branch of security. Per-
sonal liberty is security against a certain kind of injuries which
affect the person. As to what is called political liberty, it is
another branch of security,—security against injustice from the
ministers of government. What concerns this object belongs not
to civil, but to constitutional law.


CHAPTER III.
Relations between these Ends.


Taxse four objects of law are very distinct in idea, but they are
much less so in practice. The same law may advance several of
them; because they are often united. That law, for example,


* Equality may be considered in relation to all the advantages which
depend upon laws. Political equality is an equality of political rights;
civil equality is an equality of civil rights. When used by itself, the
word is commonly understood to refer to the distribution of property.
It is so used in this treatise.


38 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


which favours security, favours, at the same time, subsistence
and abundance.

But there are circumstances in which it is impossible to unite
these objects. It will sometimes happen that a measure sug-
gested by one of these principles will be condemned by another.
Equality, for example, might require a distribution of property
which would be incompatible with security.

When this contradiction exists between two of these ends, it
is necessary to find some means of deciding the pre-eminence ;
otherwise these principles, instead of guiding us in our researches,
will only serve to augment the confusion.

At the first glunce we sce subsistence and sccurity arising toge-
ther to the same level; abundance and equality arc manifestly of
inferior importance. In fact, without security, equality could
not last a day; without subsistence, abundance could not exist
at-all. The two first objects arc life itself, the two latter, the
ornaments of life.

In legislation, the most important object is security. Though
no laws were made dircctly for subsistence, it might easily be
imagined that no one would neglect it. But unless laws are
made directly for sccurity, it would be quite useless to make
them for subsistence. You may order production; you may
command cultivation; and you will have done nothing. But
assure to the cultivator the fruits of his industry, and perhaps
in that alone you will have done cnough

Security, as we have said, has many branches; and some
branches of it must yicld to others. For cxample, liberty, which
is a branch of sccurity, ought to yicld to a consideration of the
gencral security, since laws cannot be made except at the ex-
pense of liberty.

We cannot arrive at the greatest good, except by the sacrifice
of some subordinate good. All the difficulty consists in dis-
tinguishing that object which, according to the occasion, merits
pre-eminence. For each, in its turn, demands it; and a very
complicated calculation is sometimes necessary to avoid being
deceived as to the preference due to one or the other.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 99


Equality ought not to be favoured except in the cases in which
it does not interfere with security; in which it does not thwart
the expectations which the law itself has produced, in which it
does not derange the order already established.

If all property were equally divided, at fixed periods, the sure
and certain consequence would be, that presently there would be
no property to divide. All would shortly be destroyed. Those
whom it was intended to favour, would not suffer less from the
division than those at whose expense it was made. If the lot of
the industrious was not better than the lot of the idle, there
would be no longer any motives for industry.

To lay down as a principle that all mcn ought to enjoy a per-
fect equahty of rights, would be, by a necessary connection of
consequences, to render all legislation impossible. The laws are
constantly establishing incqualities, since they,cannot give nghts
to one without imposing obligations upon angther. To say that
all men—that is, all human beings—have equal rights, is to say
that there is no such thing as subordination. The son then has
the same rights with his futher; he has the same right to govern
and punish his father that his father has to govern and punish
him. He has as many rights in the house of his father as the
father himself. The maniac has the same right to shut up others.
that others have to shut up him. The idiot has the same nght
to govern his family that his family have to govern him. Al
this is fully implied in the absolute cquality of rights. It means
this, or else it means nothing. I know very well that those who
maintain this doctrine of the equality of rights, not beg them-
selves elther fools or idiots, have no intention of establishing this
absolute cquality. They have, in their own minds, restrictions,
modifications, explanations. But if they themselves cannot speak
in an intelligible manner, will the ignorant and excited multitude
understand them better than they understand themselves ?


100 PRINCIPLES OF rh» ¢IVIL CODE


CHAPTER IV.


Laws relatively to Subsistence.


Waar can the law do for subsistence? Nothing directly. All
it can do is to create motires, that is, punishments or rewards, by
the force of which men may be led to provide subsistence for
themselves. But nature herself has created these motives, and
has given them a sufficient energy. Before the idea of laws
existed, needs and enjoyments had done in that respect all that the
best concerted laws could do. Need, armed with pains of all
kinds, even death itself, commanded labour, excited courage, in-
spired foresight, developed all the faculties of man. Enjoyment,
the inseparable companion of every need satisfied, furmed an in-
exhaustible fund of rewards for those who surmounted obstacles
and fulfilled the end of nature. The force of the physical sane-
tion being sufficient, the employment of the political sanction
would be superfluous.

Besides, the motives which depend on laws are more or less
precarious in their operation. It 1s a consequence of the imper-
fection of the laws themselves; or of the difficulty of proving the
facts in order to apply punishment or reward. The hope of im-
punity conceals itself at the bottom of the heart durng all the
intermediate steps which it 15 necessary to take before arriving at
the enforcement of the law. But the natural cffects, which may
be regarded as nature’s punishments and rewards, scarcely admit
of any uncertainty. There is no evasion, no delay, no favour.
Experience announces the event, and experience confirms it.
Each day strengthens the lesson of the day before; and the
‘uniformity of this process leaves no room for doubt. What could
(be added by direct laws to the constant and irresistible power of
fhese natural motives?

But the laws provide for subsistence indirectly, by protecting
men while they labour, and by making them sure of the fruits of
their labour. Security for the labourer, security for the fruits of
labour ; such isthe benciit of laws; and it is an inestimable benefit.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 101


CHAPTER V.
Laws relativelg to Abundance.


Smart laws be made directing individuals not to confine them-
selves to mere subsistence, but to seek abundance? No! That
would be a very superfluous employment of artificial means,
where natural means suffice. The attraction of pleasure; the
succession of wants; the active desire of increasing happiness,
will procure unccasingly, under the reign of security, new efforts
towards new acquisitions. Wants, cnjoyments, those universal
agents of society, having begun with gathering the first sheaf of
corn, proceed litele by little, to build magazines of abundance,
always increasing but never filled. Desires extend with means.
The horizon elevates itsclf as we advance; and each new want,.
attended on the one hand by pain, on the other by pleasure,
becomes a new principle of action. Opulence, which is only a
comparative term, docs not arrest this movement once begun.
On the contrary, the greater our means, the greater the scale on
which we labour, the greater is the recompense, and, conse-
quently, the greater also the force of motive which animates to
labour. Now what is the wealth of society, if not the sum of
all individual wealth? And what more is necessary than the
force of these natural motives, to carry wealth, by successive
movements, to the highest possible point ?

It appears that abundance is formed little by little, by the
continued operation of the same causes which produce subsist-
ence. Those who vlume abundance under the name of luxury,
have never looked at 1t from this point of view.

Bad seasons, wars, accidents of all kinds, attack so often the
fund of subsistence, that a society which had nothing super-
fluous, and even if 1t had a good deal that was superfluous, would
often be exposed to war what is neccessary. We see this among
savago tribes; it was often scen among all nations, during the
times of ancient poverty. It 1s what happens even now, in
countries little favoured by nature, such as Sweden; and in those


102 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


where government restrains the operations of commerce, instead
of confining itself to protection. But countries in which luxury
abounds, and where governments are enlightened, are above the
risk of famine. Such is the happy situation of England. With
a free commerce, toys useless in themselves have their utility,
as the means of obtaining bread. Manufactures of luxury furnish
an assurance against famine. A brewery or a starch-factory might
be changed into a means of subsistence.

How often have we hcard declamations against dogs and horses,
as devouring the food of men! Such decclaimers rise but one
degree above those apostles of disinterestedness, who sct fire to
the magazincs in order to cause an abundance of corn.


CHAPTER VI.


Pathological Propositions upon which the good of Equality ts
founded.


ParHoLocy is a term uscd in medicine It has not been intro-
duced into morals, where it 1s equally needed, though in a some-
what different sense. By pathology, I mean the study and the
knowledge of the sensations, affections, passions, and of their
effects upon happiness Legislation, which hitherto has been
founded in a great measure only upon the quicksands of pre-
judice and instinct, ought at last to be built upon the immoveable
basis of sensations and experience. It is necessary to have a
moral thermometcr to make perceptible all the degrees of hap-
piness and miscry. This is a term of perfection which it is not
possible to reach; but it is well to have it before our cycs, I
know that a scrupulous examination of more or less, in the
matter of pain or pleasure, will at first appear a minute under-
taking. It will be said that in human affairs it is necessary to
act in gross; to be contented with a vague approximation. This
is the language of indifference or of incapacity. Tho sensations
of men are sufficiently regular to become the objects of a science
and anart, Yct hitherto we have seen but essays, blind attempts,


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 108


and irregular efforts not well followed up. Medicine has for its
foundation the axioms of physical pathology. Morality is the
medicine of the soul; and legislation, which is the practical part
of it, ought to have for its foundation the axioms of mental
pathology.

To judge of the effect of a portion of wealth upon happiness,
it is necessary to consider it in three different states :—

1st. When it has always been in the hands of the holder.

2nd. When it is leaving his hands.

3rd. When it is coming into them.

It is to be observed in general, that in speaking of the effect
of a portion of wealth upon happiness, abstraction is always to
be made of the particular sensibility of individuals, and of the
exterior circumstances 1n which they may be placed. Differences
of character are inscrutable; and such 1s the diversity of circum-
stances, that they are never the same for two individuals. Unless
we begin by dropping these two considerations, 1t will be impos-
sible to announce any general proposition. But though each of
these propositions may prove false or inexact in a given indi-
vidual case, that will furnish no argument against their specu-
lative truth and practical utihty. It is enough for the justifica-
tion of these propositions—l1st, If they approach nearer the truth
than any others which can be substituted for them; 2nd, If with
less inconvenience than any others they can be made the basis
of legislation.

I. Let us pass to the first case. The object being to examine
the effect of a portion of wealth, when it has always been in the
hands of the holder, we may lay down the following propositions :—

Ist. Each portion of wealth has a corresponding portion of hap-
piness.

2nd. Oftwo individuals with unequal fortunes, he who has the
most wealth has the most happiness.

Srd. The excess in happrness of the richer will not be so great
as the excess of his wealth.

4th. For the same reasons, the greater the disproportion ¢s
between the two masses of wealth, the less is it probable that there


104 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


exists @ disproportion equally great between the corresponding
masses of happiness.

Sth. The nearer the actual proportion approaches to equality,
the greater will be the total mass of happiness.

It is not necessary to limit what is here said of wealth to the
condition of those who are called wealthy. This word has a more
extensive signification. It embraces everything which serves
either for subsistence or abundance. It 1s for the sake of brevity
that the phrase portion of wealth is used instead of portion of the
matter of wealth.

T have said that for cach portion of wealth there ts a correspond-
tng portion of happiness. Tospeak more exactly, 1t ought rathcr to
be said, a certain chance of happiness. For the efficacy of a cause
of happiness is always precarious; or, 1n othe: words, a cause of
happiness has not its ordinary effect, nor the same effect, upon
all persons. Here is the place for making an application of what
has been said concerning the sensibility and the character of
individuals, and the variety of circumstances in which they are
found.

The second proposition is a direct consequence of the first. Of
two individuals, he who ws the richer is the hapmer or has the
greater chance of being so. This isa fact proved by the experience
of all the world. The first who doubts it shall be the very
witness I will call to prove it. Let him give all his superfluous
wealth to the first comer who asks him for it; for this superfluity,
according to his system, is but dust in his hands; it 1s a burden
and nothing more. The manna of the desert putrefied, if any
one collected a greater quantity than he could cat. If wealth
resembled that manna, and after passing a certain point was no
longer productive in happiness, no onc would wish for it; and
the desire of accumulation would be a thing unknown.

The third proposition is less likely to be disputed. Put on one
side a thousand farmers, having enough to live upon, and a little
more. Put on the other side a king, or, not to be encumbered
with the cares of government, a prince, well portioned, himself
a8 rich as all the farmers taken together. It is probable, I say,


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 105


that his happiness is greater than the average happiness of the
thousand farmers; but it is by no means probabld¢ that it is equal
to the sum total of their happiness, or, what amounts to the same
thing, a thousand times greater than the average happiness of one
of them. It would be remarkable if his happiness were ten times,
or even five times greater. The man who is born in the bosom
of opulence, is not so sensible of its pleasures as he who is the
artisan of his own fortune. It is the pleasure of acquisition, not
the satisfaction of possessing, which gives the greatest delights.
The one is a lively sentiment, pricked on by the desires, and by
anterior privations, which rushes toward an unknown good; the
other is a feeble sentiment, weakened by use, which is not
animated by contrasts, and which borrows nothing from the
imagination.

II. Passing to the second case, let us examine the effect of a
portion of wealth, when it enters for the first time into the hands
of a new possessor. It is to be observed that we must lay
expectation out of view. It is necessary to suppose that this
augmentation of fortune comes unexpectedly, as a gift of chance.

Ist. 4 portion of wealth may be so far divided as to produce no
happiness at all for any of the participants. This is what would
happen, mgorously speaking, if the portion of cach was less in
value than the smallest known coin. But it is not necessary to
carry the thing to that extreme, in order to make the proposition
true.

2nd. Among participants of equal fortunes, the more perfectly
equality ts preserved in the distribution of a new portion of wealth,
the greater will be the total mass of happiness.

3rd. Among participants of unequal fortunes, the more the dis-
tribution of new wealth tends to do away that inequality, the greater
will be the total mass of happiness.

III. The third case requires us to examine the effect produced
by a portion of wealth which is leaving the hands of its former
possessor. Here, too, we must lay expectation out of view, and
suppose the loss to be unforeseen ;—and a loss almost always is
80, because every man naturally expects to keep what he has.


106 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


This expectation is founded upon the ordinary course of things.
For in a general view of human affairs, wealth already acquired
is not only preserved, but increased. This is proved by the
extreme difference between the primitive poverty of cvery com-
munity and its actual wealth.

ist. Zhe loss of a portion of wealth will produce, in the total hap-
piness of the loser, a defalcation greater or less, according to the
proportion of the part lost to the part which remains.

Take away from a man the fourth part of his fortune, and
you take away the fourth part of his happiness, and so on.*

But there are cases in which the proportion would not be the
same. If, in taking away from me three-fourths of my fortune,
you take away what is necessary for my physical support, and if,
in taking away half of it, you would have lcft that necessary
portion untouched, the defalcation of happiness, instead of being
twice as great in the first case as in the second, will be four times,
ten times, indefinitely greater.

2nd. Zhts granted, fortunes being equal, the greater the number
of persons among whom a loss 18 shared, the less considerable wlll be
the defaleation from the sum total of happiness.

3rd. After passing a certain pornt, division renders the several
quotas impalpable, and the defaleation in the sum total of happiness
amounts to nothing.

4th. Fortunes being unequal, the loss of happiness produced by a
given loss of wealth will become less in proportion as the distribution
of the loss shall tend towards the production of an exact equality.
But in this case we must lay out of view the inconveniences
attendant on the violation of security.

Governments, profiting by the progress of knowledge, have


* It is to this head that the evils of deep play ought to be referred.
Though the chances, go far as relates to money, are equal, in regard to
pleasure, they are always unfavourable. Ihave athousand pounds. The
stake is five hundred. If I lose, my fortune is diminished one-half; if I
gain, it is increased only by a third. Suppose the stake to be a thousand
pounds. If I gain, my happiness is not doubled with my fortune; if I
lose, my happiness is destroyed; I am reduced to indigence,


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 107


favoured, in many respects, the principle of equality in the distri-
bution of losses. It is thus that they have taken under the pro-
tection of the laws policies of insurance, those useful contracts by
which individuals assess themselves beforehand to provide against
possible losses. The principle of insurance, founded upon a cal-
culation of probabilities, is but the art of distributing losses among
so great a number of associates as to make them very light, and
almost nothing.

The same spirit has influenced sovereigns when they have
indemnified, at the expense of the state, those of their subjects
who have suffercd cither by public calamities or by the devas-
tationsof war. Wehave secn nothing of this kind wiser or better
managed than the administration of the great Frederic. Itisone
of the finest points of view under which the social art can be
considered.

Some attempts have been made to indemnify individuals for
losses caused by the offences of malefactors. But examples of this
kind are yet very rare. Itisan object which merits the attention
of legislators, for 1t is the mcans of reducing almost to nothing
the evil of offences which attack property. To prevent it from
becoming injurious, such a system must be arranged with care.
It will not do to encourage mdolence and imprudence in the
neglect of precautions against offenccs, by making them sure of an
indemnification ; and it is necessary to guard even more cautiously
against frand and scerct connivances which might counterfeit
offences, and even produce them, for the sake of the indemnity.
The utility of this remedial process would depend cntirely on the
way in which it was administered, yet the rejection of a means so
salutary can only originate in a culpable indifference, anxious to
save itself the trouble of discovering expedicnts.

The principles we have laid down may equally serve to regulate
the distribution of a loss among many persons charged with a
common responsibility. If their respective contributions corre-
spond to the respective quantity of their fortunes, their relative
state will be the same as before; but if itis desired to improve
this occasion for the purposes of an approach towards equality, it


108 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


is necessary to adopt a different proportion. To levy an equal
impost, without regard to differences of fortune, would be a third
plan, which would be agrecable neither to equality nor security.

To place this subject in a clearer light, I shall present a mixed
case, in which it 1s necessary to decide between two individuals,
of whom one demands a profit at the expense of the other. The
question is to determine the effect of a portion of wealth which,
passing into the hands of one individual under the form of gain,
must come out of the hands of another in the form of loss.

Ist. stmong competitors of equal fortunes, when that which
18 gained by one must be lost by another, the arrangement pro-
ductive of the greatest sum of good will be that which favours the
old possessor to the exclusion of the new demandant

For, in the first place, the sum to be lost, bearing a greater
proportion to the reduced fortune than the same sum to the
augmented fortune, the diminution of happiness for the one will
be greater than the augmentation of happiness for the other; in
one word, equality will be violated by the contrary arrange-
ment. *

In the second place, the loser will expericnce a pain of disap-
pointment; the other mercly docs not gain. Now the negative
evil of not acquiring is not equal tv the positive evil of losing.
If it were, as every man would experience this cvil for all that
he does not acquire, the causes of suffering would be infinite,
and men would be infinitely miscrable.

In the third place, men in general appcar to be more sensitive
to pain than to pleasure, even when the cause is equal. To such
a degree, indeed, does this extend, that a loss which diminishes a
man’s fortune by one-fourth, will take away more happiness than
he could gain by doubling his property.

2nd. Fortunes being unequal, of the loser is the poorer, the evil
of the loss will be aggravated by that inequality.

3rd. If the loser 18 the richer, the evil done by an attack upon
security will be compensated in part by a good which wil be great
tn proportion to the progress towards equality.

* See the note upon gaming. This case is exactly the same.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 109


By the aid of these maxims, which, to a certain point, have the
character and the certainty of mathematical propositions, there
might be at last produced a regular and constant art of indemnities
and satisfactions. Legislators have frequently shown a disposition
to promote equality undcr the name of eguity, a word to which a
greater latitude has been given than to justece. But this idea of
equity, vague and half developed, has rather appeared an affair
of instinct than of calculation. It was only by much patience
and method that it was found possible to reduce to rigorous pro-
positions an incoherent multitude of confused sentiments.


CHAPTER VII.
Of Security.
WE come now to the principal object of law,—the care of
security. That inestimable good, the distinctive index of civili-
zation, is entirely the work of law. Without law there is no
security ; and, consequently, no abundance, and not even a cer-
tainty of subsistence , and the only equality which can exist in
such a state of things is an equality of miscry.

To form a just idca of the benefits of law, it is only necessary
to consider the condition of savages. They strive incessantly
against famine; which sometimes cuts off entire tribes. Rivalry
for subsistence produces among them the most cruel wars; and,
like beasts of prey, men pursue men, as a means of sustenance.
The fear of this terrible calamity silences the softer sentiments
of nature; pity unites with insensibility in putting to death the
old men who can hunt no longer.

Let us now examine what passes at those terrible epochs when
civilized socicty rcturns almost to the savage state; that is, during
war, when the laws on which security depends are in part sus-
pended. Every instant of its duration is fertile in calamities; at
every step which it prints upon the earth, at every movement
which it makes, the existing mass of riches, the fund of abundance
and of subsistence, decreascs and disappears. The cottage is


110 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


ravaged as well asthe palaco; and how often the rage, the caprice
even of a moment, delivers up to destruction the slow produce of
the labours of an age!

Law alone has done that which all the natural sentiments
united have not the power to do. Law alone is able to create a
fixed and durable possession which merits the name of property.
Law alone can accustom men to bow their heads under the yoke
of foresight, hard at first to bear, but afterwards light and agree-
able. Nothing but law can encourage men to labours superfluous
for the present, and which can be enjoyed only in the future.
Economy has as many enemies as there are dissipators—men who
wish to enjoy without giving themselves the trouble of producing.
Labour is too painful for idleness, 1t 1s too slow for impatience.
Fraud and inyustice sceretly conspire to appropriate its fruits.
Insolence and audacity think to ravish them by open force. Thus
security is assailed on every side—cver threatened, never tran-
quil, it exists in the midst of alarms. The legislator necds a
vigilance always sustained, a powcr always in action, to defend it
against this crowd of indcfatigable cnemics.

Law does not say to man, Labour, and [will reward you; but it
says: Labour, and Iwill assure to you the enjoyment of the fruits
of your labour—that natural and sufficient recompense hich without
me you cannot preserve; J rill insure at by arresting the hand
which may seel to ravish it from you If industry creates, it is
law which preserves; if at the first moment we owe all to labour,
at the second moment, and at every other, we are indebted for
everything to law.

To form a precise idea of the extent which ought to be given
to the principle of security, we must consider that man is not like
the animals, limited to the present, whether as respects suffering
or enjoyment ; but that he is susceptible of pains and pleasures
by anticipation , and that it 1s not cnough to secure him from
actual loss, but it 1s necessary also to guarantee him, as far as
possible, against future loss. It is necessary to prolong the idea
of his security through all the perspective which his imagination
is capable of measuring.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 111i


This presentiment, which has so marked an influence upon the
fate of man, is called expectation. Itis hence that we have the
power of forming a general plan of conduct; it is hence that
the successive instants which compose the duration of life are not
like isolated and independent points, but become continuous parts
of a whole. Ezpectation is a chain which unites our present
existence to our future existence, and which passes beyond us to
the generation which is to follow. The sensibility of man extends
through all the links of this chain.

The principle of security extends to the maintenance of all
these expectations ; it requires that events, so far as they depend
upon laws, should conform to the expectations which law itself
has created.

Every attack upon this sentiment produces a distinct and special
evil, which may be called a pain of disappointment.

It is a proof of great confusion in the ideas of lawyers, that
they have never given any particular attention to a sentiment
which exercises so powerful an influcnce upon human life. The
word expectation is scarcely found in their vocabulary. Scarce a
single argument founded upon that principle appears in their
writings. They have followed it, without doubt, in many
respects; but they have followed it by instinct rather than by
reason. If they had known its extreme importance they would
not have failed to xame it and to mark it, instead of leaving it
unnoticed in the crowd.


CHAPTER VIII.
Of Property.

Tue better to understand the advantages of law, let us endea-
vour to form a clear idea of property. We shall sce that there
is no such thing as natural property, and that it is entirely the
work of law.

Property is nothing but a basis of expectation; the expecta-
tion of deriving certain advantages from a thing which we are


113 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


said to possess, in consequence of the relation in which we stand
towards it.

There is no image, no painting, no visible trait, which can
express the relation that constitutes property. Itis not material,
it is metaphysical ; it is a mere conception of the mind.

‘'o have a thing in our hands, to keep it, to make it, to sell it,
to work it up into something else; to use it—none of these
physical circumstances, nor all united, convey the idea of pro-
perty. A piece of stuff which is actually in the Indies may
belong to mc, while the dress I wear may not. The aliment
which is incorporated into my very body may belong to another,
to whom I am bound to account for it.

The idea of property consists in an established expectation ;
in the persuasion of being able to draw such or such an advan-
tage from the thing possessed, according to the nature of the
ease. Now this expectation, this persuasion, can only be the
work of law. I cannot count upon the enjoyment of that which
I regard as mine, except through the promise of the law which
guarantees it tome. It is law alone which permits me to forget
my natural weakness. It is only through the protection of law
that I am able to inclose a ficld, and to give myself up to its
cultivation with the sure though distant hope of harvest.

But it may be asked, What is it that serves as a basis to law,
upon which to begin operations, when it adopts objects which,
under the name of property, 1t promises to protect? Have not
men, in the primitive state, a natural expectation of enjoying
certain things,—an expectation drawn from sources antcrior to
law ?

Yes. There have been from the beginning, and thcre always
will be, circumstances in which a man may sccure himsclf, by
his own means, in the enjoyment of certain things. But the
catalogue of these cases is very limited. The savage who has
killed a deer may hope to keep it for himself, so long as his cave
is undiscovered; so long as he watches to defend it, and is
stronger than his rivals; but that is all. How miscrable and
precarious is such a possession! If we suppose the lcast agree-


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 113


ment among savages to respect the acquisitions of each other,
we see the introduction of a principle to which no name can be
given but that of law. <A feeble and momentary expectation
may result from time to time from circumstances purely physical;
but a strong and permanent expectation can result only from
law. That which, in the natural state, was an almost invisible
thread, in the social state becomes a cable.

Property and law are born together, and die together. Before
laws were made there was no property; take away laws, and
property ceases.

As regards property, sccurity consists in receiving no check,
no ehock, no derangement to the expectation founded on the laws,
of enjoying such and such a portion of good. The legislator owes
the greatest respect to this expectation which he has himself pro-
duced. When he does not contradict it, he does what is essen-
tial to the happiness of society; when he disturbs it, he always
produces a proportionate sum of evil.


CHAPTER IX.
Answer to an Objection.


Bur perhaps the laws of property are good for those who have
property, and oppressive to those who have none. The poor man,
perhaps, 1s more miscrable than he would be without laws.

The laws, in creating property, have created riches only in
relation to poverty. Poverty is not the work of the laws; ituis
the primitive condition of the human race. The man who sub-
sists only from day to day is precisely the man of nature—the
savage. The poor man, in civilized society, obtains nothing, I
admit, except by painful labour; but, in the natural state, can
he obtain anything except by the sweat of his brow? Has not
the chase its fatigues, fishing its dangers, and war its uncer-
tainties? And if man seems to love this adventurous life; if he
has an instinct warm for this kind of perils; if the savage enjoys
with delight an idleness so dearly bought ;—-must we thence con-


I


114 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


clude that he is happier than our cultivators? No. Their labour
is more uniform, but their reward is more sure; the woman’s lot
is far more agreeable ; childhood and old age have more resources ;
the species multiplies in a proportion a thousand times greater,—
and that alone suffices to show on which side is the superiority
of happiness. Thus the laws, in creating riches, are the bene-
factors of those who remain in the poverty of nature. All par-
ticipate more or less in the pleasures, the advantages, and the
resources of civilized society. The industry and the labour of the
poor place them among the candidates of fortune. And have they
not the pleasures of acquisition? Docs not hope mix with their
labours? Is the security which the law gives of no importance
to them? Those who look down from above upon the inferior
ranks sce all objects smaller; but towards the base of the pyra-
mid it is the summit which in turn is lost. Comparisons are
never dreamed of; the wish of what scems impossible does not
torment. So that, in fact, all things considered, the protection
of the laws may contribute as much to the happiness of the
cottage as to the security of the palace.

It is astonishing that a writer so judicious as Beccaria has in-
terposed, in a work dictated by the soundest philosophy, a doubt
subversive of social order. The right of property, he says, ts a
terrible right, which perhaps 1s not necessary. Tyrannical and
sanguinary laws have been founded upon that right; it has been
frightfully abused; but the right itself presents only idcas_ of_
pleasure, abundance, and secunty. It is that right which has
‘vanquished the natural aversion to labour; which has given to
man the empire of the carth; which has brought to an end the
migratory life of nations; which has produced the love of country
and a regard for posterity. Men universally desire. to enjoy
speedily—to enjoy without labour. It is that desire which is
terrible; since it arms all who have not against all who have.
The law which restrains that desire is the noblest triumph of
humanity over itsclf.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 115


CHAPTER X.
Analysis of the Evils which result from Attacks upon Property.


have already seen that subsistence depends upon the laws
which assure to the labourer the produce of his labour. Butitis
desirable more exactly to analyze the evils which result from
violations of property. They may be reduced to four heads.

Ist. Evil of Non-Possession.—If the acquisition of a portion of
wealth is a good, it follows that the non-possession of itis an evil,
though only anegativeevil. Thus, although men in the condition
of primitive poverty may not have specially felt the want of a
good which they knew not, yet it is clear that they have lost all
the happiness which might have resulted from its possession, and
of which we have the enjoyment. The loss of a portion of good,
though we knew nothing of it, is still a loss. Are you doing me
no harm when, by false representations, you deter my friend from
conferring upon me a favour which I did not expect? In what
consists the harm? In the negative cvil which results from not
possessing that which, but for your falschoods, I should have had.

2nd. Pain of Losing.—Everything which I possess, or to which
I have a title, I consider in my own mind as destined always to
belong to me. I make it the basis of my expectations, and of the
hopes of those dependent upon me; and I form my plan of life
accordingly. Every part of my property may have, in my esti-
mation, besides its intrinsic valuc, a value of affection—as an
inheritance from my ancestors, as the reward of my own labour,
or as the future dependence of my children. Everything about
it represents to my eye that part of mysclf which I have put into
it—those cares, that industry, that. economy which denied itself
present pleasures to make provision for the future. Thus our
property becomes a part of our being, and cannot be torn from us
without rending us to the quick.

ard. Lear of Losing.—To regret for what we have lost is joined
inguietude as to what we possess, and even as to what we may
acquire. For the greater part of the objects which compose sub-

12


416 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


sistence and abundance being perishable matters, future acqui-
sitions are a necessary supplement to present possessions. When
insecurity reaches a certain point, the fear of losing prevents us
from enjoying what we possess already. The care of preserving
condemns us to a thousand sad and painful precautions, which yet
are always liable to fail of their end. Treasures are hidden or
conveyed away. Enjoyment becomes sombre, furtive, and soli-
tary. It fears to show itsclf, lest cupidity should be informed of
a chance to plunder.

4th. Deadening of Industry —WhenI despair of making myself
sure of the produce of my labour, I only seek to exist from day
to day. I am unwilling to give myself cares which will only be
profitable to my enemies. Besides, the will to labour is not
enough; means are wanting. While waiting to reap, in the
meantime I must live. A single loss may deprive me of the
capacity of action, without having quenched the spirit of industry,
or without having paralyzed my will. Thus the three first evils
affect the passive faculties of the individual, while the fourth
extends to his active faculties, and more or less benumbs them.

It appears from this analysis that the two first evils do not go
beyond the individual injured ; while the two latter spread through
society, and occupy an indefinite space. An attack upon the pro-
perty of an individual excites alarm among other proprietors.
This sentiment spreads from neighbour to neighbour, till at last
the contagion possesses the entire body of the state.

Power and will must unite for the development of industry.
Will depends upon encouragement; power upon mcans. These
means are what is called, in the language of political economy,
productive caprtal. When the question relates only to an indi-
vidual, his productive capital may be annihilated by a single loss,
while his spirit of industry is not extinguished, nor even weakened.
When the question is of a nation, the annihilation of its pro-
ductive capital is impossible, but a long time before that fatal
term is approached, the evil may infect the will; and the spirit
of industry may fall into a fatal lethargy, in the midst of natural
resources offered by a rich and fertile soil. The will, however,


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 117


is excited by so many stimulants, that it resists an abundance of
discouragements and losses. A transitory calamity, though great,
never destroys the spirit of industry, It is seen to spring up,
after devouring wars which have impoverished nations, as a robust
oak, mutilated by tempests, repairs its losses in a few years and
covers itself with new branches. Nothing is sufficient to deaden
industry, except the operation of a domestic and permanent cause,
such as a tyrannical government, bad legislation, an intolerant
religion which drives men from the country, or a minute super-
stition which stupifies them.

A first act of violence produces immediately a certain degree
of apprehension ; some timid spirits are already discouraged. A
second violence, which soon succeeds, spreads a more considerable
alarm. The more prudent begin to rctrench their enterprises,
and little by little to abandon an uncertain career. In proportion
as these attacks are repeated, and the system of oppression takes
a more habitual character, the dispersion increases. Those who
fly are not replaced ; those who remain fall into a state of languor.
Thus the field of industry, beaten by perpetual storms, at last
becomes a desert.

Asia Minor, Greece, Egypt, the coasts of Africa, so rich in agri-
culture, in commerce, and in population, at the flourishing epoch
of the Roman empire, what have they become under the absurd
despotism of the Turkish government? Palaces have been
changed into cabins, and citics into harlets. That government,
odious to every thinking man, has never known that a state
eannot grow mech except by an inviolable respect for property. It
has never had but two scerets of statesmanship,—to sponge the
people, and to stupify them. Thus the finest countries of the
earth, wasted, barren, and almost abandoned, can hardly be recog-
nised under the hands of barbarous conqucrors.

These evils ought not to be attributed to foreign causes. Civil
wars, invasions, natural scourges, may dissipate wealth, put the
arts to flight, and swallow up cities. But choked harbours are
opened again; communications are re-established; manufactures
revive; cities rise from their ruins. All ravages are repaired by


118 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


time, while men continue to be men; but there are no men to be
found in those unhappy countries, where the slow but fatal
despair of long insecurity has destroyed all the active faculties
of the soul.

If we trace the history of this contagion, we shall sce its first
attacks directed against that part of socicty which is easy and well
off. Opulence is the object of the first depredations. Apparent
superfluity vanishes little by httle. Absolute need makes itself
be obeyed in spite of obstacles. We must live; but when man
limits himself to living, the state languishes, and the lamp of
industry throws out only a dying flame. Besides, abundance 1s
never so distinct from subsistence, that one can be destroyed with-
out a dangerous blow at the other. While some lose only what
is superfluous, others lose a part of what is necessary; for by the
infinitely complicated system of cconomical connections, the
opulence of a part of the citizens is the only fund upon which a
part more numerous depends for subsistence.

But another picture may be traced, more smiling and not less
instructive. It is the picture of the progress of security, and of
prosperity, its inseparable companion. North Amcrica presents
to us umost stmking contrast. Savage nature may be secn there,
side by side with civilized nature. The intcrior of that immense
region offers only a frightful solitude, impenctrable forests or
sterile plains, stagnant watcrs and impure vapours; such is the
earth when left to itself. The fierce tribes which rove through
those deserts without fixed habitations, always occupicd with tho
pursuit of game, and animated against each other by implacable
rivalries, mect only for combat, and often succeed in destroying
each other. The beasts of the forest are not so dangcrous to man
as he is to himsclf. But on the borders of these frightful soli-
tudes, what different sights are seen! We appcar to comprehend
in the samc view the two empires of good andcvil. Forests give
place to cultivated ficlds; morasses arc dried up, and the surface,
grown firm, is covered with mcadows, pastures, domestic animals,
habitations healthy and smiling. Rising citics are built upor
regular plans; roads are constructed to communicate betweer


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 119


them; everything announces that men, seeking the means of
intercourse, have ceased to fear and to murder each other. Har-
bours filled with vessels receive all the productions of the earth,
and assist in the exchange of all kinds of riches. A numerous
people, living upon thcir labour in peace and abundance, has
succeeded to a few tribes of hunters, always placed between war
and famine. What has wrought these prodigies? Who has
renewed the surface of the earth? Who has given to man this
domain over nature—over nature embcllished, fertilized, and
perfected ? That beneficent genius is Security. It is security
which has wrought this great metamorphosis. And how rapid
are its operations? It is not yet two centuries since William
Penn landed upon those savage coasts, with a colony of true con-
qucrors, men of peace, who did not soul their establishments with
blood, and who made themsclves respected by acts of beneficence
and justice.


CHAPTER XI.
Opposition between Security and Equality.


In consulting the grand principle of sccumty, what ought the
legislator to decree respecting the mass of property already
existing ?

He ought to maintaim the distribution as it 1s actually established.
It is this which, under the name of justice, is regarded as his first
duty. This is a gencral and simple rule, which applics itself to
all states ; and which adapts itsclf to all places, even those of the
most opposite character. There is nothing more different than
the state of property in America, in England, in Hungary, and
in Russia. Generally, in the first of these countries, the culti-
vator is a proprictor; in the second, a tenant; in the third,
attached to the glebe; in the fourth, a slave. However, the
supreme principle of security commands the preservation of all
these distributions, though their nature is so different, and though
they do not produce the same sum of happiness. How make


120 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


another distribution without taking away from each that which he
has? And how despoil any without attacking the security of all?
When your new repartition is disarranged—that is to say, the day
after its cstablishment—how avoid making a second? Why not
correct it in the same way? And inthe meantime, what becomes
of security ? Where is happiness? Where is industry ?

When sccurity and cquality are in conflict, it will not do to
hesitate amoment. Equality must yield. The first is the found-
ation of life; subsistence, abundance, happiness, everything de-
pends upon it. Equality produces only a certain portion of good.
Besides, whatever we may do, it will never be perfect; 16 may
exist a day; but the revolutions of the morrow will overturn it.
The establishment of perfect equality is u chimera; all we can
do is to diminish inequality.

If violent causes, such as a revolution of government, a division,
or a conquest, should bring about an overturn of property, it
would be a great calamity; but it would be transitory, it would
diminish ; it would repair itself in time. Industry is a vigorous
plant which resists many amputations, and through which a
nutritious sap begins to circulate with the first rays of returning
summer. But if property should be overturned with the direct
yntention of establishing an equality of possessions, the evil would
be irreparable. No more sccurity, no more industry, no more
abundance! Society would return to the savage state whence it
emerged.

If equality ought to prevail to-day it ought te prevail always.
Yet it cannot be preserved except by renewing the violence by
which it was established. It will need an army of inquisitors
and exccutioncrs as deaf to favour as to pity; insensible to the
seductions of pleasure ; inaccessible to personal interest ; endowed
with all the virtues, though in a service which destroys them all.
The levelling apparatus ought to go incessantly backward and
forward, cutting off all that mses above the line prescribed. A
ceaseless vigilance would be neccssary to give to those who had
dissipated their portion, and to take from those who by labour
had augmented theirs. In such an order of things there would


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 121


be only one wise course for the governed,—that of prodigality ;
there would be but one foolish course,—that of industry. This
pretended remedy, seemingly so pleasant, would be a mortal
poison, a burning cautery, which would consume till it destroyed
the last fibre of life. The hostile sword in its greatest furies is a
thousand times less dreadful. It inflicts but partial evils, which
time effaces and industry repairs.

Some small societies, in the first effervescence of religious
enthusiasm, have established the community of goods as a funda-
mental principle. Does any one imagine that happiness was
gained by that arrangement? For the sweet power of reward is
substituted the sad impulses of pain. Labour, so easy and s0
light, when animated by hope, it is necessary under these
systems to represent as a penitential means of escaping eternal
punishment. So long as the religious impulse preserves its
power, all Jabour, but all groan So soon as it begins to grow
weak, the society divides into two classes: one composed of de-
graded fanatics, contracting all the vices of an unhappy super-
stition; the others, lazy rogues, who are supported in a holy
indolence by the dupes who surround them. The word equality
becomes a mere pretext—a cover to the robbery which idlenese
perpetrates upon industry.

Those ideas of benevolence and of concord which have seduced
some ardent souls into an admiration of this system are only
chimeras of the imagination. In the distribution of labours,
what motive could determine any to embrace the more painful ?
Who would undertake gross and disagreeable functions? Who
would be content with his lot? Who would not find the burden
of his neighbour lighter than his own? How many frauds would
be contrived in order to lay upon others the labour from which
all would endeavour to excmpt themselves? And, in the division,
how impossible to satisfy all: to preserve the appearances of
equality; to prevent jealousies, quarrels, rivalries, preferences.
Who would settle the numberless disputes for ever breaking out?
What an apparatus of penal laws would be necessary as a aub-
stitute for the sweet liberty of choice, and the natural recompense


122 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


of labour! One half the society would not suffice to regulate
the other half. Thus this absurd and unjust system would only
be able to maintain itself by means of a political and religious
slavery, such as that of the Hclots at Lacedemon and the Indians
of Paraguay, in the establishments of the Jesuits. Sublime in-
vention of legislators, which, to accomplish a plan of equality,
makes two corresponding lots of good and of evil, and puts all
the pain on one side and all the enjoyment on the other!


CHAPTER XII.
Means of uniting Security and Equality.


Is it necessary that between these two rivals, Security and
Equality, there should be an opposition, an eternal war? Toa
certain point thcy are incompatible ; but with a little patience
and address they may, in a great measure, be reconciled.

The only mediator between these contrary interests is time.
Do you wish to follow the counsels of equality without contra-
vening those of security ?—await the natural epoch which puts
an end to hopes and fears, the epoch of death.

When property by the death of the proprietor ccases to have
an owner, the law can interfere in its distribution, either by
limiting in certain respects the testamentary power, in order to
prevent too great an accumulation of wealth in the hands of on
individual; or by regulating the succession in favour of equality
in cases where the deceascd has left no consort, nor relation in
the direct line, and has made nowill. The question then relates
to new acquirers who have formed no expectations; and equality
may do what is best for all without disappointing any. At pre-
sent I only indicate the principle: the development of it may be
seen in the second book.

When the question is to correct a kind of civil inequality,
such as slavery, it is necessary to pay the same attention to the
right of property; to submit it to a slow operation, and to
advance towards the subordinate objcct without sacrificing the


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 123


principal object. Men who are rendered free by these grada-
tions, will be much more capable of being so than if you had
taught them to tread justice under foot, for the sake of intro-
ducing a new social order.

It is worthy of remark that, in a nation prosperous in its
agriculture, its manufacturcs, and its commerce, there is @ con-
tinual progress towards equality. If the laws do nothing to
combat it, if they do not maintain certain monopolies, if they
put no shackles upon industry and trade, if they do not permit
entails, we sce great properties divided little by little, without
effort, without revolution, without shock, and a much greater
number of men coming to participate in the modcrate favours of
fortune. This is the natural result of the opposite habits which
are formed in opulence and in poverty. The first, prodigal and
vain, wishes only to enjoy without labour; the second, accus-
tomed to obscurity and privations, finds pleasures even in labour
and economy. Thence the change which has been made in
Europe by the progress of arts and commerce, in spite of legal
obstacles. We are at no great distance from those ages of
feudality, when the world was divided into two classes: a
few great proprictors, who were everything, and a multitude
of serfs, who were nothing. These pyramidal heights have
disappeared or have fallen; and from their ruins industrious
men have formed those new establishments, the great number of
which attests the comparative happiness of modern civilization.
Thus we may conclude that Securzty, while preserving its place
as the supreme principle, leads indirectly to Equality; while
equality, if taken as the basis of the social arrangement, will
destroy both itsclf and security at the same time.


124 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


CHAPTER XIII.
Sacrifice of Security to Security.


Turs title appears at first enigmatical, but the sense of the enigma
may easily be found.

There is an important distinction between the ideal perfection
of security, and its practicable perfection. The first would
demand that nothing should ever be taken from anybody. The
second is satisfied, 1f nothing 1s taken beyond what is necessary
for the preservation of the rest.

This sacrifice is not an attack upon security; itis simply a
defalcation. An attack isan unexpected shock, an evil which
cannot be calculated, an irregularity which has no fixed principle.
It seems to put all the rest in peril; it produces a gencral alarm.
But a defalcation is a fixed, regular, and necessary deduction,
which is expected, which produces only an evil of the first order ;
but no danger, no alarm, no discouragement to industry. The
same sum of money, according to the way in which it 1s levied,
will have one or the other of these characters; and will conse-
quently produce either the deadening effects of insecurity, or the
vivifying results of confidence.

The necessity of these defalcations is evident. To labour, and
to guard the labourers, are two different operations, which cannot
be performed at the same time, by the same persons. It is neces-
sary that those who produce wealth by labour should lay aside
some portion of it, tosupport the guardians of the state. Wealth
can only be defended at its own expense.

Society, attacked by enemics, whether forcign or domestic, can
only maintain itself at the expense of sccurity,—not the security
of those enemies alone, but the sccurity even of the very persons
to whom protection is extended.

If there are men who do not perceive this necessary connection,
it is because in this matter, as in many others, the want of to-day
eclipses that of yesterday. The whole of government is but a
tissue of sacrifices. The best is that in which these sacrifices


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 125


are reduced to their lowest term. The practical perfection of
security is a quantity which tends without ceasing to approach
an ideal perfection.

‘“‘Tt is not necessary to increase the real wants of the people,
to satisfy imaginary wants of state.”

‘Imaginary wants are those created by the passions and the
weaknesses of men who govern, by the charm of an extraordinary
project, the disordered love of empty glory, and a certain power-
lessness of mind to resist the suggestions of fancy. It has often
happencd that unquiet spirits, placed by the prince at the head
of affairs, have imagined that the wants of their own little souls
were wants of the state.’’*

The author of the Persian Letters has written too many
chapters in the Spirit of Laws. What do we learn from this
satirical description? If Montesquieu had condescended to
give us a simple enumeration of the truce wants of the state, we
should have known much better what he meant by imaginary
wants.

I proceed to give a catalogue of the cases in which the sacri-
fice of some portion of security, so far as property 1s concerned,
is necessary, to preserve the greater mass of 1t.

Ist. General wants of the state for its defence against exterior
enemics.

2nd. Gencral wants of the state for its defence against violators
of the laws, or internal enemies.

3rd. General wants of the state to furnish means of affording
aid in cascs of physical calamity.

4th. Amends levied upon delinquents, cither as punishment,
or as an indemnity in favour of the parties injured.

5th. A tax upon the property of individuals to furnish the
ability of applying remedies to the evils above mentioned, by
means of courts of justicc, institutions of police, and an armed
force.

Eth. Limitation of the rights of property, or of the use which
each proprictor may make of his own goods, so as to prevent


* Spirit of Laws, book xiii. o. i.


126 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


him from employing them to his own injury or to that of
others.*

In all these cases the necessity is too palpable to need any
proofs. But it must be noticed that the same reserves will
equally apply to the other branches of security. It is not pos-
sible, for example, to maintain the rights of person and of honour,
except by penal laws; and penal laws can hardly be executed,
except at the expense of person or of honour.


CHAPTER NIV.
Of some Cases liable to be contested.


Ovucut we to reckon among thosc wants of the state which ought
to be provided for by forced contributions, the care of the in-
digent, public worship, and the cultivation of the arts and
sciences ?


* We possess a general right of property over a thing when we can
apply it to every use, except certain uses which are forbidden for special
reasons. These rcasons may be referred to three heads —


1st. Private detriment, when a given use of a thing would injure some
other individual, either in his fortune or otherwise.

2nd. Public detriment, that which may result to the community in
general.

3rd. Detriment to the individual) himsclf


This sword is mine in full property ; but however complete that nght
of property may be, as respects a thousand uses, I ought not to employ
it to wound my neighbour, nor to cut his dregs, nor to hold it up as a
signal of insurrection. If 1am amuinor or a maniac, it may be taken
from me, lest I should injure myself.

An absolute and unlimited right of property over any object, would be
the right to commit almost every crime. If I had such a right over a
4tick which I had cut, I mght employ it as a club to beat the passers-by,
or convert it into a sceptre as a sign of royalty, or into an idol offensive
to the national religion.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CLYIL CODE. 127


Section JI,
Indigence.


In the highest state of social prosperity, the great mass of
citizens will have no resource except their daily industry; and
consequently will be always near indigence, always ready to be
thrown into a state of destitution, by accidents, such as revolu-
tions of commerce, natural calamities, and especially sickness.
Infancy has no means of subsisting by its own strength; the
feebleness of old age is equally destitute. These two extremes
of life are alike in weakness. If natural instinct, humanity,
shame, and the aid of the law, assure to children and old men
the care and protection of their relatives, still these resources
are precarious, and those who give may soon themselves be
reduced to want. .\ numerous family, supported in abundance
by the labour of the father and mother, may lose at any instant
half its resources by the death of one parent, and the whole by
the death of the other.

Old age is yet worse provided for. Love which descends has
more force than love which ascends. Gratitude is less powerful
than instinct. Hope attaches to fecble beings who are beginning
life; it promiscs nothing for those who are ending it. But sup-
pose—what is not uncommon—suppose all possible care for the
old; the idca of changing the part of a giver for that of a receiver
will always shed more or less of bitterncss into the benefits
received, cspccially at that epoch of decline when the morbid
sensibility of the soul renders painful changes indifferent in
themselves.

This aspect of society is the saddcst of all. It presents that
long catalogue of evils which end in indigence, and consequently
in death, under its most terrible forms. This is the centre towards
which inertia alone, that force which acts without relaxation,
makes the lot of every mortal gravitate. Not to be drawn into
the abyss, it is necessary to mount up by a continual effort; and
we sco by our side the most diligent and the most virtuous somc-


128 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


times slipping by one false step, and sometimes thrown headlong
by inevitable reverses.

There are only two means, independently of the laws, of making
head against these evils, viz., savings and voluntary contributions.

If these two resources would always suffice, we ought, by all
means, to avoid any legal interference for the succour of the poor.
A law which offers to indigence an aid independent of industry
is, to a certain extent, a Jaw against industry—or at least against
frugality. The motives to labour and economy are—present need
and the fear of futureneed. The law which takes away that need
and that fear is an encouragement to idleness and dissipation.
Such is the reproach which is cast, and not without reason, upon
most of the establishments created in favour of the poor.

But a slight examination will be enough to convince us that the
two means of succour, independent of the laws, are not sufficient.

With respect to savings—if the greatest efforts of industry will
not suffice for the daily support of a numerous class, how can that
class lay by for the future? A second class may pay their daily
expenses by their daily labour; but they will have nothing
superfluous to lay aside against the neccssitics of a distant day.
There will remain then only a third class, which, by economizing
during the age of labour, may, perhaps, be able to provide for
the time when they can labour no longer. It 1s only these last to
whom poverty can be ascribed as a sort of crime. ‘‘ Economy,”’
it will be said, ‘‘is a duty. If they have neglected it, s0 much
the worse for them. If misery and death await them, they have
nobody to accuse but themselves. Their catastrophe, however,
will not be an unmixed evil. It will serve as a lesson to pro-
digals. It is the execution of a law established by nature—a law
which is not, hke that of men, subject to uncertainty or injustice.
Punishment does not fall save on the guilty, and it is exactly pro-
portioned to the fault.”

This severe language might be justifiable if the object of the
law were vengeance. But vengeance is condemned by the prin-
eiple of utility, as an impure motive foundcd upon antipathy.
What will be the fruit of these evils, this abandonment and this


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 129


indigence, which you regard in your anger as a just punishment
of prodigality? Are you sure that these sacrificed victims will
prevent, by their example, the faults which have led them into
misfortune? To think so would manifest a great ignorance of
the human heart. The distress, the death of some prodigals, if
we ought so to call those unfortunates who have not known how
to deny themselves some of the little pleasures of their condition,
who have not known the painful art of striving by reflection
against the temptations of cvery moment—thcir distress, J say,
even their death, will have but little influence, in the way of
instruction, upon the laborious classes of society. That sad spec-
tacle, the details of which for the most part would be concealed
by shame, would not, ike the pumishment of malefactors, have a
publicity which would attract a general attention, and not suffer
its cause to be unknown. Would those to whom the lesson was
most necessary know how to give a fit interpretation to the event?
Would they always seize upon the supposed connection between
imprudence as the cause, and misfortune as the effect? Might
they not attribute the catastrophe to accidents unforeseen, and
impossible to be forescen? In place of saying, ‘‘ Here is a man who
has been the author of his own destruction , his indigence ought
to impel me to labour and frugality,”—-would they not often say,
and with apparent reason, ‘‘ Here is an unfortunate man, who has
given himself a deal of trouble to no purpose, and whose case is a
striking proof of the vanity of human prudence!” This would
be bad reasoning, no doubt; but must an error of logic be
punished so rigorously—a mere wart of reflection, and that too
in a class of men more ofteu callec upon to exercise their muscles
than their minds?

Besides, what shall we think of a punishment delayed in its
execution till the very end of life, and which must begin to
vanquish, at the other extremity of it—that is, in youth—the
influence of the most impcrious motives? How feeble grows this
pretended lesson in the distance! How little resemblance there
is between the old man and the young man! What isthe example
of the one to the other? In youth the idea of immediate good


130 PRINCITLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


or evil, occupying all the sphere of reflection, excludes the idea of
distant good and evil. If you wish to act upon the young, place
the motive near. Show them, for example, a marriage, or some
other pleasure, in perspective. But a pain placed at a distance,
beyond their intellectual horizon, is quite thrown away. You
want to determine men who think very httle; and to draw in-
struction from the misfortunes of others, it is necessary to think
much. To what purpose employ a political means, designed to
operate upon a class having the least foresight, and yet of a nature
to be efficacious only with philosophers ?

To recapitulate. The resource of savings is insufficient. Ist,
It evidently 1s so fur those who do not gain cnough to subsist
upon; 2nd, It is equally so for those who gain a mere subsist-
ence. As to the third class, which embraces all not included in
the first two, savings are not naturally insufficient, but they
become so through the deficiency of human prudence.

Let us now pass to the other resouree—voluntary contributions.
That, too, has many imperfections.

Ist. Its uncertainty. It will eapenience daily vicissitudes, ike
the fortune and the liberality of the individuals on whom it
depends. Isit insufficient? Such junctures arc marked by misery
ard death. Is it superabundant? It will offer a reward to
idleness and profusion.

2nd. The inequality of the burden. This supply for the wants
of the poor is levicd entirely at the expense of the more humane
and the more virtuous, often without any proportion to their
means; while the avaricious calumniate the poor, to cover their
refusal with a varnish of system and of reason. Such an arrange-
ment 1s a favour granted to selfishness, and a punishment to
humanity, that first of virtucs.

I say a punishment; for though these contributions are called
voluntary, what is the motive whence they emanate? If it is not
a religious or a political fear, it is sympathy, tender but sad,
which presides over these gencrous actions. It is not the hope of
a pleasure which is bought at this price; it is the torment of
pity, which is sought to be avoided. Thus it has been noticcd in


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 131


Scotland, a country where indigence is limited to this sad resource,
that paupers derive their principal support from the class nearest
to pauperism.

8rd. The inconveniences of the distribution. If these contribu-
tions are abandoned to chance, as in the case of alms asked on
the highway ; if they are left to be paid, as occasion occurs,
without any person intermediate between him who gives and
him who asks, the uncertainty as to the sufficicncy of these gifts
is aggravated by another unccrtainty. How apprcciate in a
multitude of cases the degree of want and of need? May not
the poor widow’s farthing go to increase the ephemeral treasure
of the impure woman? How many gencrous souls like Sidney
will be found, who will repel the vivifying draught from their
parched lips, to say, J can yet wait ; first minister to that unfor-
tunate, for his distress ts greater than mine. Every one knows
that in the distribution of these gratuitous gifts, it is not modest
virtue, if is not truce poverty, often mute and bashful, which
obtains the larger part. There needs as much of management
and intrigue to succeed upon this obscure theatre, as upon the
brilliant scene of the world. He who knows how to importune,
to flatter, to lic, tomix boldness with baseness, and to vary his
impostures according to the occasion, will have success such as
the virtuous poor, devoid of artifice, and preserving their honour
in their poverty, will not attain.

Les vrais talents se taisent et s’enfuient,
Decourages des affronts qu'ils essurent.


Les faur talents sont hardis, eth ontés,
Souples, adroits, et pamars rebutes.


Discouraged by affronts, true talents fly,

And Inde themselves in silence. Hardy and bold,
Adroit and supple too, false talents brave
Repulses.


What Voltaire says of talents may be applied to mendicity.
In the division of voluntary contributions, the lot of the honest
and virtuous poor is scldom equal to that of the impudent and
obstreperous beggar.


K 2


132 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE,


Suppose that these contributions are put into a common fund
to be distributed by persons appointed for that purpose. This
method is far prefcrable, since it admits a regular examination of
wants and claims, and tends to proportion the aid accordingly ;
but it has also a tendency to diminish libcralities. That gift
which is going to pass through the hands of a stranger, of which
T shall not follow the application, of which I shall not have the
pleasure nor the immediate merit, has something abstract about
it which chills sentiment. That which I give myself, I give at
the moment when I am moved, when the cry of the poor is
re-echoed in my heart, when there is only I to succour him.
What I put into a general contribution may not have a destina-
tion agreeable to my desires, that poor coin which is much for
me and my family will be but a drop to that mass of contribu-
tions on the one hand, and that multitude of wants on the other;
let the rich sustain the poor! This is the way that many people
reason, and it is on this account that contributions succeed better
when taken for a particular class of individuals, than for an
indefinite multitude like the entire massof the poor; yet it is
for that mass that a permanent aid must be provided.

It seems to me, after these observations, that we may lay it
down as a gencral principle that the legislator ought to establish
a regular contribution for the wants of indigence, it being under-
stood that those only are to be regarded as indigent who are in
want of what is absolutely necessary. From this definition of
the indigent, it follows that thcir title as indigent 1s stronger than
the title of the proprictor of superfimtics as proprietor. For the
pain of death, which would presently full upon the starving poor.
would be always a more serious evil than the pain of disappoint-
ment which falls upon the rich when a portion of his superfluity
is taken from him.*


In the amount of the legal contribution we ought not to go


* When this tax is pnt upon a regular footing, and each proprietor
‘knows beforehand what he must contribute, the pain of disappomtment
vanishes, and gives placc to another, different in its nature, and legs in


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 138


beyond what is simply necessary. To go beyond that would be
taxing industry for the support of idleness. Those establish-
ments which furnish more than is absolutely necessary are not
good, except so far as they are supported at the expense of indi-
viduals, for individuals can make a discrimination in the distri-
bution of these aids, and apply them to specific classes.

The details of the manner of assessing this contribution, and
distributing its produce, belong to political economy, as also the
inquiry into the means of encouraging a spinit of economy and
foresight in the lower classes of society. We have some instruc-
tive memoirs upon this interesting subject, but no treatise which
embraces the whole question. Such a work should begin with
the theory of poverty—that is, by a classification of the indigent
and of the causes which bring on indigence, and thence proceed
to suggest precautions and remedies,


Section If.
The Expenses of Public Worship.


If the ministers of religion are considered as charged with
maintaining one of the sanctions of morality (the religious
sanction), the expense of their support ought to be referred to
the same branch of administration with justice and the police,
viz., the support of intcrnal security. The clergy are a body of
inspectors and moral instructors, who form, so to speak, the
advanced guard of the law. They have no power against offences,
but they combat the vices from which offences originate, and thus
render the exercise of authority more rare by maintaining morals
and subordination. If they were charged with all the functions
which might properly be assigned to them in the education of
the infcrior classes, in the promulgation of the laws, in the per-
formance of divers public acts, the utility of their ministry
would be more manifest. The morc real services they rendered
to the state the less would they be subject to those maladies of
dogmatism and of controversy which spring from the desire of


134 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE,


making themselves distinguished and from the want of power to
be useful. It is necessary to direct their activity and their
ambition towards salutary objects to prevent them from becoming
mischievous.

In this point of view, cven those who do not acknowledge the
truth of religion cannot complain at being called upon to
contribute towards its support, since they participate in its
advantages.

But if there exists a great diversity of worship and religion,
and the legislator is not fettered by an anterior establishment or
particular considerations, 1t will be more conformable to liberty
and equality to apply the contributions of each religious com-
munity to the support of thcir own church. It 1s trne that in
this arrangement we have cause to fear a spint of prosclytism on
the part of the clergy, but it is equally probable that a uscful

emulation will result from their reciprocal efforts, and that the
balance of their influence will establish a kind of equilibrium in
that fluid of opinions subject to such dangerous tempests.

We can imagine a very unfortunate case, that of a people to
whom the legislator forbids the pubhe exercise of their religion,
and at the samc time imposes upon them the obligation of sup-
porting a religion which they regard as hostile to their own.
This would be a double violation of security There would
gradually be formed among this people an habitual sentiment of
hatred against the government, a desire of change, a ferocious
courage, a profound secrecy. The people, deprived of all the
advantages of a public religion, of known guides and of avowed
priests, would be dclivcred up to ignorant and fanatical leaders,
and as the maintenance of their worshp would be a school of
conspiracy, the fuith of oaths, instead of being the safeguard of
the state, would become its terror ; instead of binding the citizens
to the government, it would unite them against it, so much so
that such a people would become as formidable through their
virtues as their viecs. This is not an imaginary case, as the
history of Ireland will show,


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 135


Section III.
The Cultivation of the Arts and Sctences.


I shall not speak here of what ought to be done for what are
called the useful arts and sciences ; nobody doubts that objects of
public utility ought to be sustained and encouraged by public
contributions.

But when the question relates to the cultivation of the fine arts,
the embellishment of a country, edifices of luxury, objects of
ornament and pleasure—in one word, to works of superfluity—-
ought we to raise forced contributions for their support? Can
taxes be justified for this brilliant, but superfluous end?

I do not desire to undertake here the support of the agreeable
against the uscful;* nor to argue that the pcople should be dis-
tressed in order to give féfes to a court, or pensions to buffoons.
But one or two reficctions may be offered by way of apology.

Ist. The expense which is, or can be, incurred for these objects
is commonly a trifling affair compared to the mass of necessary
contributions. Let any one undertake to restore to each his
quota of this superfluous expense, and would it not be almost
impalpable ?

2nd. This superfluous part of the contributions being con-
founded with the mass of those which are necessary, the levy is
imperceptible; it excites no separate sensation which can give
room to a distinct complaint; and the evil of the first order,
limited to a sum so moderate, is not sufficient to produce an evil
of the second order.

3rd. This luxury of taste may have a palpable utility by
bringing together a concourse of strangers who spend their


* Not that there 1s any real opposition between them; everything
that gives pleasure is useful; but in common language, that is exclu-
sively called uscful which produces a permanent utihty ; while the word
agrecable is hmited to an immediate utility, or a present pleasure. Many
things, in fact, which we refuse to call useful, have a much more certain
utility than somo others, to which that epithet is usually applied.


136 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


money in the country. Little by little all nations become tribu-
tary to her who holds the sceptre of the fashions. A country
fertile in amusements may be looked upon as a great theatre,
which is in part supported at the expense of a crowd of curious
spectators drawn to it from all parts.

It may happen, too, that this pre-eminence in objects of amuse
ment, literature, and taste, tends to gain for a people the good
will of other nations. Athens, which was called the eye of
Greece, was saved more than once by the sentiment of respect
which superiority of civilization inspired. The halo of glory
which encircled that home of the arts served a long time to hide
its weakness; and everything which was not barbarian was in-
terested in the preservation of a city, the centre of politeness and
of intellectual pleasures.

But, after all, it must be admitted that this seducing object
may be abandoned without risk to the sole resource of voluntary
contributions. At least, everything essential ought to be pro-
vided for before giving one’s self up to expenses of pure orna-
ment. It will be time to provide for actors, painters, and
architects after the public faith is satisfied; when individuals
have been indemnified for the losses occasioned by war, crimes,
and physical calamities, when the support of the indigent is pro-
vided for; till then, all such expense would be an unjust pre-
ference granted to brilliant accessarics oycr objects of necessity.

Such expenses, under such circumstances, are very contrary to
the interest of a sovercign, because the reproaches they occasion
will always be much cxaggcrated ; for 1t necds no sagacity to
invent them, but only passion and humour to sct them distinctly
forth. It is well known what efficacy they have had when
wrought into picces of popular cloquence, and employed to stir
up the people against regal government. Though it be true that
everything conspircs to throw kings into this illusion,—so far as
regards the luxury of amusements, have they ever fallen into
excesses 80 great as those of many republics? Athens, at an
epoch of most pressing dangers, despised alike the cloquence of
Demosthenes and the threats of Philip, engrossed with a need


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 137


more urgent than defence, an object more essential than the
maintenance of liberty. The gravest of crimes was the diversion,
even for wants of the state, of the funds destined to the support
of the theatres. And at Rome, was not the passion for spectacles
carried to an equal extreme? It was necessary to lavish the
treasures of the world, and the spoils of nations, to captivate the
suffrages of the sovereign people. Terror spread through a
whole country, whenever a pro-consul was about to give a
epectacle at Rome; an hour of the magnificences of the circus
cast into despair a hundred thousand inhabitants of the pro-
vinces,


CHAPTER XV.
Examples of Attacks upon Security.


Ir will be useful to give some examples of what I mean by
attacks upon security. It will be a means of putting principles
in a clearer hght, and of showing that what is unjust in morals
cannot be innocent in politics. Nothing is more common than to
authorize under one name what would be odious under another.
And here I cannot help observing the bad effects of one branck
of classical education. We are accustomed from our earliest
youth to sce in the history of the Roman people public acts ot
injustice, atrocious in themselves, always coloured with specious
names, always accompanied by a proud culogy on Roman virtues,
The abolition of debts pluys a great part from the earliest times
of the republic. A withdrawal of the people to Mount Aventine,
when the enemy was at the gates of Rome, forced the Senate to
pass a sponge over the rights of creditors. The historian excites
all our interest in favour of the fraudulent debtors who paid their
debts by a bankruptcy, and docs not fail to render odious those
who were despoiled by an act of violence. And what was
gained by that injustice? Usury, which had served as a pretext
for the robbery, could not but be augmented the very next day
after the catastrophe; for the exorbitant rate of interest was only


138 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


the price of the risk caused by the uncertainty of engagements.
The foundation of the Roman colonies has been celebrated as 8
work of profound policy. It always consisted in despoiling a
part of the lawful proprietors of a conquered country to create
establishments in the way of favour or reward.

This proceeding, so crucl in its immediate effects, was yet more
fatal in its consequences. The Romans, accustomed to violate all
the rights of property, knew not where to check themselves in
this career. Thence the perpetual demand for a new division of
lands, which was ever the fire-brand of the seditious, and which
contributed under the triumvirate to a frightful system of gencral
confiscations.

The history of the republics of Greece is full of facts of the
same kind, always presented in a manner plausible enough to lead
astray superficial inquirers. What abuse of reasoning has there
been upon that division of lands brought about by Lycurgus, to
serve as a basis for his community of warriors, in which, by an
inequality the most shocking, all the rights arc on one side, and
all the servitude on the other!

These attacks upon security, which have found so many officious
defenders when the question has been of the Grecks and the
Romans, have not experienced the same indulgence when the
monarchs of the East have been the actors. The despotism of an
individual has nothing seducing in it, because it confincs itself
too evidently to his person alone; there are a million chances of
suffering from it, toone of enjoying. But the despotism exercised
by a multitude deceives weak minds by a false image of the
public good. We place ourselves in imagination among the great
number that commands, instead of supposing ourselves among
the small number that yields and suffers. Let us, then, leave in
peace the sultans and the viziers. We may be sure their injustice
will not be glossed over by the flattcrics of historians. Their
reputation serves as an antidote to their example.

We may dispense, for the same reason, with insisting upon such
attacks upon security as national bankruptcics; but we may
remark, in passing, a curious effect of fidelity to engagements


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 139


upon the authority of the government itself. In England, since
the Revolution, the engagements of the state have always been
sacred; so that individuals who lend to the government never
demand any other pledge than the national credit ; and the coi-
lection of the imposts assigned to pay the interest of the debt has
always remained in the hands of the king. In France, under
the monarchy, violations of the public faith were so frequent,
that those who made advances to the government were in the
habit, from an early period, of requiring the collection of the im-
posts to be intrusted to them, and of paying themselves with
their own hands. But this arrangement cost the people dear;
for the public creditor had no intcrest to consult their conve-
nience; and 1t cost the prince yct dearer, since it deprived him
of the affections of the people. When, in 1787, the announcc-
ment of a deficient revenuc alarmed all the creditors of the state,
that class so interested in England, in the maintenance of govern-
ment, showed itself in France, ardent for a revolution. All
thought they saw their own security in taking away from the
sovereign the administration of the financcs, and placing them in
the hands of a national council. It is well known how far the
event answered to their hopes. But it is not the less interesting
to observe that the full of that monarchy, which appeared so im-
moveable, was owing, in no small measure, to the distrust which
so many violations of the public faith had caused.

But among the many attacks upon security committed through
lgnorance, inadvertence, or false reasons, it will suffice to note
some individual cases.

Ist. We may regard as such, fares unequally leried,—those
disproportioned imposts which spare the rich at the expense of
the poor. The weight of this evilis aggravated by the sentiment
of injustice at the idea of paying more than one’s fair proportion.

Corvées are the height of inequahty; since they fall entirely
upon those who have only their hands for their patrimony.

So are imposts Icvicd upon an uncertain fund; upon persons
who may have nothing to pay with. In that case, the evil takes
another turn. Indigence may protect us from paying the tax,


140 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


but it subjects us at the same time to the gravest evils. The
sufferings of want take the place of the inconveniences of the
impost. This is the reason why a poll-tax is so unjust. It is
possible to have a head, and to have nothing else.

Imposts which fetter industry, such as monopolies, and exclu-
sive companies. The true method of estimating these imposts is,
not to consider what income they pay, but what they prevent from
being paid.

Imposts upon necessaries. What physical privations, what
maladies, what deaths they produce, no man can tell! These
sufferings, caused by the fault of the government, are confounded
with natural evils which it cannot prevent.

Imposts upon private sales. Generally speaking, it is necessity
which causes these sales; and the tax-gatherer, coming in at an
epoch of distress, levies an extraordinary tribute upon an unfor-
tunate individual.

Imposts upon public sales, or sales at auction. Here the dis-
tress is fully proved, often it is extreme, and the fiscal injustice
is most manifest.

Taxes upon law proceedings. They include all kinds of
attacks upon security, since they are equivalent to refusing the
protection of the law to all those who cannot pay for it. They
consequently offer a hope of impunity to crime. It is only neces-
sary to choose as objects of injustice individuals who cannot
afford the advances necessary to a judicial prosecution, or who
are not rich enough to run the risk.

2nd. A forced Elevation of the Value of Money.—This is a bank-
ruptcy, since the government does not pay all that it owes; a
fraudulent bankruptcy, since there is a semblance of paying; and
a foolish fraud, which deceives nobody. As far as it goes, it is
equivalent to un abolition of debts. The theft which the govern-
ment commits upon its own creditors, it authorizes every debtor
to commit upon his, though without any profit from it to the
public treasury. And when this course of injustice is completed ;
after this operation has enfccbled confidence, ruined honest men,
enriched rogues, deranged commerce, disordered taxation, and


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 141


caused a thousand individual evils, it does not leave the least
advantage to the government which it has dishonoured. Expense
and income presently return to the same proportions as before.

3rd. Forced Reduction of the Rate of Interest.—Regarded as a
question of political cconomy, reducing the rate of interest by
law is injurious to wealth, because it is prohibiting the payment
of any premium for the introduction of foreign capital ; it is pro-
hibiting, in many cases, new branches of commerce, and even
old ones, if the legal interest is not sufficient to balance the risks
of the capital employed. But with a more immediate view to
security, it is taking away from lenders to give to borrowers.
Let the rate of interest be reduced by law a fifth part below its
natural level, and the event is the same to the lenders as if they
were plundered every year by robbers of the fifth part of their
fortunes.

If the legislator finds 1t good to take away from a particular
class of citizens a fifth part of their revenue, why stop there?
Why not take away another fifth part, and still another? If the
first reduction answered its end, a further reduction will answer
it in the same proportion; and if the measure is good in one case,
why should it be bad in the other? Wherever we stop, it is
necessary to have a reason for stopping; but whatever reason
prevents the second step will be just as good to prevent the first.
This operation is exactly the same as diminishing rents under the
pretext that the proprietors are uscless consumers, and the farmers
productive labourers. If you shake the principle of security as
respects once class of citizens, you shake 1t for all. The bundle of
rods is its emblem.

4th. General Confiscations.—I refer to this head vexations exer-
cised upon a sect, upon a party, upon a class of men, under the
vague pretext of some political crimc—a pretext so vague that,
while it is pretended that the confiscation is a punishment, there
is often room to belicve that the crime has been created for the
sake of the confiscation. History presents many examples of such
robbery. The Jews have often been its object; they were too
rich not to be always guilty. Financiers and farmers of the public


1492 PRINCIPLES OF TIE CIVIL CODE.


revenue, for the same reason, have been often subjected to what
were called chambers of fire (chambres ardentes). While the order
of succession remained unfixed, everybody at the sovereign’s
death might become guilty, and the spoils of the vanquished
formed, in the hands of the successor, a treasure of rewards. In
a republic torn by factions, cach half of the nation denounces the
other as traitors; and let the system of confiscations be once intro-
duced, and parties, as at Rome, become in turn the devourcrs of
each other.

The crimes of the powerful, and especially the crimes of the
popular party in democracies, have always found apologists.
‘The greater part of these great foituncs,” it is said, ‘‘ have been
founded upon injustice ; and what has been plundered from the
public may as well be restored to the public.”? To reason in this
way is to open an unlimited carecr to tyranny. It 1s a permission
to presume crime instead of proving it. According to this logic,
it is impossible for a rich man to be innocent. Ought a punish-
ment so severe as confiscation to be inflicted in gross, without
examination, without detail, without proof? Docs a procedure
which would be declared atrocious 1f employed against an
individual, become lawful when directed against a whole class of
citizens?) Can we make ourselves deaf to the evil we are doing
because of the number of the sufferers whose crics arc mingled
togcther in this common shipwreck? To plunder great proprictors,
under the pretext that some of their ancestors have acquired their
opulence by unjust means, is like bombarding a city because some
robbers are thought to be concealed in 1t.

Sth. Dissolution af Conrents and of Monastic Orders. —The deeree
for their abolition was signed by reason itself; but its exccution
should not have becn abandoned to prejudice and to avarice. It
would have been enough to have forbidden these socicties to admit
new members. In that case they would have died away gra-
dually. Individuals would have suffered no privation. The
revenues as they fell in might have becn appropriated to some
useful object, and philosophy would have applauded an opcration
exccHent in principle and mild in its exccution. But this slow


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 148


process is not that which cupidity loves. It would scem as if
sovereigns, in dissolving these socictics, had wished to punish the
members for some wrong they had done. In place of regarding
them as orphans and invalids, deserving all the compassion of the
legislator, they were looked upon as enemics, who were treated
with clemency even when they were stripped of all their wealth
and reduced to absolute want.

6th. Suppression of Pensions and Places without Indemnity to the
Possessors.—This attack upon security merits the rather a parti-
cular mention, because, instead of being blamed as an injustice, it
is often approved as an act of economy andreform. Envy is never
so much at its ease as when it can conceal itself under the mask
of patriotism and the public good. But the public good requires
only the abolition of sinccures; it docs not demand the ruin of
the persons who hold them.

The principle of security requires that reform should be
attended with complete indemnity. The only benefit that can be
lawfully drawn from it is the conversion of a perpetual into a life
annuity.

Is it said that the immediate suppression of these places will be
a gain to the public? This argumentissophistical. The sum in
question would doubtless be a gain, considered in itself, if it came
from abroad, or if it were acquired by commerce; but it is nota
gain when taken from the hands of certain individuals, who are
themselves a part of the public. Would a family be the richer
because the father had taken everything from one of his children,
the better to endow the others? Even in such a case, the spoils
of one child would increase the inheritance of his brothers, and
the evil would not be a total loss; it would produce a portion of
good. But when the question is of the public, the profit of a
place suppressed is divided among the whole community, while
the loss falls entirely upon one. The gain, spread among the
multitude, is divided into impalpable parts; the loss is wholly
felt by him who alone supports it. The result of the operation is
this—it docs not enrich the party that gains, and it reduces him
who loses to poverty. Instead of one place suppressed, suppose


144 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


a thousand, ten thousand, a hundred thousand. The total disad-
vantage willremainthe same. The plunder taken from thousands
of individuals must be divided among millions. Your streets will
everywhere present unfortunate citizens whom you will have
plunged into indigence ; and you will hardly see an individual
who will be sensibly the richer by virtue of these cruel operations.
Groans of pain and cries of despair will resound on every side.
The cries of joy, if there are any, will not be expressions of hap-
piness, but of that antipathy which rejoices in the misery of its
victims. Ministers of kings and of the people, it is not by the
wretchedness of tmdividuals that you will produce the happiness
of nations! The altar of the public good demands barbarous
sacrifices as little as the altar of the Divinity.

I cannot yet quit the subject, fur the establishment of the
principle of security demands that crror should be pursued into
all its retreats.

What means do men take to deceive themselves or to deceive
the people on the subject of such great injustice? They have
recourse to certain pompous maxims which are a mixture of
truth and falsehood, and which give to a question, simple in
itself, an air of depth and political mystery. The interest of
individuals, it is said, ought to yicld to the public interest. But
what does that mean? Is not one individual as much a part of
the public as another? This public interest, which you intro-
duce a8 a person, 13 only an abstract term; it represents nothing
but the mass of individual interests. It is necessary to take
them all into account, instead of considering some as all, and
the others as nothing. If it is a good thing to sacrifice the
fortune of one individual to augment that of others, it will be
yet better to sacrifice a second, a third, a hundred, a thoysand,
an unlimited number; for whatever may be the number of those
you have sacrificed, you will always have the same reason to add
one more. In onc word, the interest of everybody is sacred, or
the interest of nobody.

Individual interests are the only real interests. Take care of
the individuals; never molest them, never suffer any one to


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 145


molest them, and you will have done enough for the public.
Would it be believed that there are men so absurd as to love pos-
terity better than the present generation ; to prefer the man who
is not to the man who is; to torment the living under pretext of
doing good to those who are not born, and who perhaps never
will be?

Upon a multitude of occasions, men who have suffered by the
operation of a law have not dared to complain, or have not been
listened to, by reason of this fulse and obscure notion, that private
interest ought to yield to public interest. But if it comes to a
question of generosity, who is loudest called upon to exercise
it,—the whole towards one, or one towards the whole? An evil
felt, and a benefit not felt; such is the result of these admirable
operations by which individuals are sacrificed to the public !

I shall conclude by a general observation of great importance
The more the principle of property is respected the stronger hold
it takes on the popular mind. Slght attacks upon this principle
prepare the way for heavier ones. .A long time has been neces-
sary to carry property to the poimt where we now sec it in
civilized societies, but a fatal experience has shown with what
facility 1t can be shaken, and how easily the savage instinct of
plunder gets the better of the laws. Governments and the
people are, in this respect, hke tamed hons, let them but taste a
drop of blood, and their native ferocity revives.


Sv torrida parvus
Venit in ora cruor, rediunt rabiesque fur orque g
Admoniteque tument qustato sanguine fauces,
Fervet, et a trepulo via abstenet ora magistro.
Lucan, iv.
If but a httle blood
Touch his hot mouth, fury and rage return ;
IIis counselled jaws swell with the tasted gore ;
He raves, and from lis trembling keeper scaroe
Restrains his teeth.


146 PRINCIPLES OF THE CLVYIL CODE.


CHAPTER XVI.
Forced Exchanges,


in Xcnophon’s Cyropedia, asks Cyrus to give an
account of his last lesson. Cyrus answers thus: ‘One of the
boys in our school who had a coat too small for him gave it to
one of his companions a little smaller than himself, and took
away his coat, which was too large. The preceptor made me the
judge of this dispute, and I decided that the mattcr should be
left as it was, since both partics seemed to be bettcr accom-
modated than before. Upon which the preceptor pointed out to
me that I had done wrong, for I had been satisfied with con-
sidering the convenience of the thing, whercas I ought first to
have looked at the justice of it; and justice never would allow
violence to be done to any one’s property.’ ’—fontaigne’s Essays,
book i. ch. xxiv.

What ought we to think of this decision? At the first view it
would appear that a forced exchange is not contrary to security,
provided an equal value is given. How can I be said to lose
in consequence of a law, if, after it has had its full effect, the
amount of my property remains the same as before? If one has
gained, and the other has not lost, the operation secms to be
a@ good one.

No; itis not. Ie whom you suppose to have lost nothing by
a forced exchange, in reality has lost; since everything moveable
or immoveable has different valucs for different persons, accord-
ing to circumstances, and every onc expects to enjoy the favour-
able circumstances which may augmcnt the value of such or such
a part of his property. If the house that Peter occupies would
be more valuable to Paul, that is no reason why Paul should be
gratified by forcing Peter to yicld the house to him for the sum
which it is worth to himself. That would be to deprive Peter of
the benefit which he has a right to derive from the very circum-
stance that the housc is worth more to Paul.

And suppose Pau) should say that for the sake of peace he


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. ‘147


had offered a price above the ordinary value, and that Peter
refuses it out of pure obstinacy, still it might be replied to him,
‘¢ This surplus of price which you pretend to have offered is only a
supposition of yours.” The opposite supposition is just as pro-
bable. For if you had really offered more than the house is
worth, he would have hastened to seize so favourable a circum-
stance, which might not oceur again, and the bargain would have
been soon concluded. If he did not accept your offer it is a
proof that you were deceived in your estimate, and that if the
house were taken from him on the conditions you propose, it
would be an injury to his fortune, if not to what he possesses,
at least to what he has a right to acquire.

No, Paul will reply; he knows that my estimate is higher
than anything he can expect in the ordinary course of things ;
but he also knows my necessity, and he refuses a reasonable
offer in hopes to derive an unfair advantage from my situation.

I perceive a principle which may serve to settle this difference
between Paul and Peter, Things must be distinguished into
two classes, those which ordinarily have only their intrinsic value,
and those which are susceptible of a value of affection. Houses
of the common sort, ficlds cultivated in the usual way, a crop of
hay or corn, and ordinary kinds of manufactures, scem to belong
to the first class. To the second may be referred pleasure-
grounds and gardens, libraries, pictures, statues, collections of
natural history. A forced exchange of such objects should never
be permitted. The value they derive from a sentiment of affec-
tion cannot be appreciated. Lut objects of the first class may be
submitted to forced exchanges whenever it is the only means to
prevent great losses. I possess a piece of land from which I
derive a considerable revenue, but which I can approach only by
a road running along the edge of a river. The river overflows
and washes away the road. My neighbour obstinately refuses
me a passage along a strip of land which is not worth the
hundredth part of my field. Ought I to lose my all through the
caprice or hostility of an unreasonable neighbour?

But to prevent the abuse of a principle so dclicate, rigorous

L 2


148 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


rules ought to be laid down. I say, then, that forced exchanges
ought to be permitted to prevent a great loss, as in the case of a
field rendcred inaccessible except by a passage through another.

By observing all the scruples of the English legislators in this
behalf, we may perceive the respect which is paid in that country
to the rights of property. If anew road is to be opened, an Act
of Parliament must be first obtaincd. All interested are heard,
and the legislature, not content with assigning an equitable satis-
faction to the proprietors, protects houses, gardens, and such other
objects as may have a value of affection, by special exceptions in
the Act.

Forced exchanges may also be justified whenever the obstinacy
of an individual or of a small number are clearly hostile to the
advantage of a great number. Soin the matter of the English
Inclosure Acts, the opposition of a few has not been suffered to
prevail, and the sale of houses is often compelled by the law
where the convenience or the health of cities requires 11.

The question is of forced exchanges, not of forced transfers,
for a transfer is not an exchange; and a forced transfer without
equivalent, even for the benefit of the state, would be a mere
injustice, an act of power devoid of that tenderness which the
principle of utility ever demands,


CHAPTER XVII.
Power of the Laws over Expectatvon.


Tue legislator is not master of the dispositions of the human
heart, he is only their interpreter and their minister. The good-
ness of the laws depends upon their conformity to general ez-
pectation. The legislator ought to be well acquainted with the
progress of this expectation, in order to act in concert with it.
This should be the end; Ict us inquire into the conditions neces-
sary to attain it.

Ist. The first of these conditions, but at the same time the most
difficult to fulful, is this, that the laws should be anterior to expecta-


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 149


tion. If wecould suppose a new people, a generation of children,
the legislator finding no expectations already formed in contra-
diction to his views, might fashion them at his pleasure, as the
statuary does a block of marble. But as there exists already
among all people a multitude of cxpectations founded upon
ancient laws or ancient usages, the legislator is forced to follow
a system of conciliation and of humouring which constantly
fetters him.

The very first laws found some expectations already formed.
For we have seen that prior to laws there cxisted a fecble kind
of property—that is, a sort of expectation of preserving what had
been acquired. The laws received their first dctcrmination from
these anterior expectations, they have produced new ones, and
have gradually formed the channel of our desires and hopes. No
changes can be made 1n the laws of property without deranging,
more or less, this established current, and without opposing more
or less resistance to 1t.

Do you find it necessary to establish a law contrary to the
actual expectations of men? If it is possible, you should so
arrange matters that this law will not begin to take effect except
ata remote period. The present generation will not feel the
change, and the rising generation will be prepared for it. You
will find among the young auxiliarics against old opinions, you
will not wound actual interests, because time will be allowed to
prepare for a new ordcr of things. Everything will become easy
to you, because you will have prevented the birth of those
expectations which otherwise you would have becn compelled to
contradict.

2nd. The second condition is, that the laws should be known. A
law which is unknown can havo no effect upon expectation, it
will not even serve to prevent a contrary expectation.

This condition, it will be said, docs not depend upon the
nature of the law, but on the measures which are taken to make
it public. These measurcs may be sufficient for their object,
whether the law be so or not.

This reasoning is more specious than true. There are some


150 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVLL CODE.


laws so made as to be more easily known than others. These are
laws conformable to expectations already formed, laws which
rest upon natural expectations. This natural expectation, that is,
this expectation produced by previous habits, may be founded
upon a superstition, upon 2 hurtful prejudice, or upon a percep-
tion of uility, if makes no difference which, the law w hich 1s
conformed to it is casily borne in mand; in fact, it was in the
mind before 1t received the sanetion of the legislator. But a law
contrary to this natural expectation is difficult to be understood,
and still more difficult to be remembered — Another arrangement
always suggests itself, while the law, strange to all, and without
any root in the mind, tends constantly to shp from a place to
which it has only an artifical adhesion

Codes of ritual law have this inconvemence among othicrs,
that the fantastic and arbitrary rules of which they are com-
posed, never well Known, fatigne the understanding and the
memory; 6) that man, always fearful, always in fault, always
defiled by some imaginary sin, can never count upon imnocenee,
and lives in perpctual need of absolution.

Expectation naturally directs itself towards the laws which are
most important to socicty. The stranger who commits a theft, a
forgery, an assassination, should not be suffered to plead ignorance
of the laws of the country, since he could not be ignorant that
acts so manifestly hurtful were crimes everywhere.

3rd. The third condition 18, that the laws should be consistent.
This principle is closely connected with the preceding, but it
serves to pluce a great truth in a new light. When the laws
have established a certain arrangement upon a principle generally
admitted, every additional arrangement which is consistent with
that principle will prove to be conformable to the gencral expee-
tation. Every analogous law 1s presumed, as it were, beforehand.
Each new application of the principle contributes to strengthen it.
But a law which has not this character remains isolated in the
mind ; and the influence of the principle to which it is opposed
is a force which tends, without ceasing, to drive it from tho
memory.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 151


That upon a man’s death his property should go to the next of
kin, is a rule generally admitted, and according to which expec-
tations are naturally formed. A law directing the order of suc-
cession, which should conform to this principle, would obtain a
general approbation, and would be universally understood. But
the more this principle is obscured, by admitting exceptions, the
more difficult it 1s to understand the law and to remember it.
The English Common Lav” affords us a striking example. It is so
complicated in its provisions regulating the descent of property,
it admits distinctions so singular, the decisions which serve to
regulate it are so subtle, that not only is it impossible for simple
good sense to presume its regulations beforchand, but it is very
difficult to discover thematall. It is a profound study, like that
of the most abstract sciences, confined to a small number of pri-
vileged men. Jt has been even necessary to sub-divide it, for no
lawyer pretends to understand the whole of it. Such has been the
fruit of too superstitious a respect for antiquity !

When new laws are made in opposition to a principle estab-
lished by the old ones, the stronger that principle is, the more
odious will the inconsistency appear. .\ contradiction of senti-
ment results from it, and disappointed expectations accuse the
legislator of tyranny.

In Turkey, when an officer of the government dies, the Sultan
takes possession of his entire fortune, and his children fall at once
from the height of opulence to the depths of poverty. This law,
which overturns all natural cxpectations, was perhaps borrowed
from some other oriental government, in which 1t was less incon-
sistent and less odious, because the sovereign entrusted employments
only to eunuchs.

4th. The fourth condition is, that the laws should be consistent
with the principle of utility; for utility is a point towards which
all expectations have a natural tendency.

It is truc that a law conformable to utility may happen to be
contrary to public opinion; but this is only an accidental and
transitory circumstance. All minds will be reconciled to the law
so soun as its utility is made obvious. Assoon as the veil which


152 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


conceals it is raised, expectation will be satisfied, and the public
opinion be gained over. Now, it is plain that the more the laws
are conformed to utilty, the more manifest it is possible for their
utility to become. If we ascribe to a thing a quality which it
does not possess, the triumph of error can exist but for a time—a
single ray of light will suffice to dissipate it. But a quality
which actually exists, although not known, may chance to be dis-
covered at any instant. At the first moment, an innovation 1s
surrounded by an impure atmosphere ; a mass of clouds formed by
caprices and prejudices float about it; and the appearance of things
is changed by the refractions it undergovs in the passage through
so deceitful amedium. It needs time for the sight to grow strong,
and to acquire the power of separating from the object all that 1s
foreign to it. But, little by little, truth gains the ascendant. If
the first attempt docs not succeed, the second will be more fortu-
nate, because it will be better known where hes the difficulty
which it is necessary to conquer. The plan which favours the
most interests cannot fail in the end to gain the most suffrages ;
and the useful novelty, which at first was repulsed with affright,
becomes presently so familiar that no one rccollects its commence-
ment.

5th. The fifth condition is method in the awa. The bad arrange-
ment of a code of laws may produce, by its effect upon expecta-
tion, the same inconveniences with incoherence and inconsistency.
There may result from it the same difficulty of understanding
the law, and of remembering it. Every man has his hmited
measure of understanding. ‘he more complex the law is, the
more it is above the facultics of a great number. In the same
proportion it is less known ; 1t has less hold upon men; it does
not present itself to their minds upon the necessary occasions; or,
what is yet worse, it deceives them, and produces false expecta-
tions. Both the style and the method should be simple; the law
ought to be a manual of instruction for each individual; and
every one should be enabled to consult it in doubtful cases,
without the aid of an interpreter.

The more the laws conform to the principle of utility the


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE, 153


simpler they will become; for a system founded upon a single
principle may be as simple in form as in substance. It is only
such a system which is susceptible of a natural method, and a
familiar nomenclature.

6th. To become the controller of expectation, the law ought to
present itself to the mind as certain to be executed; at least, no
reason for presuming the contrary ought to appear.

Is there ground for supposing that the law will not be executed?
An expectation is formed contrary to the law itself. The law,
then, is useless, It never exercises its power except to punish ;
and these inefficacious punishments are an additional reproach to
the law. Contemptible in its weakness, odious in its force, it is
always bad, whetuer it reaches the guilty or suffers him to escape.

This principle has often been absurdly disregarded. For
example, during Law’s paper-money system, when the citizens
of France were forbidden to keep 1n their houses more than a
certain sum in coin,—could not cverybody presume on the suc-
cess of disobedience ?

How many mercantile prohibitions are vicious in this parti-
cular! A multitude of rules easily eluded, form, so to speak,
a lottery of immorality, in which individuals stake their money
against the legislator and the custom-house.

It is in accordance with this principle that the domestic
authority has been established in the hands of the husband.
If it had been given to the woman, the physical power being on
one side, and the legal power on the other, the discord would
have been cternal. If an equality had been established between
them, this nominal equality could never have been maintained,
because of two opposite wills one or the other must have the
sway. The cxisting arrangement is most favourable to the peace
of familes, because, in making the physical and legal power
operate in concert, everything 1s combined which is necessary for
effectual action.

This principle affords a great assistance towards the resolution
of certain problems which have very much embarrassed the
lawyers; such, for instance, as this—in what cases ought a


154 PRINCIPLES OF TRE CIVIL CODE.


thing found to belong to the finder? The easier it would be to
appropriate the thing in spite of the law, the more expedient is
it not to make a law which will disappoint expectation; or in
other terms, the casier it is to clude the law, the more cruel it
would be to make a law which, presenting itsclf to the mind as
almost impossible to be executed, would do nothing but evil,
when by chance it should happen to be executed. This may be
made clearer by an cxample :—Should I find a diamond in the
eround, my first idea would be to regard it as my own; and an
expectation of keeping it would be formed at the same instant,
not only through the bent of desire, but also by analogy with
habitual ideas of property. Ist. I have the physical posscssion
of it, and this possession alone is a title where there 1s no
opposing title. 2nd. There is somcthing of mine in the disco-
very; it is I who have drawn this diamond from the dirt, where,
unknown to all the world, it had no valuc. 8rd. I may flatter
myself with the idea of keeping it, without the aid of the law,
and even in spite of the law; since it will be enough to conceal
it till I have a pretext for producing 1t under some other title.
Now, should the law undertake to bestow the diamond upon some
other person than me, it could not prevent this first movement of
expectation, this hope of keeping it; and in taking it away from
me, 1t would make me experience that pain of disappointment
commonly called injustice or tyranny. This reason would be
sufficient for causing the thing to be given to the finder, unless
some stronger reason can be offered to the contrary.

This rule may vary according to the natural chance of keeping
the thing found without the aid of the law. A shipwrecked
vessel which I may have been the first to seo upon the coast; a
mine; an island which I moy have discovered ; ure objects as to
which an antenor law may prevent any idea of property, because
it is impossible for me sccretly to appropriate them to my own
use. The luw which refused them to me, being easily executed,
would have its full and entire effect upon my mind; to such a
degrec, that if tho question turned on this principle alone, the
legislator would be at liberty to give or refuse the thing to the


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODI. 155


discoverer, as he saw fit. But there is a particular reason for
showing some favour to the discoverer, which is, that a reward
given to industry tends to augment the general wealth. When
all the profit of discovery passes to the public treasury, that all
is generally very little.

7th. The seventh and last condition necessary to produce a
conformity between expectation and the laws, requires that the
laws should be literally followed. This condition depends partly
on the laws, and partly on the judges. If the laws do not har-
monize with the ideas of the people, if the code of a barbarous age
still prevails in an cra of civilization; the tribunals, little by
little, will drop old principles, and insensibly substitute new
maxims. Thence will result a kind of contest between laws that
are growing obsolete, and usage that is taking their place; and a
feeblencss in the cffcct of the laws upon expectation, will be a
consequence of this uncertainty.

The word znterpretation has a very different meaning in the
mouth of a lawyer, from what it has when employed by other
people. To interpret a passage in an author, is to bring out of it
the sense which the writer had in his mind; to interpret a law,
in the sense at least of the Roman lawyers, is often to get md of
the intention clearly and plainly expressed, and to substitute
some other for it, in the presumption that this new sense was the
actual intention of the legislator!

With such a method of proceeding, there is no security.
Where the law is fixed, though it be difficult, obscure, inco-
herent,—the citizen always has a chance to know it. It gives a
confused intimation, less efficacious than it might be, yct always
uscful ; we sce at least the limits of the evil it can do. But let
a judge dare to arrogate to himsclf the power of interpreting the
laws, that is to say, of substituting his will for that of the legis-
lator, and everything becomes arbitrary ; no one can foresce the
course which caprice will take. The question is no longer of the
actual evil; however great that may be, it is small in comparison
with the magnitude of possible consequences. The serpent, it is
said, cun pass his whole body wherever he can introduce his


156 © PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


head. As respects legal tyranny, it is this subtle head of which
we must take care, lest presently we sec it followed by all the
tortuous folds of abuse. It is not the evil only which we ought
to distrust,—it is the good even which springs frem such means.
Every usurpation of a power above the law, though useful in its
immediate effects, as regards the future ought to be an object of
terror. There are bounds, and even narrow bounds, to the good
which can result from such arbitrary proceedings, there are no
bounds to the possible evil, there are no bounds to the alarm.
An indistinct danger hovers over every head.

Without speaking of ignorance and caprice, how many facili-
ties does this arbitrary system afford to partiahty! The judge,
now conforming to the law, and now explaiming :t away, can
always decide a case to suit his own designs. He is always sure
of saving himself, either by the literal sense or the interpretation,
He is a charlatan who astonishes the spectators by making swect
and bitter run from the same cup.

One of the most eminent characteristics of the English tribunal
is their scrupulous fidelity in following the declared will of the
legislator; and in directing themselves a3 much as possible, by
former judgments, in that imperfect part of English legislation
which depends upon custom. This ngid observation of the laws
may have considerable inconveniences in an incomplete system,
but it 1s the true spint of liberty which inspires the Enghsh with
so much horror for what they call ex post facto laws.

All the conditions which constitute the goodness of the laws
have so intimate a connection that the fultilment of one supposes
the fulfilment of the others. Intrinsic utility; apparent utility ;
consistency ; simplicity, facility of being known; probability of
execution; all these qualitics may be reciprocally considered as
the cause or the effect of cach other.

If that obscure system called custom were no longer permitted,
and everything were reduced to written law; if the laws which
concern every membcr of the community were arranged in one
volume, and those which concern particular classes in little sepa-
rate collections; if the general code were universally dissemi-


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 157


nated; had it become, as among the Hebrews, a part of worship
and a manual of education; if a knowledge of it were required
as preliminary to the enjoyment of political rights;—the law
would then be truly known; every deviaticn from it would be
manifest ; every citizen would become its guardian; its violation
would not be a mystery, its explanation would not be a mono-
poly; and fraud and chicane would no longer be able to elude it.

It is further necessary that the style of the laws should be as
simple as their provisions; that it should make use of common
language; that 1ts forms should have no artificial complexity. If
the style of the code differed from that of other books, it should
be by a greater clearness, by a greater precision, by a greater
familiarity ; because it is designed for all understandings, and
particularly for the least enlightened class.

After having imagined such a system of laws, if we proceed to
compare it with what actually exists, the sentiment that results
is far from favourable to our institutions. But however bad
existing laws may be, let us distrust the declamations of chagrin
and the exaggerations of complaint. He who 1s so limited in his
views, or so passionate in his ideas of reform as to desire a
revolt, or to bring the established system into general contempt,
is unworthy to be heard at the tribunal of an enlightened public.
Who can enumerate the benefits of law, I do not say under the
best government, but under the worst? Are we not indebted to
it for all we have of security, property, industry, and abun-
dance? Are we not indebted to it for peace between citizens, for
the sanctity of marriage, and the swect perpetuity of families?
The good which the law produccs is universal; it is enjoyed
every day and every moment. Its evils are transient accidents.
But the good is not perecived; we enjoy it without referring it
to its true cause, as if it appertained to the ordinary course of
nature; while evils are vividly felt, and, in the description of
them, the suffering which is spread over a great space and a long
series of years, is accumulated by the imagination upon a single
moment. How many reasons we have to love the laws in spite
of their imperfections !


108


PART SECOND.


DISTRIBUTION OF PROPERTY.


CHAPTER I.
Titles which constitute Property.


: have already shown the reasons which induce the legislator
to sanction property. But hitherto we have viewed wealth only
in the mass;~it is now necessary to descend to details, to take
the individual objects which compose it, and to scek the prin-
ciples which ought to govern the distribution of property, at the
time when it presents itself to the law, to be appropriated to such
or such individuals. These principles are the same which we
have already laid down, viz., Subsistence, Abundance, Equality,
Security. Where they agree, the decision is easy; when they
differ, we must learn to distinguish where the preference should
be given.

I. Actua PossEsston.—Actual possession is a title to pro-
perty which precedes all others, and may hold the place of them.
It will always be good against every man who has no other to
oppose to it. Arbitrarily to take away from him who has, for
the sake of giving to lam who has not, is tu create a Joss on one
side and a gain on the other. But, first, the value of the rcsult-
ing pleasure will not be equal to the amount of tho resulting
pain; second, such an act of violence, by its attack upon security,
will spread alarm among all proprietors. It appears, then, that
actual possession is a title founded upon good of the first order,
and good of the second order.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 159


What is called the right of the first occupant, or of original
discovery, amounts to the same thing. When the right of pro-
perty is awarded to the first occupant,—Ist. He is spared the
pain of disappointment, the pain he would have felt at seeing
himsclf deprived of a thing of which he had been the first to take
possession. 2nd. The contests are prevented which might take
place between the first occupant and a succession of competitors
for the possession. 3rd. Ceitain enjoyments are produced, which
otherwise would have had no existence; for the first occupant,
if he had no mght of possession, dreading to lose what he had
found, would not dare to enjoy it openly, for fear of betraying
himself; and whatcver he could not instantly consume would be
valueless to him. 4th. The enjoyment thus bestowed upon a
discoverer is « spur to the industry of others, who will be en-
couraged to seck like enjoyments for themselves; and these
individual acquisitions will result in gencral wealth. Sth. If
unappropriated things did not belong to the first occupant, they
would always be the prey of the strongest, and the weak would
be for ever oppressed.

All these reasons do not present themselves distinctly to men’s
minds; but they are perccived in a confused manner, as it were
instinctively. Such, they say, is the decree of reason, equity,
and justice. These words, which everybody repeats and nobody
explains, express nothing but a sentiment of approbation; but
this approbation, founded upon solid reasons, acquires a new
force when distinctly supported upon the principle of utility.

The title of original occupation formed the primitive foundation
of property. It will still serve as regards islands newly risen
from the waters, or lands newly discovered, saving the right of
government, whieh 1s 2 peculiar meident of sovereignty.

II. Ancient Possrsston rn Goop Farru.—Possession, after a
certain period fixed by the law, ought to prevail over all other
titles. Ifyou have suffered that period to elapse without putting
in a claim, it is a proof, either that you were ignorant of the
existence of your right, or that you had no intention to avail
yourself of it. In these two cases there is no expectation on


160 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


your part, no desire to gain possession; and on my part there
is an expectation and a desire to preserve it. To leave the
possession with me will not be contrary to security ; but it will
be an attack upon security to transfer the possession to you, for
it will give inquictude to all possessors who are obliged to rely
for their title upon ancient posscssion in good faith.

But what length of time is necessary to produce this displace-
ment of expectation ? or, in other words, what period is necessary
to legitimate property in the hands of a possessor, and to extin-
guish every opposite title? To this inquiry, no exact answer
can be given. It is necessary to draw at hazard the line of
demarcation, according to the kind and value of the property in
question. If this linc does not always prevent the pain of dis-
appointment among those actually interested, it will at Icast
yrevent all evil of the second order. The law informs me that
if during one year, ten years, or twenty years, I neglect to claim
my right, the loss of that right will be the result of my negligence.
This threat, the effects of which I can prevent, is not calculated
to disturb my security.

I suppose that the possession is in good faith, that is, that the
possessor belicves himself to have a title If not so, to confirm
it would not be to favour security, but to reward crime. The
age of Nestor ought not to be sufficient to insure to the fraudulent
usurper the wages and the pay of his iniquity. Why should
there be a time when the malefactor can become tranquil? Why
should he enjoy the fruits of his offence under the protection of
the laws he has violated ?

With respect to heirs, a distinction must be taken. Are they
possessors in good faith, believing themselves to have a title?
The same reasons can then be alleged in their behalf as in behalf
of the former proprietor, and they have the possession beside,
which inclines the balance in their fuvour. Arc they possessors
in bad faith, as their ancestor was? Then they are his accom-
plices, and impunity ought never to become the privilege of
fraud.

This second title is what is commonly called Prescription.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 161


The reasons on which it is founded are the prevention of dis-
appointment and the general security of proprietors.

III. Possession oF THE ConTENTs AND Propucr or LaNnD.—
The property of a field includes everything which the field
contains, and everything which it produces. We understand by
contents everything beneath the surface, such as mines and
quarrics ; by produce, everything that bclongs to the vegetable
kingdom. All possible reasons,—security, subsistence, the aug-
mentation of gencral wealth, the good of peace,—combine to give
this extent to the right of property in land.

IV. Possession oF wat Lanp suPPoRTS, AND OF WHAT IT
RECEIVES.—If my land has supported animals, it is to me that
they owe thcir sustenance. Their existence would be a loss to
me if the possession of the animals themselves did not secure
me anindemnity. If the law gave them to another it would be
a pure loss on my part and a pure gain on his—an arrangement
as contrary to equality as to secunty. It would then become
my interest to diminish their number and to prevent their multi-
plication, which would be manifestly to the detriment of the
general wealth.

If chance has thrown upon land things which have not yet
received the stamp of property, or which have lost the impress
of it, as a whale driven on shore by a storm, the scattered frag-
ments of a wreck, or trees torn up by the roots, such things ought
to belong to the owner of the land. The reason of this prefer-
ence is, that he is so situated as to derive a profit from them
without any individual being subjected to a loss; tney cannot be
taken from him without occasioning a pain of disappoimtment,
and finally, no other person can take them without occupying his
land and trespassing upon his rights. He has all the reasons of
a first occupant in his favour.

VY. Possession or apdsaceNT Lanps.—If water which has
covered unappropriated land leaves it, to whom shall the new
land belong? ‘There arc many reasons for giving it to the pro-
prietors of the adjacent lands. Ist. They only can occupy it
without trespassing upon the property of others. 2nd. They


VI. AMELIORATIONS OF ONE'S OWN Prorenry.—If I have
applied my labour to one of those things which already belong
to me, my title acquires a new force. I have sowed and gathered
these vegetables, the produce of my land; I have taken care of
these animals, I have dug these roots, I have cut these trees and
shaped them. If I should have suffered at seeing these things
taken from me before I had bestowed any pains upon them, how
much more shall I suffer after the efforts of my industry have
given them a new value, and have fortified my attachment to them
tnd my expectation of keeping them? This fund for future
enjoyment, which labour constantly increases, could not exist
without security.

VII. Possrssron IN coop FaiTH wiTH AMELIORATION OF
ANOTHER S ProrertTy.—But, if I have applied my labour to a
thing belonging to another, treating it as if it belonged to me,
for example, if I have made cloth of your wool, to which of us
shall the manufacture belong? Before answering, it is necessdry
to ascertain the state of the facts. Is it in good faith or bad
faith that I have treated the thing as my property? If I have


® Such is the theory. In practice, many details will be required,
otherwise this concessicn will resemble that famous partition of the new
world, which a pope made between the Spanish and Portuguese. Sup-
pose the water quits a bay, which has many proprietors on its shores ;
shall the distribution be regulated according to the quantity of land
whioh each possesses, or to the extent of his shore? lines of demarce
‘tion will be necessary ; but it will not answer to wait till the event has
arrived, and the value of the land is known, for then all will entertain
hopes, which some only can realize. The event must be anticipated, and
expectation not yet formed will then be docile in the hands of the


The principle of caprice, without regard to the comparative
amount of pains and pleasures, gives everything to one of the
parties without paying any attention to the other. The principle
of utility anxious to reduce to the least term an inevitable incon-
venience, weighs the two interests, seeks the means of reconciling
them, and directs indemnities. It grants the thing itself to that
claimant who would suffer the greater loss if his demand were
refused, upon the condition, however, of giving to the other a
sufficient indemnification.

It is according to these same principles that we must answer
the same question in relation to things which become mixed and
confounded, as metal of yours and mine which has run together
in the melting-pot, or liquors of mine which have been poured
into the same recipient with yours. There are great debates
among the Roman jurists who shall have the whole; the
Sabintans wish to give the whole to me, the Proculetans wish to
give the whole to you. Which is right? Neither. Either
decision would still leave one of the partics a sufferer. A single
question might cut short all these debates—Which of the two,
in losing what belonged to him, would lose the most? Let him
have the possession, and let the other have an indemnity.

The English lawyers have cut this Gordian knot. They have
not troubled themselves to examine on which side would be the
greater injury, they make no account of good faith or of bad
faith, they makeno inquiry asto the gM@ater value or the stronger
expectation. They decide that the property of movable effects
shall always be given to the actual possescor, on condition,

however, of indemnifying the other claimant.


ist PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


VUI. Exrrozation or Mregs ux roe Lanp oF ANOTHER.
Your land has hidden treasures in its bosom; but, because you
lack the knowledge or the means, or have little confidence of
success, you do not dare to undertake the enterprise of mining,
and the treasures remain buried. If I, a stranger to your land,
have all the means of exploration which you want, and I wish to
undertake it, ought the right to be granted to me without your
consent? Why not? Under your hands these buried riches
are of no use to anybody; in mine they will acquire a great
value—thrown into circulation they will animate industry. What
wrong is done to you? You lose nothing. The surface, the
only thing which you put to any use, may still remain in the
same condition. But the law, attentive to the interests of all,
ought to secure you a share, greater or less, of the produce; for,
though this treasure might be of no actual value in your hands,
still you would have an expectation of sometime profiting by
it, and you ought not to be deprived of that chance without
“ndemnity.
Such is the English law. Under certain conditions, it allows
@ vein, discovered in one field, to be followed into another by any
one who is willing to undertake the enterprise.
IX. Liperry or Fisuine 1x Great Warters.—Great lakes,
great rivers, great bays, and especially the ocean, are not occupied
by exclusive proprietors. They are considered as belonging to
nohody, or rather as belonging to all.
There are no reasons tor limiting the ocean fisheries. The
saultiplication of most kinds of fish appears to be inexhaustible.
‘In this matter the prodigality, the magnificence of nature almost
surpasses conception. The indefatigable Leuwenhoek has eati-
~mated that the spawn of a single cod is capable of producing six
millions of codlings. What we can take or consume out of this
“immense magazine of food is absolutely nothing when compared
with the destruction produced by physical causes, which we- cam:
“neither lessen nor prevent. Man on the ocean, with his wherry
aad his nets, is but a foeble rival of the great rulers of the sea,
Sharks cause more ravages among the small fish than he dees;


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL Cone. 185


As to the fish of rivers, lakes, and small bays, the laws‘ take
precautions for their preservation, at once necessary and
efficacious.

Where there is no occasion for jealousy, and no fear that the
number of competitors will diminish the fund of wealth, it is
better to leave to every one the right of first occupancy, and t>
encourage every kind of labour that tends to augment the general
abundance.

X. Lrserry oF Huntine veon Unappropriatep Grounps.—It
is the same with unappropriated lands, uncultivated wastes and
savage forests. In those vast countries which are not peopled in
proportion to their extent, these unappropriated tracts are often
éf great size, and the right of hunting may be exercised without
limit. Man there is only a rival of the beasts of prey, and the
chase enlarges the fund of subsistence without injuring anybody.
. But in civilized societies, where agriculture has made great
progress, and where unappropriated lands bear only a small pro-
portion to those which have received the impress of possession,
there are many reasons against allowing this right of chase.

First inconvenience.—In those countries where the population
is numerous, the destruction of wild animals may go on faster
than their reproduction. Rendcr the chase free, and the animals
which are the object of it would sensibly diminish, and even be
annihilated. The sportsman would presently have as much
trouble to obtain a singie partridge as he now has to get a hun-
dred, and the price would be enhanced a hundred-fold. He
would suffer no loss himself, but he would furnish to society only
a handredth part the value which he now furnishes. In simpler
terms, the pleasure of eating partridges would be reduced a
hundred-fold,

Second inconvenience.—The chase, without being more produo-
tive than other labours, has unhappily more attractions. Sport
is combined with labour, idleness with exercise, and glory with
danger. The charm of a profession so well adapted to all the
natural tastes of man will draw into this pursuit a great number
of sompetitors ; by their competition they will reduce the profits


168 PRINCIPLRS OF THE CIVIL CODz.


of. this employment to a mere subsistence; and in general this
class of adventurers will be poor.

Third inconvenience.—The chase having particular seasons, there
will be intervals during which the huntsman will be unemployed.
He will not easily return from a wandering to a sedentary life,
from independence to subjection, and from s habit of idleness to
a habit of labour. Accustomed, like the gambler, to live upon
chances and hope, a small fixed income has few attractions for
him. The want and idleness of such a condition naturally lead to
crime.

Fourth tnconvenience.—The very exercise of this profession is
naturally fertile in offences. The quarrels, the lawsuits, the
prosecutions, the convictions, the imprisonments and other punish-
menta which it causes, are more than sufficient to counterbalance
its pleasures. The hunter, tired with vainly waiting for his prey
on the highways, secretly spies out the game in the neighbouring
enclosures. Does he think himself observed? He turns aside
and waits, for he is an adept in patience and stratagem. Does he
see no withesses? He respects boundaries no longer; he jumps
the ditches, he leaps the hedges, he devastates enclosures; and
his cupidity betraying him into imprudences, hoe gets himeelf into
perilous positions, whence he cannot escape without disaster or
crime. If hunting were permitted on the high roads, there
would be needed an army of guards to restrain the wanderings of
the hunters.

Lifth inconvenience.— If this right of chase, so little advan-
tageous when confined within such narrow limits, is still suffered
to exist, the civil and penal code will nced an assortment of laws
to limit its exercise and to punish its excesses. This multipli-
cation of laws is always an evil, because laws cannot be multiplied
without being weakened. Besides, the severity necessary to pre-
vent offences so easy and so attractive gives an odious character
to property, and places the opulent in a state of war with their
poor neighbours. The way to cut this matter short is not to
regulate the right, but to suppress it.

' The prohibitive law being once known, no expectations will be


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL, CODE. 167


formed of enjoying this privilege. Partridges will no more be
coveted than pullets, and even in the minds of the multitude
poaching will not be distinguished from theft.

It is true that at the present day popular ideas are in favour of
this right of hunting; but if a condescension is due to popular
ideas, it is only upon occasions when they have a great power,
and when there is little hope of changing them. Let pains be
taken to enlighten the people, to make the motives of the law
evident, to exhibit it as a means of peace and security, to show
that the exercise of this right reduces itself almost to nothing,
that the life of a hunter is miserable, that this ungrateful pro-
feasion constantly exposes him who follows it to the commission
of offences and his family to poverty and shame; and I dare to
affirm that popular ideas, pressed by the continuous and mild
force of reason, would presently assume a new direction.*

There are animals whose value does not compensate the damage
they do; such as foxes, wolves, bears, and all beasts of prey, the
enemies of the animals subject to man. So far from preserving,
it is an object to destroy them. One means for this end is, to
give all a right to destroy them, and a property in the beast when
slain, without regard to the ownership of the land. Every
hunter who attacks these hurtful animals ought to be considered
as employed by the police. But this exception ought to be ad-
mitted only in case of animals capable of much mischief.


* We may observe, that of the five inconveniences above enumerated
with which the right of free hunting is said tobe attended, the second,
third, and fourth resolve themselves into this, viz., that in a civilized
community, the business of hunting is a private loss and a publio incon-
venience. This being granted—and the fact is doubtless so— if by per-
mitting free hunting, that annihilation of wild game, which is described
as the first inconvenience, can be brought about, it will be a decided
benefit; and when hunting ceases for want of game, of course all the
evils which go to make up the inconveniences of its existence will dis-
‘appear with it. This is a view of the case which the author seems not
to have taken. That a right of free hunting would operate in thia way,
the example of Massachuestte clearly proves, a state in which game sad.
#portemen are equally rare, and game laws are woknownz.-—~-Tranelator. *


168 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


‘ CHAPTER II.
Title by Consent.


ir may happen that possessing a thing by a lawful title, we wish
to dispossess ourselves of it, and to abandon its enjoyment to
another. Shall such an arrangement be confirmed by the law ?
Doubtless it shall be. All the reasons which plead in favour
of the old proprietor change sides with the transfer, and then
plead in favour of the ncw one. Besides, the former proprietor
must have had some motive for abandoning his property. Motive
is pleasure, or equivalent; pleasure of friendship or of benevo-
lence, if the thing was given for nothing; pleasure of acquisition,
if it was a means of exchange; pleasure of security, if it was
given to ward off some evil; pleasure of reputation, if the object
was to acquire the esteem of others. It seems, then, that the
transfer must increase the enjoyment of the parties interested in
it. The acquirer stands in the place of the conferrer as to the
old advantages, and the conferrer acquires a new advantage. We
may then lay it down as a general maxim, that every altenation
emports advantage. A good of some sort is always the result
of it.

When the question is of an exchange, there are then two
alienations, of which each has its separate advantages. The
advantage for each of the contracting parties is, the difference
to him between the value of the thing he gives, and that of the
thing he acquires. In every transaction of this sort there are
two new masses of enjoyment. In this the good of commerce
consists.

In all the arts, there are many things which cannot be pro-
duced except by the concourse of a great number of workmen.
In all these cases the labour of an individual would have
no value, either for himself or for others, if it cou not be
exchanged.

TZ. Caszs In wuicn Excuanezs sHoutp se InvaLIp.—But
there are cases in which the law ought not to sanction exchanges,


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 169


and in which the interests of the parties ought to be regulated,
as if the bargain had not taken place; because, instead of being
advantageous, the exchange would be injurious to one of the
parties, or to the public. We may arrange all the causes which
invalidate exchanges under the nine following heads :—

Ist. Concealment.

2nd. Fraud.

3rd. Coercion.

4th. Subornation.

5th. Erroneous idea of legal obligation.

6th. Erroneous idea of value.

7th. Incapacity.

8th. Probable inconvenience to the public.

9th. Want of night on the part of the conferrer.

Ist. Concealment.—If the thing acquired proves of less value
than the acquirer had expected, he experiences regret, and feels
a pain of disappointment. If the value is not equal to what he
gave in exchange, instead of gaining, he has lost. It is true
that the other party has gaincd; but the good of gain is not
equivalent to the evil of loss. I have paid ten guineas for a
horse, which would be worth that sum if he were sound; but,
as his wind is broken, he is worth but two guineas. The seller
has gained eight guineas, which I have lost; but, if the interests .
of the two parties be weighed together, the trade, on the whole,
is not productive of pleasure, but the contrary.

But if at the time of the sale this inferiority of value was
unknown to the former proprietor, why should the exchange be
void ? Why oblige him to make a disadvantageous re-exchange?
The loss must fall on somebody, and why on him more than
another? And cven suppose that he knew the circumstance
which lessened the value of the thing, was he obliged to com-
municate it without being asked ?

The two following questions arise in every case of invalidity
resulting from concealment :—Did the seller know of the exist-
ence of the fault? Was it a case in which he ought to have
told of it? The solution of these questions demands too many


170 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


details and researches to find a place here, especially as an answer
cannot be given which embraces every case, but divers modifica-
tions are necessary, according to the different kinds of things.

2nd. Fraud.—This case is simpler than the preceding. A
fraudulent acquisition ought never to be permitted when it can be
hindered. Fraud is an offence which borders upon theft. You
asked the seller if the horse was broken-winded; he replied in
the negative, knowing the contrary. To sanction such a trade
would be to reward crime. Add the reason in the preceding
case, namely, an evil to the purchaser greater than the good to
‘ the seller, and it will then appear that this cause of invalidity is
well founded.

3rd. It is the same with coercion. A seller whose horse 18
worth but two guincas has constrained you, by violence and
threats, to give ten guineas. Suppose you would have been
willing to pay two guineas, the surplus is so much gained by an
offence. It is true that this loss was an advantage to you in
comparison with the evil you were threatened with in case of
refusal ; but neither this comparative advantage, nor the gain of
the delinquent, can counterbalance the evil of the offence.

4th. It is the same with sudornation; by which I understand
the price of a service, which consists in committing an offence, as
money promised to a man to engage him to give a false depost-
tion. There are two advantages in such a bargain, that of the
suborned and that of the suborner; but these two advantages
are not at all equal to the evil of the offence.

It may be observed in passing, that in the case of fraud, of undue
coercion, and of subornation, the law, not content with annulling
the act, opposes to it a stronger counter-weight of punishment.

5th. Erroneous Idea of Legal Obligation.—You have delivered
your horse to a man, under an erroneous idea that your manager
had sold him. Or you have delivered your horse to a man under
the impression that he was authorized by the government to take
him for the use of the state; in one word, you imagine yourself
obliged to sell, when no such obligation exists. If after the
digcovery of the mistake the alienation should be confirmed, the


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. “191


buyer would make an unexpected gain, while the seller would
experience an unexpected loss. But we have seen that the
good of gain is not equivalent to the evil of loss. Besides, this
case may be classed with that of coercion.

6th. Erroneous Idea of Value.—If, in alienating a thing, I was
ignorant of a circumstance which tended to augment its value,
upon discovering my error, I shall experience the regret of loss.
But is that a reason for invalidating the contract? On the one
side, if such causes of nullity are admitted without restriction,
there is the risk of a great discouragement to exchanges ; for what
security of acquisition do I have, if the seller can break the
trade, under the pretence of not knowing what he was about?
On the other side, there would be the pain of a very lively
regret, if after having sold a diamond as a morsel of crystal,
there were no means of recovering it. To hold an equal balance
between the parties, we must conform to the diversity of circum-
stances and of things. We must always examine if the igno-
rance of the seller were not the result of negligence; and even
should the case require the avoidance of the sale, it will always
be necessary to provide for the security of the person whose
interest it would be to have the bargain confirmed.

But it may be that a trade exempt from all these faults turns
out to be disadvantageous. You bought a horse for the sake of
@ journey which you do not make. When you are ready to set
out, the horse falls sick and dies. You set out, and the horse
throws you and breaks your leg. You mount the horse, but only
to go on the highway to rob. The fancy which made you buy
him was transitory, and, being past, leaves you a loser. These
eventual cases may be multiplied indefinitely,—cases in which a
thing acquired on account of its value becomes useless, or onerous,
or fatal to the acquirer, or to another. Are not these exceptions
to the axiom that every exchange imports an advantage? Are
not these reasonable grounds for invalidating the contract ?

No, All these unfavourable events are only matters of acci-
dent, posterior to the sale. The common case is, that the thing
is worth what it costs. The total advantage of useful exchanges


172 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


is far more than equivalent to the total disadvantage of such
as ate unfavourable. The gains of commere are greater than the
losses, since the world is now richer than in the savage state.
Alienations in general ought, then, to be maintaincd. But to
annul alienations, on account of accidental losses, would be to
interdict alienations in general; for nobody would wish to sell,
nobody would wish to buy, if the transaction could be annulled
at any moment, on account of some subsequent event impossible
to be foreseen or prevented.

7th. There are cases in which the legislator foresees the evil of
conventions, and prohibits them beforehand. It is thus that in
many countries prodigals are incapacitated to contract, that is, all
contracts with them are declared void. But the danger of such
contracts, that is, the disposition which rendcrs the prodigal
unfit to manage his own affairs, is always previously made known.
Every one has notice, or at least might have, of the incapacity
which the guardian hand of justice has imposed.

In all countries there has been established an incapacity to con-
tract in the two analogous cascs of infancy and madness; I say
analogous, for what a child is, for a period which may be suffi-
ciently well determined, though always by a demarcation more or
less arbitrary, the madman is, for a time indeterminate, or per-
petual. The reasons arc the same as in the preceding case.
Minors and persons of unsound understanding are, by their con-
dition, either ignorant, rash, or prodigal. This is presumed by a
general induction, which docs not necd to be sustained by par-
ticular proofs.

It is plain that in these three cases the incapacity ought to ex-
tend only to-things of a certain importance. To apply them to
little objects of daily consumption would be condemning these
three classes to die of famine.

8th. The law sometimes invalidates contracts in consideration of
some public inconvenience likely to result from them,

I have a landed property situated on the boundary of the stats:
If acquired by the neighbouring power it might become the seat
of hostile intrigues, or might favour preparations dangerous to my


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 178


country. Whether I have or have not such an intent, the law
ought to provide for the public interest. It ought to prevent the
evil by refusing beforehand to give a sanction to such sales.*

The restraints which it has been thought fit to put upon the
sale of drugs which operate as poisons may be referred to this
head. It would be the same of a prohibition to sell murderous
arms, such as stilettoes, so frequently used in Italy in the most
common quarrels.

It is to this same motive, well or ill founded, that we ought to
refer all prohibitions relative to the introduction or sale of certain
species of merchandise.t

In most of these cases the custom is to say, that the contract 1s
void in itself. We need but open the law books to see what
nonsense has been gravely uttered upon this subject, and to dis-
cover into what absurdities the lawyers have fallen, from not
having seized upon the sole cause of the invalidity of contracts
made under these circumstances, to wit, that they are attended
by more evil than good.

Having said that these contracts are void in themselves to be
consistent, it seems to follow that they ought not to have any
effect; that they ought to be annihilated; and that no trace of
them should be left. However, there are abundance of cases in
which it will be sufficient to modify them, and to correct their
inequality by compensations without altering the substance of
the original contract.

No contract 1s vv.u in 1tself; none is valid in ivself. It is the
law which, in either case, grants or refuses validity. But for


* Most nations, perhaps without thinking of it, have obviated this
danger by a general law, which forbids strangers to acquire lands. But
that is going too far. The reason of the prohibition does not extend
beyond the particular case above mentioned. The stranger who wishes
to buy immoveable property, gives the country of his choice the most
unequivocal proof of his affection, and the surest pledge of good conduct.
Even if we look no further than to finance, the state cannot but gain by
such purchases.

+ Under this head fall the Jaws prohibiting the traffic in ardent spirits.
—Tranalator.


174 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


granting or refusing it, reasons are necessary. Equivocal gene-
ration is banished from sound physiology; perhaps some day it
will be banished from jurisprudence. This votd in ttse/f is pre-
cisely an equivocal generation.

IIT. Ossractes TO THE ALIENATION oF Lanp.—To say that
the power of alienation is useful, is also to say that all arrange-
ments which tend to prevent it are generally pernicious.

It is with respect to immoveables that this inconsistency has
chiefly been displayed, whether by entails or by inalicnable foun-
dations, described by English lawyers as grants in mortmain;
yet, besides the general reasons already given, there are some
particular ones in favour of the free alienation of land.

ist. He who seeks to get rid of a landed estate shows suffi-
ciently that it is not for his advantage to keep it. He either
cannot or will not spend anything for its improvement; indeed,
it often happens that he cannot help sac cing its future value
to satisfy a present want. On the contrary, he who seeks to
acquire an cstate certainly has no intention of diminishing its
value, and he probably means to increase it.

It is true that the same capital which would be employed in
the improvement of a lar ~ ~ estate might otherwise be employed
in commerce; but, althou,. the advantage of these two employ-
ments might be the same to an individual, they would not be the
same to the state. That portion of wealth which is applied to
agriculture is more fixed, that which is applied to commerce is
more fugitive. The first is immoveable; the second can be trans-
ported at the pleasure of the proprietor.

2nd. By mortgaging an immoveable estate a productive capital
may be raised. Thus one portion of the value of a landed estate
may be employed in the improvement of the other portion of it ;
an enterprise which, perhaps, without that resource, could not be
undertaken. To prevent the free alienation of lands is to diminish
the productive capital which might be employed in their improve-
ment nearly to the amount of their saleable value; for a thing
cannot be mortgaged unless it can be alienated.

It is true that we speak here only of loans; and there is no


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. ATS


new capital created by a loan. This same capital, in other hands,
might receive a destination not less useful; but it is to be observed
that the more means there are for employing capital the greater
amount of it will come into a country. That which comes from
abroad forms a net addition to the domestic supply.

These restrainsts upon alienation, though condemned by the
soundest notions of political economy, are to be found almost
everywhere. It is true that they have gradually diminished in
proportion as governments have better understood the interests of
agriculture and commerce; but there are still three causes which
operate to maintain them.

The first is, the desire of preventing prodigality. But to ob-
viate this evil, it is not necessary to prevent the sale of lands;
it will be sufficient to protect their valuc by not leaving it at the
disposal of the prodigal.

The second is, family pride, joined to that agrecable illusion,
which paints the successive existence of our descendants as the
prolongation of our own. The imagination is not satisfied with
the idea of leaving our children the same value; they must
possess the same lands, the same houses, the same natural objects.
This continuity of possession appears a continuity of enjoyment,
and gives support to a feeling chimerical and absurd.

The third cause is, the love of power, the desire of ruling after
death. The preceding motive supposcs a posterity, this does not.
It is to this cause that we must refer all foundations, both those
which have an object of utility, well or ill understood, and those
of pure fancy.

If a foundation consists merely in the distribution of benefits
without imposing any conditions, and without exacting any service,
it appears sufficiently innocent, and its continuation is not an evil.
We must except foundations for distributing alms without dis-
tinction and discernment, which serve merely to promote men-
dicity and idleness. The best of these establishments are those
in favour of such poor as were once of a better condition. They
are a means of providing for such unfortunates a more liberal
support than public charity would allow.


176 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


As to foundations, the benefits of which are not granted except
on the fulfilment of certain duties, such as convents, colleges, and
churches, their tendency is useful, indifferent, or injurious,
according to the nature of the services exacted.

It isa singularity which merits observation, that in general,
these foundations, these particular laws, which the individual
establishes by the indulgence of the sovercign, have been treated
with more respect than the public laws, which are immediately
derived from the sovereign himself. When a legislator has
wished to tie up the hands of posterity, such a proceeding has
appeared absurd or futile. The obscurest individuals have arro-
gated that privilege, and no one has dared to attack it!

It would seem that lands Icft to corporations, convents, and
churches, must necessarily decline in value. Indiffcrent towards
successors, who are not allicd to him by blood, each transient
proprietor will be apt to exhaust as much as he can a possession
which he enjoys only for life; and, in old age especially, to
neglect the necessary repairs. This sometimes happens. We
must be just, however, to religious communitics. They are oftener
distinguished for good than for bad economy. If their situation
inflames cupidity and avarice, it represses pride and prodigality.
If there are causes which nourish among them a spirit of selfish-
ness, there are others which combat that sentiment by creating
an esprit de corps, a warm attachment to the profession to which
they belong.

It is scarcely necessary to mection public rrcrerty,—that is,
those things the use of which is public, such as roads, churches,
markets. To fulfil their end, it is necessary that their duration
should be indefinite, with provision, hewever, for permitting
those successive changes which circumstances may require.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 177


CHAPTER Iii.
Title by Succession.


Arter the decease of an individual, how ought his goods to be
disposed of ¢

In framing a law of succession, the legislator ought to have
three objects in view:—I1st, Provision for the subsistence of the
rising generation; 2nd, Prevention of disappointment; 3rd, The
equalization of fortunes.

Man is not a solitary being. With a very small number of
exceptions, every man has about hima circle of companions, more
or less extensive, who are united to him by the ties of kindred or
of marriage, by friendship or by scrvices, and who share with him,
in fact, the enjoyment of those goods which zn Jaw belong to him
exclusively. His fortune is commonly the sole fund of subsistence
on which many others depend. To prevent the calamities of which
they would be the victims, if death in taking away their friend
took from them at the same time the supplies which they draw
from his fortune, it is necessary to know who habitually enjoy
these supplies, and in what proportions. Now, since these are
facts which it would be impossible to establish by direct proofs,
without becoming involved in embarrassing procedures and infinite
contests, it is necessary to resort to general presumptions, as the
only basis upon which a decision can be established. The share
which each survivor was accustomed to enjoy in the property of
the deceased may be presumed from the degree of affection which
ought to have subsisted between them ; and this degree of affection
may be presumed from nearness of relationship.

\ Ifrelationship were the only consideration, the law of succession
would be very simple. In the jirs¢ degree of relationship are all
those who are connected with you without any other person
intervening: your wife, or husband, your father, your mother,
and your children. In the second degree are those whose con-
nection with you demands the intervention of a single person, or
the joint intervention of two persons: your grandfathers, your


176 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


grandmothers, your brothers, your sisters, and your grandchildren.

In the ¢hird degree are those whose relationship supposes two

intermediate generations: your great-grandfathers, your great-

grandmothers, your great-grandchildren, your uncles and aunts,
‘ nephews and nieces.

But this arrangement, though quite perfect as respects simpli-
city and regularity, will not answer the political and moral ends
te be aimed at by the legislator. It docs not correspond to the
degree of affection of which, if employed, it must be taken as a
presumptive proof; and it will not accomplish the principal object,
which is to provide for the wants of the rising generation. Let
us leave, then, this genealogical arrangement, and adopt one
founded upon utility. It consists in always giving to the descend-
sng line, however long, a preference over the ascending and composite
Lanes.

Still, it must happen that the presumptions of affection or of
‘want, which serve as a foundation to these rules, will often fail
in practice ; and that, in consequence, the rules themselves will
not accomplish their end. But the power of making a will offers,
as we shall see, an efficacious remedy for the imperfections of the
general law; and that is the principal reason for sanctioning such
& power.

These are the general principles; but how ought they to be
applied in detail, when it is necessary to decide between several
<laimants ?

The model of a law will serve instead of a great number of
discussions.

ArtrctE I. No distinction between the sexes; what ts said oy
one extends to the other. The portion of the one shall be alwaye
equal to that of the other.

Reason.—Good of equality. If there were any difference, it
ought to be in favour of the feebler—in favour of women—who
have more wants and fewer means of acquisition, or of employing
profitably what they possess. But the stronger have had all the
preferences. Why? Because the stronger have made the laws.

Axnriciz II. After the husband's death, the widow shall retain


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 1%9


half the common property ; unless some different arrangement was
made by the marriage contract.

Anticts III. The other half shall be distributed among the
children tn equal proportions.

Reasons.—1st. Equality of affection on the part of the father.
2nd. Equality of co-occupation on the part of the children. 8rd.
Equality of wants. 4th. Equality of all imaginable reasons on
one side and the other. Differences of age, of temperament, of
talent, and of strength, may produce some differences in point of
wants; but it is not possible for the law to appreciate them.
The father must provide for them by the exercise of his right to
make a will.

Articte lV. If a child dies before his father, leaving chtldren,
his share shall be divided among his children in equal proportions ;
and so of all descendants.

This distribution by stocks is preferred to that by heads, for
two reasons. Ist. To prevent disappointment. That the part
of the eldest should be diminished by the birth of each younger
child is a natural event, to which his expectation will conform
itself. But in general, when one of the children begins to exer-
cise his reproductive faculty, that of the father is almost at its
end. At that time the children suppose themselves arrived at
the point where the diminution of their respective portions ceases.
But if each grandson and granddaughter were to produce the same
diminution which each son and daughter had produced, the
diminution would have no bounds. There would no longer be
any certainty according to which they could arrange their plan
of life. 2nd. The grandchildren have, as an immediate resource,
the property of their deceased father. Their habit of co-occupation,
detached from their grandfather, must have been exercised in
preference, if not exclusively, upon the fund of their father’s
industry. Add to this, that they have in the property of their
mother and her relations a resource, in which the other descend-
ants of their grandfather have no share.

Anricie V. If there are no descendants, the property shall go
tn common to the father and mother.


180 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


Why to descendants before all others? Ist. Supertority of
affection. Every other arrangement would be contrary to the
inclination of the father. We love those better who depend
upon us than those upon whom we depend. It is sweeter to
govern than to obey. 2nd. Superiority of need. It is certain
that our children cannot exist without us, or some one who fills
our place. It is probable that our parents may exist without
us, as they did exist before us.

Why should the succession puss to the father and mother,
rather than to the brothers and sisters? Ist. The relationship
being more immediate, is a presumption of superior affection.
2nd. It is arecompense for services rendered, or rather an indem-
nity for the pains and expense of educating the child. The
relationship between me and my brother consists in our common
relationship to the same fathcr and mother; and the reason why
he is more dear to me than another companion with whom I have
passed an equal portion of my life 1s, his being dearer to those
who have my first affections. It is not certain that I am indebted
to him for anything, but it is certain that I am indebted to them
for everything. Thus, whenever the stronger title of my own
children does not intervene, I owe compensations to my parents,
to which a brother can have no claim.

Anticte VI. If one of the parents rs dead, the share of the
deceased shall go to his or her descendants, in the same way as tt
would have gone, had there been any, to the descendants of the
deceased child.

In poor families, whose only property is household furniture,
it will be better that the whole should go to the individual sur-
vivor, whether father or mother, with the condition of providing
for the support of the children. The expense of the sale and
the dispersion of the property would ruin the survivor, while the
parts, too small to serve as capital, would soon be dissipated.

Articte VII. Fasling such descendants, the whole property shall
go to the surviving parent.

Anricte VIII. If both father and mother are dead, the pro-
_perty, shall be divided as above among their descendants.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODz. 18]


Anticta JX. But the part of the half-blood shall be only half
as great as the part of the whole-blood.

Reason.—Superiority of affection. Two ties attach me to my
brother, but only one to my half-brother.

Articre X. In defect of relatrons wn these degrees, the property
shall go into the public treasury.

Argticte XI. Under condition, however, of distributing the
interest wn the form of life annurties among all the relations in
the ascending line in equal shares.

The tenth and eleventh articles may be adopted or not, accord-
ing to the condition of the public revenue; but I cannot dis-
cover any solid objection against this fiscal resource. It may be
said that the collateral relations who will be excluded by this
arrangement may be in want. But this is too casual an accident
to found a general rule upon. They have, as a natural resource,
the property of their respective parents, and they do not form
their expectations or fix their plan of life upon this basis. On
the part even of an uncle, the expectation of inheriting from a
nephew can be but feeble ; and a positive law will be enough to
extinguish it without violence, or to prevent it beirg formed.
The uncle has not the titles of the father and grandfather. It
is true that, in case of their death, the uncle may have taken
their place, and acted as a father to his nephew. This 1s a
circumstance which merits the attention of the Icgislator. The
power of making a will would be a remedy for cases of this sort ;
but that mcans of obviating the inconveniences of the general
law would be unavailing when the nephew died at an age too
tender to allow the exercise of that power. If, then, it were
determined to soften this fiscal regulation, the first exception
should be in favour of the uncle, whether as regards the prin-
cipal, or only the interest of the property.

Anriote XII. To effect a division among the heirs, the property
shall be sold at auction; reserving to them the right of making
such other arrangement as they may think proper.

This is the only means of preventing a community of goods,
an arrangement the pernicious consequences of which will pre-


182 PRINCIPLES OF THE CrviL CODE.


gently be pointed out. Such of the property as may have a
value of affection, will find its true price from the competition
of the heirs, and will turn to the common advantage, without
producing those disputcs which occasion durable animosities in
familics.

Articte XIII. Until sale and division be made, the whole pro-
verty shall be intrusted to the keeping of the oldest male hetr of full
age; reserving to the court to make other arrangements, through
apprehension of bad management, specified on the hearing of the case.

‘Women in general are less fit for affairs of money and business
than men. But an individual woman may have a superior apti-
tude; if pointed out by the general wish of the relations, she
ought to have the preference.

ArticLte XIV. In defect of a male heir of full age, the property
shall be intrusted to the guardian of the oldest male heir, reserving
@ discretionary power as in the preceding article.

AxntictE XV. The succession which falls to the treasury, for want
of natural heirs, shall also be sold at auction.

The government is incapable of managing specific property to
advantage. The administration of such property belonging to a
government costs much, brings in little, and is certain to undergo
a rapid deterioration. This is a truth which Adam Smith has
demonstrated.

This project of a law appears to be simple, precise, and easy to
be comprehended ; it gives little room for fraud, chicanery, or
diversity of interpretation; and finally, it is analogous to the
affections of the human heart, to those habitual inclinations which
spring from the social relations; and therefore it is likely to con-
ciliate both the affections of those who judge by sentiment and
the esteem of those who appreciate reasons.

Those who accuse this plan of being too simple, and who ieclase
that at this rate the law would no longer be a science, may find
wherewith to be satisfied, astonished, and delighted, in the laby-
rinth of the English common law of successions.

To give the reader an idea of the English common law on this
subject, it would be necessary to begin with a dictionary of new


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 183


words; and presently, when they should discover the absurdities,
the subtilties, the crueltics, the frauds, with which that system
abounds, they would imagine that I had written a satire, and that
I wished to insult a nation otherwise so justly renowned for its
wisdom.

It is to be observed, however, that the right of making a will
reduces this evil within tolerably narrow limits. It is only the
succession to the property of intestates which is obliged to pass
through the crooked roads of the common law. Wills in that
country may be compared to arbitrary pardons, which correct the
severity of penal laws.


CHAPTER IV.


Testaments.


1st. Tre law, not knowing individuals, cannot accommodate itself
to the diversity of their wants. All that can be exacted from it
is to offer the best possible chance of satisfying those wants. It
is for each proprietor, who can and who ought to know the parti-
cular circumstances in which those who depend upon him will be
placed at his death, to correct the imperfections of the law in all
those cases which it cannot foresee. The power of making a will
is an instrument intrusted to the hands of individuals, to prevent
private calamities.

2nd. The same power may be considered as an instrument of
authority, intrusted to individuals for the encouragement of virtue
in their families and the repression of vice. It is true that this
means may be cmployed for the contrary purpose ; but, fortunately,
such cases are an exception. The interest of each member of a
family is, that the conduct of every other member should be con-
formable to virtue, that is, to general utility. The passions may
occasion accidental deviations ; but the law must be arranged in
conformity to the ordinary course of things. Virtue is the domi-
nant regulator of society ; even vicious parents are as jealous as
others of the honour and the reputation of their children. A man


184 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


little scrupulous in his own conduct would be shocked to have his
secret practices disclosed to his family; at home he is still the
apostle of probity; he disregards it in his own behaviour, but he
wishes it in those about him. In this point of view, every pro-
prietor is entitled to the confidence of the law. Clothed with the
power of making a will, which is a branch of penal and remu-
nerative legislation, he may be considered as a magistrate appointed
to preserve good order in that little state called a family. This
magistrate may be guilty of partiality and injustice; and as heis
restrained in the exercise of his powcr neither by publicity nor
by responsibility, he would seem to be very likely to abuse it.
But that danger is more than counterbalanced by the ties of
interest and affection, which put his inclination in accord with his
duty. His natural attachment to his children and his relatives
is as secure a pledge for his good ccnduct as any that can be
obtained for that of the political magistrate; to such a degree
that, all things considered, the authority of this non-commissioned
magistrate, besides being absolutely necessary to children of
tender age, will oftener be found salutary than hurtful, even to
adults.

3rd. The power of making a will is advantageous under
another aspect, as a means of governing—not for the good of
those who obey, as in the preceding article, but for the good of
him who commands. In this way the power of the present
generation is extended over a portion of the future, and to a
ecrtain extent the wealth of cach proprietor is doubled. By
means ofan order not payable till after his dcath, he procures for
himself an infinity of advantages beyond what his actual means
would furnish. By continuing the submission of children
beyond the term of minority, the indemnity for paternal cares is
increased, and an additional assurance against ingratitude is
secured to the father; and though it would be agreeable to think
that such precautions are superfluous, yet when we recollect the
infirmities of old age, we must be satisfied that it is necessary
not to deprive it of this counterpoise of factitious attractions,
dn the rapid descent of life, every support on which man can


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 185


lean should be left untouched, and it is well that interest serve
as a monitor to duty.

Ingratitude on the part of children and contempt for old age
are not common vices in civilized society; but we must recollect
that everywhere, more or less, the power of making a will exists.
Are these vices most frequent where this power is most limited ?
We might decide the question by observing what passes in poor
families, where there is but little to give in legacies; but even
that method of judging would be deceptive, for the influence of
this power, established in society by the laws, tends to form
general manners, and general manners thus formed determine the
sentiments of individuals. This power given to fathers renders
the paternal authority more respectable, and those fathers whose
indigence does not permit them to exercise it, unconsciously
profit by the general habit of submission to which it has given
rise.

But in making the father a magistrate we must take care not
to make him a tyrant. If children have their faults he may have
his, and though we give him the power of correction, it does not
follow that he should have the nght to punish by starvation.
The institution called in France a légitime, by which each child
is protected against a total disinheritance, is a convenient medium
between domestic anarchy and paternal tyranny. Even this pro-
vision the father should have the power of taking away, for
causes specified in the law and judicially proved.

There is still another question. In default of natural heirs,
shall the proprictor have the right of leaving his property to
whomsoever he chooses, either to distant relations or to strangers ?
in that case the fiscal resource spoken of in the preceding chapter
will be greatly diminished, it will apply only to the case of
intestates. Here the reasons of utility divide. We must
endeavour to find some middle course.

It may be said that, in default of kin, the services of strangers
are necessary to a man, and his attachment to them almost the
same as to relations. He should have the means of cultivating
the hopes and rewarding the care of a faithful servant, and of


186 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


softening the regrets of a friend who has watched at his side, not
to speak of the woman who, but for the omission of a ceremony,
would be called his widow, and the orphans whom all the world
but the legislator regard as his children.

Again, if to enrich the public treasury you deprive a man of
the power of leaving his property to his friends, do you not force
him to spend it all upon himself? If he has no control over his
capital from the moment of his death, he will be tempted to con-
vert his property into a life annuity. It is to encourage him to
be a spendthrift, and almost to make a law against economy.

These reasons are, doubtless, more weighty than any consi-
deration of gain to the public treasury. We ought to leave the
proprietor who has no near relations the right of disposing of at
least half his property by will, while the other half is reserved
for the public; and to be contented with less would, perhaps,
in this case, be a means of getting more. Besides, it is a matter
of very great importance not to attack the principle which allows
every one to dispose of his property after death ; and not to create
a class of proprietors who will regard themselves as inferior to
others, on account of the legal incapacity attached to one-half of
their fortune.

All that has been said of alienations between the living, applies
also to testaments. On most of those points we shall be instructed
by the conformity between contracts and testaments, and some-
times by contrast.

The same causes of nullity which apply to alienations between
the living apply to testaments, except that in the place of con-
cealment on the part of the receiver, it is necessary to substitute
erroneous supposition on the part of the testator. For example,
I leave a certain legacy to Titius, who is married to my daughter,
believing that marriage to be lawful, and not knowing the bad
faith of Titius, who, before marrying my daughter, had contracted
another marriage, still subsisting.

Testaments are exposed to an unfortunate dilemma. Do we
admit their validity when made upon adeath-bed? The testator
is exposed to coercion and to fraud. Do we exact formalities


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 187


incompatible with this indulgence? We deprive the dying man
of his power over the conduct of others, at the very moment when
he needs it most. Barbarous heirs may torment him, in order to
hasten or make sure of the advantage of a will executed in form.
A dying man, who has no power to give or to take away, is no
longer to be feared. A great many details will be necessary to
reduce all these opposite dangers to their lowest amount.


CHAPTER V.
Rights to Services. Methods of acquiring them.


Arter things, services remain to be distributed, a kind of property
sometimes confounded with things, and sometimes appearing
‘ander a distinct form.

There are as many kinds of services as there are ways in which
man can be useful to man, either in procuring him some good, or
preserving him from some evil.

In that exchange of services which constitute social intercourse
some services are free, and others are compulsive. Those which
are exacted by the laws constitute nights and obligations. If I
have a right to the services of another, that other is in a state of

-obligation with respect to me; these two terms are correlative.
At first, all services were free. It was only by degrees that
laws intervened to convert the more important into positive rights.
‘It was thus that the institution of marriage changed into an ob-
ligation legally binding the hitherto voluntary connection between
husband and wife, father and child. In the same way, the law,
in certain states, has converted into an obligation the maintenance
of the poor,—a duty which yet remains, among the greater part
of nations, entirely voluntary. These political duties, compared.
to duties purely social, are like inclosures in a vast common,
where a particular kind of cultivation is carriedon with precautions
which insure success. The same plant might grow on the com-
mon, and might even be protected by certain conventions; but it
would always be exposed to more hazards than in the par-


188 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


ticular inclosure traced by the law, and protected by the public
force.

Yet, whatever the legislator may do, there is a great number
of services upon which he has no hold. It is not possible to
order them, because it is not possible to define them, or because
constraint would change their nature, and make them an evil.
If it were attempted to enforce them by law, an apparatus of
police and of penalties would be necessary, which would spread
terror through society. Besides, the law could not act against
the actual obstacles opposed to it; it could not put dormant
powers into activity ; it could not create that energy, that super-
abundance of zeal, which surmounts difficulties, and goes a thou-
sand times further than commands.

The imperfection of law, in this respect, is corrected by a kind
of supplementary law ; that is, by the moral or social code—a code
which is not written, which exists only in opinion, in manners,
and in habits, and which begins where the legislative code finishes.
The duties which it prescribes, the services which it imposes,
under the names of equity, patriotism, courage, humazaty, gene-
rosity, honour, and disintcrestedness, do not directly Lorrow the
aid of the laws, but derive their force from other sanctions,
founded upon punishments and rewards. As the duties of this
secondary code have not the imprint of the law, thcir fulfilment
has more éclat; it is more meritorious; anda superior degree of
honour attached to their performance happily makes up for their
deficiency in positive force. After this digression upon morals,
let us return to legislation.

The kind of service which is most important consists in giving
up some good in favour of another.

The kind of good which plays the greatest part in civilized
society is money,—a representative of value which is almost
universal. It thus happens that the consideration of services is
often confounded with that of things.

There are cases where the service is exacted for the benefit of :
him who commands; such is the state of a master in reference to
his servant,


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 189


There are cases in which the service is exacted for the advan-
tage of him who obeys; such is the condition of the ward in
reference to his guardian.

These two corrclative states are the foundation of all the others.
The rights which belong to them are the elements of which all the
others are composed. The father ought to be, in some respects,
the guardian, in others the master of the child; the husband
ought to be, in some respects, the guardian, in others the master
of the wife. These statcs are capable of a constant and indefinite
duration, and form domestic socicty. The rights which ought to
be attached to them are discussed in subsequent chapters.

The public services of the magistrate and the citizen constitute
other classes of obligations, of which the establishment belongs to
the constitutional code.

But beside these constant relations, there are transient and
occasional relations, in which the law may exact the services of
one individual in favour of another.

The means of acquiring rights to services—that is, the causes
which detcrmine the legislator to create obligations—may be
referred to three heads :—I1st, Superior need; 2nd, Anterior ser-
vice; 8rd, Pact or Agreement.

I. Surertorn Neep.—That is, a need of the service greater than the
inconvenience of rendering rt.

Every individual has, as a constant occupation, the care of his
own happiness—an occupation not less lawful than necessary ;
for suppose this principle could be reversed, and that the love of
others should take an ascendancy over the love of self, what a
ridiculous, what a fatal confusion would be the consequence! How-
ever, there are many occasions when we can make a considerable
addition to the well-being of others by a slight and almost imper-
ceptible sacrifice. In such circumstances, to do what depends upon
us to.prevent the evil about to fall upon another, is a service which
the law may exact ; and the omission of this service, in cases where
the law might see fit to exact it, would form a sort of offence, which
might be called negative, to distinguish it from positive offences,
whith consist in being the active and instrumental cause of evil.


190 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


But to make efforts, however slight, in the service of another,
may be an evil; to be obliged to make such efforts certainly is
one, for all restraint is evil. Therefore, to justify exacting from
you a. service in favour of me, the evil of not receiving the service
ought to be so great, and the evil of rendering it so small, that
there can be no room for hesitation as to the expediency of pro-
ducing the one, for the sake of avoiding the other. There are no
means of fixing precise limits; all must depend on the circum-
stances in which the individuals interested are placed, and we
must leaye to the judge the power of deciding upon individual
cases as they occur.

The good Samaritan, by relieving the wounded traveller, saved
his life. It was a noble action, a virtuous deed—nay, a moral
duty. Can such actions be made a legal duty? Can we ordain
them by a general law? No; not unless we limit that law by
exceptions more or less vague. It would be very necessary to
establish in such a law a dispensation in favour of the surgeon
waited for by many wounded men in great need of his services—
of the officer who hastens to his post to repel the enemy—of the
father who is rushing to the succour of his child.

This principle of superior need is the foundation of many obli-
gations. The duties required of a father to his children may be
burdensome ; but that evil is nothing when compared to the evil
of the children being abandoned. The duty of defending the state
may be more burdensome yet; but unless the state is defended,
it cannot exist. If the taxes are not paid, the government is
dissolved. If the public functions are not exercised, a career is
opened to every disorder and to every crime.

The obligation of rendering the service ought to fall upon a
particular individual, by reason of his peculiar position, which
gives him, more than any other person, the power or the incli-
nation to perform it. Itis for this reason that in selecting guard-
ians for orphan children, the choice falls upon relations or
friends, to whom the duty must be less burdensome than to a
stranger.

Il. Antertor Service.— <A service rendered,—in consideration


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 191


of which there is exacted from him who recewed the benefit a
pensation, an equivalent in favour of him who conferred tt.

This case is more simple; it is only necessary to ascertain the
value of a benefit already received, and to assign a compensation
for it. The judge will not necd so much latitude of discretion.

A surgeon has bestowed his services upon a sick man who had
lost his senses, and who was not in acondition to ask for assist-
ance. <A depositary, though not requested to doso, has employed
his labour, or has made pecuniary advances for the preservation
of a deposit. A man has exposed himself in a fire to save valu-
able property, or to rescue persons in danger. The effects of a
passenger have been thrown overboard to lighten the ship, and to »
preserve the rest of the cargo. In all these cases, and in a thon-
sand others which might be cited, the laws ought to insure a
recompense equivalent to the value of the service.

This title to indemnity is founded upon the best reasons.
Grant it, and he by whom it is furnished will still be a gainer ;
refuse it, and you leave him who has done the service in a con-
dition of loss.

Such a regulation is less for the benefit of him who receives
the compensation, than for the benefit of those who need the
service. It is a promise of indemnity made beforehand to every
man who may have the power of rendering a burdensome service,
in ordcr that a prudent regard to his own personal interest may
not come into opposition with his benevolence. Who can say
how many evils might be prevented by such a precaution? In
how many cases may not the duty of prudence restrain the wishes
of benevolence? Is it not wise for the legislator, as far as pos-
sible, to reconcile these motives? It is said that ingratitude was
punished at Athens as an infidelity injurious to the commerce of
benefits. I do not propose to punish ingratitude; but as far as
possible to prevent it. If the man to whom you have rendered
a service is ungrateful,—no matter; the law does not count upon
virtue ; if assures you a compensation, and in important cases it
will elevate that compensation to the level of reward.

Reward! that is the true means of obtaining services. In


192 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


comparison, punishment is but a feeble instrument. To punish
an omission of service we must first be sure that the individual
had the power to render it, and that he has no excuse for not
having done so. All this requires a process of investigation,
dificult and doubtful. Besides, if men act from the fear of
punishment, nothing will be done except what is absolutely
necessary to avoid it; but the hope of reward develops an un-
known strength; it triumphs over real obstacles, and brings
forth prodigies of zeal and ardour in cases where threats would
produce only an unwilling submission.

Three precautions must be observed in arranging the interests
of the two parties. First,—to prevent a hypocritical generosity
from converting itself into tyranny, and exacting the price of a
service which would not have been accepted had it not been sup-
posed disinterested. Secondly,—not to authorize a mercenary
zeal to snatch rewards for scrvices which the person obliged
might have rendered to himself, or have obtained elsewhere at a
less cost. Thirdly,—not to suffer a man to be overwhelmed by
a crowd of helpers, who cannot be fully indemnified without
counterbalancing by an equivalent loss the whole advantage of
the service.

Anterior service justifies many classes of obligations. On this
is founded the right of fathers over their children. When in the
order of nature the strength of ripening age has succeeded to the
feebleness of infancy, the need of receiving ceases, and the duty
of restitution begins. Upon this also is founded the right of the
wife to the continuance of the union after the period when time
has effaced the attractions which were its first motive.

Establishments at the public expense for those who have
served the state rest upon the same principle,—reward for past
services as a means of creating future ones.

TIT. Pacr on AareemEent.—The intervention of a promise
between two persons, with the understanding that a legal obligation
attaches to tt.

Everything that has been said of consent, in relation to the
distribution of property, applies to consent as respects the inter-


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 198


change of services. There are the same reasons for sanctioning
this interchange of services as for sanctioning the interchange of
property. Both rest on the same fundamental axiom, that every
alienation imports an advantage. Bargains are not made except
frbm the motive of utility.

The same reasons which annul consent in the one case, annul
it in the other—Concealment ; fraud; coercion; subornation ;
erroneous idea of legal obligation; erroneous idea of value;
incapacity; pernicious tendency of the bargain, though without
fault in the contracting parties.

We need not enlarge upon those subsequent causes which
produce the dissolution of agreements :—1st, Accomplishment ;
2nd, Compensation ; 3rd, Express or tacit remission; 4th, Lapse
of time; 5th, Physical impossibility; 6th, Intervention of «@
superior inconvenience. In all these cases, the reasons which
caused the agreement to be sanctioned exist no longer; but the
two latter relate only to the literal or specific accomplishment of
the bargain, and may still leave room for compensation. If ina
mutual bargain one of the parties only has fulfilled his part, or if
his part be the more nearly performed, a compensation from the
other will be necessary to re-establish the equilibrium.

It is enough to point out the principles without dwelling on
the details. Particular arrangements must vary according to
circumstances. However, if we establish firmly a small number
of rules, these particular arrangements will not interfere with
each other, and will all be arranged in the same spirit. These
rules are so very simple that they need no development.

Ist. Avoid producing disappointment.

2nd. When a portion of that evil is inevitable, diminish it
as much as possible by dividing the loss among the parties
interested in proportion to their means.

8rd. Take care in the distribution to throw the greater part of
the loss upon him who, by attention, might have prevented the
evil, so as to punish his negligence.

4th. Avoid especially producing an accidental evil greater than
disappointment.


194 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


General Observation.—It is thus that the whole theory of
obligations may be made to rest upon the basis of utility. We
have built the whole of this vast edifice upon three principles—
supertor need, anterior service, pact or agreement. Who would
have believed that to arrive at principles so simple and so familiar,
it would have been necessary to opena new road? Consult those
masters of the science, Grotius, Puffendorf, Burlamaque, Vatel,
Montesquieu himself, Locke, Rousseau, and the crowd of com-
mentators. When they wish to lay open the origin of obligations,
they tell you of a natural right, of a law anterior to man, of the
Divine law, of conscience, of a social contract, of a tacit contract,
of a guast contract, &c., &c, I know that these terms are not
incompatible with the true principle, because all of them, by
explanations more or less forced, may be made to signify good
and evil. But this oblique and roundabout process involves uncer-
tainty and embarrassment, and leads to interminable disputes.

They have not perceived that the pact, the contract of which
they tell us, strictly speaking, is not a reason in itself; and that
it wants a basis, an original and independent reason, on which to
rest. The pact serves to prove the existence of a mutual ad-
vantage on the part of the contractors. It is this reason of utility
which gives the contract all its force; thereby it 1s that the cases
are distinguished in which a contract ought to be confirmed, as
well as those in which it ought to be annulled. Ifa contract
were a reason of itself, it ought always to have the same effect.
If a pernicious tendency makes it void, it must be a useful
tendency which makes it valid.


CHAPTER VI.
Community of Goods, or Tenancy in common. Its Inconventenves.
THERE is no arrangement more contrary to the principle of utility
than community of goods; especially that kind of indeterminate’
community where the whole belongs to each of the partners.
Ast. It is the source of never-ending discord. Instead of being


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 195


a state of satisfaction and enjoyment for all interested, it is a
state of discontent and disappointment.

2nd. This undivided property always loses a great part of its
value for all the partners. Subject on the one hand to all kinds
of depredations, because it is not under the protection of indi-
vidual interest, on the other it receives no repairs or improver
ments. Shall I risk an expense of which the burden will be
certain, and which will fall entirely upon me, while the benefit
of it will be precarious and divided?

8rd. The apparent equality of this arrangement only serves to
cover a real inequality. The strong abuse their strength with
impunity; and the rich grow richer, at the expense of the poor.
The community of goods calls to mind that sort of monster which
is sometimes seen to exist,—beasts joined together back to back ;
in such cases, the stronger always carries off the weaker.

The question is not here of the community of goods between
husband and wife. Called to live together, to cultivate their
interests together, and to feel a mutual concern for the interests
of their children, they ought to enjoy in common a fortune often
acquired, and always kept by common cares. Besides, if their
wills conflict, the dispute will not be lasting; the law confers
upon the husband the right to decide.

Nor is the question here of common property among partners.
in trade. That tenancy in common is confined merely to acqui-
sition; it has nothing to do with enjoyment. Now, as concerns:
acquisition, the partners have but one and the same interest.
When the gains are to be enjoyed, they are divided, and each.
partner becomes independent of the others. Besides, associates in:
commerce are always few in number; they sclect each other, and
separate at will. It is precisely the contrary with joint prto-
prietors of land.

In England, one of the greatest and best established improve-
ments is the division of commons. In passing through the lands
which have undergone that happy change, we are enchanted as
by the sight of a new colony. Harvests, flocks, smiling habita-
tions, have succeeded to the dull sterility of a desert. Happy

0 2


196 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


conquests of peaceful industry! Noble aggrandizement, which
inspires no alarms, and provokes no enemies! But who would
believe that in a country where agriculture is so highly estimated,
millions of acres of productive land are still abandoned to the
wild state of common tenancy? A short time since the govern-
ment, desirous of knowing the true condition of its territory,
caused an examination to be made in every county, which has
brought to light a truth so interesting and so calculated to pro-
duce important consequences.

The inconveniences of tenancy in common, except in accidental
cases, do not apply to the case of servetudes,—that is, to rights
of partial property exercised over immoveables, such as a right
of passage, or a right to draw water. These rights are in general
limited ; the value lost by the subject property is not equal to
the value acquired by the property to which the night attaches ;
or, in other terms, the inconvenience to the former is not so great
as the conveniency to the latter.

In England, land which, being freehold, is worth thirty times
the annual rent, being copyhold, is worth but two-thirds as much.
The reason is, that in the latter case a lord of the manor pos-
sesses certain rights which establish a kind of common tenancy
between him and the principal proprietor. But it is not to be
supposed that what is lost by the copyholder is gained by the
lord; for the greater part of it falls into the hands of agents
and attorneys, and is consumed in useless formalities and minute
vexations. These are the remnants of the feudal system.

“‘It is a fine spectacle,” says Montesquieu, ‘that of the

feudal laws,’’—and afterwards he compares them to an ancient and


* There are circumstances which justify exceptions to general rules.
“The citizens of the small Swiss cantons, for example, possess the greater
part of their lands, to wit, the High Alps, in common. It may be that
this arrangement is the only one convement for pasturages which are
practicable only a part of the year. It may be, too, that this method of
holding their lands forms the necessary basis of a constitution purely
democratic, well adapted to the condition of a little community, shut up
in an inclosure of mountains.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 197


majestic oak. Let us rather compare them to that fatal tree
whose sap is poisonous, and whose shade is destructive. That
unfortunate system has produced in modern laws a confusion and
complexity from which it is very difficult to deliver them ; for
being everywhere interlaced with property, it needs much
management to get rid of feudal absurdities, without shaking the
eecurity of property itself.


CHAPTER VII.
Distribution of Loss.


THnas make one branch of the objects of acquisition ; services
the other. After having treated of the different methods of ac-
quiring and alienating these two objects, the analogy between
gain and loss would seem to indicate, as the next point of inquiry,
the different mcthods of distributing the losses to which possessions
are exposed.

This task will not detain us long. Has athing been destroyed,
damaged, or lost? Ifthe proprietor is known, the loss falls upon
him; if he is not known, it falls upon nobody. It is, in fact, no
loss. The question whether the loss shall be transferred to some
other person than the proprictor,—that is, whether in any case a
satisfaction shall be allowed him,—is a matter which will be dis-
cussed in that part of this work which treats of the Penal Code.
I shall confine myself here to a single example, which will serve
to indicate principles.

When the seller and buyer of an article of merchandise are at
a distance apart, the article must pass through a greater or less
number of intermediate hands. This transport is by land, by sea,
or by internal navigation; the merchandise may be destroyed,
damaged, or lost; perhaps it does not arrive at its destination, or
it does not come there in the state in which it ought to be. Upon
whom shall the loss fall—the buyer or the seller? I say the
seller, reserving his claim against the intermediate agents. The
seller, by care, may contribute to the safety of the merchandise ;


1498 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


he can choose the moment and the manner of sending it, and take
the precautions on which, in case of loss, the acquisition of evidence
depends. All this would be easier to a merchant, who makes a
business of selling, than to an individual who buys. It is only
by accident that the care of such a buyer can contribute in any
way to the safe arrival of the goods. The reason of this decision
is a superior preventive power ; it is founded upon the principle
of security.

Particular situations may show the necessity of establishing
exceptions to this general rule. For a yet stronger reason, in-
dividuals may except themselves from it by agreements made
between themselves. I only indicate principles. Thisis not the
place for their application.


199


PART THIRD.


RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS ATTACHED TO
SEVERAL PRIVATE CONDITIONS.


INTRODUCTION.


WE now proceed to consider more in detail the rights and obliga-
tions which the law ought to attach to the different states which
compose the domestic or private condition. These states may be
resolved into four: those of master and servant; guardian and
ward; father and child; husband and wife.

If we followed the historical or natural order of these relations,
the last in the catalogue would become the first. But, to avoid
repetitions, it is better to begin with the simplest. The rights
and obligations of a father and a husband are composed of the
rights and obligations of a master and a guardian; the two
former states are the elements of the two latter.


CHAPTER I.
Master and Servant.


Asrpz from the question of slavery, there is not much to be said
as to the condition of master, and the correlative conditions created
by the different kinds of servants. All these conditions are a
matter of contract. It belongs to the parties interested to arrange
them according to their own convenience. ue


200 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


The condition of master, to which the condition of apprentice
corresponds, is a mixed condition. The master of an apprentice
is at the same time a master and a guardian: a guardian as
respects the art he teaches, a master as regards the profit he
derives,

The work which the apprentice does, after the value of his
labour is worth more than the expense of maintenance and instruc-
tion, is the salary or reward of the master for his anterior ex-
penses.

This compensation ought naturally to be greater or less accord-
ing to the difficulty of the art. Some arts may be learned in
seven days; it is possible that some others may require seven
years. Competition will best regulate the price of these mutual
services, as of all other objects of commerce; and here, as else-
where, industry should find its just reward.

But the greater part of governments have not adopted this
system of liberty. They have desired to introduce what they call
order into employments ; that is, out of a mere passion for regu-
lating, they have substituted an artificial for a natural arrange-
ment. Intermeddling in this way with a business which they do
not understand, they have been led by a false notion of uniformity
to apply the same rule to things which have no resemblance.
Thus the ministers of Elizabeth fixed the same term of seven
years as the period of apprenticeship for the simplest as well as
for the most difficult arts.

This mania for regulation conceals itself under the pretence of
a desire to perfect the arts, to prevent workmen from being un-
slalful, or to guard the credit and honour of the national manu-
factures. But there is a simple and natural means of accomplish-
ing these objects. It is, to leave everybody a perfect liberty of
choosing the good and rejecting the bad, of being governed in
their preferences by merit; and to excite the emulation of artists
by the freedom of competition. But no; the public must be sup-
posed incapable of judging, and the work must be regarded as
good if the workman has wrought at the trade a certain number
of years.


PRINOIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE... 201


An artist must not be asked if he understands his business, but
whether he has served a regular apprenticeship. For, if the work
is to be judged by its merits, we may as well allow every one to
work at his own risk. According to that system, some would be
masters who had never been apprentices, and others would be
apprentices all their lives.


CHAPTER II.
Of Slavery.


WHEN servitude becomes a condition, and when the obligation to
continue in that condition, with respect to a certain master, or to
others who may derive a title from him, embraces the entire life
of the servant, that condition is slavery.

Slavery is susceptible of many modifications, according to the
fixed amount, more or less exact, of the services which may be
demanded, and according to the coercive means, the use of which
is permitted. There was a great difference in the state of a slave
at Athens and at Lacedemon ; there is more yet between that of
a Russian serf and a negro in the colonies. But whatever may be
the limits or the means of authority, if the obligation of serving
is unlimited in point of time, I still call it slavery. To draw a
line of separation between servitude and liberty, we must start
from some point ; and that above assumed seems to be the most
salient and the easiest to fix.

This distinction drawn from yperpetutty is so much the more
essential, because, wherever such perpetuity is found, it weakens,
it enervates, it renders extremely precarious the wisest precau-
tions for mitigating the exercise of authority. A power, not
limited as regards time, can hardly be limited as regards any-
thing else. Ifwe consider, on the one side, the facility with
which the master may aggravate the yoke, little by little, how
he can exact with rigour the services that are due, extend his
pretensions under different pretexts, and spy out occasions to
torment an insolent servant, who dares refuse to render services


202 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


which he does not owe; if we consider, on the other side, how
difficult it is for slaves to demand or to obtain legal protection,
how much more vexatious their domestic situation becomes after
a public breach with their master, and how they will be driven
to captivate him by an unlimited submission, rather than to
irritate him by refusals,—we shall soon see that the project of
limiting slavery by law is much easier to form than to execute;
that a fixed amount of serviccs is a very feeble means of soften-
ing the lot of slavery; that under the best laws for that purpose
only the most crying infractions will be punished, while the
ordinary course of domestic rigours will outbrave every tribunal.
I do not say that on this account slaves ought to be abandoned
to the absolute power of a master, and that the protection of laws
should not be extended to them, because that protection is in-
sufficient. But it is necessary to show the evil inherent im the
very nature of the thing; to wit, the impossibility of submitting
to a legal restraint the authority of a master over his slaves, so
as to prevent him, if so disposed, from abusing his power.

That slavery is agreeable to the masters, does not admit of a
doubt; since nothing is wanting but will on their part to bring
it to an instant termination. That it is disagreeable to the slaves,
is a fact not less certain, since they are never kept in that condi-
tion but by constraint. No one who is free wishes to become a
slave, and there is no slave who does not wish to be free.

It 18 absurd to reason on the happiness of men, except from
their own desires, and their own sensations. It is absurd to
attempt showing, by calculations, that a man ought to be happy,
when he is actually miserable; and that a condition into which
no one wishes to enter, and from which everybody wishes to
escape, 1s a condition good in itself, and adapted to human nature.
I can well believe that the difference between liberty and servi-
tude is not so great as it appears to ardent and prejudiced minds.
The habit of evil, and, for a stronger reason, the ignorance of
anything better, take away much of the interval which separates
two conditions, at the first glance, so opposite. But these reason-
ings of probability upon the happiness of slaves are quite super-


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 203


fluous, since we have complete proof that this condition is never
embraced by choice, and that, on the contrary, it is always an
object of aversion.

Slavery has been compared to the condition of a schoolboy
prolonged through life; and it is added, that a great many
people think the time passed at school the happiest part of their
existence,

The parallel is just only in one point. The circumstance which
is common to these two states is subjection; but subjection is
very far from being the circumstance which makes the happiness
of a schoolboy. What makes him happy is, a freshness of mind
which gives to all impressions the charm of novelty, lively and
boisterous pleasures with companions of the same age, contrasted
with the solitude and seriousness of the paternal dwelling. And
after all, how many schoolboys are there who are not anxious to
see their pupilage ended? Which of them desires to be a school-
boy for life?

Be this as it may, if slavery were established in such a pro-
portion that there was one slave for one master, possibly I might
hesitate before pronouncing upon the balance between the ad-
vantage of the one and the disadvantage of the other. It might
be possible, all things considered, that the sum of good in this
arrangement would be almost equal to the sum of evil. But
things cannot be so arranged. Where slavery is once established,
it presently becomes the lot of the greater number. A master
counts his slaves, like his flocks, by hundreds, thousands, tens of
thousands. The advantages are on the side of one, the disad-
vantages on the side of a multitude. Though the evil of servitude
were not great in itself, the extent of that evil would be sufficient
to render it very considerable. Generally speaking, and aside
from every other consideration, there is no room at all for
hesitating between the loss which emancipation would bring
upon the masters, and the gain which it would confer upqn the
slaves.

Another very strong argument against slavery is drawn from
its influence upon the wealth and power of nations. A freeman


204 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


produces more than aslave. If the slaves of a master were set
at liberty, that master would, doubtless, lose a part of his pro-
perty; but the slaves taken together would not only possess all
that he loses, but more too. Now happiness necessarily increases
with abundance; and the public power increases in the same
proportion.

Two circumstances combine to diminish the produce of slaves :
the absence of the stimulus of reward, and the insecurity of their
condition.

It is easy to see that the fear of chastisement is not well
adapted to extract: from a labourer all the industry of which he
is capable, all the values he can furnish. Fear rather leads him
to conceal his power than to show it; rather to sink beneath his
true level than to rise above it.

He will bring a punishment upon himself by works of supere-
rogation ; by displaying his ability he will only cause the standard
of his ordinary duty to be raised. Not only the slave produces
less; he consumes more,—not in the way of enjoyment, but by
waste, pillage, and bad economy. What does he care for interests
not his own? All the labour he can save himself is a pure gain ;
what he suffers to perish is a loss only to his master. Why
should he invent new means to do more, or to do better? To
improve, one must think; and thinking is a trouble not taken
without a motive. The man who is sunk into a mere labouring
animal never rises above a blind routine ; and generations succeed
each other without any progress.

It is true that a master who understands his own interest will
not dispute with his slaves the little profits which their industry
may occasionally procure. He knows their prosperity to be his
own, and that to offer them the inducement of an immediate reward
is the surest way to animate them to labour. But this precarious
favour, dependent upon the uncertain disposition of a master,
does not inspire that confidence which carries one’s views to the
future, which shows in daily economy the foundation of future
wealth, and which extends the care of fortune to posterity.
Slaves clearly perceive that, if richer, they would be exposed to


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 205


extortion, if not upon the part of their master, at least from over-
seers and other subalterns in authority, more greedy and more fo
be dreaded than the master himself. For the greater part of slaves
there is no to-morrow. Joys instantly to be realized alone have
power to tempt them. They are gluttonous, idle, dissolute,
without reckoning the other vices which spring from their con-
dition. Those who have any foresight hide their little treasures.
The sad feeling of insecurity, inseparable from their condition,
nourishes all the faults destructive of industry, and all the habits
most fatal to society, and that too without compensation and
without remedy. This is not an empty theory. It is an actual
result, at all times, in all places.

But we are told that, in respect to labour, the free day
labourer in Europe is nearly upon the same footing with the
slave. He who is paid by the piece has recompense as a motive,
and every effort has its reward; but he who is paid by the
day has no motive but pain,—let him do much or little,
he receives the price of a day’s work ; so that, in fact, there is
no reward for exertion. If he does less than ordinary workmen
he may be dismissed from his employment, as a slave, in the like
case, would be beaten. Both are excited only by fear, and have
no interest in the produce of their labour.

To this reasoning there are three replies :—

Ist. It is not true that the day labourer has not the motive of
reward. The more skilful and the more industrious are better
paid than others. Those who distinguish themselves are more
constantly employed, and always have the choice of the most
lucrative engagements. This is a real reward attendant upon
their exertions.

2nd. If the only motives of the free workmen were, in fact, of
the penal kind, still we should have more hold on him than on a
slave. The free workman has his honour like the rest of us. In
a free country there is a shame attached to the reputation of
being idle and incapable; in this respect, the eyes of his comrades
are an addition to those of his employer, and this punishment of
honour is inflicted upon an infinity of occasions, by judges who


206 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


have no interest to soften it. Free labourers exercise in this
way a reciprocal inspection, and are sustained by emulation.
This motive has much less force upon a slave. The treatment to
which slaves are subjected renders them little sensible to a pain
so delicate as that of honour ; and as the injustice of labouring
without compensation, for the sole benefit of another, cannot
escape them, slaves are not ashamed to avow to cach other @
repugnance to labour, in which they all agree.

3rd. That which presents itself to a day labourer as a gain,
is a sure gain; all that he can acquire belongs to himself, and
nobody has any right to touch it; but, as we have seen above,
a slave cannot enjoy any real security. Exceptions to this
remark may be cited. Such a Russian lord, for example, has
industrious slaves who possess many thousand roubles, and who
enjoy their property in the same way as their master enjoys his.
But these are particular cases which do not change the ordinary
rule. Such particular and unusual incidents are of no import-
ance in judging of the ordinary effects of a gencral arrange-
ment.

In this short exposition of the inconveniences of servitude
there has been no attempt to move the feelings, no appeal to
the imagination, no endcavour to cast odium upon masters by
generalizing particular abuses of power. There has been an
omission of all reference to those terrible means of rigour and
constraint, common in these domestic governments without law,
without procedure, without appeal, without publicity, and almost
without restraint; for, as we have already seen, the master is
never responsible, except in extraordinary cases. Everything
which touches the feelings is easily accused of cxaggeration ; and
in this case the evidence of simple reason is so strong, that it
needs no suspicious colouring. The owners of slaves, whom per-
sonal interest has not divested of common sense and of common
humanity, will readily assent to the advantages of liberty over
servitude, and would themselves desire that slavery were abo-
lished, if that abolition could take place without overturning
their rank and fortunes, and without any shock to their personal


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 307


security. The injustice and the calamities which have accom-
panied precipitate attempts, form the greatest objection to pro-
jects of emancipation.

This operation could not take place suddenly, except by a
violent revolution, which, by displacing all men, by destroying all
property, by putting all persons into situations to which they had
not been educated, would produce evils a thousand times greater
than all the immediate good which could be expected from it,*

Instead of rendering emancipation burdensome to the master,
it ought, as far as possible, to be rendered advantageous to him;
and the first means which naturally offers itself to this end, is to
fix a price at which every slave shall have the right to purchase
his freedom. Unfortunately, there is a strong objection to this
means. From the moment of its adoption, the interest of the
master is in opposition to that of his slaves. He will attempt to
prevent them from acquiring the sum necessary to their ransom,
To leave them in ignorance and to keep them in poverty, to cut
their wings as fast as they grow—such will be his policy. But
this danger arises only from fixing the price. The liberty of
redeeming themselves at such prices as may be agreed upon has
No inconvenience. The interest of the slave would induce him to
do his best, in order that he might have a greater price to offer.
The interest of the master would induce him to suffer the slave
to grow rich as fast as possible, in order to draw from him a
heavier ransom.

A second means consists in limiting the power to dispose of
slaves by will, so that where there is no successor in the direct
line, emancipation shall be a right. The hope of inheritance igs
always very feeble in distant successors, and no such hope would
exist after the law was once known. There could be no injustice
where there was no disappointment.

We might go a little further. At each change of the proprie-
torship, even in successions the nearest, a small sacrifice of pro-

* Recent experience in the West Indies seems to contradict this


theory ; 80 does the case of the Polish lordships, cited in the last para-
graph of the chapter.—Translator.


208 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


perty might be made to liberty, by the liberation, for example, of
@ tenth part of the slaves. Such a loss would not present itself
to the heir as of any determinate amount. The defalcation of a
tenth part of the inheritance would scarcely be perceptible.
At the moment of succeeding to the estate it would be less a
loss than a slight privation of gain. As respects nephews, who
have an additional hope of succession on the side of their fathers,
the tax in favour of liberty might be still greater.

This offering to liberty ought to be determined by lot. Choice,
under pretext of selecting the most worthy, would be a source of
intrigues and abuse. It would be more fruitful in discontent and
jealousy than in happiness. The lot is impartial; it gives to all
an equal chance of happiness; even those whom it does not favour
it allows to participate in the charm of hope, and the fear of being
deprived of this chance for certain specified offences would be an
additional pledge for the fidelity of the slaves. *

The emancipation ought to take place by families rather than
individually. A father enslaved, and a son free; a father free,
and a son enslaved ; what a disagreeable,——what a shocking con-
trast! what a source of domestic chagrin !

There might be other means of accelerating an object so de-
sirable; but they can only be discovered by studying the par-
ticular circumstances of each country.

These bonds of slavery, which the legislator cannot cut at a
single blow, time dissolves little by little; and the march of
liberty ,though slow, is not the less sure. The whole progress of
the human mind, of civilization, of morals, of public wealth, and
of commerce, brings on, little by little, the restoration of individual


* This means might tempt the slaves to employ murder to accelerate
their liberty—a very serious objection to this lottery. We may observe,
however, that its uncertainty would lessen the danger. There would be
less temptation to commit a crime, the fruits of which might go entirely
to others. But the temptation may be wholly got rid of, if it were pro-
vided that this partial emancipation should not apply to cases where the
master Was poisoned or assassinated, either by his slaves or by some one
unknown. In this way, this moans of liberation would become a safe
guard to the master.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 2ND -


liberty. England and France have been what Russia, Poland,
and a part of Germany now are.

Proprietors ought not to be alarmed at this change. Those
who own the land have a natural power over those who can live
only by their labour. The apprehension that freemen, at liberty
to go where they choose, would abandon their native soil, and
leave the earth uncultivated, is a fear absolutely chimerical,
especially when the emancipation goes on gradually. Because
it is seen that the slave runs aways when he can, it is concluded
that, were he free, still he would run away. The opposite con-
clusion would be much more just. The motive for flight exists
no longer, and the motives for remaining retain all their force.

We have seen in Poland some proprietors, enlightened as to
their true interest, or animated by a love of glory, carry into
effect, throughout vast lordships, a total and simultaneous eman-
cipation. Did this generosity ruin them? Just the contrary:
the farmer, having an interest in his own labour, has soon put
himself into a condition to pay more than the slave; and the
domains cultivated by the hands of freemen receive every year
an addition to their value.


CHAPTER III.
Guardian and Ward.


Tux feebleness of infancy demands a continual protection. Every-
thing must be done for an imperfect being, which, as yet, does
nothing for itself. The complete development of its physical
powers takes many years ; that of its intellectual faculties is still
slower. Atacertain age it has already strength and passions,
without experience enough to regulate them. Too sensitive to
present impulses, too negligent of the future, such a being must
be kept under an authority more immediate than that of the
laws; it must be governed by punishments and rewards, which
act, not at distant intervals, but continually, and which can
adapt themselves to all the details of conduct during the process
of education.


210 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


In order that a condition of life, or a profession, may be chosen
for a child, he must of necessity be submitted to a particular
authority. This choice is founded upon personal circumstances;
upon the expectations, the talents, the inclinations of the pupil ;
upon his facility for adopting one business rather than ‘another ;
in one word, upon probabilities of success. It is a question too’
complicated to be left to the decision of a public magistrate; it
must be determined specially for every case; and such a deter-
mination would demand a knowledge of details, which the magis-
trate could not possess.

This power of protection and of government, over individuals
thought incapable to protect and to govern themselves, constitutes
wardship,—a kind of domestic magistracy, founded upon the
manifest need of those who are submitted to it, and which ought
to include all the powers necessary to the fulfilment of its object,
and nothing more.

The powers necessary to education are those of determining the
ward’s method of life, and of fixing his domicile, with those means
of reprimand and of correction, without which this authority
would not be efficacious. The severity of these means may be
the more easily limited, inasmuch as their application is more
immediate, more certain, and more varied, and because domestic
government possesses an inexhaustible fund of rewards; for at
an age when nothing is acquired and everything is bestowed,
there is no concession which may not take the form of remu-
neration.

As to the subsistence of the ward, it can be derived from three
sources only: either from property he possesses in his own right,
from a gratuitous gift, or from his own labour.

If the ward has property of his own, it is administered in his
name and for his advantage by the guardian; and all that the
guardian does in that particular, according to the prescribed
forms, is ratified by the law.

If the ward have no property, he is supported cither at the
expense of the guardian—as in the case most common of all, when
the wardship is exercised by the father or mother of the child;


P PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 211


or at the expense of some charitable establishment ; or finally, by
his own labour, as when, for example, he is bound an apprentice
in such a way that the period of non-value shall be made up to
his master by the profitable labour of a subsequent period.

Wardship being a charge purcly burdensome, it is made to fall
upon those persons who have the greatest inclination to sustain it,
and the greatest facility for doing so. This is eminently the case
with the father and mother. Natural affection disposes them to
this duty more strongly than the law; yet the law which imposes
it upon them is not useless. It is because instances occur in which
children are abandoned by their parents, that this abandonment
has been made an offence.

If the father, when dying, names a guardian for his child, it is
_ to be presumed that he knew better than any one else who had
the means and the inclination thus to supply his place. His
choice therefore should be confirmed, unless there are very strong
reasons to the contrary.

If the father has made no provision for the wardship, the obli-
gation ought to fall upon some relation whose interest would induce
him to preserve the family property, and whose honour and affec-
‘tion would be a security for the happiness and education of the
child. In default of relatives, some friend of the orphan should
be chosen who would voluntarily undertake the office, or some
public officer appointed for that special purpose.

Some attention should be paid to those circumstances which
ought to release particular individuals from the duty of wardship,
such as advanced age, a numerous family, infirmitics, or reasons
of prudence and delicacy—such, for example, as a complication
of interests.

Particular precautions against the abuse of this power are to be
found among the penal laws. An abuse of authority as respects
the person of the child belongs to the class of personal injuries;
illicit gains at the expense of the ward’s fortune fall into the class
of fraudulent acquisitions. The only thing to be considered is
the particular circumstance of the offence, namely, the violation of
confidence. But though this renders the offence more*odious, it is


212 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


not always a reason for augmenting the punishment; on the con-
trary, as we shall see elsewhere, it is often a reason for diminish-
ing it; the position of the delinquent being such that the discovery
of the offence is easier, the reparation easier, and the alarm not so
great. In the case of seduction, the character of guardian is an
aggravation of the crime.

As regards general precautions, the wardship has often been
divided; the administration of the property has been given to the
nearest heir, who in quality of heir had the greatest interest in
its good management; and the care of the person to some other
~elative more intcrested in the welfare of the child.

Some legislators have taken further precautions, such as for-
bidding guardians to buy the goods of their wards; or permitting
wards to re-assume property sold by their guardians within so
many years after their majority. The first of these two means
does not appear liable to great inconveniencés ; the second can-
not but affect the mnterest of the ward; for it diminishes the price
of his property, in the same proportion that its value is diminished
in the hands of the purchaser, on account of the precariousness
of his possession,—a precariousness which prevents him from
making any improvements; for in the end they might turn to
his disadvantage by furnishing the former owner an additional
motive to reclaim the possession, These two means appear useless
if the sale of the property 1s required to be public, and under the
inspection of a magistrate.

The most simple means of protection is to allow anybody to
act as the friend of the ward in legal processes against his guard-
ian, whether for mismanagement of the property, for negligence,
or for violence. The law thus puts those who are too feeble to
protect themselves under the protection of every man generous
enough to undertake the charge.

Wardship being a state of dependence, is an evil which ought
fo cease as soon as there is no danger that its cessation will pro-
duce a greater evil. But what should be the age of emancipation ?
As to that matter, we must be guided by general presumptions,
The English law, which has fixed upon the age of twenty-one


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 218


years, seems much more reasonable than the Roman law, which
has appointed the age of twenty-five for that purpose, and which
has been followed throughout almost the whole of Europe. At
twenty-one the faculties of man are developed; he has a percep-
tion of his strength; he yields to counsel what he refuses to
authority ; and can no longer bear to be kept in leading-strings.
So strong is this feeling, that the prolongation of the domestic
power often produces a state of irritation and ill-nature equally
uncomfortable for all concerned. But there are individuals who
seem incapable of arriving at maturity, or who are much slower
than others in reaching it. Cases of that nature may be easily
provided for by prolonging the guardianship whenever occasion
for it occurs.


CHAPTER IV.
Father and Child.


Ir has been already mentioned that a father is, in some respects,
the master, in others the guardian of the child.

In his character of master, he will have the right to impose
services upon his children, and to employ their labour for his own
advantage, till the age at which the law establishes their inde-
pendence. This right given to the father is an indemnity for
the pains and expenses of the children’s education. It is well
that the father should have an interest and a pleasure in the
education of his children. The advantage which he finds in
bringing them up is a good thing for both parties. In his quality
of guardian he has all the rights and all the obligations which
have been mentioned under that title.

Under the first relation the advantage of the father is con-
sidered; under the second, that ofthe child. These two relations
are easily reconciled in the person of the father, on account of
his natural affection, which leads him much rather to make sacri-
fices on account of his children, than to avail himself of his rights
for his own advantage.

It would seem, at the first glance, that the legislator need not


914 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


interfere between fathers and children; that he might trust to
the tenderness of the parent and the gratitude of the child. But
this superficial view would be deceptive. It is absolutely neces-
sary, on one side, to limit the paternal power, and, on the other,
to maintain filial respect by legal enactments.

As a general rule, we ought to confer no power by the cxercise
of which the child would lose more than the father would gain.

This rule has not been followed in Prussia, where, in imitation
of the Romans, there has been given to the father the right to
prevent his son from marrying without any limitation of age.

As respects the paternal authority, political writers have fallen
into opposite excesses. Some have wished to make it despotic, as
among the Romans; others have wished to annihilate it. Some
philosophers have thought that children should not be delivered
up to the caprice and ignorance of parents, but that the state
ought to raise them in common; and they cite, in support of this
scheme, Sparta, Crete, and the ancient Persians. It is not recol-
lected that this education never existed, except for a small class
of citizens; for in those states the mass of the population was
composed of slaves.

In this artificial arrangement there would be the difficulty of
dividing the expense, and of enabling the parents to support the
burden of education without deriving any advantage from it;—
a burden which would weigh the heavier upon parents little
influenced by motives of tenderness for children who had become
almost strangers to them. What would be a still greater incon-
venience,—these children would not be seasonably formed for
that diversity of pursuits which they would be called to follow.
The choice of a business depends upon so many circumstances,
that it belengs only to parents to fix upon it; no one else can so
well judge, either what is proper for the children, what they
expect, or for what their talents and inclinations are adapted.
Besides, this system, which counts for nothing the reciprocal
affection of fathers and children, would have a most fatal effect
in destroying the family spirit, in weakening the conjugal union,
in depriving fathers and mothers of the pleasure which they


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE, . 218


derive from seeing a new generation growing up around them.
Would they feel the same zeal for the future happiness of
children who would no longer be theirs? Would they cherish’
an affection which they had no hope would ever be returned ?
Would industry, no longer animated by the spur of paternal love,
have the same ardour? Would not domestic enjoyments take a
turn less advantageous to general prosperity ?

As a last reason, I shall add, that the natural arrangement,
which leaves the choice, the mode, and the burden of education
to the parents, may be compared to a series of experiments for
perfecting the general system. Everything is advanced and
developed by the emulation of individuals, and by differences of
ideas and of genius; in a word, by the variety of particular im-
pulses. But let the whole be cast into a single mould; let
instruction everywhere take the form of legal authority ; errors
will be perpetuated, and there will be no further progress. This
perhaps is saying too much in relation to an idea so chimerical
but this notion of Plato’s has seduced, in our day, some celebrated
authors; and an error which has misled Rousseau and Helvetius
will be likely to find other defenders.


CHAPTER V.
Of Marriage.


Inde casas postquam, ac pelles, ignemque pararunt,

Et mulier conjuncta ro, concessit in unum,

Castaque private venerrs connubdia leata,

Cognita sunt, prolemque en se videre creatam,

Tunc genus humanum primum molescere capit.
Lucretius, v. 1109.


When huts, and skins, and fire they had prepared,
And woman joined to man, became as one,

And chaste connubial joys of private love

Were known, and offspring from themselves they gaw,
Then first the human race began to soften.


Uxnze whatever point of view the institution of maxriage is cone


216 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


sidered, nothing can be more striking than the utility of that
noble contract, the tie of society, and the basis of civilization.

Marriage, considered as a contract, has drawn woman from the
severest and most humiliating servitude; it has distributed the
mass of the community into distinct families; it has created a
domestic magistracy ; it has formed citizens; it has extended the
views of men to the future, through affection for the rising gene-
ration; it has multiplied social sympathies. To perceive all its
benefits, it is only necessary to imagine for a moment what men
would be without that institution.

The questions relating to this contract may be reduced to seven.
Ist. Between what persons shall it be permitted? 2nd. What
shall be its duration? 3rd. What its conditions? 4th. At what
age may it be contracted? 5th. At whose choice? 6th. Between
how many persons? 7th. With what formalities?


Section I.
Between what Persons shall Marriage be permitted ?


If we are guided upon this question by historical facts, we
shall encounter great embarrassment, or rather, it will be im-
possible to deduce any single fixed rule from so many contradic-
tory usages. There will not be wanting respectable examples,
to authorize unions which we regard as most criminal, nor for
prohibiting many which we esteem quite innocent. Every people
pretend to follow in this respect what they call the law of nature;
and they look with a sort of horror upon everything not con-
formed to the matrimonial laws of their own country. Let us
suppose ourselves ignorant of all these local institutions; let us
consult only the principle of utility, for the purpose of discover-
ing among what persons it is fit to allow, or to prohibit, this
union.

If we examine the interior of a family, composed of persons
who differ among themselves in age, sex, and relative duties,
there will be immediately presented to our minds strong reasons
for pichibiting certain alliances among several individuals of it.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 217


There is a reason which weighs directly even against the con-
nection of marriage. A father, a grandfather, or an uncle hold-
ing the place of a father, might abuse their power by compelling
a young girl to contract an alliance with them which would be
odious to her. The more necessary the authority of these rela-
tives is, the less temptation should they have to abuse it.

This inconvenience, however, extends but to a small number
of the cases called incestuous, and isnot the weightiest. It is the
danger of dissolute manners, that is, the evil which would result
from a transient commerce without marriage, that affords the
true reasons for proscribing certain alliances.

If there were not an insurmountable barrier between near rela-
tives called to live together in the greatest intimacy, this contact,
continual opportunities, friendship itself and its innocent caresses,
might kindle fatal passions. The family—that retreat where
repose ought to be found in the bosom of order, and where the
movements of the soul, agitated by the scenes of the world, ought
to grow calm—would itself become a prey to all the inquietudes
of rivalry and to all the furics of passion. Suspicions would
banish confidence—the tenderest sentiments of the heart would be
quenched—eternal enmities or vengeance, of which the bare idea
is fearful, would take their place. The belief in the chastity of
young girls, that powerful attraction to marriage, would have no
foundation to rest upon; and the most dangerous snares would be
spread for youth in the very asylum where it could least escape
them.

These inconveniences may be arranged under four heads :—

Ist. Evil of Rivalry.—The danger resulting from a real or
suspected rivalry between a married person and certain relatives
or connections.

Qnd. Prevention of Marriage-—The danger of depriving girls
of the chance of forming a permanent and advantageous establish-
ment in the way of marriage, by diminishing the confidence of
those who might desire to marry them.

Srd. Relaxation of Domestic Disctpline.—The danger of invert-
ing the nature of the relations between those who ought toe com-


218 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


mand and those who ought to obey; or, at least, of weakening
that tutelary authority which, for the interest of minors, ought to
be exercised over them by the heads of the family or those who
hold their place.

4th. Physical Injury.—Those dangers to the health and strength
which might result from premature indulgences. .


Table of Prohibited Alliances.

A man shall not marry,—

1. The wife or widow of his father, or of any other progenitor.
Inconveniences 1, 8, 4.

2. Any descendant. Jnconveniences 2, 3, 4.

3. His aunt. IJnconvenrences 2, 3, 4.

4. The wife or widow of his uncle. Jnconventences 1, 3, 4.

5. His niece. Inconvenrences 2, 3, 4.

6. His sister. IJnconveniences 2, 4.

7. Any descendant of his wife. Inconveniences 1, 2, 3, 4.

8. His wife’s mother. Jnconventence 1.

9. The wife or widow of any descendant. Inconventence 1.

10. The daughter of his father’s wife by a former husband, or

of his mother’s hushand by a former wife. JInconveniences 2, 4.


In a code of laws there would be necessary a corresponding
table of alliances forbidden to the woman: here it would be a
useless repetition.

Shall a man be allowed to marry the sister of his deceased wife ?

There are reasons for and against it. The reason against it is
the danger of rivalry between the sisters ; the reason for it is the
advantage of the children. If their mother dies, what an advan-
tage to them to have their own aunt for a stepmother! What
more likely to diminish the natural hostility of that connection
than so near a relationship? This last rcason scems to be the
weightier ; but to obviate the danger of rivalry, the wife ought to
have the legal power of forbidding the house to her sister. If the
wife does not choose to have her own sister in the house, what
lawful motive can the husband have for desiring it ?

Shall a man be allowed to marry his brother's widow? ‘There


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 919


are reasons for and against it, as before. The reason against itis
still the danger of rivalry ; the reason for it is likewise the advan-
tage of the children. But both these reasons seem to have very
little weight.

My brother has no more authority over my wife than 4
stranger, and cannot sec her but with my permission. The
danger of rivalry on his part seems as small as on that of any
other person. The reason against is reduced almost to nothing.
On the other hand, children have little to fear from a father-in-
law. If a stepmother is not the enemy of the children-in-law,
it is very remarkable; but a stepfather is commonly their friend,
their second guardian. The differences in the condition of the
two sexes, the legal subjection of the one, the legal empire of
the other, expose them to opposite weaknesses, which produce
opposite effects. The uncle is already the natural friend of his
nephews and his nieces. They have nothing to gain in that
respect by his becoming the husband of their mother. If they
find an enemy in a stepfather who is a stranger, the protection of
their uncle is always a resource. If they find a friend in such a
stepfather, they have acquired an additional protector, whom
they would not have had if their uncle had married their mother.
The reasons for and the reasons against having little force on
either side, it would seem that the good of liberty ought to
incline the balance in favour of permitting such marriages.

Instead of the reasons which I have given for prohibiting
alliances within a certain degree of relationship, ordinary morals
decide peremptorily upon all these points of legislation, without
taking the trouble to examine any of them. ‘‘Nature,”’ it is
said, ‘is repugnant to such alliances; therefore they are for-
bidden.”

This argument alone never can furnish a satisfactory reason
for prohibiting any action whatever. If the repugnance be real
the law is useless. Why forbid what nobody wishes to do? If,
in fact, there be no repugnance, the reason is at an end; vulgar
morality would have nothing more to say in favour of prohibit-
ing the acts in question, since its whole argument, founded upon


220 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE,


natural disgust, is overturned by the contrary supposition. If
everything is to be referred to nature—that is, the bent of desire,
we must equally conform to her decisions, whatever they may
be. If those alliances must be forbidden to which she is repug-
nant, those with which she is pleased must be permitted.
Nature which hates, merits no more regard than nature which
loves and desires.

It is very rare that the passion of love is developed within
the circle of individuals to whom marriage ought to be forbidden.
There needs to give birth to that sentiment a certain degree of
surprise, a sudden effect of novelty. It is this which the poets
have happily expressed by the ingenious allegory of the arrows,
quiver, and blinded eyes of Love. Individuals accustomed to
see each other and to know each other, from an age which is
neither capable of conceiving the desire nor of inspiring it, will
see each other with the same eyes to the end of life; and this
inclination finds no determinate epoch whence to begin. Their
affections have taken another course, like a river which has dug
its bed, and which does not change it.

Nature, then, agrees sufficiently well with the principle of
utility. However, it will not do to trust to nature alone.
There are circumstances in which the inclination may spring
up, and in which an alliance will become an object of desire
if it is not prohibited by the laws, and branded by public
opinion.

Under the Greek dynasty of Egyptian sovereigns, the heir of
the throne commonly married one of his own sisters. It was,
apparently, to escape the danger of an alliance either with a
subject or a foreign family. In that rank, such marriages might
be exempt from the inconveniences that would attend them in pri-
vate life. Royal opulence would admit a separation and a seclu-
sion, which could not be maintained in the dwelling of a citizen.

Policy has produced some similar examples in modern times.
In our day the kingdom of Portugal has introduced a practice
not far distant from that of Egypt; a reigning queen has had a
nephew and a subject for her husband. But to escape the blot


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE, 291


of incest, kings and the great can address themselves to an ex-
perienced chemist, who changes at his pleasure the colour of
certain actions. Protestants, to whom this laboratory is closed,
have no power to marry their aunts. The Lutherans, however,
have given the example of a similar extension of privileges.

The inconvenience of these alliances is not for the persons who
contract them. Theevilis wholly intheexample. A permission
granted to some makes others feel the prohibition as a tyranny.
When the yoke is not the same for all, it weighs the heavier upon
those who wear it.

At has been said that these intermarriages of the same blood
cause the species to degenerate, and that the necessity of crossing
the races is as great among men as among otheranimals. There
might be some force in this objection if it were likely that alli-
ances among relations, if not prohibited by law, would become
the most common. But it is enough to show the futility of bad
reasons; indeed it would be too much,—were it not an essential
service to a good cause, to put agide the false and feeble arguments
by which it is attempted to sustain it. Some well-intentioned
men are of opinion that no support to good morals, not even a
false one, ought to be taken away. This error is the same as that
of those devotees who have thought to serve religion by pious
frauds. Instead of fortifying it they have weakened it, by ex-
posing it to the derision of its adversaries. When a depraved
mind has refuted a false argument, it claims that refutation as a
triumph over morality itself.


Szcrmy IT.
For what time? Considerations on Divorce.

If the law did not prescribe any particular duration to this
contract, if individuals were allowed to form this engagement like
any other, for a longer or shorter term, what under the auspices
of liberty would be the most common arrangement? ‘Would it be
very different from the order now established ?

The end of the man in this contract might be only the gratifica-


322 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


tion of a transient passion, and that passion satisfied, he would
have had all the advantage of the union without any of its incon-
veniences. It is not the same with the woman; the engagement
has for her very durable and very burdensome consequences.
After the troubles of pregnancy, after the pains of child-birth, she
is charged with the cares of maternity. Thus a union which
would give the man nothing but pleasures, would be for the
woman the beginning of sufferings, and would lead her to inevit-
able destruction, if she had not secured beforehand for herself,
and for the germ which she nourishes in her bosom, the care and
the protection of a husband. ‘I give myself up to you,”’ she says,
‘but you shall be my guardian in my state of weakness, and you
shall provide for the fruit of our love.’’ Here is the beginning
of a partnership, which would prolong itself through many years,
though there were but one child; but successive births form
successive ties; as time advances the engagement is prolonged ;
the bounds first assigned to it presently disappear, and meanwhile
there is opened a new course of reciprocal pleasures and duties.

When the mother can expect no more children, when the father
has made provision for the support of the youngest of the family,
can we suppose that the union will be severed? After a coha-
bitation of so many years, will the parties think of separating ?
Will not habit have entwined their hearts by a thousand and a
thousand ties, which death only can sever? Will not the children
form a new centre of union? Will they not create a new fund
of pleasures and of hopes? Will they not render the father and
mother necessary to each other, by the cares and the charms of a
common affection which no one else can share with them? It
seems, then, that the ordinary course of the conjugal union would
be for life; and if it is natural to suppose in the woman prudence
enough thus to secure her dearest interests, can we expect less of
a father, or a guardian, whose experience is more mature ?

The woman has yet an additional interest in the indefinite
duration of the union. Time, pregnancy, nursing, cohabitation
itself, all conspire to diminish the effect of her charms; and she
must expect that her beauty will decline at an age when the


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL coDz. 925


energy of the man is still increasing. She knows that, having worn
out her youth with one husband, she will hardly find another ;
while the man will experience no such difficulty. Accordingly,
foresight will dictate to her this new clause in the agreement :
‘If I give myself up to you, you shall not be free to leave me
without my consent.” The man, in his turn, demands the same
promise ; and thus on both sides is completed a lawful contract,
founded upon the happiness of the parties.

It seems, then, that marriage for life is the most natural mar-
riage, the best adapted to the wants and the circumstances of
families, and, in general, the most favourable to individuals. If
there were no laws to ordain it,—that is, no laws except those
which sanction contracts in general,—this arrangement would
always be the most common, because it is best adapted to the
reciprocal interests of the parties. Love on the part of the man,
‘love and foresight on the part of the woman; the enlightened
prudence and affection of parents,—all conspire to imprint the
character of perpetuity upon this alliance.

But what shall we think if the woman adds this clause : ‘‘ We
shall not be at liberty to separate, though hereaftcr we come to
hate each other as now we love?’ Sucha condition would seem
an act of folly; it has something about it contradictory and
absurd which shocks at the first glance; everybody would agree
in regarding such a promise as rash, and in thinking that hu-
manity requires it to be omitted.

But it is not the woman who asks, it is not the man who
invokes this absurd and cruel clause; it is the law, which im-
poses it on both, as a condition which cannot be avoided. The
law comes in between the contractors ; it takes them by surprise
in the midst of youthful transports, in those moments which open
all the perspective of happiness; and it says to them, ‘“‘ You form
this connection in the hope of enjoyment; but I warn you, you
are entering a prison of which the gate will never open. I shall
be inexorable to the cries of your grief, and though you wound
each other with your chains, I cannot suffer them ever to be
loosened.”


994 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


‘To believe in the perfection of the object beloved, to believe in
the eternity of a passion felt and inspired, these are illusions
which we may well pardon in two children blinded by love. But
ancient lawyers, and legislators grey with age, do not yield
themselves up to such chimeras. If they believe in this eternity
of passion, why do they take away a power which nobody would
use? But no; they foresee inconstancy, they foresee hatred ;
they foresee that the most violent love may be succeeded by more
violent antipathy ; and with the cold-blooded indifference of care-
less unconcern, they pronounce the eternity of the marriage vow,
even though the sentiments in which it originated shall be fol-
lowed by feelings entirely the reverse. If there were a law
which forbade the taking a partner, a guardian, a manager, a
companion, except on the condition of always keeping him, what
tyranny, what madness it would be called! Yet a husband is a
companion, a guardian, a manager, a partner, and more yet; and
still, in the greater part of civilized countries, a husband cannot
be had except for life.

To live under the perpetual authority of a man you hate, is of
itself a state of slavery; but to be compelled to submit to his
embraces, is a misfortune too great even for slavery itself. Is it
said that the yoke is mutual? That only doubles the mis-
fortune.

Since marriage presents to the generality of men the only
means of satisfying fully and peaceably the imperious desires of
love, to turn them from it is to deprive them of its pleasures,
and is to do an evil of no small magnitude. Now what more ter-
rible bugbear than the indissolubility of this contract ? Whether
it be a marriage, a service, a country, a condition of any kind,
the prohibition to go out of it must operate as a prohibition to
enter in.

It is enough just to indicate another observation, well founded,
but common. As marriages are more rare, infidelity to the
marriage bed is more frequent; the more seducers, the more
seductions.


When death is the only deliverer, what horrible temptations,


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 225


what crimes may result from a position so fatal! The examples
which remain unknown, are perhaps more numerous than those
which come to light. What most commonly takes place upon
these occasions is negative offence. How easy is crime, even to
unperverted hearts, where nothing but inaction is needed to ac-
complish it! Expose a detested wife and a beloved mistress to a
common peril; will efforts as generous and as sincere be made
for the one as for the other ?

It must not be dissembled that there are objections against
the dissolubility of marriages; which I now proceed to state, and
to answer.

First Oljection.—If divorce were allowed, neither party would
regard their lot as irrevocably fixed. The husband would look
round to find some woman who pleased him better; the wife, in
like manner, would be employed upon comparisons and projects
to procure a better husband. There would result a perpetual
and mutual insecurity in this important state, on which every
plan of life depends.

Answer.—I1st. This same inconvenience exists in part, under
other names, during an indissoluble marriage, whenever, accord-
ing to the supposition, affection is extinguished. In that case, it is
not a new wife that is sought for, but a mistress; it is not a second
husband, but a lover. The strict duties of marriage, and its
prohibitions so easily eluded, rather serve to produce inconstancy
than to prevent it. It is well known that prohibition and con-
straint are a stimulus to the passions. Is it not a truth of expe-
rience, that even obstacles, by occupying the imagination, and
by recalling the mind to the same object, serve only to increase
the desire of surmounting them? The rule of liberty would
produce fewer stray fancies than the law of conjugal captivity.
Render marriages dissoluble, and there would be more apparent
separations, but fewer real ones.

2nd. We should not confine ourselves to a consideration of
the evil of the thing; we must look also at its advantages. Both
parties knowing what they might lose, would cultivate those
means of pleasing from which their mutual affection originated.

Q


226 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


They would take more pains to study and to humour each other’s
disposition. They would perceive the necessity of making some
sacrifices of inclination and self-love. In one word, care, atten-

‘.tion, complaisance, would be prolonged after marriage; and what
is now done only to gain affection, would then be practised to
preserve it.

8rd. Young persons about to be married would not be so often
sacrificed by the avarice and the cupidity of their parents. It
would be necessary to give some attention to inclinations before
forming a union which repugnance might break. That real
suitability upon which happiness depends,—correspondence of
age, of education, and of taste,—would then enter into the cal-
culations even of prudence. It would no longer be possible to
marry property without marrying the owner of it. Before
forming an establishment, some attention would be paid to
secure its durability.

Second Objectton.— Each party, regarding the connection as
transitory, would espouse with indifference the interests, espe-
cially the pecuniary interests, of the other. Hence, profusion,
negligence, and bad economy of every kind.

Answer.—There is the same danger in partnerships of com-
merce, yet the evil is very rarely felt. A dissoluble marriage
has one tie which such partnerships have not,—the strongest,
the most durable of all moral ties,—an affection for their common
children, which cements the affection of the married couple. We
see this bad cconomy, attendant upon an indissoluble marriage,
much oftener than on a partnership of commerce. Why? It is
the effect of indifference and disgust, which produces in married
people who are tired of each other a continual need of separation,
and of something to distract their attention. The moral tie of
the children is dissolved. Their education, the care of their
future happiness, is hardly a secondary object; the charm of
common intcrest vanishes; each, engaged in a separate pursuit
of pleasure, cares little what may happen to the other. This
principle of disunion introduces a thousand kinds of negligenco
and disorder into their affairs, and the ruin of their fortune is


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 227


very often a consequence of the estrangement of their hearts.
Under the reign of liberty, this eyil would not exist. Before
disuniting their interests, disgust would have separated their |
persons. ‘

Facility of divorce tends rather to prevent prodigality than to
produce it. Each would be careful of giving so all-sufficient a
ground of discontent to an associate, whose esteem it would be
necessary to conciliate. Economy estimated at all its worth by
the interested prudence of both parties would always be so great
a merit in their eyes, that it would cover a multitude of faults,
and many wrongs would be forgiven for its sake. Moreover, it
would be very evident that, in case of a divorce, that party who
had gained the reputation of misconduct and prodigality, would
have much less chance of forming a new and advantageous con-
nection.

Third Objection.—The dissolubility of marriage would produce
in the stronger party a disposition to maltreat the feebler, in
order to force consent to a divorce.

Answer.—This objection is solid; it merits the greatest atten-
. tion on the part of the legislator. Fortunately, a single precau-
tion will be sufficient to diminish the danger. In case of bad
treatment the party ill-treated should alone be set at liberty.
Thenceforth, the more desirous a husband might be of a divorce,
for the sake of a subsequent marriage, the more fearful he would
be of 111 conduct towards his wife, lest such actions might be
construed as violence intended to force her consent. Gross and
brutal means being prohibited, attractive means would be his
only resource for persuading her to a separation. He would
tempt her, if he had the means, by the offer of an independent
provision; or he would find another husband for her as the price
of his ransom.

Fourth Objection —What would become of the children after the
law had dissolved the union between their father and mother.
| Answer.— What would become of them if death had dissolved
it? In the case of divorce the disadvantage to which they are
‘ subjected is not so great. The children may continue to live
'@2


#28 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CUDE.


with that parent whose cares are most necessary to them; for
the law consulting their interest will confide the boys to the
father and the girls to the mother. The great danger of children
after the decease of a parent is, that of passing under the control
of a stepfather or of a stepmother, who may look upon them with
hostile eyes. Gurls are especially exposed to the most vexatious
treatment under the habitual despotism of a second mother. In
the case of divorce this danger does not exist. The boys will
have their father to educate them—the girls will have their
mother. Their education will suffer less than it would have done
from domestic discords and hatred. If the interests of the children
would justify the prohibition of second marriages in case of
divorce, for a much stronger reason might the same prohibition
be justified in the case of death.

The dissolution of a marriage is an act sufficiently important
to be submitted to formalities which would have the effect more
or less to counteract the operation of caprice, and to leave the
parties time for reflection. The intervention of a magistrate is
necessary, not only to establish the fact that there has been no
violence on the part of the husband to force the wife’s consent,
but also to interpose a delay, longer or shorter, between demand-
ing and obtaining the divorce.

This is one of those questions upon which opinions will always
be divided. Every person is inclined to approve or to condemn

edivorce according to the good or the evil which he may have
> seen to result from certain particular cases, or according to his
-own personal interest.
In England a marriage can be dissolved only when the adultery
- of the wife is proved. But it is necessary to pass through many
‘tribunals, and, as an Act of Parliament on this subject costs at
least five hundred pounds sterling, divorce is accessible only to a
-very limited class.

Tn Scotland the adultery of the husband is enough to found a
‘divorce upon. In this respect the law exhibits a certain degree
-of facility; yet it is not destitute of rigour. While it dissolves
the marriage it prohibits the guilty party from contracting another

the accomplice of his offence.


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL COPE. 339


In Sweden divorce is allowed for adultery on either side, which
there amounts to the same thing as permitting it by mutual con-
sent; for the husband suffers himself to he accused of adultery,
and the marriage is dissolved.

In Denmark it is the same, provided collusion cannot be
proved.

Under the code Frederic the partics can scparate at pleasure,
and marry again aftcr a year’s solitude. It would seem that
some part of this interval would be bettcr cmployed in delaying
the divorce.

At Geneva adultery is a ground of divorec; but it may also
take place for mere incompatibility of charactcr. A woman, by
leaving her husband’s house and retiring among her friends or
relations, gives him occasion to ask a divorce, which demand, if
persisted in, always has its legal effect. Divorce is rare. It is
proclaimed in all the churches; and that proclamation is a sort.
of punishment or public censure always dreaded.

After marriage, in France, was made dissoluble at the pleasure
of the parties, in two ycars there took place at Paris, out of all
the marriages in that city, between five and six hundred divorces.
But it is very difficult to judge of the real cffects of an institution
so new.

Divorces are not common in those countries where they have
been a long time permitted. The same reasons which prevent
legislators from permitting them deter individuals from availing
themselves of the permission. The government which prohibits
them decides, by so doing, that it understands the interests of
individuals better than they do themselves, If such a law has
any effect at all it must be a bad one.

In all civilized countries the woman who has experienced
cruelties and bad treatment on the part of her husband, has ob-
tained from the tribunals what is called a separation ; but thisis
not attended by a liberty to either party of marrying again. The
ascetic principle, hostile to pleasure, has only consented to the
assuagement of suffering. The outraged woman and her tyrant
undergo the same lot; but this apparent equality covers an in-


980 °- “PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE,


equality too real. Opinion leaves a great freedom to the man,
while it imposes the strictest restraints upon the woman. :


Srcrron III.
On what Conditions ?


The only question here is, to discover those general conditions
of marriage which, according to the principles of utility, suit the
greatest number best ; for it ought to be left to the persons in-
terested to fix upon the particular stipulations of their contract ;
or in other words, the conditions ought to be Icft to their will,
with some gencral exceptions.

First Condition. The wife shall be subject to the will of the
husband, reserving an appeal to the courts of justice. There may
at any moment arise a contradiction between the wills of two
persons who pass their lives together. The good of peace requires
that a pre-eminence should be established which may prevent or
end these contests. Bnt why should the man govern? Because
he is the stronger. In his hands the power maintains itself,
Give the authority to the woman, and every moment a revolt
would break out on the partof her husband. This reason is not
the only one. It is probable that the man, by his kind of life,
has acquired more experience, more aptitude for affairs, more
steadiness of mind. In these respects there are exceptions; but
there are exceptions to every general rule.

I have said, reserving an appeal to the courts of justice. For it
is not our object to make the man a tyrant, and to reduce to a
passive state of slavery the sex, which by its feebleness and its
tenderness, most needs the protection of the laws. The interests
of women have becn too often sacrificed. By the Roman law the
rules of marriage are a code of violence; the man receives the
lion’s share. But those, on the other hand, who out of some
vague notion of justice and generosity wish to give to the woman
an absolute equality, only spread for her a dangerous snare. To
absolve her by law, as far as possible, from the necessity of pleasing


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE. 231


her husband, would operate to weaken her empire instead of
strengthening it.

Man, assured of his prerogative, is not disturbed by the in-
quietudes of jealousy, and enjoysit while he yieldsit. Substitute
for this arrangement, a rivalry of powers; the pride of the stronger
would be continually wounded, it would convert him into a dan-
gerous antagonist; and looking more at what was taken from him
than at what was Icft, he would turn all his efforts towards re-
establishing his pre-eminence.

Second Condition. Zhe control of the affairs of the family shall
vest with the man alone. ‘This is the natural and immediate con-
sequence of his authority. Besides, it is commonly upon his
labour that the support of the family depends.

Third Condition. Property shall be enjoyed in common. The
reasons are, first, the good of equality; second, the benefit of
giving both parties the same interest in the domestic prosperity.
But this condition is necessarily modified by the fundamental
rule which submits the wife to the power of the husband. Differ-
ences in the mode of life and in the nature of property will
require a great many details; but this is not the place to give
them.

Fourth Condition. The wife shall observe conjugal fidelity. The
reasons why adultery should be made an offence will be given in
the Penal Code.

Fifth Condition. Zhe husband shall observe the same conjugal
jidelity. The reasons for punishing adultery on the man’s part,
are far less cogent. Still they are strong enough to justify this
legal condition. They will be explained in the Penal Code.


Section LY.
At what Age.


At what age shall marriage be permitted? It ought never to
be allowed before the age at which the contracting parties are
supposed to know the extent of the engagement; and this requi-


233° PRINCIPLES OF THR CIVIL CODE.


sition ought to be still more strict in countries where the marriage
‘is indissoluble. What precautions are not necessary to prevent 8
rash engagement in a case in which repentance will be useless?
Surely, in such a case, this right of contracting a marriage ought
not to be allowed at an age earlier than that at which the indi-
vidual is entrusted with the management of his property. It is
absurd that a man should be able to dispose of himself for life, at
an age when he cannot sell a picce of land of the value of ten
crowns.


Section V.
At whose Choice.


On whom shall the choice of a husband or a wife depend? This
question presents an apparent, or rather a real absurdity; as
though such a choice could possibly belong to any other than the
parties interested.

The law should never trust this power to fathers. They lack
two things essential to its exercise: the knowledge requisite for
such a choice, and a will directed to the true end. Parents and
children neither see nor feel alike. They have not the same
interest. Love is the motive of the young; and for that, old men
care but little. In general, fortune is a trifling consideration
with the children ; it absorbs all the father’s thoughts. The son
wishes to be happy; the father wishcs him to seem so. The son
is ready to sacrifice every interest to that of love; the father
wishes that interest to be subordinate to every other.

For a father to receive into his family a son-in-law or a
daughter-in-law whom he dislikes, is a vexatious circumstance;
but is it not more cruel that the child should be deprived of
& companion who would make him happy? Is the pain of the
father equal to that of the child? Compare the probable dura-
tion of the father’s life with that of the son, and consider if you
ought to sacrifice that which is beginning to that which is ending,
Such is the objection to the mere right of preventing a marriage.
How much stronger would it be if a pitiless tyrant might abuse


PRINCIPLES OF THE CIvit cODE. 283


the tenderness and the timidity of his daughter, and force her to
marry « husband whom she hated ?

The attachments of children depend very much upon their
fathers and mothers. This is partly true of the sons, and almost
wholly so of the daughters. If the parents neglect to use this
right, if they do not apply themselves to direct the inclinations -
of their children, if they abandon to chance the choice of their
acquaintances, whom ought they to blame for the imprudences of
youth ?

But in taking from the parents the power to restrain and to
compel, there is no need to take from them the power of mode-
rating and retarding. The marriageable age may be divided into
two epochs. During the first, the want of consent on the part of
the parents should be enough to prevent the marriage; during the
second, they might still have the power of retarding for some
months the celebration of the contract. This time might be
allowed the parents to try what they could do in the way of
advice.

There exists a very singular custom in a country of Europe
celebrated for the wisdom of its institutions. The consent of the
father is necessary to a minor, unless the lovers can run a hundred
leagues before being caught. But if they are so lucky as to arrive
in a certain village, and to procure at the moment some passer-by
to pronounce a nuptial benediction, without any questions asked
or answered, the marriage is valid and the father is ousted of his
authority. Has this privilege been left in existence for the
encouragement of fortune-hunters. Or is there a secret desire of


weakening the paternal power and of favouring what are elsewhere
called m1s-alliances ?


Secrion VI.
How many Parties to the Contract ?


Between how many persons may this contract of marriage
subsist at the same time? In other terms, ought polygamy to be


Is polygyny useful or hurtful? All that anybody has been
able to say in its favour relates to certain particuler cases, to
certain transient circumstances—as when a man by his wife's
sickness is deprived of the pleasures of marriage, or when by his
employment he is obliged to divide his time between two houses.

That polygyny might sometimes be agreeable to a man, is likely ;
but it never would beso to the women. For every man favoured
by it, the interests of two women would be sacrificed.

Ist. The effect of such a license would aggravate the inequality
of conditions. Superiority of wealth has too great an ascendancy
already, and such an institution would incrcase it. A rich man
negotiating with a poor girl would avail himself of his position
to secure the right to give her a rival. Each of his wives would
find herself reduced to half a husband, when she might have made
happy another man, who in consequence of this unjust arrange-
ment is deprived of a companion.

2nd. Where would be the peace of families? The jealousies
of rival wives would spread among their children. They would
form two opposite parties, two little armies, each having at its
head a protectress equally powerful, at least so far as rights were
concerned. Whata scene of contentions! what fury! what ani-
mosity! From the enfeeblemcnt of paternal tics would result a
like enfecblement of filial respect. Each son would see in his
father the protector of his enemy; all his acts of kindness or of
severity, interpreted by opposite prejudices, would be attributed
to unjust sentiments of favour or of hatred. The education of the
children would be wretched in the midst of these hostile passions,
under a system of favour or oppression which would spoil some
by rigour and others by indulgence. In the East polygamy may
be consistent with peace; but it is slavery that prevents discord,
one abuse palliates another, all are tranquil under the same yoke.

There would result from polygyny an increase of the husband's
authority. What zeal to satisfy him! What delight at antici-


warwortias oF tire créih' cOnE. 5s


peting:& vival in ah act pleasing to the hustand ! Would this ds
sii evil or a good? Those persons who, ont of a meati opinion of
women, think they cannot be too submissive, find polygyny admir-
able, Those who think that the ascendancy of the sex is favour-
able to refinement of manners, that it augments all the pleasures
of society, that the mild and persuasive authority of women is
salutary in the family, must esteem polygyny a great evil.

It is not necessary seriously to discuss either polyandia, or
complex polygamy. Too much has been said even on polygyny,
were it not necessary to point out the true basis upon which
manners rest.


Section VII.
With what Formalities.


The formalities of the marriage contract ought to have two
objects in view :—1st. To establish the fact of the free consent
of the parties, and of the lawfulness of their union. 2nd. To
make known the marriage, and to secure proofs of its celebra-
tion. It is proper, besidcs, to explain to the contracting parties
the legal rights which they respectively acquire, and the legal


obligations they assume.

Most nations have made this act very solemn; and, without
doubt, ceremonies which strike the imagination serve to impress
upon the mind the force and dignity of the contract.

In Scotland, the law far too accommodating, exacts no for-
mality whatever. A mutual declaration of marriage, in the pre-
sence of a witness, is enough to render the contract valid; and
therefore it is that English minors, impatient of restraint,
hasten to relieve themselves by an off-hand marriage at a village
‘on the Scotch frontier, called Gretna Green.

In establishing the forms of marriage there are two dangers to
be avoided :—Ist. That of rendering them so embarrassing as
to prevent marriage, when there is wanting neither freedom of
consent nor capacity to contract. 2nd. That of giving to the


236 PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL CODE.


persons who are required to be present at the formalities the
power of abusing that right, and of employing it to some bad
end.

In many countries one must watch a long time in the vestibule
of the temple before arriving at the altar. Under the name of
an afiance the chains of marriage are worn without its enjoy-
ments. For what serves this preliminary, except to multiply
embarrassment, and to spread snares? ‘The code Frederic is
loaded, in this respect, with uscless restraints. The English law,
on the other hand, is remarkable for its simplicity and clearness.
By the English law the parties know what they are about; they
are married, or they are not married; there is no intermediate
condition.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


239


PART FIRST.


OF OFFENCES.


INTRODUCTION.


Tae object of this first part is to describe offences, to classify
them, and to point out the circumstances by which they are
aggravated or extenuated. It is a treatise upon diseases, which
of necessity precedes the inquiry as to cures.

The common nomenclature of offences is not only incomplete,
it is deceptive. Unless we begin by reforming it, we never shall
be able to dispel the obscurity in which the science of penal legis-
lation is involved.


CHAPTER I.
Classification of Offences.


Wuart is meant by an offence? The sense of this word varies
according to the subject under discussion. If the question relates
to a system of laws already established, offences are whatever the
Jegislator has prohibited, whether for good or for bad reasons. If
the question relates to a theoretical research for the discovery of
the best possible laws, according to the principle of utility, we
give the name of offence to every act which we think ought to
be prohibited by reason of some evil which it produces or tends
lo produce. Such is the only sense of this word throughout this
treatise.


940 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. a


The most general classification of offences may be derived from
the classes of persons who suffer by them. They may be divided
into the four following kinds :—

Ist. Private Offences.—Those which are injurious to such or
such assignable individuals,* other than the delinquent himself.

2nd. Reflective Offences, or Offences against One's Self.—Those
by which the delinquent injures nobody but himself; or, if he
injures others, it is only in consequence of the injury done tv
himself.

3rd. Semi-public Offences.—Those which affect a portion of
the community, a district, a particular corporation, a religious
sect, a commercial company, or any association of individuals
united by some common interest, but forming a circle inferior in
extent to that of the community.

It is never a present evil nor a past evil that constitutes a
semi-public offence. If the evil were present or past, the
individuals who suffer, or who have suffered, would be assignable.
It would then be an offence of the first class, a private offence.
In semi-public offences the point is a future evil,—a danger
which threatens, but which as yet attacks no particular indi-
vidual.

4th. Public Offences.—Those which produce some common
danger to all the members of the state, or to an indefinite num-
ber of non-assignable individuals, although it does not appear
that any one in particular is more likely to suffer than any
other.f


* An assignable individual is such or such an individual in particular,
to the exclusion of every other ; as Peter, Paul, or William.

+ The fewer individuals there are in a district or a corporation, the
more probable it is that the parties injured will be assignable; so that it
is sometimes difficult to determine whether a given offence is private or
semi-public. The more considerable the district or corporation is, the
nearer do the offences which affect them approach to public offences.
These three classes are consequently liable to be confounded more or leas
with each other. But this inconvenience is inevitable in all the ideal
llivisions which we are obliged to establish for the sake of order and
perapicuity.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 343


CHAPTER II.
Sub-division of Offences.


Sus-vrviston oF Parvate Orrences.—Since the happiness of an
individual flows from four sources, the offences which may attack
it can be arranged under four divisions :—

lst. Offences against the person.

2nd. Offences against property.

8rd. Offences against reputation.

4th. Offences against the condition; that is, against
domestic or civil relations, such as the relation of father and
child, husband and wife, master and servant, citizen and magis-
trate, &c.

Offences which are injurious in more respects than one
may be designated by compound terms; as offences against
the person and property, offences against the person and repu-
tation, &c.

Sus-pIvision OF REFLECTIVE Orrences.—Offences against one’s
self are, properly speaking, vices and imprudences. It is useful
to classify them, not in order to subject them to legislative seve-
rity, but rather to remind the legislator, by a single word, that
such or such an action is beyond his sphere.

The sub-division of these offences is exactly the same as that
of offences of the first class; we are vulnerable by our own hand
in as many points as by the hand of another. We can injure
ourselves in our person, our property, our reputation, our civil
and domestic condition.

Sun-prvision or Semi-pustic Orrences.—The greater part of
these offences consist in the violation of those laws of which the
object is to protect the inhabitants of a district against the dif-
ferent physical calamities to which they may be exposed. Such
are laws for preventing the spread of contagious diseases, for pre-
serving dykes and causeways, for restraining the ravages of
hurtful animals, for guarding against famine. The offences


4 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


which tend to produce calamities of this sort form the first kind
of semi-public offences.

Those semi-public offences which may be consummated with-
out the intervention of a natural scourge, such as threats against
a certain class of persons, calumnies, libels which touch the
honour of some sect or company, insults to some object of reli-
gion, thefts of property belonging to societies, the destruction of
the ornaments of a city, these and others like them form a second
kind of semi-public offences. The first sort are founded upon
some calamity ; the second sort arise from pure malice.

Sus-prviston or Pusiic Orrences.—Public offences may be
arranged under nine divisions.

Ist. Offences against External Security.—Those which tend to
expose the nation to the attacks of a foreign enemy; such as
every act which provokes or encourages hostile invasion.

2nd and 8rd. Offences against Justice and the Police.—It is diffi-
cult to draw the line which separates these two branches of ad-
ministration. Their functions have the same object—that of
maintaining the internal peace of the state. Justice regards in
particular offences already committed; her power does not dis-
play itself till after the discovery of some act hostile to the
security of the citizens. Police applies itself to the prevention
both of offences and calamities; its expedients are, not punish- .
ments, but precautions; it foresees evils, and provides against
‘wants.

Offences against justice and police are those which have a ten-
dency to thwart or to misdirect the operations of these two
magistracies.

4th. Offences against the Public Force.—Those which have a
tendency to thwart or misdirect the operations of the military
force destined to protect the state, both against external enemies
and against such internal adversaries as the government cannot
subdue except by an armed force.

Sth. Offences against the Public Treasure.—Thoso whieh tend to _
diminish the revenue, and to disturb or divert the employment of
fands destined to the service of the state.


ia


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL COD#. 243


6th. Offences against Population.—Those which tend to a dimi+
nution of the numbers of the community.

7th. Offences against Natiqnal Wealth.—Those which tend to
diminish the quantity or the value of the property belonging to
the individual members of the community.

8th. Offences against the Sovereignty.—It is the more difficult
to give a clear idea of these offences because there are many states
in which it would be almost impossible to resolve the question of
fact— Where does the supreme power reside? The following is
the simplest explication. We ordinarily give the collective name
of government to the whole assemblage of persons charged with
the different political functions. There is commonly in states a
person or a body of persons who assign and distribute to the mem-
bers of the government their several departments, their several
functions and prerogatives, and who have authority over them and
over the whole. The person or the collection of persons which
exercise this supreme power is called the sovereign. Offences
against the sovereignty are those which tend to thwart or to mis-
direct the operations of the sovereign, thus having a direct tendency
to thwart or misdirect the operations of the different parts of the
government.

9th. Offences against Religion.—Governments cannot possess
either an universal knowledge of what passes in secret nor an
inevitable power which leaves the guilty no means of escape. To
supply these imperfections of human power it has been thought
necessary to inculcate a belief in supernatural power. I speak
generally of all religious systems, and not of any one in particular.
To this superior power is attributed a disposition to maintain the
laws of society, and to punish or to reward, at some future time,
such acts as may have escaped punishment or may have failed to
be rewardedamong men. telzgion isrepresented as an allegorical
personage charged with preserving and strengthening among
mankind a fear of this supreme judge. It follows that to dimi-
nish or to pervert the influence of religion is to diminish or to
pervert, in the same proportion, the service which the state re-
ceives from it, whether that service is exercised in repressing

zr 2


244 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODL.


erime or encouraging virtue. Whatever tends to thwart or to
misdirect the operations of this power is an offence against


religion.*


CHAPTER III.
Some other Divisions.


Tux divisions of which we are about to speak may all be resolved
into the fundamental divisions already given; but they are some-

- times employed for the sake of brevity, and to mark some parti-
cular circumstance in the nature of offences.

1st. Complex Offences, in opposition to Simple Offences.—An
offence which makes a joint attack upon the person and reputation,
or upon the reputation and property, is a complex offence. A
public offence may include a private offence. For example, a
perjury which saves a criminal from punishment is a simple offence
against justice ; a perjury which saves a criminal and at the same
time causes the punishment to fall upon a person who is innocent
includes a public and a private offence. It is a complex offence.

2nd. Principle and Accessory Offences.—The principal offence

‘is that which produces the evil in question ; accessory offences are
acts which have a greater or less preparatory force towards the
production of the principal offence. In the crime of counterfeit-
ing the true principal offence is the act of issuing the false money,
for thence comes his loss who receives it. The act of fabricating
the false money in this point of view is only an accessory offence.
3rd. Positive and Negative Offences.—Positive offence is the
result of an act intended to produce that end. Negative offence
results from a neglect to act, from not doing what one is bound
to do.

* The question here relates to the utility of religion in a political point
of view, not to its truth. I say offences against religion, the abstract
entity, not offences against God, the Existent Being. For how can a sin-
fal mortal offend an impassive Being, or affect his happiness? Under
what class could this imaginary offence be arranged? Would it be an
offence against his person, his property, his reputation, or his condition P


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 245


With respect to defamation, Horace has well distinguished
these two modifications of the offence :—
- Absentem qua rodit amicum,
Qui non defendit, alio culpante . ... hic niger est.
Who blames an absent friend,—
Another blaming, who does not defend him,
They both are black.

Great offences are generally of the positive kind. The gravest
of the negative kind belong to the class of public offences. If the
shepherd allows himself to sleep, the flock will suffer.

There are many cases of negative offence, which, in a perfect
system, might and ought to be placed by the side of positive
offences. To induce a man to go with a lighted candle in
his hand into a room which we know to be full of loose gun-
powder, and so to cause his death, is a positive act of homicide ;
while seeing him go of his own accord, and suffering him to do
it, without warning him of the danger, is a negative offence to be
ranged under the same head.*

4th. Imaginary Offences.—These are acts which produce no real
evil, but which prejudice, mistake, or the ascetic principle, have
caused to be regarded as offences. They vary with time and
place. They originate and end, they risc and they decay, with
the false opinions which serve as their foundation. Such at
Rome was the offence for which vestal virgins were buried alive.
Such are heresy and sorcery, which have caused so many
thousand innocent victims to perish in the flames.

To give an idea of these imaginary offences it is not necessary
to prepare a catalogue of them; it will be enough to indicate
some principal groups. We say to the legislator, ‘‘The evil
attributed to such actions is imaginary ; it will be better not to
prohibit them by law.’”’ Such is our advice ;—to the legislator,
however, not to the citizen. We do not say,—“ because they
are imaginary, it will be well to commit them in spite of public
opinion and the laws.”

* It is proper to observe, however, that negative offences do not ine
spire the same degree of alarm, and that they are very difficult to prove.


246 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


Imaginary offences are, Ist. Offences against laws which im-
pose religions belief, or religious practices. 2nd. Offences which
consist in making innocent bargains, bargains forbidden by the
laws for false reasons; usury, for example. 3rd. The offence of
an artist or other person emigrating from his native country.
4th. Offences which consist in the violation of prohibitive rules
of which the effect is to fetter onc class of citizens for the benefit
of another, such as a prohibition to export wool, intended to
favour the manufacturer at the expense of the farmer.

We shall see hereafter that so far as the public is concerned,
offences which originate in the sexual appetite, when there is
neither violence, fraud, nor interference with the rights of others,
and also offences against onc’s self, may be arranged under this
head.


CHAPTER IV.
Evil of the Second Order.


Tue alarm which different offences inspire is susceptible of many
degrees, from disquiet up to terror.

But does not the more or less of alarm depend on the imagina-
tion, the temperament, age, scx, position, experience? Can we
calculate beforehand effects which vary with so many causes?
Has alarm so regular a progress that its degrees can be measured 6

Though that which is subject to the imagination, a faculty so
changeable and so fantastic, cannot be reduced to rigorous
precision, yet the gencral alarm produced by different offences,
follows proportions sufficiently constant, and capable of being
determined. Alarm is greater or lcss, according to the following
circumstances,*

1st. The greatncss of the evil of the first order.

2nd. The intention of the delinquent.

8rd. The position which has furnished him an opportunity to
commit the offence.


* All these circumstances, except the first and last, have this in vom-
mon, that they render the repetition of the offence more probable.


PRINCIPLES OF, THE PENAL CONE. 247


4th, His motive. :

5th. The greater or less facility of preventing like offences.

6th. The greater or less facility of concealing them, and of
escaping punishment.

7th, The character of the delinquent. To this head belong
relapses.

8th. The condition of the individual injured, by virtue of
which those in a lke condition may or may not feel the impression
of fear.

It is in the examination of these circumstances that we shall
find the solution of the most interesting problems of penal juris-
prudence.


4


CHAPTER V.
Evil of the first Order.


Tue evil of the first order resulting from an offence may be esti-
mated according to the following rules :—

1st. The evil of a complex offence will be greater than that of
either of the simple offences into which it can be resolved.

A perjury, of which the effect shall be to cause the punishment
of an innocent person, will produce more evil than a perjury
which procures the discharge of a guilty one. In the former
case there is a private offence combined with the public offence ;
in the latter case there is only a public offence.

2nd. The evil of a demi-public or public offence, which evil
propagates itsclf, will be greater than the evil of a private offence
of the same kind. It is a greater evil to carry a pestilence into
a whole continent, than into some small island with few inha-
bitants, and little frequented. It is this tendency to spread, in
which consists the particular enormity of arson and inundation.

3rd. The evil of a demi-public or public offence, which, instead
of multiplying itself, tends constantly to subdivision, will be less
than that of a private offence of the same denomination. If the
public treasury be robbed, the evil of the first order will be less


348 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


than in the case of an equal robbery committed upon an indi-
vidual; for the evil which the individual has suffered can be
made up by granting him at the public expense an indemnity
equivalent to his loss. This being done, things will be brought
to the same state as if the theft, instead of being committed upon
Paul or Peter, had been directed against the public treasury.*

Offences against property are the only ones susceptible of this
repartition; and the evil of these offences is diminished in pro-
portion as it is distributed among a greater number, and as the
individual sufferers are richer.

4th. The total evil of an offence is increased, if there result
from it a consequential evil to the same individual. If in con-
sequence of an imprisonment, or a wound, you have lost a place,
a marriage, 2 lucrative business, it iz plain that these losses are a
net addition to the primitive evil.

5th. The total evil of an offence is increased, if there result
from it a derivative evil, which falls upon some other person. If
in consequence of a wrong done to you, your wife or your chil-
dren feel the miseries of want, this is an incontestable addition to
the primitive evil.

Besides these rules, which enable us to estimate the evil of the
first order, we must take the aggravations into account; that is,
the particular circumstances which augment the evil. We shall
presently exhibit a complete table of them, founded upon the
following principles: —

lst. Augmentation of evil resulting from an extraordinary
portion of physical pain, not of the essence of the offence. Addition
of Physical pain.

2nd. Augmentation of evil by a circumstance which, to the
essential evil of the offence, adds the accessary evil of terror.
Addition of terror.

3rd. Augmentation of evil from some extraordinary circum-
stances of ignominy. Addition of disgrace.


* But though, in a case like this, the evil of the first order is less, it is
of go with the evil of the second order—that is, the alarm. But this
will be, considered in its proper place.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 24%


4th. Augmentation of evil from the irreparable nature of the
damage. Jrreparable damage.

5th. Augmentation of evil arising from the extraordinary sen-
sibility of the individual injured. Aggravation of suffering.

These rules are absolutely necessary. We must be able to cal-
culate the evil of the first order, because in proportion to its
apparent or real value, alarm will be greater or less. The evil of
the second order is only a reflection of the evil of the first order.
Other circumstances, however, modify the alarm.


CHAPTER VI.
Of Intention.


WHETHER a man commits an offence knowingly and willingly
or unwillingly and undesignedly, the immediate evil is exactly
the same. But the alarm which results is very different. We
regard him who has done an evil with knowledge and design, a8 a
bad and dangerous man. He who has done an evil without
designing and without knowing it, is looked upon as a man to be
feared only by reason of his inadvertence or his ignorance.

The security felt by the public, notwithstanding the commis-
sion of an offence, when the act was unintentional, is not sur-
prising. Observe the circumstances of the act. The delinquent
had no design to put himself in opposition to the law. He has
either committed the offence because he lacked a motive to
abstain from it, or it resulted from an unfortunate concourse of
circumstances; it is an isolated and fortuitous fact, which has
no tendency to produce a repetition of itself. But an offence in-
tentionally committed is a permanent cause of evil. We see in
what the delinquent has done what he wishes to do, and what
he is able to do again. His past conduct is a prognostic of his
future conduct. Beside the idea of a villain saddens and frightens
us. It recalls to our minds that dangerous and mischievous class
which surrounds us with secret snares, and carries on its conspi-
Tacies in silence. :


250 PRINCIPLES OF ‘THE PENAL CODE.


The people, guided by a just instinct, almost always say of
an unintentional offender that he is more deserving of pity than
of blame. In fact, a man of no more than ordinary sensibility
cannot but experience the most lively regrets at evils of which
he is the innocent cause. He needs consolation rather than
punishment. He is even less to be feared than any other man;
his regrets for the past furnish a particular security for the
future.

Beside, an offence committed without intention holds out the
hope of indemnity. When a delinquent expects to encounter
punishment, he takes precautions to cover himself against the
law; an innocent man acts openly, and will not think of refusing
a legal reparation.

Such is the general principle. Its application is a matter of
considerable difficulty. To become well acquainted with all the
characteristics of intention, it is necessary to examine all the
different possible states of mind at the moment of action, as
respects design and knowledge; and how numerous are the pos-
sible modifications of the understanding and the will!

An archer shoots an arrow on which is written, ‘ For Philip’s
left eye;” the arrow strikes Philip’s left eye. Here is an inten-
tion corresponding exactly to the fact.

A jealous husband surprises his rival, and to perpetuate his
vengeance, mutilates him. The operation produces death. In
this case the intention to kill was not full and absolute.

A hunter sees a deer and a man close together. He really
thinks that he cannot shoot at the deer without danger to the
man. However, he shoots; and the man is killed. In such a
case the killing was voluntary, but the intention to kill was only
indirect.

As to the relation of the understanding to the different circum-
stances of an action, it may be in three states: knowledge, tgno-
rance, misinformation. You may know that a beverage is a
poison; you may know nothing about it; you may think it
can do only a trifling injury, or that it is, in certain cases, o
remedy.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 251


Such are the preliminaries for settling the question of inten-
tion. I shall not attempt at present to enter further into this
difficult subject.


CHAPTER VII.
Position of the Delinquent ; its Effect upon Alarm.


THxEzeE are offences which anybody may commit; there are others
dependent upon a particular position which furnishes the delin-
quent an occasion for the offence.

This latter circumstance tends, in general, to diminish the
alarm by contracting its sphere.

A larceny produces a general alarm. An act of peculation
committed by a guardian upon his ward produces hardly any.

Whatever might be the alarm caused by the extortions of an
officer of the police, a contribution levied by robbers upon the
highway produces terror infinitely greater. Why? Because
everybody sees that an extortioner in place, however rapacious,
still has some restraints and some limits. He must have occa-
sions and pretexts to abuse his power; while robbers on the
highway threaten all the world, at all times, and are not at all
controlled by public opinion.

This circumstance has the same sort of influence upon other
kinds of offences, such as seduction and adultery. You cannot
seduce the first woman you mect, as you might rob her. Such
an enterprise requires an intimate acquaintance, a certain cor-
respondency of rank and fortune—in one word, the advantage of
a particular position.

Of two homicides, one committed to secure an inheritance, the
other as a means of robbery; the first evinces a more atrocious
character, but the second excites the greater alarm. The man
who feels confident of the good disposition of his heirs experiences
no sensible terror at the first event; but what scenrity can he
have against robbers? The villain who commits a murder to
make sure of an inheritance is not likely to change into a high-


233 ' PHINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


way assassin. He will hazard a danger for the sake of an estate
which he would not risk for a few crowns.

This same observation may be extended to all offences which
imply a violation of deposit, an abuse of confidence, or a misuse
of power, whether public or private. They cause less alarm in
proportion as the situation of the delinquent is more peculiar, the
number of persons in similar situations smaller, and the sphere of
the offence more limited.

However, there is one important exception. If the delinquent
is clothed with great powers; if he envelopes in his sphere of
action a great number of persons; his situation, though peculiar,
increases the circuit of alarm instead of diminishing it. Let a
judge undertake to rob, to kill, to tyrannize; let a military officer
make it his business to plunder, to vex, to shed blood; the alarm
they will excite, being proportioned to the extent of their powers,
may surpass that of the most atrocious robberies.

In these elevated positions, alarm may be created even without
offence. A simple mistake without bad intention may cause the
most lively terror. Is an innocent man condemned to death by
an honest but ignorant judge? The moment this mistake is
known the public confidence is wounded, the shock is everywhere
felt, and inquietude reaches the highest point.

Fortunately, this kind of alarm may be arrested at once, by
the displacement of incompetent officer.


CHAPTER VIII.
The Influence of Motives upon the greatness of Alarm.


Ir the offence in question proceeds from a particular motive, rare,
and belonging to a class of motives small in number, the alarm
will have little extent. If it proceeds from a motive common,
frequent, and powerful, the alarm will have a greater extent,
because a greater number of persons will feel themselves to be in
danger.

Compare the results of an assassination committed by a robber,


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODR i |


with those of an assassination committed for revenge. In the
first case, the danger is regarded as almost universal; the second
is a crime which terrifies those only who have enemies, and enemies
whose hatred has reached an uncommon pitch of atrocity. An
offence which grows out ofa party quarrel causes a greater alarm
than the same offence when produced by private hostility.

Towards the middle of the last century, there existed in Den-
mark and a part of Germany, a religious sect whose principles
were more frightful than the blackest passions. According to
these fanatics, not good actions, but repentance, was the surest
means of gaining heaven; and the efficacy of repentance would
be the greater the more it absorbed all the faculties. Now, the
more atrocious was the crime, the greater certainty there was of
giving to remorse an expiatory force sufficiently energetic. Upon
the strength of this logic, a madman sought to merit salvation
and a hanging, by the murder of an infant child. If this sect
had been able to maintain itself, the human race would have come
to an end.*

Motives are commonly spoken of as good or bad. This is an
error, Every motive, in the final analysis, is the perspective of
a pleasure to be procured, or of a pain to be avoided. Now the
same motive, which in certain cases leads to the performance of
an action esteemed good, or indifferent, may lead in other cases
to an action reputed to be bad. A beggar steals a loaf; another
person buys one; a third works, that he may get the means to
buy. The motive which actuates all three, is one and the same,
to wit, the physical pain of hunger. A pious man founds a hos-
pital for the poor, another goes on a pilgrimage to Mecca, a third
assassinates a prince whom he thinks to be aheretic; their motive
may be exactly the same,—the desire of conciliating the Divine
favour, according to the different opinions which they have formed


* I have somewhere read that the great Frederic, when the first in-
stance of this fanaticism made its appearance in Prussia, ordered the
assassin to be shut up ina madhouse. He thought putting him to death
would be rather a reward than a punishment. This was des to put
a stop to the crime.


954 PRINCIPLES OF TITE PENAL CODE.


of it. A geometrician lives in an austere retreat, and gives himself
up to the profoundest labours; a man of the world ruins himself
and a multitude of creditors by cxcessive expenditures; a prince
undertakes a conquest, and sacrifices myriads of men to his pro-
jects; an intrepid warrior rouses the courage of a beaten people,
and triumphs over an usurper ;—all thesc men may be animated
by a motive exactly the same, the love of reputation.

In this way, we might examine all motives, and we should
perceive that each of them may give birth to actions the most
laudable, or the most criminal. Motives then ought not to be
regarded as exclusively good or bad.

However, in considering the whole catalogue of motives, that
is, the whole cataloguc of pleasures and pains, we may classify
them according to the tendency which they scem to have to unite
or to disunite the intcrests of the individual and of the community.
Upon this plan, motives may be distinguished into four classes,—
the purely social motive, benevolence ; semi-soczal motives, the love
of reputation, the desire of friendship, religion ; anti-social motives,
antipathy in allits branches ; personal motives, pleasures of sense,
love of power, pecuniary interest, the desire of sclf-preservation.

The personal motives are the most eminently useful, the only
ones whose action can never be suspended, because nature has
intrusted to them the preservation of individuals. They are the
great wheels of society ; but their movements must be regulated,
moderated, and maintaincd in a right dircction, by motives drawn
from the two first classes,

It must not be forgotten that even the anti-social motives—
necessary, to a certain degree, for the defence of the individual
—may, and often do, produce useful actions, actions absolutely
necessary to the existence of socicty ; for example, the denounce-
ment and prosecution of criminals.

Another classification of motives may be made, by considering
their more common tendency to produce good or bad effects. The
social and demi-social motives may be called éutelary motives ; the
anti-social and personal may be denominated seductive motives.
These denominations must not be taken in a rigorous sense, but'


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, © 365°


they are not without justice and truth; for whenever there is a
conflict of motives acting in opposite directions, it is found that
the social and demi-social motives generally operate in conformity
with utility, while the anti-social and personal motives are those
which tend the other way.

Without entering into a deeper investigation of motives, let us
stop at that point in which the legislator isinterested. To judge
an action it is necessary to look first to its effects abstracted from
everything else. The effects being well ascertained, we may in
certain cases ascend to the motive, in order to discover its influ-
ence on the greatness of the alarm, but without giving any atten-
tion to the good or bad quality which its common name implies.*
For the most approved motive cannot transform a pernicious action
into an action useful or indifferent; nor can a motive the most
reprobated transform a useful action into a bad one. All
that the motive can do is to raise or lower the moral quality of
the action. A good action prompted by a tutelary motive becomes
better; a bad action founded on a seductive motive is so much the
worse. Let us apply this theory to practice. A motive belong-
ing to the seductive class is no offence in itself, but it may forma
means of aggravation. A motive of the tutelary class will not
have the effect to justify or to excuse, but it may serve to diminish


* What I mean by the common names of motives are those names which
carry with them an idea of approbation or disapprobation. A neuter
name is that which expresses the motive without any association of
blame or praise; for example, pecumary anterest, love of power, desire of
friendship or favour, whether of God or man, curiosity, love of reputation,
pain from the infliction of an injury, desure of self-preservation. But these
motives have common names, as avarice, cupidity, ambition, vanity,
vengeance, animosity, &c. When a motive bears a name of reprobation,
it soems contradictory to maintain that any good can result from it; if
it bears a name of favour 1t seems equally contradictory to suppose it can
result in evil. Almost all moral disputations rest upon this foundation
of ambiguity. To cut them up by the roots, it is only necessary to give
neuter names to motives. We can then go on with the examination of
their effects, without being disconcerted by the common association of
ideas,


256 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


the necessity of a punishment; in other words, it forms a ground
of extenuation.

Let us recollect that there is no room for considering the motive
except when it is manifest and palpable. It would often be very
difficult to discover the true or dominant motive, when the action
might be equally produced by different motives, or where motives
of several sorts might have co-operated in its production. Inthe
interpretation of these doubtful cases it is necessary to distrust
the malignity of the human heart, and that general disposition to
exhibit a brilliant sagacity at the expense of good nature. We
involuntarily deceive even ourselves as to what puts us into action.
In relation even to our own motives we are wilfully blind, and
are always ready to break into a passion against the oculist who
desires to remove the cataract of ignorance and prejudice.


CHAPTER IX.


Facility or Difficulty of Preventing Offences. Their Influence on
Alarm.

Txe mind sets itself at once to examine the means of attack and
the means of defence, and according as the offence is judged more
or less easy to be consummated, our inquietude is greater or less.
This is one of the reasons which raises the evil of an act of robbery
so far above that of a theft. Force can effect many things which
would be beyond the reach of stratagem. Robbery directed
against a dwelling-house is more alarming than robbery on the
highway ; that done by night is more terrifying than that done in
the day-time ; that which is combined with arson than that which
is limited to ordinary means.

On the other hand, the greater facility we see in repelling an
offence, the less alarming it appears to us. The alarm cannot be
very great when the offence cannot be perpetrated except with the
consent of him who suffers by it. It is easy to apply this prin-
ciple to cases of fraudulent acquisition, seduction, duels, and to
offences against one’s self, particularly suicide.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 257


The rigour of laws against domestic theft has doubtless ori-
ginated in the difficulty of guarding against it. But the aggra-
vation which results from that circumstance is not equal to the
effect of another circumstance which tends to diminish the alarm,
to wit, the peculiarity of position necessary to furnish occasion
for the theft. The domestic thief once known is no longer dan-
gerous. He needs my consent to plunder me; I must introduce
him into my house and give him my confidence. When it is so
easy to guard against him, he can inspire only a very feeble
alarm.*


CHAPTER X.


Effect produced upon Alarm by greater or less Facilities for
Secrecy.


Tux alarm is greater when by the nature or the circumstances of
the offence it is more difficult to discover it or to find out its
author. If the delinquent remains unknown, his success is an
encouragement to him and to others; there seems no limit to the
impunity of similar offences, and the injured party loses the hope
of indemnity.

There are offences which admit particular precautions adapted
to secrecy, such as a disguise, the choice of the night as the time
of action, and anonymous, threatening, extorsive letters.

There are also distinct offences which are committed to render
the discovery of other offences more difficult. Persons are impri-
soned, abducted, or murdered for the sake of suppressing their
testimony.

In cases where by the nature of the offence the author must be
known, the alarm is considerably diminished. Thus a personal
injury, resulting from some momentary transport of passion,
excited by the presence of an enemy, inspires less alarm than a


* The principal reason against severity of punishment in this case is,
that it gives masters a repugnance to prosccute, and of course favours
impunity.


258 PRINCIPLES OF THE EFENAL CODE.


theft which affects concealment, although the evil of the’ first
order muy be greater in the former case than in the latter.


CHAPTER XI. '
Effect of the Delinquent’s Character upon Alarm.


Tue character of the delinquent will be presumed from the
nature of the offence, especially from the magnitude of the evil
of the first order, which is the most apparent part of it. Other
presumptions will be furnished by circumstances and details
attending the perpetration of the offence.

The character of a man will appear more or less dangerous,
according as the tuteclary motives appear to have more or less
empire over him, as compared with the seductive motives.

There are two reasons why character ought to exert an influ-
ence upon the choice and the quantity of the punishment, first,
because it augments or diminishes the alarm ; sccondly, because
it furnishes an index of sensibility. There is no need of em-
ploying such strong means to restrain a character, weak, but
good at bottom, as would be necessary in case of an opposite
temperament.

The grounds of aggravation which may be derived from this
source are as follows :—

Ist. The less an injured party is capable of defending himself,
the stronger ought to be the natural sentiment of compassion.
The law of honour, coming to the support of this instinct of pity,
makes it an imperious duty to be tender with the feeble, and to
spare those who cannot resist. The first index of a dangerous
character is oppression of the weak.

2nd. If weakness alone ought to cxcite compassion, the sight
of suffering ought to act in that direction with a yet stronger
force. A refusal to succour misfortune forms of itself a presump-
tion little favourable to character. But what shall we think of
him who selects the moment of distress to add new anxieties to
an afflicted spirit, to render a disgrace more bitter by a new


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 259


affront, or to complete the plunder of suffering poverty? The
second index of a dangerous character is aggravation of distress.

3rd. It is an essential branch of moral police, that those who
have been able to form superior habits of reflection, those in
whom greater wisdom and experience can be presumed, should
obtain the regard and the respect of those who have not becn
able, in the same degree, to acquire habits of reflection, and the
advantages of education. This kind of superiority is commonly
met with among the most distinguished citizens, in comparison
with the less elevated, among the old men and the more aged of
the same rank, and in certain professions consecrated to public
instruction. There have been formed among the mass of the
people sentiments of deference and of respect, relative to these
distinctions: and this respect, which is of the greatest use in
repressing without effort the seductive passions, is one of the
most solid foundations of morals and of laws. The third index
of a dangerous character is disrespect towards superiors.

4th. When the motives which have led to crime are compara-
tively light and trifling, it is evident that the sentiments of
honour and benevolence have very little foree. If that man is
esteemed dangerous who is pushed by an imperious desire of
vengeance to transgrcss the laws of humanity, what shall be
thought of him who gives himself up to acts of cruelty out of a-
mere motive of curiosity, imitation, or amusement? The fourth
index of a dangerous character is graturtous cruelty.

5th. Time is particularly favourable to the development of
the tutelary motives. At the first assault of a passion, as at the
first blast of a storm, the sentiments of virtue may bend for a
moment; but if the hcart is not perverted, reflection presently
restores their former force, and leads them back in triumph. If
a considerable space of time has elapsed between the project ofa
crime and its accomplishment, it 1s an unequivocal proof of a
ripe and settled wickedness. The fifth index of a dangerous
character is premeditation.

6th. The number of accomplices is another mark of depravity.
This concert supposes reflection, and a sustained and continuous


260 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


plan. Besides, the union of several against one is the double
mark of cruelty and of cowardice. The sixth index of a dan-
gerous character is conspiracy.

To these grounds of aggravation may be added two others less
easy to classify—falsehood, and violation of confidence.

Falsehood impresses a deep and degrading blot upon the
character, which even brilliant qualities cannot efface. In this
respect public opinion is just. Truth is one of the first wants of
man ; it is one of the elements of our existence; it is as necessary
to us as the light of day. LEvcry instant of our lives we are
obliged to form judgments and to regulate our conduct according
to facts, and it is only a small number of these facts which we
can ascertain from our own observation. There results an abso-
lute necessity of trusting to the reports of others. If there is in
these reports a mixture of falsehood, so far our judgments are
erroneous, our motives wrong, our expectations misplaced. We
live in restless distrust, and we do not know upon what to put
dependence. In one word, falsehood includes the principle of
every evil, because in its progress it brings on at last the disso-
lution of human society.

The importance of truth is so great, that the least violation of its
laws, even in frivolous matters, is always attended with a certain
degree of danger. The slightest deviation from it is an attack
upon the respect we owe to it. It is a first transgression which
facilitates a second, and familiarizes the odious idea of false-
hood. If the evil of falsehood is so great in things which are
themselves of no consequence, what must it be upon those more
Important occasions, when it serves in itself as the instrument
-of crime ?

Falsehood is a circumstance somctimes essential to the nature
-of an offence, and sometimes simply accessory. It is necessarily
involved in perjury, and in fraudulent acquisition under all its
modifications. In other offences it is collateral and accidental.
It is only in relation to these latter offences that it can furnish a
Separate ground of aggravation.

Violation of Confidence has reference to a particular position, to


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODI. 261


an intrusted power which imposcs upon the delinquent some-
strict obligation which he has violated. It may be considered
sometimes as the principal offence and sometimes as an accessory
offence. It is not necessary to cnter here into details.

There is one general remark which may be made upon all these
grounds of aggravation, Though they all furnish indications
unfavourable to the character of the delinquent, that is no reason
for a proportionate augmentation of punishment. It will be
sufficient to modify it in a certain way analogous to the attending
ageravation, and so as to excite in the minds of the citizens a
salutary antipathy against the aggravating circumstance. But
this will become morc clear when we treat of the means of ren-
dering punishments characteristic.*

Let us now pass to the extenuations, which may be derived
from the same source of character, and which should have an
effect to diminish punishment. I give this name to circumstances
which furnish a favourable indication with respect to the cha-


* We may here propose a question interesting to the moralist and the
legislator :—If an individual indulges in actions which the public opinion
condemns, but which, according to the principles of utility, it ought not
to condemn, can we deduce from this circumstance an indication un-
favourable to his character P

I answer, that a virtuous man, though he submits in general to the
tribunal of public opinion, may still vindicate his independence i par-
ticular cases, in which he thinks the judgment of that tribunal contrary
to reason and his own happiness ; or where 1t demands a sacrifice painfal
to him, and of no realusetoanybody. Takoa Jew at Lisbon for example ;
he dissembles, he violates the laws, he braves an opinion which has all the
force of popular sanction in its favour, and 1s he therefore the worst of
men? Shall he be thought capable of all crimes? Would he calumniate,
rob, and commit perjury if he had a hope of doing 1t with impunity? No:
a Jew in Portugal is no more given to these offences than elsewhere.—
Let a monk permit himself secretly to violate some of the absurd and
painful observances of his convent, does it follow that he is a false and
‘dangerous man, ready to violate his word upon a point where probity is
involved? This conclusion would be quite unfounded. Simple good
sense, enlightened by self-interest, is often able to explode a generat
error, Without leading on that account to a contempt of essential laws.


262 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


racter of the delinquent, and which tend in consequence to lessen
the alarm. They may be reduced to nine:—


ist. Absence of bad intention.

2nd. Self-preservation.

3rd. Provocation.

4th. Preservation of some near friend.

5th. Transgression of the limit of self-defence.
6th. Submission to menaces.

7th. Submission to authority.

8th. Drunkenness.

9th. Childhood.


It is a point common to these circumstances, except the two
last, that the offence does not originate in the will of the delin-
quent. The primary cause is the act of another, the will of
another, or some physical accident. Aside from that event, the
offender would not have dreamed of the offence; he would have
remained entirely innocent; and, even though he should not be
punished, his future conduct would still be as good as if he had
not committed the offence.

Each of the circumstances above enumerated demands details
and explanations; but I shall confine myself hcre to the observa-
tion that the judge must be allowed a great latitude in appre-
ciating the validity and extent of these different grounds of
extenuation.

Does the question relate to a provocation? <A provocation, to
deserve indulgence, must be recent; it must have beon received
in the course of the samc quarrel. But what constitutes the
same quarrel ? What ought to be looked upon asa recent injury ?
It is necessary to trace lines of demarcation. Let not the sun go
down upon your wrath, is the precept of Scripture. Sleep ought
to calm the transport of the passions, the fever of the senses, and
prepare the mind for the influence of the tutelary motives. In
the case of homicide, this natural period might serve to dis-
tinguish what is premeditated and what is the effect of sudden
passion.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 268


In the case of drunkenness it is necessary to examine if the
intention to commit the offence did not exist beforehand, if the
drunkenness were not feigned, and if it were not designed to
create energy for the perpctration. Repetition ought, perhaps,
to annihilate this excuse. He who knows by experience that
wine renders him dangerous, does not merit indulgence for the
excesses into which it may lead him.

The English law does not admit any plea of extenuation in
the case of drunkenness. That would be, it is said, to excuse
one offence by another. This reasoning scems to be hardhearted
and superficial ; it springs from the ascetic principle,—that austere
and hypocritical doctrine which those of a certain profession think
themselves obliged to maintain, but which is scouted by all the
rest of the world.

As to childhood, we do not here speak of that tender age which
is not responsible for its actions, and at which punishments would
produce no effect. Infancy of that sort is not an extenuation;
for in fact there is no offence. Such a child is not a moral agent.
What good would be done by punishing judicially, for the crime
of arson, an infant four years old ?

Within what limits ought this ground of extenuation to be
restricted ? A limit sufficiently reasonable seems to be the epoch
at which enough of mental maturity is presumed to release a
person from pupilage, and to render him master of himself.
Before that period he is not thought to havo sufficient understand-
ing to be intrusted with the management of his own affairs. Why
should the law despair before it allows him to hope?

It is not intended that the ordinary punishment ought neces-
sarily to be diminished in the case of every offence committed
before the age of majority. That diminution ought to depend
upon all the circumstances of the case. What is intended is,
that after that epoch is passed, punishment shall no longer be
liable to diminution under the plea of childhood.

Infamous punishments are those which ought principally to be
remitted under this plea. He who has no hope of recovering his
reputation will hardly rocover his virtue.


264 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


When I speak of the age of majority, I do not mean the Roman
majority, fixed at twenty-five years; because it is an injustice
and a folly to retard so long the liberty of men, and to retain
them in the leading-strings of infancy after the full development
of their facultics. It is the English rule of twenty-one years
which I have in view. We have seen Great Britain governed
for years by a minister who managed, with great reputation, the
infinitely complicated system of its finances, long before the age
at which, in the rest of Europe, he would not have been capable
of selling an acre of land.


CHAPTER NII.
Cases in which there 1s no Alarm.


THERE is no alarm whatever in those cases in which the only
persons exposed to danger arc incapable of fear.

This circumstance explains the insensibility of many nations
on the subject of infanticide, that is, homicide committed on the
person of a new-born infant, with the consent of the parents. I
say with their consent, for ctherwise the alarm would be almost
the same as if the sufferer were an adult. As the susceptibility
to fear is less on the part of infants, the morc readily is paternal
tenderness alarmed on their account.

I do not justify these nations. It is a striking additional
mark of their barbarity that they have given to the father the
right of destroying the infant without the consent of the mother,
who, after all the dangers of maternity, is deprived of her reward,
and reduced by this unworthy servitude to the same state with
the inferior animals whose fecundity is a burden to us.

Infanticide, such as I have described it, ought not to be
punished as a principal offence, since it produccs no evil either
of the first or of the second order. But it ought to be punished as
an introduction to crimes, and as furnishing a proof against the
character of those who commit it.

It is not possible to fortify too strongly the sentiments of re-


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 266°


spect for humanity, or to inspire too much repugnance against
everything that conduces to cruel habits. This offence ought
then, to be punished by branding it with disgrace. It is com-
monly the fear of shame which is its cause; it needs a greater
shame to repress it. But at the same time the occasions for
punishing it ought to be made very rare, by requiring for a con-
viction of it proofs difficult to be collected.
The laws against this offence, under pretence of humanity, are
a most manifest violation of it. Compare the offence with the
punishment. The offence is what is improperly called the death
of an infant, who has ceased to be, before knowing what exist-
ence is,—a result of a nature not to give the shghtest inquietude
to the most timid imagination; and which can cause no regrets
but to the very person who, through a sentiment of shame and
pity, has refused to prolong a life begun under the auspices of
misery. And what is the punishment ?—the barbarous infliction
of an ignominious death upon an unhappy mother, whose very
offence proves her excessive sensibility; upon a woman guided
by despair, who, in hardening her heart against the softest in-
stinct of nature, has harmed no one but herself! She is devoted
to infamy because she has dreaded shame too much, and the souls
of her surviving friends are poisoned with grief and disgrace!
And if the legislator was himself the first cause of the evil, if he
may justly be considered as the rcal murderer of these innocents,
how still more odious does his rigour appear! It is he alone who,
by severity against a weakness well entitled to indulgence, has
ccited that combat of tenderness and shame, which tears the
other’s heart, and makes her the destroyer of her child.


CHAPTER XIII.
Cases tn which there 1s greater Danger than Alarm.


Tuover there is a general correspondency between danger and
alarm, there are cases in which the proportion is not exact; the
danger may be much greater than the alarm.


ee


es PRINCIPLES OF THR Par CODE.


which include a private
evil, and at the eame time a danger, whence results their character
of pablic offences.


It might happen that a prince was robbed by faithless agents,
and the public oppressed by subaltern vexations. The accom-
plices in these disorders, forming a powerful phalanx, might per-
mit nothing but mercenary praiscs to reach the throne, and truth
might be esteemed the greatest of crimes. Timidity, under the
mask of prudence, would soon become the leading trait in the
national character. If, during this universal abjection, a virtuous
citizen, daring to denounce the guilty, should become the victim
of his zeal, his destruction would excite little alarm; his magna-
nimity would appear only an act of madness; and the citizens,
promising themselves not to imitate his example, would be un-
moved by a misfortune in their power to shun. But alarm thus
subsiding gives place to a greater evil:—the danger of impunity
to all public crimes; the cessation of all voluntary services to
justice; a profound indifference for everything not personal to

one’s self.

It is said that in some of the Italian states, those who have
given testimony against robbers or brigands, exposed to the
vengeance of their accompliccs, are obliged to seek in flight a
security which the law does not afford. It is more dangerous to
lend aid to justice than to take arms against it; a witness runs
more risks than an assassin. The alarm which results from this
state of things is not great, because all can avoid exposure to the
evil; but in proportion as alarm diminishes, danger is augmented.


CHAPTER XIV.
Grounds of Justification.
I Proczep to speak of some circumstances which, in connection
with an offence, operate to take away its injurious quality. We
may give to these circumstances the common name of means of
justification, or, for shortness, justifications,


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 267


General justifications, which apply to nearly all offences, may
be reduced to the following heads :—
Ist. Consent.
2nd. Repulsion of a greater cvil.
srd. Medical practice.
4th. Self-defence.
5th. Political power.
6th. Domestic power.

How do these circumstances furnish justifications? We shall
sce that sometimes they import proof of the absence of evil; and
sometimes they evince that the evil has been compensated—that
is, that a good morc than equivalent has resulted from it. The
question here relates to the evil of the first order; for in all these
cases there is no evil of the second order. I confine myself to
some gencral observations.

Ist. Consent. Meaning the consent of the person who suffers
the evil, if there is an evil. What more natural than to presume
that there is in fact no evil, or that it is perfectly compensated,
where there is such a consent? We therefore admit the general
rule of the lawyers, that he who consents suffers no injury. This
rule is founded upon two very simple propositions: one, that
every person is the best judge of his own interest; the other,
that no man will consent to what he thinks hurtful to himself.

This rule admits many exceptions of which the reason is pal-
pable;—such as coercion, fraud, concealment, a consent out of
date or revoked, madness, drunkenness, childhood.

Ond. Repulsion of a greater Evil—tThis is the casc in which
evil is done to prevent a greater evil, It is to this ground of
justification that we must refer the extreme measures which may
become necessary on occasions of contagious diseases, sieges,
famines, tempests, shipwrecks.

But the more serious a remedy of this nature is, the more
evident ought its necessity to be. 'The welfare of the state has
served as a pretext for all crimes. To give validity to this means
of justification, three essential points must be established—the
certainty of the evil to be avoided; the absolute inapplicability of


268 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE


any means less costly; the certain efficacy of the means em-
ployed.

It is hence that the justification of tyrannicide must be derived,
were tyrannicide justifiable ; but it is not; for it is not necessary
to assassinate a hated tyrant, it is enough to desert him, and he
is lost. James II. was abandoned by everybody, and the revolu-
tion was completed without the effusion of blood. Nero himself
saw his power overthrown by a simple decree of the senate, and
the death he was obliged to inflict with his own hand was a more
terrible lesson for tyrants than if 1t had been dealt by the dagger
of a Brutus. Greece boasts its Timoleon; but we may see in the
perpetual convulsions by which she was agitated how ill this
doctrine of tyrannicide accomplished its object. It only served
to irritate suspicious tyrants, and to render them ferocious in pro-
portion to their cowardice. When the blow failed the vengeance
was frightful. If it succeeded in popular states, factions imme-
diately regained all their violence, and the victorious party
inflicted all the evils it had feared; in monarchies, the terrified
successor harboured a profound resentment; and if he became
oppressive, he disguised his tyranny under the plausible pretext
of providing for his own security.

It is said that the penetrating eye of Sylla discovered more
than a single Marius, in a voluptuous youth yet famous only for
his debaucheries. He saw the fires of the most ardent ambition
concealed under the most effeminate softness of manners, and he
regarded those dissolute pleasures only as a cover to the project
of enslaving his country. Would these suspicions have autho-
rized him to put Cesar to death? Is it a fact, then, that an
assassin only need turn prophet, to justify a murder? May an
impostor, who pretends to a supernatural insight into futurity,
immolate all his enemies for crimes not yet committed? Under
pretence of avoiding an evil, this would be to produce the greatest
of all evils, the annihilation of general security.

8rd. Medical Practice.—This ground of justification is only a
subdivision of the preceding. An individual is made to suffer for
his own good. A man is seized with an apoplexy. Shall we


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 269


wait for his consent to bleed him? There cannot be a doubt as
to the propriety of using the lancet, because it is very certain
that it is not the patient’s wish to die.

The case is very different if a man, master of his faculties, and
able to consent, thinks proper to refuse it. Shall we give his
friends or physicians the right to force an operation which he de-
clines ? This would be to substitute a certain evil for a danger
almost imaginary. Distrust and terror would watch by the sick
man’s bed. Ifa physician, through humanity, goes beyond his
right, and the experiment turns out unfavourably, he ought to be
exposed to the rigour of the laws, and his intention, at most,
should only serve as an extenuation of his offence.

4th. Self-defence.—This, too, is a modification of the second
ground of justification. In fact, it is only the repulsion ofa
greater evil, since even the death of an unjust aggressor is a less
evil for society than the suffering of an innocent person. This
right of defence is absolutely necessary. The vigilance of magis-
trates can never make up for the vigilance of each individual in
his own behalf. The fear of the law can never restrain bad men
so effectually as the fear of the sum total of individual resistance.
Take away this right, and you become, in so doing, the accom-
plice of all bad men.

This ground of justification has its limits. Overt acts must
not be employed except to defend the person or the property. To
answer a verbal injury by a corporal injury, would not be self-
defence ; it would be vengeance. Voluntarily to do an irrepa-
rable evil, merely to avoid one which might be repaired, would be
passing the legitimate bounds of self-defence.

But can we defend nobody but ourselves? Ought we not to
have the right of protecting our fellows against an unjust aggres-
sion? Surely it isa noble movement of the heart, that indig-
nation which kindles at the sight of the feeble injured by the
strong. It is a noble movement which makes us forget our own
danger at the first cry of distress. The law ought to beware how
it enfeebles this generous alliance between courage and humanity.
Let him rather be honoured and rewarded who performs the


370 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


function of the magistrate in favour of the oppressed. It concerns
the public safety that every honest man should consider himself
as the natural protector of every other. In this case there is no
evil of the second order; on the contrary, all the effects of the
“second order are good.

5thand 6th. Politicaland Domestic Power.—The exercise of law-
ful power implies thenecessity of doingevil to repressevil. Lawful
power may be divided into political and domestic. The magis-
trate and the father, or he who stands in the father’s place, cannot
maintain their authority, the one in the state, and the other in
the family, unless they are armed with coercive means against
disobedience. The evil which they inflict is called punishment
or chastisement. The whole objcct of these acts is the good of
the great or little society which they govern; and it is hardly
necessary to say that this exercise of lawful authority is a com-
plete ground of justification, simce no one would choose to be a
magistrate or a father, if he were not secure in the exercise of his
power.


271


PART SECOND.


POLITICAL REMEDIES AGAINST THE EVI.
OF OFFENCES.


CHAPTER I.
Subject of this Part.


Havine considered offences as diseases of the body politic, we
are led by analogy to regard as remedies the means of prevention
or redress.

These remedies may be arranged in four classes :—

Ist. Preventive Remedics.
2nd. Suppressive Remedics.
drd. Satisfactory Remedies.
4th. Penal Remedies, or Punishments.

Preventive Remedies are means which tend to prevent offences.
They are of two kinds: direct means, which have an immediate
application to such or such an offence in particular; indirect
means, which consist In gencral precautions against an entire
class of offences.

Suppressive Remedies are means which tend to put a stop to
an offence already begun, an offence in progress, but not com-
pleted, and so to prevent the evil, or at least a part of it.

Satisfactory Remedies consist of reparations or indemnities,
secured to those who have suffered from offences,

Penal Remedies or Punishments are also useful; for after a
stop has been put to the evil, after the party injured has been


272 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


indemnified, it still remains to prevent like offences, whether
on the part of the same offender or of others. There are two
ways of arriving at that end; one to correct the will, the other
to take away the physical power. To take away the inclination
to repeat the act, is reformation; to take away the power, is in-
capacitation, A remedy which operates by fear is called a pun-
ishment, whether or not it produces a physical incapacity depends
upon its nature.

The principal end of punishments is to prevent like offences.
What is past is but one act; the future is infinite. The offence
already committed concerns only a single individual; similar
offences may affect all. In many cases it is impossible to redress
the evil that is done; but it is always possible to take away the
will to repeat it; for however great may be the advantage of the
offence, the evil of the punishment may be always made to out-
weigh it.

These four kinds of remedies sometimes require as many
separate operations; sometimes the same operation suffices for
the whole.

In this part I shall treat of direct preventive remedies, sup-
pressive remedies, and satisfactory remedies; the third part will
treat of punishments; in the fourth part will be considered the
indirect means of preventing offences.


CHAPTER II.
Direct means of preventing Offences.


Berorr an offence is committed, it may give warning of its
approach in many ways; it passes through a train of prepara-
tions which often allow it to be arrested before it reaches its
catastrophe.

This part of police may be exercised either through functions
assigned to all individuals alike, or by special powers intrusted
to authorized persons.

The powers given to all the citizens for their protection are


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 272


those which are exercised before justice takes cognizance of the
matter, and which may be called, on that account, ante-judictal
means. Such is the right to oppose open force to the execution
of an apprehended offence; to scize a suspected person ; to guard
him ; to carry him before a magistrate ; to call in aid; to seques-
ter into responsible hands articles believed to be stolen, or those
the destruction of which it is desired to prevent ; to summon the
bystanders as witnesses; to require the passers-by to assist in
carrying before the magistrates those who are suspected of bad
designs.

The obligation of lending themselves to this service may be
imposed upon all the citizens, and its fulfilment should be strictly
required, as one of the most important duties of society. It wilt
even be proper to establish rewards for those who may have aided
to prevent an offencc, or who have assisted to deliver the guilty
into the hands of justice.

Is it said that these powers may be abused, and that unprin-
cipled people may employ them to obtain assistance in an act of
mere outrage? This danger is imaginary. The affectation of
order and publicity would be quite unsuited to such views, and
would too manifestly expose to punishment. There is not much
“danger in granting rights which cannot be exercised but at the
risk of suffering the legal consequences in case of their misap-
plication. To refuse justice the aid which it might receive from
these means would be to suffer an irreparable evil, through fear
of an evil which carries with it its own redress.

Besides those powers which ought to appertain to every citizen,
there are others, which should be confined to the magistrate, and
which may be very useful in preventing apprehended offences.

lst. Admonttion.—This is a simple intimation, given, however,
by a judge, warning the suspected individual that he is watched,
and recalling him to his duty by a respectable authority.

2nd. ZYhreats.—This is the same means reinforced by a menace
of the law. In the first case, it is the persuasive voice of a
father; in the second, it is a magistrate whose severe rebuke
intimidates.


274 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


8rd. Exacting a Promise to keep away from a certain place.—
This means, applicable to the prevention of many offences, is
particularly so to quarrels, to personal injuries, and to seditious
plots.

4th. Partial Banishment.—A prohibition to the suspected
person to go into the presence of the threatened party; to be
found in the neighbourhood of his house; or in any other place
adapted to become the theatre of the apprehended offence.

5th. Security.—The obligation to furnish suretics, who are
bound to forfcit a certain sum in case the required limits be passed
over.

6th. The establishment of guards or watchmen tor the protec-
tion of the person or property in danger.

7th. Se:sure of arms or other implements designed to assist in
the execution of the apprehended offence.

Besides these general means, there are others which may be
specially applied to certain offences; but I shall not enter here
into these details of police and administration. The choice of
these means, the occasion and the manner of applying them,
depend upon a great number of circumstances; they are besides
sufficiently simple, and almost always indicated by the nature of
thecase. Ifthe question relates to a defamatory writing, it should
‘be seized before publication ; if it relates to things to be eaten or
‘drunk, or to medicines of a dangerous nature, they ought to be
destroyed before being put to use. Judicial visits and inspections
are proper means to prevent frauds, clandestine acts, and offences
of contraband.

This kind of cases seldom admits of precise rules. Something
must be left to the discretion of public officers and judges. But
the legislator ought to give such instructions as will prevent
arbitrary abuses.

These instructions should rest upon the following maxims.
The more rigorous is the means, the more scrupulous we ought
to be as to its use. (ireater liberties may be taken in proportion
to the magnitude of the apprehended offence, and its apparent
probability ; in proportion as the delinquent appears more er leas


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 275


dangerous, and as he has more means of accomplishing his evil
intentions. There is one limit which ought never to be passed.
Never use a preventive means of a nature to do more evil than
the offence to be prevented.


CHAPTER III.
Of Chronic Offences.


Berore treating of suppressive remedies, that is, of the means of
stopping the progress of offences, we must first discover what are
the offences whose progress can be stopped; for there are some
which do not admit of this measure . and those which do, do not
all admit it in the same manner.

The capability of being stopped supposes that the offence has a
sufficient duration to admit the intervention of justice; but all
offences do not have such duration. Some have a transient,
others a permanent effect. Homicide and violation cannot be
repaired. Theft may last only a moment, or if the thing stolen
has been consumed or destroyed, it may last for ever.

It is necessary to distinguish the circumstances according to
which offences have a greater or less duration, because they have
an influence on the suppressive means which may be applied to
them.

1st. An offence acquires duration by the simple continuation of
an act capable of ceasing at each instant without ceasing to have
been an offence. The detention of a person, the abstraction of a
thing, are offences of this kind.

2nd. Wherever the design of committing an offence is regarded:
as an offence in itself, itis clear that the continuance of the offence
will be co-extensive with the continuance of the design. This
class of chronic offences is a sub-division of the former.

8rd. The greater part of negative offences, those which consist
in omissions, have a certain duratien. Not to provide for the
support of a child, not to pay one’s debts, not to appear at the
summons of a court, not to make known one’s accomplices, not to


3706 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


put a person in the enjoyment of a right that belongs to him—all
these appertain to this class.

4th. There are material works of which the continuance is &
prolonged offence, such as 2 manufacture injurious to the health
of a neighbourhood, a building which obstructs a road, 2 dam
which interrupts the course of a river.

Sth. Productions of the mind, through the intervention of
printing, may have the same effect. Such are libels, pretended
histories, alarming prophecies, obscene picturecs—in one word,
everything which presents to the citizens, under the durable signs
of language, ideas which ought not to be presented.

6th. A series of repeated actions may have in their collective-
ness a character of unity, in virtue of which he who commits them
is said to have contracted a habit. Such are the fabrication of
false moncy, forbidden processes in a manufacture, and contraband
in general,

7th. There is a degree of duration in certain offences which,
though distinct in themselves, yet, taken together, assume a cha-
racter of unity, because one is the occasion of the other. A man
commits a theft in a garden—he beats the owner who hastens to
oppose him—he pursues him into his house, insults his family,
spoils his furniture, kills a favourite dog, and continues his depre-
dations. Thus is formed an indefinite series of offences, the
duration of which may give time for the intervention of justice.

8th. There is a certain duration in the proceedings of a number
of offenders who, with or without consent, pursue the same object.
Thus from a confused medlcy of acts of destruction, threats,
verbal injuries, personal injuries, insulting crics, and provoking
shouts, is formed that sad and fearful composition called a tumult,
a rising, an insurrection—forerunners of rebellion and civil war.

Chronic offences arc apt to lead to a catastrophe. A projected
offence ends in an executed offence. Simple corporal injuries
have a tendency towards irreparable corporal injuries and homi-
cide. There is no offence of which imprisonment may not be
the forerunner. It may be used for getting rid of a marriage tic
which proves to be inconvenient, or to carry out a scheme of


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 274


seduction ; to suppress testimony, to extort a secret, to prevent a
claim of property ; to force the prisoner to aid in some criminal
enterprise—in one word, imprisonment may always have some
particular catastrophe according to the object of the offender.

In the course of a criminal undertaking the end may change
with the means. A thief surprised in the act, through fear of
punishment, or enraged by the loss of his plunder, may become an
assassin.

The foresight of the magistrate ought to picture in every case
the probable catastrophe of the offence, and prevent it by a
prompt and well-directed interference. In determining the
punishment, reference must be had to the intentions of the
offender; in applying preventive and suppressive remedies, we
must take into account all the probable consequences, both those
intended and those which the offender overlooks or does not
foresee.


CHAPTER IV.
Suppressive Remedies for Chronie Offences.


Tue different kinds of chronic offencesdemand different suppressive
remedies, These suppressive means are the same as the preven-
tive means of which we have given a catalogue. The difference
is in the time and the application.

There are cases in which the preventive means to be used cor-
respond so visibly to the nature of the offence that they scarcely
need to be indicated. It is very plain that wrongful imprison-
ment demands release, and that theft requires restitution. The
only difficulty is to know where the person or thing detained can
be found.

There are other offences, such as seditious meetings, and some
negative offences, particularly the non-payment of debts, which
require more complicated means to suppressthem. We shall have
occasion to examine these cases under their proper head.

The evil of dangerous writings is an evil very difficult to sup-


278 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


press. They lie hid, they multiply, they revive with more vigour
after the most notable attempts to destroythem. When treating
of indirect means of prevention, we shall show how this evil may
be most effectually met.

The magistrate must be allowed more latitude in the employ-
ment of suppressive than in the use of preventive means. The
reason is plain. When the question is to suppress, there is an
actual offence, and consequently a punishment fixed for it. Too
much is not risked to stop it, provided we do not go further than
we must go to punish it. But while the point merely is to pre-
vent an offence, we cannot be too scrupulous how we act. Per-
haps no such offence is intended; perhaps we are deccived in the
person to whom we attribute the intention; perhaps the person
suspected is acting in good faith, and instead of committing the
offence he will stop of himself. Each, perhaps, demands a pro-
cedure milder and more moderate in proportion as the apprehended
offence is more problematical.

The offences of illegal detention and deportation are of such a
nature as to demand some particular means for preventing and
suppressing them. Thesc means may be reduced to the following
precautions :—

Ist. To require a register of the houses of all kinds in which
individuals are detained in spite of themselves, such as prisons,
hospitals for the insane or for idiots, and private institutions for
persons thus disordered.

2nd. To have a second register containing the causes of deten-
tion, and not to permit a person of unsound mind to be detained
fall after & juridical consultation of physicians. These two
registers, kept in the tribunals of each district, should be publicly
exposed, or at least left open to be consulted by everybody..

3rd. To establish some signal, such as shall be as much as
possible in the power of a person forcibly carricd away, which
shall be a sufficient authority to any passer-by to call the ravishers
to account, to accompany them if they declare an intention to
carry the prisoner before a magistrate, and to compel them to go
if they evince a different intention.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 379


4th. Granting to all the right to obtain authority to search
every house in which they suspect a person to be forcibly
detained.


CHAPTER V.
Observations upon Martial Law.


In England, in the case of scditious disturbances, it is not the
fashion to begin by a military assassination. Warning precedes
the punishment; martial law is proclaimed, and the soldier can-
not act till the magistrate has spoken.

The intention of this rule is excellent; but what shall we say
of its execution? The magistrate is obliged to go into the midst
of the tumult; he must pronounce a long drawling formula,
which nobody understands; and bad luck to those who are on
the spot an hour after!—they are declared guilty of a capital
offence. This statute, dangerous for the innocent and difficult to
be executed against the guilty, is a mixture of weakness and
violence.

In such a moment of disorder, the magistrate ought to announce
his presence by some extraordinary signal. The red flag, so
famous in the French revolution, had a great effect upon the
imagination. In the midst of cries, the ordinary means of lan-
guage do not answer. The multitude cannot hear ; 1t1s necessary
to speak to their eyes. An harangue supposes attention and
silence; but visible signs have a rapid and powerful operation.
They say at once all they have to say; thcy have but one sense,
and that unequivocal; a studied disturbance, a concerted uproar,
cannot prevent their cffcct.

Besides, words lose their influence through a multitude of un-
foreseen circumstances. If the orator is personally odious, from
his mouth even the language of justice is hateful. If his cha-
racter, his air, or the style of his oratory, have in them anything
ridiculous, this ridicule extends to his official acts. Here is an
additional reason for speaking to the eyes by respectable symbols,
not subject to like caprices.


280 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


But, as it may be necessary to join words to signs, a speaking
trumpet is an essential accompaniment. The singularity even of
that instrument would give to the orders of justice more dignity
and éclat ; it would banish every idea of familiar conversation,
and convey the notion of not hearing a man, the mere individual
magistrate, but the privileged minister, the herald of the law.

This means of being heard afar has long been used at sea.
There, distance and the noise of winds and waves early made
evident the insufficiency of the human voice. The poets have
often compared a tumultuous people to a stormy ocean. Does
this analogy belong exclusively to the agrecable arts? It would
be of much more importance in the hands of justice.

The orders should be in few words; nothing which is of the
nature of ordinary discourse or discussion. Let it not be by
command of the king. Speak in the name of justice. The chief
magistrate may be an object of hatred, just or unjust; perhaps
that very hatred 1s the cause of the tumult. To call up his image
would be to inflame passions instead of allaying them. If not
odious already, such a procedure would expose him to become
so. Every favour, everything which bears the character of pure
beneficence, ought to be presented as the personal act of the
father of his people. All rigorous proccedings,—those of severe
benevolence,—ought to be attributed to nobody. Let the hand
that acts be veiled. Throw the responsibility upon some creature
of reason, some animated abstraction ; such as Justice, daughter of
necessity and mother of peace, whom men ought to fear, but
whom they cannot hate, and who ought always to possess their
supremest homage.


CHAPTER VI.
Nature of Satisfaction.


SarisFaction is a good received, in consideration of a damage
suffered. If the question relate to an offence, satisfaction is an


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 281


equivalent given to the party injured on account of the damage he
has sustained.

Satisfaction is complete, whenever the good conferred is equal to
the amount of evil suffered; so that if the injury should be
repeated and the same reparation should follow, the event would
appear indifferent to the injured party. If something is wanting
to raise the value of the good to an equality with the evil, the
satisfaction is partial and imperfect.

Satisfaction has two aspects or two branches, the past and the
future. Satisfaction for the past is what is called endemnity ;
satisfaction for the future consists in putting a stop to the evil of
the offence. Ifthe evil ceases of itself, nature has performed the
functions of justice, and in this respect the tribunals have nothing
more to do.

If a sum of money has been stolen, from the moment it is
restored to the owner the satisfaction for the future is complete.
It only remains to indemnify him for the past, for the temporary
loss which he expenenced while the offence continued.

But if the question is of a thing spoiled or destroyed, satisfac-
tion for the future can only take place by giving to the party in-
jured a similar or equivalent article. Satisfaction for the past
would consist in an indemnity for the temporary privation.


CHAPTER VII.
Reasons on which the necessity of Satisfaction 1s founded.


SATISFACTION 1s necessary to put a stop to the evil of the first order,
to re-establish things in the state in which they were before the
offence was committed, and to restore the sufferer to the condition
in which he would have been if the law had not been violated.
Satisfaction is yct more necessary to put a stop to the evil of
the second order. Punishment alone is not sufficient for that
purpose. It tends, without doubt, to diminish the number of
offenders ; but this number, though diminished, can never be con-
sidered as nothing. Examples of the commission of offences, as


282 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


they arc more or less known, excite more or less of apprehension.
Every observer sees in them the chance of suffering in his turn.
If it be desired to dissipate this sentiment of fear, it 1s necessary
that the offence should be as constantly followed by satisfaction
as by punishment. If it were followed by punishment without
satisfaction, as many offenders as were punished, so many proofs
there would be of the inefficacy of punishment; and consequently
so much alarm weighing upon society.

But here needs to be made an essential observation. To take
away the alarm, it is enough that the satisfaction is complete in
the eyes of observers, although not complete to the persons in-
terested. How can we determine whether the satisfaction is com-
plete for him who receives it? The balance, in the hands of
passion, would always incline to the side of interest; to the
sreedy it would be impossible to give enough; the vindictive
never would think his adversary sufficiently humbled. We must
suppose, then, an impartial observer, and regard that satisfaction
as sufficient which he would estimate as equivalent to the evil
endured.


CHAPTER VIII.
The different Kinds of Satisfaction,
WE may distinguish six kinds :—

Ist. Pecunzary Satisfaction—As moncy is a pledge for the
greater part of pleasurcs, it is an cfficaclous compensation for a
multitude of evils. But it is not always in the offender’s power
to pay it, nor always proper that the offended party should receive
it. To offer a man, whose honour has been outraged, a compen-
sation in moncy for the insult is a new affront.

2nd. Restitution in Nature.—This satisfaction consists either
in returning the thing taken away or in giving a thing similar or
equivalent to that taken away or destroyed.

3rd. Attestatory Satisfaction.—If the evil results from a false-
hood, a statement false in point of fact, satisfaction is complete
by a legal attestation of the truth.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 288


4th. Honorary Satisfaction.—An operation which has for its
end either to maintain or to re-establish in favour of an individual
a portion of honour, of which the offence had deprived him, or
threatened to deprive him.

5th. Vindictive Satisfaction.—Everything which implies a
manifest pain to the offender implies a pleasure of vengeance to
the party injured.

6th. Substitutive Satisfaction, or satisfaction at the expense of
a third party; when a person not a party to the offence is held
responsible in his fortune for the person who committed it.

To determine our choice as to the kind of satisfaction, three
things must be considered, —the ease of furnishing it; the nature
of the evil to be compensated ; and the probable sentiments of the
party injured. These different heads will presently be taken up,
and more fully considered.


CHAPTER IX.
The Quantity of Satisfaction.


As much as the satisfaction fails of being complete, to the same
degree the evil remains without a remedy.

We may fix, by two rules, what is necessary to prevent a
deficit in this respect.

Ist. Follow the evil of the offence in all its ramifications, and
among all parties to it, and proportion the satisfaction accordingly.

If the question relates to irreparable corporal injuries, two
things must be considered ; a means of enjoyment and a means of
subsistence taken away for ever. There cannot be a compensa-
tion of the same nature, but there ought to be applied to the evil
a perpetual periodical remedy.

If the question relates to a homicide, it is proper to consider
the loss experienced by the heirs of the deceased, and to make it
up by a gratification paid at once, or periodically for a longer or
shorter term.

If the question relates to an offence against property, we shall


284 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


see, under the head of Pecuniary Satisfaction, what is required
to put the reparation on a level with the offence.

2nd. In doubtful cases, the balance ought to incline in his favour
who has suffered the injury, rather than in favour of him who com-
mitted rt.

All accidents ought to be at the risk of the offender. All satis-
faction ought rather to be superabundant than defective. If
superabundant, the excess being in the nature of a punishment,
cannot but serve to prevent like offences. If defective, that
deficit always leaves a certain degree of alarm; and in vindictive
offences, all the unsatisfied evil is a matter of triumph to the
offender,

Laws are everywhere very imperfect upon this point. On the
side of punishments there has been little fear of excess; on the
side of satisfaction, a deficit has caused little concern. Punish-
ment, which, if it goes beyond the limit of necessity, is a pure
evil, has been scattercd with a prodigal hand. Satisfaction,
which is purely a good, has been dealt out with the most evident
parsimony.


CHAPTER X.
The certainty of Satisfaction.


Certainty of satisfaction is an essential branch cf security; and
in proportion as this certainty is wanting, in the same propor-
tion security is diminished.

What shall be thought of those laws which, to the natural
causes of uncertainty, add other factitious and voluntary causes?
To obviate this defect the following rules are necessary :—

Ist. The obligation to satisfy ought not to be extinguished by the
death of the injured party. The satisfaction due to the deceased ts
due to his heirs.

To make the right of receiving satisfaction dependent upon the
life of an individual, is to take away from that right a part
of its value. It is like reducing a perpetual annuity into an


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 285


annuity for life, Satisfaction is not to be obtained except by a
process which may last a long time. If the claimant is an aged
or infirm person, the value of his right fluctuates with his health;
if the claimant is on his death-bed, his right is worth nothing.

Moreover, if you diminish on one side the certainty of satis-
faction, you increase on the other the hope of impunity. You
show in perspective to the offender a time when he may hope
quietly to enjoy the fruit of his offence. You give him a motive
to retard, by a thousand impediments, the judgment of the court,
and even to hasten the death of the injured party. At all events
you put out of the protection of the law those persons who have
the greatest need of it,—the dying and the sick.

It is true that, although the obligation of satisfaction be extin-
guished by the death of the injured party, the offender may still
be subjected to another punishment; but what other punishment
can be so fit and proper ?

2nd. The right of the injured party ought not to be extinguished
by the death of the offender, the author of the wrong. The satis-
Saction due from him 18 due from hes hetrs.

To determine otherwise would be to diminish the value of the
right, and to encourage offences. A man conscious that death
was near, might commit an injustice with no other object except
to advance the fortune of his children,—a case more common
than is generally supposed.

Is it said that if satisfaction be given to the injured party,
after the death of the delinquent, it is only by an equivalent
suffering imposed upon his heirs? But there is a great differ-
ence between the two cases. The expectation of the injured
party is a clear, precise, decided expectation, firm in proportion
to his confidence in the protection of the laws. The expectation
of the heir is but a vague hope. The object of it is not the entire
succession, but a certain, unknown, net produce, after all lawful
deductions. That which the deceased might have spent’ in plea-
sures he has spent upon injustice.


io
(43
mo


YRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


CHAPTER XI.
Pecuniary Satisfaction.


Tene are cases in which pecuniary satisfuction is demanded by
the very nature of the offence ; there are other cases in which it
is the only satisfaction that circumstances permit.

It should be employed by preference, upon occasions where it
promises to have the greatest effect.

Pecuniary satisfaction 1s at its highest point of propriety in
cases where the damage experienced by the injured party, and the
advantage obtained by the delinquent, are alike of a pecuniary
nature , as in theft, peculation, and extortion. The remedy and
the evil are homogeneous; the compensation may be exactly
measured by the loss, and the punishment by the profit of the
offence.

This kind of satisfaction 1s not so well founded when there is
@ pecuniary loss upon one side, without any pecuniary profit upon
the other; as in the case of offences committed ames hostility,
negligence, or accident.

It has still less foundation in those cases in which it is not
possible to value in money either the evil of the party injured,
or the advantage of the offender; as in case of injuries to honour.

The more a means of satisfaction is incommeasurable with the
injury, the more a means of punishment is incommeasurable
with the advantage of the offence, the more likely are both to
fail of their end.

The old Roman law, which appointed a fixed sum of money as
the damages for a blow, was no protection to honour. The repa-
ration having no common measure with the outrage, its effect
Was precarious, whether as a satisfaction or a punishment.

There is still in existence an English law, which is a true relic
of barbarous times. A daughter is considered as the servant of
her father ; if she is seduced, the father cannot obtain any other
satisfaction than a sum of money, the price of the domestic ser-
vices which he is supposed to have lost by the pregnancy of his
daughter.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. $87


As respects injuries to the person, a pecuniary indemnity may
be proper or not, according to the respective wealth of the parties.

In regulating a pecuniary satisfaction, the two branches of the
past and the future must not be forgotten. Satisfaction for the
future consists merely in putting a stop to the evil; satisfaction
for the past consists in an indemnity for the wrongendured. To
receive a sum due, is a satisfaction for the future; to receive the
accrued interest upon that sum, 1s a satisfaction for the past.

Interest ought to begin from the happening of the evil to be
compensated ; from the moment, for example, when the debt
became due; when the thing in question was taken, damaged, or
destroyed; or when the service to which one had a right was
refused.

This interest, granted as a satisfaction, ought to be higher than
the ordinary rate of commerce; at least, whenever there is a
suspicion of bad faith. Such anexcessis very necessary. If the
interest did not excecd the customary rate, there would be cases
when the satisfaction would be incomplete, and other cases in
which a profit would result to the offender,—the pecuniary profit,
for example, of obtaining a forced loan at the ordinary interest ;
a pleasure of vengeance or hostility, if the offender has wished to
keep the injured party in need, and to enjoy his distress.

For the same reason, compound interest should be allowed;
that is, every time a payment of interest became duc, that interest
should be added to the principal, and should become a part of it.
The capitalist, at each payment, might have converted his interest
into capital, or havc drawn an equivalent advantage from it. If
this part of the damage is left without satisfaction, there will be
a loss to the innocent party, and a gain to the delinquent.

The expense of satisfaction ought to be shared among the
offenders in proportion to their wealth, or, according to cireum:
stances, in proportion to their respective degrees of criminality.
For, in fact, the obligation to satisfy is a punishment; and it
would be in the highest degree unequal if co-delinquents of
unequal wealth were mulcted in the same sum.


288 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


CHAPTER XII.
Restitution 1x Nature.


ReEst1TvTion in nature is chiefly important in the case of property
which possesses a value of affection.*

But it is due in every case. The law ought to assure me
everything which is mine, without forcing me to accept equiva-
lents, even though I have no particular objection to them. With-
out restitution in nature, security,is incomplete. How can we
be secure as to the whole, when we are secure of nothing in par-
ticular ?

A thing taken away, cither in good or bad faith, may have
passed into the hands of a stranger who holds it in good faith.
Shall it be restored to the former owner, or be kept by the new
one? The rule is simple. The thing ought to remain with the
person who may be supposed to have the greatest affection for it.
This superior degree of affection may be easily estimated, from
the relations of the two parties to the thing in question, from the
time they have possessed it, from the services they have drawn
from it, from the cares and expense it has cost them. These
indications commonly unite in favour of the original owner.+

The preference is also due to him in doubtful cases, and for
these reasons :—Ist. The new owner may have been an accom-
plice in the fraudulent acquisition, though it may be impossible


* Such as immoveables in general, also family relics, portraits, the
handiwork of a dear friend, domestic animals, antiquities, curiosities,
pictures, manuscripts, instruments of music,—in fine, everything which
ig unique, or which appears to be go.

+ When the thing or animal in question is of the kind which produces
its like, we may ascertain, by the same considerations, on which side is
likely to be the superiority of affection as respects its fruits or offspring,
as wine of a particular vineyard, the colt of a favourite horse, &c. It
may well be that the claims of the former owner are not so strong in
this case as in the other. The new possessoris only owner at second
hand of the thing or animal that produces, but he is the first owner of
the things produced.


YRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 289


to get proofs of it. This suspicion is not unjust; formed by the
law and not by man, bearing upon the class and not upon the
individual, it does not impeach anybody’shonour. 2nd. If thenew
owner was not an accomplice, he may have been guilty of negli-
gence or rashness, either by omitting ordinary precautions to
verify the title of the scller, or by putting an undue confidence
in proofs of little weight. 3rd. When the question relates to '
grave offences, such as robbery, the preference ought to be given l
to the former possessor, in order to strengthen the motives which
induce him to prosecute. 4th. If the spoliation has been an act
of malice, to leave the thing in the possession of anybody except
the injured party, would be to leave the offender a gainer by the
offence.

A purchase of such articles at a low price ought always to be
followed by restitution at the price paid. If this circumstance
does not prove the purchaser to be an accomplice, it always
carries with it a strong presumption of bad faith. The purchaser
cannot have overlooked the probability of a wrongful possession
on the part of the seller; for it is the danger of carrying them
to an open market which causes the low price of stolen goods.

When the possessor, though esteemed innocent, is obliged,
on account of the bad faith of the seller, to restore the thing to
the original owner, there ought to be awarded to him a pecuniary
equivalent, to be fixed by the magistrate.

The expenses of preservation, and, for a stronger reason, the
costs of improvements, and other extraordinary outlays, ought to
be liberally allowed to him who restores the property. This is
not only a means of favouring general wealth, it is for the inte-
rest even of the original proprietor, though the indemnity be
paid at his expense. According as this indemnity is granted or
refused, the improvement of the thing is favoured or prevented.

Neither the original owner nor the subsequent possessor ought
to gain at the expense of the other. The losing party ought to
be allowed a claim of indemnity, first against the offender, and
in his default, upon the subsidiary fund of which we shall pre-
sently speak. |


290 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE,


‘When an identical restitution is impossible, there ought to be sub-
stituted for it, as far as may be, the restitution of a similar thing.
Suppose two rare medals of the same coinage. The owner of one
of them has seized upon the other, and spoiled or lost it, by
negligence or design. In such a case the best satisfaction is to
give his medal to the injured party.

In offences of this kind pecuniary satisfaction is liable to
prove insufficient or useless. A valuc of affection is seldom appre-
ciated by third persons. It needs a very enlightened benevo-
lence, and philosophy very uncommon, to sympathize with tastes
different from ourown. The Dutch florist, who sclls tuhp bulbs
for their weight in gold, laughs at the antiquary who pays a
great price for a rusty lamp.*

Legislators and judges have too often thought like the vulgar.
They have applied gross rules to cascs which required a nice dis-
cernment. There are cases in which the offer of moncy 18 not a
satisfaction, but an insult. Shall a lover take moncy as the
price of his mistress’s portrait, of which a rival has robbed him?

Mere restitution in nature leaves a deficiency of satisfaction
proportioned to the amount of enjoyment lost during the con-
tinuance of the offence. An example will show how this amount
is to be estimated. Suppose a statue illegally taken away. This
statue put up at auction would have brought a hundred pounds
sterling, according to the estimate of experts. A year elapses


* Some years since a canary-bird was the subject of ao lawsnit before
one of the Parhaments of France. A journalist, who gave an account of
it, amused himself at the expense of the parties, and regarded the whole
affair as very ridiculous. 1 cannot agree with him. Is it not the
imagination which gives a value to the objects esteemed most precions ?
As laws are made only out of deference to the universal sentiments of
men, can they show too much anxiety to guard everything which makes
a part of human happiness? Should they not acknowledge and protect
the sensibility which attaches us to creatures we have raised and
familiarized, and who in their turn are attached to us? This lawsuit, so
frivolous in the eyes of the journalist, was but too scrious a matter, since
one of the parties had sacrificed to it, to say nothing of money, his probity
and his honour. Can an object rated so highly be considered a trifle?


| PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, 291


between the robbery and the restitution; interest is at five per
cent. Put down under the head of satisfaction for the past, ordi-
nary interest, five pounds; additional for penal interest (see ch. xi.),
say two pounds ten shillings; total, seven pounds ten shillings.

In fixing the damages we must not forget the deterioration,
whether accidental or necessary, which the thing may have
undergone in the interval betwcen the commission of the offence
and the restitution. The statuc would not have deteriorated,—at
least, not necessarily ; but a horse of the same price must of
course have diminished in value. A collection of tables of
natural deterioration, year by ycar, according to the nature of
the several articles, is one of the things which the library of
Justice requires.


CHAPTER XIII.
Attestatory Satisfaction.


Turs means of satisfaction is particularly adapted to offences of
falschood whence thcre is liable to result an opinion prejudicial
to an individual ; but the weight of which, its extent, and even
its existence, cannot be established by evidence. While the error
exists, it is a constant source of actual or probable evil; there
is but one mcans of arresting it, and that is to make its falsehood
evident.

This is the proper place for cnumerating the principal offences.
of falsehood.

Ist. Simple Mental Injuries, consisting in the spread of False
Alarms.—For example, stories of apparitions, ghosts, vampires,
sorcerers, diabolical possessions; false reports of a nature to strike
some individual with fear or sadness, pretended deaths ; stories of
the bad conduct of near relations, of conjugal infidelities, of losses
of property; falsehoods adapted to alarm a class more or less
numerous, as reports of contagious diseases, Invasions, conspiracies,
conflagrations, &c.

Qnd. Offences against Reputation, of which there are many kinds:


293 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


defamation by the positive statement of particular injurious facts ;
diminution of reputation, which consists in weakening what cannot
be destroyed—concealing from the public, for example, a circum-
stance which would add to the éclat of a celebrated action; intercep-
tion of reputation, which consists in preventing the performance of
an action honourable to the individual in question, or in taking from
him the occasion of distinguishing himself by causing an enter-
prise to be regarded as impossible or finished already ; usurpatron
of reputation, of which all plagiarisms, whether of authors or
artists, are examples.

8rd. Fraudulent Acquisrtion.—Examples : false reports to affect
the rate of exchange or the price of stocks.

4th. Disturbance in the Enjoyment of Domestic and Civil Rights.—
Examples: denying to a husband, a wife, ora child their legal titles
to that condition ; or setting up a false claim of that nature; or aid-
ing in a like falsity in regard to any privilege or civil condition.

5th. Preventing A cquisition.—Preventing a man from buying
or selling by false reports as to the value of the thing or his right
to dispose of it. Preventing a person from acquiring a certain
condition, such as marriage, by false reports which make him
nostpone it or give it over.

In all these cases the arm of justice is powerless; forcible
means are null or imperfect. The only efficacious remedy is an
authentic declaration which destroys the falsehood. To dissipate
error, to publish the truth—how respectable a function, how
worthy of the highest tribunals!

What should be the form of attestatory satisfaction? It may
vary with the means of publicity ; it may consist in printing and
publishing the judgment at the expense of the offender, in hand-
bills distributed under the direction of the injured party, or pub-
lications in the national and foreign newspapers.

The idea of this satisfaction, so simple and so useful, is drawn
‘from French jurisprudence. Whenaman had been calumniated,
the parliaments almost always ordered that the sentence which
re-established his reputation should be printed and circulated at
the expense of the calumniator.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. , 293


But why force the offender to declare that he has been guilty
of false charges, and to acknowledge publicly the honour of the
party interested? This form is objectionable in several respects.
It is wrong to compel a man to the expression of certain senti-
ments which perhaps he does not entertain, and to risk the
judicial command of a falsehood. It is wrong to enfeeble the
reparation by an act of constraint; for what does a compulsory
retraction prove, except the weakness or the fear of him who
utters it ?

The offender may be the organ of his own condemnation, if it
be thought fit so to augment the punishment; but he may be so
without swerving from the exactest truth, provided the formula
prescribed to him includes only the opinion of the court as being
the opinion of the court, not his own. ‘‘ The court has decided
that I have alleged a falschood; the court has adjudged that 1
have departed from the character of an honest man; the court are
of opinion that in all this business my opponent has conducted
himself like a man of honour.”’ This is all that concerns the public
or the injured party. Thisis triumph enough for truth, humilia-
tion enough for the offender. What 1s gained by forcing him to
say, ‘‘I have alleged a falsehood ; I have departed from the cha-
racter of an honcst man; my opponent has comported like a man
of honour?’ This declaration, stronger than the former in ap-
pearance, is much less so in reality. The fear which dictates such
avowals docs not change the actual sentiments of the speaker; and
when the mouth pronounces them before a numerous audience, alk
feel and understand that the heart makes no assent.

Where the qucstion is of a fact, the court is less likely to be
deceived ; and a direct avowal of falsehood, exacted in his own
name from the guilty party, will almost always be conformable to
his intimate opinion; but when the question relates to an opinion
—to wit, that of the offender—a disavowal which is commanded
will almost always be contrary to his interior conviction. In
such contests impartial people will condemn an individual ten
times for once that he condemns himsclf.

Even if he is calm enough to give himself up to reflection, the


294 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


triumph of his opponent is before his eyes, he is himself the
instrument of it, and the irritation of wounded pride must increase
his prejudices. He may have been deceived, and you compel him
to accuse himself of falsehood ; you place him in a cruel position,
where, the honester he is, the more he will suffer—that is, he will
be more severely punished in proportion as he deserves it less.

How many scoundrels by the decision of a court would make
themselves be declared men of honour and probity by the very
persons who best knew the contrary! Besides, what signifies
such a general declaration? Because a particular imputation is
false or doubtful, docs it follow that a man’s character is above all
imputation? Because a person has been once slandered, is his
reputation therefore above all blame? Lect one of these patents
of honour be once granted to a man in bad estimation, and at once
@ contradiction appears between public opinion and the sentence
of the judges; thcir authority is weakened, and they are no
longer recurred to for a remedy which, by being badly adminis-
tered, has lost its cfficacy.

With respect to promises less reserve is necessary. It is enough
if the engagement includes nothing contrary to honour or to pro-
bity. For example, a promise ought not to be extorted from a man
to serve against his country or his party; but a promise not to
fight may be extorted, because such an undertaking on his part
produces no loss to his party or his country ; for he would not have
been able to serve them if, instead of being sct at liberty upon his
promise, he had been put to death or kept in irons.


CHAPTER XIV.
Honorary Satisfaction.


We have seen what remedy can be provided for those offences
against reputation of which falschood is the instrument. But
there arc others more dangerous; hatred has surer means of
striking a deadly blow at honour. It does not always lurk
under a timid calumny ; it makes an open attack; not, however,


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 295


by those violent means which put the person in danger. Humi-
liation is its end. An act, the least painful in itself, is often the
most so in its consequences; a greater evil to the person would
be a less injury to the honour; for when we would make a man
an object of contempt, we should avoid exciting in his favour a
sentiment of pity which will produce an antipathy against his
adversary. Hatred has cxhaustcd oll its refinements upon this
kind of offences. They must be opposed by those particular
remedies to which we give the name of honorary satisf..ction.

To perceive the necessity of this course, it is nccessary to
examine the nature and tendency of these offences; the causes
of their importance, the remedy hitherto applied to them by the
usage of duelling, and the imperfection of that remedy. These
inquiries, which relate to all that is most delicate in the human
heart, have been almost entirely neglected by those who have
made laws; and yet they are the first foundation of all good legis-
lation upon the subject of honour.

In the actual state of manners among the most civilized nations,
the ordinary and natural effect of these offences is to take from
the offended person a more or less considcrable portion of his
honour; that is, he no longer enjoys the same esteem among his
fellows; he loses a proportional part of the pleasures, services,
and good offices of every kind, which are the fruits of that esteem;
and he finds himself exposed to the disagreeable consequences of
their contempt.

Now, as the evil, at Icast the esscntial part of it, consists in
this change in the sentiments of men it is they who ought to be
considered as its immediate authors. The nominal offender has
inflicted but a trifling wound, which, left to itself, would soon
closc up. It is other men who pour a poison into it, which
makcs it dangerous, and often incurable.

At the first view, the rigour of public opinion against an
insulted person seems a piece of revolting injustice. Docs a
man stronger or more daring abuse his superiority to maltreat,
in a certain manner, a person whose feebleness ought to be his
protection? All the world, as if by a concerted movement,


296 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


instead of being angry with the oppressor, arrange themselves
upon his side, and heap upon his victim a succession of cowardly
sarcasms and neglects, often more bitter than death itself. At
the signal of some worthless wretch, the public eagerly dashes
upon the innocent object of his malice, lke a ferocious dog,
which only waits his master’s order. Thus it is that a scoundrel,
who desires to inflict upon some worthy man the torments of
disgrace, employs those who are called men of the world, men of
honour, as the executioners of his tyrannical injustice; and, aa
the contempt with which the injury 1s attcnded is in proportion
to the injury itself, this domination of ruffians 1s the more inex-
cusable, as its abuses are the more atrocious.

Whether an insult be deserved or not, is a question which
nobody dcigns to ask; deserved or not, it furnishes a triumph
not only to its insolent author, but to everybody else who chooses
to assist in aggravating it. People take honour to themselves
for trading on the fallen; an affront :cccived separates a man
from his equals; and, like a social excommunication, renders him
impure in theireyes. Thus the real evil—the ignominy—is more
the work of other men than of the first offender, he has but
pointed out the game, they have torn it to pieces; he orders the
punishment, they are the executioners.

For example, let a man go so far as publicly to spit in another’s
face. In itsclf, what is this evil ?—a drop of water, forgotten as
soon as felt. But this drop of water turns into acorrosive poison
which torments the sufferer through his whole hfe. What works
the change? Public opinion, that opinion which distributes at
pleasure honour and shame. The crucl enemy who inflicted it
knew well that this affront would be the forerunner and the signal
for a torrent of contempt.

A brute, a vile wretch, can at pleasure dishonour a virtuous
man! He can fill with chagrin and distress the termination of
the most respectable carcer! And how does he enjoy this fatal
power? He enjoys it, because an irresistible corruption has sub-
jugated the first and the purest of tribunals, that of the popular
sanction. In consequence of this deplorable state of things, all


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 297


the citizens depend individually for their honour upon the worst
man among them, and are collectively subject to his orders, to
execute his decrees of proscription against each individual in
particular.

Such is the charge which may be brought against public
opinion; and these imputations are not without foundation.
Men, admirers of power, are often guilty of injustice towards the
feeble; but when we probc to the bottom the effects of this kind
of offences, we perceive that they produce an evil independently
of opinion, and that the sentiments of the public upon affronts
received and endured, are not in general so contrary to reason
as at first sight they appear to be; I say in general, because there
are a great number ef cases in which public opinion is quite with-
out excuse.

To perceive all the evil which may result from these offences,
it is necessary to put all remedies out of view; it is necessary to
suppose there are none. Upon this supposition, these offences
may be repeated at will; an unlimited career is opened to inso-
lence; the person insulted to-day may be insulted to-morrow, the
next day, every day, and every hour; cach new affront facilitates
another, and renders more probable a succession of injuries of the
same kind. Now, under the notion of a corporal imsult is compre-
hended every act offensive to the person which can be inflicted
without causing a lasting physical evil, every act which produces
a, disagreeable sensation, inquietude, or pain. But an act of this
sort, which if single would be scarcely sensible, may produce, by
force of repetition, a very painful degree of uneasiness, or even
intolerable torture. 1 have read somewhere that water, falling
drop by drop upon the crown of the naked head, is one of the
most crucl tortures ever invented. Gutta cavat lapidem, dropping
water hollows the rock, says the Latin proverb. Thus, the indi-
vidual exposed by his relative weakness to suffer vexations of
this sort at the will of his persecutor, and destitute, as we have
supposed, of all legal protection, would be reduced to a most
miserable situation. Nothing more is needed to establish on one
side absolute despotism, and on the other complete servitude.


395 PRINCIFLES OF THE PAWAL COUR.


Bat such a one is not the slave of a single person only; he is
the slave of everybody who has a mind to play the despot. He
is the sport of the first comer, who, knowing his weaknosa, may
be tempted to abuse it. Like a Spartan helot, he is dependent
upon all the world, always fearing and always suffering, an object
of gencral ridicule, and of a contempt not even softened by com-
passion ; in one word, lower than any slave, because the misfor-
tunes of a slave spring from a compulsatory condition entitled to
pity ; while dis degradation grows out of the baseness of his
character.

These little vexations, these insults, have, for anothcr reason,
a sort of pre-eminence in tyranny over violent attacks. Those
acts of wrath sufficient to quench at once the hostility of the
offender, and cven to give an immediate feeling of repentance,
offer to view a termination of sufferings; but a humbling and
malignant insult, far from exhausting the hatred which produces
it, appears rather to scrve as an incentive; so that it presents
itself to the imagination as the forerunner of a succession of
injuries, the more alarming because indefinite.

What is here suid of corporal insults may be applied to threats,
since it is to their threatening quality alone that corporal insults
owe all their consequence.

Outrages in words are not altogether of the same character.
They are only a kind of vague defamation, an employment of
injurious terms of indeterminate signification, and of which the
meaning varics much, according to the condition of persons.*
What is signified by these verbal assaults is this, that the person
assailed is thought worthy of public contempt; but on what
particular account is not specificd. The probable evil: which
may result is the rencwal of similar reproaches. We may fear,
too, lest a profession of contempt publicly made may invite other
men to join init. Itis, in fact, an invitation which many will


* We must carofully distinguish outrageous words of special defama-
tion from those which havo no particular object. Tho former can be
refuted ; they farnish room for attestatory satisfaction. Tho latter, being
vagae and indefinite, do not offer the same hold,


PRINCIPLUS: OF THE PEWAL CODE: wee


be ready to acsept. The pride of censure, the pleasure of triumph-
ing at another’s expense, the spirit of imitation, the inclination
to believe all strong assertions, give weight to these sorts of
injuries. But they seem to owe their principal importance to
the negligence of the laws, and to the usage of duelling,—that
subsidiary remedy, by which the popular sanction has attempted
to supply the silence of the laws.

It is not surprising that legislators, fearing to give too much
importance to trifles, have left in a state of almost universal
abandonment that part of security which consists in a freedom
from the petty acts of vexation above enumerated. The physical
evil, so natural a measure of the importance of an offence, is
almost nothing; and the distant consequences quite escaped the
inexperience of those by whom laws were first established.

Duelling offered itself to fill this gap. This is not the place
to inquire into its origin, or to examine its variations and appa-
rent absurdities. It is enough that duelling exists; that in fact
it assumes the form of aremedy, and serves to restrain that enor-
mity of disorder which otherwise would result from the negligence
of the laws.

This usage once established, produces the following conse-
quences.

The first effect of duelling is to put a stop, in a great measure,
to the evil of those offences to which it applies—that is, to the
shame which results from insult. The offended party is no
longer in that miserable condition, exposed by his weakness to
the outrages of the insolent, and the contempt of all. He is deli-
vered from a state of continual fear. The blot upon his honour
is effaced; and if the duel has followed immediately upon the
affront, there is no blot; it has no time to fix itself; for dis-
honour does not consist in receiving an insult, but in submitting
to it.

The second effect of duelling is, that it acts as a punishment,
and tends to prevent the reproduction of like offences. Every
new example is a promulgation of the penal laws of honour, a
notification that offonsive acts cannot beindulged in, without expo-


$00 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


sure to the consequences of a private combat—that is, according
to the event of the duel, to the danger of different degrees of
bodily suffering, or to death itself. Thus the brave man,
impelled by the silence of the law to expose himself in order to
punish an insult, upholds the gencral security, while labouring for
his own.

But considered as a punishment, the ducl is cxtremcly defective.

ist. It is not a means of which everybody can avail themselves.
There are numerous classes who cannot participate in the protec-
tion which it affords, such as women, children, old men, the sick,
and those who lack courage to purchase exemption from shame at
the risk of so great a danger. Besides, by an absurdity in the
point of honour worthy of its feudal ongin, the upper classes
have not admitted their inferiors to the equality of the duel ;
the peasant outraged by a gentleman cannot obtain this satisfac-
tion. The insult in this case may have less scrious effects, but
still it is an insult, and an evil without a remedy. In all these
respects the duel, considered as a punishment, is inefficactous.

2nd. Often it is no punishment whatever, because opinion at-
taches a reward to it, which may appear, in many eycs, superior to
allits dangers. This reward is the honour attributed to the proof
of courage,—an honour which has often an attractive power
superior to the force of all opposing motives. The time has been
when it was essential to the character of a gallant gentleman to
have fought at least one ducl. A turn of the eye, an inattention,
a preference, a suspicion of rivalry, anything was cause enough
with men who only wanted a pretext, and who found themselves
a thousand times paid for the danger by obtaining the applauses
of both sexes, by each of which bravery, for diffcrent reasons, is
equally admired. Punishment, being thus amalgamated with
reward, has no longer a truly penal character, and becomes still
more tnefficactous.

3rd. The duel, considered as a punishment, is also defective by
excess, or, according to the proper expression, which will be
elsewhere explained, it is too expensive. Sometimes, indeed, it
amounts to nothing; but it may be capital. Between these


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODR, 801


extremes of all and nothing there is a hazard of all the inter-
mediate degrees,—wounds, scars, mutilations, limbs crippled or
lost. It is plain that if a satisfaction for insults were to be
chosen, the preference should be given to a punishment less
uncertain and less hazardous, which can neither extend to the
life of the offender, nor be entirely powerless.

There is still another singularity in the penal justice which
appertains to a duel. Costly to the aggressor, it is no less so to
the injured party. The offended person cannot claim a right to
punish the offender but by cxposing himself to the same punish-
ment, and even with a manifest disadvantage ; for the chance is
naturally in favour of him who has the choice of his antagonist.
This punishment, then, is at once expensive and misdirected.

4th. Another particular inconvenience of this jurisprudence of
duelling consists in this: it aggravates the evil of the offence in
every case in which a challenge 1s not sent, except for some
known impossibility of sending it. If the offended party does
not send a challenge, he is forced to betray two capital defects of
character,—want of courage, and want of honour: want of that
virtue which protects society, and without which it cannot be
maintained, and want of sensibility to the love of reputation, one
of the great foundations of morality. It thus happens that the
offended party finds himself, by the law of duelling, in a worse
situation than if there were no such law; for if he refuses this
austere remedy it changes into a poison, the infection of which
he cannot escape.

5th. If in certain cases tho duel, in quality of punishment, is not
60 inefficacious as it appears to be, it is only because an innocent
person has exposed himself to a punishment which is in fact a
pure evil. Such is the case of persons who by reason of some
infirmity of sex, age, or state of health, cannot employ this means
of defence. In their condition of personal feebleness they have
no resource, except chance grants them a protector, who has at
the same time the power and the will to risk his person, and to
fight in their place. It is thus that a husband, a lover, a brother,
may take upon themselves to punish an injury to a wife, a mistress,


802 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


and a sister; and if in such a case the duel becomes efficacious as
a protection, it is only by hazarding the security of a third person,
who finds himself burdened with a quarrel with which he has no
personal connection, and with the origin of which he had nothing
to do.

It is certain that duelling, considered as a branch of penal
justice, is an absurd and monstrous means; but absurd and mon-
strous as it 1s, it cannot be denicd that it answers well its prin-
cipal object, ¢¢ entirely effaces the blot which an ansult imprints
apon the honour. Vulgar moralists, by condemning public opinion
upon this point, only confirm the fact. Now, whether this result
of duelling is legitimate or not, no matter; it exists, and has its
cause. It 1s essential that the legislator should look into it; 80
interesting a phenomenonshould not remain without investigation.

An affront makes him who is the object of it be looked upon
as degraded by his own feebleness and cowardice. Always
placed between insult and disgrace, he can no longer stand on
an equal footing with other men, nor pretend to the same atten-
tions. But if, after an insult, I present myself to my adversary,
and consent to risk my hfe against his, by that act I cmerge from
the humiliation into which I had sunk. If I fall, at least I am
delivered from the public contempt and the insolent dominion
of my enemy. If he falls, I am freed from humiliation, and the
guilty is punished. If he is only wounded, it is a sufficient
lesson for him and for those who might be tempted to imitate his
conduct. Am I wounded, or is neither hurt ?—still the combat
is not useless ; it always produces its effect. My enemy perceives
that he cannot renew his insults but at the peril of his life;
I am not a passive being who may be outraged with impunity ;
my courage protects me, nearly as the law would do, if it visited
such offences by a capital or afflictive punishment.

But if, when this means of satisfaction is open to me, T patiently
endure an insult, I render myself contemptible in the eyes of
the public, because such conduct betrays timidity, and timidity
is one of the greatest imperfections in the character of a man,
A poltroon has always been an object of contempt.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 308


But ought this want. of courage to be classed among the vices ?
Is the opinion which degrades poltroonery a hurtful or a useiul
prejudice ?

It can hardly be doubted that this opinion is conformable to
the general intcrest, if we consider that the first passion of every
man is the desire of his own preservation, and that courage is
more or less a factitious quality, a social virtue which owes its
birth and growth to public estecm more than to every other cause.
A momentary ardour may be kindled by anger, but a courage,
tranquil and sustained, is only formed and rmpencd under the
happy influences of honour. The contempt, then, which 1s felt
for poltroonery isnot a uscless sentiment ; the suffering which it
brings upon poltroons is not a pain wholly thrown away. The
existence of the body politic depends upon the courage of the indi-
viduals who compose it. The external security of a state against
its rivals depends upon the courage of its soldiers; the intcrnal
security of a state against those very soldicrs depends upon the
courage of the mass of citizens. In one word, courage is the public
soul, the tutelary genius, the sacred palladium by which alone we
can be protected against all the miserics of servitude, remain in the
condition of men, or escape falling beneath the very brutes. Now
the more honourable courage is, the greater will be the number
of courageous men; the more poltroonery is despised the fewer
poltroons.

This is not all. Where duels arein vogue, he who, being in a
condition to fight, puts up with an insult, not only betrays
timidity ; he revolts against the popular sanction which has made
it a law to fight, and shows himself, on an esscntial point, in-
different to reputation. But the popular sanction is the most
active and the most faithful minister of the principle of utility,
the most powerful and the least dangerous ally of the political
sanction. The laws of the popular sanction, as a general rule,
are in accordance with the laws of utility. The more sensitive a
man is upon the point of reputation, the more likely he is to be
virtuously inclined; the less sensitive he is on that point, the
more readily does he yield to tho seduction of all the vices,


304 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


The result of this discussion is, that in the state of abandon-
ment in which the laws have hitherto left the honour of the
citizens, he who endures an insult without recurring to the satis-
faction which public opinion prescribes, is thereby reduced to a
humiliating dependence, and exposed to receive an indefinite
series of affronts. He exhibits a want of that sentiment of
courage on which the general security depends; and a lack of
sensibility to reputation, that sensibility which is the protector
of all the virtues and a defence against all the vices.

Upon examining the progress of public opinion in relation to
insults, it appears to me that, generally speaking, it has been
good and useful; and the successive changes which the practice
of duelling has undergone have made it more and more conform-
able to the principle of utihty. The public would be wrong,
or rather its folly would be palpable, if, being spectator of an
insult, it immediately directed a decree of infamy against the
insulted party; but that it docs not do. This decree of infamy
is issued only in case the person insulted shows himself a rebel to
the law of honour, and signs with his own hand the judgment of
degradation.

To speak generally, then, the public has some reasons for this
system of honour.* The real blunder is on the part of the laws.
Ist. In having suffered, in respect to insults, that anarchy and
want of all legal redress which has caused the strange and unlucky


* Does the pubhc know what reason there isin its opinion? Is it
guided by the principle of utility, or by a mere spirit of imitation, and a
blind instinct ? Does the duellist act from an enlightened view of his
own and the general interest? This is a question more curious than
usefal; but the following observation may help to resolve it. It is one
thing to be determined by the presence of certain motives, and another
thing to perceive the influence of those motives. There is no action, no
judgment, without a motive, as there is no effect without a cause, But
to ascertain the influence which a motive exercises upon us, we must
know how to turn the mind inward upon itself and to anatomize thought.
The mind must be divided into two parts, of which one is employed in
observing the other,—a difficult operation, so seldom practised that few
are capable of it.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 305


remedy of duelling to be resorted to; 2nd, In having set itself in
opposition to duelling, a remedy imperfect and objectionable, but
the only remedy against insults in the power of the sufferers;
8rd, In having opposed it by disproportioned and inefficacious
means.


CHAPTER XY.
Remedies for Offences against Honour.

WE will begin with the means of satisfaction for offended honour;
and will afterwards point out the reasons which justify those means.

Offences against honour may be divided into three classes :—
verbal outrages, corporal insults, insulting threats. The punish-
ment, if rendered analogous to the offence, may be made to operate
at the same time as a means of satisfaction to the party injured.

List of these punishments :—

Ist. Simple admonition.

2nd. The offender obliged to read aloud his own sentence.

8rd. The offender on his knecs before the injured party.

4th. An apology pronounced by him.

5th. Emblematical dresses (in certain particular cases).

6th. Emblematical masks.

7th. The witnesses of the insult called in to be witnesses of
the reparation.

8th. The persons whose good opinion is most important to the
offender called to be present at the exccution of the sentence.

9th. Publicity of the judgment.

10th. Banishment, longer or shorter, either from the presence
of the injured party or from that of his friends. For an insult
given in a public place—as a market, a theatre, or a church—
banishment from those places.

11th. For a corporal insult, a retort of the same kind, inflicted
by the injured party, or, if he prefer it, by the hand of the
executioner.

12th. For an insult to a woman, the man to be dressed in
women’s clothes, and the retort to be inflicted by the hand of a
‘woman.


806 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


Many of these means are new, and some of them will appear
singular; but new means are necessary, since experience has
shown the insufficiency of the old ones; and as to their apparent
singularity, that very thing adapts them to their end, for it
enables them, by analogy to the insult, to transfer to the offender
the contempt he desired to fix upon the innocent sufferer. These
means are varied and numerous to mect the number and variety
of this sort of offences, to correspond to the gravity of cases, and
to furnish reparations adapted to the different social distinctions ;
for it is not fit to treat in the same way an insult to a subaltern
and to a magistrate, to an ecclesiastic and to a soldier, to a youth
and to an old man. All this theatrical play, apologies, attitudes,
emblems, forms solemn or grotesquc, according to the difference
of cases—in one word, these public satisfactions turned into spec-
tacles, would furnish to the injured party immediate pleasures,
and pleasures of recollection, which would well compensate the
mortification of the insult.

Since the injury is wrought by artificial means, artificial means
should aid in the reparation ; otherwise 1t would fail to strike the
imagination in the same way, and would not be complete. The
offender has availed himself of a ccrtaim form of insult to turn
the public contempt upon his adversary ; it is necessary to employ
an analogous form of infliction in ordcr to turn this contempt back
upon him. Opinion causcs the discasc, opinion must cure it.
The wounds inflicted by the spear of Telephus could only be
healed by the touch of the same weapon. This is a symbol of
the operations of justice in matters of honour. An affront has
done the evil, an affront must work the cure.

Let us follow out the effect of a satisfaction of this kind. The
injured man, reduced to an intolerable state of inferiority in
respect to his aggressor, can no longer frequent with security
his old places of resort, and he discovers in the future only a
perspective of injuries. But immediately after the legal repa-
ration he regains what’he had lost; he walks securely with
upraised head, and even acquires a positive superiority over his
adversary. How is this change produced? It is because he


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 807


appears no longer a feeble and miserable being whom any one
may tread under foot; the power of the magistrate has become
his; no one will be tempted to repeat an insult so signally
punished. His oppressor, who for a moment seemed so high,
has fallen from his car of tnumph; the punishment to which he
has been subjected in the sight of so many witnesses proves that
he is no longer to be feared ; and nothing of his violence remains
except the recollection of his chastisement. "What more can the
insulted party desire? What morc could he do if he had the
strength of a giant?

If legislators had always fitly applied this system of satisfac-
tions, duelling never would have come into existence, for it
always has been, and now is, only a supplement to the insufii-
ciency of the laws. In proportion as this void of legislation is
filled by regulations adapted to the protection of honour, we shall
see the usage of duels diminished; and it would cease at once if
a system of honorary satisfactions were introduced, conformed to
public opinion, and faithfully administered. In former times
duels served as a means of decision in a great number of cases
in which it would be the height of absurdity to employ them
now. <A suitor who should send a challenge to his antagonist to
prove a title, or to establish a right, would be thought a fool;
but in the twelfth century that means was constantly employed
for those purposes. Whence the change? It comes from that
change in jurisprudence which has gradually taken place. Jus-
tice growing more enlightened, and directing itself by better
rules and forms, has offered means of redress preferable to the
duel.* The samo cause will continue to produce the same effects.
As soon as the law shall offer a certain remedy against offences
that wound the honour, no one will be tempted to recur to an
equivocal and dangerous means. Who loves pain and death ?
Nobody. Such a sentiment is equally a stranger to the heart of
the hero and to the soul of the coward. It is the silence of the


* In France, the duel in civil cases was abolished by Philip-le-Bel, in
1305. He had rendered the Parliament stationary at Paris, and had done
much for the establishment of judicial order.


x 3


808 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


laws, it is the forgetfulness of justice, which drives the wise man
to this sole, sad resource of self-protection.

To give to honorary satisfaction all the extent and force of
which it is susceptible, the definition of offences against honour
ought to have latitude enough to embrace them all. Follow
public opinion, step by step; be its faithful interpreter. All
which opinion regards as an assault upon honour, let the laws so
regard. Isa word, a gesture, a look sufficient in the public eye
to constitute an insult ?—that word, that gesture, that look, in
the view of justice, should constitute an offence. The intent to
injure is an injury. Everything intended to testify contempt for
@ man, or to draw contempt upon him, is an insult, and ought to
have its reparation.

Is it said that these insulting signs, doubtful in their nature,
fugitive and often imaginary, would be difficult to ascertain, and
that persons easily offended, sccing an insult where there was
none, might subject the imnocent to undue punishment ?

This danger amounts to nothing; for it is quite easy to trace the
line of separation between real and imaginary injuries. This may
be accomplished by allowing the plaintiff to question the defendant
as to his intention—‘‘ Did you design by such a word or action
to testify contempt for such a person?” If the defendant denics
the intention, his answer, true or false, is cnough to purge the
honour of him who has been, or who thinks himself offended.
For even if the injury were quite uncquivocal, to deny it is to
have recourse to falsehood; it is the avowal of a fault, it is
the betrayal of fear or weakness; in one word, it is an act of
inferiority, it is to humble one’s self before an adversary.

In arranging the catalogue of offences which have the character
of insult, there are some necessary exceptions. Care must be
taken not to involve in a decree of proscription useful acts of
public censure, an exercise of the power of the popular sanction.
There must be reserved to friends and to superiors the authority
of correction and reprimand; it is necessary to protect the liberty
of history, and the liberty of criticism.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 309


CHAPTER XVI.
Vindictive Satisfaction.


Tas subject does not require many particular rules. Every kind
of satisfaction, as it is a punishment to the offender, naturally
produces a pleasure of vengeance to the injured party.

That pleasure is a gain; 1t calls to mind Samson’s riddle—it 1s
the sweet coming out of the ternble, it is honey dropping from
the lion’s mouth. Produced without expense, a clear gain result-
ing from an operation necessary on other accounts, itis an enjoy-
ment to be cultivated, hke any other; for the pleasure of ven-
geance, abstractly considered, is, hke every other pleasure, a good
in itself. It is innocent while restrained within the limits of the
law ; it only becomes criminal at the moment when it breaks
those limits. It is not vengeance which is to be regarded as the
most malignant and dangerous passion of the human heart ; 1t 1s
antipathy, 1t is intolerance—the hatreds of pride, of prejudice, of
religion, of politics. The enmity which is dangerous is not that
which is well founded, but that which springs up without any
substantial cause.

Useful to the individual, this motive is also useful to the public;
indeed, it is necessary. It is this vindictive satisfaction which
sets the tongues of witnesses in motion; it is this which animates
the accuscr and engages him in the public service, in spite of the
embarrassments, the expenses, the enmitics to which it exposes
him ; it is this, too, which surmounts the public pity in the punish-
ment of criminals. Take away this resource, and the power of
the laws will be very limited; or, at all cvents, the tribunals
will not obtain assistance, except for money—a means not only
burdensome to society, but exposed to other very serious objections.

Common moralists, always duped by words, are not able to
comprehend this truth. The spirit of vengeance is odious; all
satisfaction drawn from that source is faulty; forgiveness of
injuries is the first of virtues. No doubt those implacable cha-
racters which no satisfaction can soften are odious, and ought


310 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


to be so. Forgétfulness of injuries is a virtue necessary to
humanity ; but it becomes a virtue only after justice has done its
work, when it has furnished or denied a satisfaction. Before that,
to forget injuries is to invite their repetition; it is not being the
friend, it is being the enemy of society. What more can crime
desire than an arrangement by which offences shall be always
pardoned ?

What ought to be done to afford this vindictive satisfaction ?
Everything which justice requires for the sake of satisfactions of
other kinds and for the punishment of the offence, but nothing more.
The least excess consccrated to the sole object of vengeance would
be a pureevil. Inflict the proper punishment, and Ict the injured
party derive from it such a degree of satisfaction as comports with
his situation, and of which his nature 1s susceptible.

But though nothing should be added to the severity of
punishment with this particular end in view, the punishment
may be modified for the accomplishment of this end, according
to what may be supposed to be the sentiments of the injured
party, from his position or from the nature of the offence. The
preceding chapter contains some examples of this sort; others
will be given when treating of the choice of punishments.


CHAPTER XVII.


Substitutive Satisfaction; or, Satisfaction at the charge of
a Third Party.


In ordinary cases, the expense of satisfaction ought to fall upon
the author of the evil; because, falling in that way, it tends in
quality of punishment to prevent the evil—that is, to diminish
the frequency of the offence. Where it falls upon another person,
it has no such tendency.

Where this reason does not exist, with regard to the first
respondent, the law of responsibility must be modified in conse-
quence; or, in other terms, a third person must be called in to
pay, instead of the author of the damage, when he cannot him-


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, 31h


self furnish the satisfaction, and when such an obligation imposed
upon a third person tends to prevent the offence.

This may happen in the following cases :—1st. The responsi-
bility of a master for his servant 2nd. The responsibility of a
guardian for his ward. 38rd. The responsibility of a father for
his children. 4th. The responsibility of a mother for her chil-
dren, in her character of guardian. 5th. The responsibility of a
husband for his wife. 6th. The responsibility of an innocent
person who profits by the offence.

I. Responstrzity or a Master.—This responsibility is founded
upon two reasons, the one of security, the other of equality. This
obligation imposed upon the master acts like a punishment, and
diminishes the chance of like mishaps. He is interested to know
the charactcr, and to watch over the conduct of those for whom he
is responsible. By making him accountable for neglect of this duty,
the law appoints him a police inspector and a domestic magistrate.

Besides, the condition of a master almost necessarily supposes
a certain fortune, the quality of being an injured party supposes
nothing of that sort. Since an inevitable evil hes between two
parties, it is best to throw the weight of it upon him who has
most means of sustaining it.

This responsibility may have some inconveniences, but if it
did not exist there would be more and worse ones. If a master
wished to occasion a trespuss upon the lands of his neighbour, to
expose him to some accident, to inflict a piece of vengeance upon
him, to make him live in continual inquietude, he would only
need choose some vicious domestics, to whom he might hint the
service of his passions and his hatreds, and that without com-
manding anything, without being an accomplice, and without
affording any evidence of participation; always ready to sustain
or to disavow, he would make them the instruments of his
designs, and would run no risks himself.* By showing them a
little more than ordinary confidence, by taking advantage of their


* There are many ways of injuring another without any trace of
participation. I have been told by a French lawyer, that when the
Parliaments wished to save a culprit, they selected with design some


312 PRINCIPLES OF THE PRNAL CODE.


attachment, their devotedness, their servile vanity, there is no-
thing he could not attain by general instigations without expos-
ing himself to the danger of commanding anything in particular,
and he would enjoy with impunity the evil which he had done
by their hands, ‘‘ Unfortunate that I am,” cricd Henry IT., one
day, when wearied with the haughtiness of an insolent prelate.
“What! so many servants who boast their zcal, and not one
who dares to avenge me'’ The murder of Becket was the fruit
of this imprudent or criminal apostrophe.

What, in the master's case, diminishes in a great degree the
danger of his responsibility, is the responsibility of the servant.
The real author of the evil, as far as circumstances permit, ought
to be the first to support its troublesome consequences; he ought
to be charged with the burden of satisfaction according to his
capacity ; so that a negligent or vicious servant may not coolly
say, while doing the damage, “ It is my master’s affair, not mine.”

Besides, the responsibility of the mastcr 1s not always the
same; it must vary according to circumstanccs, which must be
examined with attention.

The first thing to be considered is the degree of connection
subsisting between the master and the servant. If the question
is of a day-labourcr, or a man engaged by the year; of a work-
man who lodges abroad, or in the house, of an apprentice or a
slave; it is clear that the closcr the connection 18 the greater
should be the responsibility. A foreman is less dependent upon
his employer than a lackey upon his master.

The second thing to be considered is the nature of the work
upon which the scrvant 1s employed. The presumptions against
the master will be weaker in those cascs in which his interest is
most exposed to suffer by the neghgence of his servants, and
stronger in the contrary cases. In the first case the master
already has a sufficient motive to be watchful; in the second he
may not have that motive, and the law should supply it.


anskilful person to report the cause, hoping that his blunders would leave


some loop-hole for annulling the sentence! Chicane so artfal is almost
entitled to the epithet of genius.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 318


Third. The master is peculiarly responsible when the mischief
has happened by occasion, or in the act of his service: because 1t
is to be presumed that he dirccted it, or at least that he foresaw
what has happened; and because he can easier watch his servants
at those times than while they are at liberty. ;

There is a case which seems to reduce to a low degree, if it
does not altogether annihilate, the strongest reason for the master’s
responsibility : viz., when the evil is caused by a grave offence,
accompanicd consequently by a proportionate punishment. Ifa
man of mine, for example, having a personal quarrel with my
neighbour, scts his barn on fire, ought I to be responsible for a
damage which I could not prevent? If the fellow did not fear
being hung, would he fear a dismissal from my service ?

Such are the presumptions which serve as a basis to respon-
sibility ; presumption of negligence on the part of the master ;
presumption of his superiority in wealth. But it is not to be
forgotten that presumptions are nothing when belied by facts.
For example, an accident has happened by the overturn of a
vehicle. Nothing is known of the injured party. Itis presumed
that he stands in need of an mdemuity from the owner of the
vehicle, who offcrs himself to the imagination as being well able
to support the loss. But what becomes of this presumption, when
it is known that this owner is a poor farmer, and the injured
party an opulent landlord; that the first would be ruined if
obliged to pay an indemnity, hardly of the slightest consequence
to the other? Prcsumptions ought to guide, but not to govern
us. The legislator ought to consult them 1n establishing general
rules; he should lcave it to the magistrate to modify their appli-
cation according to individual cases.

The general rule would establish the responsibility of the
master; but the magistrate, according to circumstances, might
change this arrangement, and make the weight of the loss fall
upon the true author of the evil.

The greatest abuse which can result from leaving to the magis-
trate the utmost latitude in this distribution will be to produce,
in certain cases, the same inconvenience which must necessarily


314 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


result from a general and inflexible rule. Should the magistrate
on one occasion favour the author of the evil, and the master on
another? He who suffers wrong will suffer no more from this
partiality than he might have suffered from the inflexibility of
the law.

In our systems of law, no attention has been given to these
modifications. The entire burden of the loss has been thrown
sometimes upon the servant who has caused the damage, and
sometimes upon the master; whence it follows that sometimes
security and sometimes equality have been neglected, both of
which ought alternately to have the preference, according to the
nature of the case.

II. Respoxstpruiry oF A Guarpran.—The ward is not an
advantage to the guardian; in general he is a burden. If the
ward has sufficient means to furnish satisfaction, it is not neces-
sary that another should pay for his acts. If he has no means of
his own, the wardship is too heavy a burden in itself to be loaded
with factitious responsibility. All that security requires is to
attach to the negligence of the guardian, proved or even presumed,
an amend more or less weighty, according to the nature of the
proofs, but such as never to exceed the amount required for
satisfaction.

III. Resronsrsruity or a Fatuen.—If a master ought to be
responsible for the faults of his servants, for a much stronger
reason a father ought to be so for those of his children. If a
master can and ought to watch over those who depend upon him,
it is a duty more pressing upon a father, and much easier to be
fulfilled. He not only exercises over his children the authority
of a domestic magistrate, but he has all the ascendancy of affec-
tion. He is not only the guardian of their physical existence,
he has it in his power to be the controller of their feelings. Ifa
master may abstain from employing, or may dismiss upon dis-
covery, a servant who evinces dangcrous dispositions, a father,
who can fashion at his pleasure the character and habits of his
children, is justly thought to be the author of all the dispositions
which they manifest. If they are depraved, it is almost always


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 315


the effect of his negligence or of his vices; and he ought to bear:
the consequences of an evil which he might have prevented.

If, after a reason so weighty, there needs yct another argument,
it may be said that children, saving the rights which their quality
of sensitive beings confers upon them, are a part of the father’s
property, and ought so to be regarded. He who enjoys the
advantages of the possession, ought to support its inconveniences.
The good is more than a compensation for the evil. It would be
strange if the loss or depredations occasioned by children should
be borne by an individual who knows nothing of them, except by
their heedlessness or their malice, rather than by him who finds
in them the greatest source of his happincss, and who indemnifies
himself by a thousand hopes for the actual cares of their education.

But this responsibility has a natural limit. The majority ofa
son, or the marriage of a daughter, putting an end to the father’s
authority, puts an end also to his legal responsibility. He ought
not to be answerable for actions which he no longer has the
power to prevent.

To perpetuate for life the father’s responsibility, on the plea
that he is the author of the vicious dispositions of his children,
would be unjust and crucl; for in the first place it is not true
that all the vices of an adult are attributable to the defects of his
education. Diverse causes of corruption, after the epoch of inde-
pendence, may triumph over the most virtuous education. Be-
sides, the condition of a father is sufficiently unfortunate when
the bad dispositions of a son arrived at man’s cstate break out
into offences. What he has already suffered in his family, the
anguish he feels from the misconduct or dishonour of a son, is a
kind of punishment which nature inflicts upon him, and which
the law need not aggravate. It would be pouring poison upon
his wounds, and that without any hope of repairing the past, or
providing against the future. Those who have attempted to
justify such barbarous jurisprudence by the example of China,
have not recollected that the authority of a father, ending in that
country only with his life, i¢ is but just that his responsibility
should continue as long as his power.


$16 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


IV. Resronsrprniry or THE MotnEer.—The obligation of the
thother is naturally regulated by her rights, on which her means
of control depend. If the father is alive, the mother’s responsi-
bility, like her power, remains absorbed as it were in that of her
husband. If he is dead, and she has taken the reins of domestic
government into her own hands, she becomes responsible for those
who are subject to her authority.

V. Responsrpitity or A Htspanp.—This cusc is as simple as
the preceding. The obligation of a husband depends upon his
rights. As the administration of the property belongs to him
alone, unless the husband were answerable, the injured party
would be without remedy. This reasoning supposes the order of
things generally established; that order so necessary to the peace
of families, to the education of children, to the maintenance of
manners,—that order so ancient and universal, which subjects
the wife to the power of the husband. As he isher chicf and her
guardian, he is answerable for her in the cye of the law. He is
even charged with a responsibility still more delicate before the
tribunal of opinion; but that is a matter which does not apper-
tain to the present subject.

VI. RespoysrBinity oF aN INNocFNT PEKson.—It often happens
that a person, without having had any share in an offence, derives
from it a certain and perceptible profit. Is it not proper that
this person should be called upon to indemnify the injured party,
if the offender cannot be found, or cannot furmish an in-
demnity ?

Such a procedure would be conformable to the principles which
we have laid down, namely,—first, regard for security: for there
might be an aiding and abetting, though there might be no proof
of it; next, the care of equality: since 1t 1s better for one person
merely to be deprived of a gain, than for another to be left to
buffer a loss.

Examples will make this clearer. By mcans of a breach made
in a dike, he who was in possession of the bencfit of irrigation
has becn deprived of it, and it has been bestowed upon another.
He who comes into the enjoyment of this unexpected advantage


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 317


¢


ought to share a part at Icast of his gain with the person who has
experienced the loss.

A tenant for life, whose property passes by settlement to a
stranger, is killed, and lcaves a family in want. The residuary
proprietor, who realizes in consequence a premature possession,
ought to make some allowance to the children of the deceased.

A benefice is vacated, because the possessor has been killed ;
if he leaves a wife and children in poverty, the successor owes
them an indemnity proportionate to their necd and to his gain.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Subsidiary Satisfaction at the Public Expense.


Tue best fund whence satisfaction can be drawn is the property
of the delinquent,—since it then performs, as we have seen, with
superior convenience the functions both of satisfaction and of
punishment.

But if the offender is without property, ought the injured
person to remain without satisfaction? No; for, according to
the reasons already laid down, satisfaction is almost as necessary
as punishment. It ought to be furnished out of the publio
treasury, because it is an object of public good, and the security
of all is interested in it. This obligation of the public to furnish
satisfaction is founded upon a reason which has the evidence of
an axiom, A pecuniary charge divided among the mass of indi-
viduals is nothing to cach contributor, in comparison with what
it would te to an individual or a small number.

If tnsurance is useful in enterprises of commerce, it is not less
so in the great social enterprise in which the associates find them-
selves united as partners, in consequence of a train of chances,
without knowledge or choice on their part, without the power of
separation, or of securing themselves by any prudential means
from a multitude of snares which they mutually spread for each
other. The calamities which spring from offences are evils not
less real than those which result from accidents of nature. If the


als PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


owncr of a house sleeps sounder because it is insured against fire,
his sleep will be sounder yet if he is also insured against robbery.
Putting out of sight the abuses to which it is liable, it seems im-
possible to give too much extension to a means so ingenious,
which renders real losses so slight, and which gives so much secu-
rity against eventual evils.

But all kinds of insurances are exposed to great abuse from
fraud or negligence; fraud on the part of those who feign or
exaggerate losses for the sake of obtaining indemnities not due;
negligence on the part of the assurers in not taking necessary
precautions, or on the part of the assured, who use less diligence
in protecting themselves against losses which are certain to be
made up.

In a system of satisfactions at the public expense we have, then,
to fear—

Ist. A secret connivance between a party pretending to be
injured and the author of a pretended offence to obtain an
indemnity not due.

2nd. Too great security on the part of individuals, who, not
having the same conscquences to fear, will no longer make the
same efforts for the prevention of offences.

This second danger is little to be dreaded. Nobody will
neglect an actual possession certain and present in the hope of
recovering, 1n case of loss, an equivalent for the thing lost, even
a perfect equivalent; and when we consider that an indemnity
cannot be obtained without trouble and expense, that there is a
temporary privation, that the vexations of a claim and its pursuit
are to be encountered, and the disagreeable part of an accuser to
be played ; and that, after all, under the best system of procedure,
success 1s always doubtful ;—these things considered, it is plain
that every man will still have motives cnough to watch over his
property, and not to encourage offences by negligence.

On the side of fraud the danger is much greater. It can only
be prevented by detailed precautions, which will be explained
elsewhere. It will here suffice to point out, as examples, two
opposite cases, one in which the utility of the remedy surpasses


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 319


the danger of abuse, the other in which the danger of abuse 1s
greater than the utility of the remedy.

Whenever the damage is occasioned by an offence of which
the punishment is severe, and the author of which must be juridi-
cally ascertained, and also the fact of an offence committed, fraud
is very difficult. The only method an impostor, who pretends to
be injured, can employ to procure an accomplice, is to give him a
part of the profits of the fraud; but, provided there has not been
a neglect of the clearest principles of proportion between offences
and punishments, the punishment which such an accomplice must
encounter would be more than cquivalent to the total profit of
the fraud.

Observe, that the offender must be judicially convicted before
the satisfaction is granted; without that precaution the public
treasure would be exposcd to pillage. Nothing would be more
common than storics of imaginary robberies, of pretended thefts
committed by unknown persons who had taken to flight, in a
manner the most secrct, and in nights the darkest. But when
it is necessary to bring the offenders into court, a secret under-
standing is not easy. This is not a part which can be readily
filled; for, besides the certainty of punishment for the alleged
offence encountered by the person who charges himself with it,
in case the imposture be discovered, there will be still a particular
and additional punishment to be shared by both accomplices ;
and if it be recollected how difficult it is to fabricate a probable
history of an offence absolutely imaginary, it is likely that these
kinds of frauds will be very rare, if they ever happen at all.

The danger most to be apprehended is the exaggeration of a
loss resulting from a real offence. But then it is necessary that
the offence be susceptible of such sort of falsehood,—a case suffi-
ciently rare.

It would seem, then, that it may be regarded as a general
maxim, that in all cases in which the punishment of the offence
is severe, there is no occasion for apprehending that an imaginary
offender will charge himself with the offence for the sake of a
doubtful gain.


320 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


But, for the opposite reason, when the damage results from an
offence of which the punishment is slight or nothing, if the pub-
lic treasure were responsible in such cases, the danger of abuse
would be at its highest point. Insolvency is an example of this
sort. Who so poor that he would not be trusted, if the public
were his security? What treasure would suffico to pay the
creditors, whose debtors were really deficient, and how easy it
would be to get up false debts?

Not only would such an indemnity be liable to abuse, it would
be unreasonable; for, in the transactions of commerce, the risk of
loss makes « part of the price of merchandise and of the interest
of money. Let the merchant be sure of losing nothing, and he
would sell cheaper; so that, to demand an indemnity from the
public for a loss thus made up for beforehand, would be asking to
be paid twice over.

There are still other cases in which satisfaction ought to be a
public charge. ;

Ist. The case of physical calamities, such as inundations and
fires. Aids furnished by the state to sufferers in that way are
not solely founded on the principle that an evil divided among
many becomes light; they rest also upon this other principle—
that the state, as protector of the national wealth, is interested to
prevent the deterioration of its domain, and to re-establish the
means of reproduction in places which have suffered. Such were
the liberalities, so called, of the great Frederic towards provinces
desolated by some scourge; they were acts of prudence aud con-
servation.

2nd. Losses and misfortunes in consequence of hostilities.
Those who have been exposed to the invasions of a public enemy
have so much the clearer right to a public indemnity, since they
may be considered as having sustained a shock which threatened
all the citizens, and as having becn by their situation the most
exposed points of the public defence.

érd. Evils resulting from unintentional mistakes of the ministers
of justice. An error of justice is always of itself a subject of
lamentation; but that such an error, when known, should not be


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 321


repaired by proportional indemnities, is an overthrow of social
order. Ought not the public to follow the same rules of equity
which it imposes upon individuals? Is it not an odious thing
that the government should exert its power to exact severely all
that is due to it, and should avail itself of the same means to
refuse the payment of its own debts? But this obligation is 50
evident, that no attempt to demonstrate it can make it clearer. _

4th. Responsibility of a community for a high-handed offence ,
committed in a public part of its territory. Itis not properly the
public which is responsible in this case; it is the district or the
province which should be taxed for the reparation of an offence
resulting from negligence of police.

In cases of competition, the interests of an individual ought to
take precedence of those of the treasury. What is due to an
injured party under the title of satisfaction ought to be paid in
preference to what is due to the public by way of fine. This is
not the decision of vulgar jurisprudence, but it is the decision of
reason. The loss to an individual is an evil that is felt ; the gain
to the public is a good felt by nobody. What the offender pays
in quality of fine is a punishment, and nothing more; what he
pays in quality of satisfaction is also a punishment, and a severer
one; it is, beside, a satisfaction to the injured party, and so far a
good. What I pay to the state, a creature of reason with which
I have no quarrel, affects me only with the sort of chagrin I
should feel if I dropped the same money into a well; what I pay
to my adversary, the satisfaction which I am forced to make, at
my own expense, to him I wished to injure, is a degree of humi-
liation which gives to punishment its most appropriate character.


822


PART THIRD.


PUNISHMENTS.


CHAPTER I.
Punishments which ought not to be inflicted,


THe cases in which punishment ought not to be inflicted may be
reduced to four heads: when punishment would be—1st, Mis-
applied ; 2nd, Incfficacious ; 3rd, Superfluous ; 4th, Too expensive.

I. Puxisumexts Misarrrrep.—Punishments are misapplied
wherever there 1s no real offence, no evil of the first order or of
the second order; or where the evil is more than compensated by
an attendant good, as in the excrcise of political or domestic
authority, in the repulsion of a weighticr evil, in self-defence, &c.

If the idea of what constitutes a rcal offence has been clearly
apprehended, it will be casy to distinguish real from imaginary
offences—from those acts, innocent in themselves, which have
been arranged among offenccs by prejudice, antipathy, mistakes
of government, the ascctic principle, in the same way that several
wholesome kinds of food are considered among certain nations
as poisonous or unclean. Heresy and witchcraft are offences of
this class,

Il. Inerricacious Pcnisuments.—I call those punishments
tneficacious which have no power to produce an effect upon the
will, and which, in consequence, have no tendency towards the
prevention of like acts.

Punishments are inefficacious when directed against individuals
‘who could not know the law, who have acted without intention,


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 3238


who have done the evil innocently, under an erroneous supposition,
or by irresistible constraint. Children, imbeciles, idiots, though
they may be influenced, to a certain extent, by rewards and
threats, have not a sufficient idea of futurity to be restrained by
punishments. In thcir case laws have no efficacy.

If a man is determined to act by a fear superior to that of the
heaviest legal punishment, or by the hope of a preponderant good,
it is plain that the law can have little influence over him. We
have seen laws against duclling disregarded, because men of
honour are more afraid of shame than of punishment. Punish-
ments directed against religious opinions generally fail to be
effectual, because the idea of everlasting reward triumphs over
the fear of death. According as these opinions have more or less
influence, punishment, 1n such cases, is more or less efficacious.

IIL. Surerrivovs PuxrsumMEents.—Punishments are superfluous
in cases where the same end may be obtained by mcans more mild
—instruction, example, invitations, delays, rewards. A man
spreads abroad pernicious opinions: shall the magistrate therefore
seize the sword and punish him? No; if it is the interest of one
individual to give currency to bad maxims, it is the interest of a
thousand others to refute him.

IV. Punisuments roo Exrensivr.—If the evil of the punish-
ment exceeds the evil of the offence, the legislator will produce
more suffering than he prevents. Je will purchase exemption
from a lesser evil at the expense of a greater evil.

Two tables should be kept in view—one representing the evil
of offences, the other the evil of punishments.

The following evils are produced by every penal law :—I1st.
Evil of coercion. It imposes a privation more or less painful
according to the dcgrec of pleasure which the thing forbidden
has the power of conferring. 2nd. Zhe sufferings caused by the
punishment, whenever it is actually carried into execution. 38rd.
Evil of apprehension suffered by those who have violated the law
or who fear a prosecution in consequence. 4th. Evil of false
prosecutions. This inconvenience appertains to all penal laws,
but particularly to laws which are obscure and to imaginary

¥2


324 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


offences. A general antipathy often produces a frightful dispo-
sition to prosecute and to condemn upon suspicions or appearances.
5th. Derivative evil suffered by the parents or friends of those who
are exposed to the ngour of the law.

Such is the table of evils or of expenses which the legislator
ought to consider every time he establishes a punishment.

It is from this source that the principal reason is drawn for
general amnestics, in case of those complicated offences which
spring from a spirit of party. In such cases it may happen that
the law envelopes a great multitudc, sometimes half the total
number of citizens, and perhaps more than half. “Will you punish
all the guilty? Will you only decimate them? In either case
the evil of the punishment is greater than the evil of the
offence.

If a delinquent is loved by the people, so that his punishment
will cause national discontent; if he is protected by a foreign
power whose good-will it is necessary to conciliate; if he is able
to render the nation some extraordinary service ;—in these parti-
cular cases the grant of pardon is founded upon a calculation of
prudence. It is apprehended that punishment of the offence will
cost society too dear.


CHAPTER II.


Regula, peccats que ponas irroget equas:
Ne scutica dignum, horribile sectere flagello.
Hor. 1. i. Sat. iii.


Let’s have a rule
Which deals to crimes an equal punishment :
Nor tortures with the horrid lash for faults
Worthy a birchen twig.


Proportion between Offences and Punishments.


Mowrzsqurev perceived the necessity of a proportion between
offences and punishments. SBeccaria insists upon its importance.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 325


But they rather recommend than explain it; they do not tell in
what that proportion consists. Let us endeavour to supply this
defect, and to give the principal rules of this moral arithmetic.

First Rure.—TZhe evil of the punishment must be made to exceed
the advantage of the offence.

The Anglo-Saxon laws, which established a price for the lives
of men, two hundred shillings for the murder of a peasant, six
times as much for that of a noble, and thirty-six times as much for
that of the king, notwithstanding this show of pecuniary propor-
tion, were evidently deficient in moral proportion. The punishment
might appear as nothing compared to the advantage of the offence.

The same crror is committed whenever a punishment is decreed
which can only reach a certain point, while the advantage of the
offence may go much beyond.

Some celebrated authors have attempted to establish a contrary
maxim They say that punishment ought to be diminished in
proportion to the strength of temptation; that temptation dimi-
nishes the fault; and that the more potent seduction is, the less
evidence we have of the offender’s depravity.

This may be true; but it does not contravene the rule above
laid down: for to prevent an offence, it 1s necessary that the
repressive motive should be stronger than the seductive motive.
The punishment must be more an object of dread than the offence
is an object of desire. Au insufficient punishment is a greater
evil than an exccss of mgour; for an insufficient punishment is
an evil wholly thrown away. No good results from it, either to
the public, who arc left exposed to like offences, nor to the
offender, whom it makes no better. What would be said of a
surgeon, who, to spare a sick man a degree of pain, should leave
the cure unfinished ? Would it bea piece of enlightencd humanity
to add tothepainsof the disorder the tormentof a uscless operation?

Seconp Rurze.—TZhe more deficient in certainty a punishment
ts, the severer tt should be.

No man engages in a career of crime, except in the hope of
impunity. If punishment consisted merely in taking from the
guilty the fruits of his offence, and if that punishment were


826 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


inevitable, no offence would ever be committed; for what man
is so foolish as to run the risk of committing an offence with
certainty of nothing but the shame of an unsuccessful attempt ?
Tn all cases of offence there is a calculation of the chances for and
against; and it is necessary to give a much greater weight to the
punishment, in order to counterbalance the chances of impunity.

It is true, then, that the more certain punishment is, the less
severe it need be. Such is the advantage that results from sim-
plicity of laws, and a good method of procedure.

For the same reason it is desirable that punishment should
follow offence as closely as possible ; for its impression upon the
minds of men is weakened by distance, and, besides, distance adds
to the uncertainty of punishment, by affording new chances of
escape.

Tuirp Rure.— Where two offences are in conjunction, the greater
offence ought to be subjected to severer punishment, in order that the
delinquent may hare a motwe to stop at the lesser.

Two offences may be said to be in conjunction when a man
has the power and the will to commit both of them. A high-
Wayman may content himself with robbing, or he may begin
with murder, and finish with robbery. The murder should be
punished more severely than the robbery, in order to deter him
from the greater offence.

This rule would be perfectly carried out if it could be so ordered
that for each portion of evil committed there should be a corre-
sponding portion of punishment. Let a man who has stolen ten
crowns be punished as severely asif he had stolen twenty, and he
will be a fool to take the less sum in preference to the greater.
Equal punishment for unequal offences is often a motive for com-
mitting the greater offence.

Foveta Rure.— The greater an offence ts, the greater reason there
18 to hazard a severe punishment for the chance of preventing it.

We must not forget that the infliction of punishment is a cer-
tain expense for the purchase of an uncertain advantage. To
apply great punishments to small offences is to pay very dearly
for the chance of escaping a slight evil.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 337


The English law which condemned women to be burnt: for
passing counterfeit coin, was a direct invasion of this rule of pro-
portion. If burning were a punishment ever to be adopted, it
ought to be confined to the single case of incendiary homicides.

Firrn Rutz.— The same punishment for the same offence ought not
to be inflicted upon all delinquents. It is necessary to pay some
regard to the circumstances which affect sensrbilety.

The same nominal punishments are not the same real punish-
ments. Age, sex, rank, fortune, and many other circumstances,
ought to modify the punishments inflicted for the same offence.
If the offence is a corporal injury, the same pecuniary punish-
ment would be a trifle to the rich, and oppressive to the poor.
The same punishment which would brand with ignominy a man
of a certain rank, would not produce even the slightest stain in
case the offender belonged to an inferior class. The same im-
prisonment would be ruin to a man of business, death to an infirm
old man, and cternal disgrace to a woman, while it would be
next to nothing to an individual placed under other circumstances.

Let it be observed, however, that the proportion between
punishments and offences ought not to be so mathematically fol-
lowed up as to render the laws subtle, complicated, and obscure.
Brevity and simplicity are a superior good. Something of
exact proportion may also be sacrificed to render the punishment
more striking, more fit to inspire the people with a sentiment of
aversion for those vices which prepare the way for crimes.


CHAPTER III.
Of Prescription as regards Punishment.


Oveut punishment to be limited in point of time ?—in other
words, if the delinquent is successful for a given period in evad-
ing the law, ought he to escape punishment? Shall the law in
such a case no longer take cognizance of the offence? This is
a question still contested. There must always be much that is
arbitrary, both in the choice of offences which shall have the


328 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


privilege of this pardon, and in the number of years after which
the privilege shall begin.

Pardon can be safely allowed for offences of rashness and negli-
gence, offences resulting from a fault exempt from bad intention.
The very accident which makes such offenders puts them on their
guard, and thenceforth they are little to be feared. For such
individuals pardon is a good; and in such cases it is an evil to
nobody.

Prescription may also be extended to offences not completed,
to attempts that have failed. The delinquent, during the interval,
has undergone the punishment in part,—for to fear it is to feel
it. Besides, he has abstained from like offences, he has reformed,
he has become a useful member of socicty. He has recovered
his moral health without the employment of that bitter medicine
which the law had prepared for him.

But when the question relates to more scrious offences, for
example, the fraudulent acquisition of a large sum of money.
polygamy, a rape, a robbery, it would be odious and fatal to
allow wickedness, aftcr a certain time, a triumph over innocence.
No treaty should be had with malcfactors of that character. Let
the avenging sword remain always hanging above their heads.
The sight of a criminal in the peaceful enjoyment of the fruit of
his crime, protected by the laws he has violated, is a consolation
to evil doers, an object of grief to men of virtue, a public insult
to justice and to morals.

To perceive all the absurdity of an impunity acquired by
lapse of time, it is only necessary to imagine the law to be
expressed in terms like these: ‘‘ But if the murderer, the robber,
the fraudulent acquirer of another’s goods, shall succeed for
twenty years in eluding the vigilance of the tribunals, his address
shall be rewarded, his security shall be re-established, and the
fruit of his crimes shall become his lawful possession.’’


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 329


CHAPTER IV.
Mistaken Punishments, or Punishments misapplied.


PunIsHMENT ought to bear directly upon the individual who is to
be subjected to its influence. If you desire to influence Titius,
it is upon Titius that the punishment ought to act. Ifa punish-
ment destined to influence Titius falls upon any one else than
Titius himself, it is quite clear that such a punishment is mis-
applied.

But a punishment directed against those who are dear to a
man is a punishment to that man; for he participates in the suf-
ferings of those to whom he is attached by sympathy, and a hold
can be got upon him by means of his affections. This doctrine
is true, but is it good? Is it conformable to the principle of
utility ?

To ask if a punishment of sympathy acts with as much force
as a direct punishment, is to ask if, n general, attachments to
others are as strong as the love of one’s self.

If self-love is the stronger sentiment, it follows that recourse
should not be had to punishments of sympathy till we have
exhausted all the direct sufferings of which human nature is
capable. No torture is so crucl that it ought not to be employed
before punishing the wife for the acts of the husband, or children
for the offences of their father.

In punishments misapplicd, four principal faults are per-
ceptible :—

Ist. What shall be thought of a punishment which must often
fail for want of objects on which to act? If to inflict suffering
upon Titius you set about finding the persons who are dear to him,
you have no other guide than the domestic relations; you are
conducted by that thread to his father and his mother, his wife
and his children. The most cruel tyranny has attempted to go
no further. But there are many men who have no father nor
mother, no wife nor child. It is necessary, then, to apply to
this class of men a direct punishment; but the same direct


330: PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


punishment that answers in their case, will it not answer in
every case P

2nd. And does not this punishment suppose sentiments which
may not exist? If Titius does not concern himself about his
wife and children, if he has contracted a disike to them, at the
very least he will be indifferent to their sufferings, and this part
of his punishment will not affect him.

3rd. But what makes this system so frightful is the profusion,
the multiplication of evils involved in it. Consider the chain of
domestic connections, calculate the number of deseendants that
aman may have; the punishment is communicated from one to
the other; it spreads step by step hke a contagion; it envelops
a crowd of individuals. To produce a direct pain equivalent to
one, it is necessary to create a pain indirect and misapplied,
equivalent to ten, to twenty, to thirty, to a hundred, to a
thousand.

4th. Punishment thus turned aside from its natural course,
has not even the advantage of conforming to the public sentiment
of sympathy and antipathy. When the offender has paid his
personal debt to justice, the public vengeance is satisfied, and
demands nothing more. If you pursue him beyond the scaffold,
and extend the punishment to an innocent and unhappy family,
the public pity presently revives; an indistinct sentiment pro-
nounces the laws unjust; humanity declares against you; and
every day enlists new partisans on the side of your victim. Re-
spect for the government, and confidence in it, is lessened in
every heart; and all that is gained by this policy is a reputation
of ignorance with the wise, and of barbarity with the multitude.

The ties that bind men together are so complicated that it is
not possible completely to separate the lot of the innocent from
the lot of the guilty. The evil designed by the law for a single
individual bursts its bounds, and extends itself along all those
connecting ties of common sensibility which result from the
affections, from honour, and mutual interests. A whole family
is in suffering and in tears for the offence of one. But this evil
inherent in the nature of things, this evil which all the wisdom


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 838i


and all the benevolence of the legislator cannot entirely prevent,
is no reproach to him, and does not constitute a misapplication
of punishment. If the father is compelled to undergo a punish- .
ment for his offence, that punishment must, in the nature of
things, be a disadvantage to his children; it cannot be avoided;
but if after the death of a guilty father the paternal succession
is ravished from the innocent children, it is a voluntary act of
the legislator, who himself turns the punishment aside from its
legitimate channel.

The legislator, in this respect, has two dutics to fulfil. In the
first place he ought to avoid punishments misapplied in their
primitive application. The innocent son of the greatest criminal
ought to receive from the law as complete a protection as the
most illustrious citizen. In the second place, it is necessary to
reduce to its least term that portion of misapplied suffering which
falls upon the innocent, in consequence of a direct punishment
inflicted on the guilty. Ifa rebel, for cxample, is condemned to
perpetual imprisonment, or to death, everything has been done
against him which should be done. A total confiscation of his
property, to the prejudice of his heirs, or at least of his wife and
children, would be a tyrannical and odious act. The rights of
an unfortunate family smitten in its head are on that account
only the more sacred. A national treasure composed of such
spoils is like those impure exhalations which carry in their
bosom the germs of disease.

It will be sufficient to give a simple enumeration of the most
common cases in which legislators have misapplied punishments,
by making them bear upon the innocent for the sake of an oblique
effect upon the guilty.

Ist. Confiscatcon.—A remnant of barbarity which still exists
throughout almost all Europe. It is applied to many offences,
especially to crimes of state.* This punishment is the more


* Confiscation, for offences of state, ought hardly to be looked upon as
a judicial punishment ; for in civil wars, generally speaking, as both
parties act in good faith, there can be no criminality. Confiscation is a
meagure purely hostile. To leave their fortunes untouched, would be


332 PRINCIPLES OF THE PRNAL CODE.


odious, since it cannot be employed till the danger is past; and
the more imprudent, since it prolongs animosities and a spirit of
revenge, of which the remembrance ought to be cffaccd as soon
as poasible.

2nd. Corruption of Blood.—A cruel fiction of the lawyers to
disguise the injustice of confiscation. The innocent grandson
cannot inherit from the innocent grandfather, because his rights
are corrupted and destroyed in passing through the blood of a
guilty father. This corruption of blood is a fantastic idea; but
there is a corruption too real in the understandings and the hearts
of those who dishonour themselves by such sophisms.

8rd. Loss of Privileges, whereby an entire Corporation is punished
Sor the Misbehaviour of a part of its Members.—In England the
city of London is exempted, by a particular Act, from such an
infliction ; but what city, what corporation ought to be subject
to it, provided its privileges are not contrary to the interest of
the state ?

4th. Disastrous Lot of Bastards.—The incapacity to inherit is
not here referred to. The loss of that mght1s no more a legal
punishment in case of bastardy than in the case of younger sons ;
and endless contests might result, if heirs could be brought for-
ward, whose birth had not the attestation of publicity. But the
incapacity to fulfil certain trusts, the privation of many public
rights, to which they are subjected in several states of Europe,
is a true punishment, which falls upon innocent children for a
fault of imprudence committed by thcir parents.

5th. Infamy attached to the Relatives of Persons who have com-
mitted sertous Offences.—This is not the place to consider what
appertains merely to public opinion. Opinion in this respect
has taken the character of antipathy only in consequence of mis-
takes of the law, which in many cases has branded the families of
criminals, This kind of injustice, little by little, is passing away.
leaving munitions of war in the hands of the encmy. But a precaution
adapted to a state of war, to which recourse should be had only in


extreme cases, ought to cease, or be softened as much as possible, as
soon as the danger ceases to exist.


YRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 338


CHAPTER V.
Of requiring Security for good Behaviour.


To require security for good behaviour, is to demand of a person,
who is suspected of designing to commit some unlawful act, that
he procure some other person, who will consent to undergo a cer-
tain penalty, provided the apprehended offence is committed.

At first view, this appears contrary to the principles above laid
down, since it exposes the innocent to be punished for the guilty.
It ought, then, to be justified by an advantage more than equi-
valent to that evil. This advantage is the great probability of
preventing an offence, and of protecting the general security by
individual responsibility.

The great influence which it exercises over the conduct of the
suspected individual constitutes the chief merit of this procedure.
He reflects that generous friends have given him a decisive proof
of confidence or attachment in risking their fortunes and their
quiet to protect his liberty and his honour. They are hostages
who have voluntarily surrendered themselves on his account.
Shall he be vile enough to turn their kindness against themselves ?
Shall he quench every sentiment of gratitude? Shall he publicly
declare himself a traitor to friendship, and condemn himself to
solitary remorse? But suppose him imprudent, fickle, or vicious,
and not capable of restraining himself, still the security required
of him is not useless. Those who thus are responsible for him,
being interested in his actions, are guardians given him by the
law ; their vigilance will make up for his neglect, their eyes will
closely watch his proceedings. Beside their personal interest in
making themselves be listened to, they have the strongest title to
be heard, from the service they have rendered, and from the right
which they ought always to have to withdraw their security, and
to leave the suspected to his fate. Such is the operation of this |
means in preventing offences. |

It serves in another way to diminish the alarm, because it fur-

a favourable indication of the character or the resources of


384 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


the suspected individual. It is a kind of contract of assurance.
You demand, for example, the imprisonment of a man who has
attempted to do you a certain injury. One of his friends presents
himself, and disputes the necessity of so rigorous a means. ‘‘T
ought to know him better than you do, and I assure you that you
have nothing to fear from him. This penalty, which J consent to
pay in case I am mistaken, is a proof of my belicf and my
sincerity.”’

Such are the advantages of demanding security for good beha-
viour. It may produce an evil; but that evil must be compared
with its benefits, and especially with the vigorous measures which
it would be necessary to employ against suspected persons if this
procedure were not resorted to. Whenever an evil results to
him who becomes security, that cvil, having been voluntarily
incurred, produces no danger and no alarm. If, through an
imprudent zeal, he has become security with his cycs shut, the
consequences concern himalone. None are alarmed lest the same
evil should befall them. But in the greater number of cases this
engagemcnt results from a fecling of security. He who becomes
bound for another knows better than anybody else the character
and situation of the person for whom he engagcs ; he is well aware
of the risk he runs, and he docs not assume it exccpt with the
opinion that he can do so with safety.

Let us now consider in what cases it is proper to employ this
means.

Ist. Itis useful for the prevention of offences apprehended from
quarrels of hostility or honour, especially duels. In general this
class of delinquents cannot be suspected of a want of sensibility
to public esteem ; it is honour which puts them in hostile array.
But honour does not command vengeance more positively than it
forbids ingratitude, and especially that black ingratitude which
punishes the benefactor by means of his very benefit.

2nd. It is extremely well adapted to prevent abuses of confi-
dence, offences which violate the dutics of a trust. Nobody is
compelled to undertake such and such employments ; it is fit that
these employments should not be intrusted except to men who


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 335


have, in riches or reputation, wherewith to furnish a sufficient
guarantee for their good behaviour. ‘At the same time, the secu-
rity which is exacted, being attached to the office, cannot be
offensive to anybody.

3rd. This means may have a peculiar utility in certain situations
of political affairs, in case of enterprises against the state where
many delinquents are concerned. Such men, often rather misled
than perverse, nourish exalted sentiments of affection and honour,
and in the midst of their revolt against society almost always
prescrve intimate relations with each other. When such a con-
spiracy is discovered, the conspirators most suspected should be
compelled to give security for their conduct. This means, at first
sight so feeble, is very cfficacious—not only because the princi-
pals, sceing themselves watched, take the alarm ; but because the
sentiment of honour of which we have spoken furnishes a real or
plausible motive, a motive founded upon justice and gratitude,
for renouncing the enterprise.

4th. When surcties are required to prevent the escape of an
accused person, there is the advantage of restraint upon the par-
tiality of the judge. Without this condition a corrupt magis-
trate, or one of too casy temper, under pretext of a provisional
enlargement, might withdraw an accused criminal from corporal
or even pecuniary punishment, and change a severe penalty into
simple banishment. This abuse becomes impossible when the
judge cannot set the accused at liberty except upon sufficient
security.

Only a single word is necessary as to the penalty to which the
sureties should be subjected. That penalty should be pecuniary,
and never anything elsc. Any afflictive punishment would be
revolting, and would not furnish an indemnity.

It is true that a pecuniary punishment may bring on the
imprisonment of the suretics, in case they are not able to pay
their bonds. But if they were insolvent when they became
sureties, they ‘have deceived the court. If their insolvency is
posterior to their surctyship, on the occurrence of that event
they ought to have withdrawn their security by an application to


336 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


ow


the court. However, as in the case of other insolvencies, atten-
tion must be paid to circumstances ; fraud must be distinguished
from misfortune. If the suretyship was the cause of insolvency,
in that case particular indulgence is needed.


CHAPTER VI.
The Choice of Punishments.


In order that a punishment may adapt itself to the rules of pro-
portion above laid down, it should have the following qualities: —

Ist. Jé ought to be susceptible of more or less, or dwisible, in
order to conform itself to variations in the gravity of offences.
Chronic punishments, such as imprisonment and banishment,
possess this quality in an eminent degree. They are divisible
into portions of any requisite magnitude. It is the same with
pecuniary punishments.

2nd. Equal to Itself.—It ought, to a certain extent, to be the
same for all individuals guilty of the same offence, being made to
correspond to their different measures of sensibility. This de-
mands attention to age, sex, condition, fortune, individual habits,
and many other circumstances; otherwise the same nominal
punishment, being often found too severe for some persons, too
mild for others, will overshoot the mark, or will fail to reach it.
A fine fixed by law will never be a punishment equal to itself, on
account of differences of fortune. Banishment has the same
inconvenience ; too severe for one, to another it 1s nothing.

3rd. Commeasurable.—If a man has two offences before his
eyes, the law ought to give him a motive to abstain from the
greater. He will have that motive, if he can see that the
greater offence will draw upon him a greater punishment. It
ought, then, to be in his power to compare these punishments, to
measure their different degrees.

There are two methods of fulfilling this object. 1st. By adding
to a given punishment another quantity of punishment of the
some kind; for example, to five years’ imprisonment for such an


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 337


offence, two years’ additional for such an aggravation. 2nd. By
adding a punishment of a different kind; for example, to five
years’ imprisonment for such an offence, public ignominy for such
an aggravation.

4th. Analogous to the Offence.—The punishment will more
easily engrave itself on the memory, it will present itself more
strongly to the imagination, if it has a resemblance, an analogy
to the offence, a common character with it. The lex talvonis is
admirable in this respect—An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.
The most impertect understanding is capable of connecting these
ideas. But these sort of punishments are rarely practicable, and
in most cases would be too expensive.

There are other means of analogy. Search out, for example,
the motives of offences, and generally you will recognise the
dominant passion of the offender, and you may punish him, accord-
ing to the proverbial saying, with the instrument of his sin.
Offences of cupidity will best be punished by pecuniary fines,
when the wealth of the offender admits it; offences of insolence,
by humiliation; offences of idleness, by compulsory labour, or
forced rest.

5th. Hxemplary.—A real punishment which should not be ap-
parent would be lost upon the public. The great art consists in
wugmenting the apparent punishment without augmenting the
real punishment. This may be accomplished, either in the selec-
tion of the puntshments themselves, or by accompanying their
axecution with striking solemnities.

The auto-da-fé would be one of the most useful inventions of
jurisprudence, if instead of being an act of faith it were an act
of justice. What is it but a public execution, a solemn tragedy
which the legislator presents to the assembled people; a tragedy
ruly important, truly pathetic by the sad reality of its catas-
xophe, and by the greatness of its object! The preparations,
she scenery, the ornaments, cannot be too studied, since upon
hem the effect principally depends. The trifgnal, the scaffold,
he dresses of the officers of justice, the Habiliments of the
riminals, the religious service, the procession, all the accompani-


388 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


ments, ought to beara grave and mournful character. Why
should not the executioners be covered with a mourning crape ?
The terror of the scene would be increased by it, and at the same
time these useful servants of the state would be concealed from
the unjust hatred of the people. Were it possible to keep up the
illusion, all might pass in effigy. The reality of punishment is
only necessary to maintain the appearance of it.

6th. Economical._—That is, punishments should have only that
degree of severity absolutely necessary to answer their end. All
beyond is not only so much superfluous evil, but produces a mul-
titude of inconveniences, which intercept the ends of justice.

Pecuniary punishments are highly economical, since all the
evil felt by him who pays turns into an advantage for him who
recelves.

7th. Remissible or Revokable.—It is necessary that the damage
inflicted should not be absolutely irreparable, since unfortunately
cases may occur in which the infliction may be subsequently
discovered to have been without lawful cause. As long as testi-
mony is susceptible of imperfection, as long as appearances may
be deceitful, as long as men have no ccrtain criterion whereby to
distinguish truth from falsehood, one of the most important pre-
cautions which mutual security requires is, not to admit of
punishments absolutely irreparable, except upon the clearest evi-
dence of their necessity. Have we not seen all the appearances
of crime accumulated upon the head of a culprit whose innocence
‘was demonstrated, when nothing remained but to lament over
the mistake of an arrogant precipitation? Weak and inconsistent
that we are! We judge like fallible creatures; we punish as if
we could not be deceived !

To these important qualities of punishment three others may
be added, of less extensive utility, but to be aimed at when it is
possible to procure them without detracting from the great object
of example,

Ist. It is a great merit in a punishment to contribute to the
reformation of the offender, not only through fear of being punished
again, but by a change in his character and habits. This end


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 369


may be attained by studying the motive which produced the
offence, and by applying a punishment which tends to weaken
that motive. .A house of correction, to fulfil this object, ought
to admit a separation of the delinquents, in order that different
means of treatment may be adapted to the diversity of their
moral condition.

2nd. Taking away the power of doing Injury.—It is much easier

to obtain this end than the preceding. Mutilations and perpetual
imprisonment possess this quality. But the spirit of this maxim
leads to an excessive rigour. It is this which has rendered the
punishment of death so frequent.
. If there are cases in which it is possible to deprive the offender
of the power of doing injury only by taking away his life, it 1s
upon very extraordinary occasions; for example, in civil wars,
where the name of a leader, as long as he lives, is enough to
inflame the passions of a multitude. And, cven in such cases,
death inflicted upon actions of a character so equivocal ought
rather to be looked upon as an act of hostility than as a punish-
ment.

ard. Zo furnish an indemnity to the injured party is another
useful quality in a punishment. It is a means of accomplishing
two objects at once,—punishing an offence, and repairing it:
removing the evil of the first order, and putting a stop to alarm.
This is a characteristic advantage of pecuniary punishments.

I conclude this chapter by a general observation of the highest
importance. The legislator, in the choice of punishments, ought
carefully to avoid such as shock established prejudices. If there
has been formed in the minds of the people a decided aversion to
a given kind of punishment, though it has all the other requisite
qualities, it ought not to be admitted into the penal code, because
it would do more harm than good. In the first place, it is an
evil to inspire the public with a painful feeling by the establish-
ment of an unpopular punishment. It is no longer the guilty
alone who are punished. It is the most innocent and tender-
hearted persons upon whom is inflicted a punishment very real,
though it has no particular name, by wounding their sensibility,

z 3


340 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


braving their opinion, and presenting to them the image of vio-
lence and of tyranny. What can be expected from conduct so
injudicious? The legislator, by despising public sentiment,
imperceptibly turns it against himself. He loses the voluntary
assistance which individuals lend to the execution of the law
when they are content with it; the people, instead of being his
assistants, are his enemies. Some endeavour to facilitate the
escape of the guilty; others fecl a scruple at denouncing them ;
witnesses hesitate to testify; there is formed insensibly a fatal
prejudice, which attaches a kind of shame and of reproach to the
service of the law. This general discontent may go further ; it
sometimes bursts out into open resistance to the officers of justice,
or to the execution of sentences. A success against authority is
regarded by the people as a victory; and the unpunished delin-
quent triumphs over the weakness of the laws.

What renders punishments unpopular is almost always their
oad selection. The more the penal code is conformed to the
rules we have laid down, the more it will secure the enlightened
esteem of the wise, and an approbation of feeling on the part of
the multitude. Such punishments will be thought just and
moderate. Everybody will be struck with their propriety, their
analogy to offences, and with that scale of gradation by which
aggravation of punishment is made to correspond to aggravation
of offence, and mildness of punishment to smallness of offence.
This kind of merit, founded upon domestic and familiar notions,
is level to the comprehension of every mind. Nothing is more
fit to give the idca of a paternal government, to inspire confidence,
to make public opinion act in concert with authority. When
the people are on the side of the laws, the chances of escape are
reduced to their lowest term.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 341


CHAPTER VII.
The Kinds of Punishments.


THERE is no punishment which, taken separately, unites all the
requisite qualities. To attain that cnd, it is necessary to have
a choice among many punishments, to vary them, and to make
several of them enter into the same infliction. Medicine has no
panacea. Different means must be recurred to, according to the
nature of disorders and the tempcrament of the patient. The
art of medicine consists in studying all remedies, in combining
them and in putting them into operation according to circum-
stances. ,

The catalogue of punishments is the same with that of offences.
The same evil done by authority of the law, or in violation of the
law, will constitute a punishment, or an offence. The nature of
the evil is the same, but how diffcrent the effect! The offence
spreads alarm; the punishment re-cstablishes security. Offence
is the enemy of all; punishment is the common protector.
Offence, for the advantage of a single person, produces a universal
evil; punishment, by the sufferings of an individual, produces a
general good. Suspend punishment, the world becomes a scene
of robbery, and society is dissolved. e-establish it, and the
passions grow calm, order is restored, and the weakness of cach
individual is sustained by the protection of the public force.

The whole matter of punishment may be distributed under the
following heads :—

lst. Capitai Punishments.—Such as put an immediate end to
the life of the offender.

2nd. Afictive Punishments.—Such as consist in corporal suf-
ferings, but which produce only a temporary effect, as flagellation,
compulsory fasting, &c.

3rd. Indeltble Punishments.—Such as produce a permanent
effect upon the body, as branding and amputation.

4th. Ignominious Punishments.—Their principal aim is to
expose the offender to the contempt of the spectators, and to make


$42 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


him be looked upon as unworthy the society of his old friends.
The amende honorable is an example.

5th. Penitential Punishments.—Destined to awaken the senti-
ment of shame, and to expose to a certain degree of censure.
They are not severe or public enough to bring on infamy, nor to
make the offender be looked upon as unworthy the society of his
former companions. It is, in fact, such chastisements as these
that a father has the power to inflict upon his children, and which
the most tender father would feel no scruple at inflicting upon
the child he most loved.

6th. Chronic Punishments.—Their principal rigour consists in
their duration, so that they would be almost nothing if it were
not for that circumstance. Banishment and imprisonment are
examples. They may be perpetual or temporary.

7th. Punishments simply restrictivex—Those which, without
participating in any of the preceding characters, consist in some
restraint, some restriction, in being prevented frem doing what
one would desire ; for example, the prohibition to exercise a cer-
tain profession, the prohibition to frequent a certain place.

8th. Punishments simply compulsiwe.—Those which oblige a
man to do a thing from which he would wish to be exempted;
for example, the obligation to present one’s self at certain times
before an officer of justice. This punishment consists not in the
thing itself, but in the inconvenience of the constraint.

9th. Pecuniary Punrshments.—They consist in depriving the
delinquent of a sum of money, or of some article of actual pro-
perty.

10th. Punishments quasi pecuniary.—They consist in depriving
the offender of a kind of property in the services of individuals,
—pure and simple services, or services combined with some
pecuniary profit.

llth. Characteristic Punishments.—Punishments which, by
means of some analogy, present to the imagination a lively idea
of the offence. These punishments do not properly form a sepa-
rate class ; they are distributed among all the others, ignominious,
‘penitential, afflictive, &. A characteristic punishment is a


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 3843


manner of inflicting one of the preceding punishments with
some circumstance which has relation to the nature of the offence.
Suppose a counterfeiter, instead of being punished with death,
were condemned to some othcr punishments, and, among other
things, to be branded indelibly. If the word counterfeiter were
branded on his forehead, and upon each cheek the impress of @
prece of current money, this punishment, recalling the offence by
& sensible image, would be cminently characteristic.

In a house of correction, the delinquents, according to the
diversity of their offences, should be obliged to wear emblematical
dresses, or other exterior marks of some striking analogy. Thus
the notion of their offence would become inseparable from them ;
their mere presence would be like a new proclamation of the law ;
and the hope of escaping this shame, by resuming a common
dress, would be a powerful attraction to engage them to good
conduct.


CHAPTER VIII.


Et quoniam varvant morbr, varvabimus artes 3
Mille mali specres, mille salutrs erunt.


And as diseases vary, aids must vary ;
A thousand kinds of ill, a thousand cures.


Justification of Variety in Punishments.


WE have already seen that the choice of punishments is the result
of a multitude of considerations, that they ought to be susceptible
of more or less, equal to themselves, commeasurable, analogous
to the offence, exemplary, cconomical, reformative, popular, &c.

We have seen that a single punishment never can have all these
qualities, that it is necessary to combine them, to vary them, to
assort them, in order to find the composition which we need.

If a code founded upon these principles were only a project, it
might be regarded as a fine speculation impossible to be realized.
Cold and indifferent men who are always armed with a despairing
incredulity wherever the happiness of mankind is concerned,


244 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE,


would not want that common reproach of impracticability, so con-
venient to idleness and so flattering to self-love. But the work is
done, the plan is executed; a penal code has been constructed
upon these principles, and that code, in which all these rules are
scrupulously adhered to, has no quality more remarkable than its
clearness, its simplicity, its precision.* All penal legislation
hitherto known, without having accomplished a moiety of the
object, is infinitely more complicated, more vague, more difficult
to comprehend.

It has been necessary to seck out a great variety of punish-
ments, to adapt them to each offence, and to invent new means of
rendering them exemplary and characteristic. But the same
persons who will agree to the general proposition that these two
qualities are essential will perhaps be constantly revolting against
their application. Punishments naturally excite antipathy, and
even horror, when considered separately from offences. Besides,
Opinions upon a mattcr submitted to sentiment and imagination
are so floating and capricious, that the same punishment which
would excite the indignation of one as too severe, would be
blamed by another as too mild and quite inefficacious.

I wish here only to anticipate an objection. A penal system
ought not to be thought crucl because it includes a great variety
of punishments. The multiplicity and the variety of punishments
prove the industry and the cares of the legislator. To have but
one or two kinds of punishment is an cffcct of ignorance of prin-
ciples, and of a barbarous contempt of proportion. I might
mention states in which despotism is all-powerful and civilization
but little advanced, where it may be said that but one kind of
punishment is known. The more we study the nature of offences
and of motives, the more we examine the diversity of characters
and circumstances, the more we shall feel the necessity of employ-
ing different means to counteract them.


* This refers to the penal division of that Universal Code, to the con-
struction of which Bentham devoted the greater part of his life. It has


not been published, and, indeed, was never finished to the satisfaction of
the author.—Translator. '


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 845


Offences, those interior enemies of society, which carry on
against it an obstinate and varied war, display all the instincts of
mischievous animals: some employ violence ; others have recourse
to stratagem—they know how to assume an infinity of shapes and
everywhere keep up a sccret correspondence. If they have been
combated without being conquered, if the revolt continues to
subsist, it must be principally ascribed to the defect of legal
tactics and ef the instruments hitherto employed to suppress
them. Certainly, there nceds as much talent, calculation, and
prudence to defend society as to attack it, and to prevent offences
as to commit them.

To determine whethcr a penal code is rigorous, observe how it
punishes the most common offences, those against property. The
laws everywhere have been too severe upon this point, because,
punishments being ill-chosen and misapplied, it has been attempted
to compensate by rigour what was wanting in justice. It 1s
necessary to be less prodigal of punishment as respects offenccs
which attack property, in order to deal it with more severity upon
offences which attack the person. The first are susceptible of
indemnity ; the others do not admit it, atleast notin kind. The
evil of offences against property may be reduced to a trifle by
means of insurances; while all the treasure of Potosi cannot
recall to life one murdered person, or calm the terrors spread by
such a crime. But the question 1s not whether a penal code be
more or less severe; that is a wrong view of the subject. The
only question is, whether the scverity of the code be necessary or
not.

It is cruel to expose even the guilty to useless sufferings; and
such is the consequence of punishments too severe. But is it not
more cruel still to leave the innocent to suffer? Such is the
result of punishments too mild to be efficient.

We may conclude that variety in punishments is one of the
perfections of a penal code, and that the more repugnant to a
sensitive heart is the search for these means, the more necessary
is it that the legislator should be so penetrated with humanity as
to gain this victory over himself. Was Sangrado, whose only


346 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


physic consisted in bleeding, more humane than Boerhaave, who
consulted all nature to discover new remedies ?*


* The ideas suggested in this chapter are expanded at much greater
length, and sustained by additional arguments, in the Theory of Punish-
ments, which is one of the works of Bentham, compiled and pubhshed by
Dumont. Notwithstanding all the reasonings of Bentham upon the sub-
ject of diversity of punishment, I am constrained, by his own principles,
to adopt the opinion that «mprisonment, variously modified, is the only
punishment which thelegislator need employ,—with the exception of
those satisfactions, pecumary and honorary, which ought to form a part
of every code, and which in a certain sense may be regarded as punish-
ments.

Imprisonment combines all the qualities enumerated by Bentham as
desirable in a punishment. 1. It 1s peculiarly susceptible of more or less.
2. It may easily be made equal to rtself/—that is, uniform im its severity as
respects the punishment of different offenders guilty of the same offence.
3. It is commeasurable ina high degree. 4. It 1s exemplary, inasmuch as
a gaol is a constant warning to offenders. 5. It is economical, or may
easily be made so by proper arrangements, and that too in more senses
than one; for whileit is considered as a punishment both by the offender
and the public, instead of inflicting any injury on the offender, in many
cases it may be made to confer upon him a high degree of benefit, both phy-
sical and moral; and as respects the pecuniary expense to the public, every
gaol, mere houses of detention excepted, might be made, and ought to be
made, to support itself 6. It is remissible, and quite as revocable as
any other punishment. 7. It also may be regarded as analogous to the
offence, since every offence consists in an abuse of hberty and power, and
is properly punished by a restraint of liberty and power.

It also possesses in a high degree two of the other qualities esteemed
by Bentham as important, though less so than those above mentioned.
1. It has a tendency to reform the offender, by removing him from the
temptations of liberty, and giving virtuous motives an opportunity to
regain an ascendancy. 2. It takes away, so long as it lasts, which may
be for along time, the power of doing enjury.

It is a point of the highest importance that severity of punishment
should be proportioned to magnitude of offences, and that according to
a scale simple, and easily to be understood. Variety of kinds in punish-
ment seems to be inconsistent with this essential object, for by what
common measure shall we calculate them ?—how many lashes are equi-
valent to how many days of imprisonment? ‘This is a matter of fancy
upon which rio two men will agree.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 347
4


CHAPTER IX.
Examination of some Common Punishments.


ArriictivE PonisnmEents.—These are not good for all offences,
because they cannot exist in a slight degree, or at least only in
case of persons in a state of the lowest degradation. Every cor-
poral punishment publicly inflicted is infamous. Inflicted in
private, it is less infamous, but it is not exemplary

The most common afflictive punishment is whipping. In its
ordinary application, this punishment has the inconvenience of
not being equal to itself’; it varies from the slightest pain to the
most atrocious torture, and may even result in death. Everything
depends upon the kind of lash, the force of the application, and
the temperament of the individual. The Icgislator who orders
this punishment knows not what he does; the judge is nearly as
ignorant; its execution will always be in the highest degree
arbitrary and uncertain. In England, whipping is usual for such
thefts as juries, by a humane perjury, declare to be below the
value of a shilling. This punishment is a revenue to the execu-
tioner. If the delinquent suffers, it is only because he has no
money wherewith to purchase the impunity of a mock infliction.

INDELIBLE PunisHMENTS.—lIndelible affiictive punishments,
taken separately, are not capable of graduation. The mildest
of them has a very high degree of severity. Some, such as
branding, only disfigure the person; others take away the use of
some limb; others consist in mutilations, as the loss of the nose,

Imprisonment, moreover, has the decided advantage of not inflaming
the vindictive feelings or giving the sanction of the law to revolting
cruelties. Who can doubt that barbarous punishments tend to barbarize
the people which inflicts them ?

I might suggest many other considerations in favour of adopting
imprisonment as the only kind of punishment, did the limits of a note
permit it. It must be confessed, however, that imprisonment has been
fitted to serve for that purpose only by reason of those vast improve-
ments lately introduced into prison discipline, of which Bentham, next
“to Howard, deserves the credit. See the treatise entitled Panoptique,
compiled by Dumont from the writings of Bentham.—Translator.


348 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


the ears, the feet, or the hands. Mutilation of the organs which
are necessary for labour ought tot to be inflicted upon common
offences, such as those which spring from want, as theft, smug-
gling, &c. What can the offenders do after being maimed?
If the state maintains them the punishment becomes too expen-
sive; if they are left to themselves, it is the same as condemning
them to despair and death. Penal mutilations have two incon-
veniences; they are irremissible, and they are apt to be con-
founded with natural accidents. There is no apparent difference
between him who has had an arm cut off for a crime, and him
who has lost an arm in the service of his country. An artificial
and evident brand ought always to be added, to be the certificate
of offence and the safeguard of misfortune These punishments
might be suppressed altogether ; and 1f used at all, it should only
be for some very rare offences, where they have the recommenda-
tion of analogy.

Indelible brands are a powerful means of which a bad use has
been made. Among offenders convicted of theft, or of furtive
concealment, many have only yiclded to a transient temptation,
and might return to virtue if the nature of the punishment had
not corrupted them. In such cases there should be no indelible
brand, no infamous punishment. That would be to take away
the hope of re-establishing thcir reputation, and redceming a
moment of error. If an indelible brand is stamped upon coun-
terfeiters, for example, it is a sign which excites distrust of their
honesty, but which does not deprive them of the means of live-
jhood. Despised as rogues, they will still be employed as
ingenious workmen. But if a man is branded for a first theft,
what will become of him? Who will employ him? What
would it avail him to be honest? He is compelled to be a
knave.

An indelible brand is only useful toe mark a dangerous offender,
who will cease to be dangerous provided he is known, or to
secure the execution of another punishment. When the offence
is infamous, branding ought to accompany perpetual imprison-
ment, to prevent the flight of the prisoner. It binds him like a


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 349


chain, for it makes the prison his asylum, and he would be worse
off out of it than in it. To make these marks permanent and
distinguishable, they should be imprinted by coloured powders
pricked into the skin, and not with a hot iron.

Ienominious PunisHments.—Infamy is one of the most salu-
tary ingredients in penal pharmacy: but ideas upon this subject are
very confused, and the means employed very imperfect. Accord-
ing to the notion of the lawycrs, it would seem that infamy was
a homogeneous thing, indivisible, an absolute and invariable
quantity. If it were so, the employment of this punishment
would be almost always impolitic and unjust; for it is equally
applied to very unequal offences, and to some offences which ought
not to be visited with it at all. Infamy, well managed, is very
susceptible of graduation. It is, mm a moral view, what defile-
ment is in a physical. It is one thing to have a spot on one’s
clothes, and quite another to be covered with mud.

Loss of honour is another phrasc in common use, but not less
deceptive. It includes two false suppositions: one, that honour
is a good of which all men possess a certain share; the other, that
it is entirely in the power of the law, and can be taken away at
pleasure. The term dishonour, which differs from infamy in not
excluding the idea of more or less, would be more appropriate.

Infamy, as it is commonly employed, bears rather upon the
criminal than the crime. If it bore upon the offence, its effect
would be more certain, more durable, and more efficacious. It
might then be proportioned to the nature of the case. But in
order to attain that end it is necessary that a particular kind of
dishonour should be found for every kind of offence.

All this cannot be effected, except by a new apparatus of jus-
tice; inscriptions, emblems, dresses, pictural representations;
signs which speak to the eyes, which strike the imagination
through the senses, which form associations not to be effaced.
It is thus that public indignation, which is but too apt to be
directed against the laws and the judges, may be concentrated
upon the offender and the offence. The legislator should not
disdain to borrow from the theatre imposing shows and repre-


350 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


sentations. To surround the criminal with symbols of his offence
would not be, as some may incline to represent it, a vain display
of power, a ridiculous parody: it would be an instructive exhi-
bition which would announce the moral objects of punishment,
and would render justice more respectable by showing it, even
in the sad function of punishment, aiming rather to impress a
great lesson than to satisfy a spirit of vengeance.

The pillory, used in England, is of all punishments the most
unequal and unmanageable. The delinquent is abandoned to the
caprice of individuals, and this singular infliction is sometimes a
triumph, and sometimes it is death. An author was condemned
to it, some years since, for what is called a libel. The platform
upon which he was placed became a kind of lyceum; and the
whole time passed away in compliments between him and the
spectators. In 1760, a bookseller was put in the pillory for hav-
ing sold some impious or seditious work. A subscription was
opened for him, while he was still standing in it, and soon
amounted to upwards of a hundred guineas. What an affront
to the law! Lately, a man condemned to the same punishment
for a lascivious offence, was murdered by the populace under the
eyes of the police, who did not even attempt to defend him.
Mr. Burke had the spirit to denounce this abuse in the House of
Commons. ‘The man who undergoes a punishment,” he said,
‘Cis still under the protection of the law, and ought not to be
abandoned as a prey to ferocity.” The orator was applauded,
but the abuse remains; yet a simple iron grating to inclose the
criminal would prevent all such acts of barbarity.

Curonic Pounisaments.—Chronic punishments, such as ban-
ishment and imprisonment, are adapted to many offences; but
they demand a particular attention to the circumstances which
affect individual sensibility. Banishment would be an infliction
in the highest degree unequal if it were decreed without excep-
tion, Its severity depends upon the condition and the fortune of
those who undergo it. Some have no reason to be attached to
their country; others would be overwhelmed with despair at the
idea of leaving their property and their home. Some have fami-


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 351


lies, others have no such ties. One would be deprived of every
resource if compelled to leave his country, to another banishment
would be a lucky escape from his creditors. Age and sex make
a great difference. Much latitude must be allowed to the judge,
who can be directed only by general instructions.

The English, before the independence of America, were in the
habit of transporting to the colonies a numcrous class of offenders.
For some this transportation was slavery, for others a party of
pleasure. A rogue, who had a mind to travel, was a fool if he
did not commit some offence to insure himself an outfit and a
free passage. The more industrious of the convicts gained pro-
perty and a home in the colonies. Those who knew nothing,
except. how to stcal, not being able to exercise their art with
any success in a country of which they did not know even the
geography, soon ended their career on the gallows. Once con-
demned and transported, their lot was unknown. Though they
died of disease or famine, nobody cared. Thus the whole effect
of example was lost, and the principal end of punishment was
wholly neglected. The transportation to Botany Bay, which is
now im use, answers its end no better. It has all the faults
which a punishment can have, and none of the qualities which
it ought to have.

If an establishment in a distant country were offered to the
citizens, on condition of attaining it by a violation of the laws,
what absurdity! what madness! But transportation must pre-
sent itself to many wretches as an advantageous offer, of which
they can take advantage only by committing an offence. Thus
the law, instead of counterbalancing the temptation, adds, in
many cases, to its force.

As to «mprisonment, it is impossible to give any opinion with
respect to that punishment, until all that concerns the structure
and the internal government of prisons has been determined with
the greatest exactitude. Prisons, with the exception of a small
number, include every imaginable means of infecting both body
and mind. Consider merely the state of forced idleness to which
the prisoners are reduced, and this punishment is excessively


$54 ; PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


opinion of Beccaria,—that it ought to be disused. This subject
is so ably discussed in his book, that to treat it after him is a
work that may well be dispensed with. Those who wish to see,
at a single glance, all that can be said for and against it, have
only to turn back to the chapter containing the table of qualities
desirable in a punishment.

Whence originated the prodigal fury with which the punish-
ment of death has been inflicted? It is the effect.of resentment
which at first inclines to the greatest rigour; and of an imbecility
of soul, which finds in the rapid destruction of convicts the great
advantage of having no further occasion to concern one’s self
about them.

Death! always death! It requires neither the medita-
tions of genius nor resistance to the passions. It is only to
yield one’s self to them, and we are carried at once to that
fatal term.

Is it said that dcath is necessary to take from an assassin the
power of reiterating his offence? For the same reason, then, we
ought to destroy the frantic and the mad, from whom society has
everything to fear. If we can guard against these, why not
against assassins? Is it said that death is the only punishment
which can outweigh certain temptations to commit homicide ?
These temptations can only arise from hostility or cupidity; and
do not these passions, from their very nature, dread humiliation,
want, and captivity more than death ?

I should astonish the rcader were I to expose to him the penal
code of a nation celebrated for its humanity and its enlighten-
ment. We should expect to find in it the most exact proportion
between offences and punishments; but, in fact, that proportion
is continually outraged or forgotten, and the punishment of death
is lavished upon the most trifling offences. The mildness of the
national character is in contradiction to the laws, and, as might
be expected, it is that which triumphs; the laws are eluded;
pardons are multiplied; offences are overlooked; testimony is
excluded; and juries, to avoid an excess of severity, often fall
into excess of indulgence. Thence results a system of penal law,


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 855


incoherent, contradictory, uniting violence to weakness, dependent
on the humour of a judge, varying from circuit to circuit, some-
times sanguinary, sometimes null.

English law-makers have not yet adopted imprisonment jcined
to labour—a sort of punishment good in so many respects. In-
stead of compulsive occupation, they rcduce their prisoners to
complete idleness. Is this by design? No; itis doubtless by
habit. Things have been found upon that footing; it has becn
disapproved, but has not been changed. There needs pecuniary
advances, vigilance, and sustained attention, to combine imprison-
ment with labour; none of these are needed to shut up a man,
and leave him to himself.


CHAPTER X.
Of the pardoning Power.


Wuat punishment lacks in certainty must be made up in severity.
The less certain a punishment is, the sevcrer it must be; the more
certain it is, the less 1t need be severe.

What shall be said of a power created for the very purpose of
making punishment uncertain? Such, however, is the direct
consequence of a power to pardon.

In the species, as in the individual, the age of passion precedes
that of reason. Anger and vengcance have dictated the earliest
penal laws. When these barbarous enactments, founded upon
caprices and antipathies, begin to shock an enlightened public,
the power of pardoning offers a safeguard against the sanguinary
rigour of the laws, and becomes, so to speak, a comparative good ;
and nobody inquires whether this pretended remedy is not, in
fact, a new evil.

How many eulogiumis have been bestowed uponclemency! It
has been repeated a thousand times that it is the first virtue of a
sovereign. Doubtless, if the crime be only an attack upon the
sovereign’s self-love ; if the question be of a satire upon him or
: aad


356 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


his favourites; the moderation of a prince is meritorious, the
pardon which he grants is a triumph over himself. But when
the question is of an offence against society, a pardon is nof an
act of clemency ; it is a mere piece of partiality.

In cases where punishment would do more evil than good, as
after seditions, conspiracics, and public disorders, the power of
pardoning is not only useful, it is necessary. These cases being
foreseen and pointed out in a good legislative system, pardon
applied to them js not a violation, it is an execution of the law.
But pardons without motive, effects of the favour or the facility
of a prince, impeach either the laws or the government: the laws,
of cruelty to individuals; or the government, of cruelty to the
public. Reason, justice, and humanity must be wanting some-
where ; for reason is never in contradiction with itself; justice
cannot destroy with one hand what it has done with the other ;
humanity cannot require that punishment should be established
for the protection of innocence, and that pardons should be
granted for the encouragement of crime.

The power of pardoning, it has been said, is the noblest pre-
rogative of sovereignty. But may not that prerogative sometimes
turn to the disadvantage of him by whom it is exercised? If,
instead of gaining for the prince a more constant affection on the
part of his subjects, it exposes him to caprices of judgment, to
clamours, and to libels; if he can ncither yield to solicitations
without being suspected of feeblencss, nor show himself incxorable
without being accused of severity, where then is the splendour of
this dangerous right? It would seem that a just and humane
prince must often dread the exposure to this combat between
public and private virtucs.

Homicide ought, at least, to make an exception. He who has
the right to pardon that offence is master of the life of every
citizen.*


*'To prevent the abuse of this power, it would suffice to require that
its exercise should be accompanied by an exposition of motives. Where
capital punishments are in use, it would be better to preserve the power
of pardoning, even without restrictions, than to abolish it entirely.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 357


Tosumup. If the laws are too severe, the power of pardoning
3 a necessary corrective; but that corrective is itself an evil.
Take good laws, and there will be no need of a magic wand
vhich has the power to annulthem. If the punishment is neccs-
ary, it ought not to be remitted; if it is not necessary, the con-
ict should not be sentenced to undergo it.


868


PART FOURTH.


INDIRECT MEANS OF PREVENTING OFFENCES.


INTRODUCTION.


Iw all the sciences there are branches which have been cultivated
more tardily than others, because they demand a longer series of
observations and meditations more profound. It is thus that
mathematics have their transcendental or higher branch—that is,
@ new science, as it were, above ordinary science.

The same distinction, to a certain extent, may be applied to the
art of legislation. What means shall be adopted to prevent inju-
rious actions? The first answer, which presents itself to every-
body, is this: ‘Forbid those actions; punish them.” This
method of combatting offences being the most simple and the first
adopted, every other method of arriving at the same end is, so to
speak, a refinement of the art, and its transcendental branch.

‘That branch consists in devising a course of legislative acts
adapted to prevent offences—in acting principally upon the incli- -
nations of men, in order to turn them from evil and to impress
upon them the direction most uscful to themselves and to others.

The first method—that of combatting offences by punishments
—constitutes direct legislation.

The second method—that of combatting offences by preventive
meane—constitutes a branch of legislation which may be called.
indirect.

The sovereign acts directly against offences when he prohibits


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 350


them individually under special penalties, He acts indirectly
when he takes precautions to prevent them.

By direct legislation the evil is attacked in front. Indirect
legislation attacks it obliquely. In the first case, the legislator
declares open war against the enemy, points him out, pursues
him, meets him foot to foot, and carries his defences sword in
hand. In the sccond case, he does not announce his whole
design; he works underground, he procures intelligence, he seeks
to prevent hostile enterprises, and to keep still in his alliance
those who may have formed secret intentions against him.

Speculative writers upon politics have had glimpses of this art;
but in speaking of this second branch of legislation they do not
evince any clear idea of it. The first branch has been a long
time reduced to system, the good part of it as well as the bad.
The second branch has never been thoroughly examined ; nobody
has undertaken to treat 1t with method, to arrange it, to classify
it—in one word, to master itin its whole extent. It is yetanew
subject.

Writers who have composed political romances tolerate direct
legislation as a necessary evil; it is a choice of evils to which
they submit, but as to which they never express a very lively
interest. But when they come to spcak about the means of pre-
venting offences, of rendering men better, of perfecting morals,
their imagination grows warm, their hopes are excited; one
would suppose they were about to produce the great secret, and
that the human race was going to receive a new form. It is
because we have a more magnificent idea of objects in proportion
as they are less familiar, and because the imagination has a loftier
flight amid vague projects which have never been subjected to
the limits of analysis. Major ¢ longinquo reverentia—the greater
distance, the greater reverence—this is a saying as applicable to
ideas as to persons. A detailed examination will reduce all these
indefinite hopes to the just dimensions of the possible; and if ‘in
the process we lose fictitious treasures, we shall be well indem-
nified by the certainty of what remains.

To distinguish exactly what appertains to these two branches,


360 | PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


it is necessary to begin by forming a just idea of direct legislation.
It proceeds, or ought to proceed, in this way :—

ist. The choice of acts to be erected into offences.

2nd. The description of each offence, as murder, theft, pecu-
lation, &c.

8rd. An exposition of the reasons for attributing to these acts
the quality of offences—reasons which ought to be deduced from
the single principle of utility, and consequently to be consistent
with themselves.

4th. The assigning of a competent punishment for each offence.

5th. An exposition of the reasons which justify these punish-
ments.

The penal system, though it be made as perfect as possible, is
defective in several respects :—1st. The evil must exist before the
remedy can be applied. The remedy consists in the application
of punishment, and punishment cannot be applied till offence is
committed. Every new instance of punishment inflicted is an
additional proof that punishment lacks efficacy and leaves behind
it a certain degree of danger and alarm. 2nd. Punishment itself
is an evil, though necessary to prevent greater evils. Penal jus-
tice, in the whole course of its operation, can only be a series of
evils—evils arising from the threats and constraint of the law,
evils arising from the prosecution of the accused before it is pos-
sible to distinguish innocence from guilt, evils growing out of the
infliction of judicial sentences, evils from the unavoidable conse-
quences which result to the innocent. 3rd. The penal system is
not able to reach many injurious actions, which escape justice
either by their frequency, the facility of concealing them, by the
difficulty of defining them, or finally by some vicious turn of
public opinion by which they are favoured. Penal law can ope-
rate only within certain limits, and its power extends only to
palpable acts, susceptible of manifest proof.

This imperfection of the penal system has caused new expe-
dients to be sought for to supply its deficiencies. These expe-
dients have for their object the prevention of offences, either by
preventing the acquisition of the knowledge necessary to their


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 361


commission or by taking away the power or the will to commit
them. The most numerous class of these means relates to the
art of directing the inclinations by weakening the seductive
motives which excite to evil, and by strengthening the tutelary
motives which impel to good. |

Indirect means, then, are those which, without having the
character of punishments, act upon man physically or morally, to
dispose him to obey the laws, to shield him from temptations, to
govern him by his inclinations and his knowledge.

These indirect means not only have a great advantage on the
side of mildness, but they succeed in a multitude of cases in
which direct means will not answer. All modern historians have
remarked how much the abuses of the Catholic Church have
diminished since the establishment of the Protestant religion.
What popes and councils could not do by their decrees a fortunate
rivalry has accomplished without difficulty; and scandals which
would afford to hostile sects a matter of triumph have been care-
fully avoided. The indirect means of free competition among
religions has more power to restrain and reform the clergy than
all positive laws.

Let us take another example from political economy. Attempts
have been made to reduce by law the price of merchandise, and
particularly the interest of money. It is true that high prices
are an evil only in comparison with some good of which they
prevent the enjoyment; but such an evil as they are, there is
reason for seeking to diminish it. To effect that purpose, a mul-
titude of restrictive laws have been devised, a fixed tariff of
prices, a legal rate of interest. And what has been the conse-
quence? These regulations have always been eluded; punish-
ments have been multiplied; and the evil, instead of being
diminished, has become greater. The only efficacious means is an
indirect one, which few governments have had the wisdom to
employ. To grant all merchants and capitalists a free right of
competition, to intrust to them the business of making war upon

each other, of underbidding each other, and of attracting pur-
“chasers by the offer of more advantageous terms—such is this


362 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


means. Free competition amounts to the same thing as the grant
of a reward to him who furnishes merchandise of the best
kind at the lowest price. This immediate and natural reward,
which a multitude of competitors flatter themselves with the hope
of obtaining, acts with more efficacy than a distant punishment
which every one expects to escape.

Before entering upon the exposition of these indirect means, it
should be observed that the classification here employed is, to a
certain extent, arbitrary, and that several of them may be pro-
perly arranged under different heads. To distinguish them
invariably, one from the other, would require us to enter upon a
metaphysical analysis, very subtle and very fatiguing. It is
enough for the present purpose that all indirect means may be
placed under one or the other of the heads proposed, and that the
attention of the legislator is directed to the principal sources
whence they may be derived.

There is one more preliminary remark of essential importance.
Among the variety of means about to be explained, there is none
which is recommended as especially fit for any particular govern-
ment, and still less for all government in general. The special
advantage of each measure, considered by itsclf, will be indicated
under its proper head , but each may have relative inconveniences,
which it is impossible to determine without knowing the circum-
stances of the particular case. It ought to be well understood
that the object here proposed is not to advise the adoption of
such or such a measure, but simply to bring it into view, and to
recommend it to the attention of those whose province it is to
judge of its applicability.


CHAPTER I.
Means of taking away the Physical Power to do Harm.


Wuen the will, the knowledge, and the power necessary to the
performance of an act concur, that act is of necessity performed.
Enchnation, knowledge, power,—these, then, are the three points at


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 363


which it is necessary to apply the influence of law, in order to
determine the conduct of men. These three words contain in
the abstract the sum and substance of all that can be done by
legislation, direct or indirect.

I begin with power, because means ir this respect are more
simple and more limited, and because, in those cases in which we
can succeed in taking away the power to do harm, we have accom-
plished*everything. Success is certain.

Power may be distinguished into two kinds: Ist. Internal
power, that which depends upon the intrinsic faculties of the indi-
vidual; 2nd. External power, that which depends upon persons
and things external to the individual, but the aid of which he
must have, in order to act.

As to internal power, that which depends upon the faculties of
the individual, it is scarcely possible to deprive a man of it with
advantage. The power of doing evil is inseparable from the
power of doing good. With his hands cut off, a man cannot
steal, but neither can he work.

Besides, these privative means arc so severe that they cannot be
employed except upon criminals already convicted. Imprison-
ment is the only one of them that can be justified, in certain
cases, to prevent an apprehended offence.

The legislator will find greatcr resources for the prevention of
offences by turning his attention to the material objects which
aid their commission.

There are cases in which the power of doing harm may be
taken away, by excluding what Tacitus calls writamenta malorum, —
irritations to evil,—the subjects, the instruments of offence. In
such cases, the policy of the legislator may be compared to that
of a nurse; iron bars at the windows, grates around the fire, the
care of keeping sharp and dangerous instruments from the hands
of children, are means of the same kind as the prohibition to sell
and to make tools for the fabrication of false money, venerific
drugs, arms easy to be concealed, dice, or other instruments of
prohibited games, and the prohibition to make or to have certain
nets for the chase, or other instruments for trapping wild game.


364 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


Mahomet, not trusting to the restraining power of reason,
wished to take away from men the power of abusing strong
drinks ; and if we consider the climate of warm countries, where
‘wine renders men furious rather than stupid, we shall find per-
haps that the total prohibition is a milder method of procedure
than a permission which produces a numerous class of offences,
and consequently of punishments.

Imposts upon spirituous liquors fulfil, in part, the same end.
In proportion as the price is raiscd above the capacity of the
most numerous class to purchase, they are deprived of the means
of giving themselves up to intemperance.

Sumptuary laws, inasmuch as they prohibit the introduction
of certain articles which are objects of jealousy to the legislator,
may be referred to this head. It is this which has rendered so
famous the legislation of Sparta; the precious metals were
banished; strangers were excluded; travelling was not per-
mitted.

At Geneva there was a prohibition to wear diamonds, and
the number of horses which an individual might keep was
limited.*

There might be mentioned under this head many English
statutes relative to the sale of spirituous liquors. It is pro-
hibited to expose them to sale in the open air. A licence must
be obtained, and paid for, &c. The prohibition to open certain
places of amusement upon Sunday appertains to this head.

To the same class belong the measures adopted to destroy
libels, seditious writings, obscene figures exposed in the streets,
and to prevent the printing and publication of works thought to
have a pernicious tendency.

The ancient police laws of Paris forbade a servant to wear a
sword, or even to carry a cane or staff. This perhaps was a
simple distinction of rank; perhaps it was a measure of security.

Where a particular class of the people is oppressed by the
sovereign power, prudence requires that they should be forbidden


* To cite these usages is not to propose them as models. They are
cited to show under what class such laws ought to be arranged.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, 865


to carry arms. The greater injury becomes a justification for the
smaller injury. The Philistines obliged the Jews to come to
them every time they wanted to sharpen their axes and scythes.
In China the fabrication and the sale of arms is reserved exclu-
sively to the Tartar-Chinese.

By a statutc of George III., all persons, except traders, are for-
bidden to keep in their houses more than fifty pounds weight of
gunpowder, and traders are not allowed to have more than two
hundred pounds weight on hand at one time. The reason
assigned is the danger of explosions. In the statutes relating
to high roads and turnpikes, the number of carriage horses is
limited to eight, with an exception in favour of certain trans-
portations, and of artillery and munitions of war, for the service
of the king. The reason assigned is the preservation of the roads.

Whether any of thesc measures, and others of the same sort,
have a political object behind the reasons assigned for them, that
is what I do not pretend to say; but it is certain that such
expedients may operate to take away the means of revolt, and to
diminish facilities for smuggling.

Among the expedients of this sort, I know none more happy or
more simple than that commonly used in England to render diffi-
cult the theft of bank-notes. When it is necessary to send them
by a messenger or the post, they are cut into two parts, which
are sent separately. The theft of half a bank-note would be
useloss, and the difficulty of stealing the two parts, one after the
other, is so great that the offence is almost impossible.

There are professions for the exercise of which proofs of
capacity are required. Therc are others which the laws render
incompatible with each other. In England many offices of jus-
tice are incompatible with the profession of an attorney; it is
feared that the right hand might be secretly labouring for the left.

Persons who contract with the administration for the supply of
commissary stores, and the provisioning of the fleet, cannot have
a seat in parliament. These persons may be defaulters, and be
subject to parliamentary investigation ; itis not proper, therefore,
that they should be members. But there are stronger reasons yet


366 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


for this exclusion, derived from the danger of increasing minis-
‘terial influence. -


CHAPTER II.


Prohibition of acquiring Knowledge which may be turned to a
bad purpose.


T mention this kind of policy only to condemn it. It has pro-
duced the censorship of the press; it has produced the inquisition ;
and wherever it is employed it will always produce the brutaliza-
tion of mankind.

I propose here to show,—Ist, that the diffusion of knowledge
is not injurious on the whole, the offences of refinement being
less fatal than those of ignorance ; 2nd, that the most advan-
tageous method of combatting the cvil which may result from a
limited degree of knowledge is to augment its quantity.

In the first place, the diffusion of knowledge is not injurious
on the whole. Some writers have thought, or seemed to think,
that the less men know the better off they will be: that the less
enlightened they are, the less acquaintance they will have with
the objects that serve as motives to evil, or as means of commit-
ting it. Itis not surprising that fanatics have entertained this
opinion, since there is a natural and constant rivalry between the
knowledge of things real, useful, and intelligible, and the know-
ledge of things unintelligible, imaginary, and useless. But these
notions about the dangers of knowledge are sufficiently common
among the mass of mankind. The age of gold,—that is, the age
of ignorance,—is spoken of with regret. To put in a clear litht
the error upon which these notions rest, there needs a more
precise method of estimating the evil of an offence than any
hitherto employed.

It is not astonishing that offences of refinement are more
odious than offences of ignorance,—that is, of brutal violence.
In determining the greatness of offences, the principle of anti-
pathy has been more followed than the principle of utility.
Antipathy gives more attention to the apparent depravity. of


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 367


character indicated by the offence than to anything else. This,
in the eyes of passion, is the salient point of the action, in com-
parison with which the strict examination of utility always
appears too cool. Now, the more knowledge and refinement an
offence indicates, the more proof there is of reflection on the
part of the offender, and of depravity in his moral disposition.
But the evil of an offence, the sole object which the principle of
utility regards, is not determined by depravity of character alone ;
it depends immediately upon the sufferings of the persons who
are affected by the offence, and upon the alarm which # excites
in the community ; and, in the sum of evil, the depravity which
the culprit manifests is not an essential circumstance, but merely
an aggravation.

The greatest offences are those for which the smallest degree of
knowledge is sufficient; the most ignorant individual always
knows enough to commit them. Haaren is a grayer_ crime
than house-firing ; pouse-firing than h micide ; homicide than
robbery ; robbery than pilfering, This proposition may be de-


monstrated by an arithmetical process, by an inventory of the
items of evil in each case, by a comparison of the greatness of
each individual suffering, and of the number of individuals who
are made to suffer. But how much knowledge is required to
enable a man to commit these offences? The most atrocious of
all demands only a degree of intelligence possessed by the most
barbarous, the most savage of men.

Robbery is worse than seduction or adultery; but robbery is
most frequent in times of barbarism, seduction and adultery in
those of refinement.

The dissemination of knowledge has not increased the number
of offences, nor even the facility of committing them; it has only
diversified the means of their perpetration. And how? By
gradually substituting less injurious means in the place of those
‘which are more injurious.

Is a new method of theft invented? The inventor profits for
a time by his discovery; but presently his secret is found out,
and people are on their guard. It then becomes necessary to


$68 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


have recourse to some new means, which has its turn, like the
first, and passes by in the same way. All this is still but theft,
not so bad as highway robbery, which itself is not so bad as
plundering committed by armed bands.* Why? Because the con-
fidence every one has in his own prudence and his own sagacity
prevents him from being so much alarmed by theft as by robbery.

Let it be granted, however, that bad men abuse everything;
that the more they know, the more means they have of doing
evil; what follows?

If the good and the bad composed two distinct races, like the
white and black, the one might be enlightened and the other
kept in ignorance. But since it is impossible to discriminate
between them, and especially when we consider the frequent
alternation of good and evil in the same individual, all must be
subjected to the same rule. General light, or general darkness ;
there is no middle course.

However, the very evil complained of carries with it its own
cure. Knowledge cannot give advantage to the bad, except so
far as they have the exclusive possession of it. A snare which
is known ceases to be a snare. The most ignorant tribes have
known how to poison the tips of thcir arrows; but it is only
nations well instructed who have become acquainted with all
poisons, and have known how to oppose them by antidotes.

All men have the capacity to commit offences ; but only en-
lightened men are able to discover laws which can prevent them.
The more ignorant a man is, the more he is inclined to separate
his private intercst from the interest of his fellows. The more


* That is, on the supposition that the damage of the offence is the
same ; for there is a point of view in which theft is worse than robbery,
since one may possess himself of a greater sum of money by fraud than
by robbing on the highway.

For proofs of the superiority of modern manners over ancient times,
see Hume's Essay on Population. For proofs of their superiority over
the manners of the Middle Ages, see Voltaire’s General History ; Hume's
History of England; Robertson's Introduction to Charles V.; Barrington’s
Qbservations wpon English Statutes; and Chastellua, in his Treatise upon
Public Happiness, & work happily conceived but not well executed.


PRINCIPLES OF THE TIENAL CODE. 369


enlightened he is, the more clearly will he perceive the connes-
tion between his private interest and the interest of the whole.

Look through history; the most barbarous ages present an
assemblage of all offences, offences of cunning as well as offences
of violence. Barbarism, though it has some vices peculiar to
itself, seems not to exclude vices of any kind. At what epoch
were false titles and forged grants most multiplicd? When the
clergy alone knew how to read; when, through the superiority
of their knowledge, they regarded men almost as we regard
horses, animals which we could not subdue to the bit, if their
intellectual faculties were equal to ours. Why was recourse had,
during the same period, to judicial duels, to trials by fire and
water, and to all those strange means called judgments of God ?
Because, during that infancy of reason, there were no principles
known by which to distinguish truth from falsehood.

Compare the results in states in which the publication of ideas
has been restrained, and in those where freedom of thought and
of speech has been permitted. You have, on the one side, Spain,
Portugal, Italy; on the other, England, Holland, North Amcrica.
Where is the most happiness? Where the best morals? Where
the most crimes? Where is society most agreeable and most
secure ?

Too many praises have been lavished upon institutions, the
founders of which made knowledge a monopoly. Such were the
priests in ancient Egypt, the Brahmins of Hindostan, the Jesuits
in Paraguay. If their conduct merits praise, it is only in rela-
tion to the interests of those persons who have administered these
forms of government, not as regards the interest of those who
have been subject to them. It may be admitted that the people
have been quiet and docile under these theocracies; but have they
been happy? Itis not credible that they have been, unlessan ab-
ject servitude, vain terrors, useless obligations, macerations, pain-
ful observances, saddening opinions, are no obstacles to happiness.

These governments have not so much attained their end by
maintaining natural ignorance, as by spreading prejudices, and
propagating errors. The chiefs themselves have always ended


870 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


by becoming the victims of this narrow and pusillanimous policy.
States retained in a constant inferiority, by institutions opposed
to every kind of progress, become the prey of nations who have
acquired a relative superiority. States grown old in an infancy,
which has been prolonged by their tutors, that they might the
more easily govern, have always offcred an easy conquest; and
once subjected, have passed with little or no resistance from one
master to another.

But it is said we do not pretcnd to keep men in ignorance; all
governments perceive the necessity of knowledge; what they are
afraid of is the liberty of the press. They do not oppose the
publication of scientific treatises; but is it not reasonable that
they should oppose the spread of immoral or seditious writings,
the evil effects of which cannot be prevented if they are once
allowed to circulate? Punishing a guilty author may act asa
preventive to those who might incline to imitate him, but to
prevent the publication of bad books by the institution of the
censorship, is to check the evil at its source.

The liberty of the press has its inconveniences ; nevertheless,
the evils which result from it are not to be compared to those of
@ censorship.

Where will you find that rare genius, that superior intelligence,
that mortal, accessible to all truths, and inaccessible to any
passion, to whom can be intrusted this supreme dictatorship over
all the productions of the human mind? Do you suppose that a
Locke, a Leibnitz, or a Newton, would have had the presumption
to undertake it? And what is this power which you are forced
to confer upon inferior men? It isa power which by a singular
necessity combines in its exercise all the causes of partiality, and
all the characteristics of injustice. What is acensor? He isan
interested judge, a sole judge, an arbitrary judge, who proceeds
in, secret, condemns without a hearing, and decides without appeal.
Secrecy of procedure, that greatest of abuses, is absolutely essen-
tial. If a book were publicly examined, it would be publishing
the book, in order to know if it ought to be published.

As to the evil which results from a censorship, it is impossible te


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. o7vl


measure it, because it is impossible to tell where it ends. It is
nothing less than the danger of stopping the whole progress of
the human mind in all its paths. Every new and important
truth must of necessity have many enemies, for the single reason
that it is new and important. Is it to be presumed that the
censor will belong to that class, infinitely the smaller, which
elevates itself above established prejudices? And though he
should have that uncommon strength of mind, will he have the
courage to endanger himsclf on account of discoveries of which he
will not share the glory? There is but onc sure course for him
to take ; to proscribe everything which rises above common ideas,
to draw his pen through everything elevated. He risks nothing
by prohibition, but everything by permission. In doubtful cases,
it will not be he that suffers; it will be Truth.

If the advance of the human mind had depended upon the good-
will of those in authority, where should we be to-day? Reli-
gion, legislation, morals, the physical sciences, all would be in
darkness. But itis not necessary to dwell upon so common an
argument.

The true censorship is that of an cnlightened public, which
discountenances false and dangerous opinions, and encourages
useful discoveries. In a free country, the audacity of a libel does
not save it from gencral contempt; but by a contradiction easy
to be explained, the indulgence of the public in this respect is
‘always in proportion to the rigour of the government.


CHAPTER III.
Indirect Means of preventing the Wish to commit Offences.


We have seen that legislation can only operate by influencing

the power, the knowledge, and the will. We have spoken of the

indirect means of taking away the power to do injury; we have

shown that the policy of preventing men from acquiring infor-

mation, does more harm than good, All the indirect means, then,

which we can use with advantage, must be employed in directing
BB 2


372 PRINCIPLES QF THE PENAL CODE.


the inclinations of men, in putting into operation the rules of a
logic hitherto but little known, the logte of the will—a logic which,
as Horace has so well expressed it, seems often to be opposition
to that of the understanding :—
Videa melrora
Proboque, et deteriora sequor.
I see the better

And approve it ; and the worse I follow.

The means about to be presented are of a nature to put a stop
in many cases to this interior discord; to diminish that contra-
riety among motives, which often owes its existence to want of
address on the part of the legislator, to an opposition which he
has himself created between the natural sanction and the political
sanction, between the moral sanction and the religious sanction.
If he could make all these powers concur towards the same end,
all the faculties of man would be in harmony, and the will to
do evil would not exist. In cases where this end cannot be at-
tained, it is necessary, at all events, that the force of the tutelary
motives should exceed that of the seductive motives.

The indirect means by which the will can be influenced, may
be illustrated under the form of political or moral problems, of
which the solution may be shown by various examples:

Problem First.—To change the course of dangerous desires, and
to direct the inclinations towards amusements conformable to the
public interest.

Second.—To arrange so that a given desire may be satisfied
without injury, or with the least possible injury.

Third.—To avoid furnishing encouragements to crime.

Fourth.—To inercase responsibility in proportion as temptation
increases.

Fifth.—To diminish the sensibility to temptation.

Sizth.—To strengthen the impression of punishments upon the
imagination.

Seventh.—To facilitate knowledge of the fact of an offence.

Highth.—To prevent an offence by giving to many persons an
immediate interest to prevent it.


PRINCIPLES OF TH, JENAL CODE. 373


Ninth.—To facilitate the means of recognising and finding
individuals.

Tenth.—To increase the difficulty of escape.

Eleventh.—To diminish the uncertainty of prosecutions and
punishments.

Twelfth.—To prohibit accessory offences, in order prevent the
principal offence.

After these means, of which the object is special, others mofe
general will be pointed out, such as the culture of benevolence,
the culture of honour, the employment of the impulse of religion,
and the use to be made of the power of instruction, and of
education.


CHAPTER IV.


To change the Course of Dangerous Desires, and to direct the
Inclinations towards Amusements conformable to the Public
Interest.


Tux object of direct legislation is to combat pernicious desires,
by prohibitions and punishments directed against the injurious
acts to which those desires give birth. The object of indirect
legislation is to counteract their influence by increasing the force,
of less dangerous desires, capable of entering into rivalry with
them.

There are two objects to be considered—What are the desires
which it is an object to weaken? By what means can that end
be obtained ?

Pernicious desires are of three classes :—I1st, Malevolent pas-
sions; 2nd, The appetite for strong drinks; 3rd, Idleness.

The means of weakening these desires may be reduced to three
heads:—J1st, To encourage honest inclinations; 2nd, To avoid
forcing men into idleness; 8rd, To favour the consumption of non-
inebriating liquors, in preference to those of an intoxicating quality.

Some persons may be surprised that the catalogue of vicious
inclinations is so limited; but they should recollect that the
human heart has no passions absolutely bad. There is none


874 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


which does not stand in need of guidance; and at the same time
none which ought to be eradicated. When the angel Gabriel
prepared the prophet Mahomet for his divine mission, he plucked
from his heart a black spot, which contained the seed of evil.
Unfortunately, this opcration cannot be practised upon the hearts
of ordinary men. The seeds of good and the seeds of cvil are
inseparably mixed. The inclinations are governed by motives ;
but all pains and all pleasures are motives; pains to be avoided,
pleasures to be pursued. Now, all these motives may produce
all sort of effects, from the best to the worst. They are trees
which bear wholesome fruits or poisons, according to exposure,
according to the care of the gardener, according to the wind that
blows, or the temperature of the day. The purest benevolence,
confining itself too exclusively to a single subject, or mistaken in
its means, may produce great evils. Attachment to one’s self,
though occasionally it becomes hurtful, is constantly necessary ;
and in spite of their deformity, the malcvolent passions are at
least useful as means of defence, as safeguards against the inva-
sion of personal interest. We ought not, then, to attempt rooting
out any affections of the human heart, since there is none which
does not play its part in the system of utility. We should con-
fine ourselves to the operation of these affections in detail, accord-
ing to the direction which they take, and the effects which they
are likely to produce. A useful balance may be established
between these inclinations, by strengthening those which are apt
to be too weak, and by weakening those which are too strong.
It is thus that the cultivator directs the course of waters in
such a manner that his grounds suffer ncither from overflow
nor from drought.

The passion for inebriating liquors is, properly speaking, the
only one that can be extirpated without doing any injury; for
the irascible passions, as I have said, are a necessary stimulant
in cases when persons are obliged to protect themselves, and to
repel the attacks of an enemy. The love of repose is not inju-
rious in itself; indolence, however, is an evil, inasmuch as it.
favours the ascendancy of the hurtful passions. However, these


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 378


three desires may be looked upon as equally in need of being
repressed, It is hardly to be feared that we can have too great
success against the inclination to idleness, or that the vindictive
passions can be reduced below the point of utility.

The first expedient, as I have said, is to encourage innocent
amusements. It is a branch of that science, so complicated and
so ill-defined, which consists in advancing civilization. The
state of barbarism differs from civilization by two characteristic
traits :—-lst, The force of the wrascible appetites ; 2nd, The small
number of objects of enjoyment offered to the concupzscent
appetites.*

The occupations of a savage after he has supplied himself with
physical necessaries, the only oncs he knows, are soon described.
The pursuit of revenge; the pleasure of drunkenness if he has
the means; sleep; or perfect indolence; such is the sum total of
his resources. Each of thesc inclinations is favourable to the
development and to the action of the other. Resentment finds
easy access to a mind unoccupied; idleness leads to drunkenness;
and drunkenness produces quarrels, which nourish and multiply
resentments. The pleasures of love, not being mingled with the
sentimental refinements which embellish and increase them, seem
not to play a great part in the life of the savage, and go but a
little way towards filling up the intervals of exertion.

Under a regular government the necessity of vengeance is sup~
pressed by legal protection, and the pleasure of giving one’s self
up to it is counteracted by the fear of punishment; the power of
indolence is enfeebled ; but the love of strong liquors is not
diminished. A nation of savages and a nation of hunters are
convertible expressions. The life of the hunter, as well as that
of the fisherman, provided they know how to preserve the game
they take, affords long intervals of idleness; while in a civilized
state, the mass of the community is composed of labourers and
artisans, who have scarcely the leisure necessary for sleep and

* This distinction of the schoolmen is sufficiently complete. To the
firat class belong the pleasures of malevolence ; to the second, all other
pleasures. “


376 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


‘relaxation. But the misfortune is, that the passion forstrong drink

can be satisfied in the midst of a most laborious life, and that it
trenches upon the hours allotted to repose. In the lowest condi-
tions poverty is a restraint upon it; but artisans, whose labour is
better paid, can make great sacrifices to this fatal taste, and the
opulent classes may devote all their time to it. Thus we see, in
ages of barbarism, that the upper classes have divided their whole
life between war; the chase, which is the image of war; the
animal functions; and long repasts, of which drunkenness was
the greatest attraction. Such is the whole history of a great
proprietor, a great feudal lord of the Middle Ages. The privilege
ef this noble warrior, or of this noble hunter, extended into the
midst of a more civilized society the occupations and the cha-
racter of a savage.

This being so, every innocent amusement which human art
can invent, is useful under a double point of view :—I1st, For the
very pleasure which results from it; 2nd, From its tendency to
weaken the dangerous inclinations above described. By innocent
amusements must be understood all those which cannot be proved
to be injurious. Their introduction being favourable to the hap-
piness of society, it is the duty of the legislator to encourage
them, or, at least, to put no obstacle in their way. They will
be enumerated here; first, those which are esteemed the most
gross, and afterwards those which suppose more refinement.

1st. The introduction of a variety of aliments, and the progress
of the art of gardening, applied to the production of nutritious
vegetables.

2nd. The introduction of non-inebriating liquors, of which tea
end coffee are the principal. These two articles, which super-
ficial minds will be astonished to see figuring in a catalogue of
moral objects, are so much the more useful, since they come into
direct competition with inebriating liquors.

3rd. Progress in all that constitutes elegance, whether in dress,
furniture, the embellishment of grounds, &c.

4th. The invention of plays and pastimes, whether athletic.
or sedentary, among which games of cards hold a distingwished


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 377


rank. Games of hazard should alone be excluded. These tran-
quil sports have brought the sexes together, have diminished
ennut, that malady peculiar to the human race,-especially to the
opulent class and to the old.

5th. The cultivation of music.

6th. Theatres, assemblies, public amusements.*

7th. The cultivation of the arts and sciences, and of litera-
ture.

When these different means of enjoyment are placed in opposi-
tion to the means necessary to provide for subsistence, they are
called objects of luxury; but if their tendency be such asis above
suggested, luxury, singular as it may appear, is rather a source
of virtue than of vice.

This branch of policy has not been entirely neglected ; but it
has been cultivated rather with political than with moral views.
The object has rather been to render the people tranquil and sub-
missive to the government, than to render the citizens more
united among themselves, more happy, more industrious, more
virtuous.

The sports of the circus, among the Romans, formed one of
the principal objects of the government’s attention. It was not
only a means of conciliating the affections of the people, but also
of drawing off their thoughts from public affairs.

Cromwell, whose ascetic principles did not allow him this
resource, had no other means to occupy the public mind but to
engage the nation in foreign wars.

At Venice, a government excessively jealous of its authority
showed the greatest indulgence to pleasures.

The processions and other religious fétes of Catholic countries’
fulfil, in part, the same object as the games of the circus.

All these institutions have been considered by political writers


* “T heard M. d’Argenson say, that when he was Lieutenant of Police
there were more irregularities and debaucheries committed in Paris,
during the fifteen days of Lent, when the theatres were shut, than during
four months of the season when they were open.” —Memoirs of Polinits,
vol, iii, p. 312,


878 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


as so many means of alleviating the yoke of power, of turning
the public attention towards agreeable objects, and preventing it
from being occupied with public affairs. This effect, though it
was not the object of their establishment, has caused them to
obtain more favour after being established.

Peter the Great made use of a higher and more generous policy.
The manners of the Russians, their proneness to intoxication ex-
cepted, were rather Asiatic than European. Peter I., wishing to
moderate their grossness, and to temper their ferocity, employed
expedients perhaps a little too direct. He used all possible en-
couragements, and even had recourse to violence, in order to in-
troduce European dress and European spectacles, assemblies and
arts. To lcad his subjects to imitate the other nations of Europe
was, in other words, to civilize them. But he encountered the
greatest resistance to all these innovations. Envy, jealousy,
contempt, and a multitude of anti-social passions, opposed this
assimilation with foreign rivals. These passions no longer re-
cognised their objects, when visible marks of distinction were
effaced. In taking from his subjects the exterior by which they
were distinguished, he took from them, so to speak, the pretext
and the aliment of a hateful rivalry. He associated them with
the great republic of Europe; and they had everything to gain
by that association.

The rigid observation of Sunday, such as prevails in Scotland,
in England, and in some parts of Germany, is a violation of this
policy. The Act of Parliament upon this subject, passed in 1781,
seems more appropriate to the times of Cromwell than our own.
It prohibits people from every kind of Sunday amusement, except
sensual pleasures, drunkenness, and debauchery. It was in the
name of good morals that a law so contrary to good morals was
enacted. Sunday becomes by this kind of rigour an institution
in honour of idleness, and profitable to all the vices.

Two suppositions are necessary to justify such a law: one,
that amusements, innocent six days in the week, change their
nature, and become mischievous on the seventh; the other, that
idleness, the mother of all the vices, is the safeguard of religion.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, 379


I do not know what to make of these ideas ; let the theologians
expound them.*

If a revealed law is in contradiction to morality, it ought not
to be listened to. We have more certain proofs of the political
effects of an institution than we can have of the truth of a religious
history, founded upon events out of the course of nature. In
one case we have the testimony of our own senses; in the other
case we must rely upon the testimony of others, a testimony
transmitted from hand to hand, and weakened by every trans-
mission, which alters more or less its primitive traits.

But this contradiction does not exist. This rigorous obgerv-
ance of Sunday has no foundation in the Gospel; it is even con-
trary to its text, and its positive examples. The judicious
Fenelon, whom no one will accuse of having misunderstood the
spirit of Christian morality, rebuked the indiscreet severity of
his curates, and was unwilling that the people of his diocese
should be forbidden to indulge on Sundays, after the exercises of
religion were over, in dances and rustic sports.

I find fault not with a day for the suspension of ordinary
labours, nor with a day devoted in part to religious worship; but
with the absurdity of converting into offences, during that day,
the most necessary labours of the field, and the public exercise
of the most harmless amusements.

To deprive the people one day in the week of pleasures
acknowledged to be innocent, is to take away a portion of their
happiness ; forif happiness is not composed of pleasures, of what
is it composed? How is it possible to justify the severity of the


* The chaplain of Newgate takes great care to have it inserted in the
Biography of Malefactors, as their own confession, that the commence,
ment of their career was the violation of the Sabbath. I believe he would
be nearer the truth, if he said that they began their career by observing
the Sabbath—observing it, that is, ina particular way. Not knowing
what to do with their time and their money, what other resource have
they but the tavern? Drunkenness renders them quarrelsome and
stupid, destroys their health, their aptitude for labour, and their habits
of economy, and throws them into badcompany. Thus they are prepared
to enter upon the career of crime,


380 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


legislator, who, without necessity, takes away from the labouring
classes those little enjoyments which soften their hard lot, and
who forces them into gloominess or vice, under pretext of
religion ?

There are two ways of doing injury to mankind: one, the
introduction of pains; the other, the exclusion of pleasures. If
one of these ways deserves to be condemned, how can the other
be worthy of praise? Both are acts of tyranny; for in what
does tyranny consist, if not in this? It is only effects which are
here spoken of; no doubt good is intended; but it is easicr to
reason vaguely, than to go to the bottom of a mattcr; to float
here and there between folly and wisdom, than to persevere in
one or the other; to follow the current of prejudice, than to
resist its torrent. However good the intention may be, it is
certain that the tendency of this ascetic practice is hurtful and
immoral,

Happy the people which is seen to elevate itself above gross
and brutal vices, to cultivate elegance of manners, the pleasures
of society, the embellishment of gardens, the fine arts, the sciences,
public amusements, the exercises of the understanding ! Religions
which inspire gloom, governments which render men distrustful,
and which keep them apart, contain the germ of the greatest
vices, and the most injurious passions.


CHAPTER V.


To satisfy certain Desires without Injury, or with the least
possible Injury.


Desrrxs, both those of which we have spoken, and those of which
we are about to speak, are susceptible of being satisfied in differ-
ent ways, and upon different conditions, through all the degrees
of the moral scale, from innocence up to the highest point of
criminality. That these desires may be satisfied without injury,
is the first object to be accomplished ; but if this object is unat-
tainable, the second object is to render their satisfaction less in-


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, 881


jurious to the community than would be the violation of
If even this second end is unattainable, it then becomes an object
to arrange things in such a way that the individual, placed
by his desires between two offences, may be inclined to choose
that which is the least injurious. This last object seems humble;
it is a kind of composition with vice; it is, as it were, haggling
with it, and beating it down to the lowest possible rate.

Let us examine how these several points can be attained, in
the case of three kinds of imperious desires :—Ist, Vengeance ;
2nd, Want; 3rd, The scxual passion.


Srcetion I.


There are two means of satisfying the vindictive appetites
without harm :—1st, To provide legal redress for every kind of
personal injury; 2nd, To establish some competent satisfaction
for injuries which affect the point of honour.

Failing these means, there is only one expedient to satisfy
these vindictive appetites with the least harm, and that is, by
showing indulgence to duelling.

Ist. Zo provide Legal Redress for all kinds of Injurtes.—The
vices and the virtues of mankind depend very much upon the
circumstances of society. Hospitality, it has been observed, is
most practised where it is most necessary. It is the same with
vengeance. In the state of nature the fear of private revenge is
the only restraint upon force, the only safeguard against the
violence of the passions. It corresponds to the fear of punish-
ment in a state where laws are established. Every improvement
in the administration of justice tends to diminish the force of the
vindictive appetites, and to prevent acts of private animosity.

The principal interest in view, In cascs of legal redress, is the
interest of the injured party. But even the offender finds an
advantage in this arrangement. Leave a man to revenge him-
self, and his vengeance knows no limits. Grant him what, upon
a cool examination, you regard as a competent satisfaction, and
at the same time forbid him to go further, and he will rather


382 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


accept what you give him without risk or hazard than expose
himself to the judgment of the law, by attempting to obtain by
his own hand a greater satisfaction. This, then, 1s an accessory
benefit which results from providing a legal redress. Reprisals
are prevented. Covered with the buckler of justice, the trans-
gressor, after his offence, finds himself in a state of comparative
security, under the protection of the law.

It is sufficiently evident that the better provision there is for
legal redress, the less powerful will be the motive which excites
the injured party to procure it for himself. If every pain which
a man is exposed to suffer by the conduct of another were in-
stantly followed by what he regarded as an equivalent pleasure,
the irasciblo appetite would not exist. This supposition is evi-
dently exaggerated beyond anything that can possibly be accom-
plished. But, exaggerated as it is, it includes truth enough to
show that cvery amelioration in this branch of justice tends to
diminish the force of the vindictive passions.

Hume has observed, in speaking of the barbarous ages of
English history, that the great difficulty was, to engage the
injured party to receive satisfaction; and that the laws respect-
ing satisfaction aimed as much at restraining resentment as at
securing a certain indulgence to it.

More yet. Establish a legal punishment for an injury, and
you give room for generosity; you create a virtue. To pardon
an injury when the law offers a satisfaction, is to gain a kind of
superiority over your enemy, by the obligation you impose upon
him. Such a pardon cannot be attributed to weakness. The
motive is above suspicion.

2nd. Zo provide competent Redress for those particular Injuries
which attack the Point of Honour.—Injuries of this kind demand
a more particular attention, inasmuch as they have a more marked
tendency to provoke the vindictive passions. (See Chap. XIV.)

Tn this respect the laws of France have long becn superior to
those of other nations.

English jurisprudence is eminently defective upon this point.
It does not recognise the existence of such a thing ashonour. It


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 383


has no means of measuring a corporal insult, except by the dimen-
sions of the wound. It does not suspect that there is any other
evil in the loss of reputation except the loss of money, which
may be the consequence of it. It considers money as the remedy
for all evils, the palliative for all affronts, the equivalent for all
insults. He who has not received a pecuniary compensation has
received nothing; he who has been paid in money can ask nothing
more. There is no other reparation of any kind. But the gross-
ness of barbarous ages ought not to be a reproach to the present
generation. These laws were cstablished before the feelings of
honour were developed. Honour exists in the tribunal of public
opinion, and its decrees are pronounced with a peculiar force.

Still, it cannot be doubted that the silence of the law has a bad
effect. An Englishman cannot travel in France without remark-
ing that the feeling of honour and the contempt for money descend,
so to speak, much further among the inferior classes in France
than in England. This difference is especially remarkable in the
army. The sentiment of glory, the pride of disinterestedness, are
everywhere to be found among the private soldiers; and they
would think the brilliancy of a good action tarnished if they
received a reward for it. A sword of honour is the highest
recompense.

3rd. Zo show Indulgence to Duelling.—When offended persons
will not be content with the satisfaction offered by the laws, it is
necessary to show indulgence to duelling. Where the duel is
established, poisoning and assassination are seldom heard of.
The comparatively slight evil which results from that practice, is
like a premium of insurance, by which a nation guarantees itself
against the grave evil of those two crimes. The duel becomes
a preservative of politeness and peace. The fear of being obliged
to give or to receive a challenge extinguishes quarrels in the
bud. The Greeks and Romans, we are told, attained a high
pitch of glory without having known the duel. So much the
worse for them; their sentiment of glory did not oppose itself
either to poison or the dagger. In the political dissensions of
Athens one half the citizens plotted the destruction of the other


886 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


which are almost indecent in the hands of a man. Men sell
children’s toys, keep fashionable shops, and make women’s shoes,
women’s stays, and women’s dresses. Men even perform the
office of midwives. There is a reason to doubt whether the
injustice of custom might not be redressed by the law, and
whether women should not be put in possession of these means
of subsistence to the exclusion of men. This would be an
indirect means of preventing prostitution, by securing to women
suitable occupations.

With respect to the treatment of the poor, no universal
measure can be proposed. Local and national circumstances
must control particular arrangements. In Scotland, with the
exception of some large towns, the government does not concern
itself with the care of the poor. In England, the tax on
their account amounts to more than three millions sterling.*
Still the condition of the poor is better in Scotland than in
England. The object is better accomplished by custom than by
law. In spite of the inconveniences of the English system it
cannot be suddenly abandoned; otherwise half the poor would
perish before the necessary habits of benevolence and frugality
had taken root. In Scotland the influence of the clergy is
very salutary. Having but a moderate salary and no tithes,
the ministers are known and respected by their parishioners. In
England, the clergy being rich and having tithes, the rector is
often in a quarrel with his flock, and knows but little about
them.

In Scotland, Ireland, and France, the poor are moderate in
their wants. At Naples the climate saves the expense of fire, of
lodging, and almost of dress. In the East Indies dress is hardly
necessary except for decency. In Scotland, cleanliness excepted,
domestic economy is good in all respects. In Holland it is as
good as it can be. In England wants are greater than else-
where, and economy is perhaps upon a worse footing than in any
country in the world.


* It has since much increased, and. in some years has exceeded eight
millions,


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 389


The surest means is not to wait for indigence, but to prevent it.
The greatest service which can be rendered to the labouring classes
is the establishment of banks, in which the poor may be induced,
by the double attraction of security and profit, to deposit their
little savings.


Srecrion III.


We come now to that class of desires for which it is not easy to
find any neuter namc,—any name which does not present some
accessory idca of blame or praisc, but cspecially of blame. The
reason is evident. The ascetics have never been able to satisfy
themselves with degrading and criminating the desires to which
nature has intrusted the perpetuity of the species. Poetry, on
the other hand, has protested against these usurpations, and has
delighted in embellishing the images of pleasure and of love,—a
laudable object, when it has respected decency and morals. It
may be observed, however, that these inclinations naturally have
strength enough, and that there is no need of exciting them by
exaggerated and seducing pictures.

As this desire is satisfied in marriage, not only without preju-
dice to socicty, but advantageously for it, the first object of the
legislator in this respect ought to be to facilitate marriage: that
is, to put no obstacle in its way not absolutely necessary.

In the same spirit divorce ought to be authorized, under
suitable restrictions. Instead of a marriage broken in fact,
and which subsists only in appearance, divorce naturally leads
to a real marriage. Separations, permitted in countries where
matriages are indissoluble, havo the inconvenience either of
condemning individuals to the privations of celibacy, or of lead-
ing them into illicit connections.

But if we are willing to speak upon this delicate subject in
good faith, and with a frankness more modest in fact than any
hypocritical reserve, we shall acknowledge at once that there is
an age at which man has attained the development of his senses,
though his faculties are not yet mature enough for the manage-


3388 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


ment of affairs or the government of a family. This is true,
especially among the upper classes of society. Among the poor,
the necessity of labour diverts the desires of love, and retards
their development; a more frugal diet, and a simpler kind of
life, keep the senses and the imagination longer quiet. Besides,
the poor can hardly buy the favours of the other sex, except by
the sacrifice of liberty.

In addition to the young, not yet marriageable in a moral
point of view, how many men there are unable to burden them-
selves with the support and the cares of a family. On the one
side, domestics, soldiers, sailors, living in a state of dependence,
and often having no fixed dwelling ; on the other, men of a more
elevated rank, who are waiting for a fortune or an establishment ;
here is a very numerous class cut off from marriage, and reduced
-to a forced celibacy.

The first means which presents itself to diminish this evil is to
legitimate contracts for a limited time. This means has great
inconveniences ; it 1s a fact, however, that concubinage uctually
exists in all societies where there is a great disproportion in
fortunes. By prohibiting these arrangements they are not pre-
vented ; they are only rendered criminal, and made disgraceful.
Those who dare to avow them proclaim thcir contempt for the
laws and for morals; those who conceal them are exposed to
suffer a pain of self-reproach in proportion to their moral sensi-
bility.

According to the common way of thinking, the idea of virtue
is associated with this contract when its duration is indefinite,
and the idea of vice when its duration is limited. Legislators
have followed this opinion; they have forbidden contracts for a
year which they allow for life. The same action, criminal in the
first case, is innocent in the second. What is to be thought of
‘this difference ? Can the duration of the engagement change the
quality of an act which equally grows out of it, whether the
engagement be for a longer ora shorter time ?

But though marriage for a limited period be innocent in iteelf,
it does not follow that it ought to be so honourable as ® permanent


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 3898


marriage to the woman who contracts it. Indeed, she never
would obtain the same respect with a woman married for life.
The first idea which would present itself with respect to her
would be—‘‘If this woman had been as worthy as others, she
would have been able to obtain conditions which others have
obtained. This precarious arrangement is a sign of inferiority,
either in rank or merit.”

What good would result from authorizing this kind of ¢con-
tracts? It would save the law, by which they are now forbidden,
from being broken and despised. It would preserve the women
who enter into such contracts from a humiliation which, having
degraded them in their own esteem, leads almost always to utter
worthlessness. lesides, it would give publicity to the birth of
children, and would secure for them a father’s care.

In Germany, what are called left-handed marriages are gene-
rally established. The object is to reconcile domestic happiness
with family pride. The woman acquires in this way some of the
privileges of a wife ; but neithcr she nor her children are entitled
to the name or the rank of the husband. These marriages were
forbidden by the Code Frederic. However, the king reserved the
right of granting particular dispensations.

The idea now proposed is not at all conformable to common opi-
nions; let it be observed, however, that itis proposed, not as good
in itself, but as a means of alleviating an existing evil. In coun-
tries where manners are 80 simple and where fortunes are so equal
that this expedient is not needed, it would be absurd to introduce it.

With the same apology, I shall proceed to speak of a yet
graver disorder, of an evil which exists particularly in great
cities, and which also springs from inequality of fortune, and
from the combination of all those causes which ene celibacy.
That evil is prostitution.

There are countries where the laws tolerate it ; there are others,
such as England, where it is strictly prohibited. But though
prohibited, it is as common, and as publicly exercised, as can be
imagined, because the government does not dare to suppress it,
and because the public would not approve such a display of


$90 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


authority. Prostitution, thus nominally forbidden, is as common
as if there were no law against it, and much more mischievous.
The infamy of prostitution is not solely the work of the law.
There would always be a degree of shame attached to that condi-
tion, even though the political sanction remained neuter. The
condition of a courtesan is a condition of dependence and servi-
tude; her resources are precarious, and indigence and famine
always threaten to overwhelm her. Her very name is associated
with evils distressing to the imagination, for courtesans are
unjustly considered as the causes of disorders of which they are
only the victims. There is no nced to say with what sentiments
they are regarded by honest women. The most virtuous may
lament their miseries, but all agrce in despising them. Nobody,
in their behalf, attempts defence or excuse. It is natural that
they should be crushed by the weight of public opinion. They
have never thought of forming a combination, which might
counterbalance this public contempt; and, though they wished
it, they could not effect it. Ifthe interest of a common defence
should unite them, they would soon be divided by rivalry and
want. The person, as well asthe name of a public woman, is an
object of hatred and disdain to her fellows. This is perhaps the
only employment publicly despised by the very persons who pub-
licly profess if. Self-love, with the most singular inconsistency,
seeks as it were to shake off the recollection of its own misfor-
tunes; each unhappy creature strives to forget what she is, or to
earn an exception for herself, by severity towards her fellows.
Kept mistresses are regarded as almost equally infamous with
public women. The reason is plain; they do not yet belong to
that class, but they are always on the eve of falling into it. Still,
the longer a female has lived with the same man, the further is
she removed from a state of degradation, and the nearer she ap-
proaches to the condition of a married woman. The longer the
connection has endured, the more difficult it seems to break it,
and the greater is its prospect of perpetuity.
. The result of these observations is, that the remedy, as far as
there can be one, is to be found in the evil itself. The more


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 891


this condition is a natural object of contempt, the less it is neces-
sary for the law to brand it. It carries along with it a natural
punishment; a punishment already too severe, if we consider all
the reasons for pitying this unhappy class, the victims of social
inequality, and always so near to despair. How few of these
women have embraced this profession knowingly and by choice
How few would go on, if they could quit it; if they could pass
out of this circle of disgrace and misery ; if they were not repelled
from every business upon which they might attempt to enter!
How many have been precipitated into it by the error of a
moment; by the inexperience of youth; by the corruption of
their parents; by the crime of a seducer; by an inexorable
severity towards a first fault; almost all by destitution and
misery! If opinion is tyrannical and unjust, ought the legislator
to exasperate that injustice, ought he to convert himself into an
instrument of tyranny?

And what is the effect of these laws? They only serve to in-
crease the corruption of which these unhappy women are accused.
They drive them into drunkenness in search of a momentary ob-
livion of misery; they render them insensible to the restraints of
shame, by exhausting upon misfortune the disgrace which ought
to be reserved for real crimes. Finally, they prevent, those pre-
cautions which might alleviate the inconveniences of this disorder,
were it tolerated by the laws. All these cvils, which the laws so
lavishly dispense, are a price which folly pays to obtain an
imaginary good, which after all is not obtained, and never
will be.

The Empress Queen of Hungary undertook to extirpate this
evil, and laboured at it with a laudable perseverance worthy of a
better cause. Whatfollowed? Corruption spread itself through
public and private life; the marriage bed was violated; the seat
of justice was corrupted. Adultery gained all that libertinage .
lost. Magistrates made traffic of connivance. Fraud, partiality,
oppression, extortion spread themselves through the country ; and
the evil it was desired to abolish, driven to conceal itself, became
eo much the more dangerous,


392 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. ’


Among the Greeks, this profession was permitted, and some-
times even encouraged; but the parents themselves were not
allowed to traffic in the honour of their daughters. Among the
Romans, during what are called the best times of the republic,
the law was silent on this subject. The saying of Cato to a young
man, whom he met coming out of a brothel, is a proof of it. Cato
was not a person to encourage violations of the law.

In the metropolis of the Christian world, this vocation is freely
exercised.* This fact was doubtless one reason for the excessive
rigour of the Protestants.

At Venice, under the republic, the profession of a courtcsan
was publicly authorized.

In the capital of Holland, houses of this nature reccive a license
from the magistrate.

Retif of Brittany published an ingenious work, entitled The
Pornograph, in which he proposed that government should estab-
lish an institution, subject to certain rules, for the reception and
government of public women.

In some respects, the toleration of this evil in great cities is
useful ; its prohibition amounts to nothing, and has certain incon-
veniences besides.

The asylum at London for penitent prostitutes is a very excel-
lent institution; but those who regard prostitution with abso-
lute rigour, are not very consistent in approving of that charity.
If it reforms some, it encourages others. Is not the hospital at
Chelsea an encouragement to soldiers, and that at Greenwich to
sailors ?

It would be well to institute an establishment for selling an-
nuities to these women, to begin at a certain age; and the
arrangement should be adupted to the nature of this sad profes-
sion, in which the time of harvest is necessarily short, but of
which the profits are sometimes considerable.

The spirit of economy is formed from small beginnings, and
goes on always increasing. A sum too inconsiderable to offer a

* This has ceased to be the case, but it remains to be seen whether
severity on this point will be an advantage to morals,


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 393.


resource as actual capital, might furnish a considerable annuity,
at a distant period.

Upon points of morals, as to which there are contested ques-
tions, it is well to consult the laws of different nations. It is a
kind of mental travelling. In the course of such an exercise, we
are able to disengage ourselves from local and national prejudices,
by passing in review the usages of other communities.


CHAPTER VI.
To avoid furnishing Encouragements to Crime.


To say that government ought not to give rewards to crime, that
it ought not to weaken the moral nor the religious sanction, in
cases where they are uscful, is a maxim which seems too simple
to stand in need of proof. Yet it is often forgotten; and I might
give striking examples of it; but the more obvious they are, the
less need there is to point them out. It will be better to dwell
upon those cases in which this maxim is more covertly violated.

I. Ixzunrous Detention or Property.—If the law suffers a
man who unjustly dctains the property of another to gain by
delay of restitution, the law becomes an accomplice in the wrong.
The cases in which the English law is defective in this respect
areinnumerable. In many cases, a debtor has only to refuse pay-
ment till he dies, and he will escape the debt altogether; in
many others, he can, by delay, escape the payment of interest ;
and he can always retain the amount for a longer or shorter
period, and thus compel his creditor to submit to a forced loan,
at the ordinary rate of interest. |

A few simple regulations would suffice to cut off these temp-
tations to injustice :—I1st. So far as landed property is liable for
debts, the death of either party should make no difference. 2nd.
Interest should run from the moment the obligation commences,
Srd. The obligation should commence, not from the liquidation
of damages, but from the moment of the damage. 4th. Thi
interest should be higher than the ordinary rate. How happens


394 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


it that means so simple have never been adopted? Those who.
ask this question do not know the power of habit, of indolence,
of indifference to the public good; they are ignorant of the
bigotry of lawyers, and of the strength of personal interest, and
the professional spirit.

II. Untawrot Desrrvucrion.—When a man insures his pro-
perty against some calamity, if the value insured exceeds the real
value, it is hisinterest, in a certain sense, to bring on the calami-
tous event: to set fire to his house, if it is insured against fire;
to sink his vessel, if it is insured against the dangers of the seas.
The law, then, which authorizes these contracts, may be con-
sidered as furnishing a motive for the perpetration of these
offences. Does it follow, then, that the law ought not to sanction
them’ Notat all; but only that it ought to command or suggest
to the assurers precautions best adapted to the prevention of these
abuses, without being so restrictive as to interfere with the
business: such as preliminary inquiries; certificates of the real
value of the property insured; in case of loss, the testimony of
some respectable persons to the character and honcsty of the
party insured ; in doubtful cases, an inspection of the property
insured, &c.

III. Treason.—If the insurance of vessels belonging to a hos-
tile nation is permitted, the state may be exposed to two dangers :
—1st, The commerce of the hostile nation, which 1s one of the
sources of its power, is facilitated; 2nd, The insurcr, to protect
himeelf against a loss, may give secret information to the enemy
of movements made by the fleets and cruisers of his own nation.
As regards the first of these inconveniences, if is not an evil,
unless the enemy cannot obtain insurance elsewhere, or if he can,
employ his capital with the same profit in some other branch of
industry. As to the second inconvenience, it is absolutely
nothing, unless the insurer is led to give information to the enemy
which otherwise money could not buy, and unless his facility of
giving this information is so great as to transcend the infamy and
the risk of treason.

On the other hand, the advantage to the nation that assures


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 895


is certain. In this kind of traffic, it has been found that the ba-
lance of profit, during a given time, is in favour of the assurers ;
that is, taking the losses and gains together, they receive more
in premiums than they pay out in indemnities. It is then
a lucrative branch of commerce, and may be considered as a tax
levied upon the enemy.

IV. Pecotation.—In making a bargain with architects and
contractors, it 1s quite common to give them so much per cent.
upon the amount of their expenditures. This mode of payment,
which seems natural cnough, opens the door to peculation, and
to peculation of the most destructive kind ; since, while the pecu-
lator makes a little profit, the employcr must suffer a great loss.
This danger is at its highest point in the case of public works,
where nobody has a particular interest to prevent waste, and
where many persons may find an interest in conniving at it.

One remedy would be to fix the expense by estimation, and
to say to the contractor, ‘‘ So far you shall have your per centage,
but beyond that you shall have nothing. If you reduce the
expense below the estimate, you shall still have the same profit.”

VY. Antse or Pusiic Trusts.—If a public man who has it in
his power to contribute towards war or peace possesses an employ-
ment of which the emoluments are more considerable in war than
in peace, he has an interest to excrt his power for the prolongation
of war. If these emoluments increase in proportion to the
expensc, he has an additional interest that the war should be con-
ducted with the greatest possible prodigality. Exactly the oppo-
site state of things should be aimed at.

VI. OFFENCES OF EVERY KIND.—Wheu an individual makes a
bet on the affirmative side of a future event, he has an interest in
the happening of that event, proportioned to the amount of the
bet. If the event is one of thosc things prohibited by law, he
then has an interest to commit an offence. He is even stimulated
by a double force, the one partaking of the nature of reward, the
other of the nature of punishment; a reward to be received in
case the event happens; a punishment to be experienced in the
opposite case. It isas if he had been suborned by the promise of


396 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


a sum of money on one side, and as if he had made an engagement
under a formal penalty on the other.* :

If, then, allNginds of bets, without distinction, were acknow-
ledged to be valid, venality of every kind would receive the
sanction of the laws, and liberty would be given to everybody to
enlist accomplices for all sorts of offences. On the other side, if
all bets, without restriction, were prohibited, insurances, so useful
to commerce, and such a resource against a multitude of cala-
mities, would not be lawful; for insurance is nothing but a sort
of bet.

The middle course seems the best. In all cases in which bets
may become instruments of mischief, without answering any
useful object, prohibit them absolutely. In cases like insurance,
in which they may be useful, admit them; but leave it to the
judge to make necessary exceptions when it shall appear that
they have been only a cover to subornation.


CHAPTER VII.
To increase Responsibility tn proportion as Temptation tnoreases.


Tis precaution relates principally to public employments. The
more of fortune or honours those who exercise such employments
have to lose, the stronger hold we have upon them. Their salary
is a means of responsibility. In case of misconduct, the loss of
this salary is a punishment which they cannot escape, though
they may avoid every other. This means is specially useful in
employments which relate to the handling of public money. If
you cannot insure the honesty of a cashier in any other way,
make his appointments rise something above the interest of the
greatest sum which is intrusted to him. This excess of salary is
like a premium paid for an insurance against his dishonesty.


* In the Adventures of a Guinea, there is a bet made between the wife
of a clergyman and the wife of a minister, that the clergyman would nots
beanarchbishop. It is easy to imagine which was the guiner.


“Ne.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. . , 897


He has more to lose in becoming a rogue than by remaining
honest.

Birth, honours, family connections, religion, may become so
many means of responsibility, so many pledges for the good con-
duct of individuals. There are cases in which legislators have
not chosen to trust bachelors; they have regarded a wife and
children as hostages given to one’s country.


CHAPTER VIII.
To diminish the Senstbility to Zemptation.


In the preceding chapter the question was to discover precau-
tions against dishonesty; in this, the object is to avoid the
diminution of probity through the exposure of honest men to
the influence of seductive motives too strong for their virtue.

First, of salaries ; for money, according to the manner of its
application, may serve as a poison or an antidote.

Apart from any regard to the happiness of individuals, the
interest of the public service requires that the persons employed
in it should be above the pressure of want, especially in all those
employments which afford an opportunity of acquisition by inju-
rious means. The greatest abuses have been produced in Russia,
throughout the whole administration, by the insufficiency of
salaries. When men, under the pressure of want, abuse their
power, become greedy extortioners and robbers, the blame ought
to be shared between them and the government which has spread
this snare for their honesty. Placed between the necessity of
living, and the impossibility of living honestly, they are led to
look upon extortion as a lawful supplement to their pay, tacitly
authorized by those who employ them.

Will it be putting them beyond the reach of need to supply
their physical wants? No. If there is not a certain proportion
between the dignity with which a man is clothed, and his means
of sustaining it, he is in a state of suffering and privation,
because he cannot do what is expected of him, nor keep upon a


898 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


level with that class with whom he is called to associate. In one
word, wants increase with honours, and what is relatively neces-
sary varies with condition. Place a man in an elevated rank,
without giving him wherewith to maintain himself, and what is
the consequence? His dignity will furnish motives to do evil,
and his power will give him the means.

Charles II. being too much fettered by the economy of Par-
liament, sold himself to Louis XIV., who offered to supply his
profusion. The hope of escaping the embarrassments into which
he was plunged, drove him, like any other bankrupt, into crimi-
nal schemes. This miserable parsimony cost the English two
wars, and a peace yet more fatal. It is not easy to tell what
sum would have been sufficient to operate as an antiseptic upon
a@ prince so corrupt; but this example is enough to show that the
civil list of the English king, which appears exorbitant to
vulgar calculators, tends in fact to promote the general security.
Besides, by that intimate atliance which exists between riches
and power, everything which augments the magnificence of
dignity gives it additional force, the royal pomp, under this
point of view, may be compared to those architectural ornaments,
which serve also to support and strengthen the edifice.

This great rule of diminishing as much as possible the sen-
sibility to temptation, has been remarkably violated in the
Catholic church. To impose cclibacy upon priests, and at the
same time to intrust them with the most delicate functions in
the examination of consciences, and the direction of fumilies, is
to place them in a violent situation, between the misery of observ-
ing a useless law, and the disgrace of violating it.

When Gregory VII., in & council held at Rome, established
the rule that married clerks, or those having concubines, should
no longer be permitted to say mass, they uttered cries of indig-
nation, they accused him of hercsy, and according to the historians
of those times, they declared—‘‘If he persists, we had rather
renounce the priesthood than our wives; let him find angels to
govern the churches,” —( Hist. of France, by the Abbé Milot, vol. i.
Reign of Henry I.) In our times the government of France

\


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 399


desired to make the marriage of priests lawful; but by this time
there were no men to be found among them; they were all
angels.


CHAPTER IX.
To strengthen the Impression of Punishment upon the Imagination.


It is the real punishment which does all the evil; it is the
apparent punishment which docs all the good. We ought, then,
as much as possible to diminish the former, and to augment the
latter. Humanity, in this case, consists in the appearance of
cruelty.

Speak to the cyes, 1f you wish to move the heart. The pre-
cept is as old as Horace, and the experience which dictated it
was much older. Evcry onc feels its force, and strives to take
advantage of it; the comedian, the charlatan, the orator, the
priest, all know how to turn it to their purpose. Render your
punishments exemplary ; give to the attendant ceremonies a sort
of mournful pomp. Call to your aid all the imitative arts; and
let the exhibitions of these important procedures be among the
first to strike the eyes of childhood.

A. scaffold spread with black, that livery of woe; the officers
of justice in mourning; the executioner covered by a mask,
which may serve to increase the terror of the beholders, and at
the same time to conceal him from a misplaced indignation ;
emblems of his crime placed upon the head of the criminal, so
that the witnesses of his sufferings may be informed of the offence
that has produced them ;—such are a part of the decorations
proper to these tragedies of the law. Let all the persons in this
terrible drama move in a solemn procession; let a grave and
religious music prepare the hearts of the auditors for the im-
portant lesson they are going to receive. The judge should not
think it beneath him to preside at this public scene, so that its
sombre dignity may be consecrated by the minister of the law. ~

Instruction is not to be rejected, even though it come from an
enemy. The Secret Tribunal, the Inquisition, the Star Chamber


400 PRINCIFLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


. ~

~—I consuk them all; I examine every means; I consider all
that hes been done; I prize a diamond though it be picked
from adunghill. Because assassins use a pistol to commit mur-
ders, shall I not employ it in my own defence?

The emblematic robes of the inquisition may be usefully
applied to criminal justice. An incendiary clothed in a robe of
pictured flames, would offer to every eye the image of his crime,
and the indignation of the spectator would be fixed by the image
of the offence.

A system of punishments accompanied by emblems appropriate
as far as possible to each offence, would have an additional
advantage. It would furnish allusions to poetry, to eloquence,
to dramatic authors, to ordinary conversation. The ideas thence
derived would be re-echoed, if I may be allowed the expression,
by a thousand objects, and would be scattered on all sides.

The Catholic priests have known how to derive from this
source the greatest aids to the efficacy of their religious opinions.
I remember having seen at Gravelines a striking exhibition. A
priest showed the people a picture, which exhibited a multitude
of wretches in the midst of flames, and one of them making signs
for a drop of water, by showing his burning tongue. It was a
day of public prayers for souls in purgatory. It is clear that
such an exhibition was less fitted to inspire a horror of crime than
a horror of poverty. The moral was, that one ought at all events
to have the wherewithal to pay for a mass; for where money ex-
piates every sin, the sin of poverty 1s the greatest, the only one
without remedy.

The methods of punishment which prevail in England form a
perfect contrast to everything that can inspire respect, A capital
execution has no solemnity; the pillory is sometimes a scene of
buffoonery, sometimes an exhibition of popular cruelty, a game of
chance, in which the sufferer is exposed to the caprices of the mul-
titude, and the accidents of the moment. The severity of a public
whipping depends upon the money given to the executioner;
branding in the hand, according to the understanding between the
convict and the officer, is sometimes inflicted with a cold iron, and


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 46}


sometimes with a hot one; if it be done with a hot iron, the brand-
ing is often confined to a slice of bacon interposed between the
branding-iron and the criminal’s skin. To keep up the farce, while
the meat is smoking and burning, the supposed sufferer puts forth
loud cries of agony and pain. The spectators who understand the
whole game, only laugh at this parody on the law.

It may perhaps be said,—for all questions have two sides,—
that these real representations, these terrible scenes of penal
justice, would spread fright among the people, and would make
dangerous impressions. I do not think so. If they presented to
the dishonest the idea of danger, to the honest they would offer
only the idea of security. When eternal punishments are loudly
threatened, when the flames of hell are frghtfully decreed for
kinds of offences indefinite and undefinable, the imagination may
be so excited that madness is the consequence. We suppose, on
the contrary, a manifest offence, a proved offence, an offence of
which everybody can avoid the commission, so that the terror of
punishment cannot be excited to a dangerous degree. However,
Wwe must avoid producing false and odious associations.

In the first edition of the Code Theresa, the portrait of the
empress was surrounded with medallions representing gibbets,
wheels, and other instruments of torture and punishment.
What a blunder to offer the image of the sovereign with these
hideous emblems, like the head of Medusa shaking her serpents!
This scandalous frontispiece was suppressed; but a print was
allowed to remain which represented all the instruments of tor-
ture—a picture of bad omen, which no one could look at without
saying to himself, ‘‘ Even though innocent, to these evils am I
exposed!’ But if an abridgment of the penal code were accom-
panied by pictures representing the characteristic punishments
attached to each crime, it would be an imposing commentary,
a sensible and speaking image of the law. The reader would
say, “If I am guilty, this must I suffer!” In legislation, a
gingle shade sometimes distinguishes good from evil.


403 PRINUIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE


CHAPTER X, 7
To facilitate Knowledge of the Fact of an Offence,


In penal cases there are two points as to which the judge must
be certain before he can perform his office: the fact of an offence,
and the person of the offender. These two points being known,
his information is complete. In different cases there are different
proportions of obscurity as to these two points; sometimes the
first is most obscure, sometimes the second. Let us consider, in
the first place, the fact of an offencc, and the means which may
facilitate its discovery.

I Zo require Proofs of Title to be in Writing.—It 1s only by
writing that testimony can be rendered permanent and authentic.
Verbal transactions, unless they are of the most simple kind, will
be subject to innumerable disputes. Mahomet himeclf has recom-
mended to his followers to observe this precaution. It is almost
the only passage of the Koran which has a glimmer of common sense.

II. Yo enrol upon the face of Title Deeds the names of Witnesses.
~—It is one thing to require witnesses to the execution of a deed;
and another thing to require that their presence be noticed,
attested, and registered upon the face of the deed. A third step
is to add the circumstances which will enable the witnesses to be
found if they are needed.

In the attestation of deeds, it will be useful to observe the
following precautions :—1st. To prefer a large number of wit-
nesses to a small number; this will diminish the danger of
falsehood, and give a chance of finding some of them, if they
are needed. 2nd. To prefer married persons to bachelors; heads
of families to servants; persons who have a public character to
individuals less distinguished; young or middle-aged men to
the old and infirm ; persons who are known to strangers. 8rd.
‘When the deed is composed of many sheets, each sheet ought to
be signed by the witnesses; if there are corrections and erasures,
@ separate list ought to be made of them, which list ought to be
attested; the lines ought to be counted, and their number on


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, 463


each page marked. 4th. Let each witness add to his name in
full his description, place of abode, age, &c. 5th. Let the time
and place at which the deed is executed be minutely specified ;
the time, not only by the day, month, and year, but alsa by the
hour ; the place, by the district, parish, even the house, and the
name of the present occupant. This circumstance is an excellent
preventive against forgery. A man would hardly dare. venture
upon such an enterprise when he must be sure of so many details
before fabricating a false date; and if he dared attempt it he
would be much more easily discovered. 6th. All numbers ought
to be written out in Ictters, especially dates and sums, except in
matters of account, where it is sufficient to write the sum total
in letters, and except also when the same date or sum often recur
in the same deed. The reason of this precaution is, that figures,
unless they are written very carefully, are apt to be taken one
for another; and besides, it is easy to alter them, and the least
alteration may have very considerable influence. A sum of hun-
dreds is easily changed into a sum of thousands. 7th. The for-
malities to be obscrved in the execution of a deed ought to be
printed upon the margin of the shect of paper or parchment upon
which it is written.

Should these formalities be left to the discretion of individuals,
as a means of security required by prudence, or should they be
regulated by law? Some of them should be required, and others
should be optional; a latitude should be left to the judge in
favour of those cases in which it is not possible to fulfil them.
It may happen that a deed is to be made in a place where the
prescribed kind of paper is not to be had, where a sufficient
number of witnesses cannot be found, &c. In such cases, the
deed may be declared valid provisionally, and until the requisite
formalities can be fulfilled.

A greater latitude ought to be allowed in testaments than in
deeds between the living. Death does not wait for an attorney,
nor for witnesses; and making a will is a business which men
are apt to procrastinate to a time when they have neither leisure
nor capacity for precision and exactness. On’ the other hand


404 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


precautions are most requisite in this sort of deeds, because they
are most exposed to forgery. In case of a deed between the
living, the party to whom it is falsely ascribed may still be alive
and able to contradict it; in case of a testament, there is no such
chance.

Many details are necessary to explain the forms which ought
to be established, and the exceptions which should be made.
I shall only observe that I do not know of any formality, even
the most simple, the omission of which ought to render a will
absolutely invalid.

If instructions upon this subject were published by the govern-
ment, even without being made necessary, everybody would be
inclined to observe them, since, in case of deeds executed in good
faith, every one desires to insure himself all possible securities.
The omission of these formalities would then become a vehement
suspicion of fraud, unless it could be clearly seen that it ought
to be attributed either to ignorance, or to circumstances which
rendered their observance impossible.

IIT. Zo establish Registrations for the Authentication of Trtles.
—Why ought deeds to be registered? What deeds ought to be
registered? Ought the registry to be secret or public? Ought
the registration to be optional, or should its omission be visited
by a penalty ?

Registers are useful :—1st, Against acts of forgery; 2nd,
Against acts of falsification ; 3rd, Against accidents, as the loss
or destruction of originals; 4th, Against a double alienation of
the same property to different purchasers.

For the first and last of these objects, a simple abstract might
suffice; for the second, an exact copy would be needed; for the
third, an extract would be sufficient, but an entire copy would
be much better.

Against forgery, the registration would only be useful by
being obligatory; the deed being null when not recorded, with
a latitude for accidental cases. This advantage would result,
that after the expiration of the time allowed for registration, the
forgery of a deed which, according to its date, ought to be


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 405


registered, would be of no avail. It amounts to limiting to
a short period the time within which a fraud of this nature can
be committed, with a possibility of success; and at a period so
near that of the supposed act, proofs of the fraud could be easily
obtained.

So, too, when the registration is intended to prevent double
alienations, it should be obligatory, under pain of nullity. With-
out a clause to that effect, the registration would hardly take
place, since neither party would have an interest in it. In fact,
the seller has an interest the other way. If he is honest, he may
have a repugnance to its being known that he has sold or
encumbered his property ; if he is a rogue, he may desire the
opportunity of selling it twice over.

Testaments are the kind of deeds most apt to be forged. The
surest protection against this fraud is to require them, under
pain of nullity, to be registered during the life of the testator.
It may be objected that this would put a dying man at the
mercy of those who surround him in his last moments, since he
would no longer have the power to reward or to punish; but
this objection might be obviated by giving him the right to
dispose of a tenth part of his property by a codicil.

What deeds ought to be registered ?

All in which third persons are interested, and which are
important enough to justify this precaution.

In what cases should the registry be secret or public?

Deeds between the living in which third persons are interested,
hypothecations, and marriage settlements, ought to be public.
Testaments ought to be inviolably secret during the life of the
testator. Deeds, such as indentures of apprenticeship and
marriage settlements, which do not affect lands, might be kept
secret, with the reserve of communicating them to such persons
as have a special title to examine their provisions.

The registry office might be divided into departments, secret
and public, optional and obligatory. Optional registrations
would be frequent if the price were moderate. It is an act
of prudence to preserve copics against accidents, and where


406 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


could copies be more securely lodged than in an office of this
sort ?

The necessity of registering mortgages of landed property
would be a kind of restraint upon prodigality. A man could
not borrow money upon his estate, to be spent upon mere
pleasures, without some degree of shame. This consideration,
so favourable to the measure, has been regarded as an objection
against it, and, in fact, has prevented its adoption.

The law of many countries has adopted this system of regis-
tration to a greater or less extent. The French law seems to
have hit upon a medium tolerably just.

In England the law varies. In the counties of Middlesex and
York there are offices of registry, established in the reign of
Queen Anne, of which the principal object is to prevent double
alienations, and the good effects are such that the value of lands
is higher in these countries than elsewhere. How does it happen
that after so many years of an experience so decisive, this law has
not yet been made general ?

Ireland enjoys this benefit, but the registry is left to the free
choice of individuals. It has been established in Scotland.
There, testaments must be registered before the death of the tes-
tator. In the county of Middlesex, the registry is not obligatory
till after the death of the testator.

IV. Method of preventing Falstfications.—There is an expedient
which, in some respects, may take the place of registration. A
particular sort of paper or parchment being required for the deed
in question, those who sell it by retail may be forbidden to fur-
nish if without endorsing upon it the day and the year of the
sale, and the names of the seller and purchaser. The distribution
of this paper might be limited to a certain number of persons, of
whom a list should be kept. Their books would be true registers,
and after their death might be deposited in an office. This pre-
caution would prevent the forgery of deeds of any kind, pretend-
ing to be of a distant date.

It would be an additional restraint, if the paper were required
to be of the same date with the deed. The date of the paper


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, 407


might be marked in its tissue, in the same way as the name of
the maker. In that case, a paper-maker must be a party to
every forgery.

V. Institutions for the Registry of Events on whan Titles depend.
—There is no need of dwelling upon the plain necessity of pre-
serving evidence of birthsand interments. A prohibition to inter
the dead without a previous inspection by a police officer, is a
general precaution against assassinations. It is singular that in
England, marriages, instead of being recorded, were for so long
a time abandoned to the mere notoriety of a transient ceremony.
The only reason that can be given is the simplicity of this contract,
which is the same for all, except in particular dispositions relative
‘to fortune. Fortunately, under the reign of William III., mar-
riages, which serve as the foundation for so many titles, presented
themselves as fit objects for a tax. It thus became necessary to
have them registered. The tax has been suppressed, but the
register remains. But even now the security of rights which
depend upon these events is not so certain nor so universal as it
ought to be. There is but one copy of the registration. The
register of each parish ought to be transcribed in a more general
office. In the Marriage Act of George II., either through intoler-
ance or negligence, the advantage of registration was denied to
Quakers and Jews.*

VI. Zo put People on their Guard against Offences.

Ist. Against poisoning.

By giving instructions respecting the different substances which
operate as poisons, with the means of detecting them, and the
methods of preventing their effects. If these instructions were
spread among the multitude without discrimination, they might
do more harm than good. This is one of those peculiar cases in
which knowledge is more dangerous than useful. The means of
employing poisons are surer than the means of counteracting them.
The middle course would be to limit the circulation of these
instructions to the class of persons who could make a good use of


** A new Registry Act has lately been enacted by the British Pare
liament, which puts this matter on a better footing.—Tvanslator.


408 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


them, and whose eondition, character, and education furnished a
guarantee against the danger of abuse; such are the parish clergy
and the practitioners of medicine. With this view, the instruc-
tions ought to be in the Latin language, which these persons ara
supposed to understand.

But as regards those poisons which present themselves without
being sought for, and which ignorance may administer innocently,
the knowledge of them should be rendered as familiar as possible.
There must be a strange depravity in the character of a people,
if hemlock, which is so easily mistaken for parsley, and copper,
which is so apt to be dissolved in vessels of which the tinning is
worn, do not oftener operate as poisons by accident than by
design. In these cases, however dangerous knowledge may be,
there is more to hope than to fear from it.

2nd, Against false weights and measures.

By furnishing instructions relative to false weights and mea-
sures, and the methods of deception in the employment of true
ones, such as scales with unequal arms, measures with double
bottoms, &c. Such knowledge cannot be too widely diffused.
Every shop ought to have a copy of these instructions pasted up
in plain sight, as a pledge of fair dealing.

ord. Against frauds in money.

By instructions to teach people to distinguish good money from
bad. Ifa particular kind of false coin makes its appearance, the
government ought to give notice of it in the most public manner.
At Vienna, the officers of the mint always give notice of counter-
feit coins the moment they appear; but the Austrian coinage is
upon so good a footing that such attempts are rare.

4th. Against impostures of mendicants.

Some counterfeit diseases, although they are in perfect health ;
others inflict upon themselves some slight wound to aid them in
counterfeiting the appearance of the most disgusting maladies ;
others get up false stories of fires and shipwrecks by which they -
pretend to have suffered ; others borrow or steal children, whom

~ they make the instruments of their trade. But these instructions
ought to be accompanied by a preface, lest the knowledge of #0


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 409


many impostures should harden the heart, and make it indiffer-
ent to real miseries. In a country with a well-regulated police,
an individual who displays the aspect of misery ought never te
be neglected, nor left to himself; it should be the duty of the
first person who meets him to consign him to the hands of public
charity. Instructions of this kind would prove more amusing to
the people than tracts of religious controversy.

5th. Against theft, pilfering, methods of obtaining by false
pretences.

By furnishing instructions which explain all the arts employed
by thieves and swindlers. There are many books upon this sub-
ject, the materials of which have been supplied by criminals who
had repented, or who hoped to purchase pardon by their confes-
sions. These compilations are miserable affairs; but useful ex-
tracts might be made from them. One of the best is the Dis-
covertes and Revelations of Poulter, otherwise Baxter, of which
sixteen editions were published in twenty-six years,—a fact
which shows how wide a circulation might be obtained for an
authentic book of this kind, authorized by the government. The
tone which might be given to such a work would make it an
excellent moral lesson, and at the same time a book of amuse-
ment.

6th. Against religious impostures.

By furnishing instructions respecting offences committed by
the aid of a superstitious belief in the power and malice of spi-
ritual agents. These offences are too numerous; but they are
trifles in comparison with the legal persecutions which have
derived their origin from the same source. There is hardly
a nation in Christendom which cannot reproach itself with a
multitude of bloody tragedies occasioned by the belief in witch-
craft. Histories of offences committed by these means would
furnish a very instructive subject for homilies which might be
read in the churches; but as to the errors of governments und
magistrates, it were needless to give to them a sad publicity.
The opinions of so many respectable and honest judges who have
been so miserably duped by superstitions of this sort would be


410 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


more likely to confirm the people in error than to disabuse them
of it. It is much to be desired that the witch of Endor could be
got rid of. Ido not know what evils this Jewish Canidia may
have caused in Palestine, but she has produced frightful ones
throughout Europe. The wisest theologians find great objections
against that history, at least when taken in its literal and vulgar
sense.

The English law has the honour of being the first expressly to
reject from its penal code the pretended crime of witchcraft. In
the Code Theresa, though compiled in 1773, that pretended offence
makes a considerable figure.

VII. Zo publish Tables of Prices as a Check to Mercantile
Extortion.—If the exaction of an exorbitant price cannot pro-
perly be treated as an offence, and be subjected to a punishment,
it may at least be regarded as an evil which it will be useful to
put a stop to, if it can be done without producing a greater evil.
As direct punishments are not admissible for this object, indirect
means must be employed. Fortunately this is a kind of offence
of which the evil, instead of being augmented, is diminished by
increasing the number of offenders; and it therefore should be
the object of the law to increase the number as much as possible.
Such an article is sold very dear ; the profit made from it is exor-
bitant ; spread abroad this information, and scllers will flock in
from all sides, and, by the mere effect of competition, the price
will fall.

Usury may be placed under the head of mercantile extortion.
To lend money, is selling a sum of money in hand for a sum of
money to be paid at a future day, at a time determined or unde-
termined, depending or not upon certain events, and reimbursable
all at once, or in parts, &c. By forbidding usury, and making
the transaction unlawful, and so increasing the risk, of course
you augment the price. :

VITI. Publication of the Fees of Office.—Almost always fees
are allowed in the departments of government for services ren-
dered ; these fees are a part of the salaries of the officers, As an
artisan sells his labour as dear as he can, so does a public officer.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 411


Competition, and the facility of going to another market, restrain
this disposition within its just limits as respects ordinary labour;
but there is no competition in a public office; the right of selling
this particular kind of labour becomes a monopoly in the hands
of the officers. Leave the price to the discretion of the seller,
and it will presently have no other limits except those which are
prescribed by the wants of the purchaser. Fees of office ought
to be strictly limited by law; otherwise, the extortions which
will take place ought to be imputed less to the rapacity of the
officers than to the negligence of the legislator.

IX. Publication of Accounts in which the Nation 18 interested.—
When accounts are rendered at a fixed time, before a limited
number of auditors, chosen perhaps by the influence of the
accountant himself, and where nobody is called in specially to
examine them, the greatest errors may pass without being seen,
or without being corrected. But when accounts are published,
neither witnesses, commentators, nor judges will be wanting.

Each item is examined. Was this article necessary? Was it
really needed, or was it only a pretext for expense? Is the
public served as cheaply as individuals? Has not some eon-
tractor obtained an advantage at the expense of the state? Has
no secret advantage been granted to a favourite? Has nothing
been given under false pretences? Have not mancuvres been
used to prevent compctition? Is not something kept back in the
accounts? ‘There are a hundred other questions of a similar
kind, which never can be answered in a satisfactory manner,
except by publication of the accounts. In a particular committee
some may want integrity, and others may want knowledge; a
mind slow in its operations passes over what it does not under-
stand, for fear of betraying its want of quickness; a lively under-
standing will not subject itself to the study of details; each
leaves to the rest the fatigues of examination. But all the
deficiencies of a small body will be made up by the body of the
people. In that heterogeneous and discordant mass, the worst
principles have their use as well as the best; envy, hatred,
malice, perform the task of public spirit; and these very pas-


412 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


sions, by reason of their activity and their perseverance, are the
better adapted to scrutinize all parties, and to make the strictest
and most exact examination.

There seem to be but two grounds of exception, one felating to
the expense of publication, the other in regard to services of a
kind which ought to remain secret. It would be useless to
publish the accounts of a little parish, because the originals
would be accessible to all those who wished to examine them ;
and if accounts of sums employed in secret service were published,
you would no longer be able to obtain information of the designe
of your enemies.

X. Uniformity of Weights and Measures.—Weights indicate
the quantity of matter, measures the quantity of space. Their
uses are :—1st, The satisfaction of individuals; 2nd, The termina-
tion of disputes ; 3rd, The prevention of frauds.

To estabhsh uniformity in this respect throughout a single
state, has been the object of many sovereigns. To find a common
and universal measure for all nations, has been an object of re-
search for many philosophers, and at length the French govern-
ment has taken 1t in hand. This is a service truly honourable ;
for what is there rarer or greater, than to see a government
labouring at one of the foundations essential to the union of the
human race!

A uniformity of weights and measures, under the same govern-
ment, and among a people who have, in other respects, the same
language, 1s a thing, the utility of which may be made apparent
without any great depth of reasoning. A measure of which one
does not know the value, is the same as no measure. If the
measures of two cities differ either in name or quantity, the com-
merce of individuals is exposed to great mistakes or great diffi-
culties. In this respect, these cities are strangers to each other.
The nominal price of two articles may be the same, but if the
Measures are different the real prices are different. Constant
attention is necessary, and distrust interrupts the course of busi-
ness; errors slip into transactions where good faith was intended,
and fraud conceals itself under deceptive names.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 418


There are two means of introducing uniformity. The first is,
to establish standard measures by public authority, to distribute
them throughout the country, and to forbid the use of any other ;
the second is, to establish such standards, and to leave the care of
their adoption to the public convenience. I do not know any
example in which the first of these methods has been followed;
the second was practised with success by the archduke Leopold
in Tuscany.

In England, there are not less than thirty Acts of Parliament
upon this subject, and a thousand more may be made in the same
style, without success. Ist. The clauses which enforce confor-
mity to the standard are not sufficiently binding. 2nd. There
is nO provision for the manufacture and distribution of standards ;
a few have been scattered here and there, and the thing has been
left to chance.

A beginning should be made by furnishing each community
with a legal standard; a penalty might be imposed upon every
workman who made weights and measures not conformed to
that standard ; and finally, all contracts according to other weights
and measures might be declared null and void. But this last
means would not be necessary ; the two first would suffice.

Between different nations, the want of uniformity in this
respect cannot produce so many mistakes, because the mere dif-
ference of language puts every one upon his guard. However,
there results from it much embarrassment to commerce; and
fraud, favoured by mystery, often prevails over the ignorance of
purchasers.

An inconvenience, less extensive, but not less important, is
felt in medicine. If weights are not exactly the same, especially
for substances where the smallest quantities are essential, the
pharmacopoeia of one country can hardly serve for another, and
may expose practitioners to fatal errors. This is a considerable
obstacle to the free communication of science; and the same in-
convenience is felt in other arts, of which the success depends
upon delicate proportions.

XI. Hetablishment of Standards of Quality—It would he


d14 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODL.


necessary to go very much into details, to mention all that govern-
ments might do for the establishment of the fittest crttersons of
the quality and value of a multitude of objects, which are sus-
ceptible of different tests. The touch-stone is an imperfect test
‘of the quality and value of mixed metallic compositions of gold
and silver. The hydrometer is a certain test, since identity of
quality and identity of specific gravity always go together.

Falsifications, the most important to be known, are those which
may prove injurious to health, such as the mixture of chalk and
burnt bones with flour, lead employed to remove the acidity of
Wine, or arsenic to refine it. Chemistry affords the means of
discovering all these adulterations; but much knowledge is
needed for its application.

The interference of governments with these matters should be
limited to three points:—1st, To encourage the discovery of
means of proof, in cases where they are wanting ; 2nd, Spreading
knowledge of these discoveries among the people; 3rd, Defining
the duties of those officers of government to whom functions of
this sort are intrusted.

XII. Zo establish Brands or Marks attesting the quantity or
quality of Articles which ought to conform to a certain Standard.
—These marks are declarations or certificates under an abridged
form. In these documents, five points are to be considered :—
1st, Their object ; 2nd, The person whose attestation they bear;
drd, The extent and the details of the information they contain ;
4th, The distinctness and intelligibility of the mark ; 5th, Its per-
manence and indcstructibility.

The usefulness of these authentic attestations cannot be doubted.
They are successfully employed for the following purposes :—

1st. To give certainty to the rights of property. We may
trust to the prudence of individuals to make use of this precau-
tion in what concerns themselves; but, as far as relates to public
property, or to objects in deposit, it should be made an affair of
the law. Thus, in England, everything that appertains to the
royal marine bears a particular mark, which the mercantile
marine is not allowed to use.’ In the royal arsenals the imprint


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, 4158


of an arrow is made use of, and a peculiar thread is twisted into
the tissue of the cordage, which individuals are not permitted to
employ.

2nd. To assure the quantity and quality of mercantile articles
for the benefit of purchasers. Thus, by the English statutes,
marks are affixed to a great number of objects, as leather, bread,
tin, silver ware, woollen clothes, stockings, and many other
articles of trade.

8rd. To assure the payment of taxes. If the article subject to
the tax has not the mark in question, it is a proof that the tax
has not been paid. Examples are innumerable.

4th. To insure obedience to laws which prohibit importation.


CHAPTER XI.


To prevent Offences by giving to many Persons an Interest to
prevent them.


I sHaxt cite a particular example, which may be referred to the
preceding head as well as to this; for an offence is prevented
either by increasing the difficulty of concealing it, or by giving
to many persons an immediate interest to prevent it.

The carriage of the mails in England had always been deficient
in expedition and punctuality. The postmen loitered by the way,
as their own convenience or profit required ; the innkeepers never
hastened their departure. All these delays were so many little
offences,—that is, violations of established rules. What remedy
could be applied ? Watchfulness soon grew weary; penalties
were gradually relaxed; informations, always odious or embar-
rassing, became rare; and abuses, suspended for a moment, pre-
sently regained their ordinary course.

A very simple means was hit upon, which required neither
law, nor penalty, nor information, and which was all the better
for not requiring them.

‘This means consisted in combining two establishments, whigh
hitherto had been separate, the transportation of the mails and


418 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


barrassments of a change would, perhaps, exceed its advantages ;
but it might be well to prevent this disorder in a growing
colony.

It is a common usage among English sailors to trace their
family and baptismal name upon the wrist, in distinct and indelible
characters. It is done that they may be recognised in case of
shipwreck. If it were possible for such a practice to become
universal, it would furnish a new aid to morals, a new power to
the laws, an almost infallible precaution against a multitude of
offences, especially all kinds of fraud, for the success of which a
certain degree of confidence is necessary. Who are you? Who
am I dealing with ? There would be no room for prevarication in
the answer to this important question.

This means, by reason of its very energy, would favour personal
liberty, by permitting the rigours of procedure to be relaxed.
Imprisonment, where it has no object except securing the person,
would be less often necessary, if men were thus held as it were
by an invisible chain.

Doubtless there are plausible objections. In the course of the
French revolution, how many persons owed their safety to a
disguise which an imprint of this nature would have rendered
impossible! Public opinion in its actual state opposes an insur-
mountable obstacle to this institution; but patience and address
may change opinion; especially were a beginning made by some
great examples. Ifit were the custom to print marks upon the
foreheads of the great, an idea of power and of honour would be
associated with them. The women in the islands of the South
Sea submit to a painful operation in printing certain figures upon
the skin, to which an idea of beauty is attached. The imprint is
made by a multitude of punctures which penetrate to the quick,
and into which coloured powders are rubbed. =


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 419


CHAPTER XIII.
To increase the Difficulty of Escape.


TxxsE means depend very much upon the geographical situation
of a country, and upon natural and artificial barriers. In Russia,
the sparseness of the population, the severity of the climate,
the difficulty of communications, give a power to justice, of
which if would hardly be thought capable in so extensive a
country.

At Petersburg and Riga, passports cannot be obtained, unless
the intention of departure has been several times advertised in
the gazettes. This precaution against fraudulent debtors adds to
the security of commerce.

Everything which increases the facility of transmitting and
spreading intelligence, may be referred to this head.


CHAPTER XIV.
To diminish the Uncertainty of Prosecutions and Punishments.


I po not intend to enter here upon the vast subject of procedure ;
that will be the subject, not of a chapter, but of a separate
work. I confine myself to two or three general observations.

If an offence has been committed, it is for the interest of
society that the magistrate to whose cognisance it belongs should
be informed of it; and informed in such a manner ‘as to be
authorised to inflict a punishment. If it be alleged that an
offence has been committed, it is the interest of society that the
truth or falsehood of that allegation be subjected to proofs.
Therefore the rules of testimony and the forms of procedure
ought to be such as, on the one hand, to admit every true infor-
mation, and on the other, to exclude every false information, that
is, everything which is more likely to mislead than to enlighten.

Nature has placed before us a model of procedure. Consider
what passes in the domestic tribunal; examine the conduct of


430 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


the father of a family towards his children, his domestics, of
which he is the head. We shall find there the original features
of justice, which can no longer be recognised, after they have
been disfigured by men incapable of discerning the truth, or in-
terested to disguise it. A good judge is only a good father,
acting upon a much larger scale. The means which are adapted
to guide a father in the search after truth, ought equally to be
good for a judge. It is this model of procedure upon which
justice began, and from which it ought never to have departed.
It is true that a confidence may be felt in the father of a family
which cannot be felt in a judge, because a judge has not the
same motives of affection, and may be perverted by personal
interest. But this only proves that in case of a judge, it is
necessary to take precautions against partiality and corruption
which are not needed in the domestic tribunal. It does not
prove that the forms of procedure or the rules of testimony ought
to be different.
The English law admits the following principles :—
1st. That no one ought to be a witness in his own case.
2nd. That no one should be received as his own accuser.
3rd. That the testimony of persons interested in a cause ought
not to be taken.
4th. That hearsay evidence ought never to be admitted.
5th. That no one ought to be put on trial a second time for the
same offence.
It is not my intention to discuss here these rules of testimony
‘to which may be applied that description—wpenttus toto dwreos
eorbe Britannos—Britain wholly separate from the rest of the
~world. In a treatise on procedure in general, a proper place will
“be found to inquire whether the English jurisprudence, superior
‘in some respects to that of all nations, owes its superiority to
to these maxims, or whether they are not‘the principal cause of
that weakness in the executive power of justice whence there
results in England an ineffective police and such frequency of
offences,
All I shall say here is, that every piscaliin which is not abso-


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 423


lutely necessary for the protection of innocence affords a dangerous
lurking-place to crime. What maxims of procedure can be more
dangerous than those which put justice in opposition to itself,
and which establish a kind of incompatibility between its duties ?
When it is said, for example, that it is better that a hundred
of the guilty should escape than that one innocent person should
perish, a dilemma is supposed which does not exist; the security
of innocence may be complete without favouring the impunity of
crime; indeed, it can only be complete on that condition; for
every culprit who escapes threatens the public security ; and, so
far from being a protection to innocence, such an escape exposes
innocence to become the victim of a new offence. To acquit a
criminal is to commit by his hands all the offences of which he
is afterwards guilty.

The difficulty of proceeding against offences is a preat cause of
feebleness in the executive power of justice, and of impunity to
crime. When the law is clear, when the judge is appealed to
immediately after the supposed offence, the function of accuser is
almost confounded with that of a witness. When the offence is
committed under the eye of the judge, there are, so to speak, but
two persons necessary in the drama—the judge and the delin--
quent. It is distance of time and place which separate the func-
tion of the witness from that of the judge. But it may happen
that all the witnesses of the facts cannot be suddenly collected, or
that the offence is not discovered till long after its commission,
or that the accused alleges facts in his defence which it requires
time to verify—all these causes may bring on delays. Delays
give occasion to incidents which produce new delays. The pro-
cess of justice becomes complicated, and, in order to follow out
this chain of operations without confusion or negligence, it is
necessary to intrust its management to a particular person.
Hence results the function of an accuser. The accuser may
either be one of the witnesses, or a person interested in the affair,
or a public officer specially appointed for that purpose.

The judicial functions have often been divided, so that the
judge who receives the testimony while it is recent, has not the


422 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


right to decide ; but is obliged to send the affair to another judge,
who, unless the evidence were thus collected, would have no
leisure to attend to it till the proofs were half effaced. There
have been established, in most countries, a great number of use-
less formalities, and it has become necessary to create officers to
attend to those formalities. The system of procedure is so com-
plicated that it has become an abstruse science ; he who wishes
to prosecute an offence is obliged to put himself into the hands
of an attorney, and the attorney himself cannot go on without the
aid of another man of the law of a superior class, who directs him
by his counsels, and who speaks for him.

To these disadvantages, two others must be added :—

Ist. Legislators, by a strange piece of self-contradiction, have
often closed all access to the tribunals against those who have the
most need of their assistance, by subjecting proceedings at law to
taxes, the effect of which is little considered.

2nd. There is a public disfavour attached to all those who lend
their aid, in quality of accusers, to the execution of the laws,—a
stupid and pernicious prejudice, which legislators have often had
the weakness to encourage, without ever having made the slightest
effort to subdue it.

It is easy to see the consequence of this accumulation of delays
and discouragements. The laws are not executed. If a man
could address the judge at once, and tell what he has seen, the
expense to which this procedure would subject him would be but
a trifle. In proportion to the number of intermediate steps which
he is obliged to take his expenses are increased. When to this
we add loss of time, vexations, and the uncertainty of succeeding,
it is astonishing that men can be found bold enough to engage in
such a pursuit. There are but few, and there would be still
fewer if those who adventure in this lottery knew as well as the
lawyers what it will cost, and how many chances there are of
failure.

These difficulties would vanish by the mere institution of a
Public accuser, clothed with the character of a magistrate, who
should conduct all prosecutions at the public expense. Informers


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 438


who expected pay would require but a moderate compensation,
A hundred gratuitous accusers would present themselves to one
who would demand pay for his services.¥ Every law, being put
into force, would manifest its good or bad effects; the wheat
would be winnowed from the chaff. Good laws would be appre-
ciated; bad laws would be repealed. Informers, animated by
public spirit, and rejecting all pecuniary reward, would be heard
with due respect and confidence ; and delinquents could no longer
escape the punishment of their offences by a bargain with the
prosecutor.

It is true that in England, in all grave cases, the accuser is
forbidden to make a compromise with the accused, without the
permission of the court; but although this prohibition were
universal, what possibility is there of its observance in cases
where it is the interest of both parties to elude it?


CHAPTER XV.


To prohibit Accessory Offences in order to prevent the Principal
Offence.


Acts which are related to a pernicious event as causes may
be considered in relation to the principal offence, as accessory
offences.

‘ The principal offence being well determined, there may be
distinguished as many accessory offences as there are acts which
may Serve as preparations for the principal offence, and which
manifest, on the part of those who perform them, an intention of
committing it. Now, the more distinctly these preparatory acts
are pointed out and prohibited, the more chances there are of


* The smallest expense of a prosecution in an English court of justice
is twenty-eight pounds sterling,—a sum almost sufficient for thé yearly
subsistence of a common family. This sum comes out of the pocket of
the prosecutor. Under such a system, it is almost a miracle that tharé


434 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


preventing the principal offence. If the offender is not stopped
at the first step, he may be at the second, or the third. It is
thus that a vigilant legislator, like a skilful general, takes care
to reconnoitre all the exterior posts of the enemy, in order to
interrupt his enterprises. Along all the defiles, and all the passes,
he stretches a chain of works, diversified according to circum-
stances, but connected together in such a way that the enemy
finds at each step new dangers and new obstacles.

If we consider the practice of legislators we shall find none
who have laboured systematically upon this plan, and none who
have not followed it to a certain extent.

Offences of the chase, for example, have been divided into
many accessory offences, according to the nature of the game, or
the kinds of nets or instruments necessary to take it. Smuggling
has been attacked, by prohibiting many preparatory acta.
Counterfeiting has been attacked in the same manner.

I shall give some other examples of what might be done in
this way against homicide and other corporal injuries.

The prohibition to carry arms only useful for attack and easy
to be concealed. It is said that an instrument is made in
Holland in the form of a needle, which is shot through a tube,
and which inflicts a mortal wound. The manufacture, the sale,
the possession of these instruments ought to be forbidden, as
accessary to murder.

Ought pocket-pistols, such as English highwaymen use, to be
prohibited? The utility of such a prohibition is problematical,
Of all methods of robbery, that which makes use of fire-arms is
least dangerous to the person attacked. In such a case, the
mere threat is usually sufficient to accomplish the object. The
robber who began with shooting, would not only commit an act
of useless cruelty, he would disarm himself; while by reserving
his fire, he stands on the defensive. He who uses a club or a
sword, has not the same motive to abstain from striking; and
one blow becomes the motive for a second, in order to deprive
the victim of power to pursue.

The prohibition to sell poisons demands a catalogue of poisonous


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 435


substances. The'sale of them cannot be absolutely prohibited ;*
all that can be done is, to regulate it, to subject it to precau-
tions, to require that the seller should know the purchaser, that
he has witnesses of the sale, that he enters it in a separate
book ; and still, some latitude must be left for unexpected cases.
These rules, to be complete, demand many details. Would
their advantages counterbalance the embarrassments they would
produce? That depends upon the manners and habits of a
people. If poisoning is a frequent offence, it will be necessary
to take these indirect precautions. They would have been
proper in ancient Rome.

Accessory offences may be distinguished into four classcs.

The first class imply a formed intention to commit the prin-
cipal offence. Offences of this kind are comprehended under
the general name of attempts, preparations.

The second class do not imply a criminal intention actually
formed, but place the individual in a situation in which there is
reason to fear that he may presently conceive a criminal design.
Such are gaming, prodigality, and idleness, when poverty is
added to it. Cruelty towards animals is an incentive to cruelty
towards men, &c.

Accessory offences of the third class do not imply any criminal
intention, actual or probable, but only accidentally possible.
Offences of this kind are created by those regulations of police
intended to prevent calamities. When, for example, the sale of
certain poisons or the sale of gunpowder is forbidden, the
violation of these rules, separate from any criminal intention, is
an offence of this third class.

The fourth class is composed of presumed offences, that is, of
acts which are considered as proofs of an offence. They may
be called evidentiary offences; acts injurious or otherwise in
themselves, but furnishing a presumption of an offence com-
mitted. By an English statute, the concealment by the mother
of the birth of an illegitimate child, is punished as murder,
because such conduct is regarded as a sure proof of infanticide.

* Taken in a certain dose, every active medicine is a poison.


426 PRINCIPLES .OF THE PENAL CODE


By another statute, it is a capital crime for men to meet
together armed and disgnised, because this is supposed to be
a proof of a formed design to offer violent resistance to the
officers of the customs. By another statute, it is an offence to
have stolen goods in possession without being able to render a
satisfactory account how they were obtained ; because this cir-
cumstance is regarded as proof of participation in the theft. By
another statute, it is an offence to obliterate the marks upon ship-
wrecked property, because such an act indicates intention of theft.

These offences, founded upon presumptions, suppose two
things :—1st, Distrust of the system of procedure; 2nd, Dis-
trust of the wisdom of the judge. The English legislature
fearing that juries, too prone to lenity, would not see in these
presumptions a certain proof of guilt, has thought fit to erect the
Act which furnishes the presumption into a second offence, an
offence distinct from every other. In those countries in which a
perfect confidence is placed in the tribunals, these Acts may be
arranged under their proper head, and be considered merely as
presumptions, from which the court is to draw such inferences as
the circumstances warrant.

In relation to accessory offences, it is essential to lay down
three rules by way of memento to the legislator.

Ist. Whenever a principal offence’is created, all preparatory
acts and simple attempts ought also to be prohibited, ordinarily
under a less penalty han the principal offence. This rule is
general, and the exceptions ought to be founded upon particular
reasons.

2nd. To the description of the principal offence there ought to
be appended a description of all accessory, preliminary, and con-
comitant offences which are susceptible of a specific description.

3rd. In the description of these accessory offences, care must
be taken not to impose too many restraints, not to entrench too
far upon individual liberty ; not to expose innocence to danger
by conclusions too precipitate. The description of an offence of
this kind would be almost always dangerous, if it. did not include
a clause leaving power to the judge to estimate the degree of pre-


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 497


sumption to be derived fromit. In that case, creating an accessory
offence is pretty much the same thing as suggesting the fact in
question to the judge, by way of instruction, as an indicative
circumstance; but not authorizing him to draw any conclusion
from it, if he see any special reason to regard the indication as
inconclusive.

If the punishment of a preliminary offence, or of an offence
begun but not finished, were the same with that of the principal
or complete offence, without allowing anything for the possibility
of repentance or a prudent stopping short, the delinquent per-
ceiving that he had already incurred the whole danger by the
simple attempt, would feel himself at liberty to consummate the
offence without incurring any further risk.


CHAPTER XVI.
The Culture of Benevolence.


Tux sentiment of benevolence is distinct from the love of repu-
tation. Each may act without the other. This sentiment may
originate in an instinctive principle, the gift of nature; but, in a
great ‘measure, it is the produce of culture, the fruit of educa-
tion. Where is the greater amount of benevolence to be found,
among the English or the Iroquois, in the infancy of society or
its maturity? If the sentiment of benevolence be susceptible of
increase, and that it is cannot be doubted, that increase is to be
obtained by the aid of another principle of the human heart, the
love of reputation. When the moralist paints benevolence with
the most amiable features, and selfishness, hardness of heart, in
the most odious colours, at what does he aim? He seeks to
unite to the purely social principle of benevolence, the demi-
personal and demi-social principle of reputation. He seeks to
combine them; to give them the same direction; to strengthen
them one by the other. If. his efforts are crowned with success,
te which of these two- principles ought he to ascribe the honour.


438 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


Neither to the one nor to the other exclusively, but to their reci-
procal concourse; to the sentiment of benevolence as the imme-
diate cause; to the love of reputation as the remote cause. He
who yields with pleasure to the mild promptings of the social
principle knows not, and does not desire to know, that it is a
less noble principle to which his benevolence owes its impulse.
Such is the disdainful delicacy of the better element of our nature;
it is unwilling to owe its birth to anything but to itself; it
blushes af every foreign association.

There are two objects for the legislator: —I1st, To give new
force to the sentiment of benevolence; 2nd, To regulate its appli-
cation according to the principle of utility.

1st. The legislator who wishes to inspire a people with
humanity ought himself to give the first example of it. Let him
show the utmost respect, not only for the lives of men, but for
all the circumstances which have an influence upon their sensi-
bility. Sanguinary laws have atendency to render men cruel, by
fear, by imitation, and by fostering a spirit of revenge. Mild
laws humanize the manners of a nation; the spirit of the govern-
ment is reproduced among the citizens.

The legislator ought to forbid everything that serves as an
incitement to cruelty. The barbarous gladiatorial shows intro-
duced at Rome, in the latter times of the republic, contributed,
without doubt, to inspire that ferocity of spirit which the Romans
displayed in their civil wars. Willa people accustomed to despise
human life in their sports respect it in the rage of passion ?

It is proper, for the same reason, to forbid every kind of
cruelty to animals, whether by way of amusement or for the
gratification of gluttony. Cock-fights and bull-fights, the chase
of the hare and the fox, fishing, and other amusements of the
same kind, necessarily suppose a want of reflection or a want of
humanity; since these sports inflict upon sensitive beings the
most lively sufferings, and the most lingering and painful death
that can be imagined. Men must be permitted to kill animals;
but they should be forbidden to torment them. Artificial death
may be rendered less painful than natural death by simple pro-


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 439


ecsses, well worth the trouble of being studied, and of becoming
an object of police. Why should the law refuse its protection to
any sensitive being? A time will come when humanity will
spread its mantle over everything that breathes. The lot of
slaves has begun to excite pity ; we shall end by softening the lot
of the animals which labour for us and supply our wants.

I do not know whether the Chinese legislators, in establishing
their minute ceremonials, have had for their object the cultivation
of benevolence, or only the maintenance of peace and subordina-
tion. In China, politeness isa kind of worship or ritual, the
great object of education, and the principal science. The bodily
movements of the Chinese, always regulated, always prescribed
by etiquette, are almost as uniform as those of a regiment which
goes through the manual exercise. This pantomime of bene-
volence may be destitute of reality, as a devotion loaded with
minute observances may have little to do with morals. So much
restraint does not seem to accord well with the human heart; and
such demonstrations of respect do not confer any obligation,
because they have no merit.

There are principles of antipathy, which are sometimes so inter-
laced with the political constitutions of states, that it is very diffi-
cult to extirpate them. There are hostile religions which excite
their partisans to hate and to persecute each other; hereditary
feuds between hostile families; privileges of rank which erect
insurmountable barriers between the citizens ; results of conquest,
where the conquerors have not been able to mix and incorporate
themselves with the conquered people ; animosities founded upon
ancient wrongs; the rule of factions which rise with a victory,
and fall with a defeat. In this unfortunate condition of things,
hearts are oftener united by hatred than by love. Men must be
freed from fear and oppression, before they can be taught to love
each other. The destruction of prejudices which make men
hostile, is one of the greatest services that can be rendered to
morals.

Mungo Park in his African travels, has represented the blacks
in a most interesting point of view ; their simplicity, the strength


430 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


of their domestic affections, the picture of their innocent manners,
has increased the public interest in their favour.

Satirical writers weaken this sentiment. After reading Voltaire,
‘does one feel favourably disposed towards the Jews? -If that
author’s benevolence had not been eclipsed by his prejudices,
while exposing the degradations to which the Jews are subjected,
he would have explained by that very fact the less favourable
traits of their character, and would have exhibited the remedy by
the side of the evil.

The most dangerous assaults upon benevolence have been made
by exclusive religions, having incommunicable rights, inspiring
intolerance, and representing unbelievers as infidels, the enemies
of God.

In England, better than elsewhere, is understood the art of
exciting beneficence by the publicity which is given to it. Is it
wished to establish a charitable institution which requires many
contributors ?—a committee of the most active and distin-
guished benefactors is appointed; the amount of contributions
is announced in the newspapers; and the names of the subscribers
are printed from day to day. This publicity answers two ends.
Its immediate object is, to guarantee the receipt and employ-
ment of the funds ; but it is also a bait to vanity by which bene-
volence gains.

In charitable societies all the annual subscribers are named
directors; the control they exercise, the little state they form,
interest them in their office. They love to follow up the good
they have done, and to enjoy the power which it confers. The
benefactors being thus brought into contact with the unfortunate,
misery being thus placed before their eyes, benevolence is
strengthened and confirmed ; it grows cool by the removal of the
object, but warms again by its presence.

There are more of these benevolent societies in London than
there ever were convents in Paris.

Many of these charities have particular objects: the blind,

‘orphans, the maimed, widows, sailors, the children of clergymen.
Each individual is more touched by one kind of misery than by


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 431 —


another, and his sympathy almost always depends upon some per-
sonal circumstance. Of course, there is much art in diversifying
charities, in separating them into many branches, in order that
every kind of sensibility may be made available, and that none
may be lost.

It is astonishing that more advantage has not been taken of the
disposition of women, among whom the sentiment of pity is
stronger than among men. Before the revolution; there were
two institutions in France well adapted to this end: the Daughters
of Charity, who devoted themselves to the service of the hospitals,
and the Society of Maternal Charity at Paris, composed of mar-
ried ladies, who visited poor women in their pregnancy, and
aided them in the care of their infants.

2nd. The sentiment of benevolence is liable to deviate from
the principle of general utility. It-cannot be set right except by
instruction. Command and force do not avail. Men must be
persuaded, enlightened, taught little by little, to distinguish the
different degrees of utility, and to proportion their benevolence
to the extent of its object. The best model is traced by Fenelon
in that sentence which paints his heart: “I prefer my family to
myself, my country to my family, mankind to my country.”

It should be the object of public instruction to direct the
affections of the citizens towards the end of utility; to repress
vagaries of benevolence; and to make each individual perceive
how the general interest involves his own. Men should be
taught to blush at that spirit of family, at that spirit of caste, at
that spirit of party, sect or profession, which militates against
the love of country; and at that unjust patriotism which glories
in the hatred of other nations. They should be dissuaded from
assuming, through a misplaced pity, the advocacy of deserters,
smugglers, and other delinquents who sin against the state,
They should be disabused of that false notion that there is any
humanity in favouring the escape of a criminal, in lending im-
punity to-crime, in encouraging mendicity to the prejudice of
industry. The attempt should be made to give to all their senti-
ments of benevolence the most advantageous proportion, by


433, PRINCIPLED OF THR PENAL CODE.


pointing ent the littleness and the danger of those caprices,
entipathies, and momentary attachments, which incline the
balance against general utility and permanent interest. ,
The more men become enlightened, the more they will
contract a spirit of general benevolence, because the progress
of enlightenment makes it evident that the interests of men are
oftener harmonious than discordant. In commerce, nations not
well infornted treat each other as rivals, who cannot rise ex-
cept upon each other’s ruins. The work of Adam Smith is
a treatise upon universal benevolence, because it shows that
commerce is equally advantageous to all parties; that each party
profits in its own way, according to its natural means; and that
nations are partners, not rivals, in the great social enterprise.


CHAPTER XVII.
Employment of the Motive of Honour, or the Popular Sanctson.


Ir should be the object of the legislator to increase the force of
this motive, and to regulate its application.

The force of public opinion is in the compound ratio of its
extent and its intensity. Its extent is measured by the number
of suffrages ; its intensity by the degree of blame or of appro-
bation.

There are many means of increasing the power of opinion 80
far as concerns its extent: the principal are—liberty of the
press, and publicity in all proceedings in which the nation is
interested; publicity of the tribunals; publicity of accounts;
publicity of state consultations when secrecy is not required for
some particular reason, An enlightened public, the depository
of the laws and of the archives of honour, and administrator of
the moral sanction, forms a supreme tribunal, which decides upon
all cases and all persons. By publicity in affairs, this tribunal
is enabled to collect proofs and to form a judgment; by the
liberty of the press it is enabled to pronounce its judgment, and
to cause it to be executed.


' PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL,CODZ. 438:


There are also a number of means for increasing the intensity |
of the power of opinion ; such as punishments which bear some
character of ignominy, or rewards of which the principal object
is honour to those who receive them. ;

There is an art of guiding opinion, without the public suspect-
ing how it is led. It consists in arranging things so that the aet
which you wish to prevent cannot be performed without first
doing something else, which popular opinion condemns already.
If it be desired, for example, to secure the payment of an
impost, you may exact from him whose duty it is to pay, a certi-
ficate or an oath that he has paid.

To take a false oath, to fabricate a false certificate, under what-
ever pretence, are offences which the public is prepared beforehand
to stamp with disapprobation. So that here we discover a sure
means of rendering an offence infamous, which without this
addition would not be so.

Sometimes a mere change in the name of a thing is enough to
change the sentiments of a nation. The Romans abhorred the
name of king, but they could put up with the titles of dictator and
emperor. Cromwell did not succeed in seating himself upon the
throne of England, but under the name of protector, he enjoyed
more than kingly authority. Peter I. of Russia abdicated the title
of despot for himself, and he ordered that the slaves of the nobles
should henceforth be called only sudyects.

If the people were philosophers, this expedient would nof:
answer ; but on this point philosophers are as weak as the people
What deception in the words liberty and equality! What con-
tradictions between that /urury which all condemn, and that public.
prosperity which all admire!

The legislator ought to beware how he strengthens publie
opinion in cases where it is in opposition to the principle of
utility. For this reason he ought to efface from the laws every:
vestige of those pretended offences of heresy and witchcraft, lest
he give a legal foundation to superstitious notions. If he does
not dare to attack errors, too generally diffused, at least he ought
not to furnish them with a new sanction.


FF


434 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


Et is very difficult to employ the motive of honour as 4 means
to aid the enforcement of the laws. Pecuniary rewards paid to
informers, have failed of their object. The motive of gain has
been opposed by that of shame; and the law, instead of increas-
ing its power, has weakened itself by offering an inducement
condemned by public opinion. Persons are afraid of the suspicion
of acting from a mean motive. Rewards not well selected,
repulse, instead of attracting, and deprive the law of much
gratuitous assistance.

The most powerful means of producing an important revolu-
tion in public opinion, is, to strike the mind of the people by
some great example. Thus Peter the Great himself, gradually
passing through all the gradations of rank, taught his nobility,
by his own example, to bear the yoke of military subordination.
Thus Catherine II. surmounted the popular prejudice against
inoculation, by trying it, not upon criminals, but on herself.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Employment of the Motive of Religion.
Tre culture of religion has two objects :—Ist, To increase the
power of that sanction; 2nd, To give that power a proper
direction. If its direction be bad, it is plain that the less power
that sanction has, the less evil it will do. With respect then to
religion, the first thing to be examined is, its tendency; the
search for means to augment its power, is but a secondary
object.

Its tendency ought to be conformable to the plan of utility.
As a sanction, it is composed of punishments and rewards. Its
punishments ought to be attached to those acts which are injurious
to society, and to such acts alone. Its rewards ought to be pro-
mised to acts the tendency of which is advantageous to society,
and to no acts beside. This ought to be its fundamental dogma.

The only means to judge of its tendency is to consider it solely
in its relation to the good of political society. Every other part


f t
PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 436.


of it is indifferent; and whatever is indifferent in religious
belief is liable to become pernicious.

Every article of faith is of necessity injurious so soon as the
legislator, in order to favour its adoption, resorts to coercive
motives,—to motives derived from the fear of punishment. The
persons whom he wishes to influence may be considered as forming
three classes: those who are already of the same opinion with the
legislator; those who reject that opinion; those who neither
adopt nor reject it. “

For those who conform voluntarily, a coercive law is not neces-
sary ; for nonconformists it is useless, as is proved by the very
fact of their noneonformity ; it does not fulfil its purpose.

When a man has formed his opinion, can punishments make
him change it? The very question is an insult to common sense.
Punishmehts have rather a contrary effect ; they rather serve to
confirm one’s opinion than to shake it, partly because the employ-
ment of constraint is a tacit avowal that arguments are wanting ;
partly because recourse to violent means produces an aversion to
opinions so sustained. Punishment never can oblige a man to
believe, but only to pretend that he believes.

Those who, through conviction, or the pride of honour, refuse
to pretend a belief they do not feel, are exposed to the evil of
punishment,—that is, to persecution ; for what is called persecu-
tion is an evil which is not compensated by any advantage ; it is
a-pure loss; and though administered by the hand of the magis-
trate, it 1s precisely the same in nature, but much severer in
degree, than if it had been the work of an ordinary malefactor.

Those persons, less strong-minded, and less noble, who escape
by a false declaration, yield to threats, and to the immediate
danger which presses them; but the momentary punishments
thus avoided turn into a punishment of conscience, if they have
any scruples, and into a punishment of contempt upon the part
of society, which cannot endure the baseness of such hypocritical
retractions,

In such a state of things, what happens ? A portion of the

sitizens must accustom themselves to disregard the opinions of
‘FF Q


436 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


another part, in order to be at peace with themselves. There
springs up an art of making subtle distinctions between innocent
falsehoods and criminal falsehoods ; there is established a class of
privileged lies, permitted as a defence against tyranny,—a set of
perjuries which are esteemed innocent, and false signatures con-
sidered as mere formalities. In the midst of these subtilties
respect for truth disappears; the limits of good and evil are
confounded ; a train of less pardonable falsehoods is introduced
under cover of those already described; the tribunal of opinion is
divided; the judges who compose it do not follow the same law;
they do not clearly know what degree of dissimulation they
ought to condemn or what they ought to excuse. The votes are
scattered and contradictory, and the moral sanction, having no
longer a uniform regulator, grows weak, and loses its influence.
Thus, the legislator who imposes religious tests becomes the
corrupter of the nation. He sacrifices virtue to religion, though
religion itself is a good only so far as it is the auxiliary of virtue.

The third class of the community, according to the division
above stated, comprises those persons who, at the establishment
of the penal law for the regulation of belief, had yet no settled
opinion one way or the other. With respect to these, it is
likely that the law may have an influence upon the formation of
their opinions. Seeing danger upon one side, and security upon
the other, it is natural that they should examine the arguments
in favour of an opinion which the law condemns, with a degree
of fear and aversion, that they will not feel for the arguments
which support the favoured opinion. The arguments which we
desire to find true, make a more lively impression than those
which we hope to find false ; and thus a man comes to believe,
or rather not to reject, not to disbelieve a proposition which he
would not have adopted had his inclinations been left free. In
this last case, the evil, though not so great as in the two
former, does not cease to be an evil. It may happen, but it does
hot always happen, that the judgment yields entirely to the affec-
tions; and even though it should so happen, though the belief
should be as strong as it can be, if fear enters at all into the


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 487


motives of that belief, the mind is never perfectly tranquil.
There remains a secret dread that what is believed to-day may be
disbelieved to-morrow. The conviction of a clear moral truth ia
never shaken; but belief in a mere dogma is always more or les«
wavering. Thence arises that impatience towards those who
attack it. Examination and discussion are dreaded by men who
feel the ground shaking under their feet. It will not do to
allow any alterations in a building which lacks a foundation.
The understanding is enfeebled ; the mind seeks only for perfect
repose in a sort of blind credulity ; it collects together all the
errors which have any affinity with its own; it fears to explain
itself clearly as to the possible and impossible, and seeks to
confound all their limits. It delights in all sorts of sophistries,
in everything that shackles the human understanding, in every-
thing which seems to show that no certain dependence can be
placed upon reason. It acquires an inclination, an unhappy
dexterity for rejecting evidence; for giving weight to half
proofs ; for hearing but one side ; for evading the decisions of rea-
son. In one word, according to this system, it is necessary to put
a bandage about the eyes, lest we be wounded by the light of day.

Thus every penal means employed to augment the power of
religion, acts as an indirect means against that essential part of
morals, which consists in respect for truth, and respect for public
opinion. All enlightened minds now hold this doctrine; but
there are very few states which have yet adopted it. Violent
persecutions have ceased, but moderate persecutions still exist,
civil penalties, political incapacities, menacing laws, a precarious
toleration ;—a humiliating situation for large classes of men, who
owe their tranquillity only to a tacit indulgence, to a continued
pardon,

To form a clear idea of the advantage which the legislator
may derive from augmenting the force of the religious sanction,
it is necessary to distinguish three cases:—I1st, That in which
it is entirely under his control; 2nd, That in which other
persons share the influence with him; 3rd, That in which it
depends upon some foreign personage. In this last case, the sove-


488 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


reignty is really divided between two magistrates, the spiritual, as
he is called, and the temporal. The temporal sovereign is in per-
petual danger of seeing his authority disputed or snatched away
by his rival, and everything he does for the augmentation of the
religious sanction will produce a diminution of his own power.
We find in history a picture of the effects which result from such
a struggle. The temporal magistrate commands such or such an
action; the spiritual magistrate forbids it. "Whichsoever side’
the citizens take, they are punished by the one, or by the other ;
proscribed, or Gamned; they are placed between the fear of the
gallows, and the dread of hell-fire.

In Protestant countries, the clergy are essentially subordinate
to the political power. Dogmas do not depend upon the prince,
but those do who interpret the dogmas. Now the right of inter-
pretation is pretty much the same thing with the right of pro-
mulgation. Thus in Protestant countries, religion is easily
modelled, according to the plans of political authority. Married
priests are more like citizens; they do not form a phalanx which
can become formidable; they have neither the power of the con-
fessional, nor that of absolution.

But if we consider only facts, whether in Catholic or Protes-
testant countries, religion, it must be admitted, has had too great
a share in the misfortunes of mankind. It seems to have been
oftener the enemy than the instrument of civil government. The
moral sanction never has more power than when it agrees with
utility; but unfortunately the religious sanction appears to have
most power in the very cases where it is most opposite to utility.
The inefficacy of religion, so far as relates to the promotion of
political good, is the ceaseless subject of declamations on the part
of those who have the greatest interest to exaggerate its good
effects. Not powerful enough to produce good, its power of doing
evil has always been too great. It was the moral sanction which
animated Codrus, Regulus, the Russells, and the Sidneys. It
‘was the religious sanction which made Philip II. the scourge of
the Low Oountries, Mary the tyrant of England, and anette
the butcher of France.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 489 -


The common solution of this difficulty is to attribute all the
good to religion, and all the evil to superstition. But this dis-
tinction, in this sense, is purely verbal, The thing itself is not
changed because a man chooses to describe it, in one case, by the
word religion, and by the word superstition in another. The
motive which acts upon the mind is precisely the same in both
cases. It is always the fear of evil and the hope of good on the
part of an all-powerful Being, of whom different ideas are enter-
tained. In speaking of the conduct of the same man, upon the
same occasion, some attribute to religion what others ascribe to
superstition.

Another observation, as trivial as the first, and as weak as itis
trivial, is the remark so often repeated, that it is not just to argue
against the use of a thing from its abuse, and that the best instru-
ments do the most harm when misemployed. The futility of this
argument is obvious ; it consists in calling the good effects of a
thing its use, and in stigmatizing the bad effects as its abuse. To
say that you ought not to argue from the abuse of a thing against its
use, is to say that, in making a just appreciation of the tendency
of a cause, you ought to consider only the good, and not the evil
it produces. The instruments of good, wrongly employed, may
often become instruments of evil; that is true; but the principal
characteristic of perfection in an instrument is not to be liable to
be so misemployed. The most efficacious ingredients in medicine
may be converted into poisons; I admit it; but those which are
dangerous are not so good, upon the whole, as those which answer
the same purpose, if such there are, without being liable to the
same abuses. Mercury and opium are very useful; bread and
water are still more so.

I have spoken without evasion, and with perfect freedom. I
have elsewhere explained the utility of reigion, but I cannot here
omit to observe that it tends more and more to disengage itself
from futile and pernicious dogmas, and to reconcile itself to sound
morals and to sound politics. - Irreligion, on the other hand, has
been manifested in our day under the most hideous: forms ,of
absurdity, ofimmorality, and of persecution. This experience is


440 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


enough to show all well-disposed minds towards what end they

ought to direct their efforts. Butif the government should act

too openly in favour of this salutary direction, it would fail of its

end. It is freedom of inquiry which has corrected the errors of

the ages of ignorance, and brought back religion towards its true

object. Freedom of inquiry will complete the purification of reli-
, and its reconciliation with public utility.

This is not the place to examine all the services which religion
may render, either as a consolation to the woes inseparable from
humanity; or as moral instruction best adapted to the most numer-
ous class of society; or finally as a means of exciting beneficence,
and of producing acts of devoted virtue, which perhaps could hardly
be obtained by the power of mere earthly motives.

The principal employment of religion, in civil and penal legis-
lation, is to give a new degree of force to oaths, an additional
support to confidence.

An oath includes two different ties, one religious, the other
moral; one obligatory upon all, the other, obligatory upon those
only who have a certain set of opinions. The same formula
which, in case of perjury, purports to expose the offender to reli-
gious penalties, exposes him, at the same time, to legal punish-
ments and to public contempt. The religious obligation is the
striking part; but the main force of the oath depends upon the
moral tie. The influence of the first is partial, that of the second
is universal. It would be a great piece of imprudence to make
use of the former and to neglect the latter.

There are cases in which oaths have a very great power ; those,
namely, in which they act in concert with public opinion, or have
the support of the popular sanction. There are other cases in
which their power is very small; those, namely, in which they
are in opposition to public opinion, or are merely unsupported
by it. Such are custom-house oaths, and those exacted from the
pupils at certain universities.

It is the interest of a legislator, not less than of a military
thief, to know the true state of the forces under his command.
To avoid seeing the weak part, because the sight of that weak


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 441


part gives little satisfaction, is pusillanimity. If the feebleness
of oaths, so far as the religious obligation is concerned, has been
fully made known, it is the fault of those who place the greatest
reliance on this means. The abuse they have made of it, the
prodigality with which they have employed it, has betrayed the
little efficacy which it has in itself, distinct from the sanction of
honour.

The power of oaths is necessarily enfeebled, when they are
made to bear upon belief, upon opinions. Why? Because, in
such cases, it is impossible to detect perjury, and because human
reason, always afloat, always subject to variations, cannot bind
itself for the future. Can I be certain that my belief to-day will
be my belief ten years hence? These oaths are an advantage
given to unscrupulous men over those who have a greater sensi-
bility of conscience.

Oaths become degraded when they are used for puerile pur-
poses; when they are employed for purposes a8 to which there
is a general understanding to violate them ; and still more when
they are required in cases in which justice and humanity excuse,
and perhaps applaud, their violation.

The human mind, almost always opposed to tyranny, perceives
confusedly that the Deity, on account of his very perfections,
cannot ratify unjust or frivolous laws. Man, in fact, by impos-
ing an oath, wishes to exercise an authority over God himself;
man decrees a punishment, and the Supreme Judge is called
upon to execute it. Deny this supposition, and there is an end °
to the religious force of an oath.

It is very astonishing that in England, among a people other-
wise prudent and religious, this powerful means has been almost
rained by the trivial and indecent use that has been made of it.

To show how far habit may deprave moral opinions upon some
pointe, I shall cite a passage extracted from Lord Kaims, a judge |
of the Court of Session in Scotland, in a work upon education :-—

‘* Custom-house oaths, at present, go for nothing; not because
men are growing more immoral, but because no one attaches any
importance to them. The duty upon French wines is the same


443 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


in Scotland as in England ; but, as we are not rich enough to pay
it, a tacit permission to pay upon French wines the same duty as
upon Spanish wines, is found more advantageous to the revenue
than the rigour of the law. However, before the duty is paid,
an oath must be taken that the French wines are Spanish wines.
Such oaths in their origin were criminal, because they were a
fraud upon the public; but at present the oath is only a matter
of form, and does not imply any credit given or received ; it is a
mere manner of speaking, like the compliments of common civility,
your humble servant, &c. And, in fact, we see merchants who
gain a livelihood by these oaths, and who are trusted without
scruple in the most important affairs.”’

What shall we think when a moralist and a judge holds lan-
guage like this? The Quakers have raised a simple affirmation
to the dignity of an oath; a magistrate degrades an oath into a
mere formality ; the oath implies no credit, given or received.
Then why take it? Why exact it? ‘For what does this farce
serve? Is religion then the meanest of objects? If it is, why
pay so dear for it? What an absurdity to maintain a clergy at
so great an expense, to preach the sacredness of oaths, and to
have judges and legislators who turn them into ridicule!


CHAPTER XIX.
Use to be made of the Power of Instruction.


InsrRuction does not form a separate subject; but this title will
enable us to bring under one head a number of detached obser-


Government ought not to do everything by force; it is only
the body which submits to that ; nothing but wisdom can extend
its empire over the mind. When a government orders, it but
gives its subjects an artificial interest to obey; when it enlightens,
it gives them an interior motive, the influence of which they
cannot evade. The best method of instruction is the simple pub-
lication of facts, but sometimes it is advisable to aid the i
in forming a judgment upon those facts. °


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 443


‘When measures of government, excellent in themsélves, ara
seen to fail through the opposition of an ignorant people, we feel
an immediate irritation against the stupidity of the multitude,
and a disinclination to trouble ourselves further with the promo-
tion of the public good. But when we come to reflect, when we
observe that this opposition was easy to be foreseen, and that
government, with the habitual pride of authority, had taken no
precautions to prepare the minds of the people, to dissipate pre-
judices, to conciliate confidence, our indignation ought to be
transferred from a people ignorant and deceived, to its disdainful
and despotic rulers.

Experience has proved, contrary to the general anticipation,
that newspapers are one of the best means of directing opinion,
of quieting its feverish movements, and of dissipating those false-
hoods and concocted rumours by which the enemies of govern-
ment aim to accomplish their cvil designs. By means of these
papers, instruction descends from the government to the people,
and remounts from the people to the government; the more
liberty the press enjoys the easier it 1s to asccrtain the current of
opinion, so as to act with certainty.

To form an adequate idea of their utility, it is necessary to go
back to the times when newspapers did not exist, and to consider
the scenes of imposture, political and religious, which were played
off with success, in countries where the people could not read.
The last of these personators of royalty was Pugatcheff. Would
it have been possible in our times to play such a part in France
or in England? Would not the imposture be unmasked as soon
as it was announced? There are offences which are not even
attempted among enlightened nations; the ease of detecting im- ;
postures prevents their existence.

There are many other snares from which the government can
protect the people, by public instructions. How many frauds
are practised in commerce, in the arts, in the price or quality of
gooda, which it would be easy to put an end to by exposing them!
How many dangerous remedies, or rather true poisons, are
impudently seld by empirics, as marvellous secrets, as to. which


444 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


it would be easy to disabuse the most credulous, by making
known their composition! How many mischievous opinions,
errors fatal or absurd, which might be extinguished at their
birth, by enlightening public opinion! When the folly of
animal magnetism, having seduced the idle coteries of Paris, be-
gan to spread throughout Europe, a report of the Academy of
Sciences, by the mere force of truth, marked Mesmer as a char-
latan, and left him no disciples except a few incurable fools,
whose admiration completed his disgrace. If you wish to cure
an ignorant and superstitious people, send as missionaries into
the cities and the country, jugglers and wonder-workers, and let
them begin with astonishing the people, by producing the most
singular phenomena, and end by enlightening them. Those who
are best acquainted with natural magic, are least likely to be
duped by magicians. I could wish that the miracle of St.
Januarius were repeated at Naples in all the public places, and
were even made a plaything for children.

The principal sort of instruction which governments owe to
the people, is knowledge of the laws. How can we require laws
to be obeyed, when they are not even known? How can they
be known, unless they are published under the simplest forms, 80
that each individual may read for himself, the enactments which
are to regulate his conduct ?

The legislator may exercise an influence over public opinion,
by causing to be compiled a body of political morals, analogous
to the body of laws, and divided in the same manner into a
general and particular codes. The most delicate questions rela-
five to each profession might be explained. It would not be
necessary to confine the work to mere didactic lessons; by inter-
mingling a judicious selection of historical anecdotes, it might
be made a book of amusement for persons of all ages.

To compose such moral codes, would be dictating, as it were,
the judgments of public opinion upon these different questions
of politics and morals. In the same spirit, there might be added
to these moral eodes a list of popular prejudices, to which should
be subjoined the considerations which prove their fallacy.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 445


If sovereign power has ever appeared before men with dignity,
it was in the Jnstructions, published by Catherine II., for a code
of laws. Let us consider for a moment this unique example,
distinct from the remembrance of an ambitious reign. It is
impossible to see without admiration a woman descending from
the car of victory to civilize so many semi-barbarous tribes, and
to offer them the finest maxims of philosophy, sanctioned by the
approval of an empress. Superior to the vanity of composing
this work herself, she borrowed the best that could be found in
the writings of the wise men of the age ; but by adding the weight
of her authority, she lent to those writers more than she bor-
rowed. She seemed to say to her subjects, “‘ You owe me the
more confidence, since I have taken into my council the ablest
men of the times; andI do not fear to call upon those masters of
truth and virtue to hold me up to shame before the face of the
world, if I dare to act unworthily.” In the same spirit she
divided among her courtiers the labours of legislation ; and if she
was often in contradiction with herself, like Tiberius, who was
weary of the servitude of the senate, and yet would have
punished an effort at liberty, still these solemn engagements,
contracted in the face of the whole world, were like limits
voluntarily put to her power, which she seldom dared to tran-
scend.


CHAPTER XX.
Use to be made of the Power of Education.


Epvucation may be considered as the government of a domestic
magistrate.

The analogies between a family and a state are of a nature to
strike at the first glance; but the differences are not less obvious,
and are equally deserving of attention.

Ist. Domestic government needs to be more active, more
vigilant, more occupied with details, than civil government.
Without an attention always vigilant families could not. subsist.


446 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


Civil authority cannot do better than to trust the management of
personal interests to the prudence of individuals who always
understand them better than the magistrate; but the head of a
family must be constantly aiding the 1 inexperience of those sub-
“mitted to his care.

Here it is that the censorship can be exercised, —a policy which
we have condemned in civil government. The domestic governor
may protect those subject to his authority from knowledge which
may do them harm; he can watch over their social intercourse
and their studies; he can accelerate or retard the progress of
their enlightenment, according to circumstances.

2nd. This continual exercise of power, which would be liable
to so many abuses in a state, is much less so in a family; for the
father and mother have a natural affection for their children, far
stronger than that of the civil magistrate for those whom he
governs. On their part, indulgence is generally the prompting
of nature, while severity is the effect of reflection.

3rd. Domestic government can employ punishments in many
cases where the civil authority cannot ; for the head of a family
deals with individuals, while the legislator can only act upon
classes. The one proceeds upon certainties, the other upon pre-
sumptions. -A certain astronomer may be capable, perhaps, of
resolving the problem of longitude, but can the civil magistrate
know it? Can he command this discovery, and punish him for
not making it? But a particular instructor will be likely to
know whether a given problem of elementary geometry is level
to the capacity of his pupil. Though idleness assume the mask
of incapacity, the instructor will hardly be deceived; in such
cases the magistrate is sure to be deceived.

It is the same with most of the vices. The public siaeiateale
cannot repress them, because if he attempted it he must have
Spies in every family. The private magistrate, having under his
eye and his immediate control those with whose conduct he is
charged, can arrest the beginning of those vices, of which the
laws can punish only the last excesses.

. 4th, It is especially as regards the pawer of rewarding, that


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE, 447


these two governments differ, All the amusements, all the wants
of the young, may be made to assume a remuneratory character
by granting them on certain conditions, after certain performances.
In the Isle of Minorca, the dinners of the boys depended upon
their skill in shooting the bow ; and the honour of eating at the
public table was the price allotted at Lacedemon to the warlike
virtucs of the young. No civil government is rich enough to do
much by rewards; no father is so poor as not to possess an inex-
haustible fund of them.

The legislator ought nevertheless to pay particular attention to
youth, that season of lively and durable impressions, in order to
direct the course of the inclinations towards those tastes most
conformable to the public interest.

In Russia, means as powerful, as they are well devised, have
been employed to engage the young nobility to enter into the
army. The good effects that have resulted in consequence, to
the military service, are even less than those which have been
felt in a civil point of view. The young nobles are accustomed
to order, to vigilance, to subordination. They are obliged to
quit their estates, where they exercise a corrupting dominion’
over slaves, and to show themselves on a greater theatre, where
they have equals and superiors. The necessity of mingling with
others produces the desire of pleasing; the mixture of men of
different races diminishes reciprocal prejudice, and the pride of
birth is compelled to bend before the gradations of the service.
An unlimited domestic despotism such as that of Russia was,
cannot but be improved by being changed into a military govern-
ment, which has its limits. In the actual circumstances of that
empire, it would have been difficult to find a general means of
education which would have answered more useful purposes.

But when education is considered as an indirect means of pre-
venting offences, an essential reform is evidently needed. The
_class most neglected ought to become the principal object of its
“cares. The less the parents are capable of discharging their duty.
in this respect, the more necessary it is that the government
should make up for their deficiencies. Not only should attention


448 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


be given to orphans left in indigence, but also to children whose
parents are not ofa character to be trusted; to those who have
already committed some offence; and to those who, being
destitute of protectors and resources, are a prey to all the seduc-
tions of want. These classes, so absolutely neglected in the
greater number of states, become, in consequence, the pupils of
crime.

A man of rare beneficence, the Chevalier Paulet, created at
Paris an institution for more than two hundred children whom
he took from among the very poorest class. His plan rested upon
four principles: To offer the pupils many objects of study and of
labour, and to leave them the greatest possible latitude of taste ;
to employ them in mutual instruction, by offering to the scholar,
as the highest reward of proficiency, the honour of becoming in
his turn a master; to employ them in all the domestic services of
the establishment, for the double purpose of instruction and
economy; to govern them by means of themselves, by putting
each pupil under the inspection of an older one, in a way to
render them securities for each other. In this establishment,
everything breathed an appearance of freedom and gaiety; there
was no punishment except compulsive idleness, and a change of
dress. The more advanced pupils were as much interested in
the general success as the founder himself; and the whole was
going on prosperously, when the revolution, amid the general
overthrow, swallowed up also this little colony.

A greater extent might be given to institutions of this kind,
and their expensiveness might be diminished, either by teaching
a great number of trades, or by retaining the pupils till the age
of eighteen or twenty, so that their labour might contribute to
discharge the expense of their education, and to aid in that of
the younger pupils. Schools upon this plan, instead of being an
expense to the state, might become lucrative enterprises. But


* The common punishments were called, one the little idleness, and the .
other the great idleness, What could be more ingenious than to give to
punishments the very name and character of avice? It is obvious what
a‘salutary association of ideas this was calculated to produce.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 442


the pupils themselves should be interested in the labour, b
allowing them a fair rate of wages, to be paid them at leaving
the school.


CHAPTER XXI.
General Precautions against Abuses of Authority.


Let us consider some of the means which a government mav
employ to prevent abuses of authority on the part of those to
whom it intrusts portions of its power.

Constitutional law has its direct and its indirect legislation.
Its direct legislation consists in the establishment of certain
magistracies, among which all the political power is divided.
That subject is not included in this treatise. Its indirect legis-
lation consists in general precautions, of which the object is to
prevent misconduct, incapacity, or malversations among those who
hold principal or subordinate stations in the administration.

A complete enumeration of these indirect means will not be
attempted. It will be enough to direct attention towards this
object, and thus to restrain the enthusiasm of certain political
writers, who, from having got sight of one or two of these means,
have flattered themselves that they have perfected a science, of
which, in fact, they have hardly drawn the outlines.

I. Zhe Dwision of Power into different Branches.—Every divi-
sion of power is a refinement suggested by experience. The most
natural plan, the first that presents itself, is to place the whole
administration in the hands of a single person. Command upon
one side and obedience upon the other is a kind of contract of
which the terms are easily arranged, when he who is to govern
has no associate. Among all the nations of the East, the fabric
of government has continued to preserve its primitive structure.
The monarchic power descends without division, stage by stage,
from the highest to the lowest, from the great Mogul to the
simple Havildar.

When the King of Siam heard the Dutch Ambassador speak

6G.


450 " PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


of an aristocratic government, he burst into laughter at the idea
of such an absurdity. :

It is enough merely to mention this principal means. To exa-
mine into how many branches the government ought to be
divided, and which of all the possible divisions is the one that
merits the preference, would be to compose a treatise upon con-
stitutional law. I shall only remark that this division ought not
to result in separate and independent powers; for that would
bring on a state of anarchy. Some supreme authority, superior
to all, must always be acknowledged, which does not receive
law, but which gives it, and which has power over the very rules
that regulate its own mode of action.

II. The Distribution of particular Branches of Power among
several Co-participators.—In the provinces of Russia, previous to
the regulations of Catherine IIJ., all the different branches of
power—military, fiscal, and judicial—were intrusted to a single
body, a single council. So far, the constitution of these subordi-
nate governments sufficiently resembled the form of Oriental dea-
potism; but the power of the governor was somewhat limited by
the powers of the council, and in this respect the form approached
to that of an aristocracy. At present, the judicial power is
separated into many branches, and each branch is divided among
many judges, who exercise their functions conjointly. A law has
‘been established of the nature of the English Habeas Corpus, for
the protection of individuals against arbitrary imprisonment, and
@ governor has no more power of doing harm than a governor of
Barbadoes or Jamaica.

The advantages of this division are principally these :—

ist. It diminishes the danger to be apprehended from precipi-
tation.

2nd. It diminishes the danger to be apprehended from ignorance.

3rd. It diminishes the danger to be apprehended from want of
probity.

This last advantage, however, can hardly be attained, except
where the number of co-participators is very great,—so great
thet it will be difficult to separate the interests of the majority of
them from the interests of the people at large.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 451


The division of powers has also disadvantages, since it intro-
duces delays and foments disputes which may produce the disso-
lution of the established government. The evil of delays may be
obviated by graduating the division, according as the functions to
which it is applied admit of more or less deliberation. In this
point of view, the legislative power and the military power form
the two extremes; the first admitting the greatest deliberation,
the second demanding the greatest celerity. As to the dissolu-
tion of the government, that is an evil only upon one or the other
of two suppositions:—Ist, That the new government is worse
than the old one; or 2nd, That the transition from one to the
other is marked by calamities and civil wars. |

The greatest danger arising from plurality, whether in a tri-
bunal or an administrative council, is the diminution of responsi-
bility. A numerous body can count upon a sort of deference on
the part of the public, and allows itself to commit wrongs which
an individual administrator would not dare to perpetrate. Where
so many share in the act, the odium of it is shifted from one to
another, and rests nowhere. All didit; no one avowsit. If
the censure of the public is excited, the more numerous the cen-
sured body is, the more it fortifies itself against external opinion,
the more it tends to form a state within a state, a little com-
munity which has its own particular spirit, and which protects
by its applauses those of its members who encounter the reproaches
of the public.

Untty in all cases in which it is possible—that is, in all cases
which do not demand a concentration of knowledge and a concur-
rence of wills, as in a legislative body—unity is advantageous,
because it puts the whole responsibility, whether legal or moral,
upon the head of an individual. He does not share the honour
of his actions with anybody, and he bears the whole burden of
the blame; he sees himself alone against all, having no other
support but the integrity of his conduct, no other defence but the
general esteem. Though he were not honest by inclination, he
would become so, as it were, in spite of himself, by means of a
position in which his interest is inseparable from his duty.

Besides, unity in subordinate employments is a certain means


452 TRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE,


of discovering in a short time the real capacity of individuals, A
narrow and unsound judgment may conceal itself a long while,
amid a numerous company ; butif it acts alone, and upon a public
theatre, its insufficiency is soon unmasked. Men of moderate or
small talents, always ready to solicit places where they can take
refuge under the wing of some able assistant, would be afraid to
expose themselves to a dangerous career, in which they would
soon betray their want of ability.

But there are some cases in which it is possible to unite the
advantages of a collective body with the responsibility of a single
person.

In subordinate councils, there is always an individual who pre-
sides, and upon whom the principal confidence rests. Let him
have associates, in order that he may profit by their advice, and
that there may be witnesses against him, in case he abuses his
trust. But these purposes do not require that his associates
should be equal to him in authority, nor even that they should
have the right of voting. Itis only necessary that the chief
should be obliged to communicate to them all that he intends to
do, and that each councillor should make a declaration in writing
touching each administrative act, expressing an approval of it or
a disapproval. This communication ought generally to take
place before the issue of orders for carrying his designs into exe-
cution; but in those cases which require an extraordinary
despatch, it would be enough were it made immediately after.
‘Would not such an arrangement obviate, in general, the danger
of dissensions and delays ?

Ill. Putting the Power of Removal into different hands from the
Power of Appointment.—This idea is borrowed from an ingenious
pamphlet published in America, in 1778,* by a member of the
convention appointed to examine the form of government pro-
posed for the state of Massachusetts.

Our pride is interested in not condemning a man of our own
choice. Independently of affection, a superior will be less die
posed to hear complaints against an officer of his own appoint-
ment, than against an indifferent person, and will have a pre-


® Reprinted in Almon's Remembrancer, No. 84, p. 228.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 4538


judice of self-love in his favour. This considération will help to
explain those abuses of power, so common in monarchies, where
a subaltern is intrusted with great authority, of which he is not
obliged to render any account, except to the very person who gave
him his office.

In popular elections, the part which each individual has in the
nomination of a magistrate, is so very trifling, that this kind of
illusion does not exist.

In England, the choice of ministers belongs to the king; but
the parliament has the actual right of dismission, whenever a
majority votes against them. However, this is only an indirect
application of the principle.

IV. Not permitting Governors to remain along time in the same
Districts.—This principle has a particular application to important
commands in distant provinces, and especially those detached from
the body of the empire.

A governor armed with great power, if he is allowed time for
it, may attempt to establish his independence. The longer he
remains in office, the more can he strengthen himself by creating a
party of his own, or by uniting himself to one of the parties which
existed before him. Thence originates oppression towards some,
and partiality towards others. And though he has no party, he
may be guilty of a thousand abuses of authority, without any one
daring to complain to the sovereign. The duration of his power
gives birth to fears or hopes, both of which equally favour him.
He makes himself creatures, who look up to him as the sole dis-
tributor of favours; while those who suffer, fear to suffer more if
they offend a ruler who is likely to retain his power for a long
time.

The disadvantage of rapid changes consists in removing a man
from his employment so soon as he has acquired the knowledge
and experience of affairs. New men are liable to commit faults of
ignorance.- This inconvenience would be palliated by the esta-
dlishment of a subordinate and permanent council, which should
keep up the course and routine of affairs. What you gain is the
diminution of a power, which may be turned against yourself; what
you risk is a diminution in the skill with which the office is


sa PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


executed. There is no parity between these dangers, when revolt
is the evil apprehended.

To avoid giving umbrage to individuals, this arrangement ought
to be permanent. The change, at regular periods, should be
regarded as fixed and necessary. If it were limited to particular
cases, it might serve to provoke the evil which it is intended to
prevent.

The danger of revolt on the part of provincial governors is
unknown except in feeble and badly constituted governments.
In the Roman empire, from Cesar down to Augustulus, we see
a constant succession of rebellious governors and generals. This
was not owing to any neglect of the precaution here proposed, for
new appointments were frequent; but because the application of
it was not judicious, or because there was a want of vigilance
and firmness, or to some other cause of a similar kind.

The want of a permanent arrangement of this sort, is plainly
the cause of the continual revolutions to which the Turkish
empire is subject; and nothing more evidently shows the stu-
pidity of that barbarous court.

_ if there is any European government which ought to adopt
this policy, it is Spain in her American, and England in her East
Indian establishments.

In the more civilized states of Christendom, nothing is more
uncommon than the revolt of a governor. That of Prince
Gagarin, Governor of Siberia, under Peter I., is, I believe, the
only example that can be cited in the two last centuries, and that
happened in an empire which had not yet lost its Asiatic cha-
racter. The revolutions which have broken out in Europe have
originated from a more powerful and a more respectable principle,
opinions, public feeling, the love of liberty.*

V. Renowal of the Governing Bodies by Rotation.—The reasons
for not allowing a provincial governor to remain a long time in
office, all apply with still more force to a council or a directory.
Make them permanent, and if they agree among themselves with

* This principle has been judiciously adopted as respects the sit-
pendiary magistrates in the British West Indies. They remain in one
district only for a limited time.» Translator.


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 455


respect tothe generality of their measures, it is probable that
among those measures there will be many of which the object i¢
to promote their own interest or that of their friends, at the
expense of the community. If they disagree, and are afterwards
reconciled, it is probable that the public will pay the cost of
their reconciliation. On the other hand, if a certain number are
dismissed at regular periods, if there are abuses, you have a
chance to see them reformed by the new comers, before they have
been long enough in office to be corrupted by their associates.
A part should always be left, so that the course of affairs may
go on without interruption. Ought the part reserved to bs
larger or smaller than the part renewed? If it is larger, there
is reason to fear that the old system of corruption may be still
kept up in full vigour; if it is smaller, there is reason to fear
that a good system of administration may be embarrassed by ca-
pricious innovations. However this may be, it is plain that the
mere right of renewal will hardly ever answer its purpose, espe-
cially if the power of filling vacancies belongs to the body itself.
This right would never be exercised, except upon extraordinary
" occasions.

Ought those whose places are vacated to be ineligible for a
time or for ever? If it is only for a time, it will presently
happen that at the end of that time they will always be re-
elected, and the council will become a close body. If they-are
never re-eligible, the community will be deprived of the talents
and experience of its ablest servants. All things considered, this
means seems to be only an imperfect substitute for others which
will be presently mentioned, and especially for publicity in all
proceedings and accounts.

The arrangement of rotation was long ago adopted in England
by the great companies of commerce, and some years since it
* was introduced into the direction of the East India Company.

This political view is not the only one which rotation in office
has been intended to answer. It has been often introduced for
the mere object of producing a more equal distribution of the
privileges which appertain to office. —

Harrington’s celebrated treatise on politics, entitled Ocsana


th,


456 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


depends almost entirely upon a system of rotation among the
members of the government. Harrington was a man of talent,
but one who did not grasp the whole science of government.
Having scized a single idea he developed it, applied it to every-
thing, and saw nothing beyond it. So it is in medicine: the less
the extent of the art is perceived the more one is inclined to
believe in an clixir of life, a universal remedy, a marvellous
secret. Classification is useful in order to extend the attention
successively to every means.

VI. The Reception of Secret Informations.—Everybody knows
that at Venice secret informations were admitted. There were
boxes placed here and there around the palace of St. Mark, the
contents of which were regularly examined by the state inqui-
sitors. It is pretended that in consequence of these anonymous
accusations persons were scized, imprisoned, sent into exile, or
even punished with death without any further proof. If this be
true, then there was nothing more salutary or more reasonable
than the first part of the institution, nothing more pernicious
and abominable than the second. The arbitrary tribunal of the
inquisitors has cast a merited disgrace upon the Venetian govern-
ment, which must have been wise in other respects, since it
maintaincd itself for so long a time in a state of tranquillity and
prosperity.

It is a great misfortune that a good institution should. have
been connected with a bad one; for all minds have not the
prismatic power of disuniting good from evil. "Where would be
the harm of receiving secret informations, even though they were
anonymous in the first instance? Certainly one hair of a single
head ought not to be touched upon the mere ground of a secret
information, nor should the slightest inquietude be given to a
single individual; but, with this restriction, why forego the
advantage of such informations? The magistrate can judge
whether the object denounced merits his attention. If it does
not merit it he need do nothing in the matter. But, if it seems
to be of importance, let him give notice to the informer to pre-
sent himself in person. After examining the facts, if the in-
former is found to be mistaken, he can be dismissed with praise


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 457


for his good intentions, and his name may be kept secret. If the
informer has brought a charge wilfully and maliciously false, his
name and his accusation ought to be communicated to the party
accused. If the denunciation is well founded, let a judicial pro-
secution be commenced, and let the informer be obliged to appear
and give his evidence in public.

If it be asked upon what principle such an institution can be
useful, the answer is, precisely on the principle of the vote by ballot.
In the course of the prosecution the defendant ought certainly to
be informed what witnesses will testify against him; but where
is the necessity of his knowing it before the prosecution is begun ?
In that case a witness who may have something to fear on the
part of the defendant, would not be willing to expose himself to
a certain inconvenience for the chance of rendering a doubtful
service to the public. Hence it is that offences so frequently
remain unpunished, because no one is willing to make personal
enemies without any certainty of serving the public.

I have enumerated this means under the head of abuses of
authority, because it is against men in place that its efficacy is
most marked; since, in that case, the supposed power of the delin-
quent is an additional weight in the balance of dissuasive motives.

The resolution to receive secret and even anonymous informa-
tions would be good for nothing, unless it were publicly known;
but once known, the fear of these informations would soon
render the occasions of them more rare, and would diminish
their number. And upon whom would the fear fall? Only
upon the guilty, and upon those who were plotting to become
so; for with publicity of procedure, innocence could never
-be in danger; and the malice of false accusers would be con-
founded and punished.

VII. The Right of Petitioning the Supreme Authority.—
Though informations reached only the minister, they would have
their use; but to insure their utility, it is essential that they
should come to the knowledge of the sovereign.

The great Frederic received letters, like a private individual,
from the meanest of his subjects, and the answer was often
written with tits own hand. This fact would be incredible were


458 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


'


it not perfectly well attested. Butwe are not to conclude from
this example that the same thing is possible in all governments.

In England, every one has a right to present a petition to the
king; but the fate of these petitions, handed the same moment
toa gentlemen in waiting, has become proverbial; they serve the
maids of honour for hait-papers. It may well be imagined, after
this, that these petitions arc not very frequent; but neither arc
they very necessary in a country where the subject is protected
by laws which do not depend upon the sovereign. There are
other means for a private man to obtain justice ; there are other
channels of information for the prince. It isin absolute monar-
chies that it is essential to maintain a communication, constantly
open, between the subjects and the monarch; it is necessary
that the subject may be sure of protection; it is necessary to
assure the monarch against being duped by his ministers.

The people may be called canatlle, populace, or what you will;
but the prince who refuses to hear the lowest individual of that
populace, so far from augmenting his power by doing so, in fact
diminishes it. From that moment he loses the capacity of self-
direction, and becomes an instrument in the hands of those who
call themselves his servants. He may imagine that he does as
he pleases, that he determines for himself; but in fact, it is they
who determine for him; for to determine all the causes of a
man’s actions, is to determine all his actions. He who does not
see and does not understand, except as it pleases those who sur-
round him, is subject to all the impulses which they choose to give.

To put an unlimited confidence in his ministers, is ta put an
unlimited confidence in those who have the greatest interest
to abuse it, and the greatest facility for doing so.

As to the minister himself, the more honest he is, the less will
he need such a confidence; and it may be affirmed without
paradox, that the more he deserves it, the less he will desire to
possess it.

VINL. Liberty of the Press.—Hear advice from every ‘quarter,
and you may be the better for it; you cannot be the worse.
Such is the decision of simple good sense. ‘To ‘establish the
freedom, of the press, is to admit the advice of everybody. I¢ is


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 459


true that upon most occasions the public judgment is heard, not
before the measure is determined upon, but only after it is exe-
cuted. Still, this judgment is always useful as regards all’
measures of legislation which can be rectified, and all executive
acts which are of a nature to be repeated. The best advice given
toa minister in a private manner may be thrown away; but good
advice given to the public, if it does not avail at one time, may
avail at another; if it does not avail to-day, it may avail to-
morrow; if it is not presented in a becoming shape, it may re-
ceive from another hand ornaments that will make it attractive.
Instruction is a seed which requires to be planted in a great
variety of soils, and to be cultivated with patience, because its
fruits are often a long time in ripening.

Freedom of the press is much more powerful than the right of
petition in freeing the sovereign from the control of favourites.
Whatever may be his discernment in the choice of his ministers,
he can only select from a small number of candidates, whom the
chances of birth and fortune present to his choice. It may be
reasonably supposed that there are other men more enlightened
than these; and the greater power he attains of knowing such
men, the more he increases his power and his liberty of selection.

But opinions may be given with insolence and passion ; instead
of limiting itself to the examination of measures, criticism is ex-
tended to persons. And in fact, how much address is necessary
to keep these two things distinct? How can a measure be cen-
sured without attacking, to a certain extent, the judgment.or the
probity of its author? This is the stumbling-block ; this is the
reason why the liberty of the press is as uncommon as its advan-
tages are manifest. All the fears of self-love are against it. Yet
Joseph IT. and Frederic II. had the magnanimity to establish
it. It exists in Sweden; it exists in England; it might exist
everywhere, with such modifications as would prevent its greatest
abuses.

If, according to the usages of the government, or owing to
particular circumstances, the sovereign’ cannot admit a free
examination of his administrative acts, he ought at least to
permit the examination of the laws. Though he claims for


460 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


\


himself the privilege of infallibility, he need not extend it ts
his predecessors. If he is so jealous of the supreme power as ta
extort respect for everything that has been touched by the royal
sceptre, he might at least allow a free discussion of merely
ecientific subjects, such as principles of law, of procedure, and of
subaltern administration.

Even granting that the liberty of the press may have incon-
veniences, as respects pamphlets and handbills which may be
scattered among the people, and addressed to the ignorant part of
a nation as well as to the enlightened, the same reason cannot
apply to serious and lengthy works, to books which can have but
a certain class of readers, and which, as they are unable to pro-
duce an immediate effect, always afford opportunity for preparing
an antidote.

Under the old French regime, it was enough that a book of
moral science was printed at Paris, to inspire a prejudice against
it. The Instructions of the Empress of Russia to the Assembly
of Deputies, respecting the compilation of a code of laws, were
prohibited in France. The style and the sentiments of that
performance appeared too popular to be tolerated in the French
monarchy.

It is true that in France, as elsewhere, negligence and incon-
sistency palliated the evils of despotism. A foreign title served
asa passport to genius. The rigour of the censorship only availed
to transfer the trade in books to the bordering etates, and to render
more bitter the satire it was intended to suppress.

IX. Publication of the Reasons and Facts on which the Laws
and Administrative Acts are founded.—This is a necessary part
of a generous and magnanimous policy, and an indispensable
attendant upon the liberty of the press. The freedom of the
press is a debt which rulers owe to the people; to publish the
reasons of their laws and acts is a debt they owe to themselves.
If the government disdains to inform the nation of its motives
upon important occasions, it thereby announces that it chooses to
owe everything to force, and that it counts as nothing the opinions
of its subjects.

The partisan of arbitrary power will not agree to this, He is


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 461


unwilling to enlighten the people, while he despises them because
they are not enlightened. ‘You are not capable of judging, he
says, because you are ignorant ; and we will keep you ignorant,
that you may not be capable of judging. This is the endless
circle in which he moves. What is the consequence of this
vulgar policy? Discontent spreads little by little, till at length
it becomes general, founded sometimes upon false and exaggerated
imputations, which gain credit because they are not examined
and discussed. The minister complains of the injustice of the
public, without remembering that he has not afforded to it the
means to be just, and that a false interpretation of his conduct is
@ necessary consequence of the mystery with which it is covered.
To be systematic and consistent, there are but two ways of acting
with men,—absolute secrecy, or perfect frankness: the complete
exclusion of the people from the knowledge of affairs, or making
that knowledge as thorough as possible; preventing them from
forming any judgment, or putting them into a condition to form
the most enlightened judgment; to treat them like children, or
to treat them like men. Between these two plans, a choice must
be made.

The first of these plans was followed by the priests in ancient
Egypt, by the Brahmins in Hindostan, by the Jesuits in Paraguay.
The second is established by practice in England, and by law in
the United States of America. The greater part of European
governments float incessantly between one and the other, without
daring to attach themselves exclusively to either; and they are
constantly in contradiction with themselves, from a desire to have
industrious and enlightened subjects, and from a fear of encou-
raging a spirit of examination and discussion.

In many branches of administration it would be useless, and it
might be dangerous, to publish the reasons of measures before-
hand. But those cases ought to be distinguished in which it is
necessary to enlighten public opinion, to prevent it from being
misled. In matters of legislation, this principle is always appli-
cable. It may be laid down asa general rule that a law ought
never to be made without some reason expressed or understood.
For what is a good law but a law for which good reasons can be


462, PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


given? Of course, there must have been some reason, good or
bad, for making it, since there is no effect without a cause. But
oblige 2 minister to give his reasons, and he will be ashamed not
to have good ones to give; he will be ashamed to offer you false
coin if obliged to present a touch-stone ene with it, by which
it can be tried.

This is a means by which a sovereign may continue to reign
after death. If there are good reasons for his laws, he gives them
a support which cannot fail. His successors will be obliged to
maintain them through a feeling of self-respect ; and the more
good he has done in his lifetime, the more will he contribute to
the happiness of posterity.

X. To forbid all Arbitrary Proceedings.— Clotaire made a
law,” says Montesquieu, “that no person accused of crime should
be condemned without a hearing; a law which indicates a con-
trary practice in some particular case, or among some barbarous
people.” — Spirit of Laws, chap. xii.

Montesquieu did not dare totell the whole. Did he write that
passage without recollecting the Lettres de Cachet, and the admini-
stration of the police, such as it existed in histimes? A letive de
cachet may be defined, an order to punish without proof for an
act forbidden by no law.

It was in France and Venice that this abuse was carried to the
highest pitch. These two governments, mild in other respects,
gained themselves a very bad reputation by this piece of folly.
They exposed themselves to imputations which were often un-
founded, and to the re-action of alarm: for there are precautions
which, by the terror they inspire, produce the very danger they
aim to prevent. Behave well, it is said, and the government
will not be your enemy. Perhaps so; but how can I be certain
of it? Iam hated by the minister, or by his valet, or by his
valet’s valet. IfI am not to-day, I may be to-morrow, or some-
body else may be, and I may be taken for that somebody elaa
It is not my conduct upon which my safety ‘depends; it is the
opinion of my conduct entertained by men more powerful than I.
Under Louis XV., lettres de cachet were an article of trade, sold
by ministers and mistresses to gratify private hatreds. If that


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 468


could happen under a government which had the reputation of
mildness, what fruits of such a lawmight we expect in less civilized
countries? If justice and humanity have not influence enough,
the pride of governments, at least, ought to induce them to abolish
such remnants of barbarity.

Such expedients may be palmed off under the cover of maxims
of state; but lately this pretext has lost its magic. The first
thought they suggest is the idea of the incapacity and weakness
of those who employ them. If you dared to hear what this pri-
soner has to say, you would not shut his mouth; if you compel
him to be silent, it is a proof that you fear him.

XI. The Exercise of Power according to certain Rules and For-
malities.—This is another regulation with respect to subordinate
officers, not less applicable to absolute monarchies than to mixed
governments. If the sovereign thinks it for his interest to be
independent of the laws, there is no reason for extending the
same independence to all his agents.

The laws which limit subordinate officers in the exercise of
their power, may be divided into two classes: to the first class
belong those laws which limit the cases in which the exercise of .
such or such a power is permitted; to the second, those which
determine the formalities according to which its exercise is to be
regulated. These cases and these formalities ought to be speci-
fically enumerated in the law; and this being done, the citizens
ought to be informed that these are the cases, and the only cases,
in which their security, their liberty, their property, or theiy
honour can be brought into danger. Thus, the first law atthe very
beginning of a code ought to be a general law in behalf of liberty,
2, law which restrains delegated powers, and limits their exercise to
such or such particular occasions, for such or such specific causes.

Such was the intention of Magna Charta, and such would have
been its effect, but for the unlucky want of precision in some of its
expressions, as ler terre, &c.; for all was made to depend upon an
imaginary law, which restored all to uncertainty, since those in
search of that,law always referred back to the customs of ancient
times, and sought examples and authorities among the very abuses
which it was intended to prevent.


464 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


XII. The Establishment of the Right of Association, that +s,
of Assemblies of the Citizens to express their sentiments and their
wishes upon Public Measures.—Among the rights which a people
ought to reserve, when they establish a government, this is the
chief, since it is the foundation of all the rest. Yet it is hardly
necessary to mention it here, for to the people who possess it, it
needs no recommendation, and those who possess it not, have but
slight hope of obtaining it,—for what can induce their govern-
ments ever to grant it ?

At the first view, this right of association seems incompatible
with government; and it is admitted that to establish this right
as a means of keeping the government under, would be absurd
and contradictory. But the intention is very different. If the
smallest act of violence is committed by one or more members of
the association, punish it asif it had been committed by any other
individual. If you perceive that you are not powerful enough to
punish it, it is a proof that the association has made a progress
it could not have made without a just cause; so that in fact it is
either not an evil, or a necessary evil. Itis taken for granted
that you have a public force, an authority organized in all its
parts; if, then, these associations have become strong enough to
intimidate you, in the midst of all your regular means of power,
if no associations have been formed upon your side, yours, who
have so many means at your command to obtain a superiority in
that respect,—is it not an infallible sign that the calm and con-
siderate judgment of the nation is against you? This being granted,
what reason can be given for keeping the government in the same
state,—for not satisfying the public wish? I know of none.
Doubtless, a nation, since it is composed of men, does not possess
the privilege of infallibility ; a nation may be deceived, as well
as its rulers, as to ita true interests; nothing is more certain; but
if a great majority of the nation is seen upon one side, and its
government upon the other, may it not be presumed, in the first
instance, that the general discontent is well founded ?

Far from being a cause of insurrection, I look upon these asso-
ciations as one of the most powerful means of preventing that evil.
Insurrections are the convulsions of weakness, finding strength in


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 465


@ momentary despair. They are the efforts of men who are not
allowed to express their feelings, or whose projects could not
succeed if they were known. Plots which are in opposition to
the general sentiment of the people can only succeed by surprise
and by violence. Those who plan them cannot hope for success,
except by forcible means. But those who believe that the people
are on their side, those who flatter themselves that the general
opinion will secure their triumph, why should they use violence ?
Why expose themselves to manifest danger without advantage ?
TI am persuaded that men who had a perfect liberty of association,
and who could exercise it under protection of the laws, would
never have recourse to insurrection, except in those rare and
unfortunate cases in which rebellion has become necessary; and
whether associations be permitted or forbidden, open and general
rebellions never will take place until they are necessary.

The associations which were openly entered into in Ireland in
1780 did not produce any evil, and even served to maintain tran-
quillity and security, though that country, scarce semi-civilized,
was distracted by all the possible causes of a civil war.

I even believe that associations might be permitted, and might
become one of the principal means of government, in the most
absolute monarchies. This kind of states are more troubled than
others byrisings and revolts. Everything is done by sudden move-
ments. Associations would prevent these disorders. If the sub-
jects of the Roman Empire had been in the habit of combining
together, the empire and the lives ofthe emperors would not have
been constantly put up at auction by the Pretorian Guards.

For the rest, I know very well that slaves cannot be allowed to
assemble. Too much injustice has been done them not to have
everything to fear from their ignorance or theirresentment. It is
not in the American islands, it is not in Mexico, that the people
can be armed and allowed to form associations; but there are
states in Europe in which this strong and generous policy might
be safely adopted.

I admit that there is a degree of ignorance which renders asso-
ciations dangerous. This proves that ignorance is a great evil ; it
does not prove that associations are not a great good. Besides, the


466 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


measure itself may operate as an antidote against its own bad effects,
In proportion as an association extends, the foundation on which it
rests is examined, the public is enlightened, and the government
may avail itself of all these means to spread the knowledge of facts
and to dissipate errors. Liberty and instruction go hand in hand ;
liberty facilitates the progress of knowledge, and knowledge
restrains the extravagancies of liberty.

I do not see why the establishment of this right need give dis-
quiet to governments. There is no government which does not
fear the people ; which does not think it necessary to consult their
will, and to accommodate itself to their opinions; and it would
seem that the most despotic are the most timid. What sultan is
so tranquil, so secure in the exercise of his power, as a British
king? The janissaries and the populace inspire the same fear in
the Seraglio that the Seraglio inspires among the janissaries and
the populace. At London, the voice of the people makes itself
be heard by lawful assemblages; at Constantinople, it bursts
forth in outrage. At London, the people express their feelings
in petitions; and at Constantinople by setting the city on fire.

Poland, perhaps, may be brought forward as an objection—a
country in which associations seem to have produced so many
evils. But that is a mistake. The Polish associations sprung
from anarchy, they did not produce it. Besides, in speaking of
this means as a restraint upon government, there is supposed to
be a government established; it is offered as a remedy, not as
an independent means.

It may even be added, that in states where this right exists,
circumstances may occur in which it will be well,—not to
auspend it entirely,—but to regulate its exercise. There is no
need of an absolute and inflexible rule. We have seen the
British Parliament, during the late war with France, restrain
the right of assembling, and forbid meetings for a political object
unless that object were publicly announced, and unless the meet-
ing were held under the authority of a magistrate who had
power to dissolve it; and these restrictions were imposed at the
very time that the citizens were called upon to form military
corps for the defence of the state, and whilst the government


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 467


announced the most noble confidence in the general spirit of the
nation.

Though these restraints have ceased, everything remains in
the same condition; and it might be supposed that the restric-
tive law still existed. The reason is, that a people sure of its
rights enjoys them with moderation and tranquillity. If they
are ever abused, it is because they are thought to be in danger.
The precipitation of the people is the effect of their fear.


CHAPTER XX] C.


Means of Diminishing the Bad Effect of Offences. General
Result and Coneli.stion.

Tux general result of the principles laid down in this treatise
upon the subject of penal legislation, offers a happy perspective,
and well-founded hopes of diminishinys offences and of diminish-
ing punishments. At first, this subject presents to the mind
only sombre ideas, images of suffering and of terror. But
while occupied with this class of evils pajaful feeliangs soon give
place to agreeable and consoling sentizients, when it is disco-~
vered that the human heart is not corrupted by any inherent
and incurable perversity ; that the raultiplicity of offences is
principally owing to errors cf legislation easy to be reformed ;
and that even the evil that results fiom them is susceptible of
being repaired in various ways.

This is the great yroblem of penal legislation :—1st, To re-
duce all the evil of offences, as far as possible, to that kind
which can be cured by a pecuniary compensation. 2nd, To
throw the expense of this cure upon the authors of the evil, or,
in their def,ult, upon the public. What can be done in this
respect is 7auch more than is generally imagined.

The word cwre is employed in order to present the party
injured, whether it be an individual or the community, under
the character of a patient suffering from a disorder. The com-
parison is just, and it points out the procedure best adapted to
the end in view, without the intermixture of popular passions,


468 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


and of antipathies, which ideas of crime are but too apt to
awaken, even in legislators themselves.

There are three principal sources of crime,—incontinence,
hatred, and rapacity.

The offences which spring from incontinence are hardly of a
nature to be cured by a pecuniary compensation. This remedy
may apply to certain cases of seduction, and even of conjugal
infidelity ; but it does not cure that part of the evil which
consists in dishonour and the disturbance of family peace.

The evil effects of other offences are more surely arrested in
proportion as the offences themselves are more clearly proved ;
but it is to be observed as a remarkable and important singu-
larity, that offences of incontinence only become hurtful in pro-
portion as they become known. A good citizen should look upon
it as his duty to make known an act of fraud; but he ought to
be very much on his guard how he publishes to the world the
secret faults of love. To conceal a fraud is to become a party to
it; to betray to the public an unknown weakness is to do an evil
without compensation ; a wound is inflicted upon the sensibility
of those who are exposed to shame, but the thing done is not
repaired. I count among the establishments which do honour to
the humanity of the present age, those secret asylums for accouche-
ment, those foundling hospitals which have so often prevented the
fatal effects of despair, by covering with the shade of mystery the
consequences of a momentary error. The rigour which declares
against this indulgence is founded upon the ascetic principle.

The offences which spring from hatred are often of such a kind
that a pecuniary compensation can hardly be applied to them.
Compensation, indeed, if in the case of such offences it can take
place at all, is seldom complete; it cannot undo what is done;
it cannot restore a lost limb; it cannot give back a son to his
father, a father to his family; but it may act upon the condi-
tion of the party injured; it may furnish him a portion of
good in consideration of a portion of evil; and, in regulating
the account of his prosperity, it puts an item on the favourable
side to balance an item on the other. __

With respect to these offences, it is an essential oer a


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE. 469


that they diminish from day to day, by the progress of civiliza-
tion. It is an admirable thing to observe, in the greater part of
European states, how few crimes are produced by the irascible
passions, so natural to man, and so violent in the infancy of
society. What an object of emulation for those tardy govern-
ments which have not yet reached this degree of police, and
among whom the sword of justice has not yet been able to banish
the stilettoes of revenge !

Rapacity is an inexhaustible source of offences. This is the
enemy, always active, always ready to seize every advantage,
against which a continual war must be carried on; and this war
demands a peculiar kind of tactics, the principles of which have
not been well understood.

Be indulgent to this passion so long as it confines itself to the
use of peaceable means; but be careful to deprive it of all its
unlawful gains. Grow severe towards it in proportion as it
breaks out in overt acts, and has recourse to menace and to
violence. But still reserve means for further severity in case it
is guilty of such atrocities as arson and murder. Itis in the skilful
gradation of these preventive means that the penal art consists.

Do not forget that all penal police is but a choice of evils.
Let the wise administrator of punishments always keep the
balance in his hand, and in his zeal to prevent trifling evils let
him avoid the imprtdence of himself producing great ones.
Death is almost always a remedy which is unnecessary or inef-
ficacious. It is not necessary as to those whom an inferior punish-
ment might deter from crime, or whom imprisonment might
restrain ; it has no efficacy as to those who throw themaelves, so
to speak, in its way as a refuge against despair. The policy of a
legislator who punishes every offence with death, is like the
pusillanimous terror of a child who crushes the insect he does
not dare to look at. But if the circumstances of society, if the
frequency of a great offence demand this terrible means, be
careful, without aggravating the torments of death, to give it an
aspect more dreadful than nature gives it; surround it with
mournful accessories, with emblems of crime, and the tragic
pomp of ceremony.


470 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


But be slow to believe in this necessity for death. By dis-
using it as a punishment you will prevent it as a crime; for
when men are placed between two offences it is desirable to give
them a sensible interest not to commit the greater. It is desir-
able to convert the assassin into a thief; and to give him a reason
for preferring a reparable to an irreparable offence.

That which can be repaired is comparatively trifling. Every-
thing that can be made up for by a pecuniary indemnity, may
soon become as if it had never been; for if the injured individual
always receives an equivalent compensation, the alarm caused by
the offence ceases altogether, or is reduced to its lowest term.

It is an object highly desirable that the fund of compensation
due for offences should be amassed from among the delinquents
themselves, either by being levied upon their property, or ob-
tained from the profits of their compulsory labour. If this were
so, security would be the inseparable companion of innocence ;
and grief and anguish would fall exclusively to the lot of the
disturbers of social order. Such is the point of perfection to
which we ought to aspire, though we can only expect to reach it
slowly and by continuous efforts. Itis enough for me to have
pointed out the end. The happiness of attaining it will be the
reward of persevering and enlightened governments.

This means failing, it is necessary to provide compensation
either from the public treasury, or by means of private insurances.

The imperfections of our laws, in this behalf, are very flagrant.
If an offence is committed, those who have suffered from it, either
in their persons or their fortune, are abandoned to their fate.
But society, which they have contributed to uphold, and which
has undertaken to protect them, owcs them an indemnity.

When an individual, even in his own case, prosecutes a criminal
at his own expense, he is not less the defender of the state than
he who fights its foreign enemies: the losses which he sustains
in defending the public ought to be made up for at the public
expense.

But when an innocent person has suffered by mistake of the
courts, when he has been arrested, detained, subjected to sus-
picion, condemned to all the misery of a trial and a long confine-


PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL OODE. 471


ment, it is not only for his sake, but for her own, that Justice
should grant him compensation. Established to repair injuries,
does she desire an exclusive privilege to injure ?

Governments have made no provision for any of these indem-
nities. In England, some voluntary associations have been
formed to supply this deficiency. If the institution of insurance
is good in one case, it is good in all, with the precautions neces-
sary to prevent negligence and fraud.*

The inconvenience of exposure to fraud is common to all funds,
public and private. It may diminish the advantage of insurances
without destroying it. Fruit-trees are still cultivated, though
they are hable to perish by a thousand accidents. Monta-de-
piété + have succeeded in many countries. An establishment of
this kind, set up in London in the middle of the last century,
failed at the beginning, through the dishonesty of the directors,
and this theft left a prejudice which has prevented any subse-
quent attempt of the sort. According to the same logic, it might
be concluded that vessels are bad instruments of war, because
the Royal George, whose ports had been left open, sunk at her
moorings.

Insurances against offences may havc two objects:—Ist, To
create a fund to indemnify the parties injured, in case the delin-
quent is unknown or insolvent; 2nd, To defray, in the first


* Insyrance is good, because the insurer has volunteered to sustain the
loss, considering the premium he receives as equivalent to the danger
he runs. But,this remedy is imperfect in itself, because the premium,
which is a certain loss, must always be paid, to guarantee one’s self
against a loss which is uncertain. In this point of view, it is desirable
that all unforeseen losses, which may fall upon individuals without their
fault, were made up at the publicexpense. The more numerous the con-
tributors, the less sensibly do any of them feel the contribution. I¢
is to be observed; on the other hand, that a public fand is more éxposed
to fraud, to peculation, and to loss, than a private fund. Losses which
fall directly upon individuals give all possible force to motives of vigi«
lance and economy.

+ This was the name given to & kind of banks established in different
parts of Europe, for the purpose of lending money to the poor upon
pledges, without interest.—Transloter


472 PRINCIPLES OF THE PENAL CODE.


, the expense of judicial prosecutions in favour of the
poor. This payment might be extended to cases purely civil.

But the method of these indemnities would be foreign to the
subject of this treatise; its principles have been explained else-
where, and I must here confine myself to the anmouncement of
the ‘general result of this work. It is this: That by good laws
almost all offences may be reduced to acta which can be repaired by
& simple pecuniary compensation, and thus the evil of offences may
be almost wholly done away.

At first, this result, simply announced, does not strike the ima-
gination ; it must be meditated upon before its importance can be
perceived, and its weight be felt. It is not the brilliant society
of fashion that can be interested by a formula almost arithmetic
in expression. It is offered, statesmen, to you! It is yours to
judge it!

The science of which the basis has been investigated in this
work can be pleasing only to elevated souls who are warmed
with a passion for the public good. It has no connection with
that trickish and subversive kind of politics which prides itself
upon clandestine projects, which acquires a glory composed
wholly of human misery, which sees the prosperity of one nation
in the abasement of another, and which mistakes convulsions of
government for conceptions of genius. -We are here employed
upon the greatest interests of humanity; the art of forming the
manners and the character of nations; of raising to its highest
point the security of individuals; and of deriving results equally
beneficial from different forms of government. Such is the object
of this science; frank and generous; asking only for light ; wish-
ing nothing exclusive; and finding no means so sure to perpetuate
the benefits it confers as to share them with the whole family of
nations.


