A Fragment on Government
Jeremy Bentham (F. C. Montague, ed.) (1891)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Jeremy Bentham's 'A Fragment on Government' (1776), edited with an introduction by F. C. Montague (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1891). Scan via Internet Archive (University of British Columbia). Digitizer boilerplate and library stamps trimmed from the front. This 1891 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

FRAGMENT  ON  GOVERNMENT;

BEING

An  Examination  of  what  is  delivered,

On  the  Subject  of  GOVERNMENT  in  General,

In  the  Introduction  to

Sir JVilliam  Blackstone  s  Commentaries  :

WITH A

PREFACE,

IN WHICH IS GIVEN

A  CRITIQUE  ON  THE  WORK  AT  LARGE.


Rien  ne  recule  plus  le  progres  des  connoissances,  qu'un  mauvais  ouvrage
d'un  Auteur  celebre  :  parce  qu'avant  d'instruire,  il  faut  commencer  par
detromper.

Montesquieu,  Esprit  des  Loix,  L.  XXX.  Ch.  XV.


Note  : — The  first  edition  of  the  Fragment  on  Government  was
published  in  1776  without  the  author's  name.  It  has  been
followed  in  the  present  reprint.


^


PREFACE.


The  age  we  live  in  is  a  busy  age ;  in  which  knowledge  Preface.
is  rapidly  advancing  towards  perfection. In  the  natural  Motives  of
world,  in  particular,  every  thing  teems  with  discovery  and  thepresent
with  improvement. The  most  distant  and  recondite  regions  ing.
of  the  earth  traversed  and  explored — the  all-vivifying  and
subtle  element  of  the  air  so  recently  analyzed  and  made
known  to  us, — are  striking  evidences,  were  all  others  want-
ing, of  this  pleasing  truth.

Correspondent  to  discovery  and  improvement  in  the
natural  world,  is  reformation  in  the  moral  ;  if  that  which
seems  a  common  notion  be,  indeed,  a  true  one,  that  in  the
moral  world  there  no  longer  remains  any  matter  for  dis-
covery. Perhaps,  however,  this  may  not  be  the  case :
perhaps  among  such  observations  as  would  be  best  calcu-
lated to  serve  as  grounds  for  reformation,  are  some  which,
being  observ' ations  of  matters  of  fact  hitherto  either  incom-
pletely noticed,  or  not  at  all  would,  when  produced,  appear
capable  of  bearing  the  name  of  discoveries  :  with  so  little
method  and  precision  have  the  consequences  of  this  fund-
amental axiom,  it  is  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest
mimber  that  is  the  measure  of  right  and  wrong,  been  as  yet
developed.

Be  this  as  it  may,  if  there  be  room  for  making,  and  if
there  be  use  in  publishing,  discoveries  in  the  natural  world,
surely  there  is  not  much  less  room  for  making,  nor  much


94  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface,  jggg  ygg  i^  proposing,  reformation  in  the  moral.  If  it  be  a
matter  of  importance  and  of  use  to  us  to  be  made  acquainted
with  distant  countries,  surely  it  is  not  a  matter  of  much  less
importance,  nor  of  much  less  use  to  us,  to  be  made  better
and  better  acquainted  with  the  chief  means  of  living
happily  in  our  own.  If  it  be  of  importance  and  of  use  to  us
to  know  the  principles  of  the  element  we  breathe,  surely  it
is  not  of  much  less  importance  nor  of  much  less  use  to  com-
prehend the  principles,  and  endeavour  at  the  improvement
of  those  laws,  by  which  alone  we  breathe  it  in  security.  If
to  this  endeavour  we  should  fancy  any  Author,  especially
any  Author  of  great  name,  to  he,  and  as  far  as  could  in  such
case  be  expected,  to  avow  himself  a  determined  and  per-
severing enemy,  what  should  we  say  of  him  ?  We  should
say  that  the  interests  of  reformation,  and  through  them  the
welfare  of  mankind,  were  inseparably  connected  with  the
downfall  of  his  works  :  of  a  great  part,  at  least,  of  the  esteem
and  influence,  which  these  works  might  under  whatever
title  have  acquired.

Such  an  enemy  it  has  been  my  misfortune  (and  not  mine
only)  to  see,  or  fancy  at  least  I  saw,  in  the  Author  of  the
celebrated  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England  ;  an
Author  whose  works  have  had  beyond  comparison  a  more
extensive  circulation,  have  obtained  a  greater  share  of
esteem,  of  applause,  and  consequently  of  influence  (and  that
by  a  title  on  many  grounds  so  indisputable)  than  any  other
writer  who  on  that  subject  has  ever  yet  appeared.

History  It  is  on  this  account  that  I  conceived,  some  time  since,

the  design  of  pointing  out  some  of  what  appeared  to  me  the
capital  blemishes  of  that  work,  particularly  this  grand  and
fundamental  one,  the  antipathy  to  reformation  ;  or  rather,
indeed,  of  laying  open  and  exposing  the  universal  inaccuracy
and  confusion  which  seemed  to  my  apprehension  to  pervade
the  whole.  For,  indeed,  such  an  ungenerous  antipathy
seemed  of  itself  enough  to  promise  a  general  vein  of  obscure
and  crooked  reasoning,  from  whence  no  clear  and  sterling


of  it.


Preface.  95

knowledge  could  be  derived ;  so  intimate  is  the  connexion Preface.
between  some  of  the  gifts  of  the  understanding,  and  some
of  the  affections  of  the  heart.

It  is  in  this  view  then  that  I  took  in  hand  that  part  of  the
first  volume  to  which  the  Author  has  given  the  name  of
Introduction.  It  is  in  this  part  of  the  work  that  is  con-
tained whatever  comes  under  the  denomination  of  general
principles.  It  is  in  this  part  of  the  work  that  are  contained
such  preliminary  views  as  it  seemed  proper  to  him  to  give
of  certain  objects  real  or  imaginary,  which  he  found  con-
nected with  his  subject  Law  by  identity  of  name  :  two  or
three  sorts  of  Laws  of  Nature,  the  revealed  Law,  and  a
certain  Law  oi  Nations.  It  is  in  this  part  of  the  work  that
he  has  touched  upon  several  topics  which  relate  to  all  laws
or  institutions  ^  in  general,  or  at  least  to  whole  classes  of  in-
stitutions without  relating  to  any  one  more  than  to  another.

To  speak  more  particularly,  it  is  in  this  part  of  his  work
that  he  has  given  a  definition,  such  as  it  is,  of  that  whole
branch  of  law  which  he  had  taken  for  his  subject ;  that
branch,  which  some,  considering  it  as  a  main  stock,  would
term  LAW  without  addition ;  and  which  he,  to  distinguish
it  from  those  others  its  condividcnt  branches  ^,  terms  law
municipal: — an  account,  such  as  it  is,  of  the  nature  and
origin  of  Natural  Society  the  mother,  and  of  Political
Society  the  daughter,  of  Law  municipal,  duly  begotten  in
the  bed  of  Metaphor  : — a  division,  such  as  it  is,  of  a  law,
individually  considered,  into  what  he  fancies  to  be  its
parts  .-—an  account,  such  as  it  is,  of  the  method  to  be  taken
for  interpreting  any  law  that  may  occur.

In  regard  to  the  Law  of  England  in  particular,  it  is  here
that  he  gives  an  account  of  the  division  of  it  into  its  two
branches  (branches,  however,  that  are  no  ways  distinct  in
the  purport  of  them,  when  once  established,  but  only  in

'  I  add  here  the  word  institutions,  for  the  sake  of  including  rules  of
Common  Law,  as  well  as  portions  of  Statute  Law.
*  Membra  condividentia. — Saund.  Log.  L  L.  c.  46.


g6  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface,  respect  of  the  source  from  whence  their  establishment  took
its  rise)  the  Statute  or  Written  law,  as  it  is  called,  and  the
Common  or  Unwritten : — an  account  of  what  are  called
General  Customs,  or  institutions  in  force  throughout  the
whole  empire,  or  at  least  the  whole  nation ; — of  what  are
called  Particular  Customs,  institutions  of  local  extent
established  in  particular  districts  ;  and  of  such  adopted
institutions  of  a  general  extent,  as  are  parcel  of  what  are
called  the  Civil  and  the  Canon  laws ;  all  three  in  the
character  of  so  many  branches  of  what  is  called  the  Common
Law  : — in  fine,  a  general  account  of  Equity,  that  capricious
and  incomprehensible  mistress  of  our  fortunes,  whose
features  neither  our  Author,  nor  perhaps  any  one  is  well
able  to  delineate  ; — of  Equity,  who  having  in  the  beginning
been  a  rib  of  Law,  but  since  in  some  dark  age  plucked  from
her  side,  when  sleeping,  by  the  hands  not  so  much  of  God
as  of  enterprizing  Judges,  now  lords  it  over  her  parent
sister  : —

All  this,  I  say,  together  with  an  account  of  the  different
districts  of  the  empire  over  which  different  portions  of  the
Law  prevail,  or  over  which  the  Law  has  different  degrees
of  force,  composes  that  part  of  our  Author's  work  which  he
has  styled  the  Introduction.  His  eloquent  '  Discourse  on
the  study  of  the  Law,'  with  which,  as  being  a  discourse  of
the  rhetorical  kind  rather  than  of  the  didactic,  I  proposed
not  to  intermeddle,  prefaces  the  whole.

It  would  have  been  in  vain  to  have  thought  of  travelling
'over  the  whole  of  so  vast  a  work.  My  design,  therefore,
'  was  to  take  such  a  portion  of  it,  as  might  afford  a  fair  and
(adequate  specimen  of  the  character  and  complexion  of  the
\whole.  For  this  purpose  the  part  here  marked  out  would,  I
thought,  abundantly  suffice.  This,  however  narrow  in  ex-
tent, was  the  most  conspicuous,  the  most  characteristic  part
of  our  Author's  work,  and  that  which  was  most  his  own.
The  rest  was  little  more  than  compilation.  Pursuing  my
examination  thus  far,  I  should  pursue  it, I  thought,  as


Preface.  9  7

far  as  was  necessary  for  my  purpose : and  I had  little  Preface.
stomach  to  pursue  a  task  at  once  so  laborious  and  so
invidious  any  farther. If  Hercules,  according  to  the  old
proverb,  is  to  be  known  ex  pede :  much  more  thought  I,  is
he  to  be  known  ex  capite.

In  these  views  it  was  that  I  proceeded  as  far  as  the
middle  of  the  definition  of  the  Law  municipal.  It  was
there  I  found,  not  without  surprise,  the  digression  which
makes  the  subject  of  the  present  Essay,  This  threw  me  at
first  into  no  small  perplexity.  To  give  no  account  of  it  at
all;  — to  pass  wholly  sub  silentio,  so  large,  and  in  itself  so
material  a  part  of  the  work  I  was  examining,  would  seem
strange :  at  the  same  time  I  saw  no  possibility  of  entering
into  an  examination  of  a  passage  so  anomalous,  without
cutting  in  pieces  the  thread  of  the  discourse.  Under  this
doubt  I  determined  at  any  rate,  for  the  present,  to  pass  it
by  ;  the  rather  as  I  could  not  perceive  any  connection  that
it  had  with  any  thing  that  came  before  or  after.  I  did  so  ;
and  continuing  my  examination  of  the  definition  from
which  it  digressed,  I  travelled  on  to  the  end  of  the
Introduction.  It  then  became  necessary  to  come  to  some
definitive  resolution  concerning  this  excentric  part  of  it :  and
the  result  was,  that  being  loth  to  leave  the  enterprise  I  had
begun  in  this  respect,  imperfect,  I  sat  down  to  give  what  I
intended  should  be  a  very  slight  and  general  survey  of  it.
The  farther,  however,  I  proceeded  in  examining  it,  the
more  confused  and  unsatisfactory  it  appeared  to  me  :  and
the  greater  difficulty  I  found  in  knowing  what  to  make  of
it,  the  more  words  it  cost  me,  I  found,  to  say  so.  In  this
way,  and  by  these  means  it  was  that  the  present  Essa}'
grew  to  the  bulk  in  which  the  Reader  sees  it.  When  it
was  nearly  completed,  it  occurred  to  me,  that  as  the
digression  itself  which  I  was  examining  was  perfectly
distinct  from,  and  unconnected  with  the  text  from  which  it
starts,  so  was,  or  so  at  least  might  be,  the  critique  on  that
digression,  from  the  critique  on  the  text. The  former  was

H


98  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface,  by  much  too  large  to  be  engrafted  into  the  latter :  and
since  if  it  accompanied  it  at  all,  it  could  only  be  in  the
shape  of  an  Appendix,  there  seemed  no  reason  why  the
same  publication  should  include  them  both.  To  the  former,
therefore,  as  being  the  least,  I  determined  to  give  that
finish  which  I  was  able,  and  which  I  thought  was  necessary  :
and  to  publish  it  in  this  detached  manner,  as  the  first,  if
not  the  only  part  of  a  work,  the  principal  and  remaining
part  of  which  may  possibly  see  the  light  some  time  or
other,  under  some  such  title  as  that  of  '  A  Comment  on  the
Commentaries.'

In  the  mean  time  that  I  may  stand  more  fully  justified,

or  excused  at  least,  in  an  enterprise  to  most  perhaps  so

extraordinary,  and  to  many  doubtless  so  unacceptable,  it

may  be  of  use  to  endeavour  to  state  with  some  degree  of

precision,  the  grounds  of  that  war  which,  for  the  interests

of  true  science,  and  of  liberal  improvement,  I  think  myself

bound to wage against this work. I shall therefore

proceed  to  mark  out  and  distinguish  those  points  of  view

in  which  it  seems  principally  reprehensible,  not  forgetting

those  in  which  it  seems  still  entitled  to  our  approbation

and  applause.

The  busi- There  are  two  characters,  one  or  other  of  which  every

CVwsordis-  "^^^  ^^°  finds  any  thing  to  say  on  the  subject  of  Law,  may

tinguished  be  Said  to  take  upon  him  : — that  of  the  Expositor,  and  that

from  that ^,^  i,,  .  ^,„..

of  the  ^.v-  of  the  Censor. To  the  provmce  of  the  Expositor  it  belongs

post  or. |.Q  gxplain  to  us  what,  as  he  supposes,  the  Law  is  :  to  that

of  the  Censor,  to  observe  to  us  what  he  thinks  it  ought  to

be. The former, therefore, is principally occupied in

stating,  or in  enquiring  2S\.ex  facts'^  \ the latter,  in dis-

^  In  practice,  the  question  of  Law  has  commonly  been  spoken  of  as
opposed  to  that  oifad :  but  this  distinction  is  an  accidental  one.  That  a
Law  commanding  or  prohibiting  such  a  sort  of  action,  has  been  estab-
lished, is  as  much  a.  fact,  as  thfit  an  individual  action  of  that  sort  has  been
committed.  The  establishment  of  a  Law  may  be  spoken  of  as  a  fact,  at
least  for  the  purpose  of  distinguishing  it  from  any  consideration  that  may
be  offered  as  a  reason  for  such  Law.


J


Preface.  99

cussing  reasons.  The  Expositor,  keeping  within  his  sphere,  Preface.
has  no  concern  with  any  other  faculties  of  the  mind  than
the  apprehension,  the  memory,  and  the  judgment :  the  latter,
in  virtue  of  those  sentiments  of  pleasure  or  displeasure
which  he  finds  occasion  to  annex  to  the  objects  under  his
review,  holds  some  intercourse  with  the  affections.  That
which  is  Law,  is,  in  different  countries,  widely  different  :
while  that  which  ought  to  be,  is  in  all  countries  to  a  great
degree  the  same.  The  Expositor,  therefore,  is  always  the
citizen  of  this  or  that  particular  country  :  the  Censor  is,  or
ought  to  be  the  citizen  of  the  world.  To  the  Expositor  it
belongs  to  shew  what  the  Legislator  and  his  underworkman
the  Judge  have  done  already  :  to  the  Censor  it  belongs  to
suggest  what  the  Legislator  ought  to  do  in  future.  To  the
Censor,  in  short,  it  belongs  to  teach  that  science,  which  when
by  change  of  hands  converted  into  an  art^  the  Legislator
practises.

Let  us  now  return  to  our  Author.  Of  these  two  perfectly  The  lauer
distinguishable  functions,  the  latter  alone  is  that  which  it  Authors,
fell  necessarily  within  his  province  to  discharge.  His
professed  object  was  to  explain  to  us  what  the  Laws  of
England  were.  ' Ita  lex  scripta  est,'  was  the  only  motto
which  he  stood  engaged  to  keep  in  view.  The  work  of
censure  (for  to  this  word,  in  default  of  any  other,  I  find  it
necessary  to  give  a  neutral  sense)  the  work  of  censure,  as  it
may  be  styled,  or,  in  a  certain  sense,  of  criticism,  was  to
him  but  a  parergon — a  work  of  supererogation :  a  work,
indeed,  which,  if  aptly  executed,  could  not  but  be  of  great
ornament  to  the  principal  one,  and  of  great  instruction  as
well  as  entertainment  to  the  Reader,  but  from  which  our
Author,  as  well  as  those  that  had  gone  before  him  on  the
same  line,  might,  without  being  chargeable  with  any
deficiency,  have  stood  excused  :  a  work  which,  when
superadded  to  the  principal,  would  lay  the  Author  under
additional  obligations,  and  impose  on  him  new  duties :
which,  notwithstanding,  whatever  else  it  might  differ  in

H  2


lOO  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface,  from  the  principal  one,  agrees  with  it  in  this,  that  it  ought
^ to  be  executed  with  impartiaht}',  or  not  at  all.
•>.  Laws  if^  on  the  one  hand,  a  hasty  and  undiscriminating  con-

Ibe'scruti-  demner  of  what  is  established,  may  expose  himself  to
tedom''*^  contempt;  on  the  other  hand,  a  bigoted  or  corrupt  de-
fender  of  the  works  of  power,  becomes  guilty,  in  a  manner,
of  the  abuses  which  he  supports  :  the  more  so  if,  by  oblique
glances  and  sophistical  glosses,  he  studies  to  guard  from
reproach,  or  recommend  to  favour,  what  he  knows  not
how,  and  dares  not  attempt,  to  justify.  To  a  man  who
contents  himself  with  simply  stating  an  institution  as  he
thinks  it  is,  no  share,  it  is  plain,  can  justly  be  attributed
(nor  would  any  one  think  of  attributing  to  him  any  share)
of  whatever  reproach,  any  more  than  of  whatever  applause
the  institution  may  be  thought  to  merit.  But  if  not  content
j  with  this  humbler  function,  he  takes  upon  him  to  give
reasons  in  behalf  of  it,  reasons  whether  made  or  found  by
him,  it  is  far  otherwise.  Every  false  and  sophistical
reason  that  he  contributes  to  circulate,  he  himself  is
chargeable  with  :  nor  ought  he  to  be  holden  guiltless  even
of  such  as,  in  a  work  where /ac^  not  reason  is  the  question,
he  delivers  as  from  other  writers  without  censure.  By
officiously  adopting  them  he  makes  them  his  own,  though
delivered  under  the  names  of  the  respective  Authors  :  not
much  less  than  if  delivered  under  his  own.  For  the  very
idea  of  a  reason  betokens  approbation  :  so  that  to  deliver
a  remark  under  that  character,  and  that  without  censure,
is  to  adopt  it.  A  man  will  scarcely,  therefore,  without
some  note  of  disapprobation,  be  the  instrument  of  intro-
ducing, in  the  guise  of  a  reason,  an  argument  which  he
does  not  really  wish  to  see  approved.  Some  method  or
other  he  will  take  to  wash  his  hands  of  it :  some  method
or  other  he  will  take  to  let  men  see  that  what  he  means  to
be  understood  to  do,  is  merely  to  report  the  judgment  of
another,  not  to  pass  one  of  his  own.  Upon  that  other  then
he  will  lay  the  blame  :  at  least  he  will  take  care  to  repel  it


Preface.  loi

from  himself. If  he  omits  to  do  this,  the  most  favourable  Preface.
cause  that  can  be  assigned  to  the  omission  is  indifference  : ~~^
indifference  to  the  public  welfare — that  indifference  which
is  itself  a  crime.

It  is  wonderful  how  forward  some  have  been  to  look
upon  it  as  a  kind  of  presumption  and  ingratitude,  and
rebellion,  and  cruelty,  and  I  know  not  what  besides,  not  to
allege  only,  nor  to  own,  but  to  suffer  any  one  so  much  as
to  imagine,  that  an  old-established  law  could  in  any  respect
be  a  fit  object  of  condemnation.  Whether  it  has  been  a
kind  oi personification  that  has  been  the  cause  of  this,  as  if
the  Law  were  a  living  creature,  or  whether  it  has  been  the
mechanical  veneration  for  antiquity,  or  what  other  delusion
of  the  fancy,  I  shall  not  here  enquire.  For  my  part,  I
know  not  for  what  good  reason  it  is  that  the  merit  of  justi-
fying a  law  when  right  should  have  been  thought  greater,
than  that  of  censuring  it  when  wrong.  Under  a  govern-
ment of  Laws,  what  is  the  motto  of  a  good  citizen  ?  To
obey  punctually  ;  to  censure  freely.

Thus  much  is  certain  ;  that  a  system  that  is  never  to  be
censured,  will  never  be  improved :  that  if  nothing  is  ever
to  be  found  fault  with,  nothing  will  ever  be  mended  :  and
that  a  resolution  to  justify  every  thing  at  any  rate,  and  to
disapprove  of  nothing,  is  a  resolution  which,  pursued  in
future,  must  stand  as  an  effectual  bar  to  all  the  additional
happiness  we  can  ever  hope  for ;  pursued  hitherto  would
have  robbed  us  of  that  share  of  happiness  which  we  enjoy
already.

Nor  is  a  disposition  to  find  '  every  thing  as  it  should  be,'
less  at  variance  with  itself,  than  with  reason  and  utility.
The  common-place  arguments  in  which  it  vents  itself
justify  not  what  is  established,  in  effect,  any  more  than
they  condemn  it :  since  whatever  novo  is  established,  once
was  innovation.

Precipitate  censure,  cast  on  a  political  institution,  does
but  recoil  on  the  head  of  him  who  casts  it. From  such  an


I02  The  Fraz^^eiit  on  Government.


^^)


Preface,  attack  it  is  not  the  institution  itself,  if  well  grounded,  that
^ can  suffer. What  a  man says  against  it  either  makes
impression  or  makes  none. If  none,  it  is  just  as  if  nothing
had  been  said  about  the  matter:  if  it  does  make  an  im-
Ipression,  it  naturally  calls  up  some  one  or  other  in  defence.
(For  if  the  institution  is  in  truth  a  beneficial  one  to  the
[community  in  general,  it  cannot  but  have  given  an  interest
I  in  its  preservation  to  a  number  of  individuals. By  their
industry,  then,  the  reasons  on  which  it  is  grounded  are
brought  to  light :  from  the  observation  of  which  those  who
acquiesced  in  it  before  upon  trust,  now  embrace  it  upon
conviction. Censure, therefore, though ill-founded,  has
no  other  effect  upon  an  institution  than  to  bring  it  to  that
test, by  which the value of those, indeed, on which
prejudice  alone  has  stamped  a  currency,  is  cried  down,
but  by  which  the  credit  of  those  of  sterling  utility  is  con-
firmed.

Nor  is  it  by  any  means  from  passion  and  ill-humour,  that
censure,  passed  upon  legal  institutions,  is  apt  to  take  its
birth.  When  it  is  from  passion  and  ill-humour  that  men
speak,  it  is  with  men  that  they  are  in  ill-humour,  not  with
laws  :  it  is  men,  not  laws,  that  are  the  butt  of  '  arrogance\'

'  ^Arrogance;''  our  Author  calls  '\i  the  utmost  arrogance^,  'to  censure
what  has,  at  least,  a  better  chance  to  be  right,  than  the  singular  notions
of  any  particular  man:'  meaning  thereby  certain  ecclesiastical  institutions.
Vibrating,  as  it  should  seem,  between  passion  and  discretion,  he  has
thought  it  necessary,  indeed,  to  insert  in  the  sentence  that,  which  being
inserted,  turns  it  into  nothing  :  After  the  word  'censure,'  'with  contempt'
he  adds,  '  and  rudeness  : '  as  if  there  needed  a  professor  to  inform  us,
that  to  treat  any  thing  with  contempt  and  rudeness  is  arrogance.  '  In-
decency,' he  had  already  called  it,  '  to  set  up  private  judgment  in
opposition  to  public  : '  and  this  without  restriction,  qualification,  or
reserve.  This  was  in  the  first  transport  of  a  holy  zeal,  before  discretion
had  come  in  to  his  assistance.  This  passage  the  Doctors  Priestley  •>  and
Furneaux^,  who,  in  quality  of  Dissenting  Ministers,  and  champions  of
dissenting  opinions,  saw  themselves  particularly  attacked  in  it,  have  not
suffered  to  pass  unnoticed ;  any  more  than  has  the  celebrated  Author  of

"  4  Comm.  p.  50.

''  See  Remarks,  &c.

'  See  Letters  to  Mr.  Justice  Blackstone,  1771. Second  Edition.


Preface.  103

Spleen  and  turbulence  may  indeed  prompt  men  to  quarrel  Preface.
with  living  individuals  :  but  when  they  make  complaint  of
the  dead  letter  of  the  Law,  the  work  of  departed  lawgivers,
against  whom  no  personal  antipathy  can  have  subsisted,  it
is  always  from  the  observation,  or  from  the  belief  at  least,
of  some  real  grievance.  The  Law  is  no  man's  enemy :
the  Law  is  no  man's  rival.  Ask  the  clamorous  and  unruly
multitude — it  is  never  the  Law  itself  that  is  in  the  wrong :
it  is  always  some  wicked  interpreter  of  the  Law  that  has
corrupted  and  abused  it  ^.

the  '  Remarks  on  the  Acts  of  the  i^th  Parliaments,^  who  found  it  adverse
to  his  enterprize,  for  the  same  reason  that  it  is  hostile  to  every  other
Hberal  plan  of  political  discussion.

My  edition  of  the  Commentaries  happens  to  be  the  first :  since  the
above  paragraph  was  written  I  have  been  directed  to  a  later.  In  this
later  edition  the  passage  about  '  indecency '  is,  like  the  other  about
*  arrogance,'  explained  away  into  nothing.  What  we  are  now  told  is,
that  'to  set  up  private  judgment  in  [virulent  and factioits'\  opposition  to
public  authority'  (he  might  have  added— or  to  private  either)  is  '  indecen-
cy.' [See  the  5th  edit.  8vo.  p.  50,  as  in  the  ist.]  This  we  owe,  I  think,
to  Dr.  Furneaux.  The  Doctors  Furneaux  and  Priestley,  under  whose
well-applied  correction  our  Author  has  smarted  so  severely,  have  a  good
deal  to  answer  for :  They  have  been  the  means  of  his  adding  a  good  deal
of  this  kind  of  rhetorical  lumber  to  the  plentiful  stock  there  was  of  it
before.  One  passage,  indeed,  a  passage  deep-tinctured  with  religious
gall,  they  have  been  the  means  of  clearing  awaj'  entirely  *• :  and  in  this  at
least,  they  have  done  good  service.  They  have  made  him  sophisticate  :
they  have  made  him  even  expunge  :  but  all  the  Doctors  in  the  world,  I
doubt,  would  not  bring  him  to  confession.  See  his  answer  to  Dr.
Priestley.

*  There  is  only  one  way  in  which  censure,  cast  upon  the  Laws,  has  a
greater  tendency  to  do  harm  than  good  ;  and  that  is  when  it  sets  itself  to
contest  their  validity.  I  mean,  when  abandoning  the  question  of  ex-
pediency, it  sets  itself  to  contest  the  right.  But  this  is  an  attack  to  which
old-established  Laws  are  not  so  liable.  As  this  is  the  last  though  but
too  common  resource  of  passion  and  ill-humour ;  and  what  men  scarce
think  of  betaking  themselves  to,  unless  irritated  by  personal  competitions,
it  is  that  to  which  recent  Laws  are  most  exposed.  I  speak  of  what  are
called  written  Laws  :  for  as  to  unwritten  .institutions,  as  there  is  no  such
thing  as  any  certain  symbol  by  which  their  authority  is  attested,  their
validity,  how  deeply  rooted  soever,  is  what  we  see  challenged  without
remorse.  A  radical  weakness,  interwoven  into  the  very  constitution  of
all  M«written  Law.

"In  the  Preface.

^  See  Furneaux,  Letter  VII.


I04  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface.  Thus  destitute  of  foundation  are  the  terrors,  or  pretended
terrors,  of  those  who  shudder  at  the  idea  of  a  free  censure
of  estabhshed  institutions.  So  little  does  the  peace  of
society  require  the  aid  of  those  lessons  which  teach  men  to
accept  of  any  thing  as  reason,  and  to  yield  the  same  abject
and  indiscriminating  homage  to  the  Laws  here,  which  is
paid  to  the  despot  elsewhere.  The  fruits  of  such  tuition
are  visible  enough  in  the  character  of  that  race  of  men  who
have  always  occupied  too  large  a  space  in  the  circle  of  the
profession  :  a  passive  and  enervate  race,  ready  to  swallow
any  thing,  and  to  acquiesce  in  any  thing  :  with  intellects
incapable  of  distinguishing  right  from  wrong,  and  with
affections  alike  indifferent  to  either :  insensible,  short-
sighted, obstinate :  lethargic,  yet  liable  to  be  driven  into
convulsions  by  false  terrors :  deaf  to  the  voice  of  reason
and  public  utility :  obsequious  only  to  the  whisper  of
interest,  and  to  the  beck  of  power.

This  head  of  mischief,  perhaps,  is  no  more  than  what
may  seem  included  under  the  former.  For  why  is  it  an
evil  to  a  country  that  the  minds  of  those  who  have  the  Law
under  their  management  should  be  thus  enfeebled  ?  It  is
because  it  finds  them  impotent  to  every  enterprise  of  im-
provement.

Not  that  a  race  of  lawyers  and  politicians  of  this  enervate
breed  is  much  less  dangerous  to  the  duration  of  that  share
of  felicity  which  the  State  possesses  at  any  given  period,
than  it  is  mortal  to  its  chance  of  attaining  to  a  greater.  If
the  designs  of  a  Minister  are  inimical  to  his  country,  what
is  the  man  of  all  others  for  him  to  make  an  instrument  of  or  a
dupe  ?  Of  all  men,  surely  none  so  fit  as  that  sort  of  man  who
is  ever  on  his  knees  before  the  footstool  of  Authority,  and
who,  when  those  above  him,  or  before  him,  have  pronounced,
thinks  it  a  crime  to  have  an  opinion  of  his  own.

Those  who  duly  consider  upon  what  slight  and  trivial
circumstances,  even  in  the  happiest  times,  the  adoption  or
rejection  of  a  Law  so  often  turns  ;  circumstances  with  which


Preface.  105

the  utility  of  it  has  no  imaginable  connection — those  who  Preface.
consider  the  desolate  and  abject  state  of  the  human  intellect,  ^
during  the  periods  in  which  so  great  a  part  of  the  still  sub-
sisting mass  of  institutions  had  their  birth — those  who  con-
sider the  backwardness  there  is  in  most  men,  unless  when
spurred  by  personal  interests  or  resentments,  to  run  a-tilt
against  the  Colossus  of  authority — those,  I  say,  who  give
these  considerations  their  due  weight,  will  not  be  quite  so
zealous,  perhaps,  as  our  Author  has  been  to  terrify  men
from  setting  up  what  is  now  'private  judgment,'  against
what  once  was  '  public  ^ : '  nor  to  thunder  down  the  harsh
epithet  of '  arrogance'  on  those,  who,  with  whatever  success,
are  occupied  in  bringing  rude  establishments  to  the  test  of
polished  reason.  They  will  rather  do  what  they  can  to  /
cherish  a  disposition  at  once  so  useful  and  so  rare  - :  |
which  is  so  little  connected  with  the  causes  that  make
popular  discontentments  dangerous,  and  which  finds  so
little  aliment  in  those  propensities  that  govern  the  multitude
of  men.  They  will  not  be  for  giving  such  a  turn  to  their
discourses  as  to  bespeak  the  whole  of  a  man's  favour  for  the
defenders  of  what  is  established  :  nor  all  his  resentment  for
the  assailants.  They  will  acknowledge  that  if  there  be
some  institutions  which  it  is  '  arrogance '  to  attack,  there
may  be  others  which  it  is  effrontery  to  defend.  Tourreil  ^
has  defended  torture:  torture  established  by  the  'public

'  See  note,  p.  102.

^  One  may  well  say  rare.  It  is  a  matter  of  fact  about  which  there  can
be  no  dispute.  The  truth  of  it  may  be  seen  in  the  multitude  of  Expositors
which  the  Jurisprudence  of  every  nation  furnished,  ere  it  aiforded  a  single
Censor.  When  Beccaria  came,  he  was  received  by  the  intelligent  as  an
Angel  from  heaven  would  be  by  the  faithful.  He  may  be  styled  the
father  of  Censorial  Jurisprudence.  Montesquieu's  was  a  work  of  the
mixed  kind.  Before  Montesquieu  all  was  unmixed  barbarism.  Grotius
and  Puffendorf  were  to  Censorial  Jurisprudence  what  the  Schoolmen
were  to  Natural  Philosophy.

'  A  French  Jurist  of  the  last  age,  whose  works  had  like  celebrity,  and
in  many  respects  much  the  same  sort  of  merits  as  our  Author's.  He  was
known  to  most  advantage  by  a  translation  of  Demosthenes.  He  is  now
forgotten.


io6  The  Frag7iient  on  Government.

Preface,  judgment ' of  SO many  enlightened  nations. Beccaria
('indecent'  and  'arrogant'  Beccaria!)  has  condemned  it.
Our  Of  these  two  whose  lot  among  men  would  one  choose  rather,

why  at- — ^^^  Apologist's  or  the  Censor's  ?
tacked  in Of  a  piece  with  the  discernment  which  enables  a  man  to

the  ch3.r3.c~

ter  of  an  perceive,  and  with  the  courage  which  enables  him  to  avow,
Expositor.  j.^g  defects  of  a  system  of  institutions,  is  that  accuracy  of
conception  which  enables  him  to  give  a  clear  account  of  it.
No  wonder  then,  in  a  treatise  partly  of  the  expository  class,
and  partly  of  the  censorial,  that  if  the  latter  department  is
filled  with  imbecility,  symptoms  of  kindred  weakness
should  characterize  the  former.

The  former  department,  however,  of  our  Author's  work,
is  what,  on  its  own  account  merely,  I  should  scarce  have
found  myself  disposed  to  intermeddle  with.  The  business
of  simple  exposition  is  a  han-est  in  which  there  seemed  no
likelihood  of  there  being  any  want  of  labourers  :  and  into
which  therefore  I  had  little  ambition  to  thrust  my  sickle.

At  any  rate,  had  I  sat  down  to  make  a  report  of  it  in  this
character  alone,  it  would  have  been  with  feelings  very
different  from  those  of  which  I  now  am  conscious,  and  in
a  tone  very  different  from  that  which  I  perceive  myself  to
have  assumed.  In  determining  what  conduct  to  observe
respecting  it,  I  should  have  considered  whether  the  taint  of
error  seemed  to  confine  itself  to  parts,  or  to  diffuse  itself
through  the  whole.  In  the  latter  case,  the  least  invidious,
and  considering  the  bulk  of  the  work,  the  most  beneficial
course  would  have  been  to  have  taken  no  notice  of  it  at  all,
but  to  have  sat  down  and  tried  to  give  a  better.  If  not  the
whole  in  general,  but  scattered  positions  only  had  appeared
exceptionable,  I  should  have  sat  down  to  rectify  those
positions  with  the  same  apathy  with  which  they  were  ad-
vanced. To  fall  in  an  adverse  way  upon  a  work  simply
expository,  if  that  were  all  there  were  of  it,  would  have  been
alike  ungenerous  and  unnecessary.  In  the  involuntary
errors  of  the  undei'standing  there  can  be  little  to  excite,  or


Preface.  107

at  least  to  justify,  resentment.  That  which  alone,  in  a  Preface.
manner,  calls  for  rigid  censure,  is  the  sinister  bias  of  the
affections.  If  then  I  may  still  continue  to  mention  as
separate,  parts  which  in  the  work  itself  are  so  intimately,
and,  indeed,  undistinguishably  blended,  it  is  the  censorial
part  alone  that  has  drawn  from  me  that  sort  of  animadver-
sion I  have  been  led  to  bestow  indiscriminately  on  the
whole.  To  lay  open,  and  if  possible  supply,  the  imper-
fections of  the  other,  is  an  operation  that  might  indeed  of
itself  do  service  ;  but  that  which  I  thought  would  do  still
more  servdce,  was  the  weakening  the  authority  oi  this.

Under  the  sanction  of  a  great  name  every  string  of  words
however  unmeaning,  every  opinion  however  erroneous,
will  have  a  certain  currency.  Reputation  adds  weight  to
sentiments  from  whence  no  part  of  it  arose,  and  which  had
they  stood  alone  might  have  drawn  nothing,  perhaps,  but
contempt.  Popular  fame  enters  not  into  nice  distinctions.
Merit  in  one  department  of  letters  affords  a  natural,  and  in
a  manner  irrecusable  presumption  of  merit  in  another,
especially  if  the  two  departments  be  such  between  which
there  is  apparently  a  close  alliance.

Wonderful,  in  particular,  is  that  influence  which  is  gained
over  young  minds,  by  the  man  who  on  account  of  whatever
class  of  merit  is  esteemed  in  the  character  of  a  preceptor.
Those  who  have  derived,  or  fancy  themselves  to  have
derived  knowledge  from  what  he  knows,  or  appears  to
know,  will  naturally  be  for  judging  as  he  judges  :  for
reasoning  as  he  reasons ;  for  approving  as  he  approves  ;
for  condemning  as  he  condemns.  On  these  accounts  it  is,
that  when  the  general  complexion  of  a  work  is  unsound,
it  may  be  of  use  to  point  an  attack  against  the  whole
of  it  without  distinction,  although  such  parts  of  it  as  are
noxious  as  well  as  unsound  be  onl}^  scattered  here  and
there.

On  these  considerations  then  it  may  be  of  use  to  shew,
that  the  work  before  us,  in  spite  of  the  merits  which  rccom-


io8  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface,  mend  it  SO  powerfully  to  the  imagination  and  to  the  ear,  has
no  better  title  on  one  account  than  on  another,  to  that  in-
fluence which,  were  it  to  pass  unnoticed,  it  might  continue
to  exercise  over  the  judgment.

The  Introduction  is  the  part  to  which,  for  reasons  that

have  been  already  stated,  it  was  always  my  intention  to

confine  myself. It  is  but  a  part  even  of  this  Introduction

that  is  the  subject  of  the  present  Essay. What  determined

me  to  begin  with  this  small  part  of  it  is,  the  facility  I  found

in  separating  it  from  every  thing  that  precedes  or  follows

it. This  is  what  will  be  more  particularly  spoken  to  in

another  place  \

•  It  is  not  that  this  part  is  among  those  which  seemed

most  open  to  animadversion. It  is  not  that  stronger  traces

are  exhibited  in  this  part  than  in  another  of  that  spirit  in

our  Author  which  seems  so  hostile  to  Reformation,  and  to

that  Liberty  which  is  Reformation's  harbinger.

Repre-  It  is  not  here  that  he  tramples  on  the  right  of  private

passages judgment,  that  basis  of  every  thing  that  an  Englishman

from  the holds  dear '^ It  is  not  here,  in  particular,  that  he  insults

work  at  .  / x-  /

large.  our  understandings  with  nugatory  reasons ;  stands  forth
the  professed  champion  of  religious  intolerance  ;  or  openly
sets  his  face  against  civil  reformation.

It  is  not  here,  for  example,  he  would  persuade  us,
that  a  trader  who  occupies  a  booth  at  a  fair  is  z.  fool  for
his  pains;  and  on  that  account  no  fit  object  of  the  Law's
protection  \

'  See  the  ensuing  Introduction.

*  See  note.

^  '  Burglary  "*,'  says  our  Author,  'cannot  be  committed  in  a  tent  or  a
booth  erected  in  a  market  fair  ;  though  the  owner  may  lodge  therein  :  for
the  Law  regards  thus  highly  nothing  but  permanent  edifices  ;  a  house,  or
church  ;  the  wall,  or  gate  of  a  town  ;  and  it  is  \ht.  folly  of  the  owner  to
lodge  in  so  fragile  a  tenement.'  To  save  himself  from  this  charge  of  folly,
it  is  not  altogether  clear  which  of  two  things  the  trader  ought  to  do  :  quit
his  business  and  not  go  to  the  fair  at  all :  or  leave  his  goods  without  any
body  to  take  care  of  them.

"  4  Comm.  Ch.  XVI.  p.  226.


Preface,  109

It  is  not  here  that  he  gives  the  presence  of  one  man  at  Preface.
the  making  of  a  Law,  as  a  reason  why  ten  thousand  others
that  are  to  obey  it,  need  know  nothing  of  the  matter  \

It  is  not  here,  that  after  telling  us,  in  express  terms,
there  must  be  an  '  actual  breaking '  to  make  burglary,  he
tells  us,  in  the  same  breath,  and  in  terms  equally  express,
where  burglary  may  be  ivithont  actual  breaking ;  and  this
because  '  the  Law  will  not  suffer  itself  to  be  trifled  with  ^'

'■  Speaking  of  an  Act  of  Parliament*,  'There  needs,'  he  says,  'no
formal  promulgation  to  give  it  the  force  of  a  Law,  as  was  necessary  by
the  Civil  Law  with  regard  to  the  Emperor's  Edicts  :  because  every  man
in  England  is,  in  judgment  of  Law,  party  to  the  making  of  an  Act  of
Parliament,  being  present  thereat  iy  his  representatives!  This,  for  aught  I
know,  may  be  ^ooA  judgment  of  Law,  because  any  thing  may  be  called
judgment  of  Law,  that  comes  from  a  Lawyer,  who  has  got  a  name :  it
seems,  however,  not  much  like  any  thing  that  can  be  caWed  judgment  of
common  sense.  This  notable  piece  of  astutia  was  originally,  I  believe,
judgment  of  Lord  Coke  :  it  from  thence  became  judgment  of  our  Author  :
and  may  have  been  judgment  of  more  Lawyers  than  I  know  of  before
and  since.  What  grieves  me  is,  to  find  many  men  of  the  best  aifections
to  a  cause  which  needs  no  sophistry,  bewildered  and  bewildering  others
with  the  like  jargon.

^  His  words  are  ^,  '  There  must  be  an  actual  breaking,  not  a  mere  legal
clausum  fregit  (by  leaping  over  invisible  ideal  boundaries,  which  may
constitute  a  civil  trespass)  but  a  substantial  and  forcible  irruption.^  In
the  next  sentence  but  two  he  goes  on,  and  says, — '  But  to  come  down  a
chimney  is  held  a  burglarious  entry ;  for  that  is  as  much  closed  as  the
nature  of  things  will  permit.  So  also  to  knock  at  a  door,  and  upon
opening  it  to  rush  in  with  a  felonious  intent ;  or  under  pretence
of  taking  lodgings,  to  fall  upon  the  landlord  and  rob  him  ;  or  to  pro-
cure a  constable  to  gain  admittance,  in  order  to  search  for  traitors,  and
then  to  bind  the  constable  and  rob  the  house ;  all  these  entries  have  been
adjudged  burglarious,  though  there  was  no  actual  breaking :  for  the  Law
will  not  suffer  itself  to  be  trifled  with  by  such  evasions.'  .  .  .  Can  it  be
more  egregiousl}^  trifled  with  than  by  such  reasons  ?

I  must  own  I  have  been  ready  to  grow  out  of  conceit  with  these  useful
little  ^2X\ac\&%,  for,  because,  since,  and  others  of  that  fraternity,  from  seeing
the  drudgery  they  are  continually  put  to  in  these  Commentaries.  The
appearance  of  any  of  them  is  a  sort  of  warning  to  me  to  prepare  for  some
tautology,  or  some  absurdity :  for  the  same  thing  dished  up  over  again  in
the  shape  of  a  reason  for  itself:  or  for  a  reason  which,  if  a  distinct  one,
is  of  the  same  stamp  as  those  we  have  just  seen.  Other  instances  of  the
like  hard  treatment  given  to  these  poor  particles  will  come  under  obser\'a-
tion  in  the  body  of  this  Essay.  As  to  reasons  of  the  first- mentioned  class,
of  them  one  might  pick  out  enough  to  fill  a  volume.

»  I  Comm.  Ch.  H.  p.  178.  i'  4  Comm.  Ch.  XVI.  p.  226.


1 1  o  The  Fragment  on  Govermnent.

Preface.  It  is  not  here,  that  after  relating  the  Laws  by  which
peaceable  Christians  are  made  punishable  for  worshipping
God  according  to  their  consciences,  he  pronounces  with
equal  peremptormess  and  complacency,  that  every  thing,
yes,  'every  thing  is  as  it  should  be'.'

It  is  not  here,  that  he  commands  us  to  believe,  and  that
on  pain  of  forfeiting  all  pretensions  to  either  'sense  or
probity,'  that  the  system  of  our  jurisprudence  is,  in  the
whole  and  every  part  of  it,  the  very  quintessence  of
perfection  ^

^  '  In  what  I  have  now  said,'  says  he",  'I  would  not  be  understood  to
derogate  from  the  rights  of  the  national  Church,  or  to  favour  a  loose
latitude  of  propagating  any  crude  undigested  sentiments  in  religious
matters.  Oi propagating,  I  say  ;  for  the  bare  entertaining  them,  without
an  endeavour  to  diffuse  them,  seems  hardly  cognizable  by  any  human
authority.  I  only  mean  to  illustrate  the  excellence  of  our  present
establishment,  by  looking  back  to  former  times.  Every  thing  is  now  as  it
should  be  :  unless,  perhaps,  that  heresy  ought  to  be  more  strictly  defined,
and  no  prosecution  permitted,  even  in  the  Ecclesiastical  Courts,  till  the
tenets  in  question  are  by  proper  authority  prevaously  declared  to  be
heretical.  Under  these  restrictions  it  seems  necessary  for  the  support  of
the  national  religion,'  (the  national  religion  being  such,  we  are  to
understand,  as  would  not  be  able  to  support  itself  \vere  any  one  at  liberty
to  make  objections  to  it)  '  that  the  officers  of  the  Church  should  have
power  to  censure  heretics,  but  not  to  exterminate  or  destroy  them."

Upon  looking  into  a  later  edition  the  fifth'  I  find  this  passage  has  under-
gone a  modification.  After  *  Every  thing  is  now  as  it  should  be,''  is  added,
'  with  respect  to  the  spiritual  cognisance ,  and  spiritual  punishment  of  heresy.^
After  '  the  officers  of  the  Church  should  have  power  to  censure  heretics,'  is
added,  ^but  not  to  harass  them  with  temporal  penalties,  much  less  to  exter-
minate or  destroy  them. '

How  far  the  mischievousness  of  the  original  text  has  been  cured  bj'
this  amendment,  may  be  seen  from  Dr.  Furneaux,  Lett.  II.  p.  30,  2nd
edit.

*  I  Comm.  140.  I  would  not  be  altogether  positive,  how  far  it  was  he
meant  this  persuasion  should  extend  itself  in  point  of  time  :  whether  to
those  institutions  only  that  happened  to  be  in  force  at  the  individual  instant
of  his  writing  :  or  whether  to  such  opposite  institutions  also  as,  within  any
given  distance  of  time  from  that  instant,  either  had  been  in  force,  or  were
about  to  be.

His  words  are  as  follow  :  '  All  these  rights  and  liberties  it  is  our  birth-
right to  enjoy  entire  ;  unless  where  the  Laws  of  our  country  have  laid
them  under  necessary  restraints. Restraints  in  themselves  so  gentle  and

*  4  Comm.  Ch.  IV.  p.  49.


Preface,  1 1 1

It  is  not  here  that  he  assures  us  in  point  of  fact,  that  Preface.
there  never  has  been  an  alteration  made  in  the  Law  that
men  have  not  afterwards  found  reason  to  regret'.

moderate,  as  will  appear  upon  further  enquirj',  that  no  man  of  sense  or
probity  would  wish  to  see  them  slackened.  For  all  of  us  have  it  in  our
choice  to  do  every  thing  that  a  good  man  would  desire  to  do  ;  and  are
restrained  from  nothing,  but  what  would  be  pernicious  either  to  ourselves
or  our  fellow  citizens.'

If  the  Reader  would  know  what  these  rights  and  liberties  are,  I  answer
him  out  of  the  same  page,  they  are  those,  '  in  opposition  to  one  or  other
of  which  every  species  of  compulsive  tyranny  and  oppression  must  act,
having  no  other  object  upon  which  it  can  possibly  be  employed.'  The
liberty,  for  example,  of  worshipping  God  without  being  obliged  to
declare  a  belief  in  the  XXXIX  Articles,  is  a  liberty  that  no  '  goodman^ —
'no  man  of  sense  or  probity,'  '■would  wish  '  for.

*  I  Comm.  70.  If  no  reason  can  be  found  for  an  institution,  we  are  to
suppose  one  :  and  it  is  upon  the  strength  of  this  supposed  one  we  are  to
cry  it  up  as  reasonable ;  It  is  thus  that  the  Law  is  justified  of  her
children.

The  words  are — '  Not  that  the  particular  reason  of  every  rule  in  the
Law  can,  at  this  distance  of  time,  be  alwa^^s  precisely  assigned  ;  but  it  is
sufficient  that  there  be  nothing  in  the  rule  flatly  contradictory  to  reason,
and  then  the  Law  will  presume  it  to  be  \vell  founded.  And  it  hath  been
an  ancient  observation  in  the  Laws  of  England,'  (he  might  with  as  good
ground  have  added — and  in  all  other  Laws)  '  That  whenever  a  standing
rule  of  Law,  of  which  the  reason,  perhaps,  could  not  be  remembered  or
discerned,  hath  been  \_wantonly']  broke  in  upon  by  statutes  or  new  reso-
lutions, the  wisdom  of  the  rule  hath  in  the  end  appeared  from  the
inconveniences  that  have  followed  the  innovation.'

When  a  sentiment  is  expressed,  and  w^hether  from  caution,  or  from
confusion  of  ideas,  a  clause  is  put  in  by  way  of  qualifying  it  that  turns
it  into  nothing,  in  this  case  if  we  would  form  a  fair  estimate  of  the  ten-
dency and  probable  effect  of  the  whole  passage,  the  way  is,  I  take  it,  to
consider  it  as  if  no  such  clause  were  there.  Nor  let  this  seem  strange.
Taking  the  qualification  into  the  account,  the  sentiment  would  make  no
impression  on  the  mind  at  all  :  if  it  makes  any,  the  qualification  is
dropped,  and  the  mind  is  afi"ected  in  the  same  manner  nearly  as  it  would
be  were  the  sentiment  to  stand  unqualified.

This,  I  think,  we  maj'^  conclude  to  be  the  case  with  the  passage  above
mentioned.  The  word  '  wantonly '  is,  in  pursuance  of  our  Author's  standing
policy,  put  in  by  way  of  salvo.  JVith  it  the  sentiment  is  as  much  as
comes  to  nothing.  Without  it,  it  would  be  extravagant.  Yet  in  this
extravagant  form  it  is,  probably,  if  in  any,  that  it  passes  upon  the  Reader.

The  pleasant  part  of  the  contrivance  is,  the  mentioning  of  Statutes '  and
'  Resolutions'  (Resolutions  to  wit,  that  is  Decisions,  of  Courts  of  Justice)
in  the  same  breath  ;  as  if  whether  it  were  by  the  one  of  them  or  the
other  that  a  rule  of  Law  was  broke  in  upon,  made  no  difiference. By  a


1 1 2  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface.  jj-  jg  j,q|.  }^gj.g  j-j^^j.  j^g  turns  the  Law  into  a  Castle,  for
the  purpose  of  opposing  every  idea  of  'fundamental'
reparation  \

Resolution  indeed,  a  new  Resolution,  to  break  in  upon  a  standing  rule,  is
a  practice  that  in  good  truth  is  big  with  mischief.  But  this  mischief  on
what  does  it  depend  ?  Upon  the  rule's  being  a  reasonable  one  ?  By  no
means  :  but  upon  its  being  a  standing,  an  established  one.  Reasonable
or  not  reasonable,  is  what  makes  comparatively  but  a  trifling  difference.

A  new  resolution  made  in  the  teeth  of  an  old  established  rule  is
mischievous — on  what  account  ?  In  that  it  puts  men's  expectations  uni-
versally to  a  fault,  and  shakes  whatever  confidence  they  may  have  in  the
stability  of  any  rules  of  Law,  reasonable  or  not  reasonable  :  that  stability
on  which  every  thing  that  is  valuable  to  a  man  depends.  Beneficial  be
it  in  ever  so  high  a  degree  to  the  party  in  whose  favour  it  is  made,  the
benefit  it  is  of  to  him  can  never  be  so  great  as  to  outweigh  the  mischief
it  is  of  to  the  community  at  large.  Make  the  best  of  it,  it  is  general  evil
for  the  sake  of  partial  good.  It  is  what  Lord  Bacon  calls  setting  the
whole  house  on  fire,  in  order  to  roast  one  man's  eggs.

Here  then  the  salvo  is  not  wanted  :  a  '  new  resolution  can  never  be
acknowledged  to  be  contrary  to  a  standing  rule,'  but  it  must  oh  that  very
account  be  acknowledged  to  be  '■ivanton?  Let  such  a  resolution  be
made,  and  '  inconveniences  '  in  abundance  will  sure  enough  ensue  :  and
then  will  appear — what  ?  not  by  any  means  '  the  wisdom  of  the  rule,'
but,  what  is  a  very  different  thing,  the  folly  of  breaking  in  upon  it.

It  w^ere  almost  superfluous  to  remark,  that  nothing  of  all  this  applies  in
general  to  a  statute :  though  particular  Statutes  may  be  conceived  that
would  thwart  the  course  of  expectation,  and  by  that  means  produce
mischief  in  the  same  way  in  which  it  is  produced  by  irregular  resolutions.
A  new  statute,  it  is  manifest,  cannot,  unless  it  be  simply  a  declaratory
one,  be  made  in  any  case,  but  it  must  break  in  upon  some  standing  rule
of  Law.  With  regard  to  a  Statute  then  to  tell  us  that  a  '  wanton  '  one
has  produced  'inconveniences,'  what  is  it  but  to  tell  us  that  a  thing
that  has  been  mischievous  has  produced  mischief?

Of  this  temper  are  the  arguments  of  all  those  doting  politicians,  who,
when  out  of  humour  with  a  particular  innovation  without  being  able  to
tell  why,  set  themselves  to  declaim  against  all  innovation,  because  it  is
innovation.  It  is  the  nature  of  owls  to  hate  the  light :  and  it  is  the
nature  of  those  politicians  who  are  wise  by  rote,  to  detest  every  thing
that  forces  them  either  to  find  (what,  perhaps,  is  impossible)  reasons  for  a
favourite  persuasion,  or  (what  is  not  endurable)  to  discard  it.

1  3  Comm.  268,  at  the  end  of  Ch.  XVII.  which  concludes  with  three
pages  against  Reformation.  Our  Author  had  better,  perhaps,  on  this
occasion,  have  kept  clear  of  allegories :  he  should  have  considered
whether  they  might  not  be  retorted  on  him  with  severe  retaliation.  He
should  have  considered,  that  it  is  not  easier  to  him  to  turn  the  Law  into
a  Castle,  than  it  is  to  the  imaginations  of  impoverished  suitors  to  people
it  with  Harpies. He  should  have  thought  of  the  den  of  Cacus,  to  whose


Preface.  1 1 3

It is  not  here  that  he  turns  with scorn upon those Preface.
beneficent  Legislators,  whose  care  it  has  been  to  pluck  the
mask  of  Mystery  from  the  face  of  Jurisprudence  ^

enfeebled  optics,  to  whose  habits  of  dark  and  secret  rapine,  nothing  was
so  hateful,  nothing  so  dangerous,  as  the  light  of  day.

1  3  Comm.  322.  It  is  from  the  decisions  of  Courts  of  Justice  that  those
rules  of  Law  are  framed,  on  the  knowledge  of  which  depend  the  life,  the
fortune,  the  liberty  of  every  man  in  the  nation.  Of  these  decisions  the
Records  are,  according  to  our  Author  [i  Comm.  71]  the  most  authentic
histories.  These  Records  were,  till  within  these  five-and-forty  j'^ears,  in
Law- Latin  :  a  language  which,  upon  a  high  computation,  about  one  man
in  a  thousand  used  to  fancy  himself  to  understand.  In  this  Law-Latin  it
is  that  our  Author  is  satisfied  they  should  have  been  continued,  because
the  pyramids  of  Egypt  have  stood  longer  than  the  temples  of  Palmyra.
He  observes  to  us,  that  the  Latin  language  could  not  express  itself  on  the
subject  without  borrowing  a  multitude  of  virords  from  our  own  :  which  is
to  help  to  convince  us  that  of  the  two  the  former  is  the  fittest  to  be  em-
ployed. He  gives  us  to  understand  that,  taking  it  altogether,  there  could
be  no  room  to  complain  of  it,  seeing  it  was  not  more  unintelligible  than
the  jargon  of  the  schoolmen,  some  passages  of  which  he  instances  ;  and
then  he  goes  on,  'This  technical  Latin  continued  in  use  from  the  time  of
its  first  introduction  till  the  subversion  of  our  ancient  constitution  under
Cromwell ;  when,  among  many  other  innovations  on  the  body  of  the  Law,
some  for  the  better  and  some  for  the  worse,  the  language  of  our  Records
was  altered  and  turned  into  English.  But  at  the  Restoration  of  King
Charles,  this  novelty  was  no  longer  countenanced  ;  the  practisers  finding
it  very  difficult  to  express  themselves  so  concisely  or  significantly  in  any
other  language  but  the  Latin.  And  thus  it  continued  without  any  sensible
inconvenience  till  about  the  year  17301,  when  it  was  again  thought  proper
that  the  Proceedings  at  Law  should  be  done  into  English,  and  it  was
accordingly  so  ordered  by  statute  4  Geo.  II.  c.  26.

'  This  was  done  (continues  our  Author)  in  order  that  the  common  people
might  have  knowledge  and  understanding  of  what  was  alleged  or  done  for
and  against  them  in  the  process  and  pleadings,  the  judgment  and  entries
in  a  cause.  Which  purpose  I  know  not  how  well  it  has  answered  ;  but
am  apt  to  suspect  that  the  people  are  now,  after  many  years'  experience,
altogether  as  ignorant  in  matters  of  law  as  before.'

In  this  scornful  passage  the  words  novelty — dojtc  mio  English— «/>/  to
suspect — altogether  as  ignorant — sufficient]\'  speak  the  affection  of  the  mind
that  dictated  it.  It  is  thus  that  our  Author  chuckles  over  the  supposed
defeat  of  the  Legislature  with  a  fond  exultation  which  all  his  discretion
could  not  persuade  him  to  suppress.

The  case  is  this.  A  large  portion  of  the  bod}'  of  the  Law  was,  bj-the
bigotry  or  the  artifice  of  Lawyers,  locked  up  in  an  illegible  character,  and
in  a  foreign  tongue.  The  statute  he  mentions  obliged  them  to  give  up
their  hieroglyphics,  and  to  restore  the  native  language  to  its  rights.

This  was  doing  much ;  but  it  was  not doing  every  thing. Fiction.


1 1 4  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface. If  here\  as  every  where,  he  is  eager  to  hold  the  cup  of
flattery  to  high  station,  he  has  stopt  short,  however,  in

this  place,  of  idolatry  ^

tautology,  technicality,  circuitj^',  irregulanty,  inconsistency  remain.  But
above  all  the  pestilential  breath  of  Fiction  poisons  the  sense  of  every  in-
strument it  comes  near.

The  consequence  is,  that  the  Law,  and  especially  that  part  of  it  which
comes  under  the  topic  of  Procedure,  still  wants  much  of  being  generally
intelligible.  The  fault  then  of  the  Legislature  is  their  not  having  done
enough.  His  quarrel  with  them  is  for  having  done  any  thing  at  all.  In
doing  what  they  did,  they  set  up  a  light,  which,  obscured  by  many  remain-
ing clouds,  is  still  but  too  apt  to  prove  an  ignis  fatmts  :  our  Author,  instead
of  calling  for  those  clouds  to  be  removed,  deprecates  all  light,  and  pleads
for  total  darkness.

Not  content  with  representing  the  alteration  as  useless,  he  would  per-
suade us  to  look  upon  it  as  mischievous.  He  speaks  of '  inconveniences.'
What  these  inconveniences  are  it  is  pleasant  to  observe.

In  the  first  place,  many  young  practisers,  spoilt  by  the  indulgence  of
being  permitted  to  carry  on  their  business  in  their  mother-tongue,  know
not  how  to  read  a  Record  upon  the  old  plan,  '  Many  Clerks  and  Attor-
nies.'  saj's  our  Author,  '  are  hardly  able  to  read,  much  less  to  understand
a  Record  of  so  modern  a  date  as  the  reign  of  George  the  First.'

What  the  mighty  evil  is  here,  that  is  to  outweigh  the  mischief  of  almost
universal  ignorance,  is  not  altogether  clear  :  Whether  it  is,  that  certain
Lawyers,  in  a  case  that  happens  very  rarely,  may  be  obliged  to  get  assist-
ance :  or  that  the  business  in  such  a  case  may  pass  from  those  who  do
not  understand  it  to  those  who  do.

In  the  next  place,  he  observes  to  us,  '  it  has  much  enhanced  the  expense
of  all  legal  proceedings  :  for  since  the  practisers  are  confined  (for  the  sake
of  the  stamp-duties,  which  are  thereby  considerably  increased  to  WTite  only
a  stated  number  of  words  in  a  sheet ;  and  as  the  English  language,  through
the  multitude  of  its  particles,  is  much  more  verbose  than  the  Latin ;  it  follows,
that  the  number  of  sheets  must  be  very  much  augmented  by  the  change.'

I  w^ould  fain  persuade  myself,  were  it  possible,  that  this  unhappy  soph-
ism could  have  passed  apon  the  inventor.  The  sum  actually  levied  on  the
public  on  that  score  is,  upon  the  whole,  either  a  proper  sum  or  it  is  not.
If  it  is,  why  mention  it  as  an  evil  ?  If  it  is  not,  what  more  obvious  remedy
than  to  set  the  duties  lower  ?

After  all,  what  seems  to  be  the  real  evil,  notwithstanding  our  Author's
unwillingness  to  believe  it,  is,  that  by  means  of  this  alteration,  men  at  large
are  in  a  somewhat  better  way  of  knowing  what  their  Lawyers  are  about :
and  that  a  disinterested  and  enterprising  Legislator,  should  happily  such  an
one  arise,  would  now  with  somewhat  less  difficulty  be  able  to  see  before  him.

1  V.  infra,  Ch.  III.  par.  VII.  p.  187.

*  In  the  Seventh  Chapter  of  the  First  Book.  The  King  has  '  attributes  "  ; '
he  possesses  '  ubiquity^' ; '  he  is  '  all-perfect  and  immortal''.^

"  I  Comm.  242. ^  I  Comm.  Ch.  VII.  pp.  234,  238,  242,  First  Edition.
<=  I  Comm.  Ch.  VII.  p.  260,  First  Edition.


Preface.  115

It  is  not  then,  I  say,  this  part,  it  is  not  even  any  part  of  Preface.
that  Introduction,  to  which  alone  I  have  any  thoughts  of  '*^
extending  my  examination,  that  is  the  principal  seat  of  that
poison,  against  which  it  was  the  purpose  of  this  attempt
to  give  an  antidote.  The  subject  handled  in  this  part  of
the  work  is  such,  as  admits  not  of  much  to  be  said  in  the
person  of  the  Censor.  Employed,  as  we  have  seen,  in
settling  matters  of  a  preliminary  nature — in  drawing  out-
lines, it  is  not  in  this  part  that  there  was  occasion  to  enter
into  the  details  of  any  particular  institution.  If  I  chose
the  Introduction  then  in  preference  to  any  other  part,  it
was  on  account  of  its  affording  the  fairest  specimen  of  the
whole,  and  not  on  account  of  its  affording  the  greatest
scope  for  censure.

These  childish  paradoxes,  begotten  upon  servility  by  false  wit,  are  not
more  adverse  to  manly  sentiment,  than  to  accurate  apprehension.  Far
from  contributing  to  place  the  institutions  they  are  applied  to  in  any  clear
point  of  view,  they  serve  but  to  dazzle  and  confound,  by  giving  to  Reality
the  air  of  Fable.  It  is  true,  they  are  not  altogether  of  our  Author's  in-
vention :  it  is  he,  however,  that  has  revived  them,  and  that  with  improve-
ments and  additions.

One  might  be  apt  to  suppose  they  were  no  more  than  so  many  transient
flashes  of  ornament :  it  is  quite  otherwise.  He  dwells  upon  them  in  sober
sadness.  The  attribute  of  '  ubiquity,^  in  particular,  he  lays  hold  of,  and
makes  it  the  basis  of  a  chain  of  reasoning.  He  spins  it  out  into  conse-
quences :  he  makes  one  thing  'follow '  from  it,  and  another  thing  be  so
and  so  '  for  the  same  reason  : '  and  he  uses  emphatic  terms,  as  if  for  fear
he  should  not  be  thought  to  be  in  earnest.  '  From  the  ubiquity,' says  our
Author  [i  Comm.  p.  260]  '  it  follows,  that  the  King  can  never  be  nonsuit;
for  a  nonsuit  is  the  desertion  of  the  suit  or  action  by  the  non-appearance
of  the  plaintiff  in  Court.' — '  For  the  sam.e  reason  also  the  King  is  not  said
to  appear  by  his  Attorney,  as  other  men  do ;  for  he  always  appears  in
contemplation  of  Law  in  his  own  proper  person.'

This  is  the  case  so  soon  as  you  come  to  this  last  sentence  of  the  paragraph.
For  so  long  as  you  are  at  the  last  but  two,  '  it  is  the  regal  office,  and  }tot
the  royal  person,  that  is  always  present.'  All  this  is  so  drily  and  so  strictly
true,  that  it  serves  as  the  groundwork  of  a  metaphor  that  is  brought  in  to
embellish  and  enliven  it.  The  King,  we  see,  is,  that  is  to  say  is  not,  present
in  Court.  The  King's  Judges  are  present  too.  So  far  is  plain  downright
truth.  These  Judges,  then,  speaking  metaphorically,  are  so  many  looking-
glasses,  which  have  this  singular  property,  that  when  a  man  looks  at  them,
instead  of  seeing  his  own  face  in  them,  he  sees  the  King's.  '  His  Judges.'
saj's  our  Author,  '  are  the  mirror  by  which  the  King's  image  is  reflected.'

I  2


1 1 6  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface.  Let  US  reverse  the  tablet.  While  with  this  freedom  I
Its  merits,  expose  our  Author's  ill  deserts,  let  me  not  be  backward  in
acknowledging  and  paying  homage  to  his  various  merits :
a  justice  due,  not  to  him  alone,  but  to  that  Public,  which
now  for  so  many  years  has  been  dealing  out  to  him  (it
cannot  be  supposed  altogether  without  title)  so  large  a
measure  of  its  applause.

Correct,  elegant,  unembarrassed,  ornamented,  the  style
is  such,  as  could  scarce  fail  to  recommend  a  work  still  more
vicious  in  point  of  matter  to  the  multitude  of  readers.

He  it  is,  in  short,  who,  first  of  all  institutional  writers,
has  taught  Jurisprudence  to  speak  the  language  of  the
Scholar  and  the  Gentleman  :  put  a  polish  upon  that  rugged
science  :  cleansed  her  from  the  dust  and  cobwebs  of  the
office  :  and  if  he  has  not  enriched  her  with  that  precision
that  is  drawn  only  from  the  sterling  treasury  of  the
sciences,  has  decked  her  out,  however,  to  advantage,  from
the  toilette  of  classic  erudition  :  enlivened  her  with  meta-
phors and  allusions  :  and  sent  her  abroad  in  some  measure
to  instruct,  and  in  still  greater  measure  to  entertain,  the
most  miscellaneous  and  even  the  most  fastidious  societies.

The  merit  to  which,  as  much  perhaps  as  to  any,  the
work  stands  indebted  for  its  reputation,  is  the  enchanting
harmony  of  its  numbers :  a  kind  of  merit  that  of  itself  is
sufficient  to  give  a  certain  degree  of  celebrity  to  a  work"
devoid  of  every  other.  So  much  is  man  governed  by  the
ear.

The  function  of  the  Expositor  may  be  conceived  to
divide  itself  into  two  branches  :  that  of  history,  and  that  of  -
simple  demonstration.  The  business  of  history  is  to  repre-
sent the  Law  in  the  state  it  has  been  in,  in  past  periods  of
its  existence :  the  business  of  simple  demonstration  in  the
sense  in  which  I  will  take  leave  to  use  the  word,  is  to
represent  the  Law  in  the  state  it  is  in  for  the  time  being\

^  The  word  demonstration  may  here  seem,  at  first  sight,  to  be  out  of
place. It  will  be  easily  perceived  that  the  sense  here  put  upon  it  is  not


Preface.  1 1 7

Again,  to  the  head  of  demonstration  belong  the  several  Preface.
businesses  of  arrangement,  narration  and  conjecture.
Matter  of  narration  it  may  be  called,  where  the  Law  is
supposed  to  be  explicit,  clear,  and  settled :  matter  of
conjecture  or  interpretation,  where  it  is  obscure,  silent,
or  unsteady.  It  is  matter  of  arrangement  to  distribute  the
several  real  or  supposed  institutions  into  different  masses,
for  the  purpose  of  a  general  survey;  to  determine  the
order  in  which  those  masses  shall  be  brought  to  view ;  and
to  find  for  each  of  them  a  name.

The  business  of  narration  and  interpretation  are  con-
versant chiefly  about  particular  institutions.  Into  the
details  of  particular  institutions  it  has  not  been  my
purpose  to  descend.  On  these  topics,  then,  I  may  say,
in  the  language  of  procedure,  non  sum  informatus.
Viewing  the  work  in  this  light,  I  have  nothing  to  add  to
or  to  except  against  the  public  voice.

History  is  a  branch  of  instruction  which  our  Author,
though  not  rigidly  necessary  to  his  design,  called  in,  not
without  judgment,  to  cast  light  and  ornament  on  the  dull
work  of  simple  demonstration  :  this  part  he  has  executed
with  an  elegance  which  strikes  every  one :  with  what
fidelity,  having  not  very  particularly  examined,  I  will  not
take  upon  me  to  pronounce.

Among  the  most  difficult  and  the  most  important  of  the
functions  of  the  demonstrator  is  the  business  of  arrange-
ment. In  this  our  Author  has  been  thought,  and  not,  I
conceive,  without  justice,  to  excel ;  at  least  in  comparison
of  any  thing  in  that  way  that  has  hitherto  appeared.  'Tis
to  him  we  owe  such  an  arrangement  of  the  elements  of
Jurisprudence,  as  wants  little,  perhaps,  of  being  the  best

the  same  with  that  in  which  it  is  employed  b3^  Logicians  and  Mathema-
ticians. In  our  own  language,  indeed,  it  is  not  very  familiar  in  any  other
sense  than  theirs  :  but  on  the  Continent  it  is  currently  employed  in  many
other  sciences.  The  French,  for  example,  have  their  denioitstrateurs  de
botanique,  d'anaioytiie,  dc  physique  cxpciinicntale,  &^c.  I  use  it  out  of  neces-
sity ;  not  knowing  of  any  other  that  will  suit  the  purpose.


arran;
ment.


1 1 8  The  Fragment  on  Government.

Preface,  that  a  technical  nomenclature  will  admit  of.  A  technical
nomenclature,  so  long  as  it  is  admitted  to  mark  out  and
denominate  the  principal  heads,  stands  an  invincible
obstacle  to  every  other  than  a  technical  arrangement.
For  to  denominate  in  general  terms,  what  is  it  but  to
arrange  ?  and  to  arrange  under  heads,  what  is  it  but  to
denominate  upon  a  large  scale  ?  A  technical  arrangement,
governed  then  in  this  manner,  by  a  technical  nomen-
clature, can  never  be  otherwise  than  confused  and  iin-
satisfactory .  The  reason  will  be  sufficiently  apparent,
when  we  understand  what  sort  of  an  arrangement  that
must  be  which  can  be  properly  termed  a  natural  one.
Idea  of  That  arrangement  of  the  materials  of  any  science  may,

a  natural t  i • i  i  i  i • i  i  i

1  take  it,  be  termed  a  natural  one,  which  takes  such
properties  to  characterize  them  by,  as  men  in  general
are,  by  the  common  constitution  of  man's  nature,  disposed
to  attend  to :  such,  in  other  words,  as  naturally,  that  is
readily,  engage,  and  firmly  fix  the  attention  of  any  one
to  whom  they  are  pointed  out.  The  materials,  or  elements
here  in  question,  are  such  actions  as  are  the  objects  of
what  we  call  Laws  or  Institutions.

Now  then,  with  respect  to  actions  in  general,  there  is
no  property  in  them  that  is  calculated  so  readily  to
engage,  and  so  firmly  to  fix  the  attention  of  an  observer,
as  the  tendency  they  may  have  to,  or  divergency  (if  one  may
so  sa.y)  from,  that  which  may  be  styled  the  common  end  of
all  of  them.  The  end  I  mean  is  Happiness ' :  and  this
tendency  in  any  act  is  what  we  st3'le  its  utility :  as  this
divergency  is  that  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  mischiev-
ousness.  With  respect  then  to  such  actions  in  particular
as  are  among  the  objects  of  the  Law,  to  point  out  to  a  man

*  Let  this  be  taken  for  a  truth  upon  the  authority  of  Aristotle  :  I  mean
by  those,  who  Hke  the  authority  of  Aristotle  better  than  that  of  their  own
experience.  Ilacra  Ttxvr},  says  that  philosopher,  Kai  iraaa  fiiOobos'  d/xoiai^
Si  ■npa^l's  Te  Kal  TTpoaipfais,  dyaOov  Tivos  ((pieaOat  SoKer  did  Ka\ws  dne(prji'avro
Tuyaddu,  ov  navTa  eipierat.  Aiacpopd  de  tis  (paivirai  tmv  (understand  toiovtwv)
TEAnN.— Arist.  Eth.  ad  Nic.  L.  I.  c.  i.


Preface.  1 1 9

the  utility  of  them  or  the  mischievousness,  is  the  only  way  Preface.
to  make  him  see  clearly  that  property  of  them  which  every '^
man  is  in  search  of;  the  only  way,  in  short,  to  give  him
satisfaction.

From  utility  then  we  may  denominate  a  principle,  thaQ
may  serve  to  preside  over  and  govern,  as  it  were,  such\
arrangement  as  shall  be  made  of  the  several  institutions
or  combinations  of  institutions  that  compose  the  matter  of
this  science  :  and  it  is  this  principle,  that  by  putting  its
stamp  upon  the  several  names  given  to  those  combina-
tions, can  alone  render  satisfactory  and  clear  any  arrange-
ment that  can  be  made  of  them.

Governed  in  this  manner  by  a  principle  that  is  recog-
nized by  all  men,  the  same  arrangement  that  would  serve
for  the  jurisprudence  of  anyone  country,  would  serve  with
little  variation  for  that  of  any  other.

Yet  more.  The  mischievousness  of  a  bad  Law  would
be  detected,  at  least  the  utility  of  it  would  be  rendered
suspicious,  by  the  difficulty  of  finding  a  place  for  it  in  such
an  arrangement :  while,  on  the  other  hand,  a  technical
arrangement  is  a  sink  that  with  equal  facility  will  swallow
any  garbage  that  is  thrown  into  it.

That  this  advantage  may  be  possessed  by  a  natural
arrangement,  is  not  difficult  to  conceive.  Institutions
would  be  characterized  by  it  in  the  only  universal  way  in
which  they  can  be  characterized ;  by  the  nature  of  the
several  modes  of  conduct  which,  by  prohibiting,  thej^  con-
stitute offences'^.

These  offences  would  be  collected  into  classes  de-
nominated by  the  various  modes  of  their  divergency  from
the  common  etid ;  that  is,  as  we  have  said,  by  their  various

^  Offences,  the  Reader  will  remember,  may  as  well  be  offences  oi  omis-
sion as  of  commission.  I  would  avoid  the  embarrassment  of  making  sepa-
rate mention  of  such  Laws  as  exert  themselves  in  comni(iii<iiiig.  'Tis  on
this  account  I  use  the  phrase  '  mode  of  conduct,^  which  includes  omissions
or forbeayances,  as  well  as  acts.


1 20  The  FragjJient  on  Government.

Preface,  forms  and  degrees  of  mischievoiisness  :  in  a  word,  by  those
^  properties  which  are  reasons  for  their  being  made  offences  :
and  whether  any  such  mode  of  conduct  possesses  any  such
property  is  a  question  of  experience  \  Now,  a  bad  Law
is  that  which  prohibits  a  mode  of  conduct  that  is  not  mis-
chievous "-.  Thus  would  it  be  found  impracticable  to  place
the  mode  of  conduct  prohibited  by  a  bad  law  under  any
denomination  of  offence,  without  asserting  such  a  matter
of  fact  as  is  contradicted  by  experience.  Thus  cultivated,
in  short,  the  soil  of  Jurisprudence  would  be  found  to  repel
in  a  manner  every  evil  institution  ;  like  that  country  which
refuses,  we  are  told,  to  harbour  any  thing  venomous  in  its
bosom.

The  synopsis  of  such  an  arrangement  would  at  once  be
a  compendium  of  expository  and  of  c^«5or;a/ Jurisprudence :
nor  would  it  serve  more  effectually  to  instruct  the  subject,
than  it  would  to  justify  or  reprove  the  Legislator.

Such  a  synopsis,  in  short,  would  be  at  once  a  map,  and
that  an  universal  one,  of  Jurisprudence  as  it  is,  and  a
slight  but  comprehensive  sketch  of  what  it  ought  to  be.
For,  the  reasons  of  the  several  institutions  comprised
under  it  would  stand  expressed,  we  see,  and  that  uni-
formly (as  in  our  Author's  synopsis  they  do  in  scattered
instances)  by  the  names  given  to  the  several  classes  under
which  those  institutions  are  comprised.  And  what
reasons  ?  Not  technical  reasons,  such  as  none  but  a
Lawyer  gives,  nor  any  but  a  Lawyer  would  put  up  with  ' ;

'  See  note  3,  p.  122.

^  See  note,  p.  i.ig.

^  Technical  reasons :  so  called  from  the  Greek  rexv-q,  which  signifies  an
art,  science,  or  profession.

Utility  is  that  standard  to  which  men  in  general  (except  in  here  and
there  an  instance  where  they  are  deterred  by  prejudices  of  the  religious
class,  or  hurried  away  by  the  force  of  what  is  called  sentiment  or  feeling).
Utility,  as  we  have  said,  is  the  standard  to  which  they  refer  a  Law  or  in-
stitution in  judging  of  its  title  to  approbation  or  disapprobation.  Men  of
Law,  corrupted  by  interests,  or  seduced  by  illusions,  which  it  is  not  here
our  business  to  display,  have  deviated  from  it  much  more  frequently,  and


Preface.  1 2 1

but  reasons,  such  as  were  they  in  themselves  what  they  Preface.
might  and  ought  to  be,  and  expressed  too  in  the  manner
they  might  and  ought  to  be,  any  man  might  see  the  force
of  as  well  as  he.

Nor  in  this  is  there  any  thing  that  need  surprise  us.
The  consequences  of  any  Law,  or  of  any  act  which  is  \
made  the  object  of  a Law,  the  only  consequences  that  ■
men  are  at  all  interested  in,  what  are  they  but  pain  and ^
pleasure  ? By  some  such  words  then  as  pain  and  pleasure,
they  may  be  expressed  :  and  pain  and  pleasure  at  least,  are
words  which  a  man  has  no  need,  we  may  hope,  to  go  to  a
Lawyer  to  know  the  meaning  of  \ In  the  synopsis  then  of
that  sort  of  arrangement  which  alone  deserves  the  name  of
a  natural  one,  terms  such  as  these,  terms  which  if  they
can be said to belong  to any  science, belong rather
to Ethics than to Jurisprudence, even than to uni-
versal Jurisprudence,  will  engross  the  most  commanding
stations.

What  then  is  to  be  done  with  those  names  of  classes
that  are  purely  technical  ? — With  offences,  for  example,
against  prerogative,  with  misprisions,  contempts,  felonies,
praemunires^?  What  relation  is  it  that  these  mark  out
between  the  Laws  that  concern  the  sorts  of  acts  they  are
respectively  put  to  signify,  and  that  common  end  we  have
been  speaking  of?  Not  any.  In  a  natural  arrangement
what  then  would  become  of  them  ?  They  would  either  be
banished  at  once  to  the  region  o{  quiddities  and  substantial
forms ;  or  if,  and  in  deference  to  attachments  too  inveterate

with  much  less  reser\'e.  Hence  it  is  that  such  reasons  as  pass  with
Lawyers,  and  with  no  one  else,  have  got  the  name  of  tecliiiical  reasons ;
reasons  peculiar  to  the  art,  peculiar  to  the  profession.

'  The  reason  of  a  Law,  in  short,  is  no  other  than  the  good  produced  by
the  mode  of  conduct  which  it  enjoins,  or  (which  comes  to  the  same  thing)
the  mischief  produced  by  the  mode  of  conduct  which  it  prohibits.  This
mischief  or  this  good,  if  they  be  real,  cannot  but  shew  themselves  some-
where or  other  in  the  shape  oi pain  or  pleasure.

*  See  in  the  Sjaioptical  Table  prefixed  to  our  Author's  Analysis,  the
last  page  comprehending  Book  IV.


122  The  Fragment  on  Government.


Merits  of
the  work
resumed.


Prefacl.  to  be  all  at  once  dissolved,  they  were  still  to  be  indulged  a
— •"* —

place,  they  would  be  stationed  in  the  corners  and  bye-
places  of  the  Synopsis  :  stationed,  not  as  now  to  give  light,
but  to  receive  it.  But  more  of  this,  perhaps,  at  some
future  time.

To  return  to  our  Author.  Embarrassed,  as  a  man  must
needs  be,  by  this  blind  and  intractable  nomenclature,  he
will  be  found,  I  conceive,  to  have  done  as  much  as  could
reasonably  be  expected  of  a  writer  so  circumstanced  ;  and
more  and  better  than  was  ever  done  before  by  any  one.

In  one  part,  particularly,  of  his  Synopsis  \  several  frag-
ments of  a  sort  of  method  which  is,  or  at  least  comes  near
to,  what  may  be  termed  a  natural  one  -,  are  actually  to  be
found.  We  there  read  of  '  corporal  injuries ; '  of  '  offences
against /»^ac^;'  against  'health;'  against  '  personal  security"",'
'liberty:' — 'property.' — light  is  let  in,  though  irregularly,
at  various  places.

In  an  unequal  imitation  of  this  Synopsis  that  has  lately
been  performed  upon  what  is  called  the  Civil  Law,  all  is
technical.  All,  in  short,  is  darkness.  Scarce  a  syllable
by  which  a  man  would  be  led  to  suspect,  that  the  affair  in


'  It  is  that  which  comprises  his  IVth  Book,  entitled  Public  Wrongs.

^  Fraginenta  niethodi  natiiralis. — Linn^i  Phil.  Bot.  Tit.  Systemata,
par.  77.

^  This  title  affords  a  pertinent  instance  to  exemplify  the  use  that  a
natural  arrangement  may  be  of  in  repelling  an  incompetent  institution.
What  I  mean  is  the  sort  of  filthiness  that  is  termed  unnatural.  This  our
Author  has  ranked  in  his  class  of  Offences  against  ' personal  security,^  and,
in  a  subdivision  of  it,  intitled  '  Corporal  injuries.''  In  so  doing,  then,  he
has  asserted  a  fact :  he  has  asserted  that  the  offence  in  question  is  an
offence  against  personal  security ;  is  a  corporal  injury ;  is,  in  short,
productive  of  unhappiness  in  that  ivay.  Now  this  is  what,  in  the  case
where  the  act  is  committed  by  consent^  is  manifestly  not  true.  Volenti
non  Jit  injuria.  If  then  the  Law  against  the  offence  in  question  had  no
other  title  to  a  place  in  the  system  than  what  was  founded  on  this  fact,
it  is  plain  it  would  have  none.  It  would  be  a  bad  Law  altogether.  The
mischief  the  offence  is  of  to  the  community  in  this  case  is  in  truth  of
quite  another  nature,  and  would  come  under  quite  another  class.  When
against  consent,  there  indeed  it  does  belong  really  to  this  class  :  but  then
it  would  come  under  another  name. It  would  come  under  that  of  Rape.


Preface.  1 2  3

hand  were  an  affair  that  happiness  or  unhappiness  was  at  Preface.
all  concerned  in  ^

To  return,  once  more,  to  onr  Author's  Commentaries.
Not  even  in  a  censorial  view  would  I  be  understood  to
deem  them  altogether  without  merit.  For  the  institutions
commented  on,  where  they  are  capable  of  good  reasons,
good  reasons  are  every  now  and  then  given  :  in  which  way,
so  far  as  it  goes,  one-half  of  the  Censor's  task  is  well  ac-
complished. Nor  is  the  dark  side  of  the  picture  left  abso-
lutely untouched.  Under  the  head  of  'Trial  by  Jury,'  are
some  very  just  and  interesting  remarks  on  the  yet-remaining
imperfections  of  that  mode  of  triaP:  and  under  that  of  'As-
surances by  matter  of  Record,'  on  the  lying  and  extortious
jargon  oi Recoveries'^ .  So  little,  however,  are  these  parti-  Manner  in
cular  remarks  of  a  piece  with  the  general  disposition,  that  ^^esent
shews  itself  so  strongly  throughout  the  work,  indeed  so  Essay  has

been  con-
plainly  adverse  to  the  general  maxims  that  we  have  seen,  ducted.

that  I  can  scarce  bring  myself  to  attribute  them  to  our  Author.
Not  only  disorder  is  announced  by  them,  but  remedies,  well-
imagined  remedies,  are  pointed  out.  One  would  think  some
Angel  had  been  sowing  wheat  among  our  Author's  tares  \

^  I  think  it  is  Selden,  somewhere  in  his  Table-talk^  that  speaks  of  a
whimsical  notion  he  had  hit  upon  when  a  school-boy,  that  with  regard  to
Ccesar  and  Justin,  and  those  other  personages  of  antiquity  that  gave  him
so  much  trouble,  there  was  not  a  syllable  of  truth  in  any  thing  they  said,
nor  in  fact  were  there  ever  really  any  such  persons  ;  but  that  the  whole
affair  was  a  contrivance  of  parents  to  find  employment  for  their  children.
Much  the  same  sort  of  notion  is  that  which  these  technical  arrangements
are  calculated  to  give  us  of  Jurisprudence  :  which  in  them  stands  repre-
sented rather  as  a  game  at  Crambo  for  Lawyers  to  whet  their  wits  at,  than
as  that  Science  which  holds  in  her  hand  the  happiness  of  nations.

Let  us,  however,  do  no  man  wrong.  Where  the  success  has  been
worse,  the  difficulty  was  greater.  That  detestable  chaos  of  institutions
which  the  Anal3'st  last-mentioned  had  to  do  with  is  still  more  embarrassed
with  a  technical  nomenclature  than  our  own.

""  3  Comm.  Ch.  XXllI.  p.  387.

^  2  Comm.  Ch.  XXI.  p.  360.

*  The  difference  between  a  generous  and  determined  affection,  and  an
occasional,  and  as  it  were  forced  contribution,  to  the  cause  of  reformation,
may  be  seen,  I  think,  in  these  Commentaries,  compared  with  another
celebrated  work  on  the  subject  of  our  Jurisprudence. Mr.  Barrington,


Preface.


124  The  Fragment  on  Government.

With  regard  to  this  Essay  itself,  I  have  not  much  to  say.
The  principal  and  professed  purpose  of  it  is,  to  expose  the
errors  and  insufficiencies  of  our  Author.  The  business  of
it  is  therefore  rather  to  overthrow  than  to  set  up ;  which
latter  task  can  seldom  be  performed  to  any  great  advantage
where  the  former  is  the  principal  one.

To  guard  against  the  danger  of  misrepresentation,  and
to  make  sure  of  doing  our  Author  no  injustice,  his  own
words  are  given  all  along :  and,  as  scarce  any  sentence  is
left  unnoticed,  the  whole  comment  wears  the  form  of  what
is  called  a  perpetual  one.  With  regard  to  a  discourse  that
is  simply  institutional,  and  in  which  the  writer  builds  upon
a  plan  of  his  own,  a  great  part  of  the  satisfaction  it  can  be
made  to  afford  depends  upon  the  order  and  connection
that  are  established  between  the  several  parts  of  it.  In
a  comment  upon  the  work  of  another,  no  such  connection,
or  at  least  no  such  order,  can  be  established  commodiously,
if  at  all.  The  order  of  the  comment  is  prescribed  by  the
order,  perhaps  the  disorder,  of  the  text.

The  chief  employment  of  this  Essay,  as  we  have  said,
has  necessarily  been  to  overthrow.  In  the  little,  therefore,
which  has  been  done  by  it  in  the  way  of  setting  up,  my  view
has  been  not  so  much  to  think  for  the  Reader,  as  to  put
him  upon  thinking  for  himself.  This  I  flatter  myself  with
having  done  on  several  interesting  topics ;  and  this  is  all
that  at  present  I  propose.

Among  the  few  positions  of  my  own  which  I  have  found
occasion  to  advance,  some  I  observe  which  promise  to  be
far  from  popular. These  it  is  likely  may  give  rise  to  very

whose  agreeable  Miscellany  has  done  so  much  towards  opening  men's
eyes  upon  this  subject;  Mr.  Barrington,  like  an  active  General  in  the
service  of  the  Public,  storms  the  strongholds  of  chicane,  wheresoever
they  present  themselves,  and  particularly  fictions,  without  reser\-e.  Our
Author,  like  an  artful  partizan  in  the  service  of  the  profession,  sacrifices  a
few,  as  if  it  were  to  save  the  rest.

Deplorable,  indeed,  would  have  been  the  student's  chance  for  salutary
instruction,  did  not  Mr.  Barrington's  work  in  so  man3'  instances,  furnish
the  antidote  to  our  Author's  poisons.


Preface.  125

warm  objections :  objections  which  in  themselves  I  do  not  Preface.
wonder  at,  and  which  in  their  motive  I  cannot  but  approve.  ^
The  people  are  a  set  of  masters  whom  it  is  not  in  a  man's
power  in  every  instance  fully  to  please,  and  at  the  same
time  faithfully  to  serve.  He  that  is  resolved  to  persevere
without  deviation  in  the  line  of  truth  and  utility,  must  have
learnt  to  prefer  the  still  whisper  of  enduring  approbation,
to  the  short-lived  bustle  of  tumultuous  applause.

Other  passages  too  there  may  be,  of  which  some  farther
explanation  may  perhaps  not  unreasonably  be  demanded.
But  to  give  these  explanations,  and  to  obviate  those  objec-
tions, is  a  task  which,  if  executed  at  all,  must  be  referred
to  some  other  opportunity.  Consistency  forbad  our  expa-
tiating so  far  as  to  lose  sight  of  our  Author:  since  it  was
the  line  of  his  course  that  marked  the  boundaries  of  ours.


A

FRAGMENT ON GOVERNMENT.


INTRODUCTION.

Introdlc-

J_  TION.

»-•

The  subject  of  this  examination,  is  a  passage  con-  Dh-ision  of
tained  in  that  part  of  Sir  W.  BLACKSTONES  °hort"in-
CoMMENTARiES  on  the  Laws  of  England,  which  the  troduction.
Author  has  styled  the  Introduction.  This  Introduc-
tion of  his  stands  divided  into  four  Sections.  The
first  contains  his  discourse  ^On  the  Study  of  the  Law.'
The  second^  entitled  ^  Of  the  Nature  o/'Laws  in  gene-
ral^ contains  his  speculations  concerning  the  various
objects,  real  or  imaginar}",  that  are  in  use  to  be  men-
tioned under  the  common  name  of  Law.  The  third,
entitled  '  Of  the  Laws  of  England,'  contains  such
general  obser\'ations,  relative  to  these  last  mentioned
Laws,  as  seemed  proper  to  be  premised  before  he
entered  into  the  details  of  any  parts  of  them  in  parti-
cular. In  the/o/zr///,  entitled,  ^  Of  the  Co\]i<iTRi-ES  subject
to  the  Laws  of  England,'  is  given  a  statement  of
the  different  territorial  extents  of  different  branches
of  those  Laws.


128  A  Fragment  on  Government.


^i3


Introduc-  W

TION'.

~~j^J  'Tis  in  the  second  of  these  sections,  that  we  shall

What  part  find  the  passage  proposed  for  examination.  It  occu-
to  be  exa-  pies  in  the  edition  I  happen  to  have  before  me,  which
mined. -^  \}^q  first  {dccidi  all  the  editions,  I  believe,  are  paged

alike)  the  space  of  seven  pages  ;  from  the  47th,  to  the

53d,  inclusive.

III.

III.
His  defi. After  treating  of  '  Law  in  general^  of  the  '  Law  of

LaAv  muni-  Natitrc'  '  Law  of  Revelatioit'  and  *  Law  of  Nations'
cipai.  branches  of  that  imaginary  whole,  our  Author  comes
at  length  to  what  he  calls  '  Law  nmnicipal\  that  sort
of  Law,  to  which  men  in  their  ordinary  discourse
would  give  the  name  of  Law  without  addition  ;  the
only  sort  perhaps  of  them  all  (unless  it  be  that  of
Revelation)  to  which  the  name  can,  with  strict  pro-
priety, be  applied  :  in  a  word,  that  sort  which  we  see
made  in  each  nation,  to  express  the  will  of  that  body
in  it  which  governs.  On  this  subject  of  Law  Muni-
cipal he  sets  out,  as  a  man  ought,  with  a  definition  of
the  phrase  itself;  an  important  and  fundamental
phrase,  which  stood  highly  in  need  of  a  definition,
and  never  so  much  as  since  our  Author  has  de-
fined it.

IV.

IV.

A  digres- This  definition  is  ushered  in  with  no  small  display

sion  in  the  _,....  .  ...

middle  of  of  accuracy.  First,  it  is  given  entire  :  it  is  then  taken
geneid  ^o  picccs,  clausc  by  clause ;  and  every  clause  by  it-
contents,  ggif^  justified  and  explained.  In  the  very  midst  of
these  explanations,  in  the  very  midst  of  the  definition,
he  makes  a  sudden  stand.  And  now  it  bethinks  him
that  it  is  a  good  time  to  give  a  dissertation,  or  rather
a  bundle  of  dissertations,  upon  various  subjects — On
the  manner  in  which  Governments  were  established —


I


Introduction.  129

On  the  different  forms  they  assume  when  they  are  Introduc
estabhshed — On  the  pecuHar  excellence  of  that  form  — «—
which  is  established  in  this  country — On  the  rights
which  he  thinks  it  necessary  to  tell  us,  the  Govern-
ment in  every  country  has  of  making  Laws — On  the
duty  of  making  Laws  ;  which,  he  says,  is  also  incum-
bent on  the  Government.^In  stating  these  two  last
heads,  I  give,  as  near  as  possible,  his  own  words ;
thinking  it  premature  to  engage  in  discussions,  and
not  daring  to  decide  without  discussion  on  the  sense.

V.

V.

The  digression we are  about  to  examine, is, as  This  di-
it  happens,  not  at  all  involved  with  the  body  of  the  the  subject
work  from  which  it  starts. No  mutual  references  or  °^'^^  ^^^'

sent  ex-
allusions  :  no  supports  or  illustrations  communicated  amination.

or  received. It  maybe  considered  as  one  small  work

inserted  into  a  large  one  ;  the  contain///^  and  the  con-

tained,  having  scarce  any  other  connection  than  what

the  operations  of  the  press  have  given  them. It  is

this  disconnection  that  will  enable  us  the  better  to

bestow  on  the  latter  a  separate  examination,  without

breaking  in  upon  any  thread of  reasoning,  or  any

principle  of  Order.

VI.

VI.

A  general  statement  of  the  topics touched  upon  Our  Au-
in  the  digression  we  are  about  to  examine  has  been  sketch  of
given  above. It  will  be  found,  I  trust,  a  faithful  one.  ^^^^3°""
It  will  not  be  thought,  however,  much  of  a  piece,  per-
haps, with  the  following,  which  our  Author  himself
has  given  us. 'This,'  (says  he\  meaning  an  explan-
ation he  had  been  giving  of  a  part  of  the  definition
above  spoken  of)  *  will  naturally  lead  us  into  a  short
enquiry  into  the  nature  of  society  and  civil  govern-

*  I  Comni.  p.  47.
K


130  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Introduc-  ment  ^ ;  and  the  natural  inherent  right  that  belongs
— ►♦_ to  the  sovereignty  of  a  state,  wherever  that sover-
eignty be  lodged,  of  making  and  enforcing  Laws.'


VII.


VII.


inade-  |sJq  yery  explicit  mention  here,  we  may  observe,  of

the  manner  in  which  governments  have  been  es-
tablished, or  of  the  different yorw5  they  assume  when
established :  no  very  explicit  intimation  that  these  were
among  the  topics  to  be  discussed.  None  at  all  of  the
duty  of  government  to  make  laws  ;  none  at  all  of  the
British  constitution  ;  though,  of  the  four  other  topics
we  have  mentioned,  there  is  no  one  on  which  he  has
been  near  so  copious  as  on  this  last.  The  rigid  of
Government  to  make  laws,  that  delicate  and  invidious
topic,  as  we  shall  find  it  when  explained,  is  that  which
for  the  moment,  seems  to  have  swallowed  up  almost
the  whole  of  his  attention.


VIII.


VIII.


Division  of gg  this  as  it  may,  the  contents  of  the  dissertation

the  present

Essay.  before  us,  taken  as  I  have  stated  them,  will  furnish  us
with  the  matter  of  five  chapters : — one,  which  I  shall
entitle  'Formation  of  Government' — a  second,
'  Forms  of  Government  ' — a  third,  '  British  Con-
stitution ' — a  fourth,  '  Right  of  tJie  Supreme  Power
to  maf^e  Laws  ' — a  fifth, '  Duty  of  the  Supreme  Power
to  make  Laws,'

'  To  make  sure  of  doing  our  Author  no  injustice,  and  to  shew  what  it
is  that  he  thought  would  '  naturally  lead  us  into '  this  '  enquiry,'  it  may  be
proper  to  give  the  paragraph  containing  the  explanation  above  mentioned.
It  is  as  follows  :— 'But  farther  :  municipal  law  is  a  rule  of  civil  conduct,
prescribed  by  the  supreme powet-  in  a  state.'  '  For  legislature,  as  was  before
observed,  is  the  greatest  act  of  superiority  that  can  be  exercised  by  one
being  over  another.  Wherefore  it  is  requisite,  to  the  very  essence  of  a
law,  that  it  be  made '  (he  might  have  added,  or  at  least  supported)  '  by
the  supreme  power.  Sovereignty  and  legislature  are  indeed  convertible
terms;  one  cannot  subsist  without  the  other.' i  Comm.  p.  46.


CHAPTER  I.


FORMATION OF GOVERNMENT.

Chap.

I.  -J^


The  first  object  which  our  Author  seems  to  have  Subject  of
11- ir  • 1 T  ■  the  pas-

proposed  to  himself  m  the  dissertation  we  are  about  sage  to  be

to  examine,  is  to  give  us  an  idea  of  the  manner  in  fn^the  pre-

which Governments  were formed. This  occupies  ^'^"'^

'  chapter.

the  first  paragraph,  together  with  part  of  the  second :
for  the  typographical  division  does  not  seem  to  quad-
rate veiy  exactly  with  the  intellectual.  As  the
examination  of  this  passage  will  unavoidably  turn
in  great  measure  upon  the  words,  it  will  be  proper
the  reader  should  have  it  under  his  eye.

II.

II.
'  The  only  true  and  natural  foundations  of  society,'  The  pas-

(says  our  Author  ^)  '  are  the  wants  and  the  fears  of  cit'ed.

individuals. Not  that we can  believe, with some

theoretical  writers,  that  there  ever  was  a  time  when

there  was  no  such  thing  as  society ; and  that,  from

the  impulse  of  reason,  and  through  a  sense  of  their

wants  and  weaknesses,  individuals  met  together  in  a

large plain, entered into an original  contract,  and

^ I  Comm.  p.  47.
K  2


132  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap. chosG  the  tallcst  man  present  to  be  their  governor.

— M —  This  notion  of  an  actually  existing  unconnected
state  of  nature,  is  too  wild  to  be  seriously  admitted ;
and  besides,  it  is  plainly  contradictory  to  the  revealed
accounts  of  the  primitive  origin  of  mankind,  and
their  preservation  two  thousand  years  afterwards  ;
both  which  were  effected  by  the  means  of  single
families.  These  formed  the  first  society,  among
themselves ;  which  every  day  extended  its  limits,  and
when  it  grew  too  large  to  subsist  with  convenience
in  that  pastoral  state,  wherein  the  patriarchs  appear
to  have  lived,  it  necessarily  subdivided  itself  by
various  migrations  into  more.  Afterwards,  as  agri-
culture increased,  which  employs  and  can  maintain  a
much  greater  number  of  hands,  migrations  became
less  frequent ;  and  various  tribes  which  had  formerly
separated,  re-united  again  ;  sometimes  by  compulsion
and  conquest,  sometimes  by  accident,  and  sometimes
perhaps  by  compact.  But  though  society  had  not  its
formal  beginning  from  any  convention  of  individuals,
ractuated  by  their  wants  and  their  fears ;  3''et  it  is  the
\sense  of  their  weakness  and  imperfection  that  Jieeps
'mankind  together;  that  demonstrates  the  necessit}''
j  of  this  union  ;  and  that  therefore  is  the  solid  and
I  natural  foundation,  as  w^ell  as  the  cement  of  society :
'  And  this  is  what  we  mean  by  the  original  contract  of
society ;  which,  though  perhaps  in  no  instance  it
has  ever  been  formally  expressed  at  the  first  in-
stitution of  a  state,  yet  in  nature  and  reason  must
always  be  understood  and  implied,  in  the  very  act  of
associating  together :  namely,  that  the  whole  should
protect  all  its  parts,  and  that  every  part  should
pay  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  whole ;  or,  in  other
words,  that  the  community  should  guard  the  rights  of
each  individual  member,  and  that  (in  return  for  this


Formation  of  Government.  133

protection)  each  individual  should  submit  to  the  laws Chap.
of  the  community  ;  without  which  submission  of  all ];
it  was  impossible  that  protection  could  be  certainly
extended  to  any.'

'  For  when  society  is  once  formed,  government
results  of  course,  as  necessary  to  preserv^e  and  to
keep  that  society  in  order.  Unless  some  superior
were  constituted,  whose  commands  and  decisions  all
the  members  are  bound  to  obe}^,  they  would  still
remain  as  in  a  state  of  nature,  without  any  judge  upon
earth  to  define  their  several  rights,  and  redress  their
several  wrongs.' — Thus  far  our  Author.


III.

When  leading  terms  are  made  to  chop  and  change  Confusion
their  several  significations  ;  sometimes  meaning  one  fe'^dhiV^^
thing,  sometimes  another,  at  the  upshot  perhaps '^''"'^  °^ '*•
nothing ;  and  this  in  the  compass  of  a  paragraph ;
one  may  judge  what  will  be  the  complexion  of  the
whole  context.  This,  we  shall  see,  is  the  case
with  the  chief  of  those  we  have  been  reading :  for
instance,  with  the  words  '  Society,'—'  State  of  nature,'
— 'original  contract,'— not  to  tire  the  reader  with
any  more.  *  Society'  in  one  place  means  the  same
thing  as  '  a  state  of  nature '  does  :  in  another  place
it  means  the  same  as  *  Government'  Here,  we  are
required  to  believe  there  never  was  such  a  state  as  a
state  of  nature  :  there  we  are  given  to  understand
there  Itas  been.  In  like  manner  with  respect  to
an  original  contract  we  are  given  to  understand  that
such  a  thing  never  existed;  that  the  notion  of  it
is  ridiculous  :  at  the  same  time  that  there  is  no
speaking  nor  stirring  without  supposing  there  was
one.


134  ^  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap.  jy.

jv.  15/,  Society  means  a  state  of  nature. For  if  by

'Society' <^ ^f^^f^  gf  nature' a  man  means  any  thin^, it is

put  syno-  •'  .  .  JO'

nymous  the  State,  I  take  it,  men  are  in  or  supposed  to  be
of  nature  i^r  before  they  are  xindQY  government-,  the  state  men
—opposed  qyjj.  ^j^gj^  t]-jgy  enter  into  a  state  of  government ;  and

to'Govern-  ^  -j  o  '

ment'— in  which  were  it not  for  government they would

and  spo-  .  t-. i  i  -i i  ■,•>•• ^

ken  of  as  remam.  But  by  the  word  society  it  is  plain  at  one
fsted^^^  time  that  he  means  that  state.  First,  according  to
him,  comes  society;  then  afterwards  comes  govern-
ment. '  For  when  society,'  says  our  Author,  '  is  once
formed,  government  results  of  course  ;  as  necessary
to  preserve  and  keep  that  society  in  order.' — And
again,  immediately  afterwards, — *A  state  in  which
a  superior  has  been  constituted,  whose  commands
and  decisions  all  the  members  are  bound  to  obey,'
he  puts  as  an  explanation  (nor  is  it  an  inapt  one)  of  a
state  of  ' government:'  a.nd  'unless'  men  were  in  a
state  of  that  description,  they  would  still  '  remain,'  he
says,  '  as  in  a  state  of  nature.'  By  society,  therefore,  he
means,  once  more,  the  same  as  by  a  'state  of  nature : '
he  opposes  it  to  government.  And  he  speaks  of  it
as  a  state  which,  in  this  sense,  has  actually  ex-
isted.

V.

V.

'Society'  2dty,  This  is  what  he  tells  us  in  the  beginning
nymous  to  of  the  sccoud  of  the  two  paragraphs  :  but  all  the  time
the  first  paragraph  lasted,  society  meant  the  same
as  government.  In  shifting  then  from  one  paragraph
to  another,  it  has  changed  its  nature.  'Tis  '  the
foundations  of  society  ^/  that  he  first  began  to  speak
of,  and  immediately  he  goes  on  to  explain  to  us,
after  his manner  of  explaining,  the  foundations  of

^  I  Comm.  p.  47.


'  govern-
ment.'


Formation  of  Government.  135

government. 'Tis of a '  formal beginning ' of Chap.
'  Society  V  that  he  speaks  soon after ;  and  by  this — «


formal  beginning,  he  tells  us  immediately,  that  he
means, '  the  original  contract  oi  society'^,'  which  contract
entered  into,  'a  state^'  he  gives  us  to  understand,
is  thereby  'instituted,'  and  men  have  undertaken
to  'submit  to  Laws'*.'  So  long  then  as  this  first
paragraph  lasts,  ^society,"  I  think,  it  is  plain  cannot
but  have  been  meaning  the  same  as  ^government'

VI.

VI.

"^dly,  All  this  while  too,  this  same  ^  state  of  nature'  ^^^^^^^i

1-11  r- • >  1  r  nature

to  which  we  have  seen Society (a  state  spoken  of  as  spoken  of,
existing) put synonymous,  and in which were it  having^'^
not  for  ^oi^^r//w^;//,  men,  he  informs  us,  in  the  next  ^-^'s'^^'^-
page,  would  '  remain  ^,'  is  a  state  in  which  the}^  never
were. So  he  expressly  tells  us. This  '  notion,'  says
he, '  of  an actually existing unconnected state of
nature;'  (that  is,  as  he  explains  himself  afterwards  ^',
'  a  state  in  which  men  have  no  judge  to  define  their
rights,  and  redress  their  wrongs,)  is  too  wild  to  be
seriously admitted'.' When he admits it then
himself, as he does in his  next page, we are  to
understand,  it  seems,  that  he  is  bantering  us : and
that  the next paragraph is (what one  should not
otherwise  have  taken  it  for)  a  piece  of  pleasantr}'.


VII.

VII.

4////)',  The original  contract  is  a  thing,  we  are  to  Original
understand,  that  never  had  existence  ; perhaps  not  [J's'Stv
in  any  state  :  certainly  therefore  not  in  all. *  Perhaps,  denied—

1  I  Comm.  p.  47.  ^  I  Comm.  p.  47.

'  I  Comm.  p.  47.  *  I  Comm.  p.  48.

*  I  Comm.  p.  48.  ^  I  Comm.  p.  48.  '  i  Comm.  p.  47.


Chap.
I.


136  A  Frag77ient  on  Government.

in no  instance/  says  our  Author,  *  has  it  ever  been
formally  expressed  at  the  first  institution  of  a  state  \'


VIII.

-asserted.


VIII.

^thly,  Notwithstanding  all  this,  we  must  suppose,  it
seems,  that  it  had  in  evoy  state  :  '  yet  in  nature  and
reason,'  says  our  Author,  'it  must  always  be  under-
stood and  implied  I'  Growing  bolder  in  the  compass
of  four  or  five  pages,  where  he  is  speaking  of  our
own  Government,  he  asserts  roundly^,  that  such  a
Contract  was  actually  made  at  the  first  formation  of
it.  '  The  legislature  would  be  changed,'  he  says,
'  from  that  which  was  originally  set  up  b}^  the  gene-
ral consent  and  fundamental  act  of  the  society.'


IX.

IX

Attempt  to  Let  US  try  whether  it  be  not  possible  for  somethmg
these  con-  ^^  ^^  done  towards  drawing  the  import  of  these
ti-adictions  tcmis  out  of  the  mist  in  which  our  Author  has
distin-  involved  them.  The  word  '  Society,'  I  think  it
fnto^^^  appears,  is  used  by  him,  and  that  without  notice,  in
natural j-^^q  scnscs  that  are  opposite. In  the  one,  society,

and  poll-  ^  _

ticai.  or  a  STATE  of  SOCIETY,  is  put  syuonymous  to  a  state

of  NATURE  ;  and  stands  opposed  to  government,  or  a
STATE  OF  government:  in  this  sense  it  maybe  styled,
as  it  commonly  is,  natural  society.  In  the  other,  it
is  put  synonymous  to  government,  or  a  state  of  gov-
ernment ;  and  stands  opposed  to  a  state  of  nature.
In  this  sense  it  may  be  st3ded,  as  it  commonly  is,
political  SOCIETY.  Of  the  difference  between  these
two  states,  a  tolerabl}^  distinct  idea,  I  take  it,  ma}^  be
given  in  a  word  or  two.


' I  Comm.  p.  46.


I  Comm.  p.  46.


'  I  Comm.  p.  52.


Formation  of  Government.  137


Chap.

X.  I-


The  idea  of  a  natural  society  is a  negative  one.  j^^^'^f
The  idea  of  a  pohtical  society  is  a  positive  one. 'Tis  /'oW?frt/

.  society.

with  the  latter,  therefore,  we  should  begin.

When  a  number  of  persons  (whom  we  may  style
subjects)  are  supposed  to  be  in  the  1ia})it  of  paying
obedience  to  a  person,  or  an  assemblage  of  persons,  of
a  known  and  certain  description  (whom  we  may  call
governor  or  governors)  such  persons  altogether  {sub-
jects and  governors)  are  said  to  be  in  a  state  oi political

SOCIETY  ^

XL

XI.

The  idea  of  a  state  of  natural  society  is,  as  we  idea  of
have  said,  a  negative  one. When  a  number  of  per-  society.
sons  are  supposed  to  be  in  the  habit  of  conversing
with  each  other,  at  the  same  time  that  they  are  not
in  any  such  habit  as  mentioned  above,  they  are  said
to  be  in  a  state  of  natural  society.

XII.

XII.

If  we  reflect  a  little,  we  shall  perceive,  that,  be-  Difficulty

,  ,  .  ,  ... of  drawing

tween these two states, there is not that explicit  the  line
.separation  which  these  names,  and  these  definitions  thg^w "
might  teach  one,  at  first  sight,  to  expect. It  is  with  states,
them  as  with  light  and  darkness  :  however  distinct
the  ideas  may  be,  that  are,  at  first  mention,  suggested
by  those  names,  the  t/iings  themselves  have  no  deter-
minate bound  to  separate  them. The  circumstance
that  has  been  spoken  of  as  constituting  the  difference
between  these  two  states,  is  the  presence  or  absence
of  an  /labit  of  obedience. This  habit,  accordingl}',  has
been  spoken  of  simply  as  present  (that  is  as  being

'  v.  infra,  par.  12,  note  i.


138  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chak  perfectly  present)  or,  in  other  words,  we  have  spoken
—^ —  as  if  there  were  a  perfect  habit  of  obedience,  in  the
one  case  :  it  has  been  spoken  of  simply  as  absent  (that
is,  as  being  perfectly  absent)  or,  in  other  words,  we
have  spoken  as  if  there  were  no  habit  of  obedience  at
all,  in  the  otlier.  But  neither  of  these  manners  of
speaking,  perhaps,  is  strictly  just.  Few,  in  fact,  if
any,  are  the  instances  of  this  habit  being  perfectly
absent ;  certainly  none  at  all,  of  its  being  perfectly
present.  Governments  accordingl}^,  in  proportion  as
the  habit  of  obedience  is  more  perfect,  recede  from,
in  proportion  as  it  is  less  perfect,  approach  to,  a  state
of  nature  :  and  instances  may  present  themselves  in
which  it  shall  be  difficult  to  say  whether  a  habit,  per-
fect, in  the  degree  in  which,  to  constitute  a  govern-
ment, it  is  deemed  necessary  it  should  be  perfect,  does
subsist  or  not  \


I.  A  habit. '  i.  A  habit  is  but  an  assemblage  of  acts:  under  which  name  I  would
also  include,  for  the  present,  volun/aiy  forbearances.

2  Ahabitof 2.  A  /labif  0/ obedience  then  is  an  assemblage  of  acts  0/ obedience.

obedience.

^.  An  act 3-  -^'^  ^'^^  of  obedience  is  any  act  done  in  pursuance  of  an  expression  of

of  obedi- willow  the  part  of  some  superior.

ence.

4.  An  act  4-  ^"  ^^^  ^f  political  obedience  (which  is  what  is  here  meant)  is  any
of  political  act  done  in  pursuance  of  an  expression  of  will  on  the  part  of  a  person
obedience, governing.

5.  An  ex- 5.  An  expression  of  will  is  either /)«ro/e  or  tacit.
pression

of  will.

6.  A  parole  6.  A  parole  expression  of  will  is  that  which  is  conveyed  by  the  signs
expression  called  words.

of  will.

7.  A  tacit  7.  A  tacit  expression  of  will  is  that  which  is  conveyed  by  any  other  signs
expression  whatsoever :  among  which  none  are  so  efficacious  as  acts  of  punishment
of  will.  annexed  in  time  past,  to  the  non-performance  of  acts  of  the  same  sort

with  those  that  are  the  objects  of  the  will  that  is  in  question.

8.  A  com- 8.  A  parole  expression  of  the  will  of  a  superior  is  a  coinmand.
mand.


govern-
ment.


Formation  of  Government.  139

XIII.

XIII

On  these  considerations,  the  supposition  oi  d.  perfect  p^^^^^^^^
state  of  nature,  or,  as  it  may  be  termed,  a  state  of  ^^^^'^  °^

•'  ' '  -^  '  _  nature  not

society  perfectly  natural,  may,  perhaps,  be  justly  pro-  more

A 1  r  1  1  chimerical

nounced,  what  our  Author  tor  the  moment  seemed  than  a
to  think  it,  an  extravagant  supposition  :  but  then  that  st^ate'of
oi 3. government  in  this  sense  perfect;  or,  as  it  may  be
termed,  a  state  of  society  perfectly  political,  a  state  of
perfect  political  union,  a  state  of  perfect  submission  in

9.  When  a  tacit  expression  of  the  will  of  a  superior  is  supposed  to  have  9-  "■  pctiii-
been  uttered,  it  may  be  styled  z.  fictitious  command.  ■

10.  Were  we  at  liberty  to  coin  words  after  the  manner  of  the  Roman  ^°'  '-^m-
,  . ,  ,  .  ,  mands
lawyers,  we  might  say  a  <^/«is;-command.

mands.

ri.  The  Statute  Law  is  composed  oi commands. The  Common  Law,  V'  ^'^^stra-
^  .  ,  tion — Sta-

of<7««5^-commands.  tute  Law,

Common
Law.

12.  An  act  which  is  the  object  of  a  command  actual  or  fictitious;  such  12.  Duty
an  act,  considered  before  it  is  performed,  is  styled  a  duty,  or  a  point  of  ~'?°^^^^  o'

duty.  d"^y-

13.  These  definitions  premised,  we  are  now  in  a  condition  to  give  such  13. Use  of

an  idea,  of  what  is  meant  by  the  perfection  or  imperfection  oi  &  habit  of  obe-  ^^  above

dience  in  a  society  as  may  prove  tolerably  precise.  ^,  ^}^.

definitions.

14.  A  period  in  the  duration  of  the  society;  the  number  of  persons  it  is  14.  Habit
composed  of  during  that  period;  and  the  number  of  points  of  duty  incum-  of  obedi-
bent  on  each  person  being  given ; — the  habit  of  obedience  will  be  more  ^^^^

or  less  perfect,  in  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  acts  of  obedience  to  those  of c  -^
disobedience.  perfec  -

tions.

15.  The  habit  of  obedience  in  this  country  appears  to  have  been  more  15. Illus-
perfect  in  the  time  of  the  Saxons  than  in  that  of  the  Britons  :  unques-  tration.
tionably  it  is  more  so  now  than  in  the  time  of  the  Saxons. It  is  not  yet

so  perfect,  as  well  contrived  and  well  digested  laws  in  time,  it  is  to  be
hoped,  may  render  it.  But  absolutely  perfect,  till  man  ceases  to  be  man,
it  never  can  be.

A  very  ingenious  and  instructive  view  of  the  progress  of  nations,  from
the  least  perfect  states  of  political  union  to  that  highlj-  perfect  state  of  it
in  which  we  live,  may  be  found  in  Lord  K.mms's  Histon'cal  Lazv  Tracts.


140  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap, the  siibjcct  of  perfect  authority  in  the  governor,  is  no
— ^ — less  so^.


cal  union
or  con-
nection.


17.  Sub-
mission—
subjection.

18.  Sub-
mission—
subjection.


16.  Politi-  16.  For  the  convenience  and  accuracy  of  discourse  it  may  be  of  use,  in
this  place  to  settle  the  signification  of  a  few  other  expressions  relative
to  the  same  subject.  Persons  who,  with  respect  to  each  other,  are  in
a  state  oi political  society,  may  be  said  also  to  be  in  a  state  oi political  union
or  connection.

i-j.  Such  of  them  as  are  subjects  may,  accordingly,  be  said  to  be  in
a  state  of  submission,  or  of  subjection,  with  respect  to  governors  :  such  as
are  governors  in  a  state  of  authority  with  respect  to  subjects.

18.  When  the  subordination  is  considered  as  resulting  originally  from
the  will,  or  (it  may  be  more  proper  to  say)  the  pleasure  of  the  party
govern^f^,  we  rather  use  the  word  '  submission : '  when  from  that  of  the
party  govern?;?_g-,  the  word  '  subjection.'  On  this  account  it  is,  that  the
term  can  scarcely  be  used  without  apology,  unless  with  a  note  of  disap-
probation :  especially  in  this  country,  where  the  habit  of  considering  the
consent  of  the  persons  governt'rf  as  being  in  some  sense  or  other  involved
in  the  notion  of  all  lawful,  that  is,  all  commendable  government,  has  gained
so  firm  a  ground.  It  is  on  this  account,  then,  that  the  term  '  subjection,'
f.\'cluding  as  it  does,  or,  at  least,  not  /wcluding  such  consent,  is  used  com-
monly in  what  is  called  a  bad  sense :  that  is,  in  such  a  sense  as,  together
with  the  idea  of  the  object  in  question,  conveys  the  accessary  idea  of  dis-
approbation. This  accessary  idea,  however,  annexed  as  it  is  to  the
abstract  term  'subjection,'  does  not  extend  itself  to  the  concrete  term  '  sub-
jects ' — a  kind  of  inconsistency  of  which  there  are  many  instances  in
language.

'  It  is  true  that  every  person  must,  for  some  time,  at  least,  after  his
birth,  necessarily  be  in  a  state  of  subjection  with  respect  to  his  parents,
or  those  who  stand  in  the  place  of  parents  to  him  ;  and  that  a  perfect  one,
or  at  least  as  near  to  being  a  perfect  one,  as  any  that  we  see.  But  for  all
this,  the  sort  of  society  that  is  constituted  by  a  state  of  subjection  thus
circumstanced,  does  not  come  up  to  the  idea  that,  I  believe,  is  generally
entertained  by  those  who  speak  of  a  political  society.  To  constitute  what
is  meant  in  general  by  that  phrase,  a  greater  number  of  members  is  re-
quired, or,  at  least,  a  duration  capable  of  a  longer  continuance.  Indeed,
for  this  purpose  nothing  less,  I  take  it,  than  an  indefinite  duration  is  re-
quired. A  society,  to  come  within  the  notion  of  what  is  originally  meant
by  a  political  one,  must  be  such  as,  in  its  nature,  is  not  incapable  of  con-
tinuing for  ever  in  virtue  of  the  principles  which  gave  it  birth.  This,  it  is
plain,  is  not  the  case  with  such  a  family  society,  of  which  a  parent,  or  a
pair  of  parents  are  at  the  head.  In  such  a  society,  the  only  principle  of
union  which  is  certain  and  uniform  in  its  operation,  is  the  natural  weak-
ness of  those  of  its  members  that  are  in  a  state  of  subjection  ;  that  is,  the
children  ;  a  principle  which  has  but  a  short  and  limited  continuance.  I
question  whether  it  be  the  case  even  with  a  family  society,  subsisting  in
virtue  of  collateral  consanguinity  ;  and  that  for  the  like  reason.  Not  but
that  even  in  this  case  a  habit  of  obedience,  as  perfect  as  any  we  see


It  is  not  a

family

union,

however

perfect,

that  can

constitute

a  political

society —

whv.


For^nation  of  Governtnent.  141


XIV.  ""T-


A  remark  there  is,  which,  for  the  more  thoroughly xiv.
clearing  up  of  our  notions  on  this  subject,  it  may  be  nature '  a
proper  here  to  make. To  some  ears,  the  phrases,  relative  ex-

^ ^  '  r  y  pression.

*  State  of  nature,'  *  state  of  political  society,'  may
carry  the  appearance  of  being  absolute  in  their  signifi-
cation :  as  if  the  condition  of  a  man,  or  a  company  of
men,  in  one  of  these  states,  or  in  the  other,  were  a
matter  that  depended  altogether  upon  themselves.
But  this  is  not  the  case.  To  the  expression  *  state  of
nature,'  no  more  than  to  the  expression  'state  of
pohtical  society,'  can  any  precise  meaning  be  annexed,
without  reference  to  a  party  different  from  that  one
who  is  spoken  of  as  being  in  the  state  in  question.
This  will  readily  be  perceived.  The  difference  be-
tween the  two  states  lies,  as  we  have  observed,  in  the
habit  of  obedience.  With  respect  then  to  a  habit  of
obedience,  it  can  neither  be  understood  as  subsisting
in  any  person,  nor  as  not  subsisting  in  any  person,  \
but  with  reference  to  some  other  person.  For  one
party  to  obey,  there  must  be  another  party  that  is
obeyed.  But  this  party  who  is  obe3'ed,  may  at  dif-
ferent times  be  different.  Hence  may  one  and  the
same  party  be  conceived  to  obey  and  not  to  obey  at
the  same  time,  so  as  it  be  with  respect  to  different
persons,  or  as  we  may  say,  to  different  objects  of  obe-
dience. Hence  it  is,  then,  that  one  and  the  same  party

examples  of.  may  subsist  for  a  time ;  to  wit,  in  virtue  of  the  same  moral
principles  which  may  protract  a  habit  oi  filial  obedience  bej'ond  the  con-
tinuance of  the  pliysical  ones  which  gave  birth  to  it :  I  mean  affection,
gratitude,  awe,  the  force  of  habit,  and  the  like.  But  it  is  not  long,  even
in  this  case,  before  the  bond  of  connection  must  either  become  impercep-
tible, or  lose  its  influence  by  being  too  extended.

These  considerations,  therefore,  it  will  be  proper  to  bear  in  mind  in  ap-
plying the  definition  of  political  society  above  given  [in  par.  lo]  and  in
order  to  reconcile  it  with  what  is  said  further  on  [in  par.  17].


142  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap, may  be  said  to  he  in  a  state  of  nature,  and  not  to  be

— y^ in  a  state  of  nature,  and  that  at  one  and  the  same  time,

according  as  it  is  this  or  that  party  that  is  taken  for  the
other  object  of  comparison.  The  case  is,  that  in  com-
mon speech,  when  no  particular  object  of  comparison
is  specified,  all  persons  in  general  are  intended :  so
that  when  a  number  of  persons  are  said  simply  to  be  in
a  state  of  nature,  what  is  understood  is,  that  they  are  so
as  well  with  reference  to  one  another,  as  to  all  the  world.


XV.


XV.


Different jj^  |-|^g  samc  manner  we  may  understand,  how  the

degrees  of  .  .

subjection  samc  man,  who  is  governor  with  respect  to  one  man
governors,  or  sct  of  men,  may  be  subject  with  respect  to  another :
how  among  governors  some  may  be  in  a  perfect  state
of  nature^  with  respect  to  each  other :  as  the  Kings  of
France  and  Spain  :  others,  again,  in  a  state  oi  perfect
subjection^  as  the  Hospodars  of  Walachia  and
Moldavia  with  respect  to  the  Grand  Signior  :  others,
again,  in  a  state  of  manifest  but  imperfect  subjection^  as
the  German  States  with  respect  to  the  Emperor  :
others,  again,  in  such  a  state  in  which  it  may  be
difficult  to  determine  whether  they  are  in  a  state  of
imperfect  subjection  or  in  a  perfect  state  of  nature:  as
the  King  of  Naples  with  respect  to  the  Pope\

XVI.

The  same j^^  ^.j^^  Same  manner,  also,  it  may  be  conceived,

person  .

alternately  without  entering  iuto  details,  how  any  single  person,

in  a  state  .  r  r i. i_

of  political  born,  as  all  persons  are,  into  a  state  01  perfect  sub-
natuia  jg^^j-j^j^  ^q  }^jg  parcnts  ^,  that  is  into  a  state  of  perfect


society


1  The  Kingdom  of  Naples  is  feudatory  to  the  Papal  See :  and  in  token
of  fealty,  the  King,  at  his  accession,  presents  the  Holy  Father  with  a
white  horse.  The  Royal  vassal  sometimes  treats  his  Lord  but  cavalierly :
but  always  sends  him  his  white  horse.

^  V.  supra,  par.  13,  note. .


Formation  of  Government.  143

political  society  with  respect  to  his  parents,  may  from Chap.
thence  pass  into  a  perfect  state  of  nature ;  and  from


thence successively into any number of different  Z,ectTo
states  of  political  society  more  or  less  perfect,  by  different.

. ^ .  . .  r  T J societies.

passmg  into  different  societies.

XVII.

xvii.
In  the  same  manner  also  it  may  be  conceived  how,  in  the

in any political society, the same  man  ma}^,  with  poHtlcai

respect  to  the  same  individuals,  be,  at  different  periods,  j^*^'^^-^g

and  on  different  occasions,  alternately,  in  the  state  of  persons

,  ,  .  ,  .  ,  alternately

governor  and  subject :  to-day  concurring,  perhaps  governors
active,  in  the  business  of  issuing  a  general  command  ^"(,^3^"^^';^]-,
for  the  observance  of  the  whole  society,  amongst  the  respect  to

the  same

rest  of  another  man  m  quality  of  Judge :  to-morrow,  persons.
punished,  perhaps,  by  a  particular  command  of  that
same  Judge  for  not  obeying  the  general  command
which  he  himself  (I  mean  the  person  acting  in  char-
acter of  governor)  had  issued.  I  need  scarce  remind
the  reader  how  happily  this  alternate  state  of  authority
and  submission  is  exemplified  among  ourselves.


XVIII.

XVI I  r.
Here  might  be  a  place  to  state  the  different  shares  Hints  of

which  different  persons  ma}^  have  in  the  issuing  of  the  topics
same  command : to  explain  the  nature  of  corporate  be^^scd
action :  to  enumerate  and  distinguish  half  a  dozen  or  ^y-
more  different  modes  in  which  subordination  between
the  same  parties  may  subsist :  to  distinguish  and  ex-
plain the different senses of  the words, 'consent'
*  representation,'' and others of connected import :
consent  and  representation,  those  interesting  but  per-
plexing words, sources of  so much debate : and
sources  or  pretexts  of  so  much  animosit}'. But  the


144


A  Fragment  on  Govern^ne^tt.


Chap.
I.


XIX.

The  same
society
alternately
in  a  state
of  nature
and  a  state
of  govern-
ment.


XX.

Instance
the  Abori-
gines of
America.


XXI.

Charac-
teristic of
political
union.


limits  of  the  present  design  will  by  no  means  admit
of  such  protracted  and  intricate  discussions.

XIX.

In  the  same  manner,  also,  it  may  be  conceived,
how  the  same  set  of  men  considered  among  them-
selves, may  at  one  time  be  in  a  state  of  nature,  at
another  time  in  a  state  of  government.  For  the  habit
of  obedience,  in  whatever  degree  of  perfection  it  be
necessar}^  it  should  subsist  in  order  to  constitute  a
government,  may  be  conceived,  it  is  plain,  to  suffer
interruptions.  At  different  junctures  it  may  take
place  and  cease.

XX.

Instances  of  this  state  of  things  appear  not  to  be
unfrequent.  The  sort  of  society  that  has  been  ob-
served to  subsist  among  the  American  Indians  may
afford  us  one.  According  to  the  accounts  we  have  of
those  people,  in  most  of  their  tribes,  if  not  in  all,  the
habit  we  are  speaking  of  appears  to  be  taken  up
only  in  time  of  war.  It  ceases  again  in  time  of  peace.
The  necessity  of  acting  in  concert  against  a  common
enemy,  subjects  a  whole  tribe  to  the  orders  of  a
common  Chief.  On  the  return  of  peace  each  warrior
resumes  his  pristine  independence.

XXI.

One  difficulty  there  is  that  still  sticks  by  us.  It  has
been  started  indeed,  but  not  solved. — This  is  to  find
a  note  of  distinction, — a  characteristic  mark,  whereby
to  distinguish  a  society  in  which  there  is  a  habit  of
obedience,  and  that  at  the  degree  of  perfection  which
is  necessary  to  constitute  a  state  of  government,  from
a  society  in  which  there  is  not: a  mark, I  mean,


Formation  of  Government.  145

which  shall  have  a  visible  determinate  commence-  Chap.
ment ;  insomuch  that  the  instant  of  its  first  appear-  — m —
ance  shall  be  distinguishable  from  the  last  at  which  it
had  not  as  yet  appeared.  'Tis  only  by  the  help  of
such  a  mark  that  we  can  be  in  a  condition  to  deter-
mine, at  any  given  time,  whether  any  given  society  is
in  a  state  of  government,  or  in  a  state  of  nature.  I
can  find  no  such  mark,  I  must  confess,  any  where,
unless  it  be  this;  the  establishment  of  names  of  office :
the  appearance  of  a  certain  man,  or  set  of  men,  with
a  certain  name,  serving  to  mark  them  out  as  objects
of  obedience :  such  as  King,  Sachem,  Cacique,
Senator,  Burgomaster,  and  the  like.  This,  I  think,
may  serv^e  tolerably  well  to  distinguish  a  set  of  men
in  a  state  of  political  union  among  themselves  from  the
same  set  of  men  not  yet  in  such  a  state.


XXII.

XXII.

But  suppose  an  incontestable  political  societ\^,  and  Among

persons

that  a  large  one,  formed ; and  from  that  a  smaller  already  in
body  to  break  off:  by  this  breach  the  smaller  body  pofitkai°
ceases  to  be  in  a  state  of  political  union  with  respect  union. at

^  _  '^ . what  in-

to the  larger: and  has thereby placed itself,  with  stant  a  new

respect  to  that  larger  body,  in  a  state  of  nature —  be  said  to
What  means  shall  we  find  of  ascertaining  the  precise  Reformed.

•=>  r  by  defec-

juncture  at  which  this  change  took  place?  What  t'on  from  a
shall  be  taken  for  the  characteristic  marii  in  this  case  ?
The  appointment,  it  may  be  said,  of  new  governors
with  new  names.  But  no  such  appointment,  suppose,
takes  place.  The  subordinate  governors,  from  whom
alone  the  people  at  large  were  in  use  to  receive  their
commands  under  the  old  government,  are  the  same
from  whom  they  receive  them  under  the  new  one.
The habit of  obedience which these subordinate


146 A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap,  govcmors  Were  in  with  respect  to  that  single  person,
— M —  we  will  say,  who  was  the  supreme  governor  of  the
whole,  is  broken  off  insensibly  and  by  degrees.  The
old  names  by  which  these  subordinate  governors
were  characterized,  while  they  were  subordinate,
are  continued  now  they  are  supreme.  In  this  case
it  seems  rather  difficult  to  answer.

XXIII.

XXIII.

ist,  in  case If  an  example  be  required,  we  may  take  that  of  the

of-defec-  .  .

tion  by DuTCH provmccs  With respcct to Spain. These

bodies  in-  provinccs  wcre  once  branches  of  the  Spanish  mon-

stance  the  archy. They  have  now,  for  a  long  time,  been  univer-

provinces.  sally  spoken  of  as  independent  states : independent

as  well  of  that  of  Spain  as  of  every  other. They  are

now  in  a  state  of  nature  with  respect  to  Spain. They

were  once  in  a  state  of  political  union  with  respect  to

Spain : namely,  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  a  single

governor,  a  King,  who  was  King  of  Spain. At  what

precise  juncture  did  the  dissolution  of  this  political

union  take  place  ? At  what  precise  time  did  these

provinces  cease  to  be  subject  to  the  King  of  Spain  ?

This,  I  doubt,  will  be  rather  difficult  to  agree  upon  \

XXIV.

XXIV. ^  , , _ .  ,  ,

2diy,  in  Supposc  the  defection  to  have  begun,  not  by  entire

defection proviuccs,  as  in  the  instance  just  mentioned,  but  by  a

by  indivi- haudful  of  fugitivcs,  this  augmented  by  the  accession

stances, of  Other  fugitivcs,  and  so,  by  degrees,  to  a  body  of

Venice: nicn  too  stroug  to  be  reduced,  the  difficulty  will  be

increased  still  farther. At  what  precise  juncture  was

^  Upon  recollection,  I  have  some  doubt  whether  this  example  would  be
found  historically  exact.  If  not,  that  of  the  defection  of  the  Nabobs  of
Hindostan  may  answer  the  purpose.  My  first  choice  fell  upon  the  former  ;
supposing  it  to  be  rather  better  known.


it  that  ancient  Rome,  or  that  modern  Venice,  became C"-^''-


Formation  of  Government.  147

nt  Rome,  o
an  independent  state  ?

XXV.

XXV.

In  general  then,  at  what  precise  juncture  is  it,  that  a  revolt,  at
persons  subject  to  a  government,  become, by  dis-^reircan
obedience,  with  respect  to  that  government,  in  a  state  ^^^^^f  u°j,
of  nature  ? When  is  it,  in  short,  that  a  revolt  shall  be  place,
deemed  to  have  taken  place ;  and  when,  again,  is  it,
that  that  revolt  shall  be  deemed  to  such  a  degree
successful,  as  to  have  settled  into  independence  ?

XXVI.

XXVI

\  As  it  is  the  obedience  of  individuals  that  constitutes  Disobedi-
'a  state  of  submission,  so  is  it  their  disobedience  that  do'^^^^  ^
must  constitute  a  state  of  revolt. Is  it  then  every  act  amount  to

■^  a  revolt  :

of  disobedience  that  will  do  as  much  ?  The  affirma-
tive, certainly,  is  what  can  never  be  maintained :  for
then  would  there  be  no  such  thing  as  government  to
be  found  any  where.  Here  then  a  distinction  or  two
obviously  presents  itself.  Disobedience  may  be
distinguished  into  conscious  or  unconscious :  and  that,
with respect as well to the law as  to  the  facf^.


^  I.  Disobedience  may  be  said  to  be  unconscious  ivith  respect  to  the  fact,  i.  Dis-

when  the  party  is  ignorant  either  of  his  having  done  the  act  itself,  which  obedience

is  forbidden  by  the  law,  or  else  of  his  having  done  it  in  those  circumstances,  ""5°"" .

,  .  , 1 .^  . r ,  .,,  sciouswith

in  which  alone  it  is  forbidden.

respect  to

ihefact.

2.  Disobedience  may  be  said  to  be  ttnconscioits,  with  respect  to  the  lazu  ;  2. Dis-

when  although  he  may  know  of  his  having  done  the  act  that  is  in  realit\'  obedience

forbidden,  and  that,  under  the  circumstances  in  which  it  is  forbidden,  he  ""Z^*^""

knows  not  of  its  being  forbidden  in  these  circumstances.  „.  .

°  respect  to

the  Law.

3.  So  long  as  the  business  of  spreading  abroad  the  knowledge  of  the  3-  IHustra-
law  continues  to  lie  in  the  neglect  in  which  it  has  lain  hitherto,  instances "'

of  disobedience  unconscious  with  respect  to  the  lazv,  can  never  be  otherwise
than  abundant.

L  2


to  a  re-
volt.


148  A  Fi-agiueitt  on  Govertnnent.

Disobedience  that  is  unconscious  with  respect  to
either,  will  readily,  I  suppose,  be  acknowledged  not
to  be  a  revolt.  Disobedience  again  that  is  conscious
with  respect  to  hoth^  may  be  distinguished  into  secret
and  open ;  or,  in  other  words,  into  fraudulent  and
forcible^.  Disobedience  that  is  only  fraudulent,  will
likewise,  I  suppose,  be  readily  acknowledged  not  to
amount  to  a  revolt.

XXVII.

-yV  XT  T  T

Disobedi-  The  difficulty  that  will  remain  will  concern  such
^amount  disobedicuce  only  as  is  both  conscious,  (and  that  as
well  with  respect  to  law  as  fact,)  and  forcible.  This
disobedience,  it  should  seem,  is  to  be  determined
neither  by  numbers  altogether  (that  is  of  the  persons
supposed  to  be  disobedient)  nor  by  acts,  nor  by
intentions :  all  three  may  be  fit  to  be  taken  into
consideration.  But  having  brought  the  difficulty
to  this  point,  at  this  point  I  must  be  content  to  leave
it.  To  proceed  any  farther  in  the  endeavour  to
solve  it,  would  be  to  enter  into  a  discussion  of
particular  local  jurisprudence.  It  would  be  entering
upon  the  definition  of  Treason,  as  distinguished
from  Murder,  Robbery,  Riot,  and  other  such  crimes,
as,  in  comparison  with  Treason,  are  spoken  of  as
being  of  a  more  private  nature.  Suppose  the  de-
finition of  Treason  settled,  and  the  commission  of
an  act  of  Treason  is,  as  far  as  regards  the  person
committing  it,  the  characteristic  mark  we  are  in
search  of.


Disobedi-
ences
fraudulent
anc  ,

the  (]if. disobedient  party,  and  the  act  of  disobedience,  are  both  endeavoured  to  be

ference, kept  secret. In  Robbery,  the  act  of  disobedience,  at  least,  if  not  the  person
illustrated,  of  him  who  disobeys,  is  manifest  and  avowed.


^  If  examples  be  thought  necessary,  Theft  may  serve  for  an  example  of
-idTbrrTl  f''^^^*'^"^^"^  disobedience  ;  Robbery  oi  forcible. In  Theft,  the  person  of  the


Formation  of  Government.  149


Chap.

XXVIII.  ^'


XXVIII.

These  remarks  it  were  easy  to  extend  to  a  much  Unfinished
greater length. Indeed, it is  what  would be ne- the  above
cessary,  in  order  to  give  them  a  proper  fulness,  and  ^'"^•
method,  and  precision. But  that  could  not  be  done
without  exceeding  the  Umits  of  the  present  design.
As  they  are,  they  may  serve  as  hints  to  such  as  shall
be  disposed  to  give  the  subject  a  more  exact  and
regular  examination.

XXIX.

XXIX.

From  what  has  been  said,  however,  w^e  may  judge  Our

. , , ,  •  1 Author's

what  truth  there  is  m  our  Author  s  observation,  that  proposi-
'  when  society  '  (understand  natural  society)  *  is  once  govemT^^*
formed,  government'  (that  is  political  society)  (what- centre-
ever  quantity  or  degree  of  Obedience  is  necessary  to  course,'
constitute political society) *  results of  course ; as "° ™  '
necessar}^  to preser\'e and  to  keep  that  society  in
order.' By  the  w^ords,  'oj  course,'  is  meant,  I  suppose,
constantly  and  immediately:  at  least  constantly. Ac-
cording to  this,  pohtical  society,  in  any  sense  of  it,
ought  long  ago to have been estabhshed all the
world  over. Whether  this  be  the  case,  let  any  one
judge  from  the  instances  of  the Hottentots,  of  the
Patagonians,  and  of  so  many  other  barbarous  tribes,
of  which  we  hear  from  travellers  and  navigators.

XXX.

XXX.

It  ma}''  be,  after  all,  we  have  misunderstood  his  Ambiguity
meaning. We have  been  supposing  him to  have  sentence,
been  meaning  to  assert  a  matter  of  fact,  and  to  have
written,  or  at  least  begun,  this  sentence  in  the  char-
acter of  an  tiistorical  observer :  whereas,  all  he  meant
by  it,  perhaps,  was  to  speak  in  the  character  of  a


150  A  Fragment  on  Govermnent.

Censor,  and  on  a  case  supposed,  to  express  a  senti-
ment  of  approbation.  In  short,  what  he  meant,  per-
haps, to  persuade  us  of,  was  not  that  *  goverciment '
does  actually  '  result '  from  natural  *  society  ; '  but
that  it  were  better  that  it  should,  to  wit,  as  being
necessary  to  '  preserve  and  keep '  men  *  in  that  state
of  order,'  in  which  it  is  of  advantage  to  them  that  they
should  be.  Which  of  the  above-mentioned  characters
he  meant  to  speak  in,  is  a  problem  I  must  leave  to  be
determined.  The  distinction,  perhaps,  is  what  never
so  much  as  occurred  to  him ;  and  indeed  the  shifting
insensibly,  and  without  warning,  from  one  of  those
characters  to  the  other,  is  a  failing  that  seems  in-
veterate in  our  Author;  and  of  which  we  shall  pro-
bably have  more  instances  than  one  to  notice.

XXXI.

XXXI.

Darkness  To  cousidcr  the  wholc  paragraph  (with  its  append-
whoie  age)  together,  something,  it  may  be  seen,  our  Author
fm-'ther^^'^  Struggles  to  overthrow,  and  something  to  establish,
shewn.  But  how  it  is  he  would  overthrow,  or  what  it  is  he
would  establish,  are  questions  I  must  confess  myself
unable  to  resolve.  'The  preservation  of  mankind,'
he  observes,  *  was  effected  by  single  families.'  This
is  what  upon  the  authority  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,
he  assumes  ;  and  from  this  it  is  that  he  would  have
us  conclude  the  notion  of  an  original  contract  (the
same  notion  which  he  afterwards  adopts)  to  be
ridiculous.  The  force  of  this  conclusion,  I  must
own,  I  do  not  see.  Mankind  was  preserved  by
single  families — Be  it  so.  What  is  there  in  this  to
hinder  *  individuals '  of  those  families,  or  of  families
descended  from  those  families,  from  meeting  together
'  afterwards,  in  a  large  plain,'  or  any  where  else,
'entering  into an original  contract,' or  any  other


Formation  of  Government.  151

contract,  'and  choosing  the  tallest  man,'  or  any  Chap.
other  man, '  present,'  or  absent,  to  be  their  Governor  ?  — m —
The  '  flat  contradiction '  our  Author  finds  between
this  supposed  transaction  and  the  'preservation  of
mankind  by  single  families,'  is  what  I  must  own
myself  unable  to  discover,  As  to  the  '  actually
existing  unconnected  state  of  nature'  he  speaks  of,
'  the  notion  of  which,'  he  says,  *  is  too  wild  to  be
seriously  admitted,'  whether  this  be  the  case  with  it,
is  what,  as  he  has  given  us  no  notion  of  it  at  all,  I
cannot  judge  of.

XXXII.

XXXII.

Something  positive,  however,  in  one  place,  we  Farther
seem  to  have.  These  '  single  families,'  by  which  the  the  dark-
preservation  of  mankind  was  effected ;  these  single  ^^^^\^  *^^
families,  he  gives  us  to  understand,  *  formed  the  first  paragraph,
society.'  This  is  something  to  proceed  upon.  A
society  then  of  the  one  kind  or  the  other ;  a  natural
society,  or  else  a  political  society,  was  formed.  I
would  here  then  put  a  case,  and  then  propose  a
question.  In  this  society  we  will  say  no  contract
had  as  yet  been  entered  into  ;  no  liabit  of  obedience
as  yet  formed.  Was  this  then  a  natural  societ}'
merely,  or  was  it  a  political  one  ?  For  my  part,
according  to  my  notion  of  the  two  kinds  of  society  as
above  explained,  I  can  have  no  difficulty.  It  was  a
merely  natural  one.  But,  according  to  our  Author's
notion,  which  was  it?  If  it  was  already  a  political
one,  what  notion  would  he  give  us  of  such  an  one  as
shall  have  been  a  natural  one ;  and  by  what  change
should  such  precedent  natural  one  have  turned  into
this  political  one?  If  this  was  not  a  political  one,
then  what  sort  of  a  society  are  we  to  understand  an}'
one  to  be  which  is  political  ? By  what  mark  are  we


152  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap, to  distinguish  it  from  a  natural  one  ? To  this,  it  is

—^ plain,  our  Author  has  not  given  any  answer. At  the

same  time,  that  to  give  an  answer  to  it,  was,  if  any
thing,  the  professed  purpose  of  the  long  paragraph
before  us.

XXXIII.

XXXIII.

A  general  It  is  time  this  passagc  of  our  Author  were  dis-
ch?ra°cten  missed — As  among  the  expressions  of  it  are  some  of
the  most  striking  of  those  which  the  vocabulary  of
the  subject  furnishes,  and  these  ranged  in  the  most
harmonious  order,  on  a  distant  glance  nothing  can
look  fairer :  a  prettier  piece  of  tinsel-work  one  shall
seldom  see  exhibited  from  the  shew-glass  of  political
erudition.  Step  close  to  it,  and  the  delusion  vanishes.
It  is  then  seen  to  consist  partly  of  self-evident  obser-
vations, and  partly  of  contradictions  ;  partly  of  what
every  one  knows  already,  and  partly  of  what  no  one
can  understand  at  all.


XXXIV.

xxxiv.
Difficulty Throughout  the  whole  of  it,  what  distresses  me  is,

Sirexami-  ^ot  the  meeting  with  any  positions,  such  as,  thinking

nation. them  false,  I  find  a  difficulty  in  proving  so  :  but  the

not  meeting  with  any  positions,  true,  or  false,  (unless

it  be  here  and  there  a  self-evident  one,)  that  I  can

find  a  meaning  for. If  I  can  find  nothing  positive  to

accede  to,  no  more  can  I  to  contradict. Of  this  latter

kind  of  work,  indeed,  there  is  the  less  to  do  for  any

one  else,  our  Author  himself  having  executed  it,  as

we  have  seen,  so  amply.

The  whole  of  it  is,  I  must  confess,  to  me  a  riddle :

more  acute,  by  far,  than  I  am,  must  be  the  Oedipus

that  can  solve  it. Happily  it  is  not  necessary,  on

account  of  any  thing  that  follows,  that  it  should  be


Formation  of  Government.  1 5  3

solved. Nothing  is  concluded  from  it. For  aught  I  Chap.

can  find,  it  has  in  itself  no  use,  and  none  is  made  of  — U —
it. There  it  is,  and  as  well  might  it  be  any  where
else,  or  no  where.

XXXV.

XXXV.

Were  it  then  possible,  there  would  be  no  use  in  its  Use  that

.  .  rnay  be

being  solved:  but  being,  as  I  take  it,  really  unsolv- made  of  it.
able,  it  were  of  use  it  should  be  seen  to  be  so.  Peace
may  by  this  means  be  restored  to  the  breast  of  many
a  desponding  student,  who,  now  prepossessed  with
the  hopes  of  a  rich  harvest  of  instruction,  makes  a
crime  to  himself  of  his  inability  to  reap  what,  in
truth,  his  Author  has  not  sown.

XXXVI.

xxxvi.
As  to  the  Original  Contract,  by  turns  embraced  Original

and  ridiculed  by  our  Author,  a  few  pages,  perhaps,  fiction,
may  not  be  ill  bestowed  in  endeavouring  to  come  to
a  precise  notion  about  its  reality  and  use.  The  stress
laid  on  it  formerly,  and  still,  perhaps,  by  some,  is
such  as  renders  it  an  object  not  undeserving  of  atten-
tion. I  was  in  hopes,  however,  till  I  obser\'ed  the
notice  taken  of  it  by  our  author,  that  this  chimera  had
been  effectually  demolished  by  Mr.  Hume\ I  think

' I. In  the  third  Volume  of  his  Treatise  on  Human  Nature.  i.  Notion

Our  Author,  one  would  think, had  never  so  much as opened that  of  the  Ori-
celebrated  book  :  of  which  the  criminality  in  the  eyes  of  some,  and  the  s'^al  Con-
merits  in  the  eyes  of  others,  have  since  been  almost  effaced  by  the  splen-  . , . ,
dour  of  more  recent  productions  of  the  same  pen. The  magnanimity  of  jyjj.  Hume.
our  Author  scorned,  perhaps,  or  his  circumspection  feared,  to  derive  in-
struction from  an  enemy  :  or,  what  is  still  more  probable,  he  knew  not
that  the  subject  had  been  so  much  as  touched  upon  by  that  penetrating
and  acute  metaphysician,  whose  works  lie  so  much  out  of  the  beaten  track
of  Academic  reading. But  here,  as  it  happens,  there  is  no  matter  for
such  fears. Those  men,  who  are  most  alarmed  at  the  dangers  of  a  free
enquiry  ;  those  who  are  most  intimately  convinced  that  the  surest  way  to
truth  is  by  hearing  nothing  but  on  one  side,  will,  I  dare  answer  almost,
find nothing  of  that  which  they  deem  poison  in  this  third  volume. I


154


A  Fragment  on  Government.


Chap.
I.


2.  History

of  a  mind
perplexed
hy  fiction.


we  hear  not  so  much  of  it  now  as  formerly.  The
indestructible  prerogatives  of  mankind  have  no  need
to  be  supported  upon  the  sandy  foundation  of  a
fiction.

would  not  wish  to  send  the  Reader  to  any  other  than  this,  which,  if  I
recollect  aright,  stands  clear  of  the  objections  that  have  of  late  been
urged,  with  so  much  vehemence,  against  the  work  in  general*.  As  to
the  two  first,  the  Author  himself,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  is  not  ill  dis-
posed, at  present,  to  join  with  those  who  are  of  opinion,  that  they  might,
without  any  great  loss  to  the  science  of  Human  Nature,  be  dispensed
with.  The  like  might  be  said,  perhaps,  of  a  considerable  part,  even  of
this.  But,  after  all  retrenchments,  there  will  still  remain  enough  to  have
laid  mankind  under  indelible  obligations.  That  the  foundations  of  all
virtue  are  laid  in  utility,  is  there  demonstrated,  after  a  few  exceptions
made,  with  the  strongest  force  of  evidence  :  but  I  see  not,  any  more  than
Helvetius  saw,  what  need  there  was  for  the  exceptions.

2.  For  my  own  part,  I  well  remember,  no  sooner  had  I  read  that  part
of  the  work  which  touches  on  this  subject,  than  I  felt  as  if  scales  had
fallen  from  my  eyes.  I  then,  for  the  first  time,  learnt  to  call  the  cause  of
the  people  the  cause  of  Virtue.

Perhaps  a  short  sketch  of  the  wanderings  of  a  raw  but  well-
intentioned  mind,  in  its  researches  after  moral  truth,  may,  on  this
occasion,  be  not  unuseful:  for  the  history  of  one  mind  is  the  his-
tory of  many.  The  writings  of  the  honest,  but  prejudiced.  Earl  of
Clarendon,  to  whose  integrity  nothing  was  wanting,  and  to  whose
wisdom  little,  but  the  fortune  of  living  something  later ;  and  the  con-
tagion of  a  monkish  atmosphere  ;  these,  and  other  concurrent  causes,
had  lifted  my  infant  affections  on  the  side  of  despotism.  The  Genius  of
the  place  I  dwelt  in,  the  authority  of  the  state,  the  voice  of  the  Church  in
her  solemn  offices  ;  all  these  taught  me  to  call  Charles  a  Martyr,  and
his  opponents  rebels.  I  saw  innovation,  where  indeed  innovation,  but  a
glorious  innovation,  was,  in  their  efforts  to  withstand  him.  I  saw  false-
hood, where  indeed  falsehood  was,  in  their  disavowals  of  innovation.  I
saw  selfishness,  and  an  obedience  to  the  call  of  passion,  in  the  efforts  of
the  oppressed  to  rescue  themselves  from  oppression.  I  saw  strong
countenance  lent  in  the  sacred  writings  to  monarchic  government :  and
none  to  any  other.  I  saw  passive  obedience  deep  stamped  with  the  seal
of  the  Christian  Virtues  of  humility  and  self-denial.

Conversing  with  Lawyers,  I  found  them  full  of  the  virtues  of  their
Original  Contract,  as  a  recipe  of  sovereign  efficacy  for  reconciling  the
accidental  necessity  of  resistance  with  the  general  duty  of  submission.
This  drug  of  theirs  they  administered  to  me  to  calm  my  scruples.  But
my  unpractised  stomach  revolted  against  their  opiate.  I  bid  them  open
to  me  that  page  of  history  in  which  the  solemnization  of  this  important
contract  was  recorded.  They  shrunk  from  this  challenge  ;  nor  could
they,  when  thus  pressed,  do  otherwise  than  our  Author  has  done,  confess

"  B3'  Dr.  Beaitie,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Immutability  of  Truth.


Formation  of  Government.  155

Chap.

XXXVII.  I-


With  respect  to  this,  and  other  fictions,  there  was  2^^.^^'^'-

^  '  _  _ r  ictions  tn

once  a  time,  perhaps,  when  they  had  their  use.  With  general
instruments  of  this  temper,  I  will  not  deny  but  that  vous  in  the
some  political  work  may  have  been  done,  and  that  ^4Te^"f
useful  work,  which,  under  the  then  circumstances  of  things,
things,  could  hardly  have  been  done  with  any  other.
But  the  season  of  Fiction  is  now  over:  insomuch,
that  what  formerly  might  have  been  tolerated  and
countenanced  under  that  name,  would,  if  now  at-
tempted to  be  set  on  foot,  be  censured  and  stigmatized
under  the  harsher  appellations  of  incroachment  or
imposture.  To  attempt  to  introduce  any  new  one,
would  be  now  a  crime  :  for  which  reason  there  is
much  danger,  without  any  use,  in  vaunting  and  pro-
pagating such  as  have  been  introduced  alread3\  In
point  of  political  discernment,  the  universal  spread  of
learning  has  raised  mankind  in  a  manner  to  a  level
with  each  other,  in  comparison  of  what  they  have
been  in  any  former  time  :  nor  is  any  man  now  so  far
elevated  above  his  fellows,  as  that  he  should  be
indulged  in  the  dangerous  licence  of  cheating  them
for  their  good.

the  whole  to  be  a  fiction.  This,  methought,  looked  ill.  It  seemed  to
me  the  acknowledgment  of  a  bad  cause,  the  bringing  a  fiction  to  support
it.  'To  prove  fiction,  indeed,'  said  I,  'there  is  need  of  fiction;  but  it  is
the  characteristic  of  trvith  to  need  no  proof  but  truth.  Have  j'ou  then
really  any  such  privilege  as  that  of  coining  facts  ?  You  are  spending
argument  to  no  purpose.  Indulge  yourselves  in  the  licence  of  supposing
that  to  be  true  which  is  not,  and  as  well  may  you  suppose  that  propo-
sition itself  to  be  true,  which  you  wish  to  prove,  as  that  other  whereby
\-ou  hope  to  prove  it.'  Thus  continued  I  unsatisiying,  and  unsatisfied,  till  I
learnt  to  see  that  utility  was  the  test  and  measure  of  all  virtue  ;  of  lo3'alt3'
as  much  as  any ;  and  that  the  obligation  to  minister  to  general  happiness,
was  an  obligation  paramount  to  and  inclusive  of  every  other.  Having
thus  got  the  instruction  I  stood  in  need  of,  I  sat  down  to  make  my
profit  of  it.  I  bid  adieu  to  the  original  contract :  and  I  left  it  to  those  to
amuse  themselves  with  this  rattle,  who  could  think  thcv  needed  it.


156  A  Fragment  on  Government.


Chap.

!;  XXXVIII.


XXXVIII.

This  had  a As  to  the  fictioD  HOW  before  us,  in  the  character  of
ary  use." ^^  argumeutum  ad  hominem  coming  when  it  did,  and
managed  as  it  was,  it  succeeded  to  admiration.

That  compacts,  by  whomsoever  entered  into,  ougJit
to  be  kept ; — that  men  are  bound  by  compacts,  are
propositions  which  men,  without  knowing  or  enquir-
ing why,  were  disposed  universally  to  accede  to.
The  observance  of  promises  they  had  been  accus-
tomed to  see  pretty  constantly  enforced.  They  had
been  accustomed  to  see  Kings,  as  well  as  others,
behave  themselves  as  if  bound  by  them.  This  pro-
position, then,  'that  men  are  bound  by  compacts)''
and  this  other,  '  that,  if  one  party  performs  not  his
part,  the  other  is  released  from  his,'  being  pro-
positions which  no  man  disputed,  were  propositions
which  no  man  had  any  call  to  prove.  In  theory  they
were  assumed  for  axioms  :  and  in  practice  they  were
observed  as  rules  ^.  If,  on  any  occasion,  it  was
thought  proper  to  make  a  shew  of  proving  them,  it
was  rather  for  form's  sake  than  for  any  thing  else :
and  that,  rather  in  the  way  of  memento  or  instruction
to  acquiescing  auditors,  than  in  the  way  of  proof
against  opponents.  On  such  an  occasion  the  com-
mon place  retinue  of  phrases  was  at  hand ;  Justice,
Right  Reason  required  it,  the  Lazv  of  Nature  com-
manded it,  and  so  forth ;  all  which  are  but  so  many
ways  of  intimating  that  a  man  is  firmly  persuaded  of
the  truth  of  this  or  that  moral  proposition,  though  he
either  thinks  he  need  not,  or  finds  he  carit,  tell  why.

A  compact, '  A  compact  or  contract  (for  the  two  words  on  this  occasion,  at  least,
or  contract,  aie  used  in  the  same  sense)  may,  I  think,  be  defined,  a  pair  of  promises,

by  two  persons  reciprocally  given,  the  one  promise  in  consideration  of  the

other.


Formation  of  Government.  1 5  7

Men  were  too  obviously  and  too  generally  interested Chap.

in  the  obsen^ance  of  these  rules  to  entertain  doubts — m

concerning  the  force  of  any  arguments  they  saw
employed  in  their  support. — It  is  an  old  observation
how  Interest  smooths  the  road  to  Faith.

XXXIX.

XXXIX

A  compact,  then,  it  was  said,  was  made  by  the  Terms  of'
King  and  people  :  the  terms  of  it  were  to  this  effect,  [foted  con-
The  people,  on  their  part,  promised  to  the  King  a  ^^^<^^  =^^-
general  obedience.  The  King,  on  his  part,  promised
to  govern  the  people  in  such  a  particular  manner
always,  as  should  be  subservient  to  their  happiness.
I  insist  not  on  the  words :  I  undertake  only  for  the
sense ;  as  far  as  an  imaginary  engagement,  so  loosely
and  so  variously  worded  by  those  who  have  imagined
it,  is  capable  of  any  decided  signification.  Assuming
then,  as  a  general  rule,  that  promises,  when  made,
ought  to  be  observed ;  and,  as  a  point  of  fact,  that  a
promise  to  this  effect  in  particular  had  been  made  by
the  party  in  question,  men  were  more  ready  to  deem
themselves  qualified  to  judge  when  it  was  such  a
promise  was  broken,  than  to  decide  directly  and
avowedly  on  the  delicate  question,  when  it  was  that  a
King  acted  so  far  in  opposition  to  the  happiness  of  his
people,  that  it  were  better  no  longer  to  obey  him.

XL.

T •  -r  ^L.

It  IS  manifest,  on  a  very  httle  consideration,  that  Stated  thus
nothing  was  gained  by  this  manoeuvre  after  all:  norcoidd"'
difficulty  removed  by  it. It  was  still  necessar3^,  and  "°^sl'^'
that  as  much  as  ever,  that  the  question  men  studied  trom  enter-
to  avoid  should  be  determined,  in  order  to  determine  the  ques-
the  question  they  thought  to  substitute  in  its  room.  S/v/as
It  was  still  necessary  to  determine,  whether  the  Kins:  ^"'^^ '""

•^  *  tended.


158


A  Fragment  on  Government.


Chap.
I.


XLI.

Nor.  if
stated
more  par-
ticularly,
could  it
answer
what  was
designed
by  it.


in  question  had,  or  had  not  acted  so  far  in  opposition
to  the  happiness  of  his  people,  that  it  were  better  no
longer  to  obey  him  ;  in  order  to  determine,  whether
the  promise  he  was  supposed  to  have  made,  had,  or
had  not  been  broken.  For  what  was  the  supposed
purport  of  this  promise  ?  It  was  no  other  than  what
has  just  been  mentioned.

XLI.

Let  it  be  said,  that  part  at  least  of  this  promise  was
to  govern  in  subservience  to  Law :  that  hereby  a  more
precise  rule  was  laid  down  for  his  conduct,  by  means
of  this  supposal  of  a  promise,  than  that  other  loose
and  general  rule  to  govern  in  subservience  to  the
Jiappiness  of  Jiis  people :  and  that,  by  this  means,  it  is
the  letter  of  the  Law  that  forms  the  tenor  of  the  rule.

Now  true  it  is,  that  the  governing  in  opposition  to
Law,  is  one  way  of  governing  in  opposition  to  the
happiness  of  the  people :  the  natural  effect  of  such  a
contempt  of  the  Law  being,  if  not  actually  to  destroy,
at  least  to  threaten  with  destruction,  all  those  rights
and  privileges  that  are  founded  on  it :  rights  and
privileges  on  the  enjoyment  of  which  that  happiness
depends.  But  still  it  is  not  this  that  can  be  safely
taken  for  the  entire  purport  of  the  promise  here  in
question :  and  that  for  several  reasons.  Firsts  Be-
cause the  most  mischievous,  and  under  certain
constitutions  the  most  feasible,  method  of  governing
in  opposition  to  the  happiness  of  the  people,  is,  by
setting  the  Law  itself  in  opposition  to  their  happiness.
Secondly^  Because  it  is  a  case  very  conceivable,  that
a  King  may,  to  a  great  degree,  impair  the  happiness
of  his  people  without  violating  the  letter  of  any  single
Law.  Tliirdly,  Because  extraordinary  occasions  may
now  and  then  occur,  in  which  the  happiness  of  the


Formation  of  Government.  159

people  may  be  better  promoted  by  acting,  for  the
moment,  in  opposition  to  the  Law,  than  in  subservience
to  it.  Fourthly,  Because  it  is  not  any  single  violation
of  the  Law,  as  such,  that  can  properly  be  taken  for  a
breach  of  his  part  of  the  contract,  so  as  to  be  under- .
stood  to  have  released  the  people  from  the  obligation
of  performing  theirs.  For,  to  quit  the  fiction,  and
resume  the  language  of  plain  truth,  it  is  scarce  ever
any  single  violation  of  the  Law  that,  by  being  sub-
mitted to,  can  produce  so  much  mischief  as  shall
surpass  the  probable  mischief  of  resisting  it.  If  every
single  instance  whatever  of  such  a  violation  were  to
be  deemed  an  entire  dissolution  of  the  contract,  a
man  who  reflects  at  all  would  scarce  find  anywhere,
I  believe,  under  the  sun,  that  Government  which  he
could  allow  to  subsist  for  twenty  years  together.  It
is  plain,  therefore,  that  to  pass  any  sound  decision
upon  the  question  which  the  inventors  of  this  fiction
substituted  instead  of  the  true  one,  the  latter  was  still
necessary  to  be  decided.  All  they  gained  by  their
contrivance  was,  the  convenience  of  deciding  it
obliquely,  as  it  were,  and  by  a  side  wind— that  is,  in
a  crude  and  hasty  way,  without  any  direct  and  steady
examination.

XLII.

XLII.

But,  after  all,  for  what  reason  is  it,  that  men  oug/it^o^\s}t
to  keep  their  promises  ?  The  moment  any  intelligible  fndepfn""*
reason  is  given,  it  is  this  :  that  it  is  for  the  advantage  cip"e.^""'
of  society  they  should  keep  them  ;  and  if  they  do  not,
that,  as  far  as  punishment  will  go,  they  should  be  made
to  keep  them. It  is  for  the  advantage  of  the  whole
number  that  the  promises  of  each  individual  should
be  kept :  and,  rather  than  they  should  not  be  kept,
that  such  individuals  as  fail  to  keep  them  should  be


i6o  A  Fragment  on  Government.


XLIII.

Nor  can  it
serve  to
prove  any-
thing, but
what  may
be  better
proved
without  it.


punished.  If  it  be  asked,  how  this  appears  ?  the
answer  is  at  hand : — Such  is  the  benefit  to  gain,  and
mischief  to  avoid,  by  keeping  them,  as  much  more
than  compensates  the  mischief  of  so  much  punish-
ment as  is  requisite  to  oblige  men  to  it.  Whether
the  dependence  of  benefit  and  mischief  (that  is,  of
pleasure  and  pain)  upon  men's  conduct  in  this  behalf,
be  as  here  stated,  is  a  question  oifacf,  to  be  decided,
in  the  same  manner  that  all  other  questions  of  fact
are  to  be  decided,  by  testimony,  observation,  and
experience  ^

XLIII.

This  then,  and  no  other,  being  the  reason  why  men
should  be  made  to  keep  their  promises,  viz.  that  it  is
for  the  advantage  of  society  that  they  should,  is  a
reason  that  may  as  well  be  given  at  once,  why  Kings,
on  the  one  hand,  in  governing,  should  in  general
keep  within  established  Laws,  and  (to  speak  uni-
versally) abstain  from  all  such  measures  as  tend  to
the  unhappiness  of  their  subjects :  and,  on  the  other
hand,  why  subjects  should  obey  Kings  as  long  as  they
so  conduct  themselves,  and  no  longer;  why  they
should  obey  in  short  so  long  as  the  probable  mischiefs
of  obedience  are  less  than  the  probable  mischiefs  of
resistance:  why,  in  a  word,  taking  the  whole  body

*  The  importance  which  the  observance  of  promises  is  of  to  the
happiness  of  society,  is  placed  in  a  very  striking  and  satisfactory  point  of
view,  in  a  little  apologue  of  Montesquieu,  entitled,  The  History  of  the
Troglodytes'^.  The  Troglodytes  are  a  people  who  pay  no  regard  to
promises.  By  the  natural  consequences  of  this  disposition,  they  fall  from
one  scene  of  misery  into  another ;  and  are  at  last  exterminated.  The
same  Philosopher,  in  his  Spirit  of  Laws,  copying  and  refining  upon  the
current  jargon,  feigns  a  Law  for  this  and  other  purposes,  after  defining  a
Law  to  be  a  relation.  How  much  more  instructive  on  this  head  is  the
fable  of  the  Troglodytes  than  the  pseudo-metaphysical  sophistry  of  the
Esprit  des  Loix  !

"^  See  the  Collection  of  his  Works.


Formation  of  Govermnent.  i6f

together,  it  is  their  duty  to  obey,  just  so  long  as  it  is Chap.
their  interest,  and  no  longer. This  being  the  case, ..  \\ ■
what  need  of  saying  of  the  one,  that  he  promised  so
X.0  goveni)  of  the  other,  that  they  promised  so  to  obey,
when  the  fact  is  otherwise  ?

XLIV.

T  ■ ■ u • !-•  XLIV

1  rue  It  IS,  that,  in  this  country,  according  to  ancient  The  Con-
forms, some  sort  of  vague  promise  oi  good  government7o^Z"'
IS  made  by  Kings  at  the  ceremony  of  their  coronation :  J^^n  "^  ^^
and  let  the  acclamations,  perhaps  given,  perhaps  not  ont"°^'°"
given,  by chance  persons out  of  the surrounding
multitude,  be  construed  into  a  promise  of  obedience
on the part of the n'hole multitude: that whole
multitude  itself,  a  small  drop  collected  together  by
chance  out  of  the  ocean  of  the  state  :  and  let  the  two
promises thus made be deemed to have formed
a  perfect  compact -.—not  that  either  of  them  is  declared
to  be  the  consideration  of  the  other '.

XLV.

XIV

Make  the  most  of  this  concession,  one  experiment  The  obii-
there  is,  by  which  every  reflecting  man  may  satisfy  prorse'' '
himself,  I  think,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  it  is  the  con-  ^^fid  °'
sideration of utility, and no other, that, secretly  against
but  unavoidably,  has  governed  his  judgment  upon  u^nitv^:
all these matters. The experiment is easy and  ^fuimtf
decisive. It is but to  reverse, in supposition in  ^iiiagainst

,1 r;  ,  , .  ^^  '  that  ot  a

tne  lirst  place  the  import  of  the  particular  promise  promise,
thus  feigned ; in  the  next  place,  the  effect  in  point
of  idility  of  the  obser\'ance  of  promises  in  general.—
Suppose  the  King  to  promise  that  he  would  govern
his  subjects  not  according  to  Law ; not  in  the  view

'  v.  supra,  par.  38.  note,  p.  156.
M


l62


A  Fragment  on  Government.


Chap.
I.


XLVI.
A  fallacy
obviated.


XLVII.
The  obli-
gation of
promise,


to  promote  their  happiness  : — would  this  be  binding
upon  hiui  ?  Suppose  the  people  to  promise  they
would  obey  him  at  all  events,  let  him  govern  as  he
will ;  let  him  govern  to  their  destruction.  Would
this  be  binding  upon  them  ?  Suppose  the  constant
and  universal  effect  of  an  observance  of  promises
were  to  produce  mischief,  would  it  thejt  be  men's  duty
to  obsei've  them  ?  Would  it  then  be  right  to  make
Laws,  and  apply  punishment  to  oblige  men  to  observe
them  ?

XLVI.

'  No  ; '  (it  may  perhaps  be  replied)  '  but  for  this
reason ;  among  promises,  some  there  are  that,
as  every  one  allows,  are  void  :  now  these  you  have
been  supposing,  are  unquestionably  of  the  number.
A  promise  that  is  in  itself  void,  cannot,  it  is  true,
create  any  obligation.  But  allow  the  promise  to
be  valid,  and  it  is  the  promise  itself  that  creates
the  obligation,  and  nothing  else,'  The  fallacy  of
this  argument  it  is  easy  to  perceive.  For  what  is
it  then  that  the  promise  depends  on  for  its  validityl
what  is  it  that  being  present  makes  it  validl  what
is  it  that  being  wanting  makes  it  voidl  To  acknow-
ledge that  any  07ie  promise  may  be  void,  is  to
acknowledge  that  if  any  other  is  binding,  it  is  not
merely  because  it  is  a  promise.  That  circumstance
then,  whatever  it  be,  on  which  the  vahdity  of  a
promise  depends,  that  circumstance,  I  say,  and  not
the  promise  itself  must,  it  is  plain,  be  the  cause  of  the
obligation  on  which  a  promise  is  apt  in  general  to
carry  with  it.

XLVIL

But  farther. Allow,  for  argument  sake,  what  we
have  disproved  :  allow  that  the  obligation  of  a  promise


Forination  of  Govermnent.  163

is  independent  of  every  other  :  allow  that  a  promise Chap.

is  binding  propria  vi — Binding  then  on  whom  ? On ^^—

him  certainly  who  makes  it. Admit  this  : For  what  ^^^^  !^  ,

even  ntde-

reason  is  the  same  individual  promise  to  be  \y\x\.dAX\^  pendent,
on  those  who  never  made  it  ? The  King,  fifty  years  h&lxtensive
ago,  promised  my  Great-Grandfafher  to  govern  him  ^^°"&h  ^^^
according  to  Law  :  m}^  Great-Grandfather,  fifty  years  pose.
ago,  promised the  King  to  obey  him according  to
Law. The  \\.\ng,pist  now,  promised  my  neighbour  to
govern  him  according  to Law :  my  neighbour,  just
now,  promised  the  King  to  obey  him  according  to
Law. — Be  it  so — What  are  these  promises,  all  or  any
of  them,  to  me  ? To  make  answer  to  this  question,
some  other  principle,  it  is  manifest,  must  be  resorted
to,  than  that  of  the  intrinsic  obligation  of  promises
upon  those  who  make  them.

XLVIIL

Now  this  other  principle  that  still  recurs  upon  us,  But  the
what  other  can  it  be  than  the  principle  of  utility  ?  o"l4ility
The  principle  which  furnishes  us with  that  reason,  is  aii-suffi-
which  alone  depends not  upon  any  higher  reason,
but  which  is  itself  the  sole  and  all-sufficient  reason
for  every  point  of  practice  whatsoever.


i\i  2


CHAPTER  11.


Chap.
II.

I.

Subject
of  the
present
chapter.


FORMS OF GOVERNMENT.


I.


The  contents  of  the  whole  digression  we  are
examining,  were  distributed,  we  may  remember,  at
the  outset  of  this  Essay,  into  five  divisions.  The
first,  relative  to  the  manner  in  which  Government  in
general  was  formed,  has  already  been  examined  in
the  preceding  chapter.  The  next,  relative  to  the
different  species  or  forms  it  may  assume,  comes  now
to  be  considered.


II.

Theo-
logical
flourish
of  our
Author.


II.

The  first  object  that  strikes  us  in  this  divi-
sion of  our  subject  is  the  theological  flourish
it  sets  out  with.  In  God  may  be  said,  though  in
a  peculiar  sense,  to  be  our  Author's  strength.  In
theology  he  has  found  a  not  unfrequent  source,  of
ornament  to  divert  us,  of  authority  to  overawe  us,
from  sounding  into  the  shallowness  of  his  doc-
trine ^.


*  This  is  what  there  would  be  occasion  to  shew  at  large,  were  what  he
says  of  Law  in  general,  and  of  the  Laws  of  nature,  and  revelation  in
particular,  to  be  examined.


Forms  of  Government,  165

Chap.
II.

III.  -^—

III.

That  governors,  of  some  sort  or  other,  we must  Gover-
have,  is  what  he  has  been  shewing  in  the  manner  we  "efitiai
have  seen  in  the  last  chapter. Now  for  endoamients  ^"^o^^'-

r  ments

to  quahfy  them  for  the  exercise  of  their function,  found  for

-T-i  T  ■  them.

These  endowments  then,  as  11  it  were  to  make  them
shew  the  brighter,  and  to  keep  them,  as  much  as
possible,  from  being  soiled  by  the  rough  hands  of
impertinent  speculators,  he  has  chosen  should  be
of  aethereal  texture,  and  has  fetched  them  from  the
clouds.

'All  mankind  ^'  he  sa3'S,  '  will  agree  that  govern-
ment should  be  reposed  in  such  persons  in  whom
those  qualities  are  most  likely  to  be  found,  the
perfection  of  which  are  among  the  attributes  of  Him
who  is  emphatically  styled  the  Supreme  Being :  the
three  great  requisites,  I  mean,  of  wisdom,  of  goodness,
and  of  power.'

But  let  us  see  the  whole  passage  as  it  stands —

IV.

IV.

'  But  as  all  the  members  of  Society,'  (meaning  The  pas-
natural  Society)  '  are  naturally  equal,'  (i;  e.  I  suppose,  cUed."^^
with  respect  to  political  power,  of  which  none  of  them
as  yet  have  any)  '  it  may  be  asked,'  (continues  he)  '  in
whose  hands  are  the  reins  of  government  to  be  in-
trusted ?  To  this  the  general  answer  is  easy  ;  but  the
application  of  it  to  particular  cases,  has  occasioned
one  half  of  those  mischiefs  which  are  apt  to  proceed
from  misguided  political  zeal.  In  general,  all  man-
kind will  agree  that  government  should  be  reposed
in  such  persons  in  whom  those  qualities  are  most

'  1  Comm.  p.  48.


1 66  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap.  Hkely  to  be  found,  the  perfection  of  which  are  among
— ,,!_  the  attributes  of  Him  who  is  emphatically  styled  the
Supreme  Being ;  the  three  grand  requisites,  I  mean,
of  wisdom,  goodness,  and  of  power :  wisdom,  to  dis-
cern the  real  interest  of  the  community  ;  goodness,  to
endeavour  alwa3^s  to  pursue  that  real  interest ;  and
strength  or  power,  to  carry  this  knowledge  and
intention  into  action.  These  are  the  natural  foun-
dations of  sovereignty,  and  these  are  the  requisites
that  ought  to  be  found  in  every  well-constituted  frame
of  government.'


V.


V.


Theology Evcry  thmg  m  its  place. Theology  m  a  sermon,  or

on  such  an  /.  *=^ . ^  _ ^  , ^;^  . ,  . '

occasion  as  a  catcchism.  But  m  this  place,  the  nourish  we  have
tinJiir^^'^'  seen,  might,  for  every  purpose  of  instruction,  have
much  better,  it  should  seem,  been  spared.  What
purpose  the  idea  of  that  tremendous  and  incompre-
hensible Being  thus  unnecessarily  introduced  can
answer,  I  cannot  see,  unless  it  were  to  bewilder  and
entrance  the  reader ;  as  it  seems  to  have  bewildered
and  entranced  the  writer.  Beginning  thus,  is  begin-
ning at  the  wrong  end :  it  is  explaining  ignotum  per
ignotiits.  It  is  not  from  the  attributes  of  the  Deity,
that  an  idea  is  to  be  had  of  any  quahties  in  men  :  on
the  contrar}^,  it  is  from  what  we  see  of  the  qualities  of
men,  that  we  obtain  the  feeble  idea  we  can  frame
to  ourselves,  of  the  attributes  of  the  Deity.

VI.

VI.

Difficulty We  shall  soon  see  whether  it  be  light  or  darkness

himlnto. our  Author  has  brought  back  from  this  excursion  to

the  clouds. The  qualifications  he  has  pitched  upon

for  those  in  whose  hands  Government  is  to  be  reposed

we  see  are  three: wisdom,  goodness, and power.


Forms  of  Government.  167

Now  of  these  three,  one  there  is  which,  I  doubt,  will
give  him  some  trouble  to  know  what  to  do  with.  I
mean  that  of  Power :  which,  looking  upon  it  as  a
jewel,  it  should  seem,  that  would  give  a  lustre  to  the
royal  diadem,  he  was  for  importing  from  the  celestial
regions.  In  heaven,  indeed,  we  shall  not  dispute  its
being  to  be  found ;  and  that  at  all  junctures  alike.
But  the  parallel,  I  doubt,  already  fails.  In  the  earthly
governors  in  question,  or,  to  speak  more  properly,
candidates  for  government,  by  the  very  supposition
there  can  not,  at  the  juncture  he  supposes,  be  any
such  thing.  Power  is  that  very  quality  which,  in
consideration  of  these  other  qualities,  which,  it  is
supposed,  are  possessed  by  them  already,  they  are
now  waiting  to  receive.

VII.


VI  r.


By  Power  in  this  place,  I,  for  m}'  part,  mean  politi-  Power.
cal  power :  the  only  sort  of  power  our  Author  could  natural  or
mean  :  the  only  sort  of  power  that  is  here  in  question.  ^°  ^"^'^^  "
A  little  farther  on  we shall  find him  speaking of
this  endowment  as  being  possessed,  and  that  in  the
highest  degree,  by  a  King,  a  single  person. Natural
power  therefore,  mere  organical  power,  the  facult}^
of  giving  the  hardest  blows,  can  never,  it  is  plain,  be
that  which  he  meant  to  number  among  the  attributes
of  this  godhke  personage.

VIII.

VIII.

We  see  then  the  dilemma  our  Author's  theolog}'  in  neither

,  -  , ,  . .  ,  ...  , • sense  can

has  brought  him  into,  by  putting  him  upon  reckoning  ^  be  attri-
pozver  among the qualifications  of his candidates.  ^Jiribu^jeg*^
Power  is  either  natural  or  politieal. Politieal  power  it.
is what  they  cannot  have  by  the supposition  : for
that  is  the  very  thing  that  is  to  be  created,  and  which^


i68  A  Fras'tnent  on  Governme^it.


^A


Chap,  by  the  establishment  of  Government,  men  are  going
— ♦♦^—  to  confer  on  them.  If  any,  then,  it  must  be  natural
power ;  the  natural  strength  that  a  man  possesses  of
himself  without  the  help  of  Government.  But  of
this,  then,  if  this  be  it,  there  is  more,  if  we  may  believe
our  Author,  in  a  single  member  of  a  society,  than  in
that  member  and  all  the  rest  of  the  society  put
together  \

IX.

IX.

What  it  is This  difficulty,  if  possible,  one  should  be  glad  to

that  may.  , • t i • i •  i

see  cleared  up.  1  he  truth  is,  I  take  it,  that  in  what
our  Author  has  said  of  power,  he  has  been  speaking,
as  it  were,  by  anticipation  :  and  that  what  he  means
by  it,  is  not  any  power  of  either  kind  actually  pos-
sessed by  any  man,  or  body  of  men,  at  the  juncture
he  supposes,  but  only  a  capacity^  if  one  may  call  it  so,
of  retaining  and  putting  into  action  political  power,
whensoever  it  shall  have  been  conferred.  Now,  of
actual  power,  the  quantity  that  is  possessed  is,  in
every  case,  one  and  the  same  :  for  it  is  neither  more
nor  less  than  the  supreme  power.  But  as  to  the
capacity  above  spoken  of,  there  do  seem,  indeed,  to
be  good  grounds  for  supposing  it  to  subsist  in  a
higher  degree  in  a  single  man  than  in  a  body.

X.

And  for  Thcsc  grounds  it  will  not  be  expected  that  I  should

w  T^a  rea-  ^^-gpj^y  ^j.  i^j-gg  •  ^  slight  skctch  will  bc  Sufficient.—
The  efficacy  of  power  is,  in  part  at  least,  in  proportion
to  the  promptitude  of  obedience  :  the  promptitude  of
obedience  is,  in  part,  in  proportion  to  the  promptitude
of  command: — command  is  an  expression  of  will:  a

'  v.  infra,  par.  32,  p.  178.  Monarchy,  which  is  the  government  ol  one,
'  is  the  most  powerful  form  of  government,'  he  says,  '  of  any : '  more
so  than  Democracy,  w-hich  he  describes  as  being  the  Government  of  all.


Forms  of  Government.  169

will  is  sooner  formed  by  one  than  many.  And
this,  or  something  like  it,  I  take  to  be  the  plain
Enghsh  of  our  Author's  metaphor,  where  he  tells  us',
as  we  shall  see  a  little  farther  on  ^,  that '  a  monarchy
is  the  most  powerful '  [form  of  government]  '  of  an}^
all  the  sinews  of  government  being  knit  together,
and  united  in  the  hands  of  the  prince.'

XI.

...  XI.

The  next  paragraph,  short  as  it  is,  contains  variety  Heteroge-
of  matter.  The  first  two  sentences  of  it  are  to  let  us  "Jnts  of  u"e
know,  that  with  regard  to  the  manner  in  which  each  next  para-

^  graph.

of  the  particular  governments  that  we  know  of  have
been  formed,  he  thinks  proper  to  pass  it  by.  A  third
is  to  intimate,  for  the  second  time,  that  all  govern-
ments must  be  absolute  in  some  hands  or  other.  In
the  fourth  and  last,  he  favours  us  with  a  very  com-
fortable piece  of  intelligence;  the  truth  of  which,  but
for  his  averment,  few  of  us  perhaps  would  have  sus-
pected. This  is,  that  the  qualifications  mentioned  by
the  last  paragraph  as  requisite  to  be  possessed  by  all
Governors  of  states  are,  or  at  least  once  upon  a  time
were,  actually  possessed  by  them :  i.  e.  according  to
the  opinion  of  somebody ;  but  of  what  somebody  is
not  altogether  clear :  whether  in  the  opinion  of  these
Governors  themselves,  or  of  the  persons  governed
b}'  them.

XII.

XII.

'  How  the  several  forms  of  government  we  now  The  para-
see  in  the  world  at  first  actually  began,' says  our  J^ted.'  ^'^'
Author,  *  is  matter  of  great  uncertainty,  and  has  oc-
casioned infinite  disputes. It  is  not  my  business  or
intention  to  enter  into  any  of  them. However  they

*  Comm.  p.  50.  ^  Par.  3a.


I  JO  A  Fragment  on  Government.

began,  or  by  what  right  soever  they  subsist,  there  is
and  must  be  in  all  of  them  a  supreme,  irresistible,
absolute,  uncontrolled  authority,  in  which  the  jura
siimnii  imperii,  or  the  rights  of  sovereignt}^,  reside.
And  this  authority  is  placed  in  those  hands,  wherein
(according  to  the  opinion  of  the  founders  of  such
respective  states,  either  expressly  given  or  collected
from  their  tacit  approbation)  the  qualities  requisite
for  supremacy,  wisdom,  goodness,  and  power,  are
the  most  likely  to  be  found.'

XIII.

XIII.

Paiadoxi-  Who  thosc  pei'sons  are  whom  our  Author  means

tion  in  here  by  the  word  founders ;  whether  those  who  be-

^art'ofu^  came  the Governors of  the  states in question,  or

as  if  all  those  who  bccamc  the  govern^j^a',  or  both  together,

ments  is  what  I  would  not take upon me to determine.

resuU  of  ^^"^  aught  I  kuow  he  may  have  meant  neither  the  one

a  tree  pre-  j^Qr  the  Other,  but  some  third  person. And,  indeed,

terence.  . .

what  I  am  vehemently  inclined  to  suspect  is,  that,  in
our  Author's  large  conception,  the  mighty  and  exten-
sive domains  of  Athens  and  Sparta,  of  which  we
read  so  much  at  school  and  at  college,  consisting
each  of  several  score  of  miles  square,  represented,  at
the  time  this  paragraph  was  writing,  the  whole  uni-
verse :  and  the  respective  aeras  of  Solon  and  Lycurgus,
the  whole  period  of  the  history  of  those  states.

XIV.

XIV.

Reasons  The  words  'founders,' — 'opinion,' — 'approbation,'
pllshig  this  — ^^  short  the  whole  complexion  of  the  sentence  is
to  have  such  as  brings  to  one's  view  a  system  of  government
meaning  Utterly  different  from  the  generality  of  those  we  have
before  our  eyes ;  a  system  in  which  one  would  think
neither  caprice,  nor  violence,  nor  accident,  nor  pre-


Forms  of  Government.  1 7 1

judice,  nor  passion,  had  any  share  :  a  system  uniform,  Chap.
comprehensive,  and  simultaneous;  planned  with  phleg-  — •♦—
matic  deliberation  ;  established  by  full  and  general
assent :  such,  in  short,  as,  according  to  common
imagination,  were  the  systems  laid  down  by  the  two
sages  above-mentioned.  If  this  be  the  case,  the  object
he  had  in  mind  when  he  said  Founders,  might  be
neither  Governc»r5  nor  governed,  but  some  neutral
person :  such  as  those  sages,  chosen  as  they  were  in
a  manner  as  umpires,  might  be  considered  with
regard  to  the  persons  who,  under  the  prior  constitu-
tion, whatever  it  was,  had  stood  respectively  in  those
two  relations.


XV.


XV.


All  this,  however,  is  but  conjecture : In  the  pro-  The  doc-

....-.,  , .  ,  . . trine  of  it

position  itseli  neither  this,  nor  any  other  restriction  applied  to
is  expressed. It  is  delivered  explicitly  and  emphati-  fns^an'ces
cally  in  the  character  of  an  universal  one. '  In  all  of
THEM,'  he  assures  us,  *  this  authority,'  (the  supreme
authority)  '  is  placed  in  those  hands,  wherein,  accord-
ing to  the  opinion  of  the  founders  of  such  respective
states,  these "  qualities of  wisdom, goodness, and
power,"  are  the  most  likely  to  be  found.' In this
character  it  cannot but throw  a singular light on
history. I  can  see  no  end,  indeed,  to  the  discoveries
it  leads  to,  all of  them equally new  and edif^'ing.
When  the  Spaniards,  for  example,  became  masters
of  the  empire  of  Mexico,  a  vulgar  politician might
suppose  it  was  because such of  the Mexicans as
remained  unexterminated,  could  not  help  it. No  such
thing — It  was  because  the  Spaniards  were  of  *  opinion '  Applied
or  the  Mexicans  themselves  were  of  '  opinion '  (which  [a/instan-
of  the  two  is  not  altogether  clear)  that  in  Charles  Vth,  '^'^s.
and  his  successors,  more  goodness  (of  which  they  had


172  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap, such  abundant  proofs)  as  well  as  wisdom,  was  likely  to

^i— be  found,  than  in  all  the  Mexicans  put  together. The

same  persuasion  obtained  between  Charlemagne  and
the  German  Saxons  with  respect  to  the  goodness  and
wisdom  of  Charlemagne  : — between  William  the  Nor-
man and  the  English  Saxons: — between  Mahomet  II
and  the  subjects  of  John  Paleologus :— between
Odoacer  and  those  of  Augustulus  : — between  the  Tar-
tar Gingiskan  and  the  Chinese  of  his  time: — between
the  Tartars  Chang-ti  and  Cam-ghi,  and  the  Chinese
of  their  times  : — between  the  Protector  Cromwell  and
the  Scotch: — between  William  III  and  the  Irish
Papists  : — between  Caesar  and  the  Gauls  : — in  short,
between  the  Thirty  Tyrants,  so  called,  and  the  Athe-
nians, whom  our  Author  seems  to  have  had  in  view :
— to  mention  these  examples  only,  out  of  as  many
hundred  as  might  be  required.  All  this,  if  we  may
trust  our  Author,  he  has  the  ^goodness'  to  beheve :
and  by  such  lessons  is  the  penetration  of  students  to
be  sharpened  for  piercing  into  the  depths  of  politics.

XVI.
General  XVI.

contents  of

the  six  5q niuch for the introductory paragraph. — The

remaining  _  _  _  . .

paragraphs  main  part  of  the  subject  is  treated  of  in  six  others :
[he^ subject  the  general  contents  of  which  are  as  follow.

of  this

chapter.  "VA/TT

XVII.

Of  the  In  the  first  he  tells  us  how  many  different  forms

graph.  of  government  there  are  according  to  the  division
of  the  ancients :  which  division  he  adopts.  These
are  three  :  Monarchy,  Aristocracy,  and  Democracy.

XVIII.

XVIII.

Second.  The  ncxt  IS  to  tell  us,  that  by  the  sovereign  power

he  means  that  of '  making  laws'


Forms  of  Government.  173

Chap.
II.

XIX.  -^^

XIX.

In a  third  he  gives  us  the  advantages  and  dis-  Third,
advantages  of  these  three  different  forms  of  govern-
ment.

XX.

XX.

In  a  fourth  he  tell  us  that  these  are  all  the  ancients  Fourth.
would  allow  of.

XXI.

XXI.

A  fifth  is  to  tell  us  that  the  British  form  of  govern-  Fifth,
ment  is  different  from  each  of  them ; being  a  com-
bination of  all,  and  possessing  the  advantages  of  all.

XXII.

XXII.

In  the  sixth,  and  last,  he  shews  us  that  it  could  not  Sixth.
possess  these  advantages,  if,  instead  of  being  what  it
is,  it  were  either  of  those  others :  and  tells  us  what  it
is  that  may  destroy  it.  These  two  last  it  will  be
sufficient  here  to  mention :  to  examine  them  will  be
the  task  of  our  next  chapter.

XXIII.

XXIII.

Monarchy  is  that  form  of  Government  in  which  the  Definitions
power  of  making  Laws  is  lodged  in  the  hands  of  a  three  sorts
single  member  of  the  state  in  question.  Aristocracy  men°s^^"'
is  that  form  of  Government  in  which  the  power  of  ^'^'^°''^''^s

^  to  our

making  laws  is  lodged  in  the  hands  of  several  mem-  Author.
bers.  Democracy  is  that  form  of  government  in
which  the  power  of  making  laws  is  lodged  in  the
hands  of  ^  alV  of  them  put  together.  These,  ac-
cording to  our  Author,  are  the  definitions  of  the
ancients ;  and  these,  therefore,  without  difficult}'',  are
the  definitions  of  our  Author.


1 74  -^  Fragi?ient  on  Goverjunent.


Chap,
II.

XXIV.

The  para-
graph re-
cited.


XXV.
And  the
next.


XXVI.
How  he

assigns
them  their
respective
quahfica-
tions.


XXIV.

*  The  political  writers  of  antiquity,'  says  he,  '  will
not  allow  more  than  three  regular  forms  of  govern-
ment ;  the  first,  when  the  sovereign  power  is  lodged
in  an  aggregate  assembly,  consisting  of  all  the  mem-
bers of  a  community,  which  is  called  a  Democracy ;
the  second,  when  it  is  lodged  in  a  council  composed
of  select  members,  and  then  it  is  styled  an  Aristo-
cracy ;  the  last,  when  it  is  entrusted  in  the  hands  of
a  single  person,  and  then  it  takes  the  name  of  a
Monarchy.  All  other  species  of  government  they  say
are  either  corruptions  of,  or  reducible  to  these  three.'

XXV.

'  By  the  sovereign  power,  as  was  before  observed,
is  meant  the  making  of  laws  ;  for  wherever  that  power
resides,  all  others  must  conform  to,  and  be  directed
by  it,  whatever  appearance  the  outward  form  and
administration  of  the  government  may  put  on.  For  it
is  at  any  time  in  the  option  of  the  legislature  to  alter
that  form  and  administration  by  a  new  edict  or  rule,
and  to  put  the  execution  of  the  laws  into  whatever
hands  it  pleases;  and  all  the  other  powers  of  the
state  must  obey  the  legislative  power  in  the  execution
of  their  several  functions,  or  else  the  constitution  is
at  an  end.'

XXVI.

Having  thus  got  three  regular  simple  forms  of
Government  (this  anomalous  complex  one  of  our  own
out  of  the  question)  and  just  as  many  qualifications  to
divide  among  them ;  of  each  of  which,  by  what  he
told  us  a  while  ago,  each  form  of  Government  must
have  some  share,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  their  allotments
will be  made  out. Each  form  of  Government  will


Forms  of  Government.  175

possess  one  of  these  qualities  in  perfection,  taking  its  ^hap.
chance,  if  one  may  say  so,  for  its  share  in  the  two  — ** —
others.

XXVII.

Among  these  three  different  forms  of  Government  ah  appear-
then,  it  should  seem  according  to  our  Author's  ehgfbleln^
account  of  them,  there  is  not  much  to  choose. Each  his\newof

'  _  them.

of  them  has  a  qualification^  an  eiidoivment,  to  itself.
Each  of  them  is  completely  characterized  by  this
qualification.  No  intimation  is  given  of  any  pre-
eminence among  these  quahfications,  one  above
another.  Should  there  be  any  dispute  concerning  the
preference  to  be  given  to  any  of  these  forms  of
government,  as  proper  a  method  as  an}^  of  settling
it,  to  judge  from  this  view  of  them,  is  that  of  cross  and
pile.  Hence  we  may  infer,  that  all  the  governments
that  ever  were,  or  will  be  (except  a  very  particular
one  that  we  shall  come  to  presently,  that  is  to  say  our
owm)  are  upon  a  par :  that  of  Athens  with  that  of
Persia  ;  that  of  Geneva  with  that  of  Morocco  :  since
they  are  all  of  them,  he  tells  us,  '  corruptions  of,
or  reducible  to,'  one  of  these.  This  is  happ}'.  A
legislator  cannot  do  amiss.  He  ma}^  save  himself  the
expense  of  thinking.  The  choice  of  a  king  was  once
determined,  w^e  are  told,  by  the  neighing  of  a  horse.
The  choice  of  a  form  of  Government  might  be
determined  so  as  well.


xxvni.

XXVI 1 1.

As  to  our  own  form  of  government,  however,  this,  How  to
it  is  plain,  being  that  which  it  seemed  good  to  take  for  constitu-^
the  theme  of  his  paneg3Tic,  and  being  made  out  of ''°"-
the  other  three,  will  possess  the  advantages  of  all  of
them put  together; and that  w^ithout an}^  of the


176  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap, disadvantages ; the  disadvantages vanishing at the
— ►^ — word  of  command,  or  even  without  it,  as  not  being
suitable  to  the  purpose.

XXIX.

XXIX.

Contradic-  ^j-  ^-j-^g  gj^^j  q{  j-}-,g  paragraph  which  gives  us  the
falls  into,  above  definitions,  one  observation  there  is  that  is
posing  a  httle  puzzhng.  '  Other  species  of  government,'
other  sorts  ^  given  to  understand,  there  are  besides  these  ;

of  govern-  &  '  '

ment  than  but  then  thosc  others,  if  not  '  reducible  to,'  are  but

these

three,  '  corruptions  of  these.'  Now,  what  there  is  in  any  of
as^thej-^are  thcse  to  be  Corrupted,  is  not  so  easy  to  understand.
by  him.  'pj-^g  esscncc  of  tliesc  several  forms  of  government,  we
must  alwa^'S  remember,  is  placed  by  him,  solely  and
entirely,  in  the  article  of  number :  in  the  ratio  of  the
number  of  the  Governors,  (for  so  for  shortness  we
will  st^'le  those  in  whose  hands  is  lodged  this  '  power
of  making  laws')  to  that  of  the  govern<?(^.  If  the
number  of  the  former  be,  to  that  of  the  latter,  as  one  to
all,  then  is  the  form  of  Government  a  Monarchy:  if  as
all  to  fl//,  then  is  it  a  Democracy :  if  as  some  number
between  one  and  all  to  all,  then  is  it  an  Aristocrac}'".
Now  then,  if  we  can  conceive  a  fourth  number,  which
not  being  more  than  all,  is  neither  one  nor  all,  nor
any  thing  between  one  and  all  we  can  conceive  a  form
of  Government,  which,  upon  due  proof,  may  appear  to
be  a  corruption  of  some  one  or  other  of  these  three  '.
If  not.  we  must  look  for  the  corruption  somewhere
else  :  Suppose  it  were  in  our  Author's  reason  ^.

^  By  the  laws  of  Germany,  such  and  such  states  are  to  furnish  so  many
men  to  the  general  army  of  the  empire:  some  of  them  so  many  men  and  one
half;  others,  so  many  and  one  third  ;  others  again,  if  I  mistake  not,  so
many  and  one  fourth.  One  of  these  half,  third-part,  or  quarter-men,
suppose,  possesses  himself  of  the  Government :  here  then  we  have  a  kind
of  corruption  of  a  Monarchy. Is  this  what  our  Author  had  in  view?

-  A  more  suitable  place  to  look  for  corruption  in,  if  we  may  take  his
own  woid  for  it,  there  cannot  be. '  Everj'  man's  reason,'  he assures


Forms  of  Government.  i  7  7

Chap.
II.

XXX.  -*^-

XXX.

Not  but  that  we  may  meet,  indeed,  with  several  Govern-
other  hard-worded  names  for  forms  of  Government :  same^as
but  these  names  were  only  so  many  names  for  one  ^"^^^
or  other  of  those  three. We  hear  often  of  a  Tyranny:  other
but  this  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  name  a
man  gives  to  our  Author's  Monarchy,  \vhen  out  of
humour  with  it. It  is  still  the  government  of  number
one. We  hear  now  and  then,  too,  of  a  sort  of  Govern-
ment called  an  Oligarchy : but  this  is  neither  more
nor  less  than  the  name  a  man  gives  to  our  Author's
Aristocracy,  in  the  same  case. It  is  still  the  Govern-
ment of  some  number  or  other,  between  one  and  all.
In  fine,  we  hear  now  and  then  of  a  sort  of  govern-
ment fit  to  break  one's  teeth,  called  an Ochlocracy:
but  this  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  name  a
man  gives  to  a  Democracy  in  the  same  case. It  is
still  that  sort  of  government,  which,  according  to  our
Author,  is  the  Government  of  all.


XXXI.

XXXI.

Let  us  now  see  how  he  has  disposed  of  his  three  Quaiifica-
qualifications among his three sorts or forms of  the  three
Government. Upon  Monarchy,  we  shall  find,  he  has  !j°[™t;d^'''
bestowed  the  perfection  of  power;  on  Aristocracx',  of  the  subject

T^  r  ^  1 r 1  resumed.

Wisdom ;  on  Democracy,  of  goodness ;  each  01  these
forms  having  just  enough,  we  may  suppose,  of  the
two  remaining  qualifications  besides  its  own  peculiar
one  to  make  up  the  necessary  complement  of  *  quali-

us  ",  ■  is  corruf)t;'aiid  not  only  that,  but  'his  understanding  full  of  ignorance
and  error.'  With  regard  to  others,  it  were  as  well  not  to  be  too  positive  :
but  with  regard  to  a  man's  self,  what  he  tells  us  from  experience,  it
would  be  ill  manners  to  dispute  with  him.

" I  Comm p.  41.
N


A  Frao-ment  on  Government.


■ii


Chap.
II.


ties  requisite  for  supremacy,'  Kings  are,  (nay  ivere
— •' —  before  they  were  Kings,  since  it  v/as  this  quahfication
determined  their  subjects  to  make  them  Kings  \)  as
strong  as  so  many  Hercules's ;  but  then,  as  to  their
wisdom,  or  their  goodness,  there  is  not  much  to  say.
The  members  of  an  Aristocracy  are  so  many  Solo-
mons :  but  then  they  are  not  such  sturdy  folks  as
your  Kings ;  nor,  if  the  truth  is  to  be  spoken,  have
they  much  more  honesty  than  their  neighbours.  As
to  the  members  of  a  Democracy,  they  are  the  best
sort  of  people  in  the  world  ;  but  then  they  are  but  a
puny  sort  of  gentry,,  as  to  strength,  put  them  all
together ;  and  are  apt  to  be  a  little  defective  in  point
of  understanding.

^l^"^''-  XXXII.

J  he  para-
cited.  '^^  *  ^"^  ^  democracy,'  says  he,  'where  the  right  of
making  laws  resides  in  the  people  at  large,  public
virtue  or  goodness  of  intention,  is  more  likely  to  be
found,  than  either  of  the  other  qualities  of  govern-
ment. Popular  assemblies  are  frequently  foolish  in
their  contrivance,  and  weak  in  their  execution  ;  but
generally  mean  to  do  the  thing  that  is  right  and  just,
and  have  always  a  degree  of  patriotism  or  public
spirit.  In  aristocracies  there  is  more  wisdom  to  be
found  than  in  the  other  frames  of  Government ;  being
composed,  or  intended  to  be  composed,  of  the  most
experienced  citizens  ;  but  there  is  less  honesty  than
in  a  republic,  and  less  strength  than  in  a  monarchy.
A  monarchy  is  indeed  the  most  powerful  of  any,  all
the  sinews  of  government  being  knit  together  and
united  in  the  hand  of  the  prince ;  but  then  there  is
imminent  danger  of  his  employing  that  strength  to
improvident  or  oppressive  purposes.'

I  Comm.  p.  48.


Forms  of  Government.  179

XXXIIL


Chap.
II.


'  Thu.s  these  three  species  of  government  have  all  And  the
of  them  their  several  perfections  and  imperfections.  "^^^•
Democracies  are  usually  the  best  calculated  to  direct
the  end  of  a  law ;  aristocracies  to  invent  the  means
by  which  that  end  shall  be  obtained  ;  and  monarchies
to  carry  those  means  into  execution.  And  the
ancients,  as  was  observed,  had  in  general  no  idea  of
any  other  permanent  form  of  government  but  these
three  ;  for  though  Cicero  declares  himself  of  opinion,
esse  optime  constitutam  rempublicam^  quae  ex  tribiis
generibus  jllis,  regali,  optima,  et  populari  sit  modice
confusa ;  yet  Tacitus  treats  this  notion  of  a  mixed
government,  formed  out  of  them  all,  and  partaking  of
the  advantages  of  each,  as  a  visionary  whim ;  and
one,  that  if  effected,  could  never  be  lasting  or  secure.'

XXXIV.

xxxiv.

In the midst of  this fine-spun ratiocination, an  Democra-

accident  has  happened,  of  w^hich  our  Author  seems  scribed  by
not  to  be  aware. One  of  his  accidents,  as  a  logician  !l""'  "°

'  <=>  Govern-

would  say,  has  lost  its  subject :  one  of  the  qualifications  ment  at
he  has  been  telling  us  of,  is,  somehow  or  other,
become  vacant :  the  form  of  Government  he  designed
it  for,  having  unluckily  slipped  through  his  fingers  in
the  handling.  I  mean  Democracy;  which  he,  and,
according  to  him,  the  Ancients,  make  out  to  be  the
Government  of  all.  Now  '<?//'  is  a  great  many;  so
many  that,  I  much  doubt,  it  will  be  rather  a  difficult
matter  to  find  these  high  and  mighty  personages
power  enough,  so  much  as  to  make  a  decent  figure
with.  The  members  of  this  redoubtable  Common-
wealth will  be  still  worse  off,  I  doubt,  in  point  of
subjects, than Trinculo in the play, or tlian the

N  2


I  So  A  Fragment  on  Government.

potentates,  whom  some  late  navigators  found  lording
it,  with  might  and  main,  '  Kparipiii^i  /Si'rj^t,'  over  a
Spanish  settlement :  there  were  three  members  of
the  Government ;  and  they  had  one  subject  among
them  all  ^  Let  him  examine  it  a  little,  and  it  will
turn  out,  I  take  it,  to  be  precisely  that  sort  of  Govern-
ment, and  no  other,  which  one  can  conceive  to  obtain,
where  there  is  no  Government  at  all.  Our  Author,
we  may  remember,  had  shrewd  doubts  about  the
existence  of  d.  state  of  naftf re- :  grant  him  his  Demo-
cracy, and  it  exists  in  his  Democrac}^  ^.

XXXV.


XXXV.


The  quaii-  The  qualification  oi  goodness,  I  think  it  was,  that
designed  belonged  to  the  Government  of  all,  while  there  was
come  va-  such  a  Govemmcnt.  This  having  taken  its  flight,  as
cant.  ^Yg  have  seen,  to  the  region  of  nonentities,  the  quali-

fication that  was  designed  for  it  remains  upon  his
hands :  he  is  at  libert}',  therefore,  to  make  a  compli-

^  See  Hawkesworth's  Voyages.

The  condition  of  these  imaginary  sovereigns  puts  one  in  mind  of  the
story  of,  I  forget  what  King's  Fool.  The  Fool  had  stuck  himself  up  one
day,  with  great  gravity,  in  the  King's  throne,  with  a  stick,  bj'  waj'  of
a  sceptre,  in  one  hand,  and  a  ball  in  the  other:  being  asked  what  he  was
doing,  he  answered,  '  reigning.^  Much  the  same  sort  of  reign,  I  take  it,
would  be  that  of  the  members  of  our  Author's  Democracy.

^  v.  supra,  ch.  I.  par.  VI.

^  What  is  curious  is,  that  the  same  persons  who  tell  you  (having  read
as  much)  that  Democracy  is  a  form  of  Government  under  which  the
supreme  power  is  vested  in  all  the  members  of  a  state,  will  also  tell  you
(having  also  read  as  much)  that  the  Athenian  Commonwealth  was  a
Democracy.  Now  the  truth  is,  that  in  the  Athenian  Commonwealth,
upon  the  most  moderate  computation,  it  is  not  one  tenth  part  of  the  in-
habitants of  the  Athenian  state  that  ever  at  a  time  partook  of  the  supreme
power  :  women,  children,  and  slaves,  being  taken  into  the  account".
Civil  Lawj'^ers,  indeed,  will  tell  you,  with  a  grave  face,  that  a  slave  is
nobody ;  as  Common  Lawyers  will,  that  a  bastard  is  the  son  of  nobody.
But,  to  an  unprejudiced  eye,  the  condition  of  a  state  is  the  conditi^m  of
all  the  individuals,  without  distinction,  that  compose  it.

"  See,  among  Mr.  Hume's  Essays,  that  on  the  popiiloustwss  of  ancient
nations.


Forms  of  Government.  iSi

ment  of  it  to  Aristocracy  or  to  Monarch}^,  which  best  ^  "j"^-
suits  him.  Perhaps  it  were  as  well  to  give  it  to  —  ♦—
Monarchy ;  the  title  of  that  form  of  Government  to
its  own  peculiar  qualification,  pozver,  being,  as  we
have  seen,  rather  an  equivocal  one  :  or  else,  which,
perhaps,  is  as  good  a  way  of  settling  matters  as  an}^,
he  ma}^  set  them  to  cast  lots.


\


V^^'


^MAi.


CHAPTER III.


BRITISH CONSTITUTION.


Chap.


I.

With  a  set  of  data,  such  as  we  have  seen  in  the
last  chapter,  we  may  judge  whether  our  Author  can
meet  with  any  difficulty  in  proving  the  British  Con-
stitution to  be  the  best  of  all  possible  governments,
or  indeed  any  thing  else  that  he  has  a  mind.  In  his
paragraph  on  this  subject  there  are  several  things
that  lay  claim  to  our  attention.  But  it  is  necessary
we  should  have  it  under  our  e3^e.

II.

II.

The  ^ara- '  But  haopilv  for  US  in  this  island  the  British  Con-
graph  re- . .

cited.  stitution  has  long  remained,  and  I  trust  will  long-
continue,  a  standing  exception  to  the  truth  of  this
observation.  For,  as  with  us  the  executive  power  of
the  laws  is  lodged  in  a  single  person,  they  have  all
the  advantages  of  strength  and  dispatch  that  are  to
be  found  in  the  most  absolute  monarchy :  and,  as  the
legislature  of  the  kingdom  is  entrusted  to  three
distinct  powers  entirely  independent  of  each  other ;
first,  the  King;  secondly,  the  Lords  Spiritual  and
Temporal,  which  is  an  aristocratical  assembly  of
persons selected for  their  piety,  their  birth, their


British  Constitution,  i8


0


wisdom,  their  valour,  or  their  property ;  and  Chai>.
thirdly,  the  House  of  Commons,  freely  chosen  — »—
by  the  people  from  among  themselves,  which
makes  it  a  kind  of  democracy ;  as  this  aggregate
body,  actuated  by  different  springs,  and  attentive  to
different  interests,  composes  the  British  Parliament,
and  has  the  supreme  disposal  of  every  thing;  there
can  no  inconvenience  be  attempted  by  either  of  the
three  branches,  but  will  be  withstood  by  one  of  the
other  two ;  each  branch  being  armed  with  a  negative
power  sufficient  to  repel  any  innovation  which  it  shall
think  inexpedient  or  dangerous.'


III.


III.


*  Here  then  is  lodged  the  sovereignty  of  the  British  And  that
Constitution  ;  and  lodged  as  beneficially  as  is  possible  lows  it.
for  society.  For  in  no  other  shape  could  we  be  so
certain  of  finding  the  three  great  qualities  of  Govern-
ment so  well  and  so  happily  united.  If  the  supreme
power  were  lodged  in  any  one  of  the  three  branches
separatel}^,  we  must  be  exposed  to  the  inconvenien-
cies  of  either  absolute  monarchy,  aristocracy,  or
democracy ;  and  so  want  two  of  the  principal  ingre-
dients of  good  polity,  either  virtue,  wisdom,  or  power.
If  it  were  lodged  in  any  two  of  the  branches  ;  for  in-
stance, in  the  King  and  House  of  Lords,  our  laws
might  be  providently  made  and  well  executed,  but
they  might  not  always  have  the  good  of  the  people  in
view :  if  lodged  in  the  King  and  Commons,  we  should
want  that  circumspection  and  mediatory  caution,  which
the  wisdom  of  the  Peers  is  to  afford  :  if  the  supreme
rights  of  legislature  were  lodged  in  the  two  Houses
only,  and  the  King  had  no  negative  upon  their  pro-
ceedings, they  might  be  tempted  to  encroach  upon
the royal prerogative, or perhaps to abolish the


1 84  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap,  kingly  oftke,  and  thereby  weaken  (if  not  totally
__^"_  destroy)  the  strength  of  the  executive  power.  But
the  constitutional  government  of  this  island  is  so
admirably  tempered  and  compounded,  that  nothing
can  endanger  or  hurt  it,  but  destroying  the  equili-
brium of  power  between  one  branch  of  the  legislature
and  the  rest.  For  if  ever  it  should  happen  that  the
independence  of  any  one  of  the  three  should  be  lost,
or  that  it  should  become  subservient  to  the  views  of
either  of  the  other  two,  there  would  soon  be  an
end  of  our  constitution.  The  legislature  would  be
changed  from  that  which  was  originally  set  up  b^-
the  general  consent  and  fundamental  act  of  the
society;  and  such  a  change,  however  effected,  is,
according  to  Mr.  Locke  (who  perhaps  carries  his
theory  too  far)  at  once  an  entire  dissolution  of  the
bands  of  Government,  and  the  people  would  be
reduced  to  a  state  of  anarchy,  with  libert}'-  to  con-
stitute to  themselves  a  new  legislative  powxr.'

IV.

IV.

Executive  In  Considering  the  first  of  these  two  paragraphs,  in
thc^merT  the  first  placc,  the  phenomenon  we  should  little
tion  of  It expect  to  see  from  any  thing  that  goes  before,  is  a

incongru-  ^  j  o  o

ousiy  in- certain  executive  power,  that  now,  for  the  first  time,

trodiiced.  .  ,  .  .  , .

bolts  out  upon  us  without  warnmg  or  mtroduction.

The  powxr,  the  only  power  our  Author  has  been
speaking  of  all  along  till  now,  is  the  legislative.  'Tis
to  this,  and  this  alone,  that  he  has  given  the  name  of
'  sovereign  pozvcr.'  'Tis  this  power,  the  different  dis-
tributions of  which  he  makes  the  characteristics  of  his
three  different  forms  of  government.  'Tis  with  these
different  distributions,  distributions  made  of  the  legis-
lative power,  that,  according  to  his  account,  are  con-
nected the  several  qualifications  laid  down  by  him, '  as


British  Constitution.  185

requisites  for  supremacy:'  qualifications  in  the  pos-  Chap.
session  of  which  consist  all  the  advantages  which  can  — »—
belong  to  any  form  of  Government.  Coming  now  then
to  the  British  Constitution,  it  is  in  the  superior  degree
in  which  these  qualifications  of  the  legislative  body
are  possessed  by  it,  that  its  peculiar  excellence  is
to  consist.  It  is  by  possessing  the  qualification
of  strength,  that  it  possesses  the  advantage  of  a
monarchy.  But  how  is  it  then  that,  by  his  account,
it  possesses  the  qualification  of  strength  ?  By  an}^
disposition  made  of  the  legislative  power?  By  the
legislative  power's  being  lodged  in  the  hands  of  a
single  person,  as  in  the  case  of  a  monarchy?  No;
but  to  a  disposition  made  of  a  new  power,  which
comes  in,  as  it  were,  in  a  parenthesis,  a  new  power
which  we  now  hear  of  for  the  first  time,  a  power
which  has  not,  by  any  description  given  of  it,  been
distinguished  from  the  legislative,  an  executive.


J


V.


V.


What  then  is  this  same  executive  power? I  doubt  Difficulty

*■  ot  deter-

our  Author  would  not  find  it  a  very  eas}^  matter  to  mining
inform  us. 'Why  not?'  says  an  objector — *  is  it  not  ^g  ^^ontr^-

that  power  which  in  this  country  the  King  has  in  distinct

1^  -^  "^  to  legip la-

addition  to  his  share  in  the  legislative?' Be  it  so  :  live.

the  difficulty  for  a  moment  is  staved  off. But  that  it

is  far  enough  from  being  solved,  a  few  questions  will

soon  shew  us. This  power,  is  it  that  only  which  the

King  really  has^  or  is  it  all  that  he  is  said  to  have?

Is  it  that  only  which  he  really  has,  and  which he

exercises,  or  is  it  that  also,  which  although  he be

said  to  have  it,  he  neither  does  exercise,  nor  may

exercise? Does  it  include  judiciary  power  or  not?

If  it  does,  does  it  include  the  power  of  making  as

well  particular  decisions  and  orders,  as  general,  per-


Chap.
III.


1 86  A  Fragvient  on  Govcriinient.

mancnt^  spontaneous  regulations  of  procedure,  such  as
are  some  of  those  we  see  made  by  judges  ?  Doth  it
include  supreme  military  power,  and  that  as  well  in
ordinary  as  in  a  time  of  martial  law  ?  Doth  it  include
the  supreme y^iT^?/ power  ^ ;  and,  in  general,  that  power
which,  extending  as  well  over  the  public  mone}^  as
over  every  other  article  of  public  property,  may  be
styled  the  dispensatorial-  ?  Doth  it  include  the  power
of  granting  patents  for  inventions,  and  charters  of
incorporation  ?  Doth  it  include  the  right  of  making
bye-laws  in  corporations  ?  And  is  the  right  of  making
bye-laws  in  corporations  the  superior  right  to  that  of
conferring  the  power  to  make  them,  or  is  it  that  there
is  an  executive  power  that  is  superior  to  a  legislative?
This  executive  again,  doth  it  include  the  right  of  sub-
stituting the  laws  of  war  to  the  laws  of  peace ;  and
vice  versa,  the  laws  of  peace  to  the  laws  of  war  ?
Doth  it  include  the  right  of  restraining  the  trade  of
subjects  by  treaties  with  foreign  powers  ?  Doth  it
include  the  right  of  delivering  over,  by  virtue  of  the
like  treaties,  large  bodies  of  subjects  to  foreign  laws  ?
— He  that  would  understand  what  power  is  executive
and not legislative, and v/hat legislative and not

^  Byy?5m/ power  I  mean  that  which  in  this  country  is  exercised  by
what  is  called  the  Board  of  Treasury.

^  By  dispensaforial  power  I  mean  as  well  that  which  is  exercised  by
the  Board  of  Treasury,  as  those  others  which  are  executed  in  the  several
offices  styled  with  us  the  War  Office,  Admiralty  Board,  Navy  Board,
Board  of  Ordnance,  and  Board  of  Works:  excepting  from  the  business  of
all  these  offices,  the  power  of  appointing  persons  to  fill  other  subordinate
offices :  a  power  which  seems  to  be  of  a  distinct  nature  from  that  of
making  disposition  of  any  article  of  public  property.

Power,  political  power,  is  either  over  persons  or  over  i/iiiigs.  The  powers,
then,  that  have  been  mentioned  above,  in  as  far  as  they  concern  things,
are  powers  over  such  things  as  are  the  property  of  the  public :  powers
which  differ  in  this  from  those  which  constitute  private  ownership,  in  that
the  former  are,  in  the  main,  not  beneficial  (that  is,  to  the  possessors  them-
selves) and  indiscriminate ;  hutfidiiciciry,  and  limited  in  their  exercise  to  such
acts  as  are  conducive  to  the  special  purposes  oi public  benefit  and  security.


i


British  ConstitiUioii.  187

executive,  he  that  would  mark  out  and  dehneate  the <^hap.
.  . .  III.

different species of  constitutional powers, he that — **—

would  describe  either  what  is,  or  what  ought  to  be  the

constitution  of  a country, and particularly of  this

country,  let  him  tliinl^  of  tlicse  tilings.


VI.


VI.


In  the  next  place  we  are  told  in  a  parenthesis  (it  indepen-

.  1  1  r  dence  inac-

bemg  a  matter  so  plani  as  to  be  taken  for  granted)  curateiy
that  *  each  of  these  branches  of  the  Legislature is  ^'the'three
independent' — yes,  *  entirely  independent,'  of  the  two  branches

-^  ^  of  the  Gov-

others. — Is  this  then  really  the  case  ? Those  who  emment.
consider  the  influence  which  the  King  and  so  man}'  •
of  the  Lords  have  in  the  election  of  members  of  the  •
House  of  Commons  ;  the  power  which  the  King  has,
at a minute's w^arning, of  putting an end to the
existence of  any House  of  Commons ; those  who!
consider  the  influence  which  the  King  has  over  both
Flouses, by  offices  of  dignity  and  profit  given  and
taken  away  again  at  pleasure  ; those  who  consider
that  the  King,  on  the  other  hand,  depends  for  his
daily  bread  on  both  Houses,  but  more  particularly  on
the  House  of  Commons ; not  to  mention  a  variety'
of  other  circumstances  that  might  be  noticed  in  the
same  view,  will  judge  what  degree  of  precision  there
was  in  our  Author's  meaning,  when  he  so  roundly
asserted  the  affirmative.

VII.

VII.

One parenthesis more : for  this  sentence teems  A  ii^ppy
with  parenthesis  within  parenthesis. To  this  we  are  merit  in-  '
indebted  for  a  very  interesting  piece  of  intelligence  :  from^ikh
nothing  less than a full and true account of  the  station,
personal merits of  the members of  the House  of
Lords  for  the  time  being. This  he  is  enabled  to  do
by  means  of  a  contrivance  of  his  own,  no  less  simple


A  Fragment  on  Government.


^\u'  ^^^"  ^^  ^^  ingenious :  to  wit,  that  of  looking  at  their
—**—  titles.  It  is  by  looking  at  men's  titles  that  he  per-
ceives, not  merely  that  they  ought  to  possess  certain
merits,  not  that  there  is  reason  to  ivish  they  may
possess  them,  but  that  they  do  actually  possess  them,
and  that  it  is  by  possessing  those  merits  that  they  came
to  possess  these  titles.  Seeing  that  some  are  bishops,
he  knows  that  they  are  pious :  seeing  that  some  are
peers,  he  knows  that  they  are  wise,  rich,  valiant^.


'  '  The  Lords  spiritual  and  temporal,  [p.  50]  which,'  says  our  Author,
'  is  an  aristocratical  assembly  of  persons  selected  for  their  piety,  their  birth.
their  wisdom,  their  valour,  or  their  property.'

I  have  distributed,  I  think,  these  endowments,  as  our  Author  could  not
but  intend  they  should  be  distributed.  Birth,  to  such  of  the  members  of
that  assembly  as  have  their  seat  in  it  by  descent:  and,  as  to  those  who
may  chance  from  time  to  time  to  sit  there  by  creation,  wisdom,  valour,
and  property  in  common  among  the  temporal  peers  ;  and  piety,  singly
but  entirely,  among  my  Lords  the  Bishops.  As  to  the  other  three  endow-
ments, if  there  were  any  of  them  to  which  these  right  reverend  persons
could  lay  any  decent  claim,  it  would  be  wisdom :  but  since  worldly
wisdom  is  what  it  would  be  an  ill  compliment  to  attribute  to  them,  and
the  wisdom  which  is  from  above  is  fairly  included  under  piety,  I  conclude
that,  when  secured  in  the  exclusive  possession  of  this  grand  virtue,  they
have  all  that  was  intended  them.  There  is  a  remarkable  period  in  our
history,  at  which,  measuring  by  our  Author's  scale,  these  three  virtues
seem  to  have  been  at  the  boiling  point.  It  was  in  Queen  Anna's  reign,
not  long  after  the  time  of  the  hard  frost.  I  mean  in  the  year  1711.  In
that  auspicious  year,  these  three  virtues  issued  forth,  it  seems,  with  such
exuberance,  as  to  furnish  merit  enough  to  stock  no  fewer  than  a  dozen
respectable  persons,  who,  upon  the  strength  of  it,  were  all  made  Barons
in  a  day.  Unhappily  indeed,  so  little  read  was  a  right  reverend  and
contemporary  historian  ",  in  our  Author's  method  of  '  discerning  of  spirits,'
as  to  fancy,  it  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  necessity  of  making  a
majority  that  introduced  so  large  a  body  of  new  members  thus  suddenly
into  the  house.  But  I  leave  it  to  those  who  are  read  in  the  history  of
that  time,  to  judge  of  the  ground  there  can  be  for  so  romantic  an  imagina-
tion. As  to  piety,  the  peculiar  endowment  of  the  mitre,  the  stock  there
is  of  that  virtue,  should,  to  judge  by  the  like  standard,  be,  at  all  times,
pretty  much  upon  a  level  :  at  all  times,  without  question,  at  a  maximmn.
This  is  what  we  can  make  the  less  doubt  of,  since,  with  regard  to  ecclesias-
tical matters,  in  general,  our  Author,  as  in  another  place  he  assures  us,
has  had  the  happiness  to  find,  that  '  every  thing  is  as  it  should  be ''.'
"  See  Bishop  Burnet's  History  of  his  own  Times.  Vol.  2.
b  Vol.  4.  Chap.  IV.  p  49.


British  Constitution.  189

VIIL

VIII.

The  more  we  consider  the  application  he  makes  of  Supposed

,  .  •  1  1  r  qualities  of

the  common-place  notions  concernmg  the  three  lorms  the  three
of  Government  to  our  own,  the  more  we  shall  see  the  formTof*^
wide difference there is between reading  and re-  Govem-

. .  ment  not

fleeting.  Our  own  he  finds  to  be  a  combination  of  applicable
these  three.  It  has  a  Monarchical  branch,  an  Aris-
tocratical,  and  a  Democratical.  The  Aristocratical  is
the  House  of  Lords;  the  Democratical  is  the  House
of  Commons.  Much  had  our  Author  read,  at  school,
doubtless,  and  at  college,  of  the  wisdom  and  gravity
of  the  Spartan  senate  :  something,  probably,  in  Mon-
tesquieu, and  elsewhere,  about  the  Venetian.  He  had
read  of  the  turbulence  and  extravagance  of  the
Athenian  mob.  Full  of  these  ideas,  the  House  of
Lords  were  to  be  our  Spartans  or  Venetians ;  the  1
House  of  Commons,  our  Athenians.  With  respect
then  to  the  point  of  wisdom,  (for  that  of  honest}'
we  will  pass  b}^)  the  consequence  is  obvious.  The
House  of  Commons,  however  excellent  in  point  of
honesty,  is  an  assembly  of  less  zvisdoui  than  that  of  '
the  House  of  Lords.  This  is  what  our  Author  makes
no  scruple  of  assuring  us.  A  Duke's  son  gets  a  seat
in  the  House  of  Commons.  There  needs  no  more  to
make  him  the  very  model  of  an  Athenian  cobbler.


LX.


IX.


Let  us  find  out,  if  we  can,  whence  this  notion  of  the  Wisdom:

want  of  wisdom  in  the  members  of  a  Democracy,  and  to  be.-mwV-

of  the  abundance  of  it in  those  of  an  Aristocrac}',  mf^birs^

could  have  had  its  rise. We  shall  then  see  with  what  of  a  Demo-
cracy—
degree  of  propriety  such  a  notion  can  be  transferred

to  our  Houses  of  Lords  and  Commons.

In  the  members  of  a  Democracy  in  particular,  there


I  go  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap,  jg  likely  to  be  a  want  of  wisdom— Why?  The
— —  greater  part  being  poor,  are,  when  they  begin  to  take
upon  them  the  management  of  affairs,  uneducated :
being  uneducated,  they  are  illiterate :  being  illiterate,
they  are  ignorant.  Ignorant,  therefore,  and  unwise,  if
that  be  what  is  meant  by  ignorant,  they  begin.  De-
pending for  their  daily  bread  on  the  profits  of  some
petty  traffic,  or  the  labour  of  some  manual  occupation,
they  are  nailed  to  the  work-board,  or  the  counter.
In  the  business  of  Government,  it  is  only  by  fits  and
starts  that  they  have  leisure  so  much  as  to  act:  they
have  no  leisure  to  reflect.  Ignorant  therefore  they
continue. — But  in  what  degree  is  this  the  case  with
the  members  of  our  House  of  Commons?


X.


X.


—and  pre- Qu  the  Other  hand,  the  members  of  an  Aristocracy,

sent  in  .  . ,  .  ,  ,

those  of  bemg  few,  are  rich :  either  they  are  members  of
cracy?^ "  the  Aristocracy,  because  they  are  rich ;  or  they  are
rich,  because  they  are  members  of  the  Aristocracy.
Being  rich,  they  are  educated  :  being  educated,  they
are  learned  :  being  learned,  they  are  knowing.  They
are  at  leisure  to  reflect,  as  well  as  act.  They  may
therefore  naturally  be  expected  to  become  more
knowing,  that  is  more  wise,  as  they  persevere.  In
what  degree  is  this  the  case  with  the  members  of  the
House  of  Lords  more  than  with  those  of  the  House  of
Commons  ?  The  fact  is,  as  every  body  sees,  that
either  the  members  of  the  House  of  Commons  are  as
much  at  leisure  as  those  of  the  House  of  Lords  ;  or,  if
occupied,  occupied  in  such  a  way  as  tends  to  give
them  a  more  than  ordinary  insight  into  some  par-
ticular department  of  Government.  In  whom  shall  we
expect  to  find  so  much  knowledge  of  Law  as  in  a
professed  Lawyer?  of  Trade,  as  in  a  Merchant?


British  Constitution.  191

Chap.
III.

XI.  -**-

XI.

But  hold— Our  Author,  when  he  attributes  to  Why,  ac-
cording to
the  members  of  an  Aristocracy  more  wisdom  than  our  Au-
to those  of  a  Democracy,  has  a  reason  of  his  own.
Let  us  endeavour  to  understand  it,  and  then  apply
it,  as  we  have  applied  the  others.  In  Aristocratical
bodies,  we  are  to  understand  there  is  more  experience ;
at  least  it  is  intended  by  some  body  or  other  there
should  be  :  which,  it  seems,  answers  the  same  purpose
as  if  there  zuas.  '  In  Aristocracies,'  says  our  Author,
'  there  is  more  wisdom  to  be  found,  than  in  the  other
frames  of  Government ;  being  composed,'  continues
he,  'or  intended  to  be  composed,  of  the  most  expe-
rienced citizens  ^'  On  this  ground  then  it  is,  that  w^e
are  to  take  for  granted,  that  the  members  of  the  House
of  Lords  have  more  wisdom  among  them,  than  those
of  the  House  of  Commons.  It  is  this  article  of
experience  that,  being  a  qualification  possessed  by  the
members  of  an  Aristocratical  body,  as  such,  in  a
superior  degree  to  that  in  which  it  can  be  possessed
by  a  democratical  body,  is  to  afford  us  a  particular
ground  for  attributing  a  greater  share  of  wisdom
to  the  members  of  the  upper  house,  than  to  those
of  the  lower.

^"-  X,,.

How  it  is  that  a  member  of  an  aristocracy,  as  such,  ,^y  0^"°  a'^.
is,  of  all  things,  to  have  attained  more  experience  than  '•'■<"<r^,'how
the  member  of  a  democracy,  our  Author  has  not  told  of  superi-
us ;  nor  what  it  is  this  experience  is  to  consist  of. Is  ^visdom.
it  experience  of  things  preparatory  to,  but  different
from,  the  business  of  governing  ? This  should  rather
go  by  the  name  oi  knozvledge. Is  it  experience  of  the

'  P.  50.


192  A  Frag7nent  on Govcnunent.

Chap, busiiiess  itsclf  of  afoverninsf  ? Let  us  see. Fof  the

III.  ^  ^

— ♦— member  of  the  one  bod}'',  as  of  the  other,  there  must

be  a  time  when  he  first  enters  upon  this  business.

They  both  enter  upon  it,  suppose  on  the  same  da}'.

Now  then  is  it  on  that  same  day  that  one  is  more

experienced  in  it  than  the  other  ?  or  is  it  on  that  day

ten  years  ?

XIII.

XIII.

How  tar Those  indeed  who  recollect  what  we  observed  but

attributa-
ble to  aris-  now  ^,  may  answer  without  hesitation,— on that  day

in  general,  ten  ycars. The  reason  was  there  given. It  is  neither

more  nor  less,  than  that  want  of  leisure  which  the

bulk  of  the  numerous  members  of  a  Democracy  must

necessarily labour under, more than those of  an

Aristocracy. But  of  this,  what  intimation  is  there  to

be  collected,  from  any  thing  that  has  been  suggested

by  our  Author  ?

XIV.

XIV.

How  far Sq  much  With  respcct  to  Aristocracies  in  general.

to  our  ^  .

House  of  It  happens  also  by  accident,  that  that  particular  branch
particular,  o^  o^^^"  ^^*-''^  govcmment  to  which  he  has  given  the
name  of  the  Aristocratical, — the  House  of  Lords, —
has  actually  greater  opportunities  of  acquiring  the
qualification  of  experience,  than  that  other  branch,
the  House  of  Commons,  to  which  he  has  given  the
name  of  the  democratical.  But  to  what  is  this  owing  ?
not  to  any  thing  in  the  characteristic  natures  of  those
two  bodies,  not  to  the  one's  being  Aristocratical,  and
the  other  Democratical ;  but  to  a  circumstance,  en-
tirely foreign  and  accidental,  which  we  shall  see
presently.  But  let  us  observe  his  reasoning.  The
House  of  Lords,  he  sa3^s,  is  an  assembly  that  behoves

*  V.  supra,  par.  9.


B^'itish  Constitution.  193

to  have  more  wisdom  in  it,  than  the  House  of  Com- C"ap.
mons. This  is  the  proposition. Now  for  the  proof. — ^ —
The  first  is  an  Aristocratical  assembly ;  the  second  a
Democratical. An  Aristocratical  assembly  has  more
experience  than  a  Democratical ;  and  on  that  account
more  wisdom. Therefore the House  of  Lords,  as
was  to  be  proved,  has  more  wisdom  than  the  House
of  Commons. Now,  what  the  whole  of  the  argument
rests  upon,  we  may  observe,  is  this  fact,  that  an  Aris-  .
tocratical  assembly,  as  such,  has  more  experience  than  I
a  Democratical  one  ;  but  this,  with  Aristocratical  as-
semblies in  general,  we  see,  is  not,  for  any  reason  that
our  Author  has  given  us,  the  case. At  the  same  time
with  respect  to  our  House  of  Lords  in  particular,  in
comparison with the House  of  Commons, it  does
happen  to  be  the  case,  owing  to  this  simple  circum-
stance :  the  members  of  the  House  of  Lords,  when
once  they  begin  to  sit,  sit  on  for  life :  those  of  the  1
House  of  Commons  onl}^  from  seven  years  to  seven
3'ears,  or  it  may  happen,  less.

XV.

XV.

In  speaking,  however,  in  this  place,  of  experience,  ^^'hat  is  to
I  would  rather  be  understood  to  mean  opportunity  of  stood  by
acquiring  experience, than experience  itself. For  !f.,l^)',^"^
actual experience depends upon other  concurrent  ^"""
causes.

XVL

It  is,  however,  from  superiorit}' of  experience  alone,  Opportu-
that  our  Author  derives  superiority  of  wisdom.  He  periencc''
has,  indeed,  the  proverb  in  his  favour  :  *  Experience,'  "^.^  ^^"^

,  ^  sole  cause

it  has  been  said  of  old,  '  is  the  Mother  of  Wisdom  : '  of  wisdom,
be  it  so  ;— but  then  Interest  is  the  Father. There  is
even an  Interest  that  is  the  Father  of  Experience.

o


/


194  ^  Fi'agment  on  Gove^nunoit.

Chap.  Among  the  members  of  the  House  of  Commons,
—^ —  though  none  so  poor  as  to  be  ilHterate,  are  many
whose  fortunes,  according  to  the  common  phrase,  are
3^et  to  make.  The  fortunes  of  those  of  the  House  of
Lords  (I  speak  in  general)  are  made  already.  The
members  of  the  House  of  Commons  ma}^  hope  to  be
members  of  the  House  of  Lords.  The  members  of
the  House  of  Lords  have  no  higher  House  of  Lords
to  rise  to.  Is  it  natural  for  those  to  be  most  active
who  have  the  least,  or  those  who  have  the  mo5/' interest
to  be  so  ?  Are  the  experienced  those  who  are  the  least,
or  those  who  are  the  most  active  ?  Does  experience
come  to  men  when  asleep,  or  when  awake  ?  Is  it  the
members  of  the  House  of  Lords  that  are  the  most  ac-
tive, or  of  the  House  of  Commons?  To  speak  plain,
is  it  in  the  House  of  Lords  that  there  is  most  business
done,  or  in  the  House  of  Commons  ?  Was  it  after
the  fish  was  caught  that  the  successor  of  St.  Peter
used  the  net,  or  was  it  before  ^  ?  In  a  word  is  there
most  wisdom  ordinarily  where  there  is  least,  or  where
there  is  most  to  gain  by  being  wise  ^.


'  Every  body  has  heard  the  story  of  him  who,  from  a  fisherman,  was
made  Archbishop,  and  then  Pope.  While  Archbishop,  it  was  his  custom
every  day,  after  dinner,  to  have  a  fishing  net  spread  upon  his  table,  by
way  of  a  memento,  as  he  used  to  say,  of  the  meanness  of  his  original.
This  farcical  ostentation  of  humility  was  what,  in  those  days,  contributed
not  a  little  to  the  increase  of  his  reputation.  Soon  after  his  exaltation  to
St.  Peter's  chair,  one  of  his  intimates  was  taking  notice  to  him,  one  day,
when  dinner  was  over,  of  the  table's  not  being  decked  as  usual.  *  Peace,'
answered  the  Holy  Father,  '  when  the  fish  is  caught,  there  is  no  occasion
for  the  net.'

^  In  the  House  of  Commons  itself,  is  it  by  the  opulent  and  indepen-
dent Country  gentlemen  that  the  chief  business  of  the  House  is  transacted,
or  by  aspiring,  and  perhaps  needy  Courtiers  ?  The  man  who  would  per-
severe in  the  toil  of  Government,  without  any  other  reward  than  the
favour  of  the  people,  is  certainly  the  man  for  the  people  to  make  choice
of  But  such  men  are  at  best  but  rare.  Were  it  not  for  those  children
•  of  Corruption  we  have  been  speaking  of,  the  business  of  the  state,  I  doubt,
would  stagnate.


Bj'itish  Constitiitio7i.  195

Chai'.

XVII.  V/-

XVII.

A  word  or  two  more  with  respect  to  the  character-  Mediatory
istic  quahfications,  as  our  Author  states  them,  of  the  the  pecu-
higher  assembly  of  our  legislature. Experience  is,  in  ['j^j^^.^'^^f
virtue of  their  being  an aristocratical assembly,  to  the  Lords,
afford  them  wisdom  :  thus  far  we  were  arrived  before.
But  he  now  pushes  the  deduction  a  step  farther. —
Wisdom  is  to  afford  them  'circumspection  and  media- «
tory  caution  ; '  qualifications  which  it  seems  as  if  we
should  see  nothing  of,  were  it  not  for  them. Let  us
now  put  a  case. The  business,  indeed,  that  originates
in  the  House  of  Lords  is,  as  things  stand,  so  little,
that  our  Author  seems  to  forget  that  there  is any.
However,  some  there  is. A  bill  then  originates  with
the  Lords,  and  is  sent  down  to  the  Commons. — As  to
'  circumspection  ' I say  nothing :  that, let us  hope,
is  not  wanting  to  either  House. But  whose  province
is  '  mediatory  caution,'  now  ?

XVIII.

XVIII.

Thus  much  concerning  these  two  branches  of  our  The  De-
legislature,  so  long  as  they  continue  what,  according  bl-ancVo^
to  our  Author's  principles,  they  are  at  present :  the  °"''  Legis-
House  of  Lords  the  Aristocratical  branch  :  the  House  upon  our
of  Commons  the  Democratical. A  little  while  and  we  principles,
shall  see  them  so  ;  but  again  a  little  while,  perhaps,  "uJshabie
and  we  shall  not  see  them  so. By  what  characteristic  '"•"om  the

...  .  .  . , Aristo-

does  our  Author  distmguish  an  Aristocratical  legisla-  craticai.
tive  body  from  a  Democratical  one?  By  that  of
nuuibcr  :  by  the  number  of  the  persons  that  compose
them  :  by  that,  and  that  alone  :  for  no  other  has  he
given.  Now,  therefore,  to  judge  by  that,  the  House
of  Lords,  at  present,  indeed,  is  the  Aristocratical
branch  : the House  of  Commons  in  comparison  at

o  2


196  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap, least with the other, the Democratical. Thus  far
III.
—** — is  well. But  should  the  list  of  nobility  swell  at  the

rate  we  have  sometimes  seen  it,  there  is  an  assignable
period,  and  that,  perhaps,  at  no  very  enormous  dis-
tance, at  which  the  assembly  of  the  Lords  will  be
more  numerous  than  that  of  the  Commons.  Which
will  then  be  the  Aristocratical  branch  of  our  Legisla-
ture ?  Upon  our  Author's  principles,  the  House  of
Commons.  Which  the  Democratical  ?  The  House
of  Lords.

XIX.

XIX.

Aii-perfec- Xhc  final  causc  we  are  to  observe,  and  finishing

tion  of  the  1 •  1  77  >  t  i n

British  exploit,  the  ^partus  et  sabbatiim,  as  Lord  Bacon
tion  mluv  niight  perhaps  have  called  it  \  of  this  sublime  and
ematicaUy  edifving dissertatiou,  is  this  demonstration, he has

demon-  . .

stiated.  been  giving  us,  of  the  perfection  of  the  British  Form
of  Government.  This  demonstration  (for  by  no  less
a  title  ought  it  to  be  called)  is  founded,  we  may  have
observed,  altogether  upon  the  properties  of  numbers :
properties,  newly  discovered  indeed,  and  of  an  extra-
ordinary complexion,  moral  properties ;  but  proper-
ties, however,  so  it  seems,  of  numbers  ^.  'Tis  in  the
nature  then  of  numbers  we  shall  find  these  charac-
teristic properties  of  the  three  Forms  of  Government,
if  anywhere.  Now  the  properties  of  numbers  are
universally  allowed  to  be  the  proper  subject  of  that
mode  of  demonstration  which  is  called  mathematical.
The  proof  our  Author  has  given  has  therefore  al-
ready in  it  the  essence  of  such  a  demonstration.  To  be
complete  at  all  points,  it  wants  nothing  but  the  form.
This  deficiency  is  no  other  than  what  an  under-rate
workman might easily suppl}'. A mere technical

'  It  is  what  he  says  of  Theology  with  respect  to  the  Sciences.  —  V.
Augm.  Scient.  L.  VIII.  c.  III.  p.  97.

■"^  V.  supra,  ch.  II.  pars.  24,  32,  pp.  174,  178.


I


British  Constitution.


197


operation  does  the  business. That  humble  task  it  <^"'^''-

shall  be  my  endeavour  to  perform. The  substantial  — ♦^^ —
honour  I  ascribe  wholly  to  our  Author,  to  whom  only
it  is  most  due.


XX.

PROPOSITION.  THEOREM.

The  British  Government  is  all-perfect.

Demonstration.
By  definition, |  i !  The  British  Government  =:Monar-

I chy  + Aristocracy  +  Democrac}'.
Again,  by  defi-  \  2  \  Monarchy = the  Government  of  i.

nition,
Also,


XX.

The  de-
monstra-
tion drawn
up  in  form.


Also,

Put
Put  also


assumption
Also,

Also,


Democracy  =  the  Government  of
I all
4  1  Aristocracy  =  the Government of
some  number  between  i  and  all.
All=  1,000,000.

The  number  of  governors  in  an
Aristocrac3^=  i^ooo.
Now  then,  b}- 7 i  has  +  strength  —  wisdom  —  ho-
j nesty.

8  I  000  has  +  wisdom  —  strength  —  ho-
nesty.

9  I  000  000  has  +  honesty  — strength
j —wisdom.

Rejecting  —  to  i  has  +  strength,
wisdom  — ho-
nesty '  in  [7]

Also rejecting


—  strength  —
wisdom  in  [8]


III  1,000  has -I- wisdom.


'  Which  is  done  without  any  sort  of  ceremony,  the  quantities  marked
in  the  step  with  the  negative  sign,  being  as  so  m.a.n\  Jliic)iis,\\\\\c\\  are  at
a  niaximttin,  or  a  mininiunt,  just  as  happens  to  be  most  convenient.


igS  A  Fragment  on  Government.


Chap.
III.


Also rejecting  12
—  strength  —
wisdom  in  [9]

Putting toge-  13
ther  the  ex-
pressio  n  s
[10],  [11],  and

[12],

But  by  the  de-  14
finitions [1]
[2],[3][4],and
the supposi-
tions [5].  [6],

Therefore, by  15

[13]
Changing the  16

expression,
But  by  defini-  17

tion
Therefore, by  18

[16]  and  [17]

^^  Scholium


1,000000  has  +  honesty.


1  +  1000+1,000,000  has strength
+  wisdom  +  honesty.


The British Government
1,000+  1,000,000.


1  +


The  British  Government  has  +
strength  +  wisdom  +  honesty.

The  British  Government  is  all-
powerful  +  all-wise  +  all-honest.

All-powerful  +  all-wise  +  all-honest
=  all-perfect.

The  British  Government  is  all-
perfect.  Q.  E.  D.

After  the  same  manner  it  may  be


proved  to  be  all-ivcak,  all-foolisJi,  and  all-knavish.


XXI.

XXI.

Conciu-  Thus  much  for  the  British  Constitution  ;  and  for  the

sion  of  the  j r i  •  i • i • i  t

Chapter,  grounds  oi  that  pre-eminence  which  it  boasts,  I  trust,
indeed,  not  without  reason,  above  all  others  that  are
known :  Such  is  the  idea  our  Author  gives  us  of
those  grounds. — '  You  are  not  satisfied  with  it  then,'
says  some  one. — Not  perfectly. — '  What  is  then  your
own?' — In  truth  this  is  more  than  I  have  yet  quite
settled.  I  may  have  settled  it  with  myself,  and  not
think  it  worth  the  giving :  but  if  ever  I  do  think  it


British  Constitution.  199

worth  the  giving,  it  will  hardly  be  in  the  form  of  a  Chap.
comment  on  a  digression  stuffed  into  the  belly  of  a  — ——
definition.  At  any  rate  it  is  not  likely  to  be  much
wished  for,  by  those,  who  have  read  what  has  been
given  us  on  this  subject  by  an  ingenious  foreigner :
since  it  is  to  a  foreigner  we  were  destined  to  owe
the  best  idea  that  has  yet  been  given  of  a  subject  so
much  our  own.  Our  Author  has  copied  :  but  Mr.
DE  LoLME  has  thought.

The  topic  which  our  Author  has  thus  brought
upon  the  carpet  (let  any  one  judge  with  what  ne-
cessity) is  in  respect  to  some  parts  of  it  that  we  have
seen,  rather  of  an  invidious  nature.  Since,  however,
it  has  been  brought  upon  the  carpet,  I  have  treated
it  with  that  plainness  with  which  an  Englishman  of
all  others  is  bound  to  treat  it,  because  an  Englishman
may  thus  treat  it  and  be  safe.  I  have  said  what  the
subject  seemed  to  demand,  w^ithout  any  fear  indeed,
but  without  any  wish,  to  give  offence  :  resolving  not
to  permit  myself  to  consider  how  this  or  that  man
might  chance  to  take  it.  I  have  spoken  without
sycophantical  respects  indeed,  yet  I  hope  not  without
decency  :  certainly  without  any  party  spleen.  I  chose
rather  to  leave  it  to  our  Author  to  compliment  men
in  the  lump :  and  to  stand  aghast  with  admiration  at
the  virtues  of  men  unknown  \  Our  Author  w^ill  do
as  shall  seem  meet  to  him.  For  my  part,  if  ever  I
stand  forth  and  sing  the  song  of  eulogy  to  great  men,
it  shall  be  not  because  they  occupy  their  station,  but
because  they  deserve  it.

^  V.  supra,  par.  7.


CHAPTER IV.


RIGHT OF THE SUPREME POWER TO MAKE LAWS.


Chap.
IV.


I.


I.


Subject  of We  now  come  to  the  third  topic  touched  upon  in

the  para- ...  ,  '

graph  in  the  digrcssiou ;  namely,  the  right,  as  our  Author
as  stat°ed  phrascs  it,  which  the  Supreme  Power  has  of  making
by  our  laws.  And  this  topic  occupies  one  pretty  long  para-
graph. The  title  here  given  to  it  is  the  same  which
in  the  next  succeeding  paragraph  he  has  found  for  it
himself  This  is  fortunate  :  for,  to  have  been  obliged
to  find  a  title  for  it  myself,  is  what  would  have  been
to  the  last  degree  distressing.  To  entitle  a  discourse,
is  to  represent  the  drift  of  it.  But,  to  represent  the
drift  of  this,  is  a  task  which,  so  long  at  least  as  I  con-
fine my  consideration  to  the  paragraph  itself,  bids
defiance  to  my  utmost  efforts.

II.

Drift  of  it, 'Tis  to  another  passage  or  two,  a  passage  or  two

;)S  conjee- ,  ,  ,  ,  .  • t

tured.  that  we  have  alread}^  seen  startmg  up  m  distant  parts
of  this  digression,  that  I  am  indebted  for  such  conjec-
tures as  I  have  been  able  to  make  up.

These  conjectures,  however,  I  could  not  have
ventured  so  far  to  rely  on,  as  on  the  strength  of  them
to  have  furnished  the  paragraph  with  a  title  of  my  own


Right  of  the  Sttprenie  Power  to  viake  Laws.  201

framing.  The  danger  of  misrepresentation  was  too  Chap.
great;  a  kind  of  danger  which  a  man  cannot  but  He  --—
imminently  exposed  to,  who  ventures  to  put  a  precise
meaning  upon  a  discourse  which  in  itself  has  none.
That  I  may  just  mention,  however,  in  this  place,  the
result  of  them ;  what  he  is  really  aiming  at,  I  take  it,
is,  to  inculcate  a  persuasion  that  in  every  state  there
must  subsist,  in  some  hands  or  other,  a  power  that  is
absolute.  I  mention  it  thus  prematurely,  that  the
reader  may  have  some  clue  to  guide  him  in  his
progress  through  the  paragraph ;  which  it  is  now
time  I  should  recite.


III.


III.


'Having,'  says our  Author, 'thus cursorily con- The  para-

,  .  -  J  graph  re-

sidered  the  three  usual  species  of  government,  and  our  cited,
own  singular  constitution,  selected  and  compounded
from  them  all,  I  proceed  to  observe,  that,  as  the  power
of  making  laws  constitutes  the  supreme  authority,  so
wherever  the  supreme  authority  in  any  state  resides,
it  is  the  right  of  that  authority  to  make  laws ;  that  is,
in  the  words  of  our  definition,  to  prescribe  the  rule  of
civil  action.  And  this  may  be  discovered  from  the  very
end  and  institution  of  civil  states.  Tor  a  state  is  a  col-
lective body,  composed  of  a  multitude  of  individuals
united  for  their  safety  and  convenience,  and  intending
to  act  together  as  one  man.  If  it  therefore  is  to  act  as
one  man,  it  ought  to  act  b}'  one  uniform  will.  But  in  as
much  as  political  communities  are  made  up  of  many
natural  persons,  each  of  whom  has  his  particular  will
and  inclination,  these  several  wills  cannot  by  any
natural  union  be  joined  together,  or  tempered  and
disposed  into  a  lasting  harmony,  so  as  to  constitute
and  produce  that  one  uniform  will  of  the  whole.  It  can
therefore  be  no  otherwise  produced  than  b}'  a  political


202  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap,  union  ;  by  the  consent  of  all  persons  to  submit  their
— >« —  own  private  wills  to  the  will  of  one  man,  or  of  one,  or
more  assembhes  of  men,  to  whom  the  supreme
authority  is  entrusted  :  and  this  will  of  that  one  man,
or  assemblage  of  men  is,  in  different  states,  according
to  their  different  constitutions,  understood  to  be
law.'

IV.

The  sense The Other  passagcs  which  suggested  to  me  the
of  It  con- construction  I  have  ventured  to  put  upon  this,  shall

sidered  in  r  r  '

itself. be  mentioned  by  and  by. First,  let  us  try  what  is  to
be  made  of  it  by  itself.

V.

V.

The  lead-  The  obscurity  in  which  the  first  sentence  of  this
ment  m  it  paragraph  is  enveloped,  is  such,  that  I  know  not  how
nugatory.  ^^  ^^  about  bringing  it  to  light,  without  borrowing  a
word  or  two  of  logicians.  Laying  aside  the  preamble,
the  body  of  it,  viz.  '  as  the  power  of  making  laws
constitutes  the  supreme  authority,  so  wherever  the
supreme  authority  in  any  state  resides,  it  is  the  right
of  that  authority  to  make  laws,'  may  be  considered  as
constituting  that  sort  of  syllogism  which  logicians  call
an  enthymeme.  An  enthymeine  consists  of  two  pro-
positions ;  a  consequent  and  an  antecedent.  '  The  power
of  making  laws,'  says  our  Author,  '  constitutes  the
supreme  authority.'  This  is  his  antecedent.  From
hence  it  is  he  concludes,  that  *  wherever  the  supreme
authority  in  any  state  resides,  it  is  the  right  of  that
authority  to  make  laws.'  This  then  is  his  consequent.
Now  so  it  is,  that  this  antecedent,  and  this  consequent,
for  any  difference  at  least  that  I  can  possibly  perceive
in  them,  would  turn  out,  were  they  but  correctly
worded,  to  mean  precisely  the  same  thing :  for,  after


Right  of  the  Sup7'eme  Power  to  make  Laws.  203

saying  that  'the  power  of  making  laws  constitutes  the  <^"ai'.
supreme  authority,'  to  tell  us  that,  for  that  reason,  — ►—
*  the  supreme  authority  '  is  (or  has)  the  power  (or  the
right)  of  making  laws,  is  giving  us,  I  take  it,  much
the  same  sort  of  information,  as  it  would  be  to  us  to
be  told  that  a  thing  is  so,  because  it  is  so  :  a  sort  of  a
truth  which  there  seems  to  be  no  very  great  occasion
to  send  us  upon  *  discovering,  in  the  end  and  institu-
tion of  civil  states.'  That  by  the  '  sovereign  power,'
he  meant  '  the  power  of  making  laws ; '  this,  or  some-
thing like  it,  is  no  more  indeed  than  what  he  had  told
us  over  and  over,  and  over  again,  with  singular
energy  and  anxiet}'',  in  his  46th  page,  in  his  49th,  and
in,  I  know  not  how  many,  pages  besides:  always
taking  care,  for  precision's  sake,  to  give  a  little  variety
to  the  expression  :  the  words  ^ poiver'  and  ^authority,'
sometimes,  seemingly  put  for  the  same  idea ;  some-
times seemingly  opposed  to  each  other :  both  of  them
sometimes  denoting  \h^  fictitious  being,  the  abstract
quality ;  sometimes  the  real  being  or  beings,  the
person  or  persons  supposed  to  possess  that  quality. —
Let  us  disentangle  the  sense  from  these  ambiguities ;
let  us  learn  to  speak  distinctly  of  the  persons,  and  of
the  quality  we  attribute  to  them ;  and  then  let  us  make
another  effort  to  find  a  meaning  for  this  perplexing
passage.

VI.

VI.

By  the  '  supreme  authority '  then,  (we  may  suppose  The  ante-
our  Author  to  sa}^) '  I  mean  the  same  thing  as  when  I  stated
say  the  power  of  making  laws.'  This  is  the  proposition
we  took  notice  of  above,  under  the  name  of  the  antece-
dent. This  antecedent  then,  we  may  observe,  is  a
definition  :  a  definition,  to  wit,  of  the  phrase  '  supreme
authority.' Now  to  define  a  phrase  is,  to  translate  it


anew,


204  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap, into  another  phrase,  supposed  to  be  better  understood,


— M—  and  expressive  of  the  same  ideas.  The  supposition
here  then  is,  that  the  reader  was  already,  of  himself,
tolerably  well  acquainted  with  the  import  of  the  phrase
'  power  of  making  laws : '  that  he  was  not  at  all,  or
was  however  less  acquainted  with  the  import  of  the
phrase  '  supreme  authority.'  Upon  this  supposition
then,  it  is,  that  in  order  to  his  being  made  clearly  to
understand  the  latter,  he  is  informed  of  its  being
synon3^mous  to  the  former.  Let  us  now  introduce
the  mention  of  the  person  :  let  us  add  the  word  ''person '
to  the  definition ;  it  will  be  the  same  definition  still
in  substance,  only  a  little  more  fully  and  precisely
worded.  For  a  person  to  possess  the  supreme  authority,
is  for  a  person  to  possess  the  power  of  making  laws.
This  then  is  what  in  substance  has  been  already  laid
down  in  the  antecedent.

VII.

vn.
The  conse- Now  let  US  cousidcr  the  consequent',  which,  when

stated."^^^  detached  from  the  context,  may  be  spoken  of  as  making
a  sentence  of  itself.  *  Wherever,'  says  he,  '  the  su-
preme authority  in  any  state  resides,  it  is  the  right  of
that  authority  to  make  Laws.' — By  ^wherever'  I  take
it  for  granted,  he  means,  *  in  wliatever  persons  : '  by
'  autlwrify,'  in  the  former  part  of  the  sentence,— /ow^r;
by  the  same  word,  '  autliority^  in  the  latter  part  of  the
sentence, — persons.  Corrected  therefore,  the  sentence
will  stand  thus  :  In  zvJiatever  persons  in  any  state  tJie
supreme  pozver  resides,  it  is  tJie  riglit  of  tliose  persons  to
mal^e  Laivs.


VIII.

The  only  word  now  remaining  undisposed  of,  is
with  the the  word  *  riglit.' And  what  to  think  of  this,  indeed

antece-
dent ;


VIII.
That  it  is
identical


Right  of  the  Supreme  Power  to  make  Laws.  205

I  know  not :  whether  our  Author  had  a  meaning  in  CiiAP.
it,  or  whether  he  had  none.  It  is  inserted,  we  may  — ♦^ —
observe,  in  the  latter  part  only  of  the  sentence :  it
appears  not  in  the  former.  Concerning  this  omission,
two  conjectures  here  present  themselves :  it  may
have  happened  by  accident ;  or  it  may  have  been
made  by  design.  If  by  accident,  then  the  case  is,
that  the  idea  annexed  to  the  word  ^ right''  is  no  other
than  what  was  meant  to  be  included  in  the  former
part  of  the  sentence,  in  which  it  is  not  expressed,  as
well  as  in  the  latter,  in  which  it  is.  In  this  case  it
may,  without  any  change  in  the  signification,  be  ex-
pressed in  both.  Let  it  then  be  expressed,  and  the
sentence,  take  it  altogether,  will  stand  thus :  In
whatever  persons  the  right  of  exercising  supreme  power
in  any  state  resides,  it  is  the  right  of  those  persons  to
make  Laivs.  If  this  conjecture  be  the  true  one,  and
I  am  apt  to  think  it  is,  we  see  once  more,  and,  I  trust,
beyond  all  doubt,  that  the  consequent  in  this  entliymeme
is  but  a  repetition  of  the  antecedent.  We  may  judge
then,  whether  it  is  from  any  such  consideration  as
that  of  *  the  end  and  institution  of  civil  states,'  or  any
other  consideration  that  we  are  likely  to  gain  any
further  conviction  of  the  truth  of  this  conclusion,  than
it  presents  us  of  itself.  We  may  also  form  some
judgment  beforehand,  what  use  or  meaning  there
is  likely  to  be  in  the  assemblage  of  words  that  is  to
follow.

IX.

What is possible, notwithstanding,  however  im-  —or  else
probable,  is,  that  the  omission  we  have  been  speak-  the  pur-
ing  of  was  designed. In  this  case,  what  we  are  to  p°^^"
understand  is,  that  the  word  ^  riglit'  was  meant  to
introduce  a  new  idea  into  this  latter  part  of  the  sen-


2o6  A  Frag7nent  07i  Government.

Chap, tencc,  over  and  above any  that  was meant  to be

IV.  -^ .

■ — •- — suggested  by  the  former. ^ Right'  then,  according

to  this  construction,  in  the  one  place,  is  to  be  con-
sidered as  put  in  contradistinction  to  fact  in  the  other.
The  sense  is  then,  that  whatever  persons  do  actually
exercise  supreme  power,  (or  what,  according  to  the
antecedent  of  the  enthyrneme,  is  the  same  thing,  the
power  of  making  laws)  those  persons  have  the  right  to
exercise  it.  But,  in  this  case,  neither  does  what  is
given  as  a  consequence  in  any  respect  follov/  from  the
antecedent,  nor  can  any  thing  be  made  of  it,  but  what
is  altogether  foreign  to  the  rest  of  the  discourse.  So
much  indeed,  that  it  seems  more  consonant  to  proba-
bility, as  well  as  more  favourable  to  our  Author,  to
conclude  that  he  had  no  meaning  at  all,  than  that  he
had  this.


X.


X.


The  rest  of Let  US  now  trv  what  we  can  make  of  the  remainder

the  para- c ^  t-> •  i  i • i  i

graph  new  of  the  paragraph.  Bemg  ushered  m  by  the  word
supposed  'y^^/  it  seems  to  lay  claim  to  the  appellation  of  an
drift  of  It.  argument.  This  argument,  setting  out,  as  we  have
seen,  without  an  object,  seems  however  to  have
found  something  like  one  at  last,  as  if  it  had  picked
it  up  by  the  way.  This  object,  if  I  mistake  it  not,  is
to  persuade  men,  that  the  supreme  power,  (that  is  the
person  or  persons  in  use  to  exercise  the  supreme
power  in  a  state)  ought,  in  all  points  without  ex-
ception, to  be  obeyed.  What  men  intend,  he  says,
to  do  when  they  are  in  a  state,  is  to  act,  as  if  they
were  but  '  one  man.'  But  one  man  has  but  one  will
belonging  to  him.  What  they  intend  therefore,  or
what  they  ought  to  intend,  (a  slight  difference  which
our  Author  seems  not  to  be  well  aware  of)  is,  to  act  as
if  they  had  but  one  will. To  act  as  if  they  had  but


Right  of  the  Supreme  Pozver  to  make  Laws. 207

one  will,  the  way  is,  for  them  to  'join'  all  their  wills Chap.
'  tosrether.' To  do  this,  the  most  obvious  way  would — ^ —

• •  /7 > 1  •//  -11  Iherestof

be  to  jom  them  '  natitrally :  but,  as  nnlls  will  not  the  para-
splice  and  dovetail  like  deal  boards,  the  only  feasible  ftTted"*^^^
way  is  to  join  them  ^politically.''  Now  the  only  way
for  men  to  join  their  wills  together  politically,  is  for
them  all  to  consent  to  submit  their  wills  to  the  will  of
one.  This  one  will,  to  which  all  others  are  to  be
submitted,  is  the  will  of  those  persons  who  are  in
use  to  exercise  the  supreme  power ;  whose  wills
again,  when  there  happens  to  be  many  of  them,
have,  by  a  process  of  which  our  Author  has  said
nothing,  been  reduced  (as  we  must  suppose)  into  one
already.  So  far  our  Author's  argument.  The  above
is  the  substance  of  it  fairly  given  ;  not  altogether  with
so  much  ornament,  indeed,  as  he  has  given  it,  but,  I
trust,  with  somewhat  more  precision.  The  whole
concludes,  we  may  observe,  with  our  Author's
favourite  identical  proposition,  or  something  like  it,
now  for  the  twentieth  time  repeated.

XI.

xr.
Taking  it  altogether,  it  is,  without  question,  a  very  Weakness

oi it  3S  3.

ingenious  argument :  nor  can  any  thing  in  the  world  persuasive
answer  the  purpose  better,  except  just  in  the  case  enc°e*'*^'''
where  it  happens  to  be  wanted.  Not  but  that  a  veteran
antagonist,  trained  up  in  the  regular  and  accustomed
discipline  of  legal  fencing,  such  an  one,  indeed,  might
contrive  perhaps,  with  due  managem.ent,  to  give  our
Author  the  honour  of  the  field.  But  should  some
undisciplined  blunderer,  like  the  Commissary's  land-
lady, thrust  in  quart,  when  he  should  have  thrust  in
tierce,  I  doubt  much  whether  he  might  not  get  within
our  Author's  guard.  — \  '  intend  ?  ' — I  '  consent  ? '-- 1
'  submit ' myself?—'  Who are you, I wonder, that


2o8  A  Frag7nent  on  Govertwient.

Chap,  should  know  what  I  do  better  than  I  do  myself  ?  As
— —  to  '■^submitting  my  will "  to  the  wills  of  the  people  who
made  this  law  you  are  speaking  of, — what  I  know  is,
that  I  never  "  intended  "  any  such  thing :  I  abominate
them,  I  tell  you,  and  all  they  ever  did,  and  have  al-
ways said  so  :  and  as  to  my  *  consent,'  so  far  have
I  been  from  giving  it  to  their  law,  that  from  the  first
to  the  last,  I  have  protested  against  it  with  all  my
might.'  So  much  for  our  refractory  disputant. — What
I  should  say  to  him  I  know :  but  what  our  Author
could  find  to  answer  to  him,  is  more  than  I  can
imagine  ^

XII.

XII.

A  prior  Lgj-  yg  j^q-^  rctum  and  pick  up  those  other  passages

paragraph  ,  ^  ^  i.  o

supposed  which  we  supposed  to  have  a  respect  to  the  same
tive  to  the  desigu  that  seems  to  be  in  view  in  this.  First  comes
Ums^^*  °'^  the  short  introductory  paragraph  that  ushers  in  the
whole  digression  :  a  paragraph  which,  however  short,
and  however  imperfect  with  respect  to  the  purpose  of
giving  a  general  view  of  the  contents  of  those  which
follow  it,  was,  in  despite  of  method,  to  expatiate  upon
this  subject.  Upon  this  subject,  indeed,  he  does  ex-
patiate with  a  force  of  argument  and  energy  of  expres-
sion which  nothing  can  withstand.  '  This,'  it  begins,
*  will  necessarily  lead  us  into  a  short  enquiry  concern-
ing the  nature  of  society  and civil  government  -.' —

*  One  thing  in  the  paragraph  we  are  considering  is  observable ;  it  is
the  concluding  sentence,  in  which  he  brings  together  the  ideas  of  laiv  and
vjill.  Here  then,  in  the  tail  of  a  digression,  he  comes  nearer  in  fact,
though  without  being  aware  of  it,  to  the  giving  a  just  and  precise  idea  of
a  law,  than  in  any  part  of  the  definition  itself  from  whence  he  is  digressing.
If,  instead  of  saying  that  a  law  is  a  will,  he  had  called  it  the  expression  of
a  will,  and  that  sort  of  expression  of  a  will  which  goes  by  the  name  of
a  coiiunand,  his  definition  would,  so  far  as  this  goes,  have  been  clear  as
well  as  right.  As  it  is,  it  is  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  But  of  this
more,  if  at  all,  in  another  place.  The  definition  of  law  is  a  matter  of  loo
much  nicety  and  importance  to  be  dispatched  in  a  note.

"  I  Comm.  47.


Right  of  the  Supreme  Poiver  to  make  Laws.  209

This  is  all  the  intimation  itgives  of  the  contents  of  those
paragraphs  we  have  examined.  Upon  this  before  us
it  touches  in  energetic  terms  ;  but  more  energetic
than  precise. — 'And  the  natural'  (it  continues)  'and
inherent  right  that  belongs  to  the  sovereignty  of  a
state,'  {natural  right,  observe,  that  belongs  to  the
sovereignty  of  a  political  society)  '  wherever  that
sovereignty  be  lodged,  of  making  and  enforcing
laws.'

XIII.

XIII

This  is  not  all.  The  most  emphatical  passage  is  Another,
yet  behind.  It  is  a  passage  in  that  short  para-
graph ^  which  we  found  to  contain  such  a  variety  of
matter.  He  is  there  speaking  of  the  several  forms
of  government  now  in  being.  '  However  they  began,'
says  he,  '  or  by  what  right  soever  they  subsist,  there
is  and  jnust  be  in  all  of  them  a  supreme,  irresistible,  ab-
solute, uncontrolled  authority,  in  which  the  jura  sumnii
imperii,  or  the  rights  of  sovereignty,  reside.'

XIV.

XIV

The  vehemence,  the  hnvoT^^,  of  this  passage  is  Agitation
remarkable.  He  ransacks  the  language:  he  piles  ^  ^^^^^^
up,  one  upon  another,  four  of  the  most  tremendous
epithets  he  can  find  ;  he  heaps  Ossa  upon  Pelion  :  and,
as  if  the  English  tongue  did  not  furnish  expressions
strong  or  imposing  enough,  he  tops  the  whole  with  a
piece  of  formidable  Latinity.  From  all  this  agitation,
it  is  plain,  I  think,  there  is  a  something  which  he  has
very  much  at  heart ;  which  he  wishes,  but  fears,
perhaps,  to  bring  out  undisguised ;  which  in  several
places,  notwithstanding,  bursts  out  involuntarily,  as  it
were,  before  he is  well  ready  for  it  ;  and which,  a

' I  Comm.  p.  48.  supra,  ch.  II.  par.  ii.
P


2IO  A  Fragment  on  Government.

certain  discretion,  getting  at  last  the  upper  hand  of
propensity,  forces,  as  we  have  seen,  to  dribble  away
in  a  string  of  obscure  sophisms.  Thus  oddly  enough
it  happens,  that  that  passage  of  them  all,  which,  if  1
mistake  not,  is  the  only  one  that  was  meant  to  be
dedicatedexpressly  to  the  subject,  is  the  least  explicit
on  it  ^

XV.

XV.

Cause  of  it.  A  couragc  much  stauncher  than  our  Author's  might
have  wavered  here.  A  task  of  no  less  intricacy  was
here  to  be  travelled  through,  than  that  of  adjusting
the  claims  of  those  two  jealous  antagonists.  Liberty
and  Government.  A  more  invidious  ground  is
scarcely  to  be  found  any  where  within  the  field  of
politics.  Enemies  encompass  the  traveller  on  every
side.  He  can  scarce  stir  but  he  must  expect  to
be  assaulted  w^ith  the  war-whoop  of  political  heresy
from  one  quarter  or  another.  Difficult  enough  is  the
situation  of  him,  who,  in  these  defiles,  feels  himself
impelled  one  way  by  fear,  and  another  by  affection.


XVI.


XVI.


Resource To  rctum  to  the  paragraph  which  it  was  the  more

he  finds  in .  ..  . .  ^ .^  ,.  .

obscurity,  immediate  business  of  this  chapter  to  examine : —
Were  the  path  of  obscurity  less  famihar  to  our  Author,
one  should  be  tempted  to  imagine  he  had  struck  into
it  on  the  particular  occasion  before  us,  in  the  view  of
extricating  himself  from  this  dilemma.  A  discourse
thus  prudently  indeterminate  might  express  enough
to  keep  fair  with  the  rulers  of  the  earth,  without
setting  itself  in  direct  array  against the prejudices

'  Another  passage  or  two  there  is  which  might  seem  to  glance  the  same
■way :  but  these  I  pass  over  as  less  material,  after  those  which  we  have
seen.


Right  of  the  Supreme  Power  to  7?iake  Laws.  211

of  the  people.  Viewed  by  different  persons,  it  might  Chap.
present  different  aspects  :  to  men  in  power  it  might  — m—
recommend  itself,  and  that  from  the  first,  under  the
character  of  a  practical  lesson  of  obedience  for  the  use
of  the  people  ;  while  among  the  people  themselves  it
might  pass  muster,  for  a  time  at  least,  in  quality
of  a  string  of  abstract  scientific  propositions  of  juris-
prudence. It  is  not  till  some  occasion  for  making
application  of  it  should  occur,  that  its  true  use  and
efficacy  would  be  brought  to  light.  The  people,
no  matter  on  what  occasion,  begin  to  murmur,  and
concert  measures  of  resistance.  Now  then  is  the
time  for  the  latent  virtues  of  this  passage  to  be  called
forth.  The  book  is  to  be  opened  to  them,  and  in  this
passage  they  are  to  be  shewn,  what  of  themselves,
perhaps,  they  would  never  have  observed,  a  set  of
arguments  curiously  strung  together  and  wrapped
up,  in  proof  of  the  universal  expedience,  or  rather
necessity ^  of  submission  :  a  necessity  which  is  to  arise,
not  out  of  the  reflection  that  tlie  probable  mischiefs  of
resistance  are  greater  flmn  tlie  probable  misctiiefs  of
obedience;  not  out  of  any  such  debateable  consideration ;
but  out  of  a  something  that  is  to  be  much  more  cogent
and  effectual :  to  wit,  a  certain  metaptiysico-legal  im-
potence, which  is  to  beget  in  them  the  sentiment,  and
answer  all  the  purposes  of  a  natural  one.  Armed,
and  full  of  indignation,  our  malcontents  are  making
their  way  to  the  ro3^al  palace.  In  vain.  A  certain
estoppel  being  made  to  bolt  out  upon  them,  in  the
manner  we  have  seen,  by  the  force  of  our  Author's
legal  engineering,  their  arms  are  to  fall,  as  it  were  bv
enchantment,  from  their  hands.  To  disagree,  to
clamour,  to  oppose,  to  take  back,  in  short,  their  wills
again,  is  now,  they  are  told,  too  late  :  it  is  what  m//not
be  done :  their  wills  have  been  put  in  liotclipot  along

p  2


2  12  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap,  with  the  rest :  they  have  'united/ — they  have  '  con-
■  «.  sented,'— they  have  '  submitted.'— Our  Author  having
thus  put  his  hook  info  theirnose,  they  are  to  go  back  as
they  came,  and  all  is  peace.  An  ingenious  contri-
vance this  enough :  but  popular  passion  is  not  to  be
fooled,  I  doubt,  so  easily.  Now  and  then,  it  is  true,
one  error  may  be  driven  out,  for  a  time,  by  an  oppo-
site error :  one  piece  of  nonsense  by  another  piece  of
nonsense  :  but  for  barring  the  door  effectually  and  for
ever  against  all  error  and  all  nonsense,  there  is
nothing  like  the  simple  truth.

XVII.

XVII

inconsist- After  all  these  pains  taken  to  inculcate  unreserved

^reJenr*'''  submission,  would  any  one  have  expected  to  see  our

passage Author  himself  amoug  the  most  eager  to  excite  men  to

fbrmen disobcdiencc  ? and that, perhaps, upon the most

frivolous pretences? in short, upon any pretence

whatsoever? Such, however, upon looking  back

a  little,  we  shall  find  him. I  say,  among  the  most

eager ;  for  other  men,  at  least  the  most  enlightened

advocates  for  liberty,  are  content  with  leaving  it  to

subjects  to  resist,  for  their  own  sakes,  on  the  footing

of  permission : this  will  not  content  our  Author,  but

he  must  be  forcing  it  upon  them  as  a  point  of  fliif)\

XVIII.

XVIII.

The  former  'Tis  in  a  passagc  antecedent  to  the  digression  we
cked^^^  ^^'  are  examining,  but  in  the  same  section,  that,  speaking
of  the  pretended  law  of  Nature,  and  of  the  law  of
revelation,  '  no  human  laws,'  he  says,  *  should  be
silvered  to  contradict  these  \'  The  expression  is
remarkable. It  is  not  that no human laws  should

^  I  Comm.  p.  42.


Right  of  the  Supreme  Power  to  make  Laws.  213

contradict  them  :  but  that  no  human  laws  should  be Chap.

SUFFERED  to contradict  them. He  then proceeds ►_

to  give  us  an  example.  This  example,  one  might
think,  would  be  such  as  should  have  the  effect  of
softening  the  dangerous  tendency  of  the  rule : — on
the  contrar}',  it  is  such  as  cannot  but  enhance  it  ^  ;
and,  in  the  application  of  it  to  the  rule,  the  substance
of  the  latter  is  again  repeated  in  still  more  explicit
and  energetic  terms.  *  Nay,'  says  he,  speaking  of  the
act  he  instances,  *  if  any  human  law  should  allow
or  enjoin  us  to  commit  it,  we  are  bound  to  trans-
gress that  human  law,  or  else  we  must  offend  both
the  natural  and  the  divine.'

XIX.

XIX

The  propriety  of  this dangerous maxim, so  far  Dangerous
as  the  Divine  Law  is  concerned,  is  what  I  must  refer  ^^f"^^""'
to  a  future  occasion  for  more  particular  consideration  ^.
As  to  the  Law  of  Nature,  if  (as  I  trust  it  will  appear)
it  be  nothing  but  a  phrase  ^ ;  if  there  be  no  other
medium  for  proving  any  act  to  be  an  offence  against

*  It  is  that  of  murder.  In  the  word  here  chosen  there  lurks  a  fallacy
which  makes  the  proposition  the  more  dangerous  as  it  is  the  more  plau-
sible. It  is  too  important  to  be  altogether  past  over :  at  the  same  time
that  a  slight  hint  of  it,  in  this  place,  is  all  that  can  be  given.  Murder  is
killing  under  certain  circumstances. — Is  the  human  law  then  to  be  allowed
to  define,  in  dernier  ressori,  what  shall  be  those  circumstances,  or  is  it  not  ?
If  yes,  the  case  of  a  '  human  law  allowing  or  enjoining  us  to  commit  it,'
is  a  case  that  is  not  so  much  as  supposable  :  if  «o,  adieu  to  all  human  laws:
to  the  fire  with  our  Statutes  at  large,  our  Reports,  our  Institutes,  and  all
that  we  have  hitherto  been  used  to  call  our  law  books ;  our  law  books,  the
only  law  books  we  can  be  safe  in  trusting  to,  are  Puffendorf  and  the  Bible.

"^  According  to  our  Author,  indeed,  it  should  be  to  no  purpose  to
make  any  separate  mention  of  the  two  laws ;  since  the  Di\-ine  Law,  he
tells  us,  is  but  '  a  part  of  that  of  Nature  ".  Of  consequence,  with  respect
to  that  part,  at  least,  which  is  common  to  both,  to  be  contrary  to  the  one,
is,  of  course,  to  be  contrary  to  the  other.

*  This  is  what  there  would  be  occasion  to  shew  more  at  large  in
examining  some  former  parts  of  this  section.

"  I  Comm.  p.  42.


2  14  -^  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap,  it,  than  the  mischievous  tendenc}^  of  such  act ;  if  there
_  »» 1.  be  no  other  medium  for  proving  a  law  of  the  state  to  be
contrary  to  it,  than  the  mexpediency  of  such  law,  unless  .
the  bare  unfounded  disapprobation  of  any  one  who  '
thinks  of  it  be  called  a  proof;  if  a  test  for  distinguish-
ing such  laws  as  would  be  contrary  to  the  Law  of\
Nature  from  such  as,  ivitttout  being  contrary  to  it,  are
simply  inexpedient,  be  that  which  neither  our  Author,
nor  any  man  else,  so  much  as  pretended  ever  to  give  ;
if,  in  a  word,  there  be  scarce  any  law  whatever  but
what  those  who  have  not  liked  it  have  found,  on
some  account  or  another,  to  be  repugnant  to  some
text  of  scripture ;  I  see  no  remedy  but  that  the
natural  tendency  of  such  doctrine  is  to  impel  a  man,
by  the  force  of  conscience,  to  rise  up  in  arms  against
any  law  whatever  that  he  happens  not  to  like.  What
sort  of  government  it  is  that  can  consist  with  such
a  disposition,  I  must  leave  to  our  Author  to  inform  us.

XX.

XX

Theprinci It  is  the  principle  of  utility,  accurately  apprehended—- 1
nYdie^" '^^'^  steadily  applied, that affords the  only  clue to
only  guide  p-uide  a  man  through  these  straits. It  is  for  that,

under  ="  ^  .  ...

these  dirti-  if  any,  and  for  that  alone  to  furnish  a  decision  which  j
neither  party  shall  dare  in  tlieory  to  disavow.  It  is
something  to  reconcile  men  even  in  theory.  They
are  at  least,  somettiing  nearer  to  an  effectual  union,
than  when  at  variance  as  well  in  respect  of  theor}^  as
of  practice.

XXL

XXI.

Juncture In spcakiug of the supposed contract between

aiK-e^"^ King  and  people  \ I have  already  had  occasion  to

give  the  description,  and,  as  it  appears  to  me, the

'  Ch.  I.


Right  of  the  Supreme  Power  to  make  Lazes.  215

only  general  description  that  can  be  given,  of  that  Chap.
juncture  at  which,  and  not  before,  resistance  to  gov-  ,,'
ernment  becomes  commendable ;  or,  in  other  words,
reconcileable  to  just  notions,  whether  of  legal  or  not,
at  least  of  moral,  and,  if  there  be  any  difference,
religions  AvXy  ^  What  was  there  said  was  spoken,
at  the  time,  with  reference  to  that  particular  branch
of  government  which  was  then  in  question ;  the  branch
that  in  this  country  is  administered  by  the  King.
But  if  it  was  just,  as  applied  to  that  branch  of  govern-
ment, and  in  this  country,  it  could  only  be  for  the
same  reason  that  it  is  so  when  applied  to  the  wliote
of  government,  and  that  in  any  country  whatsoever.
It  is  then,  we  may  say,  and  not  till  then,  allowable  to,
if  not  incumbent  on,  ever}'  man,  as  well  on  the  score
of  duty  as  of  interest,  to  enter  into  measures  of  resist-
ance ;  when,  according  to  the  best  calculation  he  is
able  to  make,  the  probable  mischiefs  of  resistance
(speaking  with  respect  to  the  community  in  general)
appear  less  to  liini  than  tlie  probable  mischiefs  of  sub-
mission. This  then  is  to  him,  that  is  to  each  man  in
particular,  \h^  juncture  for  resistance.

XXII.

XXIF

A  natural  question  here  is — b}'  what  sign  shall  this  Not  cha-
juncture  be  known  ? By  what  common  signal  alike  aS^bv
conspicuous and perceptible to all  ? A question  f^^^
which is readily enough started, but to which, I
hope,  it  will  be  almost  as  readily  perceived  that  it  is
impossible to find an answer. Common sign for
such  a  purpose, I,  for  my  part,  know  of  none : he
must be more than a prophet, I  think, that can
shew us one. For that which shall serve a

'  See  Ch.  V.  par.  7,  note  i.


coni-
mon  sisn.


2 1 6  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap, particular  person,  I  have  already  given  one — his  own
,.' internal  persuasion  of  a  balance  of  utility  on  the  side
of  resistance.

XXIII.

XXIII.

Freedom  Unlcss  such  a  sign  then,  which  I  think  impossible,
'e"irnfe°iu  Can  be  shewn,  the  field,  if  one  may  say  so,  of  the
not  u"pmi  supreme  governor's  authority,  though  not  infinite,
anyiimita-  must  unavoidabK^,  I  think,  unless  wliere  limited  by  ex-

tion  to  the  i i • 7 /- •  -nt

Supreme  pFcss  Convention  \,  be  allowed  to  be  indefinite.  Nor  can
I  see  any  narrower,  or  other  bounds  to  it,  under  this
constitution,  or  under  any  other  yet /r^'^r  constitution,
if  there  be  one,  than  under  the  most  despotic.  Before
the  juncture  I  have  been  describing  were  arrived,
resistance,  even  in  a  country  like  this,  would  come
too  soon  :  were  the  juncture  arrived  already,  the  time
for  resistance  would  be  come  already,  under  such
a  government  even  as  an}^  one  should  call  despotic.

XXIV.

XXIV.

Principal  In  regard  to  a  government  that  is  free,  and  one
stances  on  that  is  despotic,  wherein  is  it  then  that  the  difference
which  It consists  ? Is  it  that  those  persons  in  whose  hands

does  de-  ^

pend.  that  power  is  lodged  which  is  acknowledged  to  be
supreme,  have  less  power  in  the  one  than  in  the
other,  when  it  is  from  custom  that  they  derive  it  ?
By  no  means.  Is  it  not  that  the  power  of  one  any
more  than  of  the  other  has  any  certain  bounds  to  it  ?
The  distinction  turns  upon  circumstances  of  a  very
different  complexion :— on  the  manner  in  w^hich  that
whole mass of power, which, taken together, is

^  This  respects  the  case  where  one  state  has,  upon  terms,  submitted
itself  to  the  government  of  another  :  or  where  the  governing  bodies  of  a
number  of  states  agree  to  take  ciiiections  in  certain  specified  cases,  from
some  body  or  other  that  is  distinct  from  all  of  them  :  consisting  of
members,  for  instance,  appointed  out  of  each.


Right  of  the  Supreme  Power  to  make  Laws.  2 1 7

supreme,  is,  in  a  free  state,  distributed  among  the
several  ranks  of  persons  that  are  sharers  in  it : — on
the  source  from  whence  their  titles  to  it  are  succes-
sively derived  : — on  the  frequent  and  easy  changes  of
condition  between  governors  and  govern<?t/;  whereby
the  interests  of  the  one  class  are  more  or  less  indistin-
guishably  blended  with  those  of  the  other : — on  the
responsibility  of  the  governors ;  or  the  right  v/hich  a
subject  has  of  having  the  reasons  publicly  assigned
and  canvassed  of  every  act  of  power  that  is  exerted
over  him  : — on  the  liberty  of  the  press)  or  the  security
with  which  every  man,  be  he  of  the  one  class  or  the
other,  may  make  known  his  complaints  and  remon-
strances to  the  whole  community : — on  the  liberty  of
public  association ;  or  the  security  with  w^hich  mal-
contents may  communicate  their  sentiments,  concert
their  plans,  and  practise  every  mode  of  opposition
short  of  actual  revolt,  before  the  executive  power  can
be  legally  justified  in  disturbing  them.

XXV.

XXV.

True then, it may  be, that, owing  to this last  Freedom
circumstance m particular,  m  a state  thus  circum-  emment—
stanced,  the  road  to  a  revolution,  if  a  revolution  be  Y''^  ^^\ .

'  '  lavourable

necessary,  is  to  appearance  shorter ;  certainly  more  to  resist-
smooth  and  easy.  More  likelihood,  certainly  there
is  of  its  being  such  a  revolution  as  shall  be  the  work
of  a  number;  and  in  w^hich,  therefore,  the  interests  of
a  number  are  likely  to  be  consulted.  Grant  then,
that  by  reason  of  these  facilitating  circumstances,  the
juncture  itself  may  arrive  sooner,  and  upon  less  pro-
vocation, under  what  is  called  a  free  government,
than  under  what  is  called  an  absolute  one :  grant
this ; — yet  till  it  be  arrived,  resistance  is  as  much  too
soon  under  one  of  them  as  under  the  other.


2 1 8  A  Frao;ment  on  Govcrnvicnt.


'".i


XXVI.

Let  us  avow  then,  in  short,  steadily  but  calml}',
what  our  Author  hazards  with  anxiety  and  agitation,
Hmited  h°'  ^hat  the  authority  of  the  supreme  body  cannot,  unless
Itself.  where  liinited  by  express  convention^  be  said  to  have
any  assignable,  any  certain  bounds. — That  to  say
there  is  any  act  they  cannot  do, — to  speak  of  any
thing  of  their's  as  being  illegal, — as  being  void; — to
speak  of  their  exceeding  their  authority  (whatever  be
the  phrase) — their  power,  their  riglit, — is,  however
common,  an  abuse  of  language.

XXVII.

XXVII.

.\rguments  The  legislature  r<7;/not  do  it  ?  The  legislature
pose ^t  to  canxio'i  make  a  law  to  this  effect?  Why  cannot?
besoun- \\ri-i^^|-  is  there  that  should  hinder  them? Why  not

satistac-  -^

toiy—  this,  as  well  as  so  many  other  laws  murmured  at,
perhaps,  as  inexpedient,  yet  submitted  to  without  any
question  of  the  rightl  With  men  of  the  same  party,
with  men  whose  affections  are  already  lifted  against
the  law  in  question,  any  thing  will  go  down :  any
rubbish  is  good  that  will  add  fuel  to  the  flame.  But
with  regard  to  an  impartial  bystander,  it  is  plain  that
it  is  not  denying  the  right  of  the  legislature,  their
authority,  their  poiver,  or  whatever  be  the  word — it  is
not  denying  that  they  can  do  what  is  in  question — it
is  not  that,  I  say,  or  any  discourse  verging  that  way
than  can  tend  to  give  him  the  smallest  satisfaction.

XXVIII.

XXVIII.  ...  1 wri-

-and  in- Grant  even  the  proposition  in  general : — What  are

?o  pSu-  we  the  nearer? Grant  that  there  are  certain  bounds

'^'■^-  to  the  authority  of  the  legislature  :— Of  what  use  is  it

to  say  so,  when  these  bounds  are  what  no  body  has


Right  of  the  Supreme  Power'  to  inake  Laius.  2 1 9

ever  attempted  to  mark  out  to  any  useful  purpose ;
that  is,  in  any  such  manner  whereby  it  might  be
known  beforehand  what  description  a  law  must  be  of
to  fall  within,  and  what  to  fall  beyond  them  ?  Grant
that  there  are  things  which  the  legislature  cannot
do ;— grant  that  there  are  laws  which  exceed  the
power  of  the  legislature  to  establish.  What  rule
does  this  sort  of  discourse  furnish  us  for  determining
whether  any  one  that  is  in  question  is,  or  is  not  of
the  number?  As  far  as  I  can  discover,  none.  Either
the  discourse  goes  on  in  the  confusion  it  began  ;
either  all  rests  in  vague  assertions,  and  no  intelligible
argument  at  all  is  offered ;  or  if  any,  such  arguments
as  are  drawn  from  the  principle  of  utility  :  arguments
which,  in  whatever  variet}-  of  words  expressed,  come
at  last  to  neither  more  nor  less  than  this ;  that  the
tendency  of  the  law  is,  to  a  greater  or  a  less  degree,
pernicious.  If  this  then  be  the  result  of  the  argu-
ment, why  not  come  home  to  it  at  once  ?  Why  turn
aside  into  a  wilderness  of  sophistry,  when  the  path  of
plain  reason  is  straight  before  us  ?

XXIX.

XXIX.

What  practical  inferences  those  who  maintain  this  What  they
language  mean should be  deduced  from it, is  not  either  an
altogether  clear ;  nor,  perhaps,  does  every  one  mean  l[^^^^^'^.
the  same. Some  who  speak  of  a  law  as  being  void  of  the

I I  1 1 people  —

(lor  to  this  expression,  not  to  travel  through  the
whole  list,  I  shall  confine  myself)  would  persuade  us
to  look  upon  the  authors  of  it  as  having  thereby
forfeited,  as  the  phrase  is,  their  n'hole  power :  as  well
that  of  giving  force  to  the  particular  law  in  question,
as  to  any  other.  These  are  they  who,  had  they
arrived  at  the  same  practical  conclusion  through  the
principle  of  utility,  would  have  spoken  of  the  law  as


2  20  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap, being  to  such  a  degree  pernicious,  as  that,  were  the

— <hk1- bulk  of  the  community  to  see  it  in  its  true  hght,  the

probable  mischief  of  resisting  it  would  be  less  than  the

probable  mischief  of  submitting  to  it. These  point,  in

the  first  instance,  at  hostile  opposition.

XXX.

XXX.

—or  to  the  Those  who  say  nothing  about  forfeiture  are  corn-
power,  monly  less  violent  in  their  views.  These  are  they
who,  were  they  to  ground  themselves  on  the  principle
of  utility,  and,  to  use  our  language,  would  have
spoken  of  the  law  as  being  mischievous  indeed,  but
without  speaking  of  it  as  being  mischievous  to  the
degree  that  has  been  just  mentioned.  The  mode  of
opposition  which  they  point  to  is  one  which  passes
under  the  appellation  of  a  legal  one.

XXXI.

XXXI.

Which  Admit  then  the  law  to  be  void  in  their  sense,  and

glveVa niark  the  consequences. The  idea  annexed  to  the
control epithet  void  is  obtained  from  tHose  instances  in  which

over  the  ^  .  .  .  .

legislative,  w^e  scc  it  applied  to  a  private  instrument.  The  con-
sequence of  a  private  instrument's  being  void  is,  that
all  persons  concerned  are  to  act  as  if  no  such  instru-
ment had  existed.  The  consequence,  accordingl}^  of
a  law's  being  void  must  be,  that  people  shall  act  as  if
there  were  no  such  law  about  the  matter :  and  there-
fore that  if  any  person  in  virtue  of  the  mandate  of  the
law  should  do  an3'thing  in  coercion  of  another  person,
which  without  such  law  he  would  be  punishable  for
doing,  he  would  still  be  punishable ;  to  wit,  by
appointment  of  the  judicial  power.  Let  the  law  for
instance,  be  a  law  imposing  a  tax :  a  man  who  should
go  about  to  levy  the  tax  by  force  would  be  punishable
as  a  trespasser :  should  he  chance  to  be  killed  in  the


Right  of  the  Stcpre7?te  Pozver  to  make  Lazvs. 221

attempt,  the  person  killing  him  would  not  be  punish-  Chap.
able  as  for  murder :  should  he  kill,  he  himself  would,  — ^^—
perhaps,  be  punishable  as  for  murder.  To  whose
office  does  it  appertain  to  do  those  acts  in  virtue  of
which  such  punishment  would  be  inflicted?  To
that  of  the  Judges.  Applied  to  practice  then,  the
effect  of  this  language  is,  by  an  appeal  made  to  the
Judges,  to  confer  on  those  magistrates  a  controlling
power  over  the  acts  of  the  legislature.

XXXII.

XXXII

By  this  management  a  particular  purpose  might  Remedy
perhaps,  by  chance  be  answered  :  and  let  this  be  ^^t^^%1_  ^"
supposed  a  good  one.  Still  what  benefit  would,  from  ease.
the  general  tendency  of  such  a  doctrine,  and  such  a
practice  in  conformity  to  it,  accrue  to  the  body  of  the
people  is  more  than  I  can  conceive.  A  Parliament,
let  it  be  supposed,  is  too  much  under  the  influence
of  the  Crown  :  pays  too  little  regard  to  the  sentiments
and  the  interests  of  the  people.  Be  it  so.  The
people  at  any  rate,  if  not  so  great  a  share  as  they
might  and  ought  to  have,  have  had,  at  least,  some
share  in  choosing  it.  Give  to  the  Judges  a  power  of
annulling  its  acts ;  and  you  transfer  a  portion  of  the
supreme  power  from  an  assembly  which  the  people
have  had  some  share,  at  least,  in  choosing,  to  a  set  of
men  in  the  choice  of  whom  they  have  not  the  least
imaginable  share  :  to  a  set  of  men  appointed  solel}''
b}^  the  Crown  :  appointed  solely,  and  avowedly  and
constantly,  by  that  very  magistrate  whose  partial  and
occasional  influence  is  the  very  grievance  3'ou  seek  to
remedy.

XXXIII.  /Pl^^-

But  not  so

In  the  heat  of  debate,  some,  perhaps,  would  be  for  some^i>ht
saying  of  this  management  that  it  was  transferring  at  represent


222  A  Fi'ao'nient  on Gove7'7nnent.


<b


Chap, once  the  supreme  authority  from  the  legislative  power

„ to  the  judicial. But  this  would  be  going  too  far  on

the  other  side.  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  a
positive  and  a  negative  part  in  legislation.  There  is  a
wide  difference  again  between  a  negative  upon  reasons
given,  and  a  negative  without  any.  The  power  oirepeaU
ing  a  law  even  for  reasons  given  is  a  great  power:
too  great  indeed  for  Judges  :  but  still  very  distinguish-
able from,  and  much  inferior  to  that  of  making  one  ^


XXXIV.

xxxiv.
Thesu-  Let  us  now  go  back  a  little. In  denying  the  exist-

preme  •  i  » i

power  ence  of  an}-  assignable  bounds  to  the  supreme  power,
bTconven-  ^  added  ^  '  unless  where  limited  by  express  conven-
tion. j-JQj^  . '  fQj.  |-|-^jg  exception  I  could  not  but  subjoin.  Our
Author  indeed,  in  that  passage  in  which,  short  as  it  is,
he  is  the  most  explicit,  leaves,  we  may  obsewe,  no
room  for  it.  *  However  they  began,'  says  he  (speak-
ing of  the  several  forms  of  government)  '  however
they  began,  and  by  what  right  soever  they  subsist,
there  is  and  must  be  in  all  of  them  an  authority  that
is  absolute.' — To  say  this,  however,  oiall  governments
without  exception  ; — to  say  that  no  assemblage  of  men
can  subsist  in  a  state  of  government,  without  being
subject to some one  body  whose authority  stands

'  Notwithstanding  what  has  been  said,  it  would  be  in  vain  to  dissemble,
but  that,  upon  occasion,  an  appeal  of  this  sort  may  very  well  answer,
and  has,  indeed,  in  general,  a  tendency  to  answer,  in  some  sort,  the
purposes  of  those  who  espouse,  or  profess  to  espouse,  the  interests  of  the
people.  A  public  and  authorised  debate  on  the  propriety  of  the  law  is
by  this  means  brought  on.  The  artillery  of  the  tongue  is  pla3'ed  off
against  the  law,  under  cover  of  the  law  itself.  An  opportunity  is  gained
of  impressing  sentiments  unfavourable  to  it,  upon  a  numerous  and
attentive  audience.  As  to  any  other  effects  from  such  an  appeal,  let  us
believe  that  in  the  instances  in  which  we  have  seen  it  made,  it  is  the
certainty  of  miscarriage  that  has  been  the  encouragement  to  the  attempt.

*  V.  supra,  par.  26.


Right  of  the  Supreme  Poiver  to  make  Laws.  223

unlimited  so  much  as  by  convention  ;  to  say,  in  short, Chap.

that  not  even  by  convention  can any hmitation be .."  ,

made  to  the  power  of  that  body  in  a  state  which  in
other  respects  is  supreme,  would  be  saying,  1  take  it,
rather  too  much  :  it  would  be  saying  that  there  is
no  such  thing  as  government  in  the  German  Empire  ;
nor  in  the  Dutch  Provinces ;  nor  in  the  Swiss  Cantons  ;
nor  was  of  old  in  the  Achaean  league.

XXXV.

XXXV.

In  this  mode  of  limitation  I  see  not  what  there  is  — So  as
that  need  surprise  us. By  what  is  it  that  any  degree  it  be  ex-  °
of  power  (meaning  political  power)  is  established  ? It  p^'^"'
it  neither  more  nor  less,  as  we  have  already  had  occa-
sion to observ^e  \  than  a  habit  of,  and  disposition  to
obedience  :  habit,  speaking  with  respect  to  past  acts  ;
disposition,  with  respect  tojufure. This  disposition  it
is  as  easy,  or  I am  much mistaken,  to  conceive  as
being  absent  with regard to one sort of  acts  ;  as
present  with regard to other. For  a  bod}^  then,
which  is  in  other  respects  supreme,  to  be  conceived
as  being  with  respect  to  acertain  sort  of  acts,  limited,
all  that  is  necessary  is,  that  this  sort  of  acts  be  in  its
description  distinguishable  from  every  other.

XXXVI.

_,  .  .  XXXVI.

By  means  of  a  convention  then  we  are  furnished  Which  fur-

with  that  common  signal  which,  in  other  cases,  we  wLt  may

despaired  of  finding  ^. A  certain  act  is  in  the  instru-  ^^  **'^*^"

^  _ °  for  a  com-

ment of  convention  specified,  with  respect  to  which  mon  signal

,  ...  ^ I ^ r  .  .  of  rcsist-

the government  is therein precluded  from issuing  ance.
a  law  to  a  certain  effect:  whether  to  the  effect  of  com-
manding the  act,  of  permitting  it,  or  of  forbidding  it.

'  v.  supra,  cli.  I.  par.  13,  rote.
^  V.  supra,  par.  22.


2  24  A  Fragment  on  Government.

A  law  is  issued  to  that  effect  notwithstanding.  The
issuing  then  of  such  a  law  (the  sense  of  it,  and  likewise
the  sense  of  that  part  of  the  convention  which  provides
against  it  being  supposed  clear)  is  a  fact  notorious  and
visible  to  all :  in  the  issuing  then  of  such  a  law  we
have  a  fact  which  is  capable  of  being  taken  for  that
common  signal  we  have  been  speaking  of.  These
bounds  the  supreme  body  in  question  has  marked  out
to  its  authority  :  of  such  a  demarcation  then  what  is
the  effect  ?  either  none  at  all,  or  this  :  that  the  dis-
position to  obedience  confines  itself  within  these
bounds.  Beyond  them  the  disposition  is  stopped
from  extending :  beyond  them  the  subject  is  no  more
prepared  to  obey  the  governing  body  of  his  own
state,  than  that  of  any  other.  What  difficulty,  I  say,
there  should  be  in  conceiving  a  state  of  things  to  sub-
sist in  which  the  supreme  authority  is  thus  limited, —
what  greater  difficulty  in  conceiving  it  with  this  limita-
tion, than  without  any,  I  cannot  see.  The  two  states
are,  I  must  confess,  to  me  alike  conceivable  :  whether
alike  expedient, — alike  conducive  to  the  happiness  of
the  people,  is  another  question.


XXXVII.

XXXVII.

A  salvo  for God  forbid,  that  from  any  thing  here  said  it  should

reforma-  i i i i •  •  • ■

tion.  be  concluded  that  m  any  society  any  convention  is  or

can  be  made,  which  shall  have  the  effect  of  setting  up
an  insuperable  bar  to  that  which  the  parties  affected
shall  deem  a  reformation  : — God  forbid  that  any  dis-
ease in  the  constitution  of  a  state  should  be  without  its
remedy.  Such  might  by  some  be  thought  to  be  the
case,  where  that  supreme  body  which  in  such  a  con-
vention, was  one  of  the  contracting  parties,  having  in-
corporated itself  with  that  which  was  the  other,  no


Right  of  the  Sup7xme  Power  to  make  Laws.  225

longer  subsists  to  give  any  new  modification  to  the  Chap.
engagement.  Many  ways  might  however  be  found  to  — ,—
make  the  requisite  alteration,  without  any  departure
from  the  spirit  of  the  engagement.  Although  that
body  itself  which  contracted  the  engagement  be  no
more,  a  larger  body,  from  whence  the  first  is  under-
stood to  have  derived  its  title,  may  still  subsist.  Let
this  larger  body  be  consulted.  Various  are  the  ways
that  might  be  conceived  of  doing  this,  and  that  with-
out any  disparagement  to  the  dignit}^  of  the  subsisting
legislature  :  of  doing  it,  I  mean  to  such  effect,  as  that,
should  the  sense  of  such  larger  body  be  favourable  to
the  alteration,  it  may  be  made  by  a  law,  which,  in  this
case,  neither  ought  to  be,  nor  probably  would  be,  re-
garded by  the  body  of  the  people  as  a  breach  of  the
convention  ^.


'  In  Great  Britain,  for  instance,  suppose  it  were  deemed  necessar}'  to
make  an  alteration  in  the  Act  of  Union.  If  in  an  article  stipulated  in
favour  of  England,  there  need  be  no  difficulty;  so  that  there  were  a
majority  for  the  alteration  among  the  English  members,  without  reckon-
ing the  Scotch.  The  only  difficulty  would  be  with  respect  to  an  article
stipulated  in  favour  of  Scotland  ;  on  account,  to  wit,  of  the  small  number
of  the  Scotch  members,  in  comparison  with  the  English.  In  such  a  case,
it  would  be  highly  expedient,  to  say  no  more,  for  the  sake  of  preserving
the  public  faith,  and  to  avoid  irritating  the  body  of  the  nation,  to  take
some  method  for  making  the  establishment  of  the  new  law,  depend  upon
their  sentiments.  One  such  method  might  be  as  follows.  Let  the  new
law  in  question  be  enacted  in  the  common  form.  But  let  its  commence-
ment be  deferred  to  a  distant  period,  suppose,  a  3^ear  or  two  :  let  it  then,
at  the  end  of  that  period,  be  in  force,  unless  petitioned  against,  by  persons
of  such  a  description,  and  in  such  a  number  as  might  be  supposed  fairly
to  represent  the  sentiments  of  the  people  in  general  :  persons,  for  instance,
of  the  description  of  those  who  at  the  time  of  the  Union,  constituted  the
body  of  electors.  To  put  the  validity  of  the  law  out  of  dispute,  it  would
be  necessary  the  fact  upon  which  it  was  made  ultimately  to  depend,
should  be  in  its  nature  too  notorious  to  be  controverted.  To  determine
therefore,  whether  the  conditions  upon  which  the  invalidation  of  it  was
made  to  depend,  had  been  complied  with,  is  what  must  be  left  to  the
simple  declaration  of  some  person  or  persons;  for  instance  the  King.  I
ofler  this  onl^'  as  a  general  idea :  and  as  one  amongst  many  that  perhaps
might  be  offered  in  the  same  view.  It  will  not  be  expected  that  I  should
here  answer  objections,  or  enter  into  details.

Q


2  26  A  Frag77ient  on  Government.


Chap.
IV.


""^  XXXVIII.

XXXVIII.

Notion  of  To  return  for  a  moment  to  the  language  used  by
fimft  to^he  those  who  speak  of  the  supreme  power  as  being
supreme limited  in  its  own  nature. One  thing  I  would  wish

power,  °

difficult  to  to  have  remembered.  What  is  here  said  of  the
impropriety,  and  evil  influence  of  that  kind  of  dis-
course, is  not  intended  to  convey  the  smallest
censure  on  those  who  use  it,  as  if  intentionally
accessory  to  the  ill  effects  it  has  a  tendency  to
produce.  It  is  rather  a  misfortune  in  the  language,
than  a  fault  of  any  person  in  particular.  The  original
of  it  is  lost  in  the  darkness  of  antiquity.  We  in-
herited it  from  our  fathers,  and,  maugre  all  its  incon-
veniencies,  are  likely,  I  doubt,  to  transmit  it  to  our
children.

XXXIX.

XXXIX

This  not  a I  cannot  look  upon  this  as  a  mere  dispute  of  words.

of*words^"^  I  cannot  help  persuading  myself,  that  the  disputes
between  contending  parties — between  the  defenders
of  a  law  and  the  opposers  of  it,  would  stand  a  much
better  chance  of  being  adjusted  than  at  present,  were
they  but  explicitly  and  constantly  referred  at  once  to
the  principle  of  utility.  The  footing  on  which  this
principle  rests  every  dispute,  is  that  of  matter  of  fact ;
that  is,  future  fact— the  probability  of  certain  future
contingencies.  Were  the  debate  then  conducted
under  the  auspices  of  this  principle,  one  of  two
things  would  happen :  either  men  would  come  to  an
agreement  concerning  that  probabilit}^,  or  they  would
see  at  length,  after  due  discussion  of  the  real  grounds
of  the  dispute,  that  no  agreement  was  to  be  hoped
for. They  would  at  any  rate see clearly  and ex-


Right  of  the  Supreme  Power  to  make  Laws.  227

plicitly,  the  point  on  which  the  disagreement  turned.  Chap
The  discontented  party  would  then  take  their  resolu-  — m—
tion  to  resist  or  to  submit,  upon  just  grounds,  ac-
cording as  it  should  appear  to  them  w^orth  their
while— according  to  what  should  appear  to  them,  the
importance  of  the  matter  in  dispute — according  to
what  should  appear  to  them  the  probability  or
improbability  of  success — according,  in  short,  as  the
mischiefs  of  submission  should  appear  to  bear  a  less,  or
a  greater  ratio  to  tJie  miscJiiefs  of  resistance.  But  the
door  to  reconcilement  would  be  much  more  open,
when  they  saw  that  it  might  be  not  a  mere  affair  of
passion,  but  a  difference  of  judgment,  and  that,  for
any  thing  they  could  know  to  the  contrary,  a  sincere
one,  that  was  the  ground  of  quarrel.


XL.

All  else  is  but  womanish  scolding  and  childish  The  above
altercation,  which  is  sure  to  irritate,  and  which  never  peSe?'^
can  persuade. — '  /  say,  the  legislature  can«o/  do  this  wrangling.
— /  say,  that  it  can.  I  say,  that  to  do  this,  exceeds  the
bounds  of  its  aiitJiority — /  say,  it  does  not! — It  is
evident,  that  a  pair  of  disputants  setting  out  in  this
manner,  may  go  on  irritating  and  perplexing  one
another  for  everlasting,  without  the  smallest  chance
of  ever  coming  to  an  agreement.  It  is  no  more  than
announcing,  and  that  in  an  obscure  and  at  the  same
time,  a  peremptory  and  captious  manner,  their  op-
posite persuasions,  or  rather  affections,  on  a  question
of  which  neither  of  them  sets  himself  to  discuss  the
grounds.  The  question  of  utility,  all  this  while,  most
probabl}^  is  never  so  much  as  at  all  brought  upon  the
carpet :  if  it  be,  the  language  in  which  it  is  discussed
is  sure  to  be  warped  and  clouded  to  make  it  match

Q  2


2  28  A  Fragment  on  Govermnent.

Ln.y. with  the obscure and entangled pattern we have
— ^— seen.

XLI.

XLI.

The  prin-  On  the  Other  hand,  had  the  debate  been  originally
uTtLiTv  and  avowedly  instituted  on  the  footing  of  utility,  the
endto"ii  Parties  might  at  length  have  come  to  an  agreement;
or  at  least  to  a  visible  and  explicit  issue. — '  /  say,  that
the  mischiefs  of  the  measure  in  question  are  to  such
an  amount. — /  say,  not  so,  but  to  a  less. — /  sa}^,  the
benefits  of  it  are  only  to  such  an  amount. — /  say,  not
so,  but  to  a  greater.' — This,  we  see,  is  a  ground  of
controversy  very  different  from  the  former.  The
question  is  now  manifestl}'  a  question  of  conjecture
concerning  so  man}^  future  contingent  matters  of
fact :  to  solve  it,  both  parties  then  are  naturally
directed  to  support  their  respective  persuasions  by
the  only  evidence  the  nature  of  the  case  admits  of; —
the  evidence  of  such  past  matters  of  fact  as  appear  to
be  analogous  to  those  contingent ////z/r^  ones.  Now
these  past  facts  are  almost  always  numerous :  so
numerous,  that  till  brought  into  view  for  the  purpose
of  the  debate,  a  great  proportion  of  them  are  what
may  very  fairly  have  escaped  the  obser\^ation  of  one
of  the  parties :  and  it  is  owing,  perhaps,  to  this  and
nothing  else,  that  that  party  is  of  the  persuasion
which  sets  it  at  variance  with  the  other.  Here,  then,
we  have  a  plain  and  open  road,  perhaps,  to  present
reconcilement :  at  the  worst  to  an  intelligible  and
explicit  issue, — that  is,  to  such  a  ground  of  difference
as  may,  when  thoroughly  trodden  and  explored,  be
found  to  lead  on  to  reconcilement  at  the  last.  Men,
let  them  but  once  clearly  understand  one  another,
will  not  be  long  ere  they  agree.  It  is  the  perplexity
of  ambiguous  and  sophistical  discourse  that,  while  it


Right  of  the  Supreme  Poiver  to  make  Lazus.  229

distracts  and  eludes  the  apprehension,  stimulates  and ^'"-^^-
inflames  the  passions.  — »♦—

But  it  is  now  high  time  we  should  return  to  our
Author,  from  whose  text  we  have  been  insensibly
led  astra}^,  b}'  the  nicety  and  intricacy  of  the  question
it  seemed  to  offer  to  our  view.


Chap.
V.


CHAPTER  V.

DUTY  OF  THE  SUPREME  POWER  TO  MAKE  LAWS.

I.


I.

Subject  of  We  now  come  to  the  last  topic  touched  upon  in
graph^  e^K-  this  digrcssion  :  a  certain  '  ditty'  which,  according  to
amined  in  ^^^  AuthoTS  accouut,  the  suprcme  power  hes  under :

the  present  '  ^  '^

chapter. — the  duty  of  making  lazvs.

II.

The  para-  '  Thus  far/  says  he,  '  as  to  the  right  of  the  supreme
cited.  ^'^  power  to  make  laws ;  but  farther,  it  is  its  duty  like-
wise. For  since  the  respective  members  are  bound
to  conform  themselves  to  the  will  of  the  state,  it  is
expedient  that  they  receive  dircctidns  from  the  state
declaratory  of  that  its  will.  But  since  it  is  impossible^
in  so  great  a  multitude,  to  give  injunctions  to  ever}'
particular  man,  relative  to  each  particular  action,
therefore  the  state  establishes  general  rules  for  the
perpetual  information  and  direction  of  all  persons,  in
all  points,  whether  of  positive  or  negative  duty.  And
this,  in  order  that  every  man  may  know  what  to  look
upon  as  his  own,  what  as  another's ;  what  absolute
and  what  relative  duties  are  required  at  his  hands ;
what  is  to  be  esteemed  honest,  dishonest,  or  indifferent ;


Duty  of  the  Supreme  Power  to  make  Lazes. 231

what  degree  every  man  retains  of  his  natural  hbert}' ; Chap.

what  he has  given  up  as  the  price  of  the  benefits ►♦_

of  societ}^ ;  and  after  what  manner  each  person  is
to  moderate  the  use  and  exercise  of  those  rights
which  the  state  assigns  him,  in  order  to  promote  and
secure  the  pubhc  tranquilHty.'


III.


III.

Still  as  obscure,  still  as  ambiguous  as  ever. The  The  first
'  supreme  power '  we  may  remember,  according  to  the  examined.
definition  so  lately  given  of  it  by  our  Author,  and  so  ^?^^  ™°^'
often spoken  of,  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  sense  of  it
power  to  make  laws. Of  this  power  we  are  now  told  ^^ ^^^ '
that  it  is  its  '  duty  '  to  make  laws. Hence  we  learn —
what  ? — that  it  is  its  *  duty '  to  do  what  it  does  ;  to  be,
in  short,  what  it  is. This  then  is  what  the  paragraph
now  before  us,  with  its  apparatus  of  'fors,'  and  '  buts,'
and '  si'nces,' is designed to prove to  us. Of  this
stamp  is  that  meaning,  at  least,  of  the  initial  sentence,
which  is  apparent  upon  the  face  of  it.

IV.

IV

Complete  the  sense  of  the  phrase,  '  to  ma/t^e  taws  ; '  The  next
add  to  it,  in  this  place,  what  it  wants  in  order  to  be  an  ous  extrav-
adequate  expression  of  the  import  which  the  preceding  ^^^"^•
paragraph  seemed  to  annex  to  it ;  3^ou  have  now,  for
what  is  mentioned  as  the  object  of  the  '  duty^'  another
sense  indeed,  but  a  sense  still  more  untenable  than
the foregoing. 'Thus  far,'  says our  Author  (reca-
pitulating what  he  had  been  saying  before)  '  as  to  the
right  oit\\Q  supreme  power  to  make  laws.' — By  this
'  rigtif  we  saw,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  was  meant,
a  right  to  make  laws  in  all  cases  ivtmtsocvcr. '  But
further,'  he  now  adds,  '  it  is  its  duty  likewise.' Its


2  ;2  A  FrarinciU  on  Government.


"^


Chap,  duty  then  to  do — what  ?  to  do  the  same  thing  that  it
_*.^—  was  before  asserted  to  be  its  right  to  do  — to  make
laws  in  all  cases  whatsoever  :  or  (to  use  another  w^ord,
and  that  our  Author's  own,  and  that  applied  to  the
same  purpose)  that  it  is  its  duty  to  be  '  absolute  ^/  A
sort  of  duty  this  which  will  probably  be  thought
rather  a  singular  one.

V.

V.

A  third  Mean  time  the  observation  which,  if  I  conjecture

posed.-  right,  he  really  had  in  view  to  make,  is  one  which
seems  very  just  indeed,  and  of  no  mean  importance,
but  which  is  very  obscurely  expressed,  and  not  very
obviously  connected  with  the  purport  of  what  goes
before.  The  duty  he  here  means  is  a  duty,  which
respects,  I  take  it,  not  so  much  the  actual  making  of
laws,  as  the  taking  of  proper  measures  to  spread  abroad
the  knowledge  of  whatever  laws  happen  to  have  been
made :  a  duty  which  (to  adopt  some  of  our  Author's
own  words)  is  conversant,  not  so  much  about  issuing
'  directions,'  as  about  providing  that  such  as  air
issued  shall  be  '  received.'


VI.

VI.

Objection Mean time to speak of  the  duties  of  a  supreme

to  the  use  r  j -  i ,  •  t •

of  the power  ; — oi a  legislature,  meanmg a  supreme  legis-
^^°''*^ lature  ; — of  a  set  of  men  acknowledged  to  be  absolute  ;


sion.


'  duty "  on  '  ts

this  occa-  — is  what,  I  must  own,  I  am  not  very  fond  of.  Not
that  I  would  wish  the  subordinate  part  of  the  com-
munity to  be  a  whit  less  watchful  over  their  governors,
or  more  disposed  to  unlimited  submission  in  point  of
conduct,  than  if  I  were  to  talk  with  ever  so  much
peremptoriness  of  the  '  duties '  of  these  latter,  and  of

^  I  Comm.  p.  49,


Duty  of  the  Supreme  Pozver  to  make  Laws. 2;^^^

the  rights  which  the  former  have  against  them  ^ :  what
I  am  afraid  of  is,  running  into  solecism  and  confusion
in  discoiwse.

'  With  this  note  let  no  man  trouble  himself  who  is  not  used,  or  does
not  intend  to  use  himself,  to  what  are  called  metaphysical  speculations  :
in  whose  estimation  the  benefit  of  understanding  clearly  what  he  is  speak-
ing of,  is  not  worth  the  labour.

1.  That  may  be  said  to  be  my  duty  to  do  (understand  political  duty)  i.  Duty
which  you  ^or  some  other  person  or  persons)  have  a  right  to  have  me  (political  .
made  to  do. I  then  have  a  duty  towards  you  : you  have  a  right  as

against  me.

2.  What  you have  a right  to have  me  made  to do (understand  a  2.  Right
political  right)  is  that  which  I  am  liable,  according  to  law,  upon  a  requisi-  (political),
tion  made  on  your  behalf,  to  be  punished  for  not  doing.

3.  I  say  pitnished:  for  without  the  notion  of  punishment  (that  is  oi pain  3.  Punish-
annexed  to  an  act,  and  accruing  on  a  certain  account,  and  from  a  certain  ment  a
source)  no  notion  can  we  have  of  either  right  or  duty.  lundamen-

tal  idea.

4.  Now  the  idea  belonging  to  the  word  pain  is  a  simple one. To  4.  To  de-
define  or  rather  (to  speak  more  generally)  to  expound  a  word,  is  to  resolve,  P^^^  ^^
or  to  make  a  progress  towards  resolving,  the  idea  belonging  to  it  into •  "  "
simple  ones.

5.  For  expounding  the  words  duty,  right,  poivcr,  title,  and  those  other  5.  Words
terms  of  the  same  stamp  that  abound  so  much  in  ethics  and  jurisprudence,  not  to  be
either  I  am  much  deceived,  or  the  only  method  by  which  any  instruction  expounded
can  be conveyed,  is  that  which is  here exemplified. An  exposition . ,  ,  •^•
framed  after  this  method  I  would  term  paraphrasis.

6.  A  word  may  be  said  to  be  expounded  hy  paraphrasis,  when  not  that  6.  Para-
zvord  alone  is  translated  into  other  ivords,  but  some  whole  sentence  of  phrasis
which  it  forms  a  part  is  translated  into  another  sentence ; the  words  of  what,
which  latter  are  expressive of  such  ideas  as  are  simple, or are  more
immediately  resolvable  into  simple  ones  than  those  of  the  former. Such

are  those  expressive  of  substances  and  simple  modes,  in  respect  of  such
abstract  terms  as  are  expressive  of  what  Locke  has  called  mixed  modes.
This,  in  short,  is  the  only  method  in  which  any  abstract  terms  can,  at  the
long  run,  be  expounded  to  any  instructive  purpose  :  that  is  in  terms
calculated  to  raise  images  either  of  substances  perceived,  or  of  emotions ; —
sources,  one  or  other  of  which  every  idea  must  be  drawn  from,  to  be  a
clear  one.

7.  The  common  method  of  defining — the  method  per  genus  et  differ-  7.  Defini-

entiam,  as  logicians  call  it,  will,  in  many  cases,  not  at  all  answer  the  '•'"^  P'''

purpose. Among  abstract  terms  we  soon  come  to  such  as  have  no  superior  ^,'.'~"^  '
, , „ r.  ,.-. .  ,  ,. ,  ,  differen-

geniis. A  definition,  per  genus  ct  diffcrcntiam,  when  applied  to  these,  //,,,, ^ot

it  is  manifest,  can  make  no  advance  :  it  must  either  stop  short,  or  turn  universally

back,  as  it  were,  upon  itself,  in  a  circulate  or  a  rcpoitcd.  applicable.


2  34  -^  Fragment  on  Government.

VII.

vii-  I  understand,  I  think,  pretty  well,  what  is  meant  by

sense  of  it.  the  word  ^/^Z)^  (political  duty)  when  applied  to  myself;
and  I  could  not  persuade  myself,  I  think,  to  apply  it
in  the  same  sense  in  a  regular  didactic  discourse  to
those  whom  I  am  speaking  of  as  my  supreme  gover-
nors. That  is  my  duty  to  do,  which  I  am  liable  to  be
punishedj  according  to  law,  if  I  do  not  do  :  this  is  the
original,  ordinary,  and  proper  sense  of  the  word
ditty^. Have these supreme governors any such

8.  Further 8. '  Fortitude  is  a  virtue  : ' — Very  well : — but  what  is  a  virtue  ? '  A

examples  ; virtue  is  a  disposition  : ' — Good  again  : — but  what  is  a  disposition  ? '  A

—atspost- clisposiiioit  is  a  .  .  . : '  and  there  we  stop. The  fact  is,  a  disposition  has  no

tion, — es-  ^  .....  ,  .  ...  ,

,_/. j-j^_ superior  genus  :  a  disposition  is  not  a  .  .  .,  any  thing  :■ — this  is  not  the  way

terest, to  give  us  any  notion  of  what  is  meant  by  it. '  Apoiver,''  again  '  is  a  right  : '

poiver.  and  what  is  a  right] It  is  a  power. — An  estate  is  an  interest,  says  our

Author  somewhere  ;  where  he  begins  defining  an  estate  : — as  well  might

he  have  said  an  interest  was  an  estate. As  well,  in  short,  were  it  to  define

in  this  manner,  a  conjunction  or  a  preposition. As  well  were  it  to  say  of

the  preposition  through,  or  the  conjunction  because;  a  through  is  a  .  .  . ,

or  a  because  is  a  ... ,  and  so  go  on  defining  them.

9.  An  im-  9.  Of  this  stamp,  by  the  bye,  are  some  of  his  most  fundamental  defini-
perfection  tions  :  of  consequence  they  must  leave  the  reader  where  they  found  him.
frequent  g^^  ^j-  ^.j^j^^  perhaps,  more  fully  and  methodically  on  some  future  occasion.
Author's  ^^  ^^^  mean  time  I  have  thrown  out  these  loose  hints  for  the  considera-
method.  tion  of  the  curious.

1.  Duties,  '  I.  One  may  conceive  three  sorts  of  duties;  poHtical,  moral,  and
three  sorts,  religious ;  correspondent  to  the  three  sorts  of  sanctions  by  which  they

are  enforced  :  or  the  same  point  of  conduct  may  be  a  man's  duty  on
these  three  several  accounts.  After  speaking  of  the  one  of  these  to  put
the  change  upon  the  reader,  and  without  warning  begin  speaking  of
another,  or  not  to  let  it  be  seen  from  the  first  which  of  them  one  is
speaking  of,  cannot  but  be  productive  of  confusion.

2.  Political  2.  Political  duty  is  created  by  punishment  :  or  at  least  by  the  will  of
duty.  persons  who  have  punishment  in  their  hands  ;  persons  stated  and  certain,

— political  superiors.

3. Religious  3.  Religious  duty  is  also  created  by  punishment:  by  punishment
duty.  expected  at  the  hands  of  a  person  certain, — the  Supreme  Being.

4.  Moral  4-  Moral  duty  is  created  by  a  kind of  motive,  which from the  un-

duly—  certainty  of  the  persons  to  apply  it,  and  of  the  species  and  degree  in  which

the  proper  jj  y^[\i  bg  applied,  has  hardly  yet  got  the  name  of  punishment :  by
sense  01  it.  various  mortifications  resulting  from  the  ill-wifl  of  persons  wwcertain  and


Duty  of  the  Supreme  Power  to  make  Laws. 235

duty? No  :  for  if  they  are  at  all  liable  to  punishment Chap.
according  to  law,  whether  it  be for  not  doing  any — ** —

variable, — the  community  in  general :  that  is,  such  individuals  of  that
community  as  he,  whose  duty  is  in  question,  shall  happen  to  be  con-
nected with.

5.  When  in  any  of  these  three  senses  a  man  asserts  a  point  of  conduct  5.  Differ-
to  be  a  duty,  what  he  asserts  is  the  existence,  actual  or  probable,  of  an  ence  be-
external  event :  viz.  of  a  punishment  issuing  from  one  or  other  of  these  '^ween

sources  in  consequence  of  a  contravention  of  the  duty :  an  event  extrinsic  ,

senses  flncl
to,  and  distinct  from,  as  well  the  conduct  of  the  party  spoken  of,  as  the  ^  fourth

sentiment  of  him  who  speaks. If  he  persists  in  asserting  it  to  be  a  duty,  which  is

but  without  meaning  it  should  be  understood  that  it  is  on  any  one  of  figurative

these  three  accounts  that  he  looks  upon  it  as  such ;  all  he  then  asserts  is  ^"^"^  "**"

his  own  internal  seiiiitiient : all  he  means  then  is,  that  he  feels  himself  •^'^°-^^'^'

pleased  or  displeased  at  the  thoughts  of  the  point  of  conduct  in  question,  but

without  being  able  to  tell  why. In  this  case  he  should  e'en  say  so  :  and  not

seek  to  give  an  undue  influence  to  his  own  single  suffrage,  by  delivering  it

in  terms  that  purport  to  declare  the  voice  either  of  God,  or  of  the  law,  or

of  the  people.

6.  Now  which  of  all  these  senses  of  the  word  our  Author  had in  6.  Duty  not
mind ;  in  which  of  them  all  he  meant  to  assert  that  it  was  the  duty  of  ^Ppbcable
supreme  governors  to  make  laws,  I  know  not. Political  duty  is  what  x^*^?,'"^"^
they  cannot  be  subject  to  * :  and  to  say  that  a  duty  even  of  the  moral  or  sense
religions kind to this effect is incumbent on them,  seems rather a
precipitate  assertion.

In  truth  what  he  meant  was  neither  more  nor  less,  I  suppose,  than  that
he  should  be  glad  to  see  them  do  what  he  is  speaking  of;  to  wit,  '  make
laws : '  that  is,  as  he  explains  himself,  spread  abroad  the  knowledge  of
them.  Would  he  so  ?  So  indeed  should  I  ;  and  if  asked  why,  what
answer  our  Author  would  give  I  know  not ;  but  I,  for  my  part,  have
no  difficulty.  I  answer, — because  I  am  persuaded  that  it  is  for  the
benefit  of  the  community  that  they  (its  governors)  should  do  so.  This
would  be  enough  to  warrant  me  in  mj'  own  opinion  for  saying  that  they
ought  to  do  it.  For  all  this,  I  should  not  at  any  rate  say  that  it  was
their  duty  in  a  political  sense.  No  more  should  I  venture  to  say  it  was  in
a  moral  or  religious  sense,  till  I  were  satisfied  whether  they  themselves
thought  the  measures  useful  and  feasible,  and  whether  thej'  were  gener-
ally supposed  to  think  so.

Were  I  satisfied  that  they  themselves  thought  so,  God  then,  I  might
say,  knows  they  do.  God,  we  are  to  suppose,  will  punish  them  if  they
neglect  pursuing  it.  It  is  then  their  religious  duty.  Were  I  satisfied
that  the  people  supposed  they  thought  so  :  the  people,  I  might  say,  in
case  of  such  neglect, — the  people,  by  various  manifestations  of  its  ill-will,
will  also  punish  them. It  is  then  their  moral  dutj\

In  any  of  these  senses  it  must  be  observed,  there  can  be  no  more
propriety  in  averring  it  to  be  the  duty  of  the  supreme  power  to  pursue
the  measure  in  question,  than  in  averring  it  to  be  their  duty  to  pursue  any

"  See  the  note  following.


2:6  A  Fragment  on  Government.

thing,  or  for  doing,  then  are  they  not,  what  they  are
supposed  to  be,  supreme  governors  ^ :  those  are  the
supreme  governors,  by  whose  appointment  the  former
are  liable  to  be  piuiished.

VIII.

VIII.

That  in  The  word  duty,  then,  if  applied  to  persons  spoken

here  used^  of  as  Supreme  governors,  is  evidently  applied  to  them
figurative,  jj^  ^  seuse  which  is  figurative  and  improper :  nor
therefore  are  the  same  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from
any  propositions  in  which  it  is  used  in  this  sense,  as
might  be  drawn  from  them  if  it  were  used  in  the  other
sense,  which  is  its  proper  one.


IX.


IX.


Thepropo- This  explanation,  then, being premised  ; — under-

sition  ac-  .  , ,  . .

ceded  to  in  staudmg  mysclf  to  be  usmg  the  word  duty  in  its
sense^^*  improper  sense,  the  proposition  that  it  is  the  duty  of
the  legislature  to  spread  abroad,  as  much  as  possible,
the  knowledge  of  their  will  among  the  people,  is  a
proposition  I  am  disposed  most  unreservedly  to  ac-
cede to.  If  this  be  our  Author's  meaning,  I  join
myself  to  him  heart  and  voice.

other  supposable  measure  equally  beneficial  to  the  community. To  usher

in  the  proposal  of  a  measure  in  this  peremptory  and  assuming  guise,

may  be  pardonable in  a  loose  rhetorical  harangue,  but  can  never  be

justifiable in an exact didactic composition. Modes of  pnvate  moral

conduct  there  are  indeed  many,  the  tendency  whereof  is  so  well  known

and  so  generally  acknowledged,  that  the  ob'ser\'ance  of  them  may  well  be

styled  a  duty. But  to  apply  the  same  term  to  the  particular  details  of

legislative  conduct,  especially  newly  proposed  ones,  is  going,  I  think,  too

far,  and  tends  only  to  confusion.

Governors  .  .....

in  what  '  ^  mean  for  wliat  they  do,  or  omit  to  do,  when  acting  in  a  body :  in

way  sub- that  body  in  which,  when  acting,  they  are  supreme. Because  for  any

ject  to  po- thing  any  of  them  do  separately,  or  acting  in  bodies  that  are  subordinate,

litical duties  they  maj'  any  of  them  be  punished  without  any  disparagement  to  their

,. " supremacy. Not  only  any  may  be,  but  many  are: it  is  what  we  see

the^r  bdng  examples  of  every  day.

supreme.


Duty  of  the  SiLprevie  Power  to  make  Lazvs. 237


Chap.

X.  -^


What  particular  institutions  our  Author  wished  to  obscured
see  estabhshed  in  this  view — what  particular  duties  the  nex^
he  would  have  found  for  the  learislature  under  this  sentence—

°  , the  Len-

general  head  of  duty,  is  not  very  apparent :  though  it  sors  part
is  what  should  have  appeared  more  precisely  than  it  ded  with
does,  ere  his  meaning  could  be  apprehended  to  any  ^)^*^°/^-^|]*^
purpose.  What  increases  still  the  difficulty  of  ap-
prehending it,  is  a  practice  which  we  have  already
had  more  than  once  occasion  to  detect  him  in  ^, — a
kind  of  versatility,  than  which  nothing  can  be  more
vexatious  to  a  reader  who  makes  a  point  of  entering
into  the  sentiments  of  his  Author.  He  sets  out  with
the  word  duty  in  his  mouth ;  and,  in  the  character  of
a  Censor^  with  all  due  gravity  begins  talking  to  us  of
what  ought  to  be,  'Tis  in  the  midst  of  this  lecture
that  our  Proteus  slips  aside ;  puts  on  the  liistorian ;
gives  an  insensible  turn  to  the  discourse ;  and,  with-
out any  warning  of  the  change,  finishes  with  telling
us  what  is.  Between  these  two  points,  indeed,  the  is,
and  the  ought  to  be,  so  opposite  as  they  frequently  are
in  the  eyes  of  other  men,  that  spirit  of  obsequious
quietism  that  seems  constitutional  in  our  Author,  will
scarce  ever  let  him  recognise  a  difference.  'Tis  in
the  second  sentence  of  the  paragraph  that  he  obser\^es
that  '  it  is  expedient  that  they '  (the  people)  '  receive
directions  from  the  state '  (meaning  the  governing
body)  *  declaratory  of  that  its  will.'  'Tis  in  the  very
next  sentence  that  we  learn  from  him,  that  what  it  is
thus  ^expedient'  that  the  state  sJiould  do,  it  does  do.
'  But  since  it  is  impossible  in  so  great  a  multitude,  to
give  particular  injunctions  to  every  particular  man
relative  to  each  particular  action,  therefore,'  says  he

'  V.  supra,  ch.  II.  par.  ii,  ch.  III.  par.  7,  ch.  IV.  par.  10.


2^8  A  Ffap'ment  on  Government.


*<!>


Chap.  <  the  State  establishes '  (does  actually  estabhsh) '  general
— • —  rules'  {the  state  generally,  any  state,  that  is  to  say,
that  one  can  mention,  all  states,  in  short,  whatever  do
establish)  '  general  rules  for  the  perpetual  information
and  direction  of  all  persons  in  all  points,  whether  of
positive  or  of  negative  duty.'  Thus  far  our  Author ;
so  that,  for  aught  appears,  whatever  he  could  wish  to
see  done  in  this  view  is  done.  Neither  this  state  of
our  own,  nor  any  other,  does  he  wish  to  see  do  any
thing  more  in  the  matter  than  he  sees  done  already ;
nay,  nor  than  what  is  sure  to  be  done  at  all  events :
so  that  happily  the  duty  he  is  here  so  forward  to  lay
on  his  superiors  will  not  sit  on  them  very  heavy.
Thus  far  is  he  from  having  any  determinate  instructive
meaning  in  that  part  of  the  paragraph  in  which,  to
appearance,  and  by  accident,  he  comes  nearest  to  it,

XI.

XI.

Fixed  Not that  the  passage however  is  absolutely  so

and  par-  -  .,,,..

ticuiarised.  remote  irom  meanmg,  but  that  the  mventive  com-
^ioM  recom-  P^^isance  of  a  commentator  of  the  admiring  breed
mended,  might  find  it  pregnant  with  a  good  deal  of  useful
matter.  The  design  of  disseminating  the  knowledge
of  the  laws  is  glanced  at  by  it  at  least,  with  a  show
of  approbation.  Were  our  Author's  writings  then
as  sacred  as  they  are  mysterious  ;  and  were  they  in
the  number  of  those  which  stamp  the  seal  of  au-
thority on  whatever  doctrines  can  be  fastened  on
them ;  what  we  have  read  might  serve  as  a  text,  from
which  the  obligation  of  adopting  as  many  measures
as  a  man  should  deem  subservient  to  that  design,
might,  without  any  unexampled  violence,  be  deduced.
In  this  oracular  passage  I  might  find  inculcated,  if  not
totidan  syllabis,  at  least  totidem  Uteris,  as  many  points
of  legislative  duty  as  should  seem  subservient  to  the


Duty  of  the  Supreme  Power  to  make  Laws. 239

purposes  of  digestion  and  promulgation. Thus  for- Ckap.
tified,  I  might  press  upon  the  legislature,  and  that  on — ^*_


the  score  of  '  duty,'  to  carr^^  into  execution,  and  that
without  delay,  many  a  busy  project  as  yet  either  un-
thought  of  or  unheeded.  I  might  call  them  with  a
tone  of  authority  to  their  work  :  I  might  bid  them  go
make  provision  forthwith  for  the  bringing  to  light  such
scattered  materials  as  can  be  found  of  the  judicial
decisions  of  time  past, — sole  and  neglected  materials
of  common  law ; — for  the  registering  and  publishing
of  all  future  ones  as  they  arise  ; — for  transforming,  by
a  digest,  the  body  of  the  common  law  thus  completed,
into  statute-law ; — for  breaking  down  the  whole  to-
gether into  codes  or  parcels,  as  many  as  there  are
classes  of  persons  distinguishably  concerned  in  it ; —
for  introducing  to  the  notice  and  possession  of  every
person  his  respective  code : — works  which  public
necessity  cries  aloud  for,  at  which  professional  in-
terest shudders,  and  at  which  legislative  indolence
stands  aghast.

XII.

XII.

All  these  leading  points,  I  say,  of  legislative  eco-  Therecom-
nomy,  with  as  many  points  of  detail  subservient  to  Enforced "
each  as  a  meditation  not  unassiduous  has  suggested,  ^l  °^^  ^^'

C50  »  thors  con-

I  might  enforce,  were  it  necessary,  b}^  our  Author's  eluding

.  sentence

oracular  authorit}'-.  For  nothing  less  than  what  has
been  mentioned,  I  trust,  is  necessary,  in  order  that
every  man  may  be  made  to  know,  in  the  degree  in
which  he  might  and  ought  to  be  made  to  know,  what
(in  our  Authors  words)  '  to  look  upon  as  his  own,
what  as  another's ;  what  absolute  and  what  relative
duties  are  required  at  his  hands;  what  is  to  be  es-
teemed honest,  dishonest,  or  indifferent ;  what  degree
ever}-  man  retains  of  his  natural  liberty ;  what  he  has


240  A  Fragment  on  Government.

Chap,  givcii  up  as  the  price  of  the  benefits  of  society ;  and
— M—  after  what  manner  each  person  is  to  moderate  the
use  and  exercise  of  those  rights  which  the  state
assigns  him,  in  order  to  promote  and  secure  the
pubhc  tranquilhty.'  In  taking  my  leave  of  our  Author,
I  finish  gladly  with  this  pleasing  peroration  :  a  scru-
tinizing judgment,  perhaps,  would  not  be  altogether
satisfied  with  it ;  but  the  ear  is  soothed  by  it,  and  the
heart  is  warmed.

XIII.

XIJI.

Necessity  I  now  put  an  end  to  the  tedious  and  intricate  war
u?ese\^er-  of  words  that  has  subsisted,  in  a  more  particular
cismT^'  manner  during  the  course  of  these  two  last  chapters  :
a  logomachy,  wearisome  enough,  perhaps,  and  in-
sipid to  the  reader,  but  beyond  description  laborious
and  irksome  to  the  writer.  What  remedy?  Had
there  been  sense,  I  should  have  attached  myself  to
the  sense :  finding  nothing  but  words ;  to  the  words
I  was  to  attach  myself,  or  to  nothing.  Had  the
doctrine  been  \>vX  false,  the  task  of  exposing  it  w^ould
have  been  comparatively  an  easy  one :  but  it  was
what  is  worse,  unmeaning;  and  thence  it  came  to
require  all  these  pains  which  I  have  been  here
bestowing  on  it :  to  what  profit  let  the  reader  judge.

'Well  then,' — (cries  an  objector) — 'the  task  you
have  set  yourself  is  at  an  end  ;  and  the  subject  of  it
after  all,  according  to  your  own  representation,  teaches
nothing ; — according  to  3^our  own  shewing  it  is  not
worth  attending  to. — Why  then  bestow  on  it  so  much
attention  ? '

In  this  view — To  do  something  to  instruct,  but
more  to  undeceive,  the  timid  and  admiring  student :
— to  excite  him  to  place  more  confidence  in  his  own
strength,  and  less  in  the  infallibility  of  great  names :


Duty  of  the  Siipf'evie  Poiver  to  make  Laws. 241

— to  help  him  to  emancipate  his  judgment  from  the  Chap.
shackles  of  authority : — to  let  him  see  that  the  not  — *i—
understanding  a  discourse  may  as  well  be  the  writer's
fault  as  the  reader's  : — to  teach  him  to  distinguish
between  showy  language  and  sound  sense : — to  warn
him  not  to  pay  himself  with  words  : — to  shew  him
that  what  may  tickle  the  ear,  or  dazzle  the  imagina-
tion, will  not  always  inform  the  judgment : — to  shew
him  what  it  is  our  Author  can  do,  and  has  done :  and
what  it  is  he  has  not  done,  and  cannot  do  : — to  dispose
him  rather  to  fast  on  ignorance  than  feed  himself
with  error :  to  let  him  see  that  with  regard  to  an
expositor  of  the  law,  our  Author  is  not  he  that  stiould
come,  but  that  we  may  be  still  toothing  for  another.
— '  Who  then,'  says  my  objector,  '  shall  be  that  other?
Yourself?' — No  verily. — M3'  mission  is  at  an  end,
when  I  \\.2C<[Q  prepared  tlie  ivay  before  him.


THE END.


CLARENDON  PRESS, OXFORD.


BACON. The  Essays  or  Counsels,  Civil  and Moral,  of

Francis  Bacon,  Lord  Verulam,  Viscount  St.  Albans.  Edited,  with
Introduction  and  Illustrative  Notes,  by  S.  H.  REYNOLDS,  M. A.,  late  Fellow
and  Tutor  of  Brasenose  College. 8vo,  half-bound,  12J-.  6d.

Novum  Organum. Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,

&c.,  by  T.  Fowler,  D.D. Second  Edition. 8vo,  i^s.

Novum  Organum. Edited,  with  English  Notes,  by

G.  W.  KiTCHiN,  D.D. 8vo,  9^.  M.

Novum  Organum. Translated  by  G.  W.  KiTCHIN,

D.D. Svo,  c^s.  6d.

BENTHAM, An  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals

and  Legislation. By  Jeremy  Bentiiam. Crown  Svo,  6^-.  6d.

BERKELEY. The works of George Berkeley, D.D.,

formerly  Bishop  of  Cloyne  ;  including  many  of  his  writings  hitherto
unpublished.  With  Prefaces,  Annotations,  and  an  Account  of  his  Life  and
Philosophy,  by  Alexander  Campbell  Fraser,  LL.D.  4  vols.  Svo,
2/.  iSj-.

Selections. With  Introduction  and  Notes. For  the

use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  Alexander  Campbell  Fraser,
LL.D. Third  Edition. Crown  Svo,  1$.  6d.

BLUNTSCHLI. The Theory  of the State. By J. K.

Bluntsciili.  Translated  from  the  Sixth  German  Edition.  Svo,  half-
bound,  I2S.  6d.

BOSANQUET. Logic  ; oi',  the  Morphology  of  Knowledge.

By  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A. 2  vols.  8vo,  2\s.

BUTLER'S  Works,  with  Index  to  the  Analogy. 2  vols.

Svo,  lis.

FOWLER. The  Elements  of  Dediietive  Logic,  designed

mainly  for  the  use  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  T.  Fowler,
D.D. Ninth  Edition,  with  a  Collection  of  Examples. E.xtra  fcap.  Svo,

2,s.  dd.


FOWLER. The  Elements  of  Inductive  Logic,  designed

mainly for  the use of Students in the Universities. F?//^ Edition.
Extra  fcap.  8vo,  6s.

■ •  The  Principles  of  Morals  (introductory  Chapters).

By  T.  Fowler,  D.D.,  and  J.  M.  Wilson,  B.D. 8vo,  boards,  ^s.  6d.

■■ The  Principles  of  Morals. Part  II. By  T.  FoWLER,

D.D. Svo,  los.  dd.

GREEN. Prolegomena to Ethics. By  T. H. Green,

M.A. Edited  by  A.  C.  Bradley,  M.A. Svo,  12s.  6d.

HEGEL. The Logic of Hegel; translated from the

Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. With Prolegomena by
William  Wallace,  M.A. Svo,  14^.

HOLLAND. The European Concert in the Eastern

Question,  a  Collection  of  Treaties  and  other  Public  Acts. Edited,  with
Introductions  and  Notes,  byT.  E.  Holland,  D.C.L. Svo,  i2.r.  6d.

HUME'S  Treatise  of  Human  Nature.  Reprinted  from
the  Original  Edition  in  Three  Volumes,  and  Edited  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge,
M.A. Crown  Svo,  9^.

LOCKE'S Conduct of the Understanding. Edited by

T.  Fowler,  D.D. Third  Edition. Extra  fcap.  Svo,  2s.  dd.

LOTZE'S  Logic,  in  Three  Books  ;  of  Thought,  of  Investi-
gation, and  of  Knowledge.  English  Translation ;  Edited  by  B.
BOSANQUET,  M.A. Second  Edition. 2  vols. Crown  Svo,  125-.

Metaphysic,  in  Three  Books  ;  Ontology,  Cosmology,

and Psychology. English Translation ; Edited by B.  Bosanquet,
M.A. Second  Edition. 2  vols. Crown  Svo,  12s.

MARTINEAU. Types of Ethical Theory. By JameS

Martineau,  D.D. Second  Edition. 2  vols. Crown  Svo,  15.?.

A Study  of  Religion  : its Sources and Contents.


A  A^ciu  Edition. 2  vols. Crown  Svo,  15^'.


AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
LONDON : HENRY FROWDE

OXFORD UNIVERSrrY PRESS WAREHOUSE,  AMEN CORNER, E.G.


i


dlarenbon  Pvcqq,  ©yfovb.

SELECT LIST  OF  STANDARD  WORKS.


DICTIONARIES Page  i.

LAW _ 2

HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC. ...  ,,3.

PHILOSOPHY,  LOGIC,  ETC ,,6.

PHYSICAL  SCIENCE 7.


1. DICTIONARIES.

A  New  English  Dictionary  on  Historical  Prin-
ciples, founded  mainly  on  the  materials  collected  by  the  Philological
Society.  Edited  by  James  A.  H.  Murray,  LL.D.  Imperial  4to.  In  Parts,
price  I2S.  6d.  each.

Vol.  I  (A  and  B),  half-morocco,  2I.  12s.  6d.

Part  IV,  Section  2,  C— CASS,  beginning  Vol.  II,  price  5s,

Part  V,  CAST— CLIVY,  price  12s.  6d.

Part  VI,  CLO— CONSIGNEE,  price  12s.  6d.

Vol.  Ill,  Part  I,  E-EVERY,  edited  by  Heniy  Bradley,  M.A.,  with
the  co-operation  of  Dr.  Murray,  price  1 2s.  6d.

An Etymological Dictionary of the English

Language,  arranged  on  an  Historical  Basis. By  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.

Second  Edition. 4to. 2!.  4.<!.

A  Middle-English  Dictionary,  containing  Words  used

by  English  Writers  from  the  l\velftli  to  the  Fifteenth  Century.  By
Francis  Heniy  Stratmann.  A  new  edition,  re-arranged,  revised,  and
enlarged  by  Henry  Bradley. 4to,  half-bound,  i?.  iis,  6rf.

An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.  col-
lections of  the  late  Joseph  Bosworth,  D.D.  Edited  and  enlarged  by
Prof  T.  N.  Toller,  M.A.,  Owens  College,  Manchester.  Parts  ^I-III.
A-SAR.  4to,  stiff  covers,  15s.  each.  Part  IV,  §  i,  SAR  SWIDRIAX.
Stiff  covers,  8s.  6d.

An  Icelandic-English  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.

collections  of  the  late  Richard  Clcashj.  Enlarged  and  completed  by
G.  Vigfusson,  M.A. 4to. 3/.  7.9.

A Greek-English Lexicon,  by  H.  G.  Liddell,  D.D.,

and  Robert  Scott,  D.D.  Seventh  Edition,  Bevised  and  Augmented. 410. U.  16s.
Oxford:  Clarendon  Press. London  :  Henry  Frowdk,  Amen  C^.irner,  E.C.


ENGLISH  AND  ROMAN  LAW.


A Latin Dictionary,  founded  on Andrews' edition of

Freund's  Latin  Dictionary,  revised,  enlarged,  and  in  great  part  rewritten
by  Charlton  T.  Lewis,  Ph.D.,  and  Charles  Short,  LL.D. 4to. i^  5s.

A  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary. Etymologically  and

Pliilologically  arranged,  with  special  reference  to  Greek,  Latin,  German,
Anglo-Saxon,  English,  and  other  cognate  Indo-European  Languages.
By  Sir  M.  Monier- Williams,  D.C.L. 4to. 4?.  14s.  6d.

Thesaurus  Syriacus :  coUegerunt  Quatremere,  Bernstein,

Lorsbach,  Ai-noldi,  Agrell,  Field,  Roediger :  edidit  R.  Payne  Snaith,
S.T.P. Vol.  I,  containing  Fasc.  I-V,  sm.  fol.  5L  5s.

Fasc.  VI.  il.  IS. Fasc.  VII.  il.  lis.  6d. Fasc.  VIII.  il.  16s.


2. LAW.


Anson. Principles of the

English  Law  of  Contract,  and  of  Agency
in  its  Relation  to  Contract.  By  Sir  W.
R.  Anson,  D.C.L.  Sixth  Edition.  8vo.
I  OS.  6d.

Laiv  and  Custom  of  the

Const itutio7i. 2  vols. 8vo.

Part  I.  Parliament.  Second
Edition.  12s.  6d.  Jiist  Pub-
lished.

Part  II. The  Crown. 14s.

Baden-Powell.  Land-Systems

of  British  India  ;  being  a  Manual  of
the  Land-Tenures,  and  of  the  Sys-
tems of  Land-Revenue  Adminis-
tration prevalent  in  the  several
Provinces.  By  B.  H.  Baden-Powell,
CLE. 3  vols. 8a'o. 3L  3s.

Digby. An  Introduction  to

the  History  of  the  Law  of  Real  Property.
By  Kenelm  E,  Digby,  M.A.  Fourth
Edition. Svo. las.  6d.

Grueber. Leo:  Aquilia. The

Roman  Law  of  Damage  to  Pro-
pei-ty  :  being  a  Commentary  on  the
Title  of  the  Digest  'Ad  Legem
Aquiliam '  (ix.  2).  By  Erwin  Grue-
ber, Dr.  Jur.,  M.A. Svo. los.  6d.


Hall. International Lcnv.

ByW.  E.  Hall,  M.A.  Third  Edition.
Svo. 22s.  6d.

Holland  and  Shadwell.  Select

Titles  from  the  Digest  of  Justinian. By
T.  E.  Holland,  D.C.L.,  and  C.  L.
Shadwell,  B.C.L. Svo. 14s.
ALso  sold  in  Parts,  in  paper  covers,
as  follows : —
Parti.  Introductory  Titles.  2s.6d.
Part  II.  Family  Law. is.
Part  III.  Property  Law. 2s.  6(1.
Part IV. Law of Obligations

(No.  1). 3s.  6d.
Part IV. Law of Obligations
(No.  2). 4s.  6c;.

Holland. Elements  of  Juris-
prudence. By  T.  E.  Holland,  D.C.L.

Fifth  Edition. Svo. los.  6d.

The Euroj^ean Concert

in  the  Eastern  Question ;  a  Collection
of  Treaties  and  other  Public  Acts.
Edited,  with  Introductions  and
Notes,  by  T.  E.  Holland,  D.C.L.
Svo. I2s.  6d.

Gentilis, Alherici, De

lure  Belli  Libri  Tres.  Edidit  T.  E.
Holland,  LCD.  Small  4to,  half-
morocco,  2  IS.


Oxford  :  Clarendon  Press.


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


HoUand. The  Institutes  of

Justinian,  edited  as  a  recension  of
the  Institutes  of  Gains,  by  T.  E.
Holland,  D.C.L.  Second  Edition.
Extra  fcap.  8vo. 5s.

Markby. Elements of  Laiu

considered  tcith  reference  to  Principles  of
GeneralJiirisprudence.  By  Sir  William
Markby,  D.C.L.  Fourth  Edition.  8vo,
I2S.  6d.

Moyle. Im2Jeratoris lus-

tiniani  Institutionum  Libri  Quattuor ;
with  Introductions,  Commentary,
Excursus  and  Translation.  By  J.  B.
Moyle,  D.C.L.  Second  Edition.  2  vols.
8vo. Vol.  I.  1 6s. Vol.  II.  6s.

Contract  of  Sale  in  the

Civil  Laiv.  By  J.  B.  Moyle,  D.C.L.
Svo. 10s.  6d.

Pollock and Wright. An

Essay  on  Possession  in  the  Common  Law.
By  Sir  F.  Pollock,  M.A.,  and  E.  S.
Wright,  B.C.L.  (Now  the  Hon.  Mr.
Justice  Weight). Svo. 8s.  6d.

Poste. Oaii Institutionum

Juris  Civilis  Commentarii  Quattuor  ;  or.


Elements  of  Roman  Law  by  Gaius.
With  a  Ti-anslation  and  Commen-
tary by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.  Svo.  iSs.

Raleigh. An  Outline  of  the

Law  ofProperiij.  By  Thos.  Raleigh,
M.A. Svo. 7s.  ed.

Sohm. Institutes  of  Roman

Law.  By  Rudolph  Sohm,  Professor
in  the  University  of  Leipzig.  Trans-
lated by  J.  C.  Ledlie,  B.C.L.  With
an  Introductory  Essay  by  Erwin
Grueber,  Dr.  Jur.,  M.A. Svo. iSs.

Stokes. The Anglo-Indian

Codes. By  \Vliitley  Stokes,  LL.D.

Vol.  I.  Substantive  Law.  Svo.  30s.

Vol.  II.  Adjective  Law.  Svo.  35s.
First  and  Second  Sujjplements  to

the  above. Svo.  6s.  6d.
Separately,  No.  i,  2s.  6d. ;  No.  2, 4s.  6d.

Twiss. The  Laiu  of  Nations

considered  as  Independent  Politiccd  Com-
munities. By  Sir  Travers  Twiss,
D.C.L.  Part  I.  On  the  Rights  and
Duties  of  Nations  in  time  of  Peace.
New  Edition. Svo. 15s.


3.  HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


Arbuthnot. The Life and

Works  of  John  Arbuthnot,  M.D.  By
George  A.  Aitken.  Svo,  cloth,  with
portrait,  i6s.

Baker's  Chronicle.  Chronicon

Gulfridi  le  Baker  de  Swxjnebroke.
Edited  with  Notes  by  Edward
Maunde  Thompson,  Principal
Librarian  of  the  British  Museum.
4to,  stiff  covers, iSs.  ; cloth, gilt

top, 2  IS.

Bentham. A Fragment  on


Government.  By  Jeremy  Bentham.
Edited  with  an  Introduction  by
F.  C.  Montague,  M.A. Svo. 7s.  6d.

Boswell's Life of Samuel

Johnson,  LL.D.  Edited  by  G.  Birk-
beck  Hill,  D.C.L.  In  six  volumes,
medium  Svo.  With  Portraits  and
Facsimiles. HaLf-bound,  3?.  3s.

Calendar  0/  Charters  and  Rolls

preserved  in  the  Bodleian  Library.
Svo. il.  lis.  6d.


London  :  Henry  Frowde,  Amen  Coiner,  E.G.


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


Carte's  Life  of  James  Duke  of

Onnond. 6  vols. 8vo. il.  5s.

Casaubon  (Isaac).  1559-1614.

By  Mark  Pattison. 8vo. l6s.

Clarendon's History of the

Rebellion  and  Civil  Wars  in  England.
Re-edited  from  a  fresh  collation  of
the  original  MS.  in  the  Bodleian
Library,  with  marginal  dates  and
occasional  notes,  by  W.  Dunn
Macray,  M.A.,  F.S.A.  6  vols.  Cro^vn
8vo. 2?.  5s.

Earle.  Handbook  to  the  Land-

.  Charters,  and  other  Saxonic  Documents.
By  John  Earle,  M.A.,  Professor  of
Anglo-Saxon  in  the  University  of
Oxford. Crown  Svo. i6s.

Finlay. A  History  of  Greece

from  its  Conquest  hy  the  Romans  to  the
present  time,  B.C.  146  to  a.  d.  1864.
By  George  Finlay,  LL.D.  A  new
Edition,  revised  throughout,  and  in
part  re-written,  with  considerable
additions,  by  the  Author,  and  edited
by  H.  F.  Tozer,  M.A.  7  vols.  Svo.
3?.  10s.

Fortescue. The Governance

of  England:  othei-wise  called  The
Difference  between  an  Absolute  and
a  Limited  Monarchy.  By  Sir  John
Fortescue,  Kt.  A  Revised  Text.
Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,
&c.,  by  Charles  Plummer,  M.A.
Svo,  half-bound,  12s.  6d.

Freeman. Tlte History of

Sicily  from  the  Earliest  Times.

Vols.  I.  and  II. Svo,  cloth,  2I.  2s.
Vol. III. The Athenian and

Carthaginian  Invasions. Svo,

cloth,  24s.

History  of  the  Norman

Conquest  of  Etigland ;  its  Causes
and  Results.  By  E.  A.  Freeman,
D.C.L.  In  Six  Volumes.  Svo.
5^.  9s.  6d.


Freeman.  The  Reign  of  Wil-
liam Rufus  and  the  Accession  of  Hem-y
the  First. 2  vols. Svo. il.  i6s.

A  Short  History  of  the

Norman  Conquest  of  England.  Second
Edition. Extra  fcap.  Svo. 2s.  6d.

French  Revolutionary  Speeches.

(See  Stephens,  H.  Morse.)

Gardiner. The  Constitutional

Documents  of  the  Puritan  Revolution,
1628-1660.  Selected  and  Edited
by  Samuel  Rawson  Gardiner,  M.A.
Crown  Svo. 9s.

Gascoigne's  Theological  Dic-
tionary \' Liber  Verifatum') :  Selected
Passages,  illustrating  the  Condition
of  Chui-ch  and  State,  1403-1458.
With  an  Introduction  by  James  E.
Thorold  Rogers,  M.A. 4to. los.  6d.

Greswell. History of the

Dominion  of  Canada.  By  W.  PaiT
Greswell,  M.A.  Crown  Svo.  With
Eleven  Maps. ^s.  6d.

Geograi^hy  of  the  Do-
minion of  Canada  and  Newfoundland.
CroAvn  Svo. With  Ten  Maps. 6s.

Geography of Africa

South  of  the  Zambesi.  With  Maps.
Crown  Svo. ys.  ()d.

Gross. The  Gild  Merchant;

a  Contribution  to  British  Municipal
History.  By  Charles  Gross,  Ph  .D .
2  vols. Svo. 24s.

Hastings. Hastings  and  the

Rohilla  War.  By  Sir  John  Strachey,
G. C.S.I. Svo,  cloth,  los.  6d.

Hodgkin.  Italy  and  her  In-
vaders. With  Plates  and  Maps.  By
T.  Hodgkin,  D.C.L.  Vols.  I-IV,
A.D.  376-553- Svo. 3?.  1 8s.

Vols.  I.  and  II. Second  Edition.

2I.  2S.
Vols.  III.  and  IV. il.  16s.

The  Dynasty  of  Theo-

dosius;  or,  Seventy  Years'  Struggle
with  the  Barbarians.  By  the  same
Author. Cro-svn  Svo. 6s.


Oxford  :  Clarendon  Press.


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


Hume.  Letters  of  David  Hume

to  William  Strahan.  Edited  with
Notes,  Index,  &c.,  by  G.  Birkbeck
Hill,  D.C.L. 8vo. 12S.  6d.

Johnson. Letters  of  Samuel

Johnson,  LL.D.  Collected  and  edited
by  G.  Birkbeck  Hill,  D.C.L.,  Editor
of  Boswell's  '  Life  of  Johnson  '  (see
Boswell). 2  vols,  half-roan,  28s.

Kitchin.  A  History  of  France.

With  Numerous  Maps,  Plans,  and
Tables.  By  G.  W.  Eatchin,  D.D.
In  three  Volumes.  Second  Edition.
Crown  Svo,  each  los.  6d.

Vol.  I.  to  1453.  Vol.  II.  1453-
1624. Vol.  III.  1624-1793.

Luttrell's  (N'arcissus)  Diary.

A  Brief  Historical  Relation  of  State
Affairs,  1678-1714. 6  vols. 1^.45.

Lucas. Introduction to a

Historical  Geography  of  the  British
Colonies.  By  C.  P.  Lucas,  B.A.
With  Eight  Maps.  Crown  Svo.
4s.  6d.

Lucas. Historical  Geography

of  the  British  Colonies  :

Vol.  I.  The  Mediterranean  and
Eastern  Colonies  (exclusive  of
India).  With  Eleven  Maps.
Crown  Svo. 5s.

Vol.  II.  The  West  Indian  Colo-
nies. With  Twelve  Maps.
Crown  Svo. 7s.  6d.

Machiavelli. II PHncipe.

Edited  by  L.  Arthur  Burd,  M.A.
With  an  Introduction  by  Lord
Acton. Svo. Cloth,  14s.

Ralegh. Sir  Walter  Ralegh.

A  Biography.  By  W.  Stebbing,
M.A. Svo. los.  6rf.

Ramsay  (Sir  J.  H.).  Lancaster

and  York. A  Century  of  English


History  (a.d.  i 399-1485).  By  Sir
J.  H.  Ramsay  of  Bamff,  Bart.,  M.A.
With  Maps,  Pedigrees,  and  Illus-
trations. 2  vols. Svo. 36s.

Ranke.  A  History  of  Eng-
land, principally  in  the  Seventeenth
Centwy.  By  L.  von  Ranke.  Trans-
lated under  the  superintendence  of
G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.,  and  C.  W.
Boase,  M.A. 6  vols. Svo. 3^.  3s.

Rawlinson. A Manual of

Ancient  History.  By  George  Rawlin-
son, M.A. Second  Edition. Svo. 14s.

Rhys.  Studies  in  the  Ar-
thurian Legend.  By  John  Rhys,
M.A. Svo. I2S.  6d.

Ricardo. Letters of  David

Pucardo  to  T.  R.  Malthus  (1810-1823).
Edited  by  James  Bonar,  M.A.  Svo.
I  OS.  6d.

Rogers. History  of  AgHcul-

ture  and  Prices  in  England,  a.d.  1259-
1702.  By  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers,
M.A. 6  vols.,  Svo. 7/.  2s.

First  Nine  Years  of  the

Bank  of  England. Svo. 8s.  6c?.

Protests  of  the  Lords,  in-

cluditig  those  which  have  been  expunged,
from  1624  to  1874  ;  with  Historical
Introductions.  In  three  volumes.
Svo. 2?.  2S.

Smith's Wealth of  Nations.

With  Notes,  by  J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,
M.A. 2  vols. Svo. 2  IS.

Stephens. The Principal

Speeches  of  the  Statesmen  and  Orators  of
the  French  Revolution,  1 789-1 795.
With  Historical  Introductions,
Notes,  and  Index.  By  H.  Morse
Stephens.  2  vols. Crown  Svo. 21s.


London :  Henry  Frowi>e,  Amen  Corner,  E.C.


PHILOSOPHY,  LOGIC,  ETC.


Stubbs. Select  Charters  and

other  Illustrations  of  English  Constitu-
tional History,  from  the  Earliest  Times
to  the  Reign  of  Edioard  I.  Arranged
and  edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  D.D.,
Lord  Bishop  of  Oxford.  Seventh
Edition. Crown  8vo. 8s.  6d.

The  Constitutional  His-
tory of  England,  in  its  Origin  and
Development.  Library  Edition.  3  vols.
Demy  Svo. 2I.  8s.

Also  in  3  vols, crown  Svo. price
I2S.  each.

Seventeen  Lectures on

the  Study  of  Medieval  and  Modern
History,  delivered  at  Oxford  1 867-1 884.
Crown  8vo. 8s.  6d.

Registruni Sacrum

Anglicanum.  An  attempt  to  exhibit,
the  course  of  Episcopal  Succession
in  England.  By  W.  Stubbs,  D.D.
Small  4to. 8s.  6d.


Vinogradoff. Villainage  in

England.  Essays  in  English  Medi-
aeval History.  By  Paul  Vinogradoff,
Professor  in  the  University  of
Moscow. 8vo,  half-bound. i6s.

Wellesley. A  Selection  from

the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and  other
Papers  of  t}ie  Marquess  Wellesley,  K.G.,
during  his  Govermnent  of  India.  Edited
by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A. Svo. il.  4s.

Wellington.  A  Selection  from

the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and  other
Papers  relating  to  India  of  Field-Marshal
the  Duke  of  Wellington,  K.G.  Edited
by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A. Svo. il.  4s.

Whitelock's Memorials of

English  Affairs  from 1625 to 1660.

4  vols. Svo. ll.  I  OS.


4. PHILOSOPHY,

Bacon.  The  Essays.  With  In-
troduction and  Illustrative  Notes.
By  S.  H.  Reynolds,  M.A.  Svo,  half-
bound. 1 2s.  6d.

Novum Organum.

Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,
&c.,  by  T.  Fowler,  D.D.  Second
Edition. Svo. 1 5s.


Novuin Organum.

Edited, with English Notes, by
G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D. Svo. 9s.  6d.

Novum Organum.


Translated  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.
Svo. 9s.  6d.

Berkeley. The Works of

George  Berkeley,  D.D.,  formerly  Bishop
of  Cloyne ;  including  many  of  his  writ-
ings hitherto  unpublished.  With  Pre-
faces, Annotations,  and  an  Account


LOGIC, ETC.

of  his  Life  and  Philosophy.  By
Alexander  Campbell  Fraser,  LL.D.
4  vols. Svo. 2I.  iSs.

The  Life,  Letters,  Ac,  separately,  i6s.

Bosanquet. Logic ; or, the

Moiphology  of  Knowledge.  By  B.
Bosanquet,  M.A. Svo. 21s.

Butler's  Works,  luith  Index  to

the  Ancdogy. 2  vols. Svo. lis.

Fowler.  The  Elements  of  De-
ductive Logic,  designed  mainly  for  the
tise  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities.
By  T.  Fowler,  D.D.  Ninth  Edition,
with  a  Collection  of  Examples.
Extra  fcap.  Svo. 3s.  6d.

The  Elements  of  Induc-
tive Logic,  desigyied  mainly  for  the  use  of
Students  in  the  Universities.  By  the
same  Author.  Fifth  Edition.  Extra
fcap.  Svo. 6s.


Oxford ;  Clarendon  Press.


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.


Fowler. The  Principles of

Morals.  (Introductory  Chapters.)
By  T.  Fowler,  D.D.,  and  J.  M.
Wilson,  B.D. 8vo,  boards,  3s.  6d.

The Principles of

Morals.  Part  II.  By  T.  Fowler,  D.D.
8vo. I  OS.  6d.

Green.  Prolegomena  toEthics.

By  T.  H.  Green,  M.A.  Edited  by
A.  C.  Bradley,  M.A. 8vo. 12s.  6d.

Hegel. The  Logic  of  Hegel  ;

translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia
of  the  Philosophical  Sciences.  With
Prolegomena  by  W.  Wallace,  M.A.
Crown  8vo. Neiv  Edition  in  the  Press.

Hume's Treatise  of  Human

Nature.  Edited,  with  Analytical
Index,  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge,  M.A.
Crown  8vo. 9s.


Locke's  Conduct  of  the  Under-
standing. Edited  by  T.  Fowler,  D.D.
Third  Edition.  Extra  f cap.  8  vo. 2s.6d.

Lotze's  Logic,  in  Three  Books ;

of  Thought,  of  Investigation,  and
of  Knowledge.  English  Translation;
Edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A.
Second  Edition. 2  vols.  Cr.  8vo. 12s.

Metajyhysic, in Three

Books ;  Ontology,  Cosmology,  and
Psychology.  English  Translation  ;
Edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A.
Seco7ul  Edition. 2  vols. Cr.  8vo. 12s.

Martineau. Types  of  Ethiccd

TJieonj.  By  James  Martineau,  D.  D.
Third  Edition. 2  vols. Cr.  8vo. 15s.

A  Study  of  Religion  :

its  Sources  and  Contents.  Second  Edition.
2  vols, Cr.  8vo. 15s.


5. PHYSICAL

Aplin.  The  Birds  of  Oxford-
shire.  By  0.  V.  Aplin.  8vo.  los.  6d.

Chambers. A  Handbook of

Descriptive and  Practical  Astronomy.
By  G.  F.  Chambers,  F.RA.S. Fourth
Edition,  in  3  vols. Demy  8vo.
Vol.  I. The  Sun,  Planets,  and

Comets. 21s.
Vol.  II. Instruments  and  Prac-
tical Astronomy. 21s.
Vol.  III. The Starry  Heavens.
14s.

De  Bary.  Comparative  Ana-
tomy of  the  Vegetative  Organs  of  the
Phanerogams  and  Ferns.  By  Dr.  A.
de  Baiy.  Translated  and  Anno-
tated by  F.  O.  Bower,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,
and  D.  H.  Scott,  M. A.,  Ph.D.,  F.L.S.
Royal  8vo,  half-morocco,  il.  2s.  6d.

Comparative  Mor-
phology and  Biology  of  Fungi,  Mycetosoa
and  Bacteria.  By  Dr.  A.  de  Bary.
Translated  by  H.  E.  F.  Garnsey,
M.A. Eevised by Isaac Bayley


SCIENCE.

Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  Royal
8vo,  half-morocco,  il.  2s.  6d.

DeBary.  Lectures  on  Bacteria.

By  Dr.  A.  de  Bary.  Second  Im-
proved Edition.  Translated  by  H.
E.  F.  Garnsey,  M.A.  Eevised  by
Isaac  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,
F.R.S. Crown  8vo. 6s.

Fisher. A  Class  Book  of  Ele-

inentary  Chemistry,  By  W.  W.  Fisher,
M.A.,  F.C.S. Crown  8vo. 4s.  6d.

Chemistry  in  Space.  By  Van 't

Hofif.  Translated  and  edited  by  J.  E.
Marsh,  B.A. Crown  8vo.  4s.  6rf.

Goebel. Outlines  of  Classiji-

cation  and  Special  Morphology  of  Plants.
A  new  Edition  of  Sachs'  Text-Book
of  Botany,  Book  II.  By  Dr.  K.
Goebel.  Translated  by  H.  E.  F.
Garnsey,  M.A.  Revised  by  Isaac
Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,'f.RS.
Royal  8 vo,  half-morocco,  il.  is.


London  :  Henry  Frowde,  Amen  Corner,  E.G.


PH  \  'SIC A  L  SCIENCE.


Sachs.  Lectures  on  the  Phy-
siology of  Plants.  By  Julius  von
Sachs.  Translated  by  H.  Marshall
Ward,  M.A.,  F.L.S.  Royal  8vo,
half-morocco,  iZ.  lis.  6d.

A History of  Botany.

Translated  by  H.  E.  F.  Garnsey,
M.  A.  Edited  by  I.  Bayley  Balfour,
M.A., M.D., F.R.S. Crown Svo.

I  OS.

Fossil  Botany. Being  an  Tn-

troducHon  to  Palaeophytology  from  the
Standpoint  of  the  Botanist.  By  H.
Graf  zu  Solms-Laubach.  Translated
"  by  H.  E.  F.  Garnsey,  M.A.  Edited
by  I.  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,
F.E.S.  Royal  Svo,  half-morocco,  iSs.

Annals  of  Botany.  Edited  by
Isaac  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,
F.R.S.,  Sydney  H.  Vines,  D.Sc,
F.R.S.,  W.  G.  Farlow,  M.D.,  and
W.  T.  Thiselton-Dyer,  C.M.G.,
M.A.,  F.R.S. ;  assisted  by  other
Botanists.  Royal  Svo,  half-morocco,
gilt  top.

Vol.  I. Parts  I-IV. i?.  i6s.

Vol.  II. Parts  V-VIII. 2I.  2s.

Vol. III.  PartsIX-XII.  2I.12s.6d.

Vol.  IV. Parts  XIII-XVI. 2?.  5s.

Vol.V. Parts  XVII-XX. 2?.  los.

Vol.  VI.  Part  XXI.  1 2s.  ;  Part
XXII. IIS.

Biological  Series.  {Transla-
tions of  Foreign  Biological  Memoirs.)
1.  TJie  Plujswlogij  of  Nerve , of  Muscle,
and  of  the  Electrical  Organ,
Edited  by  J.  Burdon-Sanderson,
M.D.,  F.R.SS.  L.  &  E.  Medium
Svo. il.  IS.


II.  Hie  Anatomy  of  the  Frog.  By
Dr.  Alexander  Ecker,  Professor
in  the  University  of  Freiburg.
Translated,  with  numerous
Annotations  and  Additions,  by
G.  Haslam,M.D.  Med. Svo.  21s.

III.  Contributions  to  the  History
of  the  Physiology  of  the  Nerrous
System.  By  Professor  Conrad
Eckhard.  Translated  by  Miss
Edith  Prance. 7w  P)-eparation.

IV.  Essays  tipon  Heredity  and
Kindred  Biological  Problems.
By  Dr.  A.  Weismann.  Ti-ans-
lated  and  Edited  by  E.  B.  Poul-
ton,  M.A.,  S.  Schonland,  Ph.D.,
and  A.  E.  Shipley,  M.A.  Second
Edition. Crown  Svo.  7s.  6d.

Vol.  II.  Edited  by  E.  B.  Poulton,
and  A.  E.  Shipley.  Crown
Svo. 5s. Just  Published.

Prestwich.  Geology,  Chemi-
cal, Physical,  and  Stratigraphical.  By
Joseph  Prestwich,  M.A.,  F.R.S.
In  two  Volumes.

Vol.  I. Chemical  and  Physical.

Royal  Svo.  il.  5s.
Vol.  II.  Stratigraphical  and
Physical.  With  a  new  Geo-
logical Map  of  Europe.  Royal
Svo.  il.  1 6s.
New  Geological  Map  of  Europe.
In  case  or  on  roller. 5s.

RoUeston  and  Jackson.  Forms

of  Animal  Life.  A  Manual  of  Com-
parative Anatomy,  with  descrip-
tions of  selected  tj^es.  By  George
Rolleston,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  Second
Edition.  Revised  and  Enlarged  by
W.  Hatchett  Jackson, M.A.  Medium
Svo. il.  1 6s.


Oxford

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
LONDON: HENRY  FROWDE

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE,  AMEN  CORNER,  E.C.


University  of  British  Columbia  Library

DUE  DATE


i  2  ;g74

ilCT  9 la/^.  HU
"SEP  3 1975


t


N0VO4198GBEn


4-


ET-6


:r,


f3.  H^


