Matter and Memory (Henri Bergson (Nancy Margaret Paul and W. Scott Palmer, trans.), 1911)
==========================================================
Founding text of modern philosophy of mind: memory, perception, and the critique of materialism. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (mattermemory0000berg).

School of Theology at Claremont


i


ION


1 1314186


Theology Library


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
California


2
t
t
t


~~


PROFESSOR HENRI LOUIS BERGSON, LITT.D. (see page 20).


Professor of the Collége de France since 1900; born Paris, October 18, 1859; educated Lycée
Condorcet; Profe of Philosophy in the Lyceum at Angers. 1881-83; at that of
Clermont, 18 3; at the Collége Rollin, 1888-89; at the Lycée Henri IV.,

1889-97 ; Master of Conferences at the Ecole Normale Supérieur,

1897-1900 ; Member of the Institute and of the Academy of
Moral and Political Sciences; author of numerous
works on philosopby.


ay


THE LIBRARY
OF
JAMES CHAMBERLAIN BAKER


Library of Philosophy.
EDITED BY J. H. MUIRHEAD, ‘LL.D,


THE LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY.


Tue LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY is in the first instance a
contribution to the History of Thought. While much has been
done in England in tracing the course of evolution in nature,
history, religion and morality, comparatively little has been
done in tracing the development of Thought upon these and
kindred subjects, and yet ‘“ the evolution of opinion is part of
the whole evolution.”

This Library will deal mainly with Modern Philosophy,
partly because Ancient Philosophy has already had a fair share
of attention in this country through the labours of Grote, Fer-
rier, Benn and others, and through translations from Zeller ;
partly because the Library does not profess to give a complete
history of thought.

By the co-operation of different writers in carrying out this
plan, it is hoped that a completeness and thoroughness of treat-
ment otherwise unattainable will be secured. It is believed,
also, that from writers mainly English and American fuller con-
sideration of English Philosophy than it has hitherto received
from the great German Histories of Philosophy may be looked
for. In the departments of Ethics, Economics and Politics,
for instance, the contributions of English writers to the common
stock of theoretic discussion have been especially valuable, and
these subjects will accordingly have special prominence in this
undertaking.

Another feature in the plan of the Library is its arrangement
according to subjects rather than authors and dates, enabling the
writers to follow out and exhibit in a way hitherto unattempted
the results of the logical development of particular lines of
thought.

The historical portion of the Library is divided into two
sections, of which the first contains works upon the develop-
ment of particular schools of Philosophy, while the second
exhibits the history of theory in particular departments.

To these have been added, by way of Introduction to the
whole Library, (1) an English translation of Erdmann’s His-
tory of Philosophy, long since recognised in Germany as the best ;
(2) translations of standard foreign works upon Philosophy.


J. H. MUIRHEAD,
General Editor.


ALREADY PUBLISHED.


THE History oF Puitosopuy. By Dr. JoHANN EDUARD ERDMANN, .


English Translation. Edited by Wit.iston S. Houcu, M.Ph., Pro-
fessor of Mental and Moral Philosophy and Logic in the University of Min-
nesota.

In 3 vols., medium 8vo, cloth.


Vol. I. Ancient and Medieval Philosophy, 15s. - Third Edition.
Vol. II. Modern Philosophy, 15s. . C - Fifth Edttion.
Vol. III. Modern Philosophy, since Hegel, 12s. - Third Edition,


Tue History oF AsTHETIC. By BERNARD BOoSANQUET, M.A., LL.D., late
Fellow of University College, Oxford. tos. 6d. net. Third Edition,


Tur DEVELOPMENT OF RATIONAL THEOLOGY since Kant. By Prorgessor OTTo
PFLEIDERER, Of Berlin. tos. 6d. net. Thivd Edition.


PHILOSOPHY AND POLITICAL ECONOMY IN SOME OF THEIR HISTORICAL RELATIONS
By JAmEs Bonar, M.A., LL.D. tos. 6d. net. Second Edition.


APPEARANCE AND REALITY. By F. H. BrapDiey, M.A., Fellow of Merton Col-
lege, Oxford. 12s. net. Second Edition.


NatTurRAL Ricuts. By Davin G. Rircute, Professor of Logic and Metaphysics
"in the University of St. Andrews. tos. 6d. net.


ANALYTIC PsycHOLoGy. By G. F. Stout, M.A., Fellow of St. John’s College,
Cambridge, Wilde Reader in Mental Philosophy, Oxford. 2 vols. 21s.
net. Third Edition.


A History oF ENGLISH UTILITARIANISM. By Ernesr ALBEE, Ph.D., Instructor
in the Sage School of Philosophy, Cornell University. 10s. 6d. net.


CONTEMPORARY PsycHOLOoGy. By PRoFEssoR GuIDO ViLLa, Lecturer on Philo-
sophy in the University of Rome. Authorized Translation. tos, 6d. net.


THOUGHT AND THINGS: a Study of the Development and Meaning of Thought
or Genetic Logic. By JAmMEs Mark BaLtpwin, Ph.D., Hon. D.Sc. (Oxon.),
LL.D. (Glasgow), Professor in the Johns Hopkins University. Vol. I,
Functional Logic; or Genetic Theory of Knowledge. Ios. 6d. net.


Vol. II., Experimental Logic. tos. 6d. net.
Vol. III., Real Logic (in preparation).


VaLuaATION: Irs NATURE AND Laws. Being an Introduction to the General
Theory of Value. By WiLBpuR MARSHALL URBAN, Ph.D., Professor of
Philosophy, Trinity College, Hartford, Conn. Ios. 6d. net.


ATTENTION. By Pror. W. B. Pittspury, University of Michigan. tos. 6d. net.


TIME AND FREE WILL. By Pror. HENRI BerGson. Translated from the French
by F. L. Pocson, St. John’s College, Oxford. tos. 6d. net.


HEGEL’s PHENOMENOLOGY OF MinpD. Translated by Pror. J. B. Baiiiz.
2 vols. 21s. net.


MATTER AND Memory. By Pror. HENRI BerGson. Translated by N. M. Pau.
and W. Scott PALMER. Ios. 6d. net.


PsycHOLOGY OF THE RELicious Lire. By Pror.G. M. Stratton, University
of California. 10s. 6d. net.


GEORGE ALLEN & CO., Lim., LONDON.
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY, NEW YORK.


ERDMANN’S HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.


NOTICES OF THE PRESS.


“(A SPLENDID monument of patient labour, critical acumen and admirable
methodical treatment. . . . It is not too much to predict that, for the library
of the savant, for the academical student, whose business it is to be primed in
the wisdom of the ages, and for the literary dilettante, who is nothing if not
well up in ‘ things that everybody ought to know,’ these volumes will at once
become a necessity for purposes, at least, of reference, if not of actual study... .
We possess nothing that can bear any comparison with it in point of complete-
ness.”’—Pall Mall Gazette.


“It is not necessary to speak of the great merits of Erdmann’s History of
Philosophy. Itsremarkable clearness and comprehensiveness are well known... .
The translation is a good, faithful rendering, and in some parts even reaches a
high literary level.’’—Professor JoHN WaTSON, in The Week, of Canada.


“Tt is matter of real congratulation, in the dearth still of original English or
American work over the whole field of historical philosophy, that by the side of
the one important German compend of this generation, the other, so well fitted
to serve as its complement, is now made accessible to the English-speaking
student.”’—Mind.


‘“It has been long known, highly esteemed, and in its successive editions
has sought to make itself more worthy of the success it has justly achieved.
Erdmann’s work is excellent. His history of medieval philosophy especially
deserves attention and praise for its comparative fulness and its admirable
scholarship. ... It must prove a valuable and much needed addition to our
philosophical works.’’-—Scotsman.


“The combination of qualities necessary to produce a work of the scope
and grade of Erdmann’s is rare. Industry, accuracy, and a fair degree of philo-
sophic understanding may give us a work like Ueberweg’s; but Erdmann’s
history, while in no way superseding Ueberweg’s as a handbook for general
use, yet occupies a different position. Erdmann wrote his book, not as a refer-
ence book, to give in brief compass a digest of the writings of various authors, but
as a genuine history of philosophy, tracing in a genetic way the development
of thought in its treatment of philosophic problems. Its purpose is to develop
philosophic intelligence rather than to furnish information. When we add that,
to the successful execution of this intention, Erdmann unites a minute and
exhaustive knowledge of philosophic sources at first hand, equalled over the
entire field of philosophy probably by no other one man, we are in a condition
to form some idea of the value of the book. To the student who wishes, not
simply a general idea of the course of philosophy, nor a summary of what this
and that man has said, but a somewhat detailed knowledge of the evolution
of thought, and of what this and the other writer have contributed to it, Erd-
mann is indispensable; there is no substitute.’’—Professor JoHN DEWEY, in
The Andover Review.


“Tt is a work that is at once compact enough for the ordinary student, and
full enough for the reader of literature. ... At once systematic and interest-
ing.”’—Journal of Education.


“The translation into English of Erdmann’s History of Philosophy is an
important event in itself, and in the fact that it is the first instalment of an under-
taking of great significance for the study of philosophy in this country. Apart,
however, from its relation to the Library to which it is to serve as an introduc-
tion, the translation of Erdmann’s History of Philosophy is something for which
the English student ought to be thankful. .. . A History of past endeavours,
achievements and failures cannot but be of great use to the student. Such a
History, able, competent, trustworthy, we have now in our hands, adequately
and worthily rendered into our mother-tongue.”—Spectator.


Library of Pbtlosopby.


EDITED BY J. H. MUIRHEAD, LL.D.


MATTER AND MEMORY


“ Though tt can hardly be claimed that
Bergson has completely solved the extra-
ordinary complex and difficult problem
of memory and least of all the mystery
of matter, it may be admitted ungrudg-
ingly that he has clarified the obscurities of
the former problem to a considerable extent,
and has, above all, rendered great service
by the masterly way in which he points out
the insuperable difficulties of the materi-
alistic position. . . . This excellent trans-
lation.” —The Quest.


“Of M. Bergson’s three works the pre-
sent is that which appeals most to the
educator because of the excellent treatment
of the very practical subjects of memory
and attention. We do not look for a


SoME OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.


final deciston of such problems as ave
here dealt with, but no one can rise from
reading this book and retain unchanged
the views with which he began it. To say
this oj a book of psychometaphysics ts to
say much.’’—Journal of Education.


“As in the case of the former volume
the translator of this second volume has
the author's assistance and approval, and
the author has also written for it a new
Introduction, superseding that which ac-
companies the original work. In this
volume, also, the translators have given
a number of useful marginal summaries
and a copious index.”—Westminster
Review.


By the same Author, uniform with this volume, 10s. 6d. net.


TIME AND FREE WILL:


An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness.
SOME OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.


“A philosopher who can think origin-
ally and write felicitously is a combin-
ation rare enough to justify a careful
study of his message; and it is satis-
factory to note that M. Bergson’s three
chief works will soon be all accessible in
English. We can only hope that the
rendering of the two remaining volumes
will be as successful as the clear and
scholarly version which Mr. Pogson gives
of his Les Données immediates de la
conscience. The title Time and Free Wii}
has been substituted for the somewhat
colourless title given by M. Bergson to his
first book and tt indicates accurately the
chief contents of the volume, mainly a
discussion of the real nature of time and
the conclusions drawn by the author there-
from as to the possibility of real freedom.
The general line of argument is the same
as that familiay to English readers in
James’ Principles of Psychology, but tt
ts worked out by Bergson with incom-
parable lucidity and a fulness of treatment
that make tt quite conclusive. It ts not
easy, by any process of summarizing or
selecting, to convey the real force and
persuastveness of M. Bergson’s argument.
The temperate critic may reasonably
doubt whether he has laid this venerable
controversy to tts final rest, but he will
not deny that both his admissions and
contentions go far to clear the air, and
that many musty idols of the schools
crumble at his touch.”—Times.


“ Prof. Bergson ocuptes to-day in
France, and indeed on the Continent,
something of the same position as the
late Prof. William Young occupied
among English-speaking peoples. Both
are apostles of the plain man and the
ordinary consciousness. Both approached
philosophy proper through experimental
psychology, but Professor Bergson has
one special stage in his development which
gives his work a peculiar interest. He is
an eminent mathematician and familiar
with the most abstract types of symbolical
thought. Prof. Bergson is not an easy
writer to translate. His style in its


simplicity and clarity and concentration
ts one of the best that have ever been used
in the service of philosophy; and for a
succinct French style it is a hard matter
to find an English equivalent. Mr.
Pogson seems to have done his work ad-
mirably, for he has succeeded tn being
always lucid and satisfactory, while re-
taining something of the grace of the
original.” —Spectator.


“The translation reproduces the re-
markable lucidity of thought and express-
sion that distinguish M. Bergson’s pre
sentment of a philosophical subject. It
will be fairly easy for the educated reader
who has any taste for inquiry into ques-
tions of man’s mental life to follow M.
Bergson’s extremely interesting discus-
stons.”’—Saturday Review.


“The translator of this book has done
his work thoroughly well. Prof. Berg-
son’s French style 1s lucid enough in tis
own way, but he writes in @ highly con-
centrated fashion, having, moreover, @
line of thought to develop which is apt
by its sheer unfamiliarity to baffie even the
most professional of philosophers. In
the present version the meaning ts brought
out with punctilious exactness as by
one who has weighed each word of the
original, yet the effect of the whole is
natural and easy. It 4s indeed no small
misfortune to the world of letters that the
rendering of those later works in which
the Bergsontan doctrine of reality attains
tts full consummation must become the
task of other hands. . . . Itts not necessary
here to examine in any great detail a book,
the conclusions of which are as stepping
stones leading on to the maturer, or at
any vate, more comprehensive studies
represented by Matiére et Memoire, and
more notably still that triumph of auda-
cious synthesis, L’Evolution Créatrice.
The present treatise embodies a highly
compact piece of introspective psychology
in three chapters, the first two of which
are intended to serve as a sort of intro-
duction to the first.”—Athenzum.


MATTER
AND MEMORY


, By
HENRI BERGSON /
MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE
PROFESSOR AT THE COLLEGE DE FRANCE


Authorized Translation by
NANCY MARGARET PAUL anno W. SCOTT PALMER


LONDON
GEORGE ALLEN & CO., LTD.
New York: THE MACMILLAN CO.
1912


BO ee eae rypr by tee,
ey ete OH Pew Vee eso : co Cae ee
renters dab a2 rr~all,, Beceem ear:


sd cap


Bee.
ee Le ya) W dium
reer nee ace

ss Pree cece tine vo 4 leewfer


Soe Ss eee ye eee


Wan act tv wo 4 fect Yieatlen se EAI GELPEM fire to nF.
Gehan First EpITION: January rg1t.


aaj yh ee = os Bea Cur
Lecmiaday Mat 19 Crvsste Peele] und atom | 1) ve


at hes 1 pera plem nipple lie
BU. (i ae
Dae Le Ofte aule , ser Vorg wee
Ce fat bat ar pe fy elie, My nalee
Pe er We Pal cah Yas pls


a


pe a a See (]atietenr
6455, Yt Ad ow 4] xrchacecerece LALA cL,
ee eS ay? Nb bg Crete I~ Lug ect
1 SY rae pea ay) MC Re MEME PE oy Bove ee Pm


ve d copa fot C1 _ 'MCttazeoso MU20A Wms ne


Dtoh. + wu gue brtiatels - Aba alt, Beeerche


on Sie imme deo 0) C05 reli
Jo Charny fron (eta rence ty fitrscein.s Hitt 12
La Geren rey IPE PaaS FE Pd eS) (Fame Fe


By ov:
Sl. io pret iat, Hat 1) past Whe - Se


_ wSRANSLATORS NOTE yp


y, 22,2

OBrien ets s Ma Foie oc” 34,353
et Mémoire has been made from the fifth edition 67.’ &#-

of 1908, and has had the great advantage of fcaten/ :

being revised in proof by the author. Monsieur «~G=
Bergson has also written a new Introduction for*<<= -

it, which supersedes that which accompanied the


- original work. Oy ze Aa
The translators offer their sincere thanks to val
tude, *


the author for his invaluable help in these matters * poe
ava St
and for many suggestions made by him while tie to,
book was in manuscript. Be a Cle
They beg leave to call the reader’s attention,“ ~ ee
to the fact that all the marginal notes are peculiaryy— hee
to the English edition ; and that, although Mon+iin Pine
sieur Bergson has been good enough to revisea Liaise
them, he is not responsible for their insertion orlnce ee, }
character, since they form no pas of his own plan’ brdloe
for the book, lems. — P3eq - 4I- 779 ~ GH


Dees aot
“nde” pp. Bo UT 0 , 1 Ne prongs Chin trees le
Lean Len Hes Lorine trem Han hloo 5 - 64
rund Veptual —p- Ss 7 Reha Usaren 9 fe a
lan 4) ee eee es
3. Puitial eh f/- haa her amen 7 Bene
7 Sruiflicaline, YF Meals Ae
oe aa the. “thdce CrAd’ bir ceern BL, pa Bane:
es I) pa 0-cla ; Gee tn.
Loe Tiles Pe ee et U-tntt be hin ker
SIO) a ewe leans pon Aen ws HS


Myr poe


Se ee Fe ik ES ch Veale 5 em ena ra A 2a ee
makl. wclie > Whalm dn patecm -« net joel Mh
lm J uf Whit, WA wr, ach hi ee


Leva ped Cop ee aegis Game we
KS oe po Crecesened, WAH ace


= te 24. ; fe id canoes


> ee


‘Theology Library


SCHOSGE OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT.
* Californta


INTRODUCTION


Tuis book affirms the reality of spirit and the
reality of matter, and tries to determine the rela-
tion of the one to the other by the study of a defi-
nite example, that of memory. It is, then, frankly
dualistic. But, on the other hand, it deals with
body and mind in such a way as, we hope, to
lessen greatly, if not to overcome, the theoretical
difficulties which have always beset dualism, and
which cause it, though suggested by the immediate
verdict of consciousness and adopted by common
sense, to be held in small honour among philoso-
phers.

These difficulties are due, for the most part, to
the conception, now realistic, now idealistic,
which philosophers have of matter. The aim of
our first chapter is to show that realism and
idealism both go too far, that it is a mistake to
reduce matter to the perception which we have
of it, a mistake also to make of it a thing able to
produce in us perceptions, but in itself of another
nature than they. Matter, in our view, is an
aggregate of ‘images.’ And by ‘image’ we
mean a certain existence which is more than that
which the idealist calls a representation, but less


than that which the realist calls a thing,—an
vii


aS


Vili INTRODUCTION


existence placed half-way between the ‘thing’
and the ‘representation.’ This conception of
matter is simply that of common sense. It would
greatly astonish a man unaware of the specula-
tions of philosophy if we told him that the object
before him, which he sees and touches, exists only
in his mind and for his mind, or even, more gener-
ally, exists only for mind, as Berkeley held. Such
a man would always maintain that the object
exists independently of the consciousness which
perceives it. But, on the other hand, we should
astonish him quite as much by telling him that
the object is entirely different from that which is
perceived in it, that it has neither the colour as-
cribed to it by the eye, nor the resistance found in
it by the hand. The colour, the resistance, are,
for him, in the object: they are not states of our
mind ; they are part and parcel of an existence
really independent of our own. For common
sense, then, the object exists in itself, and, on the
other hand, the object is, in itself, pictorial, as we
perceive it: image it is, but a self-existing image.

This is just the sense in which we use the word
image in our first chapter. We place ourselves
at the point of view of a mind unaware of the dis-
putes between philosophers. Such a mind would
naturally believe that matter exists just as it is
perceived ; and, since it is perceived as an image,
the mind would make of it, in itself, an image.
In a word, we consider matter before the dissocia-
tion which idealism and realism have brought


INTRODUCTION ix


about between its existence and its appearance.
No doubt it has become difficult to avoid this
dissociation now that philosophers have made it.
To forget it, however, is what we ask of the reader.
If, in the course of this first chapter, objections
arise in his mind against any of the views that we
put forward, let him ask himself whether these
objections do not imply his return to one or the
other of the two points of view above which we
urge him to rise.

Philosophy made a great step forward on the
day when Berkeley proved, as against the ‘ mee
chanical philosophers,’ that the secondary qualities
of matter have at least as much reality as the
primary qualities. His mistake lay in believing
that, for this, it was necessary to place matter
within the mind, and make it into a pure idea.
Descartes, no doubt, had put matter too far from
us when he made it one with geometrical extensity.
But, in order to bring it nearer to us, there was no
need to go to the point of making it one with our
own mind. .Because he did go as far as this,
Berkeley was unable to account for the success of
physics, and, whereas Descartes had set up the
mathematical relations between phenomena as
their very essence, he was obliged to regard the
mathematical order of the universe as a mere
accident. So the Kantian criticism became neces-
sary, to show the reason of this mathematical
order and to give back to our physics a solid found-
ation—a task in which, however, it succeeded


x INTRODUCTION


only by limiting the range and value of our senses
and of our understanding. The criticism of
Kant, on this point at least, would have been
unnecessary ; the human mind, in this direction at
least, would not have been led to limit its own
range ; metaphysics would not have been sacrificed
to physics, if philosophy had been content to leave
matter half way between the place to which
Descartes had driven it and that to which Berkeley
drew it back—to leave it, in fact, where it is seen
by common sense.

There we shall try to see it ourselves. Our
first chapter defines this way of looking at matter ;
the last sets forth the consequences of such a view.
But, as we said before, we treat of matter only in
so far as it concerns the problem dealt with in our
second and third chapters, that which is the subject
of this essay : the problem of the relation between
soul and body.

This relation, though it has been a favourite
theme throughout the history of philosophy, has
really been very little studied. If weleave on one
side the theories which are content to state the
“union of soul and body’ as an irreducible and
inexplicable fact, and those which speak vaguely
of the body as an instrument of the soul, there
remains hardly any other conception of the psycho-
physiological relation than the hypothesis of
‘ epiphenomenalism ’ or that of ‘ parallelism,’ which
in practice—I mean in the interpretation of par-
ticular facts—both end in the same conclusions.


INTRODUCTION xi


For whether, indeed, thought is regarded as a mere
function of the brain and the state of consciousness
as an epiphenomenon of the state of the brain, or
whether mental states and brain states are held to
be two versions, in two different languages, of
one and the same original, in either case it is laid
down that, could we penetrate into the inside of a
brain at work and behold the dance of the atoms
which make up the cortex, and if, on the other
hand, we possessed the key to psycho-physiology,
we should know every detail of what is going on in
the corresponding consciousness.

This, indeed, is what is most commonly main-
tained by philosophers as well as by men of science.
Yet it would be well to ask whether the facts,
when examined without any preconceived idea,
really suggest an hypothesis of this kind. That
there is a close connexion between a state of con-
sciousness and the brain we do not dispute. But
there is also a close connexion between a coat and
the nail on which it hangs, for, if the nail is pulled
‘out, the coat falls to the ground. Shall we say,
then, that the shape of the nail gives us the shape
of the coat, or in any way corresponds to it?
No more are we entitled to conclude, because the
physical fact is hung on to a cerebral state, that
there is any parallelism between the two series
psychical and physiological. When philosophy
pleads that the theory of parallelism is borne out
by the results of positive science, it enters upon an
unmistakably vicious circle ; for, if science inter-


o>


xii INTRODUCTION


prets connexion, which is a fact, as signifying
parallelism, which is an hypothesis (and an hypo-
thesis to which it is difficult to attach an intelligible
meaning 3), it does so, consciously or unconsciously,
for reasons of a philosophic order: it is because
science has been accustomed by a certain type of
philosophy to believe that there is no hypothesis
more probable, more in accordance with the
interests of scientific enquiry.

Now, as soon as we do, indeed, apply to positive
facts for such information as may help us to solve
the problem, we find it is with memory that we have
to deal. This was to be expected, because mem-
. ory—we shall try to prove itin the course of this
work—is just the intersection of mind and matter.
But we may leave out the reason here : no one, at
any rate, will deny that, among all the facts capable
of throwing light on the psycho-physiological
relation, those which concern memory, whether in
, the normal or in the pathological state, hold a
privileged position. Not only is the evidence here
extremely abundant (consider the enormous mass
of observations collected in regard to the various
kinds of aphasia), but nowhere else have anatomy,
physiology and psychology been able to lend each
other such valuable aid. Any one who approaches,
without preconceived idea and on the firm ground
of facts, the classical problem of the relations of


* We have laid stress on this particular point in an essay


on ‘‘Le paralogisme psycho-physiologique”’ (Revue de Méta-
physique et de Morale, Nov., 1904).


INTRODUCTION xii


soul and body, will soon see this problem
centering upon the subject of memory, and eve
more particularly upon the memory of words: it
is from this quarter, undoubtedly, that will com
the light which will illumine the obscurer parts o:
the problem.

The reader will see how we try to solve it. Speak-
ing generally, the psychical state seems to us to be,
in most cases, immensely wider than the cerebral
state. I mean that the brain state indicates only
a very small part of the mental state, that part
which is capable of translating itself into move-
ments of locomotion. Take a complex thought
which unrolls itself in a chain of abstract reasoning,
This thought is accompanied by images, that are


at least nascent. And these images themselves -
are not pictured in consciousness without some ¥


foreshadowing, in the form of a sketch or a ten-
dency, of the movements by which these images
would be acted or played in space,—would, that is
to say, impress particular attitudes upon the body,
and set free all that they implicitly contain of
spatial movement. Now, of all the thought which
is unrolling, this, in our view, is what the cerebral
state indicates at every moment. He who could
penetrate into the interior of a brain and see what
happens there, would probably obtain full details
of these sketched-out, or prepared, movements ;
there is no proof that he would learn anything else.
Were he endowed with a superhuman intellect,
did he possess the key to psycho-physiology, he


a a ee
wri


XiV INTRODUCTION


would know no more of what is going on in the
*S, corresponding consciousness than we should know
of a play frorn the comings and goings of the actors
upon the stage.
That is to say, the relation of the mental to the
cerebral is not a constant, any more than it is a
simple, relation. According to the nature of the
play that is being acted, the movements of the
“players tell us more or less about it : nearly every-
thing, if it is a pantomime ; next to nothing, if it
is a delicate comedy. Thus our cerebral state
contains more or less of our mental state in the
measure that we reel off our psychic life into
action or wind it up into pure knowledge.
There are then, in short, divers tones of mental
life, or, in other words, our psychic life may be
| lived at different heights, now nearer to action,
now further removed from it, according to the
degree of our attention to life. Here we have one
of the ruling ideas of this book—the idea, indeed,
which served as the starting-point of our enquiry.
That which is usually held to be a greater complex-
ity of the psychical state appears to us, from our
point of view, to be a greater dilatation of the
whole personality, which, normally narrowed down
by action, expands with the unscrewing of the
vice in which it has allowed itself to be squeezed,
and, always whole and undivided, spreads itself
over a wider and wider surface. That which is
commonly held to be a disturbance of the psychic
life itself, an inward disorder, a disease of the per-


%


INTRODUCTION XV.


sonality, appears to us, from our point of view,
to be an unloosing or a breaking of the tie which
binds this psychic life to its motor accompaniment,
a weakening or an impairing of our attention to
outward life. This opinion, as also that which de-
nies the localization of the memory-images of words
and explains aphasia quite otherwise than by such
localization, was considered paradoxical at the
date of the first publication of the present work
(1896). It will appear much less so now. The
conception of aphasia then classical, universally
admitted, believed to be unshakeable, has been
considerably shaken in the last few years, chiefly
by reasons of an anatomical order, but partly also
by reasons of the same kind as those which we then
advanced.t And the profound and original study
of neuroses made by Professor Pierre Janet has
led him, of late years, to explain all psychasthenic
forms of disease by these same considerations of
psychic ‘ tension ’ and of attention to reality which |
were then presumed to be metaphysical.?

In truth, it was not altogether a mistake to call
them by that name. Without denying to psycho-
logy, any more than to metaphysics, the right to
make itself into an independent science, we believe
that each of these two sciences should set problems
to the other and can, in a measure, help it to solve


1 F, Moutier, L’Aphasie de Broca, Paris, 1908; especially
Chapter VII. Cf. the work of Professor Pierre Marie.

2 P. Janet, Les obsessions et la Psychasthéme, Paris, 1903 ;
in particular pp. 474-502.


XVI INTRODUCTION


them. How should it be otherwise, if psychology
has for its object the study of the human mind
working for practical utility, and if metaphysics is
but this same mind striving to transcend the con-
ditions of useful action and to come back to itself
as to a pure creative energy? Many problems
which appear foreign to each other as long as we
are bound by the letter of the terms in which
_these two sciences state them, are seen to be very
near akin and to be able to solve each other when
we thus penetrate into their inner meaning. We
little thought, at the beginning of our enquiry,
that there could be any connexion between the
analytical study of memory and the question;
which are debated between realists and idealists$
or between mechanists and dynamists, with regard
to the existence or the essence of matter. Yet this
connexion is real, it is even intimate; and, if we
take it into account, a cardinal metaphysical
problem is carried into the open field of observa-
tion, where it may be solved progressively, instead
of for ever giving rise to fresh disputes of the
schools within the closed lists of pure dialectic.
The complexity of some parts of the present work
is due to the inevitable dovetailing of problems
which results from approaching philosophy in such
a way. But through this complexity, which is
due to the complexity of reality itself, we believe
that the reader will find his way if he keeps a fast
hold on the two principles which we have used as
a clue throughout our own researches. The first


INTRODUCTION XVii


is that in psychological analysis we must never w
tions, which a: are e essenti tially turned t towards ¢ action.
The second is that the habits formed in action find
their way up to the sphere of speculation, where
they create fictitious problems, and that meta-—
physics must begin by dispersing this artificial
obscurity.
H. BERGSON,
Paris,
October, 1910.


ee ee Mi wstig lin heel Ia
er cae z LAr, Rega 8
Mein ~ ules WLS mee oe

“aero Ch. S- Gor
Bo Rokr ta


% ene MEBTES er ne Sefplel
feel Pune 1904 ee
Re ict Cee eerie 2 Clee


oe tO as


Se


fete


990 .
te (" Cas f eh. ee


fore ee eee


Pete cee
2 | =
. ah hag bs a m
mise. Ate Mun Oa, - pr / fry


fl


1 “ dit- : ) { a
Bata eric 2 PR Rs Meh fie
CONTENTS
ww) Gplinectmte - 1-7 AE coe 5
PAGES
[INTRODUCTION . : ; 5 . Vii-xvii
CHAPTER I


OF THE SELECTION OF IMAGES FOR CONSCIOUS

PRESENTATION. WHAT OUR Bopy MEANS AND

DoEs . : : : ‘ 5 : j I-85

! Real action and virtual action, 1-8; Representation,
8-14; Realism and Idealism, 14-17; The choice of
images, 17-35; Relation between representation and
action, 35-45; The image and reality, 45-51; The
image and affective sensation, 51-55; Nature of affective
sensation, 55-59; The image, apart from sensation,
59-62; Natural extension of images, 62-69; Pure
perception, 69-73 ; Approach to the problem of matter,
73-81; Memory, 81-85.


CHAPTER II


OF THE RECOGNITION OF IMAGES. MEMORY AND
BRAIN . : ; : : : A . 86-169


The two forms of memory, 86-105; Movements and
Recollections, 105-118; Recollections and movements,
118-145; Realization of memories, 145-169.


CHAPTER III


OF THE SURVIVAL OF IMAGES. MEMORY AND
MIND . ? ° : : ° ° . 170-232


Pure memory, 170-176; What the present is, 176-181 ;
The unconscious, 181-189; Exstence, 189-191; Rela-
tion of past and present, 191-200; Memory and general

aX


XX CONTENTS


PAGES
ideas, 201-212; The Association of Ideas, 212-217;
The plane of action and the plane of dream, 217—220;
The different planes of consciousness, 220-225; Attention
to life, 225-226; Mental equilibrium, 227-230; The
Office of the body, 231-232.


CHAPTER IV
THE DELIMITING AND FIXING OF IMAGES. PERCEP-
TION AND MATTER: SOUL AND Bopy . . 233-298


The problem of dualism, 233-238 ; Description of the
Method, 238-245 ; Indivisibility of movement, 246-253 ;
Real movement, 254-259; Perception and matter,
259-267; Duration and tension, 267-277; Extensity
and extension, 277-291; Soul and body, 291-298.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION . . : . - 299-332
INDEX Fy c = e . e e e 333-339
‘ ly ee


Re ee ge ge yess eo ee


y — <i 1 ff.


| SEY Peer Ye Spar ee eee


Ue 1. Fos Ss } }
V7 ee Per tye View PFinnir > vo an Wert


CARTERS |


OF THE SELECTION OF IMAGES FOR CONSCIOUS
PRESENTATION. WHAT OUR BODY MEANS AND
DOES. p


; pe :

WE will assume for the moment that we knowé/- fs
nothing of theories of matter and theories ne:
spirit, nothing of the discussions as to the reality” 4. agp
or ideality of the external world. Here I am in ¢ * 6 ata i Ry
the presence of images, in the vaguest sense of? es
the word, images perceived when my senses Ae vite =
are opened to them, unperceived when they ALL fa Fen 7
closed. All these images act and react upon zs
one another in all their elementary parts y_~ =
according to constant laws which I call laws of fee 7k,
nature, and, as a perfect knowledge of these laws ve gets oe
would probably allow us to calculate and to fore- pyle Colgan
see what will happen in each of these images, the ~ te
future of the images must be contained in their
present and will add to them nothing new.

Yet there is ane of them which is distinct from
all the others, in that I do not know it only from

without by perceptions, but from within

The unique aoe 5 ayes
place and | by affections : it is my body. I exa-
pe Pons eee the conditions in which these

: affections are produced: I find that
they always interpose themselves between the ex-


citations that I receive from without and the move-
a B


‘


2 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. f


ments which I am about to execute, as though
they had some undefined influence on the final
issue. I pass in review my different affections :
it seems to me that each of them contains, after
its kind, an invitation to act, with at the same
time leave to wait and even to do nothing. I
look closer: I find movements begun, but not
executed, the indication of a more or less useful
decision, but not that constraint which precludes
choice. I call up, I compare my recollections:
I remember that everywhere, in the organic
world, I have thought I saw this same sensibility
appear at the very moment when nature, having


“x, conferred upon the living being the power of
“mobility in space, gives warning to the species,


by means of sensation, of the general dangers
which threaten it, leaving to the individuals the
precautions necessary for escaping from them.


_ Lastly, I interrogate my consciousness as to the


part which it plays in affection: consciousness
replies that it is present indeed, in the form of
feeling or of sensation, at all the steps in which I
believe that I take the initiative, and that it
fades and disappears as soon as my activity, by


becoming automatic, shows that consciousness


is no longer needed. Therefore, either all these
appearances are deceptive, or the act in which
the affective state issues is not one of those
which might be rigorously deduced from ante-
cedent phenomena, as a movement from a move-
ment; and hence it really adds something new to


a


Peay 3 ap


MeL Ky” ot: 1 Qal- a FP tld


CHAP, I REAL AND VIRTUAL ACTION =>


the universe and to its history. Let us hold to
the appearances; I will formulate purely and
simply what I feel and what I see: AU seems
to take place as if, in this aggregate of images


which I call the universe, nothing really new could ~


happen except through the medium of certain par-
ticular images, the type of which is furnished me
by my body.

I pass now to the study, in bodies similar to
my own, of the structure of that particular
image which I call my body. I perceive afferent
nerves which transmit a disturbance to the nerve
centres, then efferent nerves which start from the
centre, conduct the disturbance to the periphery,
and set in motion parts of the body or the body
as a whole. I question the physiologist and the
psychologist as to the purpose of both kinds.
They answer that as the centrifugal movements
of the nervous system can call forth a movement
of the body or of parts of the body, so the centri-
petal movements, or at least some of them, give
birth to the representation ! of the external world.
What are we to think of this?

The afferent nerves are images, the brain is an
image, the disturbance travelling through the
Yotthe brainis SCNSOTy nerves and propagated in the
pay eee Drain isan imagetoo; If the image


among other 4
images. which I term cerebral disturbance really


1 The word representation is used throughout this book
in the French sense, as meaning a mental picture, which
mental picture is very often perception. (Translators’ note.)


-


4 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP.1


Sg begot external images, it would contain them in
one way or another, and the representation of the
whole material universe would be implied in that
of this molecular movement. Now to state this
proposition is enough to show its absurdity. The
brain is part of the material world ; the material
world is not part of the brain. Eliminate the
image which bears the name material world, and
you destroy at the same time the brain and the
cerebral disturbance which are parts of it. Sup-
pose, on the contrary, that these two images, the
brain and the cerebral disturbance, vanish: ex
hypothest you efface only these, that is to say very
little, an insignificant detail from an immense
picture. The picture in its totality, that is to say
the whole universe, remains. To make of the
brain the condition on which the whole image
depends is in truth a contradiction in terms, since
the brain is by hypothesis a part of this image.
Neither nerves nor nerve centres can, then, con-
dition the image of the universe.

Let us consider this last point. Here are
external images, then my body, and, lastly, the
The body isa Changes brought about by my body in
centre of the surrounding images. I see plainly
reesives and how external images influence the image
mmovenients--that.1 call my sbody <5 they transmit
movement to it. And I also see how this body’
influences external images: it gives back move-
ment to them. My body is, then, in the agegre-
gate of the material world, an image which


CHAP. REAL AND VIRTUAL ACTION 3S


acts like other images, receiving and giving back
movement, with, perhaps, this difference only,
that my body appears to choose, within certain
limits, the manner in which it shall restore what
it receives. But how could my body in general,
and my nervous system in particular, beget the
whole or a part of my representation of the uni-
verse? You may say that my body is matter,
or that it is an image : the word is of no importance,
If it is matter, it is a part of the material
world ; and the material world, consequently, exists
around it and without it. If it is an image, that
image can give but what has been put into it,
and since it is, by hypothesis, the image of my
body only, it would be absurd to expect to get
from it that of the whole universe. My body,
ai object destined to move other objects, is, then, a
centre of action ; it cannot give birth to a representa-
tion.


But if my body is an object capable of exercis-
ing a genuine and therefore a new action upon
go the body the surrounding objects, it must occupy


is but a ivi iti i

saviors privileged position in regard to them.
Image, As a rule, any image influences other
providing for ~ y ; : z

the exercise. “images in a manner which is determined,
among and even calculable, through what are
possible


reactions. called the laws of nature. As it has
not to choose, so neither has it any need to ex-
plore the region round about it, nor to try its
hand at several merely eventual actions. The


6 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, I


necessary action will take place automatically,

when its hour strikes. But I have supposed that

the office of the image which I call my body was

to exercise on other images a veal influence, and,
consequently, to decide which step to take among

several which are all materially possible. And

since these steps are probably suggested to it by

the greater or less advantage which it can derive

from the surrounding images, these images must

display in some way, upon the aspect which they

present to my body, the profit which my body
ae can gain from them. In fact, I note that the size,
cf shape, even the colour, of external objects is
Misty Be according as my body approaches or
Lhrecedes from them; that the strength of an

os aie the ince of a sound, increases or di-
“4 bt minishes with distance; finally, that this very
ode distance represents, ADOT all, the measure in
r/ an which surrounding bodies are insured, in some
So _AKort, against the immediate action of my body.
the degree that my horizon widens, the images
¢ hich surround me seem to be painted upon a
Fea Cah le uniform background and become to me more
g ca indifferent. The more I narrow this horizon, the
v-more the objects which it circumscribes space
themselves out distinctly according to the greater

ate a yur\or less ease with ae my body can touch and


¢ move them. The ack, then, to my body,
Co a mirror, G eventual influence ; they
an rank in an order corresponding to the


es or ey en as powers of i RE The


ake cn


S¥ U2 ?


Pia ee Al


aes


-
—


CHAP. I REAL AND VIRTUAL ACTION ¥)


objects which surround my body reflect its possible
action upon them.


I will now, without touching the other images,
modify slightly that image which I call my body.
In this image I cut asunder, in thought,


Baa
point 10 all the afferent nerves of the cerebro-
possible spinal system. What will happen?


reactions.


A few cuts with the scalpel have
severed a few bundles of fibres: the rest of the
universe, and even the rest of my body, remain
what they were before. The change effected is
therefore insignificant. As a matter of fact, my
perception has entirely vanished. Let us con-
sider more closely what has just occurred.
Here are the images which compose the universe
in general, then those which are near to my body,
and finally my body itself. In this last image
the habitual office of the centripetal nerves is
to transmit movements to the brain and to
the cord; the centrifugal nerves send back
this movement to the periphery. Section of the
centripetal nerves can therefore produce only
one intelligible effect: that is, to interrupt the
current which goes from the periphery to the
periphery by way of the centre, and, conse-
quently, to make it impossible for my body to
extract, from among all the things which surround
it, the quantity and quality of movement neces-
sary in order to act upon them. Here is some-
thing which concerns action, and action alone.


hy hy 1


8 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


Yet it is my perception which has vanished.
What does this mean, if not that my perception
displays, in the midst of the image world, as
would their outward reflexion or shadow, the
eventual or possible actions of my body? Now
the system of images in which the scalpel has
effected only an insignificant change is what is
generally called the material world ; and, on the
other hand, that which has just vanished is ‘my
ey cle eee > of matter. Whence, provisionally,
Wh these two definitions: J call matter the aggregate
of twmages, and perception of matter these same
oF images referred to the eventual action of one particular
ac Nimage, my body.


sel Let us go more deeply into this reference.
P I consider my body, with its centripetal and cen-
The brain is tYifugal nerves, with its nerve centres.
ormete XL know that external objects make in
reaction, not the afferent nerves a disturbance which
perception. passes onward to the centres, that

the centres are the theatre of very varied molecular
movements, and that these movements depend

on the nature and position of the objects. Change

the objects, or modify their relation to my body,

and everything is changed in the interior move-

ments of my perceptive centres. But every-

thing is also changed ‘in ‘my perception.’ My
perception is, then, a function of these molecular
movements ; it depends upon them. But how

does it depend upon them? It will perhaps be


CHAP. I REPRESENTATION 9.


said that it translates them, and that, in the main,
I represent to myself nothing but the molecular
movements of cerebral substance. But how
should this have any meaning, since the image
of the nervous system and of its internal
movements is only, by hypothesis, that of a cer-
tain material object, whereas I represent to
myself the whole material universe? It is true
that many philosophers attempt to evade the diffi-
culty. They show us a brain, analogous in its
essence to the rest of the material universe, an
image, consequently, if the universe is an image.
Then, since they want the internal move-
ments of this brain to create or determine the
representation of the whole material world—an
image infinitely greater than that of the cere-
bral vibrations—they maintain that these mole-
cular movements, and movement in general,
are not images like others, but something
which is either more or less than an image—
in any case is of anothernature than an image—
and from which representation will issue as by
miracle. Thus matter is made into something
radically different from representation, something
of which, consequently, we have no image ;_ over
against it they place a consciousness empty of
images, of which we are unable to form any idea;
lastly, to fill consciousness, they invent an incom-
prehensible action of this formless matter upon
this matterless thought. But the truth is that
the movements of matter are very clear, regarded


Io MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, 1


as images, and that there is no need to look in
movement for anything more than what we see
in it. The sole difficulty would consist in bring-
ing forth from these very particular images the
infinite variety of representations ; but why seek
to do so, since we all agree that the cerebral
vibrations ave contained in the material world,
and that these images, consequently, are only a
part of the representation ?—What then are these
movements, and what part do these particular
images play in the representation of the whole?
The answer is obvious: they are, within my
body, the movements intended to prepare, while
beginning it, the reaction of my body to the action
of external objects. Images themselves, they
cannot create images ; but they indicate at each
moment, like a compass that is being moved
about, the position of a certain given image,
my body, in relation to the surrounding images.
In the totality of representation they are very
little; but they are of capital importance for
that part of representation which I call my
body, since they foreshadow at each successive
moment its virtual acts. There is then only a
difference of degree—there can be no difference in


“. kind—between what is called the perceptive


faculty of the brain and the reflex functions of
the spinal cord. The cord transforms into move-
ments the stimulation received ; the brain prolongs
it into reactions which are merely nascent ;
but, in the one case as in the other, the function,


CHAP, ¥ REPRESENTATION TI.


of the nerve substance is to conduct, to codrdin-
ate or to inhibit movements. How then does it
come about that ‘my perception of the universe’
appears to depend upon the internal movements
of the cerebral substance, to change when they
vary, and to vanish when they cease?

The difficulty of this problem is mainly due to
the fact that the grey matter and its modifications
The brain are regarded as things which are suffi-
Beis! oreate: cient to themselves and might be isolated
sree a from the rest of the universe. Materia-
lists and dualists are fundamentally agreed on
this point. Theyconsider certain molecular move-
ments of the cerebral matter apart: then, some
see in our conscious perception a phosphorescence 3 =
which follows these movements and illuminates *
their track; for others, our perceptions succeed
each other like an unwinding scroll in a conscious-
ness which expresses continuously, in its own way,
the molecular vibrations of the cortical sub-
stance: in the one case, as in the other, our per-
ception is supposed to translate or to picture the
states of our nervous system. But is it possible
to conceive the nervous system as living apart
from the organism which nourishes it, from the
atmosphere in which the organism breathes, from
the earth which that atmosphere envelopes, from
the sun round which the earth revolves? More
generally, does not the fiction of an isolated
material object imply a kind of absurdity, since
this object borrows its physical properties from


Byes


I2 MATTER AND MEMORY cua


the relations which it maintains with all others,
and owes each of its determinations, and conse-
quently its very existence, to the place which it
occupies in the universe as a whole? Let us no
longer say, then,that our perceptions depend simply
upon the molecular movements of the cerebral.
mass. We must say rather that they vary with
_them, but that these movements themselves
“remain inseparably bound up with the rest of the
material world. The question, then, is not only
how our perceptions are connected with the
modifications of the grey matter. The problem
widens, and can also be put in much clearer terms.

It might be stated as follows: Here is a
system of images which I term my perception
of the universe, and which may be entirely
eee altered by a very slight change in
belong to, @ certain privileged image,—my body.


two systems, aS eae ;
to science and This image occupies. the centre ; by it


to conscious~

ness. all the others are conditioned ; at each
of its movements everything changes, as though
by a turn of a kaleidoscope. Here, on the other
hand, are the same images, but referred each one
to itself; influencing each other no doubt, but
in such a manner that the effect is always in pro-
portion to the cause: this is what I term the
universe. The question is: how can these two
systems co-exist, and why are the same images
relatively invariable in the‘universe, and infinitely
variable in perception? The problem at issue
between realism and idealism, perhaps even be-


CHAP.! REPRESENTATION 3s


tween materialism and spiritualism, should be
stated, then, it seems to us, in the following
terms : How 1s it that the same images can belong at
the same time to two different systems, the one in
which each image varies for itself and in the well-
defined measure that it 1s patient of the real action of
surrounding images, the other in which all change
for a single image, and in the varying measure that
they reflect the eventual action of this privileged
image ?

Every image is within certain images and with-
out others; but of the aggregate of images we
cannot say that it is within us or without us, since
interiority and exteriority are only relations
among images. To ask whether the universe ~
exists only in our thought, or outside of our
thought, is to put the problem in terms that are
insoluble, even if we suppose them to be intelli-
gible; it is to condemn ourselves to a barren
discussion, in which the terms thought, being,
universe, will always be taken on either hand in
entirely different senses. To settle the matter,
we must first find a common ground on which
combatants may meet ; and since on both sides it
is agreed that we can only grasp things in the
form of images, we must state the problem in
terms of images, and of images alone. Now
‘no philosophical doctrine denies that the same
images can enter at the same time into two dis- +
tinct systems, one belonging to scrence, wherein
each image, related only to itself, possesses an


14 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


absolute value; and the other, the world of con-
"SCiousness, wherein all the images depend on a
“ central image, our body, the variations of which
they follow. The question raised between realism
and idealism then becomes quite clear: what are

“ithe relations which these two systems of images
maintain with each other? And it is easy to see
that subjective idealism consists in deriving the
first system from the second, materialistic realism
in deriving the second from the first.

The_realist_ starts, in fact, from the universe,
that is to say from an aggregate of images gov-
Be ee erned, as to their mutual relations, by
realism nor fixed laws, in which effects are in strict
able fo" “proportion to their causes, and of which
feraare two the character is an absence of centre, all
dite the images unfolding on one and the
same plane indefinitely prolonged. But he is at
once bound to recognize that, besides this systems
there are perceptions, that is to say, systems in
which these same images seem to depend on a single
one among them, around which they range them-
selves on different planes, so as to be wholly
transformed by the slightest modification of this
central image. Now this perception is just what
the idealist starts from: in the system of images
which he a adopts there is a privileged image, his
body, by which the other images are conditioned.
But as soon as he attempts to connect the present
with the past and to foretell the future, he is
obliged to abandon this central position, to replace


CHAP, I REALISM AND IDEALISM I5


all the images on the same plane, to. suppose that
they no longer vary for him, but for themselves;
and to treat them as though they made part of a
system in which every change gives the exact
measure of its cause. On this condition alone a
science of the universe becomes possible; and,
since this science exists, since it succeeds in fore-
seeing the future, its fundamental hypothesis can-
not be arbitrary. The first system alone is given
to present experience; but we believe in the
second, if only because we affirm the continuity
of the past, present, andfuture. Thusinidealism,
as in realism, we posit one of the two systems and
seek to deduce the other from it.

But in this deduction neither realism nor ideal-
ism can succeed, because neither of the two systems ,
of images is implied in the other, and each of them®
is sufficient to itself. If you posit the system
of images which has no centre, and in which each
element possesses its absolute dimensions and
value, I see no reason why to this system should
accrue a second, in which each image has an
undetermined value, subject to all the vicissi-
tudes of a central image. You must then, to


engender perception, conjure up some deus ex ~


machina, such as the materialistic hypothesis of
the epiphenomenal consciousness, whereby you
choose, among all the images that vary absolutely
and that you posited to begin with, the one which
we term our brain,—conferring on the internal
states of this image the singular and inexplicable


a


16 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


privilege of adding to itself-a reproduction, this


time relative and variable, of all the others. It
is true that you afterwards pretend to attach no
importance to this representation, to see in it a
mere phosphorescence which the cerebral vibrations
leave behind them: as if the cerebral matter and
cerebral vibrations, set in the images which com-
pose this representation, could be of another nature
than they! All realism is thus bound to make per-
ception an accident, and. consequently a mystery.


Sabres inversely, if you posit a system of unstable


images disposed about a privileged centre, and
profoundly modified by trifling displacements of
this centre, you begin by excluding the order of
nature, that order which is indifferent to the point
at which we take our stand and to the particular
end from which we begin. You will have to
bring back this order by conjuring up in your turn
a deus ex machina; I mean that you will have to
assume, by an arbitrary hypothesis, some sort of
pre-established harmony between things and
mind, or, at least (to use Kant’s terms), between
sense and understanding. It_is science now that


y will become an accident, and its su success a mys-


tery.—You cannot, then, deduce the first system


of images from the second, nor the second from
the first; and these two antagonistic doctrines,
realism and idealism, as soon as they decide to
enter the same lists, hurl themselves from opposite
directions against the same obstacle.

If we now look closely at the two doctrines,


CHAP, 1 REALISM AND IDEALISM 17


we shall discover in them a common postulate,
: which we may formulate thus: fer-
ecause they.


both imply an ception has a wholly speculative Oa. a ie


erroneous


pe attain wu is pure knowledge. The whole dis-
7 ) y
4 si perception cussion turns upon the importance to be eee”
speculative attributed to this knowledge as com- pyar
a4 interest, : é : V9 oy)
/ , pared with screntific knowledge. The eo
one_doctrine starts from the order required by
if cience, and sees in perception only a confused and Klatz L
provisional science. The othér_ puts perception “A 4
in the first place, erects it into an absolute, and Rel
wi’ then holds science to be a symbolic expression of ae
pee real. But, for both parties, to perceive means yo 2
?/syADove all to know. aS
ve Now it is just this postulate that we dispute. = 4»
pokes the most superficial examination of the ya
structure of the nervous system in the animal
series gives it the lie. And it is not possible
to accept it without profoundly obscuring the
threefold problem of matter, consciousness, and
their relation.
For if we follow, step by step, the progress of
external perception from the monera to the higher
eee: vertebrates, we find that living matter,


really suggest Even aS a Simple mass of protoplasm, is
the opposite


view. already irritable and contractile, that
Evidence ees :
fromthe _ it is open to the influence of external


structure and .. : -
evolution of Stimulation, and answers to it by


the brain. : : “

mechanical, physical, and chemical re-

actions. As we rise in the organic series, we find

a division of physiological labour. Nerve cells
@


18 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, I


appear, are diversified, tend to group themselves
into a system; at the same time, the animal
reacts by more varied movements to external
stimulation. But even when the stimulation re-
ceived is not at once prolonged into movement, it
appears merely to await its occasion ; and the same
impression, which makes the organism aware of
changes in the environment, determines it or pre-
pares it to adapt itself to them. No doubt there
is in the higher vertebrates a radical distinction
between pure automatism, of which the seat is
mainly in the spinal cord, and voluntary activity,
which requires the intervention of the brain. It
might be imagined that the impression received,
instead of expanding into more movements,
spiritualizes itself into consciousness. Butassoon
as we compare the structure of the spinal cord with
that of the brain, we are bound to infer that there
is merely a difference of complication, and not a
difference in kind, between the functions of the
brain and the reflex activity of the medullary
system. For what takes place in reflex action ?
The centripetal movement communicated by the
stimulus is reflected at once, by the intermediary of
the nerve centres of the spinal cord, in a centrifugal
movement determining a muscular contraction.
In what, on the other hand, does the function of
the cerebral system consist ? The peripheral excita-
tion, instead of proceeding directly to the motor-
cells of the spinal cord and impressing on the muscle
a necessary contraction, mounts first to the brain,


CHAP, I THE CHOICE OF IMAGES 19g


and then descends again to the very same motor
cells of the spinal cord which intervened in the reflex
action. Now what has it gained by this round-
about course, and what did it seek in the so-called
sensory cells of the cerebral cortex ? I do not un-
derstand, I shall never understand, that it draws
thence a miraculous power of changing itself into
a representation of things ; and moreover, I hold
this hypothesis to be useless, as will shortly ap-
pear. But what I do see clearly is that the cells of
the various regions of the cortex which are termed
sensory,—cells interposed between the terminal
branches of the centripetal fibres and the motor
cells of the Rolandic area,—allow the stimulation
received to reach at will this or that motor mechan-
ism of the spinal cord, and so to choose its effect.
The more these intercalated cells are multiplied
and the more they project amoeboid prolonga-
tions which are probably capable of approaching
each other in various ways, the more numerous
and more varied will be the paths capable of
opening to one and the same disturbance from the
periphery, and, consequently, the more systems
of movements will there be among which one and


¥


the same stimulation will allow of choice. In our
a


opinion, then, the brainis no more than a kind of


central telephonic exchange : ‘its office is to allow ~


communication, or to delay it. It adds nothin
to what it receives; but, as all the organs of
perception send it to their ultimate prolongations,
and as all the motor mechanisms of the spinal


f
F
yo


20 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, 1


cord and of the medulla oblongata have in it their
accredited representatives, it really constitutes
a centre, where the peripheral excitation gets into
relation with this or that motor mechanism, chosen
and no longer prescribed. On the other hand, as
a great multitude of motor tracks can open simul-
taneously in this substance to one and the same
excitation from the periphery, this disturbance may
subdivide to any extent, and consequently dissipate
itself in innumerable motor reactions which are
merely nascent. Hence the office of the brain is
sometimes to conduct the movement received to a
chosen organ of reaction, and sometimes to open to
\ this movement the ¢ofality of the motor tracks, so
“that it may manifest there all the potential reactions
‘with which it is charged,and may divide and so
disperse. In other words, the brain appears to us
~ to be an instrument of analysis in regard to the
“movement received, and an instrument_of selec-
tion in regard to the movement executed. But,
in the one case as in the other, its office is limited
to the transmission and division of movement.
And no more in the higher centres of the cortex
_ than in the spinal cord do the nervous elements
= work with a view to knowledge: they do but
indicate a number of possible actions at once, or
organize one of them.
That is to say that the nervous system is in no
_ sense an apparatus which may serve to fabricate,
>Lor even to prepare, eee oe Its function is


wer


CHAP, I THE CHOICE OF IMAGES Ae


and to present the largest possible number of these
apparatuses to a given stimulus. The more it
develops, the more numerous and the more
distant are the points of space which it brings into
relation with ever more complex motor mechan-


isms. In this way the scope which it allows to our,


action enlarges: its growing perfection consists
in nothing else. But if the nervous system is
thus constructed, from one end of the animal series
to the other, in view of an action which isless and
less necessary, must we not think that perception,
of which the progress is regulated by that of the
nervous system, is also entirely directed towards
action, and not towards pure knowledge? And, if
this be so, is not the growing richness of this
perception likely to symbolize the wider range of
indetermination left to the choice of the living
being in its conduct with regard to things? Let
us start, then, from this indetermination as from
‘the true pri principle, and try ‘whether we cannot deduce
from it the possibility, and even the necessity, of
conscious perception. In other words, let us posit
that system of closely-linked images which we call
the material world, and imagine here and there,
within the system, centres of real action, represented
by living matter: “what we mean to prove is
that there must be, ranged round each one of these
centres, images that are subordinated to its posi-
tion and variable with it ; that conscious percep-
tion is bound to occur, and that, moreover, it is
possible to understand how it arises.


f&


~~,


22 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


We note, inthe first place, that astrict law con-
nects the amount of conscious perception with the
intensity of action at the disposal of the

Gare from the living being. If our hypothesis is well


idea that


perception founded, this perception appears at the
means


eventual precise moment when a stimulation re-
iciaminate ceived by matter is not prolonged into a
eg necessary action. Inthe case of a rudi-
mentary organism, it is true that immediate contact
with the object which interests it is necessary to pro-
duce the stimulation, and that reaction can then
hardly be delayed. Thus, in the lower organ-
isms, touch is active and passive at one and the
», Same time,enabling them'to recognize their prey and
“seize it, to feel a danger and make the effort to
avoid it. The various prolongations of the pro-
tozoa, the ambulacra of the echinodermata, are
organs of movement as well as of tactile percep-
tion ; the stinging apparatus of the coelenterata is
an instrument of perception as well as a means
of defence. In a word, the more immediate the
reaction is compelled to be, the more must percep-
tion resemble a mere contact ; and the complete
process of perception and of reaction can then
hardly be distinguished from a mechanical impul-
sion followed by a necessary movement. But in
the measure that the reaction becomes more un-
certain, and allows more room for suspense,
does the distance increase at Which the animal
is sensible of the action of that which interests it.
By sight, by hearing, it enters into relation with an


CHAP. I THE CHOICE OF IMAGES 23


ever greater number of things, and is subject to more
and more distant influences; and, whether these
objects promise an advantage or threaten a
danger, both promises and threats defer the date
of their fulfilment. The degree of independence
of which a living being is master, or, as we shall
say, the zone of indetermination which surrounds
its activity, allows, then, of an a priori estimate of
the number and the distance of the things with
which it is in relation. Whatever this relation
may be, whatever be the inner nature of percep-
tion, we can affirm that its amplitude gives the
exact measure of the indetermination of the act
which is to follow. So that we can formulate


this law: perception 1s master of space in the exact.


measure in which action 1s master of time.

But why does this relation of the organism to
more or less distant objects take the particular form
ree Olaeconsciolss perception? “We > have


becomes of : : x
pecomes ot examined what takes place in the or


ness P 1
Peat ganized body, we have seen movements
hints. transmitted or inhibited, metamor-


phosed into accomplished actions or broken up
into nascent actions. These movements appear
to us to concern action, and action alone ; they
remain absolutely foreign to the process of repre-
sentation. We then considered action itself, and
the indetermination which surrounds it and is
implied in the structure of the nervous system,
—an indetermination to which this system seems
to point much more than to representation.


24 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. f


From this indetermination, accepted as a fact,
we have been able to infer the necessity
of a perception, that is to say, of a variable
relation between the living being and the more or
less distant influence of the objects which interest
it. How isit that this perception is consciousness,
and why does everything happen as 1/ this con-
sciousness were born of the internal movements of
the cerebral substance ?

To answer this question, we will first simplify
considerably the conditions under which conscious
perception takes place. In fact, there is no
perception which is not full of memories.
With ‘the immediate and present data of
our senses we mingle a thousand details out of
our past experience. In most cases. these
memories ‘supplant our actual perceptions, of
which we then retain only a few hints, thus
using them merely as ‘signs’ that recall to
us former images. The convenience and the
rapidity of perception are bought at this price ;
but hence also springs every kind of illusion. Let
us, for the purposes of study, substitute for this
perception, impregnated with our past, a_per-
ception that a consciousness would have if it
were supposed to be ripe and full-grown, yet
confined to the present and absorbed, to the
exclusion of all else, in the task of moulding
itself upon the external object.—It may be
urged that this is an arbitrary hypothesis, and
that such an ideal perception, obtained by the


CHAP, f THE CHOICE OF IMAGES 25


elimination of individual accidents, has no corre-
spondence with reality—But we hope to show
that the individual accidents are merely grafted


on to this impersonal perception, which is at the ‘


very root of our knowledge of things; and that
just because philosophers have overlooked it,
because they have not distinguished it from that
which memory adds to or subtracts from it, they
have taken perception as a whole for a kind of
intertoy and subjective vision, which would then
differ from memory only by its greater intensity.
This will be our first hypothesis. But it leads
naturally to another. However brief we suppose


NY


ed


any perception to be, it always occupies a certain/))
duration, and involves consequently an effort


of memory which prolongs one ‘into another a
plurality of moments. As we shall endeavour
to show, even the ‘subjectivity’ of sensible quali-
ties consists above all else in a kind of contraction
of the real, effected by our memory. In short,
memory in these two forms, covering as it _does with
a cloak of recollections a core of immediate percep-
tion, and also contracting’ a. number of external
moments into a single internal moment, con-
stitutes the principal share of individual con-
sciousness in perception, the subjective side of the
knowledge of things ; and, since we must neglect
this share in order to make our idea clearer, we
shall go too far along the path we have chosen.
But we shall only have to retrace our steps
and to correct, especially by bringing memory


26 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


back again, whatever may be excessive in our
conclusions. What follows, therefore, must be
regarded as only a schematic rendering, and we
ask that perception should be provisionally
understood to mean not my concrete and com-
plex perception—that which is enlarged by
memories and offers always a certain breadth of
duration—but a pure perception, I mean a percep-
tion which exists in theory rather than in fact and
would be possessed by a being placed where
I am, living as I live, but absorbed in the
present and capable, by giving up every form
of memory, of obtaining a vision of matter both
immediate and instantaneous. Adopting this
hypothesis, let us consider how conscious per-
ception may be explained.

To deduce consciousness would be, indeed, a bold
undertaking ; but it is really not necessary here, be-
Conscious Cause by positing the material world we as-
perception is_ sumean aggregate of images, and more-


but our power


of choice, om Over because it is impossible to assume


thes, s, anything else. No theory of matter escapes
UEEOE: this necessity. Reduce matter to atoms
in motion : these atoms, though denuded of physical
qualities, are determined only. in relation to an
eventual vision and an eventual contact, the one
without light and the other without materiality.
Condense atoms into centres of force, dissolve
them into vortices revolving in a continuous fluid :
this fluid, these movements, these centres, can
themselves be determined only in relation to an


CHAP, I THE CHOICE OF IMAGES 27


impotent touch, an ineffectual impulsion, a colour-
less light ; they are still images. It is true that
an image may be without being perceived ; it
may be present without being represented ; and Z
the distance between these two terms, presence
and representation, seems just to measure
the interval between matter itself and our con-
scious perception of matter. But let us examine
the point more closely, and see in what this
difference consists. If there were move in the
second term than in the first, if,in order to pass from
presence to representation, it were necessary to add —
something, the barrier would indeed be insuperable,
and the passage from matter to perception would
remain wrapt in impenetrable mystery. It would
not be the same if it were possible to pass from the
first term to the second by way of diminution, and

if the representation of an image were less than its <
presence ; for it would then suffice that the images
present should be compelled to abandon some-_
thing of themselves in order that their mere pre-
sence should convert them into representations.
Now, here is the image which I call a material
object; I have the representation of it. How
comes it that it does not appear to be in itself
that which it is forme ? It is because, being bound
up with all other images, it is continued in those
which follow it, just as it prolonged those which pre-
ceded it. To transform its existence into represen-
tation, it would be enough to suppress what follows

it, what precedes it, and also all that fills it, and to


milly aay V1 thee be Paneer ve Ue tna? uo rfterercce Se
aa) oA aa eee Garren tut Wil Gani ~w Surfapr rere Gy tte
prune. rte Later , tee clin weal werd th bolus
mach de os Gubaccud ee Wy Cun Cece Uhat Simene oct #7
: aceon wit. We Qeeouli— Cen aise pI Fe oi iN
de ne REE SONS tee EDM Bm
~ th Wie “Seta on ‘snly ieee crust: ee superticial skin.
oe That which distinguishes it asa present image, asan
eee reality, from a represented image is the
ee ,v necessity which obliges it to act through every one
sr = _of its points upon all the points of all other images,
— __ to transmit the whole of what it receives, to oppose
to every action an equal and contrary reaction, to
be, in short, merely a road by which pass, in every
direction, the modifications propagated through-
out the immensity of the universe. I should con-
vert it into representation if I could isolate it,
especially if I could isolate its shell. Represen-
‘tation is there, but always virtual—being neutral-
ized, at the very moment when it might become
* actual, by the obligation to continue itself and to
lose itself in something else. To obtain this con-
version from the virtual to the actual it would be
necessary, not to throw more light on the object,
\} but on the contrary to obscure some of its aspects,
vO to diminish it by the greater part of itself, so that
~< the remainders instead of being encased in its sur-
roundingsas a thing, should detach itself from them
as a picture. Nowif living beings are, within the uni-

—.t verse, just ‘ centres ofindetermination,’ and if the
degree of this indetermination is measured by the
number and rank of their functions, we can con-
ceive that their mere presence is equivalent to the A
__ suppression of all t those e parts. of objects in which
their functions find no interest. They allow to

pass through them, so to speak, those external in-
“<, fluences which are indifferent to them ; the others


%
¥


CHAP, I THE CHOICE OF IMAGES 29


isolated, become ‘perceptions’ by their very
isolation. Everything thus happens for us as
though we reflected back to surfaces the light which
emanates from them, the light which, hadit passed
on unopposed, would never have been revealed.
The images which surround us will appear to turn
towards our body the side, emphasized by the
light upon it, which interests our body. They
will detach from themselves that which we have
arrested on its way, that which we are capable
of influencing. Indifferent to each other because
of the radical mechanism which binds them to-
gether, they present each to the others all their
sides at once: which means that they act and
react mutually by all their elements, and that none
of them perceives or is perceived consciously.
Suppose, on the contrary, that they encounter some-


where a certain spontaneity of reaction: their /


action is so far diminished, and this diminution of
their action is just the representation which
we have of them. Our representation of things
would thus arise from the fact that they are
thrown back and reflected by our freedom.

When a ray of light passes from one medium
into another, it usually traverses it with a
change of direction. But the respective den-
sities of the two media may be such that, for a
given angle of incidence, refraction is no longer
possible. Then we have total reflexion. The
luminous point gives rise to a wivtual image which
symbolizes, so to speak, the fact that the luminous


=


me


44%


30 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


rays cannot pursue their way. Perception is just a
phenomenon of the same kind. That which is
given is the totality of the images of the material
world, with the totality of their internal elements.
But if we suppose centres of real, that is to say
of spontaneous, activity, the rays which reach it,
and which interest that activity, instead of pass-
ing through those centres, will appear to be re-
flected and thus to indicate the outlines of the object
which emits them. There is nothing positive
here, nothing added_to the image, nothing new.
The objécts_merely_abandon_ something of their
real action in order to manifest their virtual
action—that is to say, in the main, the eventual
influence of the living being upon them. Per-
ception therefore resembles those phenomena of
reflexion which result from an impeded refraction ;
it is like an effect of mirage.

This is as much as to say that there is for images
merely a difference of degree, and not of kind, be-
So that tween being and being consciously per-


representa=


tion results cezved. The e reality of matter consists


from the


omission ofp in the totality of its elements and of
that in the


totality of their actions of every kind. Our re-
matter which : N. ;

has no presentation of matter is the measure
interest for Sey 4 5
our needs, Of our possible action upon bodies: it
results from the discarding of what has no interest
for our needs, or more generally for our functions.
In one sense we might say that the perception
of any unconscious material point whatever, in


its instantaneousness, is infinitely greater and


CHAP, I THE CHOICE OF IMAGES 31.


more complete than ours, since this point gathers \, 4. edie
and transmits the influences of all the points of the eco, Aneen
material universe, whereas our consciousness only Sra eff Ch.
attains to certain parts and to certain aspects Cus horses $ filrd
those parts. Consciousness,—in regard to external 4 ue sole cle
perception, —lies in just this choice. But there a nel
is, in this necessary poverty of our conscious pers oe Le 1
ception, something that is positive, that foretellsw.r' ay vee
spirit : it is, in | the e etymological al sensg of ps yng mene ffs
discernment. pelos oe
The whole difficulty of the problem that one yee
pies us comes from the fact that. we imagine
perception to be a kind of photographic
limited by _ view of things, taken from a fixed point
the degree of
indeterminate by that special apparatus which is called
ving beng an organ of perception—a photograph ¥
is master ol which would then be developed in the y
brain-matter by some unknown chemical and
psychical process of elaboration. But is it not
obvious that the photograph, if photograph there
be, is already taken, already developed in the very
heart of things and at all the points of space ?
No metaphysics, no physics even, can escape this
conclusion. Build up the universe with atoms:
each of them is subject to the action, variable in
quantity and quality according to the distance,
exerted on it by all material atoms. Bring in
Faraday’s centres of force: the lines of force emitted
in every direction from every centre bring to bear
upon each the influences of the whole material
world. Call up the Leibnizian monads: each is


y


32 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


the mirror of the universe. All philosophers, then,
agree on this point. Only if when we consider
any other given place in the universe we can
regard the action of all matter as passing
through it without resistance and without loss,
and the photograph of the whole as_ trans-
lucent: here there is wanting behind the plate
the black screen on which the image could be
shown. Our ‘zones. of _ indetermination ’ play
f in some sort the part of the screen. “They a add
nothing to what _is there; they effect merely
this: that the real action passes.through, the
virtual action remains.

This is no hypothesis. We content ourselves
with formulating data with which no theory of
perception can dispense. For no philosopher
can begin the study of external perception with-
out assuming the possibility at least of a material

ahora that is to say, in -he main, the virtual
perception of all things. From this merely
possible material mass he will then isolate the
particular object which I call my body, and, in
this body, centres of perception: he will show
me the disturbance coming from a certain point
in space, propagating itself along the nerves and
reaching the centres. But here I am confronted
by a transformation scene from fairyland. The
material world which surrounds the body, the body
which shelters the brain, the brain in which we
distinguish centres, he abruptly dismisses ; and, as .
by a magician’s wand, he conjures up, as a thing


CHAP, I THE CHOICE OF IMAGES 35°


entirely new the representation of what he began
by postulating. This representation he drives
out of space, so that it may have nothing in
common with the matter from which he started.
As for matter itself, he would fain go without it,
but cannot, because its phenomena present
relatively to each other an order so strict and
so indifferent as to the point of origin chosen,
that this regularity and this indifference really
constitute an independent existence. So that
he must resign himself to retaining at least the
phantasm of matter. But then he manages to
deprive it of all the qualities which give it life.
In an amorphous space he carves out moving
figures ; or else (and it comes to nearly the same
thing), he imagines relations of magnitude which
adjust themselves one to another, mathematical
functions which go on evolving and developing
their own content: representation, laden with
the spoils of matter, thenceforth displays itself
freely in an unextended consciousness.—But
it is not enough to cut out, it is necessary to
sew the pieces together. You must now explain
how those qualities which you have detached
from their material support can be joined to it
again. Each attribute which you take away ¢
from matter widens the interval between repre-
sentation and its object. If you make matter
unextended, how will it acquire extension? If
you reduce it to homogeneous movement, whence
arises quality ? Above ali, how are we to imagine
D


34 : MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


a relation between a thing and its image, between
matter and thought, since each of these terms
possesses, by definition, only that which is lack-
ing to the other? Thus difficulties spring up
beneath our feet ; andevery effort that you make
to dispose of one of them does but resolve it into
many more. What then do we ask of you?
Merely to give up your magician’s wand, and to
continue along the path on which you first set
out. You showed us external images reaching
the organs of sense, modifying the nerves, propa-
gating their influence in the brain. Well, follow
the process to the end. The movement will pass
through the cerebral substance (although not
>s, without having tarried there), and will then
~ expand into voluntary action. There you have
the whole mechanism of perception. As for
perception itself, in so far as it is an image, you
are not called upon to retrace its genesis, since
you posited it to begin with, and since moreover
no other course was open to you. In assuming
the brain, in assuming the smallest portion of
matter, did you not assume the totality of
images ? What you have to explain, then, is not how
perception arises, but how it is limited, since it
should be the tmage of the whole, and is in fact
reduced to the image of that which interests you.
But if it differs from the mere image, precisely
in that its parts range themselves with reference to
a variable centre, its limitation is easy to under-
stand: unlimited de jure, it confines itself de facto


CHAP, I REPRESENTATION AND ACTION 35


to indicating the degree of indetermination allowed
to the acts of the special image which you call
your body. And, inversely, it follows that the
indetermination of the movements of your body,
such as it results from the structure of the grey
matter of the brain, gives the exact measure of the


extent of your perception. It is no wonder, then,


that everything happens as though your perception
were a result of the internal motions of the brain,
and issued in some sort from the cortical centres.


It could not actually come from them, since the ie
brain is an image like others, enveloped in the ©


mass of other images, and it would be absurd
that the container should issue from the content.
But since the structure of the brain is like the
detailed plan of the movements among which
you have the choice, and since that part of the
external images which appears to return upon
itself in order to constitute perception includes
precisely all the points of the universe which
these movements could affect, conscious per-
ception and cerebral movement are in strict corre-


‘dp eq


spondence. The reciprocal dependence of these /


two terms is therefore simply due to the fact that

both are functions of a third, whichis the indeter-

mination of the will. ee
Take, for example, a luminous point P, of which


The image, the rays impinge on the different parts

then, i ; , :

ereaad G20 ot the retina. _ Atithis pomt,P

perceived in ; ¢ A :

the object, Science localizes vibrations of a cer-
t in the ; ; 2

brain. tain amplitude and duration. At the


36 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I.


same point P consciousness perceives light.
We propose to show, in the course of this
study, that both are right; and that there is no
essential difference between the light and the
movements, provided we restore to movement
the unity, indivisibility, and qualitative hetero-
geneity denied to it by abstract mechanics ;
provided also that we see in sensible qualities
contractions effected by our memory. Science
and consciousness would then coincide in the in-
stantaneous. For the moment all we need say,
without examining too closely into the meaning
of the words, is that the point P sends to the
retina vibrations of light. What happens then ?
If the visual image of the point P were not
already given, we should indeed have to seek the
manner in which it had been engendered, and
should soon be confronted by an_ insoluble
problem. But, whatever we do, we cannot avoid
assuming it to begin with: the sole question
is, then, to know how and why this image 7s
chosen to form part of my perception, while an
infinite number of other images remain ex-


~_claded from it. Now I see that the vibrations


- transmitted from the point P to the various parts
of the retina are conducted to the sub-cortical
and cortical optic centres, often to other centres
as well, andthat these centres sometimes transmit
them to motor mechanisms, sometimes provision-
ally arrest them. The nervous elements concerned
are, therefore, what give efficacy to the disturbance


CHAP, I REPRESENTATION AND ACTION 37


received; they symbolize the indetermination of
the will ; on their soundness this indetermination
depends ; and consequently any injury to these
elements, by diminishing our possible action,
diminishes perception in thesame degree. In other
words, if there exist in the material world places
where the vibrations received are not mechanically
transmitted, if there are, as we said, zones of
indetermination, these zones must occur along the
path of what is termed the sensori-motor process ;
and hence all must happen as though the rays
Pa, Pb, Pc were perceived along this path and
afterwards projected into P. Further, while
the indetermination is something which escapes
experiment and calculation, this is not the case
with the nervous elements by which the impres-
sion is received and transmitted. These elements
are the special concern of the physiologist and
the psychologist ; on them all the details of exter-
nal perception would seem to depend and by them
they may be explained. So we may say, if we like,
that the disturbance, after having travelled along
these nervous elements, after having gained the
centre, there changes into a conscious image which
is subsequently exteriorized at the point P. But,
when we so express ourselves, we merely bow to
the exigencies of the scientific method; we in
no way describe the real process. There is not,


in fact, an unextended image which forms itself.


in consciousness and then projects itself into P.
The truth is that the point P, the rays which it


a


38 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAD.


emits, the retina and the nervous elements af-
fected, form a single whole; that the luminous
point P isa part of this whole; and that it is


' reallyin P, and not elsewhere, that the image of P


is formed and perceived.

When we represent things to ourselves in this
manner, we do but return to the simple convictions
of common sense. We all of us began by believ-
ing that we grasped the very object, that we per-
ceived it in itself and not in us. When philoso-
phers disdain an idea so simple and so close to
reality, it is because the intra-cerebral process,—


that diminutive part of perception,—appears to


them the ~ equivalent of the whole of percep-
tion. If we suppress the object perceived and
keep the internal process, it seems to them that
the image of the object remains. And their belief
is easily explained: there are many conditions,
such as hallucination and dreams, in which images
arise that resemble external perception in all
their details. As, in such cases, the object has
disappeared while the brain persists, he holds
that the cerebral phenomenon is sufficient for
the production of the image. But it must not
be forgotten that in all psychical states of this
kind memory plays the chief part. Now, we
shall try to show later that, when perception, as


.. we understand it, is once admitted, memory must


~ arise, and that this memory has not, any more


than perception itself, a cerebral state as its true
andcompletecondition. But, without as yet enter-


CHAP. I REPRESENTATION AND ACTION 39


ing upon the examination of these two points, we
will content ourselves with a very simple observa-
tion, which has indeed no novelty. In many .
people who are blind from birth the visual centres ~-
are intact ; yet they live and die without having /
formed a single visual image. Such an image,
therefore, cannot appear unless the external object
has, once at least, played its part: it must, once
at any rate, have been part and parcel with repre-
sentation. Now this is what we claim and for the
moment all that we require, for we are dealing here
with pure perception, and not with perception
complicated by memory. Reject then the share of
memory, consider perception in its unmixed state,
and you “will be forced to_recognize. that there
is no image without an object. But, from the
moment that’ you thus posit the intra-cerebral


processes besides the external object which causes foe


them, we can clearly see how the image of that
object is given with it and in it: how the image
should arise from the cerebral movement we shall
never understand.
When a lesion of the nerves or of the centres
interrupts the passage of the nerve vibration,
perception is to that extent diminished.
Bitweban” Need we be surprised : ? The office of
peroeption ty the nervous system is to utilize that
seca te vibration, to convert ‘it into practical
activity. deeds, really or virtually accomplished.
If, for one reason or another, the disturbance cannot


pass along, it would be strange if the correspond-


Ok?


alll


t-


40 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP.. I


ing perception still took place, since this percep-
tion would then connect our body with points
of space which no longer directly invite it
to make a choice. Sever the optic nerve of an
animal: the vibrations issuing from the luminous
point can no longer be transmitted to the brain
and thence to the motor nerves; the thread, of
which the optic nerve isa part and which binds the
external object to the motor mechanisms of the
animal, is broken: visual perception has there-
fore become impotent, and this very impotence
is unconsciousness. That matter should be per-
ceived without the help of a nervous system,
and without organs of sense, is not theoretically
inconceivable ; but it is practically impossible,
because such perception would be of no use. It
would suit a phantom, not a living, and therefore
acting, being. Weare too muchinclined to regard
the living body as a world within a world, the ner-
vous system as a separate being, of which the func-
tion is, first, to elaborate perceptions, and then to
create movements. The truth is that my nervous
system, interposed between the objects which
affect my body and those which I can influence,
is a mere conductor, transmitting, sending back,
or inhibiting movement. This conductor is
composed of an enormous number of threads
which stretch from the periphery to the centre,
and from the centre to the periphery. As many


_threads as pass from the periphery to the
‘centre, so many points of space are there able


CHAP, I REPRESENTATION AND ACTION 4I


to make an appeal to my will and to put, so
to speak, an elementary question to my motor
activity. Every such question is what is termed
a perception. Thus perception is diminished by
one of its elements each time one of the threads
termed sensory is cut, because some part of the
external object then becomes unable to appeal to
activity ; and it is-also diminished whenever a
the ready - made response renders the question
unnecessary. What disappears in either case is
the apparent reflexion of the stimulus upon itself,
the return of the light on the image whence it
comes; or rather that dissociation, that discern-
ment, whereby the perception is disengaged from
the image. We may therefore say that while the
detail of perception is moulded exactly upon that of
the nerves termed sensory, perception 2 as_a_ whole 4¥
_ has its true and final explanation in the tendency
‘of the body to r movement.

The cause of the “general illusion on this point
lies in the apparent indifference of our movements
to the stimulation which excites them. It seems that
the movement of my body inorder to reach and to
modify an object is the same, whether I have been
told of its existence by the ear or whether it has
been revealed to me by sight or touch. My
motor activity thus appears as a separate entity, a
sort of reservoir whence movements issue at will,
always the same for the same action, whatever
the kind of image which has called it into being.


42 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. ¥


But the truth is that the character of movements
which are externally identical is internally differ-
ent, according as they respond to a visual, an au-
ditory or a tactile impression. Suppose I perceive
a multitude of objects in space; each of them,
inasmuch as it is a visual form, solicits my acti-


“.vity. NowI suddenly lose my sight. No doubt I


“ still have at my disposal the same quantity and
the same quality of movements in space; but
these movements can no longer be co-ordinated
to visual impressions ; they must in future follow
tactile impressions, for example, and a new
arrangement will take place in the _ brain.
The protoplasmic expansions of the motor nervous
elements in the cortex will be in relation, now,
with a much smaller number of the nervous
elements termed sensory. My activity is then
really diminished, in the sense that although I can
produce the same movements, the occasion comes
more rarely from the external objects. Con-
sequently, the sudden interruption of optical


... continuity has brought with it, as its essential and


profound effect, the suppression of a large part
of the queries or demands addressed to my activity.
Now such a query or.demand is, as we have
seen, a perception. Here we put our finger on
the mistake of those who maintain that percep-
tion springs from the sensory vibration properly
so called, and not from a sort of question ad-
dressed to motor activity. They sever this motor.


activity from the perceptive process; and, as


CHAP, I REPRESENTATION AND ACTION 43


it appears to survive the loss of perception,

they conclude that perception is localized in the

nervous elements termed sensory. But the truth

is that perception is no more in the sensory ,

centres than in the motor centres; it measures
the complexity of their relations, and is, in

fact, where it appears to be.

Psychologists who have studied infancy are well
aware that our representation is at first impersonal.
In peroption ee little ey little, and as a result of ,
pe eave perience, does it adopt our body as a
periphery centre and become our representation.


the aggregate


of images, to . : Q %
of images, to ‘he mechanism of this process is, more


the pody i sa, OWCL, easy to understand. As my body

moves in space, all the other images vary,
while that image, my body, remains invariable. I
must therefore make it acentre, to which I refer all
the other images. My belief in an external world
does not come, cannot come, from the fact that
I project outside myself sensations that are unex- »—
tended : how could these sensations ever acquire ex-
tension, and whence should I get the notion of ex-
teriority ? Butif we allow that, as experience testi-
fies, the aggregate of imagesis given to begin with,
I can see clearly how my body comes to occupy,
within this aggregate, a privileged position. And
I understand also whence arises the notion of in-
teriority and exteriority, which is, to begin with,
merely the distinction between my body and other
bodies. Forif youstart from my body, as is usually
done, you will never make me understand how


44 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


impressions received on the surface of my body,
impressions which concern that body alone, are able
to become for me independent objects and form
an external world. But if, on the contrary, all
images are posited at the outset, my body will
necessarily end by standing out in the midst of
them as a distinct thing, since they change unceas-
ingly, andit does not vary. The distinction between
the inside and the outside will then be only a dis-
tinction between the partand the whole. There is,
first of all, the aggregate of images ; and then, in
this aggregate, there are ‘centres of action,’ from
which the interesting images appear to be reflected :
thus perceptions are born and actions made ready.
My body is that which stands out as the centre of
these perceptions ; my personality is the being to
which these actions must be referred. The whole
subject becomes clear if we travel thus from the peri-


phery to the centre, as the child does, “and as we


reo


ourselves are invited to do by immediate experience
and bycommonsense. On the contrary everything
becomes obscure, and problems are multiplied on
all sides, if we attempt, with the theorists, to travel
from the centre to the periphery.—Whence arises,
then, this idea of an external world constructed arti-
ficially, piece by piece, out of unextended sensa-
tions, though we can neither understand how
they come to form an extended surface, nor how
they are subsequently projected outside our body ?
Why insist, in spite of appearances, that I should


go from my conscious self to my body, then


CHAP. I THE IMAGE AND REALITY 45


from my body to other bodies, whereas in fact I
place myself at once in the material world in
general, and then gradually cut out within
it the centre of action which I shall come
to call my body and to distinguish from all
others >—There are so many illusions gathered
round this belief in the originally unex-
tended character of our external perception ; there
are, in the idea that we project outside our-
selves states which are purely internal, so many
misconceptions, so many lame answers to badly
stated questions, that we cannot hope to throw
light on the whole subject at once. We believe
that light will increase, as we show more clearly,
behind these illusions, the metaphysical error which
confounds the unbroken extensity with homo-
geneous space, and the psychological error which
confounds ‘ pure perception’ with memory. But
these illusions are, nevertheless, connected with real
facts, which we may here indicate in order to
correct their interpretation.

The first of these facts is that our senses require
education. Neither sight nor touch is able at
Onjection the outset to localize impressions. A
derived from series of comparisons and inductions is


the so-called


‘education’ a
opiucations. necessary, whereby we gradually co


meee mean ordinate one impression with another.
education. fence philosophers may jump to the
belief that sensations are in their essence inexten-
sive, and that they constitute extensity by their


juxtaposition. But is it not clear that, upon the


—


46 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


hypothesis just advanced, our senses are equally in
need of education,—not of course in order to accom-
modate themselves to things, but to accommodate
themselves toeach other? Here, in the midst of all
the images, there is a certain image which I term
my body, and of which the virtual action reveals
itself by an apparent reflexion of the surround-
ing images upon themselves. Suppose there are
so many kinds of possible action for my body:
there must be an equal number of systems of
reflexion for other bodies; and each of these
systems will be just what is perceived by one of
my senses. My body, then, acts like an image
which reflects others, and which, in so doing,
analyses them along lines corresponding to the
different actions which it can exercise upon them.
And, consequently, each of the qualities perceived
in the same object by my different senses symbolizes
a particular direction of my activity, a par-
ticular need. Now, will all these perceptions of
a body by my different senses give me, when
united, the complete image of that body? Cer-
tainly not, because they have been gathered from
a larger whole. To perceive all the influences
from all the points of all bodies would be to de-
scend to the condition of a material object. Con-
scious perception signifies choice, and consciousness
mainly consists in this practical discernment. The
diverse perceptions of the same object, given by
my different senses, will not, then, when put to-
gether, reconstruct the complete image of the


CHAP, I THE IMAGE AND REALITY 47


object ; they will remain separated from each other
by intervals which measure, so to speak, the gaps
in my needs. It is to-fill these intervals that an
education of the senses is necessary. The aim of
this education is to harmonize my senses with


each other, to restore between their data a vA


continuity which has been broken by the discon-
tinuity of the needs of my body, in short to re-
construct, as nearly as may be, the whole of the
material object. This, on our hypothesis, ex-
plains the need for an education of the senses.
Now let us compare it with the preceding explana-
tion. In tHe first, unextended sensations of sight
combine with unextended sensations of touch and
of the other senses, to give, by their synthesis,
the idea of a material object. But, to begin with,
it is not easy to see how these sensations can ac-
quire extension, nor how, above all, when exten-
sion in general has been acquired, we can explain
in particular the preference of a given one of these
sensations for a given point of space. And then
we may ask by what happy agreement, in virtue
of what pre-established harmony, do these sen-
sations of different kinds co-ordinate themselves
to form a stable object, henceforth solidified,
common to my experience and to that of all men,
subject, in its relation to other objects, to those
inflexible rules which we call the laws of nature ?
In the Second, ‘ the data_of our different senses’
are, on the contrary, the very qualities of things,
perceived first in the things rather than in us:


y


A


48 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, I


is it surprising that they come together, since
abstraction alone has separated them ?—On the
first hypothesis, the material object is nothing of
all that we perceive: you put on one side the con-
scious principle with the sensible qualities, and
on the other a matter of which you can predicate
nothing, which you define by negations because
you have begun by, despoiling it of all that reveals
it to us. In the second, an ever-deepening know-
ledge of matter becomes possible. Far from
depriving matter of anything perceived, we must
on the contrary bring together all sensible quali-
ties, restore their relationship, and re-establish
among them the continuity broken by our needs.
Our perception of matter is, then, no longer
either relative or subjective, at least in principle,
and apart, as we shall see presently, from
affection and especially from memory; it is
merely dissevered ,by the multiplicity of our
needs.—On the first hypothesis, spirit is as un-
knowable as matter, for you attribute to it the
undefinable power of evoking sensations we know
not whence, and of projecting them, we know
not why, into a space where they will form bodies.
On the second, the part played by consciousness
is clearly defined: consciousness means_yirtual
action; and the forms acquired by mind, those
which hide the essence of spirit from us, should,
with the help of this second principle, be removed
as so many concealing veils. Thus, on our hypo-
thesis, we begin to see the possibility of a clearer


CHAP. I THE IMAGE AND REALITY 49 .


distinction between spirit and matter, and of a
reconciliation between them. But we will leave
this first point and come to the second.
The second fact brought forward consists in
what was long termed the ‘ specific energy of the
nerves.’ We know that stimulation of
Objection 5
See! the optic nerve by an external shock or
ene by an electric current will produce a
ape visual sensation, and that this same
electric current applied to the acoustic or
to the glosso-pharyngeal nerve will cause a sound
to be heard or a taste to be perceived. From
these very particular facts have been deduced two
very general laws: that different causes acting on
the same nerve excite the same sensation; and
that the same_cause, acting on different nerves,
provokes different sensations. And from these
laws it has been inferred that our sensations are
merely signals, and that the office of each sense is to
translate into its own language homogeneous and
mechanical movements occurring in space. Hence,
as a conclusion, the idea of cutting our perception
into two distinct parts, thenceforward incapable
of uniting : on the one hand homogeneous move-
ments in space, and on the other unextended sen-
sations in consciousness. Now, it is not our part
to enter into an examination of the physiological
problems raised by the interpretation of the two
laws: in whatever way these laws are understood,
whether the specific energy is attributed to the


nerves or whether it 1s reicired to the centres, insur-
= BE


\


50 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, I


mountable difficulties arise. But the very existence
of the laws themselves appears more and more
problematical. Lotze himself already suspected
a fallacy in them. He awaited, before putting
faith in them, ‘ sound waves which should give to
the eye the sensation of light, or luminous vibra-
tions which should give to the ear a sound.’ !
The truth is that all the facts alleged can be brought
back to a single type: the one stimulus capable
of producing different sensations, the multiple
stimuli capable of inducing the same sensation,
are either an electric current or a mechanical
cause capable of determining in the organ a modi-
fication of electrical equilibrium. Now we may
well ask whether the electrical stimulus does not
include different components, answering objec-
tively to sensations of different kinds, and whether
the office of each sense is not merely to extract
from the whole the component that concerns it.
We should then have, indeed, the same stimuli
giving the same sensations, and different stimuli
provoking different sensations. To speak more


» precisely, it is difficult to admit, for instance, that


applying an electrical stimulus to the tongue
would not occasion chemical changes ; and these
changes are what, in all cases, we term tastes.
On the other hand, while the physicist has been


“able to identify light with an electro-magnetic


disturbance, we may say, inversely, that what he


1 Lotze, Metaphysic, Oxford, 1887, vol. ii, p. 206.


cHaP, I THE IMAGE AND AFFECTIVE SENSATION 51


calls here an electro-magnetic disturbance ‘s light,
so that it is really light that the optic nerve per-
ceives objectively when subject to electrical
stimulus. The doctrine of specific energy appears
to be nowhere more firmly based than in the case “
of the ear: nowhere also has the real existence of
the thing perceived become more probable. We
will not insist on these facts, because they will
be found stated and exhaustively discussed in a
recent work.1 We will only remark that the
sensations here spoken of are not images per-
ceived by us outside our body, but rather affec-
tions localized within the body. Nowitresults from
the nature and use of our body, as we shall see,
that each of its so-called sensory elements has
its own veal action, which must be of the same
kind as its virtual action on the external objects
which it usually perceives; and thus we can
understand how it is that each of the sensory
nerves appears to vibrate according to a fixed
manner of sensation. But to elucidate this point
we must consider the nature of affection. Thus
we are led to the third and last argument which
we have to examine.

This third argument is drawn from the fact ,
that we pass by insensible degrees from the repre-
sentative state which occupies space, to the
affective state which appears to be unextended.


1 Schwarz, Das Wahrnehmungsproblem, Leipzig, 1892, pp-
313 and seq.


52 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


Hence it is inferred that all sensation is

naturally and necessarily unextended,
freaaten so- that extensity is superimposed upon
heb? sensation, and the process of percep-
cate ° ~=6tion _consists in an exteriorization of
Rewivecate internalstates. The psychologist starts,
Whee is in fact, from his body, and, as the im-
— pressions received at the periphery of
this body seem to him sufficient for the recon-
stitution of the entire material universe, to
his body he at first reduces the universe. But
this first position is not tenable; his body
has not, and cannot have, any more or any
less reality than all other bodies. So he must
go farther, follow to the end the consequences
of his principle, and, after having narrowed the
universe to the surface of the living body,
contract this body itself into a centre which he
will end by supposing unextended. Then, from
this centre will start unextended sensations, which
will swell, so to speak, will grow into extensity,
and will end by giving extension first to his
body, and afterwards to all other material objects.
But this strange supposition would be impos-
sible if there were not, in point of fact, between
images and ideas, the former extended and the
latter unextended, a series of intermediate states,
more or less vaguely localized, which are the
affective states. Our understanding, yielding to
its customary illusion, poses the dilemma, that
a thing either is or is not extended; and as the


cHaP. 1 THE IMAGE AND AFFECTIVE SENSATION 53


affective state participates vaguely in extension,
is in fact imperfectly localized, we conclude that
this state is absolutely unextended. But then the
successive degrees of extension, and extensity itself,
will have to be explained by I know not what ac-


quired property of unextended states ; the history 4


of perception will become that of internal_unex-
tended states which acquire extension.and.project
themselves without. Shall we put the argument
in another form? There is hardly any percep-
tion which may not, by the increase of the action
of its object upon our body, become an affection,

and, more particularly, pain. Thus we pass in-
- sensibly from the contact with a pin to its prick.


Inversely the decreasing pain coincides with the |
lessening perception of its cause, and exteriorizes %,
itself, so to speak, intoarepresentation. So it does ©


seem, then, as if there were a difference of degree
and not of nature between affection and perception.
Now, the first is intimately bound up with my per-
sonal existence: what, indeed, would be a pain
detached from the subject that feels it ? It seems
therefore that it must be so with the second, and
that external perception is formed by projecting
into space an affection which has become harm-
less. Realists.and idealists are agreed in this
method of reasoning. The latter_see in the
material universe nothing but a synthesis of sub-
jective and unextended states; the_former add
that, behind this synthesis, there is an indepen-
dent reality corresponding to it; but both con-


sf
A


54 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, I


clude, from the gradual passage of affection to
representation, that our representation of the

~ material universe is relative and subjective, and
that it has, so to speak, emerged from us, rather
than that we have emerged from it.

Before criticizing this questionable interpretation
of an unquestionable fact, we may show that it does
not succeed in explaining, or even in throwing light
upon, the nature either of pain or of perception.
That affective states, essentially bound up with
my personality, and vanishing if I disappear,
should acquire extensity by losing intensity,
should adopt a definite position in space, and
build up a firm, solid experience, always in accord
with itself and with the experience of other
men—this is very difficult to realize. Whatever
we do, we shall be forced to give back to sen-
sations, in one form or another, first the exten-
sion and then the independence which we have
triedto do without. But, what is more, affection,
on this hypothesis, is hardly clearer than repre-
sentation. For if it is not easy to see how affec-
tions, by diminishing in intensity, become
representations, neither can we understand how
the same phenomenon, which was given at first
as perception, becomes affection by an increase
of intensity. There is in pain something positive
and active, which is ill explained by saying, as
do some philosophers, that it consists in a con-
fused representation. But still this is not the
principal difficulty. That the gradual augmen-


CHAP, I NATURE OF AFFECTIVE SENSATION 55


tation of the stimulus ends by transforming per-
ception into pain, no one will deny; it is none
the less true that this change arises at a definite
moment: why at this moment rather than at
another ? and what special reason brings about
that a phenomenon of which I was at first only an
indifferent spectator suddenly acquires for me a
vital interest ? Therefore, on this hypothesis
I fail to see either why, at a given moment, a dim-
inution of intensity in the phenomenon confers ,
on it a right to extension and to an apparent
independence; or why an increase of intensity
should create, at one moment rather than at
another, this new property, the source of positive
action, which is called pain.

Let us return now to our hypothesis, and show
that affection must, at a given moment, arise out
Real of the image. We shall thus under-


significance stand how it is that we pass from a


a locating perception which has extensity to an
eben affection which is believed to be unex-
tended. But some preliminary remarks on the
real significance of pain are indispensable.
When a foreign body touches one of the pro-
longations of the- amoeba, that prolongation is
retracted; every part of the protoplasmic mass
is equally able to receive a stimulation and to
react against it; perception and movement being
here blended in a single property,—contrac-
tility. But, as the organism grows more com-
plex, there is a division of labour; functions


56 MATTER AND MEMORY bee


become differentiated, and the anatomical ele-
ments thus determined forego their independence.
In such an organism as our own, the nerve fibres
termed sensory are exclusively empowered to
transmit stimulation to a central region whence the
vibration will be passed on to motor elements.
It would seem then that they have abandoned
individual action to take their share, as outposts,
in the manceuvres of the whole body. But none
the less they remain exposed, singly, to the same
causes of destruction which threaten the organ-
ism as a whole; and while this organism is able to
move, and thereby to escape a danger or to repair
a loss, the sensitive element retains the relative
immobility to which the division of labour con-
demnsit. Thence arises pain, which, in our view,
is nothing but the effort of the damaged element
to set things right,—a kind of motor tendency in
a sensory nerve. Every pain, then, must consist
_ in an effort,—an effort which is doomed to be
“unavailing. Every pain is a local effort, and in
its very isolation lies the cause of its impotence ;
because the organism, by reason of the solidarity
of its parts, is able to move only as a whole.
It is also because the effort is local that pain is
entirely disproportioned to the danger incurred
by the living being. The danger may be mortal
and the pain slight ; the pain may be unbearable
(as in toothache) and the danger insignificant.
There is then, there must be, a precise moment
when pain intervenes: it is when the interested


CHAP, ¥ NATURE OF AFFECTIVE SENSATION 57


part of the organism, instead of accepting the
stimulation, repels it. And it is not merely a dif-
ference of degree that separates perception from
affection, but a difference in kind.

Now, we have considered the living body as a
kind of centre whence is reflected on the surround-
ing objects the action which these objects exercise
upon it: in that reflexion external perception
consists. But this centre is not a mathematical
point ; itisa body, exposed, like all natural bodies,
to the action of external causes which threaten
to disintegrate it. We have just seen that it
resists the influence of these causes. It does not
merely reflect action received from without; it
struggles, and thus absorbs some part of this action.
Here is the source of affection. We might there-
fore say, metaphorically, that while perception”
measures the reflecting power of the body, affection
measures its power to absorb.

But this is only a metaphor. We must con-
sider the matter more carefully, in order to under-
Affection Stand clearly that the necessity of affec-
difters from tion follows from the very existence of


perception in
that it isteal perception. Perception, understood as
virtual action. we understand it, measures our possible
action upon things, and thereby, inversely, the 3
possible action of things upon us. The greater
the body’s power of action (symbolized by a higher
degree of complexity in the nervous system), the
wider is the field that perception embraces. The %4+=---~*
distance which separates our body from an object » + res olka
Sy ae J Pare, -} ae Wir wr feta eras Pa Ol pus Ue andi
| oF wre sytney awk but amas od Whack, artteet
ee 0 ee in) tran &t Tern LA. fe toto : Yb Via are 7


2, $@e “ie
A
e


Kes
AAPL A U/ts_,. £54.


Pa Ae
ee te


aw low


5 ut
a Maa ee es “s


4c
Wat CAm cued Care Rarnes Ae fe a as Ps psica Fat


i frre lor avant Ly trad wo peo eGanieala 2 ag sat
at. LS RoR Sees, Sim

AA Ap ’ . ¥ ie z The a

~e re "er pa Fu ore, mas f ey ~ @ 4, 4 APOE , hare {- Ga a ste * te

naa alc es Ree


a A \ a


"3 5 te
A ta ale apex. “ore


58 MATTER AND MEMORY sHAP. ¥


perceived really measures, therefore, the greater or
less imminence of a danger, the nearer or more
remote fulfilment of a promise. And, conse-
quently, our perception of an object distinct from
our body, separated from our body by an interval,
never expresses anything but a vwivtual action.
But the more the distance decreases between this
object and our body (the more, in other words,
the danger becomes urgent or the promise immedi-
ate), the more does virtual action tend to pass into
vealaction. Suppose the distance reduced to zero,
that is to say that the object to be perceived
coincides with our body, that is to say again,
that our body is the object to be perceived. Then
it is no longer virtual action, but real action, that
this specialized perception will express: and this is
exactly what affection is. Our sensations are, then,
to our perceptions that which the real action of our
body is to its possible or virtual action. Its virtual
action concerns other objects, and is manifested
within those objects; its real action concerns
itself, and is manifested within its own  sub-
stance. Everything then will happen as if, by
a true return of real and virtual actions to their
points of application or of origin, the external
images were reflected by our body into surrounding
space, and the real actions arrested by it within
itself. And that is why its surface, the common
limit of the external and the internal, is the only
portion of space which is both perceived and
felt.


CHAP, I THE IMAGE, APART FROM SENSATION 59


That is to say, once more, that my perception is
outside my body, and my affection within it.
Just as external objects are perceived by me
where they are, in themselves and not in me,
so my affective states are experienced there where
they occur, that is, at a given point in my body.
Consider the system of images which is called the
material world. My body is one of them.

Around this image is grouped the representation,
1.e. its eventual influence on the others. Within
it occurs affection, z.e. its actual effort upon
itself. Such is indeed the fundamental differ-
ence which every one of us naturally makes
between an image and a sensation. When we say
that the image exists outside us, we signify by
this that it is external to our body. When we
speak of sensation as an internal state, we mean
that it arises within in our body. And this is
why we affirm that the totality of perceived images
subsists, even if our body disappears, whereas
we know that we cannot annihilate our body with-
out destroying our sensations.

Hence we begin to see that we must correct, at
least in this particular, our theory of pure percep-

tion. We have argued as though our
That is to ; :
say pure perception were a part of the images,
Deis only if detached, as such, from their entirety ; as
fact itis. though, expressing the virtual action of
with afc ** the object upon our body, or of our body
“ae upon the object, perception merely iso-
lated from the total object that aspect of it which


5 |


f-


60 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


interests us. But we have to take into account the
fact that our body is not a mathematical point in
space, that its virtual actions are complicated by
and impregnated with real actions, or, in other
words, that there isno perception without affection.
Affection is, then, that part or aspect of the inside of
our ‘body which we mix with the image of external
bodies ; it is what we must first of all subtract from
perception to get the image inits purity. Butthe
psychologist who shuts his eyes to the difference
of function and nature between perception and
sensation,—the latter involving a real action,
and the former a merely possible action,—can
only find between them a difference of degree.
Because sensation (on account of the confused
effort which it involves) is only vaguely loca-
lized, he declares it unextended, and thence makes
sensation in general the simple element from which
we obtain by composition all externalimages. The
truth is that affection is not the primary matter
of which perception is made; it is rather the
impurity with which perception is alloyed.

Here we grasp, at its origin, the error which
leads the psychologist to consider sensation as
unextended and perception as an aggregate of
sensations. This error is reinforced, as we shall
see, by illusions derived from a false conception of
the réle of space and of the nature of extensity.
But it has also the support of misinterpreted facts,
which we must now examine.

It appears, in the first place, as if the localiza-


cHaP. I THE IMAGE, APART FROM SENSATION 61


tion of an affective sensation in one part of the


Why aftee- body were a matter of gradual training. |


inte cnuett A certain time elapses before the child


unextended. can touch with the finger the precise
point where it has been pricked.—The fact is
indisputable ; but all that can be concluded from
it is that some tentative essays are required to
co-ordinate the painful impressions on the skin,
which has received the prick, with the impressions
of the muscular sense which guides the movement
of arm and hand. Our internal affections, like
our external perceptions, are of different kinds.
These kinds, like those of perception, are discon-
tinuous, separated by intervals which are filled up
in the course of education. But it does not at all
follow that there is not, for each affection, an
immediate localization of a certain kind, a local
colour which is proper to it. We may go further :
if the affection has not this local colour at once, it
will never have it. For all that education can do
is to associate with the actual affective sensation
the idea of a certain potential perception of sight
and touch, so that a definite affection may evoke
the image of a visual or tactile impression, equally
definite. There must be, therefore, in this affec-
tion itself, something which distinguishes it from
other affections of the same kind, and permits of
its reference to this or that potential datum of sight
or touch rather than to any other. But is not this
equivalent to saying that affection possesses, from
the outset, a certain determination of extensity °


i,
oe


&y


62 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


Again, it is alleged that there are erroneous
localizations ; for example, the illusion of those


+ who have lost a limb (an illusion which requires,


‘however, further examination). But what can we

conclude from this beyond the fact that education,
once acquired, persists, and that such data of
memory as are more useful in practical life supplant
those of immediate consciousness ? It is indispen-
sable, in view of action, that we should translate
our affective experience into eventual data of sight,
touch, and muscular sense. When once this
translation is made, the original pales; but it
never could have been made if the original had not
been there to begin with, and if sensation had
not been, from the beginning, localized by its own
power and in its own way.

But the psychologist has much difficulty in
accepting this idea from common sense. Just
It we make 2S perception, in his view, could be in.
affection | the things perceived only if they had


extra-spatial :
we render + perception, so a sensation cannot be in


perception

inexplicable. =the nerve unless the nerve feels. Now
it is evident that the nerve does not feel. So
he takes sensation away from the point where
common sense localizes it, carries it towards the
brain, on which, more than on the nerve, it appears
to depend, and logically should end by placing
itin the brain. But it soon becomes clear that
if it is not at the point where it appears to arise,
neither can it be anywhere else : if it is not in the
nerve, neither is it in the brain ; for to explain its


CHAP, I NATURAL EXTENSION OF IMAGES 63


projection from the centre to the periphery a
certain force is necessary, which must be attributed
to a consciousness that is to some extent active.
Therefore, he must go further; and, after having
made sensations converge towards the cerebral
centre, must push them out of the brain, and
thereby out of space. So he has to imagine on
the one hand sensations that are absolutely
unextended, and on the other hand an empty space
indifferent to the sensations which are projected
into it: henceforth he will exhaust himself in
efforts of every kind to make us understand how
unextended sensations acquire extensity, and why
they choose for their abode this or that point of
space rather than any other. But this doctrine
is not only incapable of showing us clearly how
the unextended takes on extension; it renders
affection, extension, and representation equally
inexplicable. It must assume affective states as
so many absolutes, of which it is impossible to
say why they appear in or disappear from con-
sciousness at definite moments. The passage from
affection to representation remains wrapt in an
equally impenetrable mystery, because, once again,
you will never find in internal states, which are
supposed to be simple and unextended, any reason
why they should prefer this or that particular
order in space. And, finally, representation itself
must be posited as an absolute : we cannot guess
either its origin or its goal.

Everything becomes clearer, on the other hand,


64 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


/ ifwe start from representation itself, that is to say


’ from the totality of perceived images. My percep-


tion, in its pure state, isolated from memory, does
not go on from my body to other bodies ; it is, to
begin with, in the aggregate of bodies, then gradu-
ally limits itself and adopts my body as a centre.
And it is led to do so precisely by experience of the
double faculty, which this body possesses, of per-
forming actions and feeling affections ; ina word, by
experience of the sensori-motor power of a certain
image, privileged among other images. For, on
the one hand, this image always occupies the centre
of representation, so that the other images range
themselves round it in the very order in which they
might be subject to its action; on the other hand,
I know it from within, by sensations which I term
affective, instead of knowing only, as in the case of
the other images, its outer skin. There is then, in
the aggregate of images, a privileged image,
perceived in its depths and no longer only on the


~ surface—the seat of affection and, at the same


time, the source of action: it is this particular
image which I adopt as the centre of my universe
and as the physical basis of my personality.

But before we go on to establish the precise rela-
tion between the personality and the images in
which it dwells, let us briefly sum up, contrast-
ing it with the analyses of current psychology, the
theory of pure perception which we have just
sketched out.

_ We will return, for the sake of simplicity, to


CHAP, I NATURAL EXTENSION OF IMAGES 65


the sense of sight, which we chose as our example.
The result pF SYChology has accustomed us t@ assume
positing sensa- the elementary sensations corresponding


tions and : “ :
thencon- to the impressions received by the rods


structing
peepaon, and cones of the retina. With these
sensations it goes on to reconstitute
visual perception. But, in the first place, there is
not one retina, there are two; so that we have to
explain how two sensations, held to be distinct,
combine to form a single perception correspond-
ing to what we call a point in space.

Suppose this problem solved. The sensations
in question are unextended ; how will they ac-
quire extension? Whether we see in extensity
a framework ready to receive sensations, or an
effect of the mere simultaneity of sensations co-
existing in consciousness without coalescing, in
either case something new is introduced with
extensity, something unaccounted for; the
process by which sensation arrives at extension,
and the choice by each elementary sensation of a
definite point in space, remain alike unexplained,

We will leave this difficulty, and suppose visual
extension constituted. How does it in its turn re-
unite with tactile extension? All that my vision
perceives in space is verified by my touch. Shall
we say that objects are constituted by just the
co-operation of sight and touch, and that the agree-
ment of the two senses in perception may. be
explained by the fact that the object perceived is


their common product ? But how could there be
F


66 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


anything common, in the matter of quality, between
an elementary visual sensation and a tactile sensa-
tion, since they belong to two different genera ? The
correspondence between visual and tactile extension
can only be explained, therefore, by the parallelism
of the order of the visual sensations with the order
of the tactile sensations. So we are now obliged
to suppose, over and above visual sensations, over
and above tactile sensations, a certain order which
is common to both, and which consequently must
be independent of either. We may go further : this
order is independent of our individual perception,
since it is the same for all men, and constitutes
a material world in which effects are linked with
causes, in which phenomena obey laws. We are
thus led at last to the hypothesis of an objective
order, independent of ourselves; that is to say, of
a material world distinct from sensation.

We have had, as we advanced, to multiply our
irreducible data, and to complicate more and more
the simple hypothesisfrom which we started. But
have we gained anything by it? Though the
matter which we have been led to posit is indis-
pensable in order to account for the marvellous
accord of sensations among themselves, we still
know nothing of it, since we must refuse to it all
the qualities perceived, all the sensations of which
it has only to explain the correspondence. It is
not, then, it cannot be, anything of what we
know, anything of what we imagine. It remains
a mysterious entity.


CHAP. I NATURAL EXTENSION OF IMAGES 67 .


But our own nature, the office and the function
of our personality, remain enveloped in equal
mystery. For these elementary unextended sen-
sations which develop themselves in space, whence
do they come, how are they born, what purpose
do they serve ? We must posit them as so many
absolutes, of which we see neither the origin nor
the end. And even supposing that we must
distinguish, in each of us, between the spirit
and the body, we can know nothing either of
body or of spirit, nor of the relation between them.

Now in what does this hypothesis of ours consist,
and at what precise point does it part company
Action, not Withtheother? Instead of starting from
shoulite the 4fection, of which we can say nothing,
starting point. since there is no reason why it should be
what it is rather than anything else, we start from
action, that is to say from our faculty of effecting
changes in things,a faculty attested by consciousness
and towards which all the powers of the organized
body are seen to converge. So we place ourselves
at once in the midst of extended images; and in
this material universe we perceive centres of inde-
termination, characteristic of life. In order that
actions may radiate from these centres, the move-
ments or influences of the other images must beon
the one hand received and on the other utilized.
Living matter, in its simplest form, and in a
homogeneous state, accomplishes this function
simultaneously with those of nourishment and
repair. The progress of such matter consists in


68 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, I


sharing this double labour between two categories
of organs, the purpose of the first, called organs
_, of nutrition, being to maintain the second: these
last are made for action; they have as their
simple type a chain of nervous elements, connect-
ing two extremities of which the one receives
external impressions and the other executes move-
ments. Thus, to return to the example of visual
perception, the office of the rods and cones is merely
to receive excitations which will be subsequently
elaborated into movements, either accomplished
or nascent. No perception can result from this,
and nowhere, in the nervous system, are there
conscious centres ; but perception arises from the
same cause which has brought into being the chain
of nervous elements, with the organs which sustain
them and with life in general. It expresses and
measures the power of action in the living being,


the indetermination of the movement or of the ¢*


action which will follow the receipt of the stimulus.
This indetermination, as we have shown, will ex-
press itself in a reflexion upon themselves, or
better in a division, of the images which surround
our body ; and, as the chain of nervous elements
which receives, arrests, and transmits movements
is the seat of this indetermination and gives its
measure, our perception will follow all the detail
and will appear to express all the variations of
the nervous elements themselves. Perception,
in its pure state, is then, in very truth, a part of
things. And as for affective sensation, it does


Pins,


CHAP. I PURE PERCEPTION 69.


not spring spontaneously from the depths of
consciousness to extend itself, as it grows weaker,
in space; it is one with the necessary modifi-
cations to which, in the midst of the surround-
ing images that influence it, the particular
image that each one of us terms his body is
subject.


Such is our simplified, schematic theory of exter-
nal perception. It is the theory of pure percep-
tion. If we went no further, the part of con-
sciousness in perception would thus be confined to
threading on the continuous string of memory
an uninterrupted series of instantaneous visions,
which would be a part of things rather than of
ourselves. That this 7s the chief office of con-
sciousness in external perception is indeed
what we may deduce a priori from the very defini-
tion of living bodies. For though the function
of these bodies is to receive stimulations in order
to elaborate them into unforeseen reactions, still
the choice of the reaction cannot be the work of ~
chance. This choice is likely to be inspired by
past experience, and the reaction does not take
place without an appeal to the memories which
analogous situations may have left behind them.
The indetermination of acts to be accomplished
requires then, if it is not to be confounded with
pure caprice, the preservation of the images per-
ceived. It may be said that we have no grasp of
the future without an equal and corresponding


70 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


outlook over the past, that the onrush of our
activity makes a void behind it into which memories
flow, and that memory is thus the reverbera-
tion, in the sphere of consciousness, of the inde-
termination of our will.—But the action of memory
goes further and deeper than this superficial
glance would suggest. The moment has come
to reinstate. memory in perception, to correct
in this way the element of exaggeration in our
conclusions, and so to determine with more
precision the point of contact between con-
sciousness and things, between the body and
the spirit.

Weassert, at the outset, that if there be memory,
that is, the survival of past images, these images
panies: aust constantly mingle with our percep-

erception is 7 ee ae :
less objective tion of the present, and may even takeits


in fact than in ¢ : Br :
theory because place. Forifthey have survived it is with


it includes : eae
- nine of a view tot utility ; at every moment they
complete our present experience, enrich-
ing it with experience already acquired ; and, as the
latter is ever increasing, it must end by covering up
andsubmerging theformer. Itisindisputable that
the basis of real, and so to speak instantaneous,
intuition, on which our perception of the external
world is developed, is a small matter compared
with all that memory adds to it. Just because
the recollection of earlier analogous intuitions
is more useful than the intuition itself, being
bound up in memory with the whole series of
subsequent events, and capable thereby of throw-


CHAP, I PURE PERCEPTION 71


ing a better light on our decision, it supplants the
eal intuition o which the office is then merely—
we shall prove it later—to call up the recollection,
to give it a body, to render it active and thereby
actual. We had every right, then, to say that
the coincidence of perception with the object
perceived exists in theory rather than in fact.
We must take into account that_perception ends
by being merely < an occasion for _temembering,


peers


that we measure in practice the “deer ee of reality +


by the degree of utility, and, finally, that it


is our interest to regard as mere signs of the ,


real those immediate intuitions which are, in
fact, part and parcel with reality. But here we


discover the mistake of those who say that to


perceive is to project externally unextended
sensations which have been drawn from our
own depths, and then to develop them in space.
They have no difficulty in showing that our com-
plete perception is filled with images which belong
to us personally, with exteriorized (that is to say
~ recollected) images; but they forget that an
impersonal basis remains in which perception
coincides with the object perceived; and which

is, in fact, externality itself.
The capital error, the error which, passing over
from psychology into metaphysic, shuts us out
in the end from the knowledge both of


Pure percep-


tion and pure body and of spirit, is that which sees »*


memory


constantly only a difference of intensity, instead


t ingle, g
intermi of a difference of nature, between pure


7


ee


72 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


perception and memory. Our perceptions are un-
doubtedly interlaced with memories, and inversely,
a memory, as we shall show later, only becomes
‘gactual by borrowing the body of some perception
‘into which it slips. These two acts, perception
and recollection, always interpenetrate each other,
are always exchanging something of their sub-
stance as by a process of endosmosis. The proper
office of psychologists would be to dissociate
them, to give back to each its natural purity ;
in this way many difficulties raised by psychology,
and perhaps also by metaphysics, might be les-
sened. But they will have it that these mixed
states, compounded, in unequal proportions, of
pure perception and pure memory, are simple.
And so we are condemned to an ignorance
alike of pure memory and of pure perception;
to knowing only a single kind of phenomenon
which will be called now memory and now per-
ception, according to the predominance in it of
one or other of the two aspects; and, con-
sequently, to finding between perception and
memory only a difference in degree and not in
kind. The first effect of this error, as we shall
see in detail, is to vitiate profoundly the theory
of memory; for if we make _ recollection
merely a weakened perception we misunderstand
the essential difference between the past and the
present, we abandon all hope of understanding
the phenomena of recognition, and, more gener-
ally, the mechanism of the unconscious. But, in-


CHAP, THE PROBLEM OF MATTER vis:


versely, if recollection is regarded as a weakened
perception, perception must be regarded as a
stronger recollection. We are driven to argue as
though it was given to us after the manner of a
memory, as an internal state, a mere modification
of our personality; and our eyes are closed to the
primordial and fundamental act of perception,—


the act, constituting pure perception, whereby we sie


place ourselves in the very heart of things. And
thus the same error, which manifests itself in
psychology by a radical incapacity to explain the
mechanism of memory, will in metaphysics pro-
foundly influence the idealistic and _ realistic
conceptions of matter.

For realism, in fact, the invariable order of the
phenomena of nature lies in a cause distinct from
our perceptions, whether this cause must remain
unknowable, or whether we can reach it by an
effort (always more or less arbitrary) of meta-
physical construction. For the idealist, on the
contrary, these perceptions are the whole of
reality, and the invariable order of the phenomena
of nature is but the symbol whereby we express,
alongside of real perceptions, perceptions that are
possible. But, for realism as for idealism, percep-
tions are ‘veridical hallucinations,’ states of the
subject, projected outside himself; and the two
doctrines differ merely in this: that in the one
these states constitute reality, in the other they
are sent forth to unite with it.

But behind this illusion lurks yet another that


me Grandes gone Bets peer
re ae ae Saat oe | CHAP. I


extends to the theory of knowledge in general. We

have said that the material world is made

Philosophy Up. Of objects, -or, -if- you :preier it, of

figecate . images, of which all the parts act and

ean react upon each other bymovements. And

‘that which constitutes our pure perception

ge our dawning action, in so far as it is pre-

¥ figured in those images. The actuality of

a ete our perception thus lies in its activity, in the

~ kad movements which prolong it, and not in its

W oF ({’ greater intensity: the past is only idea, the

ee present_is_ideo-motor. But this is what our

opponents are determined not to see, because

W they regard perception as a kind of contempla-

4 tion, attribute to it always a purely speculative

z end, and maintain that it seeks some strange

disinterested knowledge ; as though, by isolating

it from action, and thus severing its links with the

real, they were not rendering it both inexplicable

and useless. But thenceforward all difference

between perception and recollection is abolished,

—~ since the pastis essentially that which acts no longer,

and since, by misunderstanding this characteristic

of the past, they become incapable of making a

real distinction between it and the present, 7.¢. that

which 1s acting. No difference but that of
mere degree will remain between perception and —~
memory ; and neither in the one nor in the other a
will the subject be acknowledged to pass beyond .- i
himself.—Restore, on the contrary, the true char- ~ ~

* acter of 5 Pree recognize in p pure eee ception a


ne ah ee ee
ey te Bi y t. Py tee ALG. ’ ru~ Ci lek . Me PE Ew fe ~. a Ade Carter
= Su bons dee a fi iret ( wae at b2e HW ¢. PR boty <7 «e gf Cerarctt
ee ou Seer
a Ge ON OO Ae A Ferre ob wy en mea 2 Kaen, 7 ak [eae ae


fe Tut. nia - oat *) poa La ie “lis — wre A x 1 ¢ 44f% be ae
4, ‘ dipew et RED = F I


”


\ e &: t hohe? 2 Mier ye vhs . vk whey © « Bdinde & hat Oy io PLE to were td


a $ « ff fs. ie Pee so: be ase :
Vd. fo sal } 2 +, is ae ‘ t % ftad “hieval- t es eae me bee, Lets


Met Wha yutdo “ (nee polim Mead ry proce fle
gece Lotte dart - Min, 6S =


CHAP. I THE PROBLEM OF MATTER ye)


system of nascent acts which plunges roots deep
into the real; and at once perception is seen to be
radically distinct from recollection; the reality /4.
of things is no more constructed or recon-
structed, but touched, penetrated, lived; and the
problem at issue e between realism svi idealism,
instead of giving rise to interminable metaphysical
discussions, is solved, or rather dissolved by


In this way also we shall plainly see what


position we ought to take up between idealism


It might and realism, which are both condemned
mee *" to see in matter only a construc-


tatwesr’ tion or a reconstruction executed by


cp ts the mind. For if we follow out to the
end the principle according to which the
subjectivity of our perception consists, above
all, in the share taken by memory, we shall say
that even the sensible qualities of matter would
be known in themselves, from within and not from
without, could we but disengage them from that
particular rhythm of duration which characterizes
our consciousness. Pure perception, in fact,
however rapid we suppose it to be, occupies a
certain depth of duration, so that our successive
perceptions are never the real moments of things,
as we have hitherto supposed, but are moments
of our.consciousness. Theoretically, we said, the
part played by consciousness in external perception
would be to join together, by the continuous
thread of memory, instantaneous visions of


76 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


the real. But, in fact, there is for usnothing that
’ is instantaneous. In all that goes by that name
there is already some work of our memory, and
consequently of our consciousness, which prolongs
into each other, so as to grasp them in one relatively
simple intuition, an endless number of moments
of an endlessly divisible time. Now what is,
in truth, the difference between matter as the
strictest realism might conceive it, and the per-
ception which we have of it? Our perception
presents us with a series of pictorial, but discon-
tinuous, views of the universe; from our present
perceptions we could not deduce subsequent
perceptions, because there is nothing in an
aggregate of sensible qualities which foretells
the new qualities into which they will change.
On the contrary, matter, as realism usually
posits it, evolves in such a manner that we can
pass from one moment to the next by a mathe-
matical deduction. It is true that, between this
matter and this perception, scientific realism can
| find no point of contact, because it develops
~ matter into homogeneous changes in space, while
it contracts perception into unextended sensa-
tions within consciousness. But, if our hypo-
thesis is correct, we can easily see how perception
and matter are distinguished, and how they
coincide. The qualitative heterogeneity of our
successive perceptions of the universe results from
the fact that each, in itself, extends over a certain
depth of duration, and that memory condenses


CHAP, 1 THE PROBLEM OF MATTER a7


in each an enormous multiplicity of vibrations


which appear to us all at once, although they are
successive. If we were only to divide, ideally, this
undivided depth of time, to distinguish in it the
necessary multiplicity of moments, in a word to
eliminate all memory, we should pass thereby from
perception to matter, from the subject to the object.
Then matter, becoming more and more homo-
geneous as our extended sensations spread them-
selves over a greater number of moments, would
tend more and more towards that system of homo-
geneous vibrations of which realism tells us, al-
though it would never coincide entirely with them.
There would be no need to assume, on the one
hand, space with unperceived movements, and,
on the other, consciousness with unextended
sensations. Subject and object would unite in
an extended perception the subjective side of
perception being the contraction effected by
memory, and the objective reality of matter fusing
with the multitudinous and successive vibrations
into which this perception can be internally
broken up. Such at least is the conclusion which,
we hope, will issue clearly from the last part of
this essay. Questions relating to subject and object,
to their distinction and their umion, should be put
in terms of time rather than of space.


But our distinction between ‘ pure perception ’
and ‘pure memory’ has yet another aim. Just
as pure perception, by giving us hints as to the


a


i


78 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, I


nature of matter, allows us to take an intermediate
position between realism and idealism, so pure
memory, on the other hand, by opening to us a
view of what is called spirit, should enable us to
decide between those other two doctrines, mater-


“Y ialism and spiritualism Indeed it is this aspect


NN


of the subject which will first occupy our atten-
tion in the two following chapters, because it
is in this aspect that our hypothesis allows some
degree of experimental verification.

For it is possible to sum up our conclusions as
to pure perception by saying that there 1s in matter
As also ofthe something more than, but not something
true nature of ,. © :

Spirit. different from, that which 1s actually
given. Undoubtedly conscious perception does not
compass the whole of matter, since it consists,
in as far as it is conscious, in the separation, or the
‘discernment,’ of that which, in matter, interests
our various needs. But between this perception
of matter and matter itself there is but a differ-
ence of degree and not of kind, pure perception
standing towards matter in the relation of the
part to the whole. This amounts to saying that
matter cannot exercise powers of any kind other
than those which we perceive. It has no mys-
terious virtue, it can conceal none. To take a
definite example, one moreover which interests
us most nearly, we may say that the nervous


1 The word ‘spiritualism’ is used throughout this work
to signify any philosophy that claims for spirit an existence
of its own, (Translators’ note.)


CHAP. I THE PROBLEM OF MATTER 79


system, a material mass presenting certain quali-
ties of colour, resistance, cohesion, etc., may
well possess unperceived physical properties, but
physical properties only. And hence it can have
no other office than to receive, inhibit, or transmit
movement.

Now the essence of every form of materialism
is to maintain the contrary, since it holds that
consciousness, with all its functions, is born of
the mere interplay of materialelements. Hence it
is led to consider even the perceived qualities
of matter,—sensible, and consequently felt, quali-
ties,—as so many phosphorescences which follow
the track of the cerebral phenomena in the act of
perception. Matter, thus supposed capable of
creating elementary facts of consciousness, might
therefore just as well engender intellectual facts
of the highest order. It is, then, of the essence
of materialism to assert the perfect relativity of
sensible qualities, and it is not without good
reason that this thesis, which Democritus has
formulated in precise terms, is as old as
materialism.

But spiritualism has always followed mater-
ialism along this path. As if everything lost to
matter must be gained by spirit, spiritualism has
never hesitated to despoil matter of the qualities
with which it isinvested in our perception, and
which, on this view, are subjective appearances.
Matter has thus too often been reduced to a
mysterious entity which, just because all we


+


~~


* of memory.


80 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


know of it is an empty show, might as well
engender thought as any other phenomenon.

The truth is that there is one, and only one,
method of refuting materialism: it is to show
that matter is precisely that which it appears to be.
Thereby we eliminate all virtuality, all hidden
power, from matter, andestablish the phenomena
of spirit as an independent reality. But to do
this we must leave to matter those qualities
which materialists and spiritualists alike strip
from it: the latter that they may make of them
representations of the spirit, the former that they
may regard them only as the accidental garb of
space.

This, indeed, is the attitude of common sense
with regard to matter, and for this reason com-
mon sense believes in spirit. It seems to us
that philosophy should here adopt the attitude
of common sense, although correcting it in one
respect. Memory, inseparable in practice from
perception, imports the _past into_ tne _ present,
contracts into a single intuition ma many moments
of duration, and thus by a twofold operation com-
pells us, de facto, to perceive matter in ourselves,
whereas we, de jure, perceive matter within matter.

Hence the capital importance of the problem
of memory. If it is memory above all that lends

to perception its subjective character,
ae * the philosophy of matter must aim
eee in the first instance, we said, at elimina-
_ting the contributions of memory. We


CHAP, 1 THE PROBLEM OF MATTER 81.


must now add that, as pure perception gives us
the whole or at least the essential part of matter
(since the rest comes from memory and is super-
added to matter), it follows that memory must
be, in principle, a power absolutely independent


of matter. If, then, spirit is a reality, it is here, &


in the phenomenon of memory, that wé may
come into touch with it experimentally. And
hence any attempt to derive pure memory from
an operation of the brain should reveal on analysis
a radical illusion.

Let us put the same statement in clearer lan-


guage. We maintain that matter has no occult ~


or unknowable power, and that it coin-
Seeing that a
cates cides, in essentials, with pure perception,
refutes: mate- Thence we conclude that the living body
in general, and the nervous system in
particular, are only channels for the transmission
of movements, which, received in the form of
stimulation, are transmitted in the form of action,
reflex or voluntary. That is to say, it is vain to
attribute to the cerebral substance the property
of engendering representations. Now the pheno-
mena of memory, in which we believe that we
can grasp spirit in its most tangible form, are pre-
cisely those of which a superficial psychology is
most ready to find the origin in cerebral activity
alone ; just because they are at the point of con-
tact between consciousness and matter, and
because even the adversaries of materialism have


no objection to treating the brain as a storehouse
G


\\


ate
7


"denon
mee Mapai tes sy


82 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, I


of memories. But if it could be positively estab-
lished that the cerebral process answers only to
a very small part of memory, that it is rather the
effect than the cause, that matter is here as else-
where the vehicle of an action and not the sub-
stratum of a knowledge, then the thesis which
we are maintaining would be demonstrated by
the very example which is commonly supposed to
be most unfavourable to it, and the necessity


might arise of erecting spirit into an independent


reality. In this way also, perhaps, some light would
be thrown on the nature of what is called
spirit, and on the possibility of the interaction of
spirit and matter. For a demonstration of this
kind could not be purely negative. Having shown
what memory is not, we should have to try to
discover what it is. Having attributed to the
body the sole function of preparing actions, we are
bound to enquire why memory appears to be one
with this body, how bodily lesions influence it,
and in what sense it may be said to mould itself
upon the state of the brain matter. It is, more-
over, impossible that this enquiry should fail to
give us some information as to the psychological
mechanism of memory, and the various mental
operations connected therewith. And, inversely,
if the problems of pure psychology seem to ac-
quire some light from our hypothesis, this
hypothesis itself will thereby gain in certainty and
weight.

But we must present this same idea in yet a


CHAP, I MEMORY 8 om


third form, so as to make it quite clear why the
And might Problem of memory is in our eyes a
read teat privileged problem. From our analysis
eatentyanal Of pure perception issue two conclu-
problems. sions which are in some sort divergent,
one of them going beyond psychology in the
direction of psycho-physiology, and the other in
that of metaphysics, but neither allowing of immed-
late verification. The first concerns the office of
the brain in_ perception: we maintain that the
brain is an instrument of action, and not of
representation. We cannot demand from facts
the direct confirmation of this thesis, because pure
perception bears, by definition, upon present
objects, acting on our organs and our nerve centres ;
and because everything always happens, in conse-
quence, as though our perceptions emanated from
our cerebral state, and were subsequently pro-
jected upon an object which differs absolutely
from them. In other words, with regard to
external perception the thesis which we dispute
and that which we substitute for it lead to pre-
cisely the same consequences, so that it is possible
to invoke in favour of either the one or the other
its greater intelligibility, but not the authority of
experience. On the contrary, the empirical study
of memory may and must decide between them.
For pure recollection is, by hypothesis, the repre-
sentation of an absent object. If the necessary
and sufficient cause of perception lies in a certain
activity of the brain, this same cerebral activity,


84 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


repeating itself more or less completely in the
absence of the object, will suffice to reproduce
perception: memory will be entirely explicable
by the brain. But if we find that the cerebral
mechanism does indeed in some sort condition
memories, but is in no way sufficient to ensure
their survival; if it concerns, in remembered
perception, our action rather than our repre-
sentation; we shall be able to infer that it
plays an analogous part in perception itself, and
that its office is merely to ensure our effective
action on the object present. Our first conclusion
may thus find its verification—There would
still remain this second conclusion, which is of a
more metaphysical order,—viz. : that in pure per-
ception we are actually placed outside ourselves,
we touch the reality of the object in an immediate
intuition. Here also an experimental verifica-
tion is impossible, since the practical results are
absolutely the same whether the reality of the
object is intuitively perceived or whether it is
rationally constructed. But here again a study
of memory may decide between the two
hypotheses. For, in the second, there is only. a
difference of intensity, or more generally, of
degree, between perception and_ recollection,
since they are both self-sufficient phenomena
of representation. But if, on the contrary, we
find that the difference between perception and
recollection is not merely in degree, but is a
radical difference in kind, the presumption will


CHAP. 1 MEMORY 85


be in favour of the hypothesis which finds in per-
ception something which is entirely absent from
memory, a reality intuitively grasped. Thus
the problem of memory is in very truth a privi-
leged problem, in that it must lead to the psycho-
logical verification of two theses which appear to
be insusceptible of proof, and of which the second,
being of a metaphysical order, appears to go far
beyond the borders of psychology.

The road which we have to follow, then, lies
clear before us. We shall first pass in review
evidences of various kinds borrowed from normal
and from pathological psychology, by which
philosophers might hold themselves justified in
maintaining a physical explanation of memory.
This examination must needs be minute or it
would be useless. Keeping as close as possible
to facts, we must seek to discover where, in the
operations of memory, the office of the body begins,
and where it ends. And should we, in the course
of this enquiry, find confirmation of our own hypo-
thesis, we shall not hesitate to go further and,
considering in itself the elementary work of the
mind, complete the theory thereby sketched out,
of the relation of spirit with matter,


CHAPTER II


OF THE RECOGNITION OF IMAGES. MEMORY AND
THE BRAIN.


WE pass now to the consideration of the conse-
quences for the theory of memory, which might
The two ensue from the acceptance of the prin-
memory: the CIples we have laid down. We have
asa bodily said that the body, placed between the
habit, or as . : 2
an indepen- objects which act upon it and those
lection. which it influences, is only a conductor,
the office of which is to receive movements, and
to transmit them (when it does not arrest them)
to certain motor mechanisms, determined if the
action is reflex, chosen if the action is volun-
tary. Everything, then, must happen as if an
independent memory gathered images as they
successively occur along the course of time;
and as if our body, together with its surround-
ings, was never more than one among these
images, the last, that which we obtain at any mo-
ment by making an instantaneous section in the
general stream of becoming. In this section our
body occupies the centre. The things which
surround it act upon it, and it reacts upon them.


Its reactions are more or less complex, more or
85


CHAP. II THE TWO FORMS OF MEMORY 87


less varied, according to the number and nature ~


of the apparatus which experience has set up
within it. Therefore in the form of motor contri-
vances, and of motor contrivances only, it can
store up the action of the past. Whence it
results that past images, properly so called, must
be otherwise preserved ; and we may formulate
this first hypothesis :

I. The past survives under two distinct forms :
first, 1n motoy_mechanisms ; secondly, in_andepen-
pendent_recollections.

But then the practical, and consequently the
usual function of memory, the utilizing of past
experience for present action,—recognition, in
short,—must take place in two different ways.
Sometimes it lies in the action itself, and in the
automatic setting in motion of a mechanism
adapted to the circumstances ; at other times it
implies an effort of the mind Anon seeks in the
past, in order to ‘apply them to the present, those
representations which are best able to enter into
the present situation. Whence our second pro-
position :

II. The recogmtion of a present object is effected
by movements when wt proceeds from the object, by
representations when it issues from the subject.

It is true that there remains yet another ques-
tion: how these representations are preserved,
and what are their relations with the motor me-
chanisms. We shall go into this subject thor-
oughly in our next chapter, after we have con-


88 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. If


sidered the unconscious, and shown where the
fundamental distinction lies between the past
and the present. But already we may speak of
, thebody as.an ever advancing boundary between
x, the future a _and_ tne el past} asa pointed en end,
NS GOT
! which ch soups past.i s_continually _ driving forward
inta_o our future. Whereas my body, taken at a
single moment, is but a conductor interposed
between the objects which influence it and those
on which it acts, it is, on the other hand, when
replaced in the flux of time, always situated at
the very point where my past expires in a deed.
And, consequently, those particular images which
I call cerebral mechanisms terminate at each
successive moment the series of my past representa-
tions, being the extreme prolongation of those
representations into the present, their link with
the real, that is, withaction. Sever that link,—and
you do not necessarily destroy the past image,
but you deprive it of all means of acting upon
the real and consequently, as we shall show, of
being realized. It is in this sense, and in this
sense only, that an injury to the brain can abolish
any part of memory. Hence our third, and last,
proposition :


III. We pass, by imperceptible stages, from
recollections strung out along the course of time to
the movements which indicate their nascent or pos-
sible actionin space. Lesions of the brain may affect
ETLeSG, OCLC CTIES eMie ACE TIE E COs Cau AS:


A


CHAP. 11 THE TWO FORMS OF MEMORY 89


_ We have now to see whether experience verifies


these three propositions.


I. The two forms of memory.—I study a lesson,
and in order to learn it by heart I read it a first
time, accentuating every line; I then repeat it a
certain number of times. At each repetition


there is progress; the words are more and more =
linked together, and at last make a continuous ~~


whole. When that moment comes, it is said that
I know my lesson by heart, that it is imprinted
on my memory.

I consider now how the lesson has been learnt,
and picture to myself the successive phases of
the process. Each several reading then recurs
to me with its own individuality ; I can see it
again with the circumstances which attended it
then and still form its setting. It is distinguished
from those which preceded or followed it by the
place which it occupied in time; in short, each
reading stands out before my mind as a definite
event in my history. Again it will be said that
these images are recollections, that they are im-
printed on my memory. The same words, then,
are used in both cases. Do they mean the same
thing ?

The memory of the lesson, which is remembered
in the sense of learnt by heart, has a// the marks
of a habit. Like a habit, it is acquired by the
repetition of the same effort. Like a habit, it
demands first a decomposition and then a recom-


eer
wen


go -MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


position of the whole action. Lastly, like every
habitual bodily exercise, it is stored up


To learn by . : : 4 ; :
heart isto in a mechanism which is set in motion
create a carts : .
cerebral as a whole by an initial impulse, in a
mechanism,


2 habit of closed system of automatic movements
w=" which succeed each other in the same
order and, together, take the same length of time.

The memory of each several reading, on the
contrary, the second or the third for instance,
has none of the marks of a_ habit.


To recall the


successive Its image was necessarily imprinted
stages of


learning by at once on the memory, since the
heart is to ‘ : :
appeal toan other readings form, by their very de-
__memory. finition, other recollections. It is like,
an event in my life; its essence is to bear a date’
_ and consequently to be unable to occur again.
All that later readings can add to it will only
alter its original nature; and though my effort
to recall this image becomes more and more easy
as I repeat it, the image, regarded in itself, was
necessarily at the outset what it always will
be.

It may be urged that these two recollections,
that of the reading and that of the lesson, differ
only as the less from the more, and that the images
successively developed by each repetition overlie
each other, so that the lesson once learned is but
the composite image in which all readings are
blended. And I quite agree that each of the
successive readings differs from the preceding
mainly in the fact that the lesson is better known.


CHAP, II THE TWO FORMS OF MEMORY | OL


But it is no less certain that each of them, con-
sidered as anew reading and not as a lesson better
known, is entirely sufficient to itself, subsists ex-
actly as it occurred, and constitutes with all its
concomitant perceptions an original moment of
my history. We may even go further and aver
that consciousness reveals to us a profound differ-
ence, a difference in kind, between the two sorts
of recollection. The memory of a given reading ,y
is a representation, and only a representation ;
it is embraced in an intuition of the mind which
I may lengthen or shorten at will; I assign to it
any duration I please ; there is nothing to prevent
my grasping the whole of it instantaneously, as in
one picture. On the contrary, the memory-of the
lesson I have learnt, even if I repeat this lesson y“
only mentally, requires a definite time, the time
necessary to develop one by one, were it only in
imagination, all the articulatory movements that
are necessary: it is no longer a representation,
it_is an action. And, in fact, the lesson once
learnt bears upon it no mark which betrays its
origin and classes it in the past; it is part of
my present, exactly like my habit of walking or
of writing; it is lived and acted, rather than
represented: I might believe it innate, if I
did not choose to recall at the same time, as
so many representations, the successive readings
by means of which I learnt it. Therefore these
representations are independent of it, and, just as
they preceded the lesson as I now possess and


g2 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. If


know it, so that lesson once learned can do with-
out them.

Following to the end this fundamental dis-
tinction, we are confronted by two different
memories theoretically independent. The first
records, in the form of memory-images, all the
“ events of our daily life as they occur in time ;
it neglects no detail; it leaves to each fact,
to each gesture, its place and date. Regardless
of utility or of practical application, it stores up
the past by the mere necessity of its own nature.
By this memory is made possible the intelligent,
or rather intellectual, recognition of a perception


already experienced ; in it we take refuge every


time that, in the search for a particular image, we
remount the slope of our past. But every percep-
Habits tion is prolonged into a nascent action ;
formed >y and while the images are taking their


actions are place and order in this memory, the


the body; | movements which continue them modi-


: these do not


4 ‘past esr fy the organism, and create in the body
_ ly act it, new dispositions towards action. Thus


is gradually formed an experience of an entirely >


.~ different order, which accumulates within the body,


a series Of mechanisms wound up and ready, with
reactions to extertial stimuli ever more numerous
and more varied, and answers ready prepared to an
ever growing number of possible solicitations. We
become conscious of these mechanisms as they
come into play ; and this consciousness of a whole


past of efforts stored up in the present is indeed


4


CHAP. It THE TWO FORMS OF MEMORY 93


also a memory, but a memory profoundly differ-
ent from the first, always bent upon action, seated
in the present and looking only to the future.
It has retained from the past only the intelli-
gently codrdinated movements which represent
the accumulated efforts of the past ; and it recovers
those past efforts, not inthe memory-images which
recall them, but in the definite order and systema-
tic character with which the actual movements
take place. In truth, it no longer represents our
past to us, it acts it; and if it still deserves the
name of memory, it is not because it conserves
bygone images, but because it prolongs their_use-
ful 1 effect into the. ; present. moment.

Of these two memories, of which the one
imagines and the other repeats, the second may
guchisthe SUpply the place of the first and even


animal’s 2 y 5
wemery, asa sometimes be mistaken for it. When a


rule, even wae
re va dog welcomes his master, barking and s


recognizes. wagging his tail, he certainly recognizes
him ; but does this recognition imply the evoca-
tion of a past image and the comparison of that


image with the present perception? Does it not/=.


rather consist in the animal’s consciousness of a 3%.


certain special attitude adopted by his body, an 3 .,...!.0
attitude which has been gradually built up by his »2.
familiar relations with his master, and which the , ..


b> Ee. Big


mere perception of his master now calls forth in him
mechanically ? We must not go too far; even


in the animal it is possible that vague images ol 1? ot feo


the eae overflow into the present ig ae
La $s EY] aa ses ar ae BAF - Wrist hex kc s en


%
§


Ryo _, HF: wth


« $5 - ‘ §
2 5 <F # 5 2 Sox a & $< re Bae ¢ FR " a ee
Ls fet - + ot rotate fa LAAT Zi Phat A Mh be Se
Fors
f #


3


ee
ie seas a


23


¥


we can even conceive that its entire past is vir-
tually indicated in its consciousness ; but this past’:
does not interest the animal enough to detach it
from the fascinating present, and its recognition -
must be rather lived than thought. To call up the


past in the form of an image, we must be able to


withdraw ourselves from the action of the moment,


{ we must have the power to value the useless, we


must have the will to dream. Man alone is cap-
able of such an effort. But even in him the past
to which he returns is fugitive, ever on the point
of escaping him, as though his backward turning
memory were thwarted by the other, more natural,
memory, of which the forward movement bears
him on to action and to life.
When psychologists talk of recollection as of a
fold in a material, as of an impress graven deeper
by repetition, they forget that the im-
representative Mense majority of our memories bear


memory re=-
cords every upon events and details of our life of


qeatcn ne which the essence is to havea date,
each unique, .
and not to and consequently to be incapable of
be repeated. : i: :
being repeated. The memories which
we acquire voluntarily by repetition are rare
and exceptional. On the contrary, the record-
ing, by memory, of facts and images unique
in their kind takes place at every moment of
duration. But inasmuch as learnt memories are
more useful, they are more remarked. And as
the acquisition of these memories by a repetition


of the same effort resembles the well-known process


CHAP. II THE TWO FORMS OF MEMORY 95


of habit, we prefer to set this kind of memory in
the foreground, to erect it into the model memory,
and to see in spontaneous recollection only the
same phenomenon in a nascent state, the begin-
ning of a lesson learnt by heart. But how can
we overlook the radical. difference between.that
which _must_be built up by repetition and_that
which is es essentially | incapable of being repeated ?
Spontaneous recollection is perfect from the out-
set ; time can add nothing to its image without
disfiguring it; it retains in memory its place
and date. On the contrary, a learnt recollection
passes out of time in the measure that the lesson
is better known; it becomes more and more im-
personal, more and more foreign to our past life.
Repetition, therefore, in no sense effects the con-
version of the first into the last ; its office is merely
to utilize more and more the movements by which
the first was continued, in order to organize
them together and, by setting up a mechanism, to
create a bodily habit. Indeed, this habit could
not be called a remembrance, were it not that I
-remember that I have acquired it ; and I remem-
ber its acquisition only because I appeal to that
memory which is spontaneous, which dates events
and records them but once. Of the two memories,
then, which we have just distinguished, the first
appears to be memory par excellence. The second,
that generally studied by psychologists, is habit
interpreted by memory rather than memory itself.

It is true that the example of a lesson learnt


96 4 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP II


by heart is to some extent artificial. Yet our
whole life is passed among a limited
The normal

consciousness number of objects, which pass more or
thosememory- less often before our eyes: each of

images which oe :
can usefully them, as it is perceived, provokes on
the none our part movements, at least nascent,
Seagiree whereby we adapt ourselvestoit. These
<* movements, as they recur, contrive a mechanism
“for themselves, grow into a habit, and deter-
a *) ss ys i*mine in us attitudes which automatically follow
> \. our perception-of things. This, as we have said,
is the main office of our nervous system. The
. ©: afferent nerves bring to the brain a disturbance,
“Which, after having intelligently chosen its path,
_ttansmits itself to motor mechanisms created by re-
* petition. Thus is ensured the appropriate reaction,
the correspondence to environment—adaptation,
ee. in a word—which is the general aim of life. And
aa wid a living being which did nothing but live would
ae need no more than this. But, simultaneously
af «with this process of perception and adaptation
*" which ends in the record of the past in the form
of motor habits, consciousness, as we have seen,
) retains the image of the situations through which it
> has successively travelled, and lays them side by
“ side in the order in which they took place. Of
what use.are these memory- images ? Preserved in
memory, reproduced i in consciousness, do they not
distort the practical character of life, mingling
dream with reality ? They would, no doubt, if


our actual consciousness, a consciousness which re-


en


oat ys
ae apo” en
ger Ps ae i a FORMS OF MEMORY 07 |
fe oe


viects the ae adaptation of our nervous system
-=to the present situation, did not set aside all those


among the past images which cannot be co-
ordinated with the present perception and are
unable to form with it a useful combination. At
most, certain confused recollections, unrelated


to the present circumstances, may overflow #% a


the usefully associated images, making around
these a less illuminated fringe which fades away ©
into an immense zone of obscurity. But sup-°
pose an accident which upsets the Shas
maintained by the brain between the external
stimulation and the motor reaction, relax for a


2 Le


2%
av


moment the tension of the threads which go from +


the periphery to the periphery by way of the ¥


#


centre, and immediately these darkened images
come forward into the fulllight : it is probably the
latter condition which is realized in any sleep where-
inwedream. Of these two memories that we have
distinguished, the second, which is active or motor,
will, then, constantly inhibit the first, or at least
only accept from it that which can throw light
upon and complete in a useful way the present
situation : thus, as we shall see later, could the
laws of the association of ideas be explained.—
But, besides the services which they can render
by associating with the present perception, the


images stored up in the spontaneous memory.


‘have yet another use. No doubt they are

. dream-images; no doubt they usually appear

and disappear independently of our will; and
H


08 MATTER AND: MEMORY CHAP. II


this is why, when we really wish to know a
thing, we are obliged to learn it by heart, that is
to say, to substitute for the spontaneous image a
motor mechanism which can serve in its stead.
But there is a certain effort suc generis which
permits us to retain the image itself, for a limited
time, within the field of our consciousness ; and,
thanks to this faculty, we have no need to await
at the hands of chance the accidental repetition
of the same situations, in order to organize into a
habit concomitant movements ; we make use of the
fugitive image to construct a stable mechanism
which takes its place —Either, then, our distinction
of the two independent memories is unsound, or,
if it corresponds to facts, we shall find an exaltation
of spontanéous memory in most cases where the
sensori-motor equilibrium of the nervous system
is disturbed ; an inhibition, on the contrary, in
the normal state, of all spontaneous recollections
- which do not serve f° consolidate the present
equilibrium ; and lastly, in the operation by
means of which we acquire the habit-memory, a
latent intervention of the image-memory. Let
us see whether the facts confirm this hypothesis.
For the moment we will insist on neither point ;
we hope to throw ample light upon both when
we study the disturbances of memory and the laws
of the association of ideas. We shall be content
for the present to show, in regard to things which
s, are learnt, how the two memories run side by side
\ and lend to each other a mutual support. It is


cHaP 1. = THE TWO FORMS OF MEMORY 99°


a matter of every-day experience that lessons
committed to the motor memory can be auto-
matically repeated; but observation of patho-
logical cases proves that automatism extends
Therefore Much further in this direction than we
automatiem think. In cases of dementia, we some-
raneeedteive times find that intelligent answers are
atten ape: given to a succession of questions which
sateaby are not understood: language here works
habit memory. 4fter the manner of a reflex. Aphasics,
incapable of uttering a word spontaneously, can
recollect without a mistake the words of an air
which they sing. Or again, they will fluently
repeat a prayer, a series of numbers, the days of
the week, or the months of the year.2 Thus
extremely complex mechanisms, subtle enough to
imitate intelligence, can work by themselves when
once they have been built up, and in consequence
usually obey a mere initial impulse of the will.


ee


But what takes place while they are being built &~


up? When we strive to learn a lesson, for in-
stance, is not the visual or auditory image which
we endeavour to reconstitute by movements
already in our mind, invisible though present ?


° . . . t- Hye
Even in the very first recitation, we recognize, *


1 Robertson, Reflex Speech (Journal of Mental Science,
April, 1888). Cf. the article by Ch. Féré, Le langage MT:
(Revue Philosophique, Jan. 1896).


i


i


2 Oppenheim, Ueber das Verhalten der musikalischen Aus-5, ;


drucksbewegungen bet Aphatischen (Charité Annalen, xiii,
1888, p. 348 et seq.).
8 Ibid., p. 365. P


tA


a


I00 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


by a vague feeling of uneasiness, any error we
have made, as though from the obscure depths
of consciousness we received a sort of warn-_
ing Concentrate your mind on that sensation,
and you will feel that the complete image is there,
but evanescent, a phantasm that disappears just
at the moment when motor activity tries to fix
its outline. During some recent experiments
(which, however, were undertaken with quite a
different purpose),? the subjects averred that they
felt just such an impression. A series of letters,
which they were asked to remember, was held
before their eyes for a few seconds. But, to pre-
vent any accentuating of the letters so perceived
by appropriate movements of articulation, they
were asked to repeat continuously a given syl-
lable while their eyes were fixed on the image.
From this resulted a special psychical state ;
the subjects felt themselves to be in complete
possession of the visual image, although unable to
produce any part of it on demand: to their great
surprise the line disappeared. ‘ According to one
observer, the basis was a Gesammtvorstellung, a
sort of all-embracing complex idea in which the
parts have an indefinitely felt unity.’ ®

1 See, on the subject of this sense of error, the article by
Miller and Schumann, Experimentelle Beitvage zur Untersu-
chung des Geddcthtnisses (Zeitschr. f. Psych. u. Phys. der
Sinnesorgane (Dec., 1893, p. 305).

2 W. G. Smith, The Relation of Attention to Memory. (Mind,


Jan. 1895.)
3 Ibid. loc. cit., Pp. 23.


CHAP, It THE TWO FORMS OF MEMORY IOL


This spontaneous recollection, which is masked
by the acquired recollection, may flash out at
intervals ; but it disappears at the least move-
ment of the voluntary memory. If the subject
sees the series of letters, of which he thought he
retained the image, vanish from before his eyes,
this happens mainly when he begins to repeat it :
the effort seems to drive the rest of the image out
of his consciousness.1 Now, analyse many of the
imaginative methods of mnenomics and you will
find that the object of this science is to bring into
the foreground the spontaneous memory which
was hidden, and to place it, as an active memory,
at our service; to this end every attempt at
motor memory is, to begin with, suppressed.
The faculty of mental photography, says one
author,? belongs rather to subconsciousness than


* Something of this nature appears to take place in that
affection which German authors call Dyslexie. The patient
reads the first words of a sentence aright, and then stops
abruptly, unable to go on, as though the movements of
articulation had inhibited memory. See, on the subject
of dyslexie: Berlin, Eine besondere Art der Wortblindhert
(Dyslexie), Wiesbaden, 1887, and Sommer, Die Dyslextie
als functionelle Storung (Arch. f. Psychiatrie, 1893). We may
also compare with these phenomena the remarkable cases
of word deafness in which the patient understands the
speech of others, but no longer understands his own. - (See
examples cited by Bateman, On Aphasia, p. 200 ; by Bernard,
Del aphasie, Paris 1889, pp. 143 and 144; and by Broadbent,
Case of Peculiar Affection of Speech, Brain, 1878-9, p. 484 et
seq.).

2 Mortimer Granville, Ways of remembering. (Lancet, Sept.
27, 1899, p. 458.)


t


{02 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. It


to consciousness ; it answers with difficulty to
the summons of the will. In order to exercise it,
we should accustom ourselves to retaining, for
instance, several arrangements of points at once,
without even thinking of counting them!: we
must imitate in some sort the instantaneity of
this memory in order to attain to its mastery.
Even so it remains capricious in its manifesta-
tions ; and as the recollections which it brings us
are akin to dreams, its more regular intrusion
into the life of the mind may seriously disturb
intellectual equilibrium.

‘What this memory is, whence it is derived and
how it works, will be shown in the next chapter.
For the moment, the schematic conception will
be enough. So we shall merely sum up the pre-
ceding paragraphs and say that the past appears
indeed to be stored up, as we had surmised, under
two extreme forms: on the one hand, motor


mechanisms which make use of it ; on the other,


personal memory-images which picture all past
events with their outline, their colour and their
place in time. Of these two memories the first
follows the direction of nature ; the second, left
to itself, would rather go the contrary way.
The first, conquered by effort, remains depen-
dent upon our will; the second, entirely spon-
taneous, is as capricious in reproducing as it
is faithful in preserving. The only regular and


1 Kay, Memory and how to improve it. New York, 1888.


CHAP. It THE TWO FORMS OF MEMORY 103


certain service which the second memory can
render to the first is to bring before it images of
what preceded or followed situations similar to
the present situation, so as to guide its choice:
in this consists the association of ideas. There
is no other case in which the memory which recalls
issure to obey the memory which repeats. Every-
where else, we prefer to construct a mechanism
which allows us to sketch the image again, at
need, because we are well aware that we cannot
count upon its reappearance. These are the two
extreme forms of memory in their pure state.
Now we may say at once that it is because
philosophers have concerned themselves only with
the intermediate and, so to speak, impure forms
Thus memory. that they have misunderstood. the true
image and = nature of memory. Instead of dis-


motor habit


are distinct iat]
in Kind, sociating the two elements, memory-


though they ; j iS-
taysoaless unage and movement, in order to dis


in life. Rea- j
sons why e 6cOver subsequently by what series of


thorough study Qnerations they come, having each aban-
ignecessary. doned some part of its original purity
to fuse one with the other, they are apt to consider
only the mixed phenomenon which results from
their coalescence. This phenomenon, being mixed,
presents on the one side the aspect of a motor
habit, and on the other that of an image more or less
consciously localized. But they will haveit that the
phenomenonisa simple one. So they must assume
that the cerebral mechanism, whether of the brain
or of the medulla oblongata or of the cord, which


104 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


serves as the basis of the motor habit, is at the

same time the substratum of the conscious image.

Hence the strange hypothesis of recollections stored

in the brain, which are supposed to become con-

scious as though by a miracle, and bring us back

to the past by a process that is left unexplained.

True, some observers do not make so light of

the conscious aspect of the operation, and see

in it something more than an epiphenomenon.

But, as they have not begun by isolating the
memory which retains and sets out the successive
repetitions side by side in the form of memory
images, since they confound it with the habit which

is perfected by use, they are led to believe that the

effect of repetition is brought to bear upon one and

the same single and indivisible phenomenon which

merely grows stronger by recurrence: and, as this
phenomenon clearly ends by being merely a motor

habit corresponding to a mechanism, cerebral or

other, they are led, whether they will or no, to sup-

pose that some mechanism of this kind was from the
beginning behind the image and that the brain is an

. organ ofrepresentation. Weare now about to con-

—s ider these intermediate states, and distinguish in
pee = ak each of them the part which belongs to nascent
wwe es action, that is to say of the brain, and the part of
pe .” independent memory, that is to say of memory-
aS images. What are thesestates ? Being partly motor
s a they must, on our hypothesis, Broleoe a present
— Pa a 2“perception ; but, on the other hand, inasmuch as
“wad they are images, they reproduce past perceptions.


CHAP. II MOVEMENTS AND MEMORY 105


Now the concrete process by which we grasp the
past in the present is recognition. Recognition,
therefore, is what we have to study, to begin
with.


II. Of recognition in general: ‘memory-images
and movements——There are two ways in which
it is customary to explain the feeling of
What then =, : : ;
is recogni- having seen a thing before.’ On one
theory, the recognition of a present
perception consists in inserting it mentally in its
former surroundings. I encounter a man for the
firsttime: I simply perceive him. If I meet him
again, I recognize him, in the sense that the
concomitant circumstances of the original per-
ception, returning to my mind, surround the
actual image with a setting which is not a
setting actually perceived. To recognize, then,
according to this theory, is to associate with a
present perception the images which were for-,
merly given in connexion with it.—But, as it
has been justly observed, a renewed perception
cannot suggest the concomitant circumstances }}
of the original perception unless the latter is ‘><
evoked, to begin with, by the present state which
resembles it.2 Let A be the first perception ;


1 See the systematic treatment of this thesis, supported
by experiments, in Lehmann’s articles, Ueber Wieder-
erkennen (Philos. Studien Wundt, vol. v, p. 96 et seq., and
vol. vii, p.. 169 et seq.).

2 Pillon, La formation des idées absiraites et générales (Crit.


106 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


the accompanying circumstances B, C, D, remain
associated with it by contiguity. If I call the
same perception renewed A’, as it is not with
A’, but with A that the terms B, C, D are bound
up, it is necessary, in order to evoke the terms
B, C, D, that A’ should be first called up by some
association of resemblance. And it is of no use to
assert that A’ isidentical with A. For the two terms,
though similar, are numerically distinct, and differ
at least by this simple fact that A’ is a perception,
whereas A is but a memory. Of the two interpre-
tations of which we have spoken, the first, then,
melts into the second, which we will now examine.

It is alleged that the present perception dives
Itis nota ito the depths of memory in search of the
mere bern Femembrance of the previous perception
and memory. which resembles it: the sense of recog-
nition would thus come from a bringing together,
or a blending, of perception and memory. No
doubt, as an acute thinker! has already pointed
out, resemblance is a relation established by
the mind between terms which it compares
and consequently already possesses; so the
perception of a resemblance is rather an effect
of association than its cause. But, along with
this definite and perceived resemblance which


Philos. 1885, vol i, p. 208 et seq.).—Cf. Ward, Assimilation
and Association (Mind, July 1893 and Oct. 1894).

' Brochard, La lot de similarité (Revue Philosophique, 1880,
vol. ix, p. 258). M. Rabier shows himself also of this opinion
in his Legons de Philosophie, vol. i, Psychologie, pp. 187-192.


CHAP. II MOVEMENTS AND MEMORIES 107


consists in the common element seized and disen-
gaged by the mind, there is a vague and in some
sort objective resemblance, spread over the sur-
face of the images themselves, which might act
perhaps like a physical cause of reciprocal attrac-
tion.1 And should we ask how it is, then, that
we often recognize an object without being able
to identify it with a former image, refuge is
sought in the convenient hypothesis of cerebral
tracks which coincide with each other, of cerebral
movements made easier by practice,? or of percep-
tive cells communicating with cells where memories
are stored. In truth, all such theories of recog-
nition are bound to melt away, in the end, into
physiological hypotheses of this kind. What they
were aiming at, first, was to make all recog-
nition issue from a bringing together of per-
ception and memory; but experience stands
over against them, testifying that in most cases
recollection emerges only after the perception
is recognized. So they are sooner or later
forced to relegate to the brain, in the form of a
combination between movements or of a connexion
between cells, that which they had first declared
to be an association of ideas; and to explain the


1 Pillon, loc. cit. p. 207. Cf. James Sully, The Human
Mind, London, 1892, vol. i, p. 331.

2 Hoffding, Ueber Wiedererkennen, Association und psy-
chische Activitat (Vierteljahresschrift f. wissenschaftliche Philo-
soplie, 1889, p. 433.

3 Munk, Ueber die Functionen der Grosshirnrinde. Berlin,
1881, p. 108 et seq.


108 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. It


fact of recognition,—very clear on our view—by
the hypothesis, which seems to us very obscure, of
a brain which stores up ideas.

But the fact is that the association of a perception
with a memory is not enough to account for the
process of recognition. For if recognition took place
in this way, it would always be obliterated when
the memory images had disappeared, and always
happen when these images are retained. Psychic
blindness, or the inability to recognize perceived
objects, would, then, never occur without an inhibi-

“tion of visual memory; and, above all, the inhibi-

tion of visual memory would invariably produce

‘ psychic blindness. But neither consequence is -
\ borne out by facts. In a case studied by Wil-
‘Ke ‘brand, the patient could describe with her eyes
‘shut the town she lived in and, in imagination,
walk through its streets: yet, once in the street,
she felt like a complete stranger ; she recognized
nothing and could not findher way. Facts of the
same kind have been observed by Fr. Miiller 2 and

\ Lissauer:* the patients can summon up the
“mental picture of an object named to them ; they
describe it very well; but they cannot recognize

it when it is shown to them. The retention, even
the conscious retention, of a visual memory is,


1 Die Seelenblindheit als Herderscheinung, Wiesbaden,
1887, p. 56.

2 Ein Beitrag zur Kenntniss der Seelenblindheit (Arch. f.
Psychiatrie, vol. xxiv, 1892.

° Ein Fall von Seelenblindheit (Arch. f. Psychiatrie, 1880).


CHAP. It MOVEMENTS AND MEMORIES I0Q


therefore, not enough for the recognition of a simi-
lar perception. Inversely, in Charcot’s case, which
has become the classic example of a complete
eclipse of visual images,‘ not all recognition of
perceptions was obliterated. A careful study of the
report of the case is conclusive on this point. No
doubt the patient failed to recognize the streets and
houses of his native town, to the extent of being
unable to name them or to find his way about
them ; yet he knew that they were streets and
houses. He no longer recognized his wife and chil-
dren; yet, when he saw them, he could say that
this was a woman, that those were children. None
of this would have been possible; had there been
psychic blindness in the absolute sense of the
word. A certain kind of recognition, then, which
we shall need to analyse, was obliterated, not the
general faculty of recognition. So we must conclude
that not every recognition implies the intervention
of a~memory image; and, conversely, that we
may still be able to call up such images when we
have lost the power of identifying perceptions
with them. What then is recognition, and how
shall we define it ?

There is, in the first place, if we carry the


. RA
process to the extreme, an iustantaneous recogni-


tion, of which the body is capable by itself,
without the help of any explicit memory-image. It


1 Reported by Bernard, Un cas de suppression brusque et
isolée de la vision mentale (Progrés Médical, July 21, 1883).


Ion


IIo MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, II


consists in action and not in representation.
In onekindot POF instance, I take a walk in a town
recognition, seen then for the first time. At every
gue sense of, street corner I hesitate, uncertain where “/
the eoustiont Tv allt “eoing) a lads CouDEs sant et
well-ordered mean by this that alternatives are offered


compeniment. to my body, that my movement as a
whole is discontinuous, that there is nothing in one
attitude which foretells and prepares future atti-
tudes. Later, after prolonged sojourn in the town,
Ishall go about it mechanically, without having any
distinct perception of the objects which I am
passing. Now, between these two extremes, the one
in which perception has not yet organized the
definite movements which accompany it, and the
other in which these accompanying movements are
organized to a degree which renders perception
useless, there is an intermediate state in which
the object is perceived, yet provokes movements
which are connected, continuous and called up
by one another. I began by a state in which I
distinguished only my perception; I shall end
in a state in which I am hardly conscious of
anything but automatism: in the interval there
isa mixed state, a perception followed step by
step by automatism just impending. Now, if
the later perceptions differ from the first percep-
tion in the fact that they guide the body towards
the appropriate mechanical reaction, if, on the
other hand, those renewed perceptions appear to
the mind under that special aspect which charac-


CHAP, II MOVEMENTS AND MEMORIES 1S Gi x02


b3
a Ee,


terizes familiar or recognized perceptions, must ji

we not assume that the consciousness of a well- g3 os.

regulated motor accompaniment, of an organized,» “ gp

motor reaction, is here the foundation of the sense ,

of familiarity ? At the basis of recognition there

would thus be a phenomenon of a motor order. T™** |
To recognize a common. object Js,Jnainly to ~ As wt

know_how to use. it. This is so true that early o, tet

observers gave “the name apraxia to that failure ~" 69 4

of recognition which we call psychic blindness.’ 4"*

But to know how to use a thing is to sketch

out the movements which adapt themselves to

it; it is to take a certain attitude, or at least

to have a tendency to do so through what

the Germans call motor impulses (Bewegungs-

antricbe). The habit of using the object has,

then, resulted in organizing together movements .

and perceptions; and the consciousness of these cf jet

nascent movements, which follow perception after ~~ ‘**"’ |.

the manner of a-reflex, must be here also at the Wied’ pi

bottom of recognition. > aan dures
There is no perception which is not prolonged ey

into movement. Ribot? and Maudsley* long

since drew attention to this point. The training of


1 Kussmaul, Die Stérungen dey Sprache, p. 181, Allen
Starr, Apraxia and Aphasia (Medical Record, Oct. 27, 1888).
—Cf. Laquer, Zur Localisation der Sensorischen Aphasie
(Neurolog. Centralblatt, Jane 15, 1888), and Dodds, On some
central affections of vision (Brain, 1885).

2 Les mouvements, et leur importance psychologique (Revue
Philosophique, 1879, vol. viii, p.271 et seq.).—Cf. Psychologie
de Vattention, Paris, 1889, p. 75.

3 Physiology of Mind, p. 206 et seq.


ew oe


ms. #
te “wom


f or


TE MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


the senses consists in just the sum of the connexions
established between the sensory impression and the
movement which makes use of it. As the impression
is repeated, the connexion is consolidated. Nor is
there anything mysterious in the mechanism of
the operation. Our nervous system is evidently
arranged with a view to the building up of motor
~ apparatus linked, through the intermediary of cen-
tres, with sense stimuli; and the discontinuity of
the nervous elements, the multiplicity of their
terminal branches, which are probably capable of
joining in various ways, make possible an unlimited
number of connexions between impressions and
the corresponding movements. But the mechan-
ism in course of construction cannot appear to
consciousness in the same form as the mechan-
ism already constructed. There is something
which profoundly distinguishes and clearly mani-
fests those systems of movements which are consoli-
dated in the organism ; and that is, we believe,
the difficulty we have in modifying their order.
It is, again, the preformation of the movements
which follow in the movements which precede,
a preformation whereby the part virtually con-


tains the whole, as when each note of a tune learnt


. by heart seems to lean over the next to watch
“its execution. If, then, every perception has


1 In one of the most ingenious chapters of his Psychologie
(Paris, 1893, vol.i, p. 242), Fouillée says that the sense of
familiarity is largely due to the diminution of the inward
shock which constitutes surprise.


cHAP. 1 MOVEMENTS AND RECOLLECTIONS II3


its organized motor accompaniment, the ordinary
feeling of recognition has its root in the conscious-
ness of this organization.

In fact, we commonly act_our recognition before
we think it. Our daily life is spent among objects
whose very presence invites us to play a part: in
this the familiarity of their aspect consists. Motor
tendencies would, then, be enough by themselves to
give us the feeling of recognition. But we hasten to
add that in most cases thereissomething else besides.

For, while motor apparatus are built up under
the influence of perceptions that are analysed
And these With increasing precision by the body,
evements our past psychical life is there: it


prepare the


choice among °
memory. SUTVives—as we shall try to prove—


images We with all the detail of its events local-
gesintervene. i7eqd in time. Always inhibited by
the practical and useful consciousness of the


present moment, that is to say, by the sensori-


x


2


motor equilibrium of a nervous system con- Ww»


necting perception with action, this memory


merely awaits the occurrence of a rift between ~


the actual impression and its corresponding


%
LA
Aare
+i>


&


movement to slip in its images. As a rule,~,>**


when we desire to go back along the course of the


past and discover the known, localized, personal ,
memory-image which is related to the present, |
an effort is necessary, whereby we draw back from %««


the act to which perception inclines us: the

latter would urge us towards the future ; we have

to go backwards into the past. In this sense,
I


Aa tt
Min >


on
ha


pa
pour & PE
rT we


PD


Ba MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


movement rather tends to drive away the image.
Yet, in one way, it contributes to its approach.
For, though the whole series of our past images
remains present within us, still the representation
which is analogous to the present perception
has to be chosen from among all possible repre-
sentations. Movements, accomplished or merely
nascent, prepare this choice, or at the very least
mark out the field in which we shall seek the
image we need. By the very constitution of our
nervous system, we are beings in whom present
impressions find their way to appropriate move-
ments: if it so happens that former images can
just as well be prolonged in these movements, they
take advantage of the opportunity to slip into the
actual perception and get themselves adopted by
it. They then appear, in fact, to our conscious-
ness, though it seems as if they ought, by right,
to remain concealed by the present state. So
we may say that the movements which bring about
~ mechanical recognition hinder in one way, and
encourage in another, recognition by images. In
principle, the present supplants the past. But, on
the other hand, just because the disappearance of
former images is due to their inhibition by our
present attitude, those whose shape might fit
into this attitude encounter less resistance than
the others ; and if, then, any one of them is
indeed able to overcome the obstacle, it is the
image most similar to the present perception that
will actually do so.


cHar. 1 MOVEMENTS AND RECOLLECTIONS 115


If our analysis is correct, the diseases which
affect recognition will be of two widely differing
Therefore forms, and facts will show us two kinds


one kind of


psychic of i : ; :
blindness may psychic blindness. For we may pre


be due toa sume that, in some cases, it is the mem-
disturbance


of motor rv-l i
of motor | | ory-image which can no longer reappear,


thelossof and that, in other cases, it is merely
memory-

images. the bond between perception and
the accompanying habitual movements which is
broken,—perception provoking diffused move-
ments, as though it were wholly new. Do the facts
confirm this hypothesis ? .

There can be no dispute as to the first point.
The apparent abolition of visual memory in psychic
blindness is so common a fact that it served, fora
time, as a definition of that disorder. We shall
have to consider how far, and in what sense, mem-
ories can really disappear. What interests us for
the moment is that cases occur in which there is no
recognition and yet visual memory is not altogether
lost. Have we here then, as we maintain, merely
a disturbance of motor habits, or at most an inter-
ruption of the chain which unite them to sense
perceptions ? As no observer has considered a
question of this nature, we should be hard put to
it for an answer if we had not noticed here and
there in their descriptions certain facts which
appear to us significant.

The first of these facts is the loss of the sense of
direction. All those who have treated the subject
of psychic blindness have been struck by this pecu-


—


116 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


liarity. Lissauer’s patient had completely lost the
faculty of finding his way about his own house.?
Fr. Miiller insists on the fact that, while blind men
soon learn to find their way, the victim of psychic
blindness fails, even after months of practice, to
find his way about his own room.? But is not this
faculty of orientation the same thing as the faculty
of codrdinating the movements of the body with
the visual impression, and of mechanically prolong-
ing perceptions in useful reactions ?

There is a second, and even more characteristic
fact, and that is the manner in which these patients
draw.. We can conceive two fashions of drawing.
In the first we manage, by tentative efforts, to
set down here and there on the paper a certain
number of points, and we then connect them
together, verifying continually the resemblance
between the drawing and the object. This is
what is known as ‘ point to point’ drawing. But
our habitual method is quite different. We draw
with a continuous line, after having looked at, or
thought of, ourmodel. How shall we explain such
a faculty, except by our habit of discovering at once
the organization of the outlines of common objects,
that is to say, by a motor tendency to draft
their diagram in one continuous line? But if it is


1 Op. cit., Arch. f. Psychiatrie, 1889-90, p. 224. Cf. Wil-
brand, op. ci#., p. 140, and Bernhardt, Eigenthiimlicher Fall
von Hirnerkrankung (Berliner klinische Wochenschrift, 1877,
p. 58z). :

2 Op. cit., Arch. f. Psychiatrie, vol. xxiv, p. 898.


CHAP. II MOVEMENTS AND RECOLLECTIONS Lr7


just such habits or correspondences which are lost
in certain forms of psychic blindness, the patient
may still perhaps be able to draw bits of a line
which he will connect together more or less well ;
but he will no longer be able to draw at a stroke,
because the tendency to adopt and reproduce the
general movement of the outline is no longer pre-
sent in his hand. Now this is just what experi-
ment verifies. Lissauer’s observations are instruc-
tive on this head.1_ His patient had the greatest
difficulty in drawing simple objects; and if he
tried to draw them from memory, he traced de-
tached portions of them chosen at random, and
was unable to unite these into a whole. Cases
of complete psychic blindness are, however, rare.
Those of word-blindness are much more numerous
—cases ofa loss, that is, of visual recognition limited
to the characters of the alphabet. Nowitisa fact of
common observation that the patient, in such cases,
is unable to seize what may be called the movement
of the letters when he tries to copy them. He
begins to draw them at any point, passing back
and forth between the copy and the original to
make sure that they agree. And this is the more
remarkable in that he often retains unimpaired
the faculty of writing from dictation or spon-
taneously. What is lost is clearly the habit of
distinguishing the articulations of the object per-
ceived, that is to say, of completing the visual


1 Op. cit., Arch. f. Psychiatrie, 1889-90, p. 233.


}


118 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 7


perception by a motor tendency to sketch its
diagram. Whence we may conclude that such
is indeed the primordial condition of recogni-
tion.

But we must pass now from automatic recog-
nition, which is mainly achieved through move-
ments, to that which requires the regular interven-
tion of memory-images. The first is recognition by
inattention ; the second, as we shall see, is attentive
recognition.

This form also begins by migvements But,
whereas, in automatic recognition, our movements
prolong our perception in order to draw from
it useful effects and thus take us away from the
object perceived, here, on the contrary, they bring
us back to the object, to dwell upon its outlines.
Thus is explained the preponderant, and no longer
merely accessory, part taken here by memory-
images. For if we suppose that the movements
forego their practical end, and that motor activity,
instead of continuing perception by useful reactions,
turns back to mark out its more striking features,
then the images which are analogous to the pre-
sent perception,—images of which these movements
have already sketched out, so tospeak, the form,—
will come regularly, and no longer accidentally, to
flow into this mould, though they may have to give
up much of their detail in order to get in more
easily.


III.—Gradual passage of recollections into move-


CHAP. IT RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS IIg


ments. Recognition and attention—Here we come


Transition to tO the essential point of our discussion.

attentive ate :

recognition. In those cases where recognition is
e pro- 2 : :

blem of etten- attentive, i.e. where memory-images

tion should be


considered, ate vegudavly united with the present
ire posites Perception, is it the perception which
ee ce ae Cetermines mechanically the appearance
Brain. of the memories, or is it the memories
which spontaneously go to meet the perception ?
On the answer to this question will depend the
nature of the relation which philosophers will have
to establish between the brain and memory. For


in every perception there is a disturbance communi-


cated by the nerves to the perceptive centres. _ If ¥


the passing on of this movement to other cortical
centres had, as its real effect, the upspringing of
images in these, then we might in strictness main-
tain that memory is but a function of the brain.
But if we can establish that here, as elsewhere,
movement produces nothing but movement, that
the office of the sense-stimulation is merely to
impress on the body a certain attitude into which
recollections will come to insert themselves, then,
as it would be clear that the whole effect of
the material vibrations is exhausted in this work
of motor adaptation, we should ave to look for
memory elsewhere. On the first_ hypothesis, the
disorders of memory occasioned by a cerebral
lesion would result from the fact that the recol-
lections occupied the damaged, region and were
destroyed with it. On the second, these lesions


X20 MATTER AND MEMORY SHAP, It


would affect our nascent or possible action, but
our action alone. Sometimes they would hinder
the body from taking, in regard to the object, the
attitude that may call back its memory-image ;
sometimes they would sever the bonds between
remembrance and the present reality; that is,
by suppressing the last phase of the realization
of a memory—the phase of action—they would
thereby hinder the memory from becoming actual.
But in neither case would a lesion of the brain
really destroy memories.

The second hypothesis is ours; but, before we
attempt to verify it, we must briefly state how
we understand the general relations of percep-
tion, attention and memory. In order to show
chow a memory may, by gradual stages, come to

‘eraft itself on an attitude or a movement, we
shall have to anticipate in some degree the con-
clusions of our next chapter.

What is attention ? In one point of view the


ec PPT TNT OTE ET Flt AO TN
essential effect of attention is to render perception


more intense, and to spread out its

attention is, details; regarded in its content, it would
~pdapiafion.ot resolve itself into a certain magnifying
Negativey, it of the intellectual state1 But, on the
inhibition of other hand, consciousness testifies to an
irreducible difference of form between

1 Marillier, Remarques sur le mecanisme de Il attention
(Revue Philosophique, 1889, vol. xxvii).—Cf. Ward, art.
PsycuoLoey in the Encyclopaedia Britannica; and Bradley,


Is there a Special Activity of Attention? (Mind, 1886, vol. xi,
P- 305.)


CHAP. II RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS I21


this increase of intensity and that which is owing
to a higher power of the external stimulus: it
Seems indeed to come from within, and to indicate
a certain attitude adopted by the intellect. But
just here begins the difficulty, for the idea of
an intellectual attitude is not a clear idea. Psy-
chologists will here speak of a ‘ concentration of
the mind,’1 or again of an ‘ apperceptive’?
effort to bring perception into the field of distinct
intelligence. Some of them, materializing this
idea, will suppose a higher tension of cerebral
energy,’ or even the setting free ofa certain amount
of central energy which reinforces the stimulation
received. But either the fact observed psy-
chologically is merely translated thereby into a
physiological symbolism which seems to us even less
' clear, or else we always come back to a metaphor.

Stage by stage we shall be led on to define atten-
tion as an adaptation of the body rather than of the
mind, and to see in this attitude of Consciousness
mainly the consciousness of an attitude. Such
is the position assumed by Ribot® in the
discussion, and, though it has been attacked,*

1 Hamilton, Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. i, p. 247.

2 Wundt, Grundziige dev physiologischen Psychologie,
vol. ili, p. 331 et seq.

3 Maudsley, Physiology of Mind, p. 299. Cf. Bastian,
Les processus nerveux dans Vattention (Revue Philosophique,
vol. xxxiii, p. 360 et seq.).

4 W. James, Principles of Psychology, vol. i, p. 441.

5 Psychologie de Vattention, Paris, 18809.

8 Marillier, op. cit. Cf. J. Sully, The Psycho-physical
Process in Attention (Brain, 1890, p. 154).


I22 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. It


it appears to have retained all its strength, pro-
vided, however, that we are content to see, in
the movements described by Ribot, only
the negative condition of the phenomenon. For,
even if we suppose that the accompanying move-
ments of voluntary attention are mainly move-
ments of arrest, we still have to 0 explain the accom-
panying work of the m mind, that is to say, thee
But the mysterious operation by which the same
positive side Se :

of attention Organ, perceiving in the same surround-


is the effort


which seeks ings the same object, discovers in it
past memory-


images to a growing number of things. But we
insert them


into the may go farther, and maintain that the
eS. phenomena of inhibition are merely a
preparation for the actual movements of volun-
tary attention. Suppose for amoment that atten-
.tion, as we have already suggested, implies a
“backward movement of the mind which thus gives
“up the pursuit of the useful effect of a present per-
ception : there will indeed be, first, an inhibition
Se of movement, an arresting action. But, upon this

general attitude, more subtle movements will
* .¥ soon graft themselves, some of which have been
> already remarked and described, andall of which
~ « combine to retrace the outlines of the object
* “perceived. With these movements the positive,
i* no longer merely negative, work of attention
_ ene It is continued by memories.


. For, while external perception provokes on our


= ~ -% 2 3 : ONS ‘Tan ge, Beaty. zur Theorie der Sinnlichen Aufmerk-
“  \a “=  samkeit (Philos. Studien, Wundt, vol. vii, pp. 390-422).
oS : . ore

. z ee gee a


ol | :
CHAP. 1 RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS 123


part movements which retrace its main lines, our
memory directs upon the perception received the
memory-images which resemble it and which are ,,
already sketched out by the movements themselves. *
Memory thus creates anew the present perception;
or rather it doubles this perception by reflecting “~ cual


upon it either its own image orsome othermemory- **~ = Ass
image of the same kind. If the retained or f%* SE Z
remembered image will not cover all the details of; . x:.s« fet
the image that is being perceived, an appeal is made" ye - AUS i
to the deeper and more distant regions of memory, “*~ Sa ae
until other details that are already known cometo # ** #%
project themselves upon those details that remain eer


unperceived. And the operation may go on in- Ares
definitely ;—memory strengthening and enriching .... *”


perception, which, in its turn becoming wider, °»+ i+
draws into itself a growing number of comple-**” ae
mentary recollections. So let us no longer think Me i fe
of a mind which disposes of some fixed quantity # ". |
of light, now diffusing it around, now concen- ¢, eee
trating it on a single point. Metaphor for meta- oe ae 32
phor, we would rather compare the elementary Pas: ae


work of attention to that of the telegraph clerk p yak“
who, on receipt of an important despatch, sends
it back again, word for word, in order to check
its accuracy.

But, to send a telegram, we must know how to
use the machine. And, inthesame way, in order to
reflect upon a perception the image which we have
received from it, we must be able to reproduce
it, i.e. to reconstruct it by an effort of synthesis.


I24 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. It


It has been said that attention is a power of
analysis, and it is true; but it has not been suffi-
ciently shown how an analysis of this kind is
possible, nor by what process we are able to
discover in a perception that which could not be
perceived in it at first. The truth is that this
analysis is effected by a series of attempts at a
synthesis, i.e. by somany hypotheses : our memory
chooses, one after the other, various analogous
images which it launches in the direction of the
new perception. But the choice is not made
at random. What suggests the hypotheses,
what presides, even from afar, over the choice
is the movement of imitation which continues
the perception, and provides for the perception
and for the images a common framework.

But, if this be so, the mechanism of distinct
perception must be different from what it
Thus an is usually thought to be. Perception
attentive : ° °
perception is Goes not consist merely in impres-
Sere sions gathered, or even elaborated, by
agen the mind. This is the case, at most,
the past. with the perceptions that are dissipated
as soon as received, those which we disperse
in useful actions. But every attentive percep-
tion truly involves a reflexion, in the etymological
sense of the word, that is to say the pro-
jection, outside ourselves, of an actively created
image, identical with, or similar to, the object on
which it comes to mould itself. If, after having
gazed at any object, we turn our eyes abruptly


me
Ps,
ig
a, &


CHAP. 1. RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS I25


away, we obtain an ‘after image’ of it: must
we not. suppose that this image existed already
while we were looking? The recent discovery
of centrifugal fibres of perception inclines us to
think that this is the usual course of things and
that, beside the afferent process which carries
the impression to the centre, there is another
process, of contrary direction, which brings back
the image to the periphery. It is true that we
are here dealing with images photographed upon
the object itself, and with memories fo:lowing
immediately upon the perception of which they
are but the echo. But, behind these images,
which are identical with the object, there are
others, stored in memory, which merely resemble
it, and others, finally, which are only more or
less distantly akin to it. All these go out to
meet the perception, and, feeding on its substance,
acquire sufficient vigour and life to abide with it
in space. The experiments of Miinsterberg! and
of Kiilpe * leave no doubt as to this latter point :
any memory-image thatis capable of interpreting
our actual perception inserts itself so thoroughly
into it that we are no longer able to discern what
is perception and what is memory. The ingenious
experiments of Goldscheider and Miller on the
mechanism of reading are most interesting in
this regard.* Arguing against Grashey, who, in

1 Beitrage zur experimentellen Psychologie, vol. iv, p. 15


et seq. *? Grundriss der Psychologie. Leipzig, 1893, p. 185,
8 Zur Physiologie und Pathologie des Lesens (Zettschr. f.


126 MATTER AND MEMORY ZHAP, I


a well-known essay,! maintained that we read
words letter by letter, these observers proved
by experiments that rapid reading is a real work
of divination. Our mind notes here and there
a few characteristic lines and fills all the inter-
vals with memory-images which, projected on
the paper, take the place of the real printed
characters and. may be mistaken for them. Thus
we are constantly creating or reconstructing.
Our distinct perception is really comparable to
a closed circle in which the perception-image,
going towards the mind, and the memory-
image, launched into space, career the one behind
the other. . ,
We must emphasize this latter point. Atten-
tive perception is often represented as a Series
The of processes which make their way in
number and


complexity single file; the object exciting sensa-
i) ese


images tions, the sensations causing ideas to
WL. epen . 6
on the start up before them, each idea setting
degree of A 5 :

tension in motion, one in front of the other,
adopted by


the mind. points more and more remote of the
intellectual mass. Thus there is supposed to be
a rectilinear progress, by which the mind goes
further and further from the object, never to
return to it. We maintain, on the contrary.


Klinische Medicin, 1893).—Cf. McKeen Cattell, Ueber die
Zeit der Evrkennung von Schriftzeichen (Philos. Studien, 1885-
86).

* Ueber Aphasie und thre Beziehungen zur Wahrnehmungen
(Arch. f. Psychiatrie, 1885, vol. xvi).


cHar. 11 RECOLLECTIONS AND rs ee A “a7”


we


af


that reflective perception is_a circuit, in which —
(OO renee)


all the elements, including the perceived object
itself, hold each other in a state of mutual tension
as in an electric circuit, so that no disturbance
starting from the object can stop on its way and
remain in the depths of the mind: it must always
find its way back to the object whenceit proceeds.
Now, it must not be thought that this is a mere
matter of words. We have here two radically
different conceptions of the intellectual process.
According to the first, things happen mechanic- y
ally, and by a merely accidental series of succes-
sive additions. At each moment of an attentive
perception, for example, new elements sent up
from a deeper stratum of the mind might join
the earlier elements, without creating thereby
a general disturbance and without bringing about
a transformation of the whole system. In the
second, on the Xontrary, an act of attention implies
such a solidarity between the mind and its object,
it is a circuit so well closed, that we cannot pass
to states of higher concentration without creating,
whole and entire, so many new circuits which
envelop the first and have nothing in common
between them but the perceived object. Of
these different circles of memory, which later
we shall study in detail, the smallest, A, is the
nearest to immediate perception. It contains
only the object O, with the after-image which
comes back and overlies it. Behind it, the larger
and larger circles B, C, D correspond to growing


128 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, II


efforts at intellectual expansion. It is the whole
of memory, as we shall see, that passes over into

‘ yy each of these circuits, since
memory is always present ;
but that memory, capable,
by reason of its elasticity, of
expanding more and more,
reflects upon the object a
growing number of sug-
gested images,—sometimes
the details of the object
itself, sometimes concomi-
tant details which ae!
throw light upon it. Thus, .


object perceived, as an‘
independent whole, we re-
assemble, together with
it, the more and more
distant conditions with which it forms one
system. If we call B’, C’, D’, these causes of
growing depth, situated behind the object, and
virtually given with the object itself, it will
be seen that the progress of attention results in
creating anew not only the object perceived,
but also the ever widening systems with which
it may be bound up; so that in the measure in
which the circles B, C, D represent a higher
expansion of memory, their reflexion attains
in B’, C’, D’ deeper strata of reality.

The same psychical life, therefore, must be


after having rebuilt the 33


a


CHAP. II RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS I29


supposed to be repeated an endless number of
times on the different storeys of memory, and the
same act of the mind may be performed at
varying heights. In the effort of attention, the


mind is always concerned in its entirety, but it pe


a ge!
By 5S
-f eG


simplifies or complicates itself according to the


level on which it chooses to go to work. Usually
it is the present perception which determines
the direction of our mind; but, according to the


4a a3 23
degree of tension which our mind adopts and the ©


sf 2
=.


Ay


%


vax,


¥%


Pe


>


$5,


¢


height at which it takes its stand, the perception i Sl ~ ‘


develops a greater or smaller number of images.
In other words, personal recollections, exactly
localized, the series of which represents the course
So there are Of our past existence, make up, all to-
aumereme gether, the last and largest enclosure
the largest of our memory. Essentially fugitive,
includes a ; 1
our past, they become materialized only by chance,
Cie at either when an accidentally precise de-
phir termination of our bodily attitude
attracts them, or when the very indetermination
of that attitude leaves a clear field to the
caprices of their manifestation. But this outer-
most envelope contracts and repeats itself in
inner and concentric circles, which in _ their
narrower range enclose the same recollections
grown smaller, more and more removed from
their personal and original form, and more and
more capable, from their lack of distinguishing
features, of being applied to the present percep-


tion and of determining it after the manner of a
7 K


wed,
ie


“is, BS
Ly
‘ina


tise S
? % >


130 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


species which defines and absorbs the individual.
There comes a moment when the recollection thus
brought down is capable of blending so well with
the present perception that we cannot say where
perception ends or where memory begins. At
that precise moment, memory, instead of capri-
ciously sending in and calling back its images,
follows regularly, in all their details, the move-
ments of the body.

But, in the degree that these recollections draw
nearer to movements, and so to external per-
While, on Ception, the work of memory acquires
the vlene of 4 “higher |practical™ importance = Past


action,


etwas images, reproduced exactly as they were,


down to, with all their details and even with their
with action. affective colouring, are the images of
idle fancy or of dream: to_act_is just to induce
this_ memory _to_ shrink, or rather to become
thinned and “sharpened, so that it presents nothing ,
thicker than the edge of a blade to actual exper- “/
ience, into which it will thus be able to penetrate. .
In truth, it is because psychology has failed to
separate out the motor element in memory, that
we have sometimes overlooked and sometimes
exaggerated what is automatic in the evocation
of remembrances. According to our view, an
appeal is made to activity at the precise moment
when perception gives rise to imitative move-
ments which scan it, as it were, automatically. A
sketch is thereby furnished to us, into which we
put the right details and the right colouring by


CHAP. II RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS 13%


projecting into it memories more or less remote.
But such is not the usual way of describing the
process. Sometimes the mind is supposed to be
absolutely independent of circumstances, to work
exactly as it likes on present or absent objects ;—
and then we can no longer understand how it is
that the normal process of attention may be
seriously impaired by even a slight disturbance
of the sensori-motor equilibrium. Sometimes,
on the contrary, the evocation of images is sup-
posed to be a mere mechanical effect of present
perception; it is assumed that, by a necessary
concatenation of processes supposed to be all
alike, the object calls forth sensations and the
sensations ideas which cling to them ;—but then,
since there is no reason why the operation, which
is mechanical to begin with, should change its
character as it goes on, we are led to the hypo- _
thesis of a brain wherein mental states may dwell
to slumber and to awaken. In both cases the
true function of the body is misunderstood, and
as neither theory teaches how and why the inter-
vention of a mechanism is necessary, neither of
them is able to show where such intervention
should stop if it is once brought in.

But it is time to leave these general considera-
tions. We must ascertain whether our hypothesis
is confirmed or contradicted by the facts of
cerebral localization known at the present day.
The disorders of imaginative memory, which
correspond to local lesions of the cortex, are


132 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


always diseases of the faculty of recognition ;
either of visual or auditory recognition in general
(psychic blindness and deafness), or of the recog-
nition of words (word blindness, word deafness,
etc.). These disorders we have now to exam-
ine.

If our hypothesis is well founded, these failures
of recognition are in no sense due to the fact
Hence wemay tat the recollections occupied the in-
infer that = =jured region of the brain. They must


lesions of the


brain affect Z 2
eerste be due to one of two causes: some


movements of times our body is no longer able
inattentive é 5
Te0ggnIHGN, | automatically to adopt, under the influ-
tary move- ence of the external stimulus, the precise


~aiientire attitude by means of which a choice
bat nothing could be automatically made among

our memories; sometimes the mem-
ories are no longer able to find a fulcrum in
the body, a means of prolonging themselves in
action. In the first case, the lesion affects the
mechanisms which continue, in an automati-
cally executed movement, the stimulation re-
ceived: attention can no longer be fixed by the
object. In the second case, the lesion involves
those particular cortical centres which prepare
voluntary movements by lending them the re-
quired sensory antecedent, centres which, rightly
or wrongly, are termed image-centres : attention
can no longer be fixed by the subject. But, in
either case, it is actual. movements which are
hindered or future movements. which are no


CHAP, II RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS 133


longer prepared: there has been no destruction
o£ memories. ea es SY
Now pathology confirms this forecast. It re-
reveals to us two absolutely distinct kinds of psychic
blindness and deafness, and of word blindness and
deafness. In the first kfnd, visual and auditory
memories are still evoked, but they cannot apply
themselyes to the corresponding perceptions. In
the second, evocation of the memories themselves
is hindered. Is it true that the lesion involves,
as we said, the sensori-motor mechanisms of auto-
matic attention in the first case, and the imagina-
tive mechanisms of voluntary attention in the
second? In order tc verify our hypothesis, we
must limit demonstration to a definite example.
No doubt we could show that visual recognition
of things in general, and of words in particular,
implies a semi-automatic motor process to begin
with, and then an active projection of memories
which engraft themselves on the corresponding atti-
tudes. But we prefer to confine ourselves to impres-
sions of hearing, and more particularly to the hear-
ing of articulate language, because this example
is the most comprehensive. To hear speech is,
in fact, first of all to recognize a sound, then
to discover its sense, and finally to interpret it
more or less thoroughly: in short, it is to pass
through all the stages of attention and to exercise
several higher or lower powers of memory. More-
over, no disorders are more common or better
studied than those of the auditive memory of


he


“fue


134 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


words. And, lastly, acoustic verbal images are
not destroyed without a serious lesion of certain
determined convolutions of the cortex: so that
we are here provided with an undisputed example
of localization, in regard to which we can enquire
whether the brain is really capable of storing up
memories. We have, then, to show in the audi-
tory recognition of words: first, an automatic
sensori-motor process ; secondly, an active and,
so to speak, excentric projection of memory-
images.


1. I listen to two people speaking in a language
which is unknown to me. Do I therefore hear
Evidencefrom them talk? The vibrations which y
eyrviay life. reach my ears are the same as those
ieeniny ana Which’ strike theirs. Yet I perceive
hearing. the only, a confused “noise, jin whichwall
diagram’ sounds are alike. I distinguish no-
thing, and could not repeat anything. In this
same sonorous mass, however, the two _ interlo-
cutors distinguish consonants, vowels and sylla-
bles which are not at all alike, in short, separate
words. Between them and me where is the
difference ?

The question is, how can the knowledge of a
language, which is only memory, modify the
material content of a present perception, and
cause some listeners actually to hear what
others, in the same physical conditions, do not
hear. It is alleged, indeed, that the auditory


CHAP, II RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS 135


recollections of words, accumulated in memory,
are called up by the sound-impression and come
to strengthen its effect. But if the conversa-
tion to which I listen is, for me, only a noise,
we may suppose the sound increased as much
as we like: the noise will be none the more
intelligible for being louder. I grant that the
memory of a word will be called up by the sound
of that word: yet it is necessary, for this, that
the sound of the word should have been heard
-by the ear. How can the sounds perceived speak
to memory, how can they choose, in the store-
house of auditory images, those which should
come to rejoin them, unless they have been al-
ready separated, distinguished,—in short, per-
ceived,—as syllables and as words ?

This difficulty does not appear to have been
sufficiently noticed by the theorists of sensory
aphasia. For in word deafness the patient finds
himself, in regard to his own language, in the
same position as we all are when we hear an
unknown tongue. He has generally preserved
intact his sense of hearing, but he has no under-
standing of the words spoken to him, and is fre-
quently even unable to distinguish them. The —
explanation generally given of the disease is
that the auditory recollection of words has
been destroyed in the cortex, or that a lesion,
sometimes transcortical, sometimes sub-cortical,
hinders the auditive memory from evoking the
idea, or the perception from uniting with the


136 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


memofy.. But in the latter case, at least, the
psychological question has still to be answered:
what is the conscious process which the lesion
has abolished, and what is the intermediary pro-
cess that we go through in our normal condition
in order to discern words and syllables which are,
at first, given to the ear as a continuity of sound ?

The difficulty would be insuperable if we really
had only auditory impressions on the one hand,
and auditory memories on the other. Not so
however, if auditory impressions organize nascent
movements, capable of scanning the phrase which
is heard and of emphasizing its main articulations.
These automatic movements of internal accom-
paniment, at first undecided or uncodrdinated,
might become more precise by repetition; they
would end by sketching a simplified figure in
which the listener would find, in their main lines
and principal directions, the very movements of
the speaker. Thus would unfold itself in con-
sciousness, under the form of nascent muscular
sensations, the motor diagram, as it were, of the
speech we hear. To adapt our hearing to a
new language would then consist, at the outset,
neither in modifying the crude sound nor in sup-
plementing the sounds with memories; it would
be to codrdinate the motor tendencies of the mus-
cular apparatus of the voice to the impressions of
the ear; it would be to perfect the motor accom-
paniment.

In learning a physical exercise, we begin by


CHAP. II RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS £57


imitating the movement as a whole, as our eyes
see it from without, as we think we have seen it
done. Our perception of ?t is confused ; confused
therefore will be the movement whereby we try to
repeat it. But whereas our visual perception was
of a continuous whole, the movement by which we
endeavour to reconstruct the image is compound
and made up of a multitude of muscular contrac-
tions and tensions ; and our consciousness of these
itself includes a number of sensations resulting
from the varied play of the articulations. The
confused movement which copies the image is,
then, already its virtual decomposition ; it bears
within itself, so to speak, its own analysis. The
progress which is brought about by repetition and
practice consists merely in unfolding what was
previously wrapped up, in bestowing on each of
the elementary movements that autonomy which
ensures precision, without, however, breaking up
that solidarity with the others without which it
would become useless. We are right when we
say that habit is formed by the repetition of an
effort ; but what would be the use of repeating
it, if the result were always to reproduce the same
thing? The true effect of repetition is to decom-
pose, and then to recompose, and thus appeal to
the intelligence of the body. At each newattempt
it separates movements which were interpenetrat-
ing; each time it calls the attention of the body
to a new detail which had passed unperceived ;
it bids the body discriminate and classify; it


138 MATTER-AND MEMORY CHAP. 11


teaches what is the essential; it points out,
one after another, within the total movement,
the lines that mark off its internal structure.
In this sense,a movement is learnt when the
body has been made to understand it.

So a motor accompaniment of speech may well
break the continuity of the mass ofsound. But we
But this have now to point out in what this
motor acy, accompaniment consists. Is it speech


companiment


of hear’a- itself, repeated internally? If this were


cates only ~_so, the child would be able to repeat all
outlines. the words that its ear can distinguish ;
and we ourselves should only need to understand
a foreign language to be able to pronounce it
with a correct accent. The matter is far from
being so simple. I may be able to catch a tune,
to follow its phrasing, even to fix it in memory,
without being able to sing it. I can easily dis-
tinguish the peculiarities of inflexion and tone in
an Englishman speaking German—I correct him
therefore, mentally ;—but it by no means follows
that I could give the right inflexion and tone to
the German phrase, if I were to utter it. Here,
moreover, the observation of every-day life is
confirmed by clinical facts. It is still possible to
follow and understand speech when one has be-
come incapable of speaking. Motor aphasia does
not involve word deafness.

This is because the diagram, by means of which
we divide up the speech we hear, indicates only
its salient outlines. It is to speech itself what


enaP. 11 RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS 139


the rough sketch is to the finished picture. For it
is one thing to understand a difficult movement,
another to be able to carry it out. To under-
stand it, we need only to realize in it what is
essential, just enough to distinguish it from all
other possible movements. But to be able to
carry it out, we must besides have brought our
body tounderstand it. Now, the logic of the body
admits of no tacit implications. It demands
that all the constituent parts of the required
movement shall be set forth one by one, and
then put together again. Herea complete analysis
is necessary, in which no detail is neglected,
and an actual ‘synthesis, in which nothing is
curtailed. The imagined diagram, composed of
a few nascent muscular sensations, is but a sketch.
The muscular sensations, really and completely
experienced, give it colour and life.

It remains to be considered how an accom-
paniment of this kind can be produced, and
whether it really is always produced.


Evidence

from certain We know that in order effectively to
sensory i
aphasia, in Pronounce a word the tongue and lips
wa ee etmust articulate, the- larynx must -be
diagram i i

diaeram ye brought into play for phonation, and
pegs the muscles of the chest must produce


an expiratory movement of air. Thus, to every
syllable uttered there corresponds the play of a
number of mechanisms already prepared in the
cerebral and bulbar centres. These mechanisms
are joined to the higher centres of the cortex by


NH?


I40 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I


the axis-cylinder processes of the pyramidal cells
in the psycho-motor zone. Along this path the
impulse of the will travels. So, when we desire
to articulate this or that sound, we transmit the
order to act to this or that group of motor me-
chanisms selected from among them all. But,
while the ready-made mechanisms which corres-
pond to the various possible movements of articu-
lation and phonation are connected with the causes
(whatever these may be) which set them to work
in voluntary speech, there are facts which put
beyond all doubt the linkage of these same mechan-
isms with the auditory perception of words. First
of all, among the numerous varieties of aphasia de-
scribed in clinical reports, we know of two (Licht-
heim’s 4th and 6th forms) which appear to imply
a relation of this kind. Thus, in a case observed
by Lichtheim himself, the subject had lost, as the
result of a fall, the memory of the articulation
of words, and consequently the faculty of spon-
taneous speech ; yet he repeated quite correctly
what was said to him.1 On the other hand, in
cases where spontaneous speech is unaffected,
but where word deafness is absolute and the
patient no longer understands what is said to
him, the faculty of repeating another person’s words
may still be completely. retained. It may be
said, with Bastian, that these phenomena merely
point to a fatigue of the articulatory or auditive
? Lichtheim, On Aphasia (Brain, Jan. 1885, p. 447).
2 Ibid., p. 484.


CHAP, II RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS I41t


memory of words, the acoustic impressions only
serving to awaken that memory from its torpor.
We may have to allow for this hypothesis, but it
does not appear to us to account for the curious
phenomena of echolalia, long since pointed out
by Romberg,? Voisin? and Forbes Winslow,‘
which are termed by Kussmaul® (probably with
some exaggeration) acoustic reflexes. Here the
subject repeats mechanically, and perhaps uncon-
sciously, the words he hears, as though the auditory
sensations converted themselves automatically
into movements of articulation. From these
facts some have inferred that there is a special
mechanism which unites a so-called acoustic cen-
tre of words with an articulatory centre of speech.*
The truth appears to lie between these two hypo-
theses. There is more in these various phenomena
than absolutely mechanical actions, but less than
an appeal to voluntary memory. They testify
to a tendency of verbal auditory impressions to

1 Bastian, On Different Kinds of Aphasia (British Medical
Journal, Oct. and Nov. 1887, p. 935).

2 Romberg, Lehrbuch der Nervenkrankhetten, 1853, vol. il.

3 Quoted by Bateman, On Aphasia. London, 1890, p. 79.—
Cf. Marcé, Mémoire sur quelques observations de physiologie
pathologique (Mém. de la Soc. de Biologie, 2nd series, vol. ii,

. 102).
: 4 pk Winslow, On Obscure Diseases of the Brain.
London, 1861, p. 505.

5 Kussmaul, Die Siérungen der Sprache, Leipzig. 1877, pp.
55 et seq. -

6 Arnaud, Contribution a V’étude clinique de la surdité verbale


(Arch. de neurologie, 1886, p. 192).—Spamer, Ueber Asymbolie
(Arch. f. Psychiatrie, vol. vi, pp. 507 and 524).


I42 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


prolong themselves in movements of articulation ;
a tendency which assuredly does not escape, as
a rule, the control of the will, perhaps even im-
plies a rudimentary discrimination, and expresses
itself, in the normal state, by an internal repe-
tition of the striking features of the words that
are heard. Now our motor diagram is nothing
else.

Considering this hypothesis more closely, we
shall perhaps find in it the psychological explana-
tion, which we were just now seeking, of certain
forms of word deafness. A few cases of word
deafness are known where there was a com-
plete survival of acoustic memory. The patient
had retained, unimpaired, both the auditive
memory of words and the sense of hearing ;
yet he recognized no word that was said to
him.1. A subcortical lesion is here supposed,
which prevents the acoustic impressions from
going to join the verbal auditory images in the
cortical centres where they are supposed to be
deposited. But, in the first place, the question
is whether the brain can store up images. And,
secondly, even if it were proved that there is
some lesion in the paths that the acoustic impres-
sions have to follow, we should still be compelled
to seek a psychological interpretation of the final


1 See, in particular: P. Sérieux, Suv un cas de surdité
verbale pure (Revue de Médecine, 1893, p. 733 et seq.) ; Licht-
heim, loc. cit., p. 461; and Arnaud, Contrib. a étude de la
surdité verbale (2° article), Arch. de Neurologie, 1886, p. 366.


CHAP. II RECOLLECTIONS AND MOVEMENTS 143


result. For, by hypothesis, the auditory memories
can still be recalled to consciousness ; by hypo-
thesis also, the auditory impressions still reach
consciousness ; there must therefore be in con-
sciousness itself a gap, a solution of continuity,
something, whatever it is, which hinders the
perception from joining the memories. Now, we
may throw some light on the case if we remember
that crude auditory perception is really that of
a continuity of sound, and that the sensori-motor
connexions established by habit must have as
their office, in the normal state, to decompose this
continuity. A lesion of these conscious mechan-
isms, by hindering the decomposition, might
completely check the up-rush of memories which
tend to alight upon the corresponding perceptions.
Therefore the ‘motor diagram’ might be what is
injured by the lesion. If we pass in review the
cases (which are, indeed, not very numerous) of
word deafness where acoustic memories were
retained, we notice certain details that are inter-
esting in this respect. Adler notes, as a remark- |
able fact in word deafness, that the patients no
longer react even to the loudest sounds, though
their hearing has preserved all its acuteness.}
In other words, sound no longer finds in them its
motor echo. A patient of Charcot’s, attacked by
a passing word deafness, relates that he heard
his clock strike, but that he could not count the


1 Adler, Beitrag zur Kenntniss der selineren Formen von
sensorischer A phasie (Neurol. Centralblatt, 1891, p. 296 et seq.).


I44 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, 11


strokes.1 Probably he was unable to separate
and distinguish them. Another patient declares
that he perceives the words of a conversation,
but as a confused noise. Lastly, the patient
who has lost the understanding of the spoken
word recovers it if the word is repeated to him
several times, and especially if it is pronounced
with marked divisions, syllable by syllable.?
This last fact, observed in several cases of word
deafness where acoustic memories were unim-
paired, is particularly significant.

Stricker’s# mistake was to believe in a complete
internal repetition of the words that are heard.
His assertion is already contradicted by the
simple fact that we do not know of a single
case of motor aphasia which brought out word
deafness. But all the facts combine to prove
the existence of a motor tendency to separate
the sounds and to establish their diagram. This
automatic tendency is not without (as we said
above) a certain elementary mental effort: how
otherwise could we identify with each other,
and consequently follow with the same diagram,


1 Bernard, De l’Aphasie. Paris, 1889, p. 143.

2 Ballet, Le langage intérieur. Paris, 1888, p. 85.

8 See the three cases cited by Arnaud in the Archives de
neurologie, 1886, p. 366 et seq. (Contrib. clinique a Vétude de la
surdité verbale, 2° article).—Cf. Schmidt’s case, Gehdrs- und
Sprachstorung im Folge von Apoplexie (Allg. Zeitschriften f.
Psychiatrie, 1871, vol. xxvii, p. 304).

4 Stricker, Studien tiber die Sprachvorstellung. Vienna, 1880.


CHAP, IT REALIZATION OF MEMORIES I45


similar words pronounced on different notes
and by different qualities of voice? These
inner movements of repeating and recognizing
are like a prelude to voluntary attention. They
mark the limit between the voluntary and the
automatic. By them, as we hinted before, the
characteristic phenomena of intellectual recogni-
tion are first prepared and then determined.
But what is this complete and fully conscious
recognition ?


2. We come to the second part of our subject :
from movements we pass to memories. We have
Transition to S2id that attentive recognition is a kind
ede Of cirvcuit, in which the external object


White ™ yields to us deeper and deeper parts


impossible ‘
tj sins ee OL itself, as, our memory adopts. a


interpretation correspondingly higher degree of tension
eal process. in order to project recollections towards
it. In the particular case we are now considering,
the object is an interlocutor whose ideas develop
within his consciousness into auditory representa-
tions which are then materialized into uttered
words. So, if we are right, the hearer places him-
self at once in the midst of the corresponding ideas,
and then develops them into acoustic memories
which go out to overlie the crude sounds perceived,
while fitting themselves into the motor diagram.
To follow an arithmetical addition is to do it
over again for ourselves. To understand another’s
words is, in like manner, to reconstruct intelli-
ie


146 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


gently, starting from the ideas, the continuity of
sound which the ear perceives. And, more gener-
ally, to attend, to recognize intellectually, to
interpret, may be summed up in a single opera-
tion whereby the mind, having chosen its level,
having selected within itself, with reference to
the crude perceptions, the point that is exactly
symmetrical with their more or less immediate
cause, allows to flow towards them the memories
that will go out to overlie them.

Such, however, is certainly not the usual way
of looking at the matter. The associationist habit
is there ; and, in accordance with it, we find men
maintaining that, by the mere effect of contiguity,
the perception of a sound brings back the memory
of the sound and memories bring back the cor-
responding ideas. Andthen, we have the cerebral
lesions which seem to bring about a destruction of
memories ; more particularly, in the case we are
studying, there are the lesions of the brain found
in word deafness. Thus psychological observa-
tions and clinical facts seem to conspire. To-
gether they seem to point to the existence, within
the cortex, of auditory memories slumbering,
whether as a physico-chemical modification of cer-
tain cells or under some other form. A sensory
stimulation is then supposed to awaken them ;
and, finally, by an intra-cerebral process, perhaps
by trans-cortical movements that go to find the
complementary representations, they are supposed
to evoke ideas.


CHAP, II REALIZATION OF MEMORIES 147


Now consider for a moment the amazing con-
sequences of an hypothesis of this kind. The
auditory image of a word is not an

Hauditory object with well-defined outlines; for


le, :
really stored the Same word pronounced by different


in the b . ;
there would VOices, or by the same voice on different


th ds . . .
ve imaete notes, gives a different sound. So, if


each single


word: and yOu adopt the hypothesis of which we
ae me shave: been speaking, you must assume
pence that there areas many auditory images
of the same word as there are pitches of
sound and qualities of voice. Do you mean that
all these images are treasured up in the brain ?
Or is it that the brain chooses? If the brain
chooses one of them, whence comes its pre-
ference ? Suppose, even, that you can explain
why the brain chooses one or the other; how
is it that this same word, uttered by a new
person, gives a sound which, although different,
is still able to rejoin the same memory? For
you must bear in mind that this memory is
supposed to be an inert and passive thing and
consequently incapable of discovering, beneath
external differences, an internal similitude. You
speak of the auditory image of a word as if it
were an entity or a genus: such a genus can,
indeed, be constructed by an active memory
which extracts the resemblance of several com-
plex sounds and only retains, as it were, their
common diagram. But, for a brain that is sup-
posed—nay, is bound—to record only the materi-


148 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. It


ality of the sounds perceived, there must be, of
one and the same word, thousands of distinct
images. Uttered by a new voice, it will constitute a
new image, which will simply be added to the others.

But there is something still more perplexing.
,A word has an individuality for us only from the
moment that we have been taught to abstract
it. What we first hear are short phrases, not words.
A word is always continuous with the other
words which accompany it, and takes different
aspects according to the cadence and movement
of the sentence in which it is set: just as each
note of a melody vaguely reflects the whole musi-
cal phrase. Suppose, then, that there are indeed
model auditory memories, consisting in certain
intra-cerebral arrangements, and lying in wait for
analogous impressions of sound: these impressions
may come, but they will pass unrecognized. How
could there be a common measure, how could
there be a point of contact, between the dry,
inert, isolated image and the living reality of the
word organized with the rest of the phrase ?
I understand clearly enough that beginning of auto-
matic recognition which would consist, as I have
said above, in emphasizing inwardly the principal
divisions of the sentence that is heard, and so
in adopting its movement. But, unless we are to
suppose in all men identical voices pronouncing
in the same tone the same stereotyped phrases,
I fail to see how the words we hear are able to
rejoin their images in the brain.


CHAP, II, REALIZATION OF MEMORIES I49


Now, if memories are really deposited in the
cortical cells, we should find in sensory aphasia,
The pheno- for -instance, the irreparable loss of


mena of sen- :


soryaphasiado Certain determined words, the integral
not point to the


existence of | COnServation of others. But, as a mat-
such images.


but suggesta ter of fact, things happen quite differ-
“sah ops ently. Sometimes it is the whole set
of memories that disappears, the faculty of
mental hearing being purely and simply abol-
ished; sometimes there is a general weakening of
the function ; but it is usually the function which
is diminished and not the number of recollections.
It seems as if the patient had no longer strength
to grasp his acoustic memories, as if he turned
round about the verbal image without being able
to hit upon it. To enable him to recover a word
it is often enough to put him on the track of it,
by giving him its first syllable, or even by merely
encouraging him. An emotion may produce
the same effect. There are, however, cases in
which it does indeed seem that definite groups
of representations have disappeared from memory.
I have passed in review a large number of these
facts, and it has seemed that they could be referred


1 Bernard, of. cit., pp. 172 and 179. Cf. Babilée, Les troubles
de la mémoire dans Valcoolisme. Paris, 1886 (medical thesis),
P. 44. : eee )

2 Rieger, Beschreibung dey Intelligenzstovungen in Folge
einer Hirnverletzung. Wurzburg, 1889, p. 35.

3 Wernicke, Der aphasische Symptomencomplex. Breslau,
1874, p. 39.—Cf. Valentin, Sur un cas d’aphaste dorigine
traumatique (Revue médicale de l'Est, 1880, p. 171).


150 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


to two absolutely distinct categories. In the
first, the loss of memories is usually abrupt ;
in the second, it is progressive. In the first, the
recollections detached from memory are arbitrarily
and even capriciously chosen : they may be certain
words, certain figures, or often all the words
of an acquired language. In the second, the
disappearance of the words is governed by a
methodical and grammatical order, that which is
indicated by Ribot’s law : proper names go first,
then common nouns, and lastly verbs.1 Such
are the external differences. Now this, I believe,
is the internal difference. In the amnesias of the
first type, which are nearly always the result of
a violent shock, I incline to think that the
memories which are apparently destroyed are
really present, and not only present but acting.
To take an example frequently borrowed from
Forbes Winslow,? that of a patient who had
forgotten the letter F, and the letter F only,
I wonder how it is possible to subtract a given
letter wherever met with,—to detach it, that
is, from the spoken or written words in which
it occurs,—if it were not first implicitly re-
cognized. In another case cited by the same
author, the patient had forgotten languages


1 Ribot, Les maladies de la mémoire. Paris, 1881, p. 131
et seq.

2 Forbes Winslow, On Obscure Diseases of the Brain. London,
1861.

3 [bid., p. 372


CHAP, Ir REALIZATION OF MEMORIES I51I


he had learnt and poems he had written. Hav-
ing begun to write again, he reproduced nearly
thesame lines. Moreover, in such cases the patient
may often recover the lost memories. Without
wishing to be too dogmatic on a question of this
kind, we cannot avoid noticing the analogy be-
tween these phenomena and that dividing of
the self of which instances have been described
by Pierre Janet:1 some of them bear a remark-
able resemblance to the ‘ negative hallucinations,’
and suggestions with point de repére, induced by
hypnotizers.2—Entirely different are the aphasias
of the second kind, which are indeed the true
aphasias. These are due, as we shall try to
show presently, to the progressive diminution
of a well-localized function, the faculty of actual-
izing the recollection of words. How are we to
explain the fact that amnesia here follows a
methodical course, beginning with proper nouns
and ending with verbs ? We could hardly explain
it if the verbal images were really deposited in


1 Pierre Janet, Etat mental des hystévriques. Paris, 1894,
vol. ii, p. 263 et seq.—Cf. L’Automatisme psychologique, by
the same author, Paris, 1889.

2 See Grashey’s case, studied afresh by Sommer, and by
him declared to be inexplicable by the existing theories of
aphasia. In this instance, the movements executed by the
patient seem to me to have been signals addressed by him
to an independent memory. (Sommer, Zur Psychologie der
Sprache, Zeitschy.f. Psychol. u. Physiol. der Simnesorgane, vol.
ii, 1891, p. 143 et seq.)—Cf. Sommer’s paper at the Con-
gress of German Alienists, Arch. de Newrologie, vol. xxiv, 1892).


152 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. It


the cells of the cortex: it would be wonderful
indeed that disease should always attack these
cells in the same order.1 But the fact can be
explained, if we admit that memories need, for
their actualization, a motor ally, and that they
require for their recall a kind of mental attitude ~
which must itself be engrafted upon an attitude
of the body. Ifsuch be the case, verbs in gene-
ral, which essentially express tmuitable actions, are
precisely the words that a bodily effort might
enable us to recapture when the function of
language has all but escaped us: proper names,
on the other hand, being of all words the most
remote from those impersonal actions which our
body can sketch out, are those which a weaken-
ing of the function will earliest affect. It is a
noteworthy fact that the aphasic patient, who
has become as a rule incapable of finding
the noun he seeks, may replace it by an
appropriate periphrasis into which other nouns,?
and perhaps even the evasive noun itself,
enter. Unable to think of the precise word,
he has thought of the corresponding action, and
this attitude has determined the general direction
of a movement from which the phrase then
springs. So likewise it may happen to any of us.
that, having retained the initial of a forgotten
name, we recover the name by repeating the


* Wundt, Grundziige der physiologische Psychologie.
Leipzig, 1903, vol i, 314-315.
* Bernard, De Vaphasie. Paris, 1889, pp. 171 and 174.


CHAP, It REALIZATION OF MEMORIES TAS


initial..—Therefore, in facts of the second kind,


it is the function that is attacked as a whole, .


and in those of the first kind the forgetting,
though in appearance more complete, is never
really final. Neither in the one case nor in the
other do we find memories localized in certain
cells of the cerebral substance and abolished by
their destruction.

But let us question our own consciousness, and


ask of it what happens when we listen to the words |


Whatintro- Of another person with the desire to
enn, understand them. Do we passively wait
roe for the impressions to go in search of
their images? Do we not rather feel that we
are adopting a certain disposition which varies
with our interlocutor, with. the language he


speaks, with the nature of the ideas which he


expresses,—and varies, above all, with the general va


movement of his phrase, as though we were choos-
ing the key in which our own intellect is called
upon to play? The motor diagram, emphasizing
his utterance, following through all its windings
the curve of his thought, shows our thought the
road. It is the empty vessel, which determines,
by its form, the form which the fluid mass, rush-
ing into it, already tends to take.

But psychologists may be unwilling to explain


1 Graves cites the case of a patient who had forgotten all
names but remembered their initial, and by that means was
able to recover them (quoted by Bernard, De l’aphasie,


p. 179).


Hho


154 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. If


in this way the mechanism of interpretation,
Current errors Decause of the invincible tendency which


on this impels us to think on all occasions of


see ere things rather than of movements. We
the mind to have said that we start from the idea,
things rather and that we develop it into auditory
movement. memory-images capable of inserting
themselves in the motor diagram, so as to over-
lie the sounds we hear. We have here a con-
tinuous movement, by which the nebulosity of
the idea is condensed into distinct auditory
images, which, still fluid, will be finally solidified as
they coalesce with the sounds materially perceived
At no moment is it possible to say with precision
that the idea or the memory-image ends, that the
memory-image or the sensation begins. And, in
fact, where is the dividing line between the confu-
sion of sounds perceived in the lump and the clear-
ness which the remembered auditory images add to
them, between the discontinuity of these remem-
bered images themselves and the continuity of
the original idea which they dissociate and refract
into distinct words? But scientific thought,
analysing this unbroken series of changes, and
yielding to an irresistible need of symbolic present-
ment, arrests and solidifies into finished things the
principal phases of this development. It erects
the crude sounds heard into separate and complete
words, then the remembered auditory images into
entities independent of the idea they develop:
these three terms, crude perception, auditory image


CHAP. If REALIZATION OF MEMORIES 155


and idea, are thus made into distinct wholes
of which each is supposed to be self-sufficing.
And while, if we really confined ourselves to pure
experience, the idea is what we should start from—
since it is to the idea that the auditory memories
owe their connexion and since it is by the memo-
ries that the crude sounds become completed,—
on the contrary, when once we have arbitrarily
supposed the crude sound to be by itself com-
plete, and arbitrarily also assumed the memories
to be connected together, we see no harm in re-
versing the real order of the processes, and in
asserting that we go from the perception to the
memories and from the memories to the idea.
Nevertheless, we cannot help feeling that we must
bring back again, under one form or another, at
one moment or another, the continuity which we
have thus broken between the perception, the mem-
ory andtheidea. Sowemake out that these three
things, each lodged in a certain portion of the cortex
or of the medulla, intercommunicate, the percep-
tions going to awaken the auditory memories,
and the memories going to rouse up the ideas.
As we have begun by solidifying into distinct and
independent things what were only phases—the
main phases—of a continuous development, we
go on materializing the development itself into
lines of communication, contacts and impulsions.
But not with impunity can we thus invert the
true order, and as a necessary consequence, intro-
duce into each term of the series elements which


156 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. I!


are only realized by those that follow. Not with
impunity, either, can we congeal into distinct and
independent things the fluidity of a continuous
undivided process. This symbolism may indeed
suffice as long as it is strictly limited to the facts
which ‘have served to invent it: but each new
fact will force us to complicate our diagram, to in-
sert new stations along the line of the movement ;
and yet all these stations laid side by side will
never be able to reconstitute the movement itself.

Nothing is more instructive, in this regard, than
the history of the diagrams of sensory apha-
wees ee Sl In the early period, marked by
from the, i the work of Charcot,* Broadbent,’ Kuss-
theoriesof maul? and Lichtheim,* the theorists
cae confined themselves to the hypothesis
of an ‘ideational centre’ linked by transcortical
paths to the various speech centres. But, as
the analysis of cases was pushed further, this
centre for ideas receded and finally disap-
peared. For, while the physiology of the brain
was more and more successful in localizing sensa-
tions and movements, but never ideas, the diversity
of sensory aphasias obliged clinicians to break up

1 Bernard, De l’aphasie, p. 37.

2 Broadbent, A Case of Peculiar Affection of Speech (Brain,
1879, Pp. 494).


3 Kussmaul, Die Stérungen der Sprache. Leipzig, 1877,
p.. 162:

4 Lichtheim, On Aphasia (Brain, 1885). Yet we must note
the fact that Wernicke, the first to study sensory aphasia
methodically, was able to do without a centre for concepts
(Der aphasische Symptomencomplex, Breslau, 1874).


CHAP. 11. | REALIZATION OF MEMORIES 157


the intellectual centre into a growing multiplicity
of image centres—a centre for visual representa-
tions, for tactile representations, for auditory
representations, etc.,—nay, to divide sometimes
into two different tracks, the one ascending and
the other descending, the line of communication
between any two of them. This was the charac-
teristic feature of the diagrams of the later period,
those of Wysman,? of Moeli,? of Freud,‘ etc.
Thus the theory grew more and more compli-
cated, yet without ever being able to grasp the
full complexity of reality. And as the diagrams
became more complicated, they figured and sug-
gested the possibility of lesions which, just because
they were more diverse, were more special and more
simple, the complication of the diagram being due
precisely to that dissociation of centres which had
at first been confounded. Experience, however,
was far from justifying the theory at this point,
since it nearly always showed, in partial and diverse
combinations, several of those simple psychical


1 Bastian, On Different Kinds of Aphasia (Brit. Med. Journal,
1887).—Cf. the explanation (indicated merely as possible)
of optical aphasia by Bernheim: De la cécité psychique des
choses (Revue de Médecine, 1885).

2 Wysman, Aphasie und verwandte Zustinde (Deutches
Archiv. fiir Klinische Medecin, 1880).—Magnan had already
opened the way, as Skwortzoff’s diagram indicates, De
la cécité des mots (Th. de Med., 1881, pl. i).

8 Moeli, Ueber Aphasie bec Wahrnehmung der Gegenstande
durch das Gesicht (Berliner Klinische Wochenschrift, 28 Apr.,
1890).

H Soe: Zur Auffassung dey Aphasien. Leipzig, 1891.


pe
ener


158 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, 1


lesions which the theory isolated. The complica-
tion of the theories of aphasia being thus self-
destructive, it is no wonder that modern patho-
logy, becoming more and more sceptical with
regard to diagrams, is returning purely and simply
to the description of facts.1

But how could it be otherwise ? To hear some
theorists discourse on sensory aphasia, we might
imagine that they had never considered with any
care the structure of a sentence. They argue as if
a sentence were composed of nouns which call up
the images of things. What becomes of those
parts of speech, of which the precise function is to
establish, between images, relations and shades of
meaning of every kind? Is it said that each of
such words still expresses and evokes a material
image, more confused, no doubt, but yet deter-
mined? Consider then the host of different rela-
tions which can be expressed by the same word,
according to the place it occupies and the terms
which it unites. Is it urged that these are the
refinements of a highly-developed language, but
that speech is possible with concrete nouns that
all summon up images of things? No doubt
it is, but the more primitive the language you
speak with me and the poorer in words which
express relations, the more you are bound to
allow for my mind’s activity, since you compel
me to find out the relations which you leave


1 Sommer, Addressing a Congress of Alienists, (Arch.
de Neurologie, vol. xxiv, 1892).


CHAP, II REALIZATION OF MEMORIES I59


unexpressed : which amounts to saying that you
abandon more and more the hypothesis that
each verbal image goes up and fetches down its
corresponding idea. In truth, there is here only
a question of degree: every language, whether
elaborated or crude, leaves many more things to
be understood than it is able to express. Essen-
tially discontinuous, since it proceeds by juxta-
posing words, speech can only indicate by a few
guide-posts placed here and there the chief
_ stages in the movement of thought. That is why
I can indeed understand your speech if I start
from a thought analogous to your own, and follow
its windings by the aid of verbal images which
are sO many sign-posts that show me the way
from time to time. But I shall never be able
to understand it if I start from the verbal
images themselves, because between two conse-
cutive verbal images there is a gulf which no
amount of concrete representations can ever fill.
For images can never be anything but things,
and thought is a movement.

It is vain, therefore, to treat memory-images
and ideas as ready-made things, and then assign
Attemptsto t© them an abiding place in problemati-
localizeimages ca] centres. Nor is it of any avail to


in the brain ; :
are thus con- diseuise the hypothesis under the cover


tradicted by

peveholorioal of a language borrowed from anatomy
mand physiology; it is nothing but the
association theory of mind; it has nothing in its


favour but the constant tendency of discursive


160 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 11


intellect to cut up all progress into phases and
afterwards to solidify these phases into things ;
and since it is born a prom from a kind of
metaphysical prepossession, it has neither the
advantage of following the movement of con-
sciousness nor that of simplifying the explana-
tion of the facts.
But we must follow this illusion up to the point
where it issues in a manifest contradiction. We
have said that ideas,—pure recollections
And moreover
contradict summoned from the depths of memory,—
develop into memory-images more and
more capable of inserting themselves into the
motor diagram. In the degree that these recol-
lections take the form of a more complete,
more concrete and more conscious represen-
tation, do they tend to confound themselves
with the perception which attracts them or of
which they adopt the outline. Therefore there
“vis not, there cannot be in the brain a region in
which memories congeal and accumulate. The
alleged destruction of memories by an injury to
the brain is but a “break i in the “continuous pro-
gress by ° which ‘they actualize _themselves. “And,
consequently, if we insist on localizing ‘ the auditory
memory of words, for instance, in a given part of
the brain, we shall be led by equally cogent reasons
to distinguish this image-centre from the percep-
tive centre or to confound the two in one. Now
this is just what experience teaches.
For notice the strange contradiction to which


CHAP, II REALIZATION OF MEMORIES 161


this theory is led by psychological analysis on
the one hand, by pathological facts on the other.
On the one hand, it would seem that if percep-
tion, once it has taken place, remains in the brain
in the state of a stored-up memory, this can
only be as an acquired disposition of the very
elements that perception has affected: how,
at what precise moment, can it go in search of
others? This is, indeed, the most natural hypo-
thesis, and Bain! and Ribot? are content to
rest upon it. But, on the other hand, there is
pathology, which tells us that a// the recollections
of a certain kind may have gone while the
corresponding faculty of perception remains
unimpaired. Psychic blindness does not hinder
seeing, any more than psychic deafness hinders
hearing. More particularly, in regard to the
loss of the auditory memory of words — the
only one we are now considering—there are a
number of facts which show it to be regularly
associated with a destructive lesion of the first and
second - left temporo-sphenoidal convolutions,?
though not a single case is on record in which this
lesion was the cause of deafness properly so-called :


1 The Senses and the Intellect, p. 329. Cf. Spencer, Principles
of Psychology, vol. i., p. 456.

2 Ribot, Les maladies de la mémoive. Paris, 1881, p. Io.

8 See an enumeration of the most typical cases in Shaw’s
article, The Sensory Side of Aphasia (Brain, 1893, p. 501).—
Several authors, however, limit to the first convolution the
lesion corresponding to the loss of verbal auditory images,
See, in particular, Ballet, Le langage intévieur, p. 153.

M


162 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, IT


it has even been produced experimentally in the
monkey without determining anything but psychic
deafness, that is to say, a loss of the power to
interpret the sounds which it was still able to
heart So that we must attribute to perception
and to memory separate nervous elements. But
then this hypothesis will be contradicted by the
most elementary psychological observation ; for
we see that a memory, as it becomes more dis-
tinct and more intense, tends to become a percep-
tion, though there is no precise moment at which
a radical transformation takes place, nor conse-
quently a moment when we can say that it moves
forward from imaginative elements to sensory ele-
ments. Thus these two contrary hypotheses, the
first identifying the elements of perception with
the elements of memory, the second distinguish-
ing them, are. of such a nature that each sends
us back to the other without allowing us to
rest in either.

How should it be otherwise? Here again
distinct perception and memory-image are taken
/ the memory- in the static condition, as things of
bya dynamic Which the first is supposed to be al-
progress, into >
the perception ready complete without the second;
comes actual, whereas we ought to consider the dyna-
mic progress by which the one passes into the
other.

For, on the one hand, complete perception is


1 Luciani, quoted by J. Soury, Les fonctions du cerveau.
Paris, 1892;. p; 211.


CHAP, It - REALIZATION OF MEMORIES 163


only defined and distinguished by its coalescence
with a memory-image, which we send forth to meet
it. Only thus is attention secured, and without
attention there is but a passive juxtapositing of
sensations, accompanied by a mechanical reaction.
But, on the other hand, as we shall show later, the
memory-image itself, if it remained pure memory,
would be ineffectual. Virtual, this memory can
only become actual by means of the perception
which attracts it. Powerless, it borrows life and
strength from the present sensation in which it
is materialized. Does not this amount to saying
that distinct perception is brought about by two\/
opposite currents, of which the one, centripetal,
comes from the external object, and the other,
centrifugal, has for its point of departure that
which we term ‘pure memory’? The first
current, alone, would only give a passive percep-
tion with the mechanical reactions which accom-
pany it. The second, left to itself, tends to give
a recollection that is actualized—more and more
actual as the current becomes more marked.
Together, these two currents make up, at their
point of confluence, the perception that is distinct
and recognized.

This is the witness of introspection. But
we have no right to stop there. Undoubtedly
there is considerable risk in venturing, without
sufficient evidence, into the obscure problems
of cerebral localization. But we have said that
to separate from one another the completed per-


164 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


ception and the memory. image is to bring clini-
cal observation into conflict with psychological
analysis, and that the result is a serious antino-
my in the theory of the localization of memories.
We are bound to consider what becomes of the
known facts when we cease to regard the brain
as a storehouse of memories.!

Let us admit, for the moment, in order to simpli-


1 The theory which is here sketched out resembles,
in one respect, that of Wundt. We will give the common
element and the essential difference between them. With
Wundt, we believe that distinct perception implies a centri-
fugal action; and thereby we are led to suppose with him
(although in a slightly different sense), that the so-called
image centres are ‘rather centres for the grouping of
sense-impressions. But whereas, according to Wundt, the
centrifugal action lies in an ‘ apperceptive stimulation,’ the
nature of which can only be defined in a general manner,
and which appears to correspond to what is commonly called
the fixing of the attention, we maintain that this centrifugal
action bears in each case a distinct form, the very form of
that ‘virtual object’ which tends to actualize itself by
successive stages. Hence an important difference in our
understanding of the office of the centres. Wundt is led to
assume: Ist, a general organ of apperception, occupying
the frontal lobe; 2ndly, particular centres which, though
most likely incapable of storing images, retain nevertheless
a tendency or a disposition to reproduce them. Our con-
tention, on the contrary, is that no trace of an image can
remain in the substance of the brain, and that no such centre
of apperception can exist ; but that there are merely, in that
substance, organs of virtual perception, influenced by the
intention of the memory, as there are at the periphery organs
of real perception, influenced by the action of the object. (See
Grundaziige der physiologische Psychologie, vol. i, pp. 320-327.)


coat REALIZATION OF MEMORIES 165


fy the argument, that stimuli from without give
It any image- birth, either in the cortex or in other
centre really

exists, itis Cerebral centres, to elementary sensa-
kind ofkey- tions. In fact, every perception includes
board, played 2 ¢

upon by mem- a considerable number of such sensations,
sense-organ is All co-existing and arranged in a deter-
soles mined order. Whence comes this order,
and what ensures this co-existence ? In the case
of a present material object, there is no doubt as to
the answer: order and co-existence come from
an organ of sense, receiving the impression of an
external object. This organ is constructed pre-
cisely with a view to allowing a plurality of simul-
taneous excitants to impress it in a certain order
and in a certain way, by distributing themselves,
all at one time, over selected portions of its sur-
face. It is like an immense keyboard, on which
the external object executes at once its harmony of
a thousand notes, thus calling forth in a definite
order, and at a single moment, a great multitude
of elementary sensations corresponding to all the
points of the sensory centre that are concerned.
Now, suppress the external object or the organ of
sense, or both : the same elementary sensations may
be excited, for the same strings are there, ready
to vibrate in the same way; but where is the
keyboard which permits thousands of them to be
struck at once, and so many single notes to
unite in one accord? In our opinion the ‘ region
of images,’ if it exists, can only be a keyboard


of this nature. Certainly it is in no way incon-


166 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 1


ceivable that a purely psychical cause should
directly set in action all the strings concerned.
But in the case of mental hearing—which alone
we are considering now—the localization of the
function appears certain, since a definite injury of
the temporal lobe abolishes it; and, on the other
hand, we have set forth the reasons which make
it impossible for us to admit, or even to conceive,
traces of images deposited in any region of the
cerebral substance. Hence only one plausible hy-
' pothesis remains, namely, that this region occupies
with regard to the centre of hearing itself the
place that is exactly symmetrical with the organ
of sense. It is, in this case, a mental ear.

But then the contradiction we have spoken of
disappears. We see, on the one hand, that the
auditory image called back by memory must set
in motion the same nervous elements as the first
perception, and that recollection must thus change
gradually into perception. And we see also, on
the other hand, that the faculty of recalling
to memory complex sounds, such as_ words,
may concern other parts of the nervous sub-
stance than does the faculty of perceiving them.
This is why in psychic deafness real hearing
survives mental hearing. The strings are still
there, and to the influence of external sounds
they vibrate still; it is the internal keyboard
which is lacking.

In other terms, the centres in which the ele-
mentary sensationsseem to originate may be actu-


CHAP. 11 REALIZATION OF MEMORIES 167


ated, in some sort, from two different sides, from
in front and from behind. From the front they
receive impressions sent in by the sense-organs,
and consequently by a veal object ; from behind
they are subject, through successive intermedi-
aries, to the influence of a virtual object. The
centres of images, if these exist, can only be the
organs that are exactly symmetrical with the
organs of the senses in reference to the sensory
centres. They are no more the depositories of
pure memories, that is, of virtual objects, than
the organs of the senses are depositories of real
objects.

We would add that this is but a much abridged
version of what may happen in reality. The
various sensory aphasias are sufficient proof that
the calling up of an auditory image is not a
single act. Between the intention, which is what
we call the pure memory, and the auditory
memory-image properly so called, intermediate
memories are commonly intercalated which must
first have been realized as memory-images in more
or less distant centres. It is, then, by successive
degrees that the idea comes to embody itself in
that particular image which is the verbal image.
Thereby mental hearing may depend upon the
integrity of the various centres and of the paths
which lead to them. But these complications
change nothing at the root of things. Whatever
be the number and the nature of the interven-
ing processes, we do not go from the perception


A os


>


168 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. It


to the idea, but from the idea to the perception ;
and the essential process of recognition is not
centripetal, but centrifugal.

Here, indeed, the question arises how stimulation
from within can give birth to sensations, either
by its action on the cerebral cortex or on other
centres. But it is clear enough that we have here
only a convenient way of expressing ourselves.
Pure memories, as they become actual, tend to
bring about, within the body, all the corresponding
sensations. But these virtual sensations them-
selves, in order to become real, must tend to
urge the body to action, and to impress upon
it those movements and attitudes of which they
are the habitual antecedent. The modifications
in the centres called sensory, modifications
which usually precede movements accomplished
or sketched out by the body and of which the
normal office is to prepare them while they begin
them, are, then, less the real cause of the sensa-
tion than the mark of its power and the con-
dition of its efficacy. The progress by which the
virtual image realizes itself is nothing else than
the series of stages by which this image gradually
obtains from the body useful actions or use-
ful attitudes. The stimulation of the so-called
sensory centres is the last of these stages: it is
the prelude to a motor reaction, the beginning of
an action in space. In other words, the virtual
image evolves towards the virtual sensation, and
the virtual sensation towards real movement : this


CHAP. 11 REALIZATION OF MEMORIES 169


movement, in realizing itself, realizes both the
sensation of which it might have been the natural
continuation, and the image which has tried to
embody itself in the sensation. We must now
consider these virtual!states ‘more carefully, and,
penetrating further into the internal mechanism of
psychical and psycho-physical actions, show by
what continuots progress the past tends to recon-
quer, by actualizing itself, the influence it had
lost.


CHAPTER III


OF THE SURVIVAL OF IMAGES. MEMORY AND
MIND.


To sum up briefly the preceding chapters. We
have distinguished three processes, pure memory,
memory-image, and perception, of which no one,
in fact, occurs apart from the others. Perception
is never a mere contact of the mind with the

object present ; it is

¥ impregnated. with

aa memory-images
Pure memory Meméry image Perception which complete it as


A Bee SC D theyinterpretit. The
| memory-image, in its
i


turn, partakes of the
»pUresstrem oby7
which it begins to
materialize, and of the perception in whichit tends
to embody itself: regarded from the latter point of
view, it might be defined as a nascent perception.
Lastly, pure memory, though independent in
theory, manifests itself as a rule only in the
coloured and living image which reveals it. Sym-
bolizing these three terms by the consecutive
segments AB, BC, CD, of the same straight line


170


Fic, 2.


CHAP, Hil PURE MEMORY Bc


AD, we may say that our thought describes this
line in a single movement which goes from A to
D, and that itis impossible to say precisely where
one of the terms ends and another begins.

In fact, this is just what consciousness bears
witness to whenever, in order to analyse memory,
it follows the movement of memory at~ work.
Whenever we are trying to recover a recollection,
to call up some period of our history, we become
conscious of anact su generis by which we detach
ourselves from the present in order to replace
ourselves, first in the past in general, then ina
certain region of the past—a work of adjustment,
something like the focussing of a camera. But
our recollection still remains virtual ; we simply
prepare ourselves to receive it by adopting the
appropriate attitude. Little by little it comes into
view like a condensing cloud; from the virtual
state it passes into the actual; and as its outlines
become more distinct and its surface takes on
colour, it tends to imitate perception. But it re-
mains attached to the past by its deepest roots,
and if, when once realized, it did not retain
something of its original virtuality, if, being a
present state, it were not also something which
stands out distinct from the present, we should
never know it for a memory.

The capital error of. associationism is that it


et a
™~


substitutes for this continuity. of becoming, which §,y |


is the living reality, a discontinuous multiplicity
of elements, inert and juxtaposed. Just because


172 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. II


each of the elements so constituted contains, by
Association- Yeason of its origin, something of what
‘ita, __- precedes and also of what follows, it must


wont cements take to our eyes the form of a mixed


fue for the and, so to speak, impure state. But
reality, andthe principle of associationism requires
memory wv that each psychical state should be a
perception. kind of atom, a simple element. Hence
the necessity for sacrificing, in each of the phases
we have distinguished, the unstable to the stable,
that is to say, the beginning to the end. If we
are dealing with perception, we are asked to see in
it nothing but the agglomerated sensations which
colour it, and to overlook the remembered images
which form its dim nucleus. If it is the remem-
bered image that we are considering, we are bidden
to take it already made, realized in a weak per-
ception, and to shut our eyes to the pure memory
which this image has progressively developed. In
the rivalry which associationism thus sets up
between the stable and the unstable, perception
is bound to expel the memory-image, and the
memory-image to expel pure memory. And thus
the pure memory disappears altogether. Associa-
tionism, cutting in two by a line MO the totality
of the progress AD, sees, in the part OD, only the
sensations which terminate it and which have been
supposed to constitute the whole of perception ;—
and, on the other hand, it reduces.also the part AO
to the realized image which pure memory attains
to as it expands. Psychical life, then, is en-


CHAP. III PURE MEMORY E73


tirely summed up in these two elements, sensation
and image. And as, on the one hand, this
theory drowns in the image the pure memory
which makes the image into an original state,
and, on the other hand, brings the image yet
closer to perception by putting into perception,
in advance, something of the image itself, it ends
by finding between these two states only a differ-
ence of degree, or of intensity. Hence the dis-
tinction between strong states and weak states, of
which the first are supposed to be set up by us
as perceptions of the present, and the second (why,
no man knows) as representations of the past.
But the truth is that we shall never reach the
past unless we frankly place ourselves within it.
Essentially virtual, it cannot be known as some-
thing past unless we follow and adopt the move-
ment by which it expands into a present image,
thus emerging from obscurity into the light of day.
In vain do we seek its trace in anything actual
and already realized: we might as well look for
darkness beneath the light. This is, in fact, the
error of associationism: placed in the actual, it
exhausts itself in vain attempts to discover in a
realized and present state the mark of its past
origin, to distinguish memory from perception,
and to erect into a difference in kind that which
it condemned in advance to be but a difference
of magnitude.


To picture is not to vemember. No doubt a
recollection, as it becomes actual, tends to live in


—
=


174 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, IIt


an image; but the converse is not true, and the
image, pure and simple, will not be referred to the
past unless, indeed, it was in the past that I sought
it, thus following the continuous progress which
brought it from darkness into light. This is what
psychologists too often forget when they conclude,
from the fact that a remembered sensation be-
comes more actual the more we dwell upon it,
that the memory of the sensation is the sensation
itself beginning to be. The fact which they allege
is undoubtedly true: the more I strive to recall a
past pain, the nearer I come to feeling it in reality.
But this is easy to understand, since the progress
of a memory precisely consists, as we have said,
in its becoming materialized. The question is:
was the memory of a pain, when it began, really
pain? Because the hypnotized subject ends by
§ feeling hot when he is repeatedly told that he is
<?hot, it does not follow that the words of the sug-
gestion were themselves hot. Neither must we
conclude that, because the memory of a sensa-
tion prolongs itself into that very sensation, the
memory was a nascent sensation : perhaps indeed
‘“ this memory plays, with regard to the sensation
which follows it, precisely the part of the hypnotizer
who makes the suggestion. The argument we are
criticizing, presented in this form, is then already of
no value as proof ; but still, it is not yet a vicious
argument, because it profits by the incontestable
truth that memory passes into something else by
becoming actual. The absurdity becomes patent


CHAP, III PURE MEMORY LES


when the argument is inverted (although this
ought to be legitimate on the hypothesis adopted),
that is to say, when the intensity of the sensation is
decreased instead of the intensity of pure memory
being increased. For then, if the two states
differ merely in degree, there should be a given
moment at which the sensation changed into a
memory. If the memory of an acute pain, for
instance, is but a slight pain, inversely an intense
pain which I feel will end, as it grows less, by being
an acute pain remembered. Now the moment
will come, undoubtedly, when it is impossible
for me to say whether what I feel is a slight sen-
sation which I experience or a slight sensation
which I imagine (and this is natural, because the
memory-image is already partly sensation); but
never will this weak state appear to me to be
the memory of a strong state. Memory, then, is
something quite different.

But the illusion which consists in establishing
only a difference of degree between memory and
perception is more than a mere consequence of
associationism, more than an accident in the
history of philosophy. Its roots lie deep. It
rests, in the last analysis, on a false idea of the
nature and of the object of external perception.
We are bent on regarding perception as only an
instruction addressed to a pure spirit, as having
a purely speculative interest. Then, as memory
is itself essentially a knowledge of this kind, since its
object is no longer present, we can only find between


176 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, IIT


perception and memory a difference of degree—
perceptions being then supposed to throw mem-
But memory Orles back into the past, ‘and thus to
is radically |, reserve to themselves the present simply
perception. because right is might. But there is


The past is


powerless ; the
povent ia sen, AUCH more between past and present


ori motor thal aq inleres ditterence, Of secre mmn\Ly,
artes: present is that which interests me, which
lives for me, and, in a word, that which summons
me toaction ; whereas my past is essentially power-
less. We must dwell further on this point. By
contrasting it with present perception we shall
better understand the nature of what we call
‘ pure memory.’

For we should endeavour in vain to characterize
the memory of a past state unless we began by
defining the concrete note, accepted by conscious-
ness, of present reality. What is, for me, the
present moment? The essence of time is that
it goes by ; time already gone by is the past, and
we call the present the instant in which it goes
by. But there can be no question here of a
mathematical instant. No doubt there is an
ideal present—a pure conception, the indivisible
limit which separates past from future. But the
real, concrete, live present—that of which I speak
when I speak of my present perception—that
present necessarily occupies a duration. Where
then is this duration placed? Is it on the hither
or on the further side of the mathematical point
which I determine ideally when I think of the


CHAP, III WHAT THE PRESENT IS uly is/


present instant ?. Quite evidently, it is both on
this side and on that ; and what I call ‘my pre-
sent’ has one foot in my past and another in my
future. In my past, first, because ‘ the moment
in which I am speaking is already far from me’ ;
in my future, next, because this moment is im-
pending over the future: it is to the future that I~
am tending, and could I fix this indivisible present,
this infinitesimal element of the curve of time,
it is the direction of the future that it would in-
dicate. [he psychical state,-then, that I call
“ my present,’ must be both a perception of the
immediate past and a determination of the im-
mediate future. Now the immediate past, in so
far as it is perceived, is, as we shall see, sensation,
since every sensation translates a very long suc-
cession of elementary vibrations; and the im-
mediate future, in so far as it is being determined,
is action or movement. My present, then, is both
sensation and movement ; and, since my present
forms an undivided whole, then the movement
must be linked with the sensation, must prolong
it in action. Whence I conclude that my present
consists in a joint system of sensations and
movements. My present is, in its essence, sensori-
motor.

Our present Lis is to say that my present con-
is the ,sists in the consciousness that I have


materiality o


puss it of my body. Having extension in space,
for each 1 i

sr ae PRN body experiences sauuoitls and at
duration. the same time executes movements.


N


178 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 111


Sensations and movements being localized at de-
termined points of this extended body, there can
only be, at a given moment, a single system of
movements and sensations. That is why my pre-
sent appears to me to be a thing absolutely deter-
mined, and contrasting with my past. Situated
between the matter which influences it and that
on which it has influence, my body is a centre of
action, the place where the impressions received
choose intelligently the path they will follow to
transform themselves into movements accom-
plished. Thus it indeed represents the actual
state of my becoming, that part of my duration
which is in process of growth. More generally, in
that continuity of becoming which is reality itself,
the present moment is constituted by the quasi-
instantaneous section effected by our perception
in the flowing mass; and this section is precisely
that which we call the material world. Our body
occupies its centre; it is, in this material world,
that part of which we directly feel the flux; in
its actual state the actuality of our present lies.
If matter, so far as extended in space, is to be de-
fined (as we believe it must) as a present which is
always beginning again, inversely, our present is
the very materiality of our existence, that is to say,
a system of sensations and movements, and nothing
else. And this system is determined, unique for
each moment of duration, just because sensa-
tions and movements occupy space, and because
there cannot be in the same place several things


CHAP, III WHAT THE PRESENT IS 179


at the same time.—Whence comes it that it has
been possible to misunderstand so simple, so
evident a truth, one which is, moreover, the
very idea of common sense ?

The reason lies simply in the fact that philoso-
phers insist on regarding the difference between
But pure actual sensations and pure memory as a
memory, in . °
which each mere difference in degree, and not in kind.
unique mo- ° .
ment of the In our view the difference is radical.
past survives, 7 é
is essentially My actual sensations occupy definite por-
from life. tions of the surface of my body; pure
memory, on the other hand, interests no part of
my body. No doubt, it will beget sensations as it
materializes ; but at that very moment it will cease
to be a memory and pass into the state of a present
thing, something actually lived; and I shall only
restore to it its character of memory by carrying
myself back to the process by which I called it up,
as it was virtual, from the depths of my past.
It is just because I made it active that it has
become actual, that is to say, a sensation capable
of provoking movements. But most psychologists
see in pure memory only a weakened perception,
an assembly of nascent sensations. Having thus
effaced, to begin with, all difference in kind be-
tween sensation and memory, they are led by the
logic of their hypothesis to materialize memory
and to idealize sensation. They perceive memory
only in the form of an image; that is tosay, already
embodied in nascent sensations. Having thus
attributed to it that which is essential to sensa-


180 MATTER AND MEMORY —_—cnar. m1


tion, and refusing to see in the ideality of memory
something distinct, something contrasted with
sensation itself, they are forced, when they come
back to pure sensation, to leave to it that ideality
with which they have thus implicitly endowed nas-
cent sensations. For if the past, which by hypo-
thesis is no longer active, can subsist in the form of
a weak sensation, there must be sensations that
are powerless. If pure memory, which by hypo-
thesis interests no definite part of the body, is a
nascent sensation, then sensation is not essentially
localized in any point of the body. Hence the
illusion that consists in regarding sensation as an
ethereal and unextended state which acquires
extension and consolidates in the body by mere
accident : an illusion which vitiates profoundly,
as we have seen, the theory of external perception,
and raises a great number of the questions at issue
between the various metaphysics of matter. We
must make up our minds to it: sensation is, in
its essence, extended and localized ; it is a source
of movement ;—pure memory, being inextensive
and powerless, does not in any degree share the
nature of sensation.

That which I call my present is my attitude
with regard to the immediate future; it is my

impending action. My present is, then,

Memory, :
when. actua~ sensori-motor. Of my past, that alone
image, becomes image and consequently sensa-
borrows some~ |. ,
thing from tion, at least nascent, which can colla-
perception. borate in that action, insert itself in


CHAP, 111 THE UNCONSCIOUS 18I


that attitude, in a word make itself useful ; but,
from the moment that it becomes image, the
past leaves the state of pure memory and coin-
cides with a certain part of my present. Memory
actualized in an image differs, then, profoundly
from pure memory. The image is a present state,
and its sole share in the past is the memory whence
it arose. Memory, on the contrary, powerless as
long as it remains without utility, is pure from
all admixture of sensation, is without attachment
to the present, and is consequently unextended.

This radical powerlessness of pure memory is
_ just what will enable us to understand how it is
Se ee preserved in a latent state. Without
is the note of as yet going to the heart of the matter,
therefore pure we will confine ourselves to the remark
latent and §=© that our unwillingness to conceive un-
“CONSCIOUS psychical states is due, above
all, to the fact that we hold consciousness to
be the essential property of psychical states:
so that a psychical state cannot, it seems, cease
to be conscious without ceasing to exist. But
if consciousness is but the characteristic note of
the present, that is to say of the actually lived,
in short of the active, then that which does not
act may cease to belong to consciousness without
therefore ceasing to exist in some manner. In
other words, in the psychological domain, con-
sciousness may not be the synonym of existence,
but only of real action or of immediate efficacy ;
and, limiting thus the meaning of the term, we


182 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 111


shall have less difficulty in representing to our-
selves a psychical state which is unconscious, that
is to say, ineffective. Whatever idea we may frame
of consciousness in itself, such as it would be if it
could work untrammelled, we cannot deny that,
ina being which has bodily functions, the chief
office of consciousness is to preside over action
and to enlighten choice. Therefore it throws
light on the immediate antecedents of the decision,
and on those past recollections which can usefully
combine with it; all else remains in shadow.
But we find here once more, in a new form, the
ever-recurrent illusion which, throughout this work,
we have endeavoured to dispel. It is supposed
that consciousness, even when linked with bodily
functions, is a faculty that is only accidentally
practical, and is directed essentially towards
speculation. Then, since we cannot see what
interest, devoted as it is supposed to be to pure
knowledge, it would have in allowing any infor-
mation thatit possesses to escape, we fail to under-
stand why it refuses to throw light on something -
that was not entirely lost to it. Whence we con-
clude that it can possess nothing more de jure
than what it holds de facto, and that, in the
domain of consciousness, all that is real is actual.
But restore to consciousness its true réle: there
will no longer be any more reason to say that
the past effaces itself as soon as perceived, than
there is to suppose that material objects cease to
exist when we cease to perceive them,


CHAP. mm THE UNCONSCIOUS 183


We must insist on this last point, for here we
have the central difficulty,and the source of the
ambiguities which surround the problem
scious mental Of the unconscious. The idea of an wn-
states in gen- : : : :
eral. Artifi- Conscious representation is clear, despite
raised round current prejudice; we may even say
the tneon that we make constant use of it, and
pricy that there is no conception more familiar
to common sense. For every one admits that the
images actually present to our perception are not
the whole of matter. But, on the other hand,
what can be a non-perceived material object, an
image not imagined, unless it is a kind of uncon-
scious mental state ? Beyond the walls of your
room, which you perceive at this moment, there
are the adjoining rooms, then the rest of the
house, finally the street and the town in which
you live. It signifies little to which theory of
matter you adhere; realist or idealist, you are
evidently thinking, when you speak of the town,
of the street, of the other rooms in the house, of
so many perceptions absent from your conscious-
ness and yet given outside of it. They are not
created as your consciousness receives them ; they
existed, then, in some sort ; and since, by hypothe-
sis, your consciousness did not apprehend them,
how could they exist in themselves unless in the
unconscious state ? How comes it then that an
existence outside of consciousness appears clear to
us in the case of objects, but obscure when we
are speaking of the subject ? Our perceptions,


184 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, I1t


actual and virtual, extend along two lines, the
one horizontal, AB, which contains all simultane-
ous objects in space, the other vertical, CI, on
which are ranged our successive recollections
set out in time. The point I, at the intersection
of the two lines, is
the only one actually
given to consciousness.
Whence comes it that
we do not hesitate to
Fic. 3. posit the reality of the

whole line AB, although

it remains unperceived, while, on the contrary,
of the line CI, the present I which is actually
perceived is the only point which appears to
us really to exist? There are, at the bottom of
this radical distinction between the two series,
temporal and spatial, so many confused or half-
formed ideas, so many hypotheses devoid of any
speculative value, that we cannot all at once make
an exhaustive analysis of them. In order to
unmask the illusion entirely, we should have to
seek at its origin, and follow through all its wind-
ings, the double movement by which we come to
assume objective realities without relation to
consciousness, and states of consciousness without
objective reality,—space thus appearing to pre-
serve indefinitely the things which are there
juxtaposed, while time in its advance devours the
states which succeed each other within it. Part
of this work has been done in our first chapter,


CHAP, 111 THE UNCONSCIOUS 185


where we discussed objectivity in general ; another
part will be dealt with in the last pages of this
book, where we shall speak of the idea of matter.
We confine ourselves here to a few essential points.

First, the objects ranged along the line AB
represent to our eyes what we are going to per-
ceive, while the line CI contains only that which
has already been perceived. Now the past has
no longer any interest for us; it has exhausted
its possible action, or will only recover an influence
by borrowing the vitality of the present percep-
tion. The immediate future, on the contrary,
consists in an impending action, in an energy
not yet spent. The unperceived part of the ma-
terial universe, big with promises and threats,
has then for us a reality which the actually un-
perceived periods of our past existence cannot
and should not possess. But this distinction,
which is entirely relative to practical utility and
to the material needs of life, takes in our minds
the more and more marked form of a metaphysical
distinction.

We have shown that the objects which sur-
round us represent, in varying degrees, an action
Why theidea which we can accomplish upon things,
thatis teal Or Which we must experience from them.
peeved ap- The date of fulfilment of this possible
tearinthe action is indicated by the greater or
perceived less remoteness of the corresponding ob-
object, obscure . : -
~ inthe case of ject, so that distance in space mea-


unper- . 5
ceived idea, sures the proximity of a threat or of


186 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 11%


a promise in time. Thus space furnishes us at
once with the diagram of our near future, and, as
this future must recede indefinitely, space which
symbolizes it has for its property to remain, in its
immobility, indefinitely open. Hence the imme-
diate horizon given to our perception appears to
us to be necessarily surrounded by a wider circle,
existing though unperceived, this circle itself
implying yet another outside it and so on, ad
infinitum. It is, then, of the essence of our actual
perception, inasmuch as it is extended, to be
always only a content in relation to a vaster, even
an unlimited, experience which contains it; and
this experience, absent from our consciousness,
since it spreads beyond the perceived horizon,
nevertheless appears to be actually given. But
while we feel ourselves to be dependent upon these
material objects which we thus erect into present
realities, our memories, on the contrary, inas-
- much as they are past, are so much dead weight
that we carry with us, and by which we prefer
to imagine ourselves unencumbered. The same
instinct, in virtue of which we open out space
indefinitely before us, prompts us to shut off
time behind us as it flows. And while reality,
in so far as it is extended, appears to us to over-
pass infinitely the bounds of our perception, in
our inner life that alone seems to us to be real
which begins with the present moment ; the rest
is practically abolished. Then, when a memory
reappears in consciousness, it produces on us the


CHAP. ™m THE UNCONSCIOUS 187


effect of a ghost whose mysterious apparition
must be explained by special causes. In truth,
the adherence of this memory to our present
condition is exactly comparable to the adherence
of unperceived objects to those objects which we
perceive ; and the unconscious plays in each case
a similar part.

But we have great difficulty in representing
the matter to ourselves in this way, because we
have fallen into the habit of emphasizing the
differences and, on the contrary, of slurring over
the resemblances, between the series of objects
simultaneously set out in space and that of
states successively developed in time. In the first,
the terms condition each other in a manner
which is entirely determined, so that the appear-
ance of each new term may be foreseen. Thus
I know, when I leave my room, what other
rooms I shall go through. On the contrary, my
memories present themselves in an order which
is apparently capricious. The order of the repre-
sentations is then necessary in the one case,
contingent in the other; and it is this necessity
which I hypostatize, as it were, when I speak
of the existence of objects outside of all conscious-
ness. If I see no inconvenience in supposing
given the totality of objects which I do not per-
ceive, it is because the strictly determined order
of these objects lends to them the appearance ofa
chain, of which my present perception is only
one link. This link communicates its actuality


188 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 111


to the rest of the chain.—But, if we look at the
matter nearly, we shall see that our memories
form a chain of the same kind, and that our char-
acter, always present in all our decisions, is indeed
the actual synthesis of all our past states. In
this epitomized form our previous psychical life
exists for us even more than the external world,
of which we never perceive more than a very small
part, whereas on the contrary we use the whole
of our lived experience. It is true that we possess
merely a digest of it, and that our former percep-
tions, considered as distinct individualities, seem
to us to have completely disappeared, or to
appear again only at the bidding of their caprice.
But this semblance of complete destruction or of
capricious revival is due merely to the fact that
actual consciousness accepts at each moment the
useful, and rejects in the same breath the super-
fluous. Ever bent upon action, it can only ma-
terialize those of our former perceptions which
can ally themselves with the present perception to
take a share in the final decision. If it is neces-
sary, when I would manifest my will at a given
point of space, that my consciousness should go
successively through those intermediaries or those
obstacles of which the sum constitutes what we call
distance in space, soon the other hand it is useful,
in order to throw light on this action, that my con-
sciousness should jump the interval of time which
separates the actual situation from a former one
which resembles it; and as consciousness goes


CHAP, III EXISTENCE 189


back to the earlier date at a bound, all the inter-
mediate past escapes its hold. The same reasons,
then, which bring about that our perceptions range
themselves in strict continuity in space, cause our
memories to be illumined discontinuously in time.
We have not, in regard to objects unperceived in
space and unconscious memories in time, to do
with two radically different forms of existence ;
but the exigencies of action are the inverse in the
one case of what they are in the other.

But here we come to the capital problem of
existence, a problem we can only glance at, for
Existence im- Otherwise it would lead us step by step


plies both = into the heart of metaphysics. We will


Dt cceuiaes merely say that with regard to matters


connexion ; : —_ :
Battlers Gey of experience—which alone concern us


be ditterctt here—existence appears to imply two
ri conditions taken together : (1) presenta-
tion in consciousness; and (2) the logical or
causal connexion of that which is so presented
with what precedes and with what follows. The
reality for us of a psychical state or of a
material object consists in the double fact that
our consciousness perceives them and that they
form part of a series, temporal or spatial, of which
the elements determine each other. But these
two conditions admit of degrees, and it is conceiv-
able that, though both are necessary, they may be
unequally fulfilled. Thus, in the case of actual
internal states, the connexion is less close, and
the determination of the present by the past, leav-


190 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, It


ing ample room for contingency, has not the
character of a mathematical derivation ;—but
then, presentation in consciousness is_ perfect,
an actual psychical state yielding the whole
of its content in the act itself whereby we
perceive it. On the contrary, if we are dealing
with external objects it is the connexion which is
perfect, since these objects obey necessary laws ;
but then the other condition, presentation in con-
sciousness, is never more than partially fulfilled,
for the material object, just because of the multi-
tude of unperceived elements by which it is linked
with all other objects, appears to enfold within
itself and to hide behind it infinitely more than
it allows to be seen.—We ought to say, then, that
existence, in the empirical sense of the word,
always implies conscious apprehension and regular
connexion ; both at the same time but in different
degrees. But our intellect, of which the function
is to establish clear-cut distinctions, does not so
understand things. Rather than admit the
presence in all cases of the two elements mingled
Thefallacy 22 Varying proportions, it prefers to
consistsin dis- dissociate them, and thus attribute


tinguishing


two kinds of 5
pact. external objects on the one hand, and


characterized 7 7
chatectte to internal states on the other, two radi


conscious “ . di
ee cally, different modes of existence, each


ange one characterized by the exclusive presence of
connexion. the condition which should be regarded
as merely preponderating. Then the existence of


psychical states is assumed to consist entirely in


CHAP III, RELATION OF PAST AND PRESENT IQ!


their apprehension by consciousness, and that of ex-
ternal phenomena, entirely also, in the strict order of
their concomitance and their succession. Whence
the impossibility of leaving to material objects,
existing, but unperceived, the smallest share in
consciousness, and to internal unconscious states
the smallest share in existence. We have shown,
at the beginning. of this book, the consequences
of the first illusion: it ends by falsifying our
representation of matter. The second, comple-
mentary to the first, vitiates our conception of
mind by casting over the idea of the unconscious
an artificial obscurity. The whole of our past
psychical life conditions our present state, with-
out being its necessary determinant; whole,
also, it reveals itself in our character, although
no one of its past states manifests itself explicitly
in character. Taken together, these two con-
ditions assure to each one of the past psychological
states a real, though an unconscious, existence.
But we are so much accustomed to reverse,
for the sake of action, the real order of things,
But, ifmem- We are so strongly obsessed by images


ories are ,pre= s s
vaca drawn from space, that we cannot hin


memories, ° 2
memonee der ourselves from asking where mem


theyP Fallacy ories are stored up. We understand
the question. that physico-chemical phenomena take
place im the brain, that the brain is im the body,
the body im the air which surrounds it, etc. ;
but the past, once achieved, if it is retained,


where is it? To locate it in the cerebral sub-


Ig2 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, III


stance, in the state of molecular modification,
seems clear and simple enough, because then we
have a receptacle, actually given, which we have
only to open in order to let the latent images
flow into consciousness. But if the brain cannot
serve such a purpose, in what warehouse shall
we store the accumulated images ?—We forget
that the relation of container to content borrows
its apparent clearness and universality from the
necessity laid upon us of always opening out space
in front of us, and of always closing duration be-
hind us. Because it has been shown that one thing
is within another, the phenomenon of its preserva-
tion is not thereby made any clearer. We may
even go further: let us admit for a moment that
the past survives in the form of a memory stored
in the brain ; it is then necessary that the brain,
in order to preserve the memory, should pre-
serve itself. But the brain, in so far as it is an
image extended in space, never occupies more
than the present moment: it constitutes, with all
the rest of the material universe, an ever renewed
section of universal becoming. Either, then,
you must suppose that this universe dies and is
born again miraculously at each moment of dura-
tion, or you must attribute to it that continuity of
existence which you deny to consciousness, and
make of its past a reality which endures and is pro-
longed into its present. So that you have gained
nothing by depositing the memories in matter,
and you find yourself, on the contrary, compelled


cHAP, 111 RELATION OF PAST AND PRESENT 193


to extend to the totality of the states of the ma-
terial world that complete and independent sur-
vival of the past which you have just refused to
psychical states. This survival of the past fer
se forces itself upon philosophers, then, under one
form or another ; and the difficulty that we have
in conceiving it comes simply from the fact
that we extend to the series of memories, in time,
that obligation of containing and being contained
which applies only to the collection of bodies
instantaneously perceived in space. The funda-
mental illusion consists in transferring to dura-
tion itself, in its continuous flow, the form of
the instantaneous sections which we make in it.
But how can the past, which, by hypothesis,
has ceased to be, preserve itself? Have we not
here a real contradiction ?—We reply
The past has : o. 1G
not ceased to that the question is just whether the
only ceased past has ceased to exist or whether it
epee” has simply ceased to be useful. You
define the present in an arbitrary manner as that
which 1s, whereas the present is simply what is
being made. Nothing is less than the present
moment, if you understand by that the indivisible
limit which divides the past from the future.
When we think this present as going to be, it exists
not yet ; and when we think it as existing, it is
already past. If, on the other hand, what you are
considering is the concrete present such as it is act-
ually lived by consciousness, we may say that this
present consists, in large measure, in the immediate
Q


I94 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, III


past. In the fraction of a second which covers
the briefest possible perception of light, billions
of vibrations have taken place, of which the first
is separated from the last by an interval which is
enormously divided. Your perception, however
instantaneous, consists then in an incalculable
multitude of remembered elements ; and in truth
every perception is already memory. Practically
we perceive only the past, the pure present being
the invisible progress of the past gnawing into
the future.

Consciousness, then, illumines, at each moment
of time, that immediate part of the past which,
impending over the future, seeks to realize
and to associate with it. Solely preoccupied in
thus determining an undetermined future, con-
sciousness may shed a little of its light on those
of our states, more remote in the past, which can
be usefully combined with our present state,
that is to say, with our immediate past: the rest
remains in the dark. It is in this illuminated part
of our history that we remain seated, in virtue of
the fundamental law of life, which is a law of
action: hence the difficulty we experience in con-
ceiving memories which are preserved in the
shadow. Our reluctance to admit the integral
survival of the past has its origin, then, in the
very bent of our psychical life——an unfolding of
states wherein our interest prompts us to look at
that which is unrolling, and not at that which is
entirely unrolled. -


CHAP, If RELATION OF PAST AND PRESENT I95


So we return, after a long digression, to our
point of departure. There are, we have said, two
Thettee memories which are profoundly dis-
memories


and thar tinct: the one, fixed in the organism,
interplay.


Rail becowats Otuine celse’ buE the: complete set of
oe n'ine intelligently constructed mechanisms
Sea which ensure the appropriate reply to
the various possible demands. This memory
enables us to adapt ourselves to the present situa-
tion ; through it the actions to which we are sub-
ject prolong themselves into reactions that are
sometimes accomplished, sometimes merely nas-
cent, but always more or less appropriate. Habit
rather than memory, it acts our past experience
but does not call up its image. The other is the
true_memory. Co-extensive with consciousness,
it retains and ranges alongside of each other all
our states in the order in which they occur,
leaving to each fact its place and consequently
marking its date, truly moving in the past and
not, like the first, in anever renewed present. But,
in marking the profound distinction between
these two forms of memory, we have not shown
their connecting link. Above the body, with its
mechanisms which symbolize the accumulated
effort of past actions, the memory which ima-
gines and repeats has been left to hang, as it
were, suspended in the void. Now, if it be
true that we never perceive anything but our
immediate past, if our consciousness of the
present is already memory, the two terms


196 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, m1


which had been separated to begin with cohere
closely together. Seen from this new point of
view, indeed, our body is nothing but that part
of our representation which is ever being born
again, the part always present, or rather that
which at each moment is just past. Itself an
image, the body cannot store up images, since
it forms a part of the images; and this is why it
is a chimerical enterprise to seek to localize past
or even present perceptions in the brain: they
are not init; it is the brain that isin them. But
this special image which persists in the midst of
the others, and which I call my body, constitutes
at every moment, as we have said, a section of
the universal becoming. It is then the lace of
passage of the movements received and thrown

\y back, a hyphen, a connecting link between the
things which act upon me and the things upon
which I act,—the seat, in a word, of the sensori-
motor phenomena. If I represent by a cone SAB
the totality of the recollections accumulated in
my memory, the base AB, situated in the past,
remains motionless, while the summit S, which
indicates at all times my present, moves forward
unceasingly, and unceasingly also touches the
moving plane P of my actual representation
of the universe. At S the image of the body
is concentrated; and, since it belongs to the
plane P, this image does but receive and restore
actions emanating from all the uneEes of which
the plane is composed.


cHAP, 11 RELATION OF PAST AND PRESENT I9Q7


The bodily memory, made up of the sum of the
sensori-motor systems organized by habit, is then
a quasi-instantaneous mem-
ory to which the true memory A B
of the past serves as base.

Since they arenot two separ-

ate things, since the first is ?
only, as we have said, the f 5 pe
pointed end, ever moving,
inserted by the second in the
shifting plane of experience,it is natural that the two
functions should lend each other a mutual support.
So, on the one hand, the memory of the past offers
to the sensori-motor mechanisms all the recollections
capable of guiding them in their task and of giv-
ing to the motor reaction the direction suggested
by the lessons of experience. It is in just this
that the associations of contiguity and likeness
consist. But, onthe other hand, the sensori-motor
apparatus furnish to ineffective, that is uncon-
scious, memories, the means of taking on a body,
of materializing themselves, in short of becoming
present. For, that a recollection should reappear
in consciousness, it is necessary that it should
descend from the heights of pure memory down
to the precise point where action is taking place.
In other words, it is from the present that comes
the appeal to which memory responds, and it
is from the sensori-motor elements of present
action that a memory borrows the warmth which
gives it life.


“Fie, 4.


198 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, Itt


Is it not by the constancy of this agreement,
by the precision with which these two comple-
mentary memories insert themselves

‘Good sense’ each into the other, that we recognize a


consists main:


lyin making ‘ well-balanced’ mind, that is to say,
the right use


ofspontan- in fact, a man nicely adapted to life ?
eous memory, rte
The characteristic of the man of action
is the promptitude with which he summons
to the help of a given situation all the mem-
ories which have reference to it ; but it is also the
insurmountable barrier which encounter, when they
present themselves on the threshold of his con-
sciousness, memories that are useless or indiffer-
ent. To live only in the present, to respond
to a stimulus by the immediate reaction which
prolongs it, is the mark of the lower animals:
the man who proceeds in this way is a man of 7m-
pulse. But he who lives in the past for the mere
pleasure of living there, and in whom recollections
emerge into the light of consciousness without
any advantage for the present situation, is
hardly better fitted for action: here we have no
man of impulse, but a dreamer. Between these
two extremes lies the happy disposition of a
memory docile enough to follow with precision
all the outlines of the present situation, but ener-
getic enough to resist all other appeal. Good
sense, or practical sense, is probably nothing but
this.
The extraordinary development of spontaneous
memory in most children is due to the fact that


CHAP. WI RELATION OF PAST AND PRESENT 199


they have not yet persuaded their memory to
remain bound up with their conduct. They
usually follow the impression of the moment,
and as with them action does not bow to the
suggestions of memory, so neither are their recol-
lections limited to the necessities of action.
They seem to retain with greater facility only
because they remember with less discernment.
The apparent diminution of memory, as intellect
developes, is then due to the growing organi-
zation of recollections with acts. Thus con-
scious memory loses in range what it gains
in force of penetration: it had at first the
facility of the memory of dreams, but then
it was actually dreaming. Indeed we observe
this same exaggeration of spontaneous mem-
ory in men whose intellectual development
hardly goes beyond that of childhood. A mis-
sionary, after preaching a long sermon to some
African savages, heard one of them repeat it tex-
tually, with the same gestures, from beginning to
end."

But, if almost the whole of our past is hidden
from us because it is inhibited by the necessities
of present action, it will find strength to cross the
threshold of consciousness in all cases where we
renounce the interests of effective action to replace
ourselves, so to speak, in the life of dreams. Sleep,
natural or artificial, brings about an indifference


1 Kay, Memory and How to Improve tt. New York, 1888,
p. 18.


200 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IK


of just this kind. It has been recently suggested
that in sleep there is an imterruption of the con-
tact between the nervous elements, motor and
sensory.1. Even if we do not accept this in-
genious hypothesis, it is impossible not to sce
in sleep a relaxing, even if only functional, of
the tension of the nervous system, ever ready,
during waking hours, to prolong by an appropriate
reaction the stimulation received. Now the exalta-
tion of the memory in certain dreams and in cer-
tain somnambulistic states is well known. Mem-
ories which we believed abolished then reappear
with striking completeness ; we live over again,
in all their detail, forgotten scenes of childhood ;
we speak languages which we no longer even
remember to have learnt. But there is nothing
more instructive in this regard than what hap-
pens in cases of sudden suffocation, in men
drowned or hanged. The man, when brought to
life again, states that he saw, in a very short
time, all the forgotten events of his life passing
before him with, great rapidity, with their smallest
circumstances and in the very order in which


they occurred.?


1 Mathias Duval, Théorie Iistologique du sommeil (C. R. de
la Soc. de Biologie, 1895, p. 74). Cf. Leépine, zbid., p. 85 and
Revue de Médecine, Aug. 1894, and especially Pupin, Le
neurone et les hypothéses histologiques, Paris, 1896.

2 Forbes Winslow, Obscure Diseases of the Brain, p. 25
et seq.—Ribot, Maladies de la mémoire, p. 139 et seq.—Mauro,
Le sommeil et les réves, Paris, 1878, p. 439.—Egger, Le moi
des mourants (Revue philosophique, Jan. and Oct. 1896).—


CHAP, It MEMORY AND GENERAL IDEAS 201


A human being who should dream his life in-
stead of living it would no doubt thus keep before
Spontancous his eyes at each moment the infinite mul-
recalls Sifter titude of the details of his past history.
memory And, on the other hand, the man who
atthe should repudiate this memory with all
place arises that it begets would be continually
the general ° : : :
idea. acting his life instead of truly repre-
senting it to himself: a conscious automaton,
he would follow the lead of useful habits which
prolong into an appropriate reaction the stimula-
tion received. The first would never rise above
the particular, or even above the individual ;
leaving to each image its date in time and its
position in space, he would see wherein it differs
from others and not how it resembles them. The
other, always swayed by habit, would only dis-
tinguish in any situation that aspect in which it
practically resembles former situations ; incapable,
doubtless, of thinking universals, since every
general idea implies the representation, at least
virtual, of a number of remembered images, he
would nevertheless move in the universal, habit
being to action what generality is to thought.
But these two extreme states, the one of an
entirely contemplative memory which appre-

hends only the singular in its vision, the other
of a purely motor memory which stamps the note
Cf. Ball’s dictum: ‘ Memory is a faculty which loses nothing
and records everything.’ (Quoted by Rouillard, Les amnésies
{medical thesis], Paris, 1885, p. 25.)


202 a MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. Ill


of generality on its action, are really apart and
are fully visible only in exceptional cases. In
normal life they are interpenetrating, so that
each has to abandon some part of its original
purity. The first reveals itself in the recollection
of differences, the second in the perception of
resemblances : at the meeting of the two currents
appears the general idea.


We are not here concerned to settle once for all
the whole question of general ideas. Some there
are that have not originated in perception alone,
and that have but a very distant connexion
with material objects. We will leave these
on one side, and consider only those general
ideas that are founded on what we have
called the perception of similarity. We will try
to follow pure memory, integral memory, in the
continuous effort which it makes to insert itself
into motor habit. In this way we may throw
more light upon the office and nature of this
memory, and perhaps make clearer, at the same
time, by regarding them in this particular aspect,
the two equally obscure notions of resemblance
and of generality.

If we consider as closely as possible the diffi-
culties of a psychological order which surround

the problem of general ideas, we shall
Nominalism
and concep- COME, We believe, to enclose them in
tualism : : : oie
revolve ina this circle: to generalize, it is first of
circle, each
leading back all necessary to abstract, but to abstract
to the other.

to any purpose we must already know


CHAP, III MEMORY AND GENERAL IDEAS 203


how to generalize. Round this circle gravitate,
consciously or unconsciously, nominalism and
conceptualism, each doctrine having in its fav-
our mainly the insufficiency of the other. The
nominalists, retaining of the general idea only its
extension, see in it merely an open and unlimited
series of individual objects. The unity of the
idea can then, for them, consist only in the identity
of the symbol by which we designate indiffer-
ently all these distinct objects. According to
them, we begin by perceiving a thing, and then
we assign to it a word: this word, backed by
the faculty or the habit of extending itself to an
unlimited number of other things, then sets up for
a general idea. But, in order that the word
should extend and yet limit itself to the objects
which it designates, it is necessary that these
objects should offer us resemblances which,
when we compare them, shall distinguish them
from all the objects to which the word does not
apply. Generalization does not, consequently,
occur without our taking into account qualities
that have been found to be common and there-
fore considered in the abstract ; and from step to
step, nominalism is thus led to define the general
idea by its intension and not merely by its exten-
sion, as it set out to do. It is just from this in-
tension that conceptualism starts; the intellect, on
this theory, resolves the superficial unity of the
individual into different qualities, each of which,
isolated from the individual which limited it, be-


204 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. Ii¥.


comes by that very isolation representative of a
genus. Instead of regarding each genus as includ-
ing actually a multiplicity of objects, it is now main-
tained, on the contrary, that each object involves
potentially, and as so many qualities which it holds
captive, a multiplicity of genera. But the ques-
tion before us is whether individual qualities, -
even isolated by an effort of abstraction, do not
remain individual ; and whether, to make them
into genera, a new effort of the mind is not re-
quired, by which it first bestows on each quality
a name, and then collects under this name a
multitude of individual objects. The whiteness
of a lily is not the whiteness of a snow-field ; they
remain, even as isolated from the snow and the
lily, snow-white or lily-white. They only forego
their individuality if we consider their likeness in
order to give them a common name ; then, apply-
ing this name to an unlimited number of similar
objects, we throw back upon the quality, by a
sort of ricochet, the generality which the word
went out to seek in its application to things.
But, reasoning in this way, do we not return to
the point of view of extension, which we just now
abandoned ? We are then, in truth, revolving
in a circle, nominalism leading us to conceptualism,
and conceptualism bringing us back to nominalism.
Generalization can only be effected by extracting
common qualities; but, that qualities should
appear common, they must have already been
subjected to a process of generalization.


CHAP III. MEMORY AND GENERAL IDEAS 205


Now, when we get to the bottom of these two
opposite theories, we find in them a common
postulate ; each will have it that we start from
the perception of individual objects. The first
composes the genus by an enumeration; the
second disengages it by an analysis; but it is
upon individuals, considered as so many realities
given to immediate intuition, that both analysis
and enumeration are supposed to bear. This is
the postulate. In spite of its apparent obvious-
ness, we must expect to find, and we do indeed
find, that experience belies it.

A priori, indeed, we may expect the clear dis-
tinction of individual objects to be a luxury of

perception, just as the clear repre-
The clear : : 3
perception of Sentation of general ideas is a refinement
objecis and Of the intellect. The full conception
the clear :
conception of Of genera is no doubt proper to human
alike of late thought ; it demands an effort of reflex-
development. . :
ion, by which we expunge from a repre-
sentation the details of time and place. But the re-
flexion on these details—a reflexion without which
the individuality of objects would escape us—pre-
supposes a faculty of noticing differences, and
therefore a memory of images, which is certainly
the privilege of man and of the higher animals.
It would seem, then, that we start neither
from the perception of the individual nor from
the conception of the genus, but from an inter-
mediate knowledge, from a confused sense of the
striking quality or of resemblance: this sense,


206 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. HI


equally remote from generality fully conceived
and from individuality clearly perceived, begets
them both by a process of dissociation. Reflective
analysis clarifies it into the general idea; dis-
criminative memory solidifies it into a perception
of the individual.

But this will be more clearly evident if we go
back to the purely utilitarian origin of our per-
ception of things. That which interests us in a
given situation, that which we are likely to grasp
in it first, is the side by which it can respond to
a tendency or a need. But a need goes straight
to the resemblance or quality ; it cares little for
individual differences. To this discernment of the
useful we may surmise that the perception of
animals is, in most cases, confined. It is grass
in general which attracts the herbivorous animal :
the colour and the smell of grass, felt and ex-
perienced as forces, (we do not go so far as to
say, thought as qualities or genera) are the sole
immediate data ofitsexternal perception. On this
rere background of generality or of resem-
primary pet- blance the animal’s memory may show


ception is a


discernment : ‘ 5 .
egineprer Le) contrasts from which will issue dif-


ful ty ferentiations ; it will then distinguish
things. one countryside from another, one field
from another field ; but this is, we repeat, the super-
fluity of perception, not a necessary part. It may
be urged that we are only throwing the problem
further back, that we are merely relegating to


the unconscious the process by which similarity


CHAP, II MEMORY AND GENERAL IDEAS 207


is discovered and genera are constituted. But
we relegate nothing to the unconscious, for the
very simple reason that it is not, in our opinion,
an effort of a psychological nature which here dis-
engages similarity ; this similarity acts objectively
like a force, and provokes reactions that are iden-
tical in virtue of the purely physical law which re-
quires that the same general effects should follow the
same profound causes. Hydrochloric acid always
acts in the same way upon carbonate of lime—
whether in the form of marble or of chalk—yet
we do not say that the acid perceives in the various
species the characteristic features of the genus.
Now there is no essential difference between the
process by which this acid picks out from the
salt its base, and the act of the plant which
invariably extracts from the most diverse soils
those elements that serve to nourish it. Make
one more step; imagine a rudimentary con-
sciousness such as that of an amoeba in a drop
of water: it will be sensible of the resemblance,
and not of the difference,in the various organic
substances which it can assimilate. In short,
we can follow from the mineral to the plant,
from the plant to the simplest conscious beings,
from the animal to man, the progress of the
operation by which things and beings seize from
out their surroundings that which attracts them,
that which interests them practically, without
needing any effort of abstraction, simply because
the rest of their surroundings takes no hold upon


208 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. III


them ;: this similarity of reaction following actions
superficially different is the germ which the human
consciousness developes into general ideas.
Consider, indeed, the purpose and function
of our nervous system as far as we can infer
them from its structure. We see a great
So that the Watiety of mechanisms of perception,
general idea ]] bound, through the intermediary


is experi-
enced before of the centres, to the same motor


it is repre=
sented. apparatus. Sensation is unstable; it
can take the most varied shades; the motor
mechanism, on the contrary, once set going, will
invariably work in the same way. We may then
suppose perceptions as different as possible in
their superficial details : if only they are continued
“ton at by the same motor reactions, if the organism can
A f\ extract from them the same useful effects, if they
4. impress upon the body the same attitude, some-
ao thing common will issue from them, and the general
) Se idea will have been felt’ and passively experienced,
¥ _before being represented.i—Here then we escape
X95 at last from the circle in which we at first appeared
ae - to be confined. In order to generalize, we said,
we have to abstract similarity, but in order to
disengage similarity usefully we must already
know how to generalize. There really is no circle,
because the similarity, from which the mind starts
when it first begins the work of abstraction, is
not the similarity at which the mind arrives when
it consciously generalizes. That from which it
starts is a similarity felt and lived; or, if you prefer


CHAP, Ill. MEMORY AND GENERAL IDEAS 209


the expression, a similarity which is automatically
acted. That to which it returns is a similarity in-
telligently perceived, or thought. Anditis precisely
in the course of this progress that are built up,
by the double effort of the understanding and of
the memory, the perception of individuals and
the conception of genera,—memory grafting dis-
tinctions upon resemblances which have been
spontaneously abstracted, the understanding dis-
engaging from the habit of resemblances the clear
idea of generality. This idea of generality was,
in the beginning, only our consciousness of a likeness
of attitude in a diversity of situations; it was
habit itself, mounting from the sphere of move-
ment to that of thought. But from genera so
sketched out mechanically by habit we have
passed, by an effort of reflexion upon this very
process, to the general idea of genus; and when
that idea has been once constituted, we have con-
structed (this time voluntarily) an unlimited num-
ber of general notions. It is not necessary here to
follow the intellect into the detail of this con-
struction. It is enough to say that the under-
standing, imitating the effort of nature, has also
set up motor apparatuses, artificial in this case, to
make a limited number of them answer to an un-
limited number of individual objects : the assem-
blage of these mechanisms is articulate speech.
Yet these two divergent operations of the mind,
the one by which it discerns individuals, the other
by which it constructs genera, are far from demand-
P


210 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IIt


ing the same effort or progressing with the same
rapidity. The first, requiring only the inter-
vention of memory, takes place from the outset
of our experience ; the second goes on indefinitely
without ever reaching its goal. The first issues in
the formation of stable images, which in their turn
are stored up in memory; the second comes out in
representations that are unstable and evanescent.
We must dwell on this last point, for we touch
here an essential problem of mental life.

The essence of the general idea, in fact, is to
be unceasingly going backwards and forwards
between the plane of action and that of pure
memory. Let us refer once more to the dia-
gram we traced above. At S is the present
perception which I have of my body, that is
to say, of a certain sensori-motor equilibrium.
Over the surface of the base AB are spread,
we may say, my recollections in their totality.
Within the cone so determined the general
idea oscillates continually between the summit
S and the base AB. In § it would take the
clearly defined form of a bodily attitude or of
an uttered word ; at AB it would wear the aspect,
no less defined, of the thousand individual images

into which its fragile unity would break
And the :
general idea Up. Andthat is why a psychology which
feet abiaes by the already done, which con-
Mane at siders only that which is made and
action and : 5 : S :
that of pure Ignores that which is in the making,
memery will never perceive in this movement


CHAP. UI MEMORY AND GENERAL IDEAS 211


anything more than the two extremities between
which it oscillates; it makes the general idea
coincide sometimes with the action which mani-
fests it or the word which expresses it, and
at other times with the multitudinous images,
unlimited in number, which are its equivalent in
memory. But the truth is that the general idea
escapes us as soon as we try to fix it at either of
the two extremities. It consists in the double
current which goes from the one to the other,—
always ready either to crystallize into uttered
words or to evaporate into memories.

This amounts to saying that between the
sensori-motor mechanisms figured by the point
S and the totality of the memories disposed in
AB there is room, as we indicated in the preceding
chapter, for a thou-
sand repetitions of our
psychical life, figured
by as many sections
A’B’, A’ B”, etc., of the
same cone. We tend
to scatter- ourselves
over AB in the measure
that we detach our-
selves from our sensory
and motor state to live
in the life of dreams ;
we tend to concentrate
ourselves in S in the measure that we attach
ourselves more firmly to the present reality,


Fic. 5.


2A, MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. Ill


responding by motor reactions to sensory stimula-
tion. In point of fact, the normal self never stays
in either of these extreme positions; it moves
between them, adopts in turn the positions corre-
sponding to the intermediate sections, or, in other
words, gives to its representations just enough
image and just enough idea for them to be able
to lend useful aid to the present action.


From this conception of the lower mental life
the laws of the association of ideas can be deduced.
But, before we deal with this point, we must first
show the insufficiency of the current theories of
association.

That every idea which arises in the mind has
a relation of similarity or of contiguity with
But associae the previous mental state, we do not
Honism errs dispute; but a statement of the kind


in missing the ;
connexion = throws no light on the mechanism of as-


between

these ideas sociation ; nor, indeed, does it really tell
peuau access anything at all. For we should seek
in vain for two ideas which have not some point
of resemblance, or which do not touch each other
somewhere. To take similarity first: however
profound are the differences which separate two
images, we shall always find, if we go back high
enough, acommon genus to which they belong, and
consequently a resemblance which may serve as a
connecting link between them. And, in regard to
contiguity, a perception A, as we said before, will
not evoke‘ by contiguity’ a former image B, unless


CHAP. lil THE ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS 213


it recalls to us first an image A’ which is like it,
because it is the recollection A’, and not the
perception A, which really touches B in memory.
However distant, then, we suppose the terms A
and B from each other, a relation of contiguity
can always be found between them, provided that
the intercalated term A’ bears a sufficiently far-
fetched resemblance to A. This is as much as to
say that between any two ideas chosen at random
there is always a resemblance, and always, even,
contiguity ; so that, when we discover a relation
of contiguity or of resemblance between two suc-
cessive ideas, we have in no way explained why
the one evokes the other.

What we really need to discover is how a choice
is effected among an infinite number of recollec-
tions which all resemble in some way the present
perception, and why only one of them,—this rather
than that,—emerges into the light of consciousness.
But this is just what associationism cannot tell
us, because it has made ideas and images into
independent entities floating, like the atoms of
Epicurus, in an inward space, drawing near to
each other and catching hold of each other when
chance brings them within the sphere of mutual
attraction. And if we try to get to the bottom
of the doctrine on this point, we find that its
error is that it intellectualizes ideas over much:
it attributes to them a purely speculative role,
believes that they exist for themselves and not
for us, and overlooks the relation which they


214 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. If


bear to the activity of the will. If memories
move about, indifferent, in a consciousness that is
both lifeless and shapeless, there is no reason why
the present perception should prefer and attract
any one of them: we can only, in that case,
note the conjunction when once it has taken
place and speak of similarity or of contiguity,—
which is merely, at bottom, to express in vague
terms that our mental states have affinities for
one another.

But even of this affinity, which takes the double
form of contiguity and of similarity, associationism
can furnish no explanation. The general ten-
dency to associate remains as obscure for us,if we
adhere to this doctrine, as the particular forms of
association. Having stiffened individual memory-
images into ready-made things, given cut and
dry in the course of our mental life, associa-
tionism is reduced to bringing in, between these
objects, mysterious attractions of which it is not ©
even possible to say beforehand, as of physical
attraction, by what effects they will manifest
themselves. For why should an image which is,
by hypothesis, self-sufficient, seek to accrue to
itself others either similar or given in contiguity
with it? The truth is that this independent
image is a late and artificial product of the mind.
In fact, we perceive the resemblance before we per-
ceive the individuals which resemble each other ;
and,in an aggregate of contiguous parts, we per-
ceive the whole before the parts. We go on from


cHAP.1r THE ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS 215


similarity to similar objects, embroidering upon
the similarity, as on their common stuff or canvas,
the variety of individual differences. And we
go on also from the whole to the parts, by a process
of decomposition the law of which will appear
later, a process which consists in breaking up,
for the greater convenience of practical life,
the continuity of the real. Association, then,
is not the primary fact: dissociation is what
we begin with, and the tendency of every mem-
ory to gather to itself others must be explained
by the natural return of the mind to the undivided
unity of perception.

But here we discover the radical vice of associa-
tionism. Given a present perception which forms
«Similarity? by turns, with different recollections,
and ‘conti- ~several associations one after another,


guity’ do not


account for i =
Sete i there are two ways, as we said, of con


less they are ceiving the mechanism of this associa-
accounted for. tion. We may suppose that the percep-
tion remains identical with itself, a true psychical
atom which gathers to itself others just as these
happen to be passing by. This is the point of
view of associationism. But thereis also another,
—precisely the one which we have indicated in
our theory of recognition. We have supposed
that our entire personality, with the totality of
our recollections, is present, undivided within our
actual perception. Then, if this perception evokes
in turn different memories, it is not by a mechan-
ical adjunction of more and more numerous


216 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, HI


elements which, while it remains itself unmoved,
it attracts around it, but rather by an expansion
of the entire consciousness which, spreading out
over a larger area, discovers the fuller detail of
its wealth. So a nebulous mass, seen through
more and more powerful telescopes, resolves itself
into an ever greater number of stars. On the
first hypothesis (in favour of which there is little
but its apparent simplicity and its analogy
with a misunderstood physical atomism), each
recollection is a fixed and independent being,
of which we can neither say why it seeks to
accrue to itself others, nor how it chooses, among
a thousand memories which should have equal
rights, those with which to associate itself in
virtue of similarity or contiguity. We must
suppose that ideas jostle each other at random,
or that they exert among themselves mysterious
forces, and moreover we have against us the
witness of consciousness, which never shows us
psychical facts floating as independent entities.
From the second point of view, we merely state a
fact, viz. that psychic facts are bound up with
each other, and are always given together to
immediate consciousness as an undivided whole
which reflexion alone cuts up into distinct frag-
ments. What we have to explain, then, is no
longer the cohesion of internal states, but the
double movement of contraction and expansion
by which consciousness narrows or enlarges
the development of its content. But this move-


cHaP. ur THE PLANES OF DREAM AND ACTION 217


ment, we shall see, is the result of the fun-
damental needs of life; and we shall also
see why the ‘associations,’ which we appear
to form in the course of this movement, corre-
spond to all the possible degrees of so-called con-
tiguity and resemblance.

Let us, for a moment, suppose our psychical
life reduced to sensori-motor functions alone.
They shonla 0 Other words, suppose ourselves placed
eacousidcred, in the diagrammatic figure on page 211
rae  nere at the pointS, which corresponds to the
they coincides; sreatest possible simplification of our
mental life. In this state every perception
spontaneously prolongs itself into appropriate
reactions; for analogous former perceptions
have set up more or less complex motor
apparatus, which only await a recurrence of
the same appeal in order to enter into play.
Now there is, in this mechanism, an associa-
tion of similarity, since the present perception
acts in virtue of its likeness to past perceptions ;
and there is also an association of contiguity,
since the movements which followed those
former perceptions reproduce themselves, and
may even bring in their train a vast num-
ber of actions co-ordinate with the first. Here
then we seize association of similarity and
association of contiguity at their ‘very source,
and at a point where they are almost confounded
in one—not indeed thought, but acted and lived.
They are not contingent forms of our psychical


215 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. It


life; they represent the two complementary
aspects of one and the same fundamental tendency,
the tendency of every organism to extract from
a given situation that in it which is useful, and to
store up the eventual reaction in the form of a
motor habit, that it may serve other situations
of the same kind.
Let us jump now to the other extremity of
our mental life, and, following our line of thought,
go from the psychical existence which
And, secondly, is merely ‘ acted,’ to that which is ex-


on the plane :
of dream, clusively ‘dreamed.’ In other words,


where they
are entirely let = us ) places ourselves= one thea base
AB of memory (page 211) where all the
events of our past life are set out in their small-
est details. Aconsciousness which, detached from
action, should thus keep in view the totality of
its past, would have no reason to dwell upon one
part of this past rather than upon another. In
one sense, all its recollections would differ from
its present perception, for, if we take them with
the multiplicity of their detail, no two memories
are ever precisely the same thing. But, in another
sense, avy memory may be set alongside the pre-
sent situation : it. would be sufficient to neglect in
this perception and in this memory just enough
detail for similarity alone to appear. Moreover,
the moment that the recollection is linked with
the perception, a multitude of events contig-
uous to the memory are thereby fastened to the
perception—an indefinite multitude, which is only


‘cHap. ul THE PLANES OF DREAM AND ACTION 219


limited at the point at which we choose to stop
it. The necessities of life are no longer there
to regulate the effect of similarity, and conse-
quently of contiguity ; and as, after all, everything
resembles everything else, it follows that any-
thing can be associated with anything. In the
first case the present perception continued itself
in determinate movements; now it melts into
an infinity of memories, all equally possible.
At AB association would provoke an arbitrary
choice, and in § an inevitable deed.

But these are only two extreme limits, at
which the psychologist must place himself alter-

nately for convenience of study, and

Now normal : c
psychical | Which are really never reached in prac-
life oscillates .. : :
between these tice. There is not, in man at least, a
two extremes, :
oo ae purely sensori-motor state, any more
tension in than there is in him an imaginative
met: life without some slight activity be-
neath it. Our psychical life, as we have said,
oscillates normally between these two extremes.
On the one hand, the sensori-motor state S marks
out the present direction of memory, being no-
thing else, in fact, than its actual and acting
extremity ; and on the other hand this memory
itself, with the totality of our past, is continually
pressing forward, so as to insert the largest
possible part of itself into the present action.
From this double effort result, at every mo-
ment, an infinite number of possible states
of memory, states figured by the sections


220 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, II!


A’B’, A’”B” of our diagram. These are, as we
have said, so many repetitions of the whole
of our past life. But each section is larger or
smaller according to its nearness to the base or
to the summit; and moreover each of these
complete representations of the past brings to
the light of consciousness only that which can
fit into the sensori-motor state, and consequently
that which resembles the present perception
from the point of view of the action to be accom-
plished. In other words, memory, laden with
the whole of the past, responds to the appeal
of the present state by two simultaneous move-
ments, one of translation, by which it moves
in its entirety to meet experience, thus contracting
more or less, though without dividing, with a
view to action ; the other of rotation upon itself,
by which it turns towards the situation of the
moment, presenting to it that side of itself which
may prove to be the most useful. To these
varying degrees of contraction correspond the
various forms of association by similarity.
Everything happens, then, as though our
recollections were repeated an infinite number
Associations of times in these many possible reduc-


are more tions of. our past life. They take a
general when

memory is more common form when memory
near the plane : :
ofaction, more Shrinks most, more personal when it
personal as ; 5

it withdraws widens out, and they thus enter into
towards the we : ‘
plane ofdream, an unlimited number of different ‘ sys-


tematizations.’” A word from a foreign language,


CHAP. 11 DIFFERENT PLANES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 221


uttered in my hearing, may make me think of
that language in general or of a voice which once
pronounced it in a certain way. These two
associations by similarity are not due to the
accidental arrival of two different representations,
which chance brought by turns within the attract-
ing influence of the actual perception. They
answer to two different mental dispositions, to
two distinct degrees of tension of the memory;
in the latter case nearer to the pure image, in
the former more disposed towards immediate
response, that is to say, to action. To classify
these systems, to discover the law which binds
them respectively to the different ‘tones’ of
our mental life, to show how each of these tones
is itself determined by the needs of the moment
and also by the varying degree of our personal
effort, would be a difficult task: the whole of
this psychology is yet to do, and for the moment
we do not even wish to attempt it. But every
one is clearly aware of the existence of these laws,
and of stable relations of this kind. We know, for
instance, when we read a psychological novel,
that certain associations of ideas there depicted
for us are true, that they may have been lived ;
others offend us, or fail to give us an impression
of reality, because we feel in them the effect of
a connexion, mechanically and artificially brought
about, between different mental levels, as though
the author had not taken care to maintain him-
self on that plane of the mental life which he


222 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. 19]


had chosen. Memory has then its successive
and distinct degrees of tension or of vitality:
they are certainly not easy to define, but the
painter of mental scenery may not with impunity
confound them. Pathology, moreover, here con-
firms—by means, it is true, of coarser examples
—a truth of which we are all instinctively
aware. In the ‘systematized amnesias’ of hyster-
ical patients, for example, the recollections which
appear to be abolished are really present ; but
they are probably all bound up with a certain
determined tone of intellectual vitality in which
the subject can no longer place himself.
Just as there are these different planes, infinite
in number, for association by similarity, so there
are with association by contiguity. In
Onthe various the extreme plane, which represents


planes that


are interme- : >
prifagra tae the base of memory, there is no recol


the two ex- lection which is not linked by contiguity


same memo- with the totality of the events which pre-
tematized in cede and also with those which follow

it. Whereas, at the point in space where
our action is concentrated, contiguity brings back,
in the form of movement, only the reaction which
immediately followed a former similar perception.
Asa matter of fact, every association by conti-
guity implies a position of the mind intermediate
between the two extreme limits. If, here again, we
imagine a number of possible repetitions of the total-
ity of our memories, each of these copies of our
past life must be supposed to becut up, in its own.


cHAP. 111 DIFFERENT PLANES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 223


way, into definite parts, and the cutting up is
not the same when we pass from one copy to
another, each of them being in fact character-
ized by the particular kind of dominant mem-
ories on which the other memories lean as
on supporting points. The nearer we come to
action, for instance, the more contiguity tends
to approximate to similarity and to be thus dis-
tinguished from a mere relation of chronological
succession: thus we cannot say of the words
of a foreign language, when they call each other
up in memory, whether they are associated by
similarity or by contiguity. On the contrary,
the more we detach ourselves from action, real or
possible, the more association by contiguity tends
merely to reproduce the consecutive images
of our past life. It is impossible to enter
here into a profound study of these different
systems. It is sufficient to point out that these
systems are not formed of recollections laid side
by side like so many atoms. There are always
some dominant memories, shining points round
which the others form a vague nebulosity. These
shining points are multiplied in the degree in
which our memoryexpands. The process of local-
izing a recollection in the past, for instance, can-
not at all consist, as has been said, in plunging
into the mass of our memories as into a bag, to
draw out memories, closer and closer to each
other, between which the memory to be localized
may find its place. By what happy chance


224 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. III


could we just hit upon on a growing number of
intercalary recollections ? The work of localiza-
tion consists, in reality, in a growing effort of ex-
pansion, by which the memory, always present in
its entirety to itself, spreads out its recollections
over an ever wider surface and so ends by dis-
tinguishing, in what was till then a confused mass,
the remembrance which could not find its proper
place. Here again, moreover, the pathology of
memory is instructive. In retrogressive amnesia,
the recollections which disappear from conscious-
ness are probably preserved in remote planes
of memory, and the patient can find them there
by an exceptional effort like that which is effected
in the hypnotic state. But on the lower planes
these memories await, so to speak, the dominant
image to which they may be fastened. A sharp
shock, a violent emotion, forms the decisive
event to which they cling ; and if this event, by
reason of its sudden character, is cut off from
the rest of our history, they follow it into
oblivion. We can understand, then, that the
oblivion which follows a physical or moral shock
should include the events which immediately
preceded it—a phenomenon which is very difficult
to explain in all other conceptions of memory.
Let us remark in passing that if we refuse to
attribute some such waiting to recent, and even to
relatively distant, recollections, the normal work
of memory becomes unintelligible. For every
‘event of which the recollection is now imprinted’


CHAP, III ATTENTION TO LIFE 225


on the memory, however simple we suppose it
to be, has occupied a certain time. The percep-
tions which filled the first period of this interval,
and now form with the later perceptions an
undivided memory, were then really ‘loose’ as
long as the decisive part of the event had not
occurred and drawn them along. Between the
disappearance of a memory with its various pre-
liminary details, and the abolition, in retrogres-
sive amnesia, of a greater or less number of recol-
lections previous to a given event, there is, then,
merely a difference of degree and not of kind.


From these various considerations on the lower
mental life results a certain view of intellectual
since the equilibrium. This equilibrium will be
body condi- ypset only by a perturbation of the


tions our


attention to 1 :
ie the noe elements which serve as its matter.


mal work of We cannot here go into questions of
must depend mental pathology ; yet neither can we
wholeness of Avoid them entirely, since we are
motor system. endeavouring to discover the exact
relation between body and mind.

We have supposed that the mind travels unceas-
ingly over the interval comprised between its two
extreme limits, the plane of action and the plane of
dream. Let us suppose that we have to make a
decision. Collecting, organizing the totality of its ©
experience in what we call its character, the mind
causes it to converge upon actions in which we
shall afterwards find, together with the past

Q


226 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. III


which is their matter, the unforeseen form which is
stamped upon them by personality ; but the action
is not able to become real unless it succeeds in
encasing itself in the actual situation, that is to
say, in that particular assemblage of circumstances
which is due to the particular position of the body
in time and space. Let us suppose, now, that we
have to do a piece of intellectual work, to form
a conception, to extract a more or less general
idea from the multiplicity of our recollections.
A wide margin is left to fancy on the one hand, ~
to logical discernment on the other; but,if the
idea is to live, it must touch present reality on
some side; that is to say, it must be able, from
step to step, and by progressive diminutions or
contractions of itself, to be more or less acted
by the body at the same time as it is thought
by the mind. Our body, with the sensations
which it receives on the one hand and the
movements which it is capable of executing on
the other, is, then, that which fixes our mind,
and gives it ballast and poise. The activity of
the mind goes far beyond the mass of accumulated
memories, as this mass of memories itself is
infinitely more than the sensations and move-
ments of the present hour; but these sensations
and these movements condition what we may
term our attention to life, and that is why every-
thing depends on their cohesion in the normal
work of the mind, as in a pyramid which should
stand upon its apex.


CHAP. {11 MENTAL EQUILIBRIUM 227


If, moreover, we cast a glance at the minute
structure of the nervous system as recent dis-
coveries have revealed it to us, we see every-
where conducting lines, nowhere any centres.
Threads placed end to end, of which the
extremities probably touch when the current
passes: this is all that is seen. And perhaps
this is all there is, if it be true that the body is
only a place of meeting and transfer, where stimula-
tions received result in movements accomplished, as
we have supposed it to be throughout this work.’
But these threads which receive disturbances or
stimulations from the external world and return
them to it in the form of appropriate reactions,
these threads so beautifully stretched from the
periphery to the periphery, are just what ensure
by the solidity of their connexions and the
precision of their interweaving the sensori-
motor equilibrium of the body, that is to say
its adaptation to the present circumstances.
Relax this tension or destroy this equilibrium:
everything happens as if attention detached
itself from life. Dreams and insanity appear to
be little else than this. |
Sleep and We were speaking just now of the
insanity de> recent hypothesis which attributes


tach memory


and atten- : C s
pnd steno sleep to an interruption of the soli


sensori- s Fs
motor tune darity among the neurons. Even if
lons DY

tions by ey we do not accept this hypothesis


ener’ (which is, however, confirmed by some


reality. curious experiments) we must suppose,


22 Same MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IIT


in deep sleep, at least a functional break in the
relation established in the nervous system be-
tween stimulation and motor reaction. So that
dreams would always be the state of a mind
of which the attention was not fixed by the
sensori-motor equilibrium of thebody. And it
appears more and more probable that this re-
laxing of tension in the nervous system is due
to the poisoning of its elements by products of
their normal activity accumulated in the waking
state. Now, in every way dreams imitate insanity.
Not only are all the psychological symptoms of
madness found in dreams—to such a degree that
- the comparison of the two states has become
a commonplace—but insanity appears also to
have its origin in an exhaustion of the brain,
which is caused, like normal fatigue, by the
accumulation of certain specific poisons in the
elements of the nervous system.1 We know that
insanity is often a sequel to infectious diseases,
and that, moreover, it is possible to reproduce
experimentally, by toxic drugs, all the phenomena
of madness.? Is it not likely, therefore, that the
loss of mental equilibrium in the insane is simply
the result of a disturbance of the sensori-motor
relations established in the organism? This

1 This idea has recently been developed by various authors.
A systematic account of it will be found in the work of Cowles,
The Mechanism of Insanity (American Journal of Insanity,
1890-1801).

2 See, in especial, Moreau de Tours, Du haschisch, Paris,
1845.


CHAP. IIt MENTAL EQUILIBRIUM 229


disturbance may be enough to create a sort of
psychic vertigo, and so cause memory and atten-
tion to lose contact with reality. If we read the
descriptions given by some mad patients of the
beginning of their malady, we find that they often
feel a sensation of strangeness, or, as they say,
of ‘unreality,’ as if the things they perceived
had for them lost solidity and relief1 If our
analyses are correct, the concrete feeling that
we have of present reality consists, in fact, of
our consciousness of the actual movements where-
by our organism is naturally responding to stimu-
lation; so that where the connecting links be-
tween sensations and movements are slackened
or tangled, the sense of the real grows weaker
or disappears.?

There are here, moreover, many distinctions
to be made, not only between the various forms
of insanity, but also between insanity properly
so-called and that division of the personality
which recent psychology has so ingeniously com-
pared with it.2 In these diseases of personality it
seems that groups of recollections detach themselves
from the central memory and forego their solid-
arity with the others. But, then, it seldom occurs
that the patient does not also display accompany-

1 Ball, Lecons sur les maladies mentales. Paris, 1890, p. 608
et seq.—Cf. a curious analysis : Visions, a Personal Narrative,
Journal of Mental Science (1896, p. 284).

2 See above, p. 170.

8 Pierre Janet, Les accidents mentaux. Paris, 1894, p. 292
et seq.


230 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, It


ing scissions of sensibility and of motor activity.t
We cannot help seeing in these latter phenomena
the real material substratum of the former. If
it be true that our intellectual life rests, as a whole,
uponits apex, that is tosay upon the sensori-motor
functions by which it inserts itself into present
reality, intellectual equilibrium will be differently
affected as these functions are damaged in one
manner or in another. Now, besides the lesions
which affect the general vitality of the sensori-
motor functions, weakening or destroying what
we have called the sense of reality, there are others
which reveal themselves in a mechanical, not a
dynamical, diminution of these functions, as if
certain sensori-motor connexions merely parted
company with the rest. If we are right in our.
hypothesis, memory is very differently affected
in the two cases. In the first, no recollection is
taken away, but all recollections are less ballasted,
less solidly directed towards the real ; whence
arises a true disturbance of the mental equili-
brium. In the second, the equilibrium is not
destroyed, but it loses something of its com-
plexity. Recollections retain their normal as-
pect, but forego a part of their solidarity, because
their sensori-motor base, instead of being, so
to speak, chemically changed, is mechanically
diminished. But neither in the one case nor in
the other are memories directly attacked or
damaged.

1 Pierre Janet, L’automatisme psychologique. Paris, 1898,
p. 95 et seq. 2 ee


CHAP, IIT THE OFFICE OF THE BODY 231


The idea that the body preserves memories in

the mechanical form of cerebral deposits, that the

loss or decrease of memory consists in
Injuries to the 9
brain affect the their more or less complete destruction,
motor prolon
gations thro through that the heightening of memory and hal-
ries are actual lucination consists, on the contrary, in
sensori-motor an excess of their activity, is not, then,
equilibrium : :
which condi- borne out either by reasoning or by facts.
‘attention The truth is that there is one case, and
to life.” They
cannot destroy One ONly, in which observation would
memories.

seem at first to suggest this view: we
mean aphasia, or, more generally, the disturb-
ance of auditory or visual recognition. This is
the only case in which the constant-seat of the
disorder is in a determined convolution of the
brain ; but it is also precisely the case in which
we do not find a mechanical, immediate and
final destruction of certain definite recollections,
but rather the gradual and functional weakening of
the whole of the affected memory. And we have
explained how the cerebral lesion may effect this
weakening, without the necessity of supposing any
sort of provision of memories stored in the brain.
What the injury really attacks are the sensory and
motor regions corresponding to this class of percep-
tion, and especially those adjuncts through which
they may be set in motion from within ; so that
memory, finding nothing to catch hold of, ends by
becoming practically powerless: now, in psychology,
powerlessness means unconsciousness. Inall other


cases, the lesion observed or supposed, never defi-


232 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. Ill


nitely localized, acts by the disturbance which it
causes to the whole of the sensori-motor con-
nexions, either by damaging or by breaking up
this mass : whence results a breach or a simplifying
of the intellectual equilibrium, and, by ricochet,
the disorder or the disjunction of memory. The
doctrine which makes of memory an immediate
function of the brain—a doctrine which raises
insoluble theoretical difficulties—a doctrine the
complexity of which defies allimagination, and the
results of which are incompatible with the data
of introspection—cannot even count upon the sup-
port of cerebral pathology. All the facts and all
the analogies are in favour of a theory which
regards the brain as only an intermediary between
sensation and movement, which sees in this
aggregate of sensations and movements the pointed
end of mental life—a point ever pressed forward
into the tissue of events, and, attributing thus to the
body the sole function of directing memory to-
wards the real and of binding it to the present,
considers memory itself as absolutely independent
of matter. In this sense, the brain contributes to
the recall of the useful recollection, but still more
to the provisional banishment of all the others.
We cannot see how memory could settle within
matter; but we do clearly understand how—
according to the profound saying of a contempor-
ary philosopher—materiality begets oblivion 2


1 Ravaisson, La philosophie en France au xix* siécle, 3rd
edit., p. 176.


CHA PEERS LY.


THE DELIMITING AND FIXING OF IMAGES.
PERCEPTION AND MATTER. SOUL AND BODY.


ONE general conclusion follows from the first
three chapters of this book: it is that the body,
always turned towards action, has for its

The funda essential function to limit, with a view


calle is to action, the life of thespirit. In regard


tea ot to representations it is an instrument of


consciousness Choice, and of choice alone. It can
rte ae neither beget nor cause an intellectual
state. Consider perception, to begin with. The
body, by the place which at each moment it occupies
in the universe, indicates the parts and the aspects
of matter on which we can lay hold: our percep- —
tion, which exactly measures our virtual action on
things, thus limits itself to the objects which ‘ac-
tually influence our organs and prepare our move-
ments. Now let usturntomemory. The function
of the body is not to store up recollections, but
simply to choose, in order to bring back to distinct
consciousness, by the real efficacy thus conferred
on it, the useful memory, that which may com-


plete and illuminate the present situation witha
233


——


234 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


view toultimate action. It is true that this second
choice is much less strictly determined than the
first, because our past experience is an individual and
no longer a common experience, because we have
always many different recollections equally capable
of squaring with the same actual situation, and
because nature cannot here, as in the case of per-
ception, have one inflexible rule for delimiting our
representations. A certain margin is, therefore,
necessarily left in this case to fancy ; and though
animals scarcely profit by it, bound as they are to
material needs, it would seem that the human mind
ceaselessly presses with the totality of its memory
against the door which the body may half open
to it: hence the play of fancy and the work of
imagination—so many liberties which the mind
takes with nature. It is none the less true that
the orientation of our consciousness towards action


appears to be the fundamental law of our psychi-
" cal life.


Strictly, we might stop here, for this work was
undertaken to define the function of the body in
the life of the spirit. But, on the one hand, we
have raised by the way a metaphysical problem
which we cannot bring ourselves to leave in sus-
pense; and on the other, our researches, although
mainly psychological, have on several occasions
given us glimpses, if not of the means of solving
the problem, at any rate of the side on which it
should be approached.

This problem is no less than that of the union of


CHAP. Iv THE PROBLEM OF DUALISM 235


soul and body. It comes before us clearly and
with urgency, because we make a profound


A true

psychology, isti 1 it]

aitingushing Rees between matter and spirit.
etween

pemen nd we cannot regard it as insoluble,


sugeeisthe Since we define spirit and matter by
manner of positive characters, and not by nega-

tions. It is in very truth within matter
that pure perception places us, and it is really into
spirit that we penetrate by means of memory.
But on the other hand, whilst introspection reveals
to us the distinction between matter and spirit,
it also bears witness to their union. Either,
_ then, our analyses are vitiated ab ovigine, or they
must help us to issue from the difficulties that
they raise.

The obscurity of this problem, in all doctrines,
is due to the double antithesis which our under-
Dificulties Standing establishes between the ex-
caused by tended and the unextended on the one


the double


antithesis ; 7 :
antithesis; side, between quality and quantity on


and quality in ° : :
te eine the other. It is certain that mind, first


mind ; the -
mind ; the _ of all, stands over against matter as a


quality in’, pure unity in face of an essentially
universe. divisible multiplicity; and moreover
that our perceptions are composed of heterogene-
ous qualities, whereas the perceived universe
seems to resolve itself into homogeneous and cal-
culable changes. There would thus be inexten-
sion and quality on the one hand, extensity
and quantity on the other. We have repu-
diated materialism, which derives the first term


236 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


from the second; but neither do we accept
idealism, which holds that the second is con-
structed by the first. We maintain, as against
materialism, that perception overflows infi-
nitely the cerebral state; but we have en-
deavoured to establish, as against idealism,
that matter goes in every direction beyond our
representation of it, a representation which the
mind has gathered out of it, so to speak, by
an intelligent choice. Of these two opposite
doctrines, the one attributes to the body and the
other to the intellect a true power of creation, the
first insisting that our brain begets representation
and thesecond that our understanding designs the
plan of nature. And against these two doctrines
we invoke the same testimony, that of conscious-
ness, which shows us our body as one image
among others and our understanding as a certain
faculty of dissociating, of distinguishing, of oppos-
ing logically, but not of creating or of construct-
ing. Thus, willing captives of psychological
analysis and consequently of common sense, it
would seem that, after having exacerbated the
conflicts raised by ordinary dualism, we have
closed all the avenues of escape which metaphysic
might set open to us.

But, just because we have pushed dualism to an
extreme, our analysis has perhaps dissociated its
contradictory elements. The theory of pure per-
ception on the one hand, of pure memory on the
other, may thus prepare the way for a reconcili-


CHAP, IV THE PROBLEM OF DUALISM 237


ation between the unextended and the extended,
between quality and quantity.

To take pure perception first. When we make
the cerebral state the beginning of anaction, and in
But since 0 Sense the condition of a perception,
pare percep-' we place the perceived images of things


tion is a par


of things, these ;
ofthings, these outside the image of our body, and


eee heats replace perception within the things
the idea of themselves. But then, our perception

being a part of things, things participate
in the nature of our perception. Material ex-
tensity is not, cannot any longer be, that compo-
site extensity which is considered in geometry;
it indeed resembles rather the undivided exten-
sion of our own representation. That is to say
that the analysis of pure perception allows us to
foreshadow in the idea of extension the possible
approach to each other of the extended and
the unextended.

But our conception of pure memory should
lead us, by a parallel road, to attenuate the second
Aree opposition, that of quality and quantity.
heterogeneity For we have radically separated pure


of sensible


qualities’ recollection from the cerebral state


their con- = which continues it and renders it effica-


memory: the cious. Memory is, then, in no degree an
tension. emanation of matter ; on the contrary,
matter, as grasped in concrete perception which
always occupies a certain duration, is in great
part the work of memory. Now where is, pre-


cisely, the difference between the heterogeneous


238 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


qualities which succeed each other in our con-
crete perception and the homogeneous changes
which science puts at the back of these perceptions
in space? The first are discontinuous and can-
not be deduced one from another; the second,
on the contrary, lend themselves to calculation.
But, in order that they may lend themselves to
calculation, there is no need to make them into
pure quantities: we might as well say that they
are nothing at all. It is enough that their hetero-
geneity should be, so to speak, sufficiently diluted
to become, from our point of view, practically
negligible. Now, if every concrete perception,
however short we suppose it, is already a
synthesis, made by memory, of an infinity of
‘pure perceptions’ which succeed each other,
must we not think that the heterogeneity of
sensible qualities is due to their being contracted
in our memory, and the relative homogeneity
of objective changes to the slackness of their
natural tension? And might not the interval
between quantity and quality be lessened by
considerations of tension, as the distance be-
tween the extended and the unextended is les-
sened by considerations of extension ?

Before entering on this question, let us formu-
late the general principle of the method we would
apply. We have already made use of it in an
earlier work and even, by implication, in the
present essay.

That which is commonly called a fact is not


CHAP, IV DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD .239


reality as it appears to immediate intuition, but
The method of 2N adaptation of the real to the interests ™


philosophy. : : 5
Objectsand Of practice and to the exigencies of


acts. Or, : : sy:
(eee social life. Pure intuition, external or


reality. pry. internal, is that of an undivided con-
getback to tinuity. We break up this continuity
reality itself. into elements laid side by side, which
correspond in the one case to distinct words,
in the other to independent objects. But, just
because we have thus broken the unity of our
original intuition, we feel ourselves obliged to
establish between the severed terms a bond which
can only then be external and superadded. For
the living unity, which was one with internal
continuity, we substitute the factitious unity
of an empty diagram as lifeless as the parts
which it holds together. Empiricism and dog-
matism are, at bottom, agreed in starting from
phenomena so reconstructed ; they differ only in
that dogmatism attaches itself more particularly
to the form and empiricism to the matter. Em-
piricism, feeling indeed, but feeling vaguely, the
artificial character of the relations which unite
the terms together, holds to the terms and
neglects the relations. Its error is not that
it sets too high a value on experience, but
that it substitutes for true experience, that ex-
perience which arises from the immediate contact
of the mind with its object, an experience which is
disarticulated and therefore, most probably, dis-
figured,—at any rate arranged for the greater


240 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


facility of action and of language. Just because
this parcelling of the real has been effected in view
of the exigencies of practical life, it has not followed
the internal lines of the structure of things: for
that very reason empiricism cannot satisfy the
mind in regard to any of the great problems and,
indeed, whenever it becomes fully conscious of its
own principle, it refrains from putting them.—
Dogmatism discovers and disengages the diffi-
culties to which empiricism is blind ; but it really
seeks the solution along the very road that
empiricism has marked out. It accepts, at the
hands of empiricism, phenomena that are separate
and discontinuous, and simply endeavours to effect
a synthesis of them which, not having been given
by intuition, cannot but be arbitrary. In other
words, if metaphysic is only a construction, there
are several systems of metaphysic equally plau-
sible, which consequently refute each other,
and the last word must remain with a critical
philosophy, which holds all knowledge to be re-
lative and the ultimate nature of things to be
inaccessible to the mind. Such is, in truth, the
ordinary course of philosophic thought: we start
from what we take to be experience, we attempt
various possible arrangements of the fragments
which apparently compose it, and when at last we
feel bound to acknowledge the fragility of every
edifice that we have built, we end by giving
up all effort to build. But there is a last enter-
prise that might be undertaken. It would be to


CHAP, IV DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD 241


seek experience at its source, or rather above that
decisive turn where, taking a bias in the direction
of our utility, it becomes properly human experi-
ence. The impotence of speculative reason, as
Kant has demonstrated it, is perhaps at bottom
only the impotence of an intellect enslaved to
certain necessities of bodily life, and concerned
with a matter which man has had to disorganize
for the satisfaction of hiswants. Our knowledge of
things would thus no longer be relative to the
fundamental structure of our mind, but only to its
superficial and acquired habits, to the contingent
form which it derives from our bodily functions
and from our lower needs. The relativity of
knowledge may not, then, be definitive. By
unmaking that which these needs have made, we
may restore to intuition its original purity and
so recover contact with the real.

This method presents, in its application, diffi-
culties which are considerable and ever recurrent,
because it demands for the solution of each new
problem an entirely new effort. To give up certain
habits of thinking, and even of perceiving, is far
from easy : yet this is but the negative part of the
work to be done; and when it is done, when we
have placed ourselves at what we have called the
turn of experience, when we have profited by the
faint light which, illuminating the passage from
the immediate to the useful, marks the dawn of our
human experience, there still remains to be recon-
stituted, with the infinitely small elements which

R


zy


ie


o


242 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


we thus perceive of the real curve, the curve itself
stretching out into the darkness behind them.
In this sense the task of the philosopher, as we
understand it, closely resembles that of the mathe-
matician who determines a function by starting
from the differential. The final effort of philo-
sophical research is a true work of integration.
We have already attempted to apply this
method to the problem of consciousness ;t and it
appeared to us that the utilitarian work of the mind,
in what concerns the perception of our inner life,
consisted in a sort of refracting of pure duration
into space, a refracting which permits us to separate
our psychical states, to reduce them to a more
and more impersonal form and to impose names
upon them,—in short, tomake them enter the cur-
rent of social life. Empiricism and dogmatism
ears take interior states in this discontinuous
cismand form; the first confining itself to the
dogmatism - :
alike take States themselves, so that it can see in
reality . 6
in a discon= the self only a succession of juxtaposed
ignoring facts ; the other grasping the necessity
of a bond, but unable to find this bond
anywhere except in a form or in a force,—an
exterior form into which the aggregate is inserted,
an indetermined and so to speak physical force
which assures the cohesion of the elements. Hence


the two opposing points of view as to the question


1 Time and Free Will, H. Bergson. Published by Sonnen-
schein & Co. Translation of Les données immédiates de la
conscience.


CHAP. IV DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD 243


of freedom : for determinism the act is the result-
ant of a mechanical composition of the elements ;
for the adversaries of that doctrine, if they adhered
strictly to their principle, the free decision would
be an arbitrary fiat,a true creation ex nihilo.—
It seemed to us that a third course lay open. This
is to replace ourselves in pure duration, of which
the flow is continuous and in which we pass insensi-
bly from one state to another : a continuity which
is really lived, but artifically decomposed for the
greater convenience of customary knowledge.
Then, it seemed to us, we saw the action issue from
its antecedents by an evolution sw generis, in such
a way that we find in this action the antecedents
which explain it, while it yet adds to these some-
thing entirely new, being an advance upon them
such as the fruit is upon the flower. Freedom is
not hereby, as has been asserted, reduced to sen-
sible spontaneity. At most this would be the
case in the animal, of which the psychical life is
mainly affective. But in man, the thinking being,
the free act may be termed a synthesis of feelings
and ideas, and the evolution which leads to it a
reasonable evolution. The artifice of this method
simply consists, in short, in distinguishing the
point of view of customary or useful knowledge
from that of true knowledge. The duration
wherein we see ourselves acting, and in which it is
useful that we should see ourselves, is a duration
whose elements are dissociated and juxtaposed.
The duration wherein we act is a duration wherein


244 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


our states melt into each other. It is within this
that we should try to replace ourselves by
thought, in the exceptional and unique case when
we speculate on the intimate nature of action, that
is to say, when we are discussing human freedom.

Is a method of this kind applicable to the prob-
lem of matter ? The question is, whether, in this
‘diversity of phenomena’ of which Kant spoke,
that part which shows a vague tendency to-
wards extension could be seized by us on the
hither side of the homogeneous space to which ©
it is applied and through which we subdivide it,
—just as that part which goes to make up our
Mi Own inner life can be detached from time,
equally ignore empty and indefinite, and brought back


that extension, : : :
concreteand to pure duration. Certainly it would


undivided, mW: :;

beneath which be a chimerical enterprise to try to free
we stretch out

an artificial Ourselves from the fundamental con-
zt ditions of external perception. But the
question is whether certain conditions, which
we usually regard as fundamental, do not rather
concern the use to be made of things, the
practical advantage to be drawn from them, far
more than the pure knowledge which we can have
of them. More particularly, in regard to concrete
extension, continuous, diversified and at the same
time organized, we do not see why it should be
bound up with the amorphous and inert space
which subtends it—a space which we divide in-
definitely, out of which we carve figures arbitrar-
ily, and in which movement itself, as we have


CHAP. IV DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD 245


said elsewhere, can only appear as a multiplicity of
instantaneous positions, since nothing there can
ensure the coherence of past with present. It
might, then, be possible, in a certain measure, to
transcend space without stepping out from
extensity ; and here we should really have a
return to the immediate, since we do indeed per-
ceive extensity, whereas space is merely conceived,—
being a kind of mental diagram. It may be urged
against this method that it arbitrarily attri-
butes a privileged value to immediate know-
ledge ? But what reasons should we have for
doubting any knowledge,—-would the idea of doubt-
ing it ever occur to us,—but for the difficulties
and the contradictions which reflexion discovers,
but for the problems which philosophy poses ?
And would not immediate knowledge find in itself
its justification and proof, if we could show that
these difficulties, contradictions and problems
are mainly the result of the symbolic diagrams
which cover it up, diagrams which have for us
become reality itself, and beyond which only an
intense and unusual effort can succeed in pene-
trating ?

Let us choose at once, among the results to
which the application of this method may lead,
those which concern our present enquiry. We
must confine ourselves to mere suggestions ;
there can be no question here of constructing a
theory of matter.


246 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


I.—Every movement; inasmuch as tt is a passage
from rest to vest, is absolutely indivisible.


This is not an hypothesis, but a fact, generally
masked by an hypothesis.

Here, for example, is my hand, placed at the
point A. I carry it to the point B, passing at one
stroke through the interval between them. There
are two things in this movement: an image which
I see, and an act of which my muscular sense
makes my consciousness aware. My consciousness -
gives me the inward feeling of a single fact,
for in A was rest, in B there is again rest, and
between A and B is placed an indivisible or at
least an undivided act, the passage from rest to
Movement Jest, which. is movement; itceli bue
ibleen my sight perceives the movement in
pay dey of the form of a line AB which is traversed,
a moving, and this line, like all space, may be
divisible, = indefinitely divided. It seems then, at
first sight, that I may at will take this move-
ment to be multiple or indivisible, according as
I consider it in space or in time, as an image which
takes shape outside of me or as an act which I
am myself accomplishing.

Yet, when I put aside all preconceived ideas,
I soon perceive that I have no such choice, that
even my sight takes in the movement from A to B
as an indivisible whole, and that if it divides any-
thing, it is the line supposed to have been traversed,
and not the movement traversing it. It is indeed


cHar.1v JNDIVISIBILITY OF MOVEMENT 247


true that my hand does not go from A to B with-
out passing through the intermediate positions,
and that these intermediate points resemble
stages, aS numerous as you please, all along the
route; but there is, between the divisions so
marked out and stages properly so called, this
capital difference, that at a stage we halt, where-
as at these points the moving body asses. Now
a passage is a movement and a halt is an immo-
bility. The halt interrupts the movement ; the pas-
sage is one with the movement itself. When I see
the moving body pass any point, I conceive, no
doubt, that it might stop there ; and even when
it does not stop there, I incline to consider its
passage as an arrest, though infinitely short,
because I must have at least the time to think
of it; but it is only my imagination which stops
there, and what the moving body has to do is, on
the contrary, to move. As every point of space
necessarily appears to me fixed, I find it ex-
tremely difficult not to attribute to the moving
body itself the immobility of the point with
which, for a moment, I make it coincide; it
seems to me, then, when I reconstitute the total
movement, that the moving body has stayed an
infinitely short time at every point of its trajec-
tory. But we must not confound the data of the
senses, which perceive the movement, with the
artifice of the mind, which recomposes it. The
senses, left to themselves, present to us the real
movement, between two real halts, as a solid


248 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


and undivided whole. The division is the work
of our imagination, of which indeed the office is
to fix the moving images of our ordinary experi-
ence, like the instantaneous flash which illumin-
ates a stormy landscape by night.

We discover here, atits outset, the illusion which
accompanies and masks the perception of real
movement. Movement visibly consists in passing
from one point to another, and consequently in
traversing space. Now the space which is tra-
versed is infinitely divisible ; and as the move-
ment is, so to speak, applied to the line along
which it passes, it appears to be one with this
line and, like it, divisible. Has not the move-
ment itself drawn the line ? Has it not traversed
in turn the successive and juxtaposed points of
that line ? Yes, no doubt, but these points have
no reality except in a line drawn, that is to say
motionless; and by the very fact that you
represent the movement to yourself successively
in these different points, you necessarily arrest
it in each of them; your successive positions
are, at bottom, only so many imaginary halts.
You substitute the path for the journey, and
because the journey is subtended by the path
you think that the two coincide. But how
should a progress coincide with a thing, a move-.
ment with an immobility ?

What facilitates this illusion is that we dis-
tinguish moments in the course of duration, like
halts in the passage of the moving body. Even


CHAP. IV INDIVISIBILITY OF MOVEMENT 249


if we grant that the movement from one point to
another forms an undivided whole, this move-
ment nevertheless takes a certain time; so that
if we carve out of this duration an indivisible
instant, it seems that the moving body must oc-
cupy, at that precise moment, a certain position,
which thus stands out fromthe whole. The indi-
visibility of motion implies, then, the impossibil-
ity of real instants; and indeed, a very brief
analysis of the idea of duration will show us both
why we attribute instants to duration and why
it cannot have any. Suppose a simple movement
like that of my hand when it goes from A to B.
This passage is given to my consciousness as
an undivided whole. No doubt it endures ; but
this duration, which in fact coincides with the
aspect which the movement has inwardly
for my consciousness, is, like it, whole and
undivided. Now, while it presents itself, qua
movement, as a simple fact, it describes in space
a trajectory which I may consider, for purposes
of simplification, as a geometrical line; and the
extremities of this line, considered as abstract
limits, are no longer lines, but indivisible points.
Now, if the line, which the moving body has
described, measures for me the duration of its
movement, must not the point, where the line
ends, symbolize for me a terminus of this dura-
tion? And if this point is an indivisible of length,
how shall we avoid terminating the duration of
the movement by an indivisible of duration ? If


250 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


the total line represents the total duration, the parts
of the line must, it seems, correspond to parts
of the duration, and the points of the line to
moments of time. The indivisibles of duration,
or moments of time, are born, then, of the need
of symmetry; we come to them naturally as
soon as we demand from space an integral pre-
sentment of duration.—But herein, precisely, lies
the error. While the line AB symbolizes the
duration already lapsed of the movement from A
to B already accomplished, it cannot, motion-
less, represent the movement in its accomplish-
ment nor duration in its flow. And from
the fact that this line is divisible into parts
and that it ends in points, we cannot conclude
either that the corresponding duration is com-
posed of separate parts or that it is limited by
instants.

The arguments of Zeno of Elea have no other
origin than this illusion. They all consist in
Zeno. trans making time and movement coincide


fers to the


eccrine ay with the line which underlies them, in


ties ot its «attributing to them the same _ sub-
trajectory :


hence all the divisions as to the line, in short in
difficulties an :
contradictions treating them like that line. In this
confusion Zeno was encouraged by common
sense, which usually carries over to the movement
the properties of its trajectory, and also by
language, which always translates movement
and duration in terms of space. But common


sense and language have a right to do so


CHAP. IV INDIVISIBILITY OF MOVEMENT 251


and are even bound to do so, for, since they
always regard the becoming as a thing to be
made use of, they have no more concern with
the interior organization of movement than
a workman has with the molecular structure of
his tools. In holding movement to be divisible,
as its trajectory is, common sense merely expresses
the two facts which alone are of importance in
practical life: first, that every movement de-
scribes a space; second, that at every point of
this space the moving body might stop. But the
philosopher who reasons upon the inner nature
of movement is bound to restore to it the mobility
which is its essence, and this is what Zeno omits
to do. By the first argument (the Dichotomy)
he supposes the moving body to be at rest, and
then considers nothing but the stages, infinite in
number, that are along the line to be traversed :
we cannot imagine, he says, how the body could
ever get through the interval between them.
But in this way he merely proves that it is
impossible to construct, @ priovt, movement with
immobilities, a thing no man ever doubted.
The sole question is whether, movement being
posited as a fact, there is a sort of retrospective
absurdity in assuming that an infinite number
of points has been passed through. But at
this we need not wonder, since movement is an
undivided fact, or a series of undivided facts,
whereas the trajectory is infinitely divisible. In
the second argument (the Achilles) movement is


t,


=


252 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


indeed given, it is even attributed to two moving
bodies, but, always by the same error, there is
an assumption that their movement coincides
with their path, and that we may divide
it, like the path itself, in any way we please.
Then, instead of recognizing that the tortoise
has the pace of a tortoise and Achilles the pace
of Achilles, so that after a certain number of these
indivisible acts or bounds Achilles will have
outrun the tortoise, the contention is that we
may disarticulate as we will the movement of
Achilles and, as we will also, the movement of the
tortoise: thus reconstructing both in an arbi-
trary ,way, according to a law of our own which
may be incompatible with the real conditions
of mobility. The same fallacy appears, yet
more evident, in the third argument (the Arrow)
which consists in the conclusion that, because
it is possible to distinguish points on the path
of a moving body, we have the right to distinguish
indivisible moments in the duration of its move-
ment. But the most instructive of Zeno’s argu-
ments is perhaps the fourth (the Stadium) which
has, we believe, been unjustly disdained, and of
which the absurdity is more manifest only because
the postulate masked in the three others is here
frankly displayed.1. Without entering on a dis-


1 We may here briefly recall this argument. Let there
be a moving body which is displaced with a certain velocity,
and which passes simultaneously before two bodies, one at
rest and the other moving towards it with the same velocity


CHAP. IV INDIVISIBILITY OF MOVEMENT 253


cussion which would here be out of place, we will
content ourselves with observing that motion, as
given to spontaneous perception, is a fact which is
quite clear, and that the difficulties and contra-
dictions pointed out by the Eleatic school concern
far less the living movement itself than a dead
and artificial reorganization of movement by the
mind. But we now come to the conclusion of all
the preceding paragraphs :


as its own. During the same time that it passes a certain
length of the first body, it naturally passes double that length
of the other. Whence Zeno concludes that ‘a duration is
the double of itself.’ A childish argument, it is said, because
Zeno takes no account of the fact that the velocity is in the
one case double that which it is in the other.—Certainly, but
how, I ask, could he be aware of this? That, in the same
time, a moving body passes different lengths of two bodies,
of which one is at rest and the other in motion, is clear for
him who makes of duration a kind of absolute, and places
it either in consciousness or in something which partakes
of consciousness. For while a determined portion of this
absolute or conscious duration elapses, the same moving
body will traverse, as it passes the two bodies, two spaces of
which the one is the double of the other, without our being
able to conclude from this that a duration is double itself,
since duration remains independent of both spaces. But
Zeno’s error, in all his reasoning, is due to just this fact,
that he leaves real duration on one side, and considers only
its objective track in space. How then should the two
lines traced by the same moving body not merit an equal
consideration, gua measures of duration? And how should
they not represent the same duration, even though the one
is twice the other? In concluding from this that ‘a duration
is the double of itself,’ Zeno was true to the logic of his hypo-
thesis; and his fourth argument is worth exactly as much
as the three others.


254 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


IT. There are real movements.
The mathematician, expressing with greater pre-
cision an idea of common sense, defines position
by the distance from points of reference


Movement

is relative Or from axes, and movement by the
only for the eats A

mathema-. Variation of the distance. Of move-
tician, real ; 5
for the ment, then, he only retains changes in
physicist.


"length ; and as the absolute values of
the variable distance between a point and an
axis, for instance, express either the displacement
of the axis with regard to the point or that
of the point with regard to the axis, just as we
please, he attributes indifferently to the same point
repose or motion. If, then, movement is no-
thing but a change of distance, the same object
is in motion or motionless according to the
points to which it is referred, and there is no
absolute movement.

But things wear a very different aspect when
we pass from mathematics to physics, and from
the abstract study of motion to a consideration
of the concrete changes occurring in the universe.
Though we are free to attribute rest or motion
to any material point taken by itself, it is none
the less true that the aspect of the material
universe changes, that the internal configuration
of every real system varies, and that here we have
no longer the choice between mobility and rest.
Movement, whatever its inner nature, becomes
an indisputable reality. We may not be able
to say what parts of the whole are in motion;


CHAP. IV REAL MOVEMENT 255


motion there is in the whole, none the less.
Therefore it is not surprising that the same
thinkers, who maintain that every particular
movement is relative, speak of the totality of
movements as of an absolute. The contradiction
has been pointed out in Descartes, who, after hav-
ing given to the thesis of relativity its most radical
form by affirming that all movement is ‘ recip-
rocal,’ 1 formulated the laws of motion as though
motion were an absolute.2 Leibniz and others
after him have remarked this contradiction 3:
it is due simply to the fact that Descartes handles
motion as a physicist after having defined it as a
geometer. For the geometer all movement is
relative: which signifies only, in our view, that
none of our mathematical symbols can express the
fact that it is the moving body which is in motion
vather than the axes or the points to which wt ts
veferred. And this is very natural, because
these symbols, always meant for measurement,
can express only distances. But that there
is real motion no one can seriously deny: if
there were not, nothing in the universe would
change ; and, above all, there would be no meaning
in the consciousness which we have of our own
movements. In his controversy with Descartes
Henry More makes jesting allusion to this last


1 Descartes, Principes, ii, 29.

2 Principes, part ii, § 37 et seq.

3 Leibniz, Specimen dynamicum (Mathem. Schriften,
Gerhardt, 2nd section, vol. ii, p. 246).


256 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


point: ‘When I am quietly seated, and another,
going a thousand paces away, is flushed with
fatigue, it is certainly he who moves and I who
am-aterest.’ +

But if there is absolute motion, is it possible
to persist in regarding movement as nothing
but a change of place? We should then

have to make diversity of place into

any real move- an. absolute difference, and distinguish
cannot be absolute positions in an absolute space.
cme op Newton? went as far as this, followed
position. moreover by Euler® and by others,
But can this be imagined, or even conceived ?
A place could be absolutely distinguished from
another place only by its quality or by its rela-
tion to the totality of space: so that space
would become, on this hypothesis, either com-
posed of heterogeneous parts or finite. But to
finite space we should give another space as
boundary, and beneath heterogeneous parts of
space we should imagine an homogeneous space
as its foundation: in both cases it is to homogen-
eous and indefinite space that we should neces-
sarily return. We cannot, then, hinder ourselves
either from holding every place to be relative,
or from believing some motion to be absolute.

It may be urged that real movement is dis-
tinguished from relative movement in that it

1H. Morus, Scripta Philosophica, 1679, vol. ii, p. 248.


* Newton, Principia, Ed. Thomson, 1871, p. 6 et seq.
* Euler, Theoria motus corporum solidorum, 1765, pp. 30-33.


CHAP. IV REAL MOVEMENT 257


has a real cause, that it emanates from a force.
But we must understand what we mean by this
last word. In natural science force is only a
function of mass and velocity: it is measured
by acceleration: it is known and estimated only
by the movements which it is supposed to
produce in space. One with these movements,
it shares their relativity. Hence the physicists,
who seek the principle of absolute motion in force
so defined, are led by the logic of their system
back to the hypothesis of an absolute space which
they had at first desired to avoid.* So it will be-
come necessary to take refuge in the metaphy-
sical sense of the word, and attribute the motion
which we perceive in space to profound causes,
analogous to those which our consciousness be-
lieves it discovers within the feeling of effort.
But is the feeling of effort really the sense of
a profound cause ? Have not decisive analyses
shown that there is nothing in this feeling other
than the consciousness of movements already
effected or begun at the periphery of the body ?
It is in vain, then, that we seek to found the
reality of motion on a cause which is distinct
from it: analysis always brings us back to
motion itself.

But why seek elsewhere ? So long as we apply
a movement to the line along which it passes,
the same point will appear to us, by turns, accord-
ing to the points or the axes to which we


1 Newton, in particular.
s


258 MATTER AND MEMORY _ CHAP. IV


refer it, either at rest or in movement. But it
is otherwise if we draw out of the movement the
_ mobility which is its essence. When my eyes give
me the sensation of a movement, this sensation is
a reality, and something is effectually going on,
whether it be that an object is changing its place
before my eyes or that my eyes are moving
before the object. A fortiovi am I assured of
‘the reality of the movement when I produce
it after having willed to produce it, and my
muscular sense brings. me the consciousness .
of it. That is to say, I grasp the reality of
movement when it appears to me, within me, as a
change of state or of quality. But then how should
it be otherwise when I perceive changes of quality
in things ? Sound differs absolutely from silence,
as also one sound from another sound. Between
light and darkness, between colours, between
shades, the difference ,is absolute. The passage
from one to another is also an absolutely real
phenomenon. I hold then the two ends of the
chain, muscular sensations within me, the sensible
qualities of matter without me, and neither in
the one case nor in the other do I see movement,
if there be movement, as a mere relation : it is an
absolute. Now, between these two extremities lie
the movements of external bodies, properly so
called. Howare we to distinguish here between real
and apparent movement? Of what object, exter-
nally perceived, can it be said that it moves, of
what other that it remains motionless ? To put


CHAP. IV PERCEPTION AND MATTER 259


such a question is to admit that the discontinuity
established by common sense between objects
independent of each other, having each its indi-
viduality, comparable to kinds of persons, is a valid
distinction. For, on the contrary hypothesis,
the question would no longer be how are pro-
duced in given parts of matter changes of posi-
.tion, but how is effected in the whole a change
of aspect,—a change of which we should then have
to ascertain the nature. Let us then formulate
at once our third proposition :—

III. All division of matter into independent
bodies with absolutely determined outlines is an
artificial division.

A body, that is, an independent material object,
presents itself at first to us as a system of qualities
The division of 12 Which resistance and colour—the data
matter into’ of sight and touch—occupy the centre,
igno datum = 4]] the rest being, as it were, suspended


of immediate


intuition, po from them. On the other hand, the


of science, if data of sight and touch are those which


scienoe in its most obviously have extension in space,
pirations. and the essential character of space is
continuity. There are intervals of silence between
sounds, for the sense of hearing is not always oc-
cupied ; between odours, between tastes, there are
gaps, as though the senses of smell and taste only
functioned accidentally: as soon as we open
our eyes, on the contrary, the whole field of vision
takes on colour ; and, since solids are necessarily
in contact with each other, our touch must follow


260 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


the surface or the edges of objects without ever
encountering a true interruption. How do we
parcel out the continuity of material extensity,
given in primary perception, into bodies of which
each is supposed to have its substance and in-
dividuality ? No doubt the aspect of this con-
tinuity changes from moment to moment; but
why do we not purely and simply realize that
the whole has changed, as with the turning of
akaleidoscope ? Why, in short, do we seek, in the
mobility of the whole, tracks that are supposed to
be followed by bodies supposed to be in motion?
A moving continuity is given to us, in which every-
thing changes and yet remains: whence comes
it that we dissociate the two terms, permanence and
change, and then represent permanence by bodies
and change by homogeneous movements in space ?
This is no teaching of immediate intuition ; but
neither is it a demand of science, for the object
of science is, on the contrary, to rediscover the
natural articulations of a universe we have carved
artificially. Nay more, science, as we shall see,
by an evermore complete demonstration of the
reciprocal action of all material points upon each
other, returns, in spite of appearances, to the idea
of anuniversal continuity. Science and conscious-
ness are agreed at bottom, provided that we re-
gard consciousness in its most immediate data,
and science in its remotest aspirations. Whence
comes then the irresistible tendency to set up a
material universe that is discontinuous, composed


CHAP. Iv PERCEPTION AND MATTER 261


of bodies which have clearly defined outlines and
change their place, that is, their relation with
each other ?

Besides consciousness and science, there is life.
Beneath the principles of speculation, so carefully
It is the analysed by philosophers, there are ten-
ofliving,  dencies of which the study has been neg-
that mark” lected, and which are to be explained
consciousness simply by the necessity of living, that
bodies. is, of acting. Already the power con-
ferred on the individual consciousness of mani-
festing itself in acts requires the formation
of distinct material zones, which correspond re-
spectively to living bodies: in this sense my own
body and, by analogy with it, all other living
bodies are those which I have the most right
to distinguish in the continuity of the universe.
But this body itself, as soon as it is constituted
and distinguished, is led by its various needs
to distinguish and constitute other bodies. In
the humblest living being nutrition demands
research, then contact, in short a series of efforts
which converge towards a centre: this centre is
just what is made into an object—the object
which will serve as food. Whatever be the
nature of matter, it may be said that life will
at once establish in it a primary discontinuity,
expressing the duality of the need and of that
which must serve to satisfy it. But the need
of food is not the only need. Others group
themselves round it, all having for object the


262 - MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


conservation of the individual or of the spe-
cies; and each of them leads us to distin-
guish, besides our own body, bodies inde-
pendent of it which we must seek or avoid. Our
needs are, then, so many search-lights which,
directed upon the continuity of sensible qualities,
single out in it distinct bodies. They cannot
satisfy themselves except upon the condition that
they carve out, within this continuity, a body
which is to be their own, and then delimit
other bodies with which the first can enter into
relation, as if with persons. To establish these
special relations among portions thus carved out
from sensible reality is just what we call living.
But if this first subdivision of the real answers
much less to immediate intuition than to the
But, to get a LUNdamental needs of life, are we likely
philosophical to pain a nearer knowledge of things by


theory


center ject PUShing the division yet further ? In this


customar . :
fuaces’ way we do indeed prolong the vital move-


ratucal. ment; but we turn our back upon true
needs. knowledge. That is why the rough and


ready operation, which consists in decomposing
the body into parts of the same nature as itself,
leads us down a blind alley, where we soon feel
ourselves incapable’ of conceiving either why
this division should cease or how it could go
on ad infinitum. It is nothing, in fact, but the
ordinary condition of useful action, unsuitably
transported into the domain of pure know-
ledge. We shall never explain by means of


CHAP. IV PERCEPTION AND MATTER 263


particles, whatever these may be, the simple pro-
perties of matter: at most we can thus follow
out into corpuscles as artificial as the corpus—
the body itself—the actions and reactions of this
body with regard to all the others. This is pre-
cisely the object of chemistry. It studies bodies
rather than matter ; and so we understand why
it stops at the atom, which is still endowed with
the general properties of matter. But the ma-
teriality of the atom dissolves more and more
under the eyes of the physicist. We have no
reason, for instance, for representing the atom
to ourselves as a solid, rather than as liquid or
gaseous, nor for picturing the reciprocal action of
atoms by shocks rather than in any other way.
Why do we think of a solid atom, and why of
shocks ? Because solids, being the bodies on
which we clearly have the most hold, are those
which interest us most in our relations with the
external world ; and because contact is the only
means which appears to be at our disposal in
order to make our body act upon other bodies.
But very simple experiments show that there is
never true contact between two neighbouring
bodies 1; and besides, solidity is far from being
an absolutely defined state of matter.? Solidity
and shock borrow, then, their apparent clearness

1 See, on this subject, Clerk-Maxwell, Action at a Distance
(Scientific Papers, Cambridge, 1890, vol. ii, pp. 313-314).

2 Clerk-Maxwell, Molecular Constitution of Bodies (Scientific


Papers, vol. ii, p. 618).—Van der Waals has shown, on the
other hand, the continuity of liquid and gaseous states.


264 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


from the habits and necessities of practical life ;—
images of this kind throw no light on the inner
nature of things.

Moreover, if there is a truth that science has
placed beyond dispute, it is that of the reciprocal
action of all parts of matter upon each other.
Between the supposed molecules of bodies the
forces of attraction and repulsion are at work.
The influence of gravitation extends throughout
interplanetary space. Something, then, exists be-
tween the atoms. It will be said that this some-
thing is no longer matter, but force. And we
shall be asked to, picture to ourselves, stretched
between the atoms, threads which will be made
more and more tenuous, until they are invisi-
ble and even, we are told, immaterial. But
what purpose can this crude image serve?
The preservation of life no doubt requires that
we should distinguish, in our daily experience,
between passive things and actions effected by
these things in space. As it is useful to us to fix
the seat of the ¢hing at the precise point where we
might touch it, its palpable outlines become for
us its real limit, and we then see in its actiona
something, I know not what, which, being altogether
different, can part company with it. But since a
theory of matter is an attempt to find the reality
hidden beneath these customary images which are
entirely relative to our needs, from these images
it must first of all set itself free. And, indeed, we
see force and matter drawing nearer together the


CHAP. IV PERCEPTION AND MATTER 265


more deeply the physicist has penetrated into their
effects. We see force more and more materialized,
the atom more and more idealized, the two terms
converging towards a common limit and the uni-
verse thus recovering its continuity. We may still
speak of atoms; the atom may even retain its
individuality for our mind which isolates it ; but
the solidity and the inertia of the atom dissolve
either into movements or into lines of force whose
reciprocal solidarity brings back to us universal
continuity. To this conclusion were bound to
come, though they started from very different
positions, the two physicists of the last century
who have most closely investigated the consti-
tution of matter, Lord Kelvin and Faraday.
For Faraday the atom is a centre of force. He
means by this that the individuality of the atom
consists in the mathematical point at which cross,
radiating throughout space, the indefinite lines
of force which really constitute it: thus each
atom occupies the whole space to which gravita-
tion extends and all atoms are interpenetrating.’
Lord Kelvin, moving in another order of ideas,
supposes a perfect, continuous, homogeneous and
incompressible fluid, filling space: what we term
an atom he makes into a vortex ring, ever whirl-
ing in this continuity, and owing its properties to
its circular form, its existence and consequently


1 Faraday, A Speculation concerning Electryic Conduction
(Philos. Magazine, 3rd series, vol. xxiv).


266 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, IV


its individuality to its motion.1. But on either
hypothesis, the nearer we draw to the ultimate
elements of matter the better we note the van-
ishing of that discontinuity which our senses per-
ceived on the surface. Psychological analysis has
already revealed to us that this discontinuity
is relative to our needs: every philosophy of
nature ends by finding it incompatible with the
general properties of matter.

In truth, vortices and lines of force are never,
to the mind of the physicist, more than convenient
figures for illustrating his calculations. But philo-
sophy is bound to ask why these symbols are more
convenient than others, and why they permit of
further advance. Could we, working with them,
get back to experience, if the notions to which
they correspond did not at least point out the
direction in which we may seek for a representa-
tion of the real? Now the direction which they
indicate is obvious; they show us, pervading
concrete extensity, modifications, perturbations,
changes of tension or of energy, and nothing else.
It is by this, above all, that they tend to unite
with the purely psychological analysis of motion
which we considered to begin with, an analysis
which presented it to us not as a mere change of
relation between objects to which it was, as it


1 Thomson, On Vortex Atoms (Proc. of the Roy. Soc. of
Edin., 1867). An hypothesis of the same nature had been
put forward by Graham, On the Molecular Mobility of Gases
(Proc. of the Roy. Soc., 1863, p. 621 et seq.).


CHAP, IV DURATION AND TENSION £207


were, an accidental addition, but as a true and,
in some sort, an independent, reality. Neither
science nor consciousness, then, is opposed to
this last proposition :—


IV. Real movement is rather the transference of
a state than of a thing.


By formulating these four propositions, we
have, in reality, only been progressively narrowing


the interval between the two terms
oO we shall


gee real which it is usual to oppose to each
movement as me :
rather other,—qualities or sensations, and


quantity, | movements. At first sight, the distance
akinto | appears impassable. Qualities are
consciousness.

: heterogeneous, movements homogene-
ous. Sensations, essentially indivisible, escape
measurement ; movements, always divisible, are
distinguished by calculable differences of direction
and velocity. We are fain to put qualities, in the
form of sensations, in consciousness ; while move-
ments are supposed to take place independently
of us in space. These movements, compounded
together, we confess, will never yield anything
but movements ; our consciousness, though in-
capable of coming into touch with them, yet by a
mysterious process is said to translate them into
sensations, which afterwards project themselves
into space and come to overlie, we know not how,
the movements they translate. Hence two differ-
ent worlds, incapable of communicating otherwise
than by a miracle,—on the one hand that of motion


268 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV’


in space, on the other that of consciousness with
sensations. Now, certainly the difference is irre-
ducible (as we have shown in an earlier work *)
between quality on the one hand and pure quan-
tity on the other. But this is just the question:
do real movements present merely differences of
quantity, or are they not quality itself, vibra-
ting, so to speak, internally, and beating time
for its own existence through an often incal-
culable number of moments ? Motion, as studied
in mechanics, is but an abstraction or a sym-
bol, a common measure, a common denomina-
tor, permitting the comparison of all real move-
ments with each other; but these movements,
regarded in themselves, are indivisibles which
occupy duration, involve a before and an after,
and link together the successive moments of time
by a thread of variable quality which cannot be
without some likeness to the continuity of our
own consciousness. May we not conceive, for
instance, that the irreducibility of two perceived
colours is due mainly to the narrow duration into
which are contracted the billions of vibrations
which they execute in one of our moments? If
we could stretch out this duration, that is to say,
live it at a slower rhythm, should we not, as the
rhythm slowed down, see these colours pale and
lengthen into successive impressions, still coloured,
no doubt, but nearer and nearer to coincidence


1 H. Bergson, Time and Free Will. Sonnenschein & Co.


CHAP. IV DURATION AND TENSION 269


_with pure vibrations? In cases where the rhythm
of the movement is slow enough to tally with
the habits of our consciousness,—as in the case of
the deep notes of the musical scale, for instance,—
do we not feel that the quality perceived analyses
itself into repeated and successive vibrations,
bound together by an inner continuity ? That
which usually hinders this mutual approach of
motion and quality is the acquired habit of attach-
ing movement to elements—atoms or what not,—
which interpose their solidity between the move-
ment itself and the quality into which it contracts.
As our daily experience shows us bodies in motion,
it appears to us that there ought to be, in order
to sustain the elementary movements to which
qualities may be reduced, diminutive bodies or
corpuscles. Motion becomes then for our imagin-
ation no more than an accident, a series of posi-
tions, a change of relations; and, as it is a law
of our representation that in it the stable drives
away the unstable, the important and central
element for us becomes the atom, between the
successive positions of which movement then be-
comes a mere link. But not only has this concep-
tion the inconvenience of merely carrying over to
the atom all the problems raised by matter ; not only
does it wrongly set up as an absolute that division
of matter which, in our view, is hardly anything
but an outward projection of human needs ; it
also renders unintelligible the process by which we
grasp, in perception, at one and the same time, a


SS


270 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


state of our consciousness and a reality independent
of ourselves. This mixed character of our imme-
diate perception, this appearance of a realized
contradiction, is the principal theoretical reason
that we have for believing in an external world
which does not coincide absolutely with our per-
ception. As it is overlooked in the doctrine that
regards sensation as entirely heterogeneous with
movements, of which sensation is then supposed
to be only a translation into the language of
consciousness, this doctrine ought, it would seem,
to confine itself to sensations, which it had indeed
begun by setting up as the actual data, and
not add to them movements which, having no
possible contact with them, are no longer any-
thing but their useless duplicate. Realism, so
understood, is self-destructive. Indeed, we have
no choice: if our belief in a more or less homo-
geneous substratum of sensible qualities has any
ground, this can only be found in an act which
makes us seize or divine, im quality itself, some-
thing which goes beyond sensation, as if this sensa-
tion itself were pregnant with details suspected yet
unperceived. Its objectivity—that is to say, what
it contains over and above what it yields up—
must then consist, as we have foreshadowed, pre-
cisely in the immense multiplicity of the move-
ments which it executes, so to speak, within itself
as a chrysalis. Motionless on the surface, in its
very depth it lives and vibrates.

As a matter of fact, no one represents to himself


CHAP. IV DURATION AND TENSION 271


the relation between quantity and quality in any
Whilst in Other way. To believe in realities, dis-
quailty imei, tinct from that which is perceived, is
fomeinisg “above all to recognize that the order
ionsation, |. of our perceptions depends on them
tiplicity of and not on us. There must be, then,
ents con. Within the perceptions which fill a
mythm of given moment, the reason of what will
duration, happen in the following moment. And
mechanism only formulates this belief with more
precision when it affirms that the states of matter
can be deduced one from the other. It is true
that this deduction is possible only if we discover,
beneath the apparent heterogeneity of sensible
qualities, homogeneous elements which lend them-
selves to calculation. But, on the other hand, if
these elements are external to the qualities of
which they are meant to explain the regular
order, they can no longer render the service de-
manded of them, because then the qualities must
be supposed to come to overlie them bya kind of
miracle, and cannot correspond to them unless we
bring in some pre-established harmony. So, do
what we will, we cannot avoid placing those
movements within these qualities, in the form of
internal vibrations, and then considering the vibra-
tions as less homogeneous, and the qualities as
less heterogeneous, than they appear, and lastly
attributing the difference of aspect in the two
terms to the necessity which lies upon what may
be called an endless multiplicity of contracting


272 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


into a duration too narrow to permit of the
separation of its moments.

We must insist on this last point, to which we
have already alluded elsewhere, and which we
There may regard as essential. The duration lived
be as many by our consciousness is a duration with


tensions of


Guration as its own ‘determined rhythm, a duration


degrees of = very different from the time of the phy-
meee sicist, which can store up, in a given in-
terval, as great a number of phenomena as we
please. In the space of a second, red light,—
the light which has the longest wave-length,
and of which, consequently, the vibrations are
the least frequent—accomplishes 400 billions of
successive vibrations. If we would form some
idea of this number, we should have to separ-
ate the vibrations sufficiently to allow our con-
sciousness to count them, or at least to record
explicitly their succession; and we should then
have to enquire how many days or months or
years this succession would occupy. Now the
smallest interval of empty time which we can
detect equals, according to Exner, 545 of asecond ;
and it is even doubtful whether we can per-
ceive in succession several intervals as short as
this. Let us admit, however, that we can go on
doing so indefinitely. Let us imagine, in a word,
a consciousness which should watch the succession
of 400 billions of vibrations, each instantaneous,
and each separated from the next only by the
500 Of a second necessary to distinguish them.


CHAP, IV DURATION AND TENSION 273


A very simple calculation shows that more than
25,000 years would elapse before the conclusion
of the operation. Thus the sensation of red light,
experienced by us in the course of a second, cor-
responds in itself to a succession of phenomena
which, separately distinguished in our duration
with the greatest possible economy of time, would
occupy more than 250 centuries of our history.
Is this conceivable ? We must distinguish here
between our own duration and time in general.
In our duration,—the duration which our con-
sciousness perceives,—a given interval can only
contain a limited number of phenomena of which
we are aware. Do we conceive that this content
can increase; and when we speak of an infi-
nitely divisible time, is it our own duration that
we are thinking of ?

As long as we are dealing with space, we may
carry the division as far as we please ; we change
in no way, thereby, the nature of what is divided.
This is because space, by definition, is outside us ;
it is because a part of space appears to us to sub-
sist even when we cease to be concerned with it;
so that, even when we leave it undivided, we know
that it can wait, and that a new effort of our
imagination may decompose it when we choose.
As, moreover, it never ceases to be space, it always
implies juxtaposition and consequently possible
division. Abstract space is, indeed, at bottom, no-
thing but the mental diagram of infinite divisibility.
But with duration it is quite otherwise. The parts of

T


274 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


our duration are one with the successive moments of
the act which divides it ; if we distinguish in it so
many instants, so many parts it indeed possesses ;
and if our consciousness can only distinguish in a
given interval a definite number of elementary
acts, if it terminates the division at a given
_ point, there also terminates the divisibility. In
vain does our imagination endeavour to go on, to
carry division further still, and to quicken, so to
speak, the circulation of our inner phenomena :
the very effort by which we are trying to effect
this further division of our duration lengthens
that duration by just so much. And yet we
know that millions of phenomena succeed each
other while we hardly succeed in counting a few.
We know this not from physics alone ; the crude
experience of the senses allows us to divine it;
we are dimly aware of successions in nature
much more rapid than those of our internal states.
How are we to conceive them, and what is this
duration of which the capacity goes beyond all
our imagination ?

It is not ours, assuredly ; but neither is it that
homogeneous and impersonal duration, the same
for everything and for every one, which flows
onward, indifferent and void, external to all that
endures. This imaginary homogeneous time is,
as we have endeavoured to show elsewhere,! an
idol of language, a fiction of which the origin is


1H. Bergson, Time and Free Will. Sonnenschein & Co.


CHAP. IV _ DURATION AND TENSION 275


easy to discover. In reality there is no one
rhythm of duration; it is possible to imagine
many different rhythms which, slower or faster,
measure the degree of tension or relaxation of
different kinds of consciousness, and thereby fix
their respective places in the scale of being. To
conceive of durations of different tensions is per-
haps both difficult and strange to our mind, be-
cause we have acquired the useful habit of sub-
stituting for the true duration, lived by conscious-
ness, an homogeneous and independent Time ;
but, in the first place, it is easy, as we have shown,
to detect the ilusion which renders such a
thought foreign to us, and, secondly, this idea
has in its favour, at bottom, the tacit agreement
of our consciousness. Do we not sometimes per-
ceive in ourselves, in sleep, two contemporaneous
and distinct persons of whom one sleeps a few
minutes, while the other’s dream fills days and
weeks ? And would not the whole of history be
contained in a very short time for a conscious-
ness at a higher degree of tension than our own,
which should watch the development of human-
ity while contracting it, so to speak, into the
great phases of its evolution? In short, then,
to perceive consists in condensing enormous


periods of an infinitely diluted existence into a”


few more differentiated moments of an intenser
life, and in thus summing up a very long history.
To perceive means to immobilize.

To say this is to say that we seize, in the


276 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


act of perception, something which outruns per-
on ception itself, although the material
conscious” » universe is not essentially different or


for us cas : :
whole periods Gistinct from the representation which


of tne Inver we. have Ol its 9 Liwone)Selise sinyaper-
oe ception is indeed truly within me, since
it contracts into a single moment of my duration
that which, taken in itself, spreads over an
incalculable number of moments. But, if you
abolish my consciousness, the material universe
subsists exactly as it was; only, since you have
removed that particular rhythm of duration
which was the condition of my action upon things,
these things draw back into themselves, mark
aS many moments in their own existence as science
distinguishes in it; and sensible qualities, with-
out vanishing, are spread and diluted in an in-
comparably more divided duration. Matter thus
resolves itself into mnumberless vibrations, all
linked together in uninterrupted continuity, all
bound up with each other, and travelling in every
sO like shivers through an immense body.—
(In short, try first to connect together the dis-
continuous objects of daily experience; then
resolve the motionless continuity of their qualities
into vibrations on the spot ; finally fix your at-
tention on these movements, by abstracting from
the divisible space which underlies them and
considering only their mobility (that undivided
act which our consciousness becomes aware of
in our own movements): you will thus obtain a


CHAP. IV DURATION AND TENSION 277


vision of matter, fatiguing perhaps for your ima-
gination, but pure, and freed from all that the


exigencies of life compel you to add to it in |


external perception.—Now bring back conscious-
ness, and with it the exigencies of life: at long,
very long, intervals, and by as many leaps over
enormous periods of the inner history of things,
quasi-instantaneous views will be taken, views
which this time are bound to be pictorial, and
of which the more vivid colours will condense an
infinity of elementary repetitions and changes.
In just the same way the multitudinous successive
positions of a runner are contracted into a single
symbolic attitude, which our eyes perceive, which
art reproduces, and which becomes for us all the
image of a man running. The glance which falls
at any moment on the things about us only takes
in the effects of a multiplicity of inner repetitions
and evolutions, effects which are, for that very
reason, discontinuous, and into which we bring
back continuity by the relative movements that
we attribute to ‘objects’ in space. The change
is everywhere, but inward; we localize it here
and there, but outwardly ; and thus we consti-
tute bodies which are both stable as to their
qualities and mobile as to their positions, a mere
change of place summing up in itself, to our
eyes, the universal transformation.

That there are, in a sense, multiple objects, that
one man is distinct from another man, tree
from tree, stone from stone, is an indisputable


278 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. Iv.


fact; for each of these beings, each of these
Necessity things, has characteristic properties and
wouldrm® obeys a determined law of evolution.


adopted : -
adopted a of DUt the separation between a thing and


the duration 4; 2 ri
Sertomaben.< 1s + environment scanner be absolutely


By condensing ; i :
By condensmé definite and clearcut, there 1s a ;passage


into outa by insensible gradations from the one to
necessity, the other : the close solidarity which binds
all the objects of the material universe,the perpetu-
ity of their reciprocal actions and reactions, is suff-
cient to prove that they have not the precise ~
limits which we attribute to them. Our per-
_ception outlines, so to speak, the form of their
nucleus ; it terminates them at the point where
our possible action upon them ceases, where,
consequently, they cease to interest our needs.
Such is the primary and the most apparent opera-
tion of the perceiving mind: it marks out divi-
sions in the continuity of the extended, simply
following the suggestions of our requirement and
the needs of practical life. But, in order to divide
the real in this manner, we must first persuade
ourselves that the real is divisible at will. Conse-
quently we must throw beneath the continuity
of sensible qualities, that is to say, beneath con-
crete extensity, a network, of which the meshes
_may be altered to any shape whatsoever and
become as small as we please: this substra-
tum which is merely conceived, this wholly
ideal diagram of arbitrary and infinite divisi-
bility, is homogeneous space.—Now, at the same


=


CHAP. IV EXTENSITY AND EXTENSION 279


time that our actual and so to speak instan-
taneous perception effects this division of matter
into independent objects, our memory solidifies
into sensible qualities the continuous flow of
things. It prolongs the past into the present,
because our action will dispose of the future in
the exact proportion in which our perception,
enlarged by memory, has contracted the past.
To reply, to an action received, by an immediate
reaction which adopts the rhythm of the first
and continues it in the same duration, to be in
the present and in a present which is always
beginning again,—this is the fundamental law of
matter: herein consists necessity. If there are
actions that are really free, or at least partly in-
determinate, they can only belong to beings able
to fix, at long intervals, that becoming to which
their own becoming clings, able to solidify it into
distinct moments, and so to condense matter and,
by assimilating it, to digest it into movements
of reaction which will pass through the meshes
of natural necessity. The greater or less ten-
sion of their duration, which expresses, at bottom,
their greater or less intensity of life, thus deter-
mines both the degree of the concentrating power
of their perception and the measure of their liberty.
The independence of their action upon surround-
ing matter becomes more and more assured in the
degree that they free themselves from the par-
ticular rhythm which governs the flow of this
matter. So that sensible qualities, as they are


i’


280 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


found in our memory-shot perception, are in
fact the successive moments obtained by a solidi-
fication of the real. But, in order to distinguish
these moments, and also to bind them together
by a thread which shall be common alike to our
own existence and to that of things, we are bound
to imagine a diagrammatic design of succes-
sion in general, an homogeneous and indifferent
medium, which is to the flow of matter in the
sense of length as space is to it in the sense of
breadth: herein consists homogeneous time.
Homogeneous space and homogeneous time
are then neither properties of things nor essential
Homogeneous CONditions of our faculty of knowing
spate and them): | they. express,a.10= anesabstiace


time are the


mental dia- esis -
prance Gar form, the double work of solidification


eventual action sue i :
ibe ibe and of division which we effect on


ey ing =the «moving continuity of the real-in
of things.” order to obtain there a fulcrum for our
action, in order to fix within it starting-points
for our operation, in short, to introduce into
it real changes. They are the diagrammatic
design of our eventual action upon matter.
The first mistake, that which consists in viewing
this homogeneous time and space as properties of
things, leads to the insurmountable difficulties
of metaphysical dogmatism,—whether mechan-
istic or dynamistic,—dynamism erecting into
so many absolutes the successive cross-cuts
which we make in the course of the universe
as it flows along, and then endeavouring vainly


CHAP; IV EXTENSITY AND EXTENSION 281


to bind them together by a kind of qualitative
deduction ; mechanism attaching itself rather, in
any one of these cross-cuts, to the divisions made
in its breadth, that is to say, to instantaneous
differences in magnitude and position, and striv-
ing no less vainly to produce, by the variation of
these differences, the succession of sensible qualities.
Shall we then seek refuge in the other hypothesis,
and maintain, with Kant, that space and time are
forms of our sensibility? If we do, weshall have
to look upon matter and spirit as equally unknow-
able. Now, if we compare these two hypotheses,
we discover in them a common basis: by setting
up homogeneous time and homogeneous space
either as realities that are contemplated or as forms
of contemplation, they both attribute to space
and time an interest which is speculative rather
than vital. Hence there is room, between meta-
physical dogmatism on the one hand and critical
philosophy on the other, for a doctrine which
regards homogeneous space and time as princi-
ples of division and of solidification introduced
into the real with a view to action and not with a
view to knowledge, which attributes to things a
real duration and a real extensity, and which,
in the end, sees the source of all difficulty no
longer in that duration and in that extensity
(which really belong to things and are directly
manifest to the mind), but in the homogeneous
space and time which we stretch out beneath
them in order to divide the continuous, to fix the


282 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, IV


becoming, and provide our activity with points
to which it can be applied.

But erroneous conceptions about sensible quality
and about space are so deeply rooted in the mind

a that it is important to attack them
diferent = from every side. We may say then,
mextensiy, to reveal yet another aspect, that they
though in : :
difterent imply this double postulate, accepted

equally by realism and by idealism:
first, that between different kinds of qualities there
is nothing common ; second, that neither is there
anything common between extensity and pure
quality. We maintain, on the contrary, that
there is something common between qualities of
different orders, that they all share in extensity,
though in different degrees, and that it is im-
possible to overlook these two truths without
entangling in a thousand difficulties the meta-
physic of matter, the psychology of perception
and, more generally, the problem of the relation
of consciousness with matter. Without insisting
on these consequences, let us content ourselves
for the moment with showing, at the bottom of
the various theories of matter, the two postulates
which we dispute and the illusion from which
they proceed.

The essence of English idealism is to regard
extensity as a property of tactile perceptions.
As it sees nothing in sensible qualities but sen-
sations, and in sensations themselves nothing but
mental states, it finds in the different qualities


CHAP, IV EXTENSITY AND EXTENSION 283


nothing on which to base the parallelism of
Idealism and their phenomena. It is therefore con-
realism both
regard the strained to account for this parallelism
orders of by a habit which makes the actual per-
discontinuous, ceptions of sight, for instance, suggest
and so miss
the true to us potential sensations of touch. If
perception. the impressions of two different senses
resemble each other no more than the words
of two languages, we shall seek in vain to de-
duce the data of the one from the data of the
other. They have no common element; and
consequently, there is nothing common between
extensity, which is always tactile, and the data
of the senses other than that of touch, which
must then be supposed to be in no way extended.
But neither can atomistic realism, which locates
movements in space and sensations in conscious-
ness, discover anything in common between the
modifications or phenomena of extensity and the
sensations which correspond to them. Sensations
are supposed to issue from the modifications as
a kind of phosphorescence, or, again, to translate
into the language of the soul the manifestations
of matter; but in neither case do they re-
flect, we are told, the image of their causes. No
doubt they may all be traced to a common origin,
which is movement in space; but, just because
they develop outside of space, they must forego,
gua sensations, the kinship which binds their
causes together. In breaking with space they
break also their connexion with each other; they


284 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, IV


have nothing in common between them, nor with
extensity.

Idealism and realism, then, only differ in that
the first relegates extensity to tactile perception,
of which it becomes the exclusive property,
while the second thrusts extensity yet further
back, outside of all perception. But the two
doctrines are agreed in maintaining the discon-
tinuity of the different orders of sensible qualities,
and also the abrupt transition from that which
is purely extended to that which is not extended
at all. Now the principal difficulties which they
both encounter in the theory of perception arise
from this common postulate.

For suppose, to begin with, as Berkeley did,
that all perception of extensity is to be referred
to the sense of touch. We may, indeed, if you
will have it so, deny extension to the data of
hearing, smell and taste; but we must at least
explain the genesis of a visual space that corre-
sponds to tactile space. It is alleged, indeed, that
sight ends by becoming symbolic of touch, and
that there is nothing more in the visual per-
ception of the order of things in space than a
suggestion of tactile perception. But we fail to
understand how the visual perception of relief, for
instance, a perception which makes upon us an
impress swt generis, and indeed indescribable,
could ever be one with the mere remembrance of
a sensation of touch. The association of a mem-
ory with a present perception may complicate


CHAP, IV EXTENSITY AND EXTENSION 285


this perception by enriching it with an element
already known, but it cannot create a new kind
of impress, a new quality of perception: now
the visual perception of relief presents an abso-
lutely original character. It may be urged that
it is possible to give the illusion of relief with a
plane surface. This only proves that a surface,
on which the play of light and shadow on an
object in relief is more or less well imitated, is —
enough to vemind us of relief; but how could
we be reminded of relief if relief had not been,
at first, actually perceived? We have already
said, but we cannot repeat too often, that our
theories of perception are entirely vitiated by
the idea that if a certain arrangement produces,
at a given moment, the illusion of a certain
perception, it must always have been able to
produce the perception itself ;—as if the very
function of memory were not to make the
complexity of the effect survive the simplifica-
tion of the cause! Again, it may be urged that
the retina itself is a plane surface, and that if we
perceive by sight something that is extended, it
can only be the image on the retina. But is it
not true, as we have shown at the beginning of
this book, that in the visual perception of an
object the brain, nerves, retina and the object
itself form a connected whole, a continuous
process in which the image on the retina is only
an episode ? By what right, then, do we isolate
this image to sum up in it the whole of percep-


286 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


tion? And then, as we have also shown,?
how could a surface be perceived as a surface
otherwise than ,in a space that has recovered
its three dimensions? Berkeley, at least, carried
out his theory to its conclusion; he denied to
sight any perception of extensity. But the ob-
jections which we raised only acquire the more
force from this, since it is impossible to understand
the spontaneous creation, by a mere association
of memories, of all that is original in our visual
perceptions of line, surface and volume, per-
ceptions so distinct that the mathematician does
not go beyond them and works with a space
that is purely visual. But we will not insist on
these various points, nor on the disputable argu-
ments drawn from the observation of those, born
blind, whose sight has been surgically restored :
the theory of the acquired perceptions of sight,
classical since Berkeley’s day, does not seem likely
to resist the multiplied attacks of contemporary
psychology.? Passing over the difficulties of a
psychological order, we will content ourselves
with drawing attention to another point, in our
opinion essential. Suppose for a moment that.


1 Time and Free Will. Sonnenschein & Co., rgro.

* See on this subject: Paul Janet, La perception visuelle
de la distance, Revue philosophique, 1879, vol. vii, p. 1 et seq.—
William James, Principles of Psychology, vol.ii, chap. xxii.—
Cf. on the subject of the visual perception of extensity :
Dunan, L’espace visuel et espace tactile ee philosophique,
Feb. and Apr. 1888, Jan. 1889).


CHAP Iv. EXTENSITY AND EXTENSION — 287


the eye does not, at the outset, give us any informg-—~_
tion as to any of the relations of space. Visual
form, visual relief, visual distance, then become
the symbols of tactile perceptions. Rut how
is it, then, that this symbolism succeec >? Here
are objects which change their shape 1 move.
Vision takes note of definite cha \ whicth
touch afterwards verifies. There is, .u, i tae
two series, visual and tactile, or in their cau: ‘s,
something which makes them correspond one
to another and ensures the constancy of theii-
parallelism. What is the principle of this con:
nexion ?

For English idealism, it can only be some dens
ex machina, and we are confronted with a mys-
tery again. For ordinary realism, it is in a space
distinct from the sensations themselves that the
principle of the correspondence of sensations
one with another lies; but this doctrine only
throws the difficulty further back and even
aggravates it, for we shall now want to know
how a system of homogeneous movements
in space evokes various sensations which have
no resemblance whatever with them. Just now
the genesis of visual perception of space by a
mere association of images appeared to us to
imply a real creation ex nihilo; here all the sen-
sations are born of nothing, or at least have no
resemblance with the movement that occasions
them. In the main, this second theory differs
much less from the first than is commonly believed,


288 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP, IV


__—Amorphous space, atoms jostling against each
other, are only our tactile perceptions made ob-
jective, set apart from all our other perceptions
on account of the special importance which we
attribut/ to them, and made into independent
realities; hus contrasting with the other sensa-
tions VW are then supposed to be only the
symbol. ese. Indeed, in the course of this
op .ation, we have emptied these tactile sensa-
tins of a part of their content; after having
reduced all other senses to being mere appen-
dlages of the sense of touch, touch itself we mu-
tilate, leaving out everything in it that is not
a mere abstract or diagrammatic design of tac-
tile perception: with this design we then go
on to construct the external world. Can we
wonder that between this abstraction on the one
hand, and sensations on the other, no possible
ink is to be found? But the truth is that
space 1s no more without us than within us,
and that it does not belong to a privileged
group of sensations. AJ] sensations partake of
extensity ; all are moreor less deeply rooted init ;
and the difficulties of ordinary realism arise from
the fact that, the kinship of the sensations one
with another having been extracted and placed
apart under the form of an indefinite and empty
space, we no longer see either how these sensations
can partake of extensity or how they can corre-
spond with each other.


Contemporary psychology is more and more


CHAP. IV EXTENSITY AND EXTENSION 289


impressed with the idea that all our sensations
But modem are in some degree extensive. It is


psychology


has a tendency maintained, not without an appearance
to regard all


sensation as of reason, that there is no sensation
primarily : : :

extensive. Without extensity!or without a feel-
ing ‘of volume.’? English idealism sought to
reserve to tactile perception a monopoly of the
extended, the other senses dealing with space only
in so far as they remind us of the data of touch.
A more attentive psychology reveals to us, on
the contrary, and no doubt will hereafter reveal
still more clearly, the need of regarding all sensa-
tions as primarily extensive, their extensity fading
and disappearing before the higher intensity and
usefulness of tactile, and also, no doubt, of visual,
extensity.

So understood, space is indeed‘ the symbol
of fixity and of infinite divisibility. Concrete
We invert  CXtensity, that is to say the diversity of
we regard rest SeSible qualities, is not within space ;
asioeicaly rather‘is it space that we thrust into
motion, spare extensity. Space is not aground on which
gary antece- real motion is posited; rather is it real
movements. motion that deposits space beneath it-
self. But our imagination, which is preoccu-


1 Ward, Article Psychology in the Encycl. Britannica.

2 W. James, Principles of Psychology, vol. ii, p. 134 et seq.—
We may note in passing that we might, in strictness, attribute
this opinion to Kant, since The Transcendental Aisthetic allows
no difference between the data of the different senses as far
as their extension in space is concerned. But it must not be
forgotten that the point of view of the Critique is other than


U


290 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


pied above all by the convenience of expression
and the exigencies of material life, prefers to
invert the natural order of the terms. Accus-
tomed to seek its fulcrum in aworld of ready-
made motionless images, of which the apparent
fixity is hardly anything else but the outward
reflexion of the stability of our lower needs, it
cannot help believing that rest is anterior to
motion, cannot avoid taking rest as its point
of reference and its abiding place, so that it
comes to see movement as only a variation of —
distance, space being thus supposed to precede
motion. Then, in a space which is homo-
geneous and infinitely divisible, we draw, in
imagination, a trajectory and fix positions: after-
wards, applying the movement to the trajectory,
we see it divisible like the line we have drawn,
and equally denuded of quality. Can we wonder
that our understanding, working thenceforward
on this idea, which represents precisely the reverse
of the truth, discovers in it nothing but contra-
dictions ? Having assimilated movements to space,
we find these movements homogeneous like space ;
and since we no longer see in them anything but
calculable differences of direction and velocity, all
relation between movement and quality is for us
destroyed. Sothatall we have to do is toshut up
motion in space, qualities in consciousness, and
that of psychology, and that it is enough for its purpose that


all our sensations should end by being localized in space
when perception has reached its final form, :


CHAP, IV EXTENSITY AND EXTENSION 291


to establish between these two parallel series,
incapable, by hypothesis, of ever meeting, a
mysterious correspondence. Thrown back into
consciousness, sensible qualities become incap-
able of recovering extensity. Relegated to space,
and indeed to abstract space, where there is
never but a single instant and where everything
is always being born anew—movement aban-
dons that solidarity of the present with the past
which is its very essence. And as these two
aspects of perception, quality and movement,
have been made equally obscure, the phenomenon
of perception, in which a consciousness, assumed
to be shut upin itself and foreign to space, is
supposed to translate what occurs in space, be-
comes a mystery.—But let us, on the contrary,
banish all preconceived idea of interpreting or
measuring, let us place ourselves face to face
with immediate reality: at once we find that
there is no impassable barrier, no essential differ-
ence, no real distinction even, between percep-
tion and the thing perceived, between quality
and movement.


So we return, by a round-about way, to the
conclusions worked out in the first chapter of
this book. Our perception, we said, is originally
in things rather than in the mind, without us
rather than within. The several kinds of percep-
tion correspond to so many directions actually
marked out in reality. But, we added, this


292 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


perception, which coincides with its object, exists
rather in theory than in fact: it could only
happen if we were shut up within the present
moment. In concrete perception memory inter-
venes, and the subjectivity of sensible qualities
is due precisely to the fact that our consciousness,
which begins by being only memory, prolongs a
plurality of moments into each other, contract-
ing them into a single intuition.

Consciousness and matter, body and soul, were
thus seen to meet each other in perception. But
Perception 1 One aspect this idea remained for us
and matter’ obscure, because our perception, and con-


reveal their


kinship as sequently also our consciousness, seemed


y
aside ihe o¢ thus to share in the divisibility which is
pchion: attributed to matter. If, on the dualis-
tic hypothesis, we naturally shrink from accepting
the partial coincidence of the perceived object
and the perceiving subject, it is because we are
conscious of the undivided unity of our percep-
tion, whereas the object appears to us to be,
in essence, infinitely divisible. Hence the hypo-
thesis of a consciousness with inextensive sensa-
_ tions, placed over against an extended multiplicity.
But if the divisibility of matter is entirely relative
to our action thereon, that is to say to our faculty
of modifying its aspect, if it belongs not to
matter itself but to the space which we throw
beneath this matter in order to bring it within
our grasp, then the difficulty disappears. Ex-
tended matter, regarded as a whole, is like a


CHAP. IV SOUL AND BODY 293


consciousness where everything balances and
compensates and neutralizes everything else;
it possesses in very truth the indivisibility of our
perception ; so that, inversely, we may without
scruple attribute to perception something of the
extensity of matter. These two terms, perception
and matter, approach each other in the measure
that we divest ourselves of what may be called
the prejudices of action: sensation recovers ex-
tensity, the concrete extended recovers its natural
continuity and indivisibility. And homogeneous
space, which stood between the two terms like an
insurmountable barrier, is then seen to have no
other reality than that of a diagram or a symbol.
It interests the behaviour of a being which acts upon
matter, but not the work of a mind which specu-
lates on its essence.

Thereby also some light may be thrown
upon the problem towards which all our en-
Ordinary  QUiries converge, that of the union of
dualism, body and soul. The obscurity of this


regarding


aatitty Problem, on the dualistic hypothesis,


spatial, and = comes from the double fact that matter


spatial, | is considered as essentially divisible and
communica- ; ne
a eta CUCL state of the soul as rigorously in
peene extensive, so that from the outset the


communication between the two terms is severed.
And when we go more deeply into this double
postulate, we discover, in regard to matter, a
confusion of concrete and indivisible extensity
with the divisible space which underlies it; and


204 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. tv


also, in regard to mind, the illusory idea that there
are no degrees, no possible transition, between
the extended and the unextended. But if these
two postulates involve a common error, if there
is a gradual passage from the idea to the image
and from the image to the sensation ; if, in the
measure in which it evolves towards actuality,
that is to say towards action, the mental state
draws nearer to extension; if, finally, this
extension once attained remains undivided and
therefore is not out of harmony with the unity of
the soul; we can understand that spirit can
rest upon matter and consequently unite with
it in the act of pure perception, yet nevertheless
be radically distinct from it. It is distinct from
matter in that it is, even then, memory, that is to
say a synthesis of past and present with a view
to the future, in that it contracts the moments of
this matter in order to use them and to manifest
itself by actions which are the final aim of its
union with the body. We were right, then, when
we said, at the beginning of this book, that the
distinction between body and mind must be estab-
lished in terms not of space but of time.

The mistake of ordinary dualism is that it
starts from the spatial point of view: it puts on
the one hand matter with its modifications in
space, on the other unextended sensations in con-
sciousness. Hence the impossibility of under-
standing how the spirit acts upon the body or the
body upon spirit.. Hence hypotheses which are


ea leaay SOUL AND BODY 295


andcan be nothing but disguised statements of the
fact,—the idea of a parallelism or of a pre-estab-
lished harmony. But hence also the impossibility
of constituting either a psychology of memory or
a metaphysic of matter. Wehave striven toshow
that this psychology and this metaphysic. are
bound up with each other, and that the difficul-
ties are less formidable in a dualism which, starting
from pure perception, where subject and object
coincide, follows the development of the two terms
in their respective durations,—matter, the further
we push its analysis, tending more and more to be
only asuccession of infinitely rapid moments which
may be deduced each from the other and thereby are
equivalent to each other ; spirit being in perception
already memory, and declaring itself more and
more as a prolonging of the past into the present,
a progress, a true evolution.

But does the relation of body and mind become
thereby clearer? We substitute a temporal for
But the diss 2 Spatial distinction: are the two terms
tinction be’ any the more able to unite ? It must be
and matter observed that the first distinction does
made in ter™S not admit of degree: matter is supposed
but oftime to be in space, spirit to be extra-


or dura-
tion, which spatial; there is no possible transition
degrees. between them. But if, in fact, the
humblest function of spirit is to bind together.
the successive moments of the duration of
things, if it is by this that it comes into con-


tact with matter and by this also that it is first


296 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


of all distinguished from matter, we can con-
ceive an infinite number of degrees between matter
and fully developed spirit—a spirit capable of
action which is not only undetermined, but
also reasonable and reflective. Each of these suc-
cessive degrees, which measures a growing inten-
sity of life, corresponds to a higher tension of dura-
tion and is made manifest externally by a greater
development of the sensori-motor system. But
let us consider this nervous system itself: we note
that its increasing complexity appears to allow an
ever greater latitude to the activity of the living
being, the faculty of waiting before reacting, and
of putting the excitation received into relation

with an ever richer variety of motor mechanisms. —
Yet this is only the outward aspect ; and the more
complex organization of the nervous system, which
seems to assure the greater independence of the
living being in regard to matter, is only the
material symbol of that independence itself, that
is to say of the inner energy which allows the
being to free itself from the rhythm of the flow
of things, and to retain in an ever higher degree the
past in order to influence ever more deeply the
future,—the symbol, in the special sense which
we give to the word, of its memory. Thus,
between brute matter and the mind most cap-
able of reflexion there are all possible intensities
of memory or, what comes to the same thing,
all the degrees of freedom. On the first hypo-
thesis, that which expresses the distinction be-


CHAP, IV SOUL AND BODY 297


tween spirit and body in terms of space, body
and spirit are like two railway lines which cut
each other at a right angle; on the second, the
rails come together in a curve, so that we pass
insensibly from the one to the other.

But have we here anything but a metaphor ?
Does not a marked distinction, an irreducible oppo-
sition, remain between matter properly so-called
and the lowest degree of freedom or of memory ?
Yes, no doubt, the distinction subsists, but union
becomes possible, since it would be given, under
the radical form of a partial coincidence, in pure
perception. The difficulties of ordinary dualism
come, not from the distinction of the two terms,
but from the impossibility of seeing how the one
is grafted upon the other. Now, as we have
shown, pure perception, which is the lowest degree
of mind,—mind without memory—is really part
of matter, as we understand matter. We may
go further : memory does not intervene as a func-
tion of which matter has no presentiment and
which it does not imitate in its own way. If
matter does not remember the past, it is because
it repeats the past unceasingly, because, subject
to necessity, it unfolds a series of moments of
which each is the equivalent of the preceding
moment and may be deduced from it: thus
its past is truly given in its present. But a
being which evolves more or less freely creates
something new every moment: in vain, then,
should we seek to read its past in its present


298 MATTER AND MEMORY CHAP. IV


unless its past were deposited within it in the form
of memory. Thus, to use again a metaphor
which has more than once appeared in this book,
it is necessary, and for similar reasons, that the
past should be acted by matter, «imagined by mind.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION


I. THE idea that we have disengaged from the
facts and confirmed by reasoning is that our body


The body an 1S aninstrument of action, and of action


instrument only. In no degree, in no sense, under
eS no aspect, does it serve to prepare, far


less to explain, a representation. Consider ex-
ternal perception: there is only a difference of
degree, not of kind, between the so-called percep-
tive faculties of the brain and the reflex functions
of the spinal cord. While the spinal cord trans-
forms the excitations received into movements
which are more or less necessarily executed, the
brain puts them into relation with motor mechan-
isms which are more or less freely chosen; but
that which the brain explains in our perception is
action begun, prepared or suggested, it is not
perception itself. Consider memory, the body
retains motor habits capable of acting the past
over again; it can resume attitudes in which
the past will insert itself; or, again, by the repeti-
tion of certain cerebral phenomena which have
prolonged former perceptions, it can furnish to
remembrance a point of attachment with the
actual, a means of recovering its lost influence


upon present reality : but in no case can the brain
299


300 MATTER AND MEMORY


store up recollections or images. Thus, neither in


perception, nor in memory, nor a fortiovt in the
higher attainments of mind, does the body con-
tribute directly to representation. By develop-
ing this hypothesis under its manifold aspects and
thus pushing dualism to an extreme, we appeared
to divide body and soul by an impassable abyss.
In truth, we were indicating the only possible
means of bringing them together.

II. All the difficulties raised by this problem,
either in ordinary dualism, or in materialism and
Percontion idealism, come from considering, in the
and memory, phenomena of perception and memory,


the physica.


and the w¢ the physical and the mental as duplicates


Zopliectes o¢ the one of the other. Suppose I place
each other. myself at the materialist point of view
of the epiphenomenal consciousness: I am quite
unable to understand why certain cerebral pheno-
mena are accompanied by consciousness, that is
to say, of what use could be, or how could ever -
arise, the conscious repetition of the material uni-
verse I have begun by positing. Suppose I
prefer idealism: I then allow myself only per-
ceptions, and my body is one of them. But
whereas observation shows me that the images
I perceive are entirely changed by very slight
alterations of the image I call my body (since
I have only to shut my eyes and my visual
universe disappears), Science assures me that
all phenomena must succeed and condition one
another according to a determined order, in which


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 301


effects are strictly proportioned to causes. I
am obliged, therefore, to seek, in the image which
I call my body, and which follows me everywhere,
for changes which shall be the equivalents—but
the well-regulated equivalents, now deducible
from each other—of the images which succeed
one another around my body: the cerebral
movements, to which I am led back in this
way, again are the duplicates of my percep-
tions. It is true that these movements are
still perceptions, ‘ possible’ perceptions,—so that
this second hypothesis is more intelligible than
the first; but, on the other hand, it must sup-
pose, in its turn, an inexplicable correspondence
between my real perception of things and my
possible perception of certain cerebral movements
which do not in any way resemble these things.
When we look at it closely, we shall see that this
is the reef upon which all idealism is wrecked :
there is no possible transition from the order
which is perceived by our senses to the order which
we are to conceive for the sake of our science,
—or, if we are dealing more particularly with
the Kantian idealism, no possible transition from
sense to understanding—So my only refuge
seems to be ordinary dualism. I place matter ~~
on this side, mind on that, and I suppose that

cerebral movements are the cause or the occasion ~


of my representation of objects. But if they AP cg


are its cause, if they are enough to produce it, ”
I must fall back, step by step, upon the material-


302 MATTER AND MEMORY


istic hypothesis of an epiphenomenal conscious-
ness. Ifthey are only its occasion, I thereby suppose
that they do not resemble it in any way, and so,
depriving matter of all the qualities which I con-
ferred upon it in my representation, I come back
to idealism. Idealism and materialism are then
the two poles between which this kind of dualism
will always oscillate ; and when, in order to main-
tain the duality of substances, it decides to make
them both of equal rank, it will be led to regard
them as two translations of one and the same
Vv original, two parallel and predetermined develop-
ments of a single principle, and thus to deny their
reciprocal influence, and, by an inevitable conse-
quence, to sacrifice freedom.

Now, if we look beneath these three hypo-
theses, we find that they have a common basis:
The misiake ea three regard the elementary opera-
heloving that (1OnS Of the mind, perception and
and memory Memory, as operations of pure _know-
ore Deze, ledge... What_they place: at: the) origin
wero.’ Of consciousness is either the useless
action. duplicate of an external reality or
the inert material of an intellectual construction
entirely disinterested: but they always neglect:
the relation of perception with action and of
memory with conduct. Now, it is no doubt pos-
sible to conceive, as an ideal limit, a memory and
a perception that are disinterested ; but, in fact,

“rit is towards action that memory and perception
are turned; it is action that the body pre-


—


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 303


pares. Do we consider_perception ? The grow-
ing complexity of the nervous system shunts
the excitation received on to an ever larger
variety of motor mechanisms, and so sketches
out simultaneously an ever larger number of
possible actions. Do we turn_to memory ? We
note that its primary function is to evoke all
those past perceptions which are analogous
to the present perception, to recall to us what
preceded and followed them, and so to suggest
to us that decision which is the most useful.
But this is not all. By allowing us to grasp in a
single intuition multiple moments of duration, it
frees us from the movement of the flow of things,
that is to say, from the rhythm of necessity. The
more of these moments memory can contract into
one, the firmer is the hold which it gives to us on
matter: so that the memory of a living being
appears indeed to measure, above all, its powers of
action upon things, and to be only the intellectual
reverberation of this power. Let us start, then,
from this energy, as from the true principle: let Io
us suppose that the body isa centre of action, an
only a centre of action. We must see what con-
sequences thence result for perception, for memory,
and for the relations between body and mind.
lis To take perception first. Here is my body
Gan its ‘perceptive centres.’ These centres
Perception Vibrate, and I have the representation
givesus of things. On the other hand I have


‘things-in- ' °
themselves” sypposed that these vibrations can


304 MATTER AND MEMORY


neither produce nor translate my perception.
It is, then, outside them. Where is it? I can-
not hesitate as to the answer : positing my body,
I posit a certain image, but with it also the
ageregate of the other images, since there is no
material image which does not owe its qualities,
its determinations, in short its existence, to the
place which it occupies in the totality of the uni-
verse. My perception can, then, only be some
part of these objects themselves ; it is in them
rather than they in it. But what is it exactly
within them ? I see that. my perception appears
to follow all the vibratory detail of the ‘so-
called sensitive nerves; and on the other hand
I know that the réle of their vibrations is solely to
prepare the reaction of my body on neighbouring
bodies, to sketch out my virtual actions. Per-
ception, therefore, consists in detaching, from the
totality of objects, the possible action of my body


= choice. It creates nothing ; : its oneon ‘on the con-


trary, is to eliminate from the totality of images
all those on which I can have no hold, and then,
from each of those which I retain, all that does not
concern the needs of the image which I call my
body. Such is, at least, much simplified, the way
we explain or describe schematically what we
have called pure perception. Let us mark out
at once the intermediate place which we thus
take up between realism and idealism.

That every reality has a kinship, an analogy,


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION ~ 305


in short a relation with consciousness—this is
Though it what we concede to idealism by the very
gives ° .

only a par fact that we term things ‘images.’ No
things. philosophical doctrine, moreover, pro-
vided that it is consistent with itself, can escape
from this conclusion. But if we could assemble


all the states of consciousness, past, present, and


possible, of all conscious beings, we should still -
only have gathered a very small part of material ~


reality, because images outrun perception on
every side. It is just these images that science
and metaphysic seek to reconstitute, thus restor-
ing the whole of a chain of which our perception
grasps only a few links. But in order thus to
discover between perception and reality the
relation of the part to the whole, it is necessary to
leave to perception its true office, which is to
prepare actions. This is what idealism fails to do.
Why is it unable, as we said just now, to pass
from the order manifested in perception to the
order which is successful in science, that is to
say, from the contingency with which our sensa-
tions appear to follow each other to the deter-
minism which binds together the phenomena of
nature ? Precisely because it attributes to con-
sciousness, in perception, a speculative réle, so that
it is impossible to see what interest this conscious-
ness has in allowing to escape, between two sen-
sations for instance, the intermediate links through
which the second might be deduced from the first.
These intermediaries and their strict order thus
x


ot


a


306 MATTER AND MEMORY


remain obscure, whether, with Mill, we make the
intermediaries into ‘ possible sensations,’ or,
with Kant, hold the substructure of the order
to be the work of an impersonal understand-
ing. But suppose that my conscious perception
xhas an entirely practical destination, that it
simply indicates, in the aggregate of things, that
which interests my possible action upon them:
I can then understand that all the rest escapes
me, and that, nevertheless, all the rest is of the
same nature as what I perceive. My conscious-
ness of matter is then no longer either subjective,
as it is for English idealism, or relative, as it
is for the Kantian idealism. It is not subjec-
tive, for it is in things rather than in me. It is
not relative, because the relation between the
‘phenomenon’ and the ‘thing’ is not that of
appearance to reality, but merely that of the part
to the whole.
Here we seem to return to realism. But real-
ism, unless corrected on an essential point, is as
The mistake inacceptable as idealism, and for the


is to set up


homogeneous Same reason. Idealism, we said, cannot
space as a real


or even ideal pass from the order manifested in per-
medium prior ; ; :

toextension. ception to the order which is successful
in science, that is to say to reality. Inversely,
realism fails to draw from reality the immediate
consciousness which we have of it. Taking the
point of view of ordinary realism, we have, on
the one hand, a composite matter made up of


more or less independent parts, diffused through-


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 307


out space, and, on the other, a mind which can
have no point of contact with matter, unless it
be, as materialists maintain, the unintelligible
epiphenomenon. If we prefer the standpoint
of the Kantian realism, we find between the
“thing-in-itself,’ that is to say the real, and the
‘sensuous manifold’ from which we construct our
knowledge, no conceivable relation, no common
measure. Now, if we get to the bottom of these
two extreme forms of realism, we see that they
converge towards the same point: both raise homo-
geneous space as a barrier between the intellect
and things. The simpler realism makes of this
space a veal medium, in which things are in sus-
pension; Kantian realism regards it as an zdeal
medium, in which the multiplicity of sensations
is codrdinated; but for both of them this
medium is given to begin with, as the necessary
condition of what comes to abide init. And if we
try to get to the bottom of this common hypo-
thesis, in its turn, we find that it consists in at-
tributing to homogeneous space a disinterested
office : space is supposed either merely to uphold
material reality, or to have the function, still
purely speculative, of furnishing sensations with
means of coordinating themselves. So that
the obscurity of realism, like that of idealism,
comes from the fact that, in both of them, our
conscious perception and the conditions of our
conscious perception are assumed to point to
pure knowledge, not to action.—But suppose now


Cay


308 MATTER AND MEMORY


that this homogeneous space is not logically an-
terior, but posterior to material things and to
the pure knowledge which we can have of them ;
suppose that extensity is prior to space ; suppose
that homogeneous space concerns our action and
only our action, being like an infinitely fine net-


work which we stretch beneath material con-
‘tinuity in order to render ourselves masters of


it, to decompose it according to the plan of our
activities and our needs. Then, not only has our
hypothesis the advantage of bringing us into
harmony with science, which shows us each thing
exercising an influence on all the others and con-
sequently occupying, in a certain sense, the whole
of the extended (although we perceive of. this
thing only its centre and mark its limits at the
point where our body ceases to have any hold
upon it). Not only has it the advantage, in
metaphysic, of suppressing or lessening the contra-
dictions raised by divisibility in space,—contra-
dictions which always arise, as we have shown,
from our failure to dissociate the two points of
view, that of action from that of knowledge. It
has, above all, the advantage of overthrowing
the insurmountable barriers rdised by realism be-
tween the extended world and our perception of
it. For whereas this doctrine assumes on the one
hand an external reality which is multiple and
divided, and on the other sensations alien from
extensity and without possible contact with it,
we find that concrete extensity is not really


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 309


divided, any more than immediate perception is
in truth unextended. Starting from realism, we
come back to the point to which idealism had led
us ; we replace perception in things. And we see
realism and idealism ready to come to an under-
standing when we set aside the postulate, uncriti-
cally accepted by both, which served them as a
common frontier.

To sum up: if we suppose an extended con-
tinuum, and, in this continuum, the centre of real
action which is represented by our body, its
activity will appear to illumine all those parts
of matter with which at each successive moment
it can deal. The same needs, the same power of
action, which have delimited our body in matter,
will also carve out distinct bodies in the sur-
rounding medium. Everything will happen as if
we allowed to filter through us that action of ex-
ternal things which is real, in order to arrest and
retain that which is virtual: this virtual action of
things upon our body and of our body upon things
is our perception itself. But since the excitations
which our body receives from surrounding bodies
determine unceasingly, within its substance,nascent
reactions,—since these internal movements of the
cerebral substance thus sketch out at every mo-
ment our possible action on things, the state of
the brain exactly corresponds to the perception.
It is neither its cause, nor its effect, nor in any
sense its duplicate: it merely continues it, the
perception being our virtual action and the cere-
bral state our action already begun.


ye


310 MATTER AND MEMORY


{ IV. But. this theory of ‘ pure perception’ had
to be both qualified and completed in regard to two
Real action POints. For the so-called ‘pure’ percep-
and virtual tion, which is like a fragment of reality,


action.
Transition to detached just as it is, would belong to a


affection and

memory. being unable to mingle with the percep-
tion of other bodies that of its own body, that is
to say, its affections; nor with its intuition of
the actual moment that of other moments, that
is to say, its memory. In other words, we have,
to begin with, and for the convenience of study,
in space and conscious perception as a mathe-
matical instant in time. We then had to restore
to the body its extensity and to perception its
duration. By this we restored to consciousness
its two subjective elements, affectivity and
memory.

What is_an_affection? Our perception, we
said, indicates the possible action of our body on
others. But our body, being extended, is capable
of acting upon itself as well as upon other bodies.
Into our perception, then, something of our body
must enter. When we are dealing with external
bodies, these are, by hypothesis, separated from
ours by a space, greater or less, which measures
the remoteness in time of their promise or of
their menace: this is why our perception of these
bodies indicates only possible actions. But the
more the distance diminishes between these
bodies and our own, the more the possible action


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 3it


tends to transform itself into a real action, the
call for action becoming more urgent in the
measure and proportion that the distance dimi-
nishes. And when this distance is iJ, that is to
say when the body to be perceived is our own
body, it is a real and no longer a virtual action
that our perception sketches out. Such is,
precisely, the nature of pain, an actual effort of
the damaged part to set things to rights, an
effort that is local, isolated, and thereby con-
demned to failure, in an organism which can no
longer act except as a whole. Pain is therefore
in the place where it is felt, as the object is at the
place where it is perceived. Between the affec-
tion felt and the image perceived there is this
difference, that the affection is within our body,
the image outside our body. And that is why the
surface of our body, the common limit of this and
of other bodies, is given to us in the form
both of sensations and of an image.

In this interiority of affective sensation con-
sists its subjectivity; in that exteriority of
images in general their objectivity. But here
again we encounter the ever-recurring mistake
with which we have been confronted throughout
this work. It is supposed that perception and
sensation exist for their own sake ; the philosopher
ascribes to them an entirely speculative function ;
and, as he has overlooked those real and virtual
actions with which sensation and perception are
bound up and by which, according as the action


312 MATTER AND MEMORY


is virtual or real, perception and sensation are
characterized and distinguished, he becomes un-
able to find any other difference between them
than a difference of degree. Then, profiting by
the fact that affective sensation is but vaguely
localized (because the effort it involves is an
indistinct effort) at once he declares it to be
unextended ; and these attenuated affections or
unextended sensations he sets up as the material
with which we are supposed to build up images
in space. Thereby he condemns himself to an
impossibility of explaining either whence arise
the elements of consciousness, or sensations, which
he sets up as so many absolutes, or how, unex-
tended, they find their way to space and are co-
ordinated there, or why, in it, they adopt a par-
ticular order rather than any other, or, finally,
how they manage to make up an experience which
is regular and common to all men. This experi-
ence, the necessary field of our activity, is, on
the contrary, what we should start from. Pure
perceptions, therefore, or images, are what we
should posit at the outset. And sensations, far
from being the materials from which the image
is wrought, will then appear as the impurity
which is introduced into it, being that part of
our own body which we project into all others.
CV. But, as long as we confine ourselves to
sensation and to. pure perception, we can hardly
be said to be dealing with the spirit. No doubt
we demonstrate, as against the theory of’ an


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 313


eas consciousness, that no cerebral
aoe state is the equivalent of a perception.
spirit, not a. No doubt the choice of perceptions from
manifesta-

tion of among images in general is the effect of a


matter. : : ac
discernment which foreshadows spirit. No


doubt also the material universe itself, defined as


the totality of images, is a kind of consciousness,
a consciousness in which everything compensates
and neutralizes everything else, a consciousness of
which all the potential parts, balancing each
other by a reaction which is always equal to the
action, reciprocally hinder each other from stand-
ing out. But to touch the reality of spirit we
must place ourselves at the point where an indi-
vidual consciousness, continuing and retaining the
past in a present enriched by it, thus escapes the
law of necessity, the law which ordains that the
past shall ever follow itself in a present which
merely repeats it in another form, and that all
things shall ever be flowing away. When we pass y
from pure perception to memory, we definitely
abandon matter for spirit.


evi: VI. She theory of memory, around which .


os
cs


§


the whole of our work centres, must be both f v


the theoretic consequence and the experimental
verification of our theory of pure perception.
That the cerebral states which accompany per-
ception are neither its cause nor its duplicate,
and that perception bears to its physiological
counterpart the relation of a virtual action to an
action begun—this we cannot substantiate by


fe


314 MATTER AND MEMORY


facts, since on our hypothesis everything is bound
to happen as if perception were a consequence of
the state of the brain. For, in pure perception,
the perceived object is a present object, a body
which modifies our own. Its image is then ac-
tually given, and therefore the facts permit us to
say indifferently (though we are far from knowing
our own meaning equally well in the two cases)
that the cerebral modifications sketch the nascent


ws, reactions of our body or that they create in


consciousness the duplicate of the present image.
But with memory it is otherwise, for a remem-
brance is the representation of an absent object.
Here the two hypotheses must have opposite con-
sequences. If, in the case of a present object, a
state of our body is thought sufficient to create
the representation of the object, still more must
it be thought so in the case of an object
that is represented though absent. It is neces-
sary therefore, on this theory, that the remem-
brance should arise from the attenuated repetition
of the cerebral phenomenon which occasioned the
primary perception, and should consist simply
in a perception weakened. Whence this double
thesis : Memory is only a function of the brain, and
~ there 1s only a difference of intensity between per-
ception and recollection.—If, on the contrary, the
cerebral state in no way begets our perception of
the present object but merely continues it, it may
also prolong and convert into action the recol-
lection of it which we summon up, but it cannot


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION Sh5


give birth to that recollection. And as, on
the other hand, our perception of the present
object is something of that object itself, our
representation of the absent object must be a
phenomenon of quite another order than percep-
tion, since between presence and absence there are
no_ degrees, no intermediate stages. Whence this
double thesis, which is the opposite of the former :
Memory is something other than a function of the
brain, and there 1s not merely a difference of degree,
but of kind, between perception and recollection.—
The conflict between the two theories now takes
an acute form; and this time experience can
judge between them.

We will not here recapitulate in detail the proof
we have tried to elaborate, but merely recall its
essential points. All the arguments from fact,
which may be invoked in favour of a probable
accumulation of memories in the cortical substance,
are drawn from localized disorders of memory.
But, if recollections were really deposited in the
brain, to definite gapsin memory characteristic le-
sions of the brain would correspond. Now, in those
forms of amnesia in which a whole period of our
past existence, for example, is abruptly and entirely
obliterated from memory, we do not observe any
precise cerebral lesion ; and, on the contrary, in those
disorders of memory where cerebral localization is
distinct and certain, that is to say, in the different
types of aphasia and in the diseases of visual or
auditory recognition, we do not find that certain


316 MATTER AND MEMORY


definite recollections are as it were torn from their
seat, but that it is the whole faculty of remember-
ing that is more or less diminished im vitality,
as if the subject had more or less difficulty in
bringing his recollections into contact with the
present situation. The mechanism of this con-
tact was, therefore, what we had to study in
order to ascertain whether the office of the brain
is not rather to ensure its working than to im-
prison the recollections in cells.

We were thus led to follow through its
windings the progressive movement by which
past and present come into contact with
each other, that is to say, the process
of recognition. And we found, in fact, that the
recognition of a present object might be effected
in two absolutely different ways, but that in
neither case did the brain act as a reservoir of
images. Sometimes, by an entirely passive recog-
nition, rather acted than thought, the body re-
sponds to a perception that recurs by a move-
ment or attitude that has become automatic: in
this case everything is explained by the motor
apparatus which habit has set up in the body,
and lesions of the memory may result from the
destruction of these mechanisms. Sometimes, on
the other hand, recognition is actively produced
by memory-images which go out to meet the
present perception ; but then it is necessary that
these recollections, at the moment that they over-
lie the perception, should be able to set going


Recognition.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 317


in the brain the same machinery that percep-
tion ordinarily sets to work in order to produce
actions; if not foredoomed to impotence, they
will have no tendency to become actual. And
this is why, in all cases where a lesion of the brain
attacks a certain category of recollections, the
affected recollections do not resemble each other
by all belonging to the same period, for instance,
or by any logical relationship to each other, but
simply in that they are all auditive, or all visual,
or all motor. That which is damaged appears to
be the various sensorial or motor areas, or, more
often still, those appendages which permit of their
being set going from within the cortex, rather than
the recollections themselves. Weeven went further,
and by an attentive study of the recognition of
words, as also of the phenomena of sensory apha-
sia, we endeavoured to prove that recognition
is in no way effected by a mechanical awakening of
memories that are asleep in the brain. It implies,
on the contrary, a more or less high degree of ten-
sion in consciousness, which goes to fetch pure re-
collections in pure memory in order to materialize
them progressively by contact with the present
perception.

But what is this pure memory, what are pure
recollections ? By the answer to this enquiry we
completed the demonstration of our thesis. We
had just established its first point, that is to say,
that memory is something other than a function
of the brain. We had still to show, by the analysis


318 MATTER AND MEMORY


of ‘ pure recollection,’ that there is not between
recollection and perception a mere difference of
degree but a radical difference of kind.
(VII. Let us point out to begin with the meta-
physical, and no longer merely psychological,

bearing of this last problem. No doubt
The different
planes of con- we have a thesis of pure psychology
sciousness.

in a proposition such as this: recol-
lection is a weakened perception. But let there
be no mistake: if recollection is only a weakened
perception, inversely perception must be some-
thing like an intenser memory. Now the germ
of English idealism is to be found here. This
idealism consists in finding only a difference of
degree, and not of kind, between the reality of the
object perceived and the ideality of the object
conceived. And the belief that we construct
matter from our interior states and that per-
ception is only a true hallucination, also arises
from this thesis. It is this belief that we have
always combated whenever we have treated of
matter. Either, then, our conception of matter
is false, or memory is radically distinct from
perception.

We have thus transposed a metaphysical prob-
lem so as to make it coincide with a psycho-
logical problem which direct observation is able
to solve. How does psychology solve it? Ifthe
memory of a perception were but this perception
=, weakened, it might happen to us, for instance, to

%e : take the perception of a slight sound for the recol-


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 319


lection of a loud noise. Now such a confusion
never occurs. But we may go further, and say
that the consciousness of a recollection never
occurs as an actual weak state which we try to
relegate to the past so soon as we become aware
of its weakness. How, indeed, unless we already
possessed the representation of a past previously
lived, could we relegate to it the less intense
psychical states, when it would be so simple to
set them alongside of strong states as a present
experience more confused beside a present exper-
ience more distinct ? The truth is that memory
does not consist in aregression from the present to
the past, but, on the contrary, in a progress from
the past to the present. It is in the past that
we place ourselves at a stroke. We start froma
* virtual state’ which we lead onwards, step by
step, through a series of different planes of con-
sciousness, up to the goal where it is materialized
in an actual perception; that is to say, up to
the point where it becomes a present, active state ;
in fine, up to that extreme plane of our conscious-
ness against which our body stands out. In
this virtual state pure memory consists.

How is it that the testimony of consciousness on
this point is misunderstood ? How is it that we
make of recollection a weakened perception, of
which it is impossible to say either why we relegate
it to the past, how we rediscover its date, or
by what right it reappears at one moment rather
than at another ? Simply because we forget the


Y


320 MATTER AND MEMORY


practical end of all our actual psychical states. _
Perception is made into a disinterested work of the
mind, a pure contemplation. Then, as pure recol-
lection can evidently be only something of this
kind (since it does not correspond to a present
and urgent reality), memory and _ perception
become states of the same nature, and between
them no other difference than a difference of in-
tensity can be found. But the truth is that our
_present should not be defined as that which is
more intense: it is that which acts on us and

“si which makes us act, it is sensory and it is
motor ;—our present is, above all, the state of
our body. Our_past, on the contrary, is that
which acts no longer but which might act,
and will act by inserting itself into a present
sensation of which it borrows the vitality. It
‘is true that, from the moment when the recol-
lection actualizes itself in this manner, it ceases
to be a recollection and becomes once more a
perception.

We understand then why a remembrance can-
not be the result of a state of the brain. The state
of the brain continues the remembrance ; it gives
it a hold on the present by the materiality which
it confers upon it: but pure memory is a spiritual
manifestation. With memory we are in very truth
in the domain_of spirit.

Aiton! ( VIII. St was not our task to ex-
ism and plore this domain. Placed at the con-
Wess: fluence of mind and matter, desirous


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 321


chiefly of seeing the one flow into the other, we
had only to retain, of the spontaneity of intellect,
its place of conjunction with bodily mechanism.
In this way we were led to consider the phenomena
of association and the birth of the simplest general
ideas.

What is the cardinal error of associationism ?
It is to have set all recollections on the same plane,
to have misunderstood the greater or less distance
which separates them from the present bodily
state, that is from action. Thus associationism
is unable to explain either how the recollection
clings to the perception which evokes it, or
why association is effected by similarity or con-
tiguity rather than in any other way, or, finally, by
what caprice a particular recollection is chosen
among the thousand others which similarity or
contiguity might equally well attach to the present
perception. This means that associationism has
mixed and confounded all the different planes of
consciousness, and that it persists in regarding a less
complete as a less complex recollection, whereas
it is in reality a recollection less dreamed, more
impersonal, nearer to action and therefore more
capable of moulding itself—lke a ready-made
garment—upon the new character of the present
situation. The opponents of associationism have,
moreover, followed it on to this ground. They
combat the theory because it explains the higher
operations of the mind by association, but not
because it misunderstands the true nature of

Yi


322 MATTER AND MEMORY


association itself. Yet this is the original vice of
associationism.

Between the plane of action—the plane in which
our body has condensed its past into motor habits,
—and the plane of pure memory, where our mind
retains in all its details the picture of our past life,
we believe that we can discover thousands of
different planes of consciousness, a thousand
integral and yet diverse repetitions of the whole of
the experience through which we have lived. To
complete a recollection by more personal details
does not at all consist in mechanically juxtaposing
other recollections to this, but in transporting
ourselves to a wider plane of consciousness, in
going away from action in the direction of dream.
Neither does the localizing of a recollection con-
sist in inserting it mechanically among other
memories, but in describing, by an increasing
expansion of the memory as a whole, a circle large
enough to include this detail from the past. These
planes, moreover, are not given as ready-made
things superposed the one on the other. Rather
they exist virtually, with that existence which is
proper to things of the spirit. The intellect, for
ever moving in the interval which separates them,
unceasingly finds them again, or creates them anew:
the life of intellect consists in this very movement.
Then we understand why the laws of association
are similarity and contiguity rather than any other
laws, and why memory chooses among recollec-
tions which are similar or contiguous certain


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 323


images rather than other images, and, finally,
how by the combined work of body and mind the
earliest general ideas are formed. The interest
of a living being lies in discovering in the present
situation that which resembles a former situation,
and then in placing alongside of that present
situation what preceded and followed the previous
one, in order to profit by past experience. Of all
the associations which can be imagined, those of
resemblance and contiguity are therefore at first
the only associations that have a vital utility.
But, in order to understand the mechanism of
these associations and above all the apparently
capricious selection which they make of mem-
ories, we must place ourselves alternately on
the two extreme planes of consciousness which
we have called the plane of action and the plane
of dream. In the first are displayed only motor
habits ; these may be called associations which are
acted or lived, rather than represented: here
resemblance and contiguity are fused together,
for analogous external situations, as they recur,
have ended by connecting together certain bodily
movements, and thenceforward the same auto-
matic reaction, in which we unfold these contiguous
movements, will also draw from the situation
which occasions them its resemblance with former
situations. But, as we pass from movements to
images and from poorer to richer images, resem-
‘blance and contiguity part company: they end
by contrasting sharply with each other on that


324 MATTER AND MEMORY


other extreme plane where no action is any
longer affixed to the images. The choice of
one resemblance among many, of one contig-
uity among others, is, therefore, not made at
random: it depends on the ever varying de-
gree of the fension of memory, which, according
to its tendency to insert itself in the present
act or to withdraw from it, transposes itself as
a whole from one key into another. And this
double movement of memory between its two ex-
treme limits also sketches out, as we have shown,
the first general ideas,—motor habits ascending to
seek similar images in order to extract resemblances
from them, and similar images coming down
towards motor habits, to fuse themselves, for
instance, in the automatic utterance of the word
which makes them one. The nascent generality
of the idea consists, then, in a certain activity of
the mind, in a movement between action and
representation. And thisis why, as we have said,
it will always be easy for a certain philosophy to
localize the general idea at one of the two ex-
tremities, to make it crystallize into words or
evaporate into memories, whereas it really consists
in the transit of the mind as it passes from one
term _to the other.

IX. By representing elementary mental acti-
vity in this manner to ourselves, and by thus
making of our body and all that sur-


The union 3 :
of body rounds it the pointed end ever moving
and mind. ;


ever driven into the future by the


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 325


weight of our past, we were able to confirm and
illustrate what we had said of the function of the
body, fand at the same time to prepare the way
for an approximation of body and mind.

For after having successively studied pure
perception and pure memory, westill had to bring
them together. If pure recollection is already
spirit, and if pure perception is still in a sense
matter, we ought to be able, by placing ourselves
at their meeting place, to throw some light on
the reciprocal action ofspirit and matter. ‘ Pure,’
that is to say instantaneous, perception is, in fact,
only an ideal, an extreme. (Every perception fills
a certain depth of duration, prolongs the past
into the present, and thereby partakes of memory.\
So that if we take perception in its concrete
form, as a synthesis of pure memory and pure
perception, that is to say of mind and matter, we
compress within its narrowest limits the problem
of the union of souland body. This is the attempt
we have made especially in the latter part of this
essay. s

The opposition of the two principles, in dualism
in general, resolves itself into the threefold opposi-
tion of the inextended and the extended, quality
and quantity, freedom and necessity. If our
conception of the function of the body, if our
analyses of pure perception and pure memory,
are destined to throw light on any aspect of the
correlation of body and mind, it can only be on
condition of suppressing or toning down these


326 MATTER AND MEMORY


three oppositions. We will, then, examine them in
turn, presenting here in a more metaphysical
form the conclusions which we have made a
point of drawing from psychology alone.

1st. If we imagine on the one hand the extended
really divided into corpuscles, for example, and
on the other a consciousness with sen-
sations, in themselves inextensive, which
come to project themselves into space, we shall
evidently find nothing common to such matter
and such a consciousness, to body and mind.
But this opposition between perception and matter
is the artificial work of an understanding which
decomposes and recomposes according to its
habits or its laws: it is not given in immediate
intuition. _ What is given are not inextensive sen-
sations: how should they find their way .back to
space, choose a locality within it, and codrdinate
themselves there so as to build up an experience
that is common to all men? And what is real
is not extension, divided into independent parts:
how, being deprived of all possible relationship
to our consciousness, could it unfold a series
of changes of which the relations and the order
exactly correspond to the relations and the order
of our representations ? That which is given,
that which is real, is something intermediate
between divided extension and pure inexten-
sion. It is what we have termed the extensive,
Extensity is the most salient quality of percep
tion. It is in consolidating and in subdividing


Extension.


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 327


it by means of an abstract space, stretched by
us beneath it for the needs of action, that we
constitute the composite and infinitely divisible
extension. It is,on the other hand, in subtilizing
it, in making it, in turn, dissolve into affective
sensations and evaporate into a counterfeit of
pure ideas, that we obtain those inextensive
sensations with which we afterwards vainly
endeavour to reconstitute images. And the two
opposite directions in which we pursue this
double labour open quite naturally before us,
because it is a result of the very necessities of
action that extension should divide itself up
for us into absolutely independent objects (whence
an encouragement to go on subdividing extension) ;
and,that we should pass by insensible degrees from
affection to perception (whence a tendency to
suppose perception more and more inextensive).
But our understanding, of which the func-
tion is to set up logical distinctions, and con-
sequently clean-cut oppositions, throws itself
into each of these ways in turn, and follows each
to the end. It thus sets up, at one extremity,
an infinitely divisible extension, at the other
sensations which are absolutely inextensive. And
it creates thereby the opposition which it after-
wards contemplates amazed.
and. Far less artificial is the opposition between
quality and quantity, that is to say between
consciousness and movement: but this


si esses opposition is radical only if we have


328 MATTER AND MEMORY


already accepted the other. For if you suppose
that the qualities of things are nothing but inex-
tensive sensations ‘affecting a consciousness, SO
that these qualities represent merely, as so
many symbols, homogeneous and calculable
changes going on in space, you must imagine be-
tween these sensations and these changes an
incomprehensible correspondence. On the con-
trary, as soon as you give up establishing be-
tween them a priori this factitious contrariety,
you see the barriers which seemed to separate
them fall one after another. First, it is not
true that consciousness, turned round on itself, is
confronted with a merely internal procession of
inextensive perceptions. It is inside the very
things perceived that you put back pure percep-
tion, and the first obstacle is thus removed. You
are confronted with a second, itistrue : the homo-
geneous and calculable changes on which science
works seem to belong to multiple and independent
elements, such as atoms, of which these changes
appear as mere accidents, and this multiplicity
comes in between the perception and its object.
But if the division of the extended is purely
relative to our possible action upon it, the idea
of independent corpuscles is a fortiori schematic
and provisional. Science itself, moreover, allows
us to discard it; and so the second barrier falls.
A last interval remains to be over-leapt: that
which separates the heterogeneity of qualities from
the apparent homogeneity of movements that


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 329


are extended. But, just because we have set
aside the ‘elements, atoms or what not, to
which these movements had been affixed, we
are no longer dealing with that movement which
is the accident of a moving body, with that
abstract motion which the mechanician studies
and which is nothing, at bottom, but the common
measure of concrete movements. How could this
abstract motion, which becomes immobility when
we alter our point of reference, be the basis of
real changes, that is, of changes that are felt ?
How, composed as it is of a series of instantaneous
positions, could it filla duration of which the parts
go overand merge each into the others ? Only one
hypothesis, then, remains possible; namely, that
concrete movement, capable, like consciousness,
of prolonging its past into its present, capable,
by repeating ‘itself, of engendering sensible quali-
ties, already possesses something akin to con-
ciousness, something akin to sensation. On this
theory, it might be this same sensation diluted,
spread out over an infinitely larger number of
moments, this same sensation quivering, as we
have said, like a chrysalis within its envelope.
Then a last point would remain to be cleared
up: how is the contraction effected,—the cons
traction no longer of homogeneous movements
into distinct qualities, but of changes that are
less heterogeneous into changes that are more
heterogeneous? But this question is answered
by our analysis of concrete perception: this


330 MATTER AND MEMORY


perception, the living synthesis of pure per-
ception and pure memory, necessarily sums up
in its apparent simplicity an enormous multi-
plicity of moments. Between sensible qualities,
as regarded in our representation of them,
and these same qualities treated as calculable
changes, there is therefore only a difference in
rhythm of duration, a difference of internal ten-
sion. Thus, by the idea of tension we have
striven to overcome the opposition between quality
and quantity, as by the idea of extension that
between the inextended and the extended. Exten-
sion and tension admit of degrees, multiple but
always determined. The function of the under-
standing is to detach from these two genera,
extension and tension, their empty container,
that is to say, homogeneous space and pure
quantity, and thereby to substitute, for supple
realities which permit of degrees, rigid abstrac-
tions born of the needs of action, which can
only be taken or left; and to create thus, for
reflective thought, dilemmas of which neither
alternative is accepted by reality.

3rd. But if we regard in this way the relations
of the extended to the inextended, of quality
Freedom ana tO Quantity, we shall have less difficulty -
necessity. in comprehending the third and last
opposition, that of freedom and necessity. Abso-
lute necessity would be represented by a perfect
equivalence of the successive moments of dura-
tion, each to each. Is it so with the duration,


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION Ries


of the material universe ? Can each moment

be mathematically deduced from the preceding

moment ? We have throughout this work, and

for the convenience of study, supposed that it

was really so; and such is, in fact, the distance

between the rhythm of our duration and that of

the flow of things, that the contingency of the

course of nature, so profoundly studied in recent
philosophy, must, for us, be practically equiva-

lent to necessity. So let us keep to our hypo-

thesis, though it might have to be attenuated.

Even so, freedom is not in nature an im-

peritum in wmperto. We have said that this ¢/
nature might be regarded as a neutralized and Olg,,,,/
consequently a latent consciousness, a conscious- ps3 }
ness of which the eventual manifestations hold ie
each other reciprocally in check, and annul each pe
other precisely at the moment when they might, f/f.
appear. The first gleams which are thrown upon p 4 )»
it by an individual consciousness do not therefore ea
shine on it with an unheralded light: this con- ae
sciousness does but remove an obstacle ; it extracts & aa
from the whole that is real a part that is virtual,#


chooses and finally disengages that which interests cs aut
ef


it ;and although, by that intelligent choice, itindeed “>,
manifests that it owes to spirit its form, it assuredly ge A
takes from nature its matter. Moreover, while

we watch the birth of that consciousness we are |
confronted, at the same time, by the apparition


of living bodies, capable, even in their simplest
forms, of movements spontaneous and unforeseen,


332 MATTER AND MEMORY


The progress of living matter consists in a
differentiation of function which leads first to .
the production and then to the increasing com-
plication of a nervous system capable of canali-
zing excitations and of organizing actions:
the more the higher centres develop, the more
numerous become the motor paths among which
the same excitation allows the living being to
choose, in order that it may act. An ever greater
latitude left to movement in space—this indeed
is what is seen. What is not seen is the growing
and accompanying tension of consciousness in
time. Not only, by its memory of former experi-
ence, does this consciousness retain the past better
and better, so as to organize it with the present in
a newer and richer decision ; but, living with an
intenser life, contracting, by its memory of the
immediate experience, a growing number of exter-
nal moments in its present duration, it becomes
more capable of creating acts of which the inner
indetermination, spread over as large a multi-
plicity of the moments of matter as you please,
will pass the more easily through the meshes of
necessity. Thus, whether we consider it in time
or in space, freedom always seems to have its
roots deep in necessity and to be intimately
organized with it. Spirit borrows from matter the
perceptions on which it feeds, and restores them
to matter in the form of movements which it
has stamped with its own freedom.


INDEX


Achilles, The, of Zeno, 252.

Action, and pure knowledge, xvii;
and pure memory, planes of, 210;
and time, 23 ; necessary, 6; needs
of, and bodies, 261; orientation
of consciousness towards, 233;
plane of, 130, 217; possible, 7;
real and virtual, 310; reflex and
voluntary, 81; the true point of
departure, 67; useful, and pure
knowledge, 262; virtual and real,
57.

Actual sensation and pure memory
differ in kind, 179.

Adaptation, the general aim of life,


96.

Adler, 143.

Affection, 310; always localized, 61 ;
and perception, difference between,
53; has, from the outset, some
extensity, 61 ; impurity in percep-
tion, 60; its source, 57.

Affections, 1; an invitation to act, 2.

Affective states, vaguely localized, 52.

Amnesia, retrogressive, 224.

Amnesias, systematized, 222.

Aphasia, 231; cases of, 139; con-
ception of, xv; diagrams of sen-
sory, 156; sensory, 149; sensory,
evidence from certain forms of, 139.

Aphasias, the true, 151.

Apraxia, III.

Arnaud, 141, note; 142, note.

Arrow, The, of Zeno, 252.

Association, not the primary fact,
215; of ideas, in what it consists,
103; of ideas, laws of, 212; of
perceptions with memory, 106.

Associations, of similarity and con-
tiguity, 212 ff.

Associationism, error of, 171, 212,
321; intellectualizes ideas too
much, 213.

Attention, and recognition, 119; a
power of analysis, 124; compared
to telegraph-clerk, 123; first, an
adaptation of the body, 120; nega-
tively, inhibition of movement,
120; perception and memory,


relations of, 120 ff.; to life, xiv,
226; to life, conditioned by body,
225.

Atom, Faraday’s theory of, 265;
Kelvin’s theory of, 265; modern
theories of, 266 ; properties of, 263.

Auditory, image, 99; memory, 133;
memory of words, 161.

Automatic, the, and the voluntary,


145.
Automatism, 110; wide range of, 99.


Babilée, 149 note.

Bain, 161.

Ball, 201 note, 229 note.

Ballet, 144 note.

Bastian, 121 note, 140, 157 note.

Bateman, rox note, 141 note.

Becoming, instantaneous section of,
86.

Berkeley, fand Descartes, ix; and
‘mechanical philosophers,’ ix ; and
the object, viii; on extensity, 284


Berlin, ror note.

Bernard, ror note, 109 note, 144
note, 149 note, 153 note, 156 note.

Blindness and deafness, psychic, 132 ;
word, 132; psychic, 108, 111, 161;
psychic, as a disturbance of motor
habit, 115; psychic, two kinds of,
115; word, two kinds of, 133. ,

Bodies, distinct, and the needs of life,
261. ‘

Body, a centre of action, 5, 178; a
centre of perceptions, 43; and
mind, relation of, 295; and soul,
relation of, 234; an instrument of
action, 299; an instrument of
choice, 233; @ moving boundary
between future and past, 88; a
moving, trajectory of, 246; a
place of passage, 196; conditions
attention to life, 225; conscious-
ness of, is my present, 177; does
not give rise to representation, 5 ;
education of, 139; is that which
fixes the mind, 226; known from
within as well as from without, 1 ;


823 Zz


334


provides for the exercise of choice,
5; receives and gives back move-
ment, 5; structure of, 3; the
living, its unique place, 1.

Bradley, 120 note.

Brain, and memory, relation between,
119; an instrument of analysis
and of choice, 20; a telephonic
exchange, 19; cannot beget repre-
sentation, 81; concerned with
motor reaction, 8; functions of
the, 18; injuries to the, effect of,
231; lesions affect movements,
not recollections, 88 ; lesions affect
nascent or possible action, 120;
lesions and recognition, attentive
and inattentive, 132; lesions and
the motor diagram, 143; not con-
cerned with conscious perception, 8.

Broadbent, ror note, 156.

Brochard, 106 note.


Centre of representation, the body, 64.

Centres, of force, 265; of perception,
160; of verbal images, problem-
atic, 159.

Cerebral, localization,131; mechanism,
conditions memories, does not
ensure their survival, 84; me-
chanism, links the past with action,
88; vibrations, cannot create
images, 10; vibrations, contained
in the material world, ro.

Change, and permanence, 260.

Character, a synthesis of past states,
188.

Charcot, 109, 143, 156.

Chemistry, studies bodies rather than
matter, 263.

Clerle Maxwell, 263 note.

Colours, and rhythm of movement,
268.

Common sense, and matter, x; and
object, viii.


Conceptualism and  nominalism,
criticism of, 202.
Consciousness, actual, deals with


useful, rejects the superfluous, 188 ;
and matter, 276 ff.; and the inner
history of things, 276; chief office
of, 182; different planes of, 318 ff. ;
double movement in, 216; illusion
in regard to, 182; its office in per-
ception, 69 ; its part in affection, 2;
not the synonym of existence, 181 ;
of another tension than ours, 275 ;
orientation of, towards action, 233 ;
rhythm of, 272; the fringe of, 97;
the note of the present, 181.
Conscious perception, a discernment,
31; is our power of choice, 26;
materialist’s view of, 11.


INDEX


Contiguity and similarity, associa-
tions of, 212 ff. .

Continuity, universal, and science,
260.

Cowles, 228 note.


Dawn, of human experience, 241.

Deafness, and blindness, psychic, 132;
and blindness, word, 132 ; psychic,
does not hinder hearing, 161 ; word,
two kinds of, 133; word, with re-
tention of acoustic memory, 142.

Descartes, and Berkeley, ix; and
the laws of motion, 255.

Diagram, the motor, and brain
lesions, 143. :

Diagrams, of sensory aphasia, 156.

Dichotomy, The, of Zeno, 251.

Direction, sense of, 115.

Dissociation, is primary, 215

Dodds, 111 note.

Dogmatism and empiricism, ignore
duration, 242.

Drawing, methods of, 116.

Dream, plane of, 129, 218; power of,


94.

Dreamer, the, 198.

Dreams, memory in, 200.

Drugs, toxic, effect of, 228.

Dualism, ordinary, 293 ff.;
cended, 236.

Dunan, 286 note.

Duration, 243 ; our own, and quality,
271; tension of, determines the
measure of liberty, 279 ; tensions of
275.

Duval, 200 note.

Dynamists and mechanists, xvid

Dyslexie, ror note.


trans-


Ear, the mental, 166.

Egger, 200 note.

Eleatics, paradoxes of, 253.

Empiricism and dogmatism, 239;
ignore duration, 242.

Epiphenomenalism, x.

Epiphenomenon,and recollection, ro4.

Equilibrium, intellectual, how upset,
225.

Existence, capital problem of, 189;
conditions implied in, 189; im-
plies conscious apprehension and
regular connexion, 190; outside of
consciousness, 183; real though
SES NCS in time and in space,
185.

Exner, and empty time, 272.

Experience, human, dawn of, 241;
the true starting-point, 312.

Extended, the, and the inextended,
325.


INDEX


Extension, 326; and artificial space,
244; concrete, not bound up with
inert space, 244; idea of, 237.

Extensity, and inextension, 235;
concrete, and homogeneous space,
278; concrete, not within space,
289; perceived, space conceived,
245; perception of and sight, 286 ;
visual and tactile, 65.

Exteriority, notion of, 42.


Faraday, and centres of force, 313
and the atom, 265.

Force, centres of, 31, 265 ; in natural

> science, 257; metaphysical sense
of the word, 257.

Fouillée, 112 note.

Freedom and necessity, 279, 325 ff.,
330 ff.; degrees of, 296; two op-
posing points of view concerning,
243.

Freud, 157 note.

Future, no grasp of without outlook
over past, 69.


General idea, essence of the, 210.
Generality, 202.

Genus, general idea of, 209.
Goldscheider, 125.

Granville, Mortimer, tor note.
Grashey, 125, I5I note.

Graves, 153 note.


Habit, 89; interpreted by memory,
the study of psychologists, 95.

Habit-memory, 90; acts, not repre-
sents, the past, 93; advantageous,
94; comparatively rare, 94; in-
hibits spontaneous memory, 97;
sets up a machine, 95.

Habits, amassed in the body, 92;
formed in action, influence specu-
lation, xvi.

Hallucinations, negative, 151; veri-
dical, 73.

Hamilton, 121 note.

Hearing, intelligent, starts from the
idea, 145; mental, 149.

Heterogeneity, qualitative, 76.

H6ffding, 107 note.

Human experience, dawn of, 241.


Idea, and sound, in speech, 154.

Ideas, association of, laws of the, 212.

Ideas, general, 201, 321; always in
movement, 210; first experienced,
then represented, 208 ; the essence
of, 210.

Idealism, and materialism, 236;
and realism, vii; and realism.
have a common postulate, 17, 283;


335


English, 282, 287, 289; makes

science an accident, 16; the reef

on which it is wrecked, 301.
Idealist, the, starts from perception,


I4.

Idealists and realists, xvi.

Image, a privileged, 64; formed in
the object, 35; none without an
object, 38; present and repre-
senting, 28; representation and
thing, vii; visual or auditory, 99.

Image-centre, a kind of keyboard,
165.

Image-centres, 132.

Images, and the body, 1; belong to
two systems, 12; never any thing
but things, 159; not created by
cerebral vibrations, 10; preserved
for use, 70; recognition of, 86;
the delimiting and fixing of, 233.

Imagination, is not memory, 173.

Indetermination, of the will, 35; re-
quires preservation of images per-
ceived, 69; the true principle, 2r.

Inextended, the, and the extended,
325.

Inextension, and extensity, 235.

Insanity, a disturbance of the sensori-
motor relations, 228; and present
reality, 227.

Intellectual equilibrium, how upset,
225.

Intellectual process, two radically
distinct conceptions of, 127.

Interpretation, general problem of,145

Intuition, actual and remembered,
70; and contact with the real, 241;
pure, gives an undivided continu-
ity, 239.


James, William, 121 note, 286 note,
289 note.

Janet, Paul, 286 note. 3

Janet, Pierre, xv note, 151 note, 229
note, 230 note; study of neuroses,
XV.


Kant, 289 note; and diversity of
phenomena, 244; and speculative
reason, 241; and the impersonal
understanding, 306; on space and
time, 281.

Kantian criticism, ix.

Kay, 102 note, 199 note,

Kelvin, and the atom, 265.

Keyboard, the internal, 165.

Knowledge, relativity of, 241; useful
and true, 243.

Kiilpe, 125.

Kussmaul, rrr note, 141, 156 note.


Lange, 122 note.


336


Language, elaborate and primitive,.


158; the hearing of an unknown,
134.

Laquer, 11x note.

Learning by heart, 89 ff.

Lehmann, 105 note.

Leibniz, on Descartes, 255.

Leibnizian monads, 31.

Lépine, 200 note.

Lesions, brain and the motor diagram,
143.

Liberty, measure of determined by
tension of duration, 279.

Lichtheim, 140, 142 note, 156 note.

Light, red, 272.

Lissauer, 108, 116, 117.

Living matter, progress of, 67.

Localization, cerebral, 131.

Lotze, 50.

Luciani, 162 note.


Magnan, 157 note.

Man of impulse, 198.

Marillier, 120 note, 121 note.

Marcé, 141 note.

Materialista and idealism, 236.

Materialism and spiritualism, 13.

Materialism, essence of, 79; true
method of refuting, 80.

Materiality, begets oblivion, 232.

Matter, an aggregate of images, vii;
and common sense, vii; and con-
sciousness, 276 ff.; and percep-
tion, vii, 76 ; and perception, differ
only in degree, 78; and percep-
tion, kinship of, 292; and spirit,
reciprocal action of, 325; and
spirit, transition between, 295;
an ever renewed present, 178;
artificial division of, 259; coin-
cides with pure perception, 81;
considered before dissociation into
existence and appearance, viii;
definition of, 8; existence and
essence of, xvi; has no occult
power, 78, 81; in concrete per-
ception, 237; living, progress of,
332; metaphysic of, 295; not the
substratum of a knowledge, 82;
philosophers’ conception of, vii ;
philosophical theory of, 262 ff. ;
philosophy of, 80; the vehicle of
an action, 82.

Maudsley, 111, 121 note.

Maury, 200 note,

‘Mechanical philosophers’ and Berke-
ley, ix.

Mechanism of speech, 139.

Mechanists and dynamists, xvi.

Memories, conditioned by cerebral
mechanism, 84; supposed destruc-


INDEX


tion of, 160; where stored. Fal-
lacy involved, ror.

Memory, actualized in an image dif-
fers from pure memory, 181; and
brain, 86; and brain, relation be-
tween, 119; and perception point
to action, 302; a principle inde-
pendent of matter, 81 ; a privileged
problem, xii, 83; auditory, of
words, 147; bodily and true, their
relation, 197; capital importance
of problem of, 80; circles of, 127 ;
contraction of, 129; different
planes of, 129; empirical study of,
83; expansion of, 128; function
of, in relation to things, 279; gives
subjective character to perception,
80; habit, recalls similarity, 201 ;
habit, inhibits spontaneous me-
mory, 97; how it becomes actual,
162; independent, an appeal to,
90; in dreams, 200; intersection
of mind and matter, xii; is spirit,
313; its apparent oneness with
the body, 82; its part in percep-
tion, 70; its twofold operation,
80; loss of, 149; mixed forms of,
103; needs motor aid to become
actual, 152; not a manifestation
of matter, 313; not an emanation
of matter, 237; not destroyed by
brain lesions, 132; of a sensation
is not a nascent sensation, 174; of
words, localization of denied, xv;
perception and attention, relations
of, 120 ff.; phenomena of, 81;
primary function of, 303 ; psycho-
logical mechanism of, 82 ; psycho-
logy of, 295; pure, and action,
planes of, 210; pure, and the
memory-image, 170; pure, de-
tached from life, 179; pure, differs
in kind from actual sensation, 179 ;
pure, inextensive and powerless,
180; pure, interests no part of the
body, 179; pure, its reference to
spirit, 78; representative, 94 ff.;
reverberation, in consciousness, of
indetermination, 70 ; spontaneous,
in children and savages, 198 ; spon-
taneous, its exaltation and inhibi-
tion, 98 ; spontaneous, recalls dif-
ferences, 201; subjective side of
knowledge, 25; supplanting per-
ception, 24; the condensing power
of, 76; the two forms of, 89 ff.; to be
sought apart from motor adapta-
tion, 119; true, records every mo-
ment of duration, 94; two forms,
support each other, 98; two kinds
of, 195; visual, 108.

Memory-image, and habit memory,


INDEX


their coalescence, 103; and motor
habit, distinct in kind, 103; and
pure memory, I70.

Memory-images, and recognition, 92 ;
and the normal consciousness, 96 ;
recognition by, 118; utility deter-
mines retention of, 97.

Mental and physical, the, not mere
duplicates, 300.

Mental functions, utilitarian char-
acter of, xvii.

Mental hearing, 149.

Mental life, tones of, 221.

Mental states, unconscious, 183.

Metaphysical problems, empirical
solution of, 83.

Mes Phyaice and psychology, relation
of, xv.

Mill, J. S., and possible sensation, 306.

Mind, and body, relation of, 295;
degree of tension of, 126; normal
work of, 225.

Mnemonics, ror.

Moeli, 157 note.

Moment, the present, how consti-
tuted, 178.

More, Henry, and Descartes, 255.

Moreau de Tours, 228 note.

Motion, and its cause, 257; in
seearsany only an abstraction,
268.

Motor aphasia, does not involve word
deafness, 138.

Motor apparatus, in course of con-
struction, Ir12.

‘ Motor diagram,’ the, 134, 136, 153;
and brain lesions, 143.

Movement, absolutely indivisible, 246
ff.; and its trajectory, 250 ff. ;
as a change of quality, 258; can
only produce movement, 119;
essence of, 291; real, akin to con-
sciousness, 267; real, and ap-
parent, 258; real, for the physi-
cist, 254; real, quality rather than
quantity, 267; real, the transfer-
ence of a state, 267; relative, for
the mathematician, 254; rhythm
of, and colours, 268; rhythm of,
and sounds, 269.

Movements, consolidated, difficulty
in modifying their order, 112;
indivisibles, occupying duration,
268; in space and qualities in
consciousness, 267; of imitation,
124; prepare the choice among
memory-images, 113; real, not
merely change of position, 256.

Moving body, 246 ff.

Miiller, roo note, 108, 116, 125.

Miinck, 107 note.

Minsterberg, 125.


SEY;


Necessity, and freedom, 325, 330 ff;
natural and freedom, 279.

Negative hallucinations, 151.

Nerves, section of, 7.

Nervous system, 3, 17, 227; a con-
ductor, 40; channel for the trans-
mission of movements, 81; con-
structed in view of action, 21.

Newton, 257 note.

Nominalism and _ conceptualism,
criticism of, 202 ff.

Object, the, and common sense, viii.

Objects and facts are carved out of
teality, 239.

Oblivion and materiality, 232.

Oppenheim, 99 note.

Order of representation, necessary or
contingent, 187.

Orientation of consciousness, towards
action, 233.


Pain, a local effort, 56; real signifi-
cance of, 55; the nature of, 3rr.

Parallelism, x.

Past, an idea, 74; and present, differ
in more than degree, 175; essen-
tially virtual, 173; that which
acts no longer, 74; has ceased to
be useful, 193 ; how stored up, 87 ;
survival of, 193; survives in two
forms, 87.

Past states,
acter, 188.

Pathology, evidence from, 133.

Perception, always full of memory
images, 170 ; always occupies some
duration, 25; and affection, dif-
ference between, 53; and matter,
vii; and matter, kinship of, 292 ;
and memory, difference between,
471; and memory, differ in kind,
75; and memory-image, not
things but a progress, 162; and
memory, interpenetrate, 71; and
memory point to action, 302; and
space, 23; a question addressed
to motor activity, 42; attention
and memory, relations of, 120 ff. ;
attentive, a reflexion, 124; centres
of, 160; directed towards action,
21; displays virtual action, 8;
distinct, brought about by two
opposite currents, 163; gives us
‘things-in-themselves,’ 303; im-
personal, 25; less objective in fact
than in theory, 70; limitation of,
34; means indeterminate action,
22; mixed character of, 270;
never without affection, 59; of
invidual objects, not primary, 205 ;
of matter, definition of, 8; of


synthesized in char-


338


matter, discontinuous, 47; of
things, of utilitarian origin, 206,
primary, a discernment of the use-
ful, 206; pure, 26, 64; pure, an
intuition of reality, 84; pure, a
system of nascent acts, 74; pure,
its reference to matter, 77; pure,
lowest degree of mind, 297; pure,
theory of, 69 ; reflective, is a circuit,
126; subjectivity of, 75; varies
with cerebral vibrations, 12.
Perceptive fibres, centrifugal, 125.
Permanence and change, 260.
Personality, dilatation of, xiv; dis-
eases of, 229; division of, 229;
present undivided in perception,


215.

Philosophy, the method of, 239.

Photography, mental, and subcon-
sciousness, IOI.

Phrases and words, 148.

Physical and mental, the, not mere
duplicates, 300.

Physical exercise, how learnt, 136.

Pillon, 105 note, 107 note.

Place, diversity of, not absolute, 256;
every, relative, 256.

Plane, of action, 217; of dream, 218.

Presence and representation, 27.

Present, at once sensation and move-
ment, 177; definition of, 193;
ideal, 176; ideo-motor, 74; is
consciousness of the body, 177;
is sensori-motor, 177; materiality
of our life, 177); real, 176; that
which is acting, 74; unique for
each moment, 177.

Present moment, how constituted,
T7Ss

Progress of the idea, 154.

Psychasthenic disease, how explained,


XV

Psychic blindness, 108, 111; and
deafness, 132; as a disturbance of
motor habits, 115 ; does not hinder
seeing, 161; two kinds of, 115.

Psychic life, the normal, 219 ; funda-
mental law of, 233.

Psychical states, wider than cerebral
states, xiii; have a practical end,
320; unconscious, 181.

Psychology and metaphysics, relation
of, xv.

Pupin, 200 note.

Pure memory and the memory-image,
170.


Qualities, in consciousness, and move-
ments in space, 267; of different
orders, share in extensity, 282.

Quality, and our own duration, 271;
and quantity, 235, 325; sensible,


INDEX


and space, 282; suggests some-
thing other than sensation, 271.
Quantity and quality, 235, 325.


Rabier, 106 note.

Ravaisson, 232 note.

Reaction, immediate and delayed, 22.

Reading, a work of divination, 126;
mechanism of, 125.

Realism, atomistic, 283; Kantian,
307 ; makes perception an accident,
16; ordinary, 287.

Realism and idealism, viii, 12, 73;
their common postulate, 283.

Realist, the, starts from the universe,
I4. :

Realists and idealists, xvi; views of
universe, 53.

Reality, every, has a relation with
consciousness, 304; what it con-
sists in for us, 189.

Recognition, and attention, 119;
animal, 93; attentive,"118 ; atten-
tive, a circuit, 145; automatic,
118; basis of, a motor pheno-
menon, 110; bodily, 109; by
Memory-images, 118; commonly
acted before it is thought, 113;
diseases of, 115 ; erroneous theories
of, 107; essential process of, not
centripetal but centrifugal, 168;
how constituted, 87; in general,
105; intellectual, 145; of images,
86; of words, 133 ; process of, 316.

Recollection, spontaneous, perfect
from the outset, 95.

Recollections, disappearance of, 149.

* Region of images,’ 165.

Relativity of knowledge, 241.

Repetition, addressed to the intelli-
gence of the body, 137.

Representation, at first impersonal,
43; image and thing, vii; less
than existence, 27; measure of
possible action, 30 ; of the universe,
4; of things, reflected by free-
dom, 29; unconscious, 183; use
of word, 3 note.

Resemblance, 202 ;
209.

Rhythm, of our consciousness, 272.

Ribot, 111, 121, 161, 200 note; his
law, 150.

Rieger, 149 note.

Robertson, 99 note.

Romberg, 141.

Rouillard, 201 note.


and difference,


Schumann, roo note.
Schwartz, 51 note.
Science, and consciousness,


125
and universal continuity, 260.


INDEX


Self, the normal, 212.

Sensation, localized and extended,
180; supposed unextended, 51.

ations, order and co-existence of,

165; tactile and visual, 287 ff,

Sense, good, 198.

Senses, data of, 259 ; educationfof, 45.

Sensori-motor system, 225.

Sérieux, 142 note.

Shaw, 161 note.

Shock, effect of, 150, 224.

Sight, and the perception of exten-
sity, 286.

Similarity and contiguity, associa-
tions of, 212 ff.

Skwortzoff, 157 note.

Sleep, and present reality, 227; its
effect on memory, 199.

Smith, W. G., roo note.

Sommer, ror note, 151 note, 158 note.

Soul and body, their relation, x;
union of, 234.


Sounds, and rhythm of movement,


269.

Soury, 162.

Space, abstract, 273; and sensible
quality, 282; and time, homogen-
eous, not properties of things, 280;
artificial, and extension, 244;
conceived, extensity perceived,
245; homogeneous, a diagram,
293; homogeneous, and concrete
extensity, 278; homogeneous and
the new hypothesis, 308; the
symbol of fixity, 289; the symbol
of infinite divisibility, 289.

Spamer, 141 note.

Specific energy of the nerves, 49.

Speculation, influenced by habits
formed in action, xvii.

Speech, mechanism of, 139; to hear
it intelligently, 153.

Spencer, 161 note.


Spirit, an independent reality, 82;


life of, how limited, 233.
Spirit and matter, reciprocal action
of, 325; transition between, 295.
Spiritualism, error of in relation to
matter, 79; use of word, 78 note.
Stadium, The, of Zeno, 252.
Starr, Allen, r1rz note. :
States, psychical, have a practical
end, 320; strong and weak, 173,
Stricker, 144. are
Subject and object, their distinction
and union, 77. ;
Subjectivity, a kind of contraction of
the real, 25; of affective states, 52.
Suggestions, with point de repére, 151.
Sully, 107 note, 121 note.
Survival, of the past, 193.


339
Symbols, mathematical, express only
distances, not real movement, 255


Tension, 327; idea of, 2373 in
memory, 219, 221; psychic, xv.
ing, image, and representation, vii.

Things, and their environment, 278.

Time and Free Will,’ 242 note, 268
Rote, 286 note.

Time, homogeneous, an idol of lan-

‘guage, 274.

ime and space, homogeneous, not
properties of things, 280; the
unconscious in relation to, 186.

Tones, of mental life, 221.

Toxic drugs, effect of, 228.

Trajectory, of a moving body, 246.


Unconscious mental
representation, 183.

Unconscious, the, in relation to time
andspace, 186 ; mechanism of, 72 ;
problem of, 183.

Unity, the factitious, 239 ; the living,
239.


Valentin, 149 note.

Van der Waals, 263 note.

Verbal images, discontinuous, 159.

Verbs, why retained longest, in
aphasia, 152.

Veridical hallucinations, 73.

Vertebrates, nervous system in, 17,

Virtual image and virtual sensation,
169.

Visual image, 99.

Voisin, 141.

Voluntary, the, and the automatic,
145.

Vortex rings, 265. °

Ward, James, 106 note, 120 note,
289 note.

Wernicke, 149 note, 156 note.

Wilbrand, 108.

Winslow, Forbes, 141, 150 note, 204
note.

Word blindness and deafness, 132;
two kinds of, 133.

Word deafness, and motor aphasia,
138; with retention of acoustic
memory, 140.

Words, and phrases, 148; auditory
memory of, 147.

World, material, not part of the
brain, 4.

Wundt, 121 note, 152 note; his
theory of perception, 164.

Wysman, 157 note.


Zeno, paradoxes of, 250 ff,
‘Zones of indetermination,’ 32,


states, 183;


Butler & Tanner The Selwood Printing Works Frome and London


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
CLAREMONT, CALIF.


LES AOL


SS!


+3 19 8


ai


Please Do Not R


and giva


e€


This Card From Pocket


move
yaxeod wold P20 styL 5aowed jon 0G gseald


SIF SIRI D ADA
SEES LS


re ere a
ey
LOGE
TS IPI ISI DISD LOE
- 7 LPS
EID IIS IPI SS PISS OL PE TE Z,
eee - 5 “PEE,
oe os E Ae, AS


ee
Le
ee,


7
eee
Sig


LESS
Bs


ee ae
oo ai


PS bp ob
Pipe eet Peg oy,
135 Spe ities:
DIS SS LLL LL Le Lae
LASS SS
FINI LID DD Sp NL,
Sei aap ae
EELS ‘Ay


ergs
SEPP ALES


oat : 2 ae
PDD IEEE AILS oso
SIP ap Pee ar ae ag ee: ee
PII IL ILLS L LE EY SEe SPELD 5 : oes
- Pohd Dada Bea Sa Phd dh d ed hoe “eee 6 4 se
eS i SAGE F I rere A SPLEEN AIL Do
ee
ise mS z ae SLID FLEE LAG
rr Piety ee sem eae
Bre Sae tenn gta Sese spaetseonetd paestsede
Bena eee n ae z Seajetagsaatogees poe
Ce ee ee
eS Ae
EPPO DIP ID DS
“ee ir
2 oe Ses
LADD AL ELD ALDI EE EDL A ED SARA A,
PT FP AT PDD
y Spt bast thy o,
asa asso esses en canes me
ISS SPP ite abs
SN Lr edgar
7 Ferrey eae rase Da aeaere peat reaped cee oe eee ae
AILERON SRST ee De
Mateaaa Sea Tendon ed eS


abe : DNPH ISIE,


SSuSOKS

a
Reo
Sh


x
SeNere)
<


PEI EPO Ee ae ee PIT PID,
Be te ae ararar  aas
‘ BNA. a.


SONS


Wateys
Nene


COMER NOS
HOG
ORSON


PPP ee, eee pia sae
VELL L LLL EIRP
Cre rarer
tA Ao
Pease arate rarer aerate
REP LP SOae LP ar ir Ler EPLILP SAP Se SoaE Eee Y
Spee arp eS ate aaa ee b eae
‘o LSS,


eee ea int
aNvek


M3


rerarer4
mare


arte)


i


Rae eur


rote oS
ak teas de oheedegeaeeee
as % z Sikehas
ened ‘
ry IS at ye
BD sgecoeheseeeces
Pet Pea IS
Beckeateasatogeconeaeaceees
tats bats RReheeatetala eee
AO OOOO
Senko cat seae Bakeh ete aSehs sakes
Basreesaeds
Saseees sees seseS
sepesenciepescocanee: Madea otsecea seek shee
Saises Sean Dare eae CNN ee


oats


Ree te


RX RK


veoh


CPP Oa TD,
RR


Sete eat haees
Par eoaearens eee resseeens Sese
52525, Poet ehasateeseeee
SEDER, Reeee kee tecens
Beseaeraceca sete eee oe Seecskseee
VRB ptaratsteralatiraiaterats ateraterbretarat
~ a ppaa ri tate x.


49
eter
Mo ree,


WRAY.
OY


waerees sere SOS aera eae wae gence eras acorns tour nee,
Ke arg se Sessa, SPSS 6 cbse
BAP = Preparer erases oe! <


Seoeneoe aaenees
Retee sea ease


eth oehy htt tego
Pease ae Seer:
codon eeu tare tens ore eseos erase
AIL E No. Sp ES
Stata tatatatan
: ~ . DADA COS
SDOTS Stale see 7 SESSA SSE
ota eri ta or etety tater ehh hort tati tater eae oe8
ett o. b ted bee fein bee tetera Sa RIRIEIND
Pettey ea the Pe ey a 5,
betas beet Pete bs Oe te De Oe be Dee
Sep, SSDS PONIES
. esas PRPS,


HAN


ne,
Lene
aie,


WOES


“


JOSNIINOS:
Pee ATS


ore Pats


BEEK


rv)


ty


setatane rn nteraoeabalponer ayia ssebe ps)
SSTNDS IS TR RTS ESIGS IRE EEIO OSA
SISTENT SAN NIRS SSS


CARRE


Sete ee


SAIS =
Ses.
$ Ms QIN
Pintle ada Neti hate Na Ra Rs a Ne SSS TOS < < 6
INT ee


VULNS,
SANS
STON IC?


SIS
eee
~~


4
fied
ce
aici
ag


SRE
SSeS

PSS eS

ay ee <

eee we : se SA

NOT SER SE AA RSE SUPA Re

OSS STS SARS
SSAA SS We ee ee

SES SSSA a ee


‘
‘


“
4
4
pt
4

*
sy


4
A
y
’
“
4
aha
¢


