SIRIS: A CHAIN OF PHILOSOPHICAL REFLEXIONS AND INQUIRIES CONCERNING THE VIRTUES OF TAR WATER
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/sirischainofphil01berk): the 1744 first Dublin edition. All 367 sections complete, with the author's verse mottos and the contents.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

On  T  A  R.

HAIL  vulgar  Juice  of  never  fading  Pine  !
Cheap  as  thou  art ! thy  Virtues  are  divine.
To  mew  them  and  explain,  (fuch  is  thy  Store)
There  needs  much  modern  and  much  ancient  Lore.
While  with  flow  Pains  we  fearch  the  healing  Spe!!,
Thofe  Sparks  of  Life,  that  in  thy  Balkm  dwell ;
From  loweft  Earth  by  gentle  Steps  we  rife,
Through  Air,  Fire,  «&ther,  to  the  higheft  Skies.
Things  grofs  and  low  prefent  Truth's  facred  Clue.
Senfe,  Fancy,  Reafon,  Intellect  purfue
Her  winding  Mazes,  and  by  Nature's  Laws
From  plain  Effects  trace  out  the  my  (lie  Caufr,
And  Principles  explore,  though  wrapt  in  Shades,
That  Spring  of  Life  which  this  great  World  pervade?,
The  Spirit  that  moves,  the  Intellect  that  guides.

Th*  eternal  One  that  o'er  the  Whole  pre£des,

Go


On  T  A  R.

Go  learn'd  Mechanic,  flare  with  flupid  Eyer,

Attribute  all  to  Figure,  Weight,  and  Size  ;

Nor  look  behind  the  moving  Scene,  to  fee

What  gives  each  wondrous  form  it's  Energy.

Vain  images  poffefs  the  fenfualMind ;

To  real  Agents,  and  true  Caufea  blind.

But  foon  as  Intellects  bright  Sun  difplays

O'er  the  benighted  Oib  his  fulgent  Rays,

Delufive  Phantomes  fly  before  the  Light :

Nature  and  Truth  lye  open  to  the  Sight :

Caufes  connected  with  Effects  fupply

A  golden  Chain,  whofe radiant  Links  on  high

Fix'd  to  the  Sovereign  Throne,  from  thence  depend, j

Arid  reach  e'en  down  to  Tar  the  nether  End.


CONTENTS.


Sect?

TAR  WATER,  how  made.'  *

How  much  to  be  taken  at  a  Time. 3,  1 1 6
How  long  to  be  continued,  mo

How  made  palatable,  1 1 5

A  Prefervative  and  Preparative  againft  the  Small-
Pox.  3
A  Cuie  for  Foulnefs  of  Blood,  Ulceration  of  Bowels,
Lungs,  Coniumptive  Coughi,  Pleurify,  Peripneu-
many,  Eryfiphelas,  Althma,  Indigeftion,  Cachectic
and  Hyfteric  Cafes,  Gravel,  Dropfy,  and  all  Irv-
flammations.  4,  7
Anfwers  all  the  Piirpofes  of  Elixir  Proprietati*,
Stoughton's  Drops,  bell  Turpentine,  Deco&ion  of
tjie  VVoodsa  and  Mineral  Waters, 55,  6i,  65


&pA


CONTENTS.

Sect.
And  of  the  molt  coftly  Balfams.  21,  22,  63

May  be  given  to  Children.  67

Of. great  Ufe  in  the  Gout  68,  80

In  Fevers.  75, 114.

Cures  a  Gangrene  as  well  as  Eryfiphelas  82,  83

The Scurvy, and all Hypocondriac Maladies

86,  IC9
A  Prefervative  for  the  Teeth  and  Gums.  1 1 4

h particularly recommended to feafaring Perfons,
Ladies,  and  Men  of  lludious  and  fedentary  Lives.

. .  XI7»  ll9

Its  Specific  Virtues  c^nfiits  in  its  volatile  Salts.

8, 123
Its Virtues  heretofore  known,  but  only in Part.

9> «  I  » *  '  2

Tar,  whence  produced,  10, 17

Refm,  whence.  18,  19

Turpenpine  what.  20

Tar  mixt  with  Honey,  a  Cure  for  the  Cough.  21

Refin,  an  efFe&uiJ  Cure  for  the  Bloody-flux  79

Scotch  firs  what,  and  how  they  might  be  improved.

25
Pine  and  Fir,  different  Species  of  each.  26,  28

The  wonderful  Structure  of  Trees.  29, 38

juices  produced  with  die  leaft  violence  bed  46

Myrrh  foluble  by  the  human  R.yJy  would  prolong  Life.

49
Tar  Water,  by  what  Means  and  in what manner  it

Operates.  50,  57

Is  a  Soap  at  once  and  a  Vinegar.  59

Aromatic  Flavours  and  Vegetables  depend  on  Light  as

much  as  Colours.  40, 214,  215

Analogy  between the  fpecific  Qualities  of  Vegetable

Jui  es  and  Colours.  165

A  fine  fuhtile  Spirit,  the  diftinguifliing principle  of  all

V  getables.  121

WmAc  the  Principle  of  Vegetation,  and  how  promoted.

j  26, 128

Theory


CONTENTS,

Sect?

Theory  of  Acids,  Salts,  and  Alcalies. 129,  136,  227
Air  the  common  feminary  of  ail  vivifying  Principles.

137

Air  of  what  it  confifls.  147, 151,  195, 197

Pure  sether,  or  invifible  Fire,  the  Spirit  of  the  Uni-

veife, which  operates  in  every  Thing. 152,  162

Opinion of the Ancients concerning it

166,  175,  229
And  of  the  Chinefe,  conformable  to  them.  iSo,  182
Fire  worfhipped  among  various  Nations.  183,  185
Opinion  of  the  bell  modern  Chymifts  concerning  it.

189, 19a
Ultimately  the  only  Menftruum  in  Nature  191

Adds  to  the Weight  of  Bodies,  and  even  Gold  made
by the Introduction of it into Qyicknlver.

192, 195
The  Theory  of  Ficinus  and  others  concerning  Light.

206,  213
Sir  Ifaac Newton's  Hypothefis  of  a  fubtile  sether  ex-
amined. 221,  228,  237,  246
No  accounting  for  Phenomena,  either  by  Auraclion
and Repulfion,  or  by  elaflic  sether, without  the
Prefence  of  an  incorporeal Agent,

231,  238,  246,  249,  294,  297
Attraction  in fome  Degree  difcaver'd by Gali  sei.

Phenomena  are  but  Appearances  in  the  Soul,  not  to
be accounted  for  upon  mechanical  Principles.

251,  252,  310
The  Ancients  not  ignorant  of  many  Things  in  Phyiks
and  metar-hyiics,  which  we  think  the  Diicovery  of
modern  limes.  265,  269

Had  fome  Advantages  beyond  us.  20g

Of  abfolntc  Space,  and  Fate,  27c,  272

Of  the  Anima  Mundi  of  Pl2to,  276,  284, 322

What meant by the ^Egyptian  Ifis  and Ofiris

268,  299

Fktj


CO  NT  E  NT  S.

flato  and  Ariftotle's  three-fold  Diftinftion  of  Ob-
jecls  306,  307

Their  Opinion  of  Ideas  being innate,  or  not.

308,  309

Neither  of  'them  believed  the  abfolute  Exigence  of
corporeal  Things.  311,  312,  316,  318

The  Study  of  the  Philofophy  of  Socrates  and  Pitha-
goras  would  have  fecured  the  minds  of  Men  from
the  Seifiirmefs  which  the  mechanic  Philofophy  has
introduced,  331,  332

The  Study  of  Plato  recommended,  3.32,  3 38

Who  agrees  with  Scripture  in  many  Particulars  . 335

His  Cpi.iicn  of  the  Deity,  and  particularly  of  a  Tri-
nity, agreeable  to  Revelation.  341,  365


f§;


i


(5)


S  I  R  I  S


A  Chain  of


P hi lof optical  Reflexions

AND

I  N  QJJ  I  R  1  E  S,  &V.

F»R  Introduction  to  the  following  piece  I
iffa  e  the  Header,  that  rothing  could,  in  my
prefent  fituatkn,  have  n:d' ced  me  to  be  at  tha
pains  of  wriring  it,  but  a  &*m>  b  lief  that  it  wou.d
piove  a  v.iju  ble  prefent  to  the  Public  What  enter-
tainment foever  the  reafoning  or  notional  pi  t  may  af-
ford the  mind,  I  will  vemure  co  iny,  the  o  her  'part
fcemeth  fo  futely  calculated,  to  do  go>  d  o  trie  Body,  that
.bo  h  muft  be  gainer.,.  For  if  the  iute  be  not  well
tune:,  the  muhc  an  tails  of  his  harmony.  And  in  our
prefeni;  Hate,  the  ^peraiions  of  the  mind,  fq  far  de-
pvnd  ^  the  rigi- 1  tone  or  g~od  condition  f  it's  inftru-
imnt,  that  any  thmg  which  greatly  conttibutts  to  pre-
ferve  or  recover  the  health  of  the  bedy,  is  well  worth
the  attention  oi  the  mind,  1  hde  cc  nh .legations  have
mov.d  me  to  communicate  to  the  Public  :h£  fa  utary
virtues  of  Tar  water  ;  to  which  F  (nought  my  lelf
inoifpenfib'y  objigea-,  by  the  Duty  every  man  ewes  to
A  2  aiaukiud.


4  S I R I S.

mankind.  And,  as  effects  are  linked  with  their  caufes,
my  thoughts  on  this  low  but  ufeful  theme  led  to  farther
inquiries,  and  thofe  en  to  others  remote,  perhaps,  and
Speculative,  but,  I  hope,  not  altogether  ufelefs  or  unen-
tertaining.

J.  TTN  certain  parts  of  America,  Tar  water  is  made
X  by  putting  a  quart  of  cold  water  to  a-qUart  of
tar,  and  ilirring  them  well  together  in  a  veffel,  which
is  le:'t  {landing  til]  the  tar  finks  to  the  bottom.  A  glafs
cf  water  being  poured  off  for  a  draught,  is  repla-
ced  by  the  fame  quantity  of  frefli  water,  the  veffel  be-
ing fhaken  and  left  to  Hand  as  before.  And  this  is  re-
peated for  every  glafs,.  fo  Jong  a$  the  tar  continues  to
impregnate  the  water  fuxficiently,  which  appears  by
the  fmell  and  talk.  But  as  this  method  produceth  tar
water  of  a  naufeous  kind,  and  different  degrees  of
ilrergth,  I  chufe  to  make  it  in  the  following  manner.
Pour  a  gallon  of  cold  water  on  a  quart  of  tar,  and
flir,  work  and  mix  them  thoroughly  together  with
a  wooden  ladle  or  flat  Hick,  for  the  fpace  of  five  or  fix
minutes;  after  which  the  vefftl  mull  Hand  clofe  co-
ver'd  and  unmoved  three  days  and  nights,  that  the
tar  may  have  full  time  to  fubfide  ;  and  then  the  clear
water,  having  been  firft  carefully  skimmed  without
ihaking  the  veiTel,  is  to  be  poured  off,  and  kept  in
bottles  well  flopped  for  ufe  *,  no  more  being  made
from  the  fame  tar,  which  may  Hill  ferve  for  com-
mon  ufes.

2.  The  cold  infuGon  of  tar  hath  been  ufed  in  fome
of  our  colonies,  as  a  prtfervative  or  preparative  a-
gainll  the  fmall  pox,  which  foreign  practice  induced
me  to  try  it  in  my  own  neighbourhood, when  the  fmall-
pox  raged  with  great  violence. And  the  tryai  fully  an-

fwered

*  I  make  this  water  Hronger,  than  that  firfl  pre-
fcribed  in  Sir  is,  having  found  on  more  general  ex*
perience,  that  five  or  fix  minutes  itirring,  when  the
water  is  carefully  cleared  and  skimmed,  agrees  with
molt  ilomachs.


S I R I S  j

fwered  my  expe&ation  :  all  thofe,  within  my  know-
ledge, who  took  the  tar  water  having  either  efcaped
that  diilemper,  or  had  it  very  favourably.  In  one  fa-
mily there  was  a  remarkable  inflance  of  feven  children/.'
who  came  all  very  well  through  the  fm  all  Pox,  ex-
cept one  young  child  which  could  not  be  brought  to
diink  tar  water  as  the  reft  had  done.

3.  Several  were  preferved  from  taking  the  fmall
pox  by  the  nfe  of  this  liquor  :  others  had  it  in  the
mildeft  manner,  and  others  that  they  might  be  able  to*
take  the  infection,  were  obliged  to  intermit  drinking
the  tar  water,.  I  have  found  it  may  be  drunk  with
great  fafety  and  fuccefs  for  any  length  of  time,  and
this  not  only  before,  but  alfo  during  the  difiemper.
The  general  rule  for  taking  it  is,  about  half  a  pint-
night  and  morning  on  an  empty  itomach,  which  quan-
tity may  be  varied,  according  to  the  cafe  and  age  of
the  patient,  provided  it  be  always  taken  on  an  empty
itomach,  and  about  two  hours  before  or  after  a  meal.
For  children  and  fqueamifh  perfons  it  may  be  made
weaker  or  given  Iittie  and  often,  more  water  or  Itfs
Itirring  makes  it  weaker,  as  lei's  water  or  more  ftirring
makes  it  llronger.  It  fhould  not  be  lighter  than  French,,
nor  deeper  coloured  than  Spanim  white  wine  j  if  a
fpirit  be  not  very  fenfihly-  perceived  on  drinking,  eit  e  s
the  tar  mull  have  been  bad  or  already  ufed,  or  the
tar  water  carelefly  made  or  kept.  Particular  experi-
ence will  belt  fhew  how  much  and  how  flrong  the-
ftomach  cm  bear,  and  what  are  the  pmpereil  times
icr  taking  it.  I  apprehend  no  danger  irorn  excels  in
the  ufe  oi  this  medicine.

4.  It  fee'med  probable, that  a medicine of  fuch
efficacy  in  a  diftemper  attended  with  fo rnauy  paruh t
ulcers,  might be alfo  ufeful  in  other  foulneffesof  the
blood,  accordingly  I  tried  it  on  feveral  perfons  infc
with  cutaneous  eruptions  and  ulcers,  w o  were  foon  re-
lieved,, and  loon  after,  cured. Eocdujraged by
SucceiTes,  I  ventured  to advife  it  in  the  foulef:  d ill
pers; wrereink  proved  much  more  fucctlsful  than  oa-
livatior.s  and  wood  drirjks  had  done.

5.  Having  tried  it in  a  great  v:irie:y  &f -cafes, !


6  S I R I S.

found  it  fucceeded  beyond  my  hopes  ;  in  a  tedious  and
painful  ulceration  of  the  bowels,  in  a  confumptive
cough  ar.d  (as  appeared  by  expectorated  pus)  an  ulcer
in  the  lungs ;  in  a  pleurify  and  pcripneumony.  Ami
when  a  per/on  who  for  fome  years  had  b(-en  fubjett
to  eryfipelatous  fevers,  perceived  the  ufual  forerunning
fy mptoms  to  come  on,  I  advifed  her  to  drink  tar  water,
which  prevented  the  eryfipelas.

6.  I  never,  knew  any  thing-  fo  good  for  the
ftomach  as  tar  water  :  it  cures  indtgeftion  and  gives  a
good  appetite.  It  is  an  excellent  medicine  in  an  althnia.
It  imparts  a  kindly  warmth  and  quick  circulation
t.Q  the  juices  without  heating,  and  is  therefore  ufefulr
not  only  as  a  pectoral  and  baliamic,.  but  alfo  as  a  pow-
erful and  fare  dcobllruent  in  cachectic  and  hylleric
cafes.  As  it  is  both  healing  and  diuretic,  it  is  very
good  for  the  gravel.  I  believe  it  to  be  of  great  ufe  in
a  dropfy,  having. known  it  cure  a  very  bad  anaiarci  in
a  perfon  whofe  thirlr,  thojgh  very  extraordinary,  oral
in  a  lhoit  time  removed  by  the  drinking  of  tar  witer.

\  The  ufefulnefs  of  this  medicine  in  inflainaiatory
oafes is  evident,  from  what has been already ob-

I  {a}.  And  yet  fome  perhaps  may  fufpect  that,  '
as  the  tar  itfelf  is  fulphureou*,  tar  water  muil  be  of  a
hot  and  inflaming  nature.  Rut  it  is  to  be  noted  that'
s>U  ballams  contain  an  acid  fpirit,  which  is  in  truth  a
volatile  fait.  Water  is  a  menihuum  that  tliflblves  all
forts  of  falts,.  and  draws  them  from  their  fuhjic"b.  Tar,
therefore,  being  a  ballam,  it's  falutary  acid  is  extracted
by  water,  which  yet  is  incapable  of  diilolving  it's  grois
re fi nous,  parts,  whole  proper  menilruum  is  fpifit  oi"
wine.  Therefore  tar  water,  not  being  impregnated
ivith  refin,  may  be  fafely  uf-d  in  inflammatory  cafes:
and  in  fact  it  hath  brren  found  an  admirable  febrifuge,
at  or.ee  the  fat*  ll  cooler  and  cordial.

8.  Tun  volatile  l'aits  ieparated  by  infufion  from  tar,
may  be  fuppafed  to  contain  it's  fpecific  vertues.  Mr.
Boyle 'and  other  later  Chymhis  are  agreed,  that  fixed
felts  are  much  the  fame  in  ail  bodies,  But  it  is  well
known  that  volatile  fairs  do  greatly  d»r»r,  and  the
eafier  thev  are  ftparated  from. the  fuhject,  the  more  do
{?)  V:.-7.  5,-  they


S I R I S.  f

they  poffefs  of  its  fpecific  qualities.  Now  the  moft
eafy  feparation  is  by  infufion  of  tar  in  cold  warer,
which  to  fmell  and  tafte  (hewing  itfelf  well  impreg-
nated, may  be  prefumed  to  extract  and  retain  the
moil  pare  volatile  and  active  particles  of  that  vegetable
balfam.

9,  Ta  r  was  by  the  ancients  efleemed  good  againft
poifons,  ulcers,  the  bites  of  venomous  creatures,  alfo
for  ptilical,  fcrophulous,  par?;litic  and  afthmatick  per-
fons.  But  the  method  of  rendering  it  an  mofFenfive
medicine  and  agreeable  to  the  ilomach,  by  extracting
it's  virtues  in  cold  water,  was  unknown  to  them.  The
leaves  and  tender  tops  of  pme  and  fir  are  in  our  times
ufed  for  diet  drinks,  and  allowed  to  be  antilcorbutic  and
diuretic.  But  the  moil  elaborate  juice,  fait,  and  fpirir.
of  thefe  evergreens  are  to  be  found  in  rar ;  whofe  vir-
tues extend  not  to  animals  alone,  but  alfo  to  vegetables.
Mr.  Evelyn  in  his  treatife  on  Foreft  trees  obferves  with
wonder,  that  ftcms  of  trees,  fmeared  over  with  tar.  are
preferved"  thereby  from  being  hurt  by  the  invenomed
teeth  of  goats  and  other  injuries,  while  every  other
thing  of  an  unctuous  nature  is  highly  prejudicial  to  them.
i a,  It  feems  that  tar  and  turpentine  may  be  had
more  orlcfs,  from  all  forts  of  pines  a^.d  firs  v/h/ufoever  j
and- that  the  native  fpirits  and  efTemial  falts  of  thofe  ve-
getables are  the  iame  in  turpentine  and  common  tar.
In  effect  this  vulgar  tar,  which  cheapnefs  and  plsnty
may  have  rendered  contemptible,,  appears  to  be  an  ex-
ce'L-nt  baliam,  containing  the  virtues  of  moil,  other
balfaws,  which  it  eafily  imparts  to  water,  and  by  thaC
means  readily  and  inoffenfively  infinuates  them  into  the
habit  of  the  body..

ii.  The  refinous  exfudations  of  pines  and  firs  are
an  important  branch  of  the  materia  medica,  and  not
only  ufeful  in  the  prefcriptions  of  phyficians,  but  have
been  alfo  thought  otbertvife  conducive  to  health.  Pliny
tells  us,  that  wines  in  the  time  oi  the  oid  Romans  wue
medicated  with  pitch  and  re  fin  ;  and  Jcnftonus  in  his
Dsndrograthia  obferves,  that  it  is  whoie'.ome  to  walk  in
groves  of  pine- trees,  wnich  impregnate  the  air  with
twifamick  particles, That  all  turpentines  and  refins  are

good


8  S I R I  ■  S.

good  for  the  lungs,  againft  gravel  alfo  and  obit  ruction^
is  no  fecret.  And  that  the  medicinal  properties  of  thofe
drugs  are  found  in  Tar  water,  without  heating  the
blood,  or  difordering  the  itomach,  is  confirmed  by  ex-
perience ;  and  particularly  that  ptifical  and  aith-
irutick  perfous  receive  fpeedy  and  great  relief  from  the
ufe  of  it

12.  Balsams,  as  all  unctuous  and  oily  medicine*,
create  a  mulcting  in  the  itomach.  They  cannot
therefore  be  taken  m  fubftance,  fo  much  or  fo  loi  g,  as
to  produce  all  thofe  falutary  effects,  which,  if  tho-
roughly mixed  with  the  bio  id  and  juices,  they  wou'd
be  capable  of  producing.  It  muft  tnerefore  be  a  thing
of  great  benefit,  to  be  able  to  introduce  any  requiiite
quantity  of  their  volatile  parts  into  the  fineft  duct's  and
capillaries,  fo  as  not  to  offend  the  ftomach,  but,  on  the
contrary  to  comfort  and  flrengthen  it  in.  a  great  de-
gree.

13.  According  to  Pliny,  liquid  Pitch  (as  he  calls
it)  or  Tar,  was  obtained  by  letting  fire  to  billets  of  old
fat  pines  or  firs.  The  firit  running  was  Tar,  the  later
or  thicker  running  was  pitch.  Theophraftus  is  more
particular  :  He  tells  us  the  Macedonians  made  huge
heaps  of  the  cloven  trunks  of  thofe  trees,  wherein  the:
billets  were  placed  erect  bcfide  each  other.  That  fuch
heaps  or  piles  of  wood  were  fometimes  a  hundred  and
eighty  cubits  round,  and  flxty  or  even  a  hundred  high  :
And  that  having  covered  them  with  fods  of  earth  to,
prevent  the  flame  from  burfting  forth  (in  which  ca  e  t  c
Tar  was  loll)  they  fet  on  fire  thofe  huge  heaps  of  pine
or  fir,  letting  the  tar  anJ  pitch  run  out  in  a  channel.

14.  Pliny  faith,  it  was  cuftomary  for  the  antients,
to  hold  fleeces  of  wooll  over  the  fteam  of  boyling  tar,
and  fqueeze  the  moilture  from  them,  which  watery  Jub-
ilance was  called  pifiinum.  Ray  will  have  this  to  be
the  famewith  the  piiTelsourn  of  the  ancients  ;  but  Har-
douin  in  his  Notes  on  Piiny,  thinks  the  piiTclasum  to  have
been  produced  from  the  cones  of  cedars.  What  ufe
they  made  of  theie  liquors  anciently  I  know  not :  But
it  may  be  preiumed  they  were  ui'ed  in  medicine,  though
at  prefent,  for  ought  I  can  find,  they  are  not  ufed
at  ali*  15.


S I R I S.  p

i£.  FrOM  the  manner  of  procuring  tar  (u)  it  plain-
ly appears  to  be  a  natural  production,  lodged  in  the
veflels  of  the  tree  whence  it  is  only  freed  and  let  loofe
(not  made)  by  burning.  If  we  may  believe  Pliny,  the
firft  running  or  tar  was  called  cedrium,  and  was  of  fuch
efficacy  to  preferve  from  putrefaction,  that  in  JEgyft
they  embalmed  dead  bodies  with  it.  And  to  this  he
afcribes  their  mummies  continuing  uncorrupted  for  fo
many  ages.

1 6.  Some  modern  writers  inform  us  that  tar  flows
from  the  trunks  of  pines  and  firs,  when  they  are  very
old,  through  incifions  made  in  the  bark  near  the  root.
That  pitch  is  tar  infpifTited  :  and  both  are  the  oyl  of
the  tree  grown  thick  and  ripened  with  age  and  fun.
The  trees,  like  old  men,  being  unable  to  perfpire,  and
their  fecretory  ducts  obflructed,  they  are,  as  one  may
fay,  choaked  and  fluffed  with  their  own  juice.

17.  The  method  ufed  by  our  colonies  in  America,
for  making  tar  and  pitch,  is  in  effecl:  the  fame  with
that  of  the  ancient  Macedonians  ;  as  appears  from  the
account  given  in  the  Philofophical  tranfaclions.  And
the  relation  of  Leo  Africanus  who  defcribes,  as  an  eye
witnefs,  the  making  of  tar  on  Mount  Atlas,  agrees  in
fubilance,  with  the  methods  ufed  by  the  Macedonians
of  old,  and  the  people  of  New  England  at  this  day.

18.  Jonstonus  in  his  Dendrographia,  is  of  opinion,
that  pitch  was  anciently  made  of  cedar,  as  weii  as  of
the  p:ne  and  fir  grown  old  and  oily.  It  fhou'd  Item
indeed  that  one  and  the  fame  word  was  ufed  by  ihe  n-
ciems  in  a  large  fenfe,  fo  as  to  comprehend  the  juices
iffuing  from  all  thofe  trees.  Tar  and  all  lorts  of  exfu-
dations  from  evergreens  are,  in  a  general  acceptation,
included  under  the  name  re  fin.  Hard  coarfe  refin  or
dry  pitch  is  made  from  tary  by  letting  it  blaze  till  the
moifture  is  fpent.  Liquid  refin  is  properly  an  oily
vifcid  juice  oozing  from  the  bark  of  evergreen  trees,
either  fpontaneoufly  or  by  incifion.  It  is  thought  to  be
the  oyl  of  the  bark  infpiilUted  by  the  fun.  As  it  iiTues
from  the  tree  it  is  liquid,  but  becomes  dry  and  hard
being  condenfed  by  the  fun  or  by  fire.

(6)  $etf.  13*  19.


io  SIR I S.

19  According  toTheophnftus,  refin  was  obtaJ«<£by
ftripino  orF  the  bir:\  from  pints  and  by  inctfions  mads
in  thefilver  fir  nnd  the  pitch  pine.  The  inhabitants  of
Mount  Ida,  he  tells  us  ilripxl  the  trunk  of  the  pine  on
the  funny  fide  two  or  three  cubits  from  the  ground.  He
obfeno'that  a  good  pine  might  be  made  to  yield  refin
every  year;  an  indifferent  every  other  year,  and  the
weaker  trees  once  in  three  years ;  and  that  three  Tim-
ings were  as  much  as  a  tree  couV.  bear.  It  is  remark-
ed by  the  fame  author,  that  a  pine  doth  not  at  once
produce  frut  and  refin,  but  (h«  former  only  in  its
youth, the  later  in  its  .-Id  age.

20  Turpentine  is  a  fine  refin.  Four  kinds  of
this  are  irt  ufe.  The  Turpentine  of  Chios  or  Cyprus
tvlvck  flows  from  t'.e  turpentine  tree;  tf.e  Venice  lur-
penrne  which  is  g<>:  by  piercing  the  Larch  tree  ;  the
Strasburgh  turpentine  which  Mr  Ray  informs  us  19
pr  cre.i  from  the  knots  of  the  filvci  fir  ;  it  is  fragrafet
and  grows  yellow  with  age;  the  fourth  kind  is  common
turpentine  neither  rrmfparent,  roi  fu  liquid  as  the
formers  an'  this  Mr.  Kay  uiketh  to  flw 'rom  the
mountain  pine.  .AH  ibefc  turpentines  are  u-eful  in  the
fame  intentions,  f'  eopnraftus  :aith  the  belt  refin  or
turpcn'im:  U  got  from  the  Tctebintlms  growi  g  in  Sv  ria
and  tome  of  the  Greek  ifl.nds.  The  next  beft  front
the  filvci  fir  and  pitch  pine.

.  21.  Turpentine  is  on  all  hands  allowed  to  hive
grc-t  medicinal  vinues.  Tar  and  us  irfufion  coi.tain
tfRjfe  virtues'.  Tar  waiet  is  extremely  pectoral  and  ref-
tor  tve,  and  if  I  m -y  ju<'ge,  from  wit  I  eicpe  knee  I
have  hacl.it  pbifdieth  t-  e  weft  valuable  -njiu^saf-
cribed  to  the  fever*!  b  lu»s  of  P  n-  of  oh  ,  of-Ca-
pivi  and  even  to  tne  baloi  <T  Giie.J,  fucn  is  ■.«'-.  vir.i.e
in  ailhmis  and  ph-urifir%  in  obftru&ians  ?rou«

erohom  of  the  inward  pa  rs Tar in fui  >r
with honey I have fiund  anexc tent
coughs; Bajfioni  as  harh  bee ilntadj  fcbft  apt

to  offend  the  Itomach. But ,
without  <ffendmg  the  fto**ac  . Rorithe  ttf
v/hercof  it  is  the  bdi  medicine  I  have  ever  tri .

a*. Fhj


s r r. i  s*  ii

Z2  The  folly  of  man  rateth  things  by  their  fcarce-
aefs,  but  Providence  hath  made  the  moll  ufeful  things
Cioft  common  Among  tho'e  Iquid  oily  extracts  from
trees  and  {hrubs,  which  are  termed  Ballam  ,  and  valu-
ed for  medcinal  virtues,  tar  may  hold  it's  place  as  a
moll  valuable  ballam.  It's  fragrancy  fheweth,  that  it
ispoirefTed  of  active  qualities,  and  it's  oilynefs  fhat  it
is  fitted  10  retain  them.  This  excellent  b  Iftm  may
be  purchafed  for  a  penny  a  pound,  whereas  tr  e  balfain
of  Judea,  when  moil  p'enty,  was  fold  on  the  very
{pot  that  produced  t  for  couble  it's  we  ght  in  fnver,  if
we  may  credit  Pliny  ;  who  alfo  informs  u-i  that  the  bell
bal&m  of  Judea  fioweu  only  from  the  bark,  and  that
it  was  adulterated  with  rcfiri  and  ovl  of  turpentine.  Now
Comparing  the  virtues  I  have  experenced  in  tar,  vuth
thofe  I  fi.d  afcnbed  to  the  precious  b^lm  of  Ju^ea,'of
Gilead,  or  of  Mtcha  (as  h  i$  diverfly  called)  I  am  of
opinion,  that  the  later  is  not  a  medicine  of  more  value
fr  tfEcacy  th .  n  the  former,

23.  Pliny  fupp  u'ed  amber  to  be  a  refm,  and  to
diftiil  from  fome  fpecies  of  pine,  which  he  gathered
from  it  s  fmell.  Neve r'theleft  it's  being  dug  out  of  the
ea  th  (hews  ii  to  be  a  foffi  ,  though  o  a  very  diff  ren:
kind  from  ofhe'i  f  flHs.  But  thus  much  is  certain,  that
the  ..^dic'na'  virtues  of  amber  are  to  be  found  in  tiie
balfamick  juite^  oi"  pines  and  firs.  Particularly  the
viituca  of  the  moil  valualrfe  preparation,  f  mean  ;a!t  or
ambrr,  r\:e  in  a  grea-.  degree  anfwered  by  tar  water,  as
atletergent diaphoretic,  and  diuretic.

24.  Therb  i  ,  as  hath  been  already  bbferved,  more
or  1'L  oyjfand  Balfuin  n  all  evergreen  ^rees,  which  re-
t  iii  the  acid  i p ■  r  t  tikat  rinciple  of  life  <  \A  verdure  ;
the  not  retiin.rVg  whereof  in  fufHciem  quanffy,  caiifet&j
orher  plants  to  droop  and  wittier.  O  thei~  everg  e?a
tree*  productive  ;of  refin,  pitch,  and  tar,  Pliny  enume-
rate fix  kinds  in  Eu"p<: ;  ]  mlonus  reckons  up  thrice
that  number  of  the  pine  and  fir  family.  And  indeed,
their  itjmber,  their  variety,  and  their  likenefs  mak-s
it  difficult  •.<  \* y.  XA.

25.  tt  ia  reiuarked  both  by  Thophralliis  and  Jrn-

fttatttj


ia  S I  R  i s.

flonus,  that  trees  growing  in  low  and  ihady  places  do
not  yield  fo  good  tar,  as  thofe  which  grow  in  higher
and  more  expofed  fituations.  And  Theophraftus  fur-
ther obferves,  that  the  inhabitants  of  mount  Ida  in  Afia,
who  diftinguifli  the  Idaean  pine  from  the  Maritime,  af-
firm, that  the  tar  flowing  from  the  former  is  in  greater
plenty,  as  well  as  more  fragrant  than  the  other.  Hence
it  fhou'd  feem,  the  pines  or  firs  in  the  mountains  of
Scotland,  might  be  employed  that  way,  and  rendered
valuable  ;  even  where  the  timber,  by  it's  remotenefs
from  water-carriage,  is  of  fmall  value.  What  we  call
the  Scotch  fir  is  falfely  fo  called,  being  in  truth  a  wild
foreft  pine,  and  (as  Mr.  Ray  informs  us)  agreeing  much
with  the  defcription  of  a  pine  growing  on  Mount  Olym-
pus in  Phrygia,  probably  the  only  place  where  it  is
found  out  of  thefe  iflands  ;  in  which  of  late  years  it  is
fo  much  planted  and  cultivated  with  fo  little  advantage,
while  the  cedar  of  Lebanon  might  perhaps  be  raifed,  with
little  more  trouble,  and  much  more  profit  and  ornament.
26.  The  pines,  which  differ  from  the  firs  in  the*
length  and  difpofition  of  their  leaves  and  hardnefs  of  the
wood,  do  not  in  Pliny's  account,  yield  fo  much  refin  as
the  fir  trees.  Several  fpecies  of  both  are  accurately
ciefcribed  and  delineated  by  the  naturalifts.  But  they
all  agree  fo  far  as  to  feem  related.  Theophraftui  gives
the  preference  to  that  refin  which  is  got  from  the  filver
fir  and  pitch  tree  (sActTH  and  titv<;)  before  that  yielded
by  the  pine,  which  yet  he  faith  is  in  greater  plenty,
Piiny,  on  the  contrary,  affirms  that  the  pine  produceth
the  fmalleft  quantity.  It  fhou'd  feem  therefore  that  the
interpreter  of  Theophraflus  might  have  been  miitaken,
in  rendering  viux,»  by  pinus,  as  well  as  Jonftonus,  who
likewife  takes  the  pine  for  the  tivk»  of  Theophraf-
tus.  Hardouin  will  have  the  pinus  of  Pliny  to  have
been  by  others  called  flrtwur,  but  by  Theophraftus  ttitv{.
Ray  thinks  the  common  fir,  or  picea  of  the  Latins  to
be  the  male  fir  of  Theophraftus.  This  was  probably  the
fpruce  fir  j  for  the  picea  according  to  Pliny,  yields  much
refin,  loves  a  cold  and  mountainous  fituation,  and  is
diftinguifhed,  tonfui  facilitate,  by  its  fitnefs  jo  t>3  fhorn,

which


S I R I S-  13

which  agrees  with  the  fpruce  fir,  whereof  I  have  feen
clofe  (horn  hedges.

27.  There  Teems  to  have  been  fome  confufion  in
the  naming  of  thefe  trees,  as  well  among  the  ancients
as  the  moderns,  The  ancient  Greek  and  Latin  names
are  by  later  authors  applied  very  differently.  PHny
himfelf  acknowledged,  it  is  not  eafy  even  for  the
skilful  to  diflinguifli  the  trees  by  their  leaves,  and  know
their  fexes  and  kinds :  and  that  difficulty  is  fince  much
increafed,  by  the  difcovery  of  many  new  fpecies  of
that  ever  green  tribe,  growing  in  various  parts  of  the
globe.  But  defcriptions  are  not  fo  eafily  mifapplied  as
names.  Theophraftus  tells,  that  T/Tf*  differeth  from
tf-ti/jiH,  among  other  things,  in  that  it  is  neither  fo  tall
nor  fo  flreight,  nor  hath  {0  large  a  leaf.  The  fir  he
diflinguifheth  into  male  and  female:  the  later  is  fofter
timber  than  the  male,  it  is  alfo  a  taller  and  fairer  tree,
and  this  is  probably  the  filver  fir.

28.  To  fay  no  more  on  this  obfeure  bufinefs  which
I  leave  to  the  Criticks,  I  mail  obferve  that  according
to  Theophraftus  not  only  the  turpentine  trees,  the  pines,
and  the  firs  yield  refin  or  tar,  but  alfo  the  cedars  and
palm  tree3;  and  the  words  fix  and  refina  are  taken  by
Pliny  in  fo  large  a  fenfe  as  to  include  tie  weepings  of
the  Lentifcus  and  Cyprefs,  and  the  balms  of  Arabia
and  Judaea ;  all  which  perhaps  are  near  of  kin,  and  in
their  moll  ufeful  qualities  concur  with  common  tar,  ef-
pecially  the  Norwegian,  which  is  the  moll  liquid  and
bell  for  medicinal  ufes  of  any  that  I  have  experienced.
Thofe  trees  that  grow  on  mountains,  expofed  to  the
fun  or  the  North  wind,  are  reckoned  by  Theophrailus
to  produce  the  beft  and  pureftTar :  And  theldaean  pines
were  diilinguiftied  from  thofe  growing  on  the  plain,  as
yielding  a  thinner,  fweeter,  and  better  fcented  tar,  all
which  differences  I  think  I  have  obferved,  between  the
tar  that  comes  from  Norway,  and  that  which  comes
from  low  and  fwampy  countries.

29.  Agreeable  to  the  old  obfervation  of  the  Peripa-
tetics, that  heat  gathereth  homogeneous  things  and
difperfeth  fuch  as  arc  heterogeneous,  we  find  chymiflry

B  is


14  S X R I 5.

is  fitted  for  the  analyfis  of  bodies.  But  -the  chymiftry
of  nature  is  much  more  perfect  than  that  of  human  art.
inafmnch  as  it  joineth  to  the  power  of  heat  that  of  the
moft  exquifite  mechanifm.  Thofewho  have  examined
Che  ftrutture  of  trees  and  plants  by  m;crofcopes,  have
di (covered  an  admirable  variety  of  fine  capillary  tube6
and  veiTels,  fitted  for  feveral  purpofes,  as  the  imbibing
or  attracting  of  proper  nourifhment,  the  diftributing
thereof  through  all  parts  of  the  vegetable,  the  difcharge
of  fuperfluities,  the  fecretion  of  particular  juices.  They
are  found  to  have  duels  anfvvering  to  the  tracheae  in
cnimals,  for  the  conveying  of  air;  they  have  others
anfvvering  to  lacleals,  arteries  and  veins.  They  feed,
digeft,  refpire,  perfpire  and  generate  their  kind,  and
.ire  provided  with  organs  nicely  fitted  for  all  thofe  ufes.

30.  The  fap  veflels  are  obferved  to  be  £ne  tubes  run-
ning up  through  the  trunk  from  the  root.  Secretory
i-effels  are  found  in  the  bark,  buds,  leaves,  and  flowers.
Exhaling  veiTels,  for -carrying  off  excrementitious  parts,
are  difcovered  throughout  the  whole  furface  of  the  ve-
getable. And  (though  this  point  be  not  fo  well  agreed)
I)r.  Grew  in  his  anatomy  of  plants,  thinks  there  ap-
pears a  circulation  of  the  lap,  moving  downwards  in
the  root,  and  feeding  the  trunk  upwards.

51.  Some  difference  indeed  there  is  between  learned
•men,  concerning  the  proper  ufe  of  certain  parts  of  ve-
getables. But,  whether  the  difcoverers  have  rightly
•gucfied  at  all  their  ufes  or  no,  thus  much  is  certain,
.that  there  are  innumerable  fine  and  curious  parts  in  a
vegetable  body,  and  a  wonderful  fimilitudc  or  analogy
between  the  mechanifm  of  plants  and  animals.  And
perhaps  feme  will  think  it  not  unreafonable  to  fuppofe
the  mechanism  of  plants  more  curious  than  even  that
of  animals,  if  we  confidcr  not  only  the  feveral  juices
fecretcd  by  dtffcnent  parts  of  the  fame  plant,  but  alfo
the  endlefs  variety  of  juices  drawn  and  formed  out  of
the  fame  foil,  by  various  fpeciesof  vegetables;  which
rnui;  therefore  differ  in  an  endlefs  variety,  as  to  the
..texture  of  their  abforbent  veflels  and  iecretory  duels.

52.  ABodt,  therefore,  either  animal  or  vegetable

may


S I R I S  is

may  be  considered,  as  an  organifed  fyftem  of  tubes
and  veflHs,  containing  feveral  forts  of  fluids.  And1  as
fluids  are  moved  through  the  veflels  of  animal  bodies,
by  the  fyftole  and  dlaftole  of  the  heart,  the  alternate
expanfion  and  condenfation  of  the  air,  and  the  ofcilla-
tions  in  the  membranes  and  tunicks  of  the  veflels  j
even  fo  by  means  of  air  expanded  and  contracted  in
the  tracheae  or  veflels  made  up  of  elaftie  fibres,  the  fap
is  propelled  through  the  arterial  tubes  of  a  plant,  and
the  vegetable  juices,  as  they  are  rarefied  by  heat  or
condenfed  by  cold,  will  either  afcend  and  evaporate
into  air,  or  defcend  in  the  form  of  a  grofs  liquor.

33.  Juices  therefore,  firfl  purified  by  (training
through  the  fine  pores  of  the  root,  are  afterwards  ex-
alted by  the  action  of  the  air  and  veflels  of  the  plant]
but,  above  all,  by  the  action  of  the  funys  light;  which
at  the  fame  time  that  it  heats,  doth  wonderfully  rarefy
and  raife  the  fap;  till  it  perfpires  and  forms  an  atmef-
phere,  like  the  effluvia  of  animal  bodies.  And  though
the  leaves  are  fuppofed  to  perform  principally  the  of-
fice of  lungs,  breathing  out  excrementitious  vapours
and  drawing  in  alimentary;  yet  it  feems  probable,  that
the  reciprocal  actions  of  repulflon  and  attraction,  ar«
performed  all  over  the  furface  of  vegetables,  as  well  as
animals.  In  which  reciprocation,  Hippocrates  fup-
pofeth  the  manner  of  nature's  acting,  for  the  nouriih-
ment  and  health  of  animal  bodies  chiefly  to  conlift.
And,  indeed,  what  fliare  of  a  plant's  nouriTiment  is
drawn  through  the  leaves  and  bark,  from  that  ambient
heterogeneous  fluid  called  air,  is  not  eafy  to  fay.  It
feems  very  considerable  and  altogether  neceflaryr  as
well  to  vegetable  as  animal  life.

34.  It  is  an  opinion  received  by  many,  that  ths
fap  circulates  in  plants  as  the  blood  in  animals :  that  it
afcends  through  capillary  arteries  in  the  trunk,  into
which  are  inofculated  other  veflels  of  the  bark  anfwer-
ing  to  veins,  which  bring  back  to  the  root  the  remain-
der of  the  fap,  over  and  above  what  had  been  depoflted,
during  it's  afcent  by  the  arterial  veflels,  and  fecreted
for-  the  feveral  ufes  of  the  vegetable  throughout  all  it's
B  z  parts,


i5  S I R I S.

parts,  item,  branches,  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruit.  O-
thers  deny  this  circulation,  and  affirm  that  the  Tap  doth
not  return  through  the  bark  veffcls.  It  is  nevei  thelefa
agreed  by  all  that  there  are  afcending  and  defcending
juices;  while  forae  will  have  the  afcent  and  defcent  to
be  a  circulation  of  the  fame  juices  through  different
veffels:  others  will  have  theafcending  juice  to  be  one
fort  attracted  by  the  root,  and  the  defcending  another
imbibed  by  the  leaves,  or  extremeties  of  the  branches :
laftly,  others  think  that  the  feme  juice,  as  it  is  rarefied
or  condenfed  by  heat  or  cold,  rifes  and  fubfides  in  the
fame  tube.  1  mail  not  take  upon  me  to  decide  this
controverfy.  Only  I  cannot  help  obferving,  that  the
vulgar  argument  from  analogy  between  plants  and  ani-
mals lofeth  much  of  it's  forc^,  if  it  be  confidered,  that
the  fuppofed  circulating  of  the  fap,  from  the  root  or
Jacleals  through  the  arteries,  and  thence  returning,  by
incfculations,  through  the  veins  or  bark  vt fills  to  the
root  or  lacleals  again,  is  in  no  fort  conformable  or  ana-
lagous  to  the  circulation  of  the  blood.

35.  It  is  sufficient  to  obferve.  what  all  muft  ac-
knowledge, that  a  plant  or  tree  is  a  very  nice  and  com-
plicated machine  (g) ;  by  the  feveral  parts  and  motions
whereof,  the  crude  juices  admitted  through  the  abfor-
bent  veffels,  whether  of  the  root,  trunk,  or  branches,
are  varioufly  mixed,  feparated,  altered,  digeikd,  and
exalted  in  a  very  wonderful  manner.  The  juice  as  it
paffeth  in  and  out,  up  and  down,  through  tubes  of
different  textures,  fhapes,  and  fizer,  and  is  affected  by
the  alternate  compreffion  and  expantion  of  elaftic  veffels,
by  the  uiciffitudes  of  feafons,  the  changes  of  weather,
and  the  various  action  of  the  folar  light,  grows  ftili
more  and  more  elaborate.

36.  There  is  therefore  no  chymiftry  like  that  of
nature,  which  addeth  to  the  force  of  fire  the  moll  de-
licate, various  and  artificial  percolation  (d).  The  in-
ceffant  action  of  the  fun  upon  the  elements  of  air,
earth,  and  water,  and  on  all  forts  of  mixed  bodies,
animal,  vegetable  and  foffil,  is  fuppofed  to  perform  all

forts


S I R I S.  17

forts  of  chymical  operations.  Whence  it  fhould  follow
that  the  air  contains  all  forts  of  chymic  productions,
the  vapours,  fumes,  Byte,  falts,  and  fpirits  of  all  the
bodies  we  know:  From  which  general  aggregate  or
mafs,  thofe  that  are  proper  being  drawn  in,  through
the  fine  veffels  of  the  leaves,  branches,  and  ftem  of  the
tree,  undergo  in  it's  various  organs,  new  alterations,
fecretions,  and  digeftions,  till  fuch  time  as  they  affume-
the  moll  elaborate  form.

37.  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered,  that  the  peculiar
texture  of  each  plant  or  tree,  cooperating  with  the  fo-
lar  fire  and  preexifting  juices,  fhould  fo  alter  the  fine
nourifhment  drawn  from  earth  and  air  (f),  as  to  pro-
duce various  fpecific  qualities  of  great  efficacy  in
medicine;  efpecially  if  it  be  confidered  that  in  the:
opinion  of  learned  men,  there  is  an  influence  on  plants
derived  from  the  fun,  befides  it's  mere  heat.  Certainly
Dr.  Grew,  that  curious  anatomifi  of  plant3,  holds  the
folar  influence  to  differ  from  that  of  a  mere  culinary
fire,  otherwife  than  by  being  only  a  more  temperate-
and  equal  heat.

38.  The  alementary  juice  taken  into  the  lacteal?,
if  I  may  fo  fay,,  of  vegetables,  confifls  of  oily,  aque-
eu?,  and  faline  particle?,  which  being  diflblved,  volati-
lifed,  and  diverfly  agitated,  part  thereof  is  fpent  and
exhaled  into  the  air;  and  that  part  which  remains  is  by
the  ceconomy  of  the  plant,  and  action  of  the  fun,,
{trained,  purified,,  concocted,  and  ripened  into  an  in-
fpilTated  oyl  or  balfam,  and  depofited  ia  certain  cells
placed  chiefly  in  the  bark,  which  is  thought  to  anfwer
the  panniculus  adipofus  in  animals,  defending  trees  from
the  weather,  and,;  when  in  fuflicient  quantity,  render-
ing them  evergreen.  This  balfam,  weeping  or  fweat-
ing  through  the  bark,,  hardens  into  refin;  and  this
moil  copioufly  in  the  feveral  fpecies  of  pines  and  firs,,
whofe  oyl  being  in  greater  quantity,  and  more  tenaci-
ous of  the  acid  fpirit  or  vegetable  foul  (  as  perhaps  it
may  not  improperly  be  called)  abides  the  action  of  the.
fun,  and  attracting  the  fun  beams,  is  thereby exalted

B  3  an  4

(/)  33.


18  S I R I S.

and  enriched,  fo  as  to  become  a  moft  noble  medicine  ;
fuch  is  the  laft  product  of  a  tree,  perfectly  maturated
by  time  and  fun.

39.  It  is  remarked  by  Theophraftus,  that  all  plants
and  trees  while  they  put  forth  have  moft  humour,  but
when  they  have  ceafed  to  germinate  and  bear,  then  the
iumour  is  ftrongeft  and  moft  fheweth  the  nature  of  the
plant,  and  that,  therefore,  trees  yielding  refin  fhould
be  cut  after  germination.  It  feems  alfo  very  reafonable
to  fuppofe  the  juice  of  old  trees,  whofe  organs  bring
no  new  fap,  fhould  be  better  ripened  than  that  of
others.

40.  The  aromatic  flavours  of  vegetables  feem  to  de-
pend upon  the  fun's  light,  as  much  as  colours.  As  in
ihe  production  of  the  later,  the  reflecting  powers  of
the  object:,  fo  in  that  of  the  former,  the  attractive  and
organical  powers  of  the  plant  cooperate  with  the  fun
(h).  And  as  from  Sir  Ifaac  Newton's  experiments  it
appears,  that  all  colours  are  virtually  in  the  white  light
of  the  fun,  and  fliew  themfelves  when  the  raies  are  Se-
parated by  the  attracting  and  repelling  powers  of  ob-
jects, even  fo  the  fpecirie  qualities  of  the  elaborate  juices
of  plants  feem  to  be  vhtually  or  eminently  contained  in
the  folar  light,  and  are  actually  exhibited  upon  the  fe-
paration  of  the  raies,  by  the  peculiar  powers  of  the
capillary  organs  in  vegetables,  attracting  and  imbibing
certain  raies,  which  produce  certain  flavours  and  qua-
Jities,  in  like  manner  as  certain  raies  being  reflected,,
produce  certain  colours.

41.  It  hath  been  obferved  by  fome  curious  anato-
wifts,  that  the  fecretory  veflels  in  the  glands  of  animal
bodies  are  lined  witha  fine  down,  which  in  different
glands  is  of  difierentTolours.  And  it  is  thought,  that
each  particular  down,  being  originally  imbued  with  it's
own  proper  juice,  attracts  none  but  that  fort;  by  which
means  fo  many  various  juices  are  ftcreted  in  different
parts  of  the  body.  And  perhaps  there  wcy  be  fome-
thing  analougous  to  this,  in  the  fine  abforbent  vefi'ds  of
plants,  which  may  cooperate  towards  producing  tliat

end  lei's
(b)  36,  37-


S I R I S.  is>

endlefs  variety  of  juices,  elaborated  in  plants  from  the
fame  earth  and  air.

42.  The  balfam  or  eflentitfl  oyl  of  vegetables  con-
tains a  fpirit,  wherein  confifl  the  fpecifk  qualities,  the
fmell  and  tafle  of  the  plant.  Boerhaave  holds  the  na-
tive prefiding  fpirit  to  be  neither  oyl,  fait,  earth,  or
water;  but  fomewhat  too  fine  and  fubtile  to  be  caught
alone  and  rendered  vifible  to  the  eye.  This  when  iiif-
fered  to  fly  off,,  for  inftance,  from  the  oyl  of  rofemary,
leaves  it  deftitute  of  ail  flavour.  This  fpark  of  life,
this  fpirit  or  foul,  if  we  may  fo  fay,  of  the  vegetable
departs  without  any  fenfible  diminution  of  the  oyl  or
water  wherein  it  was  lodged.

43.  It  mould  feem  that  the  forms,  fouls,  or  prin-
ciples of  vegetable  life,  fubfiil  in  the  light  or  folar  ema-
nation (m)>  which  in  refpedt  of  the  macrocofm  is
what  the  animal  fpirit  is  to  the  microcofm  ;  the  interior
tegument,  the  fubtile  inilrument  and  vehicle  of  power.
No  wonder  then  that  the  ens  frimum  or  fcintilla  fpiri-
tuofa,  as  it  is  called,  of  plants  fhculd  be  a  thing  fo  fine
and  fugacious  as  to  efcapeour  niceil  fcarch.  It  is  evi-
dent that  natnre  at  the  fun's  approach  vegetates;  and
languishes  at  his  recefs;  this  terreftiai  globe  feeming
only  a  matrix  dipofed  and  prepared  to  receive  life  from
his  light  i  whence  Homer  in  his  hymns  ftyleth  earth  the
wife  of  heaven,  cLhoy^  *BUfdtf*  &&§o'wr*$t

44.  The  luminous  fpirit  which  is  the  form  or  life
of  a  plant,  from  whence  it's  differences  and  properties
flow,  is  fomewhat  extremely  volatile,  It  is  not  the  oyl,
but  a  thing  more  fubtile  whereof  oyl  is  the  vehicle,
which  retains  it  from  flying  off,,  and  is  lodged  in  feve-
ral  parts  of  the  plant,  particularly  in  the  cells  of  the
bark  and  in  the  feeds.  This  oyl  purified  and  exalted
by  the  organicai  powers  of  the  plant,  and  agitated  by
warmth,  becomes  a  proper  receptacle  of  the  fpirit;
part  of  which  fpirit  exhales  through  the  leaves  and  flow-
ers, and  part  is  arrefted  by  this  unduous  humour  that
detains  it  in  the  plant.  J t  is  to  be  noted  this  effential
©yl  animate:?,  as  one  may  fayc  wi'.h  the  flavour  of  the

plant
(m)  40,


16  S I R I " S.

plant  Is  very  different  from  any  fpirit,  that  can  be  pro-
cured from  the  fame  plant  by  fermentation.

45.  Light  impregnates  air  (n),  air  impregnates
vapour;  and  this  becomes  a  watery  juice  by  dedillation
having  rifen  full  in  the  cold  dill  with  a  kindly  gentle
heat.  This  fragrant  vegetable  water  is  poffcfled  of  the
fpecific  odour  and  tade  of  the  plant.  It  is  remarked
that  deflilled  oyls  added  to  water  fcr  counterfeiting  the
vegetable  water  can  never  equal  it,  artificial  chymiltry
falling  (hort  of  the  natural.

46.  The  lefs  violence  is  ufed  to  nature  the  better  ifs
produce.  The  juice  of  olives  or  grapes  iffuing  by  the
lighted  preflure  is  bell.  Reims  that  drop  from  the
branches  fpontaneoufly,  or  ocze  upon  the  flighted  inci-
fion,  are  the  fined  and  mod  fragrant.  And  infufions-
ar-e  obferved  to  act  more  drongly  than  decoctions  of
plants,  the  more  fubtle  and  volatile  falts  and  fpirits,
which  might  be  lod  or  corrupted  by  the  later,  being
obtained  in  their  natural  date  by  the  former.  It  is  alfo
obferved  that  the  fined,  pured,  and  mod  volatile  par:
is  that  which  fird  afcends  indedillation.  And,  indeed,
it  mould  feem  the  lighted  and  mod  active  particles  re-
quired lead  force  to  difengage  them  from  the  fubjedt.

47.  The  falts,  therefore,  and  more  active  fpirits  of
the  tar  are  got  by  infufion  in  co^d  water:  but  the  refi-
nous  part  is  not  to  be  diilblved  thereby  (p).  Hence.
the  prejudice  which  fome  perhaps  may  entertain  againlt
Tar  water,  as  a  medicine,  the  ufe  whereof  mignt  in-»
flame  the  blood  by  it's  fulphur  and  refin,  appears  to  be
not  well  grounded;  it  being  indeed  impregnated  with
a  fine  acid  fpirit,  balfamic,  cooling,  diuretic,  and  pof-
feffed  of  many  other  virtues  (q).  Spirits  are  fuppofed
to  confid  of  falts  and  phlegme,  probably  too  fomewhat
of  a  fine  oily  nature,  differing  from  oyl  in  that  it  mix-
eth  with  water,  and  agreeing  with  oyl,  in  that  it  run-
neth in  rivulets  by  dedillation.  Thus  much  is  allowed,
that  the  water,  earth,  and  fixed  fait  are  the  fame  in  all.
plants;  that,  therefore,  which  difFcrenceth  a  plant  or
makes  it  what  it  is,  the  native  lpark  or  form,  in  the-.

language.
<W37>43- (p)S'8-7- (l)$ea>Az>  44-


S I R I S.  21

language  of  the  chymiils  or  fchools,  is  none  of  thofe
things,  nor  yet  the  fineft  oyl,  which  feemeth  only  it's
receptacle  or  vehicle.  It  is  obferved  by  chymifts,  that
all  forts  of  balfarnic  wood  aiFord  an  acid  fpirit,  which,  is
the  volatile  oily  fait  of  the  vegetable :  Herein  are  chief-
ly contained  their  medicinal  virtues,  and  by  the  fryals
I  have  made,  it  appear*,  that  the  acid  fpirit  in  tar-
water,  polTeffeth  the  virtues,  in  an  eminent  degree,  oi
that  of  guaiacum,  and  other  medicinal  woods.

48.  Qualities  in  a  degree  too  ftrong  for  human
nature  to  fubdue,  and  aiiimilate  to  itfelf,  mull  hurt  the
conflitution.  Ail  acids,  therefore,  may  not  be  ufeful
or  innocent.  But  this  feemeth  an  acid  fo  thoroughly
concocted,  fo  gentle,  bland,  and  temperate,  and  withal
a  fpirit  fo  fine  and  volatile,  as  readily  to  enter  the  fmall-
tft  vtffels,  and  be  afilmiiated  with  the  utmcfl  cafe.

49.  If  anyone  were  minded  to  diffulve  fome  of
the  refin,  together  with  the  fait  or  fpirit,  he  need  on-
ly mix  fome  fpirit  of  wine  with  the  water.  But  fuch
an  intire  folution  of  refins  and  gums,  as  to  qualify  them
for  entering  and  peivading  the  animal  fyftem,  like  the
fine  acid  fpirit  that  firit  flies  cfF  from  the  fubjcct,  is
perhaps  imrcfiible  to  obtain.  It  is  an  apcthegme  of
the  chymifts,  derived  from  Helmcnt,  that  whoever
can  make  myrrh  foluble  by  the  human  body,  has  the
feret  of  prolonging  his  days :  and  Eoerhaave  owns  that
there  feems  to  be  truth  in  this,  from  it's  refilling  pu-
trefaction. Now  this  quality"  is  as  remarkable  in  Tar,
with  which  the  ancients  embalmed  and  preserved  dead
bodies.  And  though  Boerhaave  himfelf,  and  other
chymifls  before  him,  have  given  methods  for  making
folutions  of  myrrh,  yet  it  is  by  means  of  alcohol  which
extra&s  only  the  inflammable  parts.  And  it  doth  not
feem  that  any  folution  of  rnyrrh  is  impregnated  with
it's  fait  or  acid  fpirit.  It  may  not,  therefore,  feem
ftrange  if  this  water  fhou'd  be  found  more  beneficial  for
procuring  health  and  long  life,  than  any  foiucion  of
myrrh  whatfoever.

50.  Certainly  divers  refms  and  gums  may  have
virtues,  and  yet  not  be  able  for  their  groflhefs  to  pafs

the


22  S I R. I S.

the  lacleals  and  other  finer  veflels,  nor  yet,  perhaps,
readily  impart  thofe  verues  to  a  menjlruum,  ^hat  may
with  fafety  and  fpeed  convey  them  throughout  the  hu-
man body.  Upon  all  which  accounts,  I  believe  tar
water  will  be  found  to  have  lingular  advantages.  It  is
obferved  that  acid  fpirits  prove  the  Wronger,  by  how
much  the  greater  degree  of  heat  is  required  to  raifa
them.  And  indeed,  there  feemeth  to  be  no  acid  more
gentle  than  this,  obtained  by  the  fimple  afTufion  of  cold
water  j  which  carries  off  from  the  fubjecl  the  mcfi  light
and  fubtile  parts,  and,  if  one  may  fo  fpeak,  the  very
flower  of  it's  fpeciSc  qualities.  And  here  it  is  to  be
noted,  that  the  volatile  fait  and  fpirit  of  vegetables  dor
by  gently  Simulating  the  folids,  attenuate  the  fluids
contained  in  them,  and  promote  fecretions,  and  that
they  are  penetrating  and  a&ive,  contrary  to  the  general
nature  of  other  acids.

51.  It  is  a  great  maxim  for  health,  that  the  juices
cf  the  body  be  kept  fluid  in  a  due  proportion.  Therefore,
the  acid  volatile  fpirit  in  tar  water,  at  once  attenuat-
ing and  cooling  in  a  moderate  degree,  mufl  greatly
conduce  to  health,  as  a  mild  falutary  deobllruent,  quick-
ening the  circulation  of  the  fluids  without  wounding^
the  foiids,  thereby  gently  removing  or  preventing  thofe
obitructions,  which  are  the  great  and  general  caufe  cf
molt  chronical  difeafts;  in  this  manner  anfwering  to.
the  antihyiterics,  aflli  faetida,  galbanum,  myrrh,  am-
ber, and  in  general,  to  all  the  rcfins  and  gums  of  trees
or  fhrubs  ufeful  in  nervous  cafes.

52.  Warm  water  is  itfelf  a  deobfiiuent*  There-
fore the  infufion  of  tar  drunk  warm,  is  cafier  infinuat-
ed  into  all  the  nice  capillary  veflels,  and  atts,  not  only
by  virtue  of  the  balfam,  but  alfo  by  that  of  the  vehi-
cle. It's  tafle,  it's  diuretic  quality,  it's  being  fo  great
a  cordial,  fhew  the  activity  of  this  medicine.  And  at
the  fame  time  that  it  quickens  the  fluggifh  blood  of
the  hiilerical,  its  balfamic  oily  nature  abates  the  too
rapid  motion  of  the  fliarp  thin  blood  in  thofe  who  are
hedic.  There  is  a  kntour  and  fmoothnefs  in  the  blood
for  healthy  ftrong  people,  on  the  contrary, there  is

often


S I R I S.  23

often  an  acrimony  and  folution  in  that  of  weakly  mor-
bid perfons.  The  fine  particles  of  tar  are  not  only
warm  and  active,  they  are  alfo  balfamic  and  emollient,
foftening  and  enriching  the  (harp  and  vapid  blood,  and
healing  the  erofions  occaiioned  thereby  in  the  blood
veffels  and  glands.

53.  Tar  water  poffeffeth  theflomachicand  cardiac
qualities  of  elixir  proprietatis,  Stoughton's  drops,  and
many  fuch  tinctures  and  extracts,  with  this  difference,
that  it  worketh  it's  effect  more  fafely,  as  it  hath  no-
thing of  that  fpirit  of  wine,  which,  however  mixed
-and  difguifed,  may  yet  be  well  accounted  a  poifon  in
fome  degree.

54.  Such  medicines  are  fuppofed  to  be  diaphoretic,
which  being  of  an  active  and  fubtile  nature,  pafs  thro'
the  whole  fyftem,  and  work  their  effect  in  the  fineil
capillaries  and  perfpiratory  ducts,  which  they  gently
cleanfe  and  open.  Tar  water  is  extremely  well  fitted
to  work  by  fuch  an  infenfible  diaphorefis,  by  the  fine-
nefs  and  activity  of  it's  acid  volatile  fpirit.  And  fure-
ly  thofe  parts  ought  to  be  very  fine,  which  can  fcour
the  perfpiratory  duels,  under  the  fcarf  skin  or  cuticle,
if  it  be  true  that  one  grain  of  fand  wou'd  cover  the
mouths  of  more  than  a  hundred  thoufand.

55.  Another  way  wherein  tar  water  operates,  is
by  urine,  than  which  perhaps  none  is  more  i'afe  and  ef-
fectual, for  cleanfing  the  blood  and  carrying  off  it's
falts.  But  it  feems  to  produce  it's  principal  effect  as  an
alterative,  fure  and  eafy,  much  fafer  than  thofe  vehe-
ment purgative,  emetic,  and  falivating  medicines,  which,
do  violence  to  nature.

56.  A  n  obflruction  of  fome  veffels  caufeth  the  blood
•to  move  more  fwiftly  in  other  veffels,  which  are  not
obflrncted.  Hence  manifold  diforders.  A  liquor  that
dilutes  and  attenuates  refolves  the  concretions  which  ob-
struct. Tar  water  is  fuch  a  liquor.  It  may  be  faid.,
indeed,  of  common  water,  that  it  attenuates,  alfo  of
mercurial  preparations  that  they  attenuate.  But  it
ihou'd  be  confidered  that  meer  water  only  diftends  the
veffels  and  thereby  weakens  their  tone ;  and  that  Mer-
cury


64  S I R I S.

cury  by  It's  great  7nomentum  may  juftly  be  fufpecled  of
hurting  the  line  capillaries,  which  two  deobliruents
tlierefore  might  eafily  overact  their  parts,  and  (by  kf-
fening  the  force  of  the  elaitic  veffels)  remotely  produce
thofe  concretions  they  are  intended  to  remove.

57.  Weak  and  rigid  fibres  are  looked  an  by  the
molt  able  phyficians,  a^  fources  of  two  different  chiles
of  diitempers:  a  fluggifh  motion  of  the  liquids  occafi-
ons  weak  fibres:  therefore  tar  water  is  good  to  flrenth-
en  them  as  it  gently  accelerates  their  contents.  On
the  other  hand,  being  an  unctuous  bland  fluid  it  moilt-
ens  and  foftens  the  dry  and  ilifF  fibres:  and  fo  proves  a
remedy  for  both  extremes.

58.  Common  foaps  are  compofitions  of  lixivial  fait
and  oyl.  The  corrofive  acrimony  of  the  faline  par-
ticles, being  foftened  by  the  mixture  of  an  uncluous
fubftance  they  infmuate  themfelves  into  the  fmall  duels
with  lefs  difficulty  and  dinger.  The  combination  of
thefe  different  fubitances  makes  up  a  very  fubtile  and
aclive  medicine,  fitted  for  mixing  with  all  humours,
and  refolving  all  obftruclions.  Soap  therefore  is  juitty
efteeroed  a  moil  efficacious  medicine  in  many  diilem-
pers.  Alcaline  foap  is  allowed  to  be  cleaning,  attenu-
ating, opening,  refolving,  fweetening;  it  is  peroral,
vulnerary,  diuretic,  and  hnth  other  good  qualities  which
are  alio  to  be  found  in  tar  water.  It  is  granted,  rhac
oyl  and  acid  falts  combined  together  exilt  in  vegetables,
and  that  confequently  there  are  acid  foaps  as  well  as  al-
caline. And  the  faponaceous  nature  of  the  acid  vege-
table fpirits,  is  what  renders  them  fo  diuretic,  fudoriiic,
penetrating,  ablterfive  and  refolving.  Such,  for  in-
ftance,  is  the  acid  fpirit  of  Guaicum.  And  all  thefe
fame  virtues  ieem  to  be  in  tar  water  in  a  mild  and  falu-
tary  degree.

59.  It  is  the  general  opinion  that  all  acids  coagulate
the  blood.  Boerhaave  excepts  vinegar  which  he  holds
to  be  a  foap,  inafmuch  as  it  is  found  to  contain  an  oyl
as  well  as  an  acid  fpirit.  Hence  it  is  both  uncluous  and
penetrating,  a  powerful  antiphlogiftic,  and  prefervative
againll  corruption  and  infeclion. Now  it  fcems  evident

that


S I R I S.  |j

cliat  tar  water  is  a  foap  as  well  as  vinegar.  For  though
it  be  the  character  of  refin,  which  is  an  infpifiated
grofs  oy!,  not  to  diflblve  in  water  (a),  yet  the  falts  at-
tract fomeiine  particles  of  effential  oyl:  which  fine  oy!
fervcs  as  a  vehicle  for  the  acid  falts,  and  mews  itfelf  in
the  colour  of  the  tar  water:  for  all  pure  falts  are  colour-
lefs.  And  though  the  refin  will  not  diiTolve  in  water,
yet  the  fubtile  oyl,  in  which  the  vegetable  falts  are
lodged,  may  as  well  mix  with  water  as  vinegar  doth,
which  contains  both  oyl  and  fait.  And  as  the  oyl  in
tar  water  difcovers  itfelf  to  the  eye,  fo  the  acid  falts  do
manifeft  themfelves  to  the  tafte.  Tar  water  therefore
is  a  loap  and  as  fuch  hath  the  medicinal  qualities  of
foaps.

60.  It  operates  more  gently  as  the  acid  falts  lofe
their  acrimony  being  fheathed  in  oyl,  and  thereby  ap-
proaching the  nature  of  neuteral  falts,  are  more  benign
and  friendly  to  the  animal  fyftem :  and  more  effectually,
as  by  the  help  of  a  volatile  imooth  iniinuating  oy!,
thofe  fame  falts  are  more  eafily  introduced  into  the  ca-
pillary duels.  Therefore  in  fevers  and  epidemical  dif-
tempers  it  is  (and  I  have  found  it  fo)  as  well  as  in  chro-
nical difeafes,  a  moft  fafe  and  efficacious  medicine,  be-
ing good  againft  too  great  fluidity  as  a  balfamic,  and
good  againlt  vifcidity  as  a  foap.  There  is  fomething
in  the  fiery  corrofive  nature  of  lixivial  falts,  which  makes
alcaline  ioap  a  dangerous  remedy  in  all  cafes  where  an
inflammation  is  apprehended.  And  as  inflammations  are*
often  occafioned  by  cbftructions,  it  fhou'd  feem  an  acid
foap  was  much  the  fafer  deobftruent.

61.  Even  the  belt  turpentines,  however  famous  for
their  vulnerary  and  detergent  qualities,  have  yet  been
obferved  by  their  warmth  to  difpofe  to  inflammatory  tu-
mours. But  the  acid  fpirit  (e)  being  in  fo  great  pro-
portion in  tar  water  renders  it  a  cooler  and  fafer  med-
dicine.  And  the  etherial  oyl  of  turpentine  though  an
admirable  dryer,  healer,  and  anodyne,  when  outward-
ly applied  to  wounds  and  ulcers,  and  not  lefs  ufeful  in
cleaniing  the  urinary  pafl\ges  and  healing  their  ulcera-

C  tions5

(«)  $t£l.  47.  (e)  Seti.  7,  8.


a6  SIR I S.

tions,  yet  is  known  to  be  of  a  nature  fo  very  relaxing
as  fometimes  to  do  much  mifchief  when  taken  inward-
ly. Tar  water  is  not  attended  with  the  fame  ill  effects,
which  I  believe  are  owing  in  a  great  meafure  to  the
ethenal  oyls  being  deprived  of  the  acid  fpirit  in  diftil-
Jation,  which  vellicating  and  contracting  as  a  rtimulus
might  have  proved  a  counterpoife  to  the  exceflive  lu-
bricating and  relaxing  qualities  of  the  oyl.

62.  Woods  in  decoction  do  not  feem  to  yield  To  ripe
and  elaborate  a  juice,  as  that  which  is  depofited  in  the
cells  or  locidi  terebintbiaci,  and  fpontaneoufly  oozes
from  them.  And  indeed  though  the  balfam  of  Peru
obtained  by  boiling  wood  and  fcumming  the  decoction,
be  a  very  valuable  medicine  and  of  great  account  in
divers  cafes,  particularly  aflhmas,  nephritic  pains,  ner-
vous colics  and  obftructions,  yet  I  do  verily  think  (and
1  do  not  lay  this  without  experience)  that  tar  water  is
a  more  efficacious  remedy  in  all  thofe  cafes  than  even
taat  coftly  drug.

63.  It  hath  been  already  oblerved  that  the  reitera-
tive pectoral  antihyfterical  virtues  of  the  moft  precious
balfams  and  gums  are  poflefled  in  a  high  degree  by  tar
water  [tl).  And  I  do  not  know  any  purpofe  anfwered
by  the  wood  drinks,  for  which  tar  water  may  not  be
ufed  with  at  lealt  equal  fuccefs.  It  contains  the  virtues
even  ef  Guiacum  which  feems  the  molt  efficacious  of
nil  the  woods,  warming,  and  fweetening  tne  humours,
diaphoretic  and  ufeful  in  gouts,  dropfies  and  rheums,
as  well  as  in  the  foul  difeafe.  Nor  lhou'd  it  feem
Grange,  if  the  virtues  obtained  by  boiling  an  old  dry  wood
prove  twfcrior  to  thofe  extracted  from  a  balfam.

64.  There  is  a  fine  volatile  fpirit  in  the  waters  of
Gcronfter,  the  mail  eiteemed  of  all  the  fountains  about
Spa,  but  whole  waters  do  not  bear  tranfporting.  The
Stomachic,  cardiac  and  diuretic  qualities  of  this  foun-
tain fomewhat  referable  thofe  of  tar  water,  which,  if
I  am  not  greatly  miftaken,  contains  the  virtues  of  the  bell
thalybeat  and  fulphureous  waters;  with  this  differences
that  thofe  waters  are  apt  to  affect  the  head  in  taking,

which
(d)  Se8.  9.  8,1,  22,  23.


S I R I S.  i?

which  tar  water  is  not.  Befides,  there  is  a  regimen  cf
diet  to  be  obferved,  efpecially  with  ehalybeat  waters,
which  I  never  found  necefTary  with  this.  Tar  water
layeth  under  no  refhaint  either  as  to  diet,  hours,  or
employment.  A  man  may  fludy  or  exercife  or  repofe,
keep  his  own  hours,  pafs  his  time  either  within  or
without,  and  take  wholefome  nourifhment  of  any  kind.

65.  The  ufe  of  mineral  waters,  however  excellent
for  the  nerves  and  ftomach,  is  often  fufpended  by  colds
and  inflamatory  diforders  j  in  which  they  are  acknow-
ledged to  be  very  dangerous,  whereas  tar  water  is  fo
far  from  hurting  in  thofe  cafes,  or  being  difecntinued
on  that  account,  that  it  greatly  contributes  to  their
cure  (f).

66.  Cordials,  vulgarly  fo  called,  acl  immediately
on  the  ftomach,  and  by  cenfent  of  nerves  on  the  head,
.But  medicines  of  an  operation  too  fine  and  light  to  pro-
duce a  fenfible  efFecl  in  the  primes  <via?t  may,  neverthe-
lefs,  in  their  palTage  thro1  the  capillaries,  operate  on  the
fides  of  thofe  fmall  veffels,  infuch  manner  as  to  quick-
en their  ofcillations,  and  confequently  the  motion  of
their  contents,  producing  in  iflue  and  efFecl:,  all  the  be-
nefits of  a  cordial  much  more  lafling  and  falutary  than
thole  of  diftilled  fpirits,  which  by  their  cauftic  and
coagulating  qualities  do  incomparably  more  mifchier*
than  good.  Such  a  cardiac  medicine  is  tar  water.  The
tranfient  fits  of  mirth,  produced  from  fermented  liquors,
and  diftilled  fpirits,  are  attended  with  proportionable
deprefHons  of  fpirit  in  their  intervals.  But  the  calm
chearfulnefs  arifing  from  this  water  of  health  (as  it  may
be  juftly  called)  is  permanent.  In  which  it  emulates
the  virtues  of  that  famous  plant  Gen  Seng,  fomuch  va-
lued in  China  as  the  only  cordial  that  raifeth  the  fpirits
without  deprefiing  them.  Tar  water  is  fo  far  from
hurting  the  nerves  as  common  cordials  do,  that  it  is
highly  ufeful  in  cramps,  fpafms  of  the  vifcera,  and  pa-
ralytic numbnek.

6y>  Emetics  are  on  certain  occafions  adminiftred
with  great  fuccefs. But  the  overflraining  and  weake-
ning of  nature  may  be  very  juftly  apprehended  from  a
W  Sea,  7,  C  2-  courfc


aS  S I R I S.

courfe  of  emetics.  They  are  neverthelefs  prefcribed
and  fubftituted  for  exercife.  But  it  is  well  remarked
in  Plato's  Timeus  that  vomits  and  purges  are  the  woril
exercife  in  the  world.  There  is  fomething  in  the  mild
Operation  of  tar  water,  that  feems  more  friendly  to  the
ceconomy,  and  forwards  the  digefflons  and  feaetions  in
a  way  more  natural  and  benign,  the  mildnefs  of  this
medicine  being  fuch  that  I  have  known  children  take
it,  for  above  fix  months  together,  with  great  benefit,
and  without  any  inconvenience;  and  after  long  and  re-
peated experience  I  do  efleem  it  a  moil  excellent  diet-
drink  fitted  to  all  feafons  and  ages.

68.  It  is  I  think  allowed  that  the  origin  of  the
gout  lies  in  a  faulty  digeftion.  And  it  is  remarked  by
ihe  ableft  phyficians,  that  the  gout  is  fo  difficult  to  cure,
fcecaufe  heating  medicines  aggravate  it's  immediate,  and
cooling  it's  remote  caufe.  But  tar  water,  although  it
contains  active  principles  that  flrengthen  the  digeilion
beyond  any  thing  I  know,  and  confequently  mult  be
Jhighly  ufeful,  either  to  prevent  orhiTen  the  following
fit,  or  by  invigorating  the  blood  to  cad  it  upon  the  ex-
tremities, yet  it  is  not  of  fo  heating  a  nature  as  to  do
harm  even  in  the  fit.  Nothing  is  more  difficult  or  dif-
agreeable  than  to  argue  men  out  of  their  prejudices,  I
51iall  not  therefore  enter  into  controverfies  on  this  lub-
jeel,  but  if  men  difpute  and  object,  (hall  leave  the  de-
ciiion  to  time  and  tryal.

69.  In  the  modern  practice,  foap,  opium,  and  mer-
cury bid  faireft  for  univerfal  medicines.  The  firir.  of
ihefe  is  highly  fpoken  of.  But  then  thofe  who  magni-
fy it  molt,  except  againft  the  ufe  of  it  in  fuch  cafes
where  the  obftruclion  is  attended  with  a  putrefactive  al-
jkaii,  or  where  an  inflamatory  difpofition  appears.  It
as  acknowledged  to  be  very  dangerous  inapthific,  fe\er,
and  fome  other  cafes  in  which  tar  water  is  not  only  fafe
but  ufeful.

70.  Opium  though  a  medicine  of  great  extent  and
efficacy,  yet  is  frequently  known  to  produce  grievous
diforders  in  hyfterical  or  hypochondriacal  perfons,  who
inakeagreat  part,  perhaps  the  greateft,  of  thofe  who

lead


S I R I S.  sp

lead  fedentary  lives  in  thefe  iflands.  Befidesr  upon  all
conflitutions  dangerous  errors  may  be  committed  in  the
ufe  of  opium.

71.  Mercury  hath  of  late  years  become  a  medi-
cine of  very  general  ufe.  The  extreme  minutenefs,
mobility,  and  momentum  of  it's  parts,  rendering  it  a
molt  powerful  cleanfer  of  all  obstructions,  even  in  the
moil  minute  capillaries.  But  then  we  mould  be  cautious
in  the  ufe  of  it,  if  we  confider,  that  the  very  thing
which  gives  it  power  of  doing  good  above  other  deob-
ftruents,  doth  alfo  difpofe  it  to  do  mifchief.  I  mean
it's  great  momentum,  the  weight  of  it  being  about  ten
times  that  of  blood,  and  the  momentum  being  the  joint
product  of  the  weight  and  velocity,  it  mull  needs  ope-
rate with  great  force;  and  may  it  not  be  juftly  feared,
that  fo  great  a  force  entering  the  minuteil  veliels,.  and
breaking  the  cbftructed  matter,  might  alfo  break  or
wound  the  fine  tender  coats  of  thofe  fmall  veffels,  and
fo  bring  on  the  untimely  effects  of  old  age,  producing
more,  perhaps,  and  \v»rfe  obilructions  than  thofe  it  re*
moved  ?  Similar  confequences  may  juftly  be  appre-
hended from  other  mineral  and  ponderous  medicines,
Therefore,  upon  the  whole,  there  will  not  perhaps  be
found  any  medicine,  more  general  in  it's  ufe,  or  mo*e
falutary  in  it's  effects  than  tar  water.

72.  To  fuppofe  that  all  diflempers  arifing  from  very
different,  and  it  may.  be  from  contrary  caufes,  can  be
cured  by  one  and  the  fame  medicine  mull  feem  chime-
ricaj;  But  it  may  with  truth  be  affirmed,  that  the  vir-
tue of  tar  water  extends  to  a  furprizing  variety  of  cafes
very  diflant  and  unlike  (/>).  This  I  have  experienced
in  my  neighbours,  my  family,  and  my  felf.  And  at
I- live  in  a  remote  corner  among  poor  neighbours,  who
for  want  of  a  regular  phyficianhave  often  recourfe  to  me,
I  have  had  frequent  opportunities  of  tryal,  which  con-
vince me  it  is  of  fo;juit  a  temperament  as  to  be  an  ene-
my to  all  extremes.  I  have  known  it  do  great  good
in  a  cold  watery  conllitution,  as  a  cardiac  and  {torn a-
chic ;  and  at  the  fame  time  allay  heatacd  feverifluhirft

C  3  m

(!?)  Sea.  3>4>5>6;  zl>  &c-


30  S I R I S.

in  another.  I  have  known  it  correct  coftive  habits  in
fome,  and  the  contrary  habit  in  others.  Nor  will  this
feem  incredible  if  it  be  confidered  that  middle  qualities
naturally  reduce  the  extreme.  Warm  water,  for  in-
ftance, mixed  with  hot  and  cold  will  leflen  the  heat  in
that,  and  the  cold  in  this.

73.  They  who  know  the  great  virtues  of  common
foap,  whofe  coarfe  lixivial  falts  are  the  product  of  culi-
nary fire,  will  not  think  it  incredible,  that  virtues  of
■nighty  force  and  extent  mould  be  found  in  a  fine  acid
foap  Q),  the  falts  and  oyl  whereof,  are  a  molt  elabo-
rate product  of  nature  and  the  folar  light.

74.  It  is  certain  tar  water  warms,  and  therefore
fome  may  perhaps  ftill  think  it  cannot  cool.  The  more
effe&ually  to  remove  this  prejudice,  let  it  be  farther
confidered,  that  as  on  the  one  hand,  oppofite  caufts  do
fometimes  produce  the  fame  effect,  for  inftance,  heat
fcy  rarefaction  and  cold  by  condenfation  do  both  in-
creafe  the  air's  elafticity :  fo  on  the  other  hand,  the
fame  caufe  fhall  fometimc  produce  oppofite  tffects:
lieat  for  inftance  thins,  and  again  heat  coagulates
the  blood.  It  is  not  therefore  ftrange,  that  tar  water
'Ihou'd  warm  one  habit,  and  cool  another,  have  one
good  effect  on  a  cold  conftitution,  and  another  good
effect  on  an  inflamed  one ;  nor,  if  this  be  fo,  that  it
Ihou'd  cure  oppofite  diforders.  All  which  juftifies  to
Teafon,  what  J  have  often  found  true  in  fact.  The
falts,  the  fpirits,  the  heat  of  tar  water  are  of  a  tempe-
rature congenial  to  the  conftitution  of  a  man  which  re-
ceives from  it  a  kindly  warmth,  but  no  inflaming  heat.
It  was  remarkable  that  two  children  in  my  neighbour-
hood, being  in  a  courfe  of  tar  water,  upon  an  inter-
jniffion  of  it,  never  failed  to  have  their  iffues  inflamed
by  an  humour  much  more  hot  and  marp  than  at  other
times.  £ut  it's  great  ufe  in  the  fmall  pox,  pkurifies,
and  fevers,  is  a  fufficieM  proof  thft  tar  water  is  not  of
an  inflaming  nature.

75.  J  have  dwelt  the  longer  on  this  head,  becaufe
fome  gentlemen  of  the  faculty  have  thought  fit  to  de-
clare


S I R I S.  31

clare  that  tar  water  muft  enflame,  and  that  they  wou'd
never  vifit  any  patient  in  a  fever,  who  had  been  a  drink-
er of  it.  But  I  will  venture  to  affirm,  that  it  is  fo  far
from  increafing  a  feverifh  inflamation,  that  it  is  on  the
contrary  a  moft  ready  means  to  allay  and  extinguifh  it.
It  is  of  admirable  ufe  in  fevers,  being  at  the  fame  time
the  fureft  fafeft  and  molt  effectual  both  paregoric  and
cordial ;  for  the  truth  of  wh:ch,  I  appeal  to  any  perfon's
experience,  who  mall  take  a  large  draught  of  it  milk
warm  in  the  parcxyfm  of  a  fever,  even  w^en  plain
water  or  herb  teas  fhall  be  found  to  have  little  or  no
effect.  To  me  it  feems  that  it's  fingtilar  and  iurprizing
ufe  in  fevers  of  all  kinds,  were  there  nothing  elfe,
would  be  alone  fufheien:  to  recommend  it  to  the  pub-
lic.

76.  The  belt  phyficians  make  the  idea  of  a  fever
to  confift  in  a  too  great  velocity  of  the  heart's  motion,
and  too  great  refinance  at  the  capillaries.  Tar  water,
as  it  foftens  and  gently  ftimulates  thofe  nice  vefiels,
helps  to  propel  their  contents,  and  fo  contributes  to  re-
move the  later  part  of  the  diforder.  And  for  the  for-
mer, the  irritating  acrimony  which  accelerates  the  mo-
tion of  the  heart  is  diluted  by  watery,  corrected  by  a-
cid„  and  foftened  by  balfamic  remedies,  all  which  in-
tentions are  anfvvered  by  this  aqueous  acid  balfamic  me-
dicine. Befides,  the  vifcid  juices  coagulated  by  the
febrile  heat  are  refolved  by  tar  water  as  a  foap,  and
•not  too  far  refolved,  as  it  is  a  gentle  acid  foap;  to
which  we  may  add,  that  the  peccant  humours  and  falts
are  carried  off  by  it's  diaphoretic  and  diuretic  qua-
lities,

77.  I  found  all  this  confirmed  by  my  own  experi-
ence in  the  late  fickly  feafon  of  the  year  one  thoufand
feven  hundred  and  forty  one,  having  had  twenty  five
fevers  in  my  own  family  cured  by  this  medicinal  wa-
ter, drunk  copioufly.  The  fame  method  was  practifed
on  feveral  of  my  poor  neighbours  with  equal  fuccefs.
It  fudu'enly  calmed  the  feveriih  anxieties,  and  feemed
every  glafs  to  refrefh,  and  infufe  life  and  fpriric  into
the  patient. At  frit  feme  of  thofe  patients  had  been

FGmited,


3i  S I R I S.

vomited,  but  afterwards  I  found  that  without  vomiting,
bleeding,  bliikring  or  any  other  evacuation  or  medi-
cine whatever,  very  b:id  fevers  cou'd  be  cured  by  the
fole  drinking  of  tar  water  milk  warm,  and  in  good
quantity,  perhaps  a  large  glafs  every  hour  or  oftcner
taken  in  bed.  And  it  was  remarkable,  that  fuch  as
were  cured  by  this  comfortable  cordial,  recovered  health
and  ipirits  at  once,  while  thofe  who  had  been  cured  by
evacuations  often  languished  long,  even  after  the  fever
had  left  them,  before  they  cou'd  recover  of  their  me-
dicines and  regain  their  ilrength.

78.  Ik  perip- eumonies  and  pleurifies  I  have  cbfer»
ved  tar  water  to  be  excellent,  having  known  fome  pleu-
ritic perfons  cared  without  bleeding,  by  a  blifter  early-
applied  to  the  flitch,  and  the  copious  drinking  of  tar
water,  four  or  five  quarts,  or  even  more  in  four  and
twenty  hours.  And  I  do  recommend  it  to  farther  try-
alj  whether  in  all  cafes  of  a  pleurify,  one  moderate
bleeding,  a  bliiter  on  the  fpot  and  plenty  of  tepid  tar
•water  may  not  fuflice,  without  thofe  repeated  and  im»
moderate  bleedings,  the  bad  effects  of  which  are  per-
haps never  got  over.  I  do  even  fufpect  that  a  pleuritic
patient  betaking  himfelf  to  bed  betimes,  and  drinking
very  copiouily  of  tar  water,  may  be  cured  by  that  a-
lone  without  bleeding,  bliftering,  or  any  other  medi-
cine whatfoever,  certainly  I  have  found  this  fuccced  at
a  glafs  every  half  hour.

79.  I  have  known  a  blocdy  flux  of  long  continu-
ance, after  divers  medicines  had  been  tryed  in  vain,
cured  by  tar  water.  But  that  which  I  take  to  be  the
moft  fpeedy  and  effectual  remedy  in  a  bloody  flux,  is  a
clyfler  of  an  ounce  of  common  brown  rofin  difiblved
over  a  fire  in  two  ounces  of  oyl,  and  added*  to  a  pint  of
broth,  which  not  long  firKe  I  had  frequent  occafion  of
trying  when  that  diilemper  was  epidemical.  Nor  can  I
fay  that  any  to  whom  I  advifed  it  nafcarried.  This
experiment  I  was  led  to  make  by  the  opinion  1  had  of
tar  as  a  balfamic:  and  rofm  is  only  tar  infpiflfated,

£0.  Nothing  that  I  know  corroborates  the  flomach.

fo  much  as  tar  water-  (a). Whence  it  follows, that  it

(*)  6Vtf.  68.  jnul.


S I R I S.  33

mull  be  of  lingular  ufe  to  perfons  afHI&ed  with  the
gout.  And  from  what  I  have  obferved  in  rive  or  fix
inftances,  I  do  verily  believe  it  the  belt  and  fafeft  me-
dicine either  to  prevent  the  gout,  or  fo  to  itrcngthen
nature  againft  the  fit,  as  to  drive  it  from  the  vitals.
Dr.  Sydenh  m  in  his  treatife  of  the  gout,  declares,
that  whoever  finds  a  medicine  the  moft  efficacious  for
ftrengtheriing  digeftion,  will  do  more  fervice  in  the
cure  of  that  and  other  chronical  diftempers,  than  he  can
even  form  a  notion  of.  And  I  leave  it  to  tryal,  whe-
ther tar  water  be  not  that  medicine,  as  I  my  felf  am
perfuaded  it  is,  by  all  the  experiments  I  couM  make.
But  in  all  tryals  I  wou'd  recommend  difcreifion  ;  for
inflance,  a  man  with  the  gout  in  in  his  itomach  ought
not  to  drink  cold  tar  water.  This  effay  leaves  room
for  future  experiment  in  every  part  of  it,  not  pretend-
ing to  be  a  complete  treatife.

81.  It  is  evident  to  fenfe,  that  blood,  urine,  and
other  animal  juices,  being  let  to  ftand,  foon  contract
a  great  acrimony.  Juices,  therefore  from  a  bad  di-
geftion,  retained  and  flagnating  in  the  body,  grow
fharp  and  putrid.  Hence  a  fermenting  heat,  the  im-
mediate caufe  of  the  gout.  The  curing  this  by  cool-
ing medicines,  as  they  wou'd  increafe  the  antecedent
caufe,  muft  be  a  vain  attempt.  On  the  other  hand,
fpices  and  fpirituous  liquors,  while  they  contribute  to
remove  the  antecedent  caufe,  or  bad  digeftion,  wou'd
by  inflaming  the  blood  increafe  the  proximate  or  imme-
diate caufe  of  the  gout,  to  wit,  the  fermenting  heat.
The  kope  therefore  muft  be,  to  find  a  medicine  that
fhall  coroborate,  but  not  inflame.  Bitter  herbs  are  recom-
mended ;  but  they  are  weak  in  companies  of  tar  water.

82.  The  great  force  of  tar  water,  to  correct  the  a-
crimony  of  the  blood,  appears  in  nothing  more  than
in  the  cure  of  a  gangrene,  from  an  internal  caufe  ;
which  was  performed  on  a  fervant  of  my  own,  by
prefcribing  the  copious  and  conftant  ufe  of  tar  water
for  a  few  weeks.  From  my  reprefenting  tar  water  as
good  for  fo  many  thing?,  fome  perhaps  may  conclude
it  is  good  for  nothing, But  charity  obligeth  me  to  fay,

what'


34  S I R I S.

what  I  know,  and  what  I  think,  howfoever  it  may  be
t.iken.  Men  may  cenfure  and  object  as  they  pleafe,
but  I  appeal  to  time  and  experiment,  i  ffee~b  mifimput-
ed,  cafes  wrong  told,  circum fiances  overlooked,  per-
haps too,  prejudices  and  partialities  againft  Truth,  may
for  a  time  prevail  and  keep  her  at  the  bottom  of  her
well,  from  whence  neverthelefs  me  emergeth  fooner  or
later,  and  ftrikes  the  eyes  of  all  who  do  not  keep  them
{hut.

83.  Boer  ha  ave  thinks  a  fpecijk  may  be  found,
for  that  peculiar  venome,  which  infefts  the  blood  in
the  fmall  pox,  and  that  the  profpeft  of  fo  great  a  pub-
lic benefit  mould  Itir  up-  men  to  fearch  for  it.  It's
wonderful  fuccefs  in  presenting  and  mitigating  that
diftemper  (<-),  wou'd  incline  one  to  fufpeft  that  tar-
water  is  fuch  a  fpecifk,  efpecially  fines  I  have  found
it  of  fovercign  ufe  as  well  during  the  fmall  pox  as  befora
it.  Some  think  an  Eryfipelas  and  the  plague  differ  on-
ly in  degree.  If  fo,  tar  water  fhou'd  be  ufeful  in  the
plague,  for  I  have  known  it  cure  an  Eryfipelar.

84.  Tar  water,  as  cleanfing,  healing,  and  balfamic,
is  good  in  all  diforders  of  the  urinai'y  paffiges,  whether
obilrucled  or  ulcerated.  Dr.  Lifter  fuppofeth,  indeed,
that  turpentines  aft  by  a  cauftic  quality,  which  irritates
the  coats  of  the  urinary  duels  to  expel  fand  or  gravel.
But  it  fhou'd  feem  this  expelling  diuretic  virtue,  con-
fjfted  rather  in  the  falts  than  the  refin,  and  confequent-
ly  refides  in  the  tar  water,  gently  Simulating  by  it's
felts,  without  the  dangerous  force  of  a  cauftic.  The
violent  operation  of  Ipecacuanha  lies  in  it's  rcfin,  but
the  faline  extract  is  a  gentle  purge  and  diuretic,  by  the
ftimulus  of  it's  fait?.

85.  That  which  afts  as  a  mild  cordial  (d\  neither
hurling  the  capillary  veffels  as  a  cauftic,  nor  affecting
the  nerves,  nor  coagulating  the  juices,  mufl  in  all
cafes  be  a  friend  to  nature,  an  J  affift  the  vis  wit*  in  it's
ftruggle  againft  all  kinds  of  contagion.  And  from  what
I  have  oblerved,  tar  water  appears  to  me  an  ufeful  pre-
fervative  in  all  epidemical  diforders,  and  againft  all  o-

ther
(c)  2,  3. [d]  66.


S IRIS.  35

ther  infe&ion  whatfoever,  as  well  as  that  of  the  fmall-
pox.  What  effects  the  animi  fathemata  have  in  humane
maladies,  is  well  known,  and  confequently  the  gene-
ral benefit  of  fuch  a  cardiac  may  be  reafonably  fup-
pofed.

86.  A  s  the  body  is  faid  to  cloath  the  foul,  (o  the
nerves  may  be  faid  to  conftitute  her  inner  garment.
And  as  the  foul  animates  the  whole,  what  nearly  touch-
es the  foul  relates  to  all.  Therefore  the  afperity  of  tar-
tarous  falts,  and  the  fiery  acrimony  of  alcaline  falts,  ir-
ritating and  wounding  the  nerves,  produce  nafcentpaf-
fions  and  and  anxieties  in  the  foul.;  which  both  agravate
diiterapers,  and  render  men's  lives  rtftlefs  and  wretched,
even  when  they  are  afflicted  with  no  apparent  diftemper.
This  is  the  latent  fpring  of  much  woe,  fpleen,  and
t<ediutn  <vit<e.  Small  imperceptible  irritations  of  the
minuteft.  fibres  or  filaments  caufed  by  the  pungent  falts  of
wines  and  fauces,  do  fo  make  and  difturb  the  microcofms
of  high  livers,  as  often  to  raife  tempefts  in  courts  and
fenates.  Whereas  the  gentle  vibrations  that  are  raifed
in  the  nerves,  by  a  fine  fubtile  acid,  fheathed  in  a  fmooth
volatile  oyl  (e),  foftly  flimulating  and  bracing  the  ner-
vous veiTels  and  fibres,  promotes  a  due  circulation  and
fecretion  of  the  animal  juices,  and  creates  a  calm  fa-
tisfied  fenfe  of  health.  And  accordingly  I  have  often
known  tar  water  procure  fleep  and  compofe  the  fpirits
in  cruel  vigils,  occafioned  either  by  ficknefs  or  by  too
intenfe  application  of  mind.

87.  In  difeafes  fometimes  accidents  happen  from
without  by  mifmanagement,  fometimes  latent  caufes  o-
perate  within,  jointly  with  the  fpecific  taint  or  peculiar
jcaufe  of  the  malady.  The  caufes  of  diftempers  are
often  complicated,  and  there  may  be  fomething  in  the
i^iofyncrafy  of  the  patient  that  puzzles  the  phyfician.
It  may  therefore  be  prefumed  that  no  medicine  is  in-
fallible, not  even  in  any  one  diforder.  But  as  tar  water
^poffeiTeth  the  virtues  of  fortifying  the  ftomach,  as  well  as
purifying  and  invigorating  the  blood,  beyond  any  me-
-dicine  that  1  Jtnow,  it  may  be  prefumed  of  great  and

general


36  S I R I S,

general  efficacy  in  all  thofe  numerous  illnefles,  which
take  their  rife  from  foul  or  vapid  blood,  or  from  a  bad
digeftion.  The  animal  fpirits  are  elaborated  from  the
blood.  Such  therefore  as  the  blood  is,  fuch  will  be
the  animal  fpirit,  more  or  k(sf  weaker  or  ftronger.
This  fheweth  the  ufefulncfs  of  tar  water  in  all  hyfteric
and  hypocondriac  cafes;  which  together  with  the  ma-
ladies from  indigeition  comprife  almolt  the  whole  tribe
of  chronical  difeafes.

88.  The  Scurvy  may  be  reconed  in  thefe  climates
an  univerfal  malady,  as  people  in  general  are  fubjecl
to  it,  and  as  it  mixes  more  or  lefs  in  almoft  all  difeafes.
Whether  this  proceeds  from  want  of  elallicity  in  onr
air,  upon  which  the  tone  of  the  veffcls  depends,  and
upon  that  the  feveral  fecretions:  or  whether  it  proceeds
from  the  moifture  of  our  climate,  or  the  groflhefs  of
our  food,  or  the  falts  in  our  atmofphere,  or  from  all
thefe  together.  Thus  much  at  leaft  feems  not  abfurd
to  fuppofe,  that  as  phyficians  in  Spain  and  Italy  are
apt  to  fufpeel  the  venereal  taint  to  be  a  latent  principle,
and  bear  a  part  in  every  illnefs,  fo  for  as  good  reafon
the  fcurvy  fliouM  be  confrdered  by  our  phyficians,  as
having  fome  (hare  in  moft  diforders  and  conftitutions
that  fall  in  their  way.  It  is  certain  our  perfpiration  is
not  fo  free  as  in  clearer  air  and  warmer  climates.  Per-
fpirable  humours  not  difcharged  will  ftrgnate  and  peu-
trify.  A  diet  of  animal  food  will  be  apt  to  render  the
juices  of  our  bodies  a'calefcent.  Hence  ichorous  and
corrofive  humours  and  many  diforders.  Moift  air  makes
vifcid  blood  ;  and  faline  air  inflames  this  vifcid  blood.
Hence  broken  capillaries,  extravafated  blood,  fpots  and
ulcers,  and  other  fcorbutic  fymptoms.  The  body  of  a
man  attracls  and  imbibes  the  moifture  and  falts  of  the
air,  and  whatever  floats  in  the  atmofphere,  which  as  it
is  common  to  all, fo  it  affecls  all  more  or  lefs.

89.  Doctor  Mufgrave  thinks  the  Devonshire  fcur-
vy a  relique  of  the  leprofy,  and  that  it  is  not  owing  to
the  qualities  of  the  air.  Eut  as  thefe  infulars  in  gene-
ral live  in  a  grofs  {aline  air,  and  their  veffels  being  lefs
claiiic,  are  coniequemly  lefs  able  to  fubdue  and  call  off

what,


'  S I R I S.  37

what  their  bodies  as  fponges  draw  in,  one  would  be
tempted  to  fufpect  the  air  not  a  little  concerned,  efpe-
cially  in  fuch  a  fituation  as  that  ef  Devonshire.  In
all  thefe  Britiih  iflands  we  enjoy  a  great  mediocrity  of
climate,  the  effect  whereof  is,  that  we  have  neither
heat  enough  to  exalt  and  diffipate  the  grofs  vapours,  as
in  Italy,  nor  cold  enough  to  condenfe  and  precipitate
them,  as  in  Sweden.  So  they  are  left  floating  in  the
air,  which  we  constantly  breath,  and  imbibe  through
the  whole  furface  of  our  bodies.  And  this  together
with  exalations  from  coal  jires,  and  the  various  fofTils
wherein  we  abound,  doth  greatly  contribute  to  render
us  fcorbutic  and  hypochondriac.

90.  There  are  fome  who  derive  all  difeafes  from
the  fcurvy,  which  indeed  mull  be  allowed  to  create  or
mimic  moft  other  maladies.  Boerhaave  tells  us,  it  pro-
duceth  pleuritic,  cholic,  nephritic,  hepatic  pains,  va-
rious fevers,  hot,  malignant,  intermitting  dyfenteries,
faintings,  anxieties,  dropfies,  confumptions,  convulsi-
ons, palfies,  fluxes  of  blocd.  In  a  word,  it  may  be
faid  to  contain  the  feeds  and  origine  of  almoft  all  dis-
tempers. Infomuch  that  a  medicine  which  cures  all
forts  of  fcurvy,  may  be  prefumed  good  for  mofc  other
maladies.

91.  The  fcurvy,  doth  not  only  in  variety  of  fymp*
toms  imitate  moil  liiilempers,  but  alfo  when  come  to
a  heighr,  in  degree  of  virulence  equal  the  moft  malig-
nant. Of  this  we  have  a  remarkable  proof,  in  that
horrible  defcription  of  the  fcorbutic  patients  in  the  hof-
pitals  of  Paris,  given  by  monfieur  Poupart,  in  the  me-
moirs of  the  royal  academy  of  fciences,  for  the  year
one  thoufand  fix  hundred  and  ninety  nine.  That  au-
thor thinks  he  faw  fome  refemblance  in  it  to  the  plague
of  Athens,  It  is  hard  to  imagine  any  thing  more
dreadful  than  the  cafe  of  thofe  men,  rotnng  alive  by
the  fcurvy  in  it's  fupreme  degree.  To  obviate  fuch  pu-
trefaction, I  believe  the  moil  effectual  method  wo'u'cl
be,  to  embalm  (if  one  may  fo  fay  )  the  living  tcdy
with  tar  water  copioufly  drunk j  and  this  belief  is  net
without  experience,

T>  92,  It


3*  S I R I S.

92.  It  is  the  received  opinion  that  the  animal  falts
of  a  found  body  are  of  a  neuteral,  bland,  and  benign
nature:  that  is,  the  falts  in  the  juices  pail  the  prima
o»/>,  are  neither  acid  nor  alcaline,  having  been  fub-
daed  by  the  conftitution,  and  changed  into  a  third  na-
ture. Where  the  conftitution  wants  force  to  do  this,
the  aliment  is  not  duly  aifimilated  ;  and  fo  far  as  the
i'dlis  retain  their  priftine  qualities,  fickly  fymptoms  en-
i'ue,  acids  and  alkalies  not  perfectly  fubdued,  producing
weak  ferments  in  the  jjices.  Hence  fcurvy,  cachexy,
and  a  long  train  of  ills.

93.  A  Cachexy  or  ill  habit  is  much  of  the  fame
kind  with  the  (curvy,  proceeds  from  the  fame  caufes
and  is  attended  with  like  fymptoms,  which  are  fo  ma-
nifold and  various,  that  the  fcurvy  may  well  be  looked
on  as  a  general  cachexy,  infecting  the  whole  habit  and
vitiating  all  the  degeitions.  Some  have  reconed  as  ma-
ny forts  of  the  fcu;vy,  as  there  are  different  taints  of
the  blood.  Others  have  fuppofed  it  a  collection  of  all
illneffes  together.  Some  fuppofe  it  an  accumulation  of
feveral  dikafes  in  fieri.  Others  take  it  for  an  aiTem-
blage  of  the  reliques  of  old  dhlempers.

94.  But  thus  much  is  certain,  the  cure  of  the
fcurvy  is  no  more  to  be  at:empted  by  itrongly  active
medicines  than  (  to  ufe  the  fimilitude  of  an  ingenious
writer,)  a  thorn  in  the  fleih,  or  pitch  on  fiik  to  be  re-
moved by  ioTce.  The  vifcid  humour  mull  be  gently
rciuIveU  and  diluted, -the  tone  of  the  veflels  recovered
)>y  a  moderate  Simulation, and  the  tender  fibres  ai  d

llafy  veflels  pr»  «  eared  from  the  concreted

ftuff,  ti.ar  adheres  mid  obilructs  them.  All  winch  is  in
the  apteft  manner  performed  by  a  watery  diluent,  con-
taining a  fine  vegetable  foap.  And  although  a  coai*
pleat  care  by  alteratives,  operating  on  the  isisll  capil-
lar ies,  and  by  infcnfible  discharges,  muit  require  lengi  1
of  time,  yet  the  good  effect  of  this  medicine  on  ,..«
checticahd  fcoibutic  perfbna,  is  foon  pero-ived.,  by  the
change  it  produceth  in  their  pale  difcbloured  loo  k%  c;v~
j  healthy  countenance  in  lefa  time  than  per-
hapiany  other  medicine,

95.  I>


S I R 1 8.  3$>

95.  It  is  fuppofed  by  phyficians,  that  the  imme-
diate caufe  of  the  fcurvy  lies  in  the  blood,  the  fibrous,
part  of  which  is  too  thick  and  the  ferum  too  thin  and
(harp:  and  that  hence  arifeth  the  great  difficulty  in  the
cure,  becaufe  in  the  correcting  of  one  part,  regard  muft
be  had  to  the  other.  It  is  vvdl  known,  how  extreme-
ly difficult  it  is  to  cure  an  inveterate  fcurvy :  how  many
icorbutic  patients  have  grown  woife  by  an  injuditious
courfe  of  evacuations:  how  many  are  even  rendered
incurable  by  the  treatment  of  inconfiderate  phyficians:
and  how  difficult,  tedious  and  uncertain  the  cure  is  in
the  hands  even  of  the  bell,  who  are  obliged  to  ufe  fuck
variety  and  change  of  medicines,  in  the  different  flages
of  that  malady:  which  neverthelefs  may  be  cured  (if  I
may  judge  by  what  I  have  experienced)  by  the  fole,
regular,  conftant,  copious,  ufe  of  tar  water.

96.  Tar  water  moderately  infpiflates  with  h's  ba!-
famic  virtue,  and  renders  mild  the  thin  and  (harp  part
of  the  biood.  The  fame,  as  a  foapy  medicine,  dif-
folves  the  grumous  concretions  of  the  fibrous  part.  As
a  balfam  it  deftroys  the  ulcerous  acrimony  of  the  hu-
mours, and  as  a  deobftruent  it  opens  and  cleans  the
veffds,  reftores  their  tone,  and  ftren-gthens  the  digefH-
on,  whofe  defects  are  the  principal  caufe  of  fcurvy  and
cachexy.

97.  In  the  cure  of  the  fcurvy,.  the  principal  aim
is  to  fubdue  the  acrimony  of  the  blood  and  juices.  But
as  this  acrimony  proceeds  from  different  caufes,  or  even
oppofite,  as  acid  and  alkaline,  what  is  good  in  one  fort
of  fcurvy  proves  dangerous,  or  even  mortal,  in  another*
It  is  well  known,  that  hot  antifcorbutics,  where  th«
juices  of  the  body  are  alcalefcent,  increafe  the  difeafe.
And  four  fruits  and  vegetables  produce  a  like  effect  in
the  fcurvy,  caufed  by  an  acid  acrimony,,  Hence  fatal
blunders  are  committed  by  unwary  practitioners,  who,
not  diflinguifhing  the  nature  of  the  difeafe,  do  frequent-
ly aggravate,  inftsad  of  curing  it.  H  I  may  truft
what  tryals  I  have  been  able  to  make,  this  water  is
good  in  the  feveral  kinds  of  fcurvy,  acid,  alkaline,  and
muriatic,  and  I  believe  it  the  only  medicine  that  cure*

D  3  thera


46  S I R I S.

them  all  without  doing  hurt  to  any.  As  it  contain*  a
volatile  acid  (a)  with  a  fine  volatile  oyl,  why  may  not
a  medicine  cocl  in  one  part  and  warm  in  another  be  a
remedy  to  either  extreme  (c).  I  have  obferved  it  to
produce  a  kindly  genia!  warmth  without  heat,  a  thing
to  be  aimed  at  in  ail  forts  cf  leurvy.  Befides,  the  bal-
fam  in  tar  water  (heaths  all  fcorbu'tkk  ialts  alike:  and
its  great  virtues  as  a  d:gefter  and  deobilruent  are  of  ge-
neral ufe  in  all  icorbutic,  and  I  may  add,  in  all  chro-
nical cafes  whatfoever.

»j8.  I  cannot  be  fure  that  I  have  tried  it  in  a  fcro-
phulous  cafe,  though  I  have  tried  it  fuccefsfully  in  one
that  I  fufpccled  to  be  Co.  And  I  apprehend  it  wou'd
be  very  ierv'c.ablc  in  frch  diforders.  For  although  Dr.
Gibbs  in  his  treatife  en  the  King's  Evil  derives  that
difcafe  from  a  coagulating  acid,  which  isalfo  agreeable
to  the  opinion  of  Tome  other  phyficians,  and  although
tar  water  contain  an  acid,  yet,  as  it  is  a  foap  pi),  it
refolvcs  iniiead  of  coagulating  the  juices  of  the  body.

99.  For  hyfterical  and  hjpecondriacal  diforders  fo
frequent  among  us,  it  is  commonly  fuppofed  that  all
acios  are  bad.  But  I  will  ventue  to  except  the  acid
fj.ip  of  tar  water,  having  found  by  my  own  experience
and  that  of  many  others,  that  it  raifes  the  fpirits,  and
is  an  excellent  antihyfleric,  nor  lefs  innocent  than  po-
tent, which  cannot  be  (aid  of  thofe  others  in  common
ufe,  that  often  leave  people  vvorfe  than  they  found
them.

100.  In  a  high  degree  of  fcr.rvy  a  mercurial  Sali-
vation is  looked  on  by  many  as  the  only  cure.  Which
by  the  vehement  {heck  it  gives  the  whole  frame,  and
the  fenfible  fecretion  it  product  th  may  be  thought  more
adequate  to  fuch  an  effldl.  But  the  diforder  cccafioned
by  that  violent  procefs,  it  is  to  be  feared,  may  never
be  got  over.  The  immediate  danger,  the  frequent  bad
effects,  the  extreme  trouble  and  nice  care  attending  fuch
a  courfe  do  very  defervedly  make  people  affraid  of  it.
And  though  the  fenfible  fecretion  therein  be  fo  great,
yet  in  a  longer  tract  of  time  the  ufe  of  tar  water  may

produce

C«)7- W72. (4  58.


S I R I S.  41

pr&duce  as  great  a  difcharge  of  fcorbutic  falts  by  urine
and  by  penpiration,  the  effi.ft  of  which  laft,  though
rot  fo  fenfible,  may  yet  be  greater  than  thnt  of  Saliva-
tion;  efpecially  if  it  be  true,  that  in  common  life  in-
fenfible  perfpiration  is.  to  nutrition*  and  all  fenfible  ex-
cretions as  five  to  three.

loi.  Many  hyfteric  and  fcoibutic  ailments,  many
taints  contracted  by  themfclves,  or  inherited  from  their
anceftors,  airlift  the  people  of  condition  in  thefe  iflands,
often  rendering  them,  upon  the  whole,  much  more
unhappy  than  thofe  whom  poverty  and  labour  have
ranked  in  the  loweft  lot  of  life;  which  ailments  might
be  fafcly  removed  or  relieved  by  the  fole  ufe  of  tar
water :  And  thofe  lives  which  feem  hardly  worth  living
for  bad  appetite,  low  fpirits,  refllefs  nights*  wafting
pains  and  anxieties,  be  rendered  eafy  and  comfortable.

1 02.  As  the  nerves  are  inftruments  of  fenlation,  it
follows  that  fpafms  in  the  nerves  may  produce  all  fymp-
toms,  and  therefore  a  diforder  in  the  nervous  fyitem
(hall  immitate  all  diftempers,  and  occafion,  in  appear-
ance, an  afthma  for  inftance,  a  pleurify,  or  a  fit  of
the  ftone.  Now  whatever  is  good  for  the  nerves  in  ge-
neral, is  good  againft  all  fuch  fymptoms.  But  tar  wa-
ter, as  it  includes  in  an  eminent  degree  the  virtues  of
warm  gums  and  refins,  is  of  great  ufe  for  comforting
and  ftrengthening  the  nerves  (e)9  curing  twitches  in
the  nervous  fibres,  cramps  alfo,  and  numbnefs  in  the
limbs,  removing  anxieties  and  promoting  {leep,  in  all
which  cafes  I  have  known  it  very  fuccefsful..

103.  This  fafe  and  cheap  medicine  fuits  all  circum-
fiances  and  all  conflirutions,  orerating  eafily,  curing
without  disturbing,  raifirg  the  fpirits  without  deprefl-
ing  them,  a  circumftance  that  deferves  repeated  atten-
tion, efprcially  in  thefe  climates,  where  itrong  liquors
fo  fatally  and  fo  frequently  produce  thofe  very  uirtreif-
es  they  aredefigned  to  remedy;  and,  if  I  am  not  mifin*
formed,  even  among  the  Ladies  themfelves,  who  ar«-
truiy  much  to  be  pitied.  Their  condition  of  life  make*
them  a  prey  to  imaginary  woes,  whic&  never  fail  to

D  3.  siave


41  S I R I S.

grow  up  in  minds  unexercifed  and  unemployed.  To
get  rid  of  thefe,  it  is  Cud,  there  are,  who  betake  them-
felves  to  diftilled  fpirits.  And  it  is  not  improbable,
they  are  led  gradually  to  the  ufe  of  thofe  poifons  by  a
cer:a:n  complaifant  pharmacy,,  too  much  ufed  in  the
modern  practice,  palfy  drop?,  poppy  cordial,  plague-
water,  and  fuch  like^  which  being  in  truth  nothing
but  drams  difguifed,  yet  coming  from  the  apotheca-
ries, are  coniidered  only  as  medicines.

104.  Tkjs  foul  of  man  was  fuppofed  by  many  an-
cient fages,  to  be  thrufl:  into  the  humane  body  as  into
a  prifon,.  for  punifnment  of  part  oneness.  But  the
worft  prifon  is  the  body  of  an  indolent  Epicure,  whole
blood  is  inflamed  by  fermented  liquors  f/J  and  high,
fauces,  or  render'd  putrid,  Jharp,  and  corrofive,  by  .1
ihgnation  of  the  animal  juices  through  (loth  and  in-
aolencei  whofe  membranes  are  irritated  by  pungent
falts  v  whefe  mind  is  agitated  by  painful  ofcillations  of
the  nervous  [g\  fyilem,  and  whole  nerves  are  mutually
aftecled  by  the  irregular  paffions  of  his  mind.  This
ferment  in  the  animal  ceconomy  darkens  and  confounds
the  intellect.  It  produce  th  vain  terrours  and  vain  con-
ceits, and  ftimulates  the  foul  with  mad  defires,  which,
net  being  natural,  nothing  in  nature  can  fatisfy.  No
loader,  therefore,  there  are  fo  many  fine  perfons  of
texts,  fhining  them i elves,  and  (hone  on  by  fortune,,
ivho  are  inwardly  roiferable  and  ifick  of  life.

ioc-  Tkj* hardnefs  of  llubbed  vulgar  confutations,
:.s  them  infenfible  of  a  thoufand  things,  that  free
.'!  rhefs  delicate  people,  who,  as  if  their  fkln  was
pabd  off,  feel  to  the  quick  every  thing  that  touches
The  remejy  for  this  exquifite  and  painful  fen-
is  commonly  fought  from .  fermented, perhaps
From  diftilled  liquors,  which  render  many,  lives  wretch-
ed, that wou*d  otherwife  have  been  only  ridiculous.
The  tender  nerve?,  and  law  fpirits  of  fuch  poor  crea-
lup.-s,  wou'd  be  much  relieved  by  the  uk  of  tar  water,
v.  hjch  might  prolong  and  chesr  their  lives. I  do  there-
to; s  lecommend  to  tbtmthe  uf«  of  .

•

03  as. ftJK-


SIR I S.  4$

fefe  and  innocent,  but  giving  health  and  fpirit  as  furely
as  other  cordials  deftroy  them.

1 06.  I  do  verily  think,  there  is  not  any  other  me-
dicine whatfcever,  fo  effectual  to  reftore  a  crazy  con»
flitution,.  and  cheer  a  dreary  mind,  or  fo  likely  to
fubvert  that  gloomy  empire  of  the  fpleen  (b)  which  ty-
rannifeth  over  the  better  fort  (as  they  are  called)  of  thefe
free  nations  ;  and  maketh  them,  in  fpight  of  their  li-
berty and  property,  more  wretched  Haves  than  even  the
fubje&s  of  abfolute  power,  who  breath  clear  air  in  a
funny  climate.  While  men  of  low  degree  often  enjoy  a
tranquility  and  content,  that  no  advantage  of  birth  or
fortune  can  equal.  Such,  indeed,  was  the  cafe,  while
the  rich  alone  cou'd  afford  to  be  debauched  ;  but  when
even  beggars  became  debauchees^  the  cafe  was  altered.

107.  The  public  virture  and  fpirit  of  the  Britifh
legislature,  never  mewed  it  feif  more  confpicuous  in
any  act,,  than  in  that  for  fupprelTing  the  immoderate
tife  of  diililled  fpirits  among  the  people,  whofe  itrength
and  numbers  conflitute  the  true  wealth  of  a  nation  *
though  evafive  arts  will*  it  is  feared,  prevail  fo  long  as
deftiiled  fpirits  of  any  kind  are  allowed,  the  character
cf  Englifhmen  in  genera!,,  being  that  of  Brutus,  Piu'c-
quid  <va~k  valde  <vu!t,  Bat  why  mould  fuch  a  canker
be  tolerated  in  the  vitals  of  a  ftate,  under  any  pretence
or  in  any  .  Ihapc  whatfoevsr  ?  Better  by  far,  the
whole  prefent  fet  of  difcil!ers  were  penfioners  of  the
public,  and  their  trade  aboiilhed  by  law  ;  fince  all  the-
benefit  thereof  put  together  wou'd  not  balance  the  hun-
dredth part  of  it's  mifchief.

108.  To  prove  the  deftruclive  effects  of  fuch  fpirite
With  regard  both  to  the  humane  fpecies  and  individuals,
we  need  not  go  fo  far  as  our  colonies,  or  the  lavage  na-
tives of  America.  Plain  proof  may  be  had  nearer
home.  For,  albeit  there  is  in  every  town  or  diiirict
throughout  England,  feme  tough  dram-c!rin::*r,  kt  op
as  the  Devil's  decoy,  to  draw  in  profelytes ;  yet  the
Biiined  health  and  morals,,  and  the  beggary  of  fuch
wuatea  ar/idently  mew  that  wsassd  r©.  otf*er  ewaay

to


44  s I r r s.

to  compfeat  our  deftruction,  than  this  cheap  luxury  at
the  lower  end  of  the  ftate,  and  that  a  nation  lighted  up
at  both  ends  mull  foon  be  confumed.

109.  It  is  much  to  be  lamented  that  our  Infukrs,
who  act  and  think  lb  much  for  themfelves,  fhou'd  yet
from  groflhefs  of  air  and  diet,  grow  ftupid  or  doat
fooner  than  other  people,  who  by  virtue  of  elaftic  air,
water-drinking,  and  light  food  preferve  their  faculties
to  extreme  old  age  ;  an  advantage  which  may  per-
haps be  approached,  if  not  equalled,  even  in  thefe  re-
gions, by  tar  water,  temperance,  and  early  hours;
the  lafi;  is  a  fure  addition  to  Lif§,  not  only  in  regard  of
time,  which,  being  taken  from  fleep,  the  image  of
death^  is  added  to  the  waking  hours,  but  alio  in  regard
of  longevity  and  duration  in  the  vulgar  fenfe.  I  may
fay  too,  in  regard  of  fpirit  and  vivacity,  which,  within
the  fame  compafs  of  duration,  may,  truly  and  pro-
perly be  affirmed  to  add  to  man's  life  :  it  being  mani-
feft,  that  one  man,  by  a  brisker  motion  of  his  fpirits
and  fucceffion  of  his  ideas,  (hall  live  more  in  one  hour,.
than  another  in  two  :  and  that  the  quantity  of  Life  is
to  be  eftimated,  not  merely  from  the  duration,  but  alfo
from  the  intenfenefs  of  living.  Which  intenle  living,
or,  if  I  may  fo  fay,  lively  life,  is  not  more  promoted
by  early  hours  as  a  regimen,  than  by  tar  water  as  a
cordial ;  which  acls,  not  only  as  a  flow  medicine,  but
hath  alfo  an  immediate  and  chearful  {a)  effect  on  the
fpirits.

1 10.  It  mull  be  owned,  the  light  attracted  fecreted
and  detained  in  Tar,  (<?)  and  afterwards  drawn  off  in
it's  fineil  balfamic  particles,  by  the  gentle  menftruum
of  cold  water,  is  not  a  violent  and  fudden  median?,
always  to  produce  it's  efretf  at  once,  (inch  by  irritating,
•ften  do  more  mifchief  than  good)  but  a  fare  and  mild
alterative,  which  penetrates  the  whole  fyflem,  opens,
heals,  and  ftrengthens  the  remote  v.iTcls,  alters  and  pro
pells  their  contents,  and  enters  the  minuteft  capillaries,
and  cannot  therefore,  otherwife,  than  by  degrees  and
in  time  work  a  radical  cure  of  chronic  ddtempers. It

give*


S I R I S.  45

gives  neverthelefs  fpeedy  relief  in  mofr.  cafes,  as  I  have
found  by  my  felf  and  many  others.  I  have  been  fur*
prifed  to  fee  perfons  fallen  away  and  languilhing  under
a  bad  digeftion,  after  a  few  weeks  recover  a  good  flo-
mach,  and  with  icfiefh  and  ftrength,  fo  as  to  fee m  re-
newed, by  the  drinking  of  tar  water.  The  Itrength
and  quantity  of  this  water  to  be  taken  by  each  indivi-
dual perfon  is  ben*  determined  from  experience.  And
as  for  the  time  of  taking,  I  never  knew  any  evil  enfue
from  its  being  continued  ever  fo  long  ;  but,  on  ths
contrary,  many  and  great  advantages,  which  fome-
times  would  not  perhaps  begin  to  fhevv  themfelves  till
it  had  been  taken  two  or  three  months.

in.  We  learn  from  Pliny,  that  in  the  firit  ferment
of  new  wine  or  murium,  the  ancients  were  wont  to
fprincle  it  with  powdered  rofm,  which  gave  it  a  certain
fprightlinefs,  quadam  faporis  acumina*  This  was
erleemed  a  great  improver  of  it's  odour  and  tafte,  and
was,  I  doubt  not,  of  it's  falubrity  alfo.  The  brown
old  rofm,  that  is  to  hyt  harden'd  tar,  as  being  more
eafiJy  pulverized  and  fifted,  was  mcft  in  requeft  Tor  this
purpofe.  They  uf'ed  likewife  to  feafon  their  wine  veffels
with  pitch  orroiin.  And  I  make  no  doubt,,  that  if
our  vintners  wou'd  contrive  to  medicate  their  wines
with  the  lame  ingredients,  they  might  improve  and
preferve  them,  with  Jefs  trouble  and  expence  to  them-
felves, and  lefs  danger  to  others.  He  that  wou'd  know
more  particulars  of  this  matter  may  confult  Pliny  and
Columella.  I  mall  only  add,  that  I  doubt  not  a  fimi«
lar  improvement  may  be  made  of  malt  liquor.

112.  The  fnrU'V  of  Theophraflus  and  refina  of
Pliny  are  fometimes  ufed  in  a  general  fenfe,  to  fignify
all  forts  of  oily  vifcid  exfudations  from  plants  or  trees.
The  crude  watery  juice,  that  rifeth  early  in  the  Spring,
is  gradually  ripened  and  infpiifated  by  the  folar  heat,
becoming  in  orderly  fucceiTion  with  the  feafons  an  oyl,
a  balfara,  and  at  laft  a  refin.  And  it  is  obferved  by
chymids,  that  turpentine  difTolved  over  a  gentle  fire,  is,
by  the  conftant  operation  of  heat,  fucceffively  trans-
formed into  oyl,  balfam,  pitch,  and  hard  friable  refim>

which


4«


S I R I S.


which  will  incorporate  with  oyl  or  recYfied  fpirit,  but
cot  with  water.

113.  Sir  John  Ffoyer  remarks,  that  we  want  a
method  for  the  ufe  of  turpentine,  and  again,  he  who
ihall  hit,  faith  he,  on  the  pleafantefl  method  of  giving
turpentine,  will,  do  great  cures  in  the  gout,  flone,  ca-
tarrhs, dropfies  and'cold  fcurvies,  rheumatifrns,  ulcers,
and  obflruclions  of  the  glands.  Laflly,  he  fubjoins,
that  for  the  ufe  of  altering  and  amending  the  juicei
and  fibres,  it  mull  be  given  frequently,  and  in  fuch
fmall  quantities  at  a  time,  and  in  fo  comodious  a  man-
ner, as  will  agree  befi  with  the  ftomach  fV),  flay  long-
ell  in  the  body,  and  not  purge  it  felf  off;  for  large
dofes  (faith  he)  go  through  too  quick,  and  befides  offend
the  head.  Now  the  infufion  of  tar  or  turpentine  in
cold  water  feems  to  fupply  the  very  method  that  vis
wanted,  as  it  leaves  the  more  unctuous,  and  grofspirti
behind  {/),  which  might  offend  the  ftomach  inteltinei
and  head  ;  and  as  it  may  be  eafily  taken,  and  as  often,
and  in  fuch  quantity  and  fuch  degree  of  ftrength,  a»
fuits  the  cafe  of  the  patient,  nor  ihou'd  it  feem,  that
the  fine  fpirit  and  volatile  oyl,  obtained  by  infufion
of  tar  (g),  is  inferior  to  that  of  turpentine,  to  which
it  fuperadds  the  virtue  of  wood  foot,  which  is  known
to  be  very  great  with  refpect  to  the  head  and  nerves ;
and  thii  appears  evident  from  the  manner  of  obtaining
tar  {b).  And  as  the  fine  volatile  pnrts  of  tar  or  turpen-
tine are  drawn  off  by  infufion  in  cold  water  and  eafily
conveyed  throughout  the  whole  fyflem  of  the  human
body;  fo  it  iliould  feem  the  fame  method  may  be  ufed
with  all  forts  of  balfams  or  refins  whatfocver,  as  tht
readied,  eaftcil,  and  moil  inoffenfivc,  as  well  as  in
many  cafes  the  moft  effectual  way  of  obtaining  and  im-
parting their  virtues.

114.  Aftbr  having  faid  fo  much  of  the  ufes  of
tar,  1  mull  farther  add,  that  being  rubbM  on  them,  it
is  an  excellent  prefervative  of  the  teeth  and  gums :  that
it  fweeetens  the  breath,  and  that  it  clears  and  ftrength-
ons  the  voice. And,  as  it's  effects  are  various  and  ufe-

ful,

W9- (/)47- fc)  7.42*  58- W«3-


S I R I  ■  S.  47

Jiil,  To  there  is  nothing  to  be  feared  from  the  operation
of  an  alterative  fo  mild  and  friendly  to  nature.  It
was  a  wife  maxim  of  certain  ancient  philofophers,  that
difeafes  ought  not  to  be  irritated  by  medicines  {h).  But
no  medicine  difturbs  the  animal  ceconomy  lefs  than  this,
which,  if  I  may  truft  my  own  experience,  never  pro-
duces any  diforder  in  a  patient  when  rightly  taken.

1 1  r.  I  knew  indeed  a  perfon  who  took  a  large  glafs
of  tar  water  jail  before  breakfaft,  which  gave  him  an
invincible  naufea  and  difgufi,  although  he  had  before
received  the  greateft  benefit  from  it.  But  if  the  tar
water  be  taken  and  made  in  the  manner  prefcribed  at
the  beginning  of  this  eiTay,  it  will,  if  I  miftake  not
have  enough  of  the  fait  to  be  ufeful,  and  little  enough
of  the  oyl  to  be  inofenfive.  I  mean  my  own  manner
of  making  it,  and  not  the  American  which  makes  it
fometimes  too  ftrong  and  fometimes  too  weak,  and  how-
over  ferviceable  as  there  ufed  meerly  for  a  prefervative
againft  the  fmall-pox,  yet  may  not  be  fit  to  ufe  in  all
thofe  various  cafes  wherein  I  have  found  tar  water  fo
fuccefsful.  Perfons  more  delicate  than  ordinary  may
render  it  palatable,  by  mixing  a  drop  of  the  chymical
oyl  of  nutmegs,  or  a  fpoonful  of  mountain  wine  in  each
•glafs.  It  may  not  be  amifs  to  obferve,  that  I  have
known  fome,  whofe  nice  ilomachs  could  not  bear  it  in
the  morning,  take  it  at  night  going  to  bed  without  any
inconvenience.  For  outward  wafhes  and  fomentations,
it  may  be  made  ftronger  as  by  pouring  on  warm  water;
aifo  for  brute  beaits,  as  horfes,  in  whofe  difcrders  I
have  found  it  very  uferul,  I  believe  more  fo  than  that
bituminous  fubftance  called  Barbadoes  tar.

1 1 6.  In  very  dangerous  and  acute  cafes  much  may
be  taken  and  often ;  as  far  as  the  ftomach  can  bear.
But  in  chronica!  cafes,  about  half  a  pint  night  and  mor-
nings may  furlice,  or,  in  cafe  fo  large  a  dofe  fliou'd
prove  difagreeable,  half  the  -quantity  may  be  taken
four  time=,  to  wit,  in  the  morning  early,  at  night  go-
ing co  bed,  and  about  two  hours  after  dinner  and  break-
fail.  A  medicine  of  fo  great  virtue  in  fo  many  differ-
ent diforders,  and  efpcciaily  in  that  grand  enemy,  the
(J>y  103.  fever,


4$


S I R I S.


fever,  muft  needs  be  a  benefit  to  mankind  in  genera?.
There  are  neverthelefs  three  forts  of  people  to  whom  [
wou'd  peculiarly  recommend  it:  Sea-faring  perfons,
Ladies,  and  men  of  ftudious  and  fedentary  lives.

117.  To  failors  and  all  fea-faring  perfons,  who  are
fubjedl  to  fcorbutic  diforders  and  putrid  fevers,  efpeciaily
in  long  fouthern  voyages,  I  am  pefuaded  this  tar  water
wou'd  be  very  beneficial.  And  this  may  deferve  par-
ticular notice  in  the  prefent  courfe  of  marine  expediti-
ons, when  fo  many  of  our  countrymen  have  perilhed  by
fuch  diftempers,  contracted  at  feaand  in  foregn  climates.
Which,  it  is  probable,  might  have  been  prevented  by
the  copious  ufe  of  tar  water.

118.  This  fame  water  will  alfo  give  charitable  re-
lief to  the  Ladies  (w),  who  often  want  it  more  than
the  parifli  poor ;  being  many  of  them  never  able  to
make  a  good  meal,  and  fitting  pale,  puny,  and  for-
bidden like  ghofb,  at  their  own  table,  victims  of  va-
pours and  indigeition.

1 19.  Studious  perfons  alfo  pent  up  in  narrow  holes,
breathing  bad  air,  and  Hooping  over  their  books,  are
much  to  be  pitied.  As  they  are  debarred  the  free  ufecf
air  andexercife,  this  I  will  venture  to  recommend  as  the
bell  fuccedanejm  to  both.  Though  it  were  to  be  wifh-
ed,  that  modern  fcholars  would,  like  the  ancients,  me-
ditate and  converfe  more  in  walks  and  gardens  and
open  air,  which  upon  the  whole,  would  perhaps  be  no
hindrance  to  their  learning,  and  a  great  advantage  to
their  health.  My  own  fedentary  courfe  of  life  had
long  fmce  thrown  me  into  an  ill  habit,  attended  with
many  ailments,  particularly  a  nervous  cholic,  which
rendered  my  life  a  burthen,  and  the  more  fo,  becaufe
my  pains  were  exafperated  by  exerciie.  But  fince  the
ule  of  ear  water,  I  find,  though  not  a  perfect  recovery
from  my  old  and  rooted  illnefb,  yet  fuch  a  gradual  re-

t  lrn  of  health  and  eafe,  that  I  efteem  my  haviug  taken
th's  medicine  the  greateit  of  ail  temporal  b'effings  and
am  convinced,  that  under  provideuce,  I  owe  my  life
to  it.

120.  In
(«0  i°3«


S I.  R I S.  49

I2p.  In  the  diftilling  of  turpentine  and  other  bal-
faras  by  a  gentle  heat,  it  hath  been  ebferved,  that
there  rifeth  rn-ft  an  acid  fpirit  (»)  that  will  mix  with
water  ;  which  fpirit,  except  the  fire  be  very  gentle,  is
loll.  This  grateful  acid  fpirit  that  firfr.  comes  over,  is,
as  a  learned  chymift  and  phyfician  informs  us,  highly
refrigeratory,  diuretic,  fudori£c,  balfamic  or  preserva-
tive from  putrefaction,  excellent  in  nephritic  cafes,  and
lor  quenching  thirft,  all  which  virtue!  are  contained  m
the  cold  infufion,  which  draws  forth  from  Tar  only
it's  fine  flower  or  quinteffence,  if  I  may  fo  fay,  or  the
native  vegetable  fpirit,  together  with  a  little  volatile
oyl.

121.  The  diftinguifhing  principle  cf  all  vegetables,
that  whereon  their  peculiar  fmei),  taite,  and  fpecific
properties  depend,  feems  to  be  fome  extremely  fine  and
fubtile  fpirit,  whofe  immediate  vehicle  is  an  exceeding;
thin  volatile  oyl,  which  is  it  felf  detained  in  a  groffer
and  more  vifcid  refm  orbaifam,  lodged  in  proper  cells
in  the  bark  and  feeds,  and  moll  abounding  in  autumn
or  winter,  after  the  crude  juices  have  been  thoroughly
concocted,  ripened,  and  impregnated  with  fehr  I
The  fpirit  it  icif  is  by  fome  fuppoied  to  be  an  oyl  h
fubtilized,  fo  as  to  mix.  with  water. But  fuch  v:

oyl  is  not  the  fpirit,  tat  only  it's  vehicle.  Sii:ce  aro-
matic oyls  being  long  exposed  to  air,  will  kfe  their
fpecific  fmell  and  taile,  which  rly  cfFwith  the  fpirit  or
vegetable  ialt,  without  any  fenuble  diminution  of  the
oyl

122.  Those  volatile  (a!'.s,  that  ere  fct  free  and
railed  by  a  geruie  heat,  may  jultly  be  iuppofed  effen-
tia!  («),  and  to  have  pieexifted  in  the  vegetable  £
whereas  the  lixivia!  fixed  faltjs  obtained  by  the  incine-
ration of  the  fubjeel,  whole  natural  conftituem  parts
have  been  altered  or  deftroyed  by  the  extreme  force  A
fire,  are  by  later  chymifls  upon  very  good  grounds,
iuppofed  not  to  have  pre-exifled  therein  5  all  fuch  fal,ts
Appearing,  from  the  experiments  of  fignior  Redi,  not

::\  t  -)

(»)  7* W  »..


fr  S I Pv I s.

to  prefcrre  the  virtues  of  the  refpettive  vegetable  fab*
jefts  ;  ut'd  to  be  alikt  purgative  and  in  an  equal  de-
gree, whatsoever  may  be  t.»e  frnpe  of"  their  points,
Whether  (harp  or  obtufe.  But  although  fixed  or  lixivi-
ou>  (kits  may  not  contain  the  original  properties  of  the
Sublet  ;  yet  volatile  falts  railed  by  a  flight  heat  from
vegetables  are  allowed  co  preferve  their  native  virtues:
ami  i'ach  falts  are  readily  imbibed  by  water.

123.  Tut  moft  volatile  of  the  falt5,  and  the  mod
attenuated  part  of  the  oy!,  may  be  fuppoied  the  firil
and  readieit  to  impregnate  a  cold  infuiion  (c).  And
this  willailiit  us  to  account  for  the  virtues  of  tar  water.
That  volatile  acid  in  vegetables,  which  refills  putre-
faction and  is  their  great  prefervative,  is  detained  in  a
fubtiie  oyl  mifcible  with  water,  which  cyl  is  it  felf
imprifened  in  the  refin  or  grciler  part  of  the  tar,  from
which  it  is  eafily  kt  free  and  obtained  pure  by  cold
water.

124.  Tke  mild  native  acids  are  obferved  more
kindly  to  work  upon,  and  more  thoroughly  to  diiTolve,
metallic  bodie?,  than  the  ftrongeft  acid  fpirits  produced
by  a  vehement  fire  ;  and  it  may  be  iufpecled,  they
have  the  fame  advantage  as  a  medicine.  And  as  no
acid,  by  the  obfervation  of  fome  of  the  belt  chymilts,
can  be  obtained  from  the  fubllsnce  of  animals
thoroughly  aifimilated,  it  mould  fallow,  that  the  acids
received  into  a  healthy  body  mult  be  quite  fubdued  and
chanced  by  the  vital  powers  :  but  it  is  eafier  to  fubdue
and  aiiimilate  (#)  the  gentler  than  the  ltronger  acids.

125.  I  am  very  fenfible,  that  on  luch  fubjects  ar-
guments fall  fiiort  of  evidence  :  and  that  mine  fall  fhort
even  ci  what  they  might  have  been  if  I  enjoyed  better
health,  or  thofe  opportunities  of  a  learned  commerce,
from  whkh  1  am  cut  off  in  this  remote  corner.  I  (hall
neverthelefs  go  on  as  1  have  begun,  and  proceed  by
rcaiun,  by  conjecture,  and  by  authority,  to  cift  the
beft  light  I  can  on  the  obfeure  paths  that  lie  in  my
way.

126.  Sjr


S I R I 9.  51

126.  Sir  Ifaac  Newton,  Boerhaave,  and  Romberg
are  all  agreed,  that  the  acid  is  a  fine  fubtile  fubflance,
pervading  the  whole  terraqueous  globe  j  which  pro-
duceth divers  k.in-is  of  bodies,  as  it  is  united  to  different
fubjec~b.  This  according  to  Romberg  is  the  pure  fait,
fait  the  pjinciple,  in  it  ielf  fimilar  and  oni form,  buc
never  found  alone.  And  although  this  principle  be
called  the  felt  of  the  earth,  yet  it  mould  leem  it  may
more  properly  be  called  the  fait  of  the  air,  fince  earth
turned  up  and  lying  fallow  receives  it  from  the  air.
And  it  fhould  feem  that  this  is  the  great  principle  of
vegetation,  derived  into  the  earth  from  all  forts  of  ma-
nures, as  well  as  fr.m  the  air.  The  acid  is  allowed  to
be  the  caufe  of  fermentation-  in  all  fermented  liquors.
Why  therefore,  may  it  net  be  fuppofed  to  ferment  the
earth,  and  to  conftitute  that  fine  penetrating  principle,
which  introduces  and  afiimilates  the  food  of  plants,  and
is  fo  fugitive  as  to  eleape  ail  the  filiations  and  perqui-
sitions of  the  mofl  nice  obfervers  ?

127.  It  is  tho  doctrine  of  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  and
monfieur  Homberg,  that,  as  the  watery  acid  is  that
which  renders  fait  folubie  in  water,  fo  it  is  that  fame
which  joined  to  the  earthy  part  makes  it  a  fait.  Let
it  therefore  be  confidered,  that  the  organs  [d)  of
plants  are  tubes,  the  rilling,  unfolding,  and  difknding
whereof  by  liquors,  doth  conftitute  what  is  called  the
vegetation  or  growth  of  the  plant.  But  earth  it  felf
is  not  folubie  in  water,  fo  as  to  form  one  vegetable
fluid  therewith.  Therefore  the  particles  of  earth  mufl
be  joined  with  a  watery  acid,  that  is,  they  muft  be-
come falts  in  order  to  difiblve  in  water  ;  that  fo,  in  the
form  of  a  vegetable  juice,  they  may  pafs  through  the
ftrainers  and  tubes  of  the  root  into  the  body  of  the  plant,
fwelling  and  diflending  it's  parts  and  organs,  that  if,
increafing  it's  bulk  Therefore  the  vegetable  matter
of  the  earth  is  in  effect  earth  changed  into  fait.  And
to  render  earth  fertile,  is  to  caufe  many  of  its  particle*
to  affume  a  faline  form.

E  2  128.  Hence

C4  30;  3'*  35-


fct  S I R I S.

128.  Hence  it  is  obferved,  there  are  more  falts  in
the root  than in the  bark,  more  falls  in  vegetables

ing  than  in  the  autumn  or  winter,  the
crude  laiine  juices  being  in  the  fummer  months  partly
evaropatfd,  and  partly  ripened  by  the  action  and  mix-
ture of  light..  Hence  al;.o  it  appears,  why  the  di-
viding of  earth,  fo  as  to  enlarge  its  furface,  v.  hereby
it  may  admit  more  acid  from  the  air,  is  of  fuch  uie  in
promoting  vegetation.  And  why  allies,  lime,  rind
burn:  clay  are  found  fo  profitable  manure?,  fire  being
in  reality  the  acid,  *s  is  proved  it  the  firqucl  (*)t  Mais  -
alfo  and  flitlls  are  ufeful,  fbrafmuch  as  thoft  ileal  if  e
bodies  attract,  the  acid,  and  raife  an  efferve/ceflce  v.  ith
i%  thereby  promoting  a  fermentation  in  the  gfebe.
The  eaocrements  of  animals  and  putrid  vegetables  do  in
like  manner  contribute  to  vegetation,  by  increafing  the
felts  of  the  earth.  And  where  fallows  r.re  well  broken,
and  lye  long  to  receive  the  acid  of  the  air  into  all  their
parts ;  This  alone  will  be  fuflicient  io  change  many
terrene  particles*  into falls, and  eoi  / render

them  fallible  in  water,  and  therefoie  fit  aliment  for  ve-
getables.

129.  The  acid,  faith  Homberg,  is  always  joined  to
feme  iulphur,  which  determines  it  to  this  cr  that  fpe-
cies,  producirg  different  falts,  as  it  is  the  vegetable,
bituminous,  or  metallique  fulphur.  Even  the  alkaline,
whether,  volatile  or  lixivial  falts,  are  fuppofed  to  be
nothing  but  this  fame  acid  fliicTly  detained  by  oyl  and
earth,  in  fpight  of  the  extreme  force  of  fire,  which
lodgeth  in  them,  without  being  able  to  diflodge  fome
remains  of  the  acid.

130.  Salts,  according  to  fir  Ifaac  Newton,  are
dry  earth  and  watery  acid  united  by  attraction,  the
acid  rendering  them  foluble  in  water  {/).  He  fuppo-
feth  the  watery  acid  to  flow  round  the  terrellrial  parr,
as  the  ocean  doth  round  the  earth,  being  attracted
thereby,  and  compares  each  particle  of  fait,  to  a  chaos
whereof  the  innermoft  part  is  hard  and  earthy,  but  the

furface

(a) 202. (/) I27.


S I R I S.  S3

fiii-face  toft  and  watry. Whatever  attracts  and  is  at*
traded  moft  ftrongly,  is  an  acid  in  his  fenfe.

131.  It  feems  impcfiible  to  determine  the  figures  of
particular  falts.  All  acid  fol  vents  together  with  the
diiTolved  bodies  are  apt  to  (hoot  into  certain  figures.
.And  the  figures,  in  which  the  foflil  falts  cryftaliize,
have  been  iuppofed  the  proper  natural  fhapes  of  them
and  their  acids.  But  Homberg  hath  clearly  mewed
the  contrary  :  forafmuch  as  the  fame  acid  difiblvirg
different  bodie.%  a  flumes  different  fhapes.  Spirit  of
nitre,  for  mflance,  having  diffolved  copper  (hoots  into
hexagonal  cryftals  ;  the  fame  having  diffolved  iron,
moots  into  irregular  fquares  ;  and  again,  having  dif-
folved filver,  fonns  thin  cfyftals  of  a  triangular  figure.

132.  Hcmberg  neverthelefs  holds  in  general,  that
acids  are  fnaped  like  daggers,  and  alkalie3  like
fheaths  :  j^nd  that  moving  in  the  fame  liquor,  the
daggers  run  into  the  fheaths  fitted  to  receive  them,
with  fuch  violence  as  toraife  thatefreivefcence  obferved
in  the  mixture  of  acids  and  alkalies.  But  it  feems  very
difficult  to  conceive,  how,  or  why  the  mere  configura-
tion of  daggers  and  fheaths,  floating  in  the  fame  li-
quor, fhould  caufe  the  former  to  ruih  with  fuch  ve-
hemence, and  direct  their  points  fo  aptly  into  thelater,
any  more  than  a  parcel  of  fpigots  and  foffets  floating
together  in  the  fame  water,  fhould  rufh  one  into  the
other.

133.  It  mould  feem  rather,  that  the  vehement  at-
traction which  fir  liaac  Newton  attributes  to  all  acids,
whereby  he  fuppofeth  tb-m  to  rufh  towards,  penetrate,
make,  and  divide  the  molt  folid  bodie,%  and  to  fer-
ment the  liquid  of  vege  ables,  could  better  account  for
this  phenomenon.  It  is  in  this  attraction,,  that  fir
Iliaac  placeth  all  their  activity,  and  indeed  it  fhould
feem,  the  figures  of  fairs  were  not  of  fuch  efficacy  in
producing  their  effects,  as  the  ftrong  active  powers
whereby  they  are  agitated  and  do  agitate  other  bodies.
Efpecially  if  it  be  true  (what  was  b?fbre  .remark-
ed), that  lixivicus  falts  are  alike  purgartive,  whaWvfcr

E 3  «Uy


54  S I R I S.

may  be  tbe  fhape  of  their  angles,  whether  more  or  lefj
acute  or  obtufe.

134.  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  accounts  for  the  watry
acid's  making  earthy  corpufcles  foluble  in  water,  by
fuppofing  the  acid  to  be  a  mean  between  earth  and
water,  it's  particles  greater  than  thofe  of  water,  and
lefs  than  thofe  of  earth,  and  ftrcngly  to  attract  both.
But  perhaps  there  is  no  neceflary  reafon,  for  fuppofing
the  parts  of  the  acid  groflfer  than  the  parts  of  water,  in
order  to  produce  this  effect  ;  may  not  this  as  well  be
accounted  for,  by  giving  them  only  a  itrong  attraction
or  cohefion  with  the  bodies  to  which  they  are  joined  ?

135.  The  acid  fpirit  or  fait,  that  mighty  initru-
ment  in  the  hand  of  nature,  refiding  in  the  air,  and
diffufed  throughout  that  whole  element,  is  difcernible
alfo  in  many  parts  of  the  earth,  particularly  in  foflik,
fuch  as  (u'phur,  vitriol,  and  alum  ;  it  was  already  ob-
ferved  from  Homberg,  that  this  acid  is  never  found
pure,  but  hath  always  fjlphur  joined  with  it,  and  is
claiTcd  by  the  difference  of  its  fulphurs,  whether  mi-
neral, vegetable,  or  animal.

136.  Salts  are  vulgarly  reckoned  the  moil  active
©f  chymical  principles.  But  Homberg  derives  all  their
activity  from  the  fulphurs  joined  with  them.  From
Which  alio,  as  hath  been  iaid,  he  derive*  all  their
kinds and differences (g). Salt, water, oyl, and

1  feem  to  be  originally  the  fame  in  all  vegetables.
the  difference,  according  to  the  chymiib.  arifeth
from  a  fpirit  refiding  in  the  oy',  called  the  Rector  or
Archxus.  Tint  is  otherwife  called  by  chymilts,  em
l»-imu?,'!,  or  the  native  fpirit,  whereon  depend,  and
wherein  are  contained,  the  peculiar  11  .vour  and  odour,
!he  fpecifjc  qualities  aud  virtues  of  the  plant.

1  37.  'in  ess  native  fpiriis  or  vegetable  fouls  are  all
breathed  or  exhaled  into  the  air,  which  feems  the  re-
ceptacle as  well  as  fource  of  all  fublunary  forms,  the
great  mafs  or  chaos  which  imparts  and  receives  them.
The  air  or  atmofpheie  that  fur  rounds  our  earth  contain  a
a  mix.uie  ufall  he  active  volatile  parts  of  the  whole

habitable


S I R I S.  S3

habitable  world,  that  is  of  all  vegetables,  minerals
and  animals.  Whatever  perfpires,  corrupts,  or  exhales
impregnates  the  air  j  which,  being  acled  upon  by  the
folar  fire,  produceth  within  it  felf  all  forts  of  chymical
operations,  difpenfing  again  thofe  falts  and  fpirits  in
new  generations,  which  it  had  received  from  putre-
factions.

ij8.  The  parpetual  ofcillations  of  this  elaftic  and
reftlefs  element  operate  without  ceafing,  on  all  things
that  have  life,  whether  animal  or  vegetable,  keeping
their  fibres,  veffels,  and  fluids  in  a  motion  always
changing ;  as  heat,  cold,  moiilure,  drynefs,  and  other
caufes  alter  the  elafticity  of  the  air.  Which  accounts,
it  muft  be  owned,  for  many  efrecls.  But  there  are
many  more  which  mail  be  derived  from  other  prin-
ciples or  qualities  in  the  air.  Thus  iron  and  copper
are  corroded  and  gather  ruft  in  the  air,  and  bodies  of
all  forts  are  diifolved  or  corrupted,  which  fneweth  an
acid  to  abound  and  diffule  it  felf  throughout  the  air*

i  39.  By  this  fame  air  fire  is  kindled,  the  lamp  cf
life  preferved,  refpiration,  digeftion,  nutrition,  the
pulfe  of  the  heart  and  motion  of  all  the  mufcles  feemto
be  performed.  Air  therefore  is  a  general  agent,  not
only  exerting  it's  own,  but  calling  forth  the  Qualities  or
powers  of  all  other  bodies,  by  a  divlfion,  comminution,
and  agitation  cf  their  particles,  caufing  them  to  Hy  off
and  become  volatile  and  aclive.

140.  Nothing  ferments,  vegetate?,  or  putrefies
without  air,  which  operates  with  ail  the  virtues  of  the
bodies  included  in  it  ;  that  is,  of  all  nature  3  there  be-
ing  no  drug,  falutary  or  poifonous,  whofe  virtues  are
not  breathed  into  the  air.  The  air  therefore  is  an
a&i'/e  mafs  of  numberlefs  different  principles,  the  gene-
ral fource  of  corruption  and  generation  j  on  one  hand.,
dividing,  abrading,  and  carrying  orr  the  particles  of
bodies,  that  is,  corrupting  or  diffolving  them  ;  on  ths
frther,  producing  new  ones  into  being;  deilroy ing  arid
bellowing  forms  without  inteimilhor..

141,  Til  $


i<5


S I R I $.


141.  The  feeds  of  things  fee m  to  lye  latent  in  the
air,  ready  to  appear  and  produce  their  kind,  whenever
they  light  on  a  proper  matrix.  The  extremely  fmall
feeds  of  fern,  moffes,  mufhroorns,  and  fome  other  plants
are  concealed  and  wafted  about  in  the  air,  every  part
whereof  feems  replete  with  feeds  of  one  kind  or  other.
The  whole  atmofphere  feems  alive.  There  is  tvery
where  acid  to  corrode,  and  feed  to  engender.  Iron  will
lull,  and  mold  will  grow  in  all  places.  Virgin  earth
becomes  fertile,  crops  of  new  plants  evei  and  anon
fhew  themfelves,  all  which  demonftrates  the  air  to  be
a  common  feminary  and  recepticle  of  all  vivifying
principles.

141.  Air  may  alfo  be  faid  to  be  the  feminary  of
minerals  and  metals,  as  it  is  of  vegetables.  Mr.  Boyle
informs  u?,  that  the  exhaufted'  ores  of  tin  and  iron  be-
ing expofed  to  the  air  become  again  impregnated  with
metal,  and  that  ore  of  alum  having  loll  it's  fait  re-
covers it  after  the  fame  manner.  And  numberlefs  in-
stances there  are  of  falts  produced  by  th«  air,  that  vail
collection  or  treafury  of  active  principles,  from  which
all  fublunary  bodies  fcem  to  derive  their  forms,  and
on  which  animals  depend  for  their  life  and  breath

143.  That  there  is  fome  latent  vivifying  fpirit  dif-
perfed  throughout  the  air  common  experience  lheweth  $
infomuch  as  it  is  neceiltry  both  to  vegetables  and  ani-
mals (k)  whether  terretirial  or,  aquatic,  neither  beafb,
infects,  birds  nor  fifties  being  able  to  fubful  without
air.  Nor  doth  all  air  fuffice,  there  being  fome  quality
or  ingredient,  of  which  when  air  is  deprived,  it  be-
comcth  unfit  to  maintain  either  life  or  flume.  And  this
even  though  the  air  mould  retain  it's  elaflicity  j
which,  by  the  bye,  is  an  argument  that  air  doth  not
ad  only  as  an  antagonifl  to  the  intercoilal  mufcles.
It  hath  both  that  and  many  other  uies.  it  gives  and
preferves  a  proper  tone  to  the  veffela  :  Tins  elaitio
fluid  promotes  all  fecretions  :  it's  oicillaticr.s  keep
tvery  part  in  motion  :  it  pervades  and  actuates  the
ivhole animal fyftem, producing  great variety of

effect*,
(/>)  138,  139,


S I R I S.  57

effect?,  and  even  cppofite  in  different  parts,  cooling  at
the  lame  time  and  heating,  diftending  and  contracting,
coagulating  and  refolding,  giving  and  taking,  fuilain-
ing  life  and  impairing  it,  preffing  without  and  expand-
ing within,  abrading  fome  parts,  at  the  fame  time  in-
sinuating and  Supplying  others,  producing  various  vi-
brations in  the  fibres,  and  ferments  in  the  fluids;  all
which  mufi  needs  enfae  from  fuch  a  fubtile,  active,  he-
terogeneous and  elaftic  fluid.

144.  But  there  is,  as  we  before  obferved,  fome
one  quality  or  ingredient  in  the  air,  on  which  life  more
immediately  and  principally  depends.  What  that  $*
though  men  are  not  agreed,  yet  it  is  agreed  it  mull  be
the  fame  thing  that  fupports  the  vital  and  the  common
flame  ;  it  being  found  that  when  air,  by  often  breath-
ing in  it*  is  become  unfit  for  the  one,  it  will  no  longer
ferve  for  the  other.  The  like  is  obfervable  in  poi-
fonous  damps  or  fleams,  wherein  flame  cannot  be
kindled.  As  is  evident  in  the  Grotto  del  cane  near
Naples.  And  here  it  occurs,  to  recommend  the
plunging  them  in  cold  water,  as  an  experiment  to  be
tried  on  perfons  affected  by  breathing  a  poifonous  va-
pour in  old  vaults,  mine?,  deep  holes  or  cavities  under
ground.  Which,  I  am  apt  to  think,  might  fave  the
lives  of  feveral,  by  what  I  have  feen  practifed  en  a  dog
convulfed  and  in  all  appearance  dead,  but  inftantly  re-
viving on  being  taken  out  of  the  above-mentioned
grotto  and  thrown  into  a  lake  adjacent.

145.  Air,  the  general  menitruum  and  feminary,
feemeth  to  be  only  an  aggregate  of  the  volatile  parts
of  all  natural  beings,  which  varioufly  combined  and
agitated  produceth  many  various  efTects.  Small  par-
ticles in  a  near  and  clcie  fituation  ftrongly  act  upon
each  other,  attracting,  repelling,  vibrating.  Hence
divers  fermentations,  and  all  the  variety  of  meteor?,,
ffcmpefts,  and  concuflions  boih  of  earth  and  firmament,
Nor  is  the  microcofm  lefs  affected  thereby.  Being  pent
up  in  the  vifcera,  veflels,  and  membranes  of  the  bo-
dy, by  it's  falts,  fulphurs,  and  elaftic  power,  it  en-
genders


jS  S I R I S.

genders  cholics,  fpafms, hilleric diforders and other
maladies.

146.THE  fpec'fic  quality  of  air  is  taken  to  be  perma-
nent elafticity.  Mr.  Boyle  is  ex  pre  fly  of  this  opinion.  And
yet,  whether  there  be  any  fuch  thing  as  permanently
claftic  air  may  be  doubted,  there  being  many  things
which  feem  to  rob  the  air  of  this  quality,  or  at  leait
leiTen  and  fufper.d  it's  exertion.  The  falss  and  fulphurs,
for  inilance,  that  float  in  the  air  abate  much  of  is'i
elasticity  by  their  attraction.

147.  Upon  the  whole  it  i*  manifeft,  that  air  is  no
diftinct  element,  but  a  mafs  or  mixture  of  things  the
molt  heterogeneous  and  even  oppcfite  to  each  other  (w)
which  become  air,  by  acquiring  an  elasticity  and  vola-
tility from  the  attr?£Uon  of  fome  active,  fubule  fub-
llance  ;  whether  it  be  called  fire,  aether,  light,  or  the
vital  fpirit  of  the  world  ;  in  like  manner  as  the  par-
ticles of  antimony,  of  themfelves  not  volatile,  are  car-
ried off  in  fublimation  and  rendered  volatile,  by  co-
hering with  the  particles  of  fal  ammoniac.  But  action
and  reaction  being  equal,  the  fpring  of  this  ethereal
fpirit  is  diminilhed  by  being  imparted.  It's  velocity
and  fulitility  are  alfo  lefs,  from  it's  being  mixed  with,
grofTer  particles.  Hence  found  moves  flower  than
light,  as  mud  than  water.

148.  Whether  air  be  only  freed  and  fixed,  or  ge-
nerated and  deftroyed,  it  is  certain  that  air  begins  and
ceafes  to  exert  or  fhew  it  felf.  Much  by  experiments
feems  to  be  generated,  not  only  from  animals,  fruits,
and  vegetables,  but  alfo  from  hard  bodies.  And  it  is
obferved  by  fir  Ifaac  Newton,  that  air  produced  from
hard  bodies  is  mofl  elaitic.  The  transmutation  of  ele-
ments, each  into  other,  hath  been  anciently  held.  Jn
Plutarch  we  find  it  was  the  opinion  of  Heraclitiw,
that  the  death  of  fire  was  a  birth  to  air,  and  the  death
of  air  a  birth  to  water.  This  opinion  is  alfo  mai»-
tained  by  fir  Jfaac  Newton.  Though  it  may  be  ques-
tioned, whether  what  is  thought  a  change  be  not  only
a  difguife.

149.  Fire


S I R I $  &

149.  Fire  Teems  the  moll  elaflic  and  expanfive  of
all  bodies.  It  communicates  this  quality  to  moift  va-
pours and  dry  exhalations,  when  it  heats  and  agitates
their  part*,  cohering  clofely  with  them,  overcoming
their  former  mutual  attraction,  and  caufing  them,  in-
Itead  thereof,  reciprocally  to  repcll  each  other  and  fly
afunder,  with  a  force  proportionable  to  that  where-
with they  had  cohered.

150.  Therefore  in  air  we  may  conceive  two
parts,  the  one  more  grofs  which  was  railed  and  car-
ried off  from  the  bodies  of  this  terraqueous  mafs :  the
other  a  fine  fubtile  fpirit  by  means  whereof,  the  for-
mer is  rendered  volatile  and  elaltic.  Together  they
compofea  medium,  whofe  elaflicity  is  lefs  than  that  of
p.ure  aether,  fire,  or  fpirit,  in  proportion  to  the  quan-
tity of  falts,  vapours,  and  heterogeneous  particles
contained  therein.  Hence  it  follows,  that  there  is  no
fuch  thing  as  pure  fimple  element  of  air.  It  follows
alfo  that  on  the  higheft  mountain?,  air  mould  be  more
rare  than  in  proportion  to  the  vulgar  rule,  of  the
fpaces  being  reciprocally  as  the  preffures  :  and  fo  in
facl  it  is  faid  to  have  been  found,  by  the  Gentlemen  of
the  French  Academy  of  Sciences.

151.  £ther,  fire,  or  fpirit  being  attracted  and
clogged  by  heterogeneous  particles  becometh  lefs  active  ;
and  the  particles  cohering  with  thofe  of  zether,  become
more  active  than  before.  Air  therefore  is  a  mafs  of
various  particles,  abraded  and  fubli mated  from  wet  and
dry  bodies  of  all  forts,  cohering  with  particles  of  aether;
the  whole  permeated  by  pure  aether,  or  light,  or  fire:
for  thefe  words  are  uled  promifcuoufiy  by  ancient  phi-
lofophers.

152.  This  aether  or  pure  invifible  lire,  the  moft  fub-
tile and  elaftic  of  all  bodies,  feems  to  pervade  and  ex-
pand  it  Cdf  throughout  the  whole  univerfe.  If  air  be
the  imediate  agent  or  inftrument  in  natural  things,  it
is  the  pure  inviiible  fire  that  is  the  firft  natural  mover
or  fpring,  from  whence  the  air  derives  it's  power  (  a  ).

This
M  I39>  H9*  l%h


60  S I R I S.

This  mighty  agent  is  every  where  at  hand,  ready  to
break  forth  into  action,  if  not  retrained  and  governed
with  the  greateft  wifdom.  Being  always  reftlefs  and  in
motion,  it  actuates  and  enlivens  the  whole  vifible  mafs,
is  equally  fitted  to  produce  and  todeftroy,  diftinguifhes
the  various  flages  of  nature,  and  keeps  up  the  perpe-
tual round  of  generations  and  corruptions,  pregnant
with  forms  which  it  conftantly  fends  forth  and  reibrbs.
So  quick  in  it's  motions,  fo  fubtile  and  penetrating  in
it's  nature,  fo  extenfive  in  it's  effects,  it  feemeth  no  o-
ther  than  the  vegetative  foul  or  vital  fpirit  of  the
world.

153.  The  animal  fpirit  in  man  is  the  inftrumental
or  phyfical  caufe  both  of  fenfe  and  motion.  To  fup-
pofe  fenfe  in  the  world,  would  be  grofs  and  unwarrant-
ed. But  locomotive  faculties  are  evident  in  all  it's
parts.  The  Pythogoreans,  Platonifls,  and  Stoics  held
the  world  to  be  an  animal.  Though  fome  of  them
have  chofen  to  confider  it  as  a  vegetable.  However
the  phenomena  and  effects  do  plainly  fhew  there  is  a
fpirit  that  moves,  and  a  mind  or  providence  that  pre-
fidcs".  This  providence,  Plutarch  faith,  was  thought
tq  be  in  regard  to  the  world,  what  the  foul  is  in  regard
t:>  man.

154.  The  order  and  courfe  of  things,  and  the  ex-
periments we  daily  make,  fhew  there  is  a  mind  that
governs  and  actuates  this  mundane  fyflem,  as  the  pro-
per real  agent  and  ciufe.  And  that  the  inferior  inltru-
mental  caufe  is  pure  sether,  fire,  or  the  fubfhnce  of
light  (c )  which  is  applied  and  determined  by  an  infinite
mind  in  the  macrocofm  or  univerfe,  with  unlimited
power,  and  according  to  ftated  rules ;  as  it  is  in  the
microccfm,with  limited  power  and  fkill  by  the  humane
mind.  We  have  no  proof,  either  from  experiment  or
reafon,  of  any  other  agent  or  efficient  caufe  than  mii>d
or  fpirit.  When  therefore  we  fpeak  of  corporeal  a-
gents  or  corporeal  cjufes,  this  is  to  be  underiicod  in  a
different,  fubordinate,  and  improper  fenfe.

155.  The

(')  29»  37»  i-3^  I49«


S I R I S  <Jt

•  155.  The  principles  whereof  a  thing  is  compound-
ed, the  inttrumentufed  in  it's  production,  and  the  end
for  which  it  was  intended,  are  all  in  vulgar  ufe  termed
caufes,  though  none  of  them  be  ftridtly  [peaking  agent
or  efficient.  There  is  not  any  proof  that  an  extended
corporeal  or  mechanical  caufe  doth  really  and  properly
act,  even  motion  it  felf  being  in  truth  a  paffion.  There-
fore though  we  fpeak  of  this  fiery  fubilance  as  acting,
yet  it  is  to  be  underflood  only  as  a  mean  or  inilrument,
which  indeed  is  the  cafe  of  all  mechanical  caufes  what-
soever. They  are  neverthelefs  fometimes  termed  a-
gents  and  caufes,  although  they  are  by  no  means  active
in  a  flrict  and  proper  fign ifkation.  When,  therefore,
force,  power,  virtue,  or  action  are  mentioned  as  fub-
filling  in  an  extended  and  corporeal  or  mechanical  be-
ing, this  is  not  to  be  taken  in  a  true  genuine  and  real,
but  only  in  a  grofs  and  popular  fenfe,  which  flicks  in
appearances,  and  doth  not  analyfe  things  to  their  hVit
principles.  In  compliance  with  eflablifhed  language
and  the  ufe  of  the  world,  we  mull  employ  the  popular
current  phrafe.  But  then  in  regard  to  truth  we  ought
to  diflinguim  it's  meaning.  It  may  fufnee  to  have
made  this  declaration  once  for  all,  in  order  to  avoid
miftakes.

156.  The  ealidum  innatuttiy  the  vital  flame,  or  ani-
mal fpirit  in  man  is  fuppofed  the  caufe  of  all  motion.%
in  the  feveral  parts  of  his  body,  whether  voluntary  «r
natural.  That  it  is  the  inilrument,  by  means  whereof
the  mind  exerts  and  manifefls  herielf  m  the  motions  of
the  body.  In  the  fame  fenfe  may  not  fire  be  faid  to
have  force,  to  operate,  and  agitate  the  whole  fyflem
of  the  world,  which  is  held  together  and  informed  by
one  prefiding  mind,  and  animated  throughout  by  ona
and  the  fame  fiery  fubflance,  as  an  inflrumental-  and
mechanical  agent,  not  as  a  primary  real  efficient?

157.  This  pure  fpirit  or  invihble  fire  is  ever  ready
to  exert  and  mew  itfelf  in  it's  effects  (  d ).  cheriihing,
heat  ng,  fermenting,  diffolving,  mining  and  operating
in  various  manners,  where  a  fubjtct  offers  to  employ  o:
determine  it's  force. It  is  prefent  in  all  parts  of  ths

\d)  152,  F  earth


6-i  3 I R I S.

earth  and  firmament,  though  perhaps  latent  and  unob-
ferved,  till  fome  accident  produceth  it  into  att,  and
renders  it  vifible  in  it's  effecls.

158.  There  is  no  effect  in  nature,  great,  marvel-
lous, or  terrible  but  proceeds  from  fire,  that  diffufed
and  active  principle,  which  at  the  fame  time  that  it
lhakes  the  earth  and  heavens,  will  enter,  divide,  and
-difiblve  ti;e  fmalleft,  clofeft,  and  mod  compacted  bodies.
In  remote  cavities  of  the  earth  it  remains  quiet,  till
pcrhnps  an  accidental  fpark  from  the  collifion  of  one
flone  againit  another  kindles  an  exhalation,  that  gives
birth  to  an  earthquake  or  tempeft,  which  fplits  moun-
tains or  overturns  cities.  This  fame  fire  {lands  unfeen
in  the  focus  of  a  burning  glafs,  till  fubjecls  for  it  to  aft
upon  come  in  it's  way,  when  it  is  found  to  melt,  cal-
cine, or  virrify  the  hardeft  bodies.

159.  No  eye  could  ever  hitherto  difcern,  and  no
fenfe  perceive,  the  animal  fpirit  in  a  human  body,  o-
therwife  than  from  it's  effects.  The  fame  may  be  faid
of  pure  fire,  or  the  fpirit  of  the  univerfe,  which  is
perceived  only  by  means  of  fome  other  bodies,  on
which  it  operates  or  with  which  it  is  joined.  What
•the  Chymifls  fay,  of  pure  acid's  being  never  found  a-
lone,  might  as  well  be  faid  of  pure  fire.

160.  The  mind  of  man  a<fts  by  an  inflrument  ne-
«efiarily.  The  to  tiyzuoviKov,  or  mind  prefixing  in
the  world,  acts  by  an  initrument  freely.  Without  in-
strumental and  fecond  caufes,  there  could  be  no  regular
courfe  of  nature.  And  wiihout  a  regular  courfe,  na-
ture ccr.ld  never  be  underltood.  Mankind  mult  always
Le  at  a  lofc,  not  knowing  what  to  expect,  or  how  to
govern  themfdves,  or  direct  their  actions  for  the  ob-
taining of  any  end.  Therefore  in  the  government  of
the  world  phyfical  agents,  improperly  fo  called,  or  me-»
chanical,  or  fecond  caufes,  or  natural  caufes,  or  inflru-
ir.ents,  are  neceffary  to  affiil,  not  the  Governor,  but  the
governed.

161.  In  the  humane  body  the  mind  orders  and
moves  the  limbs:  but  the  animal  fpirit  is  fuppofed  the
immediate  phyfical  caiife  of  their  Motion. So  likewife

in


S I R I S.  6$

in  the  mundane  fyftem,  a  mind  prcfides,  but  the  im-
mediate, mechanical,  or  initrumemal  caufe,  that  moves
or  animates  all  it's  parts,  is  the  pure  elementary  fire  or
fpiric  of  the  world.  The  more  fine  and  fubtile  part  or
fpirit  is  fuppofed  to  receive  the  impreffions  of  the  firfi
mover,  and  communicate  them  to  the  groffer  fenfible
parts  of  this  world.  Motion,  though  in  metaphy  ileal
rigour  and  truth  a  paflion  or  mere  effect,  yet,  in  phy-
fics  paiTeth  for  an  a&ion.  And  by  this  action  ail  elicits
are  fuppofed  to  be  produced.  Hence  the  various  com?
municatipns,  determinations,  accelerations  of  motion
conffatute  the  laws  of  nature,

162.  The  pure  aether  or  invifib'e  fire  contains  part?
of  different  kinds,  that  are  imprcfied  with  different  for-
ces, or  fubjected  to  different  laws  of  motion,  attraction,
repuifion  and  expanfion,  and  endued  with  divers 'difiinct
habitudes  towards  other  bodies.  Thefe  fcemto  coniiiiute
the  many  various  qualities  (?),  virtues,  flavours,  odours,
and colour;, which  diftinguiiti  natural  productions.
The  different  modes  of  cohaelion, attraction,  repuifion
and  motion,  appear  to  be  the  fource  from  whence  the
fpecific  properties  are  derived, rather  than different
fhapes  or  figures. This  as  hath  been  already  obferved,
feems  confirmed  by  the  experiment  of  fixed falts ope-
rating one  way,  notwithstanding  the  difFerence  of their
angles. The  original  particles  productive of  odours,
flavours,  and  other  properties,  as  well  as of colour?,
are,  one  may  fufpect,  all  contained  and  blended  toge-
ther in  that  univerfal  and  original  feminary of  pure  e-
lementary  fire;  from  which  they  are  c'iverfly  feparated
and  attracted,  by the  various  fubjects  of the  animal,
vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms; which  thereby  be-
come claiTed  into  kind?,  and  endued  with  thofe  diflinct
properties,  which  continue  till  their  feveral  forms,  or
fpecific  proportions  of  fire  return  into the  common
mafs.

163.  As  the  foul  acts  immediately  on  pure  fire,  To

pure  fire  operates  immediately  on  air. that  is,  the  a-

brafions  of  all  terreilial  things  being  rendered  volatile

F  2  and

CO  37,  40,  4,


<?4  S I R I S.

and  elafVc  by  fire  (/),  and  at  the  fame  time  l'efllning
the  volatility  and  expanfive  force  of  the  fire,  whole
panicles  they  attract  and  adhere  to  (i),  there  is  pro-
duced a  new'fluid,  more  volatile  than  water  or  earth,
and  more  fixed  than  fire.  Therefore  the  virtues  ando-
pcration?  imputed  to  air,  mult  be  ultimately  attributed
to  /ire,  as  that  which  imparts  activity  to  air  it  felf.

164.  rrirE  element  of  aetherial  fire  or  light  feems  to
comprehend,  in  a  mi\cd  Hue,  the  feeds,  the  natural
eaufes  and  forms  (g)  of  all  fublunary  things.  The
grbffer  bodies  feparate,  attract,  and  repell  the  feveral
constituent  particles  of  thnt  heterogeneous  element;  which
being  parted  from  the  corrimon  maf%  make  diitinft  ef-
fences,  producing  and  combining  together  fuch  quali-
ties and  properties,  as  are  peculiar  to  the  feveral  fub-
jedte,  and  thence  often  extracted  in  effential  oylsor  odo-
riferous waters,  from  whence  they  exhale  into  the  open
air,  and  return  into  their  orig:r.al  element.

165.  Blue,  red,  yellow,  and  other  colours,  have
been  difcovtred  by  Sir  Ifar.c  Newton  to  depend  on  the
parted  raies  or  particles  of  light.  And  in  like  ma  sr,
a  particulour  odour  or  flavour,  feemeth  to  depend  on
peculiar  particles  of  light  cr  fire  [h);  as  appeals  from
heats  being  neceffiry  to  all  vegetation  Whatfoever,  and
from  the  extreme  minutenefs  and  volatility  of  thofe  ve-
getable fouls  or  forms,  flying  off  from  the  fubjefts.
without  any  fenfible  diminution  of  their  weight.  Thcfe
particles  blended  in  one  common  ocean,  fhould  feem  to  ,
conceal  the  diftincl  forms,  but,  parted  and  attracted  by-
proper  fubje&s,  difclofe  or  produce  ihem.  As  the  par-
ticles of  light  which  when  feparated,  form  diftincl  co-
lour?, being  blended  are  loll  in  one  uniform  appear-
ance.

166.  Agreeablt  thereto,  an  aetherial  fubftance  or
fire  was  fuppofed  by  Heraclitus  to  be  the  feed  of  the
generation  of  all  things,  or  that  from  which  all  things
drew  their  original.  The  Stoics  alfo  taught,  that  all
fubftance  was  originally  fire,  and  mould  return  to  fire :
that  an  active  fubtile  fire  was  diflufed  or  expanded  through-
out

(/)  H9>  l5°>  lS2- (*)  H7- \g)  43- (*>  4°-


S I R I S.  6$

out  the  whole  univerfe;  the  feveral  parts  whereof  were
produced,  fuftained,  and  held  together  by  it's  force.
And  it  was  the  opinion  of  the  Pythagoreans,  as  Laer-
tius  informs  us,  that  Heat  or  Fire  was  the  principle  of
Life  animating  the  whole  fyitem,  and  penetrating  all
the  elements  [a).  The  Platonifts  too,  as  well  as  the
Pythagoreans,  held  fire  to  be  the  immediate  natural  a-
genr,  or  animal  fpitit;  to  cheriih,  to  warm,  to  heat,
to  enlighten,  to  vegetate,  to  produce  the  digeftions^
circulations,  fecreuons,  and  organical  motions  iri  all
living  bodies,  vegetable  or  animal,  being  effects  of  that
element,  which,  as  it  actuates  the  macrocofm,.  fo  it  a-
nimates  the  microcofm.  In  t-heTimaeusof  Plato,  there
is  fuppofed  ibmething  like  a  net  of  fire,  and  raies  of
fire  in  a  humane  body.  Doth  not  this  feem  to  mean
the  animal  fpirit,  flowing,  or  rather  darting  through
the  nerves?

167.  According  to  the  Peripatetics,  the  form  of
heaven,  or  the  fiery  aethereal  fubuance,  contains  the
forms  of  all  inferior  beings  ( <?).  It  may  be  laid  to  teem
with  forms,  and  impart  ;hem  tofubject*  fitctd  to  receive
than.  The  vital  force  thereof  in  the  Peripatetic  fenis
is  vital  to  all,  but  diverfly  received. according  to  the
diverfity  of  the  fubjects.  So  all  colours  are  virtually
contained  in  the  light ;  but  their  actual  diitinctions  of
blue,  red,  yellow,  and  the  reft,  depend  on  the  differ-
ence of  the  objects  which  it  illuftrates.  Ariflotle  in
the  book  de  mundo,  fuppoieth  a  certain  fifth  tilt  nee,  an
actherial  nature  unchangeable  and  impaffive^  and  next
in  order  a  fubtile,  flaming  iubitar.ee,  lighted  up,  or  fee
on  fir-e  by  that  aetherial  and  divine  nature.  He  fup-
poieth, indeed,  that  God  is  in  heaven,  but  that  his
power,  or  a  force  derived  from  him,  doth  actuate  and
pervade  the  univerfe.

•  168.  If  we  may  credit  Plutarch,  Empedode3-
thought  ssther  or  heat  to  be  Jupiter.  Mthct  by  the
ancient  philosophers  was  ufed  to  fignify  promifcuoufly
fometimes  fire  and  fometimes  air.  For  they  diitinguim
Swo  forts  of  air.  Plato  in  the  Timieus  fpeaking  of  air
F  3  faith,

{a)  152,  153. ft)  43.


06  S I R I S.

faith  there  are  two  kinds,  the  one  more  fine  and  fubtilr,,
called  a?ther,  the  other  more  grofs  and  replete  with  va-
pours !  This  xther  or  purer  medium  ieeras  to  have  been
the  air  or  principle,  from  which  all  things  according  to
Anaximenes  derived  their  birth,  and  into  which  they
were  back  again  refolved  at  their  death.  Hypocrates
in  his  treatife  de  di&ta,  fpeaketh  of  a  fire  pure  and  in-
vifible;  and  this  fire,  according  to  him,  is  that  which
ftirring  and  giving  movement  to  all  things  caufes  them
to  appear,  or,  as  he  ityles  ir,  come  into  evidence,  that
is  to  exift,  every  one  in  it's  time  and  according  to  it'3
dtftiny.

169.  Tins  pure  fire,  aether,  or  fubftance  of  lighr,.
was  accounted  in  itfelf  invifible  and  imperceptible  to
all  our  fenfes,  being  perceived  only  by  it's  effects,  fuch.
as  heat,  flame,  and  rarefaction  To  which  we  may
add,  that  the  moderns  pretend  farther  to  have  perceiv-
ed it  by  weight,  inafmuch  as  the  aromatic  oyls  which
inofl:  abound  with  fire,  as  being  the  molt  readily  and
vehemently  enflamed,  are  above  all  others  the  heavieft.
And  by  an  experiment  of  Mr.  Homberg's,  four  ounces
of  regulus  of  antimony,  being  calcined  by  a  burning
glafs  for  an  hour  together,  were  found  to  have  imbibed
and  fixtd  feven  drams  of  the  fubftance  of  light.

170.  Such  is  the  rarefying  and  expanfive  force  of
this  element,  as  to  produce  in  an  inftant  of  time  the
greatelt  and  moil  ftupendous  effects:  a  fufficient  proof
not  only  of  the  power  of  fire,  but  alfo  of  the  wifdom
with  which  it  is  managed,  and  witheld  from  burfting
forth  every  moment  to  the  utter  ravage  and  deflruction
of  all  things.  And  it  is  very  remarkable,  that  this
fame  clement,  fo  fierce  and  deJlructive,  fliould  yet  be
lo  varioufly  tempered  and  applied,  as  to  be  withal  the
(hlutary  warmth,  the  genial,  cherilhing  and  vital  flame
of  all  living  creatures.  It  is  not  therefore  to  be  won-
dered that  Ariftotle  thought,  the  heat  of  a  living  body
to  be  fomewhat  divine  and  celeflial,  derived  from  that
pure  sether  to  which  lie  fuppofed  the  incorporeal  deity
i'XPfttbv  i'/JV)'  to  be  immediately  united,  or  cm  which,
he  fuppoftd  n  immediately  to  acL

171.  Th»


S I R I S.  67

171.  The  Platonifts  held  that  intellect  refided  irs
foul,  and  foul  in  an  astherial  vehicle.  And  that  as  the
foul  was  a  middle  nature  reconciling  Intellect  with
JEther ,  fo  iEther  was  another  middle  nature,  which
reconciled  and  connected  the  foul  with  groffer  bodies
(d).  Galen  likewife  taught  that,  admitting  the  foul  to
be  incorporeal,  it  hath  for  it's  immediate  tegument  or
vehicle  a  body  of  aether  or  fire,  by  the  intervention
whereof  it  moveth  other  bodies  and  is  mutually  af-
fected by  them.  This  interior  cloathing  was  fuppofed
to  remain  upon  the  foul,  not  only  after  death,  but  af-
ter the  molt  perfect  purgation,  which  in  length  of
time  according  to  the  followers  of  Plato  and  Pythago-
ras cleanfed  the  foul,

'  pttrumfite  reliquit.

&thereum  fenfum  at  que  aural  Jimplicls  ignem.
This  tunicle  of  the  foul,  whether  it  be  called  pure
sether,  or  luciform  vehicle,  or  animal  fpirit  feemeth
to  be  that  which  moves  and  acts  upon  the  grofs  organs,
as  it  is  determined  by  the  foul  from  which  it  immedi-
ately receives  impreflion,  and  in  which  the  moving
force  truly  and  properly  refides.  Seme  moderns  have
thought  fit  to  deride  all  that  is  (aid  of  stherial  vehicles,
as  mere  jargon  or  words  without  a  meaning.  But  they
mould  have  confidered,  that  all  fpeech  concerning  the
foul  is  altogeiher,  or  for  the  mod  part,  metaphorical;
and  that,  agreeably  thereunto,  Plato  fpeaketh  of  the
mind  or  foul,  as  a  driver  that  guides  and  governs  a
chariot,  which  is,  not  unfitly,  ilyled  'ctvyostfif  a
luciform  aethereal  vehicle  or  V/j\y.ctr  terms  expreffive
of  the  purity,  lightnefs,  fubtiky  and  mobility  of  that
fine  cse'eitial  nature,  in  which  the  foul  immediately  re-
fides  and  operates.

172.  It  was  a  tenet  of  the  Stoics  that  the  world
was  an  animal,,  and  that  providence  anfwered  to  the
reafonable  foul  in  man.  But  then  the  providence  or
mind  was  fuppoled  by  them,  to  be  immediately  refident
or  prefent  in  fire,  to  dwell  therein,  and  to  act  thereby.

Briefly,
(d)  152., 154.


68  S I R I S.

Briefly,  they  conceived  God  to  be  an  intellectual  and
fiery  fpirit,  Trvlvuet  vospbv  Kat  irvynSis.  Therefore
though  they  looked  on  fire  (f)  as  the  70  yiyzy-oviKov
or  governing  principle  of  the  world  ;  yet  it  was  not
limply  fire,  but  animated  with  a  mind.

173.  Such  are  the  bright  and  lively  fignatures  of
a  divine  mind,  operating  ar.d  difplaying  it  feif  in  fire
and  light  throughout  the  world,  that  as  Ariftotle  ob-
ferves  in  his  book  de  mundo,  all  things  feem  full  of
divinities,  vvhofe  apparitions  on  all  fides  ftrike  and
dazzle  our  eyes.  And  it  muft  be  owned  the  chief
philofophers  and  wife  men  of  antiquity,  how  much  fo-
ever  they  attributed  to  fecond  caufes  and  the  force  of
fire,  yet  they  fuppofed  a  mind  or  intellect  always  re-
fident  therein,  active  or  provident,  retraining  it's  force
and  directing  it's  operations.

174.  Thus  Hippocrates  in  his  treatife,  de  diaeta,
fpeaksofa  ftrong  but  invifible  fire  (g),  that  rules  all
things  without  noife.  Herein,  faith  he,  refides  foul,
underflanding,  prudence,  growth,  motion,  diminution,
change,  fleep  and  waking.  This  is  what  governs  alt
things,  and  is  never  in  repofe.  And  the  fame  author^
in  his  tract,  de  carnibus,  after  a  feiious  preface  fetting
forth  that  he  is  about  to  declare  his  own  opinion,  ex-
prefleth  it  in  thefe  terms.  That  which  we  call  heat
hipy-ov  appears  to  fne  fomething  immortal,  which  un-
derstands all  tilings,  which  fees  and  knows  both  what
is  pre  fen  t  and  what  is  to  come.

175.  This  fame  heat  is  alfo  what  Hippocrates  calls
nature,  the  author  of  life  and  death  good  and  evil.
It  is  farther  to  be  noted  of  this  heat,  that  he  maketh
it  the  object  of  no  fenfe.  It  is  that  occult,  univerfal
nature,  and  inward  invifible  force,  which  actuates  and-
animates  the  whole  world,,  and  was  worfhip'd  by  rhe
ancients  under  the  name  of  Saturn  ;  which  VofTius
judges  not  improbably  to  be  derived  from  the  Hebrew
word  Sitar,  to  lye  hidden  or  concealed.  And  what
hath  bten  delivered  by  Hippocrates, agrees  with  the-

notions
if)  «66. (s)  168.


S I R I  '  S.  69

notions  of  other  philofophers :  Heraclitus,  [h)-  for  m-
flance,  who  held  fire  to  be  the  principle  and  caufe  of
the  generation  of  all  things,  did  not  mean  thereby  an
inanimate  element,  but,  as  he  termed  ir,  fftyiegj£4Wr»
an  everliving  fire.

176.  Theophrastit?,  in  his  book,  de  igne,  dif-
tinguifheth  between  heat  and  fire.  The  firft  he  confi-
ders  as  a  principle  or  caufe,  not  that  which  appeareth
to  fenfe  as  a  pafiion  or  accident  exiiling  in  a  fubjeel,
and  which  is  in  truth  the  effect  of  that  unfeen  prin-
ciple. And  it  is  remarkable,  that  he  refers  the  treat-
ing of  this  invifible  fire  or  heat,  to  the  invefbgation  of
the  firft  caufes.  Fire,  the  principle,  is  neither  gene-
.rate'd  nor  deftroyed,  is  every  where  and  always  prefent
(a)  :  while  it's  effects  in  different  times  and  places
fhew  themfelves  more  or  lefs,  and  are  very  various,
fofc  and  cheriming,  or  violent  and  deilructive,  terrible
or  agreeable,  conveying  good  and  evil,  growth  and
decay,  life  and  death,  throughout  the  mundane
fyitem.

177*  It  is  allowed  by  all,  that  the  Greeks  derived
much  of  their  philofophy  from  the  Eaftern  nations.
And  Heraclitus  is  thought  by  fome  to  have  drawn  his
principles  from  Orpheus,  as  Orpheus  did  from  the
-^Egyptians  ;  or,  as  others  write,  he  had  been  auditor
of  Hippafus  a  Pythagorean,  who  held  the  fame  no-
tian  of  fire,  and  might  have  derived  it  from  iFgypt  by
his  mailer  Pythagoras,  who  had  travelled  into^Egypi,
and  been  inftructsd  by  the  Sages  of  that  nation.  One  of
whofe  tenets  it  was,  that  fire  was  the  principle  of  all
action  ;  which  is  agreeable  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Stoics,
that  the  whole  of  things  is  adminiftred  by  a  fiery  intel-
lectual Spirit.  In  the  Afcleptan  Dialogue,  we  find
this  notion,  that  all  parts  of  the  world  vegetate  by  a
fine  fubtil  aether,  which  acts  as  an  engine  or  inftrument,
fubject  to  the  will  of  the  fupreme  God.

178.  As  the  Platonifts  held  intellect  to  be  lodged  in
foul,  and  foul in  aether  (b)  j  fo it  paifeth  for  a  doc-
trine
(b)  166. {a).  iJ7. (b)  i7i.


yo  S I R I S.

trine  of  Trifmegiltus  in  the  Pimander,  that  mind  i»
cloathed  by  foul,  and  foul  by  fpirit.  Therefore  as  the
animal  ipirit  of  man,  being fubtil  and  luminous,  is  the
immediate  tegument  of  the  human  foul,  or  that  where-
in and  whereby  ike  acls  ;  even  fo  the  fpirit  of  the
World,  that  active  fiery  aethereal  fubftance  of  Li;ht,
that  permeates  and  animates  the  whole  fyftem,  is  fup-
pofed  to  cloath  the  foul,  which  cloathi  the  mind  of
tne  univerfe."

179.  The  Magi  likewife  faid  of  God,  that  he  had
light  for  his  body  and  truth  for  his  foul.  And  in  the
Chaldaic  oracles,  all  things  are  fuppofed  to  be  go-
verned by  a  tD$  mfoP  or  intelleclual  fire.  And  in  the
fame  oracles,  the  creative  mind  is  faid  to  be  cloathed
with  fire.  tajAfxtvog  irveiiv°  which  oriental  redupli-
cation of  the  word  fire  feems  to  imply  the  extreme  pu-
rity and  force  thereof,  Thus  alfo  in  the  Pfalms,
Thou  art  cloathed  with  light  as  with  a  garment*
Where,  the  word  rendered  light  might  have  been  ren-
der'd  fire,  the  Hebrew  letters  being  the  fame  with
tho;V*  in  the  word  which  fignifies  fire,  all  the  difference
being  in  the  pointing,  which  is  juftly  counted  a  iate
invention.  That  other  fcripture  fentence  is  remark-
able :  who  maketh  his  miniilers  a  flaming  fire  :
which  might,  perhaps,  be  rendered  more  agreeably  to
the  context,  as  well  as  confidently  with  the  Hebrew,
after  this  manner:  who  maketh  flaming  fire  his  mi-
niilers  :  and  the  whole  might  run  thus  :  who  maketh
the  winds  his  meflengers,  and  filming  fire  his  rainiileri.

180.  A  notion  of  fomething  divine  in  Fire,  ani-
mating the  whole  world,  and  ordeiing  it's  feveral
parts,  was  a  tenet  of  very  general  extent  (c)  being
embraced  in  the  moft  diflant  times  and  pl.ices,  even
among  the  Chinefe  themfelves ;  who  make  tien,' aether,
or  heaven,  the  ibvereign  principle  or  caufe  of  all
thing?,  and  teach  that  the  cdcAial  virtue,  by  them,
called li,  vvhen  joined  to corporeal fubflance,  doth

fdfhion,
(c) 156, 157, 163,  166, 167, 158, 170, 172,.
l7h  !74> l7S*  l77>  fcf'«


S I R I S.  ft

fafhion,  diftinguifh,  and  fpecificate  all  natural  beings.
This  li  of  the  Chinefe  feems  to  anfwer  the  forms  of
the  Peripatetics.  And  both  bear  anology  to  the  fore-
going philofophy  of  Fire.

181.  The  Heaven  is  fuppofed  pregnant  with  vir-
tues and  forms,  which  conftitute  and  difcrirriinate  the
various  fpecies  of  things.  And  we  have  more  than
once  obferved,  that,  as  the  light,  fire,  or  celeftial
aether,  being  parted  by  refracting  or  reflecting  bodies,
produceth  variety  of  colours ;  even  fo,  that  fame  ap-
parently uniform  fubftance  being  parted  and  fecreted
by  the  attracting  and  repelling  powers  of  the  divers  fe-
cretory  ducts  of  plants  and  animals,  that  is,  by  natural
chymiftry,  produceth  or  imparteth  the  various  fpeciflc
properties  of  natural  bodies.  Whence  the  taftes  and
odours  and  medicinal  virtues  fo  various  in  vegetables.

182.  The  tien  is  confidered  and  adored  by  the
learned  Chinefe,  as  living  and  intelligent  sether,  the
mff  voz^bv  of  the  Chaldxans  and  the  Stoics.  And  the
worihip  of  things  celeftial,  the  Sun  and  Stars,  among
the  Eaitern  nations  lefs  remote,  was  on  account  of  their
fiery  nature,  their  heat  and  light,  and  the  influence
thereof.  Upon  thefe  accounts,  the  Sun  was  looked
on  by  the  Greek  Theologers  as  the  fpirit  of  the  world,
and  the  power  of  the  world.  The  cleanfing  quality,
the  light  and  heat  of  fire  are  natural  fymbols  of  purity,
knowledge,  and  power,  or  if  I  may  fo  fay,  the  things
themfelves  fo  far  as  they  are  perceptible  to  our  fenfes,
or  in  the  fame  fenfe  as  motion  is  faid  to  be  action.
Accordingly,  we  find  a  religious  regard  was  paid  to
fire,  both  by  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  indeed  by  moft,
if  not  all,  the  nations  of  the  world.

183.  The  worihip  of  Vefta  at  Rome  was,  in  truth,
the  worihip  of  Fire.

Nee  tualhidVejlam  quam  <vvvam  intellige  flammam,
Saith  Ovid  in  his  Falli.  And  as  in' old  Rome  the
eternal  Fire  was  religioufly  kept  by  virgins,  fo  in
Greece,  particularly  at  Delphi  and  Athens,  it  was
kept  by  widows.  It  is  well  known  that  Vulcan  or
iure  was  worfhiped with great distinction-  by  the

-^Egyptians,


-2  S I R I S.

Egyptians.  The  Zabii  or  Sabeans  are  al/o  known  to
have  been  worfhippers  of  Fire.  Jt  appears  too  from
the  Chaldean  oracles,  that  Fire  was  regarded  as  di-
vine by  the  fages  of  that  nation.  And  it  is  fuppoftil
that  Ur  of  the  Chaldaeans  was  fo  called  from  the  He-
brew word  fignifying  fire,  becaufe  fire  was  publickly
worfliiped  in  that  city.  That  a  religious  worfliip  was
paid  to  fire  by  the  ancient  Perfians  and  their  Magi,  is
atteflcd  by  all  antiquity.  And  the  fe&  of  Per  fees,
or  old  Gentiles,  of  whom  there  are  confiderable  re-
mains at  this  day  both  in  the  Mogols  country  and  in
Perfia,  doth  teftify  the  fame.

1 84.  It  doth  not  feem  that  their  probations  be-
fore the  perpetual  fires,  prefcrved  with  great  care  in
their  Pyreia,  or  fire  temples,  were  merely  a  civil  re-
fpett,  as  Dr.  Hyde  would  have  it  thought.  Al-
though he  brings  good  proof  that  they  do  not  invoke
the  fire  on  their  altars,  or  pray  to  it,  or  call  it  God  :
and  that  they  acknowledge  a  fupreme  invifible  deity.
Civil  refpecls  are  paid  to  things  as  related  to  civil
power  :  but  fuch  relation  doch  not  appear  in  the  pre-
sent cafe.  It  fhou'd  feem  therefore,  that  they  worihip
God  as  prefent  in  the  fire,  which  they  worihip  or
reverence,  not  ultimately  or  for  it  felf,  but  relatively
t©  the  fepreme  being.  Which  ic  is  not  unlikely  was
clfewhere  the  cafe  at  firir.  ;  though  the  practice  of
men,  efpecially  of  the  vulgar,  might  in  length  of  time
degenerate  from  the  original  inrtitution,  and  reil  in  the
objecl  of  fenfe.

1 85.  Doctor  Hyde,  in  his  hiitory  of  the  reli-
gion of  the  ancient  Perfians,  would  have  it  thought,
that  they  borrowed  the  ufe  and  reverence  of  perpetual
fires,  from  the  Jewiih  practice  prefcribed  in  the  Levi-
tical  law,  of  keeping  a  perpetual  fire  burning  on  the
altar.  Whether  that  was  the  cale  or  not,  thus  much
one  may  venture  to  fay,  it  Teems  probable  that  what-
ever was  the  original  of  this  cuitom  among  the  Perfians,
the  like  cuftoms  among  the  Greeks  and  Komans  were
derived  from  the  fame  fource.

186,  It


S I R I S.  73

1 86.  It  muft  be  owned  there  are  many  pafTages  in
holy  fcripture  (d),  that  would  make  one  think,  the
fupreme  being  was  in  a  peculiar  manner  prefent  and
manifeft  in  the  element  of  fire.  Not  to  infill  that
God  is  more  than  once  faid  to  be  a  confuming  fire,
which  might  be  underflood  in  a  metaphorical  fenfe,  the
divine  apparitions  were  by  fire,  in  the  bulb,  at  mount
Sinai,  on  the  tabenacle,  in  the  cloven  tongues.  God
is  reprefented  in  che  infpired  writings,  as  defcending  in
fire,  as  attended  by  fire,  or  with  fire  going  before  him.
Celeftial  things  as  Angels,  chariots,  and  fuch  like
phasnomena  are  inverted  with  fire,  lignt,  and  fplendor.
Ezekiel  in  his  virions  beheld  fire  ana  brightnefs,  lamps,
burning  coals  of  fire,  and  flames  of  lightning,  la  a
vifion  of  Daniel  the  throne  of  God  appeared  like  a
fiery  flame,  and  his  wheels  like  burning  fire.  Alfo  a
fiery  flame  iflued  and  came  forth  from  before  him.

1 87.  At  the  transfiguration,  the  apoltles  faw  our
faviourV  face  fhining  as  the  fun,  and  his  raiment  white
as  light,  alfo  a  lucid  cloud  or  body  of  light,  out  of
which  the  voice  came;  which  vifible  light  and  fplen-
dor was,  not  many  centuries  ago,  maintained  by  the
Greek  church,  to  have  been  divine,  and  uncreated,
and  the  very  glory  of  God  ;  as  may  be  feen  in  the
hiftory  wrote  by  the  Emperor  John  Cantacuzene.  And
of  late  years  Bifhop  Patrick  gives  it  as  his  opinion,
that  in  the  beginning  of  the  world,  the  Shecinah  or
divine  prefence,  which  was  then  frequent  and  ordi-
nary, appeared  by  light  or  fire.  In  commenting  on
that  pafiage,  where  Cain  is  faid  to  have  gone  out  from
the  prefence  of  the  Lord,  the  Bifliop  obferves  that  If
Cain  after  this  turned  a  downright  idolater,  as  many
think,  it  is  very  likely  he  introduced  the  worfhip  of
the  fun,  as  the  beft  refemblance  he  could  find  of  the
glory  of  the  Lord,  which  was  wont  to  appear  in  a
filming  light.  It  would  be  endlefs  to  enumerate  all  the
paiTages  of  holy  fcripture,  which  confirm  and  illuf-
tiate  this  notion,  or  represent  the  Deity  as  appearing
and  operating  by  fire. The  mifconftructicn  of  which

G  might

M  '79-


74  S I R I S.

might  polTibly  have  mifled  the  Gnoflics,  JBafilidians,
^nd  other  ancient  Heretics  into  an  opinion,  that  Jefas
Chriir,  was  the  vifible  corporeal  fun.

1 88.  We  have  feen,  that  in  the  raoft  remote  ages
and  countries,  the  vulgar  as  well  as  the  learned,  the  in-
fiitutions  of  lawgivers,  as  well  as  the  reafonings  of
^hilofophers,  have  ever  confidered  the  element  of  fire
in  a  peculiar  light,  and  treated  it  with  more  than  com-
mon regard,  as  if  it  were  fomething  of  a  very  fmgular
and  extraordinary  nature.  Nor  are  there  wanting  au-
thors of  principal  account  among  the  moderns,  whe
entertain  like  notions  concerning  fire,  efpeciaily  among
ihofe  who  are  moft  converfant  in  that  element,  and
Should  feem  belt  acquainted  with  it.

189.  Mr.  Homecrg  the  famous  modern  chymift,
who  brought  that  ait  to  fo  great  perfection,  holds  the
fubilance  of  light  or  fire  to  be  the  true  chymic  prin-
ciple fulphur  (e)  and  to  extend  it  felf  throughout  the
whole  univerfe.  It  is  his  opinion  that  this  is  the  only
active  principle.  That  mixed  with  various  things  it
formeth  feverai  forts  of  natural  productions.  With
falts  making  oyl,  with  earth  bitumen,  with  mercury
metal.  That  this  principle  of  fulphur,  lire,  or  the
fubilance  of  light,  is  in  it  felf  imperceptible,  and  only
becomes  fenlible,  as  it  is  joined  with  fome  other  prin-
ciple, which  ferves  as  a  vehicle  for  it.  That,  although
it  be  the  molt  active  of  all  things,  yet  it  isat  the  fame
time  the  melt  firm  bond  and  cement  to  combine  and
hold  the  principles  together,  and  give  form  to  the
mixed  bodies,  And,  that  in  theanalyfis  of  bodies  it  is
always  loft,  efcaping  the  skill  of  the  artiit,  and  puf-
fing through  the  cloieli  veiTels.

190.  Boeriiaave,  Niewenty't,  and  divers  other
moderns  are  in  the  fame  way  of  thinking.  They  with
the  ancients  diftinguifh  a  pure  elementary,  invifible
rue  from  the  culinary,  or  that  which  appears  in  igni-
ttd  bodies  (/').  This  lafi:  they  will  not  allow  to  be
pure fire. The pure  fire  is  to  'be  difcerned  by it's

e&tts

(')  i*9> if)  l63>  l^>


1 I R 1 S.  J5

effects  alone  ;  fuch  as  heat,  dilatation  of  all  folid
bodies,  and  rarefaction  cf  fluids,  the  fegregating  hete-
rogeneous bodies,  and  congregating  thofe  that  are  ho-
mogeneous. That  therefore  which  fmokes  and  flames
is  not  pure  fire,  but  that  which  is  collected  in  the  focus
of  a  mirrour  or  burning  glafs.  This  fire  ieems  the
fource  of  all  the  operations  in  nature  :  without  it  no-
thing either  vegetates,  or  putrefies,  lives  or  moves  or
ferments,  is  diflblved  or  compounded  or  altered,
throughout  this  whole  natural  world  in  which  we  fub-
ft&.  Were  it  not  for  this,  the  whole  wou'd  be  one
great  ftupid  inanimate  mafs.  But  this  :jctive  element  is
iuppofed  to  be  every  where,  and  :■■!  w  ys  present  im-
parting different  degrees  or  life  heat  and  motion,  to  the
various  animals,  vegetables,  and  ether  natural  producti-
ons, as  well  as  to  the  elements  themfelves,  wherein  they
are  produced  and  nourifned.

191. As  water  ads upon  fait,  or  aqua  fortis  opon
iron,  fo  fire  difTo'ves all  other  bodies. Fire,  ail
water  are  all  three  menftruums  :  but  the  two  la&feeih
to  derive  all  their  force  and  :dtivty  from the  firft  (g),
And  indeed  there  leems to  re,  brtgjna  ly  or  .  ] ,

but  one  menitruum  in  nature,  to  which  a. i  othei  men-
firuums  may  be  reduced.  Acid  felts  are  a  rhefitfruam,
but  their  force  and  diftiucl  powers  are  from  fulphur,
Cor.fidered  as  pure,  or  in  themfelves,  t;iey  are  all  of
the  fame  nature.  But,  as  obtained  by  diftiiktion,  they
are  conlhntly  joined  with  fome  fulphur,  which  cha-
racterized and  cannot  be  feparated  from  them.  This  is
the  doctrine  of  Monfieur  Homberg.  But  what  is  it  that
characterized!  or  diffcrenceth  the  fulphurs  themfelves?  Jf
fulphur  be  the  fubiiance  of  light,  as  that  author  will
have  it,  whence  is  it  that  animal,  vegetable,  and  me-
tallique  fu'phurs  impart  different  qualities  to  the  fr.mc
acid  fait  ?  Can  this  be  explained  upon  I4omberg's  prin  •
ciples  ?  And  are  we  not  obliged  to  fuppofe,  that
light  feparated  by  the  attracting  and  repelling  powers
in  the  /trainers,  duels,  and  pores  of  thole  bodies,  doth
form  feveral  diilinct  kinds  of  fulphur,  all  which,  be
fore  fuch fe  pa  ration, were  loft  and  blended  together,.

(g) i4(>  6  z  **


7<J-  S I R I S.

in  one  common  mafs  of  light  or fire,  feemingJy  ho-
mogeneous.

192.  Jn  the  analyfis  of  inflammable  bodies,  the
fire  or  fulphur  is  left,  and  the  diminution  of  weight
fneweth  the  lofs  (h).  Oyl  is  refolved  into  water,
earth,  and  fait,  none  of  which  is  inflammable.  But
the  fire  or  vinculum  which  connected  thofe  things,  and
gave_the  fofm  of  oyl,  efcapes  from  the  artilt.  It  dif-
appears  but  is  not  dcllroyed.  Light  or  fire  imprilbned
made  part  of  the  compound,  gave  union  to  the  other
pane,  and  form  to  the  whole.  But  having  efcaped,  it
minglts  with  the  general  ocean  of  aether,  till  being  a-
gain  parted  and  attracted,  it  enters  and  fpecificates
fom«  new  fubjeel,  of  the  animal  vegetable,  or  mineral
kingdom.  Fire  therefore  in  the  fenle  cf  Philofophers
is  always  f::e,  though  not  always  flame.

193.  SoLAR'firc  or  light,  in  calcining  certain  bodies,
is  obkived  to  add  to  their  weight.  There  is  therefore
no  doubt  but  light  can  be. fixed,  and  enter  the  compo-
ntion  of  a  body.  And  though  it  fhovld  lye  latent  for
a  long  time,  yet,  being  let  free  from  it's  prifon,  it
fba«il  iti',1  mew  it  k\f  to  be  fire.  Lead,  tin,  or  regulus
of  antimony,  being  expofed  to  the  fire  of  a  burning
glafs,  though  they  lofc  much  in  fmoak  and  fteam,  are
ucvertheiefi  found  to  be  confiderably  increafed  in  weight,
which  proves  the  introduction  of  light  or  fire  into  their
pores.  It  is  alio  obierved,  that  urine  produceth  no
phoiphorus,  uniefs  it  be  long  expofed  to  the  folar  light.
From  all  which  it  may  be  concluded,  that  bodies  at-
tract and  fix  the  light,  whence  it  mould  feem,  as  fome
have  obferved,  that  fire  without  burning  is  an  ingredient
in  many  things,  as  water  without  wetting.

194.  Of  this  there  cannot  be  a  better  proof,  than
the  experiment  of  Monfieur  Homberg,  who  made  gold
of  mercury  by  introducing  light  into  it's  pores,  but  at
fuch  trouble  and  expence,  that  I  fuppofe  no  body  will
try  the  experiment  for  profit.  By  this  junction  of  light
and  mercury,  both  bodies  became  fixed  and  produced  a
third  different  from  either,  to  wit,  real  gold. For  the

truth
(h)  ,69.


S I R I S.  77

ttnth.  of  wh'ch  fact,  I  refer  to  the  memoirs  of  the  French
academy  of  Sciences.  From  the  foregoing  experiment
it  appears,  that  Gold  is  only  a  mafsof  Mercury  pene-
trated and  cemented  by  the  fubflance  of  light,  the  par-
ticles of  thofe  bodies  attracting  and  fixing  each  otheiv  .
This  ftems  to  have  been  not  altogether  unknown  to  for-
mer Philofophers,  Marfilius  Ficinus  the  Platonift,  in
his  commentary  on  the  firit  book  of  the  fecond  Ennead
of  Plotinus,  and  others  likewife  before  him,  regarding
Mercury  as  the  Mother,  and  Sulphur  as  the  Father  of
Metals ;  and  Plato  himfelf  in  his  Timaeus  defcribing
gold,  to  be  a  denfe  fluid  with  a  mining  yellow  light,
which  well  fuits  a  compofuion  of  light  and  Mercury.

195.  Fi  ;e  or  light  mixeth  with  all  bodies  {a),  even
with  water;  vvitnefs  the  flaming  lights  in  the  Sea,
whofe  waves  feem  frequently  all  on  fire.  It's  opera-
tions are  various  according  to  it's  kind,  quantity,  and
degree  of  vehemence.  One  degree  keeps  water  fluid,
another  turns  it  into  elaftic  air  {b).  And  air  it  felt
feems  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  vapours  and  exhalations,
rendered  elaftic  by  fire.  Nothing  fl.imes  but  oyl  :  and
fuiphur  with  water,  fait,  and  earth  compofe  oyl ;  which
fulphur  is  fire  : therefore  Are  encloftd  attracts  fire,  and

• caufeth  the  bodies  whofe  compofition it  enters  to  burn
and  blaze.

196.  Fire  collected  in  the  focus  of  a  glafs  operates
in  vacuo,  aad  therefore  is  thought  not  to  need  air  te
fupport  it.  Calx  of  lesd  hath  gone  off  with  an  explo-
fion  in  vacuo,  which  Niewenty't  and  others  take  for  a
proof  that  fire  c^n  burn  without  air.  But  Mr.  Hales
attributes  this  effect  to  air  enclofed  in  the  red  lead,  and
perhaps  too  in  ihe  receiver,  which  cannot  be  perfectly
exhauikd.  When  common  lead  is  put  into  the  fire  in
order  to  make  red  lead,  a  greater  weight  of  this  comes
out  than  was  put  in  of  common  lead.  Therefore  the
red-lead  fhouM  feem  impregnated  with  fire.  Mr.  Hales
thinks  it  is  with  air.  The  vait  expanfion  of  compound
aqua  fortis,  Mr  Niewenty't  will  have  to  proceed  from,
fi.e  alone. Mr.  Hales  contends  that  air  mutt  necefTri-

G 3  ly

(a)  157. (fr)  149.


7S  S I R I S.

}y  cooperate.  Though  by  NiewentyYs  experiment  it
fhould  feem,  the  phofphorus  burns  equally,  with  and
without  air.

197.  Perhaps  they  who  hold  the  oppofite  fides  in
this  queftion,  may  be  reconciled  by  observing  that  air
is  in  reality  nothing  more  than  particles  of  wet  and  dry
bodies  volatilifed  and  rendered  elafticby  fire  (c).  What-
ever, therefore,  is  done  by  air  muft  be  afcribed  to  fire,
which  fire  is  a  fubtile  invisible  thing,  whofe  operation
is  not  to  be  difcerned  but  by  means  of  fome  grcffer  bo-
dy, which  ferves  not  for  a  pabulum  to  nourifh  the  fire,
but  for  a  vehicle  to  arreft  and  bring  it  into  view.  Which
feems  the  fole  ufe  of  oyl,  air,  or  any  other  thing,  that
vulgarly  pafTeth  for  a  pabulum  or  food  of  that  ele-
ment.

198.  To  explain  this  matter  more  clearly,  it  Is  to
be  obferved,  that  fire,  in  order  to  become  fenfible,  muft
have  fome  fubjecl  to  aft  upon.  This  being  penetrated
and  agitated  by  fire  affects  us  with  light,  heat,  or  fome
other  fenfible  alteration.  And  this  fubjecl  fo  wrought
upon  may  be  called  culinary  fire.  In  the  focus  of  a
burning  glafs  expofed  to  the  fun,  there  is  real  actual  fire
though  not  difcerned  by  the  fenfe,  till  it  hath  fomewhat
to  work  on,  and  can  (hew  it  felf  in  it's  effects,  heat-
ing, flaming,  melting  and  the  like.  Every  ignited  bo-
dy is,  in  the  foregoing  fenfe,  culinary  fire.  But  it  will
not  therefore  follow,  that  it  is  convertable  into  pure  ele-
.mentary  fire.  This,  for  ought  that  appears,  may  be
mgenerable  and  incorruptible  by  the  courfe  of  nature.
It  may  be  fixed  and  imprifoned  in  a  compound  (d),  and
yet  retain  it's  nature,  though  loft  to  fenfe,  and  though
it  return  into  the  invifible  elementary  mafs,  upon  the
analyfis  of  the  compounded  body:  as  is  manifeft  in  the
folution  of" ftone  lime  by  water.

19:;.  It  fhould  feem,  therefore,  that  what  is  faid
of  air's  being  the  pabulum  of  fire,  or  being  converted
into  fire,  ought  to  be  underftood  only  in  this  fenle;  to
wit,  that  air  being  lefs  grofs  than  other  bodies,  is  of  a

middle,

(c)  147*  lS°>  iS1' f4')  l69>  *92>  *93.


S I R I S.  79

middle  nature,  and  therefore  more  fit  to  receive  the  impref-
fionsof  a  fine  aetherial  fire  (e),  and  impart  them  to  other
things.  According  to  the  ancients,  foul  ferveth  for  a
vehicle  to  intellect  (/),  and  light  or  fire  for  a  vehicle
to  the  foul;  and,  in  like  manner,  air  may  be  fuppofed
a  vehicle  to  fire,  fixing  it  in  fome  degree,  and  commu-
nicating it's  effects  to  other  bodies.

200.  The  pure  invisible  fire  or  aether  doth  permeate
all  bodies,  even  the  hardeft  and  moft  folid  as  the  dia-
mond. This  alone,  therefore,  cannot  as  fome  learned
men  have  fuppofed,  be  the  caufe  of  mufcular  motion,
by  a  mere  impulfe  of  the  nerves  communicated  from
the  brain  to  the  membranes  of  the  mufcles,  and  there-
by to  the  enclofed  secher,  whofe  expanfive  motion,  be-
ing by  that  means  increafed,  is  thought  to  fwell  the
mufcles  and  caufe  a  contraction  of  the  flefhy  fibres.
This  it  fhou'd  feem,  the  pure  aether  eannot  do  immedi-
ately, and  of  it  felf,  becaufe,  fuppofing  it's  expanfive
motion  to  be  increafed,  it  muft  ftiii  pafs  through  the
membranes,  and  confequently  not  fwell  them,  inafmuch
as  aether  is  fuppofed  freely  to  pervade  the  moil:  folid
bodies.  It  mould  feem  therefore  that  this  effect  muft
be  owing,  not  to  pure  aether,  but  to  aether  in  fome
part  fixed  and  arrefted  by  the  particles  of  air.

201.  Although  this  aether  be  extremely  elaftic,
yet,  as  it  is  fometimes  found  by  experience  to  be  at-
tracted imprifoned  and  detained  in  grofs  bodies  (g),  fo
we  may  fuppofe  it  to  be  attracted,  and  it's  expanfive
force  diminimed,  though  it  fhould  not  be  quite  fixed,
by  the  loofe  particles  of  air,  which  combining  and  co-
hering therewith  may  bring  it  down,  and  qualify  it
for  intercourse  with  groffer  things.  Pure  fire  may  be
faid  to  animate  air,  and  air  other  things.  Pure  fire  is
invifible ;  therefore  flame  is  not  pure  fire.  Air  is  necefTa-
ry  both  to  life  and  flame.  And  it  is  found  by  experiment,
that  air  lofeth  in  the  lungs  the  power  of  feedirfg  flame.
Hence  it  is  concluded,  that  the  fame  thing  in  air  con-
tributes both  to  life  and  flame.  Vital  flame  furvives
culinary  flame  in  vacuo:  therefore  it  requires  lefs  ot
that  thing  to  fuftain  it.

(O  l63-  (/)  178.  [g]  169.  202.  What


So  S I R I S.

202.  What  this  may  be,  whether  fome  certain  pro-
portion, or  fome  peculiar  parts  of  aether,  is  not  eafy
to  fry.  But  thus  much  feems  plain,  that  whatever  is
afcribed  to  acid  may  be  alfo  afcribed  to  fire  or  aether.
The  particles  or'  aether  fly  afunder  with  the  greateft;
force :  therefore,  agreeably  to  Sir  Ifaac  Newton's  doc-
trine, when  united  they  muft  attract  each  other  with
the  greateft  force.  Therefore  they  conftitute  the  acid.
For  whatfoever  ftrongly  attracts  and  is  attracted,  may
be  called  an  acid,  as  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  informs  us  in
his  tract  de  acido.  Hence  it  fhould  feem,  that  the  ful-
phur  of  Hombergand  the  acid  of  fir  Ifaac  are  at  bottom
one  and  the  fame  thing,  to  wit,  pure  fire  or  aether.

203.  The  vital  flame  or  aetherial  fpirit,  being  at-
tracted and  imprifoned  in  grofler  bodies,  feemeth  to  be
fet  free  and  carried  off,  by  the  fuperior  attraction  of  a
fubtile  and  pure  flame.  Hence,  perhaps  it  ic,  that
lightening  kills  animals,  and  turns  fpirituous  liquors
vapid  in  an  initant.

204.  Hipocrates  in  his  book  concerning  the  henrt
obferveth,  that  the  foul  of  man  is  not  nourifhed  by
meats  and  drinks  from  the  lower  belly,  but  by  a  pure
and  luminous  fubftance  darting  it's  raies,  and  dutribut-
ing  a  non  natu;al  nouriihment,  as  he  terms  it,  in  like
manner  as  that  from  the  inttftines  is  diftributed  to  all
parts  of  the  body.  This  luminous  non  natural  nourifti-
ment,  though  it  be  fecreted  from  the  blood,  is  exprefly
faid  not  to  come  from  the  lower  bel'y.  It  is  plain,,
therefore,  he  thought  it  came  into  the  blood  either  by
refpiration,  or  by  attraction  through  the  pores.  And
it  mult  1  e  acknowledged,  that  fomewhat  igneous  or
sethereal  brought  by  the  air  into  the  blood  feems  to  nou.-
rilh,  though  not  the  foul  itfelf,  yet  the  interiour  tuni-
cle  of  the  foul,  the  aural'  Jimflias  ignem.

205.  That  there  is  really  fuch  a  thing  as  vital
flame,  actally  kindled,  nourifhed,  and  extingaifhed
like  common  flame,  and  by  the  fame  means,  is  an  o-
pinion  of  fome  modern?,  particularly  of  Dr.  Willis  in
his  tract  de  fanguinh  accenjlone:  that  it  requires  conflant
eventilation,  through  the  trachea  and  pores  of  the  body

for


S I R. I S.  81

for  the  difcharge  of  a  fuliginous  and  excrementitious
vapour:  and  that  this  vital  flame,  being  extremely  fub-
til,  might  not  be  feen  any  more  than  mining  flies  or
ignes  fatui  by  day-light.  And  yet  it  hath  fometiraes
become  vifible  on  divers  perfons,  of  which  there  are
undoubted  inftances.  This  is  Dr.  Willis's  notion :  and
perhaps  there  may  be  fome  truth  in  this,  if  it  be  fo
underitood,  as  that  light  or  fire  might  indeed  conftitute
the  animal  fpirit  or  immediate  vehicle  of  the  foul.

206.  There  have  not  been  wanting  thofe,  who,
not  content  to  fuppofe  light  the  moft  pure  and  refined
of  all  corporeal  being?,  have  gone  farther,  and  bellow-
ed upon  it  fome  attribute  of  a  yet  h'gher  nature.  J  u-
lianus  the  Platonic  philofopher,  as  cited  by  Ficinus,
faith  it  was  a  doctrine  in  the  theology  of  the  Phaenici-
ans,  that  there  is  diffufed  throughout  the  univerfe,  a
pellucid  and  mining  nature  pure  and  impaffive,  the  act
of  a  pure  intelligence.  And  Ficinus  himtelf  undertakes
to  prove,  that  light  is  incorporeal,  by  feveral  argu-
ments :  Becaufe  it  enlightens  and  fills  a  great  fpace  in  an  .
inftant,  and  without  oppofition :  Becaufe  feveral  lights
meet  without  refifting  each  other  :  Becaufe  light  cannot
be  defiled  by  filth  of  any  kind  :  Becaufe  the  folar  light  is
not  fixed  in  anyfubjecV.  Laftly,  becaufe  it  contracts  and
expands  it  felf  fo  eafily  without  collifion,  condenfation,
rarefaction,  or  delay  throughout  the  vafteft  fpace.  Thefe
reafons  are  given  by  Ficinus,  in  his  comment  on  thefirfl
book  of  the  fecond  Ennead  of  Plotinus.

207.  But  it  is  now  well  known,  that  light  moves,
and  that  it's  motion  is  not  inftantaneous:  that  it  is  ca-
pable of  condenfation,  rarefaction,  and  collifion  :  that
it  can  be  mixed  with  other  bodies,  enter  their  compofi-
tion,  and  increafe  their  weight  [b).  All  which  feems
fufiiciently  to  overthrow  thofe  arguments  of  Ficinus,
and  fhew  light  to  be  corporeal.  There  appears  indeed
fome  difficulty  at  firlt  fight,  about  the  non  refiftance  of
raies  or  particles  of  light  occuring  one  to  another,  in  all
poffible  directions  or  from  all  points.  Particularly,  if
we  fuppofe  the  hollow  furface  of  a  large  fphere,  flud-
ded  with  eyes  looking  inwards  one  at  another, it  may

(b)  169,  192,  193.  perhaps


82  SIR I S.

perhaps  feem  hard  to  conceive,  how  dilHnft  raies  from
every  eye  mould  arrive  at  every  other  eye  without  jaft-
ling,  repelling,  and  confounding  each  other.

208.  But  thefe  difficulties  may  be  got  over  by  con-
lidering  in  the  nrft  place,  that  vifible  points  are  not
mathematical  points,  and  consequently  that  we  are  not
to  fuppofe  tvery  point  of  fpace  a  radiating  point.  Se-
condly, by  granting  that  many  raies  do  refill:  and  inter-
cept each  other,  notwithstanding  which  the  act  of  vifion
may  be  performed.  Since  as  every  point  of  the  object
is  not  ken,  fo  it  is  not  neceilary  that  raies  from  every
fuch  point  arrive  at  the  eye.  We  often  fee  an  object,
though  more  dimly,  when  many  raies  are  intercepted
by  agrofs  medium.

209.  Besides,  we  may  fuppofe  the  particles  of  light
to  be  indefinitely  fmall,  that  is  as  fmall  as  we  pleafe,
and  their  aggregate  to  bear  as  fmall  a  proportion  to  the
void  as  we  pleaie,  there  being  nothing  in  this  that  con-
tradicts the  Phenomena.  And  there  needs  nothing  more,
in  order  to  conceive  the  pofiibility  of  raies  paifmg  from
and  to  all  vifible  points,  although  they  be  not  incor-
poreal. Supppofe  a  hundred  ports  placed  round  a  cir-
cular ka,  and  fhips  failing  from  each  port  to  every  0-
ther;  the  larger  the  fea,  and  the  fmaller  the  veffeh  are
fuppofed.  the  lefs  danger  will  there  be  of  their  ftr iking
againil  each  other.  But  as  there  is  by  hypothecs  no
limited  proportion  between  the  fea  and  the  fhfps,  the
void  and  folid  particles  of  light,  fo  there  is  no  difficulty
that  can  oblige  us  to  conclude  the  fun's  light  i  Co  poreal
from  it's  free  paffige ;  efpecially  when  th<  ;e  are  lo  many
clear  proofs  of  the  contrary.  As  for  the  difficulty,
therefore,  attending  the  fappofition  of  a  fphere  ftttdded
with  eyes  looking  at  each  other,  this  is  removed  only
by  fupp.fing  the  particles  of  light  exceeding  fmall  re-
latively to  tru.  empty  fpaces.

210  Plotinus  (uppoieth,  that  from  the  fun's  light
which  is  corporeal,  there  'piings  forth  another  aequivo-
cal  light  which  is  incorporeal,  and  as  it  were  the  bright-
nefs  of  the  former.  Marcilius  Ficinus  alfo  obfervmg  it
to  be  a  doctrine  m  the  Timaeus  of  Pinto  that  there  is  an

occult


S I R I S.  83

occult  fire  or  fpirit  diffufed  throughout  the  univerfe,  in-
timates that  this  fame  occult  invifible  fire  or  light  is,  as
it  were,  the  fight  of  the  mundane  foul  And  Plotinue
in  his  fourth  Ennead  fheweth  it  to  be  his  opinion,  that
the  world  feeth  it  feif  and  all  it's  parts.  The  Platonic
philofophen  do  wonderfully  refine  upon  Hg'Jt,  and  foar
very  high:  from  coal  to  flame;  from  flame  to  light:
from  this  vifible  light  to  the  occult  light  of  the  celeftial
or  mundane  foul,  which  they  fuppofed  to  pervade  and
agitate  the  fubftance  of  the  un^erfe  by  it's  vigorous
and  expanfive  motion.

2 1 1 .  I  f  we  may  believe  Diogenes  Laertius,  the
Pythagorean  philosophers  thoughc  there  was  a  certain
pure  heat  or  fire,  which  had  fomewhat  divine  in  it,  by
the  participation  whereof  men  became  allied  to  the  Gods.
And  according  to  the  Platonifts,  Heaven  is  not  defined
fo  much  by  it's  local  fitu  .tion,  as  by  it's  purity.  The
pureft  and  molt  excellent  fire,  that  is  Heaven,  faith
Ficinus.  And  again,  the  hidden  fire  thac  every  where
exerts  it  {dfy  he  calls  celeftial.  He  reprefi-nts.  fire  as
molt  powerful  and  attive,  dividing  all  things,  abhor-
ring all  compofition  or  mixture  with  other  bodies,  And,
as  foon  as  it  gets  free,  relapfing  inftantly  into  the  com-
mon mak  of  celeilial  fire,  which  is  every  where  pre-
jfent  and  latent.

212.  This  is  the  general  fource  of  life,  fpirit,  and
ftrength,  and,  therefore,  of  health  to  all  animals,  wh,®
condantly  receive  it's  illapfes  cloathed  in  air,  through
the  lungs  and  pores  of  the  body.  The  fame  fpirit  im-
prifoned  in  food  and  medicines,  is  conveyed  into  the
itomach,  the  bowels,  the  lacteal,  circulated  and  fecret-
ed  by  the  feveral  duels,  and  diftributed  throughout  the
■fyftem  (a).  Plato  in  his  Timeus  enumerating  the  ig-
nited juices,  names  wine  in  the  firil  place,  and  tar  in
the  ft:cond.  But  wine  is  preffed  from  the  grape,  and
fermented  by  humane  induftry.  Therefore  of  all  ig-
nited juices  purely  natural,  tar  or  refin  muft  in  his  ac-
count be  efteemed  the  firit.

213. The vivifying  luminous  aether  exifis  in  all

places,

l«)  37>  42>44-


84


S I R I S.


places,  even  the  darkeft  caverns,  as  is  evident  from
hence,  that  many  animals  fee  in  thofe  dark  places,  and
that  fire  may  be  kindled  in  them  by  the  collifion  or  at-
trition of  bodies.  It  is  alfo  known  that  certain  perfons
have  fits  of  feeing  in  the  dark.  Tiberius  was  faid  to
have  had  this  faculty  or  diftemper.  I  my  felf  knew
an  ingenious  man  who  had  experienced  it  feveral  times
in  himfelf.  And  Dr.  Willis  in  his  tract  de  fangumis  ac-
centione  mentions  another  of  his  own  knowledge.  Tm's
luminous  aether  or  fpirit  is  therefore  faid  by  Virgil,  to
nourifh  or  cherilh  the  innermoft  earth,  as  well  as  the
heavens  and  celeflial  bodies.

Principo  ceelum  ac  terras,  campofque  liquentes*

Lucentemque  globum  Lun/s ,  Titamaque  ajira

Spiritus  in  tus  alit.

214-  The  principles  of  motion  and  vegetation  in
living  bodies  feem  to  be  delibations  from  the  invifible
fire  or  fpirit  of  the  univerfe  (b).  Which,  though  pre-
fent  to  all  things,  is  not  neverthelefs  one  way  received
by  all;  but  variously  imbibed,  attracted,  and  fecreted
by  the  fine  capillaries,  and  exquifite  flrainers  in  the  bo-
dies of  plants  and  animals,  whereby  it  becomes  mixed
and  detained  in  their  juices.

215.  It  hath  been  thought  by  feme  obfervers  of
nature,  that  the  fine  glandular  veffds  admit  from  the
common  mafs  of  the  blood,  only  fuch  juices  as  are
homogeneous  to  thofe,  with  which  they  were  originally
imbued.  How  they  came  to  be  fo  imbued  doch  not
appear.  But  thus  much  is  plain;  That  fine  tubes  at-
tract fluids,  that  the  glands  are  fine  tubes,  and  that
they  attract  very  different  juices  from  the  common
mafs.  The  fame  holds  alfo  with  regard  to  the  capilla-
ry veffels  (c)  of  vegetables,  it  being  evident  that  thro'
the  fine  drainers  in  the  leaves  and  all  over  the  body  of
the  plant,  there  be  juices  or  fluids  of  a  particular  kind
drawn  in,  and  feparated  from  the  common  mafs  of  air
and  light.  And  that  the  moft  elaborate  fpirit,  whereon
the  character  or  diitinguiihing  viitue  and  properties  of

the

(*)43»  >57>  l64>  «7*« CO  l*  lh  33>35-


S I R I S.  8.5

the  plant  depend,  is  of  a  luminous  (d)  and  volatile
nature,  being  loft  or  efcaping  into  air  or  aether,  from
effential  oyls  and  odoriferous  waters,  without  any  fefl-
fible  diminution  of  them.

216.  As  different  kinds  of  fecreted  light  or  fire  pro-
duce different  effences,  virtues,  or  fpecific  properties,
fo  alio  different  degrees  of  heat  produce  different  effects.
Thus  one  degree  of  heat  keeps  the  blood  from  coagu-
lating, and  another  degree  coagulates  the  blood.  Thus  a
more  violent  fire  hath  beenobferved  to  fetfree  and  carry  cff
that  very  light,  which  a  more  moderate  fire  had  introduc-
ed and  fixed  in  the  calcined  regulus  of  antimony.  In  like
manner,  one  kind  or  quantity  of  this  setherial  fiery  fpirit
may  be  congenial  and  friendly  to  the  fpirits  of  a  man,
while  another  may  be  noxious.

217.  And  experience  fheweth  this  to  be  true.  For
the  fermented  fpirit  of  wine  or  other  liquors  produc-
eth  irregular  motions,  and  fubfequent  deprefiions  in  the

,  animal  fpirits.  Whereas  the  luminous  fpirit  lodged  and
detained  in  the  native  balfam  of  pines  and  firs,  is  of  a
nature  fo  mild  and  benign  and  proportioned  to  the  hu-
mane constitution,  as  to  warm  without  heating,  to
cheer  but  not  inebriate,  and  to  produce  a  calm  and  fteady
joy  like  the  erfeft  of  good  news,  without  that  finking
of  fpirits  which  is  a  fubfequent  effect  of  all  fermented
cordials.  I  may  add,  without  all  other  inconvenience,
except  that  it  may  like  any  other  medicine  be  taken
in  too  great  a  quantity  for  a  nice  ftomach.  In  which
cafe  it  may  be  right,  to  lefTen  the  dofe,  or  to  take  it
only  once  in  the  four  and  twenty  hours,  empty,  going
to  bed  ( when  it  is  found  to  be  leaft  offenfive, )  or  even
to  fufpend  the  taking  of  it  for  a  time,  till  nature  fhall
feem  to  crave  it,  and  rejoice  in  it's  benign  and  comfort-
able fpirit.

218.  Tar  water  ferving  as  a  vehicle  to  this  fpirit  is
both  diuretic  and  diaphoretic,  but  feems  to  work  it's
principal  effect  by  afiitting  the  <iti$  vita;,  as  an  altera-
tive and  cordial,  enabling  nature  by  an  acceflion  of
congenial  fpirit,  to  affimilate  that  which  could  not  be
afiimilated  by  her  proper  force,  and  fo  to  fubdue the

(<0  37>  43-  H.  femes


86  S I R I S.

femes  mobi.  And  this  fhould  feem  in  mod  cafes  the
belt  and  fafeft.  courfe.  Great  evacuations  weaken  na
tuff  as  well  as  the  difeafe.  And  it  is  to  be  feared  that
fhey  who  ufe  falivations  and  copious  bleedings,  may,
though  they  mould  recover  of  the  diftemper,  in  their
whole  life  be  never  able  to  recover  of  the  remedies.

219.  It  is  true  indeed,  that  in,  chronical  cafcs  there
is  need  of  time  to  compleat  3  cure,  and  yet  I  have
known  this  tar  water  in  disorders  of  .the  lungs  and  flo-
mach  to  prove  a  very  fpeedy  remedy,  and  to  allay  the
anxiety  and  heat  of  a  fever  in  an  inftant,  giving  eaic
and  fpirits  to  the  pattent.  This  I  have  often  experi-
enced, not  without  iurprife  at  feeing  thefe  falutary  ef-
fects follow  fo  immediately  in  a  ftver  on  taking  a  glais
of  tar  water.  Such  is  the  force  of  thefe  active  vivify-
ing principles  contained  in  this  balfam.

220.  Force  or  power,  ftn&'.y  fpeaking,  in  the  a-
■gtm  alone  who  imparts  an  equivocal  force  to  the  invi«
iible  elementary  fire,  or  animal  fpirit(^)  of  the  world,
and  this  to  the  ignited  body  or  vifible  flame,  which
produceth  the  fenfe  of  light  and  heat.  In  this  chain
the  firlr.  and  laft  links  are  allowed  to  be  incorporeal :
the  two  intermediate  are  corporeal,  being  capable  of
.■notion,  rarefaction,  gravity,  and  other  qualities  of  bo-
dies. It  is  fit  to  diftinguifh  thefe  things,  in  oider  to
avoid,  ambiguity  concerning  the  nature  of  fire,

221.  Sm  lfaac  Newton  in  hie  optic?,  asks;  Is  not
fire  a  body,  heated  fo  hot  as  to  emit  light  copioufly  ?  for
what  elfe,  adds  he,  is  a  red  hot  iron  than  fire  ?  Now
it  fhould  feem,  that  to  define  fire  by  heat,  would  be  to
explain  a  thing  by  it  felf,  A  body  heated  fo  hot  as  to
emit  light  is  an  ignited  body,  that  is,  hath  fire  in  it,
3:>  pencriated  and  agitated  by  fire,  but  is  not  it  i'e\f  fire.
And  although  it  fhould  in  the  third  foregoing  accepta-
tion, or  vulgar  fenfe  pafe  foi  fire,  yet  it  \s  not  the  pure
tlem -.ntary  (/')  fire  in  the  fecond  or  philufophic  fenfe,
fuch  as  wa?  undcrilood  by  the  Sages  of  antiquity,  and
dfuch  as  is  cci'ec"lcd  in  the  focus  of  a  burning  gtafs;  much
leis  is  it  the  vis,  force,  or  puwer  of  burning,  deicr  ;y-

0)  *Sh  !56>  l>7- (/)  «90-


:


S I R I S.  87

ir.g,  calcining,  melting,  vitrifying,  and  raifing  the
perceptions  of  light  and  heat.  This  is  truly  and  really
in  the  incorporeal  agent,  and  not  in  the  vital  fpirit  cf
the  univerfe.  Motion,  and  even  power  in  an  aequiva-
cal  fenfe,  may  be  found  in  this  pure  setherial  fpirit,
which  igniter  bodiec,  but  is  not  it  felf  the  ignited  body,,
being  an  inftrument  or  medium  (g)  by  which  the  real
agent  doth  operate  011  grofTer  bodies.

222.  It  hath  been  mewed  in  Sir  Ifiac  Newton'.-:
optics,  that  light  is  not  refie&ed  by  impinging  on  bo-'
dies,  but  by  feme  other  caufe.  And  to  him  it  feem?
probable,  that  as  many  raies  as  impinge  on  the  folio!
parts  of  bodies,  are  not  refle&ed  but  Hided  and  retained
in  the  bodies.  And  it  is  certain,  the  great  porofity  of
all  known  bodies  affords  room  for  much  of  thi*  light
or  fire  to  be  lodged  therein.  .  Gold  it  fe$f  the  moil  fokd
of  all  metals,  feems  to  have  far  more  pores  than  folia
part*,  from  water  being  preifed  through  it  in  the  Flo-
rentine experiment,  from  magnetic  effluvia  paffing,
and  from  mercury  entering  it's  pores  fo  freely.  And  it  is
admitted  that  water  though  irnpoiuble  to  be  comprefled.
hath  at  lead  forty  times  more  pores  than  folid  parti.
And  as  acid  particles,  joined  with  thofe  of  earth  in  cer-
tain proportions,  are  fo  ciofely  united  with  them,  as  to
be  quite  hid  and  loft  to  all  appearance,  as  in  ?n?rcu7-iui
dulcis  and  common  fulphur,  fo  alfo  may  we  conceive
the  particles  of  light  or  fire  to  be  abforbed  and  latent  in
g roiler  bodies..

223.  It  is  the  opinion  of  Sir  Ifrc  Newton,  that
fomewhat  unknown  remai ■■■•?.  in  vacuo,  when  the  air -13
exhaufted.  This  unknown  medium  he  calls  aether.
He  fuppofeth  it  to  be  raore  fubtile  in  it's. nature,  and
more  fwift  in  it's  motion,,  than  light,  freely  to  pervade
all  bodies,  and  by  it's  immenfe  elaiticity  to  be  expand*
ed  throughout  all  the  heavens.  ltJi  denfity  is  fuppofsd
greater  in  free  and  open  fpaces,  thm  w;thin  the  pore?
of  compact  bodies.  And,  in  puffing  from  the  celeftia!
bodies  to  great  diftances,  it  is  fuppefed  to  grow  denier
and  denfer  continually  ; .  aue)  thereby  cauis  thofe  great
. H  3  bodies


88  S I R I S.

bodies  to  gravitate  towards  one  another,  and  their  res-
pective parts  towards  their  centers,  every  body  endea-
vouring to  pafsfYom  the  denier  partsof  the  medium  to-
wards the  rarer.

224.  The  extreme  minutenefs  of  the  parts  of  this
medium  and  the  velofity  of  their  motion,  together
with  it's  gravity,  denfity  and  elaflic  force,  are  thought
to  qualify  it  for  being  the  caufe  of  all  the  natural  mo-
tions in  the  univerfe.  To  this  caufe  are  afcribed  the
gravity  and  cohefion  of  bodies.  The  refraclion  of
light  is  alio  thought  to  proceed,  from  the  different  den-
sity and  tlaftic  foice  of  this  aetherial  medium  in  differ-
ent places.  The  vibrations  of  this  medium  alternately
concurring  with,  or  obftructing,  the  motions  of  the
raies  of  light,  are  fuppcfed  to  produce  the  fits  of  eafy
reflexion  and  tranfmiffion.  Light  by  the  vibrations  tf
tkia  medium  is  thought  to  communicate  heat  to  bodies.
Animal  motion  and  fenfation  are  alfo  accounted  for  by
the  vibrating  motions  of  this  aetherial  medium,  propa-
gated through  the  foLd  capillaments  of  the  nerves.  In
a  word,  all  the  phenomena  and  properties  of  bodies,
j  hat  Were  before  attributed  to  attraction,  upon  later
thoughts  feem  afcribed  to  this  aether,  together  with  the
various  attractions  themfelves.

225.  But  in  the  philofophy  of  Sir  Ifaac  Newton,
the  fits  {as  they  are  called)  of  eafy  tranfmilTion  and  re-
flexion, feem  as  well  accounted  for  by  vibrations  excited

n  bodies  by  the  raies  of  light;  and  the  refraction  of
'ight  by  the  attraction  of  bodies.  To  explain  the  vi-
brations of  light  by  thofe  of  a  more  fubtile  medium,
feems  an  uncouth  explication.  And  gravity  feems  not
an  efftcl  of  the  denfity  and  elafticity  of  aether,  but  ra-
ther to  be  produced  by  fome  other  caufe  j  which  Sir
Ilaac  himfelf  infinuates  to  have  been  the  opinion
even  of  thofe  ancients  who  took  vacuum,  attoms,
and  the  gravity  of  attoms  for  the  principles  of  their
philofophy,  tacitly  attributing  (as  he  well  obferves)  gra-
vity to  fome  other  caufe  diftincl  from  matter,  from  atoms
and  confequently,  from  that  homogeneous  aether  or  e-
Uftic  fluid. The  elafticity  of  which  fluid  is  fuppofed

to


S I R. I S.  8^

to  depend  upon,  to  be  defined  and  meafured  by  it's  den*-
fity ;  and  this  by  the  quantity  of  matter  in  one  particle,
multiplied  by  the  number  of  particles  contained  in  a
given  fpace;  and  the  quantity  of  matter  in  any  one
particle  to  be  determined  by  it's  gravity.  Should  not
therefore  gravity  feem  the  original  property  and  fir  ft
fuppofed  ?  On  the  other  hand,  if  force  be  confidered
as  prefcinded  from  gravity  and  matter,  and  as  exifting
only  in  points  or  centers,  what  can  this  amount  to  but
an  abftract  fpiritual  incorporeal  force  ?

226.  It  doth  not  feem  neceifary  from  the  pheno-
mena, to  fuppofe  any  medium  more  active  and  (ubti'e
than  light  or  lire.  Light  being  allowed  to  move  at  the
rate  of  about  ten  millions  of  miles  in  a  minute,  what  oc>
cafion  is  there  to  conceive  another  medium  of  Hill  fmailer
and  more  movable  parts.  Light  or  fire  feem  the  fame
with  aether.  So  the  ancients  underflood,  and  fo  the
Greek  word  implies.  It  pervades  all  things  (£),  is
every  where  prefent.  And  this  fame  fubule  medium,
according  to  it's  various  quantities,  motions,  and  deter-
minations, fheweth  it  felf  in  different  eife&s  or  ap-
pearances, and  is  asther,  light  or  fire.

227.  The  particles  of  Eether  fly  aflunder  with  th&
greateft  fore,  therefore  when  united  they  muftfacco  ding-
to  the  Newtonian  doctrine)  attract  each  other  with  the
greateff.  force;  therefore  they  are  acids  (a)  or  confti-
tute  the  acid;  but  this  united  with  earthy  parts  maketh
alkaii,  as  Sir  Ifaac  teacheth  in  his  tract  de  acidoi  al-
kali, as  appears  in  cantharides  and  lixivial  falts,  is  a
cauiric;  cauftics  are  fire;  therefore  acid  is  fire;  there-
fore asther  is  fire;  and  if  lire,  light.  We  are  not
therefore  obliged  to  admit  a  new  medium  diftinct  from
light,  and  of  a  finer  and  more  exquifite  fubftance,  for
the  explication  of  phenomen',  which  appear  to  be  a>-
well  explained  without  it.  How  can  the  denfity  or  e»
lailicity  of  astner  account  for  the  rapid  flight  of  a  ray
of  light  from  the  Sun,  frill  fwifter  as  it  goes  farther
from  the  fun  ?  or  how  can  it  account  for  the  various
motions  and  attractions  of  d  fTcrent  bodies  I Why  oyl

H  3.  and


5>o  S I R I S.

and  water,  mercury  and  iron  repell,  or  why  other  bo-
die  attract  each,  ether  ?  or  why  a  particle  of  light
fhould  repel!  on  one  fide  and  attract  on  the  other,  as  in
the  cale  <fthe  'ilandic  cryftal  ?  To  explain  cohefion
by  hamate  atoms  is  accounted  ignotum  per  ignotius.
A.>  is  it  no.  as  much  fo  to  account  for  the  gravity  of
bod  e^  by  the  t  lafiicicy  o^"  aether  ?

228.  It is  one thing  to  arrive at  general  laws  of
nature from  a  contemplation  of  the  phaenomena  ;  and
another  .0  frame  an  hypothefis,  and from thence  de-
duct the  phenomena Thofe who  fuppofe  epicycles,
and  by  tn^m  explain the motions  and  appearances  of
the  pl.mets, may  not  therefore  be  thought  to  have  dis-
covered principles  true  in  fact  and  nature. And  albeit
we  may  from  the  premifes  infer  a  conclufion,  it  will  not
follow,  that  we  can  argue  reciprocally,  and  from  the
conclufion  infer  the  premifes. For  inftance,  fuppofing
an  elaitic  fluid,  whofe  conftituent  minute  particles  are
equidiftant  from  e;'.cr»  other  and  of  equal  denfities  and
diameters,  and  recede  one  from  another  with  a  centri-
fugal force  which  is  inverfly  at  the  diftance  of  the  cen-
ters, and  admitting  that  from  fuch  fuppofition  it  mull
follow,  that  the  denfity  and elaftic  force  of  fuch fluid
are  in  the  inverfe  proportion  of  the fpace  it  occupies
when  compreflld  by  any force ; yet  we  cannot  re-
ciprocally infer,  that  a  fluid  endued  with  this proper-
ty mutt  therefore  confiil  of  fuch  fuppofed equal  parti-
cles ; for  it would  then  follow, that  the  conftituent
particles  of  air  were  of  equal denfities  and  diameters  ;
whereas  it  is  certain,  that  air  is  an  heterogeneous  maie,
containing  in  it's  compofitioH  an  infinite  variety  of  ex-
halations, from  the  different  bodies  which make  up
this  terrsqueous  globe.

229.  Tmb  phenomena  of  light,  animal  ipirit,  maf-
cular  motion,  fermentation,  vegetation,  and  other  na-
tural operation*,  feein  to  require  nothing  more  than
the  intellectual  and  artificial  fire  of  Heraclitus,  Hip-
pocrates, the  Stoics  (£),  and  other  ancients. Intellect,

fupeTadded.
(*) 1 66,  168.


S I R I S.  pi

fuperadded  to  sethereal  fpirit.  fire,  or  light,  moves,
and  moves  regularly,  proceeding,  in  a  method,  as  the
Stoics,  or  increafmg  and  diminishing  by  meafure,  as
Heraclitus  expreffed  it.  The  Stoics  held  that  Fire
comprehended  and  included  the  fpermatic  reafons  or
forms  (\oyws  wmffsutn  kcv{)  of  all  natural  things.
As  the  forms  of  things  have  their  ideal  exigence  in
the  intellect,  fo  it  fhould  feem  that  feminal  principles
have  their  natural  exiflence  in  the  light  (c),  a  medium
confifting  of  heterogeneous  parts,  differing  from  each
other  in  divers  qualities  that  appear  to  fenfe,  and  not
improbably  having  many  original  properties,  attrac-
tions, repulfions  and  motions,  the  laws  and  natures
whereof  are  indifcernible  to  us,  othervvife  than  in  their
remote  effects.  And  this  animated  heterogeneous  fire
fhould  feem  a  more  adequate  caufe,  whereby  to  ex-
plain the  phenomena  of  nature,  than  one  uniform
astherial  medium.

230.  Aristotle  indeed  excepts  aginft  the  ele-
ments being  animated.  Yet  nothing  hinders  why  that
power  of  the  foul,  ftyled  by  him  mvnrimi  or  locomo-
tive, may  not  refide  therein,  under  the  direction  of  an
Intellect:,  in  fuch  fenfe  and  as  properly  as  it  is  faid  to
refide  in  animal  bodies.  It  mull  neverthelefs  be  owned,
that  albeit  that  phiiofopher  acknowledgeth  a  divine
force  or  energy  in  fire,  yet  to  fay  that  fire  is  alive,
or  that  having  a  foul  it  fhould  not  be  alive,  feem  to
him  equally  abiurd.  See  his  fecond  book,  de  partihus
animalium

231.  The  laws  of  attraction  and  repul Hon  are  to  be
regarded  as  laws  of  motion,  and  thefe  only  as  rules  or
methods -obferved  in  the  productions  of  natural  effects,
the  efficient  and  final  caules  whereof  are  not  of  mecha-
nical confideration.  Certainly,  if  the  explaining  a
phenomenon  be  to  affign  it's  proper  efficient  and  final
caufe  (d)i  it  mould  feem  the  mechanical  philofophers
never  explained  any  thing  ;  their  province  being  only
to  difcover  the laws  of  nature, that is  the general

rules
(0  "64.  (i) i$h  *5S>  160.


5>2,  S I R I S.

rules  and  methods  of  motion,  and  to  account  for  par-
ticular phenomena  by  reducing  them  under,  or  flaw-
ing their  conformity  to  fuch  general  rules.

232.  Some  corpufcularian  philofophers-of  the  Ia£
age,  have  indeed  attempted  .0  explain  the  formation  of
this  world  and  it's  phenomena,  by  a  few  fimple  laws
of  mechanifm.  But  if  we  confider  the  various  pro-
ductions of  nature,  in  the  mineral,  vegetable,  and
animal  parts  of  the  creation,  I  believe  wc  mall  fee
caufe  to  affirm,  that  not  any  one  of  them  has  hitherto
been,  or  can  be  accounted  for  on  principles  merely  me-
chanial ;  and  that  nothing  could  be  more  vain  and
imaginary,  than  to  fuppofe  with  Defcartes,  that
merely  from  a  circular  motion's,  being  imprefTed  by  ihe
fupreme  agent  on  the  particles  of  extended  fiihfhfflO,
the  whole  world  with  all  it's  feveral  parts,  appurte-
nances, and  phenomena  might  be  produced,  by  a  ne-
ceffary  confequence  from  the  laws  of  motion.

233.  Others  fuppofe  that  God  did  more  at  the
beginning,  having  then  made  the  feeds  of  all  vegetables
and  animals,  containing  their  folid  organical  parts  in
miniature,  the  gradual  filling  and  evolution  of  which,
by  the  influx  of  proper  juices,  doth  conflitute  the  gene-
ration and  growth  of  a  living  body.  So  that  the  artifici-
al ftrudture,  of  plants  and  animals  daily  generated,  re.
quires  no  prefent  exercife  of  art  to  produce  it,  having
been  already  framed  at  the  origine  of  the  world,
which  with  all  it's  parts  hath  ever  fince  fubMed,  go-
ing like  a  clock  or  machine  by  it's  felf,  according  to
the  laws  of  nature,  without  the  immediate  hand  of  tl  e
artiil.  But  how  can  this  hypothecs  explain  the  blend-
ed features  of  different  fpecies  in  mules  and  other  mon-
giels  ?  or  the  pans  added  or  changed,  and  fometimes
whole  limbs  lolt  by  marking  in  the  womb  ?  or  how
can  it  account  for  the  refurrcttion  of  a  tree  from  it's
Hump,  or  the  vegetative  pjwer  in  it's  cuttings  ?  in.
which  cafes  we  mull  neceffarily  ,  conceive  foracthing
more  than  the  mere  eyolution  of  a  feed.

234.  Mechanical $


S I R I S.  p3

234.  Mechanical  laws  of  nature  or  motion  di-
rect us  how  to  aft,  and  teach  us  what  to  expect.
Where  intellect  prefides  there  will  be  method  and  order,
and  therefore  rules,  which  if  not  dated  and  conftant
would  ceafe  to  be  rules.  There  is  therefore  a  con-
flancy  in  things,  which  is  ltyled  the  courfe  of  na-
ture (e)  All  the  phenomena  in  nature  are  produced
by  motion.  There  appears  an  uniform  working  in
things  great  and  fro  all,  by  attracting  and  repelling
forces.  But  the  particular  laws  of  attraction  and  repul-
fion  are  various.  Nor  are  we  concerned  at  all  about
the  forces,  neither  can  we  know  or  meafure  them
otherwife  than  by  their  effects,  that  is  to  fay  the
motions,  which  motions  only,  and  not  the  forces,
are  indeed  in  the  bodies  (/).  Bodies  are 'moved  to  or
from  each  other,  and  this  is  performed  according  to
different .  laws.  The  natural  or  mechanic  philofopher
endeavours  to  difcover  thofe  laws  by  experiment  and
reafonirg.  But  what  is  faid  of  forces  refiding  in  bodies,
whether  attracting  or  repelling,  is  to  be  regarded  only
as  a  mechanical  hypothecs,  and  not  as  any  thing  really
exifling  in  nature.

235.  We  are  not  therefore  ferioufly  to  fuppofe
with  certain  mechanic  philoibphers,  that  the  minute
particles  of  bodies  have  real  forces  or  powers,  by
which  they  acton  each  other,  to  produce  the  various
phenomena  in. nature.  The  minute  corpufcles  are
impelled  and  directed,  that  is  to  {ay,  moved  to  and
from  each  other  according  to  various  rules  or  laws  of
motion.  The  laws  of  gravity,  magnetifm,  and  elec-
tricity are  divers.  And  it  is  not  known,  what  other
different  rules  or  laws  of  motion  might  be  eftablifhed,
by  the  author  of  nature.  Some  bodies  approach  to-
gether, others  fly  afunder,  and  perhaps  fome  others
do  neither.  When  fait  of  tartar  flows  per  deliquium,
it  is  vifible  that  the  particles  of  water  floating  in  the  air
are  moved  towards  the  particles  of  fait,  and  joined
with  them. And  wfcen  we  behold  vulgar  fait  not  to

flow
(e) 160,  (/) 155,


94  S I R I S.

flow  per  deliquium.  may  we  not  conclude  that  the
fame  law  of  nature  and  motion  doth  not  cbtain  be-
tween it's  pai  tides  and  thofe  of  the  floating  vapours  ?
A  drop  of  water  aftumes  a  round  figure,  becaufe  it's
parts  are  moved  towards  each  other.  But  the  par-
ticles of  oyl  and  vinegar  have  no  fuch  difpofition  to
unite.  And  when  flies  walk  in  water  without  wetting
their  feet,  it  is  attributed  to  a  repelling  force  or  faculty
in  the  flie's  feet.  But  this  is  obfcure,  though  the  phe-
nomena be  plain.

236.  It  is  not  improbable,  and  feems  not  unfup-
ported  by  experiment^,  that,  as  in  algebra,  where
pofitive  quantities  ceafe  there  negative  begin,  even  ^0
in  mechanic?,  where  attracting  forces  ceafe  there  re-
pelling forces  b^gin  :  or  (to  exprefs  it  more  properly)
where  bodies  ceafe  to  be  moved  towards,  they  b;  gin  to
be  moved  from  each  other.  This  fir  Ifaac  Newton
infers  from  the  production  of  air  and  vapours,  whofe
particles  fly  afunder  with  fuch  vehement  force.  We
behold  iron  move  towards  the  loaditone,  ftraws  towards
amber,  heavy  bodies  towards  the  earth.  The  laws  of
thefe  motions  are.  various.  And  when  it  is  faid,  that
all  the  motions  and  charges  in  the  great  world  arife
from  attraction  ;  the  elasticity  of  the  air,  the  mo-
tion of  water,  the  defcent  of  heavy,  and  the  afcent
of  light  bodies,  being  ail  afcribed  to  the  fame  princi-
ple ;  when  from  infenfible  attractions  of  moft  minute
particles  at  the  final  left  diftance,  are  derived  cohe-
sion, difllution,  coagulation,  animal  fecretion,  fer-
mentatibn,  and  all  cnymical  operations  ;  and  when  it
is  faid,  that  without  fuch  principles  there  never  would
have  been  any  motion  in  the  wor.d,  and  without  the
continuance  thereof  all  motion  would  ceafe.  In  all
this  we  know  or  underftand  no  more,  than  that  bodies
are  moved  acco  ding  to  a  certain  order,  and  that  they
do  not  move  themieives.

237.  So  likewiie,  how  to  explain  all  thofe  various
motions  and  effects,  by  the  denfity and  elaflicityof

aether*


S I R I S.  9$

aether,  feems  incomprehenfible  (g).  For  inftance,
why  (hould  the  acid  particles  draw  thofe  of  water  and
repell  each  other  ?  why  (hould  fome  falts  attract  va-
pours in  the  air,  and  other?  not  ?  why  fhouid  the
particles  of  common  fait  repel  each  odier,  (o  as  not  to
fubfide  in  water  ?  why  mould  the  mofc  repellent  par-
ticles be  the  moll  attractive  upon  contact  ?  Or  why
fhouid  the  repellent  begin  wnere  the  attractive  faculty
leaves  off.  'Ihefe,  and  nu-r>berlefs  orher  eft  cts  feem.
inexplicable  en  mechanical  principle^,  or  otherwife
than  by  recourfe  to  a  mind  or  fpiritual  agent  (/?).  Nor
will  it  furHce  from  prefent  phaenomena  and  effects,
through  a  chain  of  natural  caufes,  and  fubordinate
blind  agent?,  to  trace  a  divine  intellect  as  the  remote
original  caufe,  that  firll  created  tht  worl  ,  and  then
fet  it  agoing.  We  cannot  make  even  one  fingle  ftep
in  accounting  for  the  phaenomena,  without  admitting
the  immediate  prefence  and  immediate  act";n  of  an
incorporeal  agent,  who  connects,  moves,  and  difpofes
all  things,  according  to  fifch  rules,  and  for  fuch  pur-
pofes  as  feem  good  to  him.

238.  It  is  an  old  opinion  adopted  by  the  moderns,
that  the  elements  and  other  natural  bodies  are  changed
each  into  other  (/).  Now,  as  the  particles  <f  different
bodies  are  agitated  by  different  forces,  attracting  and
repelling,  or,  to  (peak  more  accurately,  are  moved
by  different  laws,  how  can  thefe  forces  or  laws  be
changed,  and  this  change  accounted  for  by  an  elaitic
aether  ?  Such  a  medium  diflinct  from  light  or  fire
feemeth  not  to  be  made  out  by  any  proof,  nor  to  be
of  any  ufe  in  explaining  the  phenomena.  But  if
there  be  any  medinm  employed,  as  a  fubordinate
caufe  or  inflrument  in  attraction,  it  would  father  feem
to  be  light  (k) ;  fince  by  an  experiment  of  Mr.
BoyPs,  amber,  that  ihewed  no  fign  of  attraction  in
the  fiiide,  being  placed  where  the  fun-beams  fhone
upon  it,  immediately  attracted  light  bodies. Jkfides,

it

U) *53> 162.  [I) 154, 220. (;) 148.

{k) 152, 156.


p6  S I R I S.

it  hath  been  difcovered  by  fir  Ifaac  Newton,  and  an
admirable  difcovery  it  was,  that  light  is  an  heterogc
neous  medium  [a)  confuting  of  particles  endued  with
original  diftinft  properties.  And  upon  thefe,  if  I  may
venture  to  give  my  conjectures,  it  feemeth  probable
the  fpecific  properties  of  bodies,  and  the  force  of  fpe-
cific  medicines  may  depend.  Different  fides  of  the
fame  ray  mail,  one  approach  and  the  other  recede
from  the  Iilandic  Cryflal  ;  can  this  be  accounted  for
by  the  elafticity  of  a  fine  medium,  or  by  the  general
laws  of  motion,  or  by  any  mechanical  principles  what-
ever ?  And  if  not,  what  mould  hinder  but  there
may  be  fpecific  medicines,  whofe  operation  depends
not  upon  mechanical  principles,  how  much  foever  that
notion  hath  been  exploded  of  late  years  ?

239.  Why  may  we  not  fuppofe  certain  idiofyncra-
fies,  fympathies,  oppositions, in  the folids  or fluids
or  animal  fpirit  of  a  human  body,  with  regard  to  the
fine  infenfible  parts' of  minerals  or  vegetables,  impreg-
nated by  rays  of  light  of  different  properties,  not  de-
pending  on,  the different fize,  figure,  number,  foli-
dity  or  weight  of  thofe  particles,  nor  on the  general
laws  of  motion,  nor  on  tne  denfity  or elafticity  of  a
medium,  but  merely  and  altogether  on  the  good  plea-
fure of the Creator,  in  the original formation of
things  ? From  whence  divers  unaccountable and  un-
foreleen  motions  may  arile  in the  animal  ceconomy  ;
from  whence  alfo  various  peculiar  and fpecific  virtues
may  be conceived  to  arife,  refiding  in  certain  medi-
cines and  not  to  be  explained  by  mechanical  principles.
For although  the general  known  laws  of  motion are
to  be  deemed  mechanical,  yet  peculiar  motions  of  the
infenfible parts, and peculiar properties depending
thereon,  are  occult  and  fpecific.

240.  The  words  attraction  and  repulfion  may,  in
compliance  with  cuftom,  be  ufed  where,  accurately
fpeaking,  motion  alone  is  meant.  And  in  that  fenfe
it  may  be  laid,  that  peculiar  attractions  or  repulfions
in the  parts,  are  attended  with  fpecific  properties  in

the
(a)  40,  1 8 1.


S I R I S.  97

the  wholes.  The  particles  of  light  are  vehemently
moved  to  or  from,  retained  or  rejected  by,  objects.
Which  is  the  fame  thing  as  to  fay  wich  fir  Ifaac  New-
ton,  that  the  particles  of  acids  are  endued  with  great
attractive  force  (£),  wherein  their  activity  coniitts ;
whence  fermentation  and  diffolution  ;  and  that  the
moft  repellent  are,  upon  contact,  the  moil  attracting
particles.

241.  Gravity  and  fermentation  are  received  for
two  moft  extenfive  principles.  From  fermentation  are
derived  the  motion  and  warmth  of  the  heart  and
blood  in  animals,  fubterranous  heat,  fires,  and  earth-
quakes, meteors  and  changes  in  the  atmofphere.  And,
that  attracting  and  repelling  forces  operate  in  the  nu-
trition and  diffolution  of  animal  and  vegetable  bodies,
is  the  doctrine  both  of  Hippocrates,  and  fir  Ifaac
Newton.  The  former  of  thefe  celebrated  authors,  in
his  trea<ife  concerning  diet  or  regimen,  obferves  that
in  the  nourifhment  of  man,  one  part  repels  and
another  attracts.  And  again  in  the  fame  treatife,  two
carpenters,  faith  he,  faw  a  piece  of  timber  :  one
draws,  the  other  pufhes :  thefe  two  actions  tend  to  one
and  the  fame  end,  though  in  a  contrary  direction,  one
up,  the  other  down  :  This  imitates  the  nature  of
man  :  TrviuyLA  to  yJw  ihx.it  to  <^4  ^3is/.

242.  It  is  the  general  maxim  of  Hippocrates,
that  the  manner  wherein  nature  acts  confifteth  in  at-
tracting what  is  meet  and  good,  and  in  repelling  what
is  difagreeable  or  hurtful.  He  makes  the  whole  of
the  animal  ceconomy  to  be  adminiltred  by  the  facul-
ties or  powers  of  nature.  Nature  alone,  faith  he,
fufficeth  for  all  things  to  animals.  She  knows  of  her
felf  what  is~neeeffary  for  them.  Whence  it  is  plain,
he  means  a  confeious  intelligent  nature,  that  prefides
and  moves  the  aetherial  fpirit.  And  though  he  de-
clares all  things  are  accomplished  on  man  by  neceflky,
yet  it  is  not  a  blind  fate  or  chain  of  mere  corporeal
eaufes, but  a  divine  neceflity,  as  he  himfelf  expreily

I  calls

(b) 202.


5)8  S I R I S.

calls  it. And  what  is  this but  an  overruling  Intelli-
gent power  that  difpoieth  of  all  things  ?

243.  Attraction  cannot  produce,  and  in  that
•fenfe  account  for  the  phenomena,  being  it  felf  one
of  the  phenomena  produced  and  to  be  accounted
for  (c).  Attraction  is  performed  by  different  laws,
and  cannot  therefore  in  all  cafes  be  the  effeft  of  the  e-
lailicky,  of  one  uniform  medium.  The  phenomena
of  electrical  bodies,  the  laws  and  variations  of  magne-
tifm,  and,  not  to  mention  other  kinds,  even  Gravity;
'is  not  explained  by  elasticity,  a  phamenenon  not  lefs
obfeure  than  it  felf.  But  then,  although  it  Ihew  not  the
agent,  yet  it  iheweth  a  rule  and  analogy  in  nature,  to
fay,  That  the  folid  parts  of  animals  are  endued  with
attractive  powers  whereby  from  contiguous  fluids  they
draw  like  to  like  ;  and  that  glands  have  peculiar  powers
attractive  of  peculiar  juices  (d).  Nature  feems  better
known  and  explained  by  attractions  and  repulfions,
than  by  thofe  other  mechanical  principles  of  ilze,  fi-
gure, and  the  like  :  that  is  by  fir  Jfaac  Newton,  than
Defcartes.  And  natural  philofopliers  excell,  as  they
are  more  or  lefs  acquainted  with  the  laws  and  methods
obferved  by  the  author  of  nature.

244.  The  fize  and  fhape  of  :particles  and  general
laws  of  motion  can  never  explain  the  fecretions  with-*
cut  the  help  of  attraction,  obfeure  perhaps  as  to  it's
caufe,  but  clear  as  a  law.  Numberlds  inftances  of  this
might  be  ~;ven  :  Lemery  the  younger  thought  him-
fejf  obliged  to  fuppofe,  the  particles  of  light  or  fire
(contrary  to  ail  reafon)  to  be  of  a  very  grofs  kind/
even  greater  than  the  pores  of  the  burnt  Iimeftone,  in
order  to  account  for  their  being  detained  cr  imprifontd
therein  ;  but  thij  phenomenon  is  eafily  reduced  to  at-
traction. There  would  be  no  end  of  enumerating  the
like  cafes.  The  activity  and  force  of  aetherial  lpint
or  fire  by  the  laws  of  attraction,  is  imparted  to  grofler
prices  (e)*  and  thereby  wonderfully  fupports  the
CBConqnay  ol  la.ng  bodies. By  fuch  peculiar  compo-

fi  lions

(c)  .160, 235. (d)  41. (e) 152, 163.


S I R I S.  9$

fitions  and  attractions  it  feems  to  be  effected,  that
denfer  fluids  can  pafs  where  air  it  felf  cannot,  (as  oyl
through  leather)  and  therefore  through  the  niccft  and
iRneil  ftrainers  of  an  animal  or  vegetable.

245.  The  ancients  had  fome  general  conception
of  attracting  and  repelling  powers  (g)  as  natural
principles.  -  Galilsei  had  particularly  confide  red  the
attraction  of  gravity,  and  made  fome  difeovery  of  the
laws  thereof.  But  fir  Ifaac  Newton  by  his  fingular
penetration,  profound  knowledge  in  geometry  and
mechanics,  and  great  exactnefs  in  experiments,  hath
cafr,  a  new  light  on  natural  fcience,  The  laws  of  at-
traction and  repuifion  were  in  many  inflances  difco-
vered,  and  flrlf.  difcovered,  by  him,  He  fhewed  their
general  extent,  and  therewith  as  with  a  key  opened
feveral  deep  fecrets  of  nature,  in  the  knowledge  where-
of he  feems  to  have  made  a  greater  progrefc,  thaa
all  the  fects  of  corpufcularians  together  had  dene  be-
fore him.  Neverthelefs,  the  principle  of  attraction  it
felf  is  not  to  be  explained  by  phyfical  or  corporeal  caufesl

246.  The  Cart'efians  attempted  to  explain  it  by
the  nifus  of  a  fubtil  element,  receding  from  the  center
of  it's  motion,  and  impelling  grofTer  bodies  towards  ic*
Sir  Ifaac  Newton  in  his  later  thoughts  feems  (as- was
before  obferved)  to  have  ado.ted  fomewhat  not  alto-
gether foreign  from  this  notion,  aferibing  that  to
his  elaitic  medium  (f)  which  Defcartes  did  to
his  fecond  element.  But  the  great  men  of  antiquity
refolved  gravity  into  the  immediate  action  of  an
intelligent  incorporeal  being.  To  which  alfo  fir  'Ifaac
Newton  himfejf  -  attefts  and  fubferibes,  although  he
may  perhaps  (bmetimes  be  thought  to  forget  himfelf,
in  his  manner  of  fpeaking  of  phyfical  agents,  which
in  a  ftrict  fenfe  are  none  at  all ;  and  in  fappofing  real
forces  to  exifl  in  bodies,  in  which,  to  fpeak  truly,  at-
traction and  repuifion  mould  be  considered  only  •  as
tendencies  pr  motions,  that  is,  £5  mere  effects,  and
their  laws  as  laws  of  motion*

1  2  247.

(i)  241,-242; (f) 237, 23S.


ioo  S I R I S.

247.  Though  it  be  fuppofed  the  chief  bufinefs of  a
natural  philofopher  to  trace  out  caufes  from  the  effects,
yet  this  is  to  be  underftood  not  of  agents  {b)  but  of
principles,  that  is  of  component  parts,  in  one  fenfe,
or  of  ]a\*s  or  rules,  in  another.  h\  flricT;  truth  all
agents  are  incorporeal,  and  as  fucli  are  not  properly  of
phyfjcal  confideration.  The  aftronomer,  therefore,
the  Mechanic,  or  the  Chy  grift,  not  as  fueh,  but  by
accident  only,  treat  of  real  caufes,  agents  or  efficients.
Neither  doth  it  feem,  as  is  fuppokd  by  the  greatelt  oi
mechanical  philofophers,  that  the  true  way  of  pro-
ceeding in  their  fcience  is,  from  known  motions  in,
nature  to  invefb'gate  the  moving  forces.  Forafmuch
as  force  is  neither  corporeal  nor  belongs  to  any  cor-
poreal thing  (a) ;  nor  yet  to  be  difcovered  by  expert
ments  or  mathematical  reafonings,  which  reach  no  far-
ther than  difcernible  effects,  and  motions  in  things
pnftve  and  moved.

248.  Vis  or  force  is  to  the  foul,  what  extenfion  is
to  the  body,  faith  Saint  Auguitin,  in  his  trad  con-
cerning the  quantity  of  the  foul  i  and  without  force
there  is  nothing  done  or  made,  and  copfequently  there
can  be  no  agent.  Authority  is  not  to  decide  in  this
cafe.  Let  any  one  confult  his  own  notions  and  rea-
ibn,  as  well  as  experience,  concerning  the  origine  of
motion,  and  the  refpeclive  natures,  properties,  and
differences  of  foul  and  body,  and  he  will,  if  I  miftake
not,  evidently  perceive,  tha*  there  is  nothing  active
in  the  later.  Nor  are  they  natural  agents  or  corporeal
forces,  which  make  the  particles  of  bodies  to  cohere.
Nor  is  it  the  buiinefs  of  experimental  philofophers  to
tind  them  out.

249.  The  mechanical  philofopher,  as  hath  been  al-
ready obferved,  enquires  properly  concerning  the  rule*
and  modes  of  operation  alone,  and  not  concerning  the
caufe,  forafmuch  as  nothing  mechanical  is  or  really
can  be  a  caufe  {b).  And  although  a  mechanical  or
mathematical  philofopher  may  fpeak  of  abfolute  fpace*

abfolute

ifi  *s*  W  22°.  W  236, 247.


S I R. I S  ioi

abfolute  motion,  and  of  force  as  exi&ing  in  bodies*
caufing  fuch  motion  and  proportional  thereto  ;  Yet
what  thefe  forces  are,  which  are  fuppofed  to  be  lodged
in  bodies,  to  be  imprefifed  on  bodie5,  to  be  multiplied,
divided,  and  communicated  from  one  body  to  another,
and  which  feems  to  animate  bodies  like  abflraft  fpiritf,
or  fouls,  hath  been  found  very  difficult,  not  to  fay
impoflible,  for  thinking  men  to  conceive  and  explain,
as  may  be  feen  by  confulting  Benllus  de  vi  fercujfionis,
and  Torricrili  in  his  lezioni  academicbe,  among  other
authors.

250.  Nor.  if  we  confider  the  proclivity  of  man-
kind to  realize  their  notions,  will  it  feem  ftrange  that
mechanic  philofophers  and  Geometricians  mould,
like  other  men,  be  milled  by  prejudice,  and  take  ma-
thematical hypothefes,  for  real  beings  exffting  in
bodies,  ib  far  as  even  to  make  it  the  very  aim  and  end
of  their  fcience  to  compute  or  meafure  thofe  phan*
tomes ;  whereas  it  is  very  certain  lhat  nothing  ia
truth  can  be  meafured  *  or  computed,  befides  the
very  effect  or  motions  themfelves.  Sir  Jfaac  Newton
asks,  have  not  the  minute  particles  of  bodies  certain
forces  or  powers  by  which  they  act  on  one  another,
as  well  as  on  the  particles  of  light,  for  producing  molt
of  the  phenomena  in  nature  ?  But  in  reality,  thofe
minute  particles  are  only  agitated  according  to  certain
laws  of  nature,  by  fome  other  agent,  wherein  the
force  exifls  and  not  in  them,  which  have  only  the  mo-
tion ;  which  nvotion  in  the  body  moved,  the  Peripate-
tics rightly  jw'ge  to  be  a  mere  paffion,  but  in  the
mover  to  be  \ v%% ytiet  or  act.

251.  It  paiVeth  with  many,  I  know  not  how,  that
mechanical  principles  give  a  clear  folution  of  the  phae-
nomena.  The  Democritic  hypochefis,  faith  Doctor
Cudworth,  doth  much  more  iandfomely  and  intelli*
gibly  folve  the  phenomena,  than  that  of  Ariftotle  and

I  I  Plato.

*  This  fubje£t  is  handled  at  large  in  my  Latia  traft  di  motit •,
fublifhci  above  twwity  years  ago.


102  S I R I S.

Plato.  But  things  rightly  confidered,  perhaps  it  will
be  found  not  to  folve  any  phenomenon  at  all.  For  all
phenomena  are,  to  fpeak  truly,  appearances  in  the
foul  or  mind,  and  it  hath  never  been  explained,  nor
can  it  be  explained,  how  external  bodies  figures  and
motions  mould  produce  an  appearance  in  the  mindJ
Thefe  principles,  therefore,"  do  not  folve,  if  by  folving
is  meant  aligning  the  real,  either  efficient  or  final
cauie  of  appearances,  but  only  reduce  them  to  general
rules.

2  c  2.  There  is  a  certain  analogy,  conftancy,  and
unifbrmiy  in  the  phenomena  or  appearances  of  na-
ture, which  are  a  foundation  for  general  rules  :  and
thefe  are  a  grammar  for  the  underlhnding  of  nature,
or  that  feries  of  effecls  in  the  vifible  world,  whereby
we  are  enabled  to  forefee  what  will  come  to  pal*,  in
the  natural  courfe  or  things.  Plotinus  obfervcs,  in  his
third  Ennead,  that  the  art  of  prefaging  is  in  fome  fort
the  reading  of  natural  letters  denoting  order,  and  that
fo  far  forth  as  analogy  obtains  in  the  univ^rfe,  there
may  be  vaticination.  And  in  reality,  he  that  fore-
tells the  motions  of  the  planets,  or  the  effects  o:  me-
dicines, or  the  refults  of  chymical  or  mechanical  ex-
periments, may  be  faid  to  do  it  by  natural  vaticina-
tion.

253.  We  know  a  thing  when  we  underftand  it  :
and  we  underhand  it,  when  we  can  interpret  br  tell
what  it  fignifies.  Strictly  the  fenfe  knows  nothing.
We  perceive  indeed  founds  by  hearing,  and  charac-
ters by  fight.  But  we  are  not  therefore  laid  to  under-
filled them.  After  the  fame  manner,  thephasnomena
of  nature  are  alike  viiible  to  all  :  but  all  have  not  a-
like  learned  the  connexion  of  nararal  things,  or  un-
derhand what  they  fignify,  or  know  how  to  vaticinate
by  them.  There  is  no  quellion,  fairii  Socrates,  in
Theieteto,  concerning  that  which  ii  agreeable  to  each
perfon  ;  but  concerning  what  will  in  time  to  come  be
agreeable,  of  which  all  men  are  not  equally  judges.
He  who  foreknoweth  what  will  be  in  every  kind  is  the
wifett. According to  Socrates,-  you  and the cook

may


S I R I S.  103

may  judge  of  a  difh  on  the  table  equally  well,  but
while  the  difh  is  making,  the  cook  can  better  foretell,
what  will  enfue  from  this  or  that  manner  of  compo-
fing  it.  Ncr  is  this  manner  of  reafoning  confined  only
to  morals  or  politics  ;  but  extends  alfo  to  natural
fcience.

254.  As  the  natural  connexion  of  flgns  with  the
things  fignified  is  regular  and  conftant,  it  forms  a  fort
of  rational  difcourfe  (c)  and  is  therefore  the  imme-
diate effect  of  an  intelligent  caule.  This  is  agreeable
to  the  philofophy  of  Plato,  and  other  ancients.  Ploti-
nus  indeed  faith,  that  which  acts  naturally  is  not  in-
tellection, but  a  certain  power  of  moving  matter,
which  doth  not  know  but  only  do.  And  it  muft  be
owned,  that,  as  faculties  are  multiplied  by  philofo-
phers  according  to  their  operations,  the  will  may  be
diflinguifhed  from  the  intellect.  But  it  will  not  there-
fore follow,  that  the  will,  which  operates  in  the
courfe  of  nature,  is  not  conducted  and  applied  by  in-
tellect, although  it  be  granted  that  neither  will  under-
ftands,  nor  intellect  wills.  Therefore,  the  phenomena
of  nature,  which  llrike  on  the  fenfes  and  are  under-
ftood  by  the  mind,  do  form  not  only  a  magnificent
fpectacle,  but  alio  a  moil  coherent,  entertaining,  and
inilructive  difcourfe  ;  and  to  effect  this,  they  are
conducted,  adjufted,  and  ranged  by  the  greateft  wif-
dom.  This  language  or  difcourfe  is  fludied  with  dif-
ferent attention,  and  interpreted  with  different  degrees
of  skill.  Butfo  far  as  men  have  itudied  and  remarked
if  s  rules,  and  .can  interpret  right,  fo  far  they  may  be
laid  to  be  knowing  in  nature,  A  beaft  is  like  a  man
Who  hears  a  ftrange  tongue,  but  underftands  nothing.

255.  Nature,  faith  the  learned  Doctor  Cudworth,
h  not  matter  of  art  or  wifdom  :  Nature  is  ratio  merfa.
et  cou/ufat  reafon  immerfed  and  plunged  into  matter,
and  as  it  were  fudddled  in  it  and  confounded  with  it.
Bat  the  formation  of  plants  and  animals,  the  motions
of  natural  bodies,  their  various  properties,  appear-
ances and  viciflitudes,  in  a  word,  the  whole  feries  of

things
(0 ^Z'


io4  S I R I 3.

things  in  this  viftble  worlJ,  which  we  call  the  courfe
of  nature,  is  fo  wifely  managed  and  carried  on,  that
the  moft  improved  human  Reafon  cannot  thoroughly
comprehend  even  the  leaf!  particle  thereof;  fo  far  is  it
from  feeming  to  bt  produced  by  fuddled  or  confounded
reafon.

256.  Natural  produ&ions,  it  14  true,  are  not  all
equally  perfect  But  neither  doth  it  fuit  with  the  order
of  things,  the  ftructure  of  the  univcrfe,  or  the  ends  of
providence  that  they  mould  be  (o.  General  rules,  we
have  feen  (  d)9  are  neceflary  to  make  the  world  in-
telligible: and  from  the  conftant  obfervation  of  fuch
rules,  natural  evils  will  fometimes  unavoidably  enfue  :
things  will  b.  produced  in  a  flow  length  of  time,  and
arrive  at  different  dcgicca  of  perfection.

257.  It  mull  be  owned,  we  are  not  confcloos  ©f
the  fyftole  and  diaftole  of  the  heart,  ©r  the  motion  of
the  diaphragm.  It  may  not  nevenhelefs  be  thence  in-
ferred, that  unknowing  nature  can  act  regularly,  as  well
as  our  felvcs.  The  true  inference  i?,  that  the  felf,
thinking  individual,  or  humane  perfon  is  not  the  real
author  of  thofe  natural  motions.  And  in  fact  no  man
blames  himfelf  if  they  are  wrong,  or  values  himfelf  if
they  are  right.  The  fame  may  be  faid  of  the  fingers
of  a  mufician,  which  fame  ob,ecl  to  be  moved  by  ha-
bit which  underftands  not;  it  being  evident,  that  what
is  done  by  rule  mud  proceed  from  fomething  that  un-
derstands the  rule;  therefore,  if  not  from  the  mufician
himfelf,  from  forae  other  active  intelligence,  the  fame
perhaps  which  governs  bees  and  fpiders,  and  moves  the
limbs  of  thofe  who  walk  in  their  ileep.

258.  Instruments,  occafions,  andfigns(*)  occur
in,  or  rather  make  up,  the  whole  vifible  courfe  of  na-
ture. Thefe,  being  no  agents  themfelves,  are  under
the  direction  of  one  agent  concerting  all  fir  one  end,
the  fupreme  good.  All  thofe  motions,  whether  in  a-
nimal  bodies  or  in  other  pares  of  the  fyftem  of  nature,
which  are  not  efixcls  of  particular  wills,  feem  to  fp'ing
from  the  fame  general  caufe  with  the  vegetation  of
plants,  an  astherial  fpirit  actuated  by  a  mind.

(d )  249,  252. ^e  )  160.  259.  Ttts


S I R I S.  105

259.  The  n"rft  poets  and  theologers  of  Greece  and
the  Eail  confidered  the  generation  of  things,  as  afcrib-
ed  rather  to  a  divine  caufe,  but  the  Phyfici  to  natural
caufes  fubordinate  to,  and  directed  ftitl  by  a  divine ;
except  fome  corporealifts  and  mechanics  who  vainly
pretended  to  make  a  world  without  a  God.  The  hid-
den force  that  unites,  adjufts,  and  caufeth  all  things  to
hang  together,  and  mow  in  harmony,  which  Orpheus
and  Empedocles  ftyled  love ;  This  principle  of  union  is
no  blind  principle,  but  ads  with  intellect.  This  divine
love  and  intellect  are  not  themfelves  obvious  to  our  view,
or  otherwiie  difcerned  than  in  their  effects.  Intellect
enlightens,  Love  connects,  and  the  fovereign  Good  at*
tracts  all  things.

260.  All  things  are  made  for  the  fupreme  good,
all  things  tend  to  that  end :  and  we  may  be  faid  to  ac-
count for  a  thing,  when  we  mew  that  it  is  fo  befl.  la
the  Phasdon,  Socrates  declares  it  to  be  his  opinion,  that
he,  who  fuppofed  all  things  to  have  been  difpofed  and
ordered  by  a  mind  (/*),  mould  not  pretend  to  affign  a-
ny  other  caufe  of  them.  He  blames  Phyfiologers  for
attempting  to  account  for  phenomena,  particularly  for
gravity  and  cohaeiion,  by  vortexes  and  asther,  over-
looking the  to  cLya&h  and  to  JW,  the  ftrongeft  bond
and  cement  which  holds  together  all  the  parts  of  the
univerfe,  and  not  difcerning  the  caufe  it  felf  from  thofe
things  which  only  attend  it.

261.  As  in  the  microcofm,  the  conftant  regular  te-
nor of  the  motions  of  the  vifcera,  and  contained  juices
doth  not  hinder,  particular  \oluntary  motions  to  be
imprefled  by  the  mind  on  the  animal  fpirit  j  even  fo
in  the  mondane  fyliem,  the  fteady  obfervance  of  cer-
tain laws  of  nature,  in  the  grofler  maffes  and  more  con-
fpicuous  motions,  doth  not  hinder,  but  a  voluntary  a-
gent  may  fometimes  communicate  particular  iroprefo.
ens  to  the  fine  aetherial  medium,  which  in  the  world
anfwers  the  animal  fpirit  in  man.  Which  two  (if  they
are  two)  although  invifible  and  inconceivably  fmall,
yet  fe«m  the  real  latent  fprings,  whereby  all  the  parts

ot


io6  S I R I S.

of  this  vifible  world  are  moved  ;  albeit  they  are  not
to  be  regarded  as  a  true  caufe,  but  only  an  inftrument
of  motion;  and  the  inftrument  not  as  a  help  to  the
Creator,  but  only  as  a  fign  to  the  creature.

262.  Plotinu">  fuppofeth  that  the  foul  of  the  imi-
verfe  is  not  the  original  caufe  or  author  of  the  fpecies,
but  receives  them  fom  Intellect,  the  true  principle  of
order  and  diftin&ion,  the  fource  and  giver  of  forms.
Others  confider  the  vegetative  fbul  only  as  fome  lower
faculty  of  a  higher  foul,  which  animates  the  fiery  x-
therial  fpirk  (g).  As  for  the  blots  and  defects  which
appear  in  the  courfe  of  this  world,  which  fome  have
thought  to  proceed  from  a  fatality  or  neceffity  in  nature,
and  others  from  an  evil  principle,  that  fame  philcfo-
pher  obferves,  that  it  may  be  the  governing  Reafcn
produceth  and  ordaincth  all  thofe  things;  and,  not
intending  that  all  parts  mould  be;  equally  good,  mak-
eth  fome  worfe  than  others  by  deGgn,  as  a!l  parts  in
an  animal  are  not  eyes:  And  in  a  city,  comedy  or  picture
all  rankr,  characters,  and  colours  are  not  equal  al;ke  ,-
even  fo  excefies,  defects,  and  contrary  qualities,  con-
spire to  the  beauty  and  harmony  of  the  world.

263.  It  cannot  be  dewied,  that  with  refpecl  to  the
universe  of  things  we  in  this  mortal  Hate,  are  like  men
educated  in  Plan's  cave,  looking  on  fhaddows  with
our  backs  turned  to  :h~  tight.  But  though  our  light  be
dim,  and  our  fitua  o  ad  vet  if  th-  belt  ufe  be  made
of  bot'h,  perhapfc  fumcthirg  n>  y  be  feen.  I  rcchrs,  in
his  con  in  tafy  on  the  the  ogy  of  Plato,  obferves
there  are  two  forts  of  phil  1  p-  ers.  The  one  placed
body  firit  in  the  order  of  beings,  md  madf  the  faculty
of  thinking  depend  theieup  ..ppofing  that  the  prin-
ciples of  all  ipgs  are  corr>o  e  I :  that  body  molt  really
or  principally  exifts,  and  all  1  h<  th  ngs  in  a  fecondary
fe'ifc,  and  by  virtue  of  that.  Others,  making  all  cor-
poreal things  t6  be  dependent  upon  foul  ormnd,  think
this  to  extt>  in  the  firft  place  and  primary  feiif<°,  and
the  being  of  bodies  to  be  altogether  derived  from,  and
prefuppofe  that  of  the  mind,

264.  Sense


, S I R. I S.  107

.•264.  Sense  and  experience  acquaint  us,  with  the
courfe  and  analigjr  of  appearances  or  natural  effects.
Thought,  rcafon,  intellect,  introduce  us  into  the  know-
ledge of  their  caufes.  Senfible  appearance?,  though  of
a  flowing  unliable  and  uncertain  nature,  yet  having
firit  occupied  the  mind,  they  do  by  an  ear'y  preven-
tion, render  the  after  talk  of  thought  more  difficult :
and  as  they  amufe  the  eyes  and  ears,  and  arc  more  fuit-'
ed  to  vulgar  ufes  and  the  mechanic  arts  of  life,  they
eafily  obtain  a  preference,  in  the  opinion  of  mofl  nvn,
to  thofe  fuperior  principles,  which  are  the  later
growth  of  the  humane  mind  arrived  to  maturity  and
perfection,  but,  not  affecting  the  corporeal  fenfe,  are
thought  to  be  fo  far  deficient  in  point  of  folidity  and
reality,  fenfible  and  real  to  common  apprehenfions  be-
ing the  fame  thing.  Although  it  b<-  certain,  that  the
principles  of  fcience  are  neither  objects  of  fenfe  nor
imagination  ;  and  that  intellect  and  reafon  are  alone
the  fure  guides  to  Truth.

265.  The  fuccefsful  curioiity  of  the  prefent  age,
in  arts  and  experiments  and  new  fyftems,  is  apt  to  elate
men,  and  make  them  overlook  the  ancients.  But
notwithftanding  that  the  encouragement  and  purfe  of
Princes,  and  the  united  endeavours  of  great  focieties
in  thefe  later  ages,  have  extended  experimental  and
mechanical  knowledge  very  far,  yet  it  mud  be  owned,
that  the  ancients  too  were  not  ignorant  of  many
things  (h),  as  well  in  phyfics  as  metaphyfks,  which
perhaps  are  more  generally,  though  not  ftrit  known  in
thefe  modern  times.

266.  The  Pythagoreans  end  PlatoniUs  had  a  notion
of  the  true  fyilem  of  the  world.  Thsy  allowed  of
mechanical  principi  r.,  but  actuated  by  foul  or  mind :
they  cliftinguifheci  the  primary  qualities  in  bodies  from
the  fecondary,  making  the  former  to  be  phyfical  cauf-
es, and  they  uocUritood  phyfical  caufes  in  a  right  fenfe:
they  faw  that  a  mkid  infinite  in  power,  unextended,
invifible,  irnmortd,  governed,  connected  and  contain-
ed all  things :  they  faw  there  was  no  fuch  thing  as  real

abfolute
{h)  166,  167,  168,  .241.  242.  £fc.


io8  S I R I S.

abolute  fpate:  that  mind,  foul  or  fpirit,  truly  and  real-
ly exifb :  that  bodies  exifl:  only  in  a  fecondary  and
dependent  fenfe  :  that  the  foul  is  the  place  of  forms  :
that  the  fenfible  qualities  are  to  be  regarded  as  acts
only  in  the  caufe,  and  as  paflions  in  us:  they  accurate-
ly confidered  the  differences  of  inteliect,  rational  fouf,
and  fenfitive  foul,  with  their  diftinct  acts  of  intellection,
reafoning,  and  fenfation,  points  wherein  the  Carte-
fians  and  their  followers,  who  confider  fenfation  as  a
mode  of  thinking,  feem  to  have  failed.  They  knew
there  was  a  fubtil  aether  pervading  the  whole  mafs  of
corporeal  beings,  and  which  was  it  felf  actually  moved
and  directed  by  a  mind  :  and  that  phyfical  caufes
were  only  inilruments,  or  rather  marks  and  figns.

267.  THtwit  ancient-  philnfnpV)<»rs  underftood  the
generation  of  animals  to  confiit,  in  the  unfolding  and
diftending  of  the  minute  imperceptible  parts  of  pre-
exifting  animalcules,  which  palfeth  for  a  modern  dif-
covery  :  this  they  took  for  the  work  of  nature,  but
nature  animate  and  intelligent  (a)  they  underftood
that  all  things  were  alive  and  in  motion  :  they  fuppo-
fed  a  concord  and  difcord,  union  and  difunion  in  par-
ticles fome  attracting,  others  repelling  each  other :
and  that  thofe  attractions  and  repulfions,  fo  various,
regular,  and  ufcful,  could  not  be  accounted  for,  but
by  an  intelligence  prefiding  and  directing  all  particu-
lar motions,  for  the  confervation  and  benefit  of  the
whole.

268.  The  ^Egyptians,  who  imperfonated  nature,
had  made  her  a  diftinct  principle,  and  even  deified  her
under  the  name  of  Jiis.  But  Ofiris  was  underftood  to
be  mind  or  reafon,  chief  and  fovcrcign  of  all.  Ofiris,
if  we  may  believe  Plutarch,  was  the  firft,  pure,  un-
mixed and  holy  principle,  not  difcernible  by  the  low-
er faculties  ;  a  glympfe  whereof  like  lightening  dart-
ing forth,  irradiates  the  underftanding j  with  regard
to  which  Plutarch  adds,  that  Plato  and  Ariltotle
termed  one  part  of  philofophy  iiroirTtKoir  :  to  wir,
when  having  foared  above  common  mixtd  object?,

and
(m)  172.


S I R I S.  109

and  got  beyond  the  precincts  of  fenfe  and  opinion,
they  arrive  to  contemplate  the  iirft  and  moft  fimple  be-
ing,  free  from  all  matter  and  compaction.  This  is
that  k/ffict  ovrwf  oW*  of  Plato  which  employeth
mind  alone  ;  which  alone  governs  the  foul.  And  the
foul  is  that  which  immediately  informs  and  animates
nature.

269.  Although  the  ^Egyptians  did  fymbolically
rcprefent  the  fupreme  divinity  fitting  on  a  lotus,  and
that  gefture  hath  been  interpreted  to  fignify,  the  moft
holy  and  venerable  being  to  be  utterly  at  reft  repofing
within  himfelf  j  yet,  for  any  thing  that  appears,  this
geflure  might  denote  dignity  as  well  as  repofe.  And
it  cannot  be  denied,  that  Jamblichus,  fo  knowing  in
the  ^Egyptian  notions,  taught  there  was  an  intellect
that  proceeded  to  generation,  drawing  forth  the  latent
powers  into  light  in  the  formation  of  things.  Nor  was
this  to  be  underilood  of  an  external  world,  fubfifting  in
real  abfolute  fpace;  For  it  was  a  doctrine  of  thofe  an-
cient Sages,  that  Soul  was  the  place  of  forms,  as  may
be  feen  in  the  twelfth  book  of  the  arcane  part  of  divine
wifdom,  according  to  the  ^Egyptians.  This  notion
was  embraced  by  divers  philosophers  of  Greece,  who
may  be  fuppofed  to  have  derived  it  from  the  fame
fource,  from  whence  many  of  their  other  opinions
were  drawn.

270.  The  doctrine  of  real  abfolute  external  fpace,
induced  fome  modern  philosophers  to  conclude  it  was
apart  or  attribute  of  God,  or  that  God  himfelf  was
fpace  ;  inafmuch  as  incommunicable  attributes  of  the
deity  appeared  to  agree  thereto,  fuch  as  infinity,  immu-
tability, indivifibility,  incorporeity,  being  uncreated,
impaflive,  without  beginning  or  ending  ;  not  confi-
dering  that  all  thefe  negative  properties  may  belong  to
nothing.  For  nothing  hath  no  limits,  cannot  be  moved
©r  changed,  or  divided,  is  neither  created  nor  deftroy-
ed.  A  different  way  of  thinking  appears  in  the  Her-
maic  as  well  as  other  writings  of  the  ancients.  With
regard  to  abfolute  fpace,  it  is  ©bferved  in  the  Afcle-
pian  dialogue  ;  that  the  word  Space  or  Place  hath by

K  it


ito  S I R I S.

it  fell  no  meaning;  and  again,  that  it  is  rmpoflible  to
underftand  what  Space  alone  cr  pare  Sp.ce  is.  And
Plotinns  acknowledged  no  place  but  foul  or  mind,
exprcily  affirming  that  the  foul  is  not  in  the  world,
but  the  world  in  the  foul.  And  farther,  the  place  of
the  foul,  faith  he,  is  not  body,  but  ibul  is  in  mind,
and  body  in  foul.  See  the  third  chapter  of  the  fifth
book  of  the  fifth  Ennead.

271.  Concerning  abfolute  fpace  that  phantome
cf  the  mechanic  Geometrical  Philofophers  (b),  it
may  fufr.ee  to  obferve,  that  it  is  neither  perceived  by
any  fenfe,  nor  proved  by  any  reafon,  and  was  ac-
cordingly treated  by  the  the  greateft  of  the  ancients  as
ft  thing  merely  vifionary.  From  the  notion  of  abfo-
lute fpace  fprings  that  of  abfolute  motion  *  ;  and  in
thefe  are  ultimately  founded  the  notions  of  external
exigence.,  independence,  neceility,  and  fate.  Which
fate,  the  idol  of  many  moderns,  was  by  old  philofo-
.phers  differently  understood,  and  in  fuch  a  ftnfc  as  net
to  defhoy  the  aiiii^riov  of  God  or  man.  Parme-
•nides,  who  thought  all  things  to  be  made  by  necefTity
•r  fate,  underftood  juftice  and  providence  to  be  the
fame  with  faie  ;  which,  how  fixed  and  cogent
fcever  wiih  refpect  to  man,  may  yet  be  voluntary
with  refpecl  to  God.  Empedocles  declared  Fate  to  be
a  caufe  uflng  principles  and  elements.  Heraclitus
taught  that  Fate  was  the  general  reafon  that  runs
through  the  whole  nature  of  the  univerfe  :  which  na-
ture he  fuppofed  to  be  an  aetherial  body,  the  feed  of
fhe  generation  of  all  thin^. Plato  held  Fate  to  be

the
(b)  25.0.

*  Our  judgment  in  thefe  matters  is  not  to  be  overborn  by  a
.jrefumt-d  evidence  cf  mathematical  notions  and  reafonings,  fince
ji  is  plain,  thi  mathematicians  of  this  :ige  embrace  obfeure  notions,
and  uncertain  opinions,  and  arc  puzzled  about  them,  contradicting
*<ch  other  and  d'.fput'ng like  other  men  :  witnefs  their  doc/hine  of
Fluxions,  about  which  within  t)>efe  ten  years  1  have  feen  pub-
lifted  above  twenty  tracts  and  dirTertationsj  whofe  authors  'bVing
Utterly  at  varience j  and  inconhftcnt  with  each  other,  inftruct  by-
standers what  to  think  of  their  pretenfms  to  evidence.


S I R I S.  in

the  eternal  reafonorlaw  of  nature.  Chryfippus  Tup-
pofed  that  Fate  was  a  fpiritual  power  which  difpoied
the  worid  in  order  ;  that  it  was  the  reaibn  and  law  of
thofe  tnings  which  are  adminiltred  by  providence.

272.  All  the  foregoing  notions  of  Fate,  as  repre-
sented by  Plutarch,  do  plainly  fhew  that  thofe  ancient
philolophers  did  not  mean  by  fate,  a  blind,  head-long*
unintelligent  principle,  but  an  orderly  fettled  courfe  of
things  conducted  by  a  wife  and  provident  mind.  And
as  for  the  ^Egyptian  doctrine,  it  is  indeed  afferted  ia
the  Pimander,  that  all  things  are  produced  by  Fats.
But  jamblichus,  who  drew  his  notions  from  ^Egypt,
affirms  that  the  whole  of  things  is  not  bound  up  :n
Fate  ;  but  that  there  is  a  principle  of  the  foul  higher
than  nature,  whereby  we  may  be  raifed  to  an  union
with  the  Gods  and  exempt  our  felves  from  Fate.  And
in  the  Afclopian  dialogue  it  is  exprefly  faid  that  fate
follows  the  decrees  of  God.  And  indeed,  as  all  the-
moticns  in  nature  are  evidently  the  product  of  rea»-
fon  (c),  it  mould  &em  there  is  no  room  for  neceffity,
in  any  other  fenfe  than  that  of  a  iteady  regular
coutfe.

273.  Blind  fate  and  blind  chance  are  at  bot  om
much  the  fame  thing,  and  one  no  more  intelligible
than  the  ether.  Such  is  the  mutual  relation,  connec-
tion, motion,  and  fympathy  of  the  parts  of  this  worlds
that  they  feem  as  it  were  animated  and  held  together
by  one  foul  :  and  fuch  is  their  harmony,  order,  and
regular  courfe,  as  fheweth  the  foul  to  be  governed  and
directed  by  a  mind.  It  was  an  opinion  of  remote  an-
tiqui'y  that  the  world  was  an  animal  (d.)  If  we  may
trull  the  Hermaic  writings,  the  ^Egyprians  thought  all
things  did  partake  of  life.  This  opinion  was  alfo  io
general  and  current  among  the  Greeks*  that  Plutarch
ailerts  all  others  held  the  world  to,  be  an  animal,  and
governed  by  providence,  except  Leucippus,  Democri-
tus,  and  Epicurus.  And  although  an  animal,  con-
taining all  bodies  within  it  felf,  could  not be  touched

K  2  qs

(c) 154.  (J) 153, 172.


U2  S I R I S.

or  fenfibly  afFtcled  from  without  ;  yet  it  is  plain  they
attributed  to  it  an  inward  fenfe  and  feeling,  as  well  as
appetites  and  averfions ;  and  that  from  all  the  various
tones  a£tk>M  and  paffions  of  the  univerfe,  they  fuppofed
cne  fymphony,  one  animal  ad  and  life  to  refult.

274.  Jamelicus  declares  the  world  to  be  one  a-
nimal,  in  which  the  pans  however  diftant  from  each
<nher,  are  ntrerthekfs  related  and  connected  by  one
common  nature .  And  he  teacheth,  what  is  alfo  a  re-
ceived notion  of  the  Pythagoreans  and  Platonics  that
there  is  bo  chafm  in  nature,  but  a  chain  or  fcale  of
beings  fifing  by  gentle  uninterrupted  gradations  from
tie  Jo  weft  to the  highefr,  each  nature  being  informed
and  perftclcd  by  the  participation  of  a  higher.  As  air
becomes  igneous,  fo  the  pu.eft  fire  becomes  animal,
and  the  animal  foul  beccmes  intellectual,  which  is  to
be  underitocd  not  of  the  change  of  one  nature  into
another,  but  of  the  connection  of  different  nature?,
each  lower  nature  being,  according  to  thole  phiiofo-
phen=,  as  it  were  a  receptacle  or  fubjtct  for  the  next  a-
fceve  it  to  refide  and  aft  in.

275.  It  is  alfo  the  doctrine  of  Platonic  philofc-
phers,  that  intellect  is  the  very  life  of  living  things,
the  firft  principle  and  exemplar  of  all,  from  whence  by
different  degrees  are  derived  the  inferior  dalles  of  life;
fii  It  the  rational,  then  the  fenfitive,  after  that  the  ve-
getal, but  fo  as  in  the  rational  animal  there  is  ftiil
Somewhat  intellectual,  again  in  the  fenfitive  there  is
Somewhat  lational,  and  in  the  vegetal  fomewhat  fenfi-
tive, and  laftly  in  mixt  bodies  as  metals  and  minerals,
fomewhat  of  vegetation.  By  which  means  the  whole
is  thought  to  be  more  perfectly  connected.  Which  doc-
tunc  implies  that  all  the  faculties,  inflincts,  and  mo-
tions of  inferior  beings,  in  their  feveral  refpective  fub-
ordinations,  are  derived  from  and  depend  upon  mind
and  intellect.

276.  Both  Stoics  and  Platonics  held  the  world  to
be  alive,  though  fometimes  it  be  mentioned  as  a  fen-
tiert  animal,  fometimes  as  a  plant  or  vegetable.  But
in  this,  notwithstanding  what hath  been  furmifed  by

fome


S I R I S.  xij

fo#\i  learned  men,  there  feems  to  be  no  Atheifm.
For  fo  long  as  the  world  is  fuppofcd  to  be  quickened
by  elementary  fire  or  fpirit,  which  is  it  felf  animated
by  foul,  and  directed  by  undemanding,  it  follows  that
all  parts  thereof  originally  depend  upon,  and  may  be
reduced  unto,  the  fame  indivifible  item  or  principle,  to
wit,  a  fupreme  mind  ;  which  is  the  concurrent  doc-
.  {rine  of  Pythagoreans,  Platonics,  and  Stoics.

277.  There  is  according  to  thofe  philofophers  a
l'fe  infufed  throughout  all  things :  the  tDj  votfov,
crof  T%xywU  an  intellectual  and  artificial  fire  (e)9
an  inward  principle,  animal  fpirit,  or  natural  life
producing  and  forming  within  as  art  doth  without,  re-
gulating, moderating,  and  reconciling  the  various  mo-
tions qualities  and  parts  of  this  mundane  fy  Item.  By
virtue  of  this  life  the  great  mafTes  are  held  together  in
their  ordinary  courfes,  as  well  as  the  m in uteft  particles
governed  in  their  natural  motions,  according  to  the  fe-
veral  laws  of  attraction,  gravity,  electricity,  magne-
tifm,  and  the  reft.  It  is  this  gives  inftincts,  teache3
the  fpider  her  web,  and  the  bee  her  honey.  This  it  is-
that  directs  the  roots  of  plants  to  draw  forth  juices  from
,the  earth,  and  the  leaves  and  cortical  veffels  to  fepa-
.rate  and  attract  fuch  particles  of  air,  and  elementary
lire,  as  fuit  their  refpective  natures.

278.  Nature  leems  to  be  not  otherwife  diftin>
guiihed  from  the  anima  7nundii  than  as  life  is  from
foul,  and  upon  the  principles  of  the  oldelt  philofophers,,
may  not  improperly  or  incongruously  be  ruled  the  Life
of  the  world.  Some  Platomcs  indeed,  regard  Life  as
the  act  of  nature,  in  like  manner  as  intellection  is  of
the  mind  or  intellect.  As  the  firft  intellect  acta  by
Br.derilanding,  fo  nature  according  to  them  acts  or  ge-
nerates by  living.  But  life  is  the  act  of  the  foul,  and
fcems  to  be  very  nature  it  (df}  which  is  not  the  prin-
ciple, but  the  refult  of  another  and  higher  principle^,
being  a  life  refulting.  from  foul,  as  cogitation  from  in-
id:ect..  £  3.

279.,  I?
(*) 1-66, 1 63, 274, 175,,  to


114  S I R I S.

2 79.  If  nature  be  fuppofed  the  life  of  the  world,  *-
nimated  by  one  f  juI,  compacted  into  one  frame,  and  di-
rected or  governed,  in  all  parts  by  one  mind  ;  This  fyftem
cannot  be  accufed  of  Atheifm  ;  though  perhaps  it  may
of  ftiiftake  or  impropriety.  And  yet,  as  one  pre-
fiding  mind  gives  unity  to  the  infinite  aggregate  of
thing  ,  by  a  mutual  communion  of  actions  and  paf-
il)ps>  and  an  acquitment  of  parts  caufing  all  to  con-
cur in  one  v  ew  to  one  and  the  fame  end,  the  ultimate
and  fupreme  good  of  the  whole,  it  fnould  feem  rea-
fonable  to  \;\y,  with  Ocellus  Lucanus  the  Pythagoire.in,
thai  '..  life  holds  together  the  bodies  of  animal?,  the
fcaui  » ■■■■'  ;reof  is  the  ioul  ;  and  as  a  city  is  held  toge-
ther b>  conco  d,  the  caufe  whereof  is  law  ;  even  fo
the  world  u  held  together  by  harmony,  the  caufe
whereof  is  God.  And  in  this  fenfe,  the  world  or
univerfe  may  be  confidered  either  as  one  animal  (f)  or
one  city.

2S0.  Aristotle  dihpproves  the  opinion  of  thofe
who  hold  a  foul  to  be  diffused  throughout  the  world  ;
and  for  this  resfon  j  becauie  the  elements  are  not
•alive.  Though  perhaps  it  may  not  be  eafy  to  prove,
that  blcod  and  animal  fpirit  are  more  alive  in  man,
than  water  2nd  fire  in  the  world.  That  Philofopher,
in  his  books  of  the  Soul,  remarks  upon  an  opinion  fet
forth  in  the  Orphics,  of  the  Soul's  entering  from  the
imiverfe  into  living  creatures  being  born  by  winds,  that
this  cannot  be  true  of  plants  or  of  certain  animals
which  do  n  t  breath.  But  air  veiTels  arc  by  later  ex-
periments allowed  to  bt  found  in  all  plants  and  ani-
mals And  air  may  in  ibme  fort  not  improperly  be
feid,  to  be  the  carrier  or  vehicle  of  the  foul,  inas-
much as  it  is  the  vehicle  of  fire,  which  is  the  fpiri*
immediately  moved  and  animated  by  the  foul  (g)

281.  TfiE living fire, the  living omniform  femi-
feary  of  the  world,  and other  expreflions  of  the  like
nature  occurirrg  in  the  ancient  and  Platonic  Philofophy,.
2vow  can  they  be  underload  exclufive  of  light or ele-
mental
if) i:z,  £77- (lJ  l6h  *7*


S I R I S.  115

mental  fire,  the  particles  of  which  are  known  to  be
heterogeneous,  and,  for  ought  we  know,  may  forne
of  them  be  organised,  and,  notwithstanding  their
wonderful  minutenefs,  contain  original  feeds  which,
being  formed  and  fowed  in  a  proper  matrix,  do  gradu-
ally unfold  and  manifefl:  themfeives,  ftill  growing  to  a
juft  proportion  of  the  fpecies.

282.  May  not  this  ethereal  feminary  confidently
with  the  notions  of  that  philofophy,.  which  afcribe
much  of  generation  to  celeitial  influence,  be  fuppofed
to  impregnate  plants  and  animals  with  the  firlt  prin-
ciples, the  iUmina,  or  thofe  animalcules  which  Plato,
in  his  Timaeus,  faith  are  invifible  for  their  fmallnefs,
but,  being  fown  in  a  proper  matrix,  are  therein  gradu-
ally diflended  and  explicated  by  nourishment,  and  at
length  the  animals  brought  forth  to  light.  Which  no-
tion hath  been  revived  and  received  of  kte  years  by
many,  who  perhaps  are  not  awaie  of  it's  antiquity,  cr
that  it  was  to  be  found  in  Plato.  Timaeus  Lccrenfius
in  his  book  of  the  foul  of  the  World,  fuppofeth  even
fouls  to  be  derived  from  the  caelefiial  luminaries,,  ex-
cepting only  the  rational  or  intellectual  part..  But
what  influence  or  influx  is  there  from  the  casleftial  bo-
dies, which  hath  not  light  for  it's  vehicle  (b)_?

283.  What  other  nature  there  lhould  be  interme-
diate between  the  foul  of  the  World  (a)  and  this  grofe
corporeal  fyftem,  which  might  be  the  vehicle  of  life,
or,  to  ule  the  language  of  philofopher>,  might  receive
or  be  impreiTed  with  the  forms  of  thing.',  js  difficult
to  comprehend,  It  is  a  vulgar  remark,  that  the
works  of  art  do  not  bear  a  nice  microfcopieal  infpeo
tion,  but  the  more  helps  are  ufed,  and  the  more  nice-
ly you  pry  into  natural'  productions,  the  more  do  yoa
difcover  of  the  fine  mechanifm  of  nature,  which  is
endlefs  or  inexhauitible  j  new  and  other  parts,  more
fubtile  and  delicate  than  the  precedent^  ftill  continue
ing  to  offer  themfeives  to  view.  And  thefe  microf-
copieal oblervations  have  confirmed  the  ancient  theory

concerning
(h)  43» ("X  MTU


ii<5  S I R I S.

concerning  generation,  delivered  in  the  Timaeus  of
Plato.  But  that  theory  or  hypothecs,  how  agreeable
foever  to  modern  difcoveries,  is  not  alone  fufficient  to
explain  the  phenomena,  without  the  immediate  aclion
of  a  mind.  And  Ficinus,  notwithftanding  what
himfelf  and  other  Platonics  fay  of  a  plaitic  nature,  is
obliged  to  own,  that  with  the  mundane  force  or  fcul
it  is  to  be  underflcod,  there  is  joined  an  intelligence,
upon  which  the  feminal  nature  conftantly  depends,
and  by  which  it  is  governed.

284.  Alcinous  in  his  tracl  of  the  doelrine  of
Plato  faith  that  God  hath  given  the  world  both  mind
and  foul :  others  include  both  in  the  word  foul,  and
iuppofe  the  foul  of  the  world  lo  be  God.  Philo  ap-
pears to  be  of  this  opinion  in  feveral  parts  of  his  wri-
tings. And  Virgil,  who  was  no  ftranger  to  the  Py-
thagorsean  and  Platonic  tenets  writes  to  the  fame  pur*
pofe.

Deum  tiamque  ire  per  omnes

Terras  que  tr&tlufque  maris  ccelumque  p-sfundum.

Hinc  pecucies  armcntay  *viros,  genus  omne  fer arum.

Quemque  fihi  tenuis  nafeentem  arcejfere  njitas.
Thus  much  the  fchools  of  Plato  and  Pythagoras  feen*
agreed  in,  to  wit,  that  the  foul  of  the  world  (Z),
whether  having  a  diftincl  mind  of  it's-xwn,  or  directed
by  a  fuperior  mind  [c)t  doth  embrace  all  it's  parts,
conned  them  by  an  invifible  andindiilbluble  chain,
arid  prefer ve  them  ever  well  adjufted  and  in  good
order.

2S5.  Naturalists,  whofe  proper  province  it  is  to
Confider  phenomena,  experiments,  mechanical  organs
and  motions  principally  regard  the  viable  frame  of
things  or  corporeal  world,  fuppofing  foul  to  be  con-
tained in  body.  And  thi3  hypothecs  may  be  tolerated
in  phyfics,  as  it  is  not  neceiTary  in  the  art  of  dyalling
or  navigation  to  mention  the  true  fyftem  or  earth's  mo-
tion. But  thofe  who,  not  content  with  fenfible  ap-
pearances, would penetrate into the  real,  and  true

cauftj-


S I R I S.  117

caufes  (the  object  of  theology  metaphyfics,  or  the
pbilo/opbia prima)  will  rectify  this  errour,  and  fpeak
of  the  world  as  contained  by  the  foul,  and  not  the
foul  by  the  world.

286.  Aristotle  hath  obferved  there  were  indeed
fome  who  thought  fo  grofly,  as  to  fuppofe  the  univerfe
to  be  one  only  corporeal  and  extended  nature  :  but  in
the  fiift  book  of  his  metaphyfics  he  jully  remarks
they  were  guilty  of  a  great  miftake  ;  forafmuch  as
they  took  into  their  account  the  elements  of  corpo-
real beings  alone  ;  whereas  there  are  incorporeal  be-
ings alfo  in  the  univerfe  ;  and  while  they  attempt  to
aflign  the  caufes  of  generation  and  corruption,  and  ac-
count for  the  nature  of  all  things,  they  did  at  the  fame
time  deitrcy  the  very  caufe  of  motion.

287.  It  is  a  doctrine  among  other  fpeculations  con-
tained in  the  Hermaic  writings,  that  all  things  are  one.
And  it  is  not  improbable  that  Orpheus,  Parmenides,
and  others  among  the  Greeks,  might  have  derived
their  notion  of  7?  h  the  one  from  ^Egypt-
Though  that  fubtil  metaphyfician  Parmenides,  in  his
doctrine  of  eV  leaf  ftems  to  have  added  fomething  of
his  own.  If  we  fuppofe,  that  one  and  the  fame  mind
is  the  univerfal  principle  of  order  and,  harmony
throughout  the  world,  containing  and  connecting  all  ifs
parts,  and  giving  unity  to  the  fyftem,  there  feems  to
be  nothing  atheiftical  or  impious  in  this  fuppofition.

288.  Number  is  no  object  of  fenfe  :  it  is  an
act  of  the  mind.  The  fame  thing  in  a  different
conception  is  one  or  many.  Comprehending  God  and
the  creatures  in  one  general  notion,  we  may  fay  that
all  things  together  make  one  univerfe,  or  to  nreiv-
Put  if  we  fhould  fay,  that  all  things  make  one  God  ;
this  would,  indeed,  be  an  erroneous  notion  of  God,
but  would  not  amount  to  Atheifm,  fo  long  as  mind  or
intellect  was  admitted  to  be  the  70  f)yiy.ov()tov,  the
governing  part.  It  is  neverthelefs  more  refpectful,
and  confequently  the  truer  notion  of  God,  to  fuppofe
him  neither  made  up  of  parts,  nor  to  be  himfelf  a  part
©f  any  whole  whatfoever.

289.  All.


nS  S I R I S.

2.89.  All  thofe,  who  conceived  the  umverfe  to  be
an  anima1,  mult  in  confequence  of  that  notion,  fup-
pofe  all  things  to  be  one.  But  to  conceive  God  to  be
the  fentient  Soul,  of  an  animal,  is  altogether  unworthy
and  abfurd.  There  is  no  fenfe,  nor  fenfory,  nor  any
thing  like  a  fenfe  or  fenfory  in  God.  Senie  implies  an
impreifion  from  fome  other  being,  and  denotes  a  de-
pendence in  the  Soul  which  hath  it.  Senfe  is  a  paf-
iion  :  and  paflions  imply  imperfe&ion.  God  know-
eth  all  things,  as  pure  mind  or  intellect,  but  nothing
by  fenfe,  nor  in  nor  through  a  fenfory.  Therefore  to
fuppofe  a  fenfory  of  any  kind,  whether  fpace  or  any
other  in  God  would  be  very  wrcng,  and  lead  us  into
falfe  conceptions  of  his  nature.  The  prefuming  there
was  fiich  a  thing  as  real  abfolute  uncreated  fpace,
fcems  to  have  occasioned  that  modtrn  miftake.  But
this  preemption  war,  without  grounds.

290.  Body  is  oppofite  to  fpirit  cr  mind.  We  have
a  notion  of  fpi-rit  from  t1  ought  and  a&ion.  We
have  a  no:ion  of  body  from  refiilance.  So  far  forth  as
there  is  real  power,  there  is  fpirit.  So  far  forth  ae
there  i;  refill. nee,  there  is  inability  or  want  of  power.
That  is,  there  is  a  negation  ot  fpirit.  We  are  em-
bodied, that  is,  we  are  clogged  by  weight,  and  hin-
dered by  refinance.  But  in  refpecl  of  a  petfeel  fpirit,
there  is  nothing  hard  or  impenetrable  :  there  is  no  re-
finance to  the  deity  :  Nor.  hath  he  any  Body  :  Nor
is  the  fupreme  being  united  to  the  work)*  as  the  foul
of  an  animal  is  to  it's  body,  which  neceiTarily  im-
plieth  defeel,  both  as  an  inftrument  and  as  a  conitant
weight  and  impediment.

29 1.  Thus  much  it confifts  with  piety  to  fay,  that
a  divine  agent  doth  by  his  virtue  permeate  and  govern
the  elementary  fire  or  light  (d)  which  ferves  as  ani-
mal fpirit  to  enliven  and  actuate  trie  whole  mafs,  and
all  the  members  of  this  vifible  world.  Nor  is  this
do&rine  lefs  philofophical  than  picus.  We  fee  all  na-
ture aiive  or  in  motion.  We  fee  water  turned  into  air,
and  air  rarefied  and  made  elaitic  (e)  by  the  attrac

tian
W-  l57> »/2. (0  H9>  ML*>  20°-


S I R I 5.  ii£

don  of  another  medium,  more  pure  indeed,  more
fubtil  and  more  volatile  than  air.  But  fti!J,  as  this  is  a
moveable  extended  and,  confequemiy.  a  corporeal
being,  (/)  it  cannot  be  it  felf  the  principal  of  motion,
but  leads  us  naturally  and  neccffarily  to  an  incorporeal
fpirit  or  agent.  We  are  confcious  that  a  fpirit  can
begin,  alter,  or  determine  motion,  but  nothing  of  this
appears  in  body.  Nay,  the  contrary  is  evident,  both
to  experiment  and  reflection.

292.  Natural  phenomena  are  only  natural  ap-
pearances. They  are,  therefore,  fuch  as  we  fee  and
perceive  them.  Their  real  and  objective  natures  are,
therefore,  the  fame;  palTive  without  any  thing  active,
fluent  and  changing  without  any  thing  permanent  in
them.  However,  as  thefe  make  the  firil  impreffions,
and  the  mind  takes  her  firil  flight  and  fpring,  as  it
were,  by  refling  her  foot  on  thefe  objects,  they  are  not
only  fitft  confidercd  by  all  men,  but  mod  confidered  by
moll  men.  They  and  the  phantomes  that  refult  from
thofe  appearances,  the  children  of  imagination  grafted
upon  fcnfe,  fuch  for  example  as  pure  fpace  ( i  )  are
thought  by  many  the  very  fir  ft  in  exigence  and  {labili-
ty, and  to  embrace  and  comprehend all  other  beings.

293.  Now  although  fuch  phantomes  as  corporeal
forces,  abfolute  motions,  and  real  fpaces,  do  pafs  in
phyfics  for  caufes  and  principles  (g  ),  yet  are  they  in
truth  but  hypothefes,  nor  can  they  be  the  objects  of
real  fcience.  They  pafs  neverthelefs  in  phyfics  con-
verfant  about  things  of  fenfe,  and  confined  to  experi-
ments and  mechanics.  But  when  we  enter  the  province
cf  the  pbllofophia  prima, .  we  difcover  another  order  of
being?,  mind  and  it's  acts,  permanent  being,  not  de-
pendent on  corporeal  things,  nor  refuldng,  nor  connect-
ed,  nor  contained;  but  containing,  connecting,  enlive-
ning the  whole  frame ;  and  imparting  thofe  morions,
forms,  qualities,  and  that  order  and  fymetry  to  :-ll  thofe
tranfient  phenomena,  which  we  term  the  courfe  of
nature.

294.  It
if)  207. (  i )  270. (g)  220,  249,  250.


no  S I R I S.

294.  It  is  with  our  faculties  as  with  our  affections :
what  firft  feizes  holds  fall  (a).  It  is  a  vulgar  theme,
that  man  is  a  cdmpound  of  contrarieties,  which  breed
a  reftlefs  ftruggle  in  his  nature,  between  flefh  and  fpirit,
the  beafl  and  the  angel,  earth  and  heaven,  ever  weigh-
ed down  and  ever  bearing  up.  During  which  conflict
the  character  fluctuates:  when  either  iide  prevails,  it
is  then  fixed  for  vice  or  virtue.  And  Life  from  differ-
ent principles  takes  a  different  iifue.  It  is  the  fame  in
regard  to  our  faculties.  Senfe  at  firft  befets  and  over-
bears the  mind.  The  fenfible  appearances  are  all  in  all :
our  reafonings  are  employed  about  them:  our  defires
terminate  in  them :  we  look  no  farther  for  realities  or
caufesj  till  intellect  begins  to  dawn,  and  caft  a  ray  on
this  fhadowy  fcene.  We  then  perceive  the  true  prin-
ciple of  unity,  identity,  and  exiftence.  Thofe  things
that  before  feemed  to  conftitute  the  whole  of  being,
upon  taking  an  intellectual  view  of  thing.%  prove  to  bs
but  fleeting  phantomes.

295.  From  the  outward  form  of  grofs  ma/Fes  which
occ'upy  the  vulgar,  a  curious  enquirer  proceeds  to  ex-
amine the  inward  ftructure  and  minute  parts,  and  from
obferving  the  motions  in  nature,  to  difcover  the  laws
of  thofe  motions.  By  the  way,  he  frames  his  hypothe-
cs and  fuits  his  language  to  this  natural  philofophy.
And  thefe  fit  the  occafion  and  anfvver  the  end  of  a  mak-
er of  experiments  or  mechanic,  who  means  only  to  ap-
ply the  powers  of  nature,  and  reduce  the  phenomena
to  rules.  But,  if  proceeding  fliil  in  his  analyfis  and
inquiry,  he  afcends  from  the  fenfible  into  the  intellectu-
al world,  and  beholds  things  in  a  new  light  and  a  new
order.  He  will  then  change  his  fyftem  and  perceive,
that  what  he  took  for  fubttunces  and  caufes  are  but  fleet-
ing fhadows ;  that  the  mind  contains  all,  and  ads  all,
and  is  to  all  created  beings  the  fource  of  unity  and
identity,  harmony  and  order,  exiftence  and  usability.

296.  It  is  neither  acid,  nor  fair,  nor  fulphur,  nor
air,  nor  aether,  nor  vifible  corporeal  fire  [b),  much  lefs
the  phantome,  fate,  or  neceifity,  that  is  the  real  agent,

but
(«)*64. (^J  155.


S I R I S.  I2i

but  by  a  certain  analyfis,  a  regular  connexion  and  cli-
max, we  alctnd  urough  all  thofe  mediums  to  a  glympfe
of  the  firiV  mover,  invifible,  incorporeal,  unextended,
intellectual  fource  of  life  and  being.  There  is,  it  mull
be  owned,  a  mixture  of  obfcurity  and  prejudice  in  hu-
i  -.ne  fpeech  and  reafonings.  This  is  unavoidable,
i  ce  the  veils  of  prejudice  and  errour  are  flowly  and
i  gly  taken  off  one  by  one.  But  if  there  are  many
links  in  the  chain  which  conne&s  the  two  extremes  of
what  is  grcfly  fenfible  and  purely  intelligible,  and  it
feem  a  tedious  work,  by  the  flow  helps  of  memory,  i-
magination,  and  reafon,  oppreffed  and  overwhelmed,
as  we  are,  by  the  fenfes,  through  erroneous  principles
and  long  ambages  of  words  and  notions,  to  ftruggle  up-
wards into  the  light  of  Truth,  yet  as  this  gradually
dawns,  fui  ther  difcoveries  Hill  correct  the  ilyle  and  clear
up  the  notions.

297.  The  mind,  hor  acts,  and  faculties,  furnifii  a.
new  and  diftinct  ciafs  oPobjects  (c ),  from  the  contem-
plation whereof  arife  certain  other  notions,  principles,
and  verities,  fo  remote  from,  and  even  fo  repugnant  to,
the  firft  prejudices  which  furprife  thefenfe  of  mankind,
that  they  may  well  be  excluded  from  vulgar  fpeech  and
books,  as  abiiract  from  fenfible  matters,  and  more  fit
for  the  Speculation  of  Truch,  the  labour  and  aim  of
a  few,  than  for  the  practice  of  the  wcvrld,  or  the  fub-
jects  of  experimental  or  mechanical  inquiry.  Never-
thelefs  though,  perhaps,  it  may  not  be  relilhed  by  fome
modern  readers,  yet  the  treating  in  phyfical  books  con-
cerning metaphyiical  and  divine  matters  can  be  juitihed
by  great  authorities  among  the  ancients:  not  to  men-
tion, that  he,  who  profefTetily  dehvers  the  elements  of
a  fcience,  is  more  obliged  to  method  and  fyitem,  and
tyea  down  to  more  rigorous  laws,  than  a  mere  eiTiy
writer.  It  may,  therefore,  be  pardoned  if  this  rude
eil.y  dQth,  by  in  fenfible  tranfuions,  draw  the  reader  in-
to remote  inquiries  and  Ipeculations,  that  were  not
though;  of,  either  by  him  cr  by  the  author,  at  firft
fctting  out.

L  -29s*  There

(c)  163,  266.


im  S I R I S.

298.  There  are  traces  of  profound  thought  as  well
as  primeval  tradition  in  the  Platonic,  Pythagorean,  JE-
gyptian,  and  Chaklaic  phylofophy  (p).  Men  in  thofe
early  days  were  not  overlaid  with  languages  and  litera-
ture. Their  minds  feem  to  have  been  more  exercifed,
and  lefs  burthened,  than  in  later  ages;  and,  as  fo  much
nearer  the  beginning  of  the  world,  to  have  had  the  ad-
vantage of  patriarchal  lights  handed  down  through  a
few  hands.  It  cannot  indeed  be  affirmed  (how  proba-
ble foevcr  it  may  feem)  that  Mofes  was  that  fame  Mo-
chas, with  whole  lucceilors,  prie£s  and  prophets,  Py-
thagoras is  faid  to  have  converted  at  Sidon.  Yet  the
ftudy  cf  philofophy  appears  to  be  of  very  great  anti-
quity and  remote  original;  inafmuch  as  Timasus
Locrenfis;  that  ancient  Pythagorean,  author  of  the
beok  concerning  the  foul  of  the  world,  fpeaks  of  a  molt
ancient  philofophy,  even  in  his  time,  d  7Tfi<r(Z'v{et  <?i~
;'~?Q$ici%  ftirring  up  and  recovering  the  foul  from  a
ftate  of  ignorance  to  the  contemplation  of  divine  things.
.And  though  the  books  attributed  to  Mercurius  Trifme-
giitus  were  none  of  them  wrote  by  him,  and  are  al-
lowed to  contain  fome  manifeft  forgeries:  yet  it  is  alio
allowed,  that  they  contain  tenets  of  the  ancient  --Egyp-
tian phylofophy,  though  dreffed  perhaps  in  a  more  mo-
dern garb.  To  account  far  which,  Jamblichus  ob-
ferves,  that  the  books  under  his  name  contain  indeed
Mercurial  opinions,  though  often  expreiTed  in  the  ftyle
of  the  Greek  Philofophers;  as  having  been  tranilated
from  the  ^Egyptian  tongue  into  Greek.

299.  The  difference  of  Ifis  from  Ofnis  (  d)  refem-
bles  th  it  of  the  moon  from  the  fun,  of  the  female  from
the  male,  of  natura  vaturata  (as  the  fchoolmen  fpeak)
from  natura  naturans.  But  Ihs,  though  moilly  taken
for  nature,  yet  (as  the  Pagan  divinities  were  very  fluc-
tuating thing*)  it  fomc times  lignified  to  ttclv.  And  we
find  in  Monntfaucon  an  Iiis  of  the  ordinary  form  vvuh
this  Infciiption  9g«  Travis.  And  in  the  menfa  Ifiaca,
■which  itims  to  exhibit  a  general  i'yllcm  of  the  religion
and  fuptrilition  of  the  Jv  g)  ptians,  Iiis  en  her  throne

pofleiTetJi
{p)  1-9,  266. .l<f)z6S.


S I R 1 S.  12.3

poffeffeth  the  center  of  the  table.  Which  may  feeru  to
fignify,  that  the  univerfe  or  to  tt&v  was  the  cent  of
the  ancient  fecret  religion  of  the  r  gyptians ;  their  Jfis
or  to  nrclv  comprehending  both  Ofiris  the  author  of  na-
ture and  his  work.

300.  Plato  and  Ariitotle  confolered  God  as  ab-
ftracled  or  diftincl  from  the  natural  vvond.  But  the  J£L-
gyptians  coniidered  God  an  1  nature  as  making  one  v  bold,
or  all  things  together  "as  making  one  univerfe.  In  do-
ing which  they  did  not  exclude  the  intelligent  mind,  but
confidered  itas  containing  all  tilings.  Therefore,  what-
ever was  wrong  in  their  way  of  thinking,  it  dou  w  t,
neverthelefs,  imply  or  had  to  Aueiirn.

301.  The  numane  mind  it.  fo  much  cl-ggeo  and
born  downwaro,  by  the  Itrcng  an  1  eaily  imp]  flions  of
fenfe  (  e  ),  that  it  is  ivonderfui, ho«-v  the ncient

have  made  even  fuch  a  prog' <fs,  and  ft  en  ic a*

telleflual  mutters, without  fan  e  gli mer  r. .

tradition. Whoever  cohfidets  a  parcel  o r

left  to  themfelves,  now  they  are  &rrk  and

in  fenfe  and  prejudice,  arifci  now  u  qukliiiK

tural  force  to  emerge  from  this  ftatej  wii:  be  apl

that  tne  firft  fpark  of  phrolophy  was  derive',  •-.

ven;  and  that  ii  was  (is  a  Heathen  wriier  exprefleeh  .t)

B ZQ7T <* ■?<&£' 07 0<T  V'.KOJQpicL.

302.  The  lapfed  (late  of  Human  kind  is  a  thug  to
which  the  ancient  phiiofophers  were  not  ftraagew.  Tue
Kv<Ti$t  the  <pu yn,  the  'Tra.Aiyytvzcriz,  flic «v  that,  the /£-
gyptians  and  Pythagoreans,,  the  Platoniils  and  Stoics,
had  all  fome  notion  of  this  doctrine,  the  outlines  of  which
feem  to  have  been  fketched  out  m  thofe  tenets.  Theo-
logy and  philofophy  gently  unbind  the  ligaments,  that
chain  the  foul  down  to  the  earth,  and  iliit  her  right  to-
wards the  fovereign  Good.  There  is  an  inibnd  or  ten-
dency of  the  mind  upwards,  which  fheweth  a  natural
endeavour  to  recover  and  raifeour  felves,  from  our
prefent  fenfual  and  low  condition,  into  a  ilate  of  light,
•rder,  and  purity.

303.  The  perceptions  of  fenfe  are  grofs: but  even

L  2  in

10  264.


124  S I R I S.

in  the  fenfes  there  is  a  difference.  Though  harmony
and  proportion  are  not  objects  of  fenfe,  yet  the  eye  and
the  ear  are  organs,  which  offer  to  the  mind  fuch  mate-
rials, by  means  whereof  fhe  may  apprehend  both  the
one  and  the  other.  By  experiments  of  fenfe  we
become  acquainted  with  the  lower  faculties  of  the  foul;
and  from  them,  whether  by  a  gradual  ( /£)  evolution,
or  afcent,  we  arrive  at  the  higheft.  Senfe  fupplies  ima-
ges to  memory.  Thefe  become  fubjccls  for  fancy  to
work  upon.  Reafon  confidersand  judges  of  the  ima-
ginations. And  thefe  acts  of  reafon  become  new  ob-
jects to  the  understanding.  In  this  fcale,  each  lower
icculty  is  a  Hep  that  leads  to  one  above  it.  And  the
Kppermoii  naturally  leads  to  the  Deity,  which  is  rather
tiie  object  of  intellectual  knowledge  than  even  of  the
difcuriive  faculty,  not  to  mention  the  fenfitive.  There
runs  a  chain  throughout  the  whole  fyftem  of  beings.
In  this  chain  one  link  drags  another.  The  meantft
things  are  connected  with  the  higheft.  The  calamity
therefore  is  neither  itrange  nor  much  to  be  complained
of,  if  a  low  feniual  reader  (hall,  from  mere  love  of
the  animal  life,  find  himfelf  drawn  on,  furprifed,  and
betray'd  into  fome  curiofity  concerning  the  intellectual.
304.  The  re  is  according  to  Plato  properly  no  know-
ledge, but  only  opinion  concerning  things  fenfible  and
perifhing  (/*)»  not  becaufe  they  are  naturally  abftrufe
and  involved  in  darkneft.:  but  becaufe  their  nature  and
exiftence  is  uncertain,  ever  fleeting  and  changing.  Or
rather,  becaufe  they  do  not  in  drift  truth  exilt  at  all,
being  always  genera  ing  or  in  fieri,  that  is,  in  a  per-
petual flux,  without  any  thing  (table  or  permanent  in
them  to  conftitute  an  object  of  real  fcience.  The  Py-
thagoreans and  Platonics  diltinguifh  between  to  ytvo-
{At.vw  and  to  $P  that  which  is  ever  generated  and  th*:.t
which  exifts.  Senfible  things  and  corporeal  forms  are
perpetually  producing  and  perifhing,  appearing  and
difappearing,  never  refting  in  one  ftate,  but  always  in
motion  and  change;  and  therefore  in  effect,  not  one
being  but  a  fuccefiion  of  beings: while  to  ov  is  under-

ftood
{k)  275. (/)  263,  264.


S I R I S.  us

flood  to  be  fomewhat  of  an  abftracl  or  fpiritual  nature,
and  the  proper  object  of  intellectual  knowledge.  There-
fore as  there  can  be  no  knowledge  of  things  flowing
and  initable,  the  opinion  of  Protagoras  and  Theaetetus,
that  fenfe  was  fcience,  is  abfurd.  And  indeed  nothing
is  more  evident,  than  that  the  apparent  fizes  and  fhape^
for  inftance,  of  things  are  in  a  conltant  flux,  ever  dif-
fering as  they  are  view'd  at  different  diflances,  or  with
glafTes  more  or  lei's  accurate.  As  for  thofe  abfolute
magnitudes  and  figures,  which  certain  Gartefians  and
other  moderns  fuppofe  to  be  in  things;  that  mull  feem
a  vain  juppofition,  to  whoever  confiders,  itisfupport-
ed  by  no  argument  of  Reafon,  and  no  experiment  of
fenfe.

;  305.  As  Undemanding  perceiveth  not,  that  1%.
doth  not  hear  or  fee  or  kel,  fo  fenfe  knoweth  not*
'And  although  the  mind  may  ufe  both  fenfe  and  phan-
cy,  as  means  whereby  to  arrive  at  knowledge,  yet
fenfe  or  foul,  fo  far  forth  asfenfitive,  knoweth  nothing,
For,  as  it  is  rightly  obferved  inthe'J'hestetus  of  Plata,
fcience  coniirts  not  in  the  pa/live  perceptions,  but  in
the  reafoning  upon  them,  ico  7rx>i  ix&ipw  auMAyw
y.eo.

306.  In  the  ancient  philofophy  of  Plato  and  Py-
thagoras, we  find  dillinguiftied  three  forts  of  objects  :
In  the  firll  place  a  form  or  fpecies  that  is  neither  g^>
nerated  nor  deflroy'd,  unchangeable,  invifible,  and  al-
together imperceptible  to  fenfe,  being  only  understood
by  the  intellect.  A  fecond  fore  there  is  ever  fluent  and
changing  (g),  generating  and  perifhing,  appearing
and  vanilhing.  This  is  comprehended  by  fenfe  and  o<-
pirsion.  The  third  kind  is  matter  which,  as  Plato
teacheth,  being  neither  an  object  of  understanding  nor
of  fenfe,  is  hardly  to  be  made  out  by  a  certain  fp'iri-
ous  way  of  reafoning  MyKTfj.Z  rm  vo'Qa  y.oyif  ifi&y*
See  his  Timzsas.  The  fame  doctrine  is  contained  m
the  Pychagoric  treatife  de  anima  muudi,  which  diitin-
gui thing  ideas,  fenfible  things,  and  matter,  maket.h  the
kit  10  be  apprehended  by  intellect,  the  fecond  by  feafo*
L  3  »n&

is)  *r->  293-


ti<5  S I R I S.

and  the  laft,  to  wit,  matter,  \syurucS  v$u.  Where-
of Themiftius  the  Peripa.etic  affigns  the  reafon.  For,
faith  he,  that  act  is  tob'  eiteemed  ipurious,  whofe  ob-
ject hath  nothing  politive,  being  only  a  mere  privation,
as  filence  or  darknefs.  An  i  fuch  he  accounteth  mat-
ter.

307.  Aristotle  maketh  a  threefold  diftinclion  of
obje&s  according  to  the  three  fp  culntive  fciences.
Phyfics  he  fuppoferh  to  be  cmverfant  about  fuch  things
as  have  a  principle  of  motion  in  themfelves,  mathe-
matics about  things  permanent  but  not  abitracted,  and
theology  about  being  abftracted  and  immoveable,
which  diftinction  may  be  feen  in  the  ninth  book  of  his
metaph>fics.  Where  by  abftracled,  ^a^/roy,  he  un-
.derftands  feparable  from  corporeal  beings  and  fenfible
qualities.

308.  That  philofopher  held  that  the  mind  of
man  was  a  tabula  rafa,  and  that  there  were  no  innate
ideas.  Plato,  on  the  contrary,  held  original  ideas  in
the  mind,  that  is,  notions  which  never  were  or  can  be
in  the  fenfe,  fuch  as  being,  beauty,  goodnefs,  likenefs,
parity.  Some  perhaps  may  think  the  truth  to  be  this:
that  there  are  properly  no  ideas  or  pamVe  objects  in  the
mind,  but  what  were  derived  from  fenfe  :  but  that
there  are  alfo  befides  thefe  her  own  acts  or  operations :
£uch  are  notions.

309.  It  is  a  maxim  of  the  Platonic  philofophy,
that  the  foul  of  man  was  originally  furnifned  with  na-
tive inbred  notions,  and  Hands  in  need  of  fenfible  oc-
cafions,  not  abfolutely  for  producing  them,  but  only
for  awakening,  roufing  or  exciting,  into  act  what  was
already  preexiilent,  dormant,  and  latent  in  the  foul;
as  things  are  faid  to  be  laid  up  in  the  memory,  though
not  actually  perceived,  until  they  happen  to  be  called
forth  and  brought  into  view  by  other  objects.  This
notion  feemeth  fomewbat  different  from  that  of  innate
ideas,  as  underftood  by  thofe  moderns  who  have  at-
tempted to  explode  them.  To  underfland  and  to  be,
are  according  to  Parmenides  the  fame  thing. And

Plato


S I R I S.  127

Plato  in  his  feventh  letter  makes  no  difference  between
y»V  and  \irm^,  mind  and  knowledge.  Whence  it
follows  that  mind,  knowledge,  and  notions,  either  in
habit  or  in  act,  always  go  together.

310.  And  albeit  Ariftotle  confidered  the  foul  in  it's
original  Hate  as  a  blank  paper,  yet  he  held  it  to  be
the  proper  place  of  forms.  ?w  *\>v%jiv  ^vtLt  t'o7tqv
hfcov  (a).  Which  doctrine  firft  maintained  by  others
he  admits,  under  this  reftriction,  that  it  is  not  to  be
underftood  of  the  whole  foul  bu;  only  of  the  foh7/*»;
as  is  to  be  feen  in  his  third  book  de  anima.  Whence,
according  to  Themiftius  in  his  commentary  on  that
treadle,  it  may  be  inferred  that  all  beings  are  in  the
foul.  For,  faith  he,  the  forms  are  the  beings.  By  the
form  every  thing  is  what  it  is.  And  he  adds,  it  is  the
foul  that  imparteth  forms  to  matter  j  Tm  vKnv
fjiofO&Hra,  iroi'iiKctii  /aofpa/<.  Therefore  they  are  hrit
in  the  fouJ.  He  farther  adds,  that  the  mind  is  all
things,  taking  the  forms  of  all  things  it  becomes  all
things  by  intellect  and  fenfe.  Alexander  Aphrodifseus
faith  as  much,  affirming  the  mind  to  be  all  things
KtiTcii  rs  70  vouv  net)  7*  cii<&divz£rcu.  And  this  in  fact
is  Ariftotle's  own  doctrine  in  his  third  book  de  anima,
where  he  alfo  afierts,  with  Plato,  that  actual  knowledge
and  the  thing  known  are  all  one.  ri  duiz  <^e  ish  n
k&\*  ivif yndcv  iTi^dun  ra  Tfeiy.ctyTi.  Whence  it
follows  that  the  things  are  where  the  knowledge  is,
that  is  to  fay,  in  the  mind.  Or,  as  it  is  otherwife  ex-
prefled,  that  the  foul  is  all  things.  More  might  be
Jaid  to  explain  Ariftotle's  notion,  but  it  would  lead
too  far.

311.  As  to  an  abfolute  actual  exiftence  (b)  of  fen-
fible  or  corporeal  things,  it  doth  not  feem  to  have  been
admitted  either  by  Plato  or  Ariitotle.  In  the  Thtse-
tetus  we  are  told,  that  if  any  one  faith  a  thing  is  or
is  made,  he  muft  withal  fay,  for  what,  or  of  what,
or  in  refpect  of  what,  it  is  or  is  made  ;  for,  that  any
thing mould  exiil  in it  felf  or  abfolutely  is  abfurd.

Agreeably

(a) 269. {b) 264, 292, 294.


ia8  S I R I S.

Agreeably  to  which  doctrine  it  is  alfo  farther  affirmed
by  Plato,  that  it  is  impoftible  a  thing  (hould  be  fweet
and  fweet  to  nobody.  It  mull  neverthelefs  be  owned
with  regard  to  Ariftotle,  that,  even  in  his  metaphyfics
there  are  fome  expreflions  which  feem  to  favour  the
abfolute  exiftence  of  corporeal  things.  For  inftance,
in  the  eleventh  book  (peaking  of  corporeal  fenfible
things,  what  wonder,  faith  he,  if  they  never  appear
to  us  the  fame,  no  more  than  to  fee  lick  men.  fince
we  are  always  changing  and  never  remain  the  fame  our
felves  ?  and  again,  he  faith,  fenfible  things,  although
they  receive  no  change  in  them  felves,  do  nevertheless
in  fick  perfons  produce  different  fenfations  and  not  the
fame.  Thefe  pafTages  would  feem  to  imply  a  diftincl
and  abfolute  exiftence  of  the  objects  of  fenfe.

312.  But  it  mult  be  obferved,  that  Ariftotle  dif-
tinguifneth  a  twofold  exiftence  potential  and  actual.  It
will  not,  therefore,,  follow  that,  according  to  Ariflotle,
becaufe  a  thing  is,  it  mult  actually  exift.  This  is  evi-
dent from  the  eighth  book  of  his  metaphyfics,  where
he  animadverts  on  the  Megaric  philofophers,  as  not
admitting  a  poftible  exiftence  diriinct  from  the  adual  :
from  whence,  faith  he,  it  muft  follow,  that  there  is  no^
thing  cold  or  hot  or  fweet  or  any  fenfible  thing  at  all,
where  there  is  no  perception.  He  adds,  that  in  con-
sequence of  that  Alegaric  doctrine,  we  can  have  no
ienfe  but  while  we  actually  exert  it  :  we  are  blind
when  we  do  not  fee,  and  therefore  both  blind  and  deaf
feve:al  times  in  a  day.

313.  The  lvTiKiyjria.1  tqcotcli  of  the  Peripatetics*
that  is,  the  fciences  arts  and  habits,  were  by  them  dif-
tinguifhed  from  the  acts  or  v/TiKi-yeiisL  J^ut^*,,  and
fuppofed  to  exift  in  the  mind,  though  not  exerted  Of
put  into  act-  This  feems  to  iiluftrate  the  manner  in
which  Socrates,  Plato,  and  their  followers  conceive
innate  (c)  notions  to  be  in  the  foul  of  man.  It  was
the  Platonic  doctrine,  that  humane  fouls  or  mind,  de-
fended from  above,  and  were  fowed  in  generation,  ui.i
foey  were  {tunned,  ftupified,  and  intoxicated  by  this

defeng
0)  3°9.


S I R I S.  129

defcent  and  immerfion  into  animal  nature.  And  that
the  foul,  in  this  Mff*f<<?  or  flumber,  forgets  her  ori-
ginal notions,  which  are  fmothered  and  oppreflfed  by
many  falfe  tenets  and  prejudices  of  fenfe.  Jnfomuch
that  Proclus  compares  the  foul,  in  her  defcent  inverted
with  growing  prejudices,  to  Glaucus  diving  to  the  bot-
tom of  the  fea,  and  there  contracting  divers  coats  of
Tea  weed,  coral,  and  meils,  which  (tick  clofe  to  him
and  conceal  his  true  fhape.

314.  Hence,  according  to  this  philofophy,  the
mind  of  man  is  fo  reitlefs  to  make  off  that  flumber,
to  difengage  and  emancipate  her  felf  from  thofe  pre-
judicts  and  falfe  opinions,  that  fo  Xlraitly  befet  and
cling  to  her,  to  rub  cfF  thofe  covers,  that  difguife  her
original  form,  and  to  regain  her  primeval  ftate  and
firft  notions :  Hence,  that  perpetual  ftruggle  to  recover
the  loft:  region  of  light,  that  ardent  thirft  and  endea-
vour after  truth  and  intellectual  ideas,  which  fhe  would
neither  feek  to  attain,  nor  rejoice  in,  nor  know  when
attained,  except  fne  had  fome  prenotion  or  anticipation
of  thefti,  and  they  had  lain  innate  and  dormant  like
habits  and  fciences  in  the  mind,  or  things  laid  up,
which  are  called  out  and  roufed  by  recollection  or  re-
minifcence. So  that  learning  feemeth  in  effect  remi-
nifcence.

315.  The  Peripatetics  themfelves  diftinguifh  be-
tween reminifcence  and  mere  memory.  Themiftius
©bferves  that  commonly  the  bell  memories  go  with  the
woiil  parts  ;  but  that  reminifcence  is  moft  perfect  in
the  moft  ingenious  minds.  And  notwithftanding  the
tabula  raf a  (d)  ofAriftotle,  yet  fome  of  his  follow-
ers have  unertaken  to  make  him  fpeak  Plato's  fenfe.
Thus  Plutarch  the  Peripatetic  teacheth,  as  agreeable
to  his  matter's  doctrine,  that  learning  is  reminifcence,
and  that  the  vcv$  Kctb'  i^tv  is  in  children.  SimpH-
cius  alfo  in.  his  Commentary  on  the  third  book  of
Ariflotle  jttyi  ^vy^ns,  fpeaketh  of  a  certain  interiour
reafon  in  the  foul,  acting  of  it  felf,  and  originally  full
of  it's  own  proper  notions,  rrhh^  dp  icLvrx  toov
liKi'isov  yycorwy.

(</)  308.  316  And,


130  S I R I S.

316.  And,  as  the  Platonic  philofophy  fuppofed  in-
tellectual notions  to  be  originally  inexiitent  or  innate
in  the  foul  (e)  fo  likewife  it  Juppofed  fenfible  qua-
lities to  exiil  (though  not  originally)  in  the  foul,  and
there  only.  Socrates  faith  to  Theastetus,  you  mull
not  think  the  white  colour  that  you  fee  is  in  any
thing  without  your  eyes,  or  in  your  eyes,  or  in  any-
place at  all.  And  in  theTimaeus  Plato  teacheth,  that
the  figure  and  motion  of  the  particles  of  fire  dividing
the  parts  of  our  bodies  produce  that  painful  fenfation
we  call  heat.  And  Plotinus,  in  the  fixth  book  of  his
fecond  ^Ennead,  obferves  that  heat  and  other  qualities
are  not  qualities  in  the  things  themfelves,  but  ads:
that  heat  is  not  a  quality  but  aft  in  the  fire  :  -that  Fire
is  hot  really  what  we  perceive  in  the  qualities  light,
heat  and  colour.  From  all  which  it  is  plain,  that
whatever  real  things  they  fuppofe  to  exiil  independent
of  the  foui,  thofe  were  neither  fenfible  things,  nor
cloathed  with  fenfible  qualities.

317.  Neither  Piato  nor  Ariilotle  by  matter,  £.ah,
underilood  corporeal  Jubilance,  whatever  the  moderns
may  underilanJ  by  that  word.  To  them  certainly  it
£gnifirdno  pofifive  actual  being.  Ariilotle  defcribes  it
as  made  up* of  negatives,  having  neither  quantity  nor
quality  nor  efll-nce.  And  not  only  the  Platonifts  and
Pythagoreans,  but  alio  the  Peripatetics  themlelves  de-
clare it  to  be  known,  neither  by  fenle,  nor  by  nny  di-
rtft  and  jail  reafoning,  but  only  by  fome  fpuiious  or
adulterine  method,  as  hath  been  obferved  before,
Simon  Portius,  a  famous  Peripatetic  of  the  fixteenth
century,,  denies  it  to  be  any  fubilanee  at  all,,  for,  faith
he,  fie  quit  per  fe  fubfijUre  quia  fcr-Meretur,  id  quo  J ncu
£]}  in  atlu  effe  in  attu.  If  Janiblichus  may  be  credited,
the  iEgyptums  fuppofed  matter  fo  far  from  including
aught  of  Jubilance  or  eilence,  that  according  to  them>
God  produced  it  by  a  fepatation  from  all  fubilanee,
eiTence  or  being,  d?ro  gug-i'ot\)to<;  dirofti&iio-iK
vkqtyi7o<;.  That  matter  is  actually  nothing,  but  poten-
tially all  things,  is  the  docTriue  of  Ariilotle,  Theo-
phrailus,  and  all  the  antient  Peripatetics.

■  (<}  309, 314-  318.  Ac.


S I R. I S.  131

318.  Accoring  to  thofe  Philofophers,  matter  is
only  a  pura  potentiay  a  mere  poflibility.  But  Anaxi-
mander,  fucceffor  to  Thales,  is  represented  as  having
thought  the  fupreme  deity  to  be  infinite  matter.  Ne-
verthelefs  though  Plutarch  calleth  it  matter,  yet  it  was
iimply  70  aVs/for,  which  means  no  more  than  infi-
nite or  indefinite.  And  although  the  moderns  teach
that  fpace  is  real  and  infinitely  extended :  yet  if  we
confider  that  it  is  no  intellectual  notion,  nor  yet  per-
ceived by  any  of  our  fenfes,  we  fhall  perhaps  be  in-
clined to  think  with  Plato  in  his  Timzeus,  that  this
atfo  is  the  refult  of  hoyivixls  v'Sos  or  fpurious  rea-
foningj  and  a  kind  of  waking  dream.  Plato  ob-
ferves  that  we  dream,  as  it  were,  when  we  think  of
place,  and  believe  it  necefiary,  that  whatever  exifts
fhould  exiit.  in  fome  place.  Which  place  or  fpace  (f)
he  alfo  obferves  is  uit*  a.vdL£r-A<r\<L<;  d,7novy  that  is,  to
be  felt  as  darknefs  is  (qqd,  or  filence  heard,  being  a
mere  privation.

319.  If  any  one  mould  think  to  infer  the  reality
or  actual  being  of  matter  from  the  modern  tenet,  that
gravity  is  always  proportionable  to  the  quantity  of
matter,  let  him  but  narrowly  fcan  the  modern  de-
monflration  of  that  tenet,  and  he  will  find  it  to  be  a
vain  circle,  .concluding  in  truth  no  more  than  this,
that  gravity  is  proportionable  to  weight,  that  is  to  it
felf.  Since  tmtter  is  conceived  only  as  defect  and
mere  polfibility  ;  and  fmce  God  is  abfolute  perfection
ar?d  act  ;  it  follows  there  is  the  greatefl:  diilance  and
oppofition  imaginable  between  God  and  Matter.  In-
fornuch  that  a  material  God  would  be  altogether  in-
confilltx.t.

320.  The  force  that  produces,  the  intellect  that
orders,  the  goodnefs  that  perfects  all  things  is  the  fu-
preme being.  Evil,  defect,  negation,  is  not  the  ob-
ject of  God's  creative  power.  From  motion  the  Peri-
patetics trace  out  a  hril  immoveable  mover.  The  Pla-
tonics make  God  author  of  all  good,  author  of  no
evil, and unchangeable. According to  Anaxagoras

there
(/) 250,  270.


132  S I R I S.

there  was  a  confufed  mafs  of  all  things  in  one  chaos,
but  mind  fupervening,  imKbuv,  diltinguifhed  and  di-
vided them.  Anaxagoras,  it  feems  afcribed  the  motive
faculty  to  mind,  which  mind  fome  fubftquent  philo-
fcphers  have  accurately  discriminated  from  foul  and
life,  afcribing  to  it  the  fole  faculty  of  intelleclion.

321.  But  ftill  God  was  fuppofed  the  firit  a^ent,
the  fource  and  original  of  all  things,  which  he  pro*
duceth,  not  occafionally  or  inllrumentally,  but  with
a&ual  and  real  efficacy.  Thus  the  treatife,  De  fecre-
tiore  parte  divine*  fopi  entire  fecundum  ^Sgyptios,  in  the
tenth  book,  faith  of  God,  that  he  is  not  only  the  nrfl
agent,  but  alfo  that  he  it  is  who  truly  ads  or  creates,
qui  <vere  efficit.

322.  Varro,  Tully,  and  St.  Auguftin  underftand
the  foul  to  be  vik,  the  power,  or  force  that  ads,
moves,  enlivens.  Now  although,  in  our  conception,
<viit  or  fpirit  might  be  diiHnguimed  from  mind,  it
would  not  thence  follow,  that  is  acts  blindly  or  with-
out mind,  or  that  it  is  not  clofely  connected  with  in-
idled.  If  Plutarch  is  to  be  truiled  in  his  account  of
the  opinions  of  Philofophers  ;  Thales  held  the  mind
of  the. world  to  be  God:  Democntus  held  the  foul  of
the  world  to  be  an  igniform  deity  (g)  :  Pythagoras
taught  that  God  was  the  monad  and  the  good,  or
r  c/.y.Jjsi'  :  Socrates  alio  and  Plato  pronounced  him
to  be  the  io  eV  (£),  the  fingle,  felf  originate  one,
eflfentially  good.  Each  of  which  appellations  and
forms  of  Iptech  diredlly  tends  to,  and  determines  in
mind, kts  tvv  vovv  (j<®ivcr"zi  faith  Plutarch*

323.  Whence  that  author  concludes,  that  in  the
feme  ot  chofe  philofophers  God  is  a  mind,  -c  f  to  t  Jxgs,
not  an  abftracl  idea  compounded  of  in  con  fluencies  and
prefcinded  from  all  reai  things,  as  fome  moderns  un-
deritand  abilradion;  but  a. really  exifting  fpirit,  ciif-
tinct  or  feparate  from  all  fenfibk  and  corporeal  brings.
And  although  the  Stoics  are  reprefented  as  holding  a
corpoieal  deity,  or  that  the  very  fy  item  of  the  wo,  id  is
God,  yet  it  is ceitain  they did  net,  at  bottom,  dif-

fent
fe)  166,  168,  277. [b)  z%7.


S I R I S.  133

fcnt  from  the  forementioned  doctrine  j  inafmuch  as
they  fuppofed  the  world  to  be  an  animal  (a),  confining
of  foul  or  mind  as  well  as  body.

324.  This  notion  was  derived  from  the  Pythagore-
ans, who  held  the  world,  as  Timaeus  Locrus  teacheth,
to  be  one  perfect  animal,  endued  with  foul  and  rcafon  :
but  then  they  believed  it  to  have  been  generated :
Whereas  the  Stoics  looked  on  the  world  as  the  fupreme
God,  including  therein  mind  or  intellect.  For  the
elementary  fire,  or,  if  one  may  fo  fpeak,  the  animal
fpiritof  the  world,  feemeth,  according  to  them,  to
have  been  the  vehicle  of  the  foul  {b)t  intellect  or  y%s ;
fmce  they  ftyled  the  Divinity  7rvf  mgoy  {c)  or  in-
tellectual fire.

325.  The  ^Egyptians,  if  we  may  credit  the  Her-
maic  writings,  maintained  God  to  be  all  things,  not
only  actual  but  poffible.  He  is  ftyled  by  them,  that
which  is  made  and  that  which  is  unmade.  And
therein  it  is  faid,  mail  I  praife  thee  for  thofe  things
thou  haft  made  manifert,  or  for  the  things  thou  hail
hidden  ?  Therefore,  in  their  fenfe,  to  manifeft,  was
to  create  j  the  things  created  having  been  before  hidden
in  God.

326.  Now,  whether  the  povs  be  abftracted  from  the
fenfible -world,  and"  confidered  by  it  ftif,  as  diflinct
from,  and  prefiding  over  the  created  fyftem,  or  whe-
ther the  whole  univerfe,  including  mind  together  with
the  mundane  body,  is  conceived  to  be  God  (/},  and
the  creatures  to  be  partial  manifeflations  of  the  divine  ef-
fence,  there  is  noatheifm  in  either  cafe,  whatever  mis-
conceptions there  may  be  ;  fo  long  as  mind  or  intel-
lect is  underftood  to  preiideover,  govern,  and  conduct
the  whole  frame  of  things.  And  this  was  the  general
prevailing  opinion  among  the  philofophera-.

327.  Nor  if  any  one,  with  Arittotle  in  his  m eta*
phyfics,  mould  deny  that  God  knows  any  thing
without himfelf; feeing  that  God  comprehends  all

M  tilings,

(«) 2j6, 279. [b) 2J-J, 2S4. (0 272, [J) 300.


i34  S I R 1 S.

things,  could  this  be  juflly  pronounced  an  atheiftical
opinion.  Nor  even  was  the  following  notion  of  the
fame  author  to  be  accounted  atheii'in,  to  wit,  that
there  arc  fome  things  beneath  the  knowledge  of  God,
as  too  mean,  bafe,  and  vile  ;  however  wrong  tills
notion  may  be,  and  unworthy  of  the  divine  perfec-
tion.

328.  Might  we  not  conceive  that  God  maybe
faid  to  be  all  in  divers  fenfes  ;  as  he  is  the  caufe  and
engine  of  all  beings;  as  the  vow  is  the.  votira,  a  doc-
trine both  of  Platonics  and  Peripatetics  [e)  as  the  v "cvt
5s  the  place  of  all  forms,  and  as  it  is  the  fame  which
comprehends  and  orders  {/)  and  fultains  the  whole
mundane  fyftem.  Ariitotle  declares,  that  the  divine
force  or  influence  permeates  the  intire  univerfe  (g)
and  that  what  the  Pilot  is  in  a  fliip,  the  driver  in  a
chariot,  the  precentor  in  the  choir,  the  law  in  a  city,
the  general  in  an  army,  the  fame  God  is  in  the
world.  This  he  amply  fets  forth  in  his  book  de  mundo,
a  treatifc  which  having  been  anciently  afcribed  to  him,
ought  not  to  be  fet  afide  from  the  difference  of  ftyle,
which  (as  Patricius  rightly  obferves)  being  in  a  letter
to  a  King,  might  well  be  fuppofed  to  differ  from  the
other  dry  and  crabbed  parts  of  his  writings.

329.  And  although  there  are  fome  exprtflions  to
be  met  with  in  the  Philofophers,  even  of  the  Platonic
and  Ariftctelic  feels,  which  fpeak  of  God  as  mixing
with,  or  pervading  all  nature  and  ajl  the  elements;
yet  this  mull  be  explained  by  force  and  not  by  exten-
sion, which  was  never  attributed  to  the  mind  (A)  either
by  Ariltolle  or  Plato.  This  they  always  affirmed
to  be  incorporeal :  and,  as  Plotinus  remark?,  incor-
poreal things  arc  diffart  each  from  ot!  er  not  by  ph.ee,
-but  (to  ufe  his  exprifllun)  by  alterity.

330.  Thesi


(<)  309,  310. [/) 320. {s) 173,

[b) 2QO, 2Cj3, 297, 5I9.


S I R I S  !35

530.  TsfBSE  difquifitions  will  probably  feem  dry
and  uielefs,  to  fuch  readers  as  are  accuflomed  to  con-
sider only  fenfible  objedls.  The  employment  of  the
mind  on  things  purely  intellectual  is  to  moll  men  irk.,
fome  :  whereas  the  fenfuive  powers,  by  conitant  ufe
acquire  ft:ength.  Hence,  the  objects  of  fenfe  more
foTibTy  afr.ct  us  (kja  and  are  too  often  counted  the
chief  good.  For  thefe  things  men  fight,  cheat,  and
fcramble.  Therefore,  in  ord^r  to  tame  mankind  and
introduce  a  fenfe  ofvircue,  the  bcii  humane  means  is
to  exercife  their  imderflanding,  to  give  them  a  glympfe
of  another  world,  fuperior  to  the  fenfrble,  and  while
they  take  pains  to  cherifa  and  maintain  the  animal  life^
to  teach  them-  not  to  neglect  the  intellectual:

331. Prevailing  fludies  are  of  no  fmall  cqnfe-
quence  to  a  ilate,  the  religion,  manners  and civil  go-
vernment of  a  country  ever  taking  fome  bias from it's
phiiofophy,  which aiflcts  not  only  the  minds of  it's
profeiTors  and  ftudents,  but  alfo  the  opinions  of  all t;.e
better  {art,  and  the  practice of  the  whole  people*  re*
motely  and  consequentially  indeed,  though  not  tcconfr
derably. Have  not  the  polemic  and  fcHclaftic  philofo*
phy been  observed- to proiuce coiitroverffes  in  lav/
and  religion  ? And  have  not  Fatalifm  ana  Sad.iucifai
gained  ground,  during  the  general  paffion  for  the  Cor-
pufcularian  and  mechanical phiiofophy, which  hath
prevailed for about a  century  ? This  indeed might
uiefully  enough  have  employ'd  fome  mare  of  the  leiuire
and  curiofity  of  inquifitive  perfons. But when  it  en-
ter'd  the  feminaries  of  learning  as  a  nccefiary  accom-
plishment, and  mod important  part  of  education,  by
engroifing men's  thought?,  and fixing  their  minds  fo
much  on  corporeal  obj  <5b,  and  the  hw3  of  motion,  it
hath, however  undefignedly,  indirectly,  and  by acci-
dent, yet  not  a  little  ir.difp  jfed  them  tor  fpiritual,  mo-
ral, and  intellectual  matters. Certainly  had  the  philo-
ibphy  of  Socrates  and Pythagoras  prevailed  in  this
age,  among  thofe  who  think  themfelves  too  wife  to
M  z  receive

(kl  264, 294.


i36  S I R I S.

receive  the  dictates  of  the  go fpel,  we  mould  not  havi
feen  intereft  take  fo  general  and  fait  hold  on  the  minds
of  men,  nor  public  fpirit  reputed  to  be  yivvtH:*?
tutyew  a  generous  folly  among  thofe  who  are  rec-
koned to  be  the  moll  knowing  as  well  as  the  moft  get-
ting part  of  mankind.

332.  It  mi^ht  very  well  be  thought  ferious  trifling
to  tell  my  readers  that  the  greateft  men  had  ever  an
}iigh  elleem  for  Plato  ;  whofe  writings  are  the  toucii-
flene  of  a  hafty  and  (hallow  mind  ;  whofe  philofophy
]ias  been  the  admiration  of  ages  ;  which  fupplyed  pa*
triots,  magiftfates,  and  lawgivers  to  the  moil  flouriihing
iftates,  as  well  as  fathers  to  the  church,  and  dcclors  to
the-  fchools.  Albeit  in  thtfe  days,  the  depth  of  that
eld  learning  are  rarely  fathomed,  and  yet  it  were
happy  for  tiiefe  lands,  \t  our  young  nobility  and  gen-
try mitcad  of  modern  maxims  would  imbibe  the  notions
of  the  great  men  of  ant'quity.  But  in  thefe  free-
thinking  times  many  an  empty  head  is  fticok  at  Ari-
jlotle  and  Plato,  as  well  as  at  the  holy  fciiptures.
And  the  writings  of  thofe  celebrated  ancients  are  by
moil  men  treated  on  n  foot,  with  the  dry  and  barba-
rous iucubracions  of  the  fcheolmen.  It  may  be  mo-
deftly  prefumed,  there  are  not  many  among  us,  even
of  thole  who  arc  called  the  better  fort,  who  have
more  fenfe,  virtue,  and  love  of  their  country  than  Cicero,
who  in  a  letter  to  Atticus  could  not  forbear  exclaiming,
O  Socrates  et  Socratici  viri  !  nu?iquam  njobis  gratiam
refcram.  Would  to  God  many  of  our  countrymen
.had  the  fame  obligations  to  thofe  Socratic  writers.
Certainly  where  the  people  are  well  educated,  the  art
of  piloting  a  ftate  is  belt  learned  from  the  writings  of
Plato.  But  rmong  bad  men  void  of  difcipline  and
education,  Plato,  Pythagoras  and  Ariftotle  themfelves,
were  they  living,  could  do  but  little  good.  Plato  hath
drawn  a  very  humorous  and  initructive  picture  of  fuch
a  Hue  ;  which  I  fhall  not  tranferibe  for  certain  rea-
ions.  But  whoever  has  a  mind,  may  fee  it  in  the
ieventy  eighth  page  of  the  fecond  tome  of  Aldus  hi*
edition  of  Plato's  works.  *

333.PROCLVS,


S I IC I S.  rj7

jjj.  Pr-oclus*  in  the  firft  book  of  Lis  commen-
tary on  the  theology  of  Plato  obferves  that,  as  in  the
myiterie?,  thofe  who  are  initiated,  at  hYir.  mee-t  with
manifold  and  multiform  Gods,  but  being  entered
and  thoroughly  initiated  they  receive  the  divine  illu-
mination and  participate  the-  very  deity  :  in  like
manner,  if  the  foul  looks  abroad  fhe  beholds  the
fhadows  and  images  of  things  :  but  returning  into
her  felf  fhe  unravels  and  beholds  her  own  effence  z
At  flrH  ihe  feemeth  only  to  behold  licrklf  :  But  ha-
ving penetrated  farther  (lie  difcovers  the  mind,.
And  again,  iliil  farther  advancing  into  the  inner-
moft.  fun&uary  of  the  foul  ihe  contemplates  the  $*»?
yivog.  And  this,,  he  faith,  is  the  mcfl  excellent  of
all  humane  acTte,  in  the  illence  and  repofe  of  the
faculties  of  the  foul  to  tend  upwards  to  the  very  di~
vinity  ;  to  approach  and  be  clofely  joine-d  witb
that  which  is  intfFable  and  fuperior  to  all  beings.
When  come  fo  high  as  the  firit  principle  iJie  ends
her  journey  and  ixfts.  Such  is  the  docVine  of  Pro»
cius.

334.  But  Socrates  in  the  firft  Aleibiadea  teacheth-
on  the  ether  hand,  that  the  contemplation  of  God  ia
the  proper  means  to  know  or  understand  our  own  foul,
As  the  eye,  faith  he,  looking  fkdfaitly  at  the  vifive
part  or  pupil  of  another  eye  behoida  it's  ielf,  even  Co
the  foul  beholds  and  understands  her  felf,  while  fhe  con-
templates the  deity  which  is  wifdom  and  virtue  or  like
?hereunto.  In  the  Phjedon  Socrates  fpeaks  of  God  aa
king  r  (LyjJtov  and  to  £'iov  (  a  },  Plotinus  represents
God  as  order: Arillotle  as  law.

335.  I  t  may  feem  perhaps  to  thofe,  who  have  been
taught  to  d'.fcourfe  about  fubilratums,  more  reafonable
and  pious  to  attribute  to  the  Deity  a  more  fubltantial
being,  than  the  notional  entities  of  wifdom,  order,,
law,  vert u<? ,  or  goodnefs,  which  being  only  complex,
idtas,  famed  and  put  together  by  the  undemanding,.

M  §  ift,

(a). 260, 3 #3*.


i38


S I R I S.


are  it*3  own  creatures,  and  have  nothing  fubftantia!,
real,  or  independent  in  them.  But  it  mull  be  confider-
ei,  that  in  the  Platonic  fyflem,  order,  virtue,  law,
goodnefs,  and  wifdom  are  not  creatures  of  the  foul  of
man,  but  innate  and  originally  exiftent  therein,  not  a*
an  accident  in  a  fubltance,  but  as  light  to  enlighten,
and  as  a  guide  to  govern.  In  Plato's  llyle,  the  term
idea  doth  not  merely  fignify  an  inert  inactive  object  of
the  undcrilanding,  but  is  ufed  as  fynonimous  with  a,iTtov
and  df/J:t  caule  and  principle.  According  to  that
phiiofopher,  goodnels,  beauty,  virtue  and  iuch  like
are  not  figments  of  the  mind,  nor  mere  mixed  modes,
nor  yet  abllract  ideas  in  the  modern  fenfe,  but  the  moil
real  beings,  intellectual  and  unchangeable ;  and  there-
fore more  real  than  the  fleeting  tranfient  objects  of  fenfe
(  b  ),  which  wanting  fhbility  cannot  be  fubjccts  of  fci-
dice  (  c  ),  much  lefs  of  intellectual  knowledge.

336.  By  Parmenides,  Timseus,  ar,d  Plato  a  diflinc-
tion  was  made,  as  hath  been  obferved  already,  between
gexitum  and  ens.  The  former  fort  is  always  a  generat-
ing or  in  fieri  (  e ),  but  never  exifts,  becaufe  it  never
continues  the  fame,  being  in  a  conltant  change,  ever
perifhing  and  producing.  By  entia  they  under/land
things  remote  from  fenfe,  invifible  and  intellectual,
which  never  charging  are  ftili  the  fame,  and  may  there-
fore be  faid  truly  to  exiit.  weix,  which  is  generally
tranfhted  fubltance,  but  more  properly  eflence,  was
not  thought  to  belong  to  things  fenfible  and  corporeal,
which  have  no  flab.'lity ;  but  rather  to  intellectual  ideas
though  difcerned  with  more  difficulty,  and  making  left
imprenion  on  a  mind  ilupified  and  immerfed  in  animal
hie,  th  in  groi's  objects  that  continually  btfet  and  folli-
cit  our  i'enks.

337.  The  moft  refined  humane  intellect  exerted  to
at*s  utmoft  reach  can  only  feizefome  imperfect  glympfes
(  /)  of  the  divine  ideas,  abltacted  from  all  things  cor-
poreal, fenHble,  aiid  imaginable.  Therefoie  Pythago-
ras and  Plato  treated  them  in  a  myfterious  manner,  con-
cealing
(  b  )  306. ( c )  264,  266,  2Q7, (<? )  p^  306.  **

(/)  3^3,  53c-


S I R I S.  ijp

cealing  rather  than  expofing  them  to  vulgar  eyes ;  fo
far  were  they  from  thinking,  that  thofe  abilradl  things,
although  the  moll  real,  were  the  fitteflto  influence  com-
mon minds,  or  become  principles  of  knowledge,  not
"to  fay  duty  and  virtue,  to  the  generality  of  mankind.

338.  Aristotle  and  his  followers  have  made  a
monitrous  reprefentation  of  the  Platonic  ideas ;  and
fome  of  Plato's  own  fchool  have  faid  very  odd  things
concerning  them.  But  if  that  Philofopher  himfelf  was
not  read  only,  but  ftudied  alfo  with  care,  and  made  his
own  interpreter,  I  believe  the  prejudice  that  now  lies
againil  him  would  foon  wear  off  (g  },  or  be  even  con-
verted into  high  efteem  for  thofe  exalted  notions  and
fine  hints,  that  fparcle  and  fhine  throughout  his  writ-
ings ;  which  feem  to  contain  not  only  the  mofr  valuable
learning  of  Athens  and  Greece,  but  alfo  a  treafure  of
the  moil  remote  traditions  and  early  fcience  of  the
Eafh

339.  In  the  Timseus  of  Plato  mention  is  made  of
ancient  perfons,  authors  of  traditions,  and  the  offspring
of  the  Gees.  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  in  the  ac-
count of  the  creation  contained  in  the  fame  piece,  it  is
faid  that  God  was  pleafed  with  his  work,  and  that  the
night  is  placed  before  the  day.  The  more  we  think,
the  more  difficult  fhall  we  find  it  to  conceive,  how  mere
man,  grown  up  in  the  vulgar  habits  of  life,  and  weigh-
ed  down  by  fenfuality,  mould  ever  be  able  to  arrive  at
fcience,  without  fome  tradition  (  b  ).  or  teaching,  which
might  either  iow  the  feeds  of  knowledge,  or  call  forth
and  excite  thofe  latent  feeds  that  were  originally  fown
in  the  foul.

340.  Humane  fouls  in  this  low  fituation,  border-
ing on  mere  animal  life,  bear  the  weight  and.  fee  thro*
the  dufk  of  a  grofs  atmofphere,  gathered  from  wrong
judgments  daily  palled,,  falfe  opinions  daily  learned,,
and  early  habiis  of  an  older  date  than  either  judgment
or  opinion.  Through  fuch  a  medium  the  fharpeil  eye
Cannot  fee  clearly  (  k  }. And  if  by  fome  extraordinary

effort

U)  d°9>3I3' Q)  29$>  30I>  3°2. (*)  *$*>
293,  2.94;


.


140  S I R I S.

effort  the  mind  fhould  furmount  this  dulky  region,  and
{hatch  aglympfe  of  pure  light,  me  is  foon  drawn  back-
ward and  deprelTed  by  the  heavinefs  of  the  animal  na-
ture, to  which  me  is  chained.  And  if  again  lhe  chanc-
eth,  amidft  the  agitation  of  wild  fancies  and  ftrong  af*»
fections,  to  fpring  upwards,  a  fecond  relapfe  fpetdily
fucceeds  into  this  region  of  darknefs  and  dreams.

341.  Nevertheless,  as  the  mind  gathers  ftrength  by
repeated  acts,  we  mould  not  defpond,  but  continue  to
exert  the  prime  and  flower  of  our  faculties,  Hill  reco-
vering, and  reaching  on,  andflruggling  into  the  upper
region,  whereby  our  natural  weaknefs  and  blinJnefs
may  be  in  fome  degree  remedied,  and  a  tafte  attained
of  Truth  and  Intellt&ual  Life.  Befide  the  conltant  pre-
valing  opinion  of  the  greater!:  men  of  antiquity,  that
there  is  both  an  univerfal  fpirit  author  of  life  and  motion,
and  an  univerfal  mind  enlightening  and  ordering  all
things,  it  was  a  received  tenet  among  them,  that  there
is  alio  70  h  or  r  ayxQoy  {a),  which  they  looked  on
as  the  fons  deitat'nt the  firft  hypoftafis  in  the  divinity.

342.  The  one  or  70  «:',  being  immutable  and  in-
divisible, always  the  fnme  and  entire,  was  therefore
thought  to  exiit,  truly  and  originally,  and  other  things
only  fo  far  as  they  are  one  and  the  fime,  by  participa-
tion of  70  \v.  This  gives  unity,  liability,  rer.lity  to
things  (  b  ).  Plato  defcribes  God,  as  Mofes,  from  his
being.  According  to  both,  God  is  he  who  truly  isJ
0  ovruf  soy.  Charge  and  divifion  were  elteemed  defects
or  bad.  Evil  fcatters,  divides,  dtftroys.  Goo^,  on
the  contrary,  produceth  concord  and  union,  aflembles,
combines,  perfccV,  and  preferves  entire.  The  feveraf
beings  which  com  pole  the  univerfe  are  parts  of  the  lame
fyltem,  they  combine  to  carry  on  one  end,  and  perfect
one  whole.  And  this  aptnefs  and  concurrence  thereun-
to furnifties  the  partial  particular  idea  of  Good  in  t'e
ditlincl  creatures.  Hence  it  might  have  come  to  pafs,
tnat  iy  ayjAov  and  70  h  were  regarded  as  one  and  the-
fame.

343.  Lica:?
{a}  322-, (£)  264,3.06.


S I R I S.  141

343.  Light  and  fight  {  faith  Plato  in  the  fix th  book
©f  his  Republic)  are  not  the  Sun:  even  fo  truth  and
knowledge  are  not  the  Good  it  felf,  although  they  ap-
proach thereunto.  And  again,  what  the  Sun  is  in  a
vifible  plsce  with  refpect  to  fight  and  things  feen,  that
fame  is  t*  ecyetSov  or  Good  in  an  intelligible  place,
with  refpect  to  understanding  and  things  underltood.
Theaefore  the  good  or  one  is  not  the  light  that  en-
lightens, but  the  fourfe  of  that  light.

344.  Every  moment  produceth  fome  change  in
the  parts  of  this  vifible  creation.  Something  is  added
or  diminished,  or  altered  in  efTence,  quantity,  quality,
or  habitude.  Wherefore  all  generated  beings  were  faid
by  the  ancients  to  be  in  a  perpetual  flux  (c).  And
that  which,  on  a  confufed  and  general  view,  feems  one
iingle  conftant. being,  {hall  upon  a  nearer  infpeclion  ap-
pear a  continued  fenes  of  different  beings.  Eut  God
remains  for  ever  one  and  the  fame.  Therefore  God  a-
lor.e  exifts.  This  was  the  doctrine  of  Heraclitus,  Pla-
to, and  other  ancients.

345.  It  is  the  opinion  of  Plato  and  his  follower?,
that  in  the  foul  of  man,  prior  and  fuperior  to  in&ellecV
there  is  fomewhat  of  an  higher  nature,  by  virtue  cf
which  we  are  one;  and  that  by  means  of  our  one  or
unite,  we  are  moft  clofely  joined  to  the  Deity.  And,
as  by  our  intellect  we  touch  the  divine  intellect,  even
fo  by  our  to  h  or  unite  the  very  flower  of  our  effence,
as  Proclus  expreffeth  it,  we  touch  the  firft  one.

346.  According  to  the  Platonic  Phiiofophy,  tns
and  U7ium  are  the  feme.  And  consequently  our  minds
participate  fo  far  of  exigence  as  they  do  of  unity.  But
it  fhould  feem  that  perfonality  is  the  indivifible  center
of  the  foul  or  mind,  which  is  a  monad  fo  far  forth  as
ihe  is  a  Perfon.  Therefore  Perfon  is  really  that  which
exifts,  inafmuch  as  it  participates  the  divine  unity.  In
man  the  monad  or  indivifible  is  the  «tuTo  to  clvtq  the
felf  fame. felf  or  very  felf,  a  thing,  in  the  opinion  of
Socrates,  much  and  narrowly  to  be  inquired  into  and
difcuffed,  to  the  end  that,  knowing  ourfelves,  we  may
know  what  belongs  to  us  and  our  happinefs.

{c)  304,  336.  347.  Upon


142  S I R I S.

347.  Upon  mature  reflexion  the  Perfon  or  mind,  of  I
all  created  beings, feemeth alone  inditfifible, and  to
partake  moil  of  unity. But fenfible  things  are  rather \  i
confidcred  as  one  than  truly  fo,  they  being  in  a  perpe-
tual  flux  or  fucceflion,  ever  differing  ..nd  various. Ne-
verthelefs  all  things  together  may  be  confidered  as  on3
univerfe  ( J),  one  by  the  connexion,  relation, and  or- |
der  of  it's  part?,  which  is  the  work  of mind, whofe
unite  is  by  i'latonics,  fuppofed  a  participation  of  th«
flrft  to  lv.

348.  Socrates,  in  the  ThextetJs  of  Plato,  fpeak-
eth  of  two  parties  of  philofophers,  the  <4oyTs?  and  It
nrov  %KiU  TAtnvTcii,  the  flowing  philofophers  who  held
all  things  to  be  in  a  perpetual  flux,  al.vays  a  generating
and  never  exiiling;  and  thofe  others  who  maintained
the  univerfe  to  he  fixed  and  immoveable.  The  differ-
ence feems  to  have  been  this,  that  Heraclitus,  Prota-
goras, Empedocles,  and  in  general  thofe  of  the  former
&&,  confidercd  things  fenfible  and  natural;  whereas
Parmenides  and  his  party  conlidered  70  ttciv,  not  as  th«
fenfible  but  as  the  intelligible  world  ( e ),  abitrafted
from  all  fenfible  things.

349.  I  m  eff.ft,  if  we  mean  by  things  the  fenfible
objects;  theie,  it  is  evident,  are  always  flowing;  but
if  we  mean  things  purely  intelligible,  tneo  we  may
fay  on  the  other  hand,  with  equal  truth,  that  they  are
immoveable  and  unchangeable.  So  that  thofe,  who
thought  the  whole  or  to  ttav  to  be  iv  sra*  a  fixed  or
permanent  one,  fecm  to  have  underflood  the  whole  of
real  beings,  which  in  their  fenfe  was  only  the  intellectu-
al world,  not  allowing  reality  of  being  to  things  not
permanent.

350.  The  difpleafure  of  fome  readers  may  perhaps
be  incurred,  by  furprizing  them  into  certain  reflexions
and  inquiries  for  which  they  have  no  curiofity.  But
perhaps  fome  others  may  be  pleafed,  to  find  a  dry  fub-
ject  varied  by  digreffions,  traced  through  remote  in-
ferences, and  carried  into  ancient  times,  whofe  hoary
maxims  {/)  fcattered  in  this  eflfay  are  not  propofed  as

principles,

</)  287,288. (0293,294,295. (/)  298,  301.'


SI R I S.  143

principle?,  but  barely  as  hints  to  awaken  and  exercife
the  inquifitive  reader,  on  points  not  beneath  the  atten-
tion of  the  ablefl  men.  Thofe  great  men,  Pythagoras,
Plato,  and  Ariilotle  the  moft  confummate  in  politics,
who  founded  ftates,  or  inftrudted  princes,  or  wrote
moft  accurately  on  public  government,  were  at  the
fame  time  moft  acute  at  all  abftracled  and  fublime
Speculations ;  the  cleareft  light  being  ever  necefTary  to
guide  the  moft  important  actions.  And  whatever  the
world  thinks,  he  who  hath  not  much  meditated  upon
God,  the  Humane  mind,  and  the  Summum  bonum,
may  pofiibly  make  a  thriving  earthworm,  but  will  moft
indubitably  make  a  forry  patriot  and  a  forry  ftatef-
jnan-

351.  According  to  the  nice  metaphyfics  of  thofe
ancient  philofopners  70  er,  being  confidercd  as  what
was  firft  and  fimpleft  in  the  deity,  was  prefcinded  even
from  entity  to  which  it  was  thought  prior  and  fuperior;
and  is  therefore  by  the  Platonics  ftyled  fuper-
eflential,  And  in  the  Parmenides  it  is  faid,  Tatif
doth  not  exift  ; which  might  feem  to imply  a  ne-

fation  of  the  divine  being.  The  truth  is,  Zeno  and
arrr.enides  argued,  that  a  thing  exifting  in  time  was
bluer  and  younger  than  it  fclf;  therefore  the  conflant
immutable  to  'iv  did  not  exift  in  time ;  and  if  not  in
time,  then  in  none  of  the  differences  of  time  paft,
prefent,  or  to  come  ;  therefore  we  cannot  (ay  that  it
was,  is,  or  will  be.  But  neverthelefs  it  is  admitted
in  the  fame  Parmenides,  that  to  vvv  is  every  where
prefent  to  to  h  ;  that  is,  infteadof  a  temporary  fuc-
celrcn  of  moments,  there  is  one  eternal  now,  or,
%>un£lum  Stans,  as  it  is  termed  by  the  Schoolmen.

352.  The  fimplicity  of  75  iv  (the  father  in  the
Pythagpric  and  Platonic  trinity)  is  conceived  fuch  as
to  exclude  intellect  or  mind,  to  which  it  is  fuppofed
prior.  And  that  hath  created  a  fufpicion  of  atheifm
in  this  opinion.  For  faith  the  harned  Doctor  Cud-
worth,  mail  we  fay  that  tl  e  firft  hypoftafis  or  perfon
is  &vd$  and  ahoycs,  fenfelcfs  and  irrarional,  and  alto,
^etker  devoid  of  miad  and  underftunding  ? or  woald

not


144  S I R I S.

not  this  be  to  introduce  a  kind  of  myflerious  atheifm  ?
To  which  it  may  be  anfvvered,  that  whoever  ac
knowledgeth  the  univerfe  to  be  made  and  governed  by
an  eternal  mind,  cannot  be  juftly  deemed  an  atheift  £g).
And  this  was  the  tenet  of  thofe  ancient  philofophers.
In  the  Platonic  doctrine,  the  generation  of  the  vovs  or
}/oyos  was  not  contingent  but  necefiary,  not  tempo-
rary, but  from  everlaiting.  There  never  was  a  time
fuppofed  wherein  tv  h  fubfifted  without  intellect,  the
priority  having  been  underftood  only  as  a  priority  of
order  or  conception,  but  not  a  priority  of  age.  There-
fore, the  maintaining  a  diftin&ion  of  priority  between
tr  \v  and  rcuV  doth  not  infer,  that  the  one  ever  ex-
ited without  the  other.  It  follow?,  therefore,  that  the
father  or  to  iv  may,  in  a  certain  fenfe,  be  faid  to  be
cti'vf  without  atheifm,  or  without  deflroying  the  no-
tion of  a  deity  ;  anymore  than  it  would  deitroy  the
notion  of  a  humane  foul,  if  we  lhould  conceive  a  dis-
tinction between  felf  and  intellect,  or  intellect  and  life.
To  which  we  may  farther  add,  that  it  is  a  doctrine  of
Platonics,  and  agrees  with  their  mafter's  tenets,  to  fay
that  to  iv  or  the  firft  hypoftafis  contains  all  excel-
lence and  perfection  whereof  it  is  the  original  Source,
and  is  eminenter,  as  the  Schools  fpeak,  intellect  and
life,  as  well  as  goodnefs  ;  while  the  fecond  hypoftafis
is  efTentially  intellect,  and  by  participation  goodnefs
and  life ;  and  the  third,  life  effentially,  and  by  par-
ticipation  goodnefs  and  intellect.

353.  Therefore,  the  whole  being  confulered,  it
will  not  fe^m  ju(t,  to  fix  the  imputation  of  atheifm
upon  thoTe  philofophers,  who  held  the  doctrine  of
to  'iv  ;  whether  it  be  taken  in  an  abflracted  or  col-
lective, a  metaphyseal  or  merely  vulgir,  mean-
ing \J>)  ;  that  is,  whether  we  prefcind  unity  from
efience  and  intellect,  fince  metaphyseal  distinctions  of
the  divine  attributes  do  not  in  reality  divide  them  ;
or  whether  we  confider  the  univerfal  fylkm  of  beings
as  one,  fince the  union,  connexion,  and  order  of  it's

members,
(i)  "54i  z7$> 279>  z%7- W  $oo.


S I R I S.  145

members,  do  manifefliy  infer  a  mind  or  intellect  to  be
caufe  thereof.

354.  The  one  or  to  \v  may  be  conceived  either  by
competition  or  divifion.  For  as,  on  the  one  hand,  we
may  fay  the  world  or  univerfe  is  one  whole  or  one
animal  ;  fo  we  may,  en  the  other  hand,  confider  to  iv
by  divifion  or.  abftraction,  as  fomewhac  ;n  the  order  of
things  prior  to  mind  In  either  fenfe  there  is  no  athe-
ifm,  fo  long  as  mind  is  admitted  to  piefide  and  direct
the  animal ;  and  fo  long  as  the  unum  or  to  iv  is  fup-
pofed  not  to  exiit  without  mind  [a).  So  that  neither
Heraclitus  nor  Parmenides,  nor  Pythagoras  noi  Plato
neither  the  -/Egyptians  nor  Stoics,  with  their  doctrine,
of  a  divine  whole  or  animal,  nor  Xenophanes  with  his
%v  km  t£v9  are  juftly  to  be  accounted  aiheifts.
Therefore  modern  atheifm,  be  it  cf  Hobbes,  Spinofa,
Collins,  or  whom  you  will,  is  not  to  be  countenanced
by  the  learning  and  great  names  cf  antiquity.

355.  Plato  teacheth,  that  the  dofhine  concerning
the  one  or  unite  is  a  means,  to  lead  and  raife  the
mind  [h)  to  the  knowledge  of  him  who  truly  is.
And  it  is  a  tenet  both  of  Ariflotle  and  Plato,  that
identity  is  a  certain  unity.  The  Pythagoreans  alfo,
as  well  as  the  Platonic  philofophers,  held  unum  and
ens  to  be  the  fame.  Confiftenly  with  which,  that
only  can  be  faid  to  exift,  which  is  one  and  the
fame.  In  things  fenfible  and  imaginable,  as  fuch,
there  feems  to  be  no  unity,  nothing,  that  may  be
called  one  prior  to  all  act  of  the  mind  ;  fince  they  be-
ing in  themfelves  aggregates,  confirming  of  parts  or
compounded  of  elements,  are  in  effect  many.  Ac-
cordingly, it  is  remailad  by  Themiitius,  the  learned
interpreter  of  Ariflotle,  that  to  collect  many  notions
into  one,  and  to  confider  them  as  one,  is  the  work  of
intellect,  and  not  of  fence  or  fancy.

356.  Aristotle  himfelf,  in  his  third  book  of  the
Soul,  faith  it  is  the  mind  that  maketh  each  thing  to  be
one,  7p  £i  Iv  kqiqvv  tovtq  0  vx$  sx^ra;-. How  this

N  h

(a) 287, 2SS.  (fl 294, 295.


!4»  S I R I S.

is  done,  Themiflius  is  more  particular,  obferving,  that
as  being  conferreth  efler.ee,  the  mind  by  virtue  of  her
Simplicity  conferreth  fimpiicity  upon  compounded  be-
ings. And,  indeed,  it  feemeth  that  the  mind,  fo  far
forth  as  perfon,  is  individual  (c),  therein  refembling
the  divine  one  by  participation,  and  imparting  to  other
things  what  it  felf  participates  from  above.  This  is
agreeable  to  the  doctrine  of  the  ancients,  however
the  contrary  opinion  of  fuppofing  number  to  be  an
original  primary  quality  in  things,  independent  of  the
mind,  may  obtain  among  the  moderns.

357.  The  Peripatetics  taught,  that  in  all  divinble
things  there  was  fomewhat  indivifible,  and  in  all
compounded  things  fomewhat  fimple.  This  they  de-
jived  from  an  ac"l  of  the  mind.  And  neither  this
Jimple  indivifible  unite,  nor  any  fum  of  repeated
unites,  confequently  no  number  can  be  feparated  from
the  things  themfelves  and  from  the  operation  of  the
mind.  Themiflius  goeth  fo  far  as  to  afiirm,  that  it
cannot  be  feparated  from  the  words  or  figns  ;  and,  as
it  cannot  be  uttered  without  them,  fo  faith  he,  neither
can  it  be  conceived  without  them.  Thus  much  upon
the  whole  may  be  concluded,  that  diftincl  from  the
mind  and  her  operations,  there  is  in  created  beings
neither  unite  nor  number.

358.  Of  inferior  beings  the  humane  mind,  ftl£  or
perftn  is  the  moil  fimple  and  undivided  efTence  (</).
And  the  fupreme  father  is  the  moft  perfect  one.
Therefore  the  flight  of  the  mind  towards  God  is  cal-
led by  the  Platonics  e-jyii  [acy*  7r$c<;  (xovov.  The  fu-
preme being,  faith  Piotinu?,  as  he  excludes  all  diver-
sity, is  ever  alike  prefent.  And  we  are  then  prefent  to
Jiim,  when,  recollected  and  abfhacled  from  the  world
and  fenfible  object?,  we  are  molt  free  and  difenga-
jged  U)  from  all  variety.  He  adds,  that  in  the  intui-
tion of  the  fupreme  deity  the  foul  finds  her  vviihed  for
,encl  and  repoie  ;  which  that  philofopher  calls  awaking
out  of  hit  body  into  himfelf.

359.  In

CO  H5»  34&>  547- (ft  347- W  26s-


SI R I S.  147

359.  In  the  tenth  book  of  the  arcane,  or  divine
Vviiliom  of  the  Egyptians,  we  are  taught  that  the  fu-
preme  being  is  not  the  caufe  of  any  created  thing  j  but
that  he  produced  or  made  the  word;  and  that  all  ere*
ated  beings  we-  ide  by  the  word,  which  is  ac-
cordingly ilyled  he  caufe  of  all  caufrs:  and  that  this
was  alfo  the  doctrine  of  the  Chaldeans.  Plato,  like-
wife,  in  his  letter  to  Kermias,  Erailus,  and  Corifcus,"
fpeaks  of  God  the  ruler  and  caufe  cf  all  things  as  ha-
ving a  father  :  And,  in  his  Epinomis,  he  exprefiy
teacheth  that  the  word  or  Koyoi  made  the  world,
Accordingly  Saint  Auguftine  in  his  commentary  on  the
begining  of  Saint  John's  Gofpe),  having  declared  that
Chrift  is  the  wifuom  of  God  by  which  all  things  were
made,  obfcrve3  that  this  doctrine  was  alio  found  in  the-
v/ri lings  of  philofophers,  who  taught  that  God  had
an  only  begoiLcn  Son  by  whom  arc  all  things.

360.  Now,  though  Plato  had  joined  with  an  ima-
gination the  molt  fplendid  and  magnificent  an  intellect
not  lefs  deep  and  clear  ;  yet  it  is  not  to  be  fuppofed, .
that  either  he  or  any  other  philofophers  of  Greece  or
the  Eaii,  had  by  the  light  of  nature  attained  an  ade-
quate notion  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  nor  even  that  their:
imperfect  notion,  fo  far  as  it  went,  was  exactly  ja£l  5.
nor  perhaps  that  thofe  fublime  hints,  which  dart  forth
like  flafhes  of  light  in  the  midil  of  a  profound  dark-
nefs,  were  originally  flruck  from  the  hard  rock  of  hu-
mane reafon  ;  but  rather  derived,  at  leaft  in  part*
by  a  divire  tradition  (/)  from  the  author  of  all
things.  It  feems  a  remarkable  confirmation  of  this,
what,  Plotinus  obferved  in  his  fifth  ennead,  that  this
doctrine  of  a  Trinity,  father,  mind,  and  foul,  was  na
late  invention,  but  an  ancient  tenet.

361.  Certain  it  is,  that  the  notion  of  a  Trinity
is  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  many  old  heathen
philofophers,  that  is  to  fay,  a  notion  of  three,  divine
hypoflafes.  Authority,  light,  and  life  did,  to  the  eye
of  Reafon;  plainly appear  to  fupport, pervade  and

N  2  animate

(/)  298,  301.;


148  S I R I S.

animate  the  mundane  fyftem  or  macrocofm.  The
fame  appeared  in  the  microcofm,  preferving  foul  and
body,  enlig!  temng  the  mind,  and  moving  the  affec-
tions. And  thefe  were  conceived  to  be  necefTary  uni-
verfal  principles,  cocxillirg,  and  cooperating  in  fuch
Jbrt,  as  never  to  exilt  afunder,  bur  on  the  contrary  to
c  -iritute  one  Sovere:gn  of  all  things.  And,  indeed,
how  rould  power  or  authority  avail  or  fubfjft  without
knowledge  ?  or  either  without  life  and  action  ?

362,  In  the  adminiflration  of  all  things  there  is
author. ty  to  efiablifh,  law  to  direct,  andjuitice  to  ex*
ecute.  There  is  firft  the  Source  of  all  perfection,  or
fens  deitatiS)  feccndly  the  fupreme  Realon,  order,  or
hoy'oc'i  and  laftly  the  Spirit  which  quickens  and  in-
fpires.  We  ara  iprung  from^the  father,  irradiated  or
enlightened  by  the  fon,  and  moved  by  the  fpirit.  Cer-
tainly, that  there  is  father,  fon,  and  fpirit  ;  that
thef.  bear  analogy  to  the  fun,  light,  and  heat ;  and
are  otherwife  expreffed  by  the  terms  principle,  mind,
and  foul  ;  by  one  or  70  %v%  intellect,  and  life  -  by
good,  word,  and  love;  and  that  generation  was  not
attributed  to  the  fecond  hypofhfis,  the  v*<;  or  Koyot,
in  refpeel  of  time,  fgj,  but  only  in  refpect  of  origine
and  order,  as  an  eternal  necefTary  emanation  ;  thefe
are  the  exprefs  tenets  of  Platoniih,  Pythagoreans,
Egyptians,  and  Caktaans.

363.  Though  it  may  be  well  prefumed  there  is
nothing  to  be  found  on  that  fublime  iubjecl  in  humane
writings,  which  doth  hot  bear  the  fure  Signatures  of
humanity;  yet  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  feveral  fa-
thers of  the  church  have  thought  fit  to  illuitrate  the
Chriitian  do&iine  of  the  holy  trinity,  by  fimilitudes
and  exprefhons  borrowed  from  the  mod  eminent  Hea-
thens, whom  they  conceived  to  have  been  no  ltrangers
to  that  myitery  ;  as  hath  been  plainly  prdved  by
Beffarian,  Eugubinus,  and  Doctor  Cud  worth.

364,  Ther*-


S I R I S.  i4p

364.  Therefore,  How  unphilofophical  foever
that  doctrine  may  feem  to  many  of  the  prefent  age
yet  it  is  certain,  the  men  of  greateit.  fame  and  learning
among  the  ancient  phiiofophers  held  a  Trinity  in  the
Godhead.  It  mull  be  owned,  that  upon  this  point
fome  later  Platonifts  of  the  Gentile  world  feem  to  have
bewilder'd  themfelves,  (as  many  Chriflians  have  alfo
done)  while  they  purfued  the  hints  derived  from  their
predeceiTors,  with  too  much  curiofity.

365-  But  Piato  himfelf  confidered  that  doctrine
&s  a  venerable  myftery,  not  to  be  lightly  treated  of  or
rafhly  divulged.  Wherefore  in  a  letter  to  Dionyfius
he  writes  (as  he  himfelf  proieflwth)  sem'gmatically*
and  briefly  in  the  following,,  terras,  which  he  giveth
for  a  fummary  of  his  notion  concerning  the  fupreme
Being,  and  which  being  capable  of  divers  fei\[63f  I
leave  to  be  decyphered  by  the  learned  reader*
mfiilv  TtWTM  $a&iKiet  tolvt  i?},  Ktli  ix.uv*.'(yix.ai

& &VT  d  3  K&l  iiiliVO  (JLiTlQV  dLtfcLvTUV  7Q0V  K&kUV*
oivii§QV «T$ Ttfl T* cTeuTgffit, KAl Tf'tTOV TT^' Tfi£

7ft Tee.  Plato  enjoins  Dionyfius  over  and  over,  with
great  earnefinefs  not  to  fuffer,  what  he  communicates
concerning  the  royfteries  of  the  divine  Nature,  to  fall
into  illiterate  or  vulgar  hands,  giving  it  withal  as  a
reafon  for  this  caution,  that  nothj^g  would  feem  more
ridiculous  or  abfurd  to  the  common  run  of  mankind.
He  adds,  that  in  regard  writings  might  mifcarry,
the  prudent  way  was  to  write  nothing  at  ali'on  thefe
matters,  but  to  teach  and  learn  them  by  word  of
mouth  :  for  which  reafon,  faith  he,  I  have  never
wrote  any  thing  thereon ;  nor  is  there,  nor  fhall  there
ever  be  any  thing  of  Plato's,  extant  on  that  fubjecl;
He  farther  adds,  as  for  what  hath  been  now  foid^  it
belongs  all  to  Socrr.tes.

366.  And,  indeed, what  this philofopbei  in  his

Phagdrus fpeaketh of  the fuperceleftial region,  and

the  divinity  refident  therein*  is  of  a  train not  to be

relifned  or  comprehended  by  vulgar  rrrinds  ; to wit9

-  eiTence  really  exiftcnt,  obj*&  of  intellect  alone., with-

N  3  0$


ijo  S I R I S.

out  colour,  without  figure,  without  any  tangible  qua-
lity. He  mignt  very  jultly  conceive  that  fuch  a  tie-
fcription  mult  leem  ridiculous  to  fenfual  men.

367.  As  for  the  perfect  intuition  of  divine  things,
that  he  fuppofeth  to  be  the  lot  of  pure  fouls,  beholding
by  a  pure  light,  initiated,  happy,  free  and  unftained
from  thofe  bodies,  wherein  we  are  now  imprifoned
like  oy iters.  But  in  this  mortal  ftate,  we  muft  be  fa-
tisiy'd  to  make  the  belt  of  thofe  glympfes  {b)  with*
in  our  reach.  It  is  Plato's  remark  in  his  Theaetetus,
that  while  we  fit  flill  we  are  never  the  wifer,  but  go-
ing into  the  river  and  moving  up  and  down,  is  the
way  to  difover  it's  depths  and  mallows.  If  we  exer-
cife  and  beflir  our  felves,  we  may  even  here  difcover
fomething.

363.  The  eye  by  long  ufe  comes  to  fee  even  in  the
darkeit  cavern  :  and  there  is  no  fubject  (o  obfcure,
but  we  may  difcern  fome  glympfe  of  truth  by  long
poriDg  on  it.  Truth  is  trie  cry  of  all,  but  the  game
of  a  few.  Certainly  where  it  is  the  chief  paflion,  it
doth  not  give  way  to  vulgar  cares  and  views  ;  nor  is
it  contented  with  a  little  ardour  in  the  early  time  of
life,  active,  perhaps,  to  purfue,  but  not  fo  fit  to
weigh  and  revife.  He  that  would  make  a  real  pro-
grefs  in  knowledge,  mull  dedicate  his  age  as  well  as
youth,  the  later  growth  as  well  as  firft  fruijs,  at  the
altar  of  Truth.

t.  Cumfvis  eft  errare,  nullius  aid  infipientis  in  error*  peruverare.
(h)  335>  337-


F  I F I &
